A REMEDY AGAINST RUIN: OR, A SERMON PREACHED At the Assizes at LANCESTON in
Cornwall, March 17 1651.

Before the Right Honorable Henry Rolls, Lord chief Justice of the upper Bench,
And Robert Nicholas, Judges for the Western Circuit.

BY THOMAS PETER'S M. A. and Pastor of the Church at Mylor, in Cornwall.

With an APPENDIX, Vindicating the Author from an horrid imputation cast on him
by Samson Bond, Rector of Maugon, and Martin in Meneague, in the said County.

ESAI 51.6. My Salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness shall not be
abolished.

Vel Sile, vel dic aliquid Silentio melius.

London, Printed by Tho. Maxey for Samuel Gellibrand, at the sign of the Ball
in Paul's Churchyard. 1652

To the Right Worshipful RICHARD LOBB Esquire, and High Sheriff of the County
of CORNWALL.
Grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied from our Lord Jesus Christ.
Sir,
TWill be quered, why in the autumn of my days, and in this Presse-sweating
generation, I should thrust my self into print, who never before peeped in the
Press, beyond the letters of my name. To the reasonable and religious I render
these accounts: some whereof point the finger at 1 Your self. 2 My self. 3 Your
and my Antagonist. 4 Your and my Christian Friends.


1. For your self. I must confess I owe you Paul's praises and Paul's prayers,
as he to Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1.15. At my return from New England to London, you
sought me diligently and found me out, And ever since have refreshed me with an
annual as personal countenance to my Lecture at Penrin, and contribution to
my Labors at Mylor.

Let these lines (when I am dead) speak Paul's prayers; ver. 16.
The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; the Lord grant you may find
mercy in that day. In the mean, may you honor your God (who has honored you)
with the choicest of your increase, Pro. 3.9. pracipuum pro ventuum.
with your person, posterity as purse. And may your and my Enemy, who has
persecuted you for malignity, me for perjury, be therein still found (as he is
found already) a liar.

2. For my self. I have not been without solicitations to commend some of my
late labors to a public viem, but could not be induced to such
condescendency, till providence put into my hand this medium to purge my repute
from the venom of that slanderous tongue, which has bedirted my fame through
many places of this nation. I was loath my posterity should have a rotten
fathers name flung in their faces, while my ashes mouldred in the grave, when a
living opportunity bids me clear my blasted innocence.

3. For my Doctoriall, S. B. D. Featly. Don.

martial Adversary (so his name and books proclaim him,) I shall use Martials
weapons to foil him with, Stat contra, dicitque tibi tua pagina, fur^es. You
know, Sir, and many knowing Ministers here, that his Sermon on Romans 12.1. is
done, horis furtivis, without trope or figure, being scored from the two
Doctors, verbatim, paginatim, lineatim: sed si forte suas, etc. and the
Jack-dawes furtivity is nakeded. Though he imprecate curses on himself, if ever
stole two lines from them; Romans 12 1.
yet to a runner as reader, it is evident mo then half of that Sermon preached
before the Committee of Assembly of Divines, May 20. 1646. is as the hatchets
helve, borrowed; or he robbed a thief, who inhumanely stole the sheets from the
two Doctors, after they slept in their Graves. (...)

Surely, Jer. 24.
if he be one of Jeremies figs, it is of the worst basket; Jer. 6.1.
if of Esops tongues, it is not the best in the Market; or if of Jeremis fronts,
it is such as cannot blush.

For his Alarm at Pendennis, on Psalm. 106.9. both title, text, some of the
Epistle, and main prosecutions, with small variation of phrase, are formerly
beaten by Doctor Featly, as is cleeer to an unprejudiced comparer. But I Will
leap him over in the front, till I meet him in the rear.

4. For your and my Christian friends, Justices, Gentry, Ministers, and
Corporations, and my endeered parishioners, who have attested my life and
labors beyond my desires, and deserts; let these syllables re-attest my
gratefulness; truly, you came forth timely to help the Lord against the
mighty, even the Lords Truths against one of the mightiest falsehoods was ever
dawbd in the teeth of a Gospel Minister.

It Is well mine adversary shuns godly Ministers societies, by this they shun
the gunshot of a fiery serpentine Arrow. For most of them know, what places he
has lived in, he has appeared cometicall, carrying a Titio of Contention in
the tail: the Lord quench it, make him truly humble, and fit him better for the
labors of Christ's vineyard: which will be the rejoicing of

From my Study in Mylor, the 27 of May, 1652. Sir, Your weak, and unworthy
Chaplain, Pro tempore. THO. PETER'S.

A REMEDY against Ruin.
Amos 5.24. But let Judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty
stream.


WE are fallen into the hands of a blunt Prophet, and He into the handling of a
far more blunt expositor, yet both into the Arms of truth, which as it seeks
no corners, so no colors; her native beauty far transcends all borrowed.

I may not make (...), nor (...); the whole work an introduction, not the
introduction, the whole work: Nor dare I detain you any longer at the door of
the Chapter: be pleased to walk into the inner rooms.

The Chapter containing a lamentation over, or for Israel, may serve for
Englands meridian; where are four Generals: the 1 Inviters to this
Lamentation. 2 Invited or called to this lamentation. 3 Grounds or reasons of
this invitation and Lamentation. 4 Cures or remedies to remove this Lamentation.


1. The Inviters are threefold.

1. The Prophet of God, ver. 1. He are this word which I take up against you, O
house of Israel. 2. The God of the Prophet, verse 16. Therefore the Lord of
hoasts says, That wailing shall be in all streets; they shall say in all the
highwayes, Alas, alas, etc. 3. The good people of this God. verse 18. They shall
call the husbandmen to mourning, and such as are skilful in lamentations to
wailing.
2. The Invited are of two sorts: described 1. Generally, as appears by the
universality of places, Streets, Vineyards, Fields, verse 16. and O house of
Israel. ver. 1. 2. Particularly; the skillful in mourning: either first, The
Prophet and the godly people; or Secondly, Such as were accustomed to such
doleful solemnities; such as could command a resympathizing passion from their
sorrowful expressions.


3. The Grounds or occasions of this lamentation, which in general are
twofold, 1 their sins: 2. their sufferings.

1. Their sins were twofold, either against the first or second table.

1 Their sins against the first table were Idolatry, superstition, hypocrisy,
verse. 5. ver. 21. sought to Gilgal, Beersheba, etc. anciently eminent for some
extraordinary act of God. 2 Their sins against the second table, were
oppression, bribery, unjustice, ver. 11. treading on the poor, taking from him
burdens of wheat, ver. 7. turning judgment into hemlock, wormwood; building
houses upon unrighteousness. ver. 12.13. turning aside the poor in the gate,
from his right. verse 13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence.
2. Their sufferings: which were twofold; 1 Corporal. 2 Spiritual.


1. Their Corporal sufferings mentioned ver. 2. they shall fall and not rise;
a thousand shall go out, and but an hundred shall return. or, an hundred go
out, and but ten return to a City. Israel, when they went forth to wars was
wont Decimari, to be tithed forth. ver. 16.17. fly from one danger and fall into
a worse, from a Lion to a Bear; a Serpent, both in field and house.

2. Spiritual, viz. Gods slighting, abominating, abhorring their sacrifices,
fats, farinals; not smelling at their solemn feasts, fasts. Away, avaunt to
their melodies, incense, and viols. ver. 22.23. And the prudents silence in
this evil day, may be a Judgment, as a sin.

4. The cure, remedy, removal of this lamentation. Consisting of exhortations,
threats, directions, verse. 6. Seek ye me, and ye shall live. ver. 8. seek the
Lord, least he break out as fire in the house of Joseph. Seek the Lord, that
made the seven stars and Orion, that turns the shadow of death into morning.
ver. 9.14. that strengthens the spoiled against the strong. Seek ye good and
not evil, so the Lord of hoasts shall be with you. ver. 15. hate evil, and love
good, establish judgment in the gate, so the Lord will be gracious to the
remnant of Joseph. And think not to tickle the ears of the Lord with the empty
aires of your viols;

But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as the mighty stream.
And thus at length we have met with our text again: in handling whereof, we
shall observe this method.

1. The Explication. 2. The Observation. 3. The Confirmation. 4. The
Application.

1. In the explication, the sense of the 1 Scope. 2 Terms.


1. For the scope, many are the Conceptions of Interpreters.

Some think it a naked exhortation q. d. I weigh not your external fumes of
formalities in my worship, but earn after your hearts real sincerity. Calvin.
in loc.


Others repute it a pressure to repentance, with a stating the symptoms
thereof, viz. a rectitude in judgment and righteousness toward God and man.

A third sort rove far from the mark, as if God threatened his judgments
against Isreal's hypocrisy. Who hoped to pacify an angry God with outsides, as
children do their babies, puppets, with fair words and silken clouts.

A fourth sense is that the words are a solution to a vain objection, thus,
What, will not hear, smell at what himself commands? Yes: yet not at these
externals only and simply; but let judgment also and righteousness run down as
waters, etc.

A last party repute it a prophecy, reaching the cleerer days of Christ's
larger manifestations. When the Son of righteousness shall appear with healing
under his wings. Mal. 4.2.

I Will not clash, but close the various opinions of Godly expositors, and say,
It Is an exhortatory prophecy, or prophetical exhortation. For Calvin renders
it in the future, decurret, shall run down.

The Interlineary, (...)
Devolvat, ve-Jiggall, in the imperative, let it roll down; as if the first
made it a prophecy, the second an exhortation.

In this exhortatory prophecy, are 1. The Object, or things exhorted, or
prophesied of, scil. Judgment and Righteousness. 2 The act or motion, let it
run down, or it shall roll down. 3 The Manner of this motion, under a double
metaphor of 1 Waters in the plural. 2 Mighty stream or strong torrent.



And now secondly, are we arrived to the Explication of the terms. Mishphat,
(...)
from (...) judicare, judicium exercere, or litem tractare, to Judge, exercise
Judgment, or handle a controversy; which skill leans on four particulars.

1. Consultation: wherein these two must sit supreme; thus David about the Arks
return, 1 Chr. 13.1. consulted with the Captains of thousands, and Captains of
hundreds, and every leader, yea with Levites, Priests and all Israel, ver. 2,
3, etc. 2. Pleading: Where these two must fix on the lips and conscience; Job (
chapter 13.4.) questions his friends, whether they durst plead a lie for God: if
not, much less for any man. 3. Pronunciation of sentence: Here these two must
stand on the right and left hand, without respect of persons in judicialls,
Romans 2.11. Prove. 15.17. It Is equal abomination, to condemn the righteous, and
acquit the nocent. 4. Execution of sentence: To which motion these two Sluices
should be so opened, that all corruptions in persons, things, actions, may be
swept away out of Churches and Common Wealths. Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons
of men is fully set in them to do evil: Ergo, Let judgment run down as water,
and righteousness, etc. Tsedecha, from Tsadick, Divisum, divided; (...)
Righteousness divides to each one his due portion, according to right
proportion. Thus Solomon with his sword divides true justice to the two
mothers, and the sword is still Justices emblem. 2 King. 2.8. Elisha with his
mantle divides the waters, and passes over safely: This division is the author
and compleater of our safeties.
Its parts are divided

Into 1. Commutative: consisting in bargain, sale, contract.

2. Distributive: comprehended 1 In Praises, recompenses for well doing. 2 In
Punishments for evil doers, Romans 2.8.9.10, 11.


These two last are the legs of Commonwealths, and Churches; if either be
wanting, the whole body halts; If both, it is a Dagons trunck.

Some distinguish judgment from righteousness, as if the first consisted in
condemning condemnables, and the second in approving approvables. Job 36. ver.
17. Let Judgment and Righteousness take hold on thee.

Often one is set for the act, the other for the manner. Ps. 9.8. Shall
minister Judgment to the people in righteousness. Christ Joins them, John
7.24. Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

Sometimes Righteousness is taken more strictly, for defending and rewarding
Gods people; and Judgment imports an avenging wrath on Gods enemies, but what
God has joined, let no man separate. And thus we are come to the second
General of my method, Which is the observation from the whole words.

Doct. A main cure of corruptions, is, when judgment, righteousness,
execution, resembles the rolling of waters, and mighty streams.

Proof. Psalm. 72 contains a Prophecy of Christ under Solomon's type, who is
fronted in the dedication; a Psalm for Solomon: Give thy Judgments to the
King, and thy Righteousness to the Kings son. ver. 3. then the issue is,
Mountains shall bring peace. ver. 4 the children of the needy shall be saved,
the oppressor broken. verse 5. they shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moon
endures. ver. 6. he shall come down as rain upon the mowen grass, as showers
that water the earth. And so wash away corruptions out of Common wealths and
Churches; such were Ezra, Nehemiah, etc. in their days: and Christ in his,
John 2 15. whips away buyers, sellers in the Temple; and hucksters of Justice
will be whipped away by those defluxions.

To clear this channel more perspicuously, Three circumstances in the Text may
be dived into more deeply.

1 The term a quo, couched in the term ad quem; run down, therefore were first
above. 2 The term ad quem, arguing the descent of judgment, etc. 3 The
intervenient motion; run, or roll.
1. Judgment, righteousness must derive their pedigree from above, James 1.17.
Psalm 8.9. Justice and judgment are the habitation of his throne; he loves
them highly. Psalm. 33.3. God calls his Vicegerents Gods, and their seats are
above men, to stamp on their spirits Jehoshaphat's charge, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Take
heed what you do; for ye judge not for man; but the Lord is with you (on the
Bench) in Judgment. Verse. 7. Wherefore let the fear of the Lord be upon you:
Take your judgments from him. The nearer men's laws border on Gods, the cleerer
they run. Other waters are dead, deadden, deadly, breed barrenness, bursting
and death, as those of Jealousy, Number. 5. they can rise no higher then the
fountain. Self, man, corruption can cast forth nothing but mire, Isa. 48. ult.
Such were our Regalian, Episcopalian, carnalian streams, lately cried up by
some leprous Naamites: Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better
then all the waters of Israel? 2 King. 5.12


2. The term ad quem; Down, Psalm. 133.3. as oil from Aaron's head, beard, to
the meanest skirt of the garment: it must as well reach a poor Naboth, as a
potent Ahab; Too long have our waters been turned into blood, Psalm 105.25.
with not only a tenth, but a fifth part of our men, Rev. 8.10. Were turned
into wormwood, gall, hemlock, Jer. 8.19. Now since Immanuel is more gloriously
discovered, imitate him, Psalm. 68.5, 6. who is the Father of the father less, a
judge of widows causes. v. 6. Sets the Solitary into families, brings bondmen
out of chains, but drives the Rebels to dwell in a dry Land.

3. The intervenient motion; run, roll without demur, the laws common leprosy
in England.

What Tully said of Oratory, Elocution is the choicest part. Augustine of
Christianity, humility is the best ornament. I of Law, wise expedition is the
most beautiful piece. Waters, streams, seas motions, run in a Circular
circuit. From the Seas, waters are sucked up by the Sun into the clouds, these
unbucket themselves into the hills, thence flow your fountains, these by pores
crawle into the rivulets and brooks; which meeting in an assembly, unite their
powers into mighty streams, and these lay themselves down into the oceans lapp
again. One act denominates not; the text names waters in the plural (not a few
dribling drops) which rise into a strong torrent.

At the worlds deluge, we find a conspiring concurrence of them.

1. From the swollen Seas. 2. Then from the bigg bellied rivers. 3. Heavens
open their windows, else could never swinge away a whole world of corruptions.
Genesis 6.12. Truly, our channels in Churches, Commonwealths, are yet mighty
foul, need these mighty waters, streams, to cleanse them. So fall we into the
third General, the confirmation of the Observation, by Reasons taken from
waters.

1. Reas. Celerity: streams will not be interrupted in their journey: If you
pervert or divert them into many or undue courses (as Alexander vapor'd over
Ganges, to cut it into several channels) they will soon lose their name and glory.

These two should keep like Mary, to what Christ commanded his Disciples Luke
10.4. salute no man in the way. Court Bribey Greet them, they must make no
hault; not stalk in a Portugal pace. And yet may not run as Ahimaaz, with an
imperfect errand; but as Cushai, with the full truth.

This speedy motion argues them from above, James 3.3 last verses.

Thus God ran down on Isreal's cry in Egypt, and on the sins cry in Sodom,
without delays, after just scrutiny, Slow obedience is the first step to
disobedience, which is rebellion, the sin of witchcraft. 1. monstrous. 2 hardly
forsaken.

1. Whereto tends needless delays, but to keep the differencing party more
irreconcilable? 2 To play the box with the clients purse? 3 To squeeze tears
from the eyes of oppressed orphans and widows? which argues no truth of
Religion, James 1. ult. 4 To offer a rape on these pure virgins, judgment,
righteousness? 5 To spread a general mischief, as they who stop streams from
a mill, or water from a common conduit; hazarding many lives of 1. bodies, 2
states, 3 reputations, 4 souls.
O the quarrels started 'twixt the Patriarks and Phylistins about damming up
the fountains! Jer. 21.12. Execute judgment in the morning (.i.) timely,
speedily. Soldiers that must die, rather choose a speedy bullet, then a lingering
prison.

2 Rea. From their purity and cleanness. 2 Rea.
1 From base passions of love, fear, hope, etc. 2. Clearness from respect of
persons, declaimed against in many Scriptures. 3. Clearness from all sinful
self ends, 2. Chron. 9.17. Solomon's throne is of Ivory; pure gold overlaying
it; two lions standing by the stays. Lions are free from mous-like. fear:
'twas Ivory, not iron; noting all iron cruelty in Counsels, pleadings,
sentencings and executions to be absent thence; not too hard against innocent
and harmless; not leaden, and easily turned to every side. Isa. 1.6. complains
their silver was turned to dross, their gold to tin. Ours of late into
Excrements: A monstrous metamorphosis, desperate degradation! their wine into
water, ours lately into poison. Our Princes were companions of thieves. First,
Cheated cunningly, by others hands; or secondly, commandingly, by open violence.

These corruptions are intolerable in any, in every place, most abominable in
places of Judicatory, ordained to sponge away all such filthiness. Grand sins
in hell are no novell spectacles; But in heaven, in heavens Representative,
Gods; (so God himself styles them, Psalm 82.2, 3. this staggers the wisest
Solomon, Eccles. 3.16. Moreover I saw under the sun, the place of Judicatory,
that wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was
there. This in strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel were no strange thing;
but a prodigy in the Commonwealth of Israel. Where (not Princes sons) but
poor orphans went with pitchers in hand, and returned not only empty of water,
but full of mud; yea, their pitchers broken; Our fountains have resembled
Monastical Ponds, not only full of childrens, but men's, women's, childrens, and
whole families skulls.

May not our God take up Jeremiahs Quere, chap. 5. 7. Shall I pardon for these
things? shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

Some writers say, some waters in Macedonia being drunk by black sheep, change
their fleece into white. Nothing but the pure administration of judgment and
righteousness can transform our blackmouthed, blackhanded, blackhearted
adversaries into white, who cry, our corruptions are greater then in time of
Regal Tyranny, as if Rehoboams little finger were heavier then his Fathers
loins.

3 Reas. From waters naturalnesse of motion; 3. Reas.
whence issues their facilicy and constancy in running down: this flows from
internal principles. Indeed a new nature makes judgments race untireable; and
truly, piety is the best policy. Policy forces Judgments streams as waters
out of a pump. If the crew in the ship be compelled overlong to sweat at pump,
'twill tire the Mariners, and sink the vessel and goods.

The Politicians hieroglyphick, is, A man standing on his head, grasping the
grass with his hands, kicking heavenward with his heels. Such a station must
be very short, and such supports must soon yield and fail in such a
preposterous posture.

Rehoboams young Counselors could no more fasten his throne, then a tower in
the air: nor Jeroboams calves no more confirm the crown to posterity, then a
sucking babe protect a kingdom from an army of Giants.

What is natural, is facile and amiable, yea irresistible. As law constrains,
so nature loves its own actings. Can you command the seas at low water to stand
still without reflux; or at full, to keep its mark without flux? Omnia
difficilia facilia et prope. Nulla efficit amor.
Imitate then the grand Judge, Psalm. 33.5. who loves judgment and
righteousness; do the like. Love makes all things that are difficult, easy;
yea, as nothing.

4 Reas. From its irresistibleness. Court, complement the running waters,
chide or check the mighty streams, they will drive on, as Jehu, furiously; time,
tide, stays for no man. If any great log lie in the streams way, they will roll
them along; if any trash choke their channels, they will beesome them before them
into the grand ocean. Nor friend nor foe, nor bribe nor promotion, nor self nor
passion, should withstand their passages. Remember the Fig trees resolve, Shall
I leave my sweetness to become a wooden King? Felix may leave Paul in prison
gaping for a bribe; Herod may a while fear the people, which may stave John
from a present decollation. Pilat may tremble at the loss of Caesar's
friendship, and so may give up innocence it self against his conscience, to
gratify Jews: But is not Herod afterward haunted with John's Ghost, and Pilat
with Satan's hells scourges?

Love of safety, self, ease, honor, have too long stopped our streams; now times
of reformation are fallen upon us, and Christ begins to shine in a more Gospel
splendour; let not a shut, a bolted door, or gate of brass be able to keep him
out from entering our everlasting doors, Psalm. 24.
But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as the mighty
streams. I am now arrived at the fourth general, the Application.

1. Use Reaches every soul that hears me this day. 1 Use.
1. Art thou righteous, and have troubled the defluxion of those waters,
streams? then have thou fallen down before the wicked, and art a troubled
fountain, and a corrupt spring; Pro. 25.26.
that troubles the streams which glide from it. Thy misexamples are infectious.

2. Art thou unrighteous? then art thou one of them who have raised this
lamentation in this chapter, as high as heaven. Thy sins are the troublers of
England, as Achans of Israel. God may for thine own only sake, turn his back
upon all our Armies, and make us fly before our Enemies. Again, art thou a
private man? as man, thou art a Microcosm, a little world; and can the world
continue without water and streams; and these in a constant successive
defluxion? these two must have their irresistible race in all thy borders, else
art thou as Isreal's land in three years and half wanting rain, ready to starve
all that lived in it; thy gifts must wither, thy Grace will shrivell, thy
comforts shall languish and be near giving up the Ghost. Pro. 14.34.
If righteousness exalt a nation from a dunghill to a throne; unrighteousness
will tumble it from a throne to a dunghill, how soon then shall it demolish a
private man's foundation? Thou complainest the ship is leak, many foot of water
in the hold, every particular hand must take its spell at the pump, else the
vessel is like to perish for ever.

Again have thou a family, and lamentest the Great corruptions that swarm in
Commonwealth and Churches? Let the waters in thine own cisterne be clear. Oh
that each family in this Land, were as George Duke of Anhalts Chamber,
Academia, Curia, Templum.

1. An University, to dispute what waters, streams have run down from
Governors, Parents, Masters, Fathers, to servants, children, inferiors. This
carelessness is the ruin of Great and many families.

2. A Court, to pass severe sentence, and see its execution on all corruptions
that bubble up under their jurisdiction; Eccles. 8.11. Elies cruel indulgence,
cool reproofs, brake the neck, back, and bulk of all that posterity.

3. A Temple, for prayer, praise, holy conferences, heavenly practices, and
Christian encouragements, how soon would this hush our general complaints
against commanders, and turn the mouth of the Canon upon our own neglects?

Families are Churches, Commonwealths Nurseries. As these trees here are good
or bad, such will be the fruits in the Orchards. Should God come, as once to
the Vineyard, Luke 13.6.7. and find no fruits of righteousness, he might
after a hundred years manuring, trimming, not only threaten, but actuate a
decision from the Land of the Living. Do not many Masters, Parents, Governors
actions speak Cains language, Genesis 4. Am I my brothers keeper? Or the blind
man's Fathers Idiom; he is of age, let him speak for himself? But their blood
cries loud in heaven for vengeance, on such servant slayers, children killers.

3. You that are Judges, Magistrates on bench, at bar, if you hasten not forth
to help the Lord against those violent, mighty torrents of headstrong
corruptions, that like the host of Sisera, threaten our desolation; not I, but
the Angel of God threatens a doubled curse against you, Judges 5.23. Curse ye
Meroz bitterly, etc. I cannot read of any such obligation on Meroz to come into
the Lords help, as I know lies on you, who have your titles from him, to mind
you of your duties, scil. to stand for him; not to fight for God, is to fight
against him. Can God fight against God; or Michaels angels against Michael? Are
you not Gods? Psalm 82.2. Are you not stars in the higher sphere? stars never
fought against Israel, but against Sisera. Psalm 82.6. I have said, Ye are
Gods, and all of you are children of the most high ('it is monstrous to see
children imbattel their own Father) ver. 7. but ye shall die like men, and fall
as one of the Princes (remember such a one not long since has fallen) for
helping the mighty against God, ver. 8. Arise O Lord, judge thou the earth. If
men in power of Judicature, judge not for God, he will arise and take the helm
into his own hand, and judge the Judges.

Let me leave one text of Scripture seriously to be ruminated by you, when I
am far remote from you, it is Moses charge to the two tribes and half, whose
hearts were glued to a plantation on this side Jordan. Number. 32.23. If ye do not
this (help your brethren against a numerous Enemy) behold, you have sinned
against the Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out, first, to a
discovery. Secondly, or battery, or both, as Achan's did.

4. Are you Jurymen, take these two companions in the text, in your
consciences, as ye go hence to the Hall, And David's resolve as he went to the
Temple, Psalm 26.6. I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine
altar, O Lord. Washed in such a Bath, you may compass the bar boldly,
cheerfully.

The lives and estates not only of present persons, but future posterities hang
upon your lips, take these assistants to your consults, results. 1. A good
conscience. 2. Scripture Evidence. 3. Christian compassionatenesse. 4. Right
consideration of your latter ends, in which is wrapped up much of wisdom, Deuteronomy.
32.29. O that my people were wise, that they would consider their later ends.
When the great King of Jury must pass a verdict on all your verdicts, Juries,
and souls. And that without any the least atome of hope of reversing it. though
all the Angels of heaven and Saints there should beg it in tears of blood.

5. You witnesses, carefully carry with you these two in the text; ere any one
word run rashly down from your lips, hearken to the charge, Pro. 14.25. ye
that are true ones, A faithful witness delivers souls, in the plural, of
selves and others: ye that are false ones) but a false witness destroys souls;
of selves as others. The scope is to show what power is hinged on your tongues
testimonies, viz. to save, or sink the estates, credits, and lives of many,
many. Go ye false ones, and read your neck verse, Pro. 24.28. A false witness
shall not escape. viz. Gods tribunal; though he may, often does man's.

2. Use. Consists in exhortation, 2 Use.
to each soul in the Nation. Every man has had a finger in breeding these
Cobwebs of Corruption, in weaving these spider frames of poison. Let each one
with all might, labor a sweeping them down; throw them into the fire: to which
purpose take these Excitations, or Arguments.

1. Motive. From the Exuberancy of these corruptions, Genesis 6.12. 1 Motive.
The whole earth had corrupted their ways before God. And this brings in a
deluge that destroys all to eight persons. A flood of blood has been drowning
many thousands of English souls of late; and are our corruptions fewer then
formerly? instead of superstitions, Idolatries, etc. recited in this chapter,
bolstred in England, have not hideous blasphemies, hellish heresies, uncouth
Errors risen up in their room? and have not some of the prudent kept sile nce,
because 'twas an evil time? should not therefore our David's, their swordmen,
Levites, Priests, all Israel, unite shoulders, help to reduce the Ark from the
Philistims, and settle it in its due posture, place, basis! 1 Chronicles. 13.1.2. I
confess corruptions are more then my memory, or this time permits a
repetition, much less a declamation; I shall therefore epitomize all in one
Grand one, Theevery, General Theevery.

I have heard of a Corporation of Thieves in the Great City, some termed
standers, others walkers, etc. I wish it were banished the Land, or confined to
London walls only. But, Illiacos intra muros peccatur and extra; This (as the
fashions) has its Country house also.

Formerly this Corruption sat on the Throne, clothed with Tissue, Isa. 1.11.
formerly it sat in the Consistory, robed in Lawn sleeves; formerly it sat on
the Bench, clad in scarlet; formerly it stood in the pulpit, covered with
sable: Anciently the Lord found it too common among the old Prophets, insomuch
that he declares himself against it, and them, Jer. 23.30. Behold, I am against
those Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my word every one from his
neighbor. These had almost stolen away our Laws, liberties, lives, and our
Lord Jesus too, (if possible) and would have lain him we know not where. And
are our corruptions clean washed from our church channels? I dare not spare my
own coat: Are there not some of the younger fry of false Prophets, that can
steal in print, imprint those stealths, justify those stolen impressions
even with imprecations? And when all is done, all is Feately Done. I should be
larger in presenting you a mess of such ones, heterodox hogpodges; but I Will
shun the imputation of Envy, and fall on the second Motive.

2 Motive. From the necessity of these two, 2 Motiv.
as of waters, streams in a Land; how can the inhabitants live without these?
will not that place be truly, what false Spies said falsely of Canaan, a Land
that eats up the inhabitants thereof? nay, must I not say, a Land, the
inhabitants whereof eat up one another? Eccles. 1.7. All the rivers are still
running into the seas, else could not be maintained by the seas, not the seas
without the rivers. What quiet in Commonwealths, Churches, men's estates, or
Gods Worship, or what graces increase, support, continuance, without a constant
progress of these two?

They mistake a Regulation, that repute it an Annihilation; pure waters are
wholsomer then puddled ones, which Tirannicall Elephants have thickened to fish,
not see their faces in.

It Is a curse, that the heavens shall be turned into brass, Deu. 28.23.
earth into iron; yet want of waters pulls down this curse suddenly,
irremediably. And death consequently must sease on all the vegetables,
sensitives, rationalls; Yea, the whole Creation must soon surcease its
successive Individuals. Three years and a halfs want of water beleaguers King,
Peasant, man and beast. Elias rain, is Isreal's resurrection to life, and, our
text waters, streams to England. While no King in Israel, Judges ult.
every one did what he list: by King is meant supreme Governor, for then Israel
did not de perirs reges, as in Samuels time, when that Idol was as much doted
on by Israel, as by all other nations; but its better being where nil licet,
then omnia. Now self is the universal Idol, Nebuchadnezzers Image; burn them
in hot furnace, that bow not down at its command, and pipe.

3. Motive. 3 Motive.
From the several Excellencies found in waters, streams; too many to Enumerate
in so short a scantling; take a taste of some few.

1. These quench flames, fires, heates; so timely execution of judgment does
the contentions in Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Dum crastinam semper apparamus
aquam, praesenti conflagramur incendio.
Churches, Countries, corporations, families; it neglected, occasions the rulne
of all. Rome fell by its own civil flames, conflagrations.

2. These conjoyne heterogenealls. God and Israel are at ods, Joshuah and the
Camp fly before Enemies, Achans stealth has created this Chasma; judgment,
righteousness ran down as waters, streams, on the delinquent, and God and
Israel are thereupon reunited, as the chappie earth meets, becomes one, after
some continued showers, Josh. 7.

3. They Enliven most Creatures, hold up their lives by the chin Isa. 10.2. the
fishes die when waters dry. The lives of states and Churches must expire where
is no, or no due administration of Justice. Armies without these crumble to
Atoms; and nations untwist to nothingnesse.

4. They purge, cleanse the streeets channels, sources; so do these two in the
text, a land, from 1 Corruptions, 2 Corrupters. 3 Corrupted ones. All which
defile a Land as much, nay more then whoredom or Solomon's whore, which breeds
innumerable transgressions. Right Honorable, the due source of these two in
the text will gladden the City of our God, Psalm. 64.4. and as much sadden the
Citizens of Babylon.

'Twill not only exalt, but keep our Commonwealth in an established exaltation;
Yea, lift your heads above your Enemies. 'Twill break in shatters the
complicated confederacies of all our Enemies, Isaiah 8.10.11, 12. even for
Immanuel, and keep God with us.

'Twill fatten your own souls, estates, purses, posterities, Proverbs 11.25.
He that waters, shall be watered, as a gardener by watering his flowers,
herbs, roots, advances then growth, and his profits by their advance.

Last of all, it will cleanse the cankers in Churches and States, drive away
our Egyptian froggs, that have been one of our former plagues, change our
mournings into melodies, our lamentations into leapings, skippings for joy; our
real complaints into rich contents, and our sorrows into a song, not unlike
that of Angels.

Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will unto men: Amen.
(...).
An APPENDIX, showing 1. the rise, 2. progress, 3. issue of a difference
between the Author, and Master Samson Bond prementioned in the frontispiece.
1. MAster Bond preaching in Keverne, on Matthew. 5.8. divides it into 1. the
purchase, blessedness. 2. the price, purity in heart. 3 perpetuity, they shall
see God: had the second branch excepted against by Master Sweet the incumbent,
alleging that purity in heart could not be price of that purchase,
blessedness: Master Bond maintains it; a dispute is concluded. Many at the time
appointed flock to hear it. The lists are entered. Master Bond proves impar
congressus, flies to supplications, whereinvents many nonsensicalities (as the
author is credibly informed,) and the assembly is dismissed. Master Bond then
did cadere causay. Not long after Mr. Bond addresseth, by a bold Mercury, a
certificate of his own abilities, and orthodoxnesse, unto ten of us Ministers
then met at Truro, desiring our subscriptions; which we denied because of this
dispute, writing to them both to meet us at Halston: There Master Sweet
modestly, briefly opens his accusation. Master Bond as strenously justifies his
second branch, and vents this position, that the purity in heart, and blood of
Christ were one and same thing. Our Prolocutour replies, thereby he had
confounded Logic and Divinity; for purity was the effect, Christ's blood its
cause: to this effect we most of us spoke as the Spirit gave utterance. M. B.
Justifying some absurdity produce a printed Sermon.
Then the Author produced Master Bonds book on Romans 12.1, preached before the
Committee of assembly of Divines, May 20. 1646. Master Ley being chairman, and
giving Master Bond only a days Preparation, (as his frontispiece avers) Master
Bond seemed to deny the book to be his. But soon after confessed, through want
of time he was forced to be beholding to another library. Thus much for the
Rise.

2. Progress. The Author a while after called before Justices to depose what he
heard of unsoundnesse in M. Bonds preaching, took oath, 1. that M. Bond said in
Gluvius pulpit, that believers had not only Grace enough, but more then enough.
2. That Christ's blood and purity in heart were all one 3. that M. Bonds sermon
preached on Romans 12.1. was for the fourth part, or there about stolen out of
Doctor Featlies works. 4 that M. Bond seemed at first to disown that book; but
afterward confessed he was forced through want of time to be beholding to
another labor. At these last words M. Bond replies, God give you repentance,
M. Peter's for your perjury; you have taken a false oath, I never spoke such a
word.

Hereupon the Author bound him to the good behavior; M. Bond appears,
justifies the words, travenseth, sonds for two certioraries; and near a year
spent in the suit. At Bodmine Sessions Mr. Bond gives these words in the face
of the Bench, M. Peter's is a perjured man, and I Will prove him a perjured man: on
this the Author seeks a trial in Guildhall, but his witnesses not there,
'twas brought down to our assizes. Many importunities were made to the Author
for a reference, which he declines, till come to the bar where M. Bond's three
Counselors sue for a reference my Lord chief Justice moving the Author, it is
yielded unto: since which time, M. Bond vents many falsehoods, 1. that the
Author first sought a reference: 2. that the Author at bar desired it from
some of Master Bonds counsel, nominatim from M. Yard. 3. that the Authors
Counselor, Mr. Long also entreated a Reference, and many the like which M.
Quarum Minister of Manaan refuted to his face, and on oath.

3. The Issue, the day of reference came, Master Bond protests he never
called the Author perjured, yet was it proved by the oaths of Master High
Sheriff, Master Quarum, Master Halse, Master Upcot, all three Ministers; also
by the oaths of Master Pierca, Master Littleton, and testimony of absent Master
Coode: sothat Master Bond is told, he must acknowledge his error; who returns
this, I Will die first, but after a space, he is ordered to pay the Authors costs,
and confess his fault; which he did very odly. The Order was very easy, and
if justice be done to the Author, he shall silence his penn: if not, here is room
enough to discover the final period.

FINIS.

