(...)

The year running into his first Principles, or the burial of the Old year, or
Man.

Romans 6.23.

A SERMON, Intended to be preached at the Funeral of M. Edmund Whitwell, Deputy
of S. Olaves Bread-street, in the City of LONDON.

By Philip Perrey Master of Arts of Clare-hall in Cambridge, Rector of S.
Michael in the suburbs of Bristol by presentation, and by election Pastor of
Bedeminster, near adjoining to the said City of Bristol.

Mori certum, quando mori incertissimum.

In sylvis Leporem, in verbis quaere Leporem. London, Printed by W. B. for John
Saywell, and are to be sold at the sign of the Greyhound, in little Britain,
without Alders-Gate. 1654.

To his painful and Industrious Father, well-wisher to learning, Warden of the
Fishmongers Company in Alderman Lemmonds time, and now one of the Livery;
greeting.
Loving Father,
TO write or dictate many words to you, it will be counted but superfluity. But
yet least I should be guilty of Astorgy, want of affection to you my Parents; I
entreat you (good Sir) to accept of these few lines in a Sermon of mortality,
as a true sign and symptom of my thankfulness to you for my education, and my
preservation (under God) in my sickness. Your extreme charges and love I
acknowledge, and for this I shall pray that you may return to Heaven in a full
age (not yet I hope) And rest

Your dutiful and much Obliged Son PHILIP PERREY. M. A.

TO ELISABETH, the Widow of Mr. Edmund Whitwell, Deputy of S. Olaves
Breadstreet, greeting.
BEfore I speak not to, but of the dead, (dear Widow) the Apostle tells me it
is good manners to visit the Widow. I cannot, I may not, it seems by hand; but
it is no unmannerliness to visit you by my pen, the attendant of my hand, Your
Husband is dispatched by the hand of cruel death, and I am sure it was time,
because God had so determined to interre the old not the young: My Wife is
departed (the more is my grief) whether by death, or some other disaster, I am
yet uncertain. But that is not so much to my present purpose. And besides
(though some have reported, that to much learning has made me mad, this I
write with a blushing pen,) I am loath by a woeing letter, to turn your
mourning Weeds into Hymen's garments to quickly: Neither know I any reason why I
should. Receive only I pray, as a Symptom of my thankfulness to you living,
these few lines, after your Husbands decease. He that renders thanks for one
benefit, wittily and cunningly asks another (says Seneca:) But the latter is
none of my intent; My aim is only to free my self from ingratitude, to your
Son in Law Mr. Pears. And indeed I do this, mindeing and recording the
Apostles words: James 1.27.
Pure religion and undefiled, is to visit the Fatherless and the Widow, and to
live unspotted unto the Lord, or from the World. Farewell.

From my Chamber at the golden Lion in Barbican, in the Suburbs of London.
February 25. 1654.
The ELEGY Ogdodecastichon in E. W. Bur. by M. the SCOT.
HEre lies S. Olaves Deputy, 't is true;
But who must now succed? O sure 't is you,
Weeden by name; the first is gone, the best
The grave encloses now, the bodies rest.
And is the White Rose cut? must Weeds succeed?
O this is it may make thy heart to bleed.
(Dear Widow) Thy portion and thy lot
Is God. A Husband for thee; now the Scot
Has hid this Rose, or Olave in the grave;
O would the stone had choked death the Slave.
And must a Scot, who brought all evil hither?
Conduct my Sheep as to a loud belweather?
Unto his pen? My pen shall write no more,
't Is cruel death has robbed me of my store.
Of which, I pray receive this boon, but little
To adorn the body of our honored Whittle.
Adieu beholders look on me no more,
For Alms now resort to the Widows door.
Or thus:

HEre lies the body of Soapboyler Whitwell;
't Is well: But where is his Soul? in Hell?
O no, the Elysian fields receive
Souls stripped of bodies, whom death does bereave
Us off. The Usurer's at his heels,
And what then may you imagine his Soul feels?
No smart I hope. Death is three fold, Corporal,
Which makes us stand, Male, Female, and all.
The next is Spiritual, but what is that?
It is above the head; call it the hat.
The third's Eternal, (from which deliver us Lord)
Of Angels, men, and fiends it is abhorred.
At death the dole is given, eternal life;
Which is thy Husbands. What have thou? (dear wife)
An earthly Tabernacle here below?
If thou't reap joy, grudge not in tears to sow.
The custom's now to ask, what art thou? Then
What have thou? the Cock being dead (sweet Hen)
Pardon my boldness, (dear Mistress) now Adieu,
Your friend (not foe) thus truly bids to you.
Thine (so much as thou may be mine, or I mine own.) PHILIP PERREY. Minist.

(...) The year running into his first principles, or the burial of the old
year, or Man.
Romans 6.23. For the wages of sin is death, etc.
THere is a twofold state of Man often inculcated, and mentioned among the
Divines; one of which was before his fall, the other after it: The one a state
of happiness, because it had freedom adjoined to it, the other a state of
unhappiness. Insomuch as Man then (who was heretofore the Viceroy of the whole
World, a Lord at least, and free) was now brought under subjection, into a
condition vile, and beneath his first Creation; a state of service, yea,
bondage. The first, I say, was the state of innocence, wherein man had such
authority and power given unto him, that he might become Lord over all, but him
only, who was Lord of all, even God himself, which (as Aquinas says) is ens
primum tempore, essentia and dignitate, wherein he was so far from service or
slavery, that he had, as a Lord protector, or directour of all the Creatures,
he had almost the Supreme, the highest power, a good state, and well liked of
to, by Man and Woman; till the old Serpent had buz'd, Genesis 3.
or rather his't in their ears; eritis sicut dij. It is a royalty, a license
granted unto him, (before his fatal marriage of the Woman to him, or rather
extraction out of him, his side, telum intra propria latera vibrans) from Gods
own mouth. Genesis 1.28.
Have dominion over the fish of the Sea (mas in mare tanquam sydus non planeta
praedominans) and over the foul of the Air, (...) quasi (...) ( os homini
sublime, Ovid.
etc. this may be one reason subordinate why he was made upward that his
thoughts should fly upward ad inspectionem volatilium. Exp. loci.
our Savior sent us to the Sparrows for the worth of one farthing two of them)
and over every living thing that lives upon the face of the earth. Homo ab
Humo. The former intends the sublimity of his Soul; this the terrestreity, or
mortality of his body. But alas, quantum mutatus ab ipso? What a sudden, yea,
strange alteration I had almost said altercation) do we find? Behold now
another kind of man, (the Elements begin in his body and the towering thoughts
of his Soul to commence a civil uncivil war within themselves. He, which before
with Dives, sat as it were in an imperial Throne of Majesty, is presently cast
down with Lazarus full of sores, i. sins into an unexpected dungeon of misery.
He, who was to day Lord Paramount of all, to morrow, yea even the very same day
strangely dejected and cast down, Calv.
for some Divines hold that he fell in the very same day, in which he was
created. He, I say, though he were in the morning chief master of all, was by
the following night, (for what if his sin which is a work of darkness was then
committed?) fain to crave aid and help of those which were his servants, even
the very Creatures: and not the best, but the worst of them, a few Fig Leaves
to keep him, as he thought, from the sight of his jealous, incensed, and
alseeing omniscient Creator. But sure, he who like a Courtier, was at the top
Pinnacle of honor, was not thus suddenly cast down, and out of favor for
nothing. No sure; This would argue a kind of rashness and imprudence too in
him. Who was wisdom it self (God the Son I mean coessential and coeternal with
the Father, yea, coequal says the Apostle) yea, Athan. Phil. 2.9.
certainly there was a cause for the infliction of this punishment. Sin it was
which made that liberum animal, (Ames.).
that had liberam voluntatem and arbitrium. That Majestical creature, who only
of all the rest had the benefit of free will and arbitrament, thus to be
captivated to and yield obedience to the baser disaffections of his Soul. His
unbelief, his pride, his despair, his overcuriosity in prying into Gods secret
knowledge, Inst. l. 1.
with many other sins, which Calvin and other Divines reckon up in the tasting
of the Apple, or Fig, which for all it hung so high on the Tree, caused man
arborem inversam, thus to fall. Some imagine about Autumn: the fall of the
leaf. I am sure he had brought forth little, or no fruit, being arbor not only
nata, but sata between the four great waters. These were the things, Genesis 2. B.
of Wells. in Ps. 1. Luke 10.7.
which brought him into bondage, and made him that was free become a servant at
least, if not a slave. And sure the labourer is worthy of his hire says the
Evangelist from Christ. But it must be in the same kind, and agreeing to the
nature of the service. Now Adam, and so consequently his whole posterity, (for
as is the root, so are the branches) which had this sin, not only by
imitation, Aust.
(which was the error of the Pelagians) but by propagation to. The nature it
self is corrupted. And for this act of infamy man is too famous, for this
unworthy act worthy of a recompense, of pay for his work In which, because he
did nothing else but as it were seek his own destruction, and dissolution of
his body and soul; God rewarded him accordingly, gave him that he sought for,
even death it self. Which both according to Philosophers and Divines to is
dissolutio corporis and animae: Arist.
A divorce of the body from the Soul. Which was according to Gods own
composition with him, he agreed with him for so much, and no more, Genesis 2.17.
nor no less. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; dying
thou shall die, the Hebrew signifies, (as the marginal Notes declare.) And he
(who was the truth it self) would not be worse than his word. All which our
Apostle here considering; and withal setting down Man, as he was indeed, in
the form of a servant (the master was so, Phil. 2.
and the servant is not above the master) where he mentions the hire it self
that was paid him for his service. The sum total of which is significantly
expressed in the first Metaphorical words of the Text. The wages of sin is death.
Where S. Paul following this apposite allegory of service and freedom: (because
righteousness is a state of freedom, and sin of slavery, which state, it may be
of service by reason of the indiscretion of their depraved nature agrees better
to them than power, or dominion) therefore the Apostle bids them, if they will
needs be servants to make choice of the best masters they can, not tyrannizing
and domineering sin, but meek and heart-winning righteousness, verse. 18. of
this Chapter. Romans 6.22.18.
Being then made free from sin, ye become servants of righteousness. In which
approbation of their present state is a kind of exhortation for their
continuance in the same. But yet if they would by no fair means be recalled
from the service of sin, he would try whether terror would divert them from
it. And therefore lays down the words of the Text, as a terrifying reason and
dehortation unto them, for the wages, etc. A thing accounted most terrible
amongst the Heathen, except some of their Heroes, or noble spirits, their
high-minded volunteers, but of others much feared and hated. As if the Apostle
should have thus expostulated with them, why you, O Romans, who have
heretofore lived by the light of nature, wanting, or at least being without the
light of grace, and so have been superstitiously ignorant of the deity, and
changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like unto
corruptible man, birds, etc. changeing the truth of God unto a ly; worshipping
and serving the creature more than the Creator, 1 Romans 21. and in this have
committed most abominable Idolatry, with many other most execrable sins. I tell
you now, and even weeping, the end of these ways, of these sins is none other
but sorrow, and even death it self. The catastrophe and conclusion of sorrow,
(it ought be at least, for we must not be sorry as men without hope. You
therefore that accounted so much of life, that (as the Orator speaks) quaevis
sit ratio expediendae salutis, Tullie.
any way to save life and health; Arist.
and that death, as the Philosopher speaks, is (...); the most terrible of
terribles. Let it then work the same effect upon you, as it is in it self, to
wit, fear. For the end of these sinful ways of yours is no better, the wages
of your sins is death. In which words you may observe with me these two general
parts. 1. Here is the slavery, bondage, and service of man, signified and
expressed unto us by the first word of the Text wages, being a thing properly
belonging unto servants, which is likewise declared unto us by the matter of
the service, which was sin. The wages of sin. 2. Here is the stipend, or pay
that he received for his service, and that was death. Stipendium peccati mors
est. The wages of sin is death. And thus you have the division of the first
part of this verse. The words which at this time we mean to treat of. And first
of the first, The slavery, bondage, or service of man, signified by that word,
Wages, and further demonstrated unto us by the matter, or the manner of the
service, which was sin, the Wages of sin. From whence without any further
ambages, or circumlocutions, you may observe this very useful Doctrine
following from the words.

Doct. The state of every man in sin, is a state of slavery, bondage, or
service at the least. They were comminatory and angry words of God unto Adam,
the Father of us all, Genesis 3.17.
Genesis 3.17. Cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it
all the days of thy life. With sorrow! What Is that? 1. With much labor and
toil thou shall eat it, which before might have come up freely, signifying the
slavish and serviceable estate of Adam after the commission of sin. Verse. 19.
And we sure, which are ex eodem luto confecti, from dust as well as he can
receive no dust from this dust of the earth except we labor. It was sin that
did bring us into this toil. We, whose teeth are set on edge by our forefathers
tasting of the sower Grapes, must likewise have some sower sauce by reason of
our sins mingled with our sweet pleasures: serve we must, if we will live,
since by the least sin we have deserved death, (yea, eternal, ex consideratione
oppositi in the end of the verse) and this long ago. Non citius nati quam
damnati. (Aust.) No sooner born to live, but if God had not born the longer by
his mercy with us, we might very justly have been deprived of life, and so made
subject unto death. As we are born servants to it (from the womb to the tomb
sometimes) that was to pay us our due. Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread (says Jehovah) serve thou must,
if thou will have bread to eat, sin has brought thee to it, for the condition
of every sinner is a state of service. Genesis 9.21.
When Noah had committed that foul sin of drunkenness, the words are, He drank
of the Wine and was drunken. See here the true, but sad effect of this sin
according to that of the Poet. Ovid.
Quid non ebrietas designat? operta recludit. This sin of his was not so
closely done, but that it will display, and lay open his nakedness. And his own
son, whom natural duty bound to conceal, yet lays it open further, and reveals
it to his other brethren. A most abominable sin to vilify so much, and neglect
him, who under God was the cause cause of his being. Sanctum Patris nomen,
especially of such a one the name is holy, and therefore he a most unsanctified
Child to show such strange irreverence to his most reverend Father. A most
execrable sin. And behold therefore now (which is the thing I intended to note
for our present purpose) see I say, Verse. 25.
the event, the due punishment inflicted upon it in verse. 25. of the forenamed
you find it. Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his
brethren, and not only in the general together; Verses 26.27.
but to both them severally in the subsequent 26. and 27. verses. Blessed be
the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant, and again God shall
enlarge Japhet, and Canaan shall be his servant, a recompense due unto him for
so vile an act. Verse. 26.27.
He that would be so high, that by reason of his neglect he seems to be above
his Father, it were high time he were brought lower. He that was so free of
showing his fathers shame, and so liberal in his scoffing, must now be brought
down, that freedom must be taken from him; and for this sin he must be made to
serve, and that which yet further aggravates his misery, his brethren: Now
they will put off their brotherlike bonds and affections, and lay a yoke upon his
neck, serve he must, because he had sinned, and serve his brother because he
had offended and sinned against his Father: the son being most obliged to exact
recompense for the offense done to the parent. Places for the proof of this
Doctrine are very frequent in holy writ. I will name only one, or two more,
and I hope these one, or two witnesses will be sufficient for the confirmation
of the truth of this position unto you. The Apostle proves this, speaking of
sin, Romans 6.19.
Ye have yielded your selves servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto
iniquity. A strange seeming tantologie; But Galvin renders a very good reason
for it. The first is opposed to sanctity toward God, or holiness of life; The
latter has a respect to the injuries offered to our Neighbors, as the very
words do signify, ut Iniquitas quasi non Equitas, quae fit inter aequales: to
our Neighbors, which are of the same nature, and equal to us by creation, (not
in regard of God who is above us.) And by the second repeated iniquity, which
takes away the seeming tantologie, he means universalem naturae corruptionem,
the whole corruption of man's nature: unto corruption, i.e. adding more unto the
former, ut iniquitatis regnum in vobis vigeret, that the Kingdom of sin may
flourish, and you become captivated slaves and vassals unto that old tyrant the
Devil; and all this by reason of your sin: That is it which makes you servants,
S. Paul insinuates no less. Tit. 3.3.
For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures. I might indeed have gone further in the proof of
this, especially to men of this age, that take so much delight in this
thraldom, that they seem rather to think it a mastership then a service. But as
the proverb says, verbum sapienti sat' est, to you whom I perceive not the
unwisest readers, I know it may suffice. Others, if they desire more, I must
reply to them, as he to his good holding stomack't guest, especially at this
festival time of Christ's Nativity, for I suppose, yea, I think I may determine,
he was born in Winter: Luke 1.
for the Shephards were in the field praising God for it, and why should not
we. We can mump a Nativity Pie, etc. and must that stop the mouth so much, that
we may not praise God for his Sons incarnation, fiat voluntas Dei, says my
diurnal prayer. Math 6.
If some be satisfied it is sufficient, unus not sufficit omni: Or as that
distressed client to the over hearing judge. Audi Alteram partem, Hear the
rest, (then let him give a quietus est.) And it may be in that thou may pick
some thing more, that may satisfy thy appetite. In the mean time I shall
descend to some particulars, and that more clearly, yet to demonstrate unto
thee (most courtious Reader) the truth of that general I propounded, man a
sinner is truly called a servant: And that both according to the inward and
outward part of man. His body is nothing else but the mere emblem of slavery
and servitude; which seems to be born to little else but labor, toil, and
trouble. He has greater variety of work belonging to the body, then he has
members to perform them. Those feet which were so swift to commit the sin
(...), are now slow enough to undergo the service. The hands which were so
nimble to reach the forbidden fruit prepared without their labor, must now
labor and toil, and that tediously before they can obtain it. No fruits of the
ground, but they must be the fruits of their own labor. Experience tells us
the young man's days are nothing but a time of labor; and for old men, they do
hoc morbo laborare, they labor of this disease that they cannot work. Psalm.
104.23. Psalm. 90.10.
Man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the evening; yet is
their strength but labor and sorrow. And he who was wise enough to judge of
these things, (The Scripture styles him the wisdom of the Father) he lays
this down for an infallible truth; Eccl. 1.
All things are full of labor. And again in the fourth Chapter of the same
book of the Preacher; he, who was the truest and most powerfully pathetical
preacher of God, preaches this Doctrine, or definite proposition unto you: That
there is no end of the same. And as for his Soul, Divinioris spiritus afflatus,
the breath of that Divine spirit, P. Cons.
of that purest act and being of God himself; now behold by reason of its sin,
how impure it is become, peccatorum sterquilinium, Burton.
Nothing else but a mere dunghill of beastly uncleanness, in a nastie case of
vile and base servitude. Behold now those faculties of the same, before time
the favorites of God the King of Kings, thus miserably by reason of their own
defaults cast out of favor: of Lords and Masters become mean vassals and
servants. I remember what the story says of the Lord Cromwell, and Frisgobald
of France, the one the Master, the other the servant. But in process of time,
the case was plainly altered according to the Lawyers: The Master was degraded,
the servant exalted: The Master a beggar, the servant rich and highly promoted,
(I do not mean to touch the Mountains least they smoke) and dominering over the
Master. Thus it is with the affections of poor distressed man. This little
World by reason of the vertigo in the brain, is merely turned upside down:
Those higher powers of the Soul are made servants to the inferior, and lower
affections of the same. The understanding and will, which were in the Soul
tanquam Rex and Regina beati in solio, as King and Queen highly be-efied in
their Throne, now captivated and enslaved to the mere outward senses, which are
only as so many Porters to the Court-Gate, to let in and out guests (for every
object is a guest entertained by the Soul) I say, which serve to let them in or
out as they are liked, or disliked of by the royalty and government of the
understanding and the will. (...). Aristotle heretofore called the mind or
understanding the eye of the Soul, which could see and foresee to all kind of
danger by way of prevention that might happen unto the same. But now this eye
is darkened with Ignorance and Superstition: And if thine eye be evil, Math.
6.23.
how great is that darkness? i.e. altogether darkness: the question does seem
to imply no less: For the cause being removed, the effect presently ceases,
according to the Logician: And this was the plot of sin, or rather the Devils
by sin, First to bring the King, the understanding, into bondage, that then the
inferior parts of the subjects for very fear, (if nothing else) might not
resist him. It is with the mind in this case as it was with Sampson amongst
his enemies; he was not absolutely captivated unto the Philistines until they
had put out his eyes, and deprived him of sight. So it is with the Soul of man,
if the understanding, the eye of it, is not blinded, so long it is not Satan's
slave, nor sins servant. But if this eye once be blinded, it works in this
sinful World, like the horse that is hoodwink't in the Mill; Arist.
not so much as seeing, at least not seeing so far as to understand what it
does. It was the axiom of the Philosophers, and a true one secundum
apparentiam. Voluntas sequitur dictamen intellectus, The will follows the
dictate of the understanding. But sure this seems to be quite contrary in our
present cause of Divinity: Not the understanding the will, but the lower
affections draw the will; and the will in sinning seems to force the
understanding: or else why die men in these bright sunshine times of the
Gospel? when they see and understand too, that they are against the word of
God, yet they will commit so various and heinous sins. And I can give no
present reason for it, but this, That they are tanquam noctuae coram sole;
unless they are as Owls, which become blind before the Sun, that enlightens
all other, creatures, but darkens only those. This Sun of righteousness in
Malachi his Evangelical Prophecy enlightens many other poor Souls, Mal. 4.
when as these (miserable it is to see) become start blind. It is with our
understanding and will, as with a Justice of Peace and his Clerk. The silly and
indiscreet Justice not able to judge sufficiently of matters himself, is faign
to be guided and ruled by his Clerk: And our understanding by reason of sin,
blinded with ignorance, is now content to be overswayed by the will, which
indeed should be only his Clerk to follow his dictate, precept, and
Commandment. And thus far you see man's understanding appear plainly to be a
servant, if not a prisoner, yea, worse then that, a very slave. Neither is the
will free: This as a comate with the former in ill husbandry must taste of the
same sauce: They both have sin for their master, like to those beasts they draw
in the same yoke. It is there said, Sam. 1.6.12.
when the Kine were yoaked together under the Ark of the Lord, they went along
the highway and lowed as they went, so these two, our will and understanding
draw (as these Kine in the same yoke, under the Ark as it were, where was the
rod of Aaron and that budding too for correction, as well as the two Tables of
the Law for instruction heretofore) under the same burden of sin. And I know no
reason but they should with these Kine low and grieve for the same, and cry out
in this Egyptian darkness, as those Israelites in old Egypt, our burdens are
to heavy for us: and yet at the same time say they want straw, i. e. small sins
to play withal. For your very will, that liberum arbitrium, that freest part
of man is now become servile; Imagination so far overrules the will, that it
does not only make you to offend man by iniquity, but sin against God by
impiety. To this purpose are those words of the Apostle. Coll. 2.23.
These things indeed have a show of wisdom in will worship, etc. Ovid.
Sic volo, sic jubeo, was the Poets description of the wills imperial
government: But alas now the mere imaginative faculty of the Soul, the fancy
of man, seems to have this supremacy. It is not, what I will, that I fancy:
But these are termini convertibiles, (as the Logician speaks) The proposition
is convertible, and thus it is true: What we do but imagine, that we will. The
least titillation, or tickling of the fancy, now in this state of corruption,
in a manner forces the will to the willing of the object, let it be never so
bad. The adulterous man fancies his lascivious mistress, and he makes presently
to her. The drunkard fancies his potcompanions, and then he can no longer be
from them, etc. The fancy accounts them to be sweet sins, and therefore the
will must to the acting of them. But alas, In vino venenum. In the sweetest
Wines lies that poisonous sin of drunkenness. Latet anguis in herba, on their
green and pleasant bed lies that riggeling, insinuating, yea, serpent-like sin
of adultery. Yet for all this, the Will wills them, they are sweet, and
therefore she must have them: And in all this seems to be but the baser, the
more vile a servant and slave. And for all the understanding pronounces it to
be against reason, yet like an ill-affected patient, she is still inclining
most to that which does her most hurt: As a silly sullen prisoner, though shown
the way to be free, yet still will stay in prison, and therefore the more a
vassal, the more a servant. And thus you see the will and the understanding
having their Necks in the same chain of misery.

There is a third, (if that be any comfort to them) the fancy and imagination
have the same fetters about them, for they seem to be subject to the mere
outward senses, eyes, ears, etc. which are only as so many windows to let in
sinful objects into the palace of the Soul, to rob her of her proper liberty;
to convey enemies into her, (as Tarpeia the Sabines into the capitol at Rome)
to captivate and enthral her. In a word. All the affections that belong unto
our Souls as joy, grief, fear, etc. are no better then so many servants and
slaves to as many sins and vices. Alius libidini servit, alius ambitioni, omnes
spei, omnes timori, etc. Macrobius.
as Evangelus well discourses, whence the Poet styles them no less then
servants. Qui metuis, qui parva cupis, qui duceris ira: servitii patiere jugum,
etc. Not to speak of the Countrey-mans life; for that is nothing but a mere
epitome of slavery, I mean for outward service, (not inward contention.) Lovers
are slaves to their Mistresses, Rich men to their Gold, Courtiers generally to
lust and ambition: and all slaves to our affections. The one with Alexander is
a slave to his fear; the other with Caesar to pride; another with Vespasian to
his money, and the last with Heliog abalus to his gut, or belly. All servants of
sin: Omne sub regno graviore regnum. Even Princes themselves are under another:
And it were to be wished that that subjection were not under the Tyranny of sin
and Satan. Court sins being commonly now set forth (which are flattery,
dissimulation, etc.) as books cum privilegio, committed with a License, because
they suppose none are able to control them. But let them know even Nobles may
be bound with lincks of iron, as well as Manasses was in chains. No: This is no
privilege in the Court of heaven, God commands his Prophets to tell Israel of
her sins, and Judah of her transgressions: Jer. 17.1. Exp.
yea, hear more. The sin of Judah is written with a Pen of Iron, (which is hard
to enter, but being once entered is dureable) and with a point of a Diamond,
our sins being as glass very perspicuous, and they must be cut asunder, as
Samuel cut King Agag in pieces, though in sumptuous apparel. And therefore
since they had sinned and given themselves to it, Pemb.
God gives them also up to it (obdurando cor, and detrahendo gratiam) he
punishes them with the same slavery. i. e. the most sumptuous Temples and
fairest Churches, is it not so? O that I in my particular had not reason to
mourn in sable for my Bedeminster, now as yet lying in its own ashes and
ruinous heaps of indigested stone. God send us living Temples, and that also
re-aedification. And this is all the difference between the Courtiers and the
poor man's misery: The one is in Iron chains, the other in golden fetters, and
is it not all one to be bound in Irons and Gold? Both are in bondage, and if
there be any difference at all, it is that of S. Austins: There Is, as Gold, are
splendidiora peccata: there is more illustrious and notable sins; howsoever they
are sins, and are as so many clogs unto the Soul. And this, which is worse, the
opener the sin, the closer prisoner he is, who is captivated unto it. O miserum
principem, ideoque miseriorem, quod miseriae sensum perdidisti, cries that
tragic Poet of pious Herminigildus. I am sure, I may more boldly say it of
these impious sinners: Miserable they are in themselves, but more miserable
yet, in that they perceive not themselves to be miserable. Servants they are,
but the more in slavery, the more subject unto sin, in that they account
themselves not to be so. And that (with which I will conclude this position of
ours, concerning man's service unto sin) that I say, which is said of the Soul
in general, may be also affirmed of every Soul in particular. Anima est in
corpore tanquam in carcere, The Soul is in the body as in a prison, where every
outward sense almost is as so many Jaylors, or Keepers domineering over her.
And from this none are exempt. Every one by sin is made of a servile condition.
In many things we offend all. James 3.2. Romans 5.12.
And all men have sinned; says S. Paul. And therefore all must suffer. All by
reason of this are in bondage and service: Plato.
And therefore that Divine Naturalist calls it as siduam servitutem, extremam
and meluct abilem, A continual and almost inevitable slavery to be so
captivated to vices. And who is free? That is nemo, no not so much as one is
free; all servants captivated by sin; and that to these three masters.

To the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, i. e. To the Devils temptations, to
the Worlds allurements, and to the Fleshes corruption. First to Satan, as the
chief Tyrant: Then to the other two, as to his Bassa's Viceroys, or substitutes.

To the Devil first, 1 Timothy 5.25.
so S. Paul complains. Some are already turned aside to Satan: and then
servants to the Prince of this World; yea, the World it self, so the same
Apostle speaks. Ephesians. 2.2.
Ye walked according to the course (speaking of them when they were reprobate
silver, and could not otherwise pass) according to the Prince of the power of
the Air.

And in the third and last place, you are slaves to your own lust and flesh,
Paul follows it: We all had our converfations, i. e. (I as long as in sin) in
the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires, or as the Greek word (...)
signifies, the Wills of the flesh, etc. And now me thinks I am in a large
field, in which I might expatiate my self. In a large Ocean, in which I might
rove far: But I think by this time it is better, vela contrahere to let down my
fails. The latter part of my Text calls me nearer home; these things it may be
will be more fitly handled and enlarged in another portion of Scripture, thus
much therefore shall serve to have spoken of the first Doctrine, there slavery
unto fin. A word, or two of the uses, and so likewise I shall speak something
to the second, i. e. The wages in particular death.

1. Use. Is for the deploration of man's miserable condition in fin; and in that
an exhortation to him for to leave it, man by nature is made upward, (...).

Os homini sublime dedit caelumque videre, Ovid.
says the Poet. And as his nature is, so by often use and practice is his
inclination and disposition, in actions natural he claims the priority: In
actions political and civil, those which respect him ( qua hominem, as he is
merely man) he desires the praecedence and the prae-eminence, Superiority, or
supremacy is the mark he still aims and shoots at. He that is lowest desires
to be higher; and he that is high, labors to be highest: Only in actions
spiritual, and those which belong unto the Soul, man is of a base dejected
nature: a slave and servant he is to the vilest sin. You know what the
Centurian said to Christ: Luke 7.8.
I am a man set under authority (not usurping it, observe the order) having
under me Soldiers, and I say unto one, go, and he goes, and to another come,
and he comes, and to my servant, do this, and he does it; and has not sin the
same tyrannizing power over men? Does not that say to this man? go to the
acting of this sin of murder and adultery, (as it did David,) and he goes: And
to another, Come to these pot-companions; (who as the Prophet says, Isai 5.11.
rise up early in the morning, that they may drink strong drink, that continue
until night till Wine inflame them. Ho, drink with those, and be merry.) Come
says sin, and how suddenly do they come, (even as the Lord is said to hear
before they ask) almost before the base temptation of Satan to it is settled
within them, and so like so many Sybarites, or Epicures, do wallow in
drunkenness and uncleanness. Not as Christians living soberly, as S. 2 Tit. 12.
Paul exhorts them. And does not the Devil with the Centurion say to a third?
Do this art of cheating or defrauding thy Neighbor, do this any sin, and does
he not do it? Yea, is he not rather even preventing the Devils temptation, by
the willingness of his corrupted nature, in the acting of any sin?

You see thus your miserable and servile condition in sin; and will ye yet
follow it? Me thinks you should be ashamed, thus to turn your backs upon God
your King, and to side with the Devil, a malignant usurper. Thy state while
thou art thus is worse then any Turkish slave, which the whole World almost now
so much abhorres. The worst of you here, I know, if he could avoid it, would
not be a servant, no not to the kindest and most royal Master, if he could be a
master himself, and have servants that might obey him: And will you be
Superiors and Governors in worldly affairs, and yet suffer your selves to be
underlings in spiritual things? I tell you the sinful man is no better then a
servant, a slave unto his sins: And if you credit not me, yet believe the
Apostle, Romans 6.
who often tells you the same: It was the speech of the ancient Senators of old
Rome unto the common people upon the removing of the Tribuni, a certain kind
of treble Governors by Tribes, Quid expectatis, number deflagrare omnia passuri
estis? Non pudet lictorum majorem prope numerum in foro conspici, quam
togatorum aliorumque? Now what do you exexpect any thing but an inflammation,
or deflagration of all? Are you not ashamed to suffer more Bumbalies and
Sarjants to appear amongst you, then free men, etc. May not I, in this case say
the same to you? Why what mean you by this rebelling against God? By your
continuance in sin? Surely, you can expect nothing else but utter ruin and
destruction. Are you not ashamed to harbor so many corruptions within you,
which are as so many Bailiffs from the Devil, to arrest you at his suit? and
cast you hereafter into the dungeon of darkness for ever? You suffer scarce one
free man, Gal. 5.1.
one free grace of God, and Christ within you to guide you and direct you. Be
not entangled with the yoke of bondage: And if this will not serve you, I will
persuade you a little further, yet by the same arguments the Romans did their
Soldiers against their enemies, Pugnatis pro aris, pro focis, pro liberate,
pro liberis, As long as you willingly go on in sin, you have no good by the
Church; you loose your liberty, you are servants to sin. Draw therefore thy
self out of these gins and fetters of Satan: Take up arms against that sin,
which has so long captivated thee, thy Children, thy Family: and now defy it.
In that thou have obeyed sin, thou have not only enslaved thy self, but
others. It may be thy Wife, thy Children, thy Family (with Joseph) have learned
of thee to swear by the life of Pharaoh as well as thou. In a word: Art thou
addicted to any kind of sin? why man, thy very company may make them to do the
same, (...), Evil company corrupts good manners: as says S. Paul. 1 Cor. 15.33.
If therefore thou defire to have any part in Christ and his Church; if thou
would have thy Children, thy Family do well; if thou would (lastly) thy
self not die ever, but live eternally, leave sin: least that leave thee in the
lurch; And make thy self a servant of righteousness, bind thy self to it, not
to the grave like stinking menstruous rags of sin, for otherwise thy wages is
set here down determinative, say the Schools, i. e. death, which is indeed
ultima linea rerum, the determination and period of all our natural days,
whereas the reward of others is eternal life, the duration (if I may so call
it, and why not?) of a day without a night. Whence S. Rev. 21.22, 23. Exp. Ps.
84.6.
John most Divinely sets forth his heavenly Temple. The pathway to it is the
street of the City of pure Gold (not the valley of Baca) as it were transparent
glass, Ecce puritatem and claritatem: And I saw no Temple therein: Hic Ecce
Theologum the word of God sine Templo in vita aeterna, and the vail of the
Temple here rent at his death. And I would I might not justly take up the same
complaint. I have a people or Congregation: But my Temple as Jerusalem was the
Wall of it burned down. Neh. 1.3.
I wish I might not say by a perfidious brother, and the Gates thereof were
burned with fire, Exp.
for the Lord (God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple, he that was on earth)
the sacrifice: agnus ille mactatus. And the City had no need of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it; and
the Lamb is the light thereof. In the pacifical Prophet we read of the Lion and
the Lamb lying down together; but here he, who was the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, now the Lamb of God, fits alone. Col. 3.1.
Ecce, Solstitium perpetuim solis. Juscitiae^ Christ the Sun of righteousness
sits, Exp.
in praesenti implicat aeternitatem, at the right hand of God: Mal. 4.3.
Never again to descend with healing in his wings, till that general day of
doom: When he shall change our vile body, Phil 3.21. Exp.
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, similitudinem non
paritatem aut aequalitatem, according to the working, ( no more passion, Exp.
but action only) whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself. Let not
sin then, or therefore reign in your mortal body, Romans 6.12. Exp.
as the Apostle speaks (least it as another Haman exalted, swelling with pride
even against Mordecai's humility) that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof;
neither yield your Members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin (the
former against thy Neighbor, the latter against thy God,) but yield your
selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your Members as
instruments of righteousness unto God.

2. Use. Is none but that of S. Hierom. That men would not aspire too high in
this sinful World, but be content with that lot which is cast into the lap. It
may be it is not so good for them to be high: the power they have being abused
may make them the more servants unto sin. As it did Haman in his cruel design
against Gods people the Jews, Esth. 7.4. Exp.
if God had not appointed Esther to prevent it. Who boldly delivers her
message, as to God, Ecce virilitatem (...) sexus imo foeminini. For we are
sold, I, and my people to be destroyed, Exp.
(I whom thou have chosen as an instrument to increase and enliven thy own) to
be slain, (secundum corpus) and to perish as our enemies think, secundum
animam. This I take to be the meaning of the holy Ghost here.) But if we had
been sold for bondmen and bond-women I had held my tongue (an admirable
Rhetorical insinuation) although the enemy could not countervail the Kings
damage. If men then will be no more in slavery then they are, let them content
themselves with those lower places which are freest from the commission of
sins. (I speak not this to bite, or back-bite, but to caution any authority)
Occasio facit furem: The higher the place, the more occasion is offered unto
sin; and our corrupt nature (as Children about this time on sweet and gilded
Marchpans) is apt enough to lay hold of it. I Will end this use with the words of
the forenamed Father: do not repine in thy low, or so servile citate, for Satis
est potens (says he) qui servire non cogitur: For thus thou art high and
powerful enough, in that thou art not so much in service to, or under the
dominion of sin. Thus much for the uses of the first doctrine. I hasten now to
the second part of the Text, which is the Wages of sin particularly specified
in this word death. The Wages of sin is death.

And here, before we proceed any further, I pray note the earnestness of the
Apostle in the following of this argument, he was very loath to leave it, being
so enforceable to them. Why was it not enough once to tell them so? verse. The
end of these things is death. No, non frustra aliis verbis idem iterum repetit,
sed terrore duplicato magis detestabile reddere peccatum voluit. Jo. Calv.
It is Mr. Calvin's note upon the Text. If the first reason would not serve; he
repeats it again in other words, that by often inculcating, he might make the
sin the more odious to them: He speaks it the more urgently, that, as Children
with their lesson, if they will not learn at first, by often reciting it, he
would even beat it into their heads. So then the second Doctrine we may gather
from the words, without any wresting of them, are no other but the words
themselves.

Doct. The Wages of sin is death: and that three ways. All which before I
insist on, receive a modern recapitulation of my foregoing discourse. D. F^a^ly.
Sin eclipseth the light of the understanding, disordereth the desires of the
Will, weakneth the faculties of the Soul; distempereth the Organs of our body;
disturbeth the peace of our conscience, choaketh the motions of the spirit in
us: kills the fruits of grace, enthralleth the Soul of the body; and the body
and Soul to Satan. Lastly it depriveth us of the comfortable fruition of all
temporal (and if continued in) of the fruition and possession of all eternal
blessings. First.
The first is a death unto grace, which sin causes in regard of the absence of
grace altogether, or in respect of the suspersion of the acts of grace, for
some certain time, which is plainly proved in that Epistle to the Ephesians, in
two places: where the Apostle especially opposes living in grace, Ephesians. 2.
Zanch.
or by it; and death in sin, i.e. death to grace, so it is in the first verse.
And you has he quick'ned, who were dead in trespasses and sins. Exp. loci.
It was time for S. Paul to praefix a conjunction copulative, since sin had
made such a separation: Quick'ned, is raised from death, or restores unto life
ex nihilo by grace: For there the Apostle compares these two states of us, what
we are by nature and sin, and what we are by grace. And in the fifth verse 't
is more plain yet: Even when we were dead in sins, has he quick'ned us
together with Christ. Aquinas.
By grace are you saved, gratia gratis data; These last words very well explain
the former to our present purpose. And this is the first death, which is the
Wages of sin; and is truly called a spiritual death.

The second follows upon it, and that is a natural death, Magnus
or Temporal, which is dissolutio corporis and animae, the dissolution of the
body and Soul. Therefore says the Apostle: (...) 5. (...) Verse. 11.
As sin has reigned unto death: And before that you find this deaths head
more plainly presented in an ugly shape, as it were upon a stage acting a part,
^. R.
or at least moving above-board. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the
World, and sin by death; and so death did pass upon all men, for that all have
sinned: The words at least in sense and meaning of the forenamed Doctrine. This
is the second; Though S. John in the Revelation calls, my third in order, the
second death. And so it is indeed in Divinity. He is the Divine, But I have
made bold as a spiritual Physician in these distempered times, to present you
with a (...): And to give you a mixed Dosis, or taste of the natural, and the
spiritual.

The third is that which is the worst, a death unto life eternal, Bolton. Isai
66.24.
and yet a death that never dies: Their Worm shall never die, their Fire shall
never be quenched. The former death is but as the prick of a lancet, or
flea-biting unto this; 1 Cor. 15.
for that is but for a time, we shall rise again after that at the last day;
but this is to all eternity. I, what if I did say, determined from all
eternity? Constitutum est omnibus semel mori^, Heb^^ 2^. Exp.
i. e. in this death continually, always dying, and yet never dead, quae ab
ipso momento dependet aeternitas (as the Father elegantly) an eternity for ever
succeeding our sudden departure. By the former the body is but killed, fear not
him that kills the body, but by this both body and Soul are utterly destroyed.
Matthew. 10.26.
Rather fear him that is able to destroy both body and Soul in Hell: Whence S.
Austin, Lib. de Civit. Dei 21.
Prima mors animam nolentem pellit de corpore; secunda mors animam nolentem
tenet in corpore; The first death drives the Soul out of the body, being
unwilling to part with it; The second death keeps the Soul against her will
in the body. The first death is the separation of the Soul from the body. The
second is the separation of Soul and body from God: and by how much God is more
excellent then the Soul, by so much the second death is worse then the first:
Prima mors bonis bona est, malis mala, Aust^^ Civit. Dei, Lib. 13.
secunda ut nullorum bonorum est, ita nulli bona; The first death is good to
good men, because it ends their sorrows, and begins their joys: but evil to
evil men, because it ends their joys, and begins their everlasting weeping and
gnashing of teeth. The second as it belongs to none that are good, so it is
good to none. Both these are the due Wages of sin, and shall be paid at the
Audit day of doom. The sentence pronounced against Adam, mort^ morieris, By the
reduplication of the word, seems to imply as much as thou shall die again and
again, iterum atque iterum, the first and second death. The first is as the
earnest penny, the second as the whole hire, both make up the Wages of sin. The
first is like the splitting of a Ship, and casting away all the goods and
wares; the latter as the burning of both with unquenchable fire. This is the
Wages of every sinner that dies in sin unrepented off. Such must go down even
quick into Hell, Psalm. 55 15.
says King David, and Christ says, God shall pronounce the sentence of
condemnation upon them at the last day. Matthew. 25.41.
Go you cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
Every word is able to break, yea, grind in pieces a heart of Adamant. Loco
super.
I cannot let pass S. Austin his observation, Nemo hic proprie moriens, seu in
morte dicitur; sed ante mortem, aut post mortem: i.e. viventes aut mortui ibi,
e contrario non erunt homines ante mortem, aut post mortem, sed sine fine
morientes and nunquam pejus erit homini in morte, quam ubi erit mors ipsa sine
morte. In this life men cannot be said properly to be dying, or in death; but
alive, or dead: for whilst the Soul remains in the body we are living; after
the separation thereof we are dead: Whereas they that are in Hell cannot be
properly said to be dead; because they are most sensible of pain: nor to be
alive, because they suffer the punishment of the second death; but continually
dying. And never shall it be worse with man in death; then where death it self
is without death: where life perpetually lives according to that of Isaiah. A
worm continually gnawing; Lib. 9. Mor. cap. 45.
so a fire continually burning. S. Gregory sweetly quavers upon this sad
lesson, or note of death. Mors sine morte, finis sine fine, defectus sine
defectu: quia and mors vivit, and finis incipit, and deficere nescit defectus.
The death of the damned is a deathless death: an endless end, and undefiable
defect. For their death always lives, and their end begins; and their
consumption lasts, is permanent and eternal. And this death is especially
meant in my Text: The correspondency of this Member, to that which follows
makes it manifest; all which shall suffice also for the second Doctrine: For I
cannot now dilate, or enlarge my self.

1. Use. This in the first place confutes that common error of the Papists
concerning venial sin, whereas every sin is mortal. For the Apostle speaks here
very plainly: The Wages of sin is death, (...). And in that he says it of all
sins, it may be said of every sin, A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia, is an
undoubted truth of the Logicians, from, as to all the consequence is very good:
And our Apostle says as sinner, so worthy of death. Romans 5.
And therefore every sin is mortal in it self, and deserves even eternal death.
For I can give no more credit then Robert Bellarmine does to the Popish Legend;
who professedly refutes those of his own side, who give credit to the Legend;
which relates that by the prayers of S. Gregory, the Soul of Trajan was
delivered out of Hell, ( preces habent efficaciam, as in Jacobs wrestling with
God: but it made him halt ever after.) O no, death ever living, Genesis 32.31.
and not dying is their wages, in presenti, continually: Neither is this
proceeding of Gods, any ways unjust, to punish him with death, I, even
eternal: in regard the impenitent sinner, if he should always live upon the
earth; would always hold on his sinful course, had he still the use of his
tongue (says a modern) he would still blaspheme and curse; had he still the
use of his eyes, he would still look after vanity: had he still the use of his
feet, he would still walk in wicked ways: had he still the use of his hands,
he would work all manner of wickedness, had he still the free use of all the
faculties of his Soul and Members of his body, Lib. de 4. Noviss.
he would still make them weapons of unrighteousness. Inchinus the Romish
postiller gives some light to this truth by an inch of Candle, whereby two
play at Tables in the night, and are very earnest at their game; but in the
midst of it the Candle goes out, and they perforce give over; who (no doubt)
if the light had lasted would have played all night. This inch of the Candle is
the time allotted to a wicked man; who is resolved to spend it all in pleasures
and pastimes, and if it would last perpetually, he would never leave his play,
and therefore since he would sin eternally; though (by reason the light of his
life goes out) he cannot, he deserves eternal punishment: Yea, he must needs
know his Wages, and that is death, and that eternal, without repentance on
man's, and infinite mercy on Gods part.

2. Use. Is of exhortation to all to leave of their sins, and that betimes.
Agree with thine adversary, and that too quickly. And if that will not serve,
it is a use of terror to you all, for here is that which is (...). The most
terrible of terribles, whose ugly grim face in the Churches body may affright
the beholder; much more his violent and unexpected presence in our trembling
bodies, which are (or ought to be) the Temples of the holy Ghost. Eunuchus.
That (as Terence of Phaedria to Thais) paint him never so lively, and with
old-bald-pated time by him, I shall cry out, Tremo horreoque cum primum aspexi
hanc. Death it is I mean, the Wages of sin. A death to grace, and that is
miserable here; A natural, or temporal death, and that (I know) is loathsome to
most. And the more you are addicted to this sublunary world, the more grief it
breeds within you. Else what mean those outcries, and roarings with those
wild Irish at graves, as men and women without hope? Hone, Hone, etc. O my
dear Father one cries, my sweet and aged Husband another, and a third, mine
only friend is dead, and to whom shall I make my moan with him: O me miserum,
quis dabit in Lachrymas fontem? But there is a third death that is more
terrible then all, that from which there is no recovery, no release. When you
shall (without repentance) be bound in chains in Hell; where, (I am sure) that
of the Poets will take no place: Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris, But
here the screeching of your companions shall add but greater grief and horror
to your distressed and distracted mind. And do you not yet stand amazed and
tremble at the hearing of these things. Me thinks every one should cry out with
himself now, as the affrighted Jailer to Peter, what shall I do to be saved? Or
else as trembling Foelix to S. Paul. Too much learning has made thee mad: go
away now, I will hear thee of this matter, i. e. (the judgment to come)
another time: But alas it is too true. We may now again cry out, as the Prophet
once to an obdurate and stifnecked Nation. Ho every one that thirsts, Come
unto the waters, etc. Isa. 55.1.
Your poor and dejected (if not ejected) Ministers may long enough wish that
their heads may become Fountains of tears; and withal complain no man has
believed our report, and that especially in this matter of death. Our subject
subjecting all. Give me leave (as by deaths head presented at the beginning of
a Feast) to affect the Soul by the terrible presence of the body.

And now you may imagine the Sermon is drawing to an end, if not done. O no: It
is then only done, when it is applied, received, understood, and practiced.
There is no Physic, but if it works, makes the patient sick for the present:
and for the most part the most smarting plaster most speedily cures the wound.
These observations are true in corporal Physic, and much more in spiritual:
because the smart of sin, and trouble of conscience for it, are as so many
signs of maladies, as the beginning of cures. Some say, the fear of the plague
brings it: But if we speak of this plague, and other judgments of God for sin,
it is certain that the fear of them (not servile but filial) is the best
preservative against them. He only may be secure of the avoiding of Hell
torments, and escaping the pangs of eternal death, who fears them as he
ought; and he that fears them not, as another Stoical (...), as in a most
fearful case. Ecclus. 41.1.
O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee! Admirable upon which is that
strict Dr. Lake his meditation, that reverend B. of Bath; whom I rather quote
by reason of the proximity to Bristol: which (though it has scorned those old
prayers) has need now of a Lord have mercy upon me, where I have been vere vir
dolorum and afflictionum: Which made me bring to light first these dark
thoughts of death, being lately (thanks be to God) drawn by a Divine power out
of the snares of Hell and death. We have no abiding place on earth, none have:
But of those that would have there are many, here below singing an undeserved
requiem to the Soul, and saying with the fool, Soul take thy rest. Many there
are, O Lord, that though they must die, cannot endure to mind death. Nothing
more unsavory to them then that their memory should be exercised with the
memory thereof: Eccles. 12.1.
Whereas says Solomon; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: And it
was Moses wish, O that men would be wise and consider their latter end. Let me
a little raise your thoughts (before I leave you) from doting upon Lachrymae to
much, which was the first my Master taught me in Music. We have looked long
enough upon Hell and death, Let us now look up to our Savior (it is (...)
quasi (...)) who Triumphed over both: Let the sight of the one as much raise
your hope (for without it we may not, we must not be) as the other dejecteth us
in fear. Now the Sermon being finished, let us eternally sing his praises
against those mortal enemies of Funeral Elegies, Brownists I mean, and
Anabaptists; who will bury their dead, not only against, but without the
Apostles rule. 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order. Who has saved us? Even us (that
alive yet from everlasting weepings and mournings in the valley of Hinnom.
Shall any waters of affliction quench in us the love of him, who for us
quenched unquenchable fire? shall not the benefit of our delivery from
everlasting death, and burial too in the grave of Oblivion live in our memory?
shall any thing sever us from him, Matthew. 27.46. Romans 8.38.
who for our sakes after a sort was severed from his Father? When he cried my
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or the sword? No, I am sure, I may ascend higher, and
descend lower too with the Apostle (whose Antiperistasis makes his Rhetoric
more admirable and winning.) Neither life, nor death, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus. I will shut up all with that prayer of our unparalled Lake, (in
whom was the depth of all Divinity, as in an Ocean rather than a Lake) seeing
the whole world is (...), a sweet sower. And this is the evil of worldly weal,
and the ease our corrupt nature takes in it, makes us more to distaste the joys
of Heaven. Mix, I beseech thee, O Lord, my peace with war: Being of S. Paul's
temper and constitution, finding a Law in my Members rebelling against the Law
of my mind. Romans 7.
Let me never be a secure owner of my worldly goods; (neither well can I, since
thou in thy goodness have taken them, wife, and all from me.) Yea, Lord, let
them appear as they are, Transitory and uncertain, that I may not repute them
to be my goods. Let Thieves strip me, let crosses distress me, (as I thank
thee, I am Christianus, quia Crucianus) though I lose, yet I shall gain, and
prosper best when I do not prosper. Death that must come shall never be
unwelcom, yea, the remembrance of it shall be my greatest comfort; it shall
never find me but willing to leave what I never did enjoy, or joy in. And
happy shall I account that hour, that shall take me out of the World; when it
takes (as it has done, I thank God, for five months together) the World from
me, because we never were well at one, Yea, I had almost said she which once
lay in my bosom, and therefore shall not fear to be at odds. The World is
crucified to me, and I unto the World. Death shall take no pains in parting our
association: which shall find us before hand parted in affection. Let death be
bitter unto others, to me it shall be sweet, when it pleases God to send it.)
And I will (God-willing and assisting) prepare my self by a timely thinking of
it, Praemonitus praemunitus, so shall I never be uncomfortably surprised by it
in regard of my body: And with holy Stephen, (notwithstanding all the stony
hearts of these times) I shall call upon God, saying, Acts 7.39.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Amen.

(...).
P. P. Praedicator.

ERRATA.
Page 9. line 3. and 12. for tantologie r. tantologie. p. 1^. l. 5. for die r.
do, p. 16. l. 2. for contention, r. contentment, and l. 8. for graviore, r.
graviori, p. 25. l. 15. for, of the body, r. to the body, and l. 29. for
restores r. restored p. 28. last l. for undefiable r. undefeisable.


