The Petition of several Officers, who formerly have been employed in the
Parliament Service, Presented to both Houses, June the Third, 1648.
Together with their several Answers.
WE whose Judgments and Consciences invited us to annex our Lives and Estates
to your preservation and assistance, upon your first and continued
Declarations, Protestations, solemn League and Covenant, Do appeal to God and
your Honors, That we have faithfully and unmoveably prosecuted those ends: And
when under the conduct and authority of Parliament, We had shared in sustaining
the difficulties of the late War, in obedience to the same Power we humbly
submitted to Reducement; since we have not been wanting to supplicate your
Honors to improve your success in the happy consummation of a safe and
wel-grounded Peace; And upon confidence that your Wisdoms and undoubted
fidelity to your undertakings would opportunely complete the same, We ceased to
trouble your Honors, till the continued and increasing distractions of this
languishing City and Kingdoms, our Interests and Duties commands us,
notwithstanding many discouragements, to express our Resolutions, and humbly
second our Desires;

That your Honors would be pleased to prevent the great calamities impending,
by timely answering the Expectations of the Kingdoms, by settling (in a
Parliamentary way) Religion, the Kings Majesty, the Laws and Liberties of the
Subject, (to prevent the further effusion of Blood) together with the
preservation and security of all those that have and do adhere to those
principles. Toward the accomplishing whereof, We shall faithfully contribute
our utmost abilities, with the hazard of our Lives and Fortunes.

And we shall ever pray, etc.
Die Sabbathi, 3 Junii, 1648.
THat the Lords do take notice of their former services done to the Parliament
and Kingdom, and return thanks for the same, and do likewise give them thanks
for their good affections expressed at this time, whereby they declare the
continuance of their faithfulness to the Parliament; They assure you that
they will use their utmost endeavor for the answering the expectations of the
Kingdom, in the settling of a safe and well grounded Peace, according to the
Solemn League and Covenant; and for the preservation and security of all those
that do adhere and have adhered to those principles, and they will omit no
opportunity for the preventing the further effusion of blood.

Die Sabbathi, 3 Junii, 1648.
THe Petitioners were called in, and Mr. Speaker by the Command of the House,
acquainted them that the House had read their Petition, and for their good
services, their modest desires and expressions in their Petition, suitable to
men of Honor and good Affections to the Parliament: He was commanded to give
them the Thanks of this House, which he accordingly did.

FINIS.

