THE PETITION AND VINDICATION Of the Officers of the ARMY UNDER His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

SETTING FORTH, Their Canded and clear intentions in their former Petition of
the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, intended to be presented to their
General.

Wherein it will appear, they never intented to inslave the Kingdom, or put
Condition on the Parliament, or to h^nder the service of Ireland, but to
further it.

As it was presenten to the House of Commons on Tuesday, April 27. 1647.

BY Colonel Ok^y. Colonel Huson. Lieutenant Col. Read. Lieutenant Col.
Pride. Major Rogers. Captain Reinolds. Captain Goffe. And read on Friday, April
30.


London, Printed for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange, 1647.

To the Honorable the House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Officers of the Army under the command of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax on the behalf of themselves and the Soldiers of
the Army;

Humbly shewech,
THat your Petitioners being sensible of some displeasure in this Honorable
House against them through some misinformation concerning the carriage and
managing of a late Petition in the Army, do humbly offer unto your
consideration, the paper annexed for the better clearing of our intentions,
humbly desiring your favorable construction and acceptance of what is therein
contained, according to the integrity with which it is presented,

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
THE VINDICATION OF THE OFFICERS of the ARMY under Sir THOMAS FAIREFAX.
THe mis-representations of us, and our harmless intentions to this Honorable
House, occasioning hard thoughts and expressions of your displeasure against
us. We cannot but look upon as an act of most sad importance; tending, in our
apprehensions to alienate your affections from your ever-trusty and obedient
Army; then which nothing can more rejoice your Adversaries, or minister greater
hopes of their re-advancement, nothing more discouraging us, who should esteem
it the greatest point of Honor to stand by you till the consummation of your
work, the removal of every yoke from the peoples necks, and the
establishment of those good Laws you shall judge necessary for the
Commonwealth.

Out of our fears therefore of the advantage may be made therefrom, and that
the Honorable House may retain the same good opinion of us, they formerly had;
(whom God has hitherto blessed with abundant blessings) We humbly crave the
boldness to present unto you, some Reasons to clear our proceedings in those
passages, which we find most obvious to exceptions in our Petition; whereby
we hope to make it evident to you, that we did no more then what necessity
prompted us unto; That the means we used, and the method we took, was as we
conceived most orderly, and inoffencive proceeding not in the least from
distemper, and aiming in no measure at mutiny, nor in any wise to put
conditions upon the Parliament, and that you will from thence discover the
corruptions of these men's hearts, who have been the evil instruments of
occasioning your late Declaration against us.

For our liberty of petitiooing, we hope this honorable house will never deny
it unto us, we know not any thing more essential to freedom, without it
grievances are remediless, and our condition most miserable, you have not
denied it to your Adversaries; you justified it, and commended it in your
Declaration of the second of November. 1642. in these words:

It is the liberty and privilege of the People to petition unto us for the
ease and redress of their grievances, and oppressions; and we are bound in
duty to receive their Petitions: And we hope by being Soldiers, we have not
lost the capacity of Subjects, nor divested our selves thereby of our interest
in the Commonwealth, That in purchasing of the freedoms of our Brethren, we
have not lost our own: besides, we can instance in petitions from Officers in
the Earl of Essex, and Sir William Wallers Army (even whilst they were in
Arms) which were will received by this honorable house, with a return of
thanks: and therefore we hope we shall not be considered as men without the
Pale of the Kingdom, excluded from the fundamental privilege of subjects,
especially since we are conscious to our selves of nothing that may deserve
the same.

We have not till now appeared in petitioning, though our necessities have
been frequent and urgent, not that we doubted our liberty, but because we were
unwilling to interrupt you in your other weighty affairs, and we proceeded at
this time with the greatest care and caution we could, of giving the least
offense, intending not to present our Petition to this honorable house, but
with the approbation, and by the mediation of his Excellency, our ever
honored General, knowing how watchful our Enemies were to make the hardest
construction of all our actions, and represent us to you, and the world under
such terms as may render us most odious.

You may see the insidies of them by the false suggestions they have already
made to you; of our forcing subscriptions, the reasonableness and necessity of
our desires whereof almost every soldier is abundantly sensible, will plead
the vanity of such an enforcement, especialy when it shall be known that the
Petition took its first Rise from amongst the soldiers, and that we engaged
but in the second place to regulate the soldiers proceedings, and remove as
near as we could all occasion of distaste.

For our desires of indemnity for such actions, as being not warrantable by
Law in time of Peace, we were enforced unto them by the necessity and exigencie
of the war-wee are confident this honorable house will approve o it, when you
shall be informed, that the soldiers are frequently indicted at Assizes and
Sessions, and otherwise grievously molested for such actions, and many lately
suffering for the same. Notwithstanding that provision you lately made against
it, That diverse have had verdicts past against them this last Assizes, for
actions done as soldiers (as we are credibly informed) if this be our Portion
in the time of your Session, for what we did through the exigencie of your
service; what cruel and violent proceedings are we like to find, after you are
pleased to dissolve.

For the particular intimation, That the Royal Assent may be defired, we never
intended it to lessen your authority; but since you have by offering the
Propositions, judge the desiring of the Kings assent convenient. Since likewise
the City of London made the same desire without offense, and your Orders to the
Judges, we know not how effectual they may prove to save us from such
proceedings after your Sessions; All these Reasons considere will, we hope,
manifest our intentions in that intimation to be only a providen^ caution for
our future safety, without the least thought of disrespect to your authority.
For the desire of our Arrears necessity (especially of our Soldiers) enforced
us thereunto, that we have not been mercenary, or proposed gain as our end, the
speedy ending of a languishing war will testify for us, whereby the people are
much eased of their Taxes and daily disbursments and decayed Trade restored to
a full and flourishing condition in all Quarters. We left our estates, an^ many
of us our Trades and Callings to others, and forsook the contentments of a
quiet life, not fearing or regarding the difficulties of war for your sakes.
After all which we hoped that the desires of our hardly-earned-wages (by the
mediation of our General) would have been no unwelcome request, nor argued us
guilty of the least discontent, or intention of mutiny.

We know not any thing further in our Petition which has been excepted
against, but your apprehensions that it tends to hinder the relief of
Ireland, which we do not understand; wherein having always manifested in all
our actions, our readiness to further that work, unless you mean by that
desire, that those who have served voluntarily should not be pressed to go out
of the Kingdom, to which we humbly offer this; that those who have voluntarily
served in these wars, and left their Parents Trades and Livelihoods, and
without any compulsion, engaged of their own accords, should after all their
free and unwearied labors be now forced and compelled to go out of this
Kingdom, whose peace they have so much endeavored with unwaried pains,
hoping thereby to have lived and enjoyed the fruits of their labors would to
them seem very hard, but besides this, our several votes and engagements March
21. to endeavor the advancement of the service of Ireland what we could, will
clear us, and our good affections in promoting that work, and therefore we
hope what has been said, will remove all scruples, and restore us to the good
opinion of this Honorable House, in assurance whereof, and in consideration of
the premises, we are further imboldened to make these our requests unto this
honorable House.

1. That you will be pleased to allow us our liberty of petitioning in what may
concern us now as Soldiers, and afterward as members of the Commonwealth

2. Since upon the false suggestions of some men informing you, that this Army
intended to inslave the Kingdom; the honorable House was so far prevailed
withal, as to summon diverse of us to appear at your Bar; and to pass a
Declaration thereby expressing your high dislike of our Petition, declaring it
te^ded to put conditions upon the Parliament: The sense of such expressions is
so irksome to us who have ventured whatsoever we esteemed dear to us in this
world or preservation of your freedom and privileges, that we cannot but
earnestly ^mplore your justice in the vindication of us, as in your wisdoms
you sha^ ^hink fit.

Thomas Hammond Leivtennat General of the Ordnance.

Colonells. Edward Wha^ley Colonel. John Lambert Calonel. Robert Lilburne
Colonel. Nath^niel Rich Colonel. John Hewson Colonel. Robert Hammond Colonel.
John Okey Colonel.
Leivetennant Colonels. Thomas Pride Leiv. Colonel. Thomas Kelsay Leiv. Col.
Thomas Read Leiv. Col. John Iubbs L. Colonel. Mark Grim^ L. Col. (...) Ewer
L. Col. Edward Salmon L. Col.
Majors Matthew Rogers Major. Danniel Axtel Major. William Cowell Major. Thomas
Smith Major. Thomas Horton Major. John Desborow Major. Adam Lawrence Cap. James
Berry Cap. William Packer Cap. Sammuel Packer. John Gladman Cap. Leiu William
Disher L. Richard Merris Leu Joseph Wallington Capt. Leiu Nathaniel White Leiv.
Edmond Chillenden Leiv. Cox Took Coronet. Henry Pretty Capt. Sampson Toogood
Leiv. John Friend. Francis Wheeler. George Ensor Leiv. George Gregson Capt.
William Leigh Capt. Thomas Parsons Capt. Henry Bal. Cornet William Farley.
Edmond Rolfe. Capt. John Ienkins Capt. Abraham Holmes. John Carter Capt. John
Puckle Capt. William Arnop Capt. L. Thomas Price Capt. Thomas Davis Capt.
Edward Orpin Capt. William Ste^ton. Richord Z^nchy Capt. Griffith Loyde Leiv.
William Goffe Capt. John Mason Capt. Wartoff Lagoe Capt. Edward Scotton Leiv.
William Cobb Cornet. John Forgison Capt. Roger Alsop Capt. Thomas Disney Capt.
John Nicholas Leiv. John Spencer Cornet. Richard Mass Leiv. Richard Kemp.
Leiv. John Bifcoe Capt. James Loyde. Matthew Cadwell Capt. Sammuel Rosse Capt.
Leiv. William Sheares. Leiv. Thomas Sheares. William I^g. Charles Whitehead
Cornet. John Merriman Leiv. Henry Dorney Leiv. Azariell Husbands Capt. Charles
Bolton Ensign. Stephen White Lieut. Lawrence Nunny Capt. Robert Lewis Capt.
William Jones Ensign. Thomas Cartwright Ensign. W. Wear Capt. Leivt. Edw.
Atkinson Capt. Fran. Hawes Capt. Rich. Wagstaffe Capt. Gyles Sanders. Capt.
Hugh Ienkins Lieut. Benj. Burges Capt. Rich. Essex. John Risleden. Henry
Clear. T. Pennyfather Capt. Walter Bethel Capt. Sam Gardener Capt. W. Forster.
W. Milward Capt. Clem. Arnold. W. Parry. John Grove capt. W. Evanson Capt. T.
Chamberlen Lieut. John Wright. John Friend. Francis Allen. Thomas Day. Abraham
Davis Lieut. John Tapendean Capt. Hen. Davis Capt. Sam: Grame Capt. Alexander
Brafield Capt. Tho. Atkinson Capt. W. Arnold. Lieut: John Web. Lieut. Ienkin
Buen Lieut. George Ienkins. Lieut. W. Hill. Lieut Ralph Gell Lieut. T. Baker
Lieut. George Smith Lieut. Sam: Axtell Lieut. Henry Williams. Ens. Edw. Hoare
Ens. T, Rawlins Capt. T. Lewis Ens. Ier: Canfield Ens. Rob. Nunwings Ens. T.
Newnam Ens. John Davis Ens. Morgan Porter Ens. John Blunfield. Natthan. Bolet,
W. Powell. John Savage Lieut. John Shrimpton Lieut. Iehn Mill. John Grime Capt.
John Reynolds Capt. T. Mercer Capt. John Blackwell Capt. and Treas. Tho:
Coleman Capt. John Goodw^ne Quartermr. John Peck. W. Styles Cap. John Miller
Lieut. Anth. Lacon Cornet. Abell Warren Gornet. T. Savage Quartermr. George
Hayes Quartermr. John Adice quartermr.

Reader, take notice that all the names hereunto subscribed, are Commission
Officers, but by reason they did not set down their titles, the Publisher could
not make them known to thee.

Finis.

