Master Peter's MESSAGE FROM Sir Thomas Fairfax, Delivered in both Houses of
the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled: With the whole state of the
West, and all the particulars about the disbanding of the Princes and Sir Ralph
Hoptons Army. Also the total routing of Sir Jacob Ashley himself, and 1500.
taken Prisoners, their Carriages and Ammunition also taken by Colonel Morgan
and Sir William Brereton.

Commanded to be printed at the desire of diverse Members of Parliament, and
published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, 22 March, 1645.

Master Peter's Message from Sir Thomas Fairfax.
Master Speaker;
AFter the Lord had appeared for our Army at Torrington, and had written his
name in such visible characters before the faces of many, counsel was taken to
pursue the Enemy into Cornwall, and the rather because the scattering of that
body of Horse would after an especial manner promote our future designs, not
only in order to Exceter, but also to our Eastern employment, I shall
therefore give you an account, first of the steps we made into Cornwall;
secondly, of the state of the Country; thirdly, the condition of the Enemy;
fourthly of our own Army.

Upon our advance, the General gave me a Commission to apply my self to all
means and expedients I could think of, for the stopping of the East parts of
Cornwall from rising and joining with the Enemies Horse, Foot being that which
the Enemy (only) wanted, and those they brought to Torrington blown into
several parts, and scattered, with a purpose not to appear again.
Accordingly I rid to Plymouth, (though not without much difficulty) riding
forty miles very near the Enemies Guards; I dealt at Plymouth with the
Governor and the Committee there, who offered me all their furtherances, had
Passes of them for any I should employ into Cornwall, and was much engaged to
Mr. Raw, of that place, (a discreet able man, and industrious) who undertook
to agitate my desi^nes with the Enemy, and deserves exceeding well for his
faithfulness and wisdom therein.

When I was thus thoughtfull how to engage the Cornish Foot from rising in the
East, (whose example would have had a present influence on all the County) it
pleased the Lord to send in one out of Cornwall, of very good quality, (and
much interessed) who came disguized into Plymouth, having the same design with
my self, for strong affections to the Parliament and their Cause, assuring me,
that 3000. men stood ready to join with the Enemies Horse, yet that there were
good hopes, that the leaders being rightly informed, might not only prevent
it, but conditionally close with us.

Their chiefes were old Master Colliton, Colonel Edgcomb of Mount Edgcomb,
Master Thomas Lowre, and Lieutenant Colonel Scawen.

To these I applied my self (by writing) and declared what I had in Commission
from the General, and sent it by the party by me employed, who returned again,
and gave me hopes, and yet professed much jealousy on their part for the true
performance on what I promised; and therefore to shorten my work I offered my
self an Hostage to them, till the General should make good what I promised.

By the next return they invited me into Cornwall, where four of them should
be ready, in the behalf of themselves and others, to treat with me, and as
they saw cause, to accompany me to the General.

I adventured over to them, and there found Master Corriton, M. Thomas Lowre,
M. Glanvill, the eldest Son of Sergeant Glanvill, and Major Trevise; who being
persuaded of the truth of what I had engaged my self for, were persuaded to go
to the General with me, and truly I found them very ingenuous, who had long
before distasted the Court way, and abhorred the practices of many of the Kings
party.

By this time the General had entered Cornwall, and (at Stratton) our men beat
up a Guard of the Enemies, and took 300. Horse: these Cornish Gentlemen,
finding my words made good unto them, were much convinced and affected,
receiving from the General Protections for themselves and that side of the
Country against the violence of our Soldiers, as also Letters of
recommendation to the Parliament, for this their service, which took such
effect, that not only these 3000. men, ready for their march, retired to their
houses, but also the whole County where we came, either came in to us, or sat
still; and truly these Eastern Gentlemen are very considerable, and I am
persuaded the old Master Coriton, (who suffered for Magna Charta, with Sir John
Elliot,) will return to his interest again, with many more of them.

Upon our advance the Enemy retreated, the General lay at Bodman to refresh
our men, and to undeceive the County, if by any means we might, which the Lord
himself was pleased to help us in, even to wonder, by an Irish Frigot, coming
into Padstow, and bringing Letters to Hopton and others, from the Earl of
Glamorgan, that ^esuited Papist, assuring them of ten thousand Irish ready for
England.

These Letters the General commanded me to read, at a great meeting of the
Country men, in a field near Bodman, which had such success, that the
arguments I used unto them, and what I read was received with diverse
acclamations.

Upon this day fortnight a strong Party of ours was sent out to fall upon their
maine Guard, under the command of that honest and worthy Gentleman Col. Rich,
who accordingly met with one thousand of the Enemies Horse, routed them, and
put them to flight, and took two hundred Horses, and one hundred Prisoners,
amongst whom Master General Perts, who is since dead of his wounds, in whose
pocket a copy of a Letter to the Princes Counsel about him, was found to this
purpose.

That the Kings condition is so low is not our fault* we are not able to break
through the Enemy, nor strong enough to fight them; therefore are resolved to
compound for our selves, and leave you to do what you please. Sir, it came
from the Military part.

Diverse small skirmishes we had with them, Lieutenant General Cromwell
himself, with some of his horses are setting out Parties and Guards, and
attending their motions, adventured himself according to his wonted manner;
and now the Enemies head Quarter being at Truro, and their chief strength not
above five or six miles from us, the General resolving to fight them, or
drive them to the Sea, sent them such Propositions with a Summons, as he did
conceive would take off much of their Forces, and bring them all to a sudden
agreement; and upon the sending of these, advanced still forward, and in our
advance they met us with a desire of a Treaty, which accordingly was yielded
unto, and held six days, there being matters not a few to be considered of,
as appears by the Articles.

Upon the last Lords Day, upon a Down a mile from Truro, after I had Preached
to our men, and diverse of the Enemies, they began to deliver up their Arms and
Horses.

The first Regiment was a French Regiment, under the command of Mounsier
Laplane on Sunday last, yet I must much commend the civility of our Soldiers
herein, that they let them pass without mocking, or jeering, or offering any
affronts to them.

On Monday there were three Brigades more disbanded, and on Tuesday the rest
according to the Articles; If it shall be objected, That the General dealt too
gently with the County, or the Soldiery part there, I answer.

1 That the constitution of both the one and the other required it, the
Soldiers being a strong Party, and in the Enemies Country.

2 The people needed it, and the same weapon proved their cure that made their
wound, Hoptons moderation, civility that first deceived them, and the Generals
now joined with faithfulness took the scales from their eyes.

3 That we have all this year found it our advantage;

4 Meekness, sweetness and courage have been always stirring in our General
for digniority; we know that Caesar dando, sublenando, ignoscendo gloriam
adeptus est, but of the General we may say by the like means, Patriam been
adeptus est.

5 We believe, that the Conduct of this Army delight not to drink blood.

6 The Parliaments aims are not destructive, but reductive.

7 We look upon it as the Spirit of Christ in these latter times, and of the
New Testament, to save, and not to ruin; and the Heathen could say: Magnanimo
satis est praedam prostrasse leoni,
Pugna suum finem, cum jacet hostis habet.


And this I am bold to add, That such is the Providence of God, that if we had
fought and beaten them, we should not have scattered them as now they are; God
has restrained from the Enemies themselves this acknowledgement, that their
Gods is not like ours; their men not like ours, their Actions not like ours:
the very words of one of their chief Commanders were these:

That their men counseled with drink in their heads, ours with wit in their
heads; our men silently prosecuted and effected their work, their men vapoured
and did nothing: we had a Conduct and Counsel, they acted without both; yea,
that this Army was not to be fought against. And all the Enemy are engaged
never to take up Arms against the Parliament, except some very few only.

For the Country, the Gentry came almost all in unto us, the Cornish Soldiers
brought us and laid down their Arms at the Generals foot, many of them
professing they would but go home and attend him.

Some of the Arguments I used in speaking and preaching to them in their
public Assemblies were;

(...) First, for the Parliament, they did as a Justice of Peace, sent out a
Counstable to apprehended such as had broake the civil Peace: The Cunstable
beaten back from his office, has more help sent him, Town and Cuntry who are
re-resolved to pursue his disturbers, our taking up of Arms was not against
Cornish men, nor any particular men, nor any particular County, but against
such as disturbed both them and us, which if they deliver them to us; we had
the end of our travells.

Secondly* I used an Argument of utily, wishing them to consider how they could
subject without trade which are from the City of London, and other parts of the
Kingdom.

Thirdly, What havoc the Irish and French might make upon them if they landed;
of which Gorings desperadoes have given them a taste.

Fourthly, How comfortably, and safe they might live under the Parliament, who
are loath to loose such a Tribe as they were.

Fifthly, I answered a common murmuring amongst them, that their Country was
never conquered. They were told, that our Army was never conquered neither,
and yet we were willing to wrestle with them in their one way, by embracing,
and huging of them, they should conquer us, and we would conquer them, we would
win the day, and they should gain the field, or their fields: If they lost a
service B^^ke they should have a better worship:

Sixthly, was from experience, the were wished to tract all the Parliaments
proceedings, and the Armies in other Counties; whether they had had better
Ministers, and better Magistrates placed then before.

Seventhly, was taken from the practice of the enemy, and this quaerie was put
to them, what good the enemy had done for them; whether their Examples, and
Practices, Councels and endeavors, had led them to more holiness, justness,
and exactness.

Many of them confessed, they were received by ill reports brought of the
Parliament, and the crueltyes of this Army, by Hoptons flateries, and the
Courtiers, and by the Kings, and Princes Personal apperance amongst them: and
by their promises to them honoring of them, as more particular appears, by
this D^claration of the Kings, hanged up in every Church in the Country.

CHARLES R.

WE are so highly sensible of the extraordinary merit of Our County of
Cornwall, of the zeal for the Defense of Our Person and the just Rights of Our
Crown, (in a time when We could contribute so little to Our own Defense, or to
their Assistance in a time when not only no Reward appeared, but great and
probable dangers were threatened to Obedience and Loyalty;) of their great and
eminent Courage and Patience in their indefatigable Prosecution of their great
Work against so potent an Enemy, block't with so strong, rich, and populous
Cities, and so plentifully furnished and supplied with Men, Arms, Money,
Ammunition and Provision of all kinds; And of the wonderful success with
which it has pleased Almighty God (though with the loss of some most eminent
Persons, who shall never be forgotten by Us) to reward their Loyalty and
Patience by many strange Victories over their and Our Enemies, in despite of
all humane Probability, and all imaginable disadvantages; That as We cannot be
forgetful of so great deserts, so We cannot but desire to publish to all the
World, and perpetuate to all Time the Memory of these their merits, and of Our
acceptance of the same. And to that end We do hereby render Our Royal
thanks to that Our County, in the most public and most lasting manner We can
devise, commanding Copies hereof to be Printed and published, and one of them
to be read in every Church and Chapel therein, and to be kept for ever as a
Record in the same, That as long as the History of these Times, and of this
Nation shall continue, the memory of how much that County has merited from Us
and Our Crown, may be derived with it to Posterity.

Given at Our Camp at Sudeley Castle the Tenth of September, 1643.
And lastly, their lude and ungodly Ministers had councelled them, and exampled
them to the greatest part of their misery, I make no doubt, they may prove a
People of Gods praise, may they but enjoy a faithful Magistracy and Ministry;
for which, my most earnest and humble request is to this Honorable House: me
thinks they cry at every Gate, bread bread, for the Lords sake.

I wish there were some Evangelicall Ministers in each County of the Kingdom,
that poor People might know there is a God; that they might fear him, and love
him, and be acquainted with his Son, who is theirs and our life.

The County is all clearly reduced, except Pendennis, Helford, and the Mount;
which the very Country (I hope) will be willing to reduce themselves,
Feymouth Harbor is free to us; we have taken St. Mawes Castle, with Twelve
pieces of Ordnance in it, and one called the Roaring-Meg, a choice piece of
brass: the General is sending Eastward some of his forces, toward Barnstable
and Exeter, and intends (having blockt up Pendennis) to return himself.

There came two out of Exeter to us, who carried in Propositions with them; and
of Barnstable we hope to give a good account shortly.

At Foy upon Monday last, we took a ship called the Green Knight, having 16
pieces of Ordnance, and richly laden, they being ignorant that the Harbor was
ours.

Your Affairs have a good complexion upon them at present; and doubtless,
whilst you employ good men* they will be good for you.

I have observed in the whole Tract of this Western Work, diverse promises
fulfilled; As that the Lord would send an Hornet amongst them: that is, a
Spirit of fear, and that they shall fly when none pursues them: we could
seldom make them stand any where; they never offered to beat up a Guard of
ours at any time, though they had Four Thousand ^ighting Horse.

I had been told in their quarters where I lay, as 3. times my lot was to lie
in Hoptons own quarters in bed, where they told me upon every Alarm, the
sh^^kings of Belshazer was up on them, one passage above the rest was this, 40.
of them lieing in an house at Saint Auste^, two Coults that wre feeding upon a
Common* in a could night, came for shelter to the side of the house. ^hey took^
an Alarm within, charged the Coults to stand; but they not understand the
Language, kept on their way, put them to such a fight, that they tumbled one
upon the back of another to get away.

Sometimes I thought of that promise in the first Psalm, that they shall be
scattered as Chafe before the wind, they are gone into several Countries.

Sometimes, the Lord says he will bring his wheel upon them, and break them,
we saw their power broken, their Counsels broken, their intrests broken, their
expectations broken, who would have broke the very Axeltree of the State.

Sometimes I thought of the Prophesy; when the Lord says he would power
contempt upon Princes* especially when I read writings from the Prince, thus,
dated at our Court at Silly: And though he be unwilling to play with words,
ye^ I could wish that that place, and name might ever be the portion of those
that council Princes to their own Ruin.

Jncedit inscilam cupiens vitare quietem. Many of such like punishes have been
fulfilled in our fight.

And now I must be thankful to those Gentlemen of this House, that have been
careful for Moneys* Clothes, and Ammunition for the Army, being the Sinews
of Our Work, and yet must complain; that after many Letters written from
place to place, we have not had one ship from the Parliament upon the Coast, to
join with us in any Design, or to meet the Enemy when they went away
with their Welsh: only Captain Plunkets Ship lying at Plimmouth was willing
to do their utmost, and Sir George A^scugh, that commands the expedition,
brought us the last money to Foy, and is earnestly seeking out which way to
serve us to the uttermost.

I would say something for my self, and yet so prove an At^mbe, as not worth a
minute of your time; though you have been pleased to bear with my rudeness.

Since my last being in the City, I have been by some represented as one
scandalizing of others; which as it has no truth in it: so I bless God, that
there is a Parliament to appeal unto, and I know not the cause hereof, but
from my forwardness and faithfulness to the Work in hand.

This I am bold to say, Though it should be accounted a Crime to serve the
Parliament, and I might be sorry for the Despiers, which it shall never make me
weary of my Duty, nor my Masters.

If in my death the State might be a gainer, I have sometimes thought I might
be willing to come to that trial, if my life may serve you, you may command it,
for I must make the same profession that he did to Caesar, that your former
favors have done me that injury, that I must live, and die ungrateful.

These are my last Requests, and the very sithings of my soul, that

First, since the Spirit of God has done all your Works for you, that Spirit
may never be sadded by you, that glads yours: It has been an old Jesuiticall
practice, to beat Religion with Religions: I say no more.

Secondly, that you may live to see that Top stone laid; to which you may all
cry grace, grace.

Thirdly; And lastly, That when your souls shall sit upon your trembling lips,
and take care of your bodies, your accounts may be as comfortable, as your
pains have been in defatigable, and more. So prays

HUGH PETER'S.

We hear for certain, that Greenvill, Culpepper, Sir Nicholas Crisp, and diverse
others are in France, Hopton and Wentworth, and diverse others were going from
Penthancts thither on Tuesday last: the French and others have leave to take
shipping at Plymouth* 20 or 30 are allowed to go t^ the King: diverse Irish and
Welsh are gone into Pendennis, where there are many distractions, and Sir Henry
Killegrew most vilde and violent, who upon Sunday last burnt the ancient house
of that name, called Arwennock, now belonging to Sir Peter Killegrew. The
Prince remains still in Scillie, expecting what end his Father will make with
the Parliament. The same day a Letter was sent to Mr. Peter's as follows*

Mr. Peter's,
THE House of Commons have commanded me to give you notice, that they have
appointed a Day of Thansgiving (for these blessings upon our Armies) upon
Thursday come Sennight, and that they have desired your self, and Mr. Carel to
Preach upon that Day at Christ-Church.

Your affectionate Friend, OL. St. JOHN,
Satterday the 21. of March 1645.

Mr. Peter's being to preach at Brides, Sunday the 22. of March, a paper was
delivered to him of News, which Major Temple (who was in the fight) brought, of
the routing of Sir Jacob Ashley: of which here follows a Copy.

This morning, March 21. Col. Morgan his Forces, with the Forces of Sir William
Brereton (who were joined the night before) fell upon Sir Jacob Ashley and all
his Forces intended for Oxford, to join with the King, and at Stow in the
Oulds (in Gloucester-shire, after a sore conflict on both sides) Sir Jacob was
totally routed; himfelf and 1500. taken prisoners, and their Cariages: out word
was, God be our guide, the word of the Enemies was, Patrick and George.

Stow, March 21. 1645.
FJNJS.

