GOOD WORK FOR A GOOD MAGISTRATE.

OR, A short Cut to great quiet.

BY Honest, homely plain English Hints given from Scripture* Reason, and
Experience, for the regulating of most Cases in this Commonwealth.

Concerning Religion; Mercy; Justice.


By H. P.

PROVE. 14. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation; but sin is a Reproach to any
People.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard Printer to the Council of State. 1651.

To the Supreme Power, and all true Patriots under them.
Right Honorable!
FEaring this little-nothing -- Pocket -- Pamphlet might com to your view by
some other hand, it was thought needful to prevent prejudice, by assuring your
Honors, they are the scriblings of two friends divided by places, to satisfy
each other about some practicable pieces of several kinds, especially looking
at Religion; The Poor; Justice; Law; Navy; Merchandise;
Which now are the breeders of many thoughts amongst English men. And truly as
he is foolish, that would dare to prescribe to your wisdoms; so is he
unfaithful, that would keep a mite from your treasure.

These are the chatterings of your ignorant and ruder servants, who only beg
pardon of all sorts for their wishing thus, even that all the work of the
Nation may be carried on faithfully, and with the least charge: facile est
inventis addere. Every head here may procure a volume.

And it is desired, that no man of any profession would despise these small
things, or the day of them; but seriously attend them to enlargment and
practice: for doubtless, an honest heart and a quick head will soon enliven all
these.

Your Honors know you are the Remainders of much winnowing: You know as your
travels have been great and dangerous, so very successful: you know to whom
you are indebted: this good we have already under you, that men may be as
good as they can, but not so bad as they would. You may be assured the highest
Liberty England gape's for is an open day once in a year or two to choos a
wellcharactered Representative, who may tread in your steps of faithfulness and
truth; which work (they say) you are engaged in, and is near perfecting. It is
humbly conceived, Republics sow the seed of their ruin in faction: which wise
men say cannot be cured but by frequent elections, and clear and plain
dealings betwixt men in place, according to Mat. 18. And then who can say a
Government of so many prayers and tears should perish? when after-ages shall
read written on your doors, and practiced by you and your successors: Haec
Domus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, probos.
This House hate's sin, love's peace, and vice corrects,
Maintein's just Laws, and honest men protect's.


Then which nothing is more heartily wished by

Your Honors H. P.
Junii 7. 1651.
For my dear friend J. T.
My good friend!
You must excuse me, if I join my thoughts with yours, and further give way
to opportunity pressing the publishing our hearty short breathings after the
good of the Commonwealth, raised and preserved even to miracle. Be not
discouraged to continue your contributions. I know we now desire only to lay
this rough work before better heads and hands: and be assured this Nation is
not barren altogether of self-denying spirits, and ingeuous Patriots: and
though Holland seem to get the start of Us, yet we may so follow, as to stand
at length upon their shoulders, and so see further. Our present transactions
make us look like Martha, we hope our great end will appear to be Marie's,
One thing necessa^ie. Bear with us till the North and South have blown
peaceably and sweetly upon our Garden, and then call for the ripe fruits. For
all present differences tie up your judgment a while, and know that God
reigns, let the earth rejoice: Doubtless mercy and truth will follow the
Saints now deeply engaged. Live and love

Yours H. P.
Junii 7. 1651.
GOOD WORK FOR A GOOD MAGISTRATE.
THe ways, and means ordained of God, to bring any Nation to, and preserv
them in as happy a condition as this world can afford, Isa. 54. 17.


are by

I. True Religion maintained and advanced by the Magistrate, and walked in by
the people. Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6. 6-17, 18, 19. 7-12, 13, 14. 8. 18, Josh. 1. 8. Psalm.
119. 1, 2.


II. True Mercy toward the Poor practiced, and advanced both by Magistrates
and People. Deuteronomy. 15. 7. Mat. 5. 7. Prove. 14. 31. Prove. 20. 28.


III. True Justice, and Righteousness amongst both Magistrates, and People, and
toward other Nations. Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19, 20. v. Prove. 16. 12.


Not that here is intended a large discourse upon these heads, with which many
Books might be filled; but only to give some hints of some things, the
Magistrates may see practiced to advance these ends; to satisfy a friends
desire.

I. To advance true Religion.
FOr the Advancement of Religion, it will be expedient to show how the
Universities may be made useful that way, as being the foundation, upon
which the other is built.

Though it may be disputed why illustrious Schools, or Colleges should not be
separated in other parts of this Land, and not all confined to Cambridg and
Oxford, and these so near, as in Yorkshire, Cornwall, and Wales, etc. yet because
the regulating of these we have, may reach those thoughts hereafter, it is
conceived, for present, fit to pitch upon that work only.

And because the frame of these two seems very rotten, and much shaken,
doubtless the Cure must be in the foundation; though it be offensive to some,
reverencing too much the ashes of their founders, who (under the notion of
Christ) served Antichrist by works of that kind.

The true Regulating of these Colleges therefore will be the returning them to
the service of Christ indeed. Though in the Gospel we have no footsteps at all
for such conjunction of men in any place; yet doubtless they may have their
use; and Learning will prove oil to the wheel in many works.

I suppose it will not be hard to persuade men to take leav of those ornaments
(or rags rather) the monuments of Idolatry, viz. gown, caps, Matriculations,
with the many ceremonies about Commencements; but let Sholars live as other
men for apparel, etc.

Colleges properly are the meeting of men for the hearing Lectures, and
improving their parts, not walls to contein monastic d^ones; and so lose the
ends of other men's bounties, as of their own precious time.

There need no volumes, nor tedious rules of ordering the way of Colleges, or
studies, if we agree once upon the End.

Two things therefore we propound: I. That the End be Christian and Noble. II.
That the means be adequate.


I. For the End, it is generally agreed, that it should be the preparing and
sitting younger people for some service, in reference to their Countries; not
for studying to determine in studying; especially in tendencie to spiritual or
civil good; commonly called Ministry, and Magistracy: with which terms I know
not why any should quarrel.

II. Then the Means need to lead that way, and to be suitable and certain, if
possible. For present this is offered; viz. That supposing there be sixteen
such Houses in Cambridg, eight may be laid apart wholly, and only for those
intended for the Ministry: To carry this on

1. That, as the Jesuits for wits, so we, for godliness, choose all such youth
in any place, or condition where we find them at plough or trade, which are
godly and tractable, and send them thither to study Logic, and tongues, and
such to have their maintenance there out of Scholarships, etc.

2. For whom six Tutors are to be appointed in each College, and have 200 l
per annum wholly to attend that work; and the Senior of these six to be
president first, and the rest in order for the carrying on that work.

3. And all the rest of the Fellowships and Scholarships revenue laid up in a
stock, to maintein these young Preachers, when sent out, till they be settled
in the Country: and the Tutors of these Colleges shall give testimony for
them so sent out; or else not to be received: and so if you need ten or twenty
preachers at any time, you may have them and recruit again, as the Regiment in
London does now.

4. And having such materials, every College may have in it a Church of
Christ; and so eight Churches; and more may be in the Town, which may spread
over all the Nation.

5. That they be taught and exampled by their Tutors in the shortest way, for
doubtless these godly Students will get more in months, then others in years;
their own conscience being an alarm to them: And hence with submission it is
offered, that Tutors would let them know what parts of man they must deal withal
in preaching, viz.

1. The memory: therefore Method must be had. 2. The Judgment: ergo clearing
of difficulties of all kinds. 3. The Will: which the doctrinal part applied
may convince home.
And therefore they do well, that in their preaching, and public reading the
Scripture, First analize the chapter; Secondly, clear all difficulties in it
where ever it lie's; and thirdly, draw some conclusions from the analysis, which
must needs be the marrow of the Scripture. We are bold to conclude, these
three things will make a good Preacher in reference to means (the help of the
spirit supposed)*

1. Sound Judgment in the Scriptures; which must be got by prayer and daily
reading. Many commentators will not do much good; the the last are best; for
Polemicks your Jesuits will serve for water-bearers: Am^sius, and some such
short writers are best, etc.

2. A gift of Application, and bringing that to your heart which we know; here
all those rational helps of speech will do well; here Christ's reaching by
similitudes would be minded, which are properly the foolishness of preaching,
and some have found do most good.

3. Dexterity in case of Conscience: in which particular the misery of this
nation ought to be bewailed, who were wont to be fruitful in cases. Perkins
and Ames have don a little that way, but not much. What want of converting
Preachers there is, who see's not? and that high opinion of illiterate men's
doing so much good is a mistake, if generally observed.

And when they are thus fitted, they may be sent out when there is need, and
maintained by the Collegestock, till provided for in the Country, where they
may gather Churches in the County. All well qualified for the work may join at
first; and after, as the blessing of God appears, lesser Churches in several
places may arise, and Communion held amongst them all, according to that way
of New England, set forth by Hooker and Cotton.

Their maintenance may be of tithes, or rather from something answerable at two
shillings, one shilling, or eighteen pence upon a pound-rent: which stock may
be put into three gentlemen's hands, chosen yearly for that purpose, and
thence allow to these Preachers, according to their places, conditions, and
families: and out of this stock thirty pound per annum to the widow, during
widowhood, when any die's; out of this stock the poor may have help; yea good
sums may be borrowed by the State in any exigent upon good security.

And thus the State paie's them, and thus they have dependence upon the State.

Two of the ablest of these, may one day in a week, at the Countie-Town, answer
all controversies, according to a Rule after prescribed.

And for the other eight Colleges, they may have in each six Tutors, to whom,
all Gentlemen that would learn any other Arts or Science whatsoever may
resort, and there may you have whatever any Outlandish Academie can teach:
from thence, if any will apply themselves to the Ministry, they may com to
the other Colleges.

And the stock also of these Colleges so preserved, that by that means they may
send some to travel abroad, and be more furnished for the States service, as
the Hungarians and other people do.

To all this I would add, that many of your Gentry, Lawyers, and Physicians
might do well to apply themselves, being godly, and qualified, as many are.

Or why might not some of the numerous Gentry in their Country, study, and
either preach for nothing; or give Physic gratis, or advise in matters of Law
freely?

The sins of Sodom creep upon us: and whilst our Soldiers are whetting their
swords for the next battle, how many are whetting their knives for the next
feast? oh! why should any make Recreation a trade?

The great Turk teaches better doctrine, who must be skilled in some
handicraft: and most foreign Princes are Merchants.

After the foundation is well laid in the Universitie, the building thereupon
may be thus framed.

1. Let certain able, fit, godly, and learned men be maintained that, not
being tied by office to any particular charge, or flock, may, both in public
and private, take all lawful advantages, and opportunities to preach, and
dispute for true Religion, traveling continually to that end, and persuading
all men, to forsake the ways of sin and error, and to retein and profess the
truth, and walk therein. Acts 8. 4. Acts 17. 2. and chapter 19. v. 6. to 10. Acts
13. 3. and 14, 15, 16. v. 1 Cor. 14. 1.


2. And some one or more settled in every great Town; that at certain set times,
and places, weekly, may offer to dispute any point with any man, in public
hearing of all that pleas to com; and some to be appointed Moderators, and one
or two appointed by the Magistrates to fine, or mulct either party, that shall
reproach, censure, or use any unseemlie language, contrary to humanity, love,
Religion, etc. The advancement of Religion hereby would be almost incredible.
Acts* 28. 16. to 31. v.


3. To countenance, and take into special protection all the Churches of
Christ, who hold but so much fundamental truth, as denominate's them such, in
spirituals to leav them wholly free; but not to suffer any brother uncivilly
(though it be about spiritual Controversies) to abuse another, either in word
or deed, in private or public, against which certain penalties may be made;
so shall the Churches have peace, and be daily multiplied. Isa. 49. 23.


4. To cause to be brought into a Method and printed, those plain Rules in
God's word, which he has ordained, to preserv, and increas love and peace
amongst Churches, and Christians, which Rules are so plain and express, that
hardly can any contention break into a Church, if the Elders do but practice
them themselves, and see the Members do the like; if but the Rules to order
men's words only were but well observed, it is strange, what peace and love
there might be. Psalm. 119. 5. to 16. v. etc. and 27. 32. 46. 52.


5. Let every Church at their entering into that Estate (or after) petition the
Magistrate for protection, etc. and at the same time also deliver up to the
same Magistrate a book of the Articles of their Faith: and wherein they differ
from others, and promise the Magistrate also publicly, to walk peaceably
together therein*

That so, if, after that, any Brother fall from the Profession of all, or any
of those Articles, and yet will neither leav that Church, nor suffer them to
meet in peace, but still go on to disturb them (for such there are,) and is
uncivil, through a pervers zeal, let him be punished in some sort by the
Magistrate, according to his offense, and the Church to excommunicate him if
they find cause, etc.

6. To provide maintenance for Ministers, and learned men in all Languages, and
learning what can be, especially, for Churches that are poor, etc. about which
much might be said, etc.

7. If the Magistrate see cause, to exhort, and stir up the Churches to keep
close to their own Principles, and to be more zealous, both in word and deed,
etc. Isa. 49. 23.


8. To advance such to all places of power, honor, and wealth, who are purest
in their Profession, and practice of true Religion, both toward God and man.
Prove. 4. 8. 21. and v. 21. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Numb. 27. 20.


After the love and honor of God, he charge us to love and help our
Neighbor, the Magistrate especially, is charged with the weak, as the widows,
fathertheless, the poor, and the helpless, etc. of which part of God's will the
Magistrate is to have a special care; to accomplish which, a general rule must
be, that the poor may have their commodities taken off at a markettable price;
else they will rather beg, or steal then work. To which purpose the Council of
Trade should be the Merchant for the State, and in all Counties to have a
stock ready, to buy at usual rate the commodity of the Laborer; so as he
may live comfortably, and then the rule following may be attended. Isa. 1. 17.
Job 29. 12, 13.


1. Let all vagabonds and idle persons, and such as make a trade of begging,
that are able to do any kind of work, be restrained, set to work, or
punished. Psalm. 109. 10. Ezekiel. 16. 49. 2 These. 3. 10.


2. Let such provision be made, that all may be set to work that are able,
and willing; that all excuse for beging or stealing be prevented, which is not
so hard to be don. 1 Thessalonians 4. 11. 2*3 10. 1 Timothy 5. 8.


3. All lame and blind that are healthful, may be set to some work, and the
sick, and unable kept in Hospitals; and it is the Magistrates duty to see it
performed, out of love to humanity, and maintenance cannot be wanting if full
endeavor be used therein. Amsterdam is far advanced herein. 1 Timothy 5. 8. Judge.
16. 21.


4. Let truly poor Families and persons be made partakers of the public Alms,
either of the Churches of which they are, or houses in which they dwell;
Amsterdam does much this way, but this work might be much more advanced: and
the Lord would delight in such, and do them good. Exodus 22. 22, 23. v. Prove.
14. 21. and 31. v. Prove. 19. 17. and 29. 7. chapter 28. 27. and 22. 9.


5. Let in every town a Lombard (or bank of lending) be appointed, where the
poor, that have no friends, or will not make their need known, and such as on a
sudden are fallen into some strait, may have money upon their paune upon a
reasonable Interest; A Lombard well regulated, would be a work of much
mercy; and the moneys of orphans might be employed in this way to maintein
the fatherless, and increas their stock, so would good be don both ways. And
herein lie's the wisdom of the Magistrates, to do a public good, and yet not
hinder, yea often increas the public stock of the Commonwealth; many such
things are don in the Low Countries. Luke 19. 23.


6. To give freedom of dwelling, Trading, and protection [mercie also] to all
strangers; to make little or no difference, as the Lord of old commanded his
People, and promised to bless them for it, and this will enrich a Nation
mightily, as we see in Holland, and not hurt any Natives, as envious Persons
think, and can by good Reasons be proved. Levit. 19. 33, 34. Deuteronomy. 10. 19.
Exodus 23. 9. and 22-21.


7. A special relief to poor people, and great good unto all sorts is the
coining of farthings, and half farthings, and other small money, it is
incredible the good and convenience of it; and all former inconveniences as
easily prevented: for which end, all money less then sixpences mixed with so
much Copper or brass; that from one penny to four pence, all may be as big as
sixpences, and the farthings or half farthings must be made so big, that they
may have their value in copper, so will they not be made by others, when the
profit is small, nor people lose them when they are made so big; but special
care must be had, that so much copper and small money be not made, as would
be a burden to any. Mat. 10. 29. Mar. 12. 42.


8. A Chamber, or Court to keep secure, and advance the estates of fatherless
Children, etc. is of great use and relief for Orphans; the Laws and Orders
about it are many, and all must tend to the security and increas of the
estates of such Children; as their Parents for the better security have by
testament, betrusted the public with; or as it is in Holland, where the
estates of all that die without wills, are seized by the deputies of that
Court, and the nearest or best friends of the Children ordered to manage the
estate of the children: yet so as they may do nothing without consent of the
Lords; and what is don at last, is all upon good security, for safety and
increas of the estate, which being managed by true Justice and mercy, is of
great use to the fatherless, and of great use to the Commonwealth, as might
be many ways proved. Ezekiel. 22. 7. Deuteronomy. 10. 18. Isa. 1. 17. Jer. 5. 28.


9. And some course must needs be taken, that poor men especially, may not be
for small debts clapped up in prison, and thereby they and their families undon
in a short time, because he is not able to put in Bail; yea, how many a
Merchant undon presently, that was in a thriving way, and strangers also often
undon upon mere pretenses; and great is this oppression. Prove. 21. 13. Mat. 18.
30. to 33. v.


10. Wherefore, let no houskeeper that has dwelt in that place a year, or a
year and a quarter, be liable to be arrested till after sentence, and
execution be out against his goods; and if no goods can be found, then the
creditor may have power to lay the debtor in prison, if he think he has
concealed his goods, and have any friends that will releas him, provided the
Creditor must allow him six pence a day, or less, so long as he keep's him
there: and though this may be abused, yet cannot be so hurtful as the other.
Prove. 14. 31.


11. Another relief to poor and strangers is, that no stranger (that is not a
Town-dweller) after arrest may be carried to prison; nor any suit begun till
parties appear before the Peacemakers, appointed in every Town for that
purpose, to see if they can end the controversy, and persuade them to peace
and love; if not, let the debtor put in security to answer the debt, if
possible he can: if not, let him be forced to put into the hands of the
Peacemakers (or others) twenty shillings, fifty shillings, five pounds, ten
pound, or one hundred pounds, as the man is of ability, and the debt in
greatness, on condition to have his liberty presently in that Town, but not to
go out of Town, till sentence be given one way or other, upon forfeiture to
the poor of that sum deposited in the Peacemakers hands, if he go out of Town
before the debts be paid, and the Creditor to take some other opportunity, to
sue the debtor in the Town where the debtor dwel's, or to arrest him another
time, in the same Town, and then not so to be trusted again. 1 Cor. 6. 5. Mat.
5. 9.


12. Great cruelties are committed in Prisons, by great charges for fees,
chambers, and dear victuals, and by stinking and unwholsom rooms; all which in
Mercy and love to humanity ought to be prevented. Psalm. 107. 10. Mat. 18.
30. Prove. 14. 31.


13. Some course also must be taken, that widows and under aged, and persons of
small parts and education, may not be overreached, as often they are by
agreements, and under-writing of bills, for which are diverse Remedies. Isa. 10.
2. Exodus 22. 22. Ezekiel. 22. 7.


14. That none be pressed to serve the State as Soldiers, by sea or Land,
against their wills, (the evils of which are great and many) unless in some
very great exigent; and no State shall need to do it, if they manage
State Affairs well; keep a rich, public stock, and pay well, you shall never
want men; and should not they be just and pay well that are to administer
Justice to all others? Isa. 5. 7. Prove. 14. 31.


15. Needs must there be set up in every Town a house, to receiv and bring up
to all manner of Trades, the Orphans of such, as die without any estate (or if
they have so little, that none of their Kindred or acquaintance will take upon
them, to bring up the Children) who being left to beg, or perish, etc. the
civil Fathers of the * fatherless are to take charge of them; young babes to
be nursed up, and after learned to read, write, etc. and when big enough, to
be set to work, to learn something to live by; and if the stock will bear it,
to have ten or twenty pounds to set up a trade for themselves, being big
enough; or when they marry out of the Weeshous, as many do in Holland. The
orders for to regulate this house are many. * Deuteronomy. 10. 18. Jeremie 5. 28.


And for means to maintein it, every able Citizen, at first, will give ten,
twenty, one hundred pounds, or more, being put on it by the Magistrates and
Ministers, and more will daily be given by diverse ways, and especially by
Testament when men die, if all be right carried.

III. Justice.
Where there is true Religion and Mercy, no doubt but there will be good
Justice; yea, Justice is more necessary to the immediate subsistence of a
Commonwealth then the two former; for many Commonwealths subsist without
true Religion* and much Mercy; but without Justice, no Commonwealth can long
subsist; and it is, of the three, the most immediate and proper work of the
Magistrate's office, Romans 12. 1.
to see true Justice executed.

Here we take leav to propose a short Model for the Law, upon which Justice
hang's, and which has cost so much trouble and expens.
1. REgisters to be settled in every Parish, kept every year by two men
chosen to that work; and all Lands and houses entered into that book distinctly;
and the Copy thereof transferred to the Countie-Town* in case of fire, etc.
and in these books all alienations etc. entered; and none authentic but such,
that so none might be mistaken in premorgages, or any other way; whereby
every one may clearly be satisfied, in what he has, or can claim as his own.

2. That all papers for all contracts, for money or Lands, buying or selling by
any writing, have a small Seal of the States on the top of it (for which three
pence or six pence paid to the State, for which a Model is ready: such papers
will be of great use for men's security that deal; and an insensible incom to
the State.

3. That in every County, every hundred yearly choos three men to be
Peacemakers, or friend-makers for that year, to hear and determine all
common-controversies between man and man; from whom they may not appeal; and
the danger cannot be much by these often elections; for certainly, the
happiness in Government will never lie upon Laws, but men; all good men
carrying good Laws in their bosom: and therefore Venice, and other States have
founded their welfare in Elections; To which Characters and qualifications must
necessarily be given out by the supreme power: and the ballating* box never
used but upon exigents, it being a Lot, and was wont to be a part of Worship;
it being used in Scripture, only in two cases; Civilly, in the dividing Lands
and inheritances; Divinely, in the chois of Matthias for an Apostle. And the
Rule is, Where Providence does no way appear in the use of other means, then
the Lot take's place.

But never do we read of a Lusorie Lot, made common by Cards and Dice, and
urged by a grave Preacher in a dispute, betwixt him and learned Ames.

To add a word more.

In the chois of a Parlament*man, if a thousand meet to choos, let these choos
an hundred out of that number to choos for them, and the rest depart; the one
hundred then out of themselves choos twenty, to choos one for that service:
and these upon oath to be faithful; if among these, two be in competition,
then to ballating. No man to have a voice that has been an enemy ten years.

4. all entails may be cut off for ever, and men have liberty to bestow what
they have to whom they pleas, the eldest having a double portion. What
mischiefs have com'n upon families by greatning the eldest, and abasing the
rest, let Englishmen judge; yea, the high ways and gallows can witness, and
foreign plantations can testify. And if Daughters were ingenuous, and would
work, they ought to have equal portions with sons. It is an unpleasing
spectacle to see in the Cities so many men, fit for nobler things, to sell
those wares, which were properly the imploiment of women, and their daughters.
I wish a serious remedy hereunto: and that men should not blush to be sitting
in shops, yea, the choice Gentry of the Nation, I much wonder.

5. For a Body of Laws, I know none but such as should be the result of sound
reason, nor do I know any such reason, but what the God of wisdom has
appointed. Therefore the Moral Law (that short Law called ten words) is
doubtless best; to which Moses's judicials added, with Solomon's Rules and
experiments, will be complete. I wish our Lawyers would urge these for Law;
and not those obsolete presidents, which will hardly prove, or make a Sea man's
suit to fit our occasions. Necessity isthe mother, and ill manners together,
of the best Laws.

I am fully satisfied with what the Supreme power shall give out daily; yea,
though they daily alter something, if for the good of the whole.

If any Lawyer be continued, let them be allowed, and paid by the State, and
plead for justice, even for justice sake. Why should expenses in Law be thus
bottomless? yea, such, as would maintein an Army, and the fountain and issues
thereof generally malice, and rancor.

Why are not the Fees of Physicians stinted? and then help commanded upon a
known price? I know they cannot suffer by it.

6. Wills and Testaments may be acknowledged by the next two Justices, before
whom they may be proved without any charge; and then entered into the former
Register of the Parish, or a Book kept in every Parish to that purpose.

7. This being don, it is very advisable to burn all the old Records; yea,
even those in the Tower, the Monuments of tyranny.

8. No Lawyer to plead at any Committee.

9. And for Arrests, that summons may be left at men's houses; and not such a
nest of bailiefs maintained, even an Army of Caterpillars; the worst of men
employed that way.

10. None to distrein for taxes, or other debts; but the debtor's outward door
taken away, and carried to the Town house, and as many other new doors as are
set in the place. The shame and danger hereof will urge sudden payment.

Rules for Justice.
1. None can be free of great injustice, who by persecution for Religion take
away liberty of conscience from any: whose Principles or practices are not
dangerous to the Government, Peace, Propriety, and good of the Commonwealth;
if they otherwise live but civilly. For as God himself: so his Vicegerent the
Magistrate must cause his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall both upon good and
bad. Isa. 59. chapter 11. to 15. v. Acts 5. 34. to 39. v. Acts 9. 4, 5.


2. And can it be just to punish any by lothsom prisons, before a hearing
whether they be guilty or no: how many innocent persons have suffered this
way, and how many have lost their lives by sicknesses got there; put in for
small faults which are crying sins, and must needs be amended. Jer. 39. 6. 9.
Joh. 7. 51. Genesis 40. 15.


3. Long laying in prison before sentence; or delays in Justice is great
cruelty to many, and it mightily provoke's the Lord, as Isaiah says: and
certainly it may be remedied, if there were compassion enough to prisoners.
Prove. 21. 3. Genesis 40. 15. Prove. 21. 7. Isa. 59. 14. 15.


4. Delays in suits in civil things, prove's great injustice, yea, an unjust
Judgment would not be so ill to many, as are long delaie's before sentence;
And some body must one day answer for peoples great loss of time, and ruin to
some, only by delays. Jerem. 5. 28. Prove. 29. 4. Chap. 21. 7. Chapter 21. 3.


5. To attain to pure Justice is a very great blessing of God, both to
Governors and governed: Wherefore let a Committee be ordained, one, or more to
receiv requests, and advise from every particular Town and County; how true
Justice may best be obtained, how all damages and hurts may best be
prevented, and all suits be best hindered, but when begun, and committed: how
soonest and best ended, and remedied. Isa. 61. 8. Prove. 21. 3. Prove. 2. 2. 3.
Eccle. 1. 13.


6. And above all Laws whatever can be thought of, no way so good to attain
good and speedy Justice, as to put into all places of Judicature, men that
fear God, and are lovers of Justice, precise in their promises and
performances; for there are godly men not very just nor wise, and on the
other side, there are Turks and Infidels very just men, and abhor bribes, or
to break their words, etc. Exodus 18. 21. Prove. 29. 2. Isa. 32. 6. Prove. 20. 8.
Prove. 21. 15.


7. Things must be so ordered, that no man (nor Court of men always) always
be above Justice, or so powerful, but that he may be called to account,
before a Court of Justice, and there censured if he deserv it; for if any
be, the evils of it will be very great in time, as might be well proved.
Deuteronomy. 16. 19. 2 Chro. 25. 17. Isa. 10. 1, 2.


8. Let no person, City, Court, or any kind of men have any Privilege, that
may bring damage or hurt to the Commonwealth, or to any particular men; for
this is to establish injustice by a Law, and great wrong is don to the
Commonwealth by Privileges given to particular men, and companies (and often
under pretense of doing good to the Commonwealth) as might easily be proved:
and therefore men take such pains, make such suits, and give such gifts, for to
have such privileges, out of self-love. Isa. 59. 8. Prove. 21. 7.


9. For Civil Controversies, let there be in every Town, and place, (or Ward)
appointed two or more Peacemakers; who may hear the differences between man
and man, before any may go to Law, and if it be possible, let them end it:
and fit men for such business, will end most controversies, and spare the
Magistrate a great labor, and the Commonaltie, great trouble, and charge, and
only by persuading; yet these must be well regulated, they must hear no man
in private alone; and many the like. Psalm. 34. 14. Matt. 5. 9. Prove. 12. 20.


10. That Justice may be near to all men, let there be in every City, town,
and hundred, appointed five, or seven able fit men, to determine all
Controversies for Debts, and strifes; and any three of them present, to have
power to give sentence; and well regulated with other Laws; in weighty cases
they may advise with learned men, both Advocates, and Divines, but the power to
determine to be in them; as in Holland. Exodus 18. 21, 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 1. 15. and
17. v. Deuteronomy. 16. 18.


11. Let no appeals be from these men (five or seven) that are yearly new
chosen) but in very weighty Matters; first, let there be once in a month,
or at some set times, a Court for appeals; of all these seven men (not one to
be wanting upon a certain pecuniarie mulct) for revision of the sentence of
such as find themselves aggrieved at a former sentence, by three or four of
these men, and if his case be found bad by them all, let him pay three, five,
or ten percent, to the charges of the Court, for his presumption: and if he
will yet appeal to a higher Court, let him first lay down the sum he is
condemned in, into the Towns hands: which the demander may take out upon good
security; And lastly, let there be no appeal, out of that County or shire,
in which the party dwell's; for many weighty Reasons; and that, if the sum
be but above such or such a value, as the Towns are in which the sentence is
given: for if men be willing to give a just sentence, few cases are so
difficult, but they may find the right; and if they doubt, they can take two
or three days time for consideration, prayer to God, and advise with other
men, etc. Exodus 8. 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 1. 17.


Much might be said for proof, and orders here-abouts, if it would not be too
tedious.

12. Besides the constant, set good men at first spoken of; there are many
good men must be made use of, as occasion serve's; as many controversies
about the goodness of Commodities cannot be ended presently by the Judges,
till good men that have skill in such commodities, do view the same, and value
things, etc. and if then they cannot make the parties agree, to make their
report to the Judges, how they find things, and they to give sentence
accordingly; so for accounts, not possible to end men's differences justly, till
accounts be well looked over, and both parties are heard in private by good
men, and diverse the like: so that the Judges must know many honest, able men's
skill in such and such things, unto whom they may presently refer each
controversy, according to the nature of it, whereby they shall decide things
more justly, and eas themselves of a very great burden: with better content to
both parties, that have the difference. 1 Cor. 6. 5. Mat. 5. 9.


13. Let every man plead his own cause, and if he think's his adversary too
strong, or himself too weak, he shall have liberty to take a friend, or
Neighbor to plead for him, whom he judge's able; But not to let any
Advocates, Attorneys, Scriveners, nor any for salaries to plead for any man,
for many weighty Reasons, unless the difference be about a great sum, as
sixty, eighty, one hundred pounds or more; then to admit Lawyers to plead, if
one, or both parties desire it; yet so, that after they have don, the parties
themselves may have liberty to speak, if one or both desire the same. Acts 23.
1. 35. ver. Acts 24. 10.


14. Let all men's Testimonies be taken by notarial writings under oath: or in
the writing to offer an oath: if desired to verify what is therein attested,
(yet so, that parties may be sent for, and examined by word of mouth, each
apart, if any fraud be doubted in the testimony) which will prevent
incredible loss, trouble, and vexation to many. Ier. 36. 4.


15. Let all Judges, Advocates, Attorneys, Scriveners, Sergeants, Jailors, and
all whatever belong to Courts of Justice, have their pay, or salaries out of
some public stock of the Common*wealth; and to defraie all charges herein; let
every one that is condemned in his suit, or that sue's, and implead's another
unjustly, or does another wrong, and thereby forces another to sue for his
right, pay one, two, three, etc. per Cent. for a mulct or fine, to this
public stock, and let them that sue, or wrong another most basely, and
apparently unjustly, and out of plain deceit, and wrong pay half, or the whole
sum that he would have detained another of: the half whereof give to him that
was wronged, or sued unjustly, and the other half to this public stock, so
shall men fear to wrong, and sue another unjustly, and prevent abundance of
suites, and quarrels, and prevent charges to him that is, or might be wronged;
and the unwillingness of these Offices to do their office, when they have
nothing of them that set them awork, may be prevented by other means. Exodus
21. 24, 25.


16. In greater Cities (especially in London) where falls many differences,
there must be so many Courts of Justice, that all suites may be ended in a
week, or if there be too many writings to peruse, and difficulties to hear;
then to be put to good men to peruse, and hear them, and they for to bring in
their report, how they find things, if they cannot comprimise it; and all
ordinary suites to be ended at the first hearing, or next day at a second
hearing; if some paper, or circumstance of proof be wanting, in the same City
may be two or three Courts of the same kind: only one for a greater, another
for alesser sum. Ex. 18. 18. 22.


Besides, there may be one two, or three Courts for Sea matters, at London; if
one be not enough to end all things quickly; one for quarrels; one for moneys,
and one for agreements in writing, in which fall any differences; another
there may be for quarrels, between Masters and men, Mistresses and maids, etc.
and other Courts there may be, if there be need: and better the Judges sit,
though they sometimes have little or nothing to do, then hundreds daily wait on
them, and know not when they shall be heard, etc.

17. Let not one man have power of any Judgment alone, by any means; for
besides, one is more capable to be bribed then many, that are changed yearly
(only one in a Court, staie's on for the year after, and he to be the first
president for that year:) one man cannot think of all things needful at that
time, so well as many men can do; and often diverse men, or one amongst them
finde's a deceit better, and sooner then one man alone can do. Deuteronomy. 1. 16.
Prove. 21. 14. Josh. 20. 4. Deuteronomy. 21. 2.


18. Let order be taken, that no man may be put in prison, and have his
liberty taken away for debt, before sentence be past, and that he be
condemned: and when any be put in prison, let their cause be heard, and
presently determined; and if they be in debt, and cannot pay their debts, nor
any friends for them; then let them be set to work, that in time he may pay
his debts, or if possible some part of it; for that is just, and will make
others take heed how they com into debt; and do much other good. Ezra 7. 26.


19. All living men are so partial, that I doubt, there is not one alive has
so much grace, or truth, that at all times would impartially give sentence; and
though some would not take money, or presents, directly and by compact; yet
many will take some kindness, at lest indirectly, especially, from friends or
kindred; and though some would abhor all this, especially for the most part, yet
are there any living men, that dwell in houses of clay, and see through flesh,
that would not at some times be partial to their near friends and acquaintance,
and give such a sentence for them, as they would not do, if it were for an
enemy, etc. Romans 3. 10, 11, 12.


Wherefore, it is of very great concernment, that some course be taken, to
prevent, as much as can possible be, all partiality; for which many things
might be don, and many brave orders made, if men were willing to do all that
might be. Exodus 23. 8. Deuteronomy. 16. 19. Prove. 15. 27.


Great punishments on them that take gifts, * or pervert Judgments upon any
pretense, is one good means, and many other helps there are. Prove. 17. 8. 23.
Deuteronomy. 17. 4. 29. 4.


20. Sore punishment against falls witnesses; is of great conducement to
Justice, and few men there are that fear an oath, indeed much less a lie, or
falls Testimony, when it may advantage themselves, or friends; and most men in
words, do abhor a falls oath; yet very few in a temptation, that make true
conscience of it: but find a thousand ways to absolv themselves, and blind
their own consciences, that they may not think themselves forsworn, or to have
born falls witness: wherefore against the subtletie and deceitfulness of man's
heart, in this and the former article especially, all diligence of the depth of
wisdom must be set on work, by means whereof, good Laws, and order, and right
antidotes may be found to prevent all the mischief of these evils. Exodus 20.
16. Prove. 19. 5. 9. Prove. 6. 19. Prove. 21. 8.


And where any doubt is, each of the witnesses must be examined alone, in a
room apart; by which means great discoveries of untruth will be found out, to
wonderment. Acts 12. 19. Ezra 10. 16. Acts 25. 26. Luke 23. 14.


21. Let some able men be appointed (but so as they be not known to be such)
continually to ride up and down, and be present at Courts of Judicature,
sometimes in one town and County, sometimes in another; and when they find any
Court to do apparent injustice, let them discover it to the State, for them to
take a course, that such Judges may be punished, as they find each in that
Court to have been guilty thereof; so shall all Courts of Justice fear to do
wrong, lest some of these men be there present to disclose their injustice.
Ier. 8. 6. and 23. 18.


Yea doubtless, it would be of admirable use, to have either Sheriffs, or some
other, to give an account of the obedience given to all Acts of Parliament, yea,
to see them obeyed in the Counties.

For Justice in Criminal Causes.
1. LEt the same men in every town, and County, that have the Judgment in
Civil, have the Judgment in Criminal Causes; but in Country towns and places,
where are no men of much judgment, let them not have the power of life and
death in their hands, but only some other corporal punishments; yet it is
strange to see in the Low Countries, how their Bores, or men in Country towns,
that in many places have power of life and death, will do better justice then
learned men in other Countries. Joshua 20. 4. Numb. 35. 24. Deuteronomy. 21. 2. Deuteronomy.
1. 16.


2. Next day (or two) after any are com or brought into prison, let them be
examined, that if any be unjustlie imprisoned, he may be forthwith set at
liberty; and for such as are guilty, let them be tried, and sentence
pronounced, and executed as as often as possible may be, that Justice may be
speedily exercised to the terror of evil doers; and it will save much charge to
the Commonwealth, not to keep long in prison. Deuteronomy. 1. 16. Prove. 21. 7.


3. Let no Malefactors against the light of Nature, and civil society, escape
unpunished, but be justly and speedily punished, not in prisons before hand,
by cold, heat, stink, famine, or any other wale; but out of humanity, let
them be comfortably provided for, till sentence be given* and then let
Justice take place; Tha^ all Murderers, Thieves, Whore* mongers, Adulterers,
fals-witness* bearers, evil-speakers, deceivers* Bankrupts, Drunkards, roiotors
Traitors, Blasphemers, and all manner of evil doers may be duly punished,
rather inclining to mercy then cruelty, and always with a merciful heart.
Deuteronomy. 35. 31, 32. Prove. 12. 18.


4. Let no man or Court have power to pardon any offenders; for mercy to one
offender is cruelty unto many innocent persons; for if one get's pardon, one
hundred will hope for the like; and it increases offenders, and wrong's the
Commonwealth, and tend's only to the unjust greatness of him, or them that
have that power, and by God never commanded. Deuteronomy. 35. 31, 32, 33.


5. Let no difference be made between Jews, or Gentiles, bond or free,
stranger or Natives, in either Criminal, or Civil things: for so has God
commanded, and by this means shall the Governors be true fathers of humanity;
And it will mightily populate, and enrich the Commonwealth, when the oppressed
in any other Country know where to go dwell, under so just Government, with
freedom from oppression. Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. Prove. 24. 23. Prove. 20. 8.


6. That the children nor heirs of Malefactors be punished, or disinherited
for the misdeeds of their Parents, because the Lord has so commanded, and the
punishment of children for their Parents faults in former times, has been used
chiefly by Tyrants, who, to secure * themselves the better against treasons, and
hurt to themselves, set such sore punishments to deterr all from hurting them,
which should not have needed, had they lived justly. * If the Father forfeit
his estate, do it, but let his small children have their portions out of it, if
they have no way approved their father's evil. Ezekiel. 18. 20. Deuteronomy. 24. 16. 2
Kings 14. 6.


7. And I believ it can never be showed out of any History, either Divine,
or humane, that ever God changed or put down that Government, or brought so
general a plague as war, etc. upon a Nation, to destroy half, or a quarter of
the Inhabitants, so long as, but any reasonable measure of Justice Prove. 16.
12.
was found amongst them; how much then will he bless that Nation, and
Government, with all manner of blessings, both spiritual and temporal, where
with good Justice, both true Religion and Mercy are advanced? And most
certainly, Prove. 16. 12.
that Government 1 Samuel 15. 11. 23. 1 King. 2. 4. 1 King. 3 9.
that follows these principal Rules of God's word, shall never be changed
whilst they continue so doing, Prove. 16. 12.
and that Nation shall always continue most happy 1 Samuel 15. 11. 23. 1 King.
2. 4. 1 King. 3 9.
who are so governed; for the Lord will not fail of his good word, nor is his
arm shortened.

* Deuteronomy. 11. 22. to 25. and the whole chapter
Deuteronomy. 28. 2. to 13. and the whole chap.
It is very advisable, that since England breed's so many thieves, and
hanging thereupon is so common and cheap, and yet little reformation, that two
Galleys may be built to row from Gravesend to Queenborow, and where else they
may, (according to weather) and put thieves on these two years, seven, ten, or
during their life; certainly this will help more then the Gallows, and more
conformable it is to God's will; and since the root of many mischiefs is base
swinish drunkenness, and the cure hereof never reached by all the Laws already
made; there is but one main Cure propounded, Viz.

That it be inacted through the Nation, that none drink to another, directly,
or indirectly, upon the forfeiture of twelve pence, whereof six pence to the
informer, and six pence to the poor; which, though it seem ridiculous, will
prove the likeliest way of prevention; the practice being of men
ingrammatical, and practiced in no Countries, but among our neighbors in
Germany, etc.

ANd because Justice cannot be executed without Power, therefore God has given
the Sword into the Magistrate's hand to maintein the Good, and punish evil
doers; wherefore the Militia must be always well looked to, and provided for.
Romans 13. 1. 4 2 Chro. 8. 3. 6. 2 Chro. 25. 5. and 9. chapter 25. v. and 32. 5, 6.


1. By putting into all offices, both in Garrison and field, godly and trusty
men, the State may rely on. Exodus 18. 21. 2 King. 22. 7.


2. To have all Storehouses be near at hand, and well provided of all sorts
of Ammunition, and constantly well dressed and looked to, both in peace, and in
time of war especially. 2 Chro. 8. 6. 2 Chro. 11, 12. Ezekiel. 27. 11.


4. *To put the Sword into no private Soldier's hand, that is uncivil; much
less into the hands of lewd persons, who love no Justice. * They will destroy
victuals in plenty, cannot fast in want, sooner fall sick, and weaken the
Army: mutiny sooner, and fail and faint in the time of battle.

5. Let all Military persons, both Soldiers, and Officers, be truly and
justly paid, whatever is promised them; for they that are to maintein Justice,
must be first just themselves, and keep Soldiers from injustice, which cannot
be without due paiement; for by good payment you may have chois of Soldiers;
and may keep them in good discipline, and may be so justly ordered, that they
will be no burden, but profit to the places where they are. Levit. 19. 13.
May. 3. 5. Exodus 2. 9. Luke 3. 14.


6. Do justly in advancing such to Offices in the Army and Garrisons, as are
deserving men, and have longest, and faithfully served the State, and not to
put in friends that never were soldiers, or other men for money, or other
self ends, whereby many are discontented, and the Army made less serviceable,
and the State thereby weakened: when the soldiers see them in power so unjust.
2 Samuel 23. 8, 9, etc. Psalm* 125. 4.


7. Let all roiotous, and deboist soldiers be turned out of service; for such
are plagues to provoke God to wrath, they will brag much, and when it come's to
fighting, do little; when an Army is in plenty, they will devour abundance,
and the sooner bring the whole to want; and when want com's they are the less
able to bear it; but will sooner grow sick, infect others, die themselves, and
weaken the whole. Neither can rioters fast when need is, so long as temperate
men. Prove. 23. 20. Prove. 28. 7. 1 Pet. 4. 4. 2 Pet. 2, 13. Isa. 28. 1.


8. Lastly that all Commissions and Orders pass in the military channel, and
all Soldiers to give an account to the General, and the General to the State,
no interfearing with them and the civil Government, the English Souldierie
being the most unparalleled men in the world.

ANd because the Militia cannot be maintained without money; Therefore has God
commanded, that Tribute shall be paid to them that bear the sword of Justice;
and things must be so ordered, that the Commonwealth may have a very rich
stock, or revenue at least, to defray all charges plentifully, without which
they cannot be just. Luke 2. 1. 2. Romans 13. 6. 2 Chro. 10. 4. 18.


2. The charges of the whole commonwealth, must be duly known, and all
unnecessarie charges cut off, and then a proportionable tax laid accordingly,
plentifully to defray all those charges; so as no man must pay more currantly,
nor buy all things cheaper then the Commonwealth; for they must be an example
of truth in what they promise; and Justice in performance to the whole
Commonwealth, how will the Lord then bless them? Levit. 19. Mal. 3. 5.


3. Special care must be had, that men fearing God and hating covetousness,
may be chosen and trusted with the stock of the Commonwealth; and yet so
regulated, that if any prove falls, they may do little hurt. Exodus 18. 21. 2
King. 22. 7. 2 King. 12. 15.


4. The Charge of the Commonwealth may be made much less by lessening the
state of Officers, both civil and military, by land and sea, which is
nourished in a Kingly Government, to maintain their Port and Grandeur: But in
a Common wealth, who desire wealth indeed, this stately Port is wholly
needless, as has most eminently been seen in the Low Countries, where it is
strange to see (though now it is ten times greater then in the heat of their
wars against the King of Spain) how small state, the States themselves hold:
Lords of the Admiraltie, Burgomasters of the greatest Cities, not one of an
hundred have so much as a man or sergeant to wait on them in the streets, yet
do the highest acts of Power, with as much vigor as the King of Spain himself.
Prove. 16. 32.


5. Let as many offices of the Commonwealth (as can be) be served by men of
quality, who will do it freely without any charge or salaries; of which you
need not doubt of chois; for how many thousands are in England, men that have
enough to live on, and nothing to imploie their able parts in; who gladly, some
out of love of humanity and the common good, others, but that they might be
well employed, some out of love of Authority, and honor, etc. would gladly serve
the Commonwealth; yea, and would petition ten for one office, (if it were but
brought into custom, as it was under the Roman Common-wealth-government*) and
what a mass of money might be saved by this means, and the Commonwealth more
honored by being sued to to be served? and yet all offices better served then
now by needy men, that desire still more to enrich themselves, and whose hearts
say not yet, I have enough, as many men do, that live on what they have. *
And should not Christians serve the Commonwealth freely, as well as the
Romans? Nehemiah 5. 15. to 18. Prove. 21. 15.


6. As many officers about custom, excise, Clerks, Treasurers, Committees,
Towns, freeedoms, Officers of Companies, and many the like might be
discharged, as would alone maintein a great Army, if all customs, Excise, and
a hundred other ways of gathering money were put down, and instead thereof,
all men throughout the whole Commonwealth, that are able to pay any thing *
taxed once in a year, what each shall give, each according to his rents,
estate, trade, and handicraft, and a place appointed in each town, and City,
where every one shall themselves bring the money they are taxed at, with how
few Officers and little charge might this be don, and how easy would it be
for men to pay, when they should have all things so cheap without custom,
Excise, or charge of thousands of Officers; how would men be enabled hereby to
pay their taxes by the multitude of Trade that would flow in, if all Customs,
etc. were free. Luke 2. 1, 2. 2 Kings 23. 25. 2 Chro. 24. 9. Deuteronomy. 16. 17.


7. This tax to pay the whole charge of the Commonwealth (both the charge of
the State, and all the charges of each town and City) may be ordered to be
paid at once, or at three, or four several times every year; or rebate set for
them that bring it in before the time limited, proportionable to the time; and
many other means may be used, to cause people to pay willingly; or the tax
may be laid much less, and the rest taxed upon Burials, weddings, and
feastings, or the like, and people forbidden by a Law, not to make such great
weddings, burials, Christnings, etc. and instead thereof, to give but the half
so much to the State. It Is strange, what abundance of money might be gathered
by this means, and yet people have never the less, seeing now they spend twice
so much, in such things as be wholly useless, and do but hurt and trouble
themselves, so to spend their money.

8. Great would the advantages be, both to the State, and particular towns, to
have a rich public stock; as a well monied man that is prudent, by God's
blessing get's up above all his Neighbors; so would it be with a rich State,
through God's blessing being well managed; I could be large herein: first,
the State might be just, and pay all justly, and presently, upon which a
blessing is promised. Secondly, all things might be bought for ready money,
the advantage whereof is very great. Thirdly, you are ready to lend to any
Neighbor*Nation, and take strong holds for security, which is often of great
concernment. Fourthly, you are ready not only to defend, but to offend any
Nation that wrong's you, or assist any Nation oppressed, by which often whole
Provinces are gained, and in general all happiness attend's this State; for as
Christ says to him that has (using it well) shall be given, and this riches
is your strong tower.

9. It Is as easy for any State to get a rich stock, and Revenue, as for any
private man that has a good trade, to gather money, if he will be thriftie
and diligent; but as no man can grow rich that will be gallant, and costly at
first; So Kings, Princes, and States that will be thriftie, and diligent, may
gather money like dust, and make silver like the stones of the street, and that
in twenty, thirty, or fifty years time; for think not but it must have a
time, and may as easily spend all again, as we see in Solomon, or be always
poor, and in straits, as all States almost are, and know not how to get out of
debt, when it is merely their own faults, as may most evidently be proved. And
no people, (when a State is settled) will be 2 Chro. 10. 4.
unwilling to pay any taxations, when they but see, or conceiv that it is well
used, and improved; but if States will go upon profuse charges, when they are
poor, and keep thievs that steal the public stock continually, no marvel if
people be unwilling, etc. Prove. 10. 4. 15. Prove. 12. 24. Prove. 21* 5.


10. If this way of gathering money with most eas, and least charge cannot be
brought about, without disturbance of the Commonwealth; There are many ways
to gather more money by Excise and Custom, then now on foot, and with less
grievance to the Common wealth.

It is wished that all that use Coaches should pay fifteen pound, or twenty
pound yearly to the State. And so for Hackney*men, according to discretion. And
to give all encouragement to Weavers and others, to make all the manufactures
of silk in England, and to treat with some Weavers, and merchants, for the
setting up of Looms, and other inventions in England, for getting of the
manufacture here, and that countenance by the Magistrates may be given to the
undertakers of what Nation soever, provided they be bound to set only our
English poor awork, and bring over into England but a certain number, not
exceeeding a hundred, to teach our Nation the manufactures aforesaid: this
being don, would imploie many thousands of our poor, and get this Nation a
rich manufacture, and serve the exportation of our treasure, which ought now
carefully to be looked after, the like ought to be don for the advancement of
making all sort of linen cloth.

That whereas great quantity of Gold, and Silver is wasted in this Nation, in
the making Gold and Silverlace and thread, and the vanity and excess thereof is
grown so great, that an Act may be made for the putting of it totally down,
that none be permitted to wear it (or expose it to sale under a certain
penalty) or if it be allowed to be worn, then only for persons of quality,
and that an Excise of at least six pence the ounce be laid on all the Silver
Wire (and strict order taken, that none of the current coins of the Nation be
melted down for the making of that manufacture, of Gold and Silver-Thred, or
Wire) and that all the workers, both men and women may be tied to such just
Rules, as all the former abuses practiced in this Trade, may be prevented in
the making of that manufacture (and restrained only to persons of quality, to
be allowed to wear Gold or Silver-lace;) By this means many people will have
their money in their purses, to supply their necessary occasions, which they
vainly lay out on their backs, to the great waste of their private fortunes,
and damage of the Common wealth: for in all well regulated Commonwealths, the
extravagancies of Coin, and profuse people ought to be restrained by the
Magistrates. That all foreign Laces, such as are made beyond Seas, either in
silk or thread, be debarred to be imported into this Nation, upon the
forfeiture of ten times the value the Laces shall be apprised at: and if you
will allow Laces to be worn here, then let our own poor have the benefit of
making Lace here, and not forreiners.

To advise all ways and means for the bringing in of Gold and Silver into this
Commonwealth, and to inquire, and find out what ways and designs have been
practiced to obstruct the Mint and transport your Treasure, and to prevent it
carefully for the future, and to give all encouragement to Merchants to bring
moneys into the Nation; to do this effectually, would be a great advantage to
the Commonwealth, and require's a diligent prosecution and inquiry after; to
prevent the great abuses in clipped English money, to pass a Law it may all be
cut in pieces, and none to expose it in paiement; but as Bullion to be new
coined upon strict penalties, against any person that shall offend in the
premises; for the Commonwealth is very much cozened by clipped money.

NOw as a man cannot be accounted very religious, who is slothful: nor can
show much Mercy without plenty of means to do it withal; nor will be just to
others, who is not just to himself, and Family, by diligence to do his utmost
endeavor; in some honest calling; So the Magistrate in his place is bound to
use, and see that all diligence be used, to make happy the Commonwealth. Pr.
18. 9. Prove. 21. 25. Prove. 10. 4.


Which he shall do.
I. By the advancement of Learning. Isa. 29. 11.
II. By the improvement of Nature. Deuteronomy. 11. 10.
III. By the encouragement of Arts. 2 Chro. 24. 11, 12.
IV. By the increas of Merchandise. Ezekiel* 27. 33.

I.
FOr the Advancement of Learning, Lord Verulam has Bacon's Advancement of
Learning.
propounded many excellent things, and more may be added by other learned men;
for doubtless, Learning will mightily improve all other things, if so
regulated, as self might be less, and the public more intended. Eccles. 7.
12. Prove. 24. 6. 1 Kings 4. 30, 31. and 10. Chapter 8. Acts 7. 22. Dan. 1. 17.
Prove. 1. 5. 7. John 7. 15. Job. 22. 2. Prove. 12. 18. Prove. 15. 7. Prove. 21, 22.
Prove. 22. 17.


Two books we want in England; viz. First another Martyrologie, continued from
Queen Marie's time to the death of the late King. Secondly, the Experiments
Ministers and others have in several cases of Conversion, and other cases of
Desertion, with the quieting of souls, and means thereunto, with a probatum
est, the names of the parties concealed: which if every able Christian would
write, and keep by him, and print, how might Satan's Methods be discovered,
and many souls comforted?

II.
FIrst for the Improvement of Nature, Lord Verulam has also many excellent,
and learned Problemes, experiments, and speculations, and more in that kind
may be added, and brought to act by other learned men, by the encouragement,
and help of the public stock, in times of Peace, when war is ended. Prove. 13.
23. Deuteronomy. 9. 10. Bacon's natural History.


2. But of all things, I think there is nothing conduces so much to the
profit of all, as cutting of Rivers, where none are, and making them deeper
that are too shallow, both within, and without Towns, and from one town to
another; as we see in the Low Countries, who have as the Lord Verulam says,
the richest mines above ground in the world: meaning their Rivers. For in a
Country like England, the third or fourth part of all the Grain sown in the
whole Land, is spent upon beasts for carriage, etc. which by Rivers might be
spared: and might by a joint hand, and good order be made more easily then is
thought of. Genesis 13. 10. Isa. 30. 25. and 32. 2. and 23. 3. Psalm. 107. 35.


3. Some Privileges may be promised, and made sure to such, to be injoied for
life, or so many years, whosoever shall find any new invention, for
improvement of nature in any kind; be it in manuring of ground, making it
better, and finding any instruments, to till the ground mith more eas, or less
charge or the like. Joshua 15. 16. 2 Samuel 5. 8. Prove. 10. 4.


4. Much may be don about improvement of Commons; making of some waters land,
and gaining of ground out of the Sea, as is to be seen in the Low Countries,
to their great inrichment, and admiration of other Nations. Genesis 26. 12. Psalm.
107. 37. Deuteronomy. 11. 10.


5. A rich public stock in every Town, and City may hereby be laid out in
improvement of Nature, to the great profit of the Revenue of the Town, and yet
greatly to the common good, of which many examples might be produced. Eccles.
10. 19. Prove. 22. 7. Eccles. 7. 12.


6. Days of public prayer to God, to bless the fruits of the earth, and of
public thanksgiving for his blessing thereupon, is a special means for
improvement of Nature ordained by himself, and will be blessed by him, if
rightly kept, and then are special fruits of faith. Deuteronomy. 16. 10. 11. Prove. 10.
22. Deuteronomy. 26. 10. 11. Zech. 8. 10. 12.


III.
FOr Encouragement of Arts and Manufactures, great care must be taken, because
it imploie's hundred thousands, who live upon it, and also is a chief ground
for Merchandise, and many chief setters of people on work, do also much enrich
themselves, to the great good of the Commonwealth. Genesis 4. 20, 21, 22. 1 Chro.
29. 5. 2 Chro. 24, 11. 12.


1. For finding of new Arts, or for bettering of the old, by instruments,
easiness, or the like, great riches, honors, or Privileges would be
propounded, and assured, or the State to choos two men, and the inventer two;
and if they agree not themselves to choos an Umpire, to determine the reward of
the inventer, and the same liberally to be rewarded accordingly: the same
whereof would set all the wits of the world on work, to advance your
Commonwealth, to the greatest happiness that ever the world yet saw. Eccles.
9. 10. 2 Samuel 5. 8. 15 Joshua 16, 17.


2. All means to buy Materials at the cheapest prises, must in a special manner
be indeavored; and amongst other means a chief will be, to suffer all
Commodities, from all parts of the world to be brought in free without Custom;
and if they cannot make price to their minds, that they may transport them
freely out again, at all times. 1 Kings 5. 6. 9, 10.


3. That all possible care must be taken, for cheapest transportation of
goods, within the Land, from place to place, both by water and by Land; 'Also
such order about laborers, boats, Carts, and all things thereupon depending;
'Also such order about workmen, and victual, etc. as may best conduce
thereunto, about which much may be said, too large for this place. Eccles. 9,
10. 1 King. 5. 9.


4. That no Artist, or handie-laborer, that gain's not thereby ten or twenty
pound a year (or so much as shall be thought fit, according to the cheapness
of the place he live*s in) if a bachelor, or thirty, or forty pounds a year
if he be married: and five or ten pounds a year for each child he has
besides, shall give any kind of taxation to the Commonwealth, etc. Prove. 14.
31. Nehem. 5. 18.


5. That all Companies of Artists, or trades*men, give Freedom for all that
will (and are capable thereof) to set up, or be free of that Trade, without
paying any thing for freedom, either of the City or Company: for why should
any thing for common good be so locked up, enclosed, or paid for? this
freedom would be found true Freedom, if it were but in use, however it may
seem at present. Prove. 22. 16.


6. What if once in a year all of each trade (at several times) meet together;
and he that could do best, or most of any Trade, to have some kind of prise,
or honor that year, etc. Eccles. 9. 10.


7. Public days of prayer, that God would pour out his Spirit (as of grace
especially, so) of sciences and Arts upon his people, etc. Eccles. 9. 11.


IV.
FOr Increas of Merchandise, and Merchants, and helps for dispatch of their
affairs; many things may be don by the Magistrate, and ought in a special
manner to be looked upon, as a special means to enrich any Nation. Isa. 23.
8. Ezekiel. 27. 33. 34.


1.
To preserv the Commonwealth at peace, at home especially, and abroad also, as
much as possible can be, with all Nations; is a chief means to increas
Merchants, and Merchandise* And therefore to meddle very little with other
States, but trust in God, who seldom order's his people to that work; nor to
keep any Leger-Ambassadors from other Nations. Levit. 26. 6. 1 Kings 4. 24,
25. Ezekiel. 26. 11, 12. Zech. 8. 10.


2.
To have special care to keep the Soveraintie of the Sea, by numerous and able
men of war, well furnished with all things; and Mariners, Volontiers, and well
paid; and good order for constant convoies, for all places, that Merchants may
be kept from losses; to accomplish which, many things are to be don. This
short regulating of the present Navy may encourage others to add their
thoughts. Dan. 11. 30. 40. Ezekiel. 26. 15. 18.


The brief Regulating of the present Navy, which now cost's five or 600000 l.
yearly.
The work consist's either in the Governing, or the Executive part.
I. For the Governing thereof.

1. A Committee of Admiraltie consisting of five or seven very able men,
should always sit near the Council of State, with sufficient Secretaries: and
these men (if need) may have competent salaries.

2. These to be able to give satisfaction for all marine affairs whatsoever at
all times: these to have in them the Court of Admiraltie also; which may easily
be don; if the Law of Merchants were in force, who, by six men yearly chosen,
may end the usual controversies among Seamen and Merchants. The Admiraltie
Court (as now it stand's) being very offensive.

3. In this Committee, the Admirals of the Sea, to sit, when they return home,
as Assistants.

II* The Executive part consist's either in building the Ship, or employing it,
when built: to which end
1. Lay by all the Docks at Chattam, Detford, etc. whence near one thousand
mouths are daily fed upon the State, besides Officers, etc.

2. That the Ship be built in a Merchant way, at any Dock the Carpenter
will, and so built per tun as can be agreed by the said Committee, and
paiement upon deliverie; for we find the very carriage of the State's own
timber is dearer then timber can be bought elsewhere.

3. That for the performance of Covenants the Committee have a Check, or
Overseer upon the ship, whilst building.

4. That some Act be made for the preservation of timber through the
Commonwealth, there being much spoil made continually.

5. That the offer of New England may be entertained, who tender the building
of what Ships, or Frigates are desired, and to bring them into the Thames, and
there their value impartially judged: who likewise may furnish iron guns,
masts, etc.

For the Sailing of the SHIP.
1. That an able fit Captain be chosen, and the Ship commended to his care,
whilst he is worthy.

2. That the said Captain be in constant pay.

3. That he rig, man, victual, and take the whole care of the ship himself,
with a Muster-Master upon every ship, or Squadron.

4. That the Captain's accounts be given up to the Committee aforesaid, as
often as they pleas.

5. That upon any miscarriage of his, he be made very exemplarie.

6. Seamen to be paid every six months, in the several places, where they
com in to winter.

7. That Ships be as well kept at other places as at Chattam.

By which you save the charge of Commissioners, Victuallers, Pursers, Stewards,
Docks, etc.

By which means you need not press men; every Captain knowing how to get his
own gang: and certainly he that is trusted with a ship worth 10000 l. may well
be trusted with all the rest: he know's his Officers and men, whereby he may
give a better account then now, when the ship is manned by strangers; and then a
Captain chosen for six months, not knowing the men he is to join with in his
work, nor to see them more when he leav's them.

3 Special care must be had to secure Merchants, and their goods on Land as
well as by Sea, from danger by fire, by water, by Soldiers, Injustice of
Courts, or any other way: the means for these ends are plain. Ezekiel, 26. 10.
12.


4 To take of all encumbrance from Merchandise, as Custom, Excise, Pasports,
etc. by all which Merchants are extremely troubled, vexed, and hindered; and if
men might ship, and unship their goods at all times, and in all places; and
that without any toll or Custom, how would it increas trade? how would all the
world make England their packhous, as now they do the Low Countries, where
small Customs are paid: much more would it be here, if no Custom were paid*
besides the great riches to your Inhabitants, by factorage, packhouses, Porters
and all trades would feel the benefit thereof, to the mavelous increas of the
Common wealth, etc. 1 King. 12. 4.


5 To increas shipping and Mariners for the cheap transporting of Merchandise:
for which diverse things would be don; it is strange that in the Low Countries,
though they have neither wood, Iron, hemp, etc. of their own, but must fetch
all things to make ships (by ships) from other Countries, yet that they will
transport Merchandise at a cheaper rate then any other Nation, and have got to
this height in the midst of a most costly, dangerous war. Ezekiel. 27. 3. 9.
Ezekiel. 27. 25. 27.


6 To take such a course which may be easily don, if there be a will thereto;
as all differences, debts, and quarrels amongst Merchants and Mariners about
shipping, fraits, etc. may be both speedily and justly ended, and without any
charge to him that has the just cause; and a mulct upon him that does or seek's
to do wrong to his Neighbor. Let forreiners and all strangers, Jew, and
heathen, have full as just, speedy and cheap Justice as any, so shall all
Nations tell what the Lord has don for you; how will Riches flow in? 1 Cor. 6*
1. 5.


7 But one of the greatest things in the world, to increas Merchandise, is to
have money cheap at interest, as in the Low Countries, where at three 3* and
four per cent. a year, any Merchant, or any other that has credit, may take
up as much money as is incredible, upon his bare, private obligation, without
any Notarie or witness, which is of such concernment for the State it self,
and all sorts of people therein as is incredible: and can be effected as well
in England, as any where, for it is the mere fruits of Justice and
Righteousness, and a secure State; by reason whereof all Nations in wars, or
troubles, or in security, make over their treasures to that Country, where
there is lest fear to lose it; which bring's treasures from all parts, and they
at length being weary to have it still, give it out at interest at the best
price they can get, which at last so many will do, that money com's to be so
cheap as you have heard, and make's Merchants of other parts also send their
goods to that Country, to lie still for a better market; when their loss is so
little as three or four per cent. for a whole year, which also bring in great
riches. Ezekiel. 27. 12. to 27. v.


8 Upon which secure, and good state of things, a bank may be set up, as at
Amsterdam, where lie's a great deal of the Merchants, (and other) treasure; for
it is in vain to set up a bank, if Merchants think not their money would be as
secure there as in their own hands or surer. Luke 19. 23.


1. The advantage of this bank is very great to the City, who stand's for
security, and whose Deputies (three of them, yearly two chosen) are trusted
with the whole stock of the bank, which they keep in sellers, made with plaster
of Paris, and iron doors with three locks; the advantage to the town, Laws and
orders thereof would be too large here to rehears. 2. The advantage to the
State is also great at some strait, where they may orderly borrow Eccles. 9. 10.
The advantage by letting out money is great, also selling and minting of money.
a great sum at low interest, giving good security for it: but if the State
use any force, though but once, and necessitate, or force the bank to lend,
then is the bank spoiled for twenty years, or an age, as the case may stand.
3. The advantage to merchants The advantage by lying one hundred years, and
always keeping the best kind of money, is unspeakeable in a manner.
is great, especially to great ones, to have all their money received, and paid
for nothing, and most paid by bills, without stirring any money, only set
from one man's account to another's.

9 For saving of time, and that Merchants may keep a man the less, and that the
Bank may also receiv, and pay their money the easier; there must also be
minted or coined so many hundred thousand pounds in five shilling pieces, as
that all great sums may be received, and paid in great money, the commodity
whereof is great to Merchants, though there were no bank. Ephesians. 5. 17. Eccles.
9. 10.


10 It Is also a thing of great concernment to make current, at a true value the
money of other Countries, by a wise Government whereof, suitable to the
exchange, and other considerations, the riches of other Countries may by an
unsensible subtletie be drawn into yours, as in the Low Countries. Genesis 23.
16. Luke 20. 24.


11 And great care is to be taken about the Mint, and falls Coiners, and not to
mint too much or too little money of one kind; for Merchants, and all
Inhabitants are accommodated, or disaccommodated greatly hereby. Prove. 30. 8.


12 A common weigh-hous (two or three in great Cities) with four or eight
several great and small balances, in every weigh-hous regulated with brave
and just orders, is of very great use to Merchants; the seller to deliver his
goods into the balance, and the buyer to receiv it as soon as it is weighed,
the laborers about it to be sworn, and well ordered, and other things here
about would be too large. Levit. 19. 36. Prove. 11. 1.


13 Let there be as many sworn Brokers (who may not buy or sell any thing
for themselves) as will desire the office for accommodations of Merchants
regulated with good Laws, and to be put out of office upon any falls dealing
between man and man, and a rate set what they may take for brokerage of each
commodity, etc. let them have the office gratis, and let them have Officers to
decide all Controversies between two Brokers, that concern's their office, and
to maintein their own poor, if you will amongst themselves, (...) Levit. 19. 13.
Genesis 29. 15.


14 If a Court were (...)ed to assure all Merchants goods, from Pirates, and
Enemies, and fully to pay for what ever is lost that way (yet every man to
be left free, whether he will insure or no) yea if the same Court did also
insure against dangers by storms, or what is otherwise lost at Sea also; I
conceiv the State, or City that stood the venture for so much in the hundred
might make great profit thereby, and also further, and encourage Merchants to
venture, of which much might be said. Acts 27. 10. and 38. 40. 2 Chro. 20. 37.


15 A very great plague and hinderance of Merchants are Bankrupts; and
certainly Merchandise would be much increased; if the fear of Bankrupts were
but in part remedied, which might be by good Laws well executed; as that,
whosoever trust any one man, with all, or more then he is worth; or venture
so much in one or diverse ships upon the Sea, or lay so much in one house, and
loos it by fire, and by any of these means turn Bankrupt, shall be so and so
punished. 2 Kings 4. 1. and 7. v.


16 That they that know, (or may know if they pleas) they are behind hand, and
yet buy wares, or borrow moneys of other men, (under pretense of hope to get
before hand again) and yet play Bankrupts, be also more punished then the
former, especially, if upon examination it does appear, they knew they must
play Bankrupts, when they bought those wares, or borrowed that money; for then
they differ not from thievs, only in circumstance, and to be the more
punished, if when they had nothing, yet they were costly in apparel, and other
expenses, and knew they spent of other men's, etc. Mat. 18. 25. and 30. v.


17 That they, who under pretense of able men, under color of Merchandise, get
other men's goods into their hands, and yet, when they need not, bankrupt
themselves on purpose to deceiv others, and enrich themselves, be sorely
punished, as very great thievs. Luke 16. 1.


18 That no Bankrupt may ever after com into any office, or bear any Rule in
Church or State, etc. Mat. 25. 21. 23. and 28. 29. v.


19 That if the Bankrupt be taken, and no friends will pay his debts, let him
and his be set to work as a thief, and what they can earn, over besides their
own poor living, to be given to the Creditors. 2 Kings 4. 1. Mat. 18. 25. 34.


These, or the like penalties well limited, and ordered, and executed, would
prevent thousands of Bankrupts, which are like Cankers to the Commonwealth.
And what with great and little Bankrupts, it is abundance that play Bankrupt
every year.

No week passes without some Bankrupt in great Cities, and some week diverse; and
one Bankrupt does more hurt then twenty thievs that are put to death, or
sorely punished for it.

BUt for London in particular, these things following would be reformed, for
the increas, eas, pleasure, and benefit of Merchants, and all other Inhabitants
besides, and above many of the former things, that London want's.

1. For landing of goods, etc. that a brave large Key be made into the Thames,
from London Bridge to Wappin, or lower, and above the Bridge also, that ships may
lie there safe all the way, to lade and unlade their goods with roomth and
pleasure, and with much less charge then now; and there may be Pack-houses and
Sellers made all along by the Keie, to the great eas and accommodation of
Merchants, and of great pleasure to Merchants, Mariners, and all sorts of
people, to have such a large brave Keye, of forty or fifty foot broad to walk
upon, and dispatch their affairs at pleasure; and all this may be don without
charge to any. Ezekiel. 27. 25. and 2^. 27.


2. That Thames Street, for a mile or two long, be made as broad, or broader
then any street in London; large, fair, and the houses light and pleasant; the
street to be paved with ^^ch flat apiece stones, as in Holland, and high
in the midst with the gutters on both sides, and bricks on both sides next
the houses, as in Holland; the profit, pleasure, and eas to the whole
Inhabitants would be very great. The difficulty seems to be in pulling
down, and new building of houses, or removing them on screws, as at Amsterdam:
But things may be so ordered, as the profit to be made, by convenient
building; and the value, houses, and ground will be at, by bettering the
street and the Key, will fully countervail the charge of all this whole work;
though it should be six, eight or ten years in doing, it might be made one of
the bravest places in the world, where one thousand or two thousand ships may
lie with safety all weathers etc. Nehem. 7. 4.


3. The next thing some remedy must be found for, is the Passage up hill from
Thames Street to London; for which Thames Street, it may be, will permit to
be heightened a foot or two all along, which will much eas the passage upward;
and besides, right against any street that goe's into the City, Thames Street
may be heightened six or eight foot, like a bridge; and Thames Street on each
side for a hundred foot or more, to go sloping downward by an easy descent;
and being against that place of ascent into the City raised eight foot, the
ascent into the City will also fall easy by a small ascent; and if any
inconvenience should be found in this, there are other inventions to remedy
this great inconvenience for transportation of goods, etc. which is of good
concernment, besides the delight and cleanliness of this manner of
accommodation.

4. But I would have no Carts used in the wole City; for they are very
uneasy to lade, and unlade goods, and besides, do so pester the streets, as
Merchants, and others cannot pass the streets for quick dispatch of their
affairs, to their great hurt and loss, of half a quarter of an hour, and
thereby an opportunity is often great loss to many.

Now for remedy* let sleads be only used as at Amsterdam, that can draw an
half, and a whole tun weight, as the horse is in strength: and besides the slead
men alone ordinarily, can lade and unlade his slead, without other help, unless
for very heavy things he desire's to lend a hand of one or other that
stand's by; it is a neat way, and of quick dispatch, etc.

Some course must also be taken to lessen the number of Coaches, which too much
pester the streets, and hinder men in passing too and fro: which may easily be
don.

5. Next we com up into the City, where we see most beastly durtie streets,
the hurt of which is so great, as is strange; and what a world of work is daily
made by the dirt and wet, in rotting of shoes and stockins, women's coats,
fouling of houses, making clean of shoes, clothes, etc. as is strange and not
possible for Merchants to live cleanly, and neatly, as in Holland without
cleaner streets; which may in a very great measure be helped by paving the
streets, with brave slate apiece stones, the streets highest in the
midst, gutters on each side next the houses, as in Holland, and bricks on
each side next the houses, easy and clean for people to walk on, which,
besides the great pleasure to all, would ten times pay the charge in saving
shoes, stockins, etc. from wet and rotting, besides, all houses might be kept
more cleanly, and Merchants live more neatly, etc.

6. All wooden houses in London must down; and not any part be of wood, only
windows and doors, as fast as they rot away: no reparations, or very little to
be permitted, and no new houses to be built, but with brick or stone, to
prevent fire, for security of Merchants and others; and it would make
Merchants of other Countries the more willing to trust their goods in your
City, when there is less danger of fire.

7. Also diverse means must be used for prevention of fire, more water must be
provided at hand by Pumps, bored into the ground fifty, or one hundred foot,
if water may be so had by orders of Clappermen, going about all night, as in
Holland: then a Captain, and officers of fire in every Ward, to set good
orders about quenching fire, also leather Buckets in every house, and in all
public places, and leathers at hand in every ward always ready, and diverse
the like things are needful.

8. As fast as the City is paved with new brave stones, to take the old stones
and pave the high ways, every way out of the City, and to make the high
ways so round and high in the midst, that they may be clean Winter and
Summer, and to use all means, that all high ways may be well mended and kept,
which will be great delight to Merchants and other Inbabitants, etc.

9. Also a large Keie may be made on Southwark side, all along the lanes, and
Rivers cut out of the Thames with Keys on both sides; and Pack-houses built,
where all course commodities, as Pitch, Tar, Iron, Milstones, wood of all sorts,
as Masts, Timber, Planks, Deals, spars, Clapboards, and many others
Commodities may be brought, and there be kept at small charge; and landed out
of the Ships, at the doors of the the Pack houses, as at Rotterdam, and other
places, to the great accommodation of Merchants, and furtherance of
merchandise; and if these plain, and just Rules of God's word were observed;
there would be no need of any deceitful, base, and Machevilian courses, to
keep a Commonwealth, in peace and obedience, as may be seen in the
Low Countries, where no people have more liberty then they, nor pay such
great taxations, nor so little state any where used to preserv Authority; and
yet the people of so many Nations, and Religions live in the greatest peace,
and plenty of the world, merely by good Justice, Mercy and Religion, and yet
many things com short, of what they ought; and might be.

Postscript.
Refer these to their proper places. Concerning PRINTING, which well used is a
great honor, and benefit to the Commonwealth These things would be considered.
1. THat PRINTING be looked upon as a Mystery, not as a common Trade for
every ignorant man to take up; but to be ordered by the State, as the Mint is
for Coin.

2. That Printing-houses be reduced to a certain number: as heretofore they
have been: for the multiplying of them is a wrong to the Public, and
oftentimes the ruin of private men.

3. That all Popish and offensive Books, Libels, and loos Pamphlets may be
suppressed.

4. That no Books printed originally in England, may be imported from beyond
Seas into this Commonwealth: other States will not suffer it: and we find by
experience that neither Author, nor Printer, nor bookseller can be encouraged,
when the Book, as soon as it is out here, shall be printed beyond Sea, where
they have paper and printing at a cheaper rate, and hither imported, oftentimes
to the ruin of the undertakers of a good work here.

5. That the right of every man's Copy may be preserved. Much wrong has
been don this way by invading one another's right, in these licentious times.

6. That all Books fit for public view may be licensed, and nothing printed
which shall not first be allowed by some judicious men, in every faculty,
appointed by the State for that purpose. This would be a means to suppress
many idle, and noxious d^scourses; and a good warrant to the undertakers of
solid and profitable Books.

THat all Females from ten to sixty might be enjoined to spin, and have made
into linen cloth one pound of flax every month, and registered in the
Parish, where made; and returned again to the owners, with encouragement to
poor maids that do best. This would by computation, emploie two or three
hundred thousand poor: for which a Model is ready. The business of the Fens
need's great encouragement to this end for Flax.

That since the foundation of Families, Villages, Towns; Cities, and
Commonwealths spring from Marriage, and the business merely civil, that the
respective Magistrates in every place might not only do that work, which
Preachers, qua Preachers, have not to do with; but also look to the
qualifications of those that join in that estate: and that two or three such
Magistrates together may hear, and determine matters tending to Divorce: for
all which much is wanting in this Nation, and whole Families perishing upon
that account; and several sins increased.

A Post set up in every Parish, or at the Church door a Paper stuck up of the
Pa^^ie's names to be married, and there to stick three weeks or a month.

That where fees of Physicians are stated, a course may be taken for reducing
that work to sont certain Rule.

That Bedlam may be minded, the Army diseased, and Hospitals.

That superfluities may be suppressed; as Coaches, and guilding Coaches: to which
purpose those that will ride in them may pay five or ten pounds per annum to
the State: the like for Gold and Silver-lace, and Bone-lace from beyond Seas.


