A PETITION FROM Several Regiments of the Army, viz. Colonel Fleetwoods,
Colonel Whalies. Colonel Barksteads, etc.


PRESENTED To his Excellency, Thomas Lord Fairfax, at St. Albons, on Saturday
the 11. of this present November, 1648.

WHEREIN They set forth their Desires for a speedy, safe, and just settlement,
that thereby the Kingdom may be freed from the heavy burdens that now they lie
under, especially that of Free Quarter.

ALSO, A Letter from his Excellency, to the Committee of the Army, concerning
the said grievances.

London, Printed for George Whittington, at the Blue Anchor in Cornhill, near
the Royall-Exchange.

A LETTER FROM HIS Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, ^o the Committee for the
Army.
SIR,
HAving had a meeting of diverse Officers of the Army, I apprehend their
general sad Resentment of the many pressures now lying upon the Kingdom, in
particular, that of free Quarter, whereby they (and the Soldiers under their
Command who have faithfully served their Generation) are even a burden to
themselves, because they are so much to the poor Country, which is the more
grievous to them, because they have generally paid their Taxes, and yet the
Army not enabled to pay their Quarters, or provide themselves necessaries
against the injury of the approaching season. J hoped ^re this we should have
received some good fruit of your last being with us, the matters then agreed,
being of such public concernment, and so much requiring expedition. I desire
you to improve your utmost endeavor for a quick dispatch in providing
effectually for the premises to prevent those ill consequences which otherwaye
delay therein may produce. J request you to communicate this to the House: so
hoping to hear speedily from you, J remain

St. Alban^ 9 November. 1648. For the Honored, R(...) Scowen Esquire in the Chair
of the Committee for the Army. Your very assured friend FAIRFAX.

To his Excellency, Thomas Lord Fairfax, General of all Forses raised by the
Parliament, in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.
The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers in Col. Fleetwoods. Col.
Whalies, and Col Bark steads Regiments, under your Excellencies Command.
Shows,

THat through the blessing of God upon the Army, under your Excellencies
Conduct, the enemies of this Nations Peace and Freedom, have been twice subdued.

That as we engaged in Judgment and Conscience against them, to preserve this
Nation from slavery, so we hope the Parliament (by whom we were invited to
engage) would have executed Justice, upon the public and grand Enemies
thereof, and immediately have settled a just Government, under which every man's
freedom, right, and property might have been preserved.

That your Petitioners had some hope of that happy fruit of their labors,
hazard, and expense of blood, when the Parliament voted no more addresses to
the King, and hereupon your Excellency and your Petitioners did testify their
approbation of those Votes, and did engage to adhere, and stand by them, in the
settlement of the Nation without, and against the King, or any other that
should partake with him, and your Excellency, and your Petitioners received the
thanks of both Houses for the same.

That notwithstanding a bloody War has been since raised by the Prince his
Commission, a foreign Nation invited to (which did) invade us (and as there is
ground to believe) by the Kings consent, thereby to inslave us, to his
exorbitant will and lust.

Yet when through the great mercy and favor of God, All their Forces were
suppressed, instead of having our expectations answered (as to a just settlement)
we find.

That the wicked and bloody Designs of the Enemies of this Kingdom still
continue, As of that of Ireland by Ormond, and that home, threatening the lives
of every well-affected person. And this we humbly conceive they are the more
imboldened unto, because of the prevalency of some in greatest authority, that
will let not Justice be executed upon the grand fomentors, contrivers, and
actors, in the first and late War. So that the innocent blood of many of our
dear friends (that has bin spilt) the Rapines robberies, burning and spoiling
many well-affected Towns and Persons, of all livelihood is forgotten, just
Government subverted, and such Petitions tending to a feeling of a just and
equal Government, (as that of the 11. of September. last, from the City of
London and Westminster) slighted the intolerable burden of free Quarter still
continued, no redres of public grivances, by reason of which the implacable
malice of our twice conquered Enemies, seems to steal credit in the hearts of
many (whose weakness hinders them from discerning their evil ends) so that their
bloody intentions against the well-affected in this Nation, does begin to
manifest it self, both against the Parl. men, and the Army, as is apparent by
that most desperate and inhumain murdering of Col. Rainsborough.

That as we conceive, your Excellency and the Army, next under God, are the
only Bar, that lies in their way, hindering the accomplishing of their ends:
so their main design is, how to destroy you and it. A nd that they endeavor by
continuing us on free Quarter, yet providing Ordinances, against it, and
instructions to enter into no man's house (except Inns, Alehouses, and Taverns)
against their wills, which was by us joyfully excepted, that thereby the
Country might beeased of that devouring Creature free quarter, yet when the
Army was thus quartered for the ease of the Country, we were content to make
hard shift to maintain our selves out of our pay though it was small, as 2 s.
per diem for horse, and 8 d. for foot, but that through the subtilty of our
Enemies, has been kept from us, we having not received any pay in 5. months
together. So that we must either starve and lie in the streets, or else still
oppress the Country by free Quarter, which renders us odious to the people.
And it cannot be otherwise, seeing the Assesments of 60000 l. per mensem, if it
were all assessed and gathered (besides money for providing Arms for the Horse
and Foot, Recruit Horses, Ammunition for the Army and Garrisons, Coals,
Stockings, Shoes for Foot Soldiers, and other incident Charges) will not
amount to the Personal Pay of the Army by 12000 l. per mensem.

Now we being pressed in our Judgments, by our Enemies hellish and bloody
designs, and their insolent and barbarous Carriage, and also our hearts
burdened with the unsettled condition of this poor Kingdom, are bold to present
to your Excellencies consideration th^se things following.

1. That speedy and impartial Justice may be executed upon all the fomentors,
contrivors, and actors in the first and late War.

2. That inquisition be made for the blood of Col. Rainsborough.

3. That the supreme power may be declared and determined, that the want
thereof may not be the ground of future, (as it has been of these former)
Wars.

4. That a period be set for this present Parl. to end as soon as may be with
safety, and provisions made for future Parliments to meet certain without writ
or sumons.

5. That rules may be set down between the people and their Representatives.

6. That Laws may be made in things civil to bind all men, so that no man in
case of offense, may be freed from that Law whereunto another is subject.

7. That all those common grievances and desires in our Declarations of June
14. and June 23 1647 and expressed in the London Petition, be speedily granted
and redressed.

8. That prsenr Provision be made for the Constant pay of the Army.

9. That the arrears due from the 15 of January: may be paid off, before we be
Commanded to pay Quarters, and that there may be noe other abatement from
Officers or Soldiers for free Quarter, then according to the rates set down
in the Ordinance of Parliament, of the 24. day December last.

10. That the Country may be paid for our free Quarter, according to the
Deduction out of our pay out of their Assesments.

11. That in as much as the Assessments fall short to pay the Army. That
therefore there may be Additionall supplies monthly out of the Estates of the
old and new Delinquents, that there be noe more Tax or Charge to the
Commonwealth.

12. That forth with an Account be called for from all persons that have been
betrusted with any thing for the State, that the Kingdom may be satisfied
therein.

13. That the Deanes, and Chapters Lands may be given to pay the Soldiers
Arreares, seeing the Parl. have given a way the Delinquents Estates that should
have done it.

These things being the proper Issue of our serious thoughts, we implore your
Excellency through the many blessings, deliverances, Victories and successes,
the Lord has crowned you withal, The dangers you have been preserved from,
the miseries of this bleeding Nation, the blood of the innocent, the Outcry of
the Widow, and Fatherless, the sad Omen of future troubles, to consider the
necessity of attaining these things, that we may be no longer the scorn and
contempt of the Nation, nor the object of our enemies malice, by the want of
just peace and settlement; but with an undaunted courage, to desire the Parl.
that these things may be forthwith established, that we may with safety be
released, from this troublesome and hazardous employment, which by reason of
the grievous oppression thereof, we profess we are weary of which things we
challenge as ^urs and the Kingdoms due, twice bought with our blood: In the
doing of which your Excellency shall not fail of their assistance, who are
ready to wade through a Sea of troubles to have them established, though they
perish in the work.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

FINIS.

