THE PETITION OF THE CITIZENS OF LONDON TO BOTH Houses of Parliament, wherein
is a Demonstration of their Grievances, together with their Desires for Justice
to be executed upon the Earl of Strafford, and other DELINQVENTS.
To the most Honorable Assembly of the Lords and Commons in this present
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of diverse Citizens of LONDON
Shows, that notwithstanding his Majesty's gracious Answer to the humble
Petition of his Loyal Subjects in summoning this present Parliament, with the
great care, and endeavored pains, taken by both Houses for the removing the
heavy Grievances in Church and Commonwealth, whereof the Petitioners have
already received some fruit; for which they desire to return their most humble
and utmost thanks, yet nevertheless, they are enforced with all Humility to
represent to this most Honorable Assembly, some of these Obstructions which
does still hinder that Freedom and fullness of Trade in this City they have
formerly had, and with considering the numerous Multitude thereon depending,
they conceive it not able comfortably to subsist.

As the unsettled Condition of the Kingdom, even since the Troubles in Scotland
has caused both strangers, and also of our own, who did furnish great sums
of money to use to call it in, and remit much of it by Exchange unto Foreign
parts, and stands now in Expectation of what the issue of things may be.

The stopping money in the Mint, which till then was accounted the safest
place, and surest staple in these parts in the world, still does hinder the
importation of Bullyon, the Scots now disabled to pay such debts as they owe to
the Petitioners and others in the City, and by reason of the oppressions
exercised in Ireland, their debts also are detayned there.

The English Trade by reason of our general distractions and fears is so much
decayed, that Country Tradesmen cannot pay their debts in London as formerly.

The great sums of money unduely taken by his Majesty's Officers and Farmers,
for impositions upon Merchandise exported and imported, and the want of relief
in Courts of Justice against them.

The drawing out from the City great sums of money (which is the life and
spirit of Trade) for his Majesty's service in the North, and being there
employed is not yet returned.

Besides all which from what strong and secret opposition the Petitioners know
not, they have not received what so much time and pains might give and cause
to hope, but still incendiaries of the Kingdoms and other notorious offenders
remain unpunished, the affairs of the Church notwithstanding many Petitions
concerning it and long debate about it remains unsettled, the Papists still
armed, the Laws against them not executed, some of the most Active of them
still at Court, Priests and Jesuits not yet banished, The Irish Popish army
not yet disbanded, Courts of Justice not yet reformed, and the Earl of
Strafford, who as now appears, has counseled the plundering of this City,
and putting it to fine and ransom, and said it would never be well, till some
of the Aldermen were hanged up, because they would not yield to illegal
leavies of moneys, has so drawn out and spent his time in his business to
the very great charge of the whole Kingdom, and his endeavor to obtain yet
more; all which makes us fear there may be practices now in hand to hinder the
birth of your great endeavors, and that we lie under some more dangerous plot
then we can discover.

All which premises with their fears and distractions growing therefrom, and
from things of the like nature, the Petitioners humbly offer to the most grave
consideration of this most Honorable assembly, as being the true causes of
decay of Trade, discouragement of Tradesmen, and of the great scarcity of
moneys, with the consequences they labor under.

And do humbly pray that their said grievances may be redressed, the causes of
their fears removed, Justice executed upon the said Earl and other
incendiaries and offenders, the rather in regard till then, the Petitioners
humbly conceive, neither Religion nor their lives, liberties or estates can be
secured.

And as in duty bound they shall ever pray, etc.
Subscribed to this Petition 20000, all men of good rank and quality.

Printed for John Aston, 1641.


