A SERMON BY Hugh Peter's: PREACHED Before his Death: As it was taken by a
faithful hand. And now published for public Information.

Entered according to order.



LONDON, Printed by John Best in Guiltspur-street, without Newgate. 1660.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
THou have here presented unto thy perusal a Sermon taken by a faithful hand,
from the mouth of Mr. Hugh Peter's, who dyed at Charing Cross on Tuesaday last,
being the sixteenth of this present October. 1660. Were the Orphant nameless, and
did but any person (that had heard the Parent) take it in his hand and view it
with his eye, he would (as its Godfather) Baptize it with the name it bears;
let not its decent cause your censure, but your pity, good Parents may have
bad Children, but as God will not except the bad Children for the good Parents
sake, so bad Parents may have good Children, and we must not cast off the good
children for the bad Parents sake, but time is shortly coming when God will sit
as Judge, upon Children and Parents: This Sermon is not as a Trumpet sounding
Rebellion, but as a Schoolmaster teaching Religion, its call is to beleiving,
not to Rebelling.

Pass not your sentence upon it before your reading of it, which were to let
your passion give the sentence of condemnation, before your judgment has sat
upon the bench for examination.

Page 3. Line 6, 7. for too seldom proclamation,read two solemn proclamations.

A SERMON PREACHED BY Hugh Peter's.
ISA^AH 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money: come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without
money, and without price.


IN this whole Chapter there are many things driven at; The first a loving and
kind invitation of a company of poor thirsty souls to come and buy wine and
milk without money or moneys worth; they must not bring money in their purses,
but must bring hungry thirsty souls to come hither. The second is a differing
the ways of God from the ways of man; were Gods ways like the ways of men, then
a poor soul hearing of such rich booties to be had in Christ, and at so low a
rate, will be ready to object and say, Oh sir, the news is good, but I fear too
good to be true; what, to come to the market and bring no money, and yet have
the commodities, this is strange, men will ^^t do thus? therefore mark what God
answers, My ways are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your thoughts, says
the Lord. In your affairs it is not so, but in my dealing it is so; the
comfortable joy and rejoicing these poor hungry souls shall go away with, ver.
12. This, as I conceive, is the meaning of the whole Chapter.

The words in the Text are nothing else but a precept and a reason.

These words note three things,

1. The Inquisition, seek

2. The prayer, To call upon him*

3. In reformation, to forsake their evil and wicked ways, verse. 7. the reason
is verse. 8. For Gods thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor his ways as your
ways.

In the Inquisition or Inquiring there are these parts considerable.

1. Barely an act, seek.

2. The circumstance of time, implying there is a time when he will be found,
and a time when he will not be found.

3. The object, The Lord.

4. The seekers, Ye.

In the first verse there is some comfort for a poor broken soul, and I cannot
pass it over; therefore let us a little consider the invitation which the words
of the Text are a part. There is too seldom proclaimation made with a O yes,
Come all poor and rich, great and small, come without money or moneys worth,
bring only necessity and desire to buy; where you may see the qualification of
the buyers; they are but mean men, poor, hungry, thirsty souls that have
nothing: from whence take this Conclusion.

Doct. That there is no unworthiness in an humble soul, or a poor broken
hearted sinner, can hinder the work of his redemption.

A poor soul he comes, and has nothing to show what he has done, no work to
manifest, he can scarce pray, he would fain have a Sermon, fain have a
Sacrament, fain have a Christ, and that makes him long for him; such a soul as
this, is most fit to receive Christ.

Reason 1. Because the miseries of such a poor soul is the object of Gods
mercy* sin is the object of his Justice, but misery is the object of his mercy;
what would become of a poor soul if this were not a truth? what need a theif or
a murderer cry out for pardon unless he were guilty of the crimes.

2. Reas. Because all ease and refreshments flows from the free mercy of God in
Christ* First, There is a time when a sinner is turned off from God, but in
mercy God turns to them again, and turns them to himself; Ah poor wretch, in
this case you may say, I know God will abundantly pardon, yea I have a promise,
Rev. 12. 17. Who ever is athirst, come and drink of the water of life freely.

3. Reas. No unworthiness in a poor soul can hinder a poor soul from getting
Christ, because the greater the sin, the greater honor God will have in
pardoning of your sins, therefore hold up your heads ye great sinners, if your
hearts be broken God will have much glory by you, by pardoning your sins. Thus
Moses pleaded for Israel, Exodus 22. 11. If thou destroy them now, what will
become of the promises made to their Fathers, nay says he, what will the
Egyptians say. So says a great sinner, as David, If thou will pardon this may
heinous sin, then shall many sinners be converted to thee; I will tell an old
drunkard and adulterer what thou have done for me.

Object. It is a comfortable saying, says a poor soul, but I cannot find it
so in my self, my sins are so great.

Answ. Though all the sins of the whole world were upon thee, except the sin of
the Holy Ghost, thou lying under them with a broken heart, then I tell thee
there is a pardon for thee; a merciful God and a Savior for thee.

Object. True, I know God is merciful, but not to such a wretched soul as mine,
you know not me; Sir, I have been a profane person, and am so still, and an
Adulterer, and a Sabbath-breaker, indeed I confess my heart has been a little
humbled, but I am not worthy of mercy.

Answ. I tell thee, if thou were worthy in thy esteem then there were no hope
of mercy for thee, for then thou were in a poor case; if in thy own esteem thou
want worthiness, and if thou will stay till thou be worthy, certainly thou will never find Christ.

Object. But if I could find some lets and impediments taken away, there might
be some hope of comfort; but alas Sir, when I come to pray, I am like a dead
stock; and in preaching, and in hearing, I have no life nor power.

Answ. I pray you consider, is it because you can pray well, or preach well
that thou may have Christ? or is it of Gods free mercy, and that because he
delights in mercy? Mic. 7. 17. Never tell me of deadness in duties to keep thee
from Christ, but bring with thee an empty soul, and my soul for thine, Christ
will be found of thee to thy comfort.

Object. Sir, I am afraid it will not stand with Gods justice, to pardon such
sins as I have committed; for if I were in his place, I should not do it.

Answ. This God answers himself: Were you in Gods place, you would not pass by
such offenses; but says God, My ways are not as your ways; I know a way how to
be merciful to such a soul in Christ, therefore let no unworthiness hinder thee
from coming to Christ. Come we then to the words of the Text, Seek ye the Lord,
and put all the parts together, the act, agent and object, time, and cast them
up, and see what the count will be: I think it will be thus much;

Doctr. 2. That all those that do seek for true happiness, excellent, solid*
and sound comfort, must seek the Lord Jesus to accomplish their ends.

See this made more plain by a place or two of Scripture, John 3. 16. It is
called the great promise, God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life; seeking and believing in him come very near together; so Mat.
11. 28. Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh
you: And see what our Savior says, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life,
John 14. 6. No man can come to the Father but by me: So Rev. 22. 17. Let every
one that is a thirst come: The same is proclaimed, John 7. 37. it is he that
comes with healing under his wings. The point is plain, and I think understood
of all; come we then to Reasons, for we aim at Application.

Reas. 1. Taken from the ground of contraries; because all other things besides
Christ, whatsoever they be, cannot give satisfaction to the soul, they are all
sublunary, all things are short but only Christ: Take what you will, pitch
upon any thing, Honor, it passes and comes to nothing; Riches takes the wings
of the morning and flies away; Beauty, there comes a disease, and that is
blasted, whatsoever it be that man can take pleasure in; there is not a Goa^d
under Heaven, but it has a worm in the root that will eat it up, therefore
look to your hearts: Many people trust in vain things; the old doting dreamer
he comes, and he hopes well of his estate and condition; why? because he comes
to Church, he was baptized, and he pays every man his own, and he receives the
Sacrament: Ah, the Lord pity thee, thou yet falls short of Christ. This is as
if a man come to some water side, and had much business to go over, and all in
post calls for a boat, and he gets in, and he takes a nap in the boat, and goes
no farther, though his busine^s be of great importance: This is the state of
many, for want of going over the water, they fall short of Christ, and so
neglect their greatest business; much to do they had, but they never sought
Christ, there they rest only in the boat of the Ordinance; we come to the
Temple, but we find not Christ there. Again, thou have many outward blessings,
and thou say, I have a good stock, and thou rests there, well, but there
is a worm in that goard that will eat it out; thou have a pretty child, and
thou much delights in it, and thou see not that it has a desperate and
cursed heart which it will bring to thee, and as a worm will devour it. Again,
some dote upon a wife, and beauty in a wife, and then comes a disease and
seiseth upon her, then her beauty is gone, and she exposed so much misery, and
death takes her away, and deprives thee of all thy comfort thou tookest in her.
Another man, he shrewds himself under the King or State, for there be but few
but have some goard or other; for will some say, and have said, O the
Parliament will help us all: Some rest in the wisdom and policy of our
Statesmen, but you see there is a worm in that goard. Oh, but we come to the
Sacrament, and fast and pray, and that will help all, but a worm eats up that
goard; and you see our helps are almost blasted, for say some, we need not come
so often tegether, and keep Conventicles, as it is called, other matters will
serve the turn, we need not be so strict, but that worm will eat the goard. We
trusted on another sort of people, that have another goard; O, say they, we
have the Gospel, and that in a flourishing manner, as none in the World have
the like; but alas, is there not a worm in that goard? is not the Doctrine of
Devils set up amongst us, Arminianism and Heresy will soon eat up your Gospel
that is now ready to be devoured with open mouth; If thou have all these
things, and no Christ, thou have yet an empty soul, and unsatisfied for want of
Christ, thou art yet disappointed of thy ends and hopes.

Reas. 2. The second Reason is, Because that in Christ there is all that a soul
can long for, or heart can desire; therefore if you would have your hearts
filled with joy, it must be drawn out of the excellency and fullness in Christ;
for there is in him a balm to heal all our dumb and deaf, lame and blind
diseases; he is only able to satisfy a thirsty soul.

There be three things that will not be satisfied without this all-sufficient
remedy:

First, the justice of God, it comes and claims its right, this soul was
forfeited to me, and so it cries out for condemnation against such a soul,
because it despised mercy when it was offered, therefore justice claims his
right. Here the poor soul is lost, no stay in the World, but if the sentence of
justice be propounded, then the Lord have mercy on thee, as we say of a
condemned man: Then in comes Christ and brings a pardon, and he answers Gods
justice, and says, this is an humbled soul, it is mine, I have satisfied
justice for it, and thou have nothing to do with it; here a poor soul were lost
for ever, if Christ had not come in.

Secondly, The Devil comes, Oh, thou art mine, for thou art forfeited to me in
Adam, and have been lead by me, and art a wretched sinner, and a damned
creature, and therefore must share with me in torments for ever: Well, what
will help thee? now call all thy friends together, thy wife and children, and
see if they can help thee; call all thy state together, and offer it for a
ransom to the Devil, alas, it will all be nothing, all thy silver, and gold,
and friends, cannot redeem thy soul from Hell; ah poor wretch, miserable is thy
case: Well, but in steps Christ, and says, Avoid Satan, this soul is mine, I
have dyed for it; time was when it was thine, but I have redeemed it out of thy
hands; this is a poor broken soul, and I have dyed for such souls: Here is a
Savior indeed in time of need.

Thirdly, Here is another thing to be satisfied, and that is, the raging power
of sin. This soul is mine, says Sin, and I will dwell here, I will make it a
hypocritical heart, and a murderous heart, and a proud and unclean heart, I
will keep it from mending; it has been a proud heart, and it shall be so
still, a Drunkard still, a Blasphemer and unclean still, and no means shall do
him good. Then comes Christ; Nay, says he, I have redeemed this soul from the
power of sin, and sin shall have no more power over it: tell me if any thing
can help thee; for without Christ no help, no salvation.

Use. If this be so, That no thing can help us, or do us good but Christ, and
is all other things esteemed above him, and he only neglected? I cannot tell
whether I should weep or exclaim against you. I answer, we have all cause to
weep, we speak to a people that are dead, and almost past feeling: Oh, it is a
comfortable doctrine, Christ came into the world to save sinners: It is true,
but this belongs not to all. A man loose his purse, and many jewels in it (its
found) every one would have some, when as they are all but one man's; so in
this case, when we offer Christ, every one is ready to claim right in Christ,
but he belongs but to fevv. Now therefore that we may not be deceived, let us
mark this point is of singular use, let us know to whom Christ belongs. There
be four sorts of people in a miserable condition, and though Christ have cast
abroad so many excellent jewels, yet they are never a whit the better: I
could vvish you stood out by your selves, you that are not for Christ; I would
I did know who were for Christ, and who for the Devil, but such of you as
hear me, take your portion where it falls, for you best know your own case:
Christ comes, and he offers healings, and would fain do you good.

The first of people, are such as are sick, and are like a company of mad
frantic men, they have no sense at all, their case is very desperate: As if a
grave Physician comes in and offers them good physic, entreats them to take
it, or else they are all dead men; yet these mad Patients refuse to take it,
and kick out the Physician, and throvvs the glasses against the vvalls, and
will not accept of his physic; so say I to a poor soul, now for the Lords
sake take Christ, or else thou art a damned wretch for ever. Oh, but says one
of these mad Ruffins, we take Christ? get you out of our Towns, what have we to
do with Christ? we cannot endure this earnestness for Christ, keep your Christ
to your self if you will, and see if others will take him: O the Lord have
mercy on thee poor wretch: Let Ministers say what they will, and preach
themselves whorce, yet we will drink, and swagger, and svvear; are not all
these the conditions of no small fools? What, they take on them the yoke of
Christ, no, no, not they, they will not: but alas for you that make so light
of Christ; yet many such there be in the World.

A second sort are such as can be content to hear of Christ, and to receive him
a little; they are like to a people of fine stomachs that can take physic but
it must be sweetened, course fare will not down with them; so these men can be
content to hear of Christ by this or that man, and receive him so far as he
suits with them, but in all things they cannot endure him; if he come to course
fare, they cannot endure this cheer; of going to heaven and deliverance from
hell, this they can relish. I profess men would have such a Christ as I never
heard of, he must be a giving Christ, a Christ that stands with their pride,
hypocrisy and profaneness, or he is no Christ for them; if they cannot have
Christ and their ease and gain, but must part with these, then take Christ to
your selves; rather then they will part with these base lusts they will have no
Christ; if they may have him upon sweet terms well and good, if not, then
farewell Christ. You shall have one come to a Chaplain in a great man's house,
and he will say, Oh sir beware that you speak sweetly and fairly, take heed you
touch not the Governors by any means; you may have leave to preach in
forenoons, but in the afternoons let them hunt and hauk and take their
pleasure; but if you abridge them of their liberty, you will scarce be heard
any more; alas poor soul, never think to receive Christ, if thou can not
receive him but when he is a pleasure and gain unto thee. Such deal with Christ
as Innkeepers do with passengers so long as they have money, and spend it
willingly, they have what they will call for, and you are welcome Gentlemen,
but if their money be spent, and no more gain gotten by them, then let them be
gone, there is no more entertainment for them: So if you may have ease, and
pleasure, and profit, and Christ too, he is welcome; but if he will not, if he
will carry away any thing, though never so base a lust, yet we had rather part
with Christ then that which we may a great deal better spare. Oh if they cannot
have Christ but hazard their estates, expose their bodies to imprisonment,
they will have no Christ. Like the Soldiers they will follow Christ to the Hall,
but it was for his garments, when they had got that then they let Christ go; so
many will follow Christ so long as there is any thing to be gotten, but when
they must part with any thing they will go no further: Its with these as with a
child, the child having cut its finger and seeing it bleed, it will cry and
bemoan the mother; but if the mother require but an apple out of the child's
hand, it turns the back to the mother, and the mother may bleed to death before
the child will give her so small a matter: And so likewise if Christ bring you
gain, it may be you will receive him, but if he would have you part with
profaneness, pride or a base lust, then Christ may bleed his heart out before
they will look after him.

A third sort of hearers that are to be reproved are such that will not meddle
with Christ at all; they take up a principle from the Country people it is a
dangerous thing to take physic, but let nature work, and so far as nature will
work they are willing to go, and no further: They say they are well-meaning
men, that keep good houses, come to the Church, and pay every man his own, and
the like: Alas poor wretch that cries out so for nature, and thinks it needless
to look any further for Christ, your condition is lamentable and desperate.

A fourth sort of people here reproved are such as seem to have received
Christ, but tbey disgorge their stomachs of what they have received; now
physic being received, and presently coming up again it does no good at all;
even so let Christ come but to be a little costly unto us, and cross us, in any
thing then up comes profession, and Christ and all must lie in the floar.
Further to illustrate the same; Say we do seek Christ; well, what time did
thou ever set apart to seek him in? how many solemn days and hours have thou
set apart for that work? but art not thou such a one that does not greatly care
whether thou have Christ yea or no, thou see no great benefit by having of
him, nor no less if thou have him not, but if Christ will have thee so it is,
if not, well and good: O poor wretch, that thou make no more reckoning of
Christ: You see a man posting to the Physician, riding as fasting as he can:
Why, what is the matter? O my wife or my child lies at the point of death; but
where is the man that makes so much haste to the Minister for the souls of his
wife and children that are dead; nay where is the Minister that took such pains
with their people, and say, Oh neighbors look about you, you are going to hell,
you had need take heed; now get a Savior, take pains for him, and that
speedily, or else you perish; but Ministers are so lazy and dead hearted that
they have no courage for Christ, but if the Minister did see one stand at the
Church door ready to chop off his neck if he did not convert one at his Sermon,
O what zeal and earnestness would be put forth! You can tell every man of his
bodily dangers, and bid him look about, and tell him such and such will deceive
him, but his poor soul is going post to Hell, and that moves you not; you press
no necessity on him then to take heed. A beggars very necessity makes him to
beg; but we are idle, and will not pray, nor preach, nor hear a Sermon as we
ought to do; why, what is the matter? we see not the necessity of Christ, and
this is the reason why we are so dull because our hearts are not possessed with
the need of the Lord Christ; some say they can seek Christ, they can weep,
pray, and mourn, and yet walk loosly: Well, as hard a matter as it is to find
out an hypocrite from a true seeker of Christ, yet you may know him, for though
they agree in many generals, but in particulars there is a broad difference
between them; the one comes out of love to Christ, the other out of love to
himself: Look as a condemned man comes to the King for a pardon, he loves not
to stay long in the Kings presence, but so soon as he gets his pardon he is
gone. So an hypocrite comes to God in a spirit of bondage, and anguish of
conscience, and oh he would fain have a pardon out of his own easy end, not
any love to God, having ease you shall not often see him desire to come in Gods
presence. As I once saw a drunken wretch when the torments of hell lay upon his
conscience, I coming in, they told him such a one is coming to see you,
methinks I hear him still cry, It is too late, it is too late; Oh sir, what
shall I do? and when he had gotten a little ease he turned to his filthiness
again, such as those never knew what the love of God in Christ was: Oh what a
stir is there if an house be on fire, though before all asleep, then, oh save
my wife or my child; so when the conscience breaks out into terrors, then oh
help, help, but ease that and you shall hear no more of him.

Again, it may be an hypocrite prays, but either he rushes into Gods presence
without any preparation, or else passes over the duty very slubberingly of any
fashion so it be done, or else after the duty more proudly, says, I have
prayed and preached, etc. but if he have not what he would have, he leaves all.
Like as Suitors coming to a widow, some come for wealth, some for grace: Now
when she expresses her estate, and says, My estate is not that it is taken
for, it is but small, but if you like me as I am, so it is; then he that comes
for wealth makes no further labor, but ceases his (...); so we hear of Christ
that he bring* heaven, and delivers from Hell, we would fain have him, yet if
there be no present gain to be had, we are loath to take him as he is, if he
comes once to be naked, and poor, and bare Christ; then, what is this all the
gain, then farewell Christ? Ah poor wretch, the Lord pity thy soul. But now
faith a poor soul, the poor humble soul, a broken hearted Ch^istion says, Oh
let me have Christ though I have nothing else in the world.

Use. If the ground of all contentedness and happiness stands in seeking
Christ, then I must make sure work with those that have Christ and th^se that
have him not; and we may consider who have found Christ a Savior by these
parts of seeking here set down.

1. Seeking considered barely as an action. 2. As a Christian action. 3. As a
particular action. 4. The object, the Lord. 5. How, By rule of Scripture.
1. As an action barely considered: There were three things observed of the
Heathen in every action, First, A serious deliberation. Secondly, A serious
consultation. And thirdly, A present execution. Try your selves by these
particulars. First, Tell me I pray thee, when did thou deliberate about
Christ whether he was worth the having? tell me, what time have you taken to
deliberate to think with your selves how to come by him? tell me in what
closet, in what field, under what hedge have thou been casting about this
point? you can cast about how to pay your rents, but tell me when did thou
consider thy soul was going to Hell without Christ being a Savior to thee?

Secondly, Who is he that makes serious consultation how he may get Christ and
salvation to his soul? and who is he that goes to the Ministers or neighbors,
and consults how and by what means he may obtain Christ: Physicians may have
their Patients, Lawyers their cliants come by twenties knocking at their door
before they be up, and good sir follow my suit, I must beg else; but your
Minister may cool his heels in his study all the week long before you come with
such a question, Alas fir, what shall I do? and cry out good sir help me to
Christ or else I perish: But alas poor wretch thou have meat and drink, and a
deal of worldly trash, and that contents thee, is this a seeking of Christ?

Thirdly, And who puts this in execution, we stand dreaming about it; it is
good he says, but we hope all shall be well, and many other good thoughts; but
alas thou have a miserable poor soul; so that take it as an act we may in some
measure see whether we seek Christ or not.

2. Consider this as it is a Christian and good action, three things herein
very necessary to be considered. 1. A clear sight or knowledge of the thing we
go about. 2. A sincere affection to it. 3. Quickness in dispatch of it. 1.
Consider the thing we go about is weighty, and of great importance; to find
Christ pardoning sin, and working our redemption; now there must be a true
knowledge of this, else there can be no true seeking: Herein are reproved all
ignorant Masters and Ministers. I met lately with a man of eighty years of age
save one, I asked him how many Gods there were, he could not tell. It is a
pitiful case; one day their children will cry out, Oh murdering parents, you
might have made me better had you catechized me, I had never come to these
flames; Oh cursed Father and Mother it is you that sent me to hell; I might
have had a Savior had it not been for you for ought I know. Shall the Lord
give you children and will you give them to the Devil? Your servants they moil
and toil for you, and you send them to hell for their labor; well they will
one day curse you and say, I had not been here but for my bloody Master; Oh the
Lord help you to think of this better. How good a course is it for a Minister
to quarter out his Parish, and set himself and make it his daily work to go to
four or six houses in the afternoon, and see how it stands with their families,
and deal plainly with the poor souls of his people, you will find much good
follow this, you will deliver many souls from hell, and meet with them you
never met withal: Ah the Lord help us, we want a spirit of love to their poor
souls. What is the reason so many make haste to hell? it is through ignorance
and want of better instruction; many old doting fools are ready to say of these
times, Never was good world since there was so much preaching. But alas it is
because they know no better of Christ; but alas for thee, poor ignorant old man
or young man who ever thou art, look to it, thou art going to hell, if no
knowledge of Christ, there is no love to him. Now let me entreat you to buy
orthodox books, make store of them, get Bibles into your houses, get your
Minister to catechize you, and to instruct you, to have a care of your poor
souls. And thus much let me say to Ministers, If ever you would spend your
selves or be spent for the souls of your people: Now is the time, the
Palatinate and other Countries are shaken already, and England begins to shake
fast, and it is likely it cannot hold out, therefore labor as much as you can
to bring them to Christ; for Popery gets head and grows fast, therefore never
more need.

2. To seek Christ argues some sincere affection after Christ. Judas had
knowledge, but for want of practice he died in a halter. Would you think your
servant dealt well with you, if you send him to look your lost cattle, and he
goes step by step, and spend half the day before he get to the place where he
should look them. Should not Ministers now come and lift up their voices, and
cry Oh get Christ you perish else? yet see how undisposed we go about it, and
we will take our own time; now here wants affection for Christ.

But finally, for quickness in dispatch of this action, it is too much seen
what long delays, and excuses, and pretenses we have, it is soon enough we
hope, so that any thing will hinder that work.

Come we to the third rule of this seeking, and so to the metaphor, which
stands in three things:

First, It requires a good light: we have cause of great thankfulness for the
light we enjoy, God has been merciful to this Nation, light instead of
darkness; many a poor soul has had light, when most of the Kingdom have been
in darkness: Now if God intend to save thee, he will send thee a light where
thou dwell, or else remove thee to a light in a family; if God intend to
save thee, he will send a light, some good husband, or wife, or child, or
servant: If you would have Christ, you must have light, and walk in the light
while you have it; for it darkens apace, and our Sun is decliming: Now for the
Lords sake look about you; if ever you had need to get Christ, and we to preach
Christ, now is the time, for it is almost past time already, and yet we believe
it not, see it not. If thou say thou have Christ, I ask thee how thou came
by him; either thou have Christ by the Word, or else thou have him not at all:
This may be proclaimed to all the World, If any man come to Christ, it must be
by the light of the Word.

Secondly, In a particular action there is required a good eye: A blind man
cannot tell how to do any thing. Now this eye is the eye of Faith; for no
faith, no Savior, no Christ: Now it is this faith that lays hold on a
particular promise, and gets Christ: It fares with faith pitched on a
particular promise, as it is with a child; a father dies, and leaves six
children, and in his Will he bequeaths to every one of his children a portion:
When the Will comes to be read, Item, I give to my eldest son John so much
Land, that is mine, says he: I give to my daughter Elizabeth so much money,
that is mine, says she: So in this case, when Gods Will is read, that is his
Word, wherein his legacy is bequeathed to his children, and there is read,
Whosoever is a thirst, let him believe, and here is water of life for him: Oh,
says the thirsty soul, that is mine: And so when he hears, That whoever
believes in Christ, shall not perish, but have everlasting life: Such a soul as
believes in Christ, he takes and receives Christ to the use and benefit of his
soul, as act and deed; and therefore he claims his right in everlasting life:
Such a soul will adventure any thing for Christ. Oh, says some to such a soul,
what need you be so earnest in running to Sermons? it was a better world when
there was less. Ah poor hearts, you will not come together to seek; well, when
Gods judgments fall heavy upon you, then it will drive you together pell mell;
then, O good Sir help, but help will not be found. And thus much let me say to
Christians, learn to prize the good eye, there is many curious tunicles in this
eye: What faith to procure me a Savior? O preserve it.

Three things hurt the bodily eye, 1. Looking upon water. 2. Wind. 3. Dust. The
like to these hurt the spiritual eye; if you take water for the fleeting lusts,
profits, and pleasures of this life, looking much on these hurt the eye of
faith; as David looked on Bathsheba, she was a pearl wind. Secondly, that is
pride that puffs a man up, now faith and a proud heart cannot stand together,
these cannot agree; gifts received puffs a man up, and much hurt a man's faith:
A ship is cast away sometimes by the same wind that brings him into the
Harbor; there is an evil fountain in men's studies, and that is covetousness,
when men preach for hire and gain; when they are afraid to trust God with their
wives and children, this hurts faith: Take heed you stand not over long, lest
you lose the benevolence of such a one; and in prosperity a man had need have a
good eye, to see through so much thick clay.

There be three objects whom we must seek; and that is the Lord, he must be
sought in three particulars: 1. Nothing before him. 2. Nothing besides him. 3.
Nothing with him. Thus does a good soul seek Christ; every one can say they
seek Christ, but when I pray you? One day, says the Worldling, but I would
have some thing else first. Says the young man, it is time enough yet, I will
take some pleasure, and when I can do little else, I will seek Christ. Oh,
says the old doting fool, when I married all my daughters, then will I seek
Christ; alas, for thee it seems Christ must be last sought, as if he were least
worth: a lamentable condition.

5. Some rules from Scripture, whereby a man may know whether he have Christ or
not, or whether he seek him: You must seek him after his own manner prescribed
in his Word; you must not pick and choose with God, take and leave as you list:
You would seek Christ, but it must be on your own terms, you are loath to be at
cost: But to prevent this, take four or or five rules in seeking Christ.

1. The Church must be sought, as the Spouse in the Canticles sought him, Cant.
5. 8. I charge you if you see my beloved, tell him I am sick of love: If a man
should meet one in such a condition for Christ, you would think him almost mad;
but a poor soul must be thus ravished with the love of Christ. A Lawyer posting
up to the Term, O if I lose my fees, I beg: Or if a poor woman have many
children, and all of them live upon her husbands hand labor, alas, if he be
slain in the way, then I am undone: Thus must we seek Christ, without him we
have nothing, such a soul is never at rest, till he find Christ. First, we
must seek Christ, as a thirsty man would seek for drink; will you agree to
this, will you promise to seek Christ thus. A man that is ready to perish for
want of drink, will part with any thing for drink: He comes into a room, and
spies a cup of drink, he says, O good Sir, take my clothes off my back, or any
thing, so I may have but a cup of drink: So a poor soul comes to seek Christ, O
that I might have but a Christ, give me but a Christ, and take what you will
from me; then away with this fashion, or that garment, so I may have but a
Christ, away with all this dung and dross; so I may have Christ, take Simeon
and Benjamin too, or any thing, so I may have but a Christ, for it is Christ I
want, only Christ, only Christ, says the poor soul.

2. A thirsty man will be satisfied with nothing but drink; let a man come and
offer him gold, and silver, and precious stones, alas, this satisfies him not,
though you stop his mouth full; but good Sir, give me a little drink, or else I
perish; for says a poor soul, wherefore do you offer me gold, the World, and
all these outward things, its Christ I want to save me: O what hard shift will
a man make for drink in extremity; As once I heard of three men that went a
fishing from the Summer Islands in a boat, and being from the Land by a storm,
and continued at Sea eight or nine days, at length one dyed, and the other
threw him over board; a second dyed, and then the third takes up the dead and
unbowels him, and sets open his body to catch rain water; in so doing, he lived
with water and blood, and so came to Land: Thus a poor thirsty soul will make
hard shift for Christ.

3. We must seek Christ, as a man would dig for treasure, Wife and children,
all must dig: Oh it will enrich me, we must take all pains to get Christ,
why what is the matter? What? why he will save me.

4. Christ must be sought, as a condemned man would seek for pardon. I have
seen stout Gallants, being condemned, desire to fight with three or four, and
be slain; rather dye any death, then a Dogs death: O Sir, is there no hope of
pardon for me? O that I had but a day more. I have been with some in that
case, and they have greatly complained of three things, 1. They would take no
counsel. 2. They lived in profaning the Sabbath. 3. They have lost their time.
I have lived 20, 30, 40 years, but my time is now gone over; bring what you
will to a man in this case, bring a silken, satin shute, and tell him he may
have wife worth so much by the year, alas, what do you mock me? this will do me
no good: I am going to dye, if you bring me a pardon, I will say something to
it. So I may tell you, the great day is coming, when fire and faggot is about
thine ears, a Christ will then be worth something: Thou that have not Christ,
tell me what thou would do, if thou wast to dye this night; without Christ
thou art a condemned man; without Christ what will become of thy poor soul? if
thou have not a Savior, Hell is fit to receive thee, the Devil fit to carry
thee thither; and then a Christ to step in and challenge thee, were worth
thousands: Now seek the Lord while he may be found. Now let me proclaim to you,
in the name of the Lord, That if there be any man in this congregation that
does mean and intend to seek Christ from this day forward, well and good; but
if you purpose to be drunkards and swearers still, and Sabbath Breakers still,
and resolve to live so, let me entreat you to depart out of the congregatien,
let me see it, I have nothing to do with you: I pray you once again, let me see
it, who are for Christ, and who are not: Well, why do you not stir? you do not
all mean as you make a show of: What, will you all take Christ on this
condition, to be drunk no more, to swear no more, to break the Sabbath no more?
Well, I see none of you stir, if this be in truth, you are able to save a whole
Nation; but if it be not in truth, you are horrible hypocrites before God:
Therefore look to your hearts; now therefore take notice of the day of this
month, this present Thursday, that you have made a covenant with God to
forsake all your poophane courses* which at your perils break not. I desire
again to know your mind, Whether you are resolved on this or no. I tell you,
its no jesting with God; and remember what you do, we are making or receiving a
covenant, do not gratify vice with your presence, unless on this condition,
Well, I see none stir, therefore fore this covenant is ratified; therefore look
to it, for I tell you, I my self at the last will witness against you, that on
such a day, and in such a house, you made a covenant with God to be drunkards
no more, nor swearers no more, etc. therefore take notice what you have done.

Ob. But some may say, It is strange Ministers should speak thus, after such a
manner: What, is it possible to have Christ, and keep my please, my pride and
hypocrisy still, this is mavelous strange.

Answ. I tell thee thou must forgo all, and what has been past, and now to
redeem out of the Devils hands, and take this day to begin; delay no longer,
its almost past time already. Were it not a folly for a Mariner to have his
ship girt, rigged, and victualled, and he lie sleeping all the Summer, till
provision be spent, and Winter storms and rumors, and Worms eat holes in the
ship, and then go out: So do thou think its a meet time to seek the Lord,
when thy body is rotten and decayed; no, no, the Lord will not always be
found; nay, it is very likely the Lord will not give thee a heart to seek him,
then will you sleep in Summer, when the harvest is past. Will any man when
there is catching Weather, bid his servants rest? nay, will he not rather say,
get you all into the field, and work hard, for you see what catching Weather
we have; get all the Workmen you can, and work hard, though you rest for it
afterward, that you may have the harvest in the barns before the storms come.
Why truly brethren, these are catching times as ever men lived in; how soon the
storms may fall, I cannot tell, but I believe very suddenly: I would I might be
a False Prophet, but I am sure there are dark clouds abroad; therefore now set
to work, and live no longer in ignorance. I once lived in a place, where they
had not a Sermon once in ten or twelve years space; What a company of
non-residents are there, that live a hundred miles off their flock, that scarce
see them once in a year? and when they do come, it is with such tuff-taffity
phraises of Hebrew, Greek and Latin, that scarce any one understands them, but
need bring Greek and Latin ears with them: And these I cannot tell what better
to compare to, then a great pair of Brass Andirons; a comparison though homely,
yet sometimes used by me: You know these Brass Andirons stand for show, and not
for use, and the little creepers that stand by them must hold up the fire: So
these men make a show, as if all were done by them, when one Sermon in the
year, and quarter, will serve turn; as in Wales, which is most woeful, you may
have one ride and serve four or five Parishes, and read a little Starvis, or
Service, as they call it. O the Lord help you, time will come when the Lord
will not be found; How is he found of the Palatinate? One day you will say, I
had sweet times, I had a good Minister, but the time is gone. Well, I tell you,
it is now high time, it is good making hay while the Sun shine; the times are
mavelous catching, therefore be not afraid of coming together, but do any
thing for Christ, he will stand you instead. A poor man thresheth, and takes
great pains; what is the matter? it is to maintain my poor family: But who are
ye that seek Christ, to get him into your houses? Stand not hawking with God,
as a Woman is loath to part with her old gold to buy commodities; why? it was a
token of an old Friend; for we would have Christ, but we are loath to part with
the Devils tokens, the World, and our Lusts: Take heed thou have not the Devil,
and Hell and all, one day for it.

FINIS.

