Die Mercurij ultimo Maii 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir
Christopher Yelverton do from this House give thanks unto Mr. Andrew Perne for
the great pains he took in the Sermon he this day preached (at the entreaty
of the House of Commons) at St. Margarets, in the City of Westminster, being
a day of public Humiliation, and that he desire him to Print his Sermon. And
it is Ordered that no man presume to Print his Sermon, but whom the said Mr.
Perne shall authorize under his hand writing.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I authorize Stephen Powtell to Print my Sermon above named, and no man else.

ANDREW PERNE.



GOSPEL COURAGE, Or Christian Resolution for GOD, and his Truth. In a SERMON
Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at Margarets in Westminster,
at a Public FAST, the 31. of May, 1643.

By ANDREW PERNE Master of Arts, sometimes fellow of Katherine Hall in
CAMBRIDGE: Now Minister of Wilby in Northamptonshire.

JER. 6.16. Thus says the Lord stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for
the old paths: where is the good way, and walk therein; and ye shall find
rest for your souls.

Josh. 24.15. As for me and my House we will serve the Lord. Dan. 3.18. Be it
known unto thee O King, that we will not, serve thy Gods nor worship thy
Golden Image which thou have set up. LONDON, Printed by G. Dexter, for Stephen
Bowtell, at the Sign of the Bible in Popes-head-Alley, 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and Burgesses, of the COMMONS House
of PARLIAMENT.
Noble Gentlemen,
THis Sermon lately preached before your Honorable Assembly, I now present to
your review, if in the midst of so many important businesses of State, which
lie upon you; and in such variety of far more learned Discourses which daily
offer themselves, you can find any leisure to look on this: You are my
witnesses, and the world may see here is nothing but the words of truth and
soberness, though many charge us, unheard, with Schism, Heresy, Faction,
Sedition, and what not. I must seriously confess, I am conscious to my self
of many wants and infirmities, and have always avoided to be public, as
judging them things too high for me, contenting my self to approve my doctrine
to God, and the consciences of my dear people committed to me; and if I might
have pleased my self, I should rather have bin found still in mine own private
Cure, and have devolved this task to any other: But I durst not refuse an
Authority so high and sacred, to which all honest and Religious hearts cannot
but stoop, in regard of that stamp, which the great God has actually set upon
it, even for the generations of after ages: your command will be a sufficient
Apollogie for me, though not for the work; yet if the great God may have any
glory, or the poorest in the Church (for, for them only I conceive it fit) any
edification by my weak endeavors, I shall never repent either the preaching
or Printing of this Sermon, however unwillingly I undertook both, being over
ruled thereto by your request, which is to me instead of a command.

Gentlemen, I have but one suit to you, and it is the sum of the ensuing
Sermon, be Resolute still for God, and for his true Religion; and you know who
said it, God is with you while you are with him;

Your Servant for Christ, ANDREW PERNE.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS, at their public
Fast, May 31. 1643.
MICHAH 4.5. For all people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we
will walk in the name of our God for ever and ever.


THE Prophet having shut up the former Chapter with the great Judgment that
all the Prophets did threaten Jerusalem with, to wit, the Babylonish Captivity:
begins this Chapter with a prophecy of that great Mercy that all of them
comforts her with, to wit, the coming and Kingdom of Christ: But in the last
days it shall come to pass (says he) ver. 1. that the mountain of the house
of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, etc. As if he
should have said, Though God will plough Zion, rend and tear his people with
affections, make this famous City heaps of rui^^ and this Mount which is so
daintily kept shall b^ overgrown with nettles, dirt and dust, like the w^^^
hills of the desert: yet the time will come when Christ is exhibited, and the
Gospel is preached, that the Church of God shall not be obscurely confined,
and shut up in a dark corner of the world; but shall be so eminently
conspicuous, and famously known, that the Gentiles shall flow unto it: for out
of Zion (indeed) shall the word of the Gospel proceed; but it shall spread it
self over all Nations; and it shall so calm and quiet their spirits, that
they shall lay down all hostile dispositions; and as if they were composed of
peace, they shall turn their warlike infiruments into tools of husbandry;
their Swords (...) plough shares, and their spears into pruning books: every
one shall be contented with, and safely sit under his own vine and fig^r^e. And
then comes in these words, which are either as an exhortation to the people of
God that then were (as ^^lvin has it) to stir them up, Ad invictam animi
mag^nudinem ^^^sultent cunctis gentibus, to an inconquerable mag^^^mity, and to
an holy insultation over all Nations in regard of their God: or as a prophecy
of the Gospel courage, and Christian valor and resolution which shall be in
those that live in the Gospel times: and so of this. And why not of you? for
the words are a solemn and serious protestation, like whereunto you have
lately taken, and commanded all the Kingdom, that with their li^es, power, and
estares they should maintain the true Protestant Religion which is to walk in
the name of our God) against all Popery and Popish Innovations.

In the words you may observe first a general consent of all Nations, that
there is, and to have A God: this is insinuated in the Text.

2. The diversity of judgment among the Nations concerning this God: for
though they all agree that there is A God, and every one will have One: but
herein they differ, who this true God is.

3. The peremptorinesse of every Nation for Their God, and for Their Religion.
All people will walk every one in the name of their God, and we [will] walk,
etc.

4. A blessed use which the Church makes of this for her self, and her God:
others will be stiff and peremptory for their Gods, and so will she for hers.

5. The Eminency, transcendency, and Excellency of her God above theirs:
Theirs are Gods; but hers is the Lord our God: Ichovah, a God that has a Being
of himself, Theirs have none.

6. Observe the time how long. Not for a fit or a good mood (while that lasts,)
will the Church be thus peremptory for her God and Religion, but for ever and
ever.

One phrase only, I conceive, needs opening, which is this: What it is to walk
in the name of a God? and it stands under diverse senses:

First, to be called by his name, as Wives, Children, Disciples, are called by
the Names of their Husbands, Parents, Masters: So here, all Nations will
triumph, and will be willing to own, and not be ashamed of the Name of their
God, and we will not be ashamed of our glory, Deuteronomy. 28.10. and all the People
of the Earth shall see, that thou art called by the Name of the Lord, the 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my People that are called by my Name, etc.

Secondly, to go furnished with the divine Authority of God. Mar. 11. Blessed
is he that comes to us in the Name of the Lord, and so the 1 Cor. 5.4. In the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ when ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, etc.

3. To walk in the Power and strength of God, the 1 Samuel 17.45. Thou come to
me with a sword and a spear, and with a shield; but I come to thee in the Name
of the Lord of Hosts (says David to Goliath) which is in the strength of God.

Fourthly, to walk in the scare, Laws, Ordinances, and whole worship of God.
And this I conceive to be the proper meaning of this place.

The Doctrines are many. We shall therefore play the Travaller; pass by some
Towns though good, call in at others, and make our stay in that, that is most
convenient.

There is a GOD.

This truth we read in the Book of nature that lies continually open before
us, written in so great and Capital Letters, that one though stone blind, if
he have other senses, may read it. And Conscience within teaches this: All
Nations agree in it. There is a peradventure indeed, in every man's heart, that
there is no God: and according to the strength of this in the soul, so is the
life God less: But there is a semi-certainty in every soul that there is a
God: and when this prevails, then a Man will be devoute in his way. And
therefore says the Heathen: Menciuntur qui dicunt, se non sentire esse Deum,
they lie in their throats that say, they think there is no God. But we leave
this.

Several Nations have several Gods: Or there are many false Gods in the World.
In the 1 Cor. 8.5. There be Gods many, and Lords many. No truth so generally
and universally granted as this: That there is a God; but none so much
controverted as who the true God is. Man brings into the World with him notions
and sure apprehensions of a deity: Education and Custom do specificate, and
shape these general notions of a GOD, and a Religion; to that God, and into
that Religion that the Country accounts the true. From hence he that is borne
in Turkey is a Mahumetan: In Italy a Papist; in England a Protestant. So soon
as Men are borne, they fall a groaping for a God, and for a Religion: One there
is, but who, and which we know not; and that, that is first put into our hands
by our Parents and Governors, that we close withal. And this is the State and
condition of all Men living; the best and dearest Saints of God are thus by
nature, and would have been Turks, and Papists had they bin borne there, till
God seized upon them by his grace, regenerated them, and revealed himself unto
them. Ye were without God in the World as well as others.

A God then there is, but who, and what (...) one, the People and Nations of
the World cannot agree; and therefore, how many have the Nations who are left
unto the light of nature, set up for Gods; that had Country Gods, and City
Gods, and household Gods, and particular personal Gods: Gods for all places,
for Heaven, and Hell, and Sea, and Land; for all occasions; for war, and peace,
and plenty, and health, and sickness: the number of their Gods as some of their
own Authors have summed them up, was above thirty thousand. The Papists in our
days have more.

If ye say, what is the cause of this, that the World should be thus out in so
great a point?

Adam, that was our great loss; for his sin God has withdrawn himself, hid
himself in secret, and will not fully, sufficiently, or savingly reveal
himself by the Creatures to the sons of men: but has chosen a new way to vent
himself, which is by Jesus Christ, Mat. 11.27. No Man comes to the father but
by me (says Christ) and so Ioh. 11.6. No man knows the Father but the son,
and he to whom the Son shall reveal him. There is not in all the Book of
Nature, one Iota, or one hint of Jesus Christ. Many nations are without the
Gospel; few persons know Jesus Christ, (I pray God you may look to your
selves) and therefore are wild, and vain, and various in their Imaginations
of God.

It comes from the infinite disproportion that is between God and Man. God) I
fill Heaven and Earth, the Heaven of Heavens are not able to contain me: So,
what thoughts will ye rear up to entertain the great God in? How will ye
do to stretch those narrow Souls of yours that the King of glory may come in?
It is impossible for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, but how
impossible for God to come into his Creature? The senses, which are the Lanes,
or Gates which lead to the soul, neither is there any thing in the
understanding but it is first in the senses: these are all too narrow, God is
invisible, and cannot be seen: Thou can not see my Face, (says God) to
Moses, and yet he had, and could see great and dreadful things; but had he
seen this, his soul would have ran away.

He is ineffable, bigger then all definitions and descriptions; greater then
words can tell. Its peculiar to God to exceed knowledge. And therefore the
Logicians have wisely excluded him out of their Predicaments, ubique prosens,
sed latens, nothing more present then God, and nothing more unseene.

If you say, but this Reason shuts out all Men; yet there are that do know
him.

God. This Spirit lifts up the doors, and sets open the Gates that the King
of glory may come in. And because the faculties cannot be wound up to
infiniteness, that they may hold proportion to the immensity of God, therefore
the spirit does two things.

First, it creates an eekening in the soul, which is Faith, helping of it to
believe, what it cannot apprehend. He that comes unto God must believe:
he will never reach him else. The understanding and knowledge cannot be
stretched out to conceive high enough of God, and therefore the spirit creates
an addition, which is Faith, helping of the soul to believe, what it cannot
conceive. As when the Virgin Mary was told, that she should conceive and be are
a Son, how can this be (says she) seeing I know nor a man? her reason could
not reach it; and therefore she laid her Faith to it: Be it unto me according to
thy word.

2. As the Spirit does enlarge, and add to the soul; so it does in a manner
lessen God. God humbling of himself in being willing to be described after the
manner that man can take him, and reach him. And oh! what a condescension and
stoop is this in the Almighty, that he should be willing to be set out, as
having hands, and feet, and eyes; that so men may sippe a little of him! Man
cannot go up to God, and therefore God will meet him half way, and come down
to him. And before the Spirit does thus work in the soul, none know the true
God, few Nations or people, yea few persons have this work in them; and
therefore few do know the true God, and from hence so many false gods in the
world.

3. The heart of man is enraged and vexed that God does hide himself from his
senses. God keeps himself in secret, and will not be seen: and therefore man
will have other gods who shall. Make us gods that may go before us, (say the
Israelites to Aaron) such as we may see. Hence are your Idols among the
Heathen: Pictures, and Crucifixes among your Papists: and with men of carnal
and corrupt minds amongst our selves. Men will have something before their
eyes to direct their worship and service unto. Men are vexed that God should
keep himself, or any thing else secret from them. How feign would men be
fingring of Election, and Reprobation? How angry were our desperate Divines of
late, because they could not find out the bottom of them? See the reason:

There Is none, unless they can see the depth and Cause.

We are very prone to be too saucy with divine things which dwell in darkness, and
God will not bear it. Bounds and limits were set the people when God gave the
Law: they must not gaze, lest they die. And as men are angry with this
retiredness of God, that he will not make himself familiar to their senses:
So are they vexed and fretted with his monopolizing, and reserving all the ways
and manner of his worship to himself: men are mad upon Will Worship. Something
they will have of their own invention to be mingled with the worship of God:
he shall not have altogether his own way and will. They will out of their
wisdom (which is their folly) add some Ceremonies, at the least, to beautify
the slovenly worship of God: as some of them have more then profanely spoken.
And from hence were your golden Copes, and gorgious Altars, shining
Candlestickes, decent Ceremonies, the more to decorate and adorn the service of
God. Thus man will be corrupting the spiritual service of God, with his base,
carnal, beggarly inventions. And for this cause God gives men over to extreme
folly; even to worship the things that they have made so beautiful: to bow
down to their Altars that they have decked: and all their wisdom, Scholership,
learning, and distinctions, are not able to deliver them from it. The 1. Romans
21. Because when they knew God, they worshipped him not as God, therefore God
gave them over: laid them fast in their own dung and filth: And who were
these? Such as professed themselves to be wise, the great Scholars of the world.
In the 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the wise? where is the disputer? not in Christ, as
Paul was; he was foolishness. So with us, Where were our great learned
Rabbis? their distinctions had carried them down to Rome: they could break
the Sabbath with distinctions, and bow down to Name and Altar with
distinctions: and therefore God befooles them, and gives them over to worship
the works of their own hands, their own babies: And therefore wonder not (my
Brethren) that you have lately seen great Scholars to be sortish in their
bowing down to name and places, for God committed them to superstition and
Idolatry, and who could bail them? These Reasons may suffice, though many more
may be given.

Adams sin. Romans 11.33. Oh! the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past
finding out! Private men may pray for them: but it must be the power of some
such Sovereign Assembly as this is of yours, to send unto them the knowledge
of the true God: and who knows, but for this also, you are met together at this
time? that when you have repaired our breaches, and done the will of God for
us, you may be a blessing, and a healing to other nations.

England rejoice in him that made it; Esa. 33.12.
for blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, and the people whom he has
chosen for his own; this makes them Gods own. This is the greatest kindness,
the most distinguishing, special favor of God: this mercy of knowing God,
comes out of the very heart of Jesus Christ; for in him, and none else, God
reveals himself unto men, God looks to be praised and thankt for this The
knowledge of God lifts a nation up to heaven; Capernaum was lifted up to heaven
by preaching of the Gospel, Matthew. 11.23
and when God thus exalts a nation, he looks to be exalted by it: Ioh. 14 22.
Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the
world? So, who is England, Lord, that thou should reveal thy self to it,
and not to other nations? Man is a bragging creature, and God takes notice of
it: If his face be fairer, his back or arms stronger, or his head wiser, his
purse fuller then others, he will be ready to boast of it, and glory in it:
but God would have all this laid out upon himself. Ier. 9.23.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory
in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the
Lord.

England; it has been with England, as it was with Jacobs family, and the
Israelites in the days of Moses and Joshua, though the true God was publicly
acknowledged and worshipped in both, yet there were private persons and
families, who kept Idols and false Gods, and worshipped them; and therefore when
Jacob was to go up to Bethel, to build an Altar there unto God, he first
purges his family from Idols, Genesis 35. And Joshua, when he took his last leave
of the children of Israel, and caused them to enter into a Covenant that they
would serve God, exhorts them to put away the strange gods that were among them
Josh. 24.14. So, how many false gods have there been still kept, and worshipped
in private families and houses here in England, ever since the reformation?
Nay, it has been worse with us: for the Romish, superstitious, nay idolatrous
Crosses and Crucifixes have been upheld and decked, if not new built, in the
staring-Cheape, in our Churchyards, Highways, and these have been worshipped,
and by these, and some other things, the Pope has kept possession of our
Kingdom: Do you cancel these cursed Evidences, God looks for it at your
hands; Down with these high places, search England with Candles, till you
find out all the abominations which are committed in secret; and do you in
the name of England (for your places will bear it) say, What have I to do
with Idols any more? get you hence as filthy and unclean things; and instead
of these send abroad those, who may teach the good knowledge of the Lord, may
scatter the light of the Sun of righteousness. How many uncatechised dark
corners are there in this Kingdom? how many persons that know not God, nor
whether Christ were Man or Woman? Help these to know their Maker.

1. The greatest good that you can possibly do this Kingdom is, to help it
yet more to the knowledge of God; this is the end and the perfection of man;
herein his excellency above other creatures, that he had a rational soul
given him, fitted to sip a little of the knowledge of God: this is the life and
the liberty of the subject, ye stand much for them, and (for ought I know)
cannot stand too much: This is eternal life, to know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, and this estates us into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God.

2. This is the greatest profit, it will bring the Kingdom in more then all
the Merchants of it. Look how much any do know God and Christ, so much are
they theirs; now a little of God is more then a great deal of the creature: I
desire to know nothing but Christ and him crucified (says Paul) if he could
know him more, he should be more his.

3. This would reform the Kingdom better then all the Laws that you can
make; knowing the terror of the Lord we persuade men. If we can but get men
to know God, we may persuade them: A good Minister will reform a Parish better
then a Justice of Peace; the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
spiritual, yet mighty through God to cast down strong holds. We spit fire into
men's consciences, and bind men over to the great Assizes of Quick and Dead.

4. God is the fountain of all the Mercies and Miseries that we meet withal;
if any should still be sending of us kindnesses, now and then a sweet child,
an Office, change of Apparel, Meat, and Drink, and Sleep, night and day one
thing or another: and sometimes should be reaching of us a smart blow, a
Fever, a fit of the Stone and Gout, killing thousands in a week in our
streets of the Pestilence, bathing of his sword in our blood, how should we
desire to know this person, that we might know how to carry our selves toward
him, and to be at peace him? Help England to know the God of Englands mercies
and of Englands corrections.

Firstly, We can neither go any whither, or do any ^^ing without him. In him
we live, and move, and have our being. Yea, we shall ever have to do with
him. The knowledge of God, would do a Man good in time of affliction: when
comfort will be worth a World, and what will Men do in time of affliction, if
they know not God? When the Soul comes to sigh it is last, and to groan into
eternity: to go to meet with a God it knows not, how sad a thing is this? And
you that know him, labor to know him more, for ye are not past this lesson,
nor ever shall.

It is Natural with Men to be peremptory for their God, 3 Doct.
and for their Religion.
All People will, and we will. If a Nation consent together, and choose a King
to Reign over them; so long as he keeps the Paction, and the agreement
between them, they will fight for him. Ioh. 18.36. If my Kingdom were of this
world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews. The God of the Nation is above the King; and their Religion above their
Civil Laws: and therefore men will be peremptory for them; walk in them,
themselves; and be glad of your company. You cannot do a Nation a greater
kindness then to join and comply with it, in its Religion, and forsake your
own. That temper is in all men, to compass Sea and Land to make a Proselite
to their God, and their Religion. When nothing will procure liberty to a
Captive, yet this will; to abdicate and renounce his Religion, and to join
with them that have taken him. Contrarieties, yea, small differences in
Religion, do breed the strongest opp osition: But consent in Religion, is the
strongest sement in all the World.

The persecutions therefore, that have been among us of late, have been
against the Law of nations; The Turk Honors those that are the most strick't
observers of Mahomet: The Papists Saint those that are zealous for the Pope;
and yet we have been derided, scorned, persecuted, and Courted for walking in
the name of our God; for keeping his Laws, for sanctifying his Sabbaths,
hearing his word: which not only our God, but the very Laws of the Land do
command us. But we stay not here.

The Church of God has great cause to be zealous, stiff, and resolute for Her
God, and Her Religion.
All Nations will, and we will. Why? Their Rock is not like our Rock; Our's
is Jehovah as well as God; a God that nath a being: theirs have none, but in
fancy and imagination. Our's is something, but theirs are nothing; an Idol as
nothing (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 8.4.

All the attributes of God are the Reasons of this Point.

Geese, the Capital of Rome, and all the dead Gods, had been taken: So that a
living Goose is better then a dead GOD.

God, the only wise God: His understanding is infinite; Isa. 40.28. Psalm.
147.5.
There is no searching of his understanding. And who would serve a soole, have
a fool for his Master? Much less for his God. That was the blessedness of
Solomon's servants, that they stood, and heard his wisdom. The contrary is
misery; to be bound to hear the babbling of a fool. Why, all false Gods are
Fools; and so are they that worship them. Be wise then, O ye Kings, be
Learned ye that are Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord in fear, Psa. 2.10.
That King's a Fool and those Judges are but Dunces, that do not fear this
God.

God. When I behold the Heavens, the work of thy fingers (says David.) The
Heavens are but Finger work with him. He draws out the Heavens, like a
Curtain, he does it with ease; He feasts the Earth with the opening of his
hand; Thou openest thy hand and fillest with thy blessing every living
Creature: He rides upon the heavens, as upon a horse; they are his horse of
manage, he can stay them, make them to go backward, or forward as easity as
you can your horse: But other Gods are nothing: An Idol is nothing, and can do
nothing, Ier. 10.5. They cannot do evil; neither is it in them to do good,
Chap. 14.22. Are there any among the Vanities of the Gentiles that can give you
Rain? Our God alone is able to do a Man good, and to do a Man taischiefe;
he can famish all the Gods of the World, Zeph. 2.11. The Lord will be terrible
unto them, for he will famish all the Gods of the earth: He can, and we hope he
will famish Popery, and Arminianisme, and Jesus Worship. And the Lord can rescue
and deliver those that serve him. Salvation is the Lords, it is good serving
him then, Dan. 3.17. Our God is able to deliver us from the fiery Furnace; and
he will deliver us out of thy hands, O King. This God is to be stuck unto.

The Lord is faithful and true, and never fails them that trusts in him. The
Lord is a present help in trouble. A man may go to the Creature, and it cannot
help him; to a Friend, and he is from home, or deceive him. Men of low degree
(says the Psalmist) are vanity, but Men of high degree, they are worse, they
are a lie. And the refore trust not in Princes. But the Lord is always
present, when thou go through the fire, and the water, I will be with thee.
Yea, the Lord will stick to a Kingdom, or to a poor soul, as the Mountains
stick, and grow to the Earth. At my first answer (says St. Paul) all men
forsook me; notwithstanding the Lord stood by me, and streng thned me, and I
was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. The Lord was with Paul at the
Bar, and would not leave him: There is all the reason under Heaven to be
zealous, and resolute for such a God as this is: The only living, Wise,
Omnipotent, faithful God. I might run through all the attributes of God, they
all attest, and confirm this Truth. For the Uses, they will fall into the next
Point which is this.

The heart is then in an Heavenly tune, right key, pleasing and acceptable unto
God, when it is peremptorily resolved to stick to God and his ways,
whatsoever others do, or whasoever come on it.
When it takes up an unconquerable resolution to be for God: when it looks
through, or over all dangers, difficulties, and oppofitions; resolves to make
his way through the Rocks, Fire, Water, Lions: He may lose his body by the
way, but his spirit shall after God. When a Man's spirit stands at that high
note for God, that David's three Worthies did for him, who brake through the
Camp of the Philistims to fetch their King water: So, when the soul will
fetch the Sabbath, and Ordinances of God, from the midst of the greatest
opposers, this is a gracious frame and temper; when the valor of a man's spirit
is for God. How well pleased was God with this frame of spirit in Caleb, with
this pitch and height, Numb. 14.24. But my servant Caleb, he had another
spirit, a resolute, valiant spirit, not a cowardly base, feeble spirit as the
other Spies had. Let us go up at once, and possess it, for we are well able
to overcome, they are bread for us. This resolution was in the three Children,
Dan. 3.16. The King there he dubs a God, creates a Hell, sets up his Cathedral
Music, his Flute and Cornet, Psalteries, nd Sackbuts; gives out his command,
who will not worship his Gods, shall into his hell: but observe with what
resolution the three Children answered: We are not careful to answer thee in
this matter: our God is able, and will deliverus, but if not, know, that we
will not serve thy Gods, nor worship thy golden Image that thou have set up.
Good Subjects for all this; and good manners too, though they tell the King to
his tace they will not, and the King accounts them so, when God opened his
eyes, and he acquits them. We may live to see such days.

The like temper of spirit was in Moses, for the which he has obtained a good
report, and is set down in the golden legion of believers, Heb. 11.27. By
Faith Moses forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King. Add we but one
more o^ Joshua, osh. 14.15. he calls all Israel together, bids them choose whom
they would serve, whether the Gods which their Fathers worshiped on the other
side of the Flood, or the Gods of the Amorites in whose Land they dwelt: But as
for me, and my House (says he) we will serve the Lord. Thus we see this
resolutenesse of spirit for God and his ways, is found in the redeemed of the
Lord, in the brood of Gods travelers.

Now the Reason why it is thus valued and commended of God, is, because it
proceeds from some, or all these causes.

1. From a through, and a full conviction of the soul, that these are the
right ways of God, that the soul does thus resolutely pitch upon. Paul was
thus thoroughly convinced and therefore thus peremptorily resolved for the
Gospel, and wishes the Galathians so to be, Gal. 1.8. Though we, we
ourselves, that have Preached this gospel to you: yet if we should in hope of
preferment, or for fear of suffering for the truth, unsay it again, and
Preach another Gospel: nay, though an Angel from heaven (one that may seem
so to you to be) should come and Preach another Gospel: be so far from
believing it, or questioning the truth of this, as I would have you defy him.

So that the Apostle would not have them pin their Religion upon his sleeve. It
must therefore be a supernatural light, that must thus convince the soul, and
make the ways of God thus unquestionable, the 2 Cor. 1.4, 5. And my Speech,
and my Preaching, was not with the enticeing words of man's wi^edome, I preach
not in the strains of humane eloquence, in filed phrases, and quaint
expressions; which the wisdom of the World thinks the fittest way to win
men to their side, and opinions: but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of
power: that is, he used plainness of Speech, homely expressions, which gods
spirit does accompany with power: to what end did the Apostle this? Verse. 5.
That your faith might not stand in the Wisdom of Men; that is, that you might
not belive this to be the truth because it came in abundance of earthly
Wisdom; for then, if another come with finer words, and more wit, you will
go to him, and forsake this: Or others, Preaching the same Gospel, but not
with the like Worldly wisdom and eloquence, you would not believe it to be
the same. So that you would believe no longer then you are fed with Worldly
wit, and fine words: but that your faith might stand in the power of God: that
is, that you might believe it upon such grounds, upon such a powerful
conviction of the spirit, that all the World should not be able to turn you
from it; a steadfast, unconquerable resolution proceeds from a powerful and
thorough conviction of the truth of God and his ways. That is the first Reason.

2. It proceeds from an apprehension and fear of danger, if a man forsake
those ways of GOD. Fear and danger do excite courage and resolution: when a
man apprehends that the greatest danger is, a falling into the hands of God: as
Joseph, if he had yielded to his Mistress for fear of her anger, had fallen
into the wrath of GOD: How can I do this evil and sin against God? And so
Moses Heb. 11.27. He forsook Egypt, not fearing the Kings displeasure: who
would he then fear? a greater, seeing him who was invinsible; one that could
have made Egypt too hot for him if he had stayed still. The three children
feared a hotter furnace, if they should worship the golden Image. Full to this
purpose was the speech which one uttered when he was before some that threatened
him with prison, fire and faggot, if he would not forsake the truth: who
answered to a friend that stood by, they have not threatened Hell yet. So when a
man apprehends Hell the worst of Prisons, and everlasting destruction the King
of terrors to awaite him, if he forsake GOD and his ways, this will make him
resolute for GOD.

3. It proceeds from hope, hope of gain and preferment makes men bold, puts
courage and resolution into them: hope of preferment has made many a man
resolute, and even past shame in an evil and Idolatrous course: hope of white
sleeves has made many a man bloody his fingers: Well, Gods children they have
hope too, which does exceedingly much strengthen their resolutions: The Crown
of righteousness, the weight of glory, the Kingdom prepared from the
beginning, these were Paul's hopes, these are and were ours: and these bear our
charges in all our sufferings. Fear not Abraham (says GOD) I am thy Buckler,
and thy exceeding great reward: I Will see thee paid, that thou shall be no
looser: and now Abraham would lackey it at the stirrup, and go from his
Fathers house whether GOD would have him. So when a man apprehends that God
carries the purse, and that the keys of preferment hangs at his girdle, and he
can trust God for all, this will make him valiant and resolute for the ways of
God.

4. It proceeds from Love: love to the party for whom we are thus resolute; and
therefore it must needs please God. Love looks through all dangers, and
difficulties; weakens all opposition: strengthens it self; makes it apprehend
any thing feasible: your resolution will tell you what you are, and whom you
love, Ruth 1.14. There are two pretend love, but Orpha is soon taken off, when
Naomi tells her, that she had no preferment for her: yet see the resolution of
Ruth, ver. 16. Entreat me not to leave thee: where thou go, I will go:
where thou lodgest, I will lodge, nothing shall part thee and me but death.
Here Is love, and here was resolution.

5. And lastly, It proceeds from Experience: the soul has tasted of the
sweetness, comfort, peace, and joy of the ways of God, and therefore is it so
resolute for them, Psalm. 119.103. How sweet are thy words unto my taste, yea
sweeter than honey to my mouth. And see what follows upon this, v. 106. I have
sworn and I will perform it: that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.

The soul cleaves to that, that bids most pleasure: for pleasure is the food
of the soul: the body can as well live without food, as the soul can without
pleasure: when the soul has tasted how transcendently sweet the ways of God
are; what sweet hopes; what blessed peace; what joy unspeakable and glorious
the word and ways of God do breed in the soul: it pitches it is tent, sets up
it is rest, there it will dwell, and with them it will remove. The Godless
Courtiers and Flatterers without all question, thought Daniell to be a fool;
That he would hazard all his Court-preferment, and his life too: but he would
be praying, and he must have his window opened too. So many think those to be
far from wisdom, that do too far engage themselves in the cause of God:
if you do not hear so, I am sure they do in the Country: for of late we have
heard them thus say: what, you must be running to Sermons, though the Court
catch you: and you will not bow down to the name of Jesus, though you be
undone. But we may give you that Answer, that was given for the Martyrs in
the Primitive Church: Videtis punctiones, sed non unctiones: they then, and so
you now can see their smart and sufferings, but not their refreshings: the
peace, love, and joy, unspeakable comfort which the Saints of God then, and now
have met withal in these ways of God. You which power out your selves in
Hawks and Hounds, and other pastimes: and think that the Saints of God do
live a mopish life, and their souls dwell in too narrow a lane: yet could you
but meet with those heates of heart, and hints of love and mercy, that they
meet withal from their God; you would be ready, not only to do, but to
suffer with them. He that has once tasted of the savor of Christ's ointments
will never leave him. We might give you more of these Reasons, but these may
suffice.

Jer. 9.3. They are not valiant for the truth upon Earth. How many amongst us
are Laodiceans, lukewarm: neither through Protestants, nor rank Papists?
Eliah never lived in a more halting age than we do: men stand watching which
side will prevayle; and do determine to close and comply with that: they will
be wiser then to suffer for Christ; be sure to save one stake, and to sleep
in a whole skin: they were for the old Elsabeth ways; and when the Popish
language of Priests and Altars, and the superstitious bowings and gestures
were brought in under a pretense of Authority; they could then tune their
tongues, and soon learn their postures: and now Authority discountenances
them, they can forbear: and if times should turn head again, they would do
as they did. So that we may complain of this time, as they did of Neroes: that
the World had lost his Conscience, it was grown so highly wicked. Men make now
no conscience of things in Religion: their fear toward God is taught them by
the precepts of men: they willingly follow the Commandment, whether it be for
or against God. Inconstancy in any thing is naught, but worst of all in
Religion.



How many, and how weighty are the Motives I might use to persuade you to this:
I know that many of you have stronger in your own bosoms, and breasts: yet
the Ordinance of God being powerful, give me leave to use these:

First, Consider, that your God, and your Religion are the best things you
have; things of the highest nature, of the greatest consequence, of the nearest
concernment: things above us, and not under us: things that must dispose of us,
and we must not dispose of them: we had better lose all, then lose our God,
and his Truth. If we lose Father, Mother, House, Land, Life, and all for God
and his Gospel: We shall soon find better: ye know who has promised it,
if you believe not him, you will not me: we cannot be losers but by flying:
Religion is worthy of all a man's courage: where can we lay it out better? nay,
so well? It is the errand that you are met about at this time: and therefore I
praylook to it. Nay, it is the errand that you are come for into the World, to
find out the true God and the true Religion, Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord
stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old path, where is the good
way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest to your souls. It is the
business of a man's life, to find out the true God, and the true Religion. Nay,
this is your wisdom: wisdom consists in finding out truths: and the
greatest wisdom in finding out the most rare, pleasant, and profitable
truths. Now Religion is a mystery: all her ways are pleasantness, and all her
paths are peace. And what would it profit a man to win the whole world, and
loose his own soul: a man is sure to loose it in a false Religion, and save
it in a true. Nay, this is your blessedness, Matthew. 13.16. Blessed are your
eyes, for they see; and your ears for they hear: what was it that made them
thus blessed, but seeing Christ in the flesh, and hearing the Gospel? Religion
is an eternal good, and does a man good for ever, when this life is ended.

Nay, this is your Honor, and take it from me: you shall not excel, except
you be resolute for your God, and for your Religion. The Bereans were Noble in
searching out the truth of Religion. And the Elders obtained a good report,
Heb. 11.2. and honorable Name with God, and his Church, by standing for his
truth unto the death. And it is the most dishonorable thing in the World for a
man to forsake his God, and to fly from his Religion. It is a shame for a boy
to run from his Master: worse for a wife to run away from her Husband: but
the greatest of all, for a man to run away from his God. Oh! quit your selves
like men: contend earnestly for the faith, let not the ruin of Religion be in
your hands: whatsoever we leave our Children, let us to the utmost endeavor to
leave the true God, and the true Religion.

2. Consider this: That you have resolution and courage, and why may not God
have it, and his Cause? God has the most right to it, and to all that you can
lose in this quarrel, as your valor and courage comes from God, so, why may
it not be for God? All waters fall into the Sea from whence they come, why not
this? Can you be stiff and resolute for the world, and worldly things; not
lose a foot of Land, nor a Privilege, nor custom: and have you no spirit for
God? shall men stand upon their punctilioes, and show their mettle for every
toy: draw their Swords for the Wall when it is none of theirs? And shall we
like tame fools, suffer every one to wipe our noses of our God, and of our
Religion? We shall find some of the Saints of God in the Scripture, that were
of meek and of calm spirits, but only in the Cause of their God: As Moses the
meekest man upon the earth, but when he saw the golden Calfe, he breaks the
Tables, which were the workmanship and the writings of God. And see what he
does more, in the 32. Exodus 27. Put every man his sword by his side, and go in
and out from Gate to Gate throughout the Camp, and slay every man his Brother,
and every man his Companion, and every man his Neighbor. Is this your meek
man? that fights even up to the ears in blood? but this was the Cause of God.
And so the three Children, all the courage and resolution we read of them, was
for their God: Let not a contrary spirit be found in us: resolute, stiff and
peremptory for every thing; but for God and his Cause.

3. Consider, That all men are resolute for their God, and for their Religion:
for all Nations will walk every one in the name of his God. It Is natural for
men. How resolute are Papists and Mahumetans for their Gods, though of dirt,
deaf and blind, neither able to hear, nor to help them in their distresses,
and shall we be cold, and careless for our living God? Ier. 2.10. Pass over
the Isles of Chittim, and send, and see, and send unto Kedar, and consider
diligently, and see if there be such a thing, why, what is this? Has a Nation
changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods? Look about where you please, search
the world and see if you can see such inconstancy and impiety: is there any
Nation that has changed their God they have taken up, although they be no Gods
at all? Be astonished, O Heavens! here is a wonder to make the Sun to blush: My
people have done this; well, what follows? verse. 14. Is Israel a Servant? Is
he a home borne slave? What Is become of Isreal's spirit? Is he borne to
vassallage, and destined to slavery? If he had any courage in him, he would
show it for his God. Oh! let the resolutenesse of those that worship stocks and
stones, shame us that we have so little spirit for the living God.

4. God is and has been resolute for you, and for all his Elect, his good will
was set for you in the beginning, he then determined your good, and nothing
could change him: He determines Salvation for his Elect, but they sin and
make themselves incapable of it: but God will have them to it, and will break
through all difficulties and dangers. Jesus Christ breaks through Death and
Hell, and meets the wrath of God in the open field to redeem his people Esai.
9.7. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall do this: God is set upon it, and he
will fetch them out of the hands of all their adversaries. Zeal is the height
of Resolution, and is one of the pieces of Gods Armor, with which he clothes
himself, when he fights for his Church, Esai. 59.17. And he put on
righteousness as a breast plate, and an helmet of Salvation upon his head, and
put on the Garment of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as with
a Cloak. With what stedfastnes and immovable resolution did our Savior Christ
go through the work of our Redemption: when Peter would have called him off;
he calls him Devil for his pains: And when set about bringing of his people
out of Egypt, he tramples all difficulties under his feet, He drove as under
the Nations: the everlasting Mountains were scattered, and the perpetual
hills did bow, Hab. 3.6. He has a will for his people: it is very fit then,
that they should have a will for him, Psalm. 68.22. I will bring again from
Bashan. I will bring my people again from the depths of the Sea. Be you
resolute for God for he is for you.

5 The Lord is able, and will either deliver you from, or carry you through the
danger. That made the three Children so resolute for God: our God is able, and
he will. If we served a God of dirt, that could neither hear us, see our
misery, nor help us, we might forsake him, and his Cause. But when he is
omniscient, omnipotent, and omni-provident: One, who as he is good, so he does
good: as he is powerful, so he gives power and strength to the weak, why
should we then forsake him? It is our own fault, if we have not power either to
escape the danger, or be carried through it. There is power in Heaven, and we
may have it for asking, Esai. 58.8, 9. The glory of the Lord shall be thy
rereward, then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and
he shall say here I am. What is it that is not in the power of God to give?

I Will shut up all, desiring you but to consider that place in the 6. Ioh. Our
Savior in the beginning of the Chapter, preached a Doctrine about eating of
his flesh, and drinking of his blood, which carnal hearts could not conceive
of, nor digest: Whereupon many of his Disciples, (as you have it, v. 66.) went
back and walked no more with him. So in these days there are many truths a
foot, which will not down with men of carnal and corrupt minds: Therefore
they have forsaken Christ and his Cause. Our Savior looking upon the twelve,
said, v. 67. Will you also go away? give me leave to ask the same Question of
you: Will you also forsake Christ and his Cause, and seek great things for
your selves, with the ruin of the Gospel and Kingdom? Let your Answer be
that which Peter in the name of all the rest, gave, v. 68, 69. Lord, to whom
shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life: and we believe and are
sure, that thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.

I am persuaded that many of you do believe, and are sure that these are the
true and righteous ways of God, and do lead to eternal life, resolve
therefore to live with them, and in them, and to dye for them.

FINIS.

