PETERS'S RESURRECTION, By way of DIALOGVE Between Him and a Merchant:
OCCASIONED Upon the Publishing a pretended Sermon at his Funeral; wherein is
affirmed those sayings of Machiavel.

Machiavel Lib. 3. Cap. 2. Verse. 6. All men were born to play their Game.

Lib. 5. Cap. 8. Verse. 12. The whole world is but a Cheat.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

PETER'S RESURRECTION.
Peter's. FRIEND?

(Strikes the Merchant on the shoulder.)
Merchant. Thou art mistaken, I am no friend of thine; get thee to those of thy
Congregation, thy infernal friends.


Pet. Do not know me?


Merch. I think I have seen a thing like thee, when it lived; a good Witty
Fellow, and a Holder forth.


Pet. I am Hugh Peter's.


Merch. Thou have had many Hues, but this is the worst Hue that ever I saw thee
in.


Pet. Prithee be ingenuous, what causes this distance?


Merch. I know thou ever had a cloven Tongue, have thou no cloven Feet? ar't
a man, flesh, blood and bone, that we may drink, coverse, and be familiar?


Pet. Do doubt it? give me thy hand.


Merch. Hold there, we are not so familiar yer; lead on to the Ship, and we will
dispute further.


Pet. Boy, a Room, and some Wine, presently?


Boy. What Wine do you drink Gentlemen?


Pet. What Wine do we drink? why goodman Cockscomb, you see we have none to
drink.


Boy. But what wine have you a mind to drink?


Pet. I, now thou say something; why --


Merch. No matter what, so it be the coolest in the Celler, for this Gentleman
came from a hot place lately.


Boy. A glass of White? you shall Gentlemen.


Pet. But I say I will not Sirrah, bring a glass of Sack.


Merch. That Is best indeed for one overheated; it is the Foot-boyes Physic.


Pet. And now, and now your meaning?


Pet. That Is no strange thing, it is not the first time I have been dead, nor
the last time I shall go to Hell, I have another journey to make thither yet.


Merch. I hope thou wilt go alone, and bid a Pox on thy company.


Pet. If I go without thee I shall miss my way; the last time I went thither, I
was accompanied with all sorts and kinds of Merchants, especially the Turkey.


Merch. Thou know the old saying (Hugh) the Turk and the Devil are in
continual league; I hope you had no Maligo Merchants with you?


Pet. Why, that then?


Merch. I should think the worse of their Wine as long as I lived after.


Pet. Is that all? what is this to our coming hither? prithee either draw the
manner of thy amazement to a conclusion, or ply thy drinking, for thou know
that Time and Tide, etc. and I have business.


Merch. I have bestowed a Groat upon thee Hugh.


Pet. Would all the Merchants in Europe would do the like. But how upon me?


Merch. Thy funeral Sermon Hugh, drawn as thou see it, with sable lines.

Shows it him.
Pet. Has the fellow spoke well of me? I hope I have escaped that curse of
being spoke well on.


Merch. Well Hugh, when thou do take an occasion to die once in earnest, as
thou have died like a Red-bullion many a time in jest, I wish thou may never
be better spoken of.


Pet, I fear the fellow has done me wrong; I prithee hand it hither.


Merch. Wrong! no, he has done thee right, as much right as heart could wish,
for thou know, Hugh, he that has an ill name, is half hanged.


Pet. No matter for Report, so I escape the thing; I Will lose a finger to save a
hand at any time; would not you do the like?


Merch. What I would do is not, but what you have done is the question; and
here he has displayed you in your own colors.

Gives him the Book.
Pet. If he prove a witty knave I shall love him, and fight under his --
What Is here, Peter's his Pattern, or the path way to worldly happiness? -- I see
Fools will be meddling.


Merch. Nay, nay; no fool, no fool, there is no fool like the old fool, Hugh;
read and be thankful, it cost thee nothing, spend thy judgment upon it.


Pet. That Is more than it is worth; however to satisfy thee I will take a
slight survey of some part of it.

Reads it to himself.
Merch. Nay, nay, read out Hugh, be not ashamed of thy, own Picture; it is as
like thee --


Pet. As Chalk is to Cheese, or Cheese to Onions; truly the Man means well, and
offers fair, but I doubt would lose his Bets if a man should take him up; he
can be no good Bowler that holds his Bias the wrong way; besides, his often
rubs will make him fall short of the Jack, if he aims at it.


Merch. No Sir, no, it is not Presbyters Jack, but Peter's his Iackquet that he
drives at, and therefore smother not the Gentleman's conceit, but read on
without wincing or kicking; if thou be a Wir, show thy self a friend to Wit.


Pet. I can guess by the foot of Hercules, the whole proportion of his Body,
and therefore will pocket up this Pamphlet as thy gift, and at another time
will tell thee my opinion on it.


Merch. And that will be far remote from the desert of the Gentleman, or my
desire, and so we will break off.


Pet. Nay hold, now we are in, lets be in for Ale and Cakes as the saying is,
I Will tell thee what.


Merch. What will thou te^l me? some stale Tale of thy journey to Hell, and thy
entertainment there.


Pet. No such matter, it is wide of my thoughts; you see (Friend) that several
things are daily cast upon me many leagues from my knowledge or apprehension,
so that I am become the Town talk; Now since we, are met, and Friends, I Will turn
my inside outward, that as, I will expose the very secrets of my Soul to thee.


Merch. No, Hugh, thou will not tell me how many times with the Butchers wife,
nor --


Pet. Prithee hold, thou art a wicked Wit, and talk thou know nor what,
those are but the off-falls of Wit that cast that upon me, and stinck worse
than the Butchers excrements they prate on.


Merch. Prithee leave off thy railing, thou art not now in the Pulpit, keep it
to these out thy Wit next Sunday, I shall be gone if thou have nothing else to
say forthy self.


Pet. The fellow that made this book.


Merch. That Book sticks in thy stomach still, I prithee out with it, and speak
thy last.


Pet. Not so neither; I say the Fellow that made this Book.


Merch. That Fellow has no Fellow, put not thy Wit on the Tenters good Hugh,
but let me be gone, I sweat to see thee on the rack, if thou have left thy Wit
in thy other hose, tell me so, and I am satisfied, I know thou have travailed
far, St. Albanes is a place remore, either come to the point or nothing Hugh.


Pet. I am just upon it; this Fellow as I said has Gusman ad unguem, at his
fingers ends.


Merch. What then Hugh, what then?


Pet. He is much mistaken in me, that wrote the Book.


Merch. Again the Book!


Pet. For Gusman was an Author I seldom converst with, yet I very much approve
his saying, Let us make the best use of our time, as the principal point to my
ensuing discourse.


Merch. Would I could here it once.


Pet. Have Patience and you shall; I cannot but commend the Gentleman who ever
he was, that made use of this saying for his Text, for there is no man so
simple or void of reason, not to make use of his time, he that neglects it may
dye a beggar, and be registered among Gusmans Fools.


Merch. Now thou come pretty near to the business, and I will hear thee,
with much sorrow that thou have not a greater Auditory; proceed.


Pet. Make hay while the Sun shines, take opportunity by the foretop, slip no
occasion offered that may bring you in profit; These are your City Maxims, the
very Basis upon which you all ground the fabric of your Earthly hopes and
happiness, and is justifiable, why then should I be calumniated by a Company of
Earthworms, as greedy after worldly gain as the most covetous You must know
there are Jews in England.
Jew Christendom.


Merch. Now Hugh you out run the Cunstable, but will be overtaken in time, and
your reason set in the stocks, unless you keep closer to your Text, and hold
forth your meaning in plainer terms.


Pet. Well then I shall come home to your own doors in plain terms, and throw
the dirt in your own faces, that your Engines have endeavored to throw in mine.


Merch. That has been to cool the leaprous Itch of thy Zeal, and make thee
become a cleanly Christian.


Pet. W either does thy wit run?


Merch. Not a Wool-gathering Hugh, but to send Hue and Cry after thine.


Pet. Well, I shall now go on.


Merch. I, do good Hugh, make haste to the end, for I am wearied with the
beginning.


Pet. I was again thinking upon the saying of Gusman, and the ingenuity of the
person that quotes him, Let us make use of our times, etc. the which has very
pertinently put me in mind of another saying in Machaivel, corespondent apted
and agreeable to it lib. 3. cap. 2. verse. 6. Where he says, All men were born
to play their Game; and in another place, The whole world is but a Cheat.


Merch. How will you make that out Hugh?


Pet. Very well Merchant, I shall come to you anon; but the first thing I shall
insist upon is this, All Men were born to play their Game; now as by Nature we
are all supposed to become Gamesters, we ought to look about us, and every Man
to play his Cards as well as he can, to which end we ought to understand the
variety of Games; I shall give you a brief account of some of them; for the
present there is Put, --


Merch. That Is the Parsons Game.


Pet. Gleek, Best, Picket, Primero, Primavisti, the poor Scholars Game when he
is Cloak-less, Leasing-lodam, the Cavaliers Game, Wyning Loadam, Hewsons Game,
Newcut, the Presbyters Game, Cribbidge, the Usurers Game, One and thirty, the
Parliaments Game; then there is, Chess, Passage, Noddy, Hazard, which are
distinguished thus; Chess, the States-Mans Game, Passage, the Merchants Game,
--


Merch. It must be the Pippin-Merchant then.


Pet. Noddy, is the Aldermans Game, and Hazard the Soldiers Game.


Merch. Nay, now you are out Hugh, for most properly Hazard is the Merchants
Game.


Pet. It is any man's Game that has a mind to it, you know the old saying, --


Merch. Thou art made up of nothing, but old sayings like a Botchers breeches
of old shreds.


Pet. Thou have a tongue, and so has a Cal^e that will be incessantly bleating,
(the explanation and use of every which Game being very necessary, I shall at
another time more fully set forth in every particular) and so to the matter I
was upon concerning the Game Hazard, a Learned Author makes use of these
words, speaking to a friend of his, Try, it is but a Hazard, in which words are
comprehended, timely advice, good counsel and encouragement; Lazarillo de
Tormes has it, I will run the hazard; the wise and reverend Buscon has the
like, when he speaks of his intention to Court the Lady; these words, I will
run the hazard, plainly demonstrates both Resolution and Courage: And another
Author says, and very well, I have but a life to lose, and I Will venture it,
that is, I will Hazard it, --


Merch. Hold Hugh, that Author was hanged last Sessions.


Pet. Why, then he played his Game ill, and I Will quote him no more, however the
words hold, I Will run the Hazard on it, that is, he had but a life to lose, and
he adventured it; and some have this saying, I Will hazard a hangi g, but I Will
have my ends.


Merch. That will be thy end if thou mend'st not thy manners; what a stir do
thou keep about this Hazard, I think thou art turned Buzard.


Pet. It Is an old saying, Tell a Tale to a Mare and she will let a -- I tell thee,
though we are all born to play our Game, we cannot all be Winners, some must be
losers, lucks all, as the saying is, he plays well, but his lucks naught, yet
we must try, it is but a Hazard, happy be lucky, And now the words happy be
lucky, put me in mind of a Story, or rather a Tale.


Merch. What is it of Tom Thumb, John Dory, Robin Hood, or a Tale of a Tub
that has no bottom to it.


Pet. Merchant I shall wind up mine, though I am none of the weavers Company;
There was a poor, but motherly woman.


Merch. All thy dealing is in women, and this being motherly, makes me suspect
she bore thee a Bastard.


Pet. There Is no heed to be given to thy words, thy tongue's no slander; this
poor creature I say begged of a Gentleman a penny.


Merch. With the Barn, or Child at her Back.


Pet. No Merchant, with good words in her mouth.


Merch. Did they ever come out? if they did, it is more than ever come out of
thine since I knew thee.


Pet. Thou art possessed I think with the Spirit of Contradiction, prithee hold
thy Clack; The Gentleman wishfully* looking upon her.


Merch. With his Eyes or is Nose.


Pet. His Nose had not taken a journey from his face, Merchant; says he, I
wonder woman, you that have so motherly like a Countenance should be so idle to
beg, can you find no other way to live by, no an't shall please you quoth she I
am very poor, a widow, and have many Children.


Merch. I thought 'twould come to that, of thy own begetting I warrant thee,
some Truckle that kept thee above ground upon a March.


Pet. Thy tongue beats a continual March in my ears, Merchant either hear my
Tale, or kiss my --


Merch. With a Cart whip, I, and spare not, it is not the first time thou have
deserved it.


Pet. If every man had his desert, what would become of thee, but i will mind thee
no more, and so to my Tale; quoth the Gentlemen thou seem to be a grave
Matron, a woman of years,


Merch. 'Twill be ten before this Tale has an end, hark you Hugh did he give
her any thing or no.


Pet. Yes Merchant he gave her brotherly advice, told her there were many she
Doctors, or Mountebanks in the Country.


Merch. And thou have been a Pulpit Mountebank almost ever since thy head was
no bigger than a Crab.


Pet. Thy words are somewhat sower, but I shall not give over for all that.


Merch. If thou do, thou have lost thy wanted impudence.


Pet. I have you in my eye Merchant, and shall pierce you anon, Now says the
Gentleman, take my counsel, I will give thee a Receipt, which with these words
Hab Nab, Luck's all, with a stroke upon the head, and a blessing or two
following, will cure all diseases, with For anter I, For anter no. words of
power and efficacy, administer it inward or outward, it will do no more harm,
than cream will do a Cat; Bless your worship quoth she, and so they parted. It
happened not long after, the same Gentleman being at dinner, had unfortunately
a fish-bone stuck cross his Throat, which very much troubled him, and sending
up and down the Country for help, many she Mountebanks came, but none could
ease him, at last quoth the Man of the House, there is a woman not far off
has done a great many excellent cures, and if you please I shall send for her;
upon which she came, who laying her hand upon the head of the Patient with a
blessing or two cries out for For anter I, For anter no, Hab Nab the word, and
luck's all, at which the Gentleman remembering the words he had taught her,
burst out into a such a laughter, that the bone broke in his throat, he eased
and cured, and she famous many years after, and so I say we must try, and not
happy be lucky; and not like one of Guzmans fools stand staring about with
finger in mouth, while another that minds his Game pick's his pocket; he must
be vigilant as well as venturous, he must employ his Talent be what it will to
his best advantage.


Merch. As thou have done the Talent of thy Tongue an hour at least to no
purpose, is thy glass out yet?


Pet. I say we must venture our small Talent, that is, bestir our selves in the
affairs of this world, run the hazard of our Fortunes, and not sit still like
Sotts, expecting help from the Clouds, because of that saying, When the Sky
falls we shall have Larks, when you know there is another saying, While the
Grass grows the Steed starves.

He must be Madman or a Fool at least,
That starves himself with hoping for a Feast.
As a worthy Author has it; yet you know there is another saying, If it were
not for hope the heart would break; and again, He that is without hope, is
without comfort; therefore we must venture, and hope the best; we must venture,
let it be what it will: a Cat, a Dog, or any living Pig, as the saying is;
again, nothing venture, nothing have. Now it is to be noted that there is no
man so ill befriended by the world that he has nothing to venture, or more
properly to hazard; Whittington had his Cat and became Lord Mayor of your City;
Hewson old Shoes, and is become the Lord knows what; Pride his Slings and
Leather Jackquet; Barkstead his Thimbles.


Merch. And thou thy Conscience.


Pet. Thy Tongue's out of tune, would thou have me venture that I never had?
My Noble Patron whose memory is dear and precious to me, hazarding but one
small spot of Land, won three Kingdoms.


Merch. I, Hugh, but I have heard your Patron, as you call him, was but a foul
Gamester, and so it thrived with him, for what he so craftily got, his sons
have as simply lost.


Pet. But for all that the Man han't his Mare again; the truth on it is, the
sons were not so well skilled at Hazard as their father, and so fell to Put,
which they being forced to, were out, and lost all; but however, as I told you,
every one plays his Game; now let it be what it will, he Plays best that
VVins, let it be by fair Play, or by fowl, or as the saying is, by Hook or by
Crook, be it his Right, be it his wrong; And so you see Merchant that I have
made it out, all men were born to play their Game; such as VVin are Machiavels
Disciples, persons endowed with subtlety, and foresight; and such as lose are
none but Guzmans fools, that stand blowing their fingers while they lose their
part of their broth; for, it is better to be a rich Knave, then a poor Fool.


Merch. I commend thee Hugh, thou speak well for thy self, but how do thou
prove that the whole World is a Cheat?


Pet. That follows by consequence, and I have partly set it forth before, if
you did apprehend me, there is no man that goes to play, or game, but hopes he
shall win; now the resolute man must and wish win, what he cannot get by fair,
he will by foul play, what low Fullam cannot do, high Fullam must, Maxwell to
his Wife, Lib. 1. Chap. 2. Verse 4. the excellent use of which two Skelliton
instruments, are dexteriously set forth by a learned and judicious Author, read
Scarborough upon Maxwel and his Wife, and you may also cast your eye upon
Quarles that quotes both Scarborough and Maxwell, and others that Comment upon
them all; I could muster almost an Army of known Authors, that will justify
that there rests such a subtle faculty in those blessed bare bones, that once
thrown out of a man's hand with Alacrity, they shall out run, that is, cheat
both City and Country; Now I confess there are sundry other instruments, in
another way, according to their several conditions and qualities, that infer
and promote the Worshipful Trade of cheating besides Costermongers and Canters,
as in down right terms, for all thou art my friend, thou art no better than a
cheat.


Merch. How, a Cheat? -- Boy, fetch me a Sergeant, -- I will have you know I
live by my Reputation; I Will make you make your words good.


Pet. That Is easily done, Tell me, and be clear, if thou can bona-fide, what
Citizens, Merchant, or Tradesman, do thou know unacquainted, or rather not
inspired with these four Gifts.

Lying, Cozening,
Covetousness, and Hypocrisy.
Especially the two first, those inseparable Companions Lying and Cozening;
lying is as necessary as breath to your well-being; let a man come to any of
your Houses, Cellars, or Shops, to barter for any commodities whatsoever, from
the Merchant to the Mercer, from the Mercer to the Draper, etc. and bid what in
reason it is conceived to be worth, straight way you enter into Dialogue with
the Devil, and he teaches you what to say, I protest Sir you do not bid me
the rate or price it cost me; or indeed you are far wide of the price; or I
protest, if one Christian may believe another, (when the Devil a Christian is
amongst you) I would it were in my heart if it cost me so, or I paid so for it:
and it is true, for it commonly falls out he bids you more, and having bought
it, and the deceit by some other being discovered) for it is certain you cannot
give one another a good word) all the revenge the deceived party has is to cry
out, what a base Lying Couzening Knave was this; Nay I have known some of you
that have protested they could not thrive, the times were so bad, unless they
stretch out an oath now and then, and for Lying it stood as the fore man of
their Shop to draw in Custom. If a young heir (in expectation) come to Town,
and lights into ill company, (as that he cannot escape) there are so many lie
in Ambuscade to catch him up for a Waif or Stray, as belonging to the Lordships
or Manors of Dog-yard, Sodam. Cross-lane or Duck-lane,


Merch. Where thou have baited the Whore of Babylon even to death many a time.


Peter's. No Merchant, I leave that to your Cashieres, who are bound to cheat
you as well as you do others: and this young heir, as I was saying, through his
excess and prodigality in such company, comes to want money, and is to seek
for it, straight, one of your Engines, that is, his mad Companions, starts up,
I have a friend, says he, a Merchant, Mercer, Draper, Goldsmith, or Jeweller,
(according as the Gang are acquainted) that shall furnish thee with such
Commodities shall bring in money boy, it is but giving a Bond under thy hand to
pay so much when thy father dies, and when etc. hang it, it is nothing: which
commodities never yield the third part of what they are to pay for them; let
any ask you how you can have the conscience to do such ill acts, you answer, if
they pay me, I cheat them, but if they never pay me they cheat me. But
sometimes Bills in Equity are brought against you, after the fools have
recovered their senses, and then you are cozened of your expectation, and in
spite of your teeth must be content to take the bare worth of your commodity,
and you remain Vermin, if not Cheats upon Record. What combinations are daily
held between the Tailor, Drapet and Mercer, the like between the Merchant and
Vintner to cheat us all, and yet you will cry out whore first. I could insist
upon other particulars, but too much of one thing is good for nothing; and so I
end as I begun, Make hey while the Sun shines; it is good advice, every day is
not Sunday; that is, every day is not a Summers day, only this by way of
Parenthesis, and to make up my matter, in answer to the several Cheats, you
have put upon poor Country men, let me ask you what is become of your Charter?
a word to the wise is sufficient, and a fools boult is soon shot; Thus you may
see many things may happen between the Cup and the Lip, and so I conclude, Make
use of your Time; Need makes the old Wife Trot, better late thrive than never,
a little money will serve to pay a small Lays down Reckoning, and so Vale,
Vale. his money.


Merch. Nay Hugh prithee be a good fellow for once, stay and take the other
Glass.


FINIS.

