PHTHONOGPAPHIA(...). SIVE, Accurata Invidiae Delineatio, AD Archetypum
Ovidianum (quibusdam hinc illinc Immutatis and Additis) Met. l. 2. In Qua, G.
Keithus Imaginem suam ad Vivum (ex part) Depictam Contempletur.
INvidiae Ver'tas nigro Squalentia Tabo
Tecta petit: Domus est imis in Vallibus Antri
Abdita, Sole carens, non ulli pervia Vento,
Tristis, and ignavi plenissima Frigoris; and quae
Igne vacet Semper, Caligine semper abundet.
Huc ubi pervenit Ver'tas metuenda Virago,
Constitit ante Domum (neque enim Succedere Tectis
Fas habet) and Posts extrema Cuspide pulsat;
Concussae patuere Fores: Videt intus edentem
Vipereas Carnes, Vitiorum Alimenta suorum,
Invidiam: Visaque Oculos avertit. At Illa
Surgit Humo pigra, semesarumque Relinquit
Corpora Serpentum, passuque incedit inerti.
Ver'tatem ut vidit Formaque Armisque decoram
Ingemuit; Vultumque ima ad Suspiria duxit.
Pallor in Ore sedet; Macies in Corpore toto;
Nusquam recta Acies; livent Rubigine Dentes;
Pectora Fell virent; Lingua est suffusa Veneno;
Risus abest, nisi quem visi movere Dolores;
Nec fruitur Somno, Vigilacibus excita Curis:
Sed videt ingratos, intabescitque videndo,
Successus Very; carpitque and carpitur una;
Suppliciumque suum: Namque Illi frigida Men's est
Criminibus, tacita sudant Praecordia Culpa.
Corripias frustra, frustraa inhibere labores;
Acrior Admonitu est, irritaturque retenta,
Et crescit Rabies, remoraminaque ipsa nocere.
Sic ego Torrentem, qua nil obstabat eunti,
Lenius and Modico Strepitu decurrere vidi:
At quacunque Trabes obstructaque Saxa tenebant,
Spumeus, et Fervens, et ab Objice saevior ibat.
Pectore mill Dolos, Mendacia mill volutat;
Praesentemque necem Fidis intentat Amicis.
Namque Dei est 'temptrix, saevaeque avidissima Caedis,
Et violenta simul; scires e Sanguine natam.
At Brevis iste Furor; reliquis quae Fata pararet,
Succumbet proprio misere laniata Flagello.
PHTHONOGRAPHY: OR, An Accurate Description of Envy, According To the Original
Latin (with some Alteration and Addition) in Ovid's Met. b. 2. Wherein, G.
Keith may see his own Picture drawn (in part) to the Life.
TRVTH unto the Cave of Envy her Course bent,
Furred with black Filth: Within's a deep Descent,
Between two Hills, where no Sun ever shows
His cheerful Face, where no Wind ever blows;
With dismal Sadness filled, and irksome Cold;
Still void of Fire, yet still in Smoke enrolled.
Whither, when Truth, so feared by the Caitiff, came;
She stood before the House, (that Loathsome Frame
She might not enter) and the dark Door she stroke
With her bright Lance, which straight in sunder broke.
There she saw Envy lapping Vipers Blood,
And feeding on their Flesh, her Vices Food;
And having seen her, turned away her Eyes.
The Wretch then slowly from the Ground does rise,
(Her half-devoured Serpent's laid aside)
And forward crawleth with a Lazy Stride.
Viewing Truth's Form so fair, and Arms so bright,
She Groaned, and Sighed at such a Beauteous Sight.
She Is Meager-Bodied; wretched Pale her Hue;
Her Teeth furred over with Rust, her Looks Askew;
Her Heart with Gall, her Tongue with Venom flows;
She only laughs at the Sight of others Woes:
Her ever-waking Cares exile soft Sleep;
She looks on Truth's Success, with Eyes that weep.
She Rends and Tears, and, Tearing others, Bleeds;
Revenging on her self her own black Deeds.
For the Guilt which from unseen Pollution springs,
Cold-Sweating Horror on her Bosom brings.
In vain it is to Reprove her, or Dis-swade;
By Opposition she is more Furious made:
Her Rage increases, when it is withstood;
And then good Counsel does more harm than good.
So have I seen an unstopp'd Torrent glide
With quiet Streams, and scarcely heard to chide:
But when great Trees or Rocks have barred its Course,
'Thath Foamed and Roared with uncontrouled Force.
She many Lies and Falsehoods does invent,
To Persecute the Truth and Innocent.
She God contemns, and's Violent withal;
Her Wolf-like Teeth show her Original.
But Short's her Rage; see, her Revengsul Ire
Exhausts apace; 'Twill sorce her to Expire.
LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1700.


