Double Writing.
THere is invented an Instrument of small bulk and price, easily made, and very
durable, whereby one may in an hours practice, write two Copies of the same
thing at once, with great advantage above the ordinary way, and in a few days
further use thereof, recover the former fairness and swiftness of hand, in
what character soever, and whether in a Book, parchment or paper, the said
writings ought to be made.

The which Instrument shall be discovered unto Contributors, by the first day
of April. 1649. at the furthest, or so soon before, as a competent reward shall
be collected, the which (if men please,) may be done within less then three
months time, for the consideration of five shillings present payment; (both
for the discovery and license to practice the same during the whole fourteen
years term of the Privilege,) besides two shillings and six pence for the
Instrument, from such as desire that the same should be made ready for their
use, by the very time of Publication.

Which price the Inventor is content to accept (to the end that even those who
shall have least need of this invention, may have no reason to complain, nor
have any motive to incur the danger of the penalty allowed by the ordinance,
for using the same without license, as also in consideration, that the said
sum is to be presently paid, until that after discovery, (when men shall by
their own trial and experience be fully satisfied of the commodities of this
faculty,) the Inventor may with more reason expect a larger reward, and more
proportionable to the benefit, which each man may receive by the same;
Wherefore such as please to be partakers thereof, are desired to pay the said
sums either to such as the Inventor has desired to receive them, or to
himself at (...)

An Extract of the Ordinance of Parliament dated 6. Martii. 1647.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament having by several Certificats
from diverse credible men received satisfaction, not only of the feasibility,
but also of the great use of the Invention for Double Writing, lately
discovered by William Petty, Do ordain that the said Inventor shall have the
sole benefit thereof for 14. years, according to the Statute in that behalf
made, either by teaching or otherwise discovering the same, or by the sale of
such Instruments as are requisite to the practice of the said Art, strictly
forbidding unto all persons whatsoever the use or sale of any of the said
Instruments, or practice of Double Writing upon any other Instrument, without
the License of the said Inventor or his Assigns, upon the penalty of one
hundred pounds. And do further ordain that Letters Patent be passed under the
Great Seal to the same purpose.

There is also printed a Declaration concerning Double Writing, whereunto all
men are referred for further satisfaction in the feasibility and facility of
the Art, Time of discovery, price, and all other particulars, and circumstances
relating thereunto, whereunto also is annexed a true Copy of the Ordinance of
Parliament granted unto the Inventor for the sole benefit thereof; And are to
be sold by R. W. at the Star under Saint Peter's Church in Cornehill.


