A Prospective-Glasse FOR GAMESTERS: OR, A short Treatise against Gameing: In
which is contained A plain and perfect manifestation of the inconveniences,
miseries and calamities which the User or Practiser of unlawful Games does
bring upon himself, not only in regard of his mortal body, but also upon his
eternal Soul.

Wherein also these six evil consequences of Gaming are exactly and
pertinently handled, viz.

Drunkenness. Lying. Swearing. Adultery. Poverty. Theevery.
Written at the request of a Gamester, upon his detestation of his former idle
life and practice in this kind.

By JOHN PHILPOT Master in Arts.

Dedicated to the honest and judicious Youngmen and Apprentices of the
honorable City of LONDON.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed for Thomas Bates, at the Maidenhead on Snow-hill, near
Holborne Conduit. 1646.

To the Young Men and Apprentices inhabiting within the City of London.
I Have presumed to dedicate this short Treatise to you, as having by long and
sad experience found, that of all places in this Kingdom, this City,
notwithstanding the great means which has been used by the Magistrates to the
contrary, is yet contaminated by the infamous vice of gaming, whereby many
young men of good education being sent from their parents in several countries
hither to gain a trade or way of living, have by sundry provocations been by
little and little drawn to this vice, which having once used, they have found
so much sweetness in this dulee venenum, that they have not left sucking this
poisonous bait, till they have thereby brought themselves to much poverty,
penury, want and misery, besides the consideration of the unbecommingnesse of
so sensual a vice in such sad and distracted times, wherein the judgments of
God are in an extraordinary manner powered forth upon us; this and other sins,
which this big-bellied monster (as the ensuing Treatise proves) daily produces
and brings into the world, I could not but among the throng of Books (with
which the presses have been a long time oppressed) but expose these few sheets
to the public view, which although it contain not in it matter of News, (a
thing much sought after) yet the subject having not lately been treated of, may
afford new matter to the itching ears of many Athenians, and I doubt not but
will find acceptance with all ingenious Patriots: I will not trouble you any
longer with a tedious Induction, least I make too wide a door for so mall a
structure; but leave it to your perusal, hoping it may afford some benefit to
all honest Youth of the Kingdom in general, and your selves in particular;
with whom I leave my poor endeavors in this kind, and rest.

Your well-wishing Friend, J. P.

A Treatise against Gaming.
IN this discourse concerning gaming, my intent is not to condemn any kind of
lawful recreations, as running, wrestling, shooting, and the like, which as
they are necessarily used for the refreshment of the body, so we find them no
where condemned, in the holy Scripture, that therefore which is the subject
against which I have at this time undertaken to write, is concerning the
unlawful games of Cards, Dice, etc. or any other games which are carried by
fortune or lot, (as we commonly term them) because that notwithstanding they
are forbidden by the Laws of the Kingdom, and particularly in the Statute,
33. H. 8.9. whereby not only the players at unlawful games, but such as
suffer them in their houses are to be imprisoned, till they be bound over to
play no more, yet such is the liberty that many take, that it is daily used to
the mis-spending of precious time, and the undoing of the most precious souls
of many hopeful young men. I have therefore published this Treatise to the
view of the World, which (I hope) may prove as a means to deter some from
this time and soul-destroying vice of gaming, and playing at Cards, Dice, etc.
since it is a vice which the Heathens themselves condemned, even in their
Princes, as Suctonius in the life of Augustus reports, that it was his greatest
blemish, that he was at leisure to play at Dice.

Chilo being sent from the Lacedemonlans to Corinth, upon an Embassage, and
finding the Senators of that City at cards and dice, would perform no part of
his message, saying, he would not so much dis-honour the Lacedaemonians, as that
they should either make or meddle with such persons: were such games infamous
among Heathens, how much more unworthy are they among Christians* that
therefore I may the more clearly anatomize the horridness and danger of these
sins, it would not be amiss to note unto you the great and unspeakable
evils, which are procured thereby, which for method sake I will handle under
these seven heads, which I may fitly term the seven constant Handmaids or
Attendants to unlawful gaming, or if you will the cursed spawne of this base
Harlot, viz.

1. To begin with drunkenness, the roaring boys of these our times, where can
or will they find a fitter place for gaming then at a Tavern, in which place,
whereas they game without wit, so they will drink without measure: They will
be sure, although they empty their purses, by gaming, yet they will fill their
bellies by superfluous bibbing: although they go out of the Tavern lighter by
many a fair pound, yet their heads are so heavy, that they are like to salute
every post they meet withal.

O the horridness of this new-fashioned vice of gameing! which does produce so
hideous a monster as drunkenness.

But there be those in the world, which plead for drunkenness, as Lot for
Zoar, Behold, is it not a little one? Ah, let no man be so foolish, as to plead
for this little great sin of drunkenness, little in our own sights, but great
and abominable in the sight of God. S. Paul exhorts us to the contrary, Rom
13.13. saying, Let us walk honestly, (or as some Translations have it,
decently) as in the day, not in rioting, and drunkenness; why? because
drunkenness is a deed of darkness: Those which are drunk are drunk in the
night, 1. These. 5. Wherefore, except it be avoided, it will bring us unto an
eternal night of grief, horror, and lamentation.

Do but consider with thy self, O drunkard, how much many a poor soul wants
the snuffs, as thou termest them, which are powered on the ground carelessly by
thee.

What can thou tell, but when thou art in thy cups, God in judgment may
strike thee dead? O then in what a case art thou!

A drunken man is incapable of any thing that is good; but fit for all
mischief. Mark what wise. Solomon says, Pro. 20. Wine is a mocker, strong
drink is raging; and whosoever as deceived thereby, is not wise. Again he
says, Pro. 23. Be not amongst wine bibbers: we must not come in a wine-bibbers
company, Solomon commands. Why? Because the drunkard shall come to poverty:
poverty in this world, and in the world to come, except he speedily repent.

O what poverty can be like unto this, to knock at the door, saying, Lord,
Lord, open unto us, Luke 13. and he shall make answer and say, I know not
whence years, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity; there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth, procured by this vice of drunkenness, sprung from the
loins of gaming. Nor do I say, that drunkenness comes alone by gaming, but
that it is Regia via, a high way to it: Wherefore, that we may avoid the one,
let us fly the other, as two venomous Serpents, seeking to sting us unto death.

2. Gaming produces lying; for the world is now grown to such an height of
impiety, that there is no man almost even in very mercenary affairs will fear
(for his own profit) to tell a lie; but with gamesters it is grown a fashion,
followed by every one of them. A lie, that is but a trifle in their account,
shall they loose their money for want of a lie, that were a jest indeed? O but
let them look to it, least they jest away their souls by it: who is the Father
of lies but the Devil? we need to make no doubt, for Christ himself said it,
John 8.

A lying tongue God hates, says Solomon, Prove. 6. and if he hate it, then woe
be unto thee, whosoever thou art, which affectest it; it had better thou never
had been borne. That God is a God of mercy it is most true, but that he is a
God of judgment also is most certain: God will create Adam, after his own
likeness, Genesis 1. and give him dominion over the fish, over the fowls of the
air, over the cattle, over all the earth, and over every creeping thing which
creeps on the earth, and placed him in Eden.

But if Adam break the Commandment of God, if Adam does that which God hates,
then he must be thrust out of Eden, to go forth and till the ground, Genesis 3.

God dealt fairly, kindly, and mercifully, with Israel his chosen people,
until that they did that which he hated, running a whoring after their own
inventions, then did he deliver them over into the hands of their enemies who
carried them away captive.

God loves man so long as man loves God, but when man once begins to do that
which he hates, then God powers forth his violls of wrath. God hates lying,
wherefore that we may shun the effect, which is lying, let us avoid the cause
gaming, for qualis causa, talis effectus, the Logician says, if the cause be
good, it follows that effect, the end must be good; but if the cause be bad,
the effect must be so likewise.

A Lawyer, (an honest one I mean) if the cause be good, by pleading must needs
overthrow his Adversary, and so the effect prove good also, but if bad,
although all his Equivocations and Fallacies, the effect (as I said before)
must needs prove bad: Wherefore that we may not be tainted for Liars, let us
not be Gamsters, For where the dead carkas is, there will the Eagles gather
together; and so, where common Gaming is, there is also common Lying, which
produces Swearing.

Thirdly, by Gaming comes Swearing.

After a company have been Gaming together, those which lose their money when
they can get no redress for their loss, their only ease is, to curse, ban,
and swear at the Cards or Dice: Nay, and before they Have lost their money,
they are not Gamesters; if they have not a fit of Swearing, that such a one
plays not fair, or that the other has won far more then he confesses,
for that they cannot do by Lying, if it be possible, they will by Swearing. I
needed not to have made any distinction at all betwixt Lying and Swearing; for
says an ancient Father. Swearing and Lying go together; and proceeding
further, he says, Therefore they which are used to swearing, do very naught;
and no doubt, but that Gods vengeance hangs over their heads: And certain it
is, that he which is a great Swearer, is also a great Liar.

O consider with thy self O Gamester, and consequently Swearer, how thou
offendest thy good and gracious God, who when thou were in the gulf of misery,
and ready for to descend into the deep abyss of Hell. Joh. 3. He so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

In this says Saint John, 1 Ioh. 4. was manifested the love of God toward us,
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might
live through him.

Nor did he only send his Son to look into the world, and no more, but he
sent him to dye for the world, and to be made a propitiation, for all our sins:
and yet for all this, we with our roaring swearing-Gamsters pluck him from his
throne of glory again if it were possible, by those thundering Oaths.

O was it not enough that he sufferd once such torments, as the best of Orators
wanted words to express the^; but that Adamantine-hearted men, more cruel
then the Jews, for they crucyfied him but once, must by their swearing
crucify him daily. Me thinks I see the hard and flintie rocks to gush out in
tears, and yet their eyes are dry! O hark how savage beasts of the field do
seem in their kind to lament and morn to see their masters more brutish than
themselves! What shall I say? shall I tell these men Saint James admonition?
Iam. 5. Above all things my brethren swear not, neither by heaven, etc. but
let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into condemnation. I
fear their hearts are so hardened they will not regard it, nor all the rout of
this bewitching Vice of Gaming.

O God of thy great mercy open their eyes, and turn their reins, that from the
bottom of their hearts they may repent them of their wickedness, and be
converted from this evil course of Gaming, and consequently from that horrid
sin of swearing, which unto thee I know is most odious and hateful, let their
yea, be yea, and their nay, nay, so shall thy Saints rejoice, and they
hereafter to their comforts, enjoy eternal happiness.

Fourthly, Gaming is the highway to Adultery.

Lust is the Ringleader of mischief, it is a bait of much evil, it is the
Devils veil which he often throws over men's faces to blind them in the way of
igorance, it is that Diabolical sin which never leaves man till such time it
has robbed him of that glorious Diadem of happiness his precious soul and his
only Darling, it is that damned and bewithced sin that makes a separation
between God and man, it is that Grand Champion which causes that soul which was
created glorious and delightsome in the sight of God, become most detestable
and odious in his presence. By this Vice the soul is endangered, and
oftentimes with cruel ulcers and sores the body is infected, and his means by
Harlots suddenly wasted. Woe be to that man which spends his time so vainly,
and consumes his estate so wickedly in this bosome-sin, which is the only and
read jest way to hellish misery and everlasting Beggary, it is the cause their
friends forsake them, and those which are the Children of God to abhor and
detest them. Nay, it makes their neighbors to shun them, and very youth to
deride them and laugh them to scora, their kins folk do despise them, and are
very sh^e and nice to drink with them; it is so odious a Vice, that no good man
regards them, it does cause God to forsake them, and if they do not speedly
repent themselves, and ask God mercy and forgiveness for so damned a crime,
the Devil will soon take them, and who then is there able to deliver them? O
the horridness of this sin of Adultery which is ushered in by the damnable
Vice of Gaming, which is a madness (God he knows) too much embraced by
foolish and voluptuous worldlings, who do, as it were, with ardent desire,
surrender or employ themselves with every part and faculty of their bodies and
mind to this so damnable an Exercise, Gaming I mean. Which exercise is as a
bait or snare to entrap men in, to cozen and cheat them of the estate which
their forefathers with sweatie brows so turmoyled and labored for. It is as
a Thief, robbing and stripping them stark naked of those happy and celestial
cogitation, which perhaps otherwise they would be endued withal, which would
redound to the welfare both of bodies and souls.

This Vice of Gaming, as I said before, oftentimes ushers in the ugly monstrous
sin of Adultery, and puts us in mind of strange women, whose rolling and
glancing eyes allure us to their own wicked intents, of whom wise Solomon
gives us warning: Prove. 6. Lust not after her beauty in thine heart, neither
let her take thee with her eyelids, for by means of a whorish woman man is
brought to a piece of bread, and the Adulteres will hunt for the precious life.
Mark to the 2 chap. 32 verse. and there Solomon says, Who so commits
Adultery with a woman lacks und understanding, he that does it, destroys
his own soul.

Furthermore, Gaming, Esca est malorum, a net of evils, in which oftentimes men
are caught in. Gaming makes men careless of their affairs, and heedlesse of
their estates for the present, and for ever after ruinous. It makes a man, as I
told you before in the last particular, prone to swear and forswear, and in
the eagerness of their play ready to bulk out such oaths, which are ready to
tear the Divine Essence out of his sacred Throne of Glory: But especially,
this vice does Dame Lust attend upon. This mighty darling sin does still wait
on that man's elbow who is given to the vice of Gaming.

A Gamester, discruciatur animo, is troubled and perplexed in his mind; his
eyes are still effeminate, his thoughts are incrused and inflamed after
lascivious and wanton women, which are caterpillars to devour his estate, and
Darling friend his soul. Gaming does often rob man of his silken robe of
honor, and causes him to be cladded with rags of much infamy and disgrace.

Though thou may by this exercise of Gaming flourish in primo juventutis, in
the prime of thy age, and accumulate an estate, the vice being so tempting,
thou may before old days be deceived of thy former estate, and bring upon
thy self the state of beggary, as I shall show anon.

O therefore, let all men as regard prosperity in this world, and eternal
joys in the world to come, forsake this damnable exercise of Gaming, which
hatcheth such a serpentine Egg as Adultery, which that all may, God of his
great mercy grant; and thus I conclude Gaming as it is the highway to Adultery.

Fifthly, Gaming is the highway to beggary.

Gaming is the highway to idleness, and consequently to beggary: For I my
self have known many Tradesmen, and others, which after they have taken a
haunt of Gaming, neither can nor will find the way again to follow their
lawful occupations, but spend the remnant of their lives in sloth; from a
Dice-patron, he becomes an idle person and a sluggard, to whom Solomon thus
speaks, Prove. 6. Go to the Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise,
which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in the summer, and
gathers her food in the harvest: how long will thou sleep, O sluggard? when
will thou arise out of thy sleep? yet a little sleep, etc. By this we may see,
that the ways of Idleness is want and poverty. Again, Solomon says, Prove.
13. The soul of the sluggard (or slothful) desires, and has nothing. And
again, he says, chapter 22. v. 5. The slothful man says, there is a Lion
without, I shall be slain in the streets. No excuse shall be wanting to
maintain his idleness, by which buildings decay, and houses drop down,
Eccles. 10. Idleness says one, Radix omnium malorum est, is the root of all
evil. S. Paul says, Qui non laborat, non comedat, he that laboreth not let
him not eat. After Adam had offended, it was Gods pleasure that he should not
be idle; wherefore he says, Genesis 3. In sudore vultus tui vesceris pa^^ ^ue, in
the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread. And S. Paul says again, Magis
autem laboret ut det indigentibus, let him labor the more, that he may have
wherewithal to help the poor.

But alas! our Idle Gamsters are so far from that, as they will not work to
supply their own wants; what? shall they which but lately had the world in a
string, to have what they would, and do what they would, and command whom they
would, now by any one be commanded? they frown if although a proud heart and a
beggars purse agree not togegether: Content they are to live, although a dogs
life, having hunger and ease. Work! no, they will rather steal, which brings
me to the sixth danger that ensues by Gaming.

Sixthly, Gaming is the high way which leads to theevery: After beggary has
visited a Gamester, he is desperate and prone to all evil, but especially
theevery, although God in the 8. Commandment expressly commands to the
contrary, saying, Thou shall not steal. And where the Commandments of God are
broken, there can be no love to God, For if ye love me, says Christ, keep my
Commandments; as if he had said, It is not enough, to say that you love me,
making only a show of the same, but let me see it done effectually by keeping
my Commandments; to steal and keep Gods Commandments too, we cannot. Of
stealing Gaming is oftentimes a great cause. Does Gaming cause Theevery? O then
fly it like a serpentine Egg of the Devils own hatching.

The Law condemns a Thief in this world, and except God be merciful, he is
condemned also in the world to come. O who now then will not fly Gaming!

Seventhly, and lastly, Gaming leads to eternal damnation (I mean superfluous
Gaming) except the great mercy of God by speedy repentance prevent it not.

Hitherto have I described the Devils new created champions, attending upon
Gaming, and now (by the help of God) briefly, the dangers which hang over the
head, except he shake off this bewitching vice. It must needs be granted by the
precedent propositions, that it is a cause of breaking of Gods Statutes, and
therefore it is flat disobedience, against which are many and great curses
pronounced, Deuteronomy. 28. He which disobeyeth the commandments of God, cursed
shall he be in the City, and cursed shall he be in the field, the Lord shall
make the pestilence to cleave unto him, etc.

But yet the dangers of this world are not comparable to those of the world to
come, which shall happen to the disobedient: Here, they shall be only punished
corporally, there spiritually, except they speedily repent, then shall God blot
out all their wickedness out of his remembrance, which that all may do, not
only Gamesters, but all others; God of his great mercy grant.

FINIS.

