THE TRIUMPHS Of LOVE: CHASTITY: DEATH:
TRANSLATED OUT OF PETRARCH BY Mris ANNA HUME.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. 1644.

To the most excellent Princess, her Highness, the Princess ELISABETH,
Eldest daughter to the King of BOHEMIA.
THat my rude lines durst meet the dazeling rays
Of Majesty, which from your Princely eyes
Would beat the owner back, blame them not, they
Want sense, nor had they wit to bid me say
Thus much in their behalf: else having heard
Y' are merciful, they could not be affeard:
Or doubting some arrest of sudden death
Made haste to be reprived by your breath!
True glory of your sex, whose single name
Protecteth virtue, and commands fame.
Now you have saved them with a look, the rest
Assume like boldness, and desire to taste
Like honor, since they justly think their claim
Better, by virtue of great Petrarchs name:
Whom if they lamely follow it is more grace,
Then to have outgone a meaner Poets pace.
Your milder judgment must the sentence give,
For which they humbly wait to make them live.
The humblest of your Highness servants ANNA HUME.

ANOTHER TO HER HIGHNESS.
I Do not dedicate these to delight
Or profit you, both are the Authors right:
Nor is it that your Highness may protect
My part, it merits not so much respect;
Nor that you may examine and compare,
It less deserves such serious Princely care:
Nor is it gratitude, because y' have been
Pleased to approve some others you have seen:
Since retribution so far below
Proportion, would be worse then still to owe:
Nor vanity, that thus I may have leave
To tell the world the honor I receive,
In that my name has reached your sacred ear:
I hate that empty vice; yet need not fear
The censure, were it just since 't would make proud
The staidest thoughts to be by you allowed.
If any ask me, What is then my end?
It Is to approve my self a real friend
To chaste Lauretta, whom since I have taken
From the dark Cloister, where she did remain
Unmarkt, because unknown, my aim is now
To make her happy, by attending you:
Where she may see her truest worth outgone,
And learn more virtue then she yet has known
The humblest of your Highness servants ANNA HUME.

To the Reader.
REader, I have often been told,
Verse that speak not Love, are cold.
I would gladly please thine ear,
But am loath to buy 't too dear.
And it is easier far to borrow
Lovers tears, then feel their sorrow.
Therefore he has furnished me,
Who had enough to serve all three.
The Triumph of LOVE, Translated out of Petrarch.
CHAP. I.
The Argument.
A vision shows the captived
By mighty Love in triumph led.
IT was the time, when I do sadly pay
My sighs, in tribute to that sweet-sowre-day,
Which first gave being to my tedious woes:
The Sun, now over the Bulls horns proudly goes,
And Phaeton had renewed his wonted race:
When Love, the Season, and my own ill case,
Drew me that solitary place to find,
In which I often unload my charged mind:
There tired with raving thoughts and helpless moan*
Sleep sealed my eyes up, and my senses gone,
My waking fancy spied a shining light,
In which appeared long pain, and short delight.
A mighty General, I then did see,
Like one, who (for some glorious victory)
Should to the Capitol in triumph go:
I (who had not been used to such a show
In this soft age, where we no valor have
But pride) admired his habit, strange and brave,
And having raised mine eyes, which wearied were,
To understand this sight was all my care.
Four snowie steeds a fiery Chariot drew;
There sat the cruel boy; a threatening ewe
His right hand bore, his Quiver arrows held,
Against whose force, no helm or shield prevailed.
Two party-colored wings his shoulders ware;
All naked else; and round about his chair
Were thousand mortals: some in battle tain,
Many were hurt with darts, and many slain.
Glad to learn news I rose, and forward pressed
So far, that I was one amongst the rest;
As if I had been killed with loving pain
Before my time; and looking through the train
Of this teare-thirsty King, I would have spied
Some of my old acquaintance, but descri'd
No face I knew: If any such there were,
They were transformed with prison, death and care.
At last one Ghost, less sad than the others, came,
Who near approaching, called me by my name,
And said: This comes of Love: What may you be,
(I answered, wondering much) that thus know me?
For I remember not to have seen your face.
He thus replied: It is the duskie place
That dull's thy sight, and this hard yoke I bear:
Else I a Thuscan am; thy friend, and dear
To thy remembrance: his wonted phrase
And voice did then discover what he was.
So we retired aside, and left the throng,
When thus he spoke; I have expected long
To see you here with us; your face did seem
To threaten you no less. I do esteem
Your prophesies; but I have seen what care
Attends a Lovers life; and must beware.
Yet have I often been beaten in the field,
And sometimes hurt, said I, but scorned to yield.
He smiled and said: Alas! thou do not see,
(My son) how great a flame's prepared for thee.
I knew not then what by his words he meant;
But since I find it by the dire event:
And in my memory it is fixed so fast,
That marble gravings cannot firmer last.
Mean while my forward youth did thus enquire:
What may these people be? I much desire
To know their names, pray, give me leave to ask.
I think ere long, 'twill be a needless task
(Replied my friend) thou shall be of the train,
And know them all; this captivating chain
Thy neck must bear, (though thou do little fear)
And sooner change thy comely form and hair,
Then be unfettered from the cruel tie,
How ere thou struggle for thy liberty;
Yet to fulfill thy wish, I will relate
What I have learned. The first that keeps such state,
By whom, our lives and freedoms we forgo,
The world has called him Love; and he (you know
But shall know better when he comes to be
A Lord to you, as now he is to me)
Is in his childhood mild, fierce in his age;
It Is best believed of those that feel his rage.
The truth of this thou in thy self shall find,
I warn thee now, pray keep it in thy mind.
Of idle looseness, he is often the child;
With pleasant fancies nourisht, and is styled
Or made a God by vain and foolish men:
And for a recompense, some meet their bane:
Others, a harder slavery must endure,
Than many thousand chains and bolts procure.
That other gallant Lord, is conqueror
Of conquering Rome, led captive by the fair
Egyptian Queen, with her persuasive Art,
Who in his honors claims the greatest part:
For binding the worlds victor with her charms,
His Trophies are all hers by right of arms.
The next is his adoptive son, whose love
May seem more just, but does no better prove:
For though he did his loved Livia wed,
She was seduced from her husbands bed.
Nero is third, disdainful, wicked, fierce*
And yet a woman found a way to pierce
His angry soul. Behold Marcus the grave
Wise Emperor is fair Faustina's slave:
These two are tyrants: Dionysius,
And Alexander, both suspicious,
And yet both loved: the last a just reward
Found of his causeless fear. I know y' have heard
Of him, who for Creusa on the rock
Antandrus mourned so long; whose-warlike stroke
At once, revenged his friend, and won his love:
And of the youth whom Phedra could not move
TO abuse his fathers bed; he left the place,
And by his virtue lost his life (for base
Unworthy loves to rage do quickly change)
It killed her too; perhaps in just revenge
Of wronged Theseus, slain Hyppolito,
And poor forsaken Ariadne: so
It often proves that they who falsely blame
Another, in one breath themselves condemn:
And who have guilty been of treachery,
Need not complain, if they deceived be.
Behold the brave Heroes a captive made
With all his fame, and twixt these sisters led:
Who, as he joy'd the death of the one to see,
His death did ease the others misery.
The next that follows, though the world admire
His strength, love bound him. The other full of ire
Is great Achilles, he whose pitied fate
Was caused by love, Demophoon did not hate
Impatient Phyllis, yet procured her death.
This Jason is, he whom Medea has
Obliged by mischief; she to her father proved
False, to her brother cruel; to him she loved
Grew furious, by her merit over-priz'd.
Hypsiphile comes next, mournful, despised,
Wounded to see a strangers love prevail
More then her own a Greek. Here is the frail
Fair Helena, with her the Shepherd boy,
Whose gazing looks hurt Greece, and ruined Troy.
Amongst other weeping souls, you hear the moan
Enone makes, her Paris being gone.
And Menelaus, for the woe he had
To lose his wife. Hermione is sad,
And calls her dear Orestes to her aid.
And Laodamia, that hapless maid
Bewails Protesilaus. Argia proved
To Polinice more faithful then the loved
(But false and covetous) Amphiaraos wife.
The groans, and sighs of those that lose their life
By this kind Lord, in unrelenting flames
You hear: I cannot tell you half their names,
For they appear not only men that love,
The gods themselves, do fill this myrtle grove:
You see fair Venus caught by Vulcan's Art
With angry Mars: Proserpina apart
From Pluto, jealous Juno, yellow hair'd
Apollo, who the young god's courage dared;
And of his trophies proud, laughed at the bovv,
Which in Thessalia gave him such a blovv.
What shall I say? here, in a word, are all
The gods that Varro mentions, great and small;
Each with innumerable bonds detained,
And Jupiter before the chariot chained.
The end of the first Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Conqueror, 87. line.] Julius Caesar.
Egyptian Queen, 89. line.] Cleopatra.
Adoptive Son, 93. line.] Augustus.
A woman, 98. line.] Sabina Pompcia, whom she loved with much violence, yet
killed her in his anger; Italian Commentar.

Marcus the grave, 99. line.] Marcus Aurelius, who so doted on his wife
Faustina, that though he had often notice she abused his bed, yet he would
not divorce from her. Italian Commentar.

Dionysius, 101. line.] Tyrant of Syracuse, Italian Commentar.

Alexander, 102. line.] Tyrant of Thessaly, he was above measure fearful, and
yet was killed by a wench whom he kept. The Story is not worth relating,
Italian Commentar.

Creusa, 105. line.] Creusa was wife to Aeneas before he see Dido, if ever he
did see her. Italian Commentar.

Antandrus, 106. line.] Antandrus is a rock seated on the Aegean sea, where he
used sports many days together in honor of her funerals. Italian Commentar.

And won his Love, 107. line.] Aeneas killed Turnus in a combat, and so
revenged the death of his friend Pallas, whom Turnus had killed before: and
won his mistress Lavinia, in whom Turnus clamed interest, Virgil.

Phedra could not move, 108. line.] Hypolito was son to Theseus by Hypolita
the Amazon, Phedra wife to Theseus was in love with her son in law Hypolito,
and being justly rejected by him, accused him to his father, as having tempted
her; on which he fled, and drowning in his flight, she killed her self for
grief of his loss. Italian Commentar.

Forsaken Ariadne, 114. line.] Ariadne was left asleep in an Island by Theseus:
who loved this Phedra better then her, though she had brought him out of the
labyrinth, and left her father to go with him: (a known History.)

Treachery, 117. line.] He had dealt treacherously with Ariadne, for the love
of her sister Phedra, and she required him with loving, and falsely accusing
his son Hypolito.

Brave Heroes, 119. line.] Theseus led betwixt Phedra and Ariadne.

Death, 121. line.] He rejoiced, as Petrarch alleges, to see Phedra kill her
self, because she had been false to him.

Misery, 122. line.] Ariadne might rejoice both to see Phedra (for whom he had
been false to her) abuse him, and to see his death before her own, Italian
Commentar.

The next, 124. line.] Hercules.

Was caused by love, 126. line.] He was killed by Paris in a treaty of
marriage with his sister Polixena, whom Achilles loved.

Impatient Phillis, 127. line.] Demophon having occasion to go to Athens, set
a time for his return, but staying a little beyond his day, by the crossenesse
of his affairs, and the winds, Phillis jealous that he had forsaken her, very
wisely, hanged her self, Ovid.

Cruel, 130. line.] When Medea fled from her father with Jason, she took her
brother with her, and cut him in pieces, which she scattered, that the pursuers
might be stayed by gathering up his limbs, Ovid.

Grew furious, 131. line] She was revenged on his inconstancy and ingratitude
after, by sending his new choice, Chreons daughter, a golden vestment, which
was so enchanted or anointed, that it stuck fast to her, till it burnt her up.

Hypsiphile, 132. line.] She entertaind Jason with too much kindness, as he
passed by to Colchas.

Strangers love, 133. line.] Medea, whom Jason brought back with him being no
Grecian, and therefore her disgrace was the greater, by the low esteem her
rival was in.

Shepherd boy, 135. line.] Paris who was bred a shepherd by his mother, to
avoid a prophecy, that he would be the cause Troy should be burned.

Enone, 138. line.] A Nymph in Ida, whom Paris loved, when he kept sheep on
that mountain.

His wife, 140. line.] Helene, whom Paris carried to Troy.

Hermione, 140. line.] She was daughter to Menelaus, and Helene being
contracted to Orestes first, she was taken from him, and married against her
will to Pirhus.

Orestes, 141. line.] He was son to Agamemnon, beloved of Hermione.

Laodamia, 142. line.] She died for grief on the corpse of Protesilaus, when it
came back from Troy. Italian Commentar.

Argia, 143. line.] Wife to Polenice a Theban, she was killed by Creon, for
going to mourn over her husbands grave.

Amphyaraos wife, 145. line.] Eryphile, who betrayed her husbands counsels,
and was cause, that against his will, he took that journey, in the which he
perished, Italian Commentary.

Proserpina apart, 152. line.] To express her anger, for Pluto had ravished
her.

Young gods courage, 154. line.] Cupid.

His Trophies, 155. line.] The skin of Python a Monster, which he had newly
killed.

A blow, 156. line.] Struck him in love with Daphne, to try whose arrows were
sharpest, and teach him to brag.

CHAP. II.
The Argument.
Brave Massinissa does relate
His Love: Seleucus his hard fate.
WEari'd, not satisfied, with much delight,
Now here, now there I turned my greedy sight,
And many things I viewed: to write were long,
The time is short, great store of passions throng
Within my breast: when lo, a lovely pair,
Joined hand in hand, who kindly talking were,
Drew my attention that way: their attire
And foreign language quickened my desire
Of further knowledge, which I soon might gain;
My kind Interpreter did all explain.
When both I knew, I boldly then drew near;
He loved our country, though she made it fear.
O! Massinissa; I adjure thee by
Great Scipio, and her who from thine eye
Drew manly tears (said I) let it not be
A trouble, what I must demand of thee.
He looked, and said: I first desire to know
Your name and quality; for well you show
Y' have heard the combat in my wounded soul,
When Love did Friendship, Friendship Love control.
I am not worth your knowledge, my poor flame
Gives little light (said I:) your royal fame,
Sets hearts on fire, that never see your face
But (pray you) say; are you two led in peace
By him? (I showed their guide) your History
Deserves record: it seems strange to me,
That faith and cruelty should come so near.
He said; Thine own expressions witness bear.
Thou know enough, yet I will all relate
To thee, 't will somewhat ease my heavy state.
On that brave man my heart was fixed so much,
That Lelius love to him could be but such;
Where ere his colors marched, I was nigh,
And Fortune did attend with victory:
Yet still his merit called for more then she
Could give; or any else deserve but he.
When to the West the Roman Eagles came
My self was also there; and caught a flame,
A purer never burnt in Lovers breast:
But such a joy could not be long possessed!
Our nuptial knot (alas!) he soon untide,
Who had more power then all the world beside!
He cared not for our sighs; and though 't be true
That he divided us, his worth I knew:
He must be blind that cannot see the Sun,
But by strict justice Love is quite undone:
Counsel from such a friend gave such a stroke
To Love, it almost split, as on a rock:
For as my father I his wrath did fear,
And as a son he in my love was dear;
Brothers in age we were, him I obeyed,
But with a troubled soul and look dismayed:
Thus my dear half had an untimely death,
She prized her freedom far above her breath;
And I the unhappy instrument was made;
Such force the entreaty and intreater had!
I rather chose my self then him to offend,
And sent the poison brought her to her end:
With what sad thoughts I know, and she will confess,
And you, if you have sense of Love, may guess;
No heir she left me, but my tedious moan;
And though in her my hopes, and joys were gone,
She was of lower value then my faith!
But now farewell, and try if this troup has
Another wonder; for the time is less
Then is the task: I pitied their distress,
Whose short joy ended in so sharp a woe:
My soft heart melted: As they onward go,
This youth for his part, I perhaps could love
(She said) but nothing can my mind remove
From hatred of the Nation; He replide,
Good Sophonisba you may leave this pride,
Your City has by us been three times beat,
The last of which (you know) we laid it flat.
Pray use these words to another, not to me
(Said she) if Africa mourned, Italy
Needs not rejoice; search your records, and there
See what you gained by the Punick war,
He that was friend to both, without reply
A little smiling, vanished from mine eye
Amongst the crowd: As one in doubtful way
At every step looks round, and fears to stray,
(Care stops his journey) so the varied store
Of Lovers staid me, to examine more,
And try what kind of fire burnt every breast:
When on my left hand strayed from the rest
Was one, whose look expressed a ready mind
In seeking what he joy'd, (yet shamed to find;)
He freely gave away his dearest wife,
(A new found way to save a Lovers life)
She, though she joy'd, yet blushed at the change*
As they recounted their affections strange,
And for their Syria mourned; I took the way
Of these three Ghosts, who seemed their course to stay,
And take another path: The first I held
And bid him turn; he started, and beheld
Me with a troubled look, hearing my tongue
Was Roman, such a pause he made, as sprung
From some deep thought; then spoke as if inspired,
For to my wish, he told what I desired
To know: Seleucus is (said he) my name,
This is Antiochus my son, whose fame
Has reached your ear; he warred much with Rome,
But Reason often by Power is overcome.
This woman, once my Wife, does now belong
To him; I gave her, and it was no wrong
In our Religion; it staid his death,
Threatened by Love; Stratonica she has
To name: so now we may enjoy one state,
And our fast friendship shall out-last all date.
She from her height was willing to descend;
I quit my joy; he rather chose his end
Then our offense; and in his prime had did,
Had not the wise Physician been our guide:
Silence in Love orecame his vital part;
His Love was force, his Silence virtuous Art.
A fathers tender care made me agree
To this strange change. This said, he turned from me,
As changing his design, with such a pace,
Ere I could take my leave, h' had quit the place.
After the Ghost was carried from mine eye
Amazedly I walked; nor could untie
My mind from his sad story; till my friend
Admonisht me, and said: You must not lend
Attention thus to every thing you meet;
You know the number's great, and time is fleet.
More naked prisoners this triumph had
Then Xerxes soldiers in his army led:
And stretched further then my sight could reach*
Of several Countries, and of differing speech.
One of a thousand were not known to me,
Yet might those few make a large History.
Perseus was one; and well you know the way
How he was catched by Andromida:
She was a lovely brownet, black her hair
And eyes. Narcissus too, the foolish fair,
Who for his own love did himself destroy;
He had so much, he nothing could enjoy.
And she, who for his loss, deep sorrow's slave,
Changed to a voice, dwells in a hollow cave.
Iphis was there, who hasted his own fate,
He loved another, but himself did hate;
And many more condemned like woes to prove,
Whose life was made a curse by hapless love.
Some modern Lovers in my mind remain,
But those to reckon here were needless pain.
The two, whose constant loves for ever last,
On whom the winds wait while they build their nest*
For Halcion days poor laboring sailors please,
And in rough winter calm the boystrous seas.
Far off the thoughtfull Aesacus, in quest
Of his Epiria, finds a rocky rest,
Then diveth in the floods, then mounts in the air.
And she who stole old Nisus purple hair
His cruel daughter, I observed to fly.
Swift Atalanta ran for victory,
But three gold apples, and a lovely face,
Slackt her quick paces, till she lost the race:
She brought Hippomanes along, and joy'd
That he, as others, had not been destroyed,
But of the victory could singly boast.
I saw amidst the vain, and fabulous host,
Fair Galatea leaned on Atis breast;
Rude Polyphemus noise disturbs their rest.
Glaucus alone swims through the dangerous seas,
And missing her who should his fancy please,
Curses the cruels Love transformed her shape.
Canens laments that Picus could not escape
The dire enchantresse; he in Italy
Was once a King, now a pie'd Bird; for she
Who made him such, changed not his clothes nor name,
His Princely habit still appears the same.
Egeria, while she wept, became a Well:
Scylla (a horrid rock by Circes spell)
Has made infamous the Sicilian strand.
Next, she who holds in her trembling hand
A guilty knife, her right hand writ her name.
Pygmalion next, with his live mistress came.
Sweet Aganippe, and Castalia have
A thousand more; all there sung by the brave
And deathlesse Poets, on their fair banks placed*
Cydippe by an apple fooled at last.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER.
A Lovely pair, 5. line.] Massinissa and Sophonisba: The story runs thus,
Massinissa King of a part of Numidia an associate of the Romans, loving and
much beloved of Scipio: Sophonisba was daughter to Asdrubale, son of Gisco, a
Principal man in the City of Carthage: her father married her to Syphax, a
more considerable King of the same Country, then Massinissa, and an associate
also of the Romans, with intention to debauch him from the Roman friendship,
which it did accordingly. It came to pass in the progress of the war, that
Massinissa took Syphax prisoner, and entered Cirrha his principal City
victor: Sophonisba presented her self before him at the gate of the Castle,
and being beautiful and eloquent, to both which her affliction added luster,
she besought him to take her for his prisoner, and either preserve her from
being led in triumph to Rome, or kill her. Massinissa was soon taken, and as
suddenly promised to perform her desire, which that he might the more easily
do, he married her presently. When he came to Scipio (after much commendation
and honorable intertainment bestowed upon him in public) he drew him aside,
and reproved him sharply for this rash act (being afraid that Sophonisba would
make him for her Country, as she had done her other husband.) Massinissa
retired to his Tent, and after a long inward debate, and many tears, at last he
composed a cup full of poison, and writes to her with it, That since he could
not perform the first part of his promise, to make her free, (as by marrying
her he hoped to have done) he would yet keep the last; desires her to
remember whose daughter she was, and that she had been wife to two Kings. When
she read the letter, she said no more, but, If this be the best token my
Husband has to send me, I accept it willingly; but tell him, It would have
grieved me less, if my marriage bed had not been so near my grave: and with
such resolution as these times thought virtuous, she drank up the poison
cheerfully. Titus Livius.

That Lelius Love, 32. line.] Lelius was bosom friend to Scipio, yet
Massinissas Love equalled that of Lelius.

The Roman Eagles, 37. line.] The Roman Ensinges, meaning Scipio, with the
Roman army, for they carried an Eagle in their colors.

Seleucus, 101. line.] The story is clear enough here, That Seleucus King of
Syria, having married Stratonica, a young and beautiful Lady, Antiochus his
son by a former wife, became desperately in love with her, and concealing it
out of shame, or fear, or both, he fell sick almost to death, which the
Physician finding by his Art, told the father there was no safety for his son,
but by bestowing his mother in law on him: to which the father joyfully yielded

With Rome, 103. line.] It was not this Antiochus that had war with the
Romans, but another long after him, which Petrarch knew well enough, but uses
a figure of purpose to mention Antiochus the great.

In his army, 128. line.] Being as they say, 700000. men.

Perseus was one, 133. line] He was son of Jupiter and Danae.

By Andromida, 134 line] Andromida was an Ethiopian. The history is known, he
saw her tied naked to a rock, when he went to kill the sea Monster that should
have devoured her.

Iphis was there, 141. line.] Iphis hanged himself because his mistress
despised him.

Constant Loves, 147. line] Halcion, son of Aeolus, and Ceica daughter of
Lucifer: He was drowned in his return from consulting with the Oracle, she
having had an ominous dream, went to the shore, where she found his dead body
newly cast up, and as she was about to cast her self into the Sea, they were
both turned into little birds of his name, Halcion, it is the bird called the
Kings-fisher; they build on the shore, and the weather is calm all the while
they are hatching their young.

Aesacus, 151. line.] Aesacus was son to Priamus. Epiria whom he loved,
flying from his pursuit, was bit with a Serpent and died of the wound, for
grief of which misfortune, he went to the top of a Rock, and leapt into the
Sea, where Thetis in compassion, transformed him into a bird, called a Dydaper
or Diver.

His cruel daughter, 155. line.] Scilla, daughter to Nisus King of Megara;
when Minos warred against her father, and could not overcome him, by reason of
his purple hair in his head; she stole the hair and gave it to him, in hope to
gain his affection: By this means Minos became victor, but in detestation of
her unnatural fact rejected her, who being banished and desolate, wandered
till she became a Lark: Her father was turned into a Merling, and pursues her
ever since.

Swift Atalanta, 156. line.] A known History, all her suitors must outrun
her, or be killed; and she being too swift to be matched with speed,
Hyppomanes took three golden apples, and cast first one a good way off: then
as she ran aside to catch it, he got ground of her, and when she approached
he threw another, and a third, till he obtained the victory, by this cunning
(not without her consent.)

Fair Galatea, 163. line.] Galatea was daughter to Neptune: her lover Atis and
she being together, his Giant rival Poliphemus came thither, and killed him
with a great stone as he fled.

Glaucus alone, 165. line.] Glaucus was a fisher, and seeing that the new haild
fish by tasting a kind of herb upon the bank, revived, and leapt again into
the Sea; He tried the conclusion himself, and followed them, by which means he
became a Sea-god: He loved Scilla, but Circe loving him, and seeing her self
despised by him for the love he bare to Galatea; Circe transformed her rival
into a Rock: so as Glaucus swims along without his Mistress, and curses the
loving Witch that caused it.

Canens laments, 168 line.] Canens was wife to Picus, a King in Italy of old:
Circe transformed him also to a Magpie, because she could not obtain his love.

Aegeria while she wept, 173. line.] Aegeria was a Nymph, or Goddess that
converst with Numa Pompilius in his solitary retirements, whilst he composed
the Roman laws, being the first King of Rome after Romulus, So says
Plutatch, and Titus Livius: yet Livius says also she was his wife, by which it
should seem, that being as wise as her husband, she had a good hand in the
business. The Poets fained her to weep her self into a Well after his death,
because there was a Well in the middle of that Grove which he made for their
consultations.

Scilla a horrid Rock, 174. line.] See above in the Annotations, 165.

Infamous the Cicilian strand, 175. line.] That is, has made it dangerous for
passengers.

Her trembling hand, 176. line.] Cannace, daughter to Eolus, having had a
child by her brother, her father caused cut the child in pieces, and
commanded her to kill her self, which she being compelled to resolve on, writ
first to her brother, with the pen in the one hand, and a knife in the other,
to give him notice of her end, that he might bury her child and her.

His live Mistress, 178. line.] Pigmalions mistress was a statue of his own
cutting, on which he grew enamoured, and prayed till it became a live woman.

Aganippe, and Castalia, 179. line.] Aganippe and Castalia are two Fountains in
Parnassus, sacred to the Muses.

Fair banks placed, 181.] Because the Poets do all drink of these two Wells:
Petrarch will have the banks to be their ordinary residence, alive and dead.

Cydippe by an apple foold, 182. line.] Her Lover writ an oath, That she
should marry him upon an apple, and dropped it in Apollos Temple, which she
finding and reading, he made her believe she had sworn to make him her
Husband.

CHAP. III.
The Argument.
Love wounds Petrarchs wary heart,
Who well describes that dying smart.
MY heart was filled with wonder and amaze,
As one struck dumb, in silence stands at gaze
Expecting Counsel, when my friend drew near,
And said: What do you look? why stay you here?
What mean you? know you not that I am one
Of these? and must attend? pray, let us be gone
Dear friend (said I) consider what desire
To learn the rest has set my heart on fire;
My own haste stops me. I beleeve't (said he)
And I will help; it is not forbidden me.
This Noble man, on whom the others wait,
(You see) is Pompey, justly called, The great:
Cornelia follows, weeping his hard fate,
And Ptolomies unworthy causeless hate.
You see far off the Grecian General;
His base wife, with Aegisthus wrought his fall:
Behold them there, and judge if Love be blind.
But here are Lovers of another kind,
And other faith they kept, Lyncus was saved
By Hypermnestra: Pyramus bereaved
Himself of life, thinking his mistress slain:
Thisbes like end, shortened her mourning pain.
Leander swimming often, drowned at last;
Hero her fair self from her window cast.
Courteous Ulysses his long stay does mourn;
His chaste wife prays for his safe return,
While Circes amarous charms her prayers control,
And rather vex then please his virtuous soul.
Amilcars son, who made great Rome afraid,
By a mean wench of Spain is captive led.
This Hipsicrates is, the virtuous fair,
Who for her husbands dear Love cut her hair
And served in all his wars: This is the wife
Of Brutus; Portia, constant in her life
And death: This Julia is, who seems to moan,
That Pompey loved best, when she was gone.
Look here and see the Patriarch much abused
Who twice seven years for his fair Rachel choos'd
To serve: O! powerful love increast by woe!
His father this: Now see his Grandsire go
With Sarah from his home. This cruel Love
O'recame good David; so it had power to move
His righteous heart to that abhorrid crime,
For which he sorrowed all his following time.
Just such like error soiled his wise sons fame,
For whose idolatry Gods anger came;
Here Is he who in one hour could love and hate:
Here Tamar full of anguish wailes her state;
Her brother Absolon attempts to appease
Her grieved soul. Sampson takes care to please
His fancy; and appears more strong then wise,
Who in a traitresse bosom sleeping lies.
Amongst those pikes and spears which guard the place,
Love, wine, and sleep, a beauteous widows face
And pleasing Art has Holopherues taine;
She back again retires, who has him slain,
With her one maid, bearing the horrid head
In haste, and thanks God that so well she sped.
The next is Sichem, he who found his death,
In circumcision, his father has
Like mischief felt; the City all did prove
The same effect of his rash violent Love.
You see Ahashuerus how well he bears
His loss; a new love soon expels his cares:
This cure in this disease does seldom fail,
One nail best drives out another nail.
If you would see Love mingled often with hate,
Bitter with sweet; behold fierce Herod's state,
Beset with Love and cruelty at once:
Enraged first, then late his fault bemoans,
And Mariamne calls; those three fair Dames
(Who in the list of Captives write their names)
Pocris, Deidamia, Artimesia were
All good, the other three as wicked are:
Semiramis, Biblis, and Myrrha named,
Who of their crooked ways are now ashamed:
Here be the erring Knights in ancient scroules,
Lancelot, Tristram, and the vulgar souls
That wait on these; Jiniver, and the fair
Isond, with other Lovers: and the pair
Who, as they walk together, seem to plain
Their just, but cruel fate, by one hand slain;
Thus he discoursed: and as a man that fears
Approaching harm, when he a trumpet hears,
Starts at the blow ere touched, my frighted blood
Retired; as one raised from his Tomb I stood:
When by my side I spied a lovely maid,
(No Turtle ever purer whiteness had)
And straight was caught (who lately swore I would
Defend me from a man at Arms) nor could
Resist the wounds of words with motion graced;
The image yet is in my fancy placed.
My friend was willing to increase my woe,
And smiling whisperd; You alone may go
Confer with whom you please, for now we are
All stained with one crime: My sullen care
Was like to theirs, who are more grieved to know
Another happiness then their own woe:
For seeing her, who had enthralled my mind,
Live free in peace, and no disturbance find:
And seeing that I knew my hurt too late,
And that her beauty was my dying fate:
Love, jealousy, and envy held my sight
So fixed on that fair face, no other light
I could behold; like one who in the rage
Of sickness greedily his thirst would swage
With hurtful drink, which does his palate please,
Thus (blind and deaf t'all other joys are ease)
So many doubtful ways I followed her
The memory still shakes my soul with fear.
Since when mine eyes are moist, and view the ground;
My heart is heavy, and my steps have found
A solitary dwelling amongst the woods,
I stray ore rocks, and fountains, hills and floods:
Since when such store my scattered papers hold
Of thoughts, of tears, of ink; which often I fold,
Unfold, and tear: Since when I know the scope
Of Love, and what they fear, and what they hope;
And how they live that in his Cloister dwell,
The skillful in their face may read it well.
Mean while I see, how fierce and gallant she
Cares not for me, nor for my misery,
Proud of her virtue, and my overthrow:
And on the other side (if ought I know)
This Lord, who has the world in triumph led,
She keeps in fear; thus all my hopes are dead,
No strength nor courage left, nor can I be
Revenged, as I expected once; for he,
Who tortures me and others, is abused
By her; she will not be caught, and long has used
(Rebellious as she is!) to shun his vvarres,
And is a Sun amidst the lesser stars.
Her grace, smiles, slights, her words in order set;
Her hair dispersed, or in a golden net;
Her eyes enflaming with a light divine
So burn my heart, I dare no more repine.
Ah, who is able fully to express
Her pleasing ways, her merit? no excess*
No bold Hyperboles I need to fear,
My humble style cannot enough come near
The truth; my words are like a little stream
Compared with the Ocean, so large a theme
Is that high praise; new worth, not seen before,
Is seen in her, and can be seen no more*
Therefore all tongues are silenced; and I,
Her prisoner now, see her at liberty:
And night and day implore (O unjust fate!)
She neither hears, nor pitties my estate*
Hard sawes of Love! But though a partial lot
I plainly see in this, yet must I not
Refuse to serve: the gods, as well as men,
With like reward of old have felt like pain.
Now know I how the mind it self does part,
(Now making peace, now war, now truce) what art
Poor Lovers use to hide their stinging vvoe:
And how their blood now comes, and now does go
Betwixt their heart and cheeks, by shame or fear:
How they be eloquent, yet speechless are:
And how they both ways lean, they watch and sleep,
Languish to death, yet life and vigor keep:
I trod the paths made happy by her feet,
And search the foe, I am afraid to meet.
I know how Lovers metamorphos'd are
To that they love: I know what tedious care
I feel; how vain my joy, how often I change
Design, and countenance; and (which is strange)
I live without a soul: I know the way
To cheat my self a thousand times a day:
I know to follow whiles I flee my fire:
I freeze when present; absent, my desire
Is hot: I know what cruel rigor Love
Practices on the mind, and does remove
All reason thence; and how he racks the heart;
And how a soul, has neither strength nor Art
Without a helper to resist his blows;
And how he flees, and how his darts he throws:
And how his threats the fearful Lover feels;
And how he robs by force, and how he steals:
How often his wheels turn round (now high, now lovv)
With how uncertain hope, how certain vvo:
How all his promises be void of faith,
And how a fire hid in our bones he has;
How in our vains he makes a secret vvound,
Whence open flames and death do soon abound.
In sum, I know how giddy and how vain
Be Lovers lives; what fear and boldness reign
In all their vvayes; how every svveet is paid,
And with a double weight of sovvre allaide:
I also know their customs, sighs, and songs;
Their sudden mutenesse, and their stammering tongues,
How short their joy, how long their pain does last,
How Wormvvood spoyleth all their hunni's taste.
The end of the third Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE THIRD CHAPTER.
COrnelia follows, 13. line] Cornelia was last wife to Pompey the great, and
wept for the loss of his honor, being overcome at Pharsalia by Julius Caesar,
and for his death, being killed in her arms by Ptololomies command, without
other cause, but to gain favor of Caesar, who had got the better: therefore
it is justly called by Petrarch, Ptolomies. unworthy causeless hate in the
next line.

Grecian General, 15. line.] Agamemnon General of the Grecians that went
against Troy: He was in love with Cassandra, daughter to Priamus, whom he
carried home captive with him.

Aegisthus, 16. line.] In his absence Clitemnestra his wife entertained
another, with whom she conspired his death at his return, in this sort; she
gave him a shirt close at top, and as he was searching for a place to put
forth his head Aegisthus killed him.

Lyncus was saved, 19. line.] Lyncus was one of the sons of Danoe. The
History runs thus, Aegisthus and Danoe being two brothers, Aegisthus had 50.
daughters, and Danoe had 50. sons; Danoe offered his sons in marriage to
Aegisthus his daughters, which Aegisthus would by no means consent to, till the
other compelled him by force of arms: Then he gave a secret command to his
daughters, every one to kill her husband in the night: They all obeyed, except
Hypermnestra, who spared her husband Lyncus and did not kill him: A poor
courtesy, but that the wickedness of the rest made it seem a great favor.

Pyramus bereaved, 20. line.] It is a known Story, that Pyramus and Thisbe
having made an appointment in a wood, she came thither first, where seeing a
Lion approach, she let fall her mantle, and hid herself among the bushes: Her
Lover came within a little while after, and see her mantle torn or trampled by
the Lion; This made him imagine she had been devoured: so he killed himself
on the place.

Thisbies like end, 22. line.] When she came out of the bushes and found him
dead, she killed her self too with the same weapon.

Leander swimming often, 23. line.] The story is clear of it self, that
Leander having used to swim the Hellespont, was drowned one time in a storm,
which when Hero see, in a window, where she stood expecting his arrival, for
he perished near the shore, she cast her self down from thence into the sea.

Courteous Ulysses, 25. line.] He stayed ten years from his wife at the siege
of Troy, and ten years more were spent in his journey home.

His chaste wife, 26. line.] Of all the Grecian wives, she was most faithful,
though most solicited, Homer.

Circes amarous charms, 27. line.] Circe was a famous witch, that kept him
with her enchantments against his will.

Amilcars son, 29. line.] Hanniball, the great Carthagenian General: he
doted extremely upon a poor mean wench in Puglia, Italian Commentar.

Hipsicrates, 31. line.] She was wife to Mithridates King of Pontus.

Portia, 34. line.] Portia was daughter to Cato, and wife to that Brutus who
killed Julius Caesar: a woman of a great and constant spirit, adorned with
wisdom, temper, and love to her husband, of whose death being advertised,
she put hot embers or coals in her mouth, and so died.

Julia, 35. line.] Julia was daughter to Julius Caesar, and wife to Pompey the
great, whom she loved so extremely: that one day his Robes being stained with
blood at a sacrifice, and sent home; she took a sudden fright at the sight of
the blood, fell in labor, and died: Yet as it often happens, he loved her not
so well, as he did his next wife Cornelia.

Fierce Herod's state, line. 68.] Herod loved his wife Mariamne furiously, yet
put her to death on a falls accusation, that she had conspired his end. He had
the miserable and just punishment to believe her innocent, and love her better
after her death, Josephus.

Three fair Dames, 71. line.] Pochris, Deidamea, Artimesia; Pochris was wife
to one Cefalous: who went every day abroad to hunt. One day her jealousy made
her follow him, and hearing him call for the fresh arie, she rose from the
place where she was concealed, to see what Nymph it was: He thinking it had
been some wild beast, shot an arrow, and wounded her. When he knew what she
was, he was much afflicted, but she being past recocovery, desired of him, as
her last suite, that the Nymph Air might not succeed her in his love, by which
he found her mistake, and cleared it: So she died very well pleased.

Deidamia bore Pirhus to Achilles, and would never marry another whilst he
was at Troy, nor after his death.

Artimesia was wife to Maussalus, King of Caria, after his death, she dried
his heart, beat it to powder, and mingled it with her drink, saying, There
was no other Urne worthy to hold such precious ashes.

Biblis, Semiramis, and Mirrha, 75. line.] Biblis loved her brother: Semiramis
loved her son, yet some Authors think it a calumny: Mirrha loved her
father.

Lancelot, Tristram, 78. line.] Knights of the Round table.

Jiniver, 79. line.] Jiniver or Guiniver, was wife to King Arthur, and Mistress
to Lancelot.

Isond, 80. line.] Belle Isond, wife to Mark, King of Cornewell, and Mistress
to Tristram.

By one hand slain, 82. line.] The wife of one Lancelot, killed by her
husband; together with his own brother, whom she used too familiarly, Italian
Commentary.

CHAP. IV.
The Argument.
Himself with other slaves of Love
Are all shut up in Venus grove.
WHen once my will was captive by my fate,
And I had lost the liberty, which late
Made my life happy; I, who used before
To flee from Love (as fearful Dear abhor
The following huntsman) suddenly became
(Like all my fellow servants) calm and tame:
And viewd the travels, wrestlings, and the smart,
The crooked by-pathes, and the cosening Art
That guides the amarous flock: then whilst mine eye
I cast on every corner, to epsy
Some Ancient or Modern who had proved
Famous: I saw him, who had only loved
Euridice, and found out Hell, to call
Her dear Ghost back; he named her in his fall
For whom he died. Alceus there was known
Skillful in Love and verse: Anacreon
Whose Muse sung naught but Love: Pindarus, he
Was also there: there I might Virgil see:
Many brave wits I found, some looser rimes,
By others Writ has pleased the ancient times:
Ovid was one: After Catullus came;
Propertius next, his Elegies the name
Of Cynthia bear: Tibullus, and the young
Greek Poetesse, who is received among
The noble Troup for her rare Saphick Muse.
Thus looking here and there (as often I use)
I spied much people on a flowery plain,
Amongst themselves disputes of Love maintain.
Behold Beatrix with Dant; Selvagia, she
Brought her Pistoyon Cin; Guiton may be
Offended that he is the later named:
Behold both Guidoes for their learning famed:
The honest Bullonian: The Scicilians first
Wrote Love in rimes, but wrote their rimes the worst.
Francischin and Senuchio, (who all know)
Were worthy and humane: after did go
A squadron of another garb and phrase,
Of whom Arnaldo Daniel has most praise,
Great master in Loves Art, his style as new
As sweet, honors his Country: next, a few
Whom Love did lightly wound; both Peter's made
Two; one, the less Arnaldo: some have had
A harder war; both the Rimbaldoes, the one
Sung Beatrix, though her quality was known
Too much above his reach in Mont-ferrat.
Alvernia's, old Piero, and Girault:
Flocchetto, who from Genua was estranged
And called Marsilian, he wisely changed
His name, his state, and country, and did gain
In all: Jeffray made haste to catch his bane
With sails and oars: Guilliam too sweetly sung
That pleasing Art, was cause he di'd so young.
Amareg, Bernard, Hugo, and Anselme
Were there, with thousands more, whose tongues were helm,
Shield, sword and spear, all their offensive arms,
And their defensive to prevent their harms.
From those I turned, comparing my own woe,
To view my countrey-folks; and there might know
The good Thomasso, who did once adorn
Boloigna, now Messina holds his urne.
Ah vanished joys! Ah life too full of bane!
How were thou from mine eyes so quickly taken?
Since without thee nothing is in my power
To do; Where art thou from me at this hour?
What is our life? If ought it bring of ease,
A sick man's dream, a fable, told to please.
Some few there from the common road did stray,
Lelius and Socrates, with whom I may
A longer progress take: O! what a pair
Of dear esteemed friends to me they were!
It Is not my verse, nor prose, may reach their praise;
Neither of these can naked Virtue raise
Above her own true place: with them I have
Reached many heights; one yoke of learning gave
Laws to our steps, to them my festered wound
I often have showed; no time or place I found
To part from them; and hope, and wish we may
Be undivided till my breath decay:
With them I used (too early) to adorn
My head with the honored branches, only worn
For her dear sake I did so deeply love,
Who filled my thoughts (but ah!) I daily prove,
No fruit nor leaves from thence can gathered be;
The root has sharp and bitter been to me.
For this I was accustomed much to vex,
But I have seen that which my anger checks:
(A Theme for buskins, not a Comic stage)
She took the God, adored by the rage
Of such dull fools, as he has captive led:
But first, I Will tell you what of us he made;
Then from her hand what was his own sad fate:
Which Orpheus or Homer might relate.
His winged coursers ore the ditches leapt,
And we their way as desperately kept,
Till he had reached where his mother reigns,
Nor would he ever pull or turn the reigns;
But scoured ore woods and mountains, none did care
Nor could discern in what strange world they were.
Beyond the place, where old Aegeus mournes,
An Island lies, Phoebus none sweeter burns,
Nor Neptune ever bathed a better shore:
About the midst a beauteous hill, with store
Of shades and pleasing smells, so fresh a spring
As drownes all manly thoughts: this place does bring
Venus much joy; 't was given her Deity,
Ere blind man knew a truer god then she:
Of which original it yet retains
Too much, so little goodness there remains,
That it the vicious does only please,
Is by the virtuous shunned as a disease.
Here this fine Lord insulteth over us all
Tied in a chain, from Thule to Ganges fall.
Griefs in our breasts, vanity in our arms;
Fleeting delights are there, and weighty harms:
Repentance swiftly following to annoy:
(Such Tarquine found it, and the bane of Troy)
All that whole valley with the Echoes rung
Of running brooks, and birds that gently sung:
The banks were clothed in yellow, purple, green,
Scarlet and white, their pleasing springs were seen;
And gliding streams amongst the tender grass,
Thickets and soft winds to refresh the place.
After when Winter makes sharp the Air,
Warm leaves, and leisure, sports, and gallant cheer
Enthrall low minds. Now the equinox has made
The day to equal the night; and Progne had
With her sweet sister, each their old task taine:
(Ah! how the faith in Fortune placed is vain!)
Just in the time, and place, and in the hour
When humble tears should earthly joys devour,
It pleased him, whom the vulgar honor so,
To triumph over me; and now I know
What miserable servitude they prove,
What ruin, and what death, that fall in Love.
Errors, dreams, palenesse waits on his chair,
False fancies over the door, and on the stair
Are slipry hopes, unprofitable gain,
And gainful loss; such steps it does contain,
As who descend, may boast their fortune best:
Who most ascend, most fall: a wearied rest,
And resting trouble, glorious disgrace;
A duskish and obscure illustriousnesse;
Unfaithful loyalty, and cozening faith,
That nimble fury, lazy reason has:
A prison, whose wide ways do all receive,
Whose narrow paths a hard retiring leave:
A steep descent, by which we slide with ease,
But find no hold our crawling steps to raise:
Within confusion, turbulence, annoy
Are mixed; undoubted woe, and doubtful joy:
Vulcano, where the sooty Cyclops dwell;
Lyparis, Strombolli, nor Mongibel,
Nor Ischia have more horrid noise and smoke:
He hates himself that stoops to such a yoke.
Thus were we all thronged in so strait a cage,
I changed my looks and hair, before my age,
Dreaming on liberty (by strong desire
My soul made apt to hope) and did admire
Those gallant minds, enslaved to such a woe,
(My heart within my breast dissolved like snow
Before the Sun) as one would side-wayes cast
His eye on pictures, which his feet has past.
The end of the fourth Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE FOURTH CHAPTER.
EVridice, 13. line.] Euridice was wife to Orpheus a famous Greek Poet, who
made a journey to Hell for her after her death, and having recovered her from
Pluto, on condition he should not look back, lost her by breaking his
promise. He hated marriage ever after, for which, or for his unnatural Love
to boys, he was killed by women at a sacrifice, and they say, named his wife
after his head was off.

Alceus, 15. line.] An excellent, but lascivious Greek Poet, Italian Commentar.

Anacreon, 16. line.] Another Greek Poet. Italian Commentar.

Pindarus, 17. line.] An excellent Greek Poet, Italian Commentar.

Virgil, 18. line.] The Prince of Latin Poets, who knows him not? It seems
he was also in Love, Italian Commentar.

Ovid, Catullus, Propertius and Tibullus, 21. 22. and 23. lines.] All Latin
Poets, and all Lovers. Italian Commentar.

Greek Poetesse, 24. line.] Sapho, she first invented those verses called
Saphicks after her: a better Poetesse then a woman, Italian Commentar.

Dant, 29. line.] An Italian Poet, whose Mistress name was Beatrix. Italian
Commentary.

Pistoyan Cin, 30. line.] Cin of Pistoia, another Italian Poet, whose Mistress
was named Selvagia.

Guiton may, 30. line.] Guiton was the best Italian Poet of his time: and
therefore Petrarch thinks he should have had the first place here. Italian
Commentar.

Guidoes, 32. line.] They were two Italian Poets of one name. Italian Commentar.

Sicilians, 33. line.] They were the first inventers of rimes, and those very
rude ones. Italian Commentar.

Francischin and Senvchio, 35. line.] Two Italian Poets, friends to Petrarch.
Italian Commentar.

A squadron, 37. line.] Here follows a troup of obscure provincial Poets.
Italian Commentar.

Peter's, 41. line.] Two unconstant riming Lovers, of whom there cannot be much
said to much purpose, only they with Arnaldo Daniel, and the lesser Arnaldo
were provincial, Italian Commentary.

Rimbaldoes, 43. line.] There were two Poets of that name: The first loved two
or three Mistresses, and made verses, etc. The other loved but one, named
Beatrix, Countess of Mont-ferrat, Italian Commentary.

Alvernia's, old Piero, 46. line.] A good Poet that lived long: so there has
been three Peter's in all.

Girault, 46. line.] Another Provincial Poet, but I know not why he should
be here, since I cannot learn that he had either Wife or Mistress, Italian
Commentary.

Flocchetto, 47. line.] He was a Merchants son in Genua, but being of a good
spirit, he traveled, and changed his Country; from whence he was called
Marsilian: he turned religious at last, for discontent in love: he was also a
Poet, Italian Commentary.

Jeffray, 50. line] Jeffray Ruder, he fell in love with the Countess of
Tripola, by report, and making a sea-voyage to see her, fell sick by the way:
after he was landed, the Lady came to visit him, he not being able to
visit her, by which good fortune, well satisfied, he died presently after,
Italian Commentary.

Guilliam, line, 51.] Guilliam Gabesten of Rosiglion, loving, and too much
loved of a Lady, named Sorismonda, wife to Raimond, Lord of a principal place
in that Country: his fine verses discovered their Love to her Husband, who
killing him, caused dress his heart, and made her eat it, then told her what
it was: she gave him a bitter answer; with which, enraged, he drew his sword
upon her, who leaping over a Balcone to shun his fury, died of the fall,
Italian Commentary.

Amareg, 53. line.] There were two Poetical Lovers of that name.

Bernard, 53. line.] An amarous Poet, who turned religious at last, Italian
Commentary.

Hugo, 53. line.] A pleasing Poet* much respected for his Art, but an ill
Menager and died poor, Italian Commentary.

Anselme, 53. line.] A worse Poet, and worse Menager then the other, Italian
Commentary.

Thomasso, 59 line.] A Poet, and friend to Petrarch, who studied with him in
Bolognia: it seems he died, and was buried in Messiana, Italian Commentar.

Lelius and Socrates, 63. line.] They were two friends to Petrarch. Italian
Commentary.

Many heights, 74. line.] That is, they found out many mysteries of Learning,
in their common studies, Italian Commentar.

My head with the honored branches, 80. line.] His Mistress, her name being
Lauretta, he wore Laurel Garlands (as Emblems of her) sooner then he thought,
his Poesy deserved that honor.

For buskins, 87. line.] Because of the subject: Laurettas war with Cupid,
being both Tragical, for she made him prisoner, and magesticke, in regard of
the dignity of the Victresse, and powerfulness of the enemy: the Tragedians,
understood here by buskins (a kind of feet, or legge-ornament which they wore)
using a more grave and weighty style then the Comic, Italian Commentar,

Orpheus or Homer, 92. line.] Two of the best Greek Poets.

Aegeus mourns, 99. line.] The Aegean Sea, called so from Aegeus father to
Theseus, and King of Athens, who drowned himself there, thinking his son was
dead.

Tarquin, 116. line.] Tarquin ravished Lucrece, which was the ruin of his
fathers house, and made the Government be changed: a known History.

Bane of Troy, 116. line] Paris, who caused the destruction of Troy, by
carrying away Hellen wife to Menelaus.

Progne, 126. line.] The Swallow, her task is to build in the spring.

Her sweet sister, 127. line.] Philomel, or the Nightingale: her case is to
sing, or mourn if you will.

Time and place, 129. line.] Good Friday in the Church, and at Mass as it
should seem; but the Italian Commentary in the life of Petrarch, contests much
to prove that it was in the fields, that he see her by hazard, as he and she
were both going to visit the Church of Saint Varan, it was Good Friday however.

Vulcanus, 151. line.] Vulcanus or Vulcano, Lyparis, Strombolli, Mongibell, and
Ischia, all burning Islands and Mountains in the Mediterran Sea.

Side-wayes cast, 161. line.] The place seems imperfect, but is not, for he
compares himself in his last contemplation of the misery of Lovers after his
experience, (which he had not much heeded before) to a man, who neglects a
piece of rare work or picture, by haste or other thoughts; and when he is
past, considers it more seriously, either standing still* or going on with his
eye fixed on it.

The End of the Triumph of Love.
THE TRIUMPH OF CHASTITY: Written by PETRARCH, AND TRANSLATED Out of Italian,
BY Mris ANNA HUME.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1644.

THE TRIUMPH OF CHASTITY.
CHAP. I.
The Argument.
Chastity binds the winged god,
And makes him subject to her rod.
WHen to one yoke at once I saw the height
Of Gods and men subdued by Cupids might;
I took example from their cruel fate,
And by their sufferings eased my own hard state:
Since Phoebus and Leander felt like pain,
The one a God, the other but humane.
One fnare caught June, and the Carthage Dame,
(Her Husbands death prepared her funeral flame,
'Twas not a cause that Virgil makes one)
I need not grieve, that unprepared, alone,
Unarmed, and young, I did receive a wound,
Or that my enemy no hurt has found
By Love; or that she clothed him in my sight,
And took his wings, and marred his winding flight:
No angry Lions send more hideous noise
From their beat breasts, nor clashing thunders voice
Rends Heaven, frights Earth, and roareth through the air
With greater force, then Love had raised, to dare
Encounter her, of whom I write; and she
As quick and ready to assail, as he:
Enceladus when Aetna most he shakes,
Nor angry Scylla, nor Charibdis makes
So great and frightfull noise, as did the shock
Of this (first doubtful) battle, none could mock
Such earnest war; all drew them to the height
To see what mazed their hearts, and dimn'd their sight.
Victorious Love a threatening dart did show
His right hand held; the other bore a bow,
The string of which he drew just by his ear;
No Leopard could chase a frighted Dear
(Free, or broke loose) with quicker speed, then he
Made haste to wound; fire sparkled from his eye:
I burned, and had a combat in my breast,
Glad to have her company, yet 'twas not best
(Me thought) to see her lost, but it is in vain
TO abandon goodness, and of fate complain:
Virtue her servants never will forsake,
As now 'twas seen, she could resistance make:
No Fencer ever better warded blow,
Nor Pilot did to shore more wisely row
To shun a shelfe, then with undaunted power
She waved the stroke of this sharp Conqueror.
Mine eyes and heart were watchful to attend,
In hope the victory would that way bend
It ever did; and that I might no more
Be barred from her; as one, whose thoughts, before
His tongue has uttered them, you well may see
Writ in his looks; O! if you victour be
Great Sir, (said I) let her and me be bound
Both with one yoke; I may be worthy found,
And will not set her free, doubt not my faith:
When I beheld her with disdain and wrath
So filled, that to relate it, would demand
A better Muse then mine: Her virtuous hand
Had quickly quenched those gilded fiery darts,
Which dipped in beauties pleasure, poison hearts.
Neither Camilla, nor the warre-like host,
That cut their breasts, could so much valor boast;
Nor Caesar in Pharsalia fought so well,
As she against him, who pierces coats of mail;
All her brave virtues armed, attended there,
(A glorious troup!) and marched pair by pair:
Honor and blushes first in rank; the two
Religious virtues make the second row;
(By those she other women does excel)
Prudence, and Modesty, the twins that dwell
Together, both were lodged in her breast;
Glory and Perseverance ever blessed:
Fair Entertainment, Providence without,
Sweet courtesy and pureness round about*
Respect of credit, fear of infamy;
Grave thoughts in youth, and what not often agree,
True Chastity, and rarest beauty; these
All came against Love, and this the heavens did please
And every generous soul in that full height,
He had no power left to bear the weight!
A thousand famous prizes hardly gained
She took; and thousand ^lorious palms obtained,
Shook from his hands; the fall was not more strange
Of Hannibal, when Fortune pleased to change
Her mind, and on the Roman youth bestow
The favors he enjoyed; nor was he so
Amazed, who frighted the Isralitish host
Struck by the Hebrew boy, that quit his boast*
Nor Cirus more astonished at the fall
The Jewish widow gave his General:
As one that sickens suddenly, and fears
His life, or as a man taken unawares
In some base act, and does the finder hate;
Just so was he, or in a worse estate:
Fear, grief and shame, and anger in his face
Were seen, no troubled Seas more rage, the place
Where huge Typheus groans; nor Etna when
Her Giant sighs, were moved as he was then.
I pass by many noble things I see;
(To write them, were too hard a task for me)
To her and those that did attend, I go;
Her armor was a robe more white then snow;
And in her hand a shield like his she bare
Who slew Medusa, a fair pillar there
Of Jasp was fixed, and with a chain (first wet
In Lethe flood) of Jewels fitly set,
Diamonds mixed with Topasses (of old
'Twas worn by Ladies, now it is not) first hold
She caught, then bound him fast, then such revenge
She took, as might suffice* my thoughts did change;
And I who wished him victory before,
Was satisfied, he now could hurt no more.
I cannot in my rimes the names contain
Of blessed Maids that did make up her train*
Calliope nor Clio could suffice,
Nor all the other seven for the enterprise*
Yet some I will insert may justly claim
Precedence of others. Lucrece came
On her right hand: Penelope was by,
Those broke his bow, and made his arrows ly
Split on the ground, and pulled his plumes away
From off his wings: after Virginia
Nere her vexed father, armed with wrath and hate,
Fury, and ir'n and Love, he freed the state
And her from slavery, with a manly blow:
Next were those barbarous women, who could show
They judged it better die, then suffer wrong
To their rude Chastity: the wise and strong
The chaste Hebraean Judith, follows these;
The Greek that saved her honor in the Seas.
With these and other famous souls I see
Her Triumph over him, who used to be
Master of all the world: Amongst the rest
The vestall Nun I spide, who was so blessed
As by a wonder to preserve her fame.
Next came Hersilia the Roman Dame
(Or Sabine rather) with her valarous train,
Who prove all flanders on that sex are vain.
Then 'mongft the foreign Ladies, she whose faith
TO her husband (not Aeneas) caused her death;
The vulgar ignorant may hold their peace,
Her safety to her Chastity gave place;
Dido I mean, whom no vain passion led,
(As fame belies her) last, the virtuous Maid
Retired to Aruns, who no rest could find,
Her friends constraining power forced her mind;
The Triumph thither went, where salt waves wet
The Bayan shore, eastward; her foot she set
There on firm land, and did Avernus leave
On the one hand, on the other Sybils Cave,
So to Lencernus marched, the Village where
The noble Africane lies buried; there
The great news of her Triumph did appear
As glorious to the eye, as to the ear,
The fame had been; and the most chaste did show
Most beautiful; it grieved Love much to go
Another prisoner, exposed to scorn,
Who to command whole Empires seemed borne.
Thus to the chiefest City all were led,
Entering the Temple which Sulpitia made
Sacred; it drives all madness from the mind;
And chastities pure Temple next we find,
Which in brave souls does modest thoughts beget,
Not by Plebeians entered, but the great
Patrician Dames; there were the spoils displaid
Of the fair victresse; there her palms she laid,
And did commit them to the Thuscan youth,
Whose marring scarres bear witness of his truth:
With others more, whose names I fully knew,
(My guide instructed me) that overthrew
The power of Love: amongst whom of all the rest,
Hyppolito and Joseph were the best.
The end of this Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS Upon the Triumph of CHASTITY.
PHoebus and Leander, 5. line.] Phoebus loved Daphne, and Leander Hero.

Juno, 7. line.] Juno loved Jupiter so much, that she was troublesomly
jealous, if she can be called jealous, that had so much wrong.

Carthage dame, 7. line.] Dido, she burned her self in her husbands funeral
pile, lest she should be compelled to marry an importunate suitor, or bring
war on her Country.

Camilla, 57. line.] She was Queen of the Amazons: it is said, they cut off
their right breasts, that they might shoot with the more ease.

Caesar in Pharsalia, 59. line.] That famous battle, in which he overcame
Pompey the great and made way to the Empire.

Religious virtues, 64. line.] Faith and Hope, Italian Commentary.

The twins, 69. line.] Justice and Fortitude, Italian Commentary.

The Roman youth, 81. line.] Scipio, who overcame Hannibal.

Typheus groans, 95. line.] Typheus was one of the Giants that warred with
heaven: there was a mountain thrown upon him, under which when he groans,
it sends forth smoke, fire, and stones* with great noise.

Nor Aetna, 95. line.] Another mountain, which was cast upon Enceladus another
Giant: the smoke and fire of all these burning mountains, proceeds from the
Giants that lie oppressed under them.

Slew Medusa, 100. line.] The shield of Perseus* which turned all that beheld
it, to stones.

Jasp. 101. line.] Jasp has a quality to make one chaste.

Lethe flood, 103. line] Forgetfulness, an excellent cure for Love, and the
tooth-ake.

Diamonds, etc. 104. line.] Diamonds is thought makes the wearers constant:
Topasses make chaste, for which two causes they were worn by Ladies of old; but
I hope they are not needful now.

Calliope, etc. 112. 113. line.] the nine Muses.

Lucrece, 114. line.] A known Story, she killed her self after Tarquin had
ravished her.

Penellope, 115. line] The chaste wife of Ulysses.

Virginia, 118. line.] Virginia being a beautiful young Maid* was adjudged a
bondwoman by Appius Claudius, that he might obtain his own base ends: her
father seeing no other way to preserve her liberty and chastity, killed her,
which occasioned the alteration of that government, by which Appius had his
power, and gave liberty to the people.

Judged it better die, 123. line.] Their husbands, fathers* brothers, etc.
being killed and chased by Marius, they hanged themselves, Italian Commentary.

The Greek, etc. 126. line.] Hippo a Grecian maid* who being embarked against
her will by one who intended to dishonor her, leapt in to the Sea, and drowned
her self, Italian Commentary.

The vestall Nun, 130 line.] Called Tucia, who cleared her self from a false
accusation, by carrying water in a sive.

Hirsilia, 132. line.] Wife to Romulus, she with the other Roman wives, all
Sabine women, who had been stolen from their kindred, seeing their husbands
ready to fight with their fathers, brothers, cousins, etc. ran in betwixt
them, and opposing themselves to the naked swords, staid the fury of the fight,
brought them to a parley, and so to an agreement.

Dido I mean, 139. line.] Petrarch it seems was much troubled at the wrong done
to Dido, by Virgil; who to honor his Aeneas, will needs have it, that she
forfeit her honor to him, when in true History, it is known he never see
her: this he glanceth at in her defense three several times, for which I
thank him.

Retired to Arnus, 141. line.] One Piccarda, who rendered her self a Nun,
but was taken out by her friends, and compelled to marry, Italian Commentar.

Baian shore, 144. line.] Baiae, is a City in Campania, called so from the hot
bathes that are in it: it lies along the Coast of the Mediterran sea,
south-east from the mouth of Tiber, and gives name to the Bay near it, where
Lauretta landed.

Avernus, 145. line.] A great Lake nere Baiae.

Sybils cave, 146. line.] A cave not far from Avernus, where Sybilla called
Cumea, was wonted to give her answers.

Linternum, 147. line.] A little Village in Campania, honored by the death and
burial of the elder Scipio.

By Sulpitia, 156. line.] Sulpitia was a virtuous and learned Lady of Rome, who
lived and wrote in the time of Domitian: it seems she has been chosen to
dedicate that Temple or Altar to Venus* which has power to curb unreasonable
passions, for the chastest women did worship Venus for that end, belike as the
Indians worship the Devil.

Thuscan youth, 163. line.] A beautiful young man* who pitying the miseries of
those women that doted on him, and wearied with their importunities, marred his
own face.

My guide, 164. line.] His old Thuscan friend, who described The Triumph of
Love to him ere he was one of the train* does now describe The Triumph of
Chastity.

Hippolito and Joseph, 169. line.] Hippolito rejected the unlawful Love of his
stepmother, and Joseph the solicitation of his masters wife.

THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH: Written by PETRARCH, AND TRANSLATED Out of Italian, BY
Mris ANNA HUME.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1644.

THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH.
CHAP. I.
The Argument.
Lauretta meeting cruel Death,
Mildely resignes her noble Breath.
THe glorious Maid, whose soul to Heaven is gone
And left the rest cold earth, she who was grown
A pillar of true valor, and had gained
Much honor by her victory, and chained
That God which does the world with terror bind,
Using no armor but her own chaste mind:
A fair aspect, coy thoughts, and words well weighed,
Sweet modesty to these gave friendly aid.
It was a miracle on earth to see
The bow and arrows of the Deity,
And all his armor broke, who erst had slain
Such numbers, and so many captive tain:
The fair Dame from the noble fight withdrew
With her choice company, they were but few,
And made a little troup, true vertu's rare,
Yet each of them did by her self appear
A theme for Poems, and might well incite
The best Historian: they bore a white
Unspotted Ermine, in a field of green,
About whose neck a Topas chain was seen
Set in pure gold; their heavenly words and gate
Expressed them blessed were borne for such a fate.
Bright stars they seemed, she did a Sun appear,
Who darkened not the rest, but made more clear
Their splendor; honor in brave minds is found:
This troup with Violets and Roses crowned,
Cheerfully marched, when lo, I might epsy
Another ensign dreadful to mine eye,
A Lady clothed in black, whose stern looks were
With horror filled, and did like hell appear,
Advanced, and said, You who are proud to be
So fair and young, yet have no eyes to see
How near you are your end, behold, I am
She, whom they, fierce, and blind, and cruel name,
Who meet untimely deaths; 'tvvas I did make
Greece subject, and the Roman Empire shake*
My piercing svvord sacked Troy, how many rude
And barbarous people are by me subdued?
Many ambitious, vain, and amarous thought
My unvvisht presence has to nothing brought*
Now am I come to you, vvhiles yet your state
Is happy, ere you feel a harder fate.
On these you have no power, she then replide,
Who had more vvorth then all the world beside,
And little over me; but there is one
Who will be deeply grieved when I am gone,
His happiness does on my life depend,
I shall find freedom in a peaceful end.
As one who glancing with a sudden eye
Some unexpected object does epsy;
Then looks again, and does his own haste blame:
So in a doubting pause, this cruel dame
A little staid, and said, The rest I call
To mind, and know I have overcome them all:
Then with less fierce aspect, she said, Thou guide
Of this fair crew, have not my strength assaid,
Let her advise, who may command, prevent
Decrepit age, it is but a punishment;
From me this honor thou alone shall have,
Without or fear or pain, to find thy grave,
As he shall please, who dwells in the Heaven
And rules on earth, such portion must be given
To me, as others from thy hand receive:
She answered then; a far we might perceave
Millions of dead heapt on the adjacent plain,
No verse nor prose may comprehend the slain
Did on deaths Triumph wait, from India,
From Spain, and from Morocco, from Cathai,
And all the skirts of the earth they gathred were,
Who had most happy lived, attended there;
Popes, Emperors, nor Kings, no ensigns wore
Of their past height, but naked showed and poor.
Where be their riches, where their precious jems,
Their Miters, Scepters, Roabs and Diadems?
O miserable men, whose hopes arise
From worldly joys, yet be there few so wise
As in those trifling follies not to trust;
And if they be deceived in end it is just:
Ah, more then blind, what gain you by your toil
You must return once to your mothers soil,
And after times your names shall hardly know,
Nor any profit from your labor grow;
All those strange countries by your warlick stroke
Submitted to a tributary yoke;
The fuel erst of your ambitious fire,
What help they now? the vast and bad desire
Of wealth and power at a bloody rate
Is wicked, better bread and water eat
With peace; a wooden dish does seldom hold
A poisoned draught, glass is more safe then gold;
But for this Theme a larger time will ask,
I must betake me to my former task.
The fatal hour of her short life drew near,
That doubtful passage which the world does fear;
Another company, who had not been
Freed from their earthy burden there were seen,
To try if prayers could appease the wrath,
Or stay the inexorable hand of death.
That beauteous croude conveen'd to see the end
Which all must taste; each neighbor, every friend
Stood by, when grim death with her hand took hold,
And pulled away one only hair of gold.
Thus from the world this fairest flower is taken
To make her shine more bright, not out of spleen:
How many moaning plaints, what store of cries
Were uttered there, when fate shut those fair eyes
For which so often I sung; whose beauty burned
My tortured heart so long; whiles others mourned
She pleased, and quiet did the fruit enjoy
Of her blessed life; farewell, without annoy,
True Saint on earth, said they; so might she be
Esteemed, but nothing bates deaths cruelty.
What shall become of others, since so pure
A body did such heats and colds endure,
And changed so often in so little space?
Ah worldly hopes, how blind you be, how base?
If since I bathe the ground with flowing tears
For that mild soul, who sees it witness bears;
And thou who read'st may judge she fettered me.
The sixth of April, and did set me free
On the same day and month: O! how the way
Of fortune is unsure, none hates the day
Of slavery, or of death, so much as I
Abhor the time which wrought my liberty,
And my too-lasting life; it had been just
My greater age had first been turned to dust,
And paid to time, and to the world the debt
I owed, then earth had kept her glorious state:
Now at what rate I should the sorrow prise
I know not, nor have Art that can suffice
The sad affliction* to relate in verse
Of these fair Dames, that wept about her hearse*
Courtesy, Virtue, Beauty, all are lost,
What shall become of us? none else can boast
Such high perfection, no more we shall
Hear her wise words, nor the Angelical
Sweet music of her voice; whiles thus they cride
The parting spirit does it self divide
With every virtue from the noble breast,
As some grave Hermit, seeks a lonely rest:
The Heavens were clear, and all the ambient Air
Without a threatening Cloud, no adversaire
Durst once appear, or her calm mind affright;
Death singly did her self conclude the fight;
After, when fear, and the extremest plaint
Were ceast, the attentive eyes of all were bent,
On that fair face, and by despair became
Secure; she who was spent, not like a flame
By force extinguished, but as lights decay,
And undiscerned waste themselves away:
Thus went the soul in peace, so lamps are spent,
As the oil fails which gave them nourishment;
In sum, her countenance you still might know
The same it was, not pale, but white as snow,
Which on the tops of hills in gentle fleakes
Falls in a calm, or as a man that takes
Desired rest, as if her lovely sight
Were closed with sweetest sleep, after the spright
Was gone. If this be that fools call to die,
Death seemed in her exceeding fair to be.
The end of the first Chapter.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH.
NOble fight, line, 13.] Her fight with Cupid: See above in the Triumph of
Chastity.

Choice Company, 14. line.] The Ladies that had been virtuous before her time,
and now waited on her Triumph, Lucrece, Penelope, etc.

They bore a white, 18. line.] Their ensign, a white Ermine in a green field,
with a chain of Topasses set in pure gold: the white Ermine was an Emblem of
innocence: The Topasses of Chastity: and the pure gold of tried Virtue.

On these 43. line.] Meaning the other Ladies that waited on her, because they
were all dead long before.

There is one, 45. line.] Petrarch, whom she thought would be more hurt by her
death then her self, in regard of his extreme affection.

Another Company, 95. line.] The former Company who were dead, could not be
sorry for her death, because she would be nearer them, but another company of
Ladies, her friends and neighbors, came to pray that death would let her stay
longer amongst them.

One only hair, 102. line.] Alluding to the purple hair on the head of
Nisus, which his daughter stole, because he could not die whiles he wore it, as
if Lauretta had had such another: or as if every body had one: See above in the
Triumph of Love, 2. Chap. 155. line.

No adversary, 142. line.] No wicked spirit, meaning, that she was troubled
with no apparitions at her death.

CHAP. II.
The Argument.
The happy spirit does descend
To comfort her afflicted friend.
THat night which followed the too-sad decay
Of my best Sun, whiles it was yet full day:
(Whence I remain as blind) the Summer dew
Slides through the Air, and fair Titonia now
Bestows true dreams, (when like the growing year)
A Lady (crowned with orient jemmes) drew nere:
(With whom a thousand other Crowns did move)
And stretching forth that object of my love,
Her hand; she spoke, from whose sweet words did flow
Joy to my soul, and said, Do you not know
Her, who has raised your thoughts above the strain
Of the low vulgar, as her love did gain
Place in your heart, then with a sober look
She set her self and me, close by a brook
Over shadowed with a lavvrell and a beach:
Like one whose weeping interrupts his speech:
Must I not know the soul maintains my breath;
But do you live, or are taken hence by death?
I answered, Pray instruct; I live said she,
And you are dead, till you be joined with me:
But time is short, though we desire it long,
Take my advice, and curb your flowing tongue:
The day approaches fast, my sad reply
Was this: Ah say, is it much pain to die?
You lately tried and knevv, you will never obtain
True happiness, she said, if you remain
In this so blind and common error; know,
Death is the end of prison and dark vvoe
To vvell-bred souls, does only terror prove
To those that place on earthy dross their love;
And even my death which does my soul annoy,
Could you conceive the least part of my joy,
Would make you happy (having fixed her eye,
Whiles thus she spoke, devoutly on the sky)
Then closed her rosy lips, and silent staid*
Sickness and Tyrants cruelty have made
Death bitter, I replied; It Is true, said she,
The pains we feel before death bitter be,
And hellish torments worse; but he whose mind
Is staid by heavenly hopes, shall truly find,
Though weak and wearied, this last step a short
Sigh, and no more; as I drew near the Port,
My body weak, my soul did much rejoice;
Yet heard the whispering of mourning voice;
Alas, for him who reckons every day
A thousand years, and still in vain does stay
On earth, and never more must see her face
On Sea or Land, and fills every place
With that one Theme, and finds no delight
Of ought but her, to think, or speak, or write.
My sight I that way turned, from whence mine ear
Received the sound, and saw 'twas she whose care
Used to incite my Love, and temper thine:
Her face and speech I knew, often her divine
Wise councels, healing cordials were to me,
With honest mirth and cheerful gravitie;
When I with most felicity was blessed
In my first prime, and when thou lov'dst me best:
When thy praise famed me most, even then my life
Was little better then a bitter strife,
Compared with that sweet death, which few obtain;
No banished man called to his home again
Is more joy'd, then this passage pleased me:
But for the pity that I had of thee
I do adjure thee, by that faithful Love
Thou knewst on earth, but better know above;
Did ever Love, said I, beget in thee
One thought to pity my long misery,
Not wronging thy great mind; the sweet disdain,
Sweet mildness of your looks in doubtful pain,
Has held my wishes long; ere I had said
The words, a lightning smile, such as often paid
And eased the sadness of my wounded heart
I saw: Then she replide; Nothing could part
My soul from thine, nor shall; but 'tdid behove
With outward coldness to restrain thy love,
No other way would have preserved our fame;
A rod destroys not a kind mothers name:
I studied to conceal my Love, such care
And providence dwell not with hope and fear;
My countenance you saw, but not my heart,
I turned and staid thy course with heedfull Art*
As one would tame a horse: my cheeks have been
Often died with feigned wrath, when my heart within
Was a whole fire of Love; yet reason still
Kept her own place, and did command my will:
But when I found thee overcharged with woe,
I used my milder looks, preventing so
Thy death, and my reproach; when I observed
Thy passion grow too strong, I then reserved
My self, as if with grief or fear oppressed:
These were my ensigns, and I found it best
To mix disdains with favors, this your songs
Have made already pass through many tongues;
When I beheld the tears swim in thine eye,
I said, Without my help, I fear he will dye:
Then gave some modest aid; when you were bold,
I said, he must be curbed: now pale and cold,
Now warm and fresh, now sad, now full of joy,
I kept thee safe, not without much annoy;
Glad to have thus finished, 'twere enough reward
Could I believed; thus trembling, as affeard,
Not with dry eyes, I said, she made reply,
Do you distrust, for what end should I ly;
A little blushing, then went on, If to
My partial eye, the world esteemed you:
I held me quiet, being thoroughly blessed
In that true-love knot locked within my breast:
The fair report (if it be truth) I hear
Thy praises have acquired me far and near,
I much esteem, and never more did crave
But moderation in thy love to have;
That only wanted; whiles with signs of woe
You would persuade what I did thoroughly know,
To open view you did your heart expose:
My coldness hence, hence your distemper rose:
In other things we did like friends agree,
Joined by a Love, from all base passions free;
My heart was burnt with almost equal fire,
At least, when once I knew thy strong desire*
But mine I hid, whiles yours was open laid:
When you were hoarce, with having often praid,
For pity, I was silent, shame and fear
Were cause my great Love did but small appear:
Grief is of no less weight, because concealed,
Nor more when by impatience it is revealed;
Deceit does not increase, nor yet impair
A truth; But say, Was not my Love then clear
When I received the lines you sent before
Your face and song? My Love dares say no more.
My heart was still with thee, though I restrained
My looks; and you, as having vvrong, complained,
Because I gave the most part, and vvithdrevv
The least, yet was not that vvith-held from you;
A thousand and a thousand times mine eye
Was turned with pity on thy misery;
And ever had continued still the same,
But that I feared a danger in thy flame:
And not to leave you in suspense, I Will shovv
What I believe you vvil be glad to know;
In all the rest I found a pleasing fate,
Only for one cause I disliked my state*
My place of birth did to my thoughts appear
Too mean, and I still grieve 'tvvas not more near
Thy flovvry seat, yet do I well approve
Of any Country where I had thy Love;
Besides, the heart in which I place most trust,
If me thou had not known, it is like it must
Have elsewhere loved, so had I got less fame;
You do mistake, my Love had been the same
Where ever you had lived, my Stars did raise
Me to so high a flame, I said: much praise
And honor have attended me, she said,
How e're it be, but I too long have staid:
Thy joy makes thee forget the wings of time,
Aurora now brings day, the Sun does climb
Above the Ocean, from her golden bed;
At last, about to part and leave me sad,
She said, If you have ought besides make haste
And end your speech before the time be past;
All my past sufferings your kind words make light,
I answered, But I grieve without your sight,
And wish to know, if I am like to be
Long here, or if I soon may follow thee:
She going thus replide; I do believe,
That without me on earth you long must live.
The End of the Triumph of Death.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE TRIUMPH OF DEATH.
BEst sun, 2. line.] Meaning Lauretta, who dyed in the midst of her age,
being but 33. years old.

Titania, 4. line.] Aurora the morning, called Titania from Titan, the Sun,
who lodges with her.

True dreams, 5. line.] The morning dreams are held true, because the fancy
is then most free from vapors.

A Lady, 6. line.] Lauretta crowned, because she was now a Saint.

Other crowns did move, 7. line.] Other crowned Saints that came along with
her, belike he thought they must dote on her, as he did.

Do you live, etc. 18. line.] The Italian Commentary makes a long and
needless discourse to defend the congruitie of this place, as if all did not
know that those who dream they see a dead person appear, as if alive, do
ordinarily make such a doubt in their sleep.

When I received, 129. line.] He had one time, as he used, sent her some of
his verses, and coming himself just as they were presented to her, she
received them in his presence, Italian Commentary.

My Love dares say no more, 130. line.] She sung a song, beginning thus, for an
undirect excuse of her reservation.

Flowrie seat, 145. line.] Florence.

Of any country, etc. 146. line.] The sense here seemed clear to me, that
Lauretta being well descended, but borne in Cabriers, an obscure village, she
was only displeased with that particular; yet the honor of his love was
recompense enough for that misfortune, and any place good enough where she had
that honor: and if she had been borne near Florence, where he had his
birth, she might have been unknown to him who had left it, his parents being
chased from thence by a contrary faction; and if he had not seen her, it is
like he might have loved another, so should she have missed that honor, to
which Petrarch answers, That where ever she had been borne, he must needs
have loved her, by the influence of his Stars: but when I look on the
Italian Commentary, I find he takes the meaning quite other ways, which I
have expressed as near his sense as I can, thus: Thy flowery seat, for though I
well approve
Of that fair country where I had thy love:
Yet might that heart, in which I trusted, stray
To other beauties, and be turned away
By this defect, so had I got less fame, etc.


As if she had said her greatest misfortune was fear or jealousy, that he
disliking the place in which she lived (though she thought it sweet enough)
might change his affection, and be drawn to love some other* Let him that
reads or compares, take the sense he approves most.

FINIS.
Advertisement to the Reader.
THe first title page should have told thee that all the three Triumphs were
translated out of the Italian, a circumstance I considered not then, since it
is thought necessary to say so much, I will now say more: I never saw them, nor
any part of them, in any other language but Italian, except the poor words in
which I have clothed them. If they afford thee either profit or delight, I
shall the more willingly bestow some of my few leisure hours on turning the
other three Triumphs, of Fame, Time, and Divinity or Heaven.

Farewell.
Errata.
Page 19. line 13. read amasedly. p. 22. r. Massinissa was. p. 3^. l. 8. r.
mixed, for mingled. p. 33. r. blows for wounds. p. 35. l. 15. del. now. p. 54.
l. 5 r. provincial Poets. p. 65. l. 22. r. Linternum. p. 70. is figured false,
in the 17. l. of it, read know for knew, and in the 22. l. r. thy foul for my
soul.



WHen first my light did shine, you liked me well.
Now that is gone; you hate my loathsome smell;
You with prolongers made me live, and art
Preserved my light; but now Time acts his part,
Triumphant Time, shows now my glass is run
And all must end, that ever was begun:
Envy has played its part, and I do go
To Coffin: as I do, all must do so.
Time breaths a shrewd and life-bereaving blast,
Yet upward flies my light, where it shall last.
I Am glad to part from body, which I loved
So deer, that many ways and arts I proved
This mudwall to maintain, and body save,
But yet in spite of me 'twill go to grave.
This is my comfort, Body, that thy tomb
Which is thy grave, shall be thy mothers womb
To bring thee once again unto the light,
And life, which death shall never know, or night:
Then be content, though you and I depart:
Yet Soul and Body still shall have one heart.
And upward flies my soul, where it shall dwell,
Beyond the reach of Envy, Death, or Hell.

