THE Mystical Wolf.

Set forth in a Sermon Preached in the Church of Edmond the King, in
Lombard Street.

By E. P.

LONDON, Printed by Marie Oaks, and are to be sold by Robert Trot, at his Shop
under the Church of Edmond the King. 1645.

To the Right Worshipful Sir NICHOLAS RAYNTON, Knight, and Alderman of
London: and to Mr. WILLIAM GIBBS, Alderman, and Sher^ffe of the said City, and
to all his loving friends who have been Church wardens assisting him. As to the
Right Worshipful Mr. Walter Rogers* Mr. Robert Smith, Mr. Samuel Bridge, Mr.
Thomas Soane, Mr. Henry Geirie, Mr. Thomas ^aton, Mr. John Bludworth, Mr.
Nicholas Cook, Mr. Anthony Cross, Mr. Ambrose Brumskill, M^. Tobias Dixon, Mr.
John Niclas, Mr. Iaspar Clayton, Mr. Andrew H^de, Mr. George Denham, Mr. John
Rogers, Mr. Spencer Vincent, Mr. ^ohn Smith, Mr. Richard Kimble, Mr. Francis
Pat^s, Mr. Peter Worster, Mr. William Dev^nsh^re, and to all his other loving
parishioners, and to his loving friends, and fellow laborers, Mr. John
Hopkins, and Mr. John Davis. Old Ephraim Pagitt, Recto^ of Edmonds the King in
Lomb. wishes all happiness.
MUnster writes that there are no Wolves in England, which is a great
blessing, and in a manner peculiar to our Kingdom, in which our Shepherds may
securely feed their flocks without dread of those ravenous beasts, who are to
sheep most mischievous: The like might I have said of Mystical wolves, for
40. year and more of my Pastoral charge in which I had no dread of them: But
now I live to see (with grief of heart) grievous Wolves broken in among us,
not sparing the flock. Therefore the counsel that St. Paul gave to the
Presbyters of Ephesus, I will put you in remembrance of (that is* To take heed
to our selves and to the flock whereof the holy Ghost has made us overseers.
It is reported concerning the mother of Gregory Nazianzen, that she dreamed
when she was conceived of that worthy light of the Church, that she had in her
womb a white mastiffe, which by his barking should drive the Wolves from the
sheepfold: And whereas some of you with many other pious Citizens, have
erected sundry Lectures in this City* in which diverse Nazianzens now preach,
who I hope with the assistance of our religious patriots assembled in
Parliament, will drive away, not only the Romish, but all other ravening wolves
from the Sheep* fold of our Lord Jesus Christ. For my own part, although by
reason of my age, I cannot bark loud* much less bite. Yet whereas about 60.
years ago, I published in print 28. Sermons of Lavaterus upon Ruth* Now not
knowing how soon I shall put off this my Tabernacle, I publish this sermon of
my own, preached among you, when the plague of heresy first began among us,
and this I dedicate to you, to whom I conf^sse my self much obliged: Most
humbly entreating Almighty God to bless you with abundance of all gifts and
graces in this world, and eternal glory in the world to come.

Your old Pastor, Ephraim Pagitt.

THE Mystical Wolf.
Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheep clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves,

Math. 7. 15.
IN the former two Verses, our Lord tells his Disciples of two ways, in
which all mankind walk. The one a broad way that leads to destruction, in
which many walk. The other a narrow way which leads unto life, which few
find. In this verse, like a most loving kind friend, he forewarneth his
Disciples of the chief impediments hindering in the way (viz.) False Prophets.

The journey of the Israelites to the Earthly Canaan, was a type of our journey
to the Heavenly. And did not one false Prophet Balaam do them more mischief in
their journey, then Og the Giant, King of Bashan, Sehon King of the Amorites,
and all their enemies beside? Yea, could the Devil himself in his own
likeness, have been more noxious and hurtful to the Church of God, then some
Heretics have been? As one Heretic Arrius denying the deity of Christ, in a
(...)
manner infected the whole Christian world: The like did another false Prophet
called Eutyches, denying his (...)*
humanity, (affirming the immensity of Christ's divine nature to have swallowed
up his humane,) now if Christ had not been man, how could he have dyed for us
sinners? And if not God, how could he have wrought the salvation of mankind?

Time will not serve me to relate what mischief false prophets have done by the
instigation of the Devil, neither need I. Our poor Church has sense enough
of it, groaning under the burden of them at this present, and especially they
that have cure of souls, may with great grief of heart complain, of Infants
not brought to the Sacrament of Baptism, of multitudes refusing to receive the
holy Communion, of the accounting of the Lords prayer abominable, and the
Apostles Creed defective, and banishing the ten Commandments out of many of
our Churches. The miseries of this time are infinite, and who lays hand to
help? Is not our help only in the name of the Lord: upon whom our mother the
Church has taught us to call, from all false doctrine and herisie, from
hardness of heart and contempt of thy Word and Commandments, good Lord
deliver us.

These words are part of our Lords holy sermon in the Mount, which contains;

A Premonition, in which there is

A Caution in this word (...) A description of them whom we are to beware of,
whom he 1. Describes generally, by their Title, Ealse Prophets. 2.
Particularly, by their External show, they shall Inward disposition, being
Ravening wolves. 1. Intrude themselves. 2. Insinuate. 3. Dissemble.



And of these, as God shall enable me, and I pray God that this Text may be as
profitable to you as fitting.

And first I purpose to speak of false prophets, how dangerous they are, and
of the caveat in the last place, which will be then more acceptable to you, you
seeing the great danger that you are in by them (...) of false prophets.

The word Prophet is used in Scriptures,

First, for a fore-teller of things to come, derived from the word (...), which
signifies to divine False Prophets. A falsis prophetis. (...)
or foretell.

Secondly, in a larger sense for all Ministers and Teachers.

Our Lord bids us beware, not of Prophets, but of false prophets, or such as
pretend themselves to be Prophets.

The word signifies lying prophets.

Saint Peter terms them (...)* lying teachers, 2 Peter 2. 1.
who privily shall bring in damnableheresies.

St. Paul calls them (...), speaking lies in hypocrisy.

Take heed of such also as pretend that they speak immediately from God by
revelation, as the illuminated Anabaptists, Familists and other Enthusiasts
(make their proselytes believe:) or from the Oracle of Gods Word by an
especial insight given them from above, to interpret Gods Word.

Again, from such as turn the truth of God into a lie. Romans 5. 25.


The Friars of old erected their Kingdom by lies. Walsingham reports that
they were so famous for lying, In Vita Rich. 2
that it was accounted a good argument, he is a friar Ergo a liar.

Do not our lying prophets go beyond them, they tell lies, they write lies,
they preach lies, they print lies, as if God needed lies: Thou will destroy all
them that speak leasing, says the Prophet. Psalm 5.


Here I would observe two things.

1. That there have been, and always shall be false ^alse prophets always in
the Church.
prophets in the Church.

2. Why God suffers them.

For the first, that there have been, and always shall be, false prophets in
the Church.

There shall arise (says our Lord) false prophets, and if Matthew 24.
it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.

I know (says St. Paul) that after my departing, grievous Acts 20. 29.
Wolves shall enter in among you. Again, the spirit ^ Tim. 4. 1.
speaks evidently, that in the latter times, some shall depart from the
faith, and shall give heed to the spirit of error, and doctrines of Devils,
which speak lies through hypocris^^.

Likewise St. Peter affirms; But there were false 2 Pet 2. 1, 2
prophets among the people, and there shall be also false teachers among you
which privily shall bring in damnable hesies, even denying the Lord that bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation.

For example sake, we read of the Devil the archfalse prophet, deceiving our
first parents in Paradise: of Iamnes and Iambres, withstanding Moses, and
resisting 2 Timothy 3. 8
the truth: In Eliahs time of many false prophets deceiving the people: yea, in
this very time when our Lord preached upon the earth.

The Church was annoyed with diverse pernicious sects: as with ^he Pharisees,
who like the Papists held Justification by works: With the Saduces, who held
with the Atheists of our time, that there is no resurrection: With the Essens,
who like the Anabaptists of our time, thought themselves free from all humane
authority. I might set down the heretics that sprang up in the most pure ages
of the Church, viz. In the first 400. years after Christ, collected by St.
Agustine Lib. de haeresibus.
out of Eusebius and Epiphanius.

The Apostles and holy men seldom planted any Churches, but the devil with
his false prophets went about to subvert them. Hear what St. Paul says to the
Galatians. O ye foolish Galatians who has bewitched Galat. 3. 1.
you* that you should not obey the truth?

Again, to the Corinthians, I fear, lest as the Serpent 2 Cor. 11. 3.
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so you should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ.

The noble Churches of Antioch, Ephesus, Alexandria, and Constantinople, were
poisoned by false prophets.

In Ephesus were the Nicholaitans, in Alexandria, Arrius, in Antioch,
Samosatenus; in Constantinople, Eutyches and Nestorius; and i^ Britany,
Pelagius, called in Welsh, Morgan: But how Christian Princes, and holy Bishops,
and learned men bestir'd themselves to save their flocks from those Wolves, and
in the very beginning to suppress them, you may perceive by the ancient
Councels, in some one of which 400. year, 600. Bishops conve^ed, and ran
together, yea among us, to damn Pelagius heresy; Bishops came from beyond the
Seas, as Germanus and Lupus out of France, St. Augustine also Bishop of Hippo
in Africa, was assisting to us against him, as appears by his writings extant
among us: Our histories report that our Welsh Archbishop Davie was a great
means to extirpate his heresy, who wrote a book against it.

As sorreign Bishops were ayding to us in suppressing the heretics that rose
among us, so were we assisting to them, as Eborius of York, Restitutus of
London, Adel^ius of Colchester, with other British and learned men, subscribed
the Council of Arles. Also some of An ^^ 313.
our Bishops were at the Council of Nice and Sardis, and with others damned
the Arrian heresy, and absolved Athanasius. Our poor Church is at this time
oppressed Jesuits and other Rom^sh ^m^^s^^ies.
with false prophets, not only with Jesuits and other Romish Emissaries, but
also with unpure Familists, who blasphemously pretend to be godified like
F^^^lists.
God, whereas indeed they are devillified like their Father the Devil, who
would be like the most high.

With illuminated Anabaptists, who blaspheme the Anabaptists*
baptism of Children, and these heretics, whom in time past we burned, we
may hear now in our pul^its ^educing the people.

We have also Donatistical Brownists, who like the Brownists.
Pharisees of old, separate themselves from other men, counting all men
profane that are not of their Conventicles.

We have also Independants, who dream that they I^ded^^^^.
have a perfect model^ of Church Government, which Almighty God kept secret
from the Patriarks, Priests, Prophets, Apostles, and Doctors of the Church, and
now lately revealed unto them.

We have also Antinomians, who, whereas the Papists Antinomians.
leave out one Commandment of the ten, they null the whole Law, not allowing
it to be a rule of life. This opinion simple people swallow down, having, as
they suppose, found a new way to heaven.

We have Arminians, an after-brood of Pelagius. Arminian^.


We have Sabbatarianss, who affirm the old Jewish Sabbatarians.
Sabbath to be kept; and not the Lords day.

We have also Antisabbatarians, who would have Antisabbatarians.
no special Sabbath day at all, affirming every day to be a sabbath to a
christian man.

We have Traskites, who affirm many Jewish ceremonies Traskites*
to be observed by Christians.

We have Arrians, who deny the deity of Christ. Arrians.


We have Antitrinitarians, who blaspheme the holy Antitrinitarians.
Trinity.

We have Millenaries, who dream that we must Millenaries.
live with Christ 1000. years here in earth before the resurrection.

We have Hetheringtonians, who hold a hodg-podg of many heresies.

We have an Atheistical sect, who affirm that men's Souls sleep.
souls sleep with their bodies.

We have Socinians, who teach that Christ dyed, not to satisfy for our sins,
but to give us an example of patience, with other abho^inable errors.

Alas, what Heresy have we not? and most of these are subdivided into many
Sects: as there are about twenty sorts of Anabaptists, fourteen set down by
Alstedius, and the rest by Bullinger; sundry sorts of In Indi^e Po^^m. Bulling*
^dver. An^b^^.
Familists, Brownists, and of others: every day begets a new opinion, it faring
with them, as with the ancient Heretics, who having once forsaken the truth,
wandered from one error to another; they agreeing only in this one thing, to
do mischief to the Church of God.

The old Fable may have relation to our times of an overture of peace tendered
by the Wolves to the Sheep, but upon condition that they would put away their
dogs, that were malignant to them: and does not all this follow upon the
suspension of Church Government? Alas, our Church is oppressed by false
Prophets, and we have no government to help. The City of God is on fire, and
who goes about to quench it? The plague of Heresy is among us, and we have no
power to keep the sick from the whole: The Wolves that were wont to lie in the
woods, dare come into our Sheep-folds, and roar in our holy Congregations.

O thou Shepherd of Israel, why have thou broken Psalm. ^0.
down the hedges of this thy Vineyard, which thy right had had plantted? the
Boar out of the Wood, and the wild beast out of the field does devour: Oh
remember not against us our former iniquities, let thy tender mercies prevent
us, for we are brought very low.

2. Why God suffers false Prophets in his Church.

Resp. 1. For the punishment of the ungodly, as 2. Why God suffers false
Prophets.
St. Paul affirms: Because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved: Therefore 2 These. 2. 10.
God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie. (...)
That all might be damned that believed not the truth.

St. Basil has a Contemplation why the Devil has so many servants, who is
the enemy of mankind, and God so few, who has created us and redeemed us,
etc. The reason he says, is not because the Devil has spoiled God of his
Kingdom, but because men loved not the truth, God gave them over to be slaves
to the Devil. Were it possible that men should be so carried away to believe
lies and fooleries, but that they are given over to a reprobate sense?

2. God suffers false Prophets in the Church, 1 Cor. 11. 1^.
for the trial of the godly. There must be (says St. Paul) Heresies among
you, that they which are approved may be known. The Lord proves you, (says
Moses) whether you love the Lord your God.

The Uses that we should make of this is,

First in these distractions to be more diligent to Use 1.
seek after the truth.

If Arrius had not so wickedly denied the Deity of Christ, the deep mysteries
of the holy Trinity had never been so accurately determined by Athanasius, and
other learned Doctors.

If the Manichees had not so shamefully railed upon the old Testament, the
learned Doctor, St. Augustine had never taken so much pains in answering their
lewd Objections.

If the Brownists, and other Sectaries had not so imp^dently disgorged their
malice upon our Church, calling her Whore of Babylon, etc. The learned men of
our Age had never by their writings so sufficiently cleared her innocence in
the hearts of understanding men.

The second use is, that the Shepherds should use Use 2.
double diligence, taking heed to themselves and to the fl^cke, over which
Christ has made them overseers, and to double and treble our prayers to the
great Shepherd of souls, that he would lead us in the paths of righteousness
for his names sake. Let no man slight prayer which is the armor of the Church,
and of great Lib. 4. cap. 4.
force: one only example I will cite out of Theodoret, who reports that
Alexanders prayers prevailed more against the Arrians, then Athanasius profound
learning.

When the Arrian Bishops with the Emperors power, threatened to bring in Arrius
into Alexanders Church, the next day he prayed all night after this manner; O
Lord, if it be thy will to bring Arrius into my Church, then let thy servant
depart in peace; but if thou will be favorable to thy Church, of which I am
sure, then turn thine eye upon the Arrians: The next day when the Arrians came
with great p^mp to have taken possession of his church: Arrius going aside, his
bowels brake asunder like Iudasses.

Let us earnestly pray to God to keep these heretics out of our churches, let
us call upon him with David, Psa^m^ 80. 4*
How long Lord will thou be angry with thy people that pray? And thus much what
false prophets are, and why Which come, ^u^ veniunt. (...)
God suffers them.

Their outward description in which he sets down
1 their Intrusion. 2 Insinuation. 3 Dissimulation.
(...) their intrusion, they come, they have no calling, Intrusion.
these false prophets are not sent: Paul asks how they can preach except they
besent. And this stands Romans 10. 15.
with good reason, every true Minister stands in Gods room, being the Lords
Ambassador to deliver his will, who dare do this unsent? This did the Devil in
Paradise, and the heretic Arrius as the Alexandrian Synod affirms: No man
takes this honor to himself Hebr. 5 5.
but he that is called of God, says the author to the Hebrews.

They come! but whence come they, from the schools Whence come they.
of the Prophets? No, but many of them from mechanic trades: as one from a
stable from currying his horses, another from his stal from cobling his shoes,
and these fit them down in Moses chair to mend all, as Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ, as heralds of the most high God. These take upon them to reveal the
secrets of the most high, to open and shut heaven, to save souls. You may
read of such priests that Jeroboam 1 Kings 12 31
provided, but they were for his calves, fit for calves. As for the Lords
Priests, the Majesty of the King and dignity of the Priest hood concurred in
one person (viz. in the first borne) from the beginning to Moses: In the Gospel
Christ prefers St. John Baptist before all the Priests and Levites before
him: and St. Paul commands them to have double honor: and so they have been
esteemed in all ages either christian or profane, in whom there has been any
Religion at all.

But to return to my Text, to hear these base fellows to discourse of the
holy Trinity, of Gods eternal decree, and other deep points of divinity, you
may hear the mad men in Bedlam to prate as wisely as they, and are not they
that run after such men as mad as they?

May not Almighty God say to these Prophets, what Psalm 50. 16.
have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction? But they will ask why
they may not preach as well as Peter who was a fisherman, and Paul a Tent-maker,
etc. To these I answer, that these were immediately called by our Lord, and
enabled with gifts fit for so high a calling, as to heal the sick, to cleanse
Leapers, to cast out Devils; The holy Ghost came upon Acts 2. 4.
them, and they spoke diverse languages: They had all manner of learning both
humane and divine.

Neither has Almighty God always left such presumptuous wretches unpunished:
Korah, Dathan, and Numb. 16. 31
Abiram, and the 250. Princes, who would take upon them to sacrifice with
strange fire, the earth opened and swallowed some of them, and fire from heaven
consumed the rest.

Elimas going about to turn the Deputy from the Acts 13, 8.
faith was stricken with blindness.

Arrius dyed in a Jakes, voyding his bowels with Lib. 1. Eccles. histor: cap: 14
his excrements as Theodoret records.

Manes was excoriated by the Persian King. Hierom catal. scriptor. Niceph. Call.
hist. lib. 14. cap: 36. Melanct. lib. 3 Chron. Theod. lib. 2. Cap. 26. Paulus
diacon. lib. 15.


Montanus and his two mad prophetesses hanged themselves.

Nestorius tongue was eaten up with wor^es.

Anastasius the Emperor, a great defender of the Eutychian heresy was smitten
with a Thunderbolt.

Nicomedia a place where the Arrians were appointed to meet, was swallowed up
with an Earthquake: and Antioch, a nursery of faction and heresies, was shaken
with an Earthquake, and afterward burnt with fire from heaven.

And of late days John of Leiden, King of the Anabaptists Sl^id. com. l. 10.
^ol. 137.
with Knipperdolling and Crechting, had upon a scaffold their flesh torn
apeices with hot irons?

And Servetus was burnt for his abominable blasphemies at Geneva. Examples are
infinite, although seducers may escape punishment in this world, yet how can
they escape the damnation of hell.

To you. To you that are my Disciples, To you, ad vos. (...)

(...)
No word in vain [ to you] daily experience shows us, whom the Anabaptists,
Brownists and Familists, go about to seduce, viz. not drankard^, adulterers,
swearers, gamesters, and such like, but such as desire to know the right way to
heaven: St. Paul tells us, that they lead captive silly women, ever learning
that are desir^us to learn.

(...): They come not, (...) but to you, not as enemies but as friends,
in^inuating themselves into you, as Counselors under the color of giving
Subspecie consulendi ^gunt nego^ium seducendi Greg. mag. lib. 23. mor. cap. 21
good council, they seduce. This did the Devil in Paradise, councelling our
first parents to eat of the forbidden fruit, he promised to make them like
God. And tempting Christ in the wilderness, promised to give him all the
Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; Thus all seducers promise great
matters, yea the kingdom of heaven, and the glory of it.

The Wolf (says a learned man) when he takes a Lupus cum ovem rapuerit
dentibus eam non laedit, sed super dorsum suum ^am sua. viter jacere facit
Vincent in specul. Not. lib. 19. Cap. 83.
sheep at the first, lays him gently upon his back, carrying it away with
little hurt to the place where he means to worrie it. The Anabaptists and
other sectaries do the same, when they take sheep out of our folds, they
pretend to carry them unto Zion, whereas indeed they take them out of the
Church to strangle their souls in their profane conventicles.

Sweetly sings the Bird-catcher when he would catch the Foul: these
seducers have their several calls o^ notes. Come out of Babylon cries one,
Christ must reign says another, come to the holy Communalty says another,
etc. Every one have their several calls, wherewith they do inchaunt silly
souls.

That you may the better avoid their enchantments, Ephesians 6. 11. (...)
I will set down to you the method that these seducers use in deceiving simple
people.

In the first place they go about to separate the sheep from their Shepherds,
and this they endeavor to do by disgracing them that have cure for their
souls, and bringing them into contempt with their people: affirming them to be
unprofitable, unpowerfull, calling them Baals priests, Caini^es, taxing their
conversations as profane, and their doctrine as erroneous, coloring their
malice with crying out for Reformation (which God grant) For our infirmities;
which they maliciously cry up, we must confess that we ar^ men, and weak men:
but for our Doctrine, which they also scandal, it is Gods truth; would to God
ou^ lives were as pure as our Doctrine. Our infirmitie^ are our own; the
Doctrine we preach is yours; refuse not for their c^amours, and our
infirmities, the golden treasure of salvation, which we bring unt^ you in our
earthen Vessels. Thus they smi^in^ your Shepherds with their tongues, the
Sheep ar^ scatt^ered and surprised by these ravenous Wolves. The Devil in
Paradise spoke ill of God himself, and so deceived our first Parents,
persuading them tha^ he loved them no^, in forbidding them to eat of the fruit
which would make them like God.

The use that we should make of this, is to teach Use.
all true professors, that are Christ's Sheep, to take heed that they forsake
not their shepherds, and with In Sheeps clothing. Vestimen^is ovium. (...)
Their Insinua^tion.
itching ears run after seducers, who have fair outsides, and pretend much
love.

In Sheeps clothing.
In these words he sets down their dissimulation: our Savior may seem
here to allude to the Wolf in the Fable, concerning whom the Mythologist
speaks. A Wolf on a time, putting on a sheep Lupus ovis pelle indutus
ovium se immisc^it gregi, quotidieque aliquam ex ^is ^ccidebat; quod cum pastor
animadvertisset illum altissimo arbore suspendit: interrogantibus autem
caeteris pastoribus cur ovem suspendisset; aiebat, pellis quidem ut videtis est
ovis, opera autem lupidae.
skin, immi^gled himself amongst the flock, and so every day strangled one of
the sheep: which when the shepherd perceived, he took the Wolf and hung him
upon a high Tree: at which, the other shepherds wondered, being ignorant of the
cause, what he meant to be so cruel, to hang up a ^illy harmesse sheep: he
answered, His skin you see is a sheeps skin, but his works are the works of a
Wolf.

Here we may observe, that it is not the manner of Seducers, to show themselves
as they are within: if a Wolf within, yet a Lamb without: If a Wolf should
come in his own likeness into the fold, the shepherd would resist him, and
hunt him away with his Dogs: but coming in a sheeps skin he finds
entertainment, and they shun him not. Even so Seducers, if they should come in
their own likeness, the Magistrates and Ministers would withstand them: but
coming like zealous and holy Christians, they find entertainment.

Tertullian does ask, Qu^nam sunt istae pelles ovium* St. Paul tells us,
(...) having A show of godliness. 2 Timothy 3. 5.
form, or show of godliness, viz. outward sanctimo^ny, counterfeit holiness.

For example, The Devil transformed himself into an Angel of light.

Baals Priests used long prayers, they prayed from 1 King. 18 20.
morning to noon, they cried aloud, and cut themselves with Knives and Lancers,
till the blood gushed ^ut upon them.

The blasphem^us Arrians, as St. Basil reports were easily believed because
of their counterfeit holiness. Saint Augustine writes the same of the
Manichees.

The Romish seducers have many Fasts, long prayers, they whip themselves; yea,
the begging Friars befooled the Christian world with their pretended holiness,
with which they varnished their lewd lives. Generally seducers come with
outward sanctimony, with a seeming contempt of the world, with long prayers, as
the Pharisees, to devour Widows houses, fastings, tears, almsdeeds, seeming
zeal, seeming humility, seeming harmlessenesse. They can cry, weep, etc.

And this you may see in the Anabaptists who at their first coming into
Munster, seemed to be very holy men. Their talk was altogether of
Mortification, Bull. Adver. Anab^ fol. 51. lib. 2. cap. 7. Initio humiles and
demissi fuerunt: nihil splendoris and magnificentiae habebant; clamabant and
invehebantur in omnem excellentiam, fastum and magnificentia^, item adversus
gladiu^ and potestatem magistratuu^. Opes and honores erant illis (ita
simulabant) nausea. Nihil loquebantur quam de mortificatione veteris hominis,
de renovatione spiritus, de separata and Deo commissa a^ dicata vita, mundum
and cuncta quae in ipso sunt plane fassidi^bant.
and holiness. Their Apparel was modest and simple: They forbad the wearing
of rings, pearls, and lace: They made a great show of piety, mercy, and
charity: They affirmed, that it was not lawful to put any man to death, no not
for the Magistrate in case of justice; but when their number increased, and
that they had surprised the City, they became of all heretics most unpure, and
unclean, having not only many wives, for which they pretended to have a
special command from God, but also making the women of their Sect common,
casting aside all Laws of honesty and pudicity.

And for their Apparel, their Prophet John of Leiden arrayed himself, his
wives, and followers, like Princes, assuming to themselves glorious Titles, as
the foresaid John the Tailor styled himself* King of Syon, and King of
righteousness* and in stead of mercy and much pi^ty before pretended, they not
only robbed rich men, but also most cruelly murdered many, beheading some, and
impaling others upon stakes: yea one of the Articles of their religion was to
kill all the wicked. (That is, all them that were not of their Sect) and to
destroy all the Kings of the earth, and to make their Prophet John King of the
universe. In the History of the Anabaptists of Germany, you may read what fair
pretenses they made before they surprised the City.

The use that we should make of this, is to be very Solli^^^^ caveamus
h^r^ticos qui ^^nve^sa^^o^is of timae sunt, quorum ^^rte vitam non tam Deu^
quam Diabo^^s* lost* ^xit b^m* 7: in Ezekiel.
wary of these Heretics, who are of the best conversations; whose lives, says
Origem, are possibly directed not of God, but by the devil.

Secondly, this their sheeps clothing may be their palliating* their errors
with the testimony of holy Scriptures. I read that the Monster Arrius pretended
to have 42. places of Scripture, to prove that Christ was a mere man, and not
God; and this the Seducers 2. Testi^o^^^s of Scripture.
learnt of their Father the Devil, who cited the word to the Word himself,
tempting* him to cast himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, viz. He
cited part of the 91. Psalm, He has given his Psalm. 9^.
Angels charge over thee, they shall hear thee up in their hands, lest thou
should dash thy foot against* a stone, leaving out part of the Text, viz. to
keep thee in thy ways. The devil fitted it for his purpose.

This do Heretics, as among others, the Anabaptists, to maintain their
uncleanness in their spiritual marriages, cite, or rather abuse the holy
Scriptures, viz. That Christians must forsake those things that are most dear
unto them, for Chrsts sake, and therefore women must renounce their beloved
honesties. Quidam etiam liberi fratres, impuri Nebulones persuadebant levibas
mulier culis, ^on posse ips^s salvari* nisi suam pudi^itam* prostituerent.
Abutebantur autem non absque blasphemia ver^is Domini. Nisi quis deser^erit and
spreverit quaecu^que chara habeat, ^^^ posse salvari. 2. That Publicans and
harlots shall enter heaven before the Pharisee* therefore their spiritual
sisters must prostitute their bodies to enter Heaven, before honest Matrons.
Item Christi ^omi^e o^nes co^tumeli^s ^erendas esse. 3. For Christ's sake we
must undergo all manner of infamy. Praeterea^ cum Christus dixerit: meretrices
and Publicanos praececisse justitiarios in Regne Coelorum, debere mulieres
meretrices fieri, and s^am pudicitiam prostituere; ^u^ fore in Regne coeloru^
majores probis and honestis matronis. Hen. Bull. Adver. Anab. lib. 2. cap. 1.
fol. 31. Again, as Christians are one spirit, so they must be one body: such
Scripture they quote.

The Use that you should make of this, is, advise with your learned Pastors:
and double and treble your prayers to Almighty God to keep you, I^tre sec^s
^^tem Lupi ra^a^^s. (...)
and to bring into the way of truth all such as do err, and are deceived.

But inwardly they are ravening Wolves.
(...), Wolves. Whatsoever they pretend, they are Inward disposition.
Wolves: as Wolves are to the Sheep, so are false Prophets to Christ's flock.

St. Paul calls them, (...), grievous Wolves, Our Lord sets down their
outward show, and Acts 20. 19.
their inward disposition: what outward show soever they make.

(...), Wolves in diverse respects.

1. As the biting of a Wolf is venomous, like Arist. lib. 1^.
the biting of a mad Dog, making them that are bitten by them, mad: so false
Prophets venom men, causing them to go out of their wits.

2. As the Wolves destroy more sheep by craft, then by might; so do false
Prophets* of whom Saint Paul speaks of some carrryed away (...) ^ph. 4
By the cogging of men, and with craftiness, by which they lie in wait to
deceive.

3. As Wolves are dull-sighted in the day, and I^terdi o^^a^i^^ nocte ^lari^s.
^ide^ Gis^^r lib ^* ^* quadrup.
quick* sighted in the night: so false Prophets are very accute and sharp
witted to defend their errors; but very dull and blind to see the truth.

4 Make a garment, says Plutarth, of the hair of a Wolf, and it will prove
odious, being lousie, and breeding vern^^e upon him that wears it. So all the
profit you shall get by false Prophets, will be noxious to you.

(...) which signifies dilanio* to tear asunder (...) of (...) to rend
asunder* as one Wolf may destroy a flock, so one Heretic a Congregation.

^. Lupus quasi Leopus, follows the Lion hunting for his prey; and what the
Lion spares, the Wolf devoureth.

So false Prophets follow their father the Devil, the roaring Lion, seeking
whom they may devour.

Wolves play with little Children, as Aristotle reports, Arist. lib. 8 N.
Animal.
and sometimes spares them* as we read of Ro^ulus brought up by a Wolf; and
of late days I read of a man brought up among the Wolves, and ra^^e about with
them, and preyed as they did* but being taken by Hunters, and chained up, he
howled like a Wolf; and continuing among men, and having gotten his speech and
understanding* he would complain, that he lived more carefully among men, than
among Wolves.

I never read that a false Prophet spared any man whom he could seduce: and it
is not so dangerous to live among Wolves in the fields, as with false Prophets
in a strong City.

Ravening wolves they are by reason of their rapacitie, (...)
taking away truth from our understandings, charity from our affections, and
holiness from our action.

(...), grievous Wolves, cruel Wolves: a (...) Acts 20. Cruelty of these
mystical wolves. Hebr. 11. 37
Wolf delights in blood: so these mystical Wolves: of the cruelty of these
ravening Wolves you may read* Hebr. 11. 37. By them the Saints of God were
stoned, they were sawne asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with the
sword, etc. In the Primi^ive persecutions, they opened the Bellies of holy men
and virgin^, and filling them full of Corn exposed them to be eaten of Swine.
Cyril of Hierapolis had his breast opened, and his Liver taken out, and chewed
by these ravenous Wolves.

In cruelty the Romish Wolves excel. Call but Romish Wolves* Martyrs in Q.
M^^ie^ time.
to mind the martyrdom of our holy men in Queen Mary's days, which holy men
delivered our Nation from Idol worship, Bread-worship, invocation of Saints
and Angels, and translated the holy Bible into English, who restored to us the
Cup in the Sacrament, the symboll of Christ's blood, who sealed their confession
with their blood. Their blessed remembrance shall remain for ever.

In the Massacre of the Protestants in France you Massacre in ^^a^ce.
may see their Wolvish cruelty. The Papists being not able to quell the
Protestants in Battle, they put on sheep clothing, made a League with them
confirmed by Oaths, and a public Edict. And that the Protestants might the
better confide in them, the Protestant King of Navar, our Queens father, was to
marry the sister of the then French King. To the which marriage the Protestant
Princes and Nobles resorted, invited with great joy and expectation of future
happiness. The marriage was solemnized; but in the night time the Wolvish
Papists fell upon their guests, and worried them against the Law of
hospitality, promises, and oaths. The noble Prince, the Admiral (among
others) was murdered in his Chamber, was drawn to the Gallows, and hanged up
by the heels. And to consummate this abominable Treachery, the Pope (hearing
of this their mass^cring the P^o^^stant) went in Procession with his Cardinals,
and sang Te Deum. But what ^o^der (...)
need I foreign examples? Call to mind our Powder Plot, a cruelty
superlative, in a moment to destroy our King, Queen, Prince, Nobles, Bishops,
and Patriots. What Devil could have devised such a plot, and this to be done,
not in open Rebellion, but to be blown up with Gunpowder, sitting in the house
of peace, making the Parliament House like Mount Sinai, Tonitru and fumo, with
Thunder and Smoke.

The can be no agreement between wolves and Barthol de propr.
sheep: strings made of wolves guts, and sheeps guts, can never agree in an
Instrument.

I might also relate of the cruelty of the Anabaptists Plin. l 11. ^^t* hist.
in Munster, and papists in Ireland; but this shall suffice.

There are diverse kinds of Wolves.

1. There are Wolves called Cervari, unsatiable Creatures.

2. A Wolf called Glanos, (...), Ari^ lib* S: cap. 5*
which seeks to prey upon men.

3: A Wolf called Cirucs, who when the mountains Gisn*
are covered with snow, will venture into Cities.

4. In Ethiopia, wolves that have Maines like Isod. lib* 13.
Lions.

5. In India wolves that have three rows of teeth, Asist. lib. 2
feet like a Lion, a face like a man, and voice like a trumpet, Tail like a
Scorpion, swift as a Heart, a like fierce and cruel.

It is not so dangerous to live among those Wolves in a wood, as among our
mystical wolves in a strong City: As we have none of these wolves in England,
so Lord deliver us from these mystical wolves.

O God thou have not cast us off for ever.

Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy Congregation.

They have cast fire into thy Sanctuary*

O God, how long shall the adversaries reproach us? shall the enemy blaspheme
thy name for ever?

O deliver not the soul of thy Turtle Dove to the multitude of the wicked.

Arise, O Lord, and plead thy own cause.

Mr. Calvin that admirable man of God, whose name is yet terrible in the
kingdom of popery, sets Characters. Lib 3. in Perm. Lib. 4. in stit. Cap. 1.
^^. 16. Acts ^. 9.
down certain characters of these Impostors, taken out of St. Augustine.

1. Great boasters making ostentation of their own worth, like Simon Magus who
bewitched the people, saying, that he himself waa some great man, like the
Gnostiks who had a high conceit of their own knowledge, as if they were the
only knowing men of the whole world, and, as Eliah, left alone for their
faculty to expound scripture: Yea, among us some Tradesmen have a high conceit
of their deep learning. As a shoemaker being demanded by one of his neighbors
whether he could preach better then the Doctor his Parson, answered with
indignation, that he should be very sorrowful if he could not preach better
then he.

2. Superbia tumidi, blown up with pride. It is reported by Bid, that when
Austin the Monk came into Brittany, and that the British Bishops were in
doubt of receiving him, an old man gave them advice to observe whether he were
humble or no, and that by his humility they should know whether he were of God
or no: by their pride you may know them, their talk, being commonly in
commendation of themselves, and casting dirt and vilifying others. This
overweening Epiphan. cont* here is.
of heritickes has bred much distraction in the Church: In the primitive times
Marcion the heretic, having not that preferment that he expected and thought
himself worthy of, demanded what was the meaning of those words. No man
pleceth an old garment with a piece of new cloth, for Mat. 9. 16. 17
that that should fill up takes away from the garment, and the breach is worse.

They gave him the true sense of Christ's words; but the proud heretic applied
the parable to himself, and avouched that he should make a remediles breach
among them.

Thereupon he broached his heresy, viz. That there were two Gods, the one the
author of good, the other the author of evil; which error cost St. Augustine
more pains in confuting it then many other. Aerius being denied a Bishopric,
wrote against the whole order. And among us many proud spirits having not these
preferments which they thought themselves worthy of, have forsaken our Church,
and gone to Rome and Amsterdam.

3 Calumniis insidiosi, deceitfully slanderous, and in Calumniis inst. di si.
Brownists go beyond all other ^ect^ri^s in railing.
this faculty of all others the Brownists excel; they fill their sermons,
books, and communication with scandalous imputations: they spare neither
government nor church; like cursed children tearing their mother a pieces;
which when they have done, they may confess with Nero, who, when he had ripped
open his mothers belly, affirmed that he never thought his mother had bin so
fair: The Jesuits are not so bitter against our Church as the Separatists,
compare their writings: Michael the Archangel durst not give the devil such
cursed speaking, nor rail upon him as they do upon us.

4 Treacherously seditious, not preaching peace, as Treacherously seditious.
Christ commanded his disciples to do, but division: yea the Brownists
arrogate to themselves the name of Separatists, which well they may, being
separated from their Mother Church, from all the reformed Churches and
maliciously divided among themselves. Read Mr. Whites discovery of Brownisme,
who sets down among other what a fiery contention was among the Iohnsons,
the younger brother becoming a libeller, and loading his elder brother with
reproaches of shame and infamy, and that in print, and the other separated
himself, and brake fellowship with his brother and father, and cursed him with
all the curses in Gods book, which he confirmed with the sentence of
excommunication, giving his brother and father to the Devil.

Lest they should seem to be destitute of the light of truth, they arrogate to
themselves the shadow of austerity, a show of holiness. The substance of
holiness is charity, which they want, 1 Cor. 13. Without which they are
nothing: Having a show of godliness, ^ Tim. 3. 5
but denying the power thereof, from such turn away.

Sacrilegious, what the appetite of all schismatics Sacrilegious.
has been this way is notorious, caring not for the ruin of the whole Church,
upon condition that they might get somewhat. They have so taught, that some
think that there is no such sin as sacrilege a^ all.

For whereas sacrilege may be committed, 1. Against holy persons, viz Against
Gods Ministers, as the wrong done to Zacharias the Priest was punished, Mat.
23. 35*
not only in the King and people that did it, but upon the Jews that lived
many hundred years after.

2. Against holy places; Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my
Sanctuary.

3. Against holy things: Ye have robbed m^, says Mal. 3. 8
the Lord, in detention of Tithes and Offerings.

1. Now for holy persons, some affirm there to be none now: men making no
difference between a Minister and a Cobbler.

2. For holy places: they impute no more holiness to a Church than to a stable.

3. For holy things: as holy days, as Sabbaths, every day alike; and for
Tithes, they think they are repealed: never by Christ, but as the work
continues, and the service of God; so also the main^ainance: Indeed I find
them forbidden by Muntzer the Anabaptist, who also forbade paying rent to
Landlords, with other things.

It must needs follow, if there be no holy persons, places, nor things, that
there can be no sacrilege. Wha^? have we lost a sin? is that Law abrogated?
happy it were for many sacrilegious persons (among us) if it were so, to avoid
this curse. If there were no such sin in the Gospel, why does St. Peter so
curstly rebuke Ananias for it? Ananias, why has the Devil filled thy heart to
lie to the holy Ghost, and keep Acts 5. 3
away part? If the devil were in him, and he and his wife stricken dead, who
kept back but half that he himself had offered? what shall become of them?
and what devil is in them, that take away all, no^ which they themselves had
given, but which their forefathers with great piety and devotion had offered
unto Almighty God? St. Paul ^quaileth or prefers Sacrilege before Idolatry.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, Rom 2. 22
committest thou Sacrilege? An Idolater may have some Religion, but the
sacrilegious person none at all: an Atheist is worse than the Devil himself.

7. Madly obstinate, convincere ^^s possum, says M^dly obstinate.
St. Augustine, convertere ve^o non possum, He could convince them, but could
not convert them, they being given over to a repr^bate sense. From hardness of
heart good Lord deliver us.

(...).
Having before spoken of the description of false Prophets, and how dangerous
they are, I come now to the Caveat, Take heed.

The word is taken in a double sense.

1. In the sense of attending. 2 Peter 1. 19* (...), To which you do well that
you do attend: So we read in the vulgar, Attendite a falsis Prophetis.

2. It is taken in the sense of bewaring, Mat. 61. Take heed: So it is to be
taken in this place. In the Syrian Translation, which tongue our Lord preached
in, To be forewarned.

Beware, is the word of a friend: yea the Counsel of our Lord and Savior, who
is our best friend: Beware, as if he should say, I know my dear, that you
hearing of the narrow way that leads unto life, will be very desirous to
enquire of every one, but especially of those that seem to be Prophets,
concerning this way, for your better direction: But let me forewarne you above
all others, to beware of false Prophets; for they instead of directing you,
will set you out of the way.

This Caution he gave his Disciples whom he loved, Mat. 24. 4. Take heed that
no man deceive you. Again, Mat. 244.
Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees.

Let our Lords Counsel be acceptable unto you: Beware Beware precedeth danger.
usually precedeth some danger. This doubling, some great danger.

Poison is very dangerous, but no poison so dangerous Poison dangerous, heresy
worse.
to the body, as false Doctrine to the soul. Beware of false Prophets, more
dangerous than men infected with the plague.

The plague is of all diseases most infectious to the body; heresy is as
infectious to the soul.

This City is much more to be pitied at this time swarming with false
Prophets, then when there dyed in it 5000. a week of the Plague. Then we
lamented the dead bodies of our friends departed, whose souls God had taken to
himself; But now we may lament the souls of our people who are departed from
God.

They are not only in danger of infection, but grievously infected. One poor
soul cries out, no set prayers; another no Sabbath; another, no Lords Prayer;
another, no Law for a rule of life: and for them that go about to cure these
infected persons, they are in as much danger as they that go to visit men sick
of the pestilence: they being not much unlike those swine and dogs, of whom our
Lord forewarneth his Disciples, Give not holy things unto dogs, nor pearls
unto Mat. 7. 6
wine, lest they tread them under their feet, and turn again, and rend you.
We are in danger of them in our houses, yea, Cordolio I speak it, they enter
irreverently Cordolio.
into our Churches: some tear our Books, and have been ready to lay violent
hands upon us at the Lords Table, administering the holy Communion.

They are worse than murderers; a murderer may kill a man, but one fa^se
Prophet may destroy a whole Worse then murderers.
City, or C^untrey; a murderer destroys only the body, but a false Prophet
both body and soul.

The curses that were to be denounced upon mount Eball, may in part be
pronounced against these seduce^s. Cu^ses of Mount Eball* D^ut. 27. 16


Cursed be he that causes the blind to go out of the way. Yea, more cursed
are they that seduce ignorant w^ll-meaning people, from the simplicity of Gods
truth.

Cursed be he that removes the mark of his neighbors Land. Yea, more cursed
are they thac remove and take away the marks of Christianity from among us*

Cursed be he that sets light by his father and mother. Yea, more cursed be
they that blaspheme their mother the Church, in which they were begotten, and
made members of Jesus Christ.

O Almighty, which stillest the raging of the Sea, and madness of the people,
in mercy look upon these p^ore souls, and give thy people grace to avoid the
infections of the Devil, and with pure heart and mind to follow thee the only
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

(...) To whom o^ Lord gives this cavea^, not to To whom*
his Desciples only, but to all men: the word is plural.

1. To us Ministers, who are the Lords watchmen, Min^sters* Ezekiel. 33
and are to give an account, not only for our selves, but also for the people
committed to our charge. Take heed, says S. Paul, unto your selves, and to the
flock, over which the Lord has made you overseers to feed the A^^s ^0 38
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood; for I know that
after my departure grievous Wolves will enter, not sparing the flock.

Again, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus 2 Timothy 4 ^.
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, preach the
Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, etc. For the time will come
that they shall have itching ears, and after their own lusts get them a heap
of Teachers, and turn their ears from the truth, and be given unto Fables.
And again, In meekness 2 Timothy 2. 25
instructing them that oppose themselves: if peradventure God will give them
repentance to acknowledge the truth, that they may recover themselves from the
snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will.

Magistrates, who as they are nursing Fathers and Magistrates.
Mothers to the Church, so they should make good Laws to be as walls to the
Church, and also put them in execution.

They are called Shepherds (as, Cyrus my shepherd) Isa 44. 28
and are to yield an account to Almighty God for the sheep committed to their
charge; which through their negligence shall be devoured by these ravening
wolves.

A question may be asked, in that our Lord bids Whether lawful to put false
Prophets to death.
us to take heed, whether it be not lawful for the Magistrate (...). To put
false Prophets to death: in which question we are to note whom we are to
account false Prophets, viz. Not every one that differs from our Church in
opinion, or have some naevous opinions.

But by false Prophets we understand such as hold fundamental errors, and
persist therein, after all means used for their conviction; yea not only
persist, but also endeavor to disperse their pernicious errors, to the
perverting of others. Again, such whose Doctrines are blasphemous, as the
Arrians are dangerous to the destruction of the government under which they
live* And where all these concur they deserve death, because they corrupt the
faith: If such as corrupt and poison Fountains of water, at which men and
beasts drink, do deserve capital punishment: how much more they, who as much
as in them lies do poison men's souls?

Again, we have diverse examples of this lawful Examples.
severity executed upon Idolaters: first, in Eliah's time, 1 King 18 40 2 Kin^s
10. 24
commanding all the Prophets of Baal to be slain. Secondly, in Iehu, giving
the like commandment.

Thirdly, in all the inhabi^ants of the Land of 2 Kings 11. 18
Judah, who destroyed all the houses of Baal, and slew Mattan he Priest before
the Altar.

Furthermore, we have examples in Ecclesiastical histories; B^llirg. ^ecad.
^^rm. 8.
as first in Constantine, that fam^us Christian Emperor, who enacted, that if
any man did offer Sacrifice upon the Altars, Gladio ultore sterneretur, He
sh^u^d be pu^ to death, and his goods confiscated. The like als^ was en^cte b^
Theodosius, Valentinianus, and Martianus, as Mr. Bullinger reports. The
ground and warrant of this is G^d himself, That Prophet, or (...) 13. 5
dreamer of dreams, etc. shall be put to death. If any man object, that this
was a judicial Law; I answer, if it were so; yet the equity of that judicial
Law remains to all. St. Augustine says, that there is a punishing Sicut ^st
m^sere^ordia puniens, i^a est crud^lita^ p^r^e^s. Epi. 54.
mercy, and a sparing cruelty. For it is a punishing mercy, when Governors do
punish dangerous seducers for safety of the whole: And it were a sparing
cruelty, to let them go unpunished: for, look how much mercy is showed to the
Wolf, so much cruelty is done to the sheep.

This may serve for the reproof of such Magistrates, who, when they have
danger^us Wolves discovered unto them, will not lend their helping hands to
suppres them. To conclude this point: The Romish seducers are severely punished
among us, and kept from our folds, and why not all other false prophets, who
blaspheme God and seduce our people? What? shall we punish them only that
attribute too much to the Sacrament of baptism, affirming Infants un-baptized
not to enter heaven? And suffer Anabaptists who will not baptize them at all,
but blaspheme the baptism of children, calling it the mark of the Beast,
affirming that it came from Antichrist and the Devil? and suffer them to
publish books in defense of this and other their abominable errors?

Shall we punish them only that attribute too much to the Element of bread in
the holy Communion, accounting him no good Christian that will not call it his
lord god? And suffer such men who mock and sc^ffe at the sacrament of the
Lords supper, calling it a two-peny banque^?

Shall we punish them that give too much reverence to the blessed Virgin, holy
Apostles, and Saints departed, Ma^e^icta ^it caro Mariae.
and suffer them that blaspheme the holy Virgin, whom all Nations should call
blessed?

Shall we blame the Papists for saying too many Pater-nosters, and tolerate the
Brownists and other Sectaries who will not say the Lords prayer at all? some of
them affirming it to be an abhominab^e idol, although it be commanded to be
said by our Lord himself?

Shall we punish them that not only keep the Lords day, but also many
holy days, and suffer them that will neither keep holy days nor the Lords
day, as the Familists and Antisabbata^ians?

Shall we punish them that confess their sins, and suppose that they cannot
enter heaven without a particular Confession of them? and tolerate them that
will not con^esse their sins at all, and affirm that God can see no sin in
them? as the Antinomians.

Shall we punish them that worship God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity? and
tolerate them that blaspheme the holy Trinity? as the Arrians, and
Antitrinitarians. I hope that our Governors will drive these also from our
folds, as they do the Popish Emissaries: (...), Act ^ n^^l N^c p^rt 1 ap^^
Cyz^z^^.
It is fit for us that are Christ^ans to avoid all those who speak against
Christ, and hate them as the enemies of God, and corrupters of souls.

This Caveat of our Lords belongs to every 3 To every Christian* not to keep
co^p^ny with t^en.
Christian man.

We are not to keep company with them. It was Eves fault to admit conference
with the Devil. In these false Prophets there is such a malignant spirit, that
the Devil cannot do more hurt out of them, then in them. St. Paul counsels
the Romans, to Romans 18. 28
mark them diligently that make divisions, and to avoid them. If we must avoid
Schismatics that make divisions, how much more Heretics?

St. John in his Epistle to the Elect Lady, forbids 2 Ioh. 10
all society with them: if there come any to you, and bring not this Doctrine,
receive him not into your house, nor bid him, God speed.

According to his Doctring, so was his practice, he would not bath with
Cerinthus the Heretic, nor abide under the same roof with him, but leaped out
of the room, and persuaded others so to do. Polycarp, St. John's Scholar,
meeting Marcion the Heretic, would not salute him: Marcion asking him whether
he knew him or no? was answered by him, Yes, I know thee well to be the first
borne of the devil.

Would any man entertain into his family a man infected with the plague? how
much less an Heretic, who, without the great mercy of God, may be the undoing
of him and his family.

This caveat should keep men from hearing those John 5. 10
seducers: My sheep, says our Lord, will not hear the voice of a stranger.

Yet such is the folly or madness of these times, and men have such itching
ears, that if the Devil himself should preach among us, I fear that he would
have too many hearers.

(...)
But whereas they pretend to be led by the spirit, I Led by the spirit.
beseech you, says St. Paul, by the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you
be not so soon shaken in mind, neither by spirit (that is by pretense of the
spirit) for as there is a holy Spirit, by whom the Prophets and Apostles
inspired, spoke: so you may read of a lying spirit in the mouths of false
Prophets. Therefore St. John commands us not to believe every spirit, but to
search and try the spirits, whether they be of God, or no.

How shall I know Gods spirit, but by his Word? such spirits as speak against
Gods word, are the devils 1 John 4. 1
spirits, and not Gods. I have read that in a Synod in Britain held by Dunstan,
Archbish. of Canterbury, who would have had a Decree pass against Ministers
marriage, a strange voice was heard out of an Image in the Church for
confirmation thereof. But the British Bishop cried out, that that voice was the
voice of the Devil, and not of God: for God would not speak against his word:
And indeed St. Paul calls forbidding ^ Tim. 4 1*
of Marriage the doctrine of Devils. We should try all these new Doctrines
pretended to come from the spirit, whether they be against Gods word, or no* As
for example, whereas the Romish Prelates forbid the Laity the reading of the
holy Scriptures (in the vulgar) which God commands, and the holy Ghost
commends: is this their prohibition from God, or from the devil? And whereas
they command Communion under one kind, contrary to Christ's institution; whose
spirit is in them, Gods, or the Devils? And whereas other false Prophets
forbid the saying of the Lords Prayer, with other things commanded in holy
Scriptures: those are lying Prophets, who have not Gods spirit, but the
devils: for God will not speak against his Word.

O ye foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you? says Gal. 3* 1
St. Paul.

O ye foolish Galatians: we see how careful men are of being deceived in any
thing of weight; in buying land they advise with the best counsel they can
get: for health they advise with the learnedest Physicians: in receiving money,
if they doubt, they will go to the Goldsmiths and weigh it and touch it at the
stone: Let us not be careless only for our souls* Nay, who has bewitched
you, says the Apostle? It is the fashion of witches, as some report, when they
Covenant with the devil, to renounce their Baptism* were it possible for a
man, except he were bewitched indeed, to be persuaded to renounce his Baptism?

Were it possible for any man, except he were bewitched, to forsake the Church
of God, and to dream of a new one, and that Almighty God never had a true
Church, until some fanatic persons at this time had framed o^e? How could all
this their holy frame escape all the Patriarks, Prophets, holy Apostles, and
Doctors, and be revealed only to Brown, who liked it so ill, that h^e
returned again to his Mother Church. The like antiquity have the Etonites,
and others of our Sectaries.

Our Lord sending forth his Disciples, as sheep among Wolves, gives them this
counsel, Beye wise ^^ Mat. 10. 16
Serpe^ts, and harmless as Doves. And why wise as Serpents? Like the deaf
Adder, that stops her ear, Psalm. ^8* 4
which will not hearken to the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely*
It is written of the Aspe, that to avoid charming, she lays one ear close
to the ground, and stops the other with her tail. Thu^ the ancient
Christians were wont to stop their ears, and not hear Christ's truth
adulterated. It is recorded by Theodoret, that when Lucius the Arrian Bishop
came and preached among the Anti^^hians, broaching his damnable Heresies, the
people forsook the Church, and would not hear him, Lib. 4. Eccles. Histor.
cap. 20. M. Histor. Tripart.

But now they tha^ bear the name of Christians* and would be accounted
professors, r^n a if they were mad to be charmed, to hear the false Prophets
of our time: Beye wise as Serpents, says our Lord, and harmless a^ Doves. The
Dove as she is innocent, and harmless, so swift winged to avoid the danger
she may receive from Vultures, and other ravenous birds. O that I had wings
like a Dove, (says the Prophet) then would I fly away, and be at rest. Our
souls are win^ed* (...). ^5. 6
our prayers are our wings: let us fly to the rock where we shall find rest.

You have heard of two ways, the one leading to life, the the other to
destruction: and that it is a difficult thing to find heaven, and that because
of fals^ Prophets, who go about to lead us out of the way: you have heard also
what these false Prophets are, viz. lying Prophets, falsifying Gods Word; and
why God suffers them, viz. for the punishment of the ungodly, and for the
trial of the godly; and that they come unsent, without any calling, in Sheep
clothing, counterfeiting holiness, pretending Scripture; being indeed
ravening Wolves: and as Wolves destroy the body, so do they the soul. Our
Lord bids beware of them: and whereas they pretend the spirit, try the
spirits, as St. John counsels you, whether they be of God, or no; and being
not of God to avoid them, being wise as Serpen^s, who stop their ears, and
will not hear the voice of the charmer. Let us be innocent as the Dove and
mount heaven with our prayers, and praying, say with David, Sew me thy ways, O
Lord, and teach me thy paths: Open thou my eyes, that I may see the wonders of
thy law. Lead me forth in thy truth, and guide me, thou art the God of my
salvation.

And whereas the suffering of these false Prophets may be one of the causes of
Gods heavy hand upon us, and of the unnatural war among us, let us use all
means to suppress them in our callings, and so remove this cursed thing from
us.

All you that are the sons of peace, friends of peace and servants to the God
of peace, double and treble your prayers, that some Mediator may stand in the
gap, to divert Gods judgments from us: and if Almighty God has otherwise
decreed, let every one of us make his own peace with God, commending our
souls into his hands who is our faithful Creator, keeping faith and a good
conscience, of which take heed that you do not make shipwreck; which if you
keep, you need not fear neither false Prophets, nor devils, fire, nor sword,
nothing shall hurt you: Although they kill you, they shall but deliver your
souls out of the prison of your bodies, to enjoy everlasting peace; which I
entreat Almighty God to bring us all, for his son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom
with the holy Ghost, three persons, and one God, be all Glory, Praise, Honor,
and Donion, etc.

FINIS.
PErlegi concionem hanc de pseudo-Prophetis, in qua nihil reperio quo minus
utiliter Imprimatur.

Ia. Cranford. Nov. 24. 1644.


