King CHARLES the First, no Man OF BLOOD: BUT A MARTYR FOR HIS PEOPLE.

OR, A sad, and impartial enquiry, whether the King or Parliament began the
War, which has so much ruined, and undon the Kingdom of England? and who was
in the defensive part of it?

Exoritur aliquod majus e magno malum.
Nondum ruentis Ilij fatum stetit.
SENEC. Traged. in Troade Act 3. Printed in the Year 1649.

King CHARLES the First, No Man of Blood: BUT A Martyr for his People.
THAT there has been now almost seven years spent in Civill-Warres,
abundance of Bloodshed, and more Ruin and Misery brought upon the Kingdom
by it, then all the several Changes, Conquests and Civill-Warres it has
endured from the time of Brute, or the first Inhabitants of it; every man's
woeful experience (some only excepted who have been gayners by it) will easily
assent unto.

No mervaile therefore that many of those (who if all they allege for
themselves, that they were not the cause of it, could be granted to be true)
might either have hindered or lessned it: would now put the blame of so horrid a
business from themselves, and lay it upon any they can persuade to bear it.
And that the Conquerours, who would bind their Kings in Chains and their
Princes with fetters of Iron, and think they have a Commission from Heaven to
do it (the guilt of it being necessarily either to be charged upon the
Conquerors or conquered) are not willing to have their triumphant Chayres, and
the glories (as they are made believe) that hang upon their shoulders defiled
with it; but do all they can to load their Captives with it: But howsoever,
though the success and power of an Army has frighted it so far out of
question as to charge it upon the King, and take away his life for it; by
making those that must of necessity be guilty of the fact; if he should have
been (as in all reason he ought to have been acquitted of it) the only Judges
of him.

It may well become the judgment and conscience of every man that will be but
either a good Subject or a Christian, not to lend out his Soul and Salvation
so much on trust, as to take those that are parties, and the most ignorant sort
of men's words for it: but to enter into a most serious examination of the
matter of Fact it self, and by tracing out the foote-steps of Truth, see what
a conclusion may be drawn out of it. In pursuance whereof (for I hope the
original of this Sea of blood will not prove so unsearchable as the head of
Nile.) We shall enquire who first of all raised the Fears and Jelousies.
Secondly, represent and set down the truth of the matter of Fact, and
proceedings betwixt the King and Parliament; from the tumultuous and seditious
coming of the People to the Parliament and White Hall, until the 25. Aug.
1642. when he set up his Standard at Nottingham, and from the setting up of his
Standard until the 13 Sep. 1642. when the Parliament by their many acts of
hostility, and a negative and Churlish answer to his propositions, might well
have put him out of hope of any good to be obtained from them, by messages of
Peace sent unto them. Thirdly, whether a Prince or other Magistrate, laboring
to suppress or punish a rebellion of the People, be tied to those rules are
necessary to the justifying of a war if it were made between equals.
Fourthly, suppose the war to be made with a neighbor Prince, or between
equals, whether the King or Parliament were in the defensive or justifiable
part of it. Fifthly, Whether the Parliament in their pretended magistracy have
not taken lesser occasions, to punish or provide against insurrections,
treasons and rebellions as they are pleased to call them. Sixthly, Who most
desired Peace, and offered faireliest for it. Seventhly, Who labored to
shorten the War, and who to lengthen it. Eighthly, Whether the Conditions
proffered by the King; would not have been more profitable for the People if
they had been accepted, and what the Kingdom and People have got instead of
it.

CHAP. I. Who first of all Raised the Fears and Jealousies?
THE desiring of a guard for the Parliament because of a tale rather then a
plot; That the Earl of Crawford had a purpose to take away the Marquis of
Hamiltons life in Scotland; the refusing of a legal guard offered by the King;
and His Protestation to be as careful of their safety, as of the safety of
His Wife and Children. The dream of a Tailor lying in a ditch in Finsbury
fields, of this and the other good Lord, and Commonwealths men to be taken
away, The trayning of horses under ground, and a plague plaster (or rather a
clout taken from a galled horse back) sent into the house of Commons to Mr.
Pym. A Design of the Inhabitants of Covent Garden to murder the City of
London; News from France, Italy, Spain and Denmark, of Armies ready to come
for England; and a supposition, or feverish fancy, That the King intended to
introduce Popery, and alter Religion, and take away the Laws and Liberties of
the People, and many other the like seditious delusions, the People (so much as
their misery will give them leave) have now found out the way to laugh at;
either came from the Parliament party, or were cherished and turned into
advantages by them. For they had found the way, and lost nothing by it, to be
ever jealous of the King; And whilst he did all he could to show them, that
there was no cause for it, they who were jealous without a cause, could be so
cunning as to make all the haste they could to weaken Him, and strengthen
themselves, by such kind of artifices.

But he that could not choose, but take notice that there were secret ties and
combinations betwixt his English and Scottish Subjects, the latter of whom the
Earl of Essex and Sir Thomas Fairfax themselves understood to be no better
then Rebels, and therefore served in places of Command in His Majesty's Army
against them. That Sir Arthur Haselrig had brought in a Bill in Parliament to
take the Militia by Sea and Land away from him, saw himself not long after by
a Printed remonstrance or declaration made to the People of all they could but
imagine to be errors in his government, arraigned and little less then
deposed: The Bishops and diverse great Lords driven from the Parliament by
Tumults; Was enforced to keep his gates at Whitehall shut, and procure diverse
Captains and Commanders to lodge there, and to allow them a table to be a
guard for him, and had been fully informed of many Traiterous Speeches used by
some seditious mechaniques of London as that It was pity He should reign,
and that The Prince would make a better King; was yet so far from being
jealous, or solicitous to defend himself by the Sword and power which God had
entrusted him with, as when he had need and reason enough to do it, he still
granted them (that he might not seem to deny what might but seem to be for
the good of his People) every thing they could reasonably ask of him, or he
could but reasonably tell how to part with (though he could not be ignorant,
but an ill use might be made of them against himself) As the putting down of
the Star Chamber, and high Commission Court; the Courts of Honor, and of the
North and Welsh marches; Commissions for the making of Gunpowder, allowing
them approbation or nomination of the Lieutenant of the Tower, and did all and
more then all his Predecessors put together, to remove their jealousies. And
when that would not do it; stood still, and saw the game played on further;
Many Tumults raised, many Libels and Scandalous Pamphlets publicly Printed,
against His Person and Government, and when he complained of it in Parliament
so little care was taken to redress it, as that the Peoples coming to
Westminster in a Tumultuons manner, set on and invited by Pennington and Ven,
two of the most active mechanic Sectaries of the house of Commons, it was
excused and called a Liberty of Petitioning: And as for the Libels and
Pamphlets, the Licensing of Books before they should be Printed, and all
other restraint of the Printing presses were taken away, and complaints being
made against Pamphlets and seditious books, some of the Members of the house
of Commons were heard to say the work would not be done without them; and
complaints being also made to Mr. Pym against some wicked men which were ill
affected to the Government; He answered, It was not now a time to discourage
their Friends but to make use of them: And here being as many jealousies and
fears as could possibly be raised or fancied without a ground on the one side;
against all the endeavors could be used on the other side to remove them, We
shall in the next place take a view of the matter of Fact that followed upon
them, and bring before you.

CHAP. 2. The Proceedings betwixt the King and the Parliament from the
Tumultuous and Seditious coming of the People to the Parliament and White Hall
till the 13 of September 1642. being 18 days after the King had set up His
Standard at Nottingham.
WHEN all the King could do to bring the Parliament to a better understanding
of Him, did as they were pleased to make their advantage of it, but make them
seem to be the more unsatisfied; that they might the better mis-represent Him
to the People; and petition out of his hands as much power as they could tell
how to persuade him to grant them, and that he had proofs enough of what has
been since written in the blood and hearts of His People, That the five
Members and Kimbolton intended to root out Him and His Posterity; subvert the
Laws and alter the Religion, and Government of the Kingdom, and had therefore
sent his Sergeant at arms to demand their persons, and Justice to be done
upon them, instede of obedience to it, an order was made; That every Order ^.
Jan. 1641.
man might rescue them, and apprehend the Sergeant at arms for doing it; which
Parliament Records would blush at. And Queen Elizabeth (who was wont to answer
her better composed Parliaments upon lesser occasions with a Cavete ne
patientiam Principis laedatis, Camden Annalls Eliz 99. 103.
and caused Parry a Doctor of the Civil Laws and a Member of the house of
Commons by the judgment and advice of as sage and learned a privy council and
Judges as any Prince in Christendom ever had; to be hanged drawn and
quartered for Treason in the Ibidem p. 391. 394* and 395.
old Palace of Westminster when the Parliament was sitting) would have wondered
at. And 4. January 1641. desiring only to bring them to a legall-tryall and
examination, went in Person to demand them, and found that his own peaceable
behavior, and fewer attendants (then the two Speakers of the Parliament had
afterward when they brought a whole Army at their heels, to charge and fright
away eleven of their fellow Members) had all manner of evil constructions put
upon it, and that the Houses of Parliament had adjourned into London, and
occasioned such a sedition amongst the People, as all the trained bands of
London must guard them by Land, when there was no need of it, and many Boats
and Lighters armed with Seamen and murdering-peeces by water, and that unless
He should have adventured the mischief and murder has been since committed
upon him, by those which at that time intended as much as they have done since;
it was high time to think of his own safety, and of so many others were
concerned in it; having left London but the day before, (upon a greater cause
of fear th^n the Speakers of both Houses of Parliament in July 1647. to go to
the Army) retires with the Prince his Son (whom the Parliament labored to
seize and take into their custody) in his company toward York. 8. January
1641. A Cimmittee of the house of Commons sitting in London, resolved upon the
question. That the actions of the City of London, for the defense of the
Parliament were according to Law, and if any man should Vide the vote in Mr.
Viccars broke entitled God in the Mount. p. 78.
arest or trouble any of them for it, he is declared to be an enemy to the
Commonwealth. And when the King, to quiet the Parliament, 12 Jan. 1641. was
pleased to signify that for the present he would waive his proceedings against
the five Members and Kimbolton, and assures the Parliament that upon all
occasions he will be as careful of their Privileges as of his Life or his
Crown: Yet the next day after, they Declared the Lord Digby's coming to
Kingstone upon Thames Collect, of Parl. and Decl. and K^^es Mess. and Decl p. 50
but with a Coach and six horses in it, to be in a Warlike manner, and
disturbance of the Commonwealth; and take occasion thereupon to order the
Sheriffs of all Counties in England and Wales, with the assistance of the
Justices of Peace and trained bands of the several Counties to suppress any
unlawful assemblies, and to secure the said Counties and all the Magazines in
them. Ibm. 51.


14 January, 1641. The King, by a second Message, professes to Ibm. 52.
them he never had the least intention of violating the least privilege of
Parliament, and in case any doubt of breach of Privileges remain; will be
willing to clear that, and assert those, by any reasonable way his Parliament
shall advise him to: But the Design must have been laid by, or miscarried, if
that should have been taken for a satisfaction; and therefore to make a
quarrel which needed not, they Order the morrow after a Charge and Impeachment
to be made ready against Sir Edward Herbert the Kings Attorney-Generall, for
Ibm. 53.
bringing into the House of Peers the third of that instant January, by the
Kings direction, a Charge or Accusation against Kimbolton and the five Members,
etc.

In February 1641. Seize upon the Tower of London (the great Ibm 77 and 78.
Magazine and Storehouse of the Kingdom) and set some of the trayned-bands of
London, commanded by Major General Skippon to guard it.

1. March 1641. Petition for the Militia, and tell him; If he would not grant
it, they would settle and dispose it without him; And the morrow after Resolve
upon the Question, That the Kingdom be forthwith put in a posture of Defense;
in such a way as was already agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament; and
Order the Earl of Northumberland, Lord high-Admirall, to Rig, and send to Sea
his Majesty's Navy; and notwithstanding that the King 4 March 1641: by his
Letter directed to the Lord Keeper Littleton had signified that he would
wholly desist from any proceedings against the five Members and Kimbolton: Sir
John Hotham, a Member of the House of Commons, (who before the King had accused
the five Members and Kimbolton, had by Order of Parliament seized upon the
Town Vede the Petition of some Holdernesse men to the King; 6. July 1642
of Hull, the only fortified place of strength in the Kingdom, and made a
Garrison of it) summoned and forced in many of the trained Soldiers of the
County of York to help him to guard it.

And eighth of March 1641, Before the King could get to York it was Voted.
That whatsoever the two houses of Parliament should Vote or Declare to be Law,
the People were bound to obey: And when, not long after, the King offered to
go in person to suppress the Irish-Rebellion: That was Voted to be against
the Law, and an encouragement to the Rebels; and they Declare that whosoever
shall assist him in his Voyage thither should be taken for an enemy to the
Commonweal. And 15 of March, 1641. Resolved upon the Question, That the
several Commissions granted under the great-Seale to the Lievetenants of the
several Counties were illegal and void, and that whosoever should execute any
power over the Militia, by color of any such Commission, without consent of
both Houses of Parliament, should be accounted a disturber of the Peace of the
Kingdom.

April 1642. Sir John Hotham seizes the Kings Magazine at Hull, Ibm. 153.
and when the King went but with a small attendance to demand an entrance into
the Town denies him; though he had then no Order to do it: Notwithstanding
all which, the 28 of April 1642. they Vote, That what he had done was in
obedience to the commands of both Houses of Parliament, and that the Kings
proclaming him to be a Traitor was a high breach of Privilege of Parliament;
And Ordered All Sheriffs and Officers to assist their Committees sent down with
those their Votes to Sir John Hotham. In the mean time the Pulpits flame with
seditious invectives against the King, and incitements to Rebellion, and the
People running headlong into it, had all manner of countenance and
encouragement unto it; but those Ministers that preached Obedience and sought
to prevent it were sure to be imprisoned, and put out of their places for it.

Sir Henry Ludlow could be heard to say in the house of Commons, That the King
was not worthy to Reign in England; And Henry Ibm 550.
Marten, That the Kingly Office was forfeitable, and the happiness of the
Kingdom did not depend upon him and his Progeny: And though the King demanded
justice of them, were neither punished nor put out of the House, Nor so much as
questioned or blamed for it.

The Militia, the principal part of the Kings regality, without which it was
impossible either to be a King or to govern, and the Sword which God had
given him, and his Ancestors (for more then a thousand years together had
enjoyed) and none in the Barons wars, nor any Rebellion of the Kingdom since
the very being or essence of it, durst ever heretofore presume to ask for;
must now be wrestled for, and taken away from him.

The Commissions of Array, being the old legal way by which the Kings of
England had a power to raise and levy men for the defense of themselves and
the Kingdom, Voted to be illegal. The passage at Sea defended against him,
and his Navy kept from him by the Earl of Warwick, whilst the King all this
while contenting himself to be merely passive, and only busying himself in
giving answers to some Parliament Messages and Declarations, and to woo and
entreat them out of this distemper, cannot be proved to have done any one
action like a war, or to have so much as an intention to do it, unles they can
make his demanding an entrance into Hull, with about twenty of his Followers,
unarmed, in his Company, and undertaking to return and leave the Governor in
possession of it, to be otherwise then it ought to be.

5. Of May 1642. The King being informed; That Sir John Hotham sent out
warrants to Constables to raise the trained bands of Yorkshire writes his
letter to the Sheriff of that County to forbid Ihm. 169. 170.
the Trained bands, and commands them to repair to their dwelling houses.

12. Of May 1642. Perceiving himself every where endangered and a most horrid
Rebellion framing against him, and Sir John Hotham so near him at Hull as
within a days journey of him; moves the County of York for a Troop of horse,
consisting of the prime Collect. Par. Decl. 183.
gentry of that County, and a Regiment of the trained bands of foot, to be for
a guard unto him, and caused the Oath of Allegiance to be administered unto
them. But the Parliament thereupon Vote; That it Ibm 259.
appeared, the King seduced by wicked Council, intended to make a War against
them (and till then if their own Votes should be true must acquit him from any
thing more then an intention, as they call it, to do it) And that whosoever
should assist him are traitors by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. The
Earl of Essex Lord-Chamberlaine of the Kings household, and all other of the
Kings household Ser. ants forbid to go to him, and the Kings putting some of
them out, and others in their places, Voted to be an injury to the Parliament,
Messengers were sent for the apprehending some Earls and Barons about him, and
some of his Bedchamber, as if they had been Felons. The Lord Keepers going to
him with the great-Seal when he sent for him, voted to be a breach of
privilege, and pursued with a warrant directed to all Mayors and Bayliffes to
apprehend him. Cause the Kings Rents and Revenues to be brought in to them;
and forbid any to be paid him; Many of his Officers and Servants put out of
their places for being Loyal unto him, and those that were ill affected to
him, put in their Rooms; and many of his own Servants tempted and procured by
rewards and maintenance to tarry with them and be false and active against him.

The twenty sixth day of May 1642. a Declaration is sent to the King; but
printed and published before he could receive it: That Whatsoever they should
Vote, is not by Law to be questioned, either by the King or Subjects; No
precedent can limit or bound their proceedings. Ibidem p. 297. and. 298.
A Parliament may dispose of any thing wherein the King or People have any
right. The Sovereign power resides in both Houses of Parliament. The King has
no Negative voice. The levying of War against the Personal commands of the
King, though accompanied with His presence, is not a levying of War against
the King; but a levying War against His Laws and Authority (which they have
Power to declare) is levying of War against the King. Treason cannot be
committed against his Person otherwise then as He was entrusted. They have
Power to judge whether he discharge His trust or not, that if they should
follow the highest precedents of other Parliaments paternes, there would be no
cause to complain of want of modesty or duty in them, and that it belonged
only to them to Judge of the Law.

27 of May, The King, by his Proclamation, forbids all his Subjects and trained
bands of the Kingdom to Rise, March, or Muster. Ibm. 301.
But the Parliament, on the same day Command all Sheriffs, Justices of Peace
and Constables within one hundred and fifty miles of York, to seize and make
stay of all Arms and Ammunition going thither: And Declaring the said
Proclamation to be void in Law; Command all men to Rise, Muster and March, and
not to Muster or March by any Ibm. 305.
other Authority or Commission; and the Sheriffs of all Counties the morrow
after, Commanded with the posse Commitatus to suppress any of the Kings
Subjects that should be drawn thither by his Command; Secure and seize upon
the Magazines of the Counties Protect all that are Delinquents against him,
make all to be Delinquents that attend him; and censure and put out of the
house of Peers, nine Lords at once, for obeying the Kings summons and going to
him.

3. June 1642. The King summoning the Ministry Gentry, and. Freeholders of
the County of York, declared to them the reasons Ibm 328.
of providing himself a guard, and that he had no intention to make a War,
and the morrow after forbad the Lord Willoughby of Parham Ibm. 333
to Muster and Train the County of Lincoln, who under color of an Ordinance
of Parliament, for the Militia, had begun to do it.

1^. June 1642. The Parliament by a Declaration signifying; That the King
intended to make a War against his Parliament; invited the (...). 339. (...).
342.
Citizens of London, and all others, well affected (as they pleased to mis-call
them) within 80. miles of the City to bring money or plate into the Guild Hall
London, and to subscribe for Men Horses and Army, to maintai^e the Protestant
Religion, the Kings Person and Authority; ^ree course of Justice, Laws of the
Land, and privileges of Parliament; and the morrow after send 19. propositions
to the King; That the great affairs of the Kingdom and Militia, may be
managed by consent and approbation of Parliament, all the great officers of
Estate, Pri^y Council, Ambassadors and Ministers of State, and Judges be
chosen by them; that the Grvernment, Education and Marriage of the Kings
Children be by their consent and approbation, and all the Forts and Castles of
the Kingdom put under the Command and Custody of such as they should approve
of, and that no Peers to be made hereafter, should sit or vote in Parliament
without the consent of Parliament; with several other demands (which if the
King should have granted, would at once in effect, not only have undone and put
his Subjects out of his protection, but have deposed both Collect. of Parl.
Mess. and Declar. 307 308 309.
himself and his posterity) and then they would proceed to regulate his
Revenue, and deliver up the Town of Hull into such hands as the King by
consent and approbation of Parliament should appoint.

But the King having the same day before those goodly demands came to his hands
(being a greater breach of his Royal Privileges then his demanding of the 5.
Members and Kimbolton, if it had not Ibm 346. and 348.
been Lawful for him so to do, could be of theirs) granted a Commission of
array for the County of Lecester to the Earl of Huntington and by a letter
sent along with it, directed it for the present only to Muster and Array the
Trayned-Bands.

And 13. June 1642. Declared to the Lords attending Him at York; That He would
not engage them in any War against the Parliament unless it were for his
necessary defense: whereupon the L. keeper Litleton Ibm. 349. 350.
who a little before had either been affrighted or seduced by the Parliament
to vote their new Militia. The Duke of Richmond, Marquis Hartford, Earl of
Salsbury, Lord Gray of Ruthen (now Earl of Kent) and diverse Earls and Barrons
engaged; not to obey any Order or Ordinance concerning the Militia had not the
Royal assent to it.

And fourteenth of June 1642. Being informed; That the Parliament endeavored to
borrow great sums of money of the City of Ibm. 350.
London, and that there was great labor used to persuade His Subjects to
furnish horse and money, upon pretense of providing a guard, for the
Parliament: By His letter to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London
disavowing any purpose of making a War: declared; That He had not the least
thought of raising or using of forces unless He should be compelled to do
it for His own defense; and forbids therefore, the lending of money or
raising of horses.

And within two days after, the Lord Keeper, Duke of Richmond, Marquis
Hartford, Earl of Salisbury, Lord Gray of Ruthen with 17 Earls and 14.
Barons, the Lord Chiefe-Justice Bancks, and sundry others of eminent quality
and reputation; attest His Majesty's Declaration and profession that He had no
intention to make a War; but abhorred it; and, That they perceived no
Counsels or preparations tending to any such design; and send it with Ibm.
356. 357.
His Majesty's Declaration to the Parliament: In the mean time the Committee
of Parliament (appointed to make the propositions to the City of London, for
the raising of Horse) vizt. 15. June 1642. Made report to the house of Commons;
That the Citizens did very cheerfully accept the same, there being (for indeed
there had been some design and Resolution a year before concerning the
melting of plate to raise moneys) already great store of plate, and moneys
brought into Guild Hall; for that purpose and an Ordinance of Parliament was
made for the Earl of Warwick to be Lord Admiral, and keep the Navy, though
the King had commanded him upon pain of Treason to deliver up the Ships to
Him: And the Lord Brook sent down into Warwickshire to settle the Militia.

17. June 1642. A Committee of both Houses was appointed to go to the City of
London to enquire what store of Horse, Moneys and Plate were already raised
upon the Propositions.

18. June 1642. The King by His Proclamation, Disclaiming any intention to make
War against His Parliament, forbids all levies of Forces without His
Majesty's express pleasure signified under His Great-Seale.

And 20. June 1642. Informing all His Subjects, by His Proclamation of the
Lawfullnesse of His Commissions of Array; That besides Collect. Par. Decl. ^^^.
and. 374.
many other Warrants and Authorities of the Law; Judge Hutton and Judge Crook
in their arguments against the Ship Money, agreed them to be Lawful; and the
Earl of Essex himself had in the beginning of this Parliament accepted of one
for the County of York. Gave His People to understand; That He had awarded
the like Commissions into all the Counties of England and Dominion of Wales to
provide for, and secure them in a legal way; lest under a pretense of danger,
and want of Authority from His Majesty to put them into a Military postu^e,
they should be drawn and engaged in any opposition against Him, or His Just
Authority.

But 21. June 1642. The Lords and Commons in Parliament Declaring Ibm. 376.
The Design of their Propositions of raising Horse and Moneys was to maintain
the Protestant Religion, and the Kings Authority and Person, and that The
Forces already attending His Majesty, and His preparations at first colored
under the pretense of a guard (being not so great a guard as they themselves
had constantly for 6. months before) did evidently appear to be intended for
some great and extraordinary design (so as at this time also they do not
charge the King with any manner of action of War, or any thing done in a way
or course of War against them) and gave just cause of fear and jealousy to
the Parliament (being never yet by any Law of God or man accounted to be a
sufficient cause or ground for Subjects to make a War against their
Soverainge) did forbid all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes and other Officers to
publish His Majesty's said Letter to the City of London, And declare that if
He should use any force for the recovery of Hull, or suppressing of their
Ordinance for the Militia, it should be held a levying War against the
Parliament; and all this done before His Majesty had granted any Commission
for the levying or raising of a man; and lest the King should have any manner
of provision of War to defend Himself, when their Army or Sir John Hotham
should come to assault Him; Powder and Arms were every where seized on, and
Cutlers, Gun-smiths, Sadlers and all Warlike Trades ordered not to send any to
York; but to give a weekly account what was made or sold by them: And an
Order made the 24. day of June 1642. That the Horses which should be sent in
for the Service of the Parliament, when they came to the number of 60. should
be trained, and so still as the number increased.

4. July* 1642. The King by His letter under His sign Manual commanded all
the Judges of England in their circuits, to use all means to suppress Popery,
Riots, and unlawful assemblies, and to give Ibm. 442.
the People to understand His Resolution to maintain the Protestant Religion,
and the Laws of the Kingdom, and not to govern by any Arbitrary way; and
that if any should give the King or them to understand of any thing wherein
they held themselves grieved, and desired a just reformation; He would spedily
give them such an answer as they should have cause to thank Him for His Justice
and favor. But the same day a Declaration was published by both houses of
Parliament Commanding That no Sheriff, Mayor, Bayliffe, Parson, Vicar, Ibm.
449.
Curate or other (Sir Richard Gurney the Lord Mayor of London, not many days
before having been imprisoned for proclaming the Kings Proclamation against
the bringing in of Plate etc.) should publish or Proclaim any Proclamation,
Declaration or other Paper in the Kings name which should be contrary to any
Order Ordinance or Declaration of both houses of Parliament or the proceedings
thereof; and Order, That in case any Force should be brought out of one County
into another to disturb the Peace thereof, they should be suppressed by Ibm.
450.
the Trained Bands, and Volunteers of the adjacent Counties. Shortly after Sir
John Hotham fortifieth the Town of Hull, whilst the King is at York, seizes
on a Ship coming to Him with provisions Ibm. 453.
for His Household, takes Mr. Ashburnham one of the Kings Servants Prisoner,
intercepts Letters sent from the Queen to the King, and drowneth part of the
Country round about the Town; which Ibm. 459.
the Parliament allows of, and promise satisfaction to the owners.

5. July 1642. They Order a subscription of Plate and Horse to be made in
every Countey, and list the Horse under Commanders; and the morrow after, Order
2000. men should be sent to relieve Sir John Hotham in case the King should
besiege him; to which purpose Drums were beat up in London, and the adjacent
parts to Hull. The Earl of Warwick Ordered to send Ships to Humber to his
assistance, instructions drawn up to be sent to the Deputie-Lievetenants of
the several Counties to tender the Propositions for the raising of Horses
Plate and Money. Mr. Hastings and diverse of the Kings Commissioners of Array
impeached for supposed high Crimes and misdemeanors; and a Committee of five
Lords and ten of the house of Commons ordered to meet every morning for the
laying out of ten thousand pounds of the Guild Hall moneys for the buying of
700. Horse, and that 10000. Foot to be raised in London and the Country, be
employed by dirction of the Parliament, and the Lord Brook is furnished with
6. pieces of Ordnance out of the Tower of London to fortify the Castle of
Warwick.

And 9. July 1642. Order, That in case the Earl of Northampton should come
into that County with a Commission of Array they should raise the Militia to
suppress him; And that the Common Council of London should consider of away
for the speedy raising of the 10000. Foot, and that they should be listed,
and put in Pay within four days after.

11. July 1642. The King sends to the Parliament to cause the Town of Hull to
be delivered unto him and desires to have their Ibm. 452.
answer by the 15. of that month, and as then had used no force against it:
But the morrow after before that message could come Ibm. 457
unto them they resolve upon the Question: That an Army shall be forthwith
raised for the defense of the Kings Person and both houses of Parliament; and
those who have obeyed their Orders and Commands; Ibm. 457.
in perserving the true Religion, the Laws, Liberties, and the Peace of the
Kingdom; and that they would live and dye with the Earl of Essex, whom they
nominate General in that Cause.

And 12. July 1642. Declare; That, they will protect all that shall be employed
in their assistance and Militia.

And 16. July 1642. Petition the King to forbear any preparations or actions
of War; and to dismiss His extraordinary guards, to come Ibm. 465. and 483.
nearer to them, and harken to their advice; but before that Petition could be
answered, wherein the King offered, when the Town of Hull should be delivered
to Him he would no longer have an Army before it, and should be assured that
the same pretense which took Hull from him, may not put a Garrison into
Newcastle (into which after the Parliaments surprise of Hull, He was enforced
to place a Governor and a small Garrison) He would also remove that Garrison,
and so (as his Magazine and Navy might be delivered unto him; all Armies and
Levies made by the Parliament laid down, the pretended Ordinance for the
Militia disavowed, and the Parliament adjourned to a secure place) he would
lay down Arms and repair to them, and desired all differences might be
freely debated in a Parliamentary way, whereby the Law might recover its due
reverence, the Subject his just Liberty Parliaments their full vigor and
estimation, and the whole Kingdom a blessed Peace and Prosperity, and
requiring their answer by the 27. of that July promised, till then, not to make
any attempt of force upon Hull; had Armed their General with power against
Him, given him a Commission to kill and slay all that should oppose him in the
execution of it, and chosen their General of the Horse.

8. August 1642. Upon information; That some of the Town of Portsmouth had
revolted to Collonell Goring (being but sent thither with a message from the
King) and Declared for His Majesty. Order forces to be sent thither spedily
to beleaguer it by Land, and the Earl of Warwick to send thither 5. Ships of
the Navy to prevent any Foreign forces coming to their assistance, and upon
Intelligence that the Earl of Northampton appeared with great strength at
Banbury to hinder the Lord Brooks carrying the pieces of Ordinance to Warwick;
Ordered 5000 Horse and Foot to be sent to assist Him.

9. August 1642. Upon information That the Marquis of Hartford and diverse
others were in Somersetshire demanding obedience to the Kings Commission of
Array, and to have the Magazine of the County to be delivered unto them. Gave
power to the Earl of Essex their Lord General, the Lord Brook and others to
apprehend the Marquis of Hartford, and Earl of Northampton, and their
accomplices, and to kill and slay all that should oppose them. And the day
following gave the Earl of Stamford a Commission to raise forces for the
Suppressing of any should attempt for the King, in Leichestershire or the
adjacent Counties.

And on the eleventh of August 1642. Upon the Kings Proclamation 2. days
before Declaring the Earl of Essex and all that should adhere unto him in the
levying of Forces and not come in and yield to His Majesty within 6. days to
be Traitors: vote the said Proclamation to be against the Fundamental Laws
of the Ibm. 509.
Kingdom; Declare their resolutions to maintain and assist the Earl of
Essex; and resolve to spend no more time in Declarations and Petitions, but to
endeavor by raising of Forces to suppress the Kings Party (Though all that
the Kings Loyal Subjects did at that time for Him, was but to execute the
Commission of Array in the old legal way of the Militia) and within a day or
two after Ordered the Earl of Essex their Lord General to set forth with his
Army of Horse upon the Monday following, but not so much as an answer would be
afforded to the Kings message sent from Hull, where, whilst He with patience
and hope forbore any action, or attempt of force, according to His promise: Sir
John Hotham sallied out in the night, and murdered many of His fellow Subjects.

12. August 1642. The King, though he might well understand the great leavies
of Men and Arms ready to march against Him, by a declaration published to all
His Subjects assures them; as in the presence of God; That all the Acts passed
by him in this Parliament should be as equally observed, as those which most
of all concerned his own interest and rights, and that his quarrel was not
against the Parliament; but particular men, and therefore desired, That the
Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, Sir Henry Ludlow, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Strode,
Mr. Martin, Mr. Hampden, Alderman Pennington, and Capt. Venne, might be
delivered into the hands of Justice to be tried by their Peers, according to
the known Laws of the Land, and against the Earls of Essex, Warwick,
Stamford, Lord Brook, Sir John Hotham, Major General Skippon, and those who
should exercise the Militia by virtue of the Ordinance, he would cause
Indictments to be drawn of high Treason upon the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. and
if they submit to trial, and plead the Ordinance, would rest satisfied if they
should be acquitted. But when this produced as little effect as all other
endeavors He had used for peace. He that saw the Hydra in the mud and slyme
of Sedition, in its Embrio, birth and growth and finds him now erected ready to
devour him; must now (though very unwilling to cast off His beloved robe of
Peace, forsake an abused patience, and believe no more in the hopes of other
remedies had so often deceived Him: but if He will give any account to the
Watchman of Israel of the People committed to his Charge; or to the People of
his protection of them, or any manner of satisfaction to his own Judgment and
discretion) betake Himself to the Sword which God had entrusted Him with* and
therefore makes the best use he could of those few friends were about Him, and
with the money which the Queen had not long before borrowed, and the small
supplies He had obtained of His Servants and Friends about Him (who pawned and
engaged their Plate, Jewels and Lands for Him) with those Lords and Gentlemen
that willingly offered to bear Him Company in His Troubles; provides what Men
and Arms He could in His way toward Nottingham, where He intended to set up
His Standerd.

But the Parliament about the 23. of August 1642. having received some
information that He intended to set up His Standard at Nottingham, Declare:
That now it appears to all the World, that there is good ground of their
fears and jealousies (which if ever there Ibm. 573. 574 575. and 576.
had been any, as there was no cause at all of any, more then that meaning to
murder and ruin Him, they were often afraid He should take notice of it, and
seek to defend Himself; there was by their own confession till this time no
manifest or certain ground appearing that He intended to defend Himself
against the Parliament) and therefore Order: That all that shall suffer in
their Estates by any forces raised by the King, without consent of Parliament,
shall have full reparation of their damages out of the Estates of the actours,
and out of the Estates of all such Persons in any part of the Kingdom who
should persist to serve the King in this War against the Parliament; and That
it should be Lawful for any number of persons to join and defend themselves;
and That the Earl of Essex, their General should grant out Commissions for
Levying and conducting forces into the Northern parts; And Sir John Hotham the
Governor of Hull assist them; and Command also the Sheriffs of the County of
York, and the adjacent Counties, with the Power of the Counties, and
Trayned-Bands to aid them, and to seize upon all that shall execute the
Commission of Array for His Majesty; who thus sufficiently beset by those that
intended, what since they have brought to pass against Him;

25 August 1642. (being some days after the Earl of Bedsord had marched with
great forces into the West) that His Subjects might be informed of His danger
and repair to His succor; seteth up His Standard at Nottingham; being a thing
of a mere legal Vide the Kings Declaration Printed at Oxford and ordered to
be read in Churches and Chappells.
necessity, if He would have any at all to come to help Him, and not forfeit
and surprise those that by tenure of their Lands or by reason of offices,
fee's, or annuities enjoyed under Him, were more immediately bound to assist
Him.

And yet here He must weep over Jerusalem; and once again entreat the
Parliament, and His Rebellious Subjects to prevent their own miseries; and
therefore sends the Earls of Southampton and Dorset to the Parliament to
desire a Treaty, offering to do all on His own part which might advance the
Protestant Religion; oppose Cokes 1. part institutes 65. 11. H. 7. Dec. 18.
and 19. H. 7. Dec. 1. Collect. Kings Message. 579.
Popery and Superstition, and secure the Laws and Liberties of his Subjects,
and just privileges of Parliament: Which after several scorns put upon those
noble Messengers, as denying the Earl of Southampton to come and sit in the
house of Peers (a right by birth and inheritance due unto him) and causing the
Sergeant at Arms of the house of Commons to go before him with the Mace as
they use to do before Delinquents: They refuse to accept of unless the King
would first take down his Standard and recall his Declarations and
Proclamations against them. To which the King the 5. Sept. 1642.
(notwithstanding the Earl of Bedford had with great forces in the mean time
besieged the Marquis of Hartford in the Castle of Sherb^r^ in Dorset-shire)
replying, That he never did declare nor ^^er intended to declare both his
houses of Parliament to be traitors, or set up his Standard against them; much
less to put them and the Kingdom out of his protection. And utterly
protesting against it before God and the World offered to recall his
Declarations and Proclamations Ibm. 58.
with all cherfulness the same day that they should revoke their
Declarations against those had assisted him; and desiring a Treaty, and
conjuring them to consider the bleeding condition of Ireland, and the danger of
England, undertakes to be ready to grant any thing shall be really good for
his Subjects; which being brought by the Lord Falkland, one of his Majesty's
Secretaries of State, and a Member of the house of Commons, and not long before
in a very great esteem with them (all the respect could be afforded him being
to stand at the Bar of the house of Commons, and deliver his Message unto
them) had only an answer in a printed Declaration of the Lords and Commons
returned unto him, That it was Ordered and Declared by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament; That the arms which they have been forced to take up, or shall
be forced to take up, for the preservation of the Parliament, Religion, and
the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; shall not be laid down until his
Majesty shall withdraw his protection from such Persons as have been voted by
both houses of Parliament to be Delinquents, or that shall by both houses of
Parliament be voted to be Delinquents (which after their mad way of voting
might have been himself, his Queen or Ibm. 585.
his Heir apparent) and leave them to the Justice of Parliament according to
their d^merites, to the end that those great Charges and damages wherewithal
the Commonwealth has been burdened since his Majesty departed from the
Parliament, might be borne by the Delinqua^ts and other Malignant and
disaffected Persons, and that those who by Loans of money or otherwise at
their charges have assisted the Commonwealth, or shall in l^^e manner
hereafter assist the Commonwealth in times of extreme danger (and here they
would also provide for future friends and quarrels) may be re-paid all sums
of money ^ent for those purposes and satisfied their charges sustained out of
the estates of the said Delinquents and of the Malignant and disaffected party
in this Kingdom.

And to make good their words 8. of September 1642. Before their answer could
come unto the Kings hands; Ordered certain numbers of horse and foot to be
sent to Garrison and secure Oxford, and the morrow after (before the King could
possibly reply unto it) their Lord General the Earl of Essex, marched out of
London against Him with an Army of 20000. men, horse and foot gallantly Armed
and a great train of Artillery to attend him; notwithstanding all which, and
those huge impossibilities every day more and more appeared of obtaining a
Peace with those were so much afraid to be loosers by it, as they never at all
intended it.

The King must needs send one message more unto them, to try if that might not
give them some occasion to send Him gentler conditions; and therefore 13.
September 1642. (Being the same day they had impeached the Lord Strange of
high treason for executing the Kings Commission of Array, and Ordered the
propositions for furnishing of horse, plate, and money, to be tendered from
house to house, in the Cities of London and Westminster, and to be sent into
all the Shires and Counties of England to be tendered for the same purpose; and
the names of the refusers to be certified.) Mr. May one of the Pages to the
King comes to the Lords house in Parliament, with a message from Him bearing
date but two days before; That although He had used all ways and means to
prevent the present distractions and dangers of the Kingdom all His labors
have been fruitless, that not so much as a treaty earnestly Ibm. 586.
defired by Him can be obtained (though He disclaimed all His Proclamations
and Declarations, and the erecting of His Standard as against His Parliament)
unless He should denude Himself of all force to defend Him from a visible
strength marching against Him; That now He had nothing left in His power, but
to express the deep sense He had of the public misery of the Kingdom, and
to apply Himself to a necessary defense, wherein He wholly relied upon the
providence of God and the affection of His good People, and was so far from
putting them out of His protection, as when the Parliament should desire a
treaty He would piously remember whose blood is to be spilt in this quarrel
and cheerfully embrace it.

But this must also leave them as it found them, in their ungodly purposes, for
the morrow after being the 14. day of September 1642. Mr. Hampden one of the 5.
Members (by this time a Collenell of the Army) brings letters to the house of
Commons from the Parliaments Lord General, that he was at Northampton in a
very good posture, and that great numbers of the Countries thereabouts came in
daily unto him, and offered to march under him, and that so soon as all his
forces that are about London shall come unto him, which he desires may be
hastened, he intended to advance toward His Majesty: and it was the same day
voted; That all things sealed by the Kings Seal since it was carried away by
the Lord Keeper Littleton, should be Null, and of no force in the Law; and
that a new Seal should be provided.

The King therefore seeing what He must trust to, 19. September 1642. Being at
Wellington in Shrop-shire in the head of such small forces and friends as He
could get together, (for the Parliament that very day had received letters,
That the King, but the week before, having a muster at Nottingham, there
appeared but about 3000. foot, and 2000. horse, and 1500. dragoones; and that
a great part of His men were not provided with arms) made His Protestation and
Promise as in the presence of almighty God, and as He hoped for His blessing
and protection to maintain to the utmost Ibm. 614.
of His power the true reformed Protestant Religion established in the Church
of England, and that He desired to govern by the known Laws of the Land,
and that the Liberty and property of the Subject should be preserved with the
same care as His own just rights; and to observe inviolably the Laws
consented to by Him in this Parliament, and promised as in the sight of
almighty God, if He would please by His blessing upon that Army raised for His
necessary defense, to preserve Him from that Rebellion, to maintain the just
privileges and freedom of Parliament, and govern by the known Laws of the
Land. In the mean while, if this time of War, and the great necessity and
straights He was driven to, should beget any violation of them, He hoped it
would be imputed by God and man to the Authors of the War, and not to Him
who had so earnestly desired and labored for the Peace of the Kingdom, and
preservation thereof; and that when He should fail in any of those
particulars, He would expect no aid or relief from any man, nor protection
from Heaven.

And now that the stage of War seems to be made ready, and the parliament
party being the better furnished, had not seldom showed themselves, and made
several traverses over it (for indeed the King having so many necessities
upon him, and so out of power and provision for it, might in that regard only
if He had not been so unwilling to have any hurt come to His People by his
own defending of Himself, be backward and unwillingly drawn unto it, we may
do well to stand by and observe who comes first to act upon it.

22. Of September 1642. The Earl of Essex writes from Warwick that he was
upon his march after the King and before the 6. of October following had
written to the County of Warwick with all speed to raise their Trained bands
and Volunteers to resist his Forces if they should come that way, and to the
three Counties of Northampton, Lecester and Darby, to gather head and resist
him if he should retire into those parts; and by all that can be judged of a
matter of fact, so truly and faithfully represented, must needs be
acknowledged to have great advantages of the King, by the City and Tower of
London, Navy, Shipping, Arms, Ammunition, the Kings Magazine, all the strong
Towns of the Kingdom, most of the Kingdoms plate and money, the Parliament
credit and high esteem, which at that time the People Idolized; the fiery
Zeal of a Seditious Clergy to preach the People into a Rebellion, and the
People headlong lie running into the witcheraft of it: When the King on the
other side, had little more to help him, then the Laws and Religion of the
Land, which at that time every man began to mis-conster and pull in pieces, had
neither men, horse, arms, ammunition, ships, places of strength, nor money,
not any of his party or followers after the Parliament had as it were
proclaimed a War against Him, could come single or in small numbers through
any Town or Village, but were either openly assaulted, or secretly betrayed,
no man could adventure to serve or own him, but must expose Himself, and his
Estate to be ruined either by the Parliament or People, or such as for malice
or profit would inform against him. All the gains and places of preferment,
were on the Parliaments part, and nothing but losses and misfortunes on the
Kings: No man was afraid to go openly to the Parliaments side, and no man
durst openly so much as take acquaintance of his Sovereign, but if he had
done a quarter of that which Ziba did to David when he brought him the 200.
loaves of bread, or old Barzillai, or Ittay the Gittite when he went along
with him when his son Absalom rebelled against him. They should never have
escaped so well as they did, but have been sure to be undone and sequestered
for it. So much of the affections of the People had the Parliament cosened, and
stolen from them, so much profit and preferment had they to persuade it, and so
much power to enforce those, that otherwise had not a mind to it, to fight
against him; Who thus every way encompassed about with dangers and like a
Partridge hunted upon the Mountains; marches from Shrewsbury toward Banbury,
persuading and picking up what help and assistance His better for of Subjects
durst adventure to afford Him: in the way to which.

On Sunday the 23. of October 1642. (for they thought it better to rob God of
his Sabbath, then loose an opportunity of murdering their Sovereign) The Earl
of Essex and Parliament Army pouring in from all quarte^s of the kingdom upon
him, had comp^ss^d Him in on all sides; and before the King could put His men
in battle Array (many of whom being young country fellows had no better arms
then clubs and staves in their hands cut out of the hedges) and put His two
young Sons the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York in the guard of a troop
of horse at the further end of the field, and had finished a short prayer; a
bullet of the Earl of Essex's Cannon graz^d at His heels, as he was kneeling
at His prayers on the side of a b^^ke (for Blague a villain in the Kings Army
having a great Pension allowed Him for it, had given notice in what part of the
field the King stood that they might the better know how to shoot at him.) But
God having a greater care of his Anointed then of their Rebellious pretenses;
so ordered the hands of those that fought for the King, as the Earl of Essex
was so laden with Victories, as he left five of His men for one of the Kings
dead behind him; lost his baggage and Artillery, retired back to Warwick, and
left the King to bless God in the field; where He supped with such Victuals
as the more Loyal and better naturd neighbors sent him, when the worser sort
refused to do it, and lying there all night sent warrants out the next day to
the neighbor Parishes to bury the dead; drew off His ordnance and marched to
Banbury, and yet he could not forget to pity those were at such pains and
hazard the day before to murder him, but before he went out of the field sent
Sir William Le-neve Clarenci^ux King of Arms to Warwick, whither the Earl of
Essex was fled, with a Proclamation of pardon to all that would lay down
arms, which though they scornefully received, and the Herald threatened to be
hanged if he did not depart the sooner, cannot persuade him from sending a
Declaration or Message to the Parliament to offer them all that could be
requested by Subjects, but all the use they made of it was to make the City of
London believe they were in greater danger then ever, if they lent them not
more moneys and recruited the Earl of Essex his broken Army; and to cosen and
put the People on the more to seek their own misery, a day of thanks giving
was publicly kept for the great Victory obtained against the King. And
Stephen Marshall a Factious bloody minister though he confessed he was so
carried on in the crowde of those that fled from the battle, as he knew not
where he was, till he came to a Mar^et Town which was some miles from
Edgehill where the Battle was fought, preaches to the people (too little
believing the Word of God, and too much believing him:) That to his knowledge
there was not above 200. men lost on the Parliaments side; that he picked up
bullets in his black Velvet cap, and that a very small supply would now serve
to reduce the King, and bring him to his Parliament.

And here ye may see Janus Temple wide open, though the doors of it were not
lift off the hinges, or broken open at once, but picked open by those either
knew not the misery of the War, or knowing it will prove to be the more guilty
promoters of it. That we may the better therefore find out (though the matter of
Fact already represented may be evidence enough of it self) who it was that
let cut the fury and rage of War upon us, we shall consider;

CHAP. III. Whether a Prince or other Magistrate, laboring to suppress, or
punish a Rebellion of the People, be tied to those rules are necessary for the
justifying of a War; if it were made between equals.
War was first brought in by necessity where the determining of
controversies between two strange Princes of Equ^l^ power, could not be had,
because they have no superior: A Rebel therefore cannot properly be called
an enemy, for Hostis nomen notat equalitatem; and when any such arms are borne
against Rebels it is not to be called a War; but an Exercise of
Jurisdiction upon traterous and dis-loyall Persons at que est ratio manifesta
says Albericus Gentilis, qui enim jure judex est and superior, Alber. Gentil.
223.
non jure cogitur ad subeundas parts partis and aequalis, and non est bellum
cum latronibus praedonibus aut piratis quanquam magn^^ habeant excercitus, and
provide nec ulla cum illis belli jura, says Besoldus: Besoldus in dissers de
inre Belli 77. and 78.
The Romans who were so exact and curious in their public denouncing of
War, and sending Ambassadors before they made War against any other Nation;
did not do it in cases of Rebellion and defection, and therefore Fidenatibus
and Campanis non denunciant Romani, And Cicero that was of opinion, that nullum
bellum Lib Alber. 23.
justum haberi videtur nisi nunciatum, nisi indictum nisi repetitis rebus stood
not upon those solemnities in the Cataline conspiracy; for the rules of
justifying a War against an enemy or equals as demanding restitution,
denunciation, and the like, are not requisite in that of punishing of Rebels;
Pompey justifies the War maintained by the Senate against Caesar (not then
their Sovereign) Lucan. li. 2
with neque enim vocari praelia justa decet etc. Cicero did not think it
convenient to send Ambassadors to Anthony, nor entreat him by fair words; but
that it was meet to enforce him by arms to raise his siege from Mutina, for
he said They had not to do with Haniball Cieero Phi^^pic. 5.
an enemy to the Commonwealth, but with a Rebellious Citizen. The resisting of
the Kings Authourity when the Sheriff of a County goes with the posse
Comitatus, to execute it, was never yet so much as called a War; but
Rebellion and Insurrection or Commotion were the best terms bestowed upon it
[such attempts are not called Wars, but Robberies of which the Law takes no
other care of but to punish them] The haste that all our Kings and Princes in
England have made in suppressing Rebellions (as that of the Barons Wars by
Henry the 3. and his sending his son the Prince to besiege Warren Earl of
Surrey in his Castle of Rygate for affronting the Kings Justices, saying That
he would hold his Lands by the Sword: That which Ri. 2. made to suppress Wat.
Tiler, H. 6. Jack Cade, H. 8. Ket and the Norfolk Rebels, and Queen Eliz. to
suppress the Earls of Northnmberland and Westmerland) may tell us that they
understood it no otherwise then all the Kings and Magistrates of the World have
ever practiced it [by the Laws of England, if Englishmen that are Traitors go
into France and confederate with Aliens or Frenchmen, and come afterward and
make a War in England and be taken prisoners, the strangers may be
ransomed, but not the English for they were the Kings Subjects and are to be
reckoned as Traitors, not strangers:] And the Parliaments own advise to the
King to suppress the Irish Rebels that ploughed but with their own Heyfer,
and pretended as they did to defend their Religion, Laws and Liberties; and
the opinion also of Mr. President Bradshaw (as Sir John Owen called him in his
late sentence given against the Earls of Cambridge, Holland and Norwich, Lord
Capell and Sir John Owen, whom he mistakenly (God and the Law knows) would
make to be the Subjects of their worser fellow Subjects may be enough to turn
the question out of doors:

But lest all this should not be thought sufficient to satisfy those can like
nothing but what there is Scripture for, we shall a little turn over the
leaves of that sacred Volume, and see what is to be found concerning this
matter.

Moses who was the meekest Magistrate in the World, and better acquainted with
him that made the fifth Commandment then these that now pretend Revelations
against it; thought fit to suppress the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram
as soon as he could; and for no greater offense then a desire to be
coordinate with him, procured them to be buried alive with all that appertained
unto them.

When Absalom had Rebelled against his father David; and it was told him; That
the hearts of the men of Israel were after him, 2. Sam. 15
David a man after Gods own heart, without any Message of Peace or Declaration
sent unto his dear son Absalom; or offering half or any part of his
Kingdom to him, sent three several armies to pursue and give him battle.

When Sheba the son of Bichri blew a Trumpet and said, We have no part in
David every man to his Tent o Israel; and thereupon 2 Samuel 2^
every man of Israel followed after him and forsook their King, David (who
knew that Moses would not make a War upon the Amorites though he had Gods
commandment for it without offers of Peace, and messengers sent first unto
them) said to Amasa, assemble me the men of Judah within three days and when
he tarried longer said unto him; Take thou thy Lords Servants and pursue after
him lest he get him fenced Cities and escape us.

For they that would take heed of Cocatrices have ever used to kill them in
the shell. And diligenticuique Imperatori ac magistratui danda est opera (says
Bodin) ut non tam seditiones tollere quam Bodm. pa. 736.
praeoccupare student. For sedition (says he) once kindled like a spark of
fire, blown by popular fury may sooner fire a whole City then be extinguished.
Et tales igitur pestes opprimere derepente necesse est Princes and Sovereigns
who are bound to protect, and desend their Subjects, are not to stand still,
and suffer one to oppress another, and themselves to be undone by it
afterward,

But put the case the Parliament could have been called a Parliament when they
had driven away the King, which is the head and life of it, or could have been
said to have been two houses of Parliament, when there was not at that time
above a third part of the house of Peers, nor the half of the house of
Commons remaining in them, and what those few did in their absence was either
forced by a Faction of their own, or a party of Seditious Londoners (for
indeed the War rightly considered was not betwixt the Parliament and the
King; but a War made by a Factious and Seditious part of the Parliament,
against the King) and the major part of the Parliament) and had been (as it
never was nor could be by the Laws and constitution of the Kingdom)
coordinate and equal with the King, and joint tenants of the Kingdom; it
would have ^^^ne necessary to make the War as just as they could, and to hace
done all that had been in order to it: and therefore we hope they which
pretend so much to the Justice of the Kingdom will not be offended to have
the Justice of their War something examined.

CHAP. IIII. Suppose the War to be made with a neighbor Prince, or between
equals; whether the King or Parliament were in the defensive or justifiable
part of it.
PLaerique says learned Grotius, tres statuunt bellorum just as causas,
defensionem, recuperationem, and punitionem. For any defense (...) otius de
^ure pacis et belli.
the Parliament might pretend a necessity of. The King neither assaulted them,
nor used any violence to them when they first of all granted out their
Propositions and Commissions of War, unless they can turn their jealousies
into a Creed and make the Kings demanding the five Members and Kimbolton
(being done by warrant of the Law of the Land, and the Records and precedents
of their own houses) appear to be an assaulting of them. Or if any
reasonable man knew but how to make that to be an assault, or a necessary
cause of War for them to revenge it; the Kings waving and relinquishing of
his charge afterward against them, might have certainly been enough to have
taken away the cause of it (if there had been any) howsoever, a War made
only to revenge a bare demand or request of a thing was neither so much as
forced or a second time demanded of them, but was totally laid aside and
retracted; can never be accounted just.

As for the recovery of things lost, or taken away, The Parliament it self,
had nothing taken from them, for both they and the People were so far from
being loosers at that time by the King, as the Remonstrance of the house of
Commons made to the People Collect. of Mess. Remonst. and Declar. 15
15. December 1641. of the Kings errors (as they please to call them) in the
government (but indeed the errors rather of his Ministers and themselves also,
in busying him with brawles and quarrels and denying to give him fitting
supplies, mentions how much, and how many beneficial Laws the King had
granted them. And Ibm. 45. 50. 52. 55. 67. 98. 91. 94. 103. 104. 106. 109. 110.
114. 127. 255. 327. 353. 442. 472. 562. 580. 484. 686.
so the Parliament and People being no loosers, and the King never denying them
any thing could in honor or conscience be granted them; That part of the
Justyfying of a War will no way also belong to them.

But if the punishment for offenses and injuries past (if they could be be so
properly called) being a third cause of justifying a War, could be but
imagined to be a cause to justify the Parliaments War against the King; Yet
they were to remember another Rule or Law of War Ne nimis veteres causae
accersentur That they do not pick quarrels by raking up past grievances, and
that it be not propter leviusculas injurias; or for trifles. For when Besoldus
in dissert. philolog. p. 58.
the King (who if he had been no more then coordinate with them) had called
them to council to advise him, followed their advice in every thing he could
find any reason for, taken away all grievances, made a large provision to
prevent them for the future, by granting the Tryenniall Parliament, and so
large an amends for every thing they could but tell how to complain of; there
was so little left to the People and the Parliament to quarrel for, as they
were much behind in thankfulness for what they had got of him already.

Or if any other causes or provocations should be imagined as misusing the
Parliaments Messengers, or the like: we know the King (unless it were by his
patience and often Messages for Peace) was guilty of no provocations; but on
the contrary, though he had all manner of scorns and reproaches cast upon
him, and his Messengers evil entreated by them, could never be brought to
return or retaliate it to any of theirs.

But nothing as yet serving to excuse them. It will not be amiss to examine
the Causes as they are set down by themselves, to justify their war, and so
we may well suppose there are no other.

A War against the King for safety of his own Person was needless (and then
it comes within that rule of war and law of Nations, Ne leves sint causa
belli, not to make a war unnecessary; for the King would look to that
himself; and, as they were his Subjects, they, as well as every honest
Subject, were bound to defend and assist him, but not whether he would or no;
and in such a way of defense, as would tend to his ruins rather then his
safety. For surely should any stranger of another Kingdom or Nation have
casually passed by Edgehill when the Kings and the Parliaments Armies were in
fight, and have been told that the King shot at them for the safety of his
own Person, and that they also shot against him for the safety of his own
Person; and being asked which of the two parties he believed did really or
most of all intend the safety of it? we cannot tell how to think any man such
a stranger to nature, reason or understanding; as to think the King should not
fight as the Dictates of nature persuaded him to: or that the King could tell
how to fight against those that fought for him: or that if he should be so
hugely mistaken in that one year or Battle, he should be in several other
years and Battles after.

To sight for the defense of the Religion established (as they made also the
People believe) that was as needless; when the King offered to do every thing
might help to promote it: and they are so little also to be credited in that
pretense, as we know they did all they could from the beginning to ruin it;
took away Episcopacie the hedge and bounds of it, brought in Presbitery to
preach up and aid their Rebellion, and when their own turns were served
encouraged Conventicles and Tub-preachers to pull down the Presbitery: And
being demanded at the treaty at Vxbridge by the Kings Commissioners what
Religion they would have the King to establish, were so unprovided of an
answer, as they could not resolve what to nominate, nor in any of their
propositions afterward sent to the King, though often urged and complained of
by the Scottish Commissioners could ever find the way to do it, but have now
set up an Independent extemporary enthusiastic kind of worshipping God (if
there were any such thing in it) or rather a religious Chaos or gallimaufrey of
all manner of heresies, errors, blasphemies and opinions put together, not any
of the owners of which, we can be confident will subscribe to that opinion
that wars may be made for Religion, or that Conscience ought to be forced
by it.

As for the restrictive part of the Laws to keep the People in subjection,
we can very well persuade our selves, no such War was ever made yet in the
World, nor any People ever found that would engage in a War for that they
obeyed, but against their wills: And for that part of the Law that gives them
the Kings protection, privileges, immunities and certainties of deciding
controversies (which are more fitly to be called the Liberties of the People,
then to have 45. of the house of Commons or a Faction to make daily, and
hourly Laws, and Religion, and Government, and vote their estates in and out
to pay an Army, to force their obedience to it) if we had not outlived the
Parliaments disguises, and pretenses, saw them now tearing them up by the
roots, that there may be no hope of their growing up again, and seting up
their own as well as the ignorant, and illiterate fancies of Mechaniques, and
Soldiers in steed of them; we might have said that also had been needless,
when the King had done abundantly enough already; and offered to grant any
thing more could in reason be demanded of him.

And as touching their privileges of Parliament, They that understand but any
thing of the Laws of England, or have but looked into the Records, and
Journalls of Parliament, can tell that all privileges of Parliament (as King
James said) were at first bestowed upon them by the Kings and Princes of this
Kingdom: That privileges of Parliament extended not to Treason, or Felony, or
breach of the Peace. That 32. Hen. 6. Sir Thomas Thorpe Speaker of the house of
Commons being arested in execution in the time 32. Hen. 6
of the prorogation of the Parliament the Commons demanded he might be set at
liberty according to their privileges: whereupon the Judges being asked their
Council therein; made answer that general supersedeas of Parliament there
were none; but special supersedeas there was; in which case of special
supersedeas, every member of the house of Commons ought to enjoy the same;
unless in cases of Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace, or for a
Condemnation before the Parliament: After which answer it was determined; that
the said Sir Thomas Thorpe should ly in excution, and the Commons were required
on the behalf of the King to choose a new Speaker, which they did, and
presented to the King accordingly. That Queen Elizabeth was assured by her
Judges, that she might commit any of her Parliament during the Parliament, for
any offense committed against her Crown and dignity, and they showed her
precedents for it; and that primo and tertio Caroli Regis, upon search of
precedents in the several great cases of the Earls of Arundell and Bristoll,
very much insisted and stood upon, the house of Peers in Parliament allowed of
the exception of Treason, Felony, and breach of the Peace.

For indeed it is as impossible to think there can be any privilege to
commit Treason, as to think that a King should privilege all his Nobility, and
every one of his Subjects, that could get to be elected into the house of
Commons in Parliament, to commit Treason, and to take away his life in the time
of Parliament, whenever their revenge, or malice, or interest should find the
opportunity to do it; or that if it could be so, any King or Prince would ever
call or summon a Parliament to expose himself to such a latitude of danger, or
give them leave to sit as long as they would to breed it: or that privileges
of Treason can be consistent with the name or being of a Parliament to consult
and advise with the King for the defense of him, and his Kingdom: or that when
Felony and breach of Peace are excepted out of their privilege, Treason that
is of a far higher nature, consequence, and punishment, should be allowed
them: or if there could have been any such privilege, and a meaner man then
their Sovereign had broke it, a small understanding may inform them, they
could not without breach of the Peace, have fought for it against a fellow
Subject, and then also could not their privileges have reached to it, but the
King might have punished them for it: and if they cannot upon a breach of
privilege (as it was adjudged in Halls case) without the Kings writ, 18. Eliz.
and the cause first certified in Chancery, deliver one of their own servants
arrested: It is not likely any warrant can be found in Law to enforce the King
to reparation, though he himself should have broken it; but to petition the
King for an allowance of that, or any other privilege, as well in the middle,
or any other time of their sitting in Parliament, as they always do at the
presenting of their Speaker in the beginning of it. Wherefore, certainly the
People never gave the Parliament Commission (if they could have given a
Commission to make a War against their Sovereign) to claim that was never
due to them, or to fight for that was never yet fought for by any of their
forefathers, nor ever understood to be taken from them, much less for their
ayrie innovated pretenses rather than privileges which have since eaten up all
the Peoples Laws and Liberties as well as a good part of their lives and
estates with it, and are now become to be every thing their representatives
will and arbitrary power have a mind to make it; who have so driven away their
old legal privileges by setting up illegal and fantastique kind of
Privileges (as they are pleased to call them) instead of them, as there is
nothing now left of the Parliament like a Parliament, neither matter, nor
form, nor any thing at all remaining of it: For the upper, and lower houses
have driven away and fought against the King, who was their Head: the lower
after that, have driven away the upper, and fourtie-five of the house of
Commons (whereof eleven are great officers and commanders in the Army) have
after that imprisoned and driven away four hundred of their fellow members:
And from a degenerate and distemperate piece of a Parliament, brought
themselves to be but a representative, or journey-men-voters to a Council of
War of their own mercenacy and mechanique Army; and may sit another eight
years before ever they shall be able to find a reason to satisfy any man is
not a fool or a madman, or a fellow Sharer in the spoils of an abused and
deluded Nation: Why the Kings demanding of the five Members and Kimbolton by
undeniable warrant of the Laws of the Land and the Records, and precedents of
their own houses upon a charge, or accusation of Treason, for endeavoring
amongst other pieces of Treason, to alter the Government, and subvert the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, which the Parliament, and they themselves
that were accused have more then once declared to be Treason, should be taken
to be so great a breach of privilege in the King their Sovereign; when the
forcing, and over-awing the houses of Parliament by the Army, their servants
and hirelings, demanding the eleven members, and imprisoning and bannishing
some of them, upon imaginary and fantastical offenses committed against
themselves, or they could not tell whom; shall be reckoned to be no breach at
all of privilege, and the forcing of the houses by the same army within a
year afterward by setting guards upon them, violently pulling two of the
members of the house of Commons out of the house, and imprisoning them, and 39.
more of their fellow members all night in an Alchouse, and leading them
afterward to several prisons, with guards set upon them, as if they had been
common malefactors, can be called mercies, and deliverances, and a purging and
taking away rotten members out of the house of Commons.

But now that we can find nothing to make a defensive or Lawful, nor so much
as a necessary war on the Parliaments part; for (causa belli, says Besoldus,
correspondere debet damno et periculo) (...).
the Parliament fears and jealousies were not of weight enough to put the
People into a misery far beyound the utmost of what their fears and jealousies
suggested to them did amount unto, we shall do well to examine by the rules
and laws of war and Nations, the ways and means they used in it.

Injustum censetur belium si non ejus penes quem est Majestas authoritate (...).
moveatur; a War cannot be just if it be not made by a Lawful authority:
Armorum delatio et prohibitio ad Principem spect at; It belongs to the Prince
to raise or forbid arms, and the Records of the Parliament (which we take to
be a better sense of (...).
the house then their own purposes) can inform them, that the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and Commonaltie of the Realm did in the seveneth year of the
reign of King Edw, the first, declare to the King, That it belongs, and his
part is, through his Royal Signorie straightly to defend force of Armor, and
all other force against his Peace when it shall please him, and to punish them
which shall do the (...). 1.
contrary, according to the Laws and usages of the Realm, and that thereunto
they were bound to aid their Sovereign Lord the King, at all seasons when
need shall be.

How much ado then will they have to make a war against their Sovereign to
be Lawful? or (if by any warrant of Laws Divine or Humane they could but tell
how to absolve themselves from their oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, and their
very many protestations and acknowledements of Subjection to the King) find a
Supreme authority to be in the People, at the same time they swore an
allegiance, and obedience to the King, and at the same time they not only
styled themselves, but all those they represented to be his Subjects.

Or, how will they be able to produce a warrant from the People, their now
pretended Sovereigns (^^ll they shall be able sufficiently to enslave them)
to authorize them to make a War to un^^e them, when they elected them but to
consent to such things as should be treated of by the King, and his Lords for
the defense of the King and his Kingdom? Or how could a tenth part of the
People give warrant to them to fight against the King, and the other nine parts
of the People? Or can that be a good warrant when some of them were cheated,
and the other by plunderings and sequestrations forced to yield to it? Or could
the pretense of a war for defense of the Kings Person, and to maintain the
Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the People be a warrant to the Parliament
(which never sought any thing for the King and People, but to take away the
Sovereignty from the one, and the Liberties of the other) to do every thing
was contrary unto it? But if that could have legitimated their actions? as it
never did or will be able.

There is a two fold rule of Justice in the practice of War and Nations, si
bellum geratur sine denunciation^ in captivos tanquam latrones ^aciu^ a^xiom.
35.
animadverti possit; It is a thievery, rather than a War not to denounce or
give notice of it beforehand: and in that also the Parliament was faulty, for
they took Hu^^ and Portsmouth and the Kings Navy and Magazine from him when he
hoped better things of them, and sent out their Armies and the Earl of Essex
against him whilst he was in treaty with them, and offered all that he could
for to have a peace with them.

Bellum item impium injustumque sit si modus debitus non observetur; A War is
unjust if their be not a due way of proceedings Besoldus dissert philolog. 88.
held in it, which especially consists in not hurting the innocent,
Churchmen, Husbandmen, weak or impotent People, as old men, women, and
Children, and in this also they will fall short of an excuse. For how full is
every Town and Village of the truth as well as the complaints of the
unchristian usage of old and sick people, Women and Children, beaten, wounded,
or killed upon no provocation; Women and Maids ravished, and their fingers cut
off for their rings, old Best of Canturbury hanged up by the privi^ies, others
tortured, and had burning matches tied to their fingers to make them confess
where their money was, Women and Children and sick and aged Persons starved for
want of the sustenance they had taken from them, Husbandmen had their corn and
hay spoiled in the field, and the barn; their sheep, cattle and provisions
devoured, houses ruined or burnt, and their horses they should help to plough
and do other works of Husbandry taken away, in so much as some were enforced
to blind and put out their horses eyes that they might not be taken from
them; Churches that escaped defacing, profaned and made Stables, or Goales, or
Victualing, or Bawdy houses, Monuments defaced, and Sepulchers opened, as were
those of the Saxon Kings at Winchester, and the Priests and Ministers not so
much as sustered to weep betwixt the Porch and the Altar, but their benefices
and livelihood taken from them by Wolves put in the Shephards places; had their
books burned and all their means and maintenance plundered from them; and
those that were newtralls, and meddled on neither side but lived as quietly as
they could, either totally undone, or cast in prison, not for that they did
them any hurt, but because they might do it, and if they were not imprisoned
their Lands money or goods were sure to be in the fault and taken away from
them.

Vt bellum illaesa conscientia geratur necesse est ut ads^t intentio bona;
there ought to be a good intention to make the War conscionable; Besoldus
Ibm. 95.
which in this appears to fail also: For the Charge against the five Members
is now as true as it was then, they meant to ruin the King and they have don
it, and to alter the Government, and subvert the Religion, Laws and Liberties
of the Kingdom; and they have don a great part of it, and as fast as they can
are pulling down the remainder.

Quaerere debemus victoriam rationibus honestis, ne salutem quidem ^n. picart
observat. decad 10. code 2. and Facius a^iom bell. ^0.
turpibus; We ought to pursue victory and the just ends of War by honest and
Lawful means, and not to do foul and dishonest things to procure our
safety; from the latter of which, the made fears and jealousies which the
Parliament made use of to usher in their pretenses, their fayning of victories
and scandaling the King and his actions, not to insist upon their buying the
Kings servants and secrets, Battles, Towns, and Garrisons, and making too
many Judases of all that were about him, will hardly be able to free them; or
if they could, the making use of men and money intended for the support of
Ireland, and leaving them wallowing in their blood for seven years together,
whilst they were ruining their King that would have helped them, violating of
their oaths of allegiance and Supremacy which many of their members had taken
six or seven times over, breaking their oaths taken in their protestation and
National Covenant, and not so few as 100 solemn promises, and undertakings in
their several Petitions, Remonstrances, and Declarations; forcing the People
to take the Protestation and Covenant, and compel them as soon as they had
taken it, to break them, and by cosening and forcing them into Rebellions and
perjuries, cheat them out of their Religion, Loyalty, Laws and Liberties;
will without very good advocates be sure enough to condemn them: and if the
great Turk carrying the Covenant which Ladislaus the unfortunate King of
Hungary was persuaded to break with him as an ensign of public detestation
in the bettell wherein he slew him, invoked the God of the Christians to help
him to revenge so grrat a treachery, there will be more reason now for all
that are but Christians, or but pretend to any morality, to carry in their
banner, the pourtract of the Kings bleeding head, as it was cut from his
shoulders, and make War in revenge of the maisterpiecee, and totum
aggregatum, of all manner of wickednesle and perfidiousnesse, who besides all
their own and the Peoples oaths taken to defend him, when those they called
Delinquents (some few only which were specially named and excepted) for
obeying the known Laws of the Land as well as their oaths and Consciences,
were never questioned for their lives; but suffered to compound for their
estates; would not suffer the King, that was neither a Delinquent or Excepted
Person, to enjoy either his Life or Estate, though to save his people and keep
them from killing one another he yielded himself and became a Prisoner upon
the public faith of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

Paxaequa non est recusanda Licet victoriae spes adsit (says Besoldus)
Besoldus in dissert philolog p. 83.
A good or fitting Peace is not to be refused though the victory were
certain: And in this also the Parliament will be as far to seek for a
justification as in the other: For instead of offering any thing which was
likely to bring it, they caused men and women in the first year of their War
to be killed because they did but petition them to accept of a Peace; and in
the third and fourth year of their War plundered and robbed others that
petitioned them but to hearken to it, and put out of office, and made all as
Delinquents in the seventh year of their War that did but petition them for a
Treaty with the King; and refused all the Kings many, very many Messages for
Peace, not only when he was at the highest of his success in the war, but
when he was at the lowest, and a Prisoner to them, and conjured them as they
would answer at the dreadful day of Judgment to pity the bleeding conditions
of his Kingdoms and People, and send propositions of Peace unto him, quarters
and half years, and more then a whole year together after the battle of
Naseby (insomuch as their fellow Rebels the Scotch Commissioners did heavily
complain of it) were at several times trifled away and spent before any
propositions could be made ready, though those which they sent to Oxford,
Vxbridge, Newcastle and Hampton Court, were but substantially and materially
the same with their ninete^ne Propositions which they made unto the King before
the Earl of Essex was made their General and in all the Treaties, made
Propositions for themselves and the Sovereignty and great offices and places of
the Kingdom, but would neither for Gods sake, or their Kings sake, or their
Oaths or Consciences sake, or the Peoples sake, or Peace sake, which the
People petitioned and hungered and thirsted for, alter or abate one Io^a or
t^ttle of them, but were so unwilling to have any peace at all, as 6 or 7
Messengers or Trumpeters could com from the King, before they could be at
leisure or so mannerly as to answer one of them, but this or that Message from
the King was received and read, and laid by till a week or when they would
after: and the Kings Commissioners in the Treaties must forget their due titles
of Earls, Lords or Knights, because the King had made them so since the
beginning of the War, or else must be neither Treaty nor Peace there.

At Vxbridge the time of the Treaty limited for 20. days; and at Newcastle for
10. and though the King and his Commissioners at Vxbridge almost petitioned for
a cessation in the interim of that Treaty, as they had done before in that
which was at Oxford, it could not be granted, nor have a few days added to it;
and if the King could in honor and Conscience have granted all the other parts
of the propositions, must grant them an act, not only to confiscate the Estates
of his Friends and those that took arms to save his Life and Estate, but to
take away their Lives also, and not only that, but to condemn them of high
Treason, and attaint their blood, when they fought against them were only
guilty of it, a thing so unfitting and unusually stood upon, as it was never
asked in any treaty or pacification among the civilized or more barbarous
heathen, and amounts to more then Adonibezeks causing the thumbs and great toes
of his captive Kings to be cut off, and making them to gather the crumbes from
under his table, or Benhadads demand of Ahabs silver and gold, his wives and
Children, and whatsoever else was pleasant in his eyes, which the elders and
People of Israel persuaded Ahab not to consent unto, but was a thing purposely
contrived and stood upon to hinder a Peace; was not to be asked or granted by
any that could but entitle themselves to the least part of reason or humanity;
a demand Bajazet would not leave his Iron cage to yield unto; a thing nature it
self would abhor, and the worst of Villains and reprobates rather loose
their lives then yield to; would never be demanded by any but a Devil, nor
granted by any but his Equals.

And if their desiring of a war more then a peace, and to keep the King out of
his own had not been the only cause of such unnatural and barbarous
propositions it may well be wondered, why they that have made to themselves
(for we cannot believe they have found any law or warrant to ground it upon) a
power to take away the Kings life upon a color or pretense of an unread, as
well as unheard of piece of Justice; should need to strive so hard with the
King, to give them a power to do that they are now so busy to do of
themselves: and as if they had been afraid, all this would not be enough to
keep the doors of Janus, or the Devil open, for fear lest the King should
trouble them with any more offers or Messages for peace: a vote must be made
in February 1647. that it should be treason in any man to bring or receive any
more Messages from him without consent of Parliament. But suppose (that which
is not) that the Parliament could have but found any thing but somewhat like a
cause or justification of a war against their Sovereign (for notwithstanding
all their hypocritical pretenses, so it was at first intended, and so it has
proved to be ever since) to whom their Masters the People (we mean as to the
house of Commons) had sent them to consult with, not to make a War against
him: they might have remembered that saying of Cicero (if they had found nothing
in the book of God, and their own Consciences to persuade them to it) That
duo sunt genera decertandi, unum per disceptationem, Cic. 1. de offis.
alterum per vim, and ad hoc confugiendum non est si uti superiori licebit:
There are other ways to come by pretended rights, then by a War, and we
ought never to make use of a War (which is the worst of all remedies) if we
may obtain it by a better. Hen. 2. King of England was made a Judge betwixt
the Kings of Castile and Navarre. The Rebellious Barons of England in the
reign of King Hen. 3. referred their controversies to the decision of the king
of France and Jov. lib. 1.
his Parliament at Paris: And the blood of this kingdom which ran so
plentifully in those unhappy differences was by that means only stopped.
Charles the 4. Emperor was made a Judge of the differences Polidor. 1^ 20.
betwixt the English and the French Kings: For as Albericus Gentilis says
well; Intelligendum and eos qui diffugiunt genus hoc decertandi Albericus
Gentilis cap. 3.
per desceptationem, and ad alterum quod est per vim currunt, illco eos a
justitia ab humanitate, a probis exemplis refugere, et ruere, in arma volentes
qui subire judicium nullius velint: They that rush into a War without
assaying all other just means of deciding the controversy for which it is
made, and will judge only according to their own will, and opinion do turn
their backs, to Justice, Humanity, and all good Examples. And in that also the
Parliament will be found faulty: For the French King, and the Estates of the
united Provinces did by more then one request, and embassy severally and
earnestly mediate to make an accord betwixt the King and his Parliament and
desired to have all things in defference left to their arbitrament; but their
Ambassadors returned home again with a report, how much they found the King
inclined to it; and how satisfactorily he had offered; and how much the
Parliament was averse to their interposition, and altogether refused it.

But we have tarried long enough among the Parliament party, from thence
therefore (for it is time to leave the company of so much wickedness) we
shall remove to the Kings party (and yet that may cause a Sequestration) and
examine for a fuller satisfaction of that which by the rule of contraries, is
clear enough already, if he were not on the defensive and more justifiable
part of the business.

The King as he was defensor et protector subditorum suorum, and sworn to see
the Law executed; had not the sword nor his authority Committed to him in vain:
And if he had had no manner of just cause of fear either in his own Person
or authority, or no cause given him in relaesae Majestatis: the imprisoning of
his Subjects, and plundring and taking away their estates from them, long
before he had either armed himself, or had wherewithal to do it; had been
cause as sufficient as to cause a Hue and Cry to be made after a fellon; or
raise the posse Commitatus to bring him to Justice, and might by the same
reason do it in the case of more, and by the same reason he might do it by
the help of one, nothing can hinder but by the same reason he might do it by
the help of more.

When Nathan came to David with a parable, and told him of the rich man that
had taken the poor man's only Sheep he that understood well enough the duty
of a King was exceeding wroth against the man and said; As sure as the Lord
lives this man shall surely dye. And can any man think that the King when he
saw so much Sedition and Treason among the People countenanced and cherished,
Tumults grow up into outrages, outrages to parties and Warlike assemblies,
proposi^ions made to bring in Horse and Money to maintain an Army against Him,
and many of his Subjects daily imprisoned, sequestered, undone or killed; can
be blamed if he had a great deal sooner gone about to defend both himself,
and his People? For who (says St. Jerome) did ever rest quietly sleeping Jerome.
ep. 47.
near a viper? et lex una and perpetua salutem omni ratione defendere and haec
ratio doctis, necessitas Barbaris, mos gen^ibus, feris natura ipsa prescripsit,
et haec non scripta sed nata lex says Tully (that great master of morality)
Reason, Necessity, Custom, and Nature it self have made Cicero promilone.
self preservation to be warrantable.

Nemo exponere so debet periculis obviam offensiom eundum, non modo quae est in
actu, sed quae est in potentia ad actum, and justus metus justum facit belium;
say the Civil Laws, and where there was not unda cogitatio or a bare
intention only to ruin the King, but so much over and over again acted, as
might well occasion more then a fear, and apprehension in him of what has
since been brought to pass against him; no man certainly without much
blindness or partiality can think it to be a fault in him to seek to defend
himself, when the Parliament did not only long before he raised any forces to
defend himself, but at the same time when he was doing of it, make the people
believe his Person was in so much danger, as they must needs take up arms to
defend Him.

And how much more warrantable then must it be in the Kings case, when it was
not only an endeavor to defend himself, but all those that have been since
slain, and undone, and ruined for want of power enough to do it?

Defense is by the civil Lawyers said to be either necessary, profitable, or
honest: Nec distingui vult Baldus sive se, sua, suosve Baldus ^. consid. 485
and consid. 5.
defendar, sive prope, sive posita long; a man is said to defend himself when
it is but his own goods, estate, or People, whether near or furtherof;
Necessaria defensio ejus est, et factum ad necessariam defensionem contra quem
veniat armatus inimicus, et ejus contra quem inimicus se paravit; It must needs
be a necessary defense against whom an armed Enemy is either marching or
preparing.

Vtilis defensio, quum nos movemus bellum verentes ne ipsi bello petamur, when
we make a War to prevent or be before hand, when War or mischief is
threatened or likely to come upon us; For as Nicephorus the Historian says, He
that will live out of danger must occurrere malis impendentibus, et
autevertere, ^ec est cunctandum aut expectandum etc. meet and take away
growing evils, and turn them another way, and not to delay, and be ^^ock in
it.

Honesta defensio quae citra metum^ullum periculi nostri, nulla utilitate
quaesita, tantum in gratiam aliorum suscipitur: When for no fear of danger to
our selves, and for no consideration of profit to our selves, but merely in
favor or help of others the War is undertaken. Wherefore certainly when the
King may be justly said to tar^y too long before he made the second and third
kinds of defenses, A^be^i^: Gen^i. l. b. 1. Dec. 25
either to prevent the danger and fury of a War against himself, or to help
those that suffered and were undone in seeking to defend him, and was so over
much in love with Peace, as he utterly lost it; and could never again recover
it, and was so much mistaken in the love and religion of his Subjects and
Parliament promises, and the impossibilities of such horrid proceedings against
him, as all his three Kingdoms were in a flame of War, and strong
Combinations made by two of them, and the Pulpits every where flaming;
Seditious exhortations against Him, his Navy, Magazines, Ports, Revenues, Mint,
strongest Towns and places seized on, Armies marching against him, and he
only and a few friends, and followers pend up in a corner, had an enemy and a
strong Town at his back ready every day to surprise him, and several Armies
marching and in action before, and round about him, before he granted out any
Commission for War, or liad or could make any preparation for it; and had so
many to help and defend besides himself: It would be too much injury, and too
great a violence to all manner of reason, and understanding, to deny him a
Justification upon the first sort of defenses, if the two latter will not reach
it, for the first cannot by any interpretation go without. For haec est
necessitas (says Baldus) quae bellum justificat quum in extremo loco ad bellum
configitur. Or Bald. 5. Cons. pa. 439.
if with Grotius we look upon it another way, and make the Justice of War
to consist, 1o, in defensione. 2o, in recuperatione rerum. 3o, in punitione.
The King before ever he went to demand Hull, or before ever he desired a guard
of the County of York; had cause enough and enough to do it; and it would be
hard if a great deal less then that should not be able to deliver him from
the censure or blame of an offensive or unnecessary War. When that which was
made by David upon the Children of Ammon, and that of the late glorions King of
Sweden against the Emperor of Germany; the former for misusing, the latter for
encroaching upon him, and not receiving his Ambassadors, found warrant and
necessity enough to do it. But what could the King do more in his endeavors
and waiting for a Peace, or less in his preparations or making of a War? when
the least or one of the hundred provocations or causes, we dare say plainly
here set down in the matter of fact, has hitherto among the wisest Princes,
and Commonwealths in the World, been reputed a just and warrantable cause of
war.

Homicide by the Laws of England shall be excused with a se defendendo when
the assaulted has but simply defended himself, or retired in his own defense
so far till by some Water or Wall he be hindered from going any further.
Death and destruction marching toward the King, Hull fortified and kept behind
him, and all manner of necessities compassing him in on every side, could then
do no less then rouse him up to make his own defense; and he must be as
much without his senses, as care of his own preservation, if he should not
then think it to be high time to make reaedy to defend himself, and necessity
enough to excuse him, for any thing should be done in order to it.

The Parliament and he (as this case stood) could not be both at one and the
same time, in the defensive part; For, they had all the Money, Arms,
Ammunition, and strength of the Kingdom in their hands, and multitudes of
deluded People to assist them; and so hunted and pursued him from place to
place, as it was come to be a saying and a by word among the apprentices and
new levied men at London they would go a King-catching: and were not likely
therefore to be guilty of so much patience as the king, who was so much in love
with peace, and so thirsted after it, as that, and his often sending Messages,
and Propositions for it, would not suffer him to make use of any victories or
advantages God had given him. Twice did he suffer the Earl of Essex to
attempt to force him from Oxford, and Sir Thomas Fairfax once to beleager him
when he had power enough to have made London or the associate Counties the
feat of the War, and it would be something strange that he, who when he had
raised forces against his Scottish Rebels, and found himself in the head of
so gallant an Army, as he had much ado to keep them from fighting, and his
enemies so ridiculously weak, as he might have subdued them, but with looking
upon them but a fortnight ^onger; could not be persuaded to draw a Sword
against them: would ^ow begin an offensive war without any power or strength
at all against those that had before hand engrossed it: Or what policy or
wisdom could it be in him to begin a War without, Money, or Men, or Arms,
to go through with it? Or to refuse the assistance of his Catholic Subjects,
and Farraigne friends and forces? or to spend so much time in Messages, and
offers of Peace to give them time and ability to disarme him, and Arm
themselves? If he had not utterly abhorred a War; and as cordially affected
peace, as he offered fair enough for it: Or if we could but tell how to say
that the King did begin the War? (when what he did was but to preserve his
Regality and the Militia and protection of his People; which the Parliament in
expres terms as well as by Petitioning for it, acknowledged to be his own;
being but that which every private man, that had but money or friends would not
neglect to do.)

Did he any more in seeking to preserve his Regalitie then to defend and keep
himself from a breach of trust they fought to make him break? Or did he any
more then seek to defend himself against those did all they could to force him
to break it? Or could there be a greater perjury, or breach of trust in the
Kingly office then to put the Sword which God had given him, into the hands of
madmen, or fools? or such as would kill and ^^ay and undo^ their fellow
Subjects with it? or to deliver up the protection of his People into the hands
of a few of their ambitious fellow Subjects? did as much break their own
trust to those they represented in asking of it; as the King would have done,
if he had granted it? Or why shall it not be accounted an inculpata tutela in
the King to preserve and defend that by a War, the Laws of God and Man, his
Coronation Oath, Honor, and Conscience, and a duty to himself and his
Posterity, as well as to his People, would not permit him to stand still, and
suffer to be taken away from him.

But if the King by any manner of construction could be blamed, or censured for
denying to grant the Militia? which was the first pretense of beginning of the
war by those that sought to take it from him (for till the besieging of Hull
the 16. of July 1642. after many other affronts, and attempts of as high a
nature put upon him, the most malicious interpretation of the matter of Fact,
cannot find him so much at all to have defended himself, as to have done any
one act of War, or so much as like it) who shall be in the fault for all
that was done after, when he offered to condescend to all that might be
profitable for his People in the matter of Religion, Laws and Liberties? Or
was it not a just cause of War to defend himself and his People against those
would notwithstanding all he could do and offer, make a War against him
because he would not contrary to his, Oath Magna Charta, and so many other
Laws he had sworn to observe; betray, or deliver up his people into their
hands to be governed, or rather undone by a greater latitude of Arbitrary
power, then the great Turk or Crim Tartar ever exercised upon their enslaved
People; and put the education and marriage of his own Children out of his
Power; was never sought to be taken out of the hand of any father, was not a
fool or a madman; nor yielded to by any would have the Credit to be accounted
otherwise; or because he would not denude himself of the power of conferring
honors, or vilify, or discredit his great and lesser Scales, and the
Authority of them, from which many men's Estates, and Honors, and the whole
current of the Justice of the Kingdom had their Original; and refused to
perjure himself by abolishing Episcopacy, which Magna Charta, and some dozens
of other Laws bound him to preserve? Or if that be not enough to justyfie him
in his own defense? had he not cause enough to deny; and they little enough
to ask Liberty of Conscience, and practice to Anabaptists, Blasphemers of
God, deniers of the Trinity, Scriptures and Deity of Christ? when the
Parliament themselves had taken a Covenant to root them out, and made as many
of the People as they could force, to take it with them? or had he not cause
enough to deny to set up the Presbyterian authority, would not only have taken
away his own authority, but have done the like also with the Laws, and
Liberties of the Nation, and the ruling part of that they now call the
Parliament utterly abhor; or if all that could not make the War be made to
be defensive, and Lawful? had he not cause enough to deny, and they none at
all to ask that he should by act of Parliament consent to make all those to be
Traitors that took his part, their Blood and Posterities attainted, and their
Estates forfeited? when as some of the Parliaments own Members were heard to
say when those Propositions were sent unto him; That if he yielded unto them,
He was the unworthiest man living, and not fit to be a King.

For certainly, if the Laws of God and man, and the understanding of all
mankind be not changed? there was never a juster, more defensive, unwilling,
and necessitated War then that of the Kings part, since man came out of
Paradise. And if such a War should not be Lawful (after so many
provocations and necessities for the defense of himself, and his People, and
so many after generations, this War of the Parliament, and the curse of it,
is like to ruin and leave in slavery) under what censure and opinion may that
of Abraham's with Chederlaomer the King of Elum, and Tidal King of the Nations
be, when he fought with them to rescue his Genes. 14.
Brother Lot, and his goods, and was blessed by Melchisedec the Priest of the
most high God, for doing of it. Or if the War which the Tribes of Israel
made against the Tribe of Benjamin, and the Judges 20
men of Gibeah for committing lewdness and folly in Israel: that of David to
rescue his Wives that were carried away captive by the 1. Sam. 30.
Amalekites, or to fetch home the Arc of God from the Philistines 2. Sam. 6. 1.
Reg. ^0
that which Ahab made with Benhadad the king of Syria who was not half so
Tyrannical in his Propositions as the Parliament, were aproved of in sacred
Story; or that which was made by Judas Machabeus and his Brethren, to rescue
the decayed Estate of the people of the Jews, or that which was used to be
made by the heathen pro aris and focis were never yet so much as suspected to be
unlawful: How shall this of the kings be condemned that had as much as
Abraham, David, Ahab against Benhadad, Judas Machabeus, and the tribes of
Israel, or those 1. Match. ^. v. ^3.
heathens that made it pro aris and socis; put them altogether to warrant it?
Or by what reason or Law, is any man by the Laws of England excused for
killing a man in his own defense, when he is necessitated or hindered by a
Wall or a Water, that he can go no further? or for killing thieves that come
to assault or Rob him in his house or Castle? If the King shall be hunted from
his house through all the parts and corners of his Kingdom for his Life, and
not only for his Life, but his Honor, and not only for his Life and Honor,
but his Conscience? and yet must never draw his Sword, or seek to defend
himself, or have any body else to do it for him? Or how have all the Kings,
Princes and Magistrates of the world hitherto governed, and defended
themselves, and their people? or shall ever be able to give an account of the
people committed to their charge, if they may not be at liberty to make a
Legal use of the sword, power, and reason God has given them? Or how can
those State riddles (like those of Sphinx only made to destroy men withal)
that they fought for the King and Parliament, as is alleged in many of their
Orders and Declarations? and that the war was a Rebellion raised against the
King and Parliament, as is expressed in the Ordinance of Parliament for
association of the Counties of Pembroke, 8. June 1644.
Cardigan and Caermrthen; be ever understood by any rules of sense or reason;
if he were on the offensive part of the war and had begun it against them?
But if any shall be so in love with the sense of the house of Commons, as to
be out of their own senses, and think that though there be no manner of
evidence or proof to be had for love or money that the Parliament were
constrained to defend themselves by a war: yet the Kings admitting of the
Preamble of the Parliaments Propositions presented to him at the Isle of Wight,
that the Parliament was necessitated to take up Arms in their just and lawful
defense, makes him (who must needs be best acquainted with his own actions) to
be so clearly guilty of all the blood has been shed in these wars as it
puts to silence all that can be now alleged or said in his behalf.

They that made the preamble and placed it in limine and threshold of the
Treaty on purpose to catch and ensnare him (for either he must have denied it
at the very beginning and entrance into the Treaty, and leave his Kingdoms
and People to wallow in the blood and misery their Parliament Idols had
brought them to; and have all the blame laid upon him for hindering a Peace, he
had so much longed and labored for, or put himself, and all his Loyal
Subjects that helped to defend him, under the burden of those Sins and Shames
the Parliament themselves had all the right to) can tell their undone, and
deluded Proselites; how much the King stuck at it, how unwilling he was to
break off the Treaty, and was unwilling to wrong his own Innocence; and that
when the Parliament Commissioners had not any thing either in Law, or Truth, or
Reason, or Argument to persuade him to yield unto it; but laid it only as a
case of necessity before him (though there was no such preamble at the
Treaties of Oxford and Vxbridge, nor any such necessity at those times insisted
upon) that unless he would take the guilt upon himself, his two Houses of
Parliament and the People had engaged with them must necessarily be guilty of
Treason and could not have any security from the guilt and punishment. The King
bemoaning himself and people that must be thus shut out from any hopes of
peace, entreated some expedient, or medium might be found out to reconcile the
difference: But Cains sins being greater then could be forgiven him, unless
Abell can be brought to say he killed Cain; they that could afterward find
an expedient for 21. of their great Council of estate that refused to
subscribe to the Lawfullnesse of murdering the King, after it was done, could
find none at all for the King to purchase a peace for the People (though many
kinds of ways and expedients, as allowing him to make the like preamble to his
own proposition or the like might have been easily contrived and thought
upon. For the truth was, the Independent party desired no Peace at all, and
the Preshyterian desired it only to get into their hands the Kings Power and
Authority, and lay the guilt of all the blood they had shed for it upon him,
and ^oth of them were so well content to have him allow of the preamble, as the
latter, thought himself safe and out of controversy if the King took the
blood upon him, and the former that it would prove no small advantage or color
to take away his Life for confessing himself guilty of it by allowing of the
preamble; in this unparalleled demand, never before stood upon by Subject^ to
their Prince, or Conquerours to their Captives. Nero himself was so far
short of, as though he had cuuning enough when he set Rome on fire to lay the
fault upon the Christians, had not Villainy enough to torture and seek to draw
them to a confession, that they did it.

The King after Protestation that he could not without a manifest injury to
the Truth and a violation of his Honor and Conscience, take upon him a guilt,
could no way be charged upon him, or those that appeared in his defense, was
yet for peace sake, and his peoples sake content to say; It will be a great
self deny all to take this supposition of a guilt upon my self, and a
Christian virtue to undergo any affliction that may be for the good of my
People: and I am confident those that have adventured so much for me, will be
content to share with me for so good a purpose in the suffering for it. I shall
therefore Conditionally consent to the Preamble; so as there follow a
conclusion upon the whole matter in Treaty and Propositions betwixt us;
otherwise it is but sub modo, and conditional; as it is always to be
understood in this Treaty, that nothing agreed in part betwixt us, shall be
binding unless their be a conclusion upon the whole. And here let the Truth
be judge if the King did not abundantly endeavor to save his People, and if
the Parliament had not need of a justification, when they used all manner of
force and shifts, to have the King take the fault upon him: they therefore that
shall consider that the King was a close prisoner, robbed and bereaved of all
he had (but his Honor and Conscience and a great measure of knowledge and
understanding, and the hearts of his Loyal Subjects) was debarred of all
friends and comforts, penned up and used with all manner of hardship and and
extremities, and every day like to be murdered, that conditions adimpleri
debent priusquam sequatur effectus; are but inserted or added, in^casum
incertum qui potest tendere ad esse, aut non esse; and depend on subsequencies
or following effects which not happening or coming to be performed according to
the intent of the conditions, makes them to vanish and expire, as if there no
such matter at all had been acknowledged or expressed in them: That Cook, his
accuser, who when he comes to be hanged for it, will never be able to prove
that the People who substituted, or gave him warrant for to accuse him. And
Bradshaw who sat higher in the pageant of Justice, and the rest of his fellow
murderers took the Kings conditional consenting to the Preamble to be so
little for their purpose, as they never so much as mentioned it: must not only
acquit him of any Confession or guilt to be inferred from his conditional
yiedling to that Ambuscado Preamble, but dissolve into wonder and admiration;
that he who in his Royal Meditations, and Conference with death upon the
Parliaments votes of non address, and his closer imprisonment at
Carisbrooke-Castle had clearness of Conscience enough to say (for as for his
judgment we hope it cannot be suspected, when Mr. Carill the Independent, and
Mr. Vines a Presbyterian Minister could say he was a second Solomon; and the
Parliaments Commissioners at the Isle of Wight report him to be the master of
the greatest wisdom and understanding) (...) Ca. 28.
That he had the feast of a good Conscience, and the brazen wall of a
judicious integrity and Conscience! doubted not but his Innocence would find
God to be his protector! rejoiced in the comfort of Imitating Christ's example
in suffering for Righteousness sake! and thanked God he could pray for them,
that God would not impute his Blood to them, further then to convince them what
need they had of Christ's Blood, to wash their Souls from the guilt of Sheding
His! And was afterward in the face and view of Death and his murderers heard
to say upon the Scaffold He never did begin a War with the two houses of
Parliament, and called God to his witness (to whom he was shortly to make an
account) he never intended to incroach upon their privileges; but they began
upon him; It was the Militia they began upon; though they confessed it was his,
and that any that would look into the date of their Commissions and his, might
clearly see that they began these unhappie troubles, and hoped God would clear
him of it! Could be so much more then a man, and so great a protector of his
People, as not only to be content to be robbed and despoiled of all that he
had for their sakes; but to save the Laws and estates of his People, when
there was no other way to do it; deliver up himself (so as a Peace and
Agreement might have followed upon the Treaty) to the unjust Censure of Robbing
and Spoiling those that had robbed and undone him.

But now that we have hunted this Parliament Protens through all this disguises
of Parliament privileges and pretenses, and are lamentably assured a great and
accursed thing is committed in our Israel, and the anger of the Lord is kindled
against us, it may be labor well bestowed (though here is sure enough already
said and proved that the King was in the defensive and justifiable part of the
War) to send into Achans tent, and search and see what is there to be found
concerning this matter, and here we find the Lord Say, the Lord Brook, and
their accomplices, had not long before the King had summoned them to that which
is now called the Parliament, settled and conveyed their estates to prevent any
dangers might happen upon their intended enterprises. Peard the pragmatique
Parliament man was heard to say a little before this holy War began to break
out; That the Government of the Kingdom would within a year or two be altered.

A little before the second Scottish invasion Hinderson the Scotch firebrand
confesses the Covenanters of both Kingdoms were unanimously History of the
Mary. Montrosse his actions in Scotland.
agreed to bring the King to their lure before they laid down Arms: the joint
declaration of both Kingdoms in January 1643. professes they will never lay
down Arms till the pretended reformation be accomplished; many declarations
and remonstrances of the Parliament (if they may be so called) and the Army,
mention the original power and Sovereignty to be in the people, the common
Rights and Freedom of the Nation, and the opertunities God has put into their
hands. An Ordinance of Parliament 20. October. 1645. concerning rules and
directions for Tryers and Judges of the ability of Elders, declares it was the
wonderful providence of God in calling them (which he never did by force of
Arms, Hypocrisy, Treason, Rebellion, and usurping of regal authority) to the
great and difficult work of reformation and purging the Church. The Lord
Fairfax and his general council of Officers in their Remonstrance of the 16.
November 1648. made to the Parliament; call the putting down of Monarchy and
the Establishing of their unjust ends the public interest originally
contended for on the Parliaments part, and the declaration and votes of those
that call themselves the Commons of England in Parliament assembled 15. January
1648. affirm the bringing of Delinquents to punishment (which if they had been
Delinquents is certainly a part of the Kingly office) the maine if not the only
end of making this War. And in another place thereof acknowledges the rooting
out of Episcopacy, and bringing Delinquents to punishment to be the only
motives that induced them to undertake this War.

And though Achan will neither confess nor be brought to punishment, till the
wroth and never failing judgment of God shall bring them and their sons and
their daughters and their successes and the asses that follow them to be
consumed in the field of Achor: and the Fig Leaves which they have patched
together to palliate and hide their nakedness cannot keep out the eyes and
understanding of a ruined Nation bleeding under the burden of of their
iniquity, but whether ever confessed or never, will be as plain as the most
infallible demonstration; they were never necessitated to make a War, but
were so far from the Justification of a defensive War, as that they were
altogether in the offensive. For beside all that has been said to prove them
guilty of the blood and misery of this Nation, who can think, or be believed
(if he should be so mad as to say it) That they were forced to make a War
for that was none of their own; or to take away tenures in Capite, which was a
principal flower of his Crown; or for a Reformation of Religion was already
the envy and ambition of the best of the Reformed Churches, or to commit
sacrilege and abolish Episcopacy, which at the least was of Apostolical
institution; or to preserve the Statute of 25. E. 3. concerning what was
Treason; when they themselves committed most of the Treasons were mentioned in
it, and more then their forefathers and the makers of that Statute ever
thought on. But that we may do all the right we can to them have done so
much wrong, and the better carry on our judgments to a certain conclusion of
that which God and all good and just men know to be true enough, it will not
we hope be impertinent in this our search and disquisition of the truth to
proceed to the enquiry.

CHAP. V. Whether the Parliament, in their pretended Magistracy, have not taken
lesser oceasions to punish or provide against Insurrections, Treasons, and
Rebellions, as they are pleased to call them.
ALL in the neighborhood of their Proceedings, that know but any thing of them
can tell it: The Parliament have not been wanting to their own Preservations
and purposes in the exercise of the greatest jealousy, vigilance, terror and
authority, over those they could but get within their pretended Jurisdiction:
Witness Edward Archer, who was whipped and punished almost to death, for
speaking but his ill wishes to the Earl of Essex, when he was marching out of
London, with their Army against the King: the imprisonment of their own
Members, for speaking against the Sense and Cabal of the House of Commons; men
and women, old and young shut up under Decks, ready to be stifled a
shipboard, upon suspicion that they affected the King; hanging of the two
Bristoll Merchants, Master Bourchier and Master Yeomans, for an endeavor to
deliver up Bristoll; Putting Colonel Essex out of the government of that
Town, upon suspicion of favoring the enterprise; hanging of Master Tompkins
and Master Chaloner, ^or a purpose to force the delivery up of some factious
men to Justice; banishing Master Waller, an eminent Member of the House of
Commons for the contrivance of it; searching the houses of foreign
Ambassadors, and intercepting and opening their Letters; Beheading Sir
Alexander Carry for an intention to deliver up Plymouth, and Sir John Hotham
(who adventured first of all to set up their authority, and was magnified and,
almost, adored for it;) for an intention only to deliver up Hull to the King;
executing of his son, for joining with his father in it; hanging Master
Kniveton, one of the Kings Messengers, but for bringing his Majesty's
proclamation to London for the adjourning of the Term (being a greater
misusage then David's Messengers received from King Ammon) imprisoning,
starving, and undoing of any that durst but own the King, or send, or bring
any Message from him or his party, or that did but give any aid or assistance
to him, to which their Oaths and Consciences and the juggling Covenant (they
themselves took, and forced upon them) did obliege them, shooting and
cannonading of the Queen when she came but to aid her husband, and chasing
and shooting after her at Sea a year after, when she was going back into
France from him; sequestring wives and mothers that did but relieve their
husbands and childrens wants when they returned out of the Kings service,
putting thousands of Orthodox ministers out of their benefices and livelyhoods
for using the Common-Prayer-Booke, Preaching true Do^^^ne and obedience to the
King, or Praying for him at the same time when they pretended liberty of
Conscience, and preservation of Religion, voting the Prince a Traitor for
wishing well or being in company with his Father (for he was too young to do
any thing else for him) and making, or rather supposing charges of high Treason
against those that either fought for the King, or counseled him how to defend
himself; for but obeying the known Laws, they themselves made the World
believe they made some part of the War for, ordering all to dye without
mercy, that did but harbor the King when he fled in a disguise before their
armies, condemning men by a Court martial after the War was ended, and
shooting them to death but for words or intentions. And if this and many things
more might be said of it, be not enough; what means so many sequestrations,
and the bleating and lowing of men's Sheep, and Oxen taken away from them since
the War was ended, but for words spoken either for the King or against them;
husbands and Fathers undone for what their Wives or Children did without their
privity: the Mayor of London and diverse Aldermen Imprisoned but upon a
suspicion of joining with the Scots; or something in pursnance of the Covenant
they forced them to take, or else would have undone them for refusing of it;
Garrisons and Armies with free quartering and Taxes kept up after the War was
ended; and the People like sheep devoured to maintain them: so much
complaining in our streets; and taking away the fifth part of many men in whole
Counties, as Essex, Kent, etc. for joining with some of the Kings forces, or
for being forced to send provisions to them (when they took up arms, some in
pursuance of the Covenant, and others of them to deliver the King out of
Prison) and causing the Soldiers not only to cut and kill diverse of the County
of Surrey in the very act of Petitioning the Parliament for a Treaty of Peace
with the King, and sequeste^ many of them for putting their hands to it, with
disabling the Citizens of London for bearing any office in the City or
Commonwealth for but putting their hands to the Petition for the Treaty; though
Cromwell himself had not long before set on some to Petition for it, and the
ruin and undoing of two parts of three in the Kingdom, very many of whom did
nothing actually in the Wars, but were only sacrificed to their pretended
reasons and jealousies of State do sufficiently Proclaim, and remain the
woeful Registers to after generations of this lamentable assertion. If the King
could have gotten but so much leave of his mercy and a tender-heartednesse to
hi^ People, as to have used but the five hundredth part of the Parliaments
jealousies, and sharp and merciless authority in the mannaging of this War,
so much of his Kingdoms and People had not been undone and ruined, nor the
Parliament put to so much labor to coin faults and scandalls against him, nor
to wrest the Laws to non sense, and the Scriptures, to Blasphemy, to justify
their most horrid act of murdering him; but for seeking to preserve the Laws
and Liberties of his People, who are now clearly cheated out of them. And here
our misery tells us we must leave them, and in the next place shall remember
(for indeed it is so plain it needs no enquiry,)

CHAP. VI. Who most desired Peace, and offered faireliest for it.
TH'abundant satisfaction the King had offered them from his first summoning of
the late Parliament, to their dissolving of themselves, by dissolving him who
gave them all their Life and Being; That which he did, and all which he would
have done; So many Declarations, Answers and Messages penned by himself,
intending as much as his words could signify, and were believed and understood
by all at that time, that were not interessed or engaged against him, and by
many of the eagrest of them also, that had no hand, or looked to have any
profit in the murdering of him (for a trial of a King without either warrant
or color of Scripture, or the Laws of the Kingdom, or the consent of the
major part of the People; (if that could have authorized it, cannot; nay will
not by all the world, and after ages be otherwise interpreted: unless we
shall say Ravillae might have justified his killing of Henry the fourth of
France, if he had but had the wit to have framed or fancied a Supreme Court of
Justice, and have Sentenced him before he had done it) will be as Pillars and
lasting-Monuments of this Truth, The King was the only desirer of Peace, and
labored and tugged ^^rder for it then ever Prince or King, Heathen or
Christian, since Almighty-God did his first days work, did ever do with
Superiors, Equals or Subjects; and it will be no wrong certainly to David,
(whose sufferings are so much remembered in all christian Churches) complaining
so bitterly that he sought Peace with those that refused it, and in the mean
time prepared for war against him. To say the King did suffer more, and offer
more, and oftener for Peace then ever he did (for any thing is extanc or
appearing to us) for surely, so many messages of Peace as one and twenty in
two years space, from the 5. of December 1645. to the 25. of December 1647.
sent to the Parliament after so many affronts and discouragements; must needs
excuse him that offered all could be imagined to be for the good and safety
of his People, and condemn those that not only from time to time refused it
but adhered so much to their first intentions, as all the blood and riune of
the People could not persuade them to depart with the least punctillio of it;
though the King before the Isle of Wight Treaty, offered so much for the
Olive Branch, as to part with the Militia for term of his life, and in a
manner to un-king himself and was afterward content to do all that his
Coronation Oath Honor and Conscience could possibly permit him to do; and to
purchase a Peace for his People, was content to have borne the shame and
reproach of what his enemies were only guilty of; in so much as the Lord Say
himself, and most of his ever craving, never safe enough Disciples, confessed
the king had offered so much, as nothing more could be demanded of him. They
therefore that can but tell how to divide or put a difference betwixt white and
black, night and day, and the plainest contraries must needs also acknowledge;
the King offered all, and the Parliament refused all: The King was willing to
part almost with every thing; and the Parliament would never part with any
thing: The King was willing for the good of his People to give away almost
every thing of his own; but the Parliament would never yield to part with any
thing was not their own. And thus may the account be quickly cast up between
the King and Parliament, who would have saved, and kept the people from misery;
and who was most unwilling to make an end of it. But that we may not too
hastily give the sentence to try the business, as they use to do at the
Counsel of War, or the new Invented way of Justicel, sitting with their
Will, or the Sword only in one hand, and no Balance at all in the other. We
shall in the next place examine.

CHAP. VII. Who Labored to Shorten the War, and who to Lengthen it.
THe ods was so great betwixt what the Parliament labored to get, and the King
to keep, as that which swayes the balance in most men's actions will be
argument enough to conclude they were more likely to loose by a peace then a
war: therefore the more willing to continue it: and if their own interests
would not put them so far upon it, their vain glory and ambition would be
forward enough to persuade them to it, and if not that the success of their
arms, or miscalled providence would make them look (as experience tells us
they did) upon any tenders of peace, as Alexander the great did upon Darius his
offer of half his Kingdom: and if not that, their fears and jealousies now
grown greater by wronging of the King, then ever they were when they suspected
him; could never think it safe to let an enraged Lion into his den they had so
long kept out of it. But the King could not fight for his own but he must
adventure the undoing of his own; and could not but know that so much as was
lost of his Subjects, would be so much lost of a King; and therefore does all
he can to preserve a People, had no mind to preserve themselves; and before
he had gathered up the bays he won at Edgehill, sends a Proclamation of
pardon to those, that the day before did all they could to kill him; and in all
his actions of war afterward behaved himself rather like a weeping father
defending himself against the strokes and violence of disobedient Children.
Had the Parliament accepted of his offers before he came to Beverley or
besieged Hull, he had never set up his Standard at Nottingham; or had they
loved his People, but half so much as he did, their Armies had never seen his
Banners displaid at Edgehill. Had they hearkened to his many endeavors for
Peace after that battle, and not sought to surround or ruin him when he came
so near as to their very doors to entreat for it, they had never been
troubled to frame an accusation against him for defending himself at
Braynford. Had his Treaty at Oxford been proceeded in with the same desires of
Peace he brought to it, the blood that was shed at Caversham-bridge had been
kept for better purposes, had he sought his own advantages he had not
besieged Gloucester; or had he not been so unwilling to put the People in it
to the hazard of a storm might have taken it; had they not sent their General
to assault him at Gloucester, whilst he was as David besieging the strong hold
of the Jebusites that witheld it from his obedience, and sought to ruin and
undo Him as well as his Loyal Subjects, he had not fought with them afterward
at Newbery, had not his Olive branches been flung in the fire by those he sent
them unto, he had not been put to defend himself at Cropredy-bridg. Had any
thing been able to prevail with the Parliament to pity their fellow
Subjects, he had not taken such a tedious and dangerous march to relieve those
they would have ruined at Bodmin in Cornwall. Had the Treaty at Vxbridge taken
effect he needed not afterward have adventured so much to defend himself at
Newbery. Had not the newmodel'd Army after so many tenders of Peace, refused by
their masters, been sent out to destroy him, he had not been put to the
trouble of taking Lecester for his security. And had not he been surrounded
and almost surprised by them, might have reserved himself to a better success
and advantage then he had at Naseby. Had his voluntary resigning up of the
remainder of his Armies and Garrisons been able to persuade any thing with
them, there had not been so much as a relic of War left in the Kingdom,
or could so many messages for Peace, and so many Petitions of the people for
it, have made but any impression on the Parliament, so many divisions, parties
and insurrections had not since broken the Harpes of the Children of Israel,
no^ should the drums have out gone the voice of the Turtle. He that could not
bring himself to the common actions of War to hang a Spy, in so much as
when one of them was hanged before he was told he was taken, he was
entreating the Governor of Oxford to spare him. He that when he had John
Lilborne one of the most factions that were against him, Wingate and Da^ley
Parliament men, Collonell Ludlow an actor of that Treason his father had not
long before spoken against him, and Dr. Bastwick one of the bellows and
principal factours of this horrid Rebellion, did no more then imprison some of
them, and giving the rest a legal Trial, showed them what the Law they made
silly People believe they took up arms to maintain, would judge of them; and
suffered them to be exchanged to do what they could afterward against him:
He that when he had taken 400. prentise-boyes in the fight at Brainford, did
but dismiss and pity them; and when he had compelled the E. of Essex the
Parliament General at Lesti^hiel in Cornwall to fly away by Sea in a Cock-boat,
and leave all the Artillery and foot of his Army to his mercy; did no more but
disarme them, and take an oath of them never more to serve against him: and
being then in the height of his prosperity, sent a Message and offer of peace
to the Parliament who were low enough at that time (if their designs would
have given them leave) to have received it: He that could say he should be
more afraid to take away any man's life unjustly then to loose his own! was not
likely to be guilty of blood seeking, or the sheding of it: He that had
experience enough how much his Life and Crown were sought for, yet to show
them the way to peace, and to take off all pretenses to hinder it, could Sheath
his own Sword, and put himself into the hands of those he had so little
reason to trust, as he knew them to be the great contrivers of the War
against him, caused the Marquess of Montrosse, one of his mighty men of war,
to disband; when he was master of a strong and (not long before) fortunate
Army in Scotland; commanded Newarke, Oxford, Wallingford and Worcester, very
strong and almost impregnable Towns and Garrisons in England to be delivered
up, and all acts of hostility by Sea and Land, and all the preparations his
friends could make either in foreign parts or at home to cease: He that
could endure five years Ballading, Libelling, and Preaching against him, and
such heaps of numberless affronts and injuries of all kinds done unto him,
and two years imprisonment afterward; yet so long as he enjoyed but the
liberty of Pen and Ink or a Messenger to carry it; did so tire them with
Messages and offers of Peace, as they voted it to be Treason for any to bring
any message from him, and notwithstanding all that, made shift to throw a
message or declaration to his people, made up like a ball out of the place of
his close Imprisonment at Carisbrook; was not like to desire the lengthening
that war he did all he could to avoid, and offered so much to make an end of;
but on the contrary if we take into our consideration the more then Gothish
unheard of inhumane cruelties, acted and done by the Parliament against their
better fellow Subjects, their Plundrings, Sequestrations, and racking of every
man's estate they pleased to call Delinquents; severities in all their actions,
standing upon every punctilio or word, or superscription of a Letter, and not
abating a tittle of their demands as if they had been the Decalogue or some
other place of Scripture (though rivolets of blood, hundred thousands of ruined
families, and thronged Hospitalls of sick and wounded men, Widows and
Fatherless cried aloud to them for Peace) and their killing and murdering
those that but petitioned for it, and a foundation laid of a new War may last
as long as that of the Netherlands and Germany. There will be enough and
enough again to insure us of this most clear and evident truth, the King did
all he could, and more then any man else would have done to obtain Peace, and
the Faction or Parliament all they could to avoid it: for certainly if there
be any rules of Learning Truth or Reason left us to judge by, he must be
sequestered of all his brains that can but endeavor to make a doubt whether
the King did not more resemble the true mother of the Child in the case before
Solomon, who did so much, and offered to part with so much to save the life of
it; then the Parliament that would have it more then divided and to be cut and
torn all to bits and pieces, and would do nothing at all to save, but every
thing to destroy it. And now we have seen a King undone and imprisoned for
his endeavors to protect his People, and bring again beloved Peace to those
that would not entertain it: and heard the report of his murder (for most of
the Peoples eyes have not seen it, nor have their hearts acted in it) we
shall as most men do (after they have lost a good offer or opportunity)
enquire.

CHAP. VIII. Whether the Conditions offered by the King would not have been
more profitable, if they had been accepted; and what the People have got
instead of them.
IN Order to which, though so woeful and over-and-over-^itterly -Tasted,
Seen, Felt, Heard and Vnderstood-Experiences of the miseries have come unto us
by the Parliaments not accepting the gracious offers and conditions the King
made unto them, may make it to be as needless to enquire of them, as for a
man to ask where to find Paul's Steeple in London when he is in Paul's
Churchyard, or to enquire for the Sun in the dog-dayes, when he and every
man else may see or feel the effects of it, we shall be content to consider
what the King offered, and what the Parliament would have had him to grant.
What the King would have done, and what the Parliament have done; and by that
see which would have been the better bargain.

The King like a pater patriae offered over and over to grant all manner of
Laws and Liberties, which might be good and wholesome for his People, and only
denied to grant those things the granting whereof (as he said himself) would
alter the fundamental Laws, and endanger the very foundation upon which the
Public happiness and welfare of his People was founded and constituted; or
to give them Stones instead of bread, or Scorpions insteade of Fishes. But the
Parliament meaning to feed the People neither Collect. Kings Messages and
Answers p 61
with bread nor Fishes: ask the Royall-Sword, Crown, and Scepter,
Coronation Oath, and Conscience, and an Arbitrary-Power to Govern and
Domineere over their fellow Subjects, and to enslave those that trusted them:
And though the King had already granted enough to preserve the Laws, ^ives,
Religion, and Liberty of the people, and was so willing almost at any rate to
purchase a peace for himself and his people; as he was content to part with
his Sword and Militia, and diverse other parts of his Regality during his life:
Yet that would not serve the turn, 'twas Naboths vineyard, not Ahabs Fast
made all the business: the Parliament that pretended so much to deny
themselves, and to dote upon the people, do notwithstanding all they can to
continue the War and to cozen and force the Peoples blood, estates and
conscience out of them; and they must never give over paying of taxes, fighting
and fooling till they enable them to imprison their King, and not only murder
him, but thousands, and many ten thousands of their fellow subjects, and the
Laws, Religion, and Liberties of the people.

And now that they have don more then the men of the Gunpowder-treason intended
to do: and all England are become like Sheep without a Shepherd, wandering on
the mountains, and thousands of Wolves by votes and ordinances, and mis-called
Acts of Parl. appointed to feed them; 4 or 5 years sad experience in the Wars
of the Parliament against the King, and almost as much more time spent in
settling and subduing the people, making them like Camels to kneel down to take
up their burdens, labor, and travel hard, and endure hunger and thirst under
them: yet yield up their veins to be pricked for blood to enable their
drivers to furnish them with a new supply of burdens when they shall be
discharged of what they have laid upon them: May easily show us a difference as
big as a mountain betwixt our old good Laws and Liberties enjoyed under a
gracious King, who had an Estate of inheritance large enough of his own,
besides an Oath to obliege him to protect us: and a Hell upon Earth, and the
most Slavish of all the governments were ever yet put upon a Nation, by men of
as little wit and Estates as they have honesty; having no other obligations
upon them but their own abominable designs and interests. For which of the
People unless those that have traded in their neighbors blood and ruin, but
has made their complaints of their undoing?

The Religion of the Kingdom once so glorious is now cut into fancies and
blasphemies; the Churches where God was wont to be worshipped, either defaced
or pulled down or made Stables for horses; the Laws of the Kingdom that were
consonant to the Word of God, and had in them the Quintessence of all could be
found to be extant in the laws of nature, Nations, Civil laws or rectified
reason, and whatsoever the wisdom and care of all former Kings in Parliament,
or the usage and customs of this or any other neighboring Nations could bring
to it is perfection, and were wont to nourish and preserve peace and property,
among us voted out, or into that sense, or the other interest to that every thing
or nothing, or to that nonsense according as the Lawless, Unlimited, Unjust,
and Ignorant will of fellow Subjects, shall please to misuse them in the
voting-house, or place of bandying aies or noes (for a Parl. which in it is
legal and primitive institution consisting of King, Lords and Commons, and the
right use of it, is so venerable as no man (as our Laws say) ought so much as
to speak, or think dishonorably of it, we cannot without violence to the Laws
and our own reason and understanding call it) where Public orders are made
without hearing of all, or any parties interessed, a piece of a cause heard by
some, and none at all of it by others; votes and parties made and picked and
lent to one another before hand, and the best of the Faction, and juglers,
carry all the business as they have a mind to it. A way of Justice worse then
that (if there were any in it) of a lawles Court said to be kept yearly on a
Hill betwixt Raleigh and Rochford in Essex, the wednesday after every
Michaelmas-day, where the Steward or Judge sits in the Night after the first
Cockcrowing, without any light or Candle, and calls all that are bound to
attend the Weavers Funeral Monuments pa. 605.
Court with as low a voice as possibly he may, writes orders with a coals, and
they that answer not, are deeply amerced: For that being a particular
punishment long ago inflicted upon the tenants of certains Manors in Raleigh
hundred for a conspiracy against a King, is but once a year, and some shift or
change or mercy of the Steward, or an appeal may take away the inconveniency
of it. A way of government worse then to be Subject to the rule of so many
fools, for they might perchance do that would be just; or so many Knaves,
who but in playing the Knaves one with another, or for reward, might sometimes
do that which was right; or Mad men which at intervals might do something
which was reasonable, worse then for every Subject of England to be put to
play at dice for his life, or Estate, or any thing else he should crave a
Justice to get or keep; for then he might by skill or chance obtain some
thing: In fine worse then any example or way of Government the World has as
yet produced, and can have nothing worse but Hell it self.

The Parliament and privileges of it are destroyed, and every man's Life and
Estate in no better a condition then at the pleasure of the next pretenders to
it. All the Charters and Liberties of Cities and corporate Towns Corporations
of Trade, and Companies of Merchants made void; all the Merchandise, Trade,
and manufacture of the Kingdom laid open, and in common, to every one that
will intrude upon it; all that is in the Law concerning our Lives, Estates,
Liberties and Religion, made void and dependant upon their Arbitrary
Independent power; all that is in the Law concerning Navigation, the Kings
protection of his people; certainty of Customs, Trade and intercourse, leagues
and correspondencies with Foreign Princes expired or anihilated, and all that
our forefathers have obtained by way of Laws and Settlement, and certainty of
Estate, are now at dispose of our vote-mongers; who insteede of a most Pious
and gracious King governing by known Laws, have set us up 43. or 50. Kings,
and ten times as many more Knaves and Fools, who will govern by no Law but
such as they shall call Laws and make themselves; can be accusers, witnesles,
and Judges at one and the same time, and if need be, condemn and take away
men's Estates first, and try them after two or three years Petitioning for it:
a bondage and slavery in the general more then ever any of our ancestors
tasted of. For the Romans whose Justice and morality at home, and virtue and
temperance abroad, made them free enough from Tyrany; did but make them as
Tributaries: The Picts made but temporary incursions, and a wall could be made
against them: The Saxons and Danes brought us good Laws; and Willians the
Conqueror was conterted to restore them. And all that succeeded him since,
understood a government by Laws to be their own as well as the Peoples
security: but this which they have now brought upon us and would keep us
under, is a misery beyond that was suffered under the 30. Tirants of Athens,
Spartan, Ephori, or Romes Dece^^virat, for there were something of Laws and
Rules to govern by: The Children of Israel in the Egyptian sl^very had a
property in their goods and cattle, and were at liberty to serve a better God
then that of their masters, and though they had their burdens doubled upon
them, were not killed, imprisoned or fequestred for Petitioning against the
sense of Phareah. The Jews in Captivity had so much liberty of Conscience
allowed to them, as to play upon their Harps, and sing the Songs of Syon in a
strange Land. The frozen Russians though so dull and ignorant as when they are
asked any matter of State or difficulty make answer God and the great Duke
knows breath not under so arbitrarie and lawless a government. The Grecians
had not their Laws, Religion and Liberties, as we have, all at once taken
from them; nor o^n the sufferings of them, or any other vassals of the Ottoman
port or those that live under the Crim Taertar equal the one ^alie of our
English Slavery.

Into which we had never fallen or come at all, or so long groned under, had
we but served God and the King, as we ought to have done; and not wrested the
sense as well as the plain words of the Scripture and the Laws of the Land to
enable the sons of Zerviah to be too hard for us, and bring all manner of
mischief* confusion and wickedness upon us, more then Romes and Constantinoples
Antichrist ever brought upon a People, and from which the King had delivered us
if we had not Cursed, Reviled, Prayed, Contributed, and Fought against him for
endeavoring to Protect us. How gracious then was he who endured the heat of
the day and cold of the night, to preserve a great deal more for us then
Nabals Sheep could amount unto: yet being worse used then ever David was for
it; could not tell how so much as to threaten to do that which David had so
great a mind to do, but fought as long as he could to protect them, would not
so much as defend themselves; but did all they could to rain those that
defended him. And how much was he beyond Codrus the Athenian King, the Roman
Curtius, or Decij (if all that the Ancients wrote of them were true) who
sacrificed themselves, but not their Estates and Posterity to preserve the
Public, and how good beyond example, or the Credit of any history, who made
himself a Martyr for his peoples Lives, and Liberties; and endured so many
deaths and suffered more indignities then all the Kings of England put together
have ever endured to preserve a people, have (for a great part of them) either
by Rebellion, or an accursed Newtrality helped to ruin him: and when he knew
whatsoever Conditions or Propositions he should be forced to yield unto,
would by the Law of God as well as the Civil and Common Law, the Laws of
Nature and Nations, and the dictates of every common man's reason and
apprehention have been void in the very making of them, and could not have
reached to his posterity, and that if he would but have surrendered up his
people, and gone along with their new masters in their Arbitrary and
Tyrannical government, as some of his last words upon the Scaffold plainly
intimate, and sided with 20. or 30. of the Faction, and delivered up the Sheep
to the Wolves; he might no doubt have had a good part of the Fleece to his
own share; or but with Sampson have pleased himself with revenge and
delivered up a people to Slavery, were at so much expense of Treasure and Blood
and their own Souls to bring their Sovereign to it; might have worn the
title of a King and played the wanton with Sardanapalus in the company and
delight of women, pleased his palate with Vitellius, his pride if he had any
with Bassianus, his cruelty if he could ever have been guilty of it with
Commodus, and with Childerick the lazy King of France in a Chariot decked with
garlands, whilst others governed for him, been at certain times of the year
only exhibited to the People, and like the Minotaure of Creete wallowed in the
laberinth of Parliament privileges and devoured his people, did
notwithstanding refuse to do any thing might help himself either to purchase
his own quiet, or so great a Liberty; and would neither for any good might
come to himself, or any evil might be cast upon him and his posterity, be
persuaded or threatened from the protection of his People, who (if he had not
taken more care for them then they did for themselves) must, if he had yielded
to all the Parliament propositions (for then they might have imagined mischief
by a Law) have from time to time been engaged in any War their taskmasters
had a mind to put them upon, must have been excised, plundered, sequestered,
ruined, and undone; sworn and forsworn; constrained to swear to do a thing
to day, and the next day swear not at all to do it. The son set to kill his
Father, and brothers forced to fight one against another, and have all their
holidays turned to thanksgiving days, that they are undone, or fasting days
that they may be undone soon enough. And if at any time that thing they call
a Parliament should think it fit to make a directory to the Alchoran, and to
order every man to turn Turk, and the King as their Henry Scobell or Town
Clearke, but subscribe it, their Spiritual as well as their Temporal Estate,
and their Souls as well as their Bodies must be voted and forced to it.

And now let the People that have tasted too much of such a kind of happiness,
and are like to continue in it, as long as their misery-makers can by any help
of the Devil or his angels hold them to it; consider whether they or their
forefathers (though some have thought themselves to have wit enough to
adventure to call them fools) were the wiser, whether they that settled the
government, and were contented with it, or they that pulled it in pieces, and
whether the tearing up of the fundamental Laws of Monarchy, Peerage
Parliament, and Magna Charta, even since the day the King was murdered for
defending of them, which every one but themselves desired to uphold, be not
enough (besides the Scottish combination, and the plots to ruin Monarchy, and
the King and his posterity, before the five Members and Kimbolton had so far^^
engaged themselves in it) to inform them, if nothing else had been
demonstrated unto them: That the King did all he could to preserve the Laws,
Religion, and Liberties of the People (which diver^ pieces of his coin will
help to perpetuate the truth as well as the memory of) and the parliament all
they could to destroy them* And that as he actually endeavored to defend them
so have they as actually undone and destroyed them. And let the greatest search
of history can be made, or time it self be Judge, if ever any war was more
made in the defensive, or upon juster grounds, or greater necessities, or if
ever any King before fought for the Liberties of those he was to govern, and
for Laws to restrain himself withal: or if it were possible for him to
suffer so much in any man's opinion, as to have it thought to be unlawful, or
that he was a murderer of his people for seeking to protect them. How shall
any King or Majestrate be able to bear or use the Sword when they themselves
shall be in continual danger to be beaten with it?

King Edward the 2. of England was not murdered for the blood that was shed in
the Barrons Wars, though some of them had drawn their swords, but in
performance of his fathers will to take away his favorite Gavestson from him.
King Rich. 2. in those many d^vised Articles charged against him, was not
deposed for the blood was shed in Wat Tilers Commotion; nor Hen. 6. publicly
accused for that of Jack Cades Rebellion, and the most bloody differences of
the White and Red-Roses; nor Queen Elizabeth for all that was spilt in
reducing Ireland, when her favorite the Earl of Essex made it to be the more
by his practices with Tyrone, nor for the blood of Hacket who pretended to be
Christ, nor of Penry, and other Sectaries (lesser Incendiaries then Burton,
Prynn^, and Bastwick) for disturbing the Commonwealth, the great Henry of
France was not endeavored by his Catholic Subjects to be brought to trial
for sheding so much of their Blood to reduce them to his obedience, nor by his
Protestant Subjects after he was turned Catholic for spending so much of
their blood to another purpose then they intended it. Nor have the stout hearted
Germans (though many of them great and almost free Princes (in their late peace
and accord made betwixt the Swedes and the Emperor, thought it any way
reasonable or necessary to demand reparation for those millions of men, Women
and Children, houses and Estates were ruined and spoiled by a 30. years war
to reduce the Behemians and Prince Elector Palatine to their obedience.

For what rules or bounds shall be put to every man's particular fancy or
corrupted interest, if they shall be at Liberty to question and call to
account the authority God has placed over them? Shall the son condemn or
punish the father for his own disobedience? the Wife her Husband for her own
act of Adultery? or the Servant the Master, for his own unfaithfullnesse? or
can there be any thing in the Reason or understanding of man, to persuade him
to think the King was justly accused for the shedding of his Subjects blood
which the accusers themselves were only guilty of? And Bradshaw himself (like
the Jews high Priest confessing a truth against his will) in the words he gave
instead of reason for murdering the King against the will and good liking of
9. parts in every 10. of the Commons of England, could make his Masters that
call themselves the Parliament of England to be no better then the Tribum
plebis of Rome and the Ephori of Sparta, the former of which for manifold
mischiefs and inconveniences were abrogated, and laid aside, and never more
thought fit to be used, and the latter (not being half so bad as our new
State Gypsies) killed and made away to restore the People again to their
Liberties.

But the opinion, and Judgment of the Learned Lord Chief Justice Popham (who
then little thought his grandchild Collonell Popham should join with those
that sat with their Hats on their heads, and directed the murder of their
Sovereign: and if he were now living would sure enough have hanged him for
it) and those other learned Judges, in the case and Trial of the Earl of
Essex in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, That an intent to hurt Camdens Annalls
Eliz. pa. 798.
the Sovereign Prince, as well as the Act of it, was Treason.: And that the
Laws of England do interpret every act of Rebellion or Treason to aim at the
death or deposing the Prince. For that Rebels by their good will never suffer
that King or Prince to live, or Reign that understands their purposes, and may
revenge them, agreeable to that of the Civil Law: That they that go about to
give Law, to their Prince will never suffer him to recover Authority to punish
it; is now written in the blood of the King, and those many iterated complaints
of the King in several of his Declarations published to the People (in the
midst of the Parliaments greatest pretenses and promises) that they intended
to take away his life, and ruin him, are now gone beyond suspicion* and every
man may now know the meaning of their Cannoneeres levelling at the King with
perspective glasses, at Copredy bridge, the acquitting of Pym the ^nn^keeper
who said he would wash his hands in the Kings Heart Blood* stifling of 15. or
1^. several indictments for treasonable words, and Rolfe rewarded for his
purpose to kill him, and the prosecutor chequed and some of them imprisoned for
it. For, the Sun in the Firmament and the four great quarters of the Earth,
and the Shapes and Lineaments of man are not so universally known, seen or
spoken of; as this will be most certain to the present as well as after ages.
The end has now verified the beginning, and Quo^ primum fuit in intention
ultimo loco agitur, Seven years hypocritical Promises and Practices, seven
years Pretenses, and seven years preaching and prattling have now brought us
all to this conclusion as well as Confusion. The blood of old England is let
out by a greater witchcraft and cousenage then that of Medea when she set
Pelias daughters to let out his old blood that young might come in the place of
it; the Cedars of Lebanon are devoured, and the Trees have made the Bramble
King, and are like to speed as well with it as the Frogs did with the Storke
that devoured them; And they have not only slain the King who was their
Father, but like Nero rip't up the belly of the Commonwealth which was their
Mother: The light of Israel is put out; and the King, Laws, Religion, and
Liberties of the People murdered, an action so horrid, and a sin of so great
a magnitude, and complication as if we shall ask the days that are past, and
enquire from the one end of the Earth to the other, there will not be found
any wickedness like to this great wickedness, or has been heard like it.
The Seaverne, Thames, Trent and Humbar, four the greatest Rivers of the
Kingdom with all their lesser running streams of the Island in their
continual courses, and those huge heaps of water in the Ocean and girdle of
it in their restless agitations will never be able to scour and wash away
the guilt and stain of, though all the rain which the clouds shall ever bring
forth, and impart to this Nation and the tears of those that bewail the loss
of a King of so eminent graces and perfections be added to it.

Quis cladem illius diei? quis funera fando
Explicet? aut possit lachrimis aequare dolores?
Gens antiqua ruit, multos dominata per Annos.

FINIS.

