TRUTH Will never shame its MASTER.
DEDICATED By John Pain, a VVelwisher to PEACE and TRVTH,
To His Highness the Lord Protector OF England, Scotland, and Ireland.
MAy it please your Highness once more to vouchsafe to reflect a favorable
Construction upon these poor and illiterate Lines, wherein I humbly crave Your
Highness pardon for my ambition in presenting them to so great a Personage,
they being so mean, and my self so unworthy: But in confidence of Your
Highness Clemency, and wonted Favor toward others in the like nature, and
also the Loyalty and Duty which I owe unto Your Highness does engage me to do
this, and more if I could; In the mean time, I am, and will ever remain,

MY LORD, Your Highness subjected, in all Loyal and Faithful obedience, till
death, John Pain, Soldier under Col. Haine.

REnowned Sir, when in my contemplation
I think upon the danger that this Nation
Was in of late, and so I think is still,
If some could yet but only have their will
To bring their ends about; as I surmise,
From Antichrist the Pope did first arise,
And so descended to our English Court,
Where Priests and Prelates, as some do report,
They had a Project, and a great Design,
Gods glorious Gospel for to undermine
By Superstition, and indeed to me
They altogether did so well agree
To ruin all the Nation, except those
That are at present your most deadly Foes;
I know it by experience, for I see
They are as bad, or worse, than bad may be;
For since the Rumor of the Holland Peace,
In Town and Country they do much increase,
And swear they will lay a hundred pounds to ten,
That this late Treaty will break off again;
Which if it should, I hope you will have a care
To make them love you, though it be for fear;
It stands upon your Highness now to take
A stricter course, than heretofore, and make
The Cavalliers and Papists all to know
You Will have their reason whe'r they will or no.
If that your Highness have not yet forgot,
I gave you notice lately of a Plot,
Which was of late discovered as I hear
Coming to London out of Dorsetshire;
They say that some committed are to Tower,
And more to be expected there each hour,
That are as deep engaged in the Plot,
Against your Highness, for I know not what,
Nor they themselves, I dare presume to say,
But that You cross them in the Kings highway;
I do believe that all the aim they have,
Is that the Hollanders will play the Knave,
And hold You in a Treaty until they
Have gotten all their Merchant Ships away
To Sea for Merchandise, which only Trade
Is their subsistence, if they can alade;
Without the which they cannot, as I hear,
Maintain their War with us another year;
The which I leave unto the Lord of Host,
Who hitherto has kept them from our Coast;
To whom I do ascribe all power and might,
Because 'twas he who made Your Armies fight
By Sea and Land, the which does terrify
The Nations that do round about us lie.
I have a word or two yet more to write,
Concerning things which I see are not right;
But that I Will leave until some other day,
And then (God willing) when I come this way,
I Will call upon Your Highness, for to know
Whe'r I in this transgressed have or no;
I do confess here is neither Rhyme nor Reason
In all these Lines, nor yet (I hope) no Treason.
And so I Will leave Your Highness unto him
That gives Peace unto Jerusalem.
Your Highness poor
Faithful and sure
Servant till death,
Here upon earth,
I hope to remain
For ever, John Pain,
Here is a little Line for every Ten,
And if You like them I Will begin again,
Before I go for Jersie, where that I
Have lived ere since the Islands taking by
Your Highness Forces, sent by Col. Haine,
For the Reducing of that place again.
I Have one Request unto Your Highness more
That You Will be pleased to look upon the poor
And sad conditition which some Soldiery
Are like to suffer, by the subtilty
Of those that get Debenters for a song,
That never were in Arms yet all along
These bloody Wars, where many thousand men
Have lost their lives, and never came again
To see their Children, neither yet their Wives,
Which (now poor souls) are weary of their lives.
Alas what is it for to have a Crown,
Or half so much, when there is due a pound?
(For service done already for the State,
Is now forgotten, and quite out of date)
Besides, a third deducted for Free Quarter
To pay our Landlords for the same hereafter.
When we are paid off our Debenters clear,
It Will be to many a very happy year;
But in the mean time if there ben't a care
Many will starve for want of food I fear;
For I my self, as plainly may appear,
Have served the States almost this fourteen year,
And never had one penny for my pain
Until I served under Colonel Hain,
Which was about some four or five year since,
The time before was on my own expense;
Besides I Have spent, in trotting up and down
After Committees, well near forty pound.
There are many more I know can say the same,
But how to remedy, or who to blame,
I do not know as yet, because that I
Am not acquainted with State policy,
Which I confess is good, if it be well used,
But I see daily it is much abused
By some of whom Your Highness little deem
That they should so Your Orders dis-esteem,
As do Excise-men, Treasurers, and Committees,
In all Your Counties, Villages and Cities.
Once more, my Lord, I shall desire to take
My leave of You at present, and to make
An end of these my simple Lines, and so
I Will for Jersey, as fast as I can go:
And there I hope, my Lord, for to remain,
Your Highness servant until Death
JOHN PAIN.

Truth may be blamed by some, though not by all,
I have thrown it out, but know not where 'twill fall.

FINIS.

