A VINDICATION OF THE PREACHER SENT, OR A VVarrant for public Preaching
without Ordination. Wherein is further discovered. 1. That some Gifted men
unordained, are Gospel Preachers. 2. That Officers sustain not a relation (as
Officers) to the Universal Church; and other weighty questions concerning
Election and Ordination, are opened and cleared. In answer to two Books. 1.
Vindiciae Ministrij Evangelici Revindicatae or the Preacher (pretendly) Sent,
sent back again. By Dr Colling of Norwich 2 Q. warrante, or a Moderate enquiry
into the warrantableness of the Preaching of gifted and unordained persons. By
Mr. Pool, at the desire and appointment of the Provincial Assembly of London.
WITH A Reply to the exceptions of Mr. Hudson and D. Collings against the
Epistle to the Preacher Sent.

Published By Frederick Woodal, Minister of the Gospel at Woodbridge in
Suffolk. Samuel Petto Minister of the Gospel at Sandcraft in Suffolk.

LONDON. Printed by J. T. Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley,
1659.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
IT is Recorded of the most holy that when the cry of the sin of Sodom, and
Gomorrah came up unto him, he went down to see whether they had done altogether
according to the cry thereof, before he executed judgment upon them; and this
is written for our instruction, that where indictments are drawn up against
persons or things, we may not proceed to sentence upon the charg, until we
see the proof thereof.

We are not ignorant of cries, even outcries, against the liberty of Prophsying
we contend about, and we fear notwithstanding our former and present defense,
if the question be moved about it, what evil has it done? the answer will be
returned unto it, away with it, crucisie it. Our brethren are preparing Spirits
unto this, while they represent it an Idol, the City of Jericho which was not
to be built, a Trojan horse full of Error, nonsense and blasphemy, A Pandoras
box whence all sorts of mischeivous and soulpoysoning opinions fly out, etc.
See their Epistles. And here suffer us a little to expostulate with them; Is
ordination indeed as a Veniceglass that can hold no poison? are you not
partial, who can find Errors, Heresies, impertinencyes among persons not
ordained, but among the ordained omnia been? Alas what learned nonsense,
amongst many of them? what empty notions? What Aerie speculations? how often
are people served with bones instead of bread? How often have they froth for
drink? They that condemn too much Lead in a window, because it hinders light,
might be offended with painted glass.

We confess and deny not, we have seen Thieves and murderers, going out, and
in, at this door (as also in the other way) who deserve indeed that their
mouths should be stopped; but their evil, flows not from our principle, but
from the abuse thereof; not from the principle as stated by us, although Mr.
Pool in his Epistle thinks it done very loosly, because though we assert it
inexpedient, mischeivous, and uncomfortable to preach without approbation from
others; yet we say (in some cases for ought we know) it may be so done,
Preacher Sent. page 20. wherein we might promise our selves favor for them
whose principle it is, that in some cases it may be lawful to preach without
Ordination, Mr. Pool page 68. 102. If they put Ordination in the place of
Aprobation, and yet say, in some cases a man may preach without ordination;
where is the offense?

But Dr. Collings does judge that no rule of Regulation can, or will be fixed
by us upon this liberty, so that it differs not from licentiousness, but is a
very strumpet, harlot, Mother of abominations, etc. We answer,

1. If by this rule of Regulation he mean the form or pattern to which all
doctrine must conform, which therefore is called regula regulans, the Rule is
fixed. viz. the sacred Scriptures. 2. If he mean the measure or standard for
qualification, the Rule needs not be fixed by us; where it is fixed (as in
Rules of examination unto Ordination) it is rarely observed, and a man may be
qualified for one place or people, not for another.

3. If he mean the order of reducement in case Error or heresy be preached, or
the liberty any way abused, the Rule is fixed Mat. 18. 15, 16. The Church has
power over preachers and over Pastors, Coloss. 4. 17. 1 Corin. 5. 12. Rev. 2.
ver. 2. Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have
found them liars. That Church and the Angel thereof, are commended for trying
of Preachers; Those that may, and disapprove, may approve where there is cause:
here is a Scripture rule for approbation of Preachers, and that not so much as
in order to Ordination.

Courteous Reader, we desire thee to take notice of these few following
particulars.

1. That we do not repeat all the words of Dr. Collings or Mr. Pool, but what
is most material, in their Arguments, which liberty they have taken to
themselves, in replying to us.

2. That although we have cause to complain, that many Arguments in our former
book, yet remain untouched, and some but slightly wounded, are buried alive,
with too much of the dust and ashes of reproach cast upon them; yet hoping and
expecting that the determining Reader will examine and compare Arguments and
answers impartially, we shall be silent.

3. That very many of Mr. Pools Arguments and replies, are drawn from the
Apostles, and that in matters wherein they acted as extraordinary Officers.

Also necessity is often urged against us; whereas necessity cannot justly be
pleaded to justify actings, unless it be in natural duties; Their instance of
the Shewbread reaches no further; it was a natural duty to eat that, for the
preservation of life: to kill a man in self-defence is a natural duty, which
may further answer what Mr. Pool says, page 102. about necessity; we say, to
defend the life of a man, or to take away the life of a murderer, is not a
peculiar work to a Magistrate; but to command persons to the one and the other,
is the Magistrates work, and this a private man may not do in a case of
necessity; and if they will grant preaching to be a natural duty, how can they
deny gifted men liberty for doing of it?

4. That thou art to expect this the last thou shall receive from us in this
controversy we cannot absolutely promise it, because the righteous, and the
wise, and their works are in the hand of God, Eccles. 9. 1. but are very much
inclined unto it, amongst others, upon these grounds; because we have spoken
fully to the matter in our former, and this book, and there is no end of words;
neither do we love always to be wading in a controversy, which diverteth from
more practical things at present, and at the last must be left to the Reader to
judge; and we would not by multiplying replies, carry thee away from those
Arguments we used in the first Book, which they have left behind without any
thingof answer offered to them, whereby it would come to pass, that the cause
would appear more weak, when it wants no strength to support it. And as there
is liberty of spirit or vanity, bewrayed even in the Drs. Title page so we meet
with insulting language here and there, in both their books; all which
considered, we desire thou would not think their books unanswerable, if they
reply to us, and we do not answer aga^n.

5. If th^^ requirest after that man of God, Mr. John Martin, whose name is in
the title page of our former book, but not in this, know, be^^ gone to God, and
by a passage, through the g^t^s of death, has obtained rest from all his
labors; who owned this cause (in which he was engaged with us) to the last,
and witnessed his approbation, and (to use his own expression when in his last
sickness) free concurrence with us, in so much of his book as was prepared,
and came under his eve.

6. That whereas Mr Charke of Waldron in Sussex, in the latter end of his book,
has pretended to answer six arguments, which are found in the latter end of
our book; the reason why we gave him no reply is, partly because of his book,
we apprehend him to be of such a spirit, that an answer would only exasperate
his corruption, partly because his replies are very weak, and need no answer,
nor are worth the answering.

This is all at present, only, That the Lord who gives the light without, may
anoint their eyes with eye salve, and make thee see, is the prayer of.

Thine to serve thee in the work of the Gospel. Frederick Woodal. Sam. Petto.
Mon. 1. day. 27. 1659.
A vindication of the Epistle.
THe vindication of our Epistle to the former book entitled the Preacher Sent:
Wherein the nature of a Church capable of Officers, and of being preached unto
by such Office-wise, is cleared from the exceptions of Dr. Collings in his
reply, and of Mr. Hudson in his addition or postscrip to his vindication of the
Church Catholic visible.

As we saw it needful to assert (in our other book) our persuasion of the
nature of a Gospel Church, for the better clearing the nature of office and of
power of preaching Office-wise therein; So the Dr. saw it incumbant unto him to
overturne if possible, that foundation, which he calls (...) but we (...) in
this controversy an account whereof was given by us in these words; A-Church
formed unto fellowship in new Testament Ordinances, and is a particular company
of Saints in mutual union, for mutual fellowship in the means of worship
appointed by Christ, for the glory of God and edification of their own souls
and the good of others.

1. This description he examineth in the six particulars thereof: That it is a
company he grants, and that one cannot properly be called a Church, we accept
of this, but if he thinks by a figure one may be called so, (as his assertion
qualified with a strictly, and properly seems to imitate) we doubt his
figurative, will be found not a Scriptural, but anti-scriptural sense, no
better then that wherein a Prelate, a Pope claims the denomination, not as
properly, but vertua^^ so; against whose usurpations himself stands justly
engaged; as well may one man be called a City, as one man a Church, which
cannot be in any sense.

2: A particular company -- Dr. C. I cannot fathom your notion of particular,
etc.

Answ. That notion is not singular, a man cannot travel far in this
controversy, scarce in any author, but he meets it and comes acquainted with
it. It is indeed opposed to universal.

1. If a universal company of Saints, holding forth the word of Life, in a
conversation becoming the Gospel, may be called a universal visible Church. 2.
If all the members of particular Churches are, or ought to be members of this
universal, yet the particular Churches themselves, as such, are not members:
That form which gives them their being as such, implies another union, and
is attended with other Lambs, and orders then the universal is engaged in, or
obliged unto, as shall more fully appear in its due place.

3. As therefore a flock of sheep, a swarm of bees being part of that company
of sheep, of Bees, which is in the World, may be called a particular company of
sheep, bees etc. though as a flock Swarm they be no parts, but otherwise
distinguished, and so a Church of Saints, part of that company of Saints, which
is in the World, may be called a particular company, and stand related to the
universal: but as Saints, not as Churches of Saints, as we expressed our selves
before under this head. But the controversy is not only about a word, he now
disputes for the term universal to have been put in the place of particular, --
Dr. C. an universal theme in Logic is that which is apt to be predicated of
many: Church is such a Theme.

Answ. We wonder that a man of learning should run into such a contradiction to
Mr. H. unto whom we are sent for further light i^ this controversy, and also
to himself within the verge of the same Paragraph.

1. He contradicts Mr. H. who expressly denies that the Church Catholic is a
Genus, or universal notion and Theme apt to be predicated concerning many, in
the 4th Chapter of a vindication, of the essence and unity of the Church
Catholic visible.

2. He contradicts himself, when in the next leaf he affirms, that the Church
Catholic is Totum integrale, which we are sure is not apt to be predicated of
many naturally, if the whole were predicated of the part, The part might be
said Vind. Sheibl. Topic. Cap. 28. Sthal. Axion. Tit. 9. Reg. 9.
to be the whole: The head, the body, the branch, the tree, because Animal is
predicated of Homo; Homo is aptly said to be Animal. But because he sends us to
Mr. Hudson, to Mr. H. we will go, and willingly as to a man that understands
himself, whose moderation conjoined with learning, and diligence in this
controversy, (though professedly against us) we highly respect and value.

1. He urges Scriptures where the word (Church) is used not applicable to a
particular Church, Acts 8. 3. etc.

2. He uses arguments to prove, that every Officer, is an Officer to a
universal, because by baptism he admits into it; and by Excomunication casts
out of it, not into, or out of a particular only.

Answ. The term Church in the singular number is frequently used in Scripture,
to signify not a universal Church, nor a singular only, as in some of his
Scriptures but this and that and the other particular (as amongst many other)
in the Scriptures hereafter mentioned, Mat. 18. 17. Tell the Church, i. e. this
or that Church in which the offense was committed; Surely none will say that
after taking one or two, the offended brother must in the next place tell it to
the universal Church, where does any such Church meet for such Acts, to tell it
unto? So Ephesians. 3. 10. 21. 1. Tim. 3. 5. If [a man] i. e. any man, knew not to
rule his own [house] i. e. this or that house, how shall he take care of [the
Church] i. e. this or that Church 1 Timothy 3. 15. in the house of God, which is
[the Church] i e. in any Church where thou presidest, (...) Tim. 5 16. Let not
[the Church] be charged, i. e. any Church where the any man or woman (mentioned
by the Apostle) having widows does reside.

Heb. 2. 12. In the midst of the Church. This declaring praise cannot be in the
midst of the universal Church which never meets upon such Acts, and therefore
it is not meant of this, or that particular only.

but this, and that and the other, distinct indeed, in distinct individual
forms, as Plato and Socrates are distinct, but agreeing in common nature
inseparable, inherent in them both.

Thus it is said (the wife) is bound 1. Cor. 7. 39, every particular wife, --
(the man) is not of the Woman, 1 Cor. 11. 8. nor this, nor that man, nor any
man; when the name of an Integrum is given to a part, its not so because its a
part, but because of the common nature; so that the flesh of John and the flesh
of Thomas is all flesh, as well as the flesh of the Leg and arm of either of
them: we do not think a particular Church formed unto fellowship, according to
institution is (as so) a part or has its denomination for parts sake, but
being of the same kind with other Churches of the same constitution its
included in, and represented by the same name for kinds sake.

This may answer the argument from the Apostles, who because not officers to a
certain particular only, are supposed to have been so to the universal: For
the Apostles were Officers, in and over every particular, by virtue of an
immediate call and general commission wherein they have no successors, which
particulers, though not parts, (as is already expressed) may be signified by a
singular word, Church, even as many common wealths, as to order and government
Independent may be so signified, and it may be properly said, God appointed for
a commonwealth Rulers, Judgges, etc. (i. e.) for this that, and the other
Commonwealth; Nor is it hand to Imagine, how one may have power in, and over two
or three, or more, yet they have no dependence, one upon an other.

A Father may have ten daughters, and each daughter her family distinct, the
Father has power in each family, though the particular sisters, or their o
fficers not so, Nor are the arguments more cogent taken from baptism and
excommunication;-Baptism makes not any one stand in relation to the Church more
then the Lord's Supper, nor is it administered that persons may be members of the
body, we know our brethren will not administer it to the heathens, or
Idolaters, but to persons called from Idols, (i. e.) to members (in their
sense) of the visible Church.

We know our brethren qualified their Catholic notion with this term [solemn]
intending not admission, in a general sense, but solemn admission, as the
enlisting or enrolment of a soldier is his admission into the Army.

But its consistency with their other principles we see not, If a soldier be
casheired, he is readmitted by a new enrolment, If a member be excomunicate yet
when absolved he is not rebaptized; We need say no more to this argument here,
having occasion to meet it* again and to consider the Scriptures, whereon its
built. We rest very confident that some Parent, Master, or neighbor, who
through providence is instrumental to the converting of a sinner, does more to
the entering a person into the body of Christ, then any Minister ever did by
Baptism, or can do.

Though baptism enters not a member into any Church, yet, where ever
regularly performed is valid to its ends uses and consequential priveledges in
every Church, not by reason of the unity of Churches, but upon an other
account. Suppose a man be free in London, and have the seal of his freedom in
that Corporation only, yet he is free to buy and sell in every Corporation in
England, and interested in common Priveledges, where ever he is, though not in
proper, as Jurisdiction and Government. If he that sets the seal at London
admits not into every Company and Corporation in the Land: If communion with
every Corporation in some things does not prove such an union among them all,
as is between the members of some one Corporation; The argument upon Baptism to
prove a Catholic Church, falls to the ground.

Excomunication indeed separateth, the person excomunicate, from Relation to
and communion with, the body from which he is cut off, 1 Cor. 55. 7. 13. But as
a member forfeiting his freedom at London, is formerly desfranchised there,
where he was actually a member, and consequently incapacitated to claim the
Privileges which formerly he enjoyed by virtue of that freedom other where,
though London and other Cities and Towns Corporate, make not one Corporation,
So it is in this case.

Mr. Hudson objects postcript page 5. several Corporations are constituted by
several Charters etc. and but the universal Church has but one Charter, from
our Sovereign, under the same Systeme of Laws, etc.

Answ. As the World according to the fellowship of Nature, has one Jus
Gentium, and Law of nature for the whole, yet according to the fellowship of
Order, must of necessity be under other Laws for the several parts thereof, in
those combined fellowships; so the Church in the fellowship of its Nature, or
the whole company called to union and communion with the Lord Jesus, has one
Law of faith, obedience, etc. For all its individuals, yet not one Law for the
whole, as such for Order Policy, etc. But the Churches in the fellowship of
order have Laws suitable to their order, by the will and appointment of Jesus
Christ. Its the Law of the universal Church, that the members of it worship the
Lord. Its the Law of the particular, that the members meet and worship in one
place. 1 Cor. 11. 20. 14. 23. thus they walk [together] in ordinances, so that
walking in ordinances with an other Church (neglecting it in this) is sinful,
because every one is bound to walk with the same Church whereof he is a member.
That Text is yet in controversy. 1. Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the
Church, -- we said its parallel to God has set the members every one in the
body, verse 18, If this prove not a Catholic body, nor does that prove a
Catholic Church. D^. Collings replyeth the body is totum integrale. If members
had been enumerated, not confined to the service of that particular, it would
have proved a universal body.

Answ. The body to which the Church is compared is totum intigrale Organicum,
but particulare, so is the Church. The Apostles had place and power over more
then this particular, yet as Church Officers no place in, nor power over any
but particulars, It is usual to apply general terms indeterminately to
particular things, as to say the wife is bound, the man is the head of the
woman, i. e. This and that man, wife, etc. so set in the Church, i. e. in this,
and that and the other Church.

Mr. H. replyeth further, several bodies are one body genericaly not Integraty,
because not united by one external bond but the Universal Church is united into
one body by bonds of the same Sovereign, the same Laws, covenant, etc. pa. 6.

Answ. Either particular associations are no institutions of Christ or they
have several unions, Laws, Acts and Ends; Men as men have their union, Law,
Acts, etc. Men as Armies, as bodies politic have their union, Law, Acts
differing; So christians as christians have their Law proper to that state;
Christians, as a common wealth their Law proper to that state, and differing
from the other Law.

If Church Union be one and that Catholic union then schism the breach of that
union must be as the catholic breach; so that though a member cease
worshipping with this assembly in this place, yet if he worship with any
assembly part of the Church Catholic in any place, he is no Schismatic: upon
which reason the loud outcry against Sepration is unjust, as it is unreasonable
upon an other account, we therefore yet renounce the name and thing of a Church
of Churches, or a visable Catholic Church formed unto fellowship in new
Testament ordinances, (in which term we declared our sense) but do not renounce
the Scripture, nor reason, much less our own brethren, as Dr. Collings has
rashly affirmed. Our thoughts for this Abrenuntiation were confirmed in five
particulars, wherein all exceptions considered we find^ nothing for
Retractation.

1. N^ part has the power of a whole in it: Every particular Church has the
power of a whole in it, Ergo, No particular Church is a part.

Exception Dr. Col. A particular Church has not the Power of the whole,
because not Power to make a Synod, nor to ordain, nor to excommunicate.

Answ. His reason from a Synod is reason'esse: The common wealth of England is
a whole, and has the power of a whole in it^ yet a controversy arising (of
what nature so ver it be) between Eng. and another commonwealth, or
commonwealths; Eng. has no power to constitute commissioners who shall debate
determine and compose that difference, yet Power to meet in a treaty, is as
much kingdom power, as power to meet in a Synod, is Church power, Ergo; either
Englands power is incomplete, or the Drs. Argument is so.

His argument from Ordination and Excommunication is but named, therefore in
this place we do but deny it: Where nothing is proved, nothing is found to be
answered.

Excep. Mr. Hudson -- A particular Church is a whole in reference to its own
members, but in reference to the rest of the Church it is a part, as a
Corporation is complete according to its constitution, yet a member of a
greater body.

Answ. If a Corporation be considered with reference to other Corporations to
which it stands coordinate, it is a whole, not a member, not a part: If with
reference to a Kingdom, to which it stands Subordinate, it is a part, a member,
not a whole: So if a particular Congregation be considered with reference to
other Congregations to which it stands Coordinate, it is a whole, not a part.
If with reference to a Church to which it stands Subordinate it is a part, not a
whole: But there is no such Church: The Subordination which our brethren plead
for, is of the Church to Officers, not of a Church to a Church; And that
Officers are not called the Church in Scripture, we shall show, and that by
their own principles, they cannot be styled so.

2. Every whole is really distinct from every part, and from all its parts
Collectively considered; no Church of Churches is really distinct from all
particular Churches, Ergo, There is no such Church.

Except. Dr. C. Mr. H. There Is a fallacy in the Argument, -- It is a Maxim in
Logic, Totum reipsa non dissert a partibus simul sumptis and unitis.

Answ. Our Argument is right according to that Rule; Parts simul sumptae, do
not constitute a Totum, except they be unite; or the whole differs from all the
parts Collectively considered, though unitively considered, it differs not; --
suppose ten heaps of Corn in one Room, containing all the Corn which is in
the World, which afterward are reduced into one great heap; when they are ten,
they are not one, and when they are one, they are not ten.

Of the supposed union of the universal Political Church, something has been
spoken already, and more will occur under the head of union.

3. There is no universal visible meeting to worship God; Ergo, No universal
visible Church; for (...) signifies Congregation, or Assembly, company meeting
together.

Except. Dr. Collings. There is an universal meeting of the Church Catholic
visible at the Throne of Grace, etc.

Answ. We wonder at his discourse upon this Argument; for from our instance of
the Church of the firstborn gathered indeed in one spirit, united unto one
head, meeting invisibly in one worship, he would obtain this, That although
there be no local meeting, yet there may be a visible Church; when it speaks
plainly thus much, viz. as invisible union, and invisible communion is
necessary unto the being of the invisible, so visible union, and visible
communion is necessary to the being of the visible church; although we may be
present with Dr. Collings in spirit, and he with us, never coming together in
the same place; yet visibly present we cannot be, nor in the performance of any
visible work.

Exc. Mr. H. (...) signifies a calling out, not a calling together, -- the
particular congregation is rather, (...) then (...).

Answ. That particular Congregations and Assemblies of people, whether civil or
sacred, are in Scripture always termed (...) never (...) Mr H. cannot be
ignorant, what he writes, therefore is not a Corrective from the writings of
weak men, but for the Scriptures of the most wise God, by which alone we
desire to measure our notions and expressions in this controversy.

Be it so that the Scottish word [Kirk] and the English word [Church] comes
from (...) which signifies the Lords, all assemblies are not so properly the
Lords as Church Assemblies, as (...): yet as is the Church, so is the union
thereof, so the work and meeting thereunto; the Universal Church is the
general assembly, Heb. 12. 23. meeting in one place spiritually, and invisibly,
they are all come to mount Sion, to the City of the living God, To the heavenly
Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22. They are all chosen out of the World. 10. 15. 19. (i.
e.) called out of the World, else the World would not hate them, they are all
gathered unto Christ, Genesis 49. 10.

The particular Church is a particular assembly, or a Society of men assembling
together, for the Celebration of Ordinances according to Christ's appointments,
not that their assembling thereunto constitutes them a Church, but it is a main
end of their union, and the fruit, issue and manifestation of their
constitution by such union. The meetings of the Jewish Church at appointed
times, were as extensive as the Church it self; wherefore we yet conclude, if
no National meeting, no National Church, if no universal meeting, no universal
Church entrusted with the administration of ordi^ances according to the mind of
Christ.

4. There are no distinct officers appointed for such a Church, Ergo, no such
Church.

Exc. Dr. Col. No need of distinct Officers, because the Officers of particular
Congregations, which as parts constitute the whole, have power to act as
Officers in any of those parts, which united make up that whole.

The Church is one body, and as it is una, so it is unita, in one common
profession, etc. To the same purpose Mr. H. Every Minister has an indefinite
Office, which is equivalent to a general. Every Minister has power in actu
primo to dispense the word in any sacred convention, and though not an actual
Officer of the whole, yet has an habitual power, etc.

Answ. It cannot be denied, but in all civil policies, our argument stands
good, no greater body is made up of lesser, but it has a greater authority
distinct in Law and government from the lesser; diverse Towns united into one
hundred, diverse hundreds into one County, diverse Counties into one
Commonwealth, are in their several subordinations distinguished by several
acts and Officers appointed unto them. If diverse Churches were united into one
Church, surely it would be so also. In the Jewish polity it was so; besides
the Ruler of the Synagogue, besides the Priest and Levite, through every Tribe
disperced, there was a greater authority distinct in Law and Government, in
order and ministration from them, viz. the High Priest.

Who knows not that a Church Catholic visible entrusted with the
administration of Ordi nances bath been hotly contended for by the Papists as a
fit body for the Pope their head?

But as earnestly contended against by the reformed; They saw no truth in what
Dr. C. affirms, viz. That a Church may be a universal visible, yet have no
Officer over it, or Act performed in it, but what is particular.

Nor will it salve the business, to say every Minister is an indefinite
Officer, with habitual power, etc. An Officer actu primo to the Universal
Church, who as a Justice of peace, may be commissioned for a County, though
exercising but in a part thereof; For a Justice of Peace has power by virtue
of his commission to act in the whole County, without any other Call, and
fundamentum Exercitii, which is Ans. of the Assemb. pa^ 10.
denied a Minister; an Officer actu primo is furnished with all power needful
unto, and productive of a second act. He that is general of an Army in actu
primo, has power over the Army, exercere and cocrcere, a particular Officer
not so: He that is a King actu primo has power to govern a Kingdom, a Mayor
of a City not so: When any thing is in the first act, it is in a capacity for a
second act, in nature and extent, like unto the first. If a minister has not
the exercise of power in every Church, if he has not the foundation of the
exercise in any but his particular Church, to whom he stands related as their
minister, he is not a minister, actu primo to every Church.

The case of an Officer definite to some, viz. to a particular Church and
indefinite to others, viz. to a Catholic Church is a strange case; instances
sometimes given in Lawyers. Physicians. etc. reach it not who as so, are not
officers over any, nor have they office rule to parallel it.

There is no Church greater then that, which has power to hear and determine
upon offenses committed, but that is particular.

Exc. Dr. C. This Argument is nothing to the Question, which is not, which is
greater, but whether there be any Catholic Church or no; The particular Church
has not power of final determination.

Answ. When a question is de toto made up of diverse parts, it being out of
question, that a whole is greater then its parts, he that proves the preended
whole not greater then the supposed parts, pr ves that to be no whole, and
these to be no parts, and so speaks to the Question, and resolves it.

That power of final determination is in the particular Church, we proved, Mat.
18. 17. which Scripture either is no rule, to bring the offense unto the Church
particular at all, or is a rule to end it there: And if Christ has placed
power in the hand of seven, we may not remove it to place it in the hand of
seventy, though more wise and juditious then the).

Exc. Mr. H. By the Church, Christ does mean the Elders, The people never had
any right of judicature among the Jews, but the Courts where appeals were
from three Judges to 23. and from 23. to the Sanhed^im, no Christian
congregation was instituted when Christ spoke, Mat. 18. 17. Its to be taken
therefore in the Jews Dialect, etc.

Answ. That the eldership of a Church is by a Synechdoch^ called a Church in
Scripture, cannot be clearly evinced from one Text, nor is it suitable to Mr.
H. his principle to attribute that denomination to Officers either in
congregational or classical, or higher assemblies: For he says vindic. p. 126.
The body of Officers is a governing body; But the whole Church whether general
or particular is not a governing body, Ergo, Say we. the body of officers is
not the Church general or particular; again, every Church (says he) is a
similar part of the Catholic, obtaining its denomination upon that account,
page 123. and elsewhere, whence this is clear, that the Eldership of lesser or
greater Congregations is not a Church.

Such a body indeed is a body of Organs, not an Organical body, though it
should be supposed a part of the Catholic, yet could it not be said to be a
singular part; so that upon the account of similarity, it should, though a
particular bear the name of the universal, and be styled a Church. That
offenses among the Jews were never brought before the people to be judged and
sensured, but before Officers meeting apart from them, we believe not, mos suit
Hebraeis rem ultimo loco ad multitudinem, (...) i. e. eorum qui eadem instituta
sectarentur producers, cujus tamen multitudinis juditia seniores tar quam
presides moderabantur, Grot. in Mat. 18. 17. and this was the custom of
Christians in Tertullians time (who was converted to the faith, An^o. Dom. 200)
and had his approbation in his famous apology for Christians more then 1400
years old, who Cap. 39. denies the Christians being a factious society, as
they were aspersed, and shows their manner: We make (says he) a Congregation;
by certain knowledge all conspire in the service of the true God, where we
live united under one discipline* etc. We assemble together by Troops in our
prayers to God, in these assemblies we make Exhortations, and Threatenings and
Exercise Divine censure that banisheth sinners, and excludes them from our
communion, etc.

That our Savior in saying, tell the Church, should send his Disciples, in
case of scandal (Suppose committed against Religion, and his Law) to those
Courts to whom Religion it self was a scandal, and offense, is not by sober
men to be imagined. That he should allude to those Courts, intending such like
to be erected, when the Jewish polity should be taken down, as it leaves the
offended without remedy to day; So the Rule impracticable till Christ be ^ead
and risen again. It is far more probable, that as (the Temple yet standing, and
the great Congregation meeting therein) Pharisees, Saduces, Essenes, etc. Had
their caetus proprios, their distinct Ass^mblies, in which they did consult the
peace, and prosperity of their Order respectively, and sensure and judge
Offenses committed against the Laws, and institutions thereof.

So Christ having gathered a company under him, and made known his Law, this
company did meet together, Acts 1. 21. where (with reason we may conclude) the
concernments of Christianity were propounded and considered; and offenses heard
and finally determined, if this were the Church, of which Christ, Mat. 18. 17
does speak, it cleares our Argument; but suppose the Rule were impracticable
for the present, yet he cannot so speak in the Jews dialect, as to assert that
such Courts should ^e erected as, were amongst them; for the word Church is
never used in Scripture for an Eldership, but for a company of visible
believers united to walk together in the same numerical Ordinances, and it is
plain that Christ would have the offense told to such an Assembly as he gives
the name of Church to; And also Christ's order here is quite different from that
amongst the Jews, they after private admonition had not an institution for
taking one or two private persons to admonish before bringing the matter to
their Courts.

In the close of our discourse, for the compleatnesse of a particular Church,
and against a Universal, we minded this object. viz. Though Churches meet not
in all their members, yet they may meet in their representatives, which being
met, may be called a Classical, Provincial or National Church. To which we
answered, that such a Church is not a true Church.

Dr. Collings replyeth, A Synod is a true Church, or our definition is not
true; for a Synod is a particular company of Saints in mutual union, for mutual
fellowship in means of worship, etc.

Answ. To say a representative is a true Church, is to speak contradictions, If
it be an image, it is not a man, if a shadow, its not a substance, if the
representative of a true, its truly a representative, but not that which is
represented in truth.

A Synod (in Dr. C. sense) differs from a Church by us described, toto coelo; 1
Saints as so are fit matter for a Church but saints as gifted, are only fit
matter for a Synod, Saints qualified for Synodal debats and determinations.

2. Saints as united are a Church, or stand related unto it: Saints or holy men
delegated, are a Synod, or stand related to it.

3. In a Church body members are united unto fellowship in means of instituted
worship: In a Synod unto council, etc. Here is differing matter, differing
form, and differing ends. But we now return from walking the bounds of the
Church, to take a further view of the buildings thereof, and of the precious
stones therein; we said of this particular company, It is an Holy company, a
company of Saints. This D. Collings grants, Sa^o sensu, as he says upon some
arguments conclusive enough urged by us, Mr. H. does distinguish of Saints,
Some by dedication and consecration, some by regeneration, and supposes we
mean by visible Saints, such as are so in the former sense: Accordingly the Dr.
not dealing with our arguments but going about another way, does deny, that a
visibility of saving Grace is needful to the constitution of a Church in all
the members of it, and Mr. H. says we have no certain rule to judge of the
regeneration of another. In which discourse they do in effect speak thus unto
us, you do well to see that your Church members be Saints, Holy persons, but
you have nothing to do to enquire about truth of Grace, nor to conclude of
Saintship and holiness from the appearance or visibility thereof: As if
holiness or saintship could, under the Gosple, be placed at the foot of any
other account then that of the presence or appearance of Grace.

Special saving grace is indeed an invisible thing, and of it we can make no
true (i. e.) certain and infallible judgment, yet we may and must make a
Church judgment, and a judgment of saving Grace in order to communion in the
Lords Supper, he does allow, though he says a judgment of saving Grace is
impossible, what consistency there is in such expressions, let him consider,
yea in the close of his Epistle he sits in judgment upon our hearts, but how
he should diserne our secrets that does profess against inquiring about the
inward work, let the Reader judge. The children of the members we regard as
(...) 1 Cor. 7. 14. not barely from the parents profession, but the
manifestation of God, saying he is their God, and of Christ, saying of such is
the kingdom of Heaven, they are partakers of that fullness (...) (as
professors are, which the Elect and called are (...) partakers of.

The Apostolical practice does not evince Acts 2. Act. 4. That the thousands
baptized were baptized upon a bare owning the Gospel, without any respect to
saving grace: They which were baptized, renouncing the Religion in which
educated, embracing the Gospel under persecution and contempt, they were
pricked in heart, they gladly received the word, Acts 2. 37. 41. a bare
profession where that also is a carnal engagement, is not so signal in the
hundred part. His easy answer to our question, concerning trial of Grace in
order to Communion in the supper, and not to Church Communion is indeed, as he
calls it, an easy answer, we no where find (says he) let a man Examine
himself and so come into the fellowship of the Church, he thinks the 3000. and
the 5000. had scarce any leisure, before their admission to do it thoroughly.

Answ. Commendable was that fear, Acts 5. 11. not only the fear of the Church,
but of others also, ne laederent hunc caetum, nec contemnerent, nec temere, se
illis conjungerent, sed qui vellent suscipi agerent hoc serio etc. Arel. in
loc. Must not all our works be done in faith? All our homage to God, in spirit
and truth? Shall men enter the Church as the unclean beasts the Ark, not
knowing that they are unclean: As we hinted before, the 3000. had not only
leisure, but did evidence their being pricked at the heart, etc. Acts 2. 37. 41.

Let the Dr. read over again our arguments for such a qualification of members,
as is by us asserted, and (at least until some answer be made which may plead
satisfaction) not judge us in the least obstinate, if we yet sit down in this
persuasion, viz. That^ men visibly unbelieving and unregenerate are de jure no
members in that society; it is to be made up of believers, of the children of
God. etc.

Nor is this company so qualified a Church except a united company. Our
Arguments for this also the Dr. thought fit to wave, and by an attempt like
Alexanders upon the Gordian knot, to cut the discourse in pieces, rather then
to unty it: with what success is now to be considered.

He offers, Acts. 19. where mention is made of a company called (...) not a
united company, but presently he dismisseth the argument, calling the company a
rout, and so do we, having determined the subject of the union, we speak of a
Church formed unto fellowship.

He affirms, That a Church inorganical needs no union but what is in
profession, upon which account the company in a particular house is called a
Church. Coloss. 4. 15. Romans 16. 5.

Answ. If profession be the Church union, then Apostasy only is the
separation, and Independents must be acquitted of Schism until they can be
proved Apostates.

No Political union is founded in profession; A Goldsmith in London, is not of
the company, because a Goldsmith; when mention is made of a Church in a house,
it either may denote the company meeting in that house in the same numerical
administrations, or a good part of the Church living therein: In either sense
not the mere profession, but the union by consent to worship God in the self
same ordinances, is the reason of the denomination.

He grants it reasonable that a Church Organical should be a company united by
consent, but says its not necessary this consent be explicit, yet its very
convenient it be so, and they heartily wish it might be so.

Answ. We are glad if consent be seen reasonable upon any account, if any
consent, ^ut if implicit consent be reasonable, then Explicit is so much more;
A man may enter his Neighbors house without knocking, but it is not so orderly,
or peaceable a way.

We wonder at his declamation against explicit Covenant, as if there were not
the least warrant in Gods word for it, when in the next line, he tells us of
many wishes for it. We suppose his members when he shall urge submission by
explicit consent upon them, will say, but who has required that at our hand?
Is it from Heaven or of men? If he says its of Heaven, God requires it, then
it is necessary he must urge it: If he say it is not of Heaven, but of men, why
does he so much wish it, or desire it?

Against our 5th and 6th particular no objection is lifted up, only Dr.
Collings complains of one passage, which almost made his head ache in studying
the connection of it, but it was the Printers fault, not ours; we crave the many
literal sylabycal and verbal mistakes, of which no account is given in the
Errataes, be not imputed to us, who live at a great distance from the Press,
we had some thoughts when first we received the book to have printed a paper of
corrections by it self, for the benefit of them that should peruse the Book,
but have been prevented until now, and (not) remains in that troublesome
passage instead of (now) correct that, our sense is clear, for thus the words
run, Our brethren being now baptized into a belief, etc.

As to the Divine original of Presbyterial government, we are yet persuaded the
Reverend Assembly was not confident of it, at least they did not intimate so
much in that third proposition, nay they, suggest the contrary, saying, many
particular Congregations may be under one Presbyterial Government. Many Cities,
Towns, Countries may be under the Government of one, though no Jus Divinum be
stamped upon that Government; for so they may be under a Council of state, a
Parliament* etc. They that suppose the form of Church Government left
undetermined, say Episcopal may be, Presbyterial may be, but they that suppose
otherwise say. This or that form must, be We find nothing more but words, and
though we have reasoned this case, yet we delight not to word it, only some
account is given of that kind of Querimonial Rhetoric in our* advertisement to
the Reader.

ERRATA
IN the title Page line 14. r. Ministerii. l. 25. r. Sandcroft.

In the advertisement to the Reader, p. 1 l. 14. r. prophesying l. 19. r.
crucify it. * p. 2. l. 2^. from them. l. 31. r. approbation * p. 3. 1, 8,
(...). his rule, 1, 27 del^ And * p. 5. 1. 27, (...). levity of spirit *. p. 6.
l 3. r. inquire. p. 6. l. 13. r. this book. l20 r by his book l. 27. r. thine
e^es.

In the vindication of the Epistle, p. 1. l, 12. r. incumbent upon him. l. 17.
dele and. l. 25. r. intimate * p. 2. l. 16. r. laws and orders. l. 23: dele
and, p. 3. l. 10: r. Vid. Scheibler. p. 4. l. 1. r. know not how. l. 11. r:
unto such acts and it is. l. 15. r. inseparably. l. 34. r. particulars. p. 5 l.
17. r. qualify, l. 33 r. privileges. p. 6, l. 2. r privileges. l: 3 r. the
seal. l. 12. r. 1 Corin. 5. 7. 13l. 13. r. is formally. 20 dele and. l. 21. r.
one Sovereign. l. 31. r polit^ p. 7, l. 13. r. integrale. p 7 l34r a
Catholic p 8 l 5 r visible l 6 r terms, 18 r brethren, In the book it self p.
3. l. 7. r. terminated. p 4 l 8 r. Magistrate (...) 8 r show, p 5 l 5 r Office
being l 19 dele if. p 6l 2r (...) receptacle l 5 r naturae l6r consequent, l21r
que. p 9 l31r (...), p. 10l. 28r (...) * p 11 l35 r over. p 13l 15r is possible
l27 r polity l32 r in it, p 15l 28 r relation, p 16 l 2. r Officers, (...) 17 l
9 r confine it, p 19 l 35 r challenge, p 20 l 6 r term of, * l ^4 r formal
cause, p 21 l 2 r alleges, l 27 r theirs is, p 23 l 10 after chose, add [?] p
24 l 34 r acts p 25 l 26 r two acts, p 26 l 34 r for any, p 27 l 25. r
improbability; p 28 l 6. r plerunque, l 11 r Superstiosi l 12 r Migistrate. p
30 l 25 r theires, * p 33^4 r from Gospei, l (...) r be valid p 34 l 27 r
commanding p 35 l 11 r office-making l 29, r. conveyed. p 36 l 22 r
misrepresented l 34 r grants. p 42 l 21 26 r Spetie. p 43 l 26 r fallacious
but firm Argument, l 29. r prophesying. p 44 l 1 (...) r trifling, l 30 r Text
only proves the prophecy, l 32 r is enough l 34 r intended, p 45 l 14 r
simply l 36 r any other, p 46 l 9 r women. l 13 r syllable. l 23. r revelation.
l 25. r either. p 47 l 16 r prophecy. l 29 r weighing. p 48 l 27 r except he
interpret. l 25 r 1 Corin 145 p 49 l 22 r indifferent, p 53 l (...) dele Arg. 1
l. 10 dele arg. 2 p 56 l 7 r notion. l 8 r one Church. l 23 r conversion. p 57,
l 21 r Candid. l 25 r gracious p 58. l 1 r different from, l 32 r unnecessary,
p 59 l 28 r doctrinally, p 60 l 14 r enquireth p 67 l 7 r brethren, p 68 l 21 r
efficaciam l 25 r efficacia, l 26 r manifestato, l 33 r Iohannis, p 69 l ^ r
ex^^rnum l 8 r patres l 10 r efficatia, l 12 r separatim l* 13 r humanitus, l
14 r tramite and Augustine, l 17 r vocis l 18 r rem p 70 l 36 dele as. p 71 l
21 r alleges. l 27 r have no l 31 r choose. l 35 r naught, p 74 l 13 r
negatively l 30 r fundamentale formale. p 76 l 3 r argument. l 5 r
distributively p 77 l 13 r pro subjecta mareria, p 78 l 32. r may intimate, p
79 l 8 r which is r suffragia r particulars. l 35 r enquireth, p 80 l 9 r
dessented, p 81 l 7 r inference. p 81 l 4. 9 dele [be the act of] and add
[belong to] l 29 r know, p 82 l 14 r brethren l 15 r women. p 85 l 19 r runs
thus. l 24. r transcendenta^. l 32 r strictly, l 33 r a general. p 88 l 24 r
Officers p 90 l 25 dele by, p 94 l 13 r supposes p 96 l 31 r from the p 97 l 8
r (...). l 9 r (...). l 10 r Luke 14. 32. p 99 l 6 l 29 l 34 r conversion. p
100 l 4 r conversion. l 6 r arguments, p 104 l 21 r pre-requisite, p 106 l 2 r
labyrinth, l 6 dele to, l 32 r naught p 107 l 11 r privileges. l 1^ r help
him, l 22 r his baptism l 31 r man's ceasing* p 109 l 32. r ^entrance l 35 ^r
their. p 110. l 23 r visibly, p 111 l 35. r privileges p 113 l 17 l 30 r
organical p 116 l 7 r constitutive, p 117 l 5 r acts, p 120 l 33 r have p 128 l
13 and 19 r Sphere. l 23 r reason p 134 l 5 r woman l 12 r alleges p 135 l
25 r illatio l 30 r (...) p 141 l 14* r satisfied in ours p 144 l 9 r syllable
p 146 l 31 r Officers l 35, r serviceable p 149 l 3 r prophesying p 151 l 32. r
present tense, p 156 l 17 r Scriptures, p, 158 l 9 r from that sending p 59 l
15 r of an officer, p 160 l 26 r, should, p 169 l 5 r may privately exhort, p
170 l 11 r extraordinary p 180 l 13 dele and p 181 l 6 r Schools p 182 l 28
dele [2] p, 184 l 21 r maintenance p 186 l 26 r affirmative, p 187 l 30 r
weightier office p 191* l 10 r presentation p 191 l 27, r challenge 132 r
exercise p 193 l 17 r separate p 194 l 6 11 r tacit p 195 l 8 r acceptance l
15 r after officers add [.] p 196 l 27 add (...) p 198 l 35 r are to be p 200 l
12 r probability, p 204 l 5 dele or answerable l 22 r as officers l 31 r from
baptism p 206 l 3. ^ r approbation p 207 l 34 r his hands p 208 l 10 r not
juridically l 25 r conferred p 209 l 10 r Evangelists l 14 add, in l 16 r
relation p 210 l 4 r its Correlate, p 211 l 26 r. Romans 10. 15.

Of Preaching without Ordination.
CHAP. I.
Wherein is briefly shown, that Office has neither the work of the Ministry,
nor a Universal Church as its Correlate, in answer to the first Chapter of Dr.
Collings Book, called Vind. Revind.

IN his first Chapter to page 10. He endeavors to open the terms, Minister
and Ministry, and to show the signification of the Original words whereby the
the former is expressed, and all this to deny the name of Minister unto gifted
men.

To all which we shall say but this.

The term is a Generical term divided.

1. According to the subject matter of the Ministration, into 1. Civil. Romans
13. 4. 6. 2. Ecclesiastical. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 2. According to the manner of
Ministration into.
1. A Minister ex officio, which is past dispute. 2. A Minister ex dono.
We did not argue the denomination from Ministering in genere* but from
Ministering in the word.

We grant it is an appropriated term, and do use it according to its
appropriation, it being usual to say, There is the Minister of such a place,
speaking of one that ordinarily Preaches there, whose Preaching and
Ministering in the word, is the reason of the denomination, Preacher, Minister.

We have proved that gifted men have a Divine allowance to Preach, and that may
aptly denominate them Ministers i. e. of the Gospel, because they Minister unto
Christ therein.

But if he likes not to have them bear this name, let him call them (as the
Apostle does 1 Cor. 14.) by the name of Prophets.

In our Book we have this Position.

Posit. 1. That Office is not a relation to the work and employment of the
Ministry as its Correlate.

After some unbeseeming Language he levelleth two Arguments against this
Proposition.

Argu. 1. If the Office of the Ministry either has its whole being in Vind.
Revind. Page 12.
relation to the work, or be any other way referred to the work, then the
Office and employment according to Logic are relations.

But the Office and work of the Ministry have at least one of these references
each to another. Ergo,

Ans. Office is some way referred to employment, and so has some relation to
it; we expressly say, That Office is a relation which respects employment as
its end, Preacher sent. p. 4. and Dr. Collings repeateth these words as ours,
Vind. page 11. and therefore here he disputes against what he knows his
adversaries do not say, which he would blame us for, Vind. page 25.

If this whole Argument be granted, nothing is gained by it against the
Proposition, for his conclusion is only this, Ergo the office and employment
according to Logic are relations; whereas if it had concluded the question, it
must have been, Ergo Office is a relation to the work and employment of the
Ministry as its Correlate.

Arg. 2. The Correlate to any relation is, that wherein the subject is
termniated, Vin. Revi. But the office of the Ministry is terminated page 12. in
the work; Therefore the work is its Correlate.

Answ. 1. An illogicall argument^ in the major, the subject of the relation is
remembered, in the Minor it is forgotten, and the relation it self put in the
place thereof.

If it were in form, it must run thus; The Correlate to any relation is that
wherein the subject is terminated: But the subject of office relation is
terminated in the work. Ergo, work is the Correlate.

Answ. 2. If his major be understood universally, viz. That the correlate to
any relation is any thing wherein the subject is any way terminated, we may
fairly deny this without denying all Logic. If it be taken particularly, it
is not conclusive against us; we grant that the Correlate to any relation is
that wherein the subject is so terminated as the essence or being of the
relation is introduced by its termination; as a Father is so terminated in a
Son or Child, that he has his being as a Father in having a Son or Child, and
therefore a Son or child is Correlate, and so in other such relations. But the
Correlate to any relation is not that wherein the subject is terminated as the
end of the relation; for the ends cannot be attained until the relation it self
has an actual existence, and exist it cannot without a Correlate. As the
relation of a Father is terminated in the work of a Father as its end, yet
there must be a Son or child in being before the doing of that work; and the
same may be said of other relations, as Master and servant, Husband and wife,
etc. and thus the work of the Ministry being the end of that relation, there
must be a Correlate in being, before that work can be performed, and so work
cannot be the Correlate; If this will hold good in relations, secundum esse,
that is enough in this matter to evidence his argument to be false, for that
runs generally, the Correlate to [any relation, etc.] and besides it does
not yet appear that officers are relations secundum dici.

2. As to his Minor we say, The office of the Ministry is not terminated in the
work considered absolutely, but respectively, as the office of the Mayor of
Norwich is not terminated in the work of a Mayor or Magistracy absolutely, and
so for Justices of the peace or other civil officers, if they go out of the
city, Corporation or county whereunto they are limited, they cannot act as
officers, and therefore their office is terminated in their work in such a
place or amongst such a people. And thus the office of the Ministry is
terminated, not in the work in general, but with respect and reference unto
such a people, or such a Church, Relata sunt aliorum. Dr. Collings proceeds
in a reply to our four arguments, which shows that work cannot be the
Correlate to the Office; In answer to the two first, he says,

Ob. 1. Officers are, Relata secundum dici, not Relata secundum esse, nominal
relations, not those that Logicians call real relations, Vind. Revind. page 14.
15. 16.

Answ. We suppose Dr. Collings is the first that has ranked officers, (who are
to be over others) amongst those that are Relata secundum dici; we have not met
with any Logicians that have done in before him, and the Rules upon which our
arguments are built, are known (by all that are acquainted with Logic) to be
true in such as are Relata secundum esse.

Answ. 2. Against its being a Nominall Relation we shall offer an argument or
two.

Arg. 1. If the office of the Ministry has no absolute being, nor does
appertain to any other predicament besides that of Relation, then it is
(according to Logicians) a relation secundum esse, or a real relation. But the
Office of the Ministry has no absolute being, nor does appertain to any other
predicament besides that of Relation; Ergo, The office of the Ministry, is
(according to Logicians) a relation secundum esse. The major none that is
acquainted with Logic can deny.

The Minor appears, because there is no other predicament that it is
reducible to; let him show to which, if it may be referred.

We yet adhere to Aristotle in this, and Seton who giving an instance of
predicamental relation, gives it in the office of Magistracy, and we suppose
the office of the Ministry is in the same predicament with that.

Arg. 2. If officers qua officers have their whole being in respect and
reference unto others, then office is a Relation secundum esse, but officers
qua officers have their whole being in respect and reference unto others, Ergo,
office is a relation, secundum esse, The major he cannot deny, The Minor he
excepteth against.

Ob. But the Essence of office lies not in its relation, but in that authority
wherewith the person is clothed by his ordination, Vind. Revind. page 14.

Answ. 1. Authority has no Causal influence into office, but flows from it,
and follows after it; therefore the essence of Office does not consist in it.

The London Ministers say, Church Officers are the (...) the first recepticle,
or subject of Church authority, Jus. Divin. Regim. page 163. If so, then
officers are before authority, at least prioritate nature, and then authority
is but an adjunct, which though a necessary concequent, yet is no constituent:
consider Master and Scholars, a Tutor and pupils etc.

Ans. 2 If this were true, then it were possible for a relation to hold, though
every thing in the world should cease which it should stand referred to: There
might be a relation, and yet nothing be related to, or else ordination in such
a case must be lost.

It is not proved that a person can stand clothed with the authority of the
Ministerial relation, if there be no Church that he stands related to.

Ob. 2. Relations exist and perish together as to the same degree of being.

A man is not actually an officer when he cannot do his Office, but the habit
remains, Vind. Revind. page 14.

Ans. Zabarel whom he mentionethis against him, who says, Non est relatio nisi
interea que sunt actu, non est enim pater nisi qui actu filium habeat, quo fit
ut semper necessarium sit uno relativorum existente, alterum quoque existere.
Zab. de fac. an. cap. 3.

Consider Job, to day he has children, he is a Father, consider him to morrow,
he has no children, he is no Father when he has none; it is possible he may
afterward; shall we say therefore he is potentially, or habitually a father?
His dividing an officer into actual and potential, is as the dividing Ens, into
Ens and non Ens. His instance about the Mayor of Norwich is nothing to his
purpose; we grant that though he be sick or in prison, and so cannot execute
his Office, yet he is not only potentially but actually an officer still.

But suppose the City of Norwich should either by fire, or sword, or famine, or
any such sad providence, cease to exist, if the Mayor should be left alive, we
ask whither he could be deemed a Mayor or an Officer still when there were no
City of Norwich existing to be the correlate to him as a Relate? The like we
say in the case in hand, how can a man remain in the Office of the Ministry, if
there be no Church as a correlate for him to stand related to? Either he must
be an Officer or no Officer. If there be no Church existing that he is over,
then no Officer existeth, for they exist and perish together, as to the same
degree of being.

What he means by habit of Office, we know not. He intends not (we suppose)
the indelible character, which Bellarm. says is qualitas absoluta, as every
habit, excepting the tenth predicament. Office cannot be proved a qualitative
habit, forasmuch as it is not any thing inherent in body or mind, but something
adherent only.

And now (Christian Reader) thou may see Dr. Collings deals not kindly
with thee, in persuading that Officers are nominal relations; Is it not more
likely, that Office should be such a relation as is between a father and child,
master and servant, husband and wife, Magistrate and subject, then such a
relation as is between scibile and scientia, a thing to be known, and the
knowledge of this thing.

Object. But may not a man be in the Office of Colonel though at present he
has neither men to make up a Regiment, nor consequently the government of them?
it is his Commission makes him an Officer, Vind. Revind. page 15.

Ans. This is but a similitude and so proves nothing; and it will serve our
purpose as well as his, for his Commission does not make him an habitual
Officer, nor give him a power in actu primo, to act as a Colonel in the
government of all Regiments in the Army, but limiteth him unto one particular
Regiment, and so will speak as much against a man's being an Officer to any but
a particular Church, as it may seem to speak for the actual existence of a
relation without a correlate.

2. Here is a begging another question, viz. That Ordination does Commissionate
men to be Officers; this being denied there is no parity in the cases, and so
no strength in the objection.

We have proved that Election with acceptance does make men to be Officers,
and so the correlate, viz. the Church electing, does exist as soon as the
Officer.

3. We would know, whether a License given a man from his Prince, whereby he is
empowered to keep so many servants unto such an end, and so to govern them,
does make a man a Master, when not one servant is engaged by him or related to
him?

4. A Colonels Commission before he has a Regiment, does authorize him to
raise one, and gives him right unto a Colonels pay, and so makes him an
Officer nominal and Titular: but it is the Assignment or submission of a
Regiment unto him, that makes him an Officer real and actual.

Many Captains and Colonels retain Commissions and former Titles, when Wars are
ended, and Companies are disbanded, yet are no Officers, but as is expressed.
If he will yet contend that a Colonel as is instanced, is an officer; we say
further, In ordinary cases a Regiment is Assigned to him, and if he has none,
he can be but an extraordinary Officer, answerable to Apostles having
Commission from the General of the Army, as the Apostles had their call and
Commission immediately from Christ, not from men, Ergo there is no parity in
the cases, and so the instance is vain.

Obj. 3. To our third Argument he says, The Gospel owneth the Church as the
correlate to the Office of the Ministry, Acts 20. 17. 28. But not alone, he
says it owns the work too, Ephesians. 4. verse. 11. 12. and Ephesians. 4. is as much
Gospel as Act. 20. 17. Vind. Revind. page 16.

Answ. In the Major of our third Argument nothing is wanting, not alone or
only; for the Church alone or only is the correlate to a Church Officer:
should we say a wi^e is the correlate in wedlock, not only, but cohabitation,
etc. Or a Son not only, but Education; whatever we might be for Logicians, yet
in this our Logic would not be good, In dividing between the correlate and the
end, non dividimus componenda sed distinguenda, which upon second thoughts he
will not blame us for.

That Ephesians. 4. is Gospel, we grant, but that it owneth the work as the
correlate, we deny. It owneth the work of the Ministry as one end of
Office-gifts, not as the correlate to the Office of the Ministry.

It is said he gave some to be Apostles etc. and if it be enquired for what
end? the answer is [for the work of the Ministry.]

Obj. 4. To our fourth Argument he says, It is a feeble Argument Vind. Revind.
page 17. 18.
which is drawn from names and titles.

If we say that [all] their titles have the Church only as their correlate, he
desires to know whether (...) and (...) have so, 1 Timothy 27. etc.

He says every rational creature, yea God himself is the correlate; and
therefore they are called the Ministers of God, etc. He desires us to show one
Scripture where a Preaching Minister is called the Minister of the Church; he
adds that we speak no Scripture phrase, when we call Ministers (i. e.
preaching Ministers) Ministers of such a Church, etc.

Answ. 1 An Argument from Names and Titles surely is as feeble when our
brethr^n use it, as when we use it against them: does not D. Collings argue
from the name of Officers to their acts, and particularly from the title of
Teacher, Vin. page 34. yea in this very book, Vind. Revind. page 89. lin. 1, 2,
3, 4. 5. Also to prove the Office of the Ministry of divine institution, the
London Ministers argue expressly from their Names and Titles, Jus. Divin.
Minst. page 8. 9.

2 So far as Nomen is notamen rei, so far definitio nominis is definitio rei;
Consider Father in a natural sense, and the definition of the Name is the
definition of the thing. The names of Pastor, Teacher, Elder, etc. Notify the
relation, and so are forcibly Argumentative for a Churches being the Correlate.

3. The intendment of some names and titles is not to express what is the
Correlate, but some thing else about a relation: as Officers may be called
Ministers of God and Christ, only to intimate who is the Author and institutor
of their office. Ministers of the Word, to intimate what is the subject of
their preaching, Cryers or preachers (as in the Texts he mentions, 1 Timothy 2.
7. Romans 10. 14. where (...) and (...) are used) to signify their declaring or
publishing their message as Cryers or Heralds use to do. Some names and titles
are not intended for the discovering what is the Correlate to the Office of the
Ministry, but for other ends; and therefore our Argument is firm, though all
titles have not the Church only as their Correlate.

4. We judge his first answer which he calls most proper to this Question, To
whom are they Officers? most improper, For it is this, to Jesus Christ.

Should a King pass through a street, and it be enquired what or whose King
goes there, and one should answer Christ's King, he should give a very improper
answer, and leave the enquirer in the dark; but he that informs that he is
the King of France etc. leads into light. So for a Mayor, its improper to
say, there goes the Protectors Mayor, but there goes the Mayor of Norwich, is
proper.

5. Whereas he says, (p. 18.) every creature is the Correlate to office as
well as the Church.

1. If so, then the Elders of the Church are the Elders of the World; Angels of
the Churches, Angels of the World; then Pastors and Teachers set in the Church
are set in the World too; but where did he ever read of Elders of the world?
etc.

2 We would know what is the foundation of the relation between a pastor and
the world: is it founded in nature, as that of Parent and children, or in Will
or consent, as that of Husband and wife, Master and Servant, or in some third
thing?

3. Then its more proper to call Officers World-Officers then Church Officers;
as to call the Protector, Protector of England rather then of London, because
of the extent of authority and office-power. Nor is that reason in the least
cogent, viz. Officers are appointed to gather out of the World, members unto
Christ.

Suppose an Ambassador from England be in France dispatching business for his
master there, he is not thereby related unto France.

So an Ambassador for Christ in the world, is not related unto the world as his
Correlate, but only to the flock he is ever in the Lord.

He says moreover, That God is the Correlate, that God is the Author and
institutor thereof we acknowledge, upon which account there arises a
Metaphysical respect between Officers and God, and they are the Ministers of
God: but as the Correlate of a King is a subject, and only that in
predicamental relation; he who is to be governed, Ruled, and not God: So the
correlate of a Church Officer, is the Church, and only that which is to be
watched over, prayed for, instructed by virtue of a special bond in which the
Officer is engaged unto it. The duty of a relation terminates upon the
correlate; God were to be governed, if he were the Correlate of a Governor.

6. Preaching Ministers are expressly called Elders of the Church, Acts. 20.
v. 17. He sent to Ephesus and called the Elders of the Church. And this is as
much as to say, The Minister of the Church, if not more; for Elder is the name
of Office. They are called by that Church whereunto they are related, Revel. 2.
v. 1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus -- v. 8. Unto the Angel of the
church in Smyrna, so v. 12. 18. and this is as much as to say, the Ministers of
such a church; for what is it to be the angel of such a Church, but to be the
Minister thereof? And whereas he beseeches us not to endeavor to abuse simple
Souls with such woeful falacies, -- Vind. Revind page 19. Now let the Reader
judge who has gone about to abuse him most, Dr. Collings or we. Whereas he
says this is no Scripture phrase to call preaching Ministers, Ministers of
such a Church.

Our second position is this.

Posit. That Officers stand in relation as Officers to a particular Church
only, not to an universal Church. Dr. Collings insi^^eth upon an explication
of the word Church, and some other premises from page 19. to page 27. or 29. to
which we shall not give any further reply at present then he meets within the
answer to his Epistle.

Ob. 1. In his reply to our first Argument, He complains of fowl disputing,
because we take away the subject or suppositum of the question.

Answ. When the question was, whether the Pope were the supreme Officer of the
Universal visible Church, Learned Protestants denied the being of the Universal
visible Church; disputing fully against the adversary, not fowlly as he says.

Ob. 2. He tells us (Vind. Revind. page 29.) what we say may be granted, and yet
nothing is proved by it.

Answ. This we confess, we understand not how it was possible that the subject
or the suppositum of a question can be taken away, so as nothing should be
proved if the whole be granted, we desire to know of him by the next.

But what is his reason?

If the Gospel knows a Church Universal under any notion, though not under a
Political form, it is enough, Vind. Revind. p. 29.

Ans. No Organ is related but to a body Organical; hands and feet, arms and
legs as so, are not related to flesh and blood as so, but as so formed. Rulers
are not related unto men as so, but as formed in societies, and reduced under
policy and Government; as he refers us to Mr. Hudson, so we may refer him to
Mr. Hooker, Mr Stone, and to our own Epistle.

Our second Argument he puts into a form of his own, under a pretense to
mend some faults it it, and is not satisfied with that form which himself put
it into, but then puts it into an other, and thus finds himself work.
Surely this is not fair dealing, he might have shown us the faults of our
argument, and lest it to us to mend them, and not cast them into his own form,
and then spend time in answering them; we shall only say this in way of answer.

Answ. 1. As he has formed the Argument, the Office of the Ministry is made
the correlate, whereas we assert the Church to be the correlate; let the Reader
now judge whether he does not wrong himself and us, by this way of proceeding.

2. Our Argument proceeded upon those Relative names and Titles which the
Scripture expresses Officers by, and which they cannot lose without losing
their Office, and which are used upon the most special occasions, and these
Titles forbid a Universal Church to be the correlate unto Office as is shown,
Preacher sent. page 10. 11. etc. As to Acts 20. 28. It concludes that an
Officer is commanded to feed [all] the flock that he stands in the relation
of a Bishop or Overseer to, and so denies a Universal Church to be that flock
which he is an Officer or Overseer to; for he is not commanded to feed [all]
the Universal Church. And this shows that the terms Pastor and Teacher, when
used to express Office, are taken in a strict sense to denote only a relation
to a particular Church; for, Bishops, Pastors and Teachers are the same
officers, under different names:

3. If we were convinced that there were such a Universal visible Church made
up of all particulars, we should then grant that the Office of the Ministry as
it resides in every particular Minister, had that Church of Churches for its
correlate, as much as the Office of a Justice of peace (which he instanceth in)
as it resides in the whole number of Justices has the whole nation as a
correlate; but still we should think that every particular Minister were
limited in his Office to a particular Church, as a Justice is to a particular
County; Dr. Collings uses three Arguments to prove that the Office of the
Ministry relates not only to the particular Church, but to the Catholic
Church, viz. that they may do acts of Office and Authority beyond the bounds of
that particular Church over which they are more especially set.

Argu. 1. Those whom God has given for the edifying of the body of Vind.
Revind. page 33.
Christ, are related to the Universal Church. But God has given Pastors and
Teachers for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12. 13.

Ans. 1. This Argument from, Ephesians. 4. v. 12. 13. for the substance of it, is
answered, Preacher sent p. 295.

2. This Argument does not conclude the question, if such a Universal Church
could be proved, we might grant them to be some way related to it, yet not as
Officers. His Argument, if it were to the purpose, should conclude not only
that Pastors and Teachers are related to the Universal Church, but 1. As
Officers. 2. As to their correlate; whereas if a Universal Church were the body
of Christ there intended, the place alleged, Ephesians. 4. does only specify that
the edifying of that body is one end of giving Pastors and Teachers, and a
correlate must be existing before the end of the relatoin can be attained, and
so that body may not be the correlate to Pastors and Teachers.

In his following this Argument there is an altering of the phrase, from the
Universal visible Church or body, about which the question is, unto the
mystical body of Christ.

If we grant that Pastors and Teachers are related to the mystical body of
Christ which is made up only of the Elect, yet we may deny them to be related
to it as Offices, or that to be the correlate to their Office: They may be
given for the edifying of that body, although they have no work appointed them
by Jesus Christ to do, but only in a particular Church; that body is edified
if any member of it be edified.

Argu. 2. Those whom God has commissionated to Preach and Baptize Vind. Revin.
Page 34.
all Nations, are not related only to a particular Church, but to the
Catholic Church, yea to the whole world.

But God has commissionated his Ministers to go Preach and Baptize all
Nations, Ergo,

Ans. 1. His major may fairly be denied if it speaks to the question as
stated by himself, Vind. Revind. page 33.

We say, those whom God has commissionated to Preach to and Baptize all
Nations, are so related to particular Churches, as that they may not do acts
(materially and formally) of Office and Authority, beyond the bounds of the
particular Churches they are over. As the whole number of Justices of Peace in
this Nation are commissionated to perform the acts of Justices in all Counties
and shires in England, yet the office of a Justice of Peace, as it resides in
this or that particular person (as himself observes, Vind. Revind. page 31.
32.) is limited by his Commission to such a County, and he cannot act as a
Justice beyond the bounds of that County of shire. So the whole number of
Church Officers may be commissionated to perform acts of Office in all Nations,
yet the Office as it resides in this or that particular person is limited to a
particular Church, so as none may do acts of Office beyond the bounds of that
particular Church which the person is over.

2. To his minor we say, The commission (Mat. 28. 19.) was not only for the
Apostles in the substance, but in the Universality it was for them only.

Apostles as such were extraordinary Officers, and had no successors. Were this
Commission ours in the Universality, we see not how we could fix with a good
conscience. As warrantably might a man confine his ministry to a family when
appointed to a Church, as confined to a church when appointed for all the world.

Our granting that the commission reaches Officers now in the substance of it,
is enough to evidence how far we are from shaking hands with Socinus, Smalcius,
etc. though we deny their Office to have the same extent that the Apostles had.

Argu. 3. His third Argument is drawn ab absurdo. Vind. Revind. p. 35. There
are five absurdities which he lays at our door, against which we have
sufficiently justified our selves in the body of our discourse; out of the womb
of two principles he mid-wives forth these.

Pr. 1. That the Authority of him who Preaches, is that which makes the action
of the hearer duty.

Pr. 2. That an act of Office cannot be done by him who is no Officer. Vind.
Revind. page 35.

Ans. The latter of these is fully spoken to, Preacher sent. page 278. 279. 280.

And in the same book we have largely proved this principle, That many gifted
men (who are not in Office) have Authority or a command and warrant from Christ
to Preach. From which joined with

Dr. Collings first principle aforementioned, it will appear that the
absurdities Vind. Revin. Page 36.
he talks of, are pitiful non sequiturs. For, hence it follows,

1. That where there are no particular Churches formed, yet the people are
bound to come to hear; because many gifted men (not in office) have authority
to preach, and it is the authority of the speaker (says he) that makes the
action of the hearer duty; and this takes off his first absurdity.

2. That in England where there is neither Church nor officer, yet they may
wait upon that public means which is a special appointment of Christ to save
their souls; for gifted men (not in office) have authority to preach; and so
his second absurdity comes to nothing.

3 That where a particular Church is formed, when their Officer preaches not
on the Lords day, yet the members are bound to hear, though gifted men (not in
office) preach, for they have authority from Christ to do it.

4 That persons not of that Ministers Church who Preaches, may go in faith;
for he has authority as a gifted man to preach unto those that are not members
of his Church; and so his fourth absurdity is taken away.

His fifth, Concerning giving the Sacrament to one that is not a member of his
Church, we have spoken sufficiently to elsewhere. And here let us expostulate a
little, can Dr. Collings see a mote, and can he not behold a Beam? does he
strain a t a Gnat and swallow a camel? Are there not greater absurdities in his
way?

1 Is it not an absurdity to engage a man by office to preach, when none are
engaged to hear? suppose ordination make an officer, sinetitulo (which may be
in Dr. Collings judgment) a Pastor, Teacher or overseer, to whose charge no
man or company of men is committed, to whom none are bound. Where ever this
pretended officer Preaches upon the Lords day, the people may leave him and
go to other Ministers (especially if ordained also) whom they prefer before
him, who yet is bound to preach, and none to hear.

2 Is it not an absurdity solemnly to set a man apart to the work of the
Ministry, wherein nevertheless he shall not be engaged to work, but turning
aside to a School, Physic, etc. may say to them that ask why he stands idle
as to preaching work, no man has hired me?

3 To make an Officer to every rational creature, when no creature can
rationally say, this is my Minister, nor he say, this is my people; As if a
Justice should marry a man to woman kind, and leave him to act as an husband
where he could find a woman that would entertain him.

4 To determine a relate and relation actual, and the Correlate potential only.

He excepteth against our description of office, pretending that two Rules are
offended by it.

Ob. 1. The former rule he supposes to be broken, by our bringing a particular
Church into it, and our leaving Ordination out, Vind. Revind. page 38.

Answ. In our former book, and also in this, we have proved, that a particular
Church is the Correlate to Office, and that Ordination is not of the Essence,
but only an Adjunct of Office; and what Logic teaches to leave the Correlate
out, or to put an adjunct into the description of a relation?

Ob. 2 His second rule supposed to be offended, is mentioned, Vind. Revind.
page 38.

Answ. In his explaning himself he does not only oppose us, but a multitude
of ancient and modern Popish and Protestant divines, yea Scripture and reason;
That a man should be set apart for the work, though at present he has no
place; be put into office when there is not a man in the world whom he can
challinge by virtue of office to submit to him. It is not only rational and
prudential for a man to stay his coronation till he have his Kingdom, but
orderly and just; but when a man will cause himself to be crowned, and cannot
tell whether ever his kingdom will come, it is a disorder, nor is he a King,
though crowned. The term is of the relation as laid down by us, he does deny,
which we yet assert, and let the Reader judge between us.

The causes of the relation we declared viz. principal, God, instrumental, the
Church or flock.

His answer is the efficient cause we allow to be the Lord and the Church, but
not the flock.

Answ. 1. We desire to know what difference there is between Church and flock,
or how they can be distinguished, Acts 20. 28. Take heed to all the flock, to
feed the Church of God, etc. In the very same verse Church and flock are used
Synonymously.

2. What one Scripture does call officers the church in the necessary sense
thereof? See Park. de Polit. Eccles. l. 3. cap. 15. upon this question; An soli
Sacerdotes sint Ecclesia? which he answers in the negative, saying, no place
in the scriptures or Fathers can be found, where it is said, officers by
themselves considered are the Church. The former cause he asserts to be
Mission; of which in the special controversy thereabout; He finds fault with
our Logic (Vind. Revind. page 39.) in arguing from the less to the greater
Affirmatively.

We wonder Dr. Collings should trouble the Reader with such objections that are
fully answered in the very book he is replying to. In what sense we argue from
the less to the greater, and how far we are from arguing from ability to do
the lesser, to ability to do the greater, and how full the scripture is, (as
Mat. 6. 26. 30.) of such Logic as we use, he may see, Preacher Sent. page 224.
225. 226. having blamed us for arguing aminori ad majus Affirmative; To prove
preaching for trials sake he alleges, 1 Timothy 3. 10. and (says he Vind.
Revind. page 40.) we may argue, a minori ad majus negative, If the lowest
Officer of the Church must be first proved, then much more the higher officer,
I mean ordinary officers, etc. We deny not that Officers are to be proved, but
we wonder Dr. Collings is not ashamed to accuse others causelessly for using
false Logic, when in the very next page, himself does so grossly mistake. He
pretends to argue from the lesser to the greater negatively, and yet there is
never a note of negation in his argument. If the lowest Officer must, -- then
much more the higher-Surely no man will reckon this a negative proposition.

CHAP. II.
Wherein a brief answer is given to the exceptions against our two first
arguments for the preaching of gifted persons without ordination.

DR. Collings in his second Chapter chiefly tells us what he understands by
authoritative preaching. He says the authority of the preacher, 1. Obliges
him to preach, 2. Obliges people to hear.

Our arguments for the preaching of gifted men being built upon a command of
Christ, a Gospel promise, etc. will evidence that they are obliged to preach,
and that souls sin in neglecting to hear them, and that there is an
authoritative preaching in that sencewhereas (page 45.) he opposes it to
precarious preaching, in which the preacher may beg, but cannot command either
auditory, or attention.

We answer, His colonel which he mentions (Vin. page 15.) may beat his drum
and none are bound to follow him; So that a Colonel is no officer, or this
instance shows it to be no sin not to hear an ordained man, as well as not to
hear a gifted brother.

We would know whether a man who has submitted to the Ordination which Dr.
Collings pleads for, can command either Auditory or attention when none have
desired him to Preach to them, or no particular Church has by Election made
him their Minister? or, whether the Minister of one Church, can command another
Church to be his Auditory, and to give attention to him without or against the
consent of the Pastor thereof?

If he will say, he cannot in such cases command Auditory or attention, then it
follows that it is not Authoritative Preaching out of a man's own
Congregation, or to any but those that call him; and so it is Preaching ex
dono, not ex officio to others, and then it is election or the desire of the
people, and not Ordination that makes it Authoritative Preaching in that
sense; for a man is ordained and yet is not obliged to preach to any, nor any
people obliged to hear him. If they be under a general obligation to Preach
when opportunity or a call is offered, so are gifted men.

If he will say they can command it, let him prove it, and whom they may
require to hear, when Churches are full of Pastors. We urged diverse Arguments
for the Preaching of some men without Ordination.

Argu. 1. From the Antecedaneousness of Election to Ordination, Preacher Sent.
p. 29.

Obj. Dr. Collings knows no need of any Preaching in order to election, but
only twice or thrice to try a man's utterance, and denies the election of a
particular Church as necessary to precede Ordination, etc. Vind. Revind. page
45. 46.

Answ. A trial what gifts a man has for Scripture interpretation, and of the
sutableness of a man's gifts to such a people, etc. makes ordinary Preaching
necessary in order to election, as well as the trial of utterance.

2. Election did precede Ordination, Act. 6. verse. 5. they chose Stephen, verse.
6. And when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. Dr. Collings asks
whether we think that the election there was by the whole multitude?

We answer yes, for it is expressly said* v. 5 the saying pleased [the whole
multitude] and [they] chose Stephen, etc. [they] who chose the Text answers
the whole multitude. Their being divided because some widows were neglected in
the daily ministration, did not hinder their agreeing together in the choosing
of Deacons, which was propounded as a means purposely for the healing of those
divisions, neither does the number (if it were so great) forbid it, for more
have met.

We expected his attempting to give some Text to prove Ordination antecedent to
or without Election, but he waveth that altogether.

Argu. 2. From Gospel commands, 1 Pet. 4 ver. 10. 11. Hebr. 10. 25. Preach.
sent. p. 32.

Obj. Dr. Collings his chief exceptions against this are. 1. If any one, who
has ability, may dispense the the gift, then gifted brethren may administer
baptism and the Lords Supper too by virtue of this Text. Vind. p. 50. 2. The
context speaks of the good things of this world, page 50. 3. If the ability
to Preach be the gift only meant, he that never had the Oracles of God
committed to him, cannot speak them as the Oracles of God; And however this was
when the Church was in a scattered state, page 51.

4. He inclines to take it in the latitude, for any communicable gift, but it
must be ministered in a due way and order, and upon a regular C^l^, Vind.
Revind. page 55.

Ans. 1. We do not limit it to the gift of Preaching, but say, that is one
special gift intended, 1 Pet. 4. v. 11. If any man speak, etc. and so it cannot
be restained to this worlds goods.

And the foregoing and following exhortations being left in general amongst the
Saints, and a note of universality being used here, v. 10. [as every man etc.]
hence the generality of those that have grace and the gift of Scripture
interpretation are commanded to Mister that gift; and hence gift cannot be
restrained to Office, seeing many are so gifted who are no Officers.

And the gift of Preaching being a public gift (i. e. such as fitteth for, and
is mostly laid out in a public way) hence it is very probable that an use of
it in public Assemblies is that which the Apostle drives at, especially
seeing other Texts do warrant gifted men in such public actings, as Hebr. 10.
25. Act. 18 26. 28.

2. Neither may every one that is gifted administer Baptism and the Supper, by
virtue of this Text. For,

1. The gift of Preaching is particularized, 1 Pet. 4. 11. the administration
of Sacraments not so.

2. Some Preaching is an act of mere charity, no ministering of Seals is so.
Every friend of the bridegroom according to his ability may serve the
Bridegroom in acts of charity, but none can serve him in those rites wherein
mutual engagement is Sealed, but one appointed especially thereunto.

3. Dr. Collings is at liberty to Preach many Sermons without the knowledge or
express consent of his eldership, but not to suspend one member from the
Supper, or admit one thereto; there is then some difference between the
dispensation of the word, and the administration of Sacraments.

4. Baptism and the Lords S^pperare act so purely of institution, that they
would never have been duties, nor could have been known to be so, without
Scripture Light; and so are not to be dispensed by any (though gifted) without
an allowance thereunto by the institution, which is the only determining rule
about the Adminstrator and Administration.

But as prayer is a natural duty, though commanded over in the Gospel, and many
rules laid down to regulate and direct in the performance of it; So Preaching
in it self, is an act of natural worship, if there had been no Scripture rules
laid down about it, yet man by natures light might have learned it to be a duty
to publish the will God his Creator unto others according to ability and
opportunity, and therefore the Law of nature does firstly lay gifted men under
obligations to Preach, and this is seconded by Gospel rules, as in the Text
alleged.

3. It is nothing to his purpose, if gift be understood of Alms or Office,
unless it be exclusive, and that it cannot be limited to them only, we proved
in our former book, and he inclines to take it for any communicable gift
(Vind. Revind. page 55.) and so he cannot restrain it unto Alms or Office.

But if his Arguments did prove it very probable that by gift is meant Office
(which they do not) they were equally strong to prove that Alms are not the
gift chiefly intended. It might then be said, the gift is to be administered as
Stewards, and to acts of Office are instanced in ver 11. and therefore it is
meant only of Office, not of Alms, which many men out of Office may give; and
when some of his Arguments will serve as answers unto others, or when he is
found answering himself, let the Reader judge, whether that childishness which
he mentioned (Vind. Revind. p. 49.) be to be found in our replies, or in his
Arguments?

4. The Church was not in such a scattered state, but that it had Officers in
it, for its said, 1 Pet. 5. 1. The Elders which are [among you] I exhort, etc.
If gifted men may Preach in Churches that have Elders in them, much more may
they do it elsewhere.

5. The main stress is upon the Call.

Quest. What gives a Call to Preach?

Ans. 1. That which makes an habitual Prophet, Preacher, etc. (although we
allow not actual and habitual in relations, yet otherwise we allow it)
justifies the actual, except the hearers be incapacitated as to that
privilege. If men be Prophets in the collation of grace, and a gift through
the use of means, who will forbid them prophecy? but rather wish as Moses, Number.
11. 29.

2. Christ's command concerning a work, is man's Call to do it, as in hearing,
praying, fasting, etc. Dr. Collings does suppose in some time the bare command
of Christ may make an Officer, Vind. Revind. page 63. We suppose at all times a
preacher*

The commanding every man that has preaching gifts and graces to minister with
them, does determine that the Oracles of God are committed to them, and that it
is Gods way and order that they should be exercised in the work of preaching.

As to what he says, page 52. 53. we answer, the command of Christ being a
Call, it warrants their preaching on the Sabbath or Lords day, as well as at
other times; and whether gifted persons preaching be a public Ordinance for
saving of souls, let the Reader judge by our Arguments.

It was allowed of and desired by the Reformers of Scotland; for, in their
Petition to the Queen they did ask. 1. That they might have prayers publicly
in their vulgar Tongue. 2. That if any hard place of Scripture were read in
their meetings, it might be lawful to any qualified persons in knowledge, being
present, to interpret and open, etc. Hist. of Reform. of Scot. page 128. which
practice was of use in the Jewish Congregations Grot. in Mat. 4. 23.

The instance of a Magistrate is not parallel. 1. Gifts make not powers. 2. This
instance will destroy private preachers, none may do the Act of a Magistrate
privately, but a Magistrate. That the Administration of public Ordinances is
peculiar to public Officers; and that those who have public gifts and
employments are merely private persons, let him prove; will he deny Synodical
determinations to be adminstrations of public Ordinances? it is certain that
those who were no Officers, even the multitude did publicly act in that Synod,
Act. 15. see verse. 12. 22. 23. Surely no judicious Reader will think that there
is weight in these exceptions. As to Heb. 10. v. 25. who can question its being
a warrant for ordinary Church Assemblies? was it not a Church or Churches that
the Epistle is written to? will he deny Church Assemblies to be public
meetings? is not exhortation the work enjoined in them? are Officers only put
upon this work? what syllable of proof is there in the Text for any such
assertion? where do we allege this place for private meetings?

It is asserted by some, that by gift probably is meant Office; after showing
the improbillity of it diverse waves, we add these words (Preach. sent. p. 59.)

[The Apostle speaks indefinitely [a gift] and an indefinite proposition is
equipollent usually to an Universal, and so it may be extended to all gifts in
general, and therefore cannot without some special reason be restrained to one
particular gift, viz. Office.]

Dr. Collings seems to be much disturbed at this, he brings it up, Vind
Revind. page 55 and 87. and after misplacing [usually] and adding [most] he
cries out, it is no Logic.

Let him again look into Keckerman. Syst. Log. l. 2. c. (...). who says, A
Universal proposition, is either definite or indefinite.

Indefinitae est quae habet subjectum universale sine nota; and he gives this
Canon about^.

Est and indefinitarum usus ad significandum quod praedicatum subjecto insit,
non quidem semper, sed plermunque. Seu ut graeci loquuntur (...) ut matres sunt
indulgentes ^imium liberis: cretenses sunt mendaces. Interdum significatur non
maxim^ quidem ex part, sed multis tamen convenire praedicatum ut Heroum filij
noxae: Hispani superstitio and insolentes, etc.

We did not say, that an indefinite proposition is [alwayes] equipollent to a
Universal, but [usually;] and whether Keckermans [plerunque and (...)] do
amount to as much as [usually] let the Reader judge. Is not the Scripture full
of such Logic? 1 Timothy 3. 2. A Bishop must be blameless. i. e. every Bishop, 1
Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself. i. e. every man who partaketh of the
Supper.

If the rule holds only in materia necessaria, that is enough to prove that
it is frequently [usually] or often of such a general importance, and so gift
cannot (without special reason) be limited here to one gift, viz. Office.

CHAP. III.
Containing a brief answer to the exceptions against our arguments for gifted
persons preaching, from a promise, and the examples of Apollo and the scattered
Saints, and the prophecy mentioned, 1 Corin. 14.

WE urge other arguments for the preaching of of men without ordination.

Arg. 3 From a Gospel promise; Mat. 25. 29. For unto every one that has shall
be given, etc. Preacher Sent. page 62.

Ob. Dr. Collings would infer that then men not commissionated for the
Magistracy, nor ordained to the Ministry (having a talent or ability) may
execute Justice and administer Sacraments, Vind. Revind. p. 57.

Answ. 1. Talents or gifts may be considered as accidentia absoluta or
relativa. Absolute accidents alter not the state of the subject; relative make
a superior and inferior.

Aptitude to govern is an absolute accident, and makes not a Migistrate.

2. Talents or gifts which are absolute accidents are to be improved according
to the nature of such talents or gifts; he that is apt to govern may help in
government by council and advice, without pretense of power over those whom he
does direct. A skillful seaman may direct the Pilate, not stepping into his
place; we must distinguish, Ministerium circa Ecclesiam quae jam in corpus
collecta est and manet, a ministerio circa illos qui colligendi caritativa
admonitione sivelint, as Voctius tells Jansenius, Desp. Cause. Pap. l. 2. Sect.
1. Cap. 10.

3. A particular exception is enough to limit any general rule; Some Laws of
England run in general terms, yet by some particular proviso; the Universities
or some Corporations are exempted from obedience to them; all others (not
excepted) will be liable to the penalty, if they transgress the Law. So if a
King promises a reward to every subject that shall do some notable service,
except those of some particular Corporation, it is plain that all (not
excepted) have allowance to do the work, and thereupon may expect the reward.
Now the promise, Mat. 25. 29. running in general terms, hence every man (not
excepted) is to use his talents. If by a particular exception the
administration of sacraments be limited unto office yet this does not deny a
liberty to use other talents, and to expect the benefit of this promise in the
use of them, seeing it is said, [unto every one that has, shall be given.] He
grants that men may preach diverse times as probationers, when they are no
officers, but may not do the work of a Magistrate, or administer Sacraments
without those offices. Ergo, the exercise of preaching gifts is more separable
from office then the other.

We fully answered this objection, Preacher Sent. page 39. 40. 162. and
therefore let not the Reader expect any further answer from us, though Dr.
Collings often calls this in to help him.

Arg. 4. Our fourth argument is taken from Gospel presidents or examples, Act.
13. 25. etc. Apollo preached publicly, yet was not ordained, and the scattered
Saints, Act. 8. Dr. Collings may see (Preacher Sent. p. 66.) that we intend not
Gospel presidents by an extraordinary call; and therefore what ^he says (Vind.
Revind. page 57. 58.) about Apostleship, the holy Kiss, etc. is but to raise a
mist before the Eyes of the Reader.

Ob. In these instances there is not a parity.

1. In the species of their gifts, there might be office or extraordinary
gifts; Apollo is ranked with Paul and Peter, 1 Cor. 1. 12. called a Minister, 1
Cor. 3. 5. and was mighty in the Scriptures; It is plain he preached only in
order to office, p. 59. The scattered Christians were of the 8000. who were
filled with extraordinary gifts. Acts 4. 31. page 60.

2. In the Acts nothing found to evidence that they, Acts 8. did preach in
public assemblies, p. 6.

3. In the state of the Church, it was an infant state, and a persecuted state,
they might be under a necessity o^ precept, those extraordinary gifts might be
attended with a praeceptive impression, Acts 4. 31. there was necessitas medij,
there was no other ordinary means of Salvation for these people, Vind. Revind.
p. 61. 62.

Ans. 1. Apollo's gifts were not of an other species; Adam and Abel, not two
species of men, though Adam by creation, Abel by generation: nor the habits in
Adam a diverse species from them in Abel, because they infused these acquired.
If Apollo's gifts had been infused (which yet is not granted) this would not
prove them of a diverse species; but his being mighty in the Scriptures, makes
it probable that he received them in an ordinary way, as now a days, viz. by
the Scriptures and not otherwise, as the Doctor argues.

He wrongeth himself and us, in affirming (page 59.) that we say nothing to
this; but let those who say it prove it, the contrary may be seen: Preacher
Sent. p. 71. 72. 73. yet it being an endless work to answer the groundless
^urmises of men, we had reason to desire proof.

But Apollo knew only the baptism of John, Acts 18. 25. Ergo, Apollo neither
had extraordinary gifts, nor did preach in order to office or ordination; for
without knowing more then the baptism of John, he could not know these which
belong to the baptism of Christ, Mat. 3. 11. He (i. e. Jesus Christ) shall
baptize you with the holy Ghost. And that he should preach as a Probationer to
a woman, Priscilla, and that at Ephesus, in order to Office at Corinth, how
unlikely is it? As to the Scattered Christians; If all mentioned, Acts. 4. 31.
had extraordinary preaching gifts, and were 8000. in number, (which yet we do
not grant) then the Gospel knows occasional preachers; for, so many could not
have opportunity for constant preaching in that Church, neither can it be
proved that they did it elsewhere before the scattering. Also then he must say
that here was a whole Church of Preachers, which is more strange then that, in
these days there should be in Churches some gifted men, (besides Officers) who
may Preach.

Some think that the speaking the word with boldness, mentioned, v. 31. has
reference to the Apostles as an answer of that prayer for them, v. 29. 30. but
we say it cannot be proved that they were the extraordinary gifts of the holy
Ghost that they are there said to be filled with, and so the objection
vanishes.

2 As for parity of Acts, Apollo preached publicly in the Synogogue, and
Christians heard him, Acts 18. 26. and this he did not with the allowance of
the Jewish Church only, but of Christ. And if afterward he were an officer
(which we know not but he might, though upon his proofs we do not conclude it)
yet now he was none.

The scattered Christians went every where preaching, Acts 8. 4. and therefore
they acted publicly, as well as privately.

He must assert an order of private preachers, who may go every where,
preaching in private houses, but may not do it in public, or else this
exception (Vind. Revind. p. 61.) is vain.

3. As to the state of the Church, as it was an infant state, so Christ
provided extraordinary Officers, as Apostles, and gave extraordinary gifts, for
the nursing of it up in infancy; but (as we have proved) Apollo had no such
gifts, and the Dr. says (p. 59.) its plain that he preached only [in order to
Office] by which he plainly grants, that for the present he was no Officer at
all of a Gospel Church. And let it be proved that any others had an allowance
in that infant state, to act in Gospel-administrations (which were at other
times peculiar to office) as Apollo had; if preaching were so, all presidents
or examples recorded in the New Testament refer to that infant state of the
Church; and therefore no argument; for Gospel presidents could be veiled, if
the infancy of the Church could hinder it, because that may be alleged
against all, and that some presidents have the force of a rule, himself
grants, Vind. Revind. page 58. and others Jus Dinin. Min. page 160. 161. as
for those Acts 8. there being in a persecuted state will not make such a case
of necessity as he speaks of; for it does not appear that all these scattered
Saints which preached had such extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost; and
however such extraordinary preaching gifts are to be used in the most tranquil
and settled state of the Church, though many Ministers ordained be present, and
therefore persecution (about which we are now speaking) could not put them
under any such preceptive impression as might render their preaching lawful
now, which in a settled state of the Church would be unlawful.

And upon this supposition that it was the will of God his Gospel should at
that time be made known to those people, no such necessity as he talks of
will be evinced from it.

If Churches had lost their Officers by persecution, there were a greater
color for such a plea, but here the case was otherways, for the Apostles (who
were Officers) were not scattered, neither was it the persecuted Church that
was preached to, but others. How men's being persecuted from their habitations
can render their preaching Lawful, which otherwise were not, or lay them under
either a natural or moral necessity to preach in their travels, beyond what
they should have, if their occasions did lead them to the same places without
persecution, we understand not.

And the Apostles (who were by Christ's appointment to preach, not only in the
Regions of Judea and Samaria (where this scattering was, Acts 8. 1.) but in all
Nations, Mat. 28. 19.) were neither scattered, nor necessitated (that it
appears) to stay where they were, by the persecution; and therefore there was
other means of salvation for those people, though these scattered Saints had
not preached, when the Lord had Officers of his own near, viz. Apostles, yet he
would honor gifted persons in the work of preaching, and this shows that
neither his necessitas praecepti, nor necessitas medii can weaken the force of
this argument.

We are at as great a loss to find any ordination of an ordinary officer
without a precedent Election by a particular Church, as he is to find it before
the ordination of Paul, Barnabas and Timothy, who were extraordinarily or
immediately called to Office, and so needed not such Election.

Ob. And whereas he says, that in such cases of necessity they may be said to
preach by extraordinary authority, which the word of the Lord has given them,
which may be called a Mission, and they may be officers as to that time and
state, yet it will not follow, but in another state of the Church, Ordination
is essential to an ordinary Minister, Vind. Revind. page 63. 64.

Answ. Here he has found out a Mission by the word which is not by the Church
commanded, Electing or Ordaining; and so either his objection, or else his
Argument (page 112.) or both, must needs be naught, and he be guilty of self*
contradiction; let his words be compared.

Those who preach in such casesof necessity, where people can have no ordained
Ministers to hear, may be said to preachby an extraordinary authority, which
the word of That Gods revealed will in his word is called sending (as his word
is now written) is of the Lord has in such cases given them, which may be
called a mission, Vind. Revind. page 63. not proved nor can be proved. Vi.
Revind. page 112.

He asserteth page 63 a mission by the word, and denies (page 112.) that any
such mission can be proved. His officer in case of necessity has no mission
either mediately ^or immediately by any of the ways he mentions, Ergo, not
at all; thus might we urge his argument against himself.

2. He has given no proof for his extraordinary Office, making mission in such
cases of necessity; and where nothing is proved, nothing need be answered.

3. If there were such extraordinary Officers by necessity; then

1. They must be greater then ordained ones; for extraordinary Officers are
greater then ordinary.

2. They are not to be ordained afterward, though the Church comes into an
other state; or else Ordination is not the constituting office-making act; for
(says he) they were officers before.

3. They must be either Apostles, Evangelists or Prophets, and these he
concludes to be ceased; Or else they are Pastors and Teachers; for the Gospel
owneth no other preaching Officers but those aforementioned. And that ordinary
officers (Pastors and Teachers) should be made by an extraordinary call, will
hardly be proved.

Or that such ordinary offices can be convved without Ordination; if that in
ordinary cases be essential to such Offices, we suppose can never be proved;
for, it is as much as to say, such offices have a being, without that which
gives being to them.

A thing may have a being without some necessary accidents, but that there can
be any case so extraordinary as a thing should have a being without that which
is essencial to it, we find not.

Arg. 5. Our fifth Argument is taken from Gospel Rules about Prophesying.

All that are Prophets way ordinarily and publicly preach, 1 Corin. 14. v. 23.
24. 29. 31. Dr. Collings says (Vind. Revind. page 64.) no such gifted men as
now live are prophets.

To prove our minor, that some men, (i. e. now living) who are not ordained
Officers, are Prophets, we lay down three propositions.

1. That Prophecy is a gift, not an office.

2. That Prophesying is a gift still continuing.

3. That some men who are not ordained officers, have that gift of Prophecy,
Preacher Sent. page 90. Dr. Collings (page 65.) repeateth three of our
arguments, and tells the Reader, that we bring them to prove, that Prophecy
is a gift, not an office, and cries out of a pitiful non sequitur, etc.
whereas we use those arguments to prove the last position, which is about the
un-necessarinesse of Ordination for prophets; Thus are we mis-presented, as if
we brought arguments to prove one Proposition, which we use to prove an other,
and whether great wrong and injury be not offered to us and the Reader, by such
dealing, let any wise man judge? We neither argue in this place against their
being extraordinary, or ordinary officers, nor against their being furnished
with extraordinary gifts, other mediums we use elsewhere that way, and
therefore his pitiful non sequitur is of his own making: but the main
question was about preaching without ordination, and so we proved (Preacher
Sent. page 90.) that ordination was not necessary for Prophets, which here he
graneth.

We knew not which part of our argument would be denied, and therefore left no
part unproved.

Whereas he enquireth (Vind. p. 65.) who ever said these Prophets were ordinary
Officers? we answer Mr. Rutherford in his due right of Presbyt. declares it to
be his judgment; that this is a pattern of a College of ordinary Prophets.

But neither of the Arguments which he is replying to, speak one word about
their being ordinary officers, and therefore we wonder how that question should
be started here.

Prop. 1. The prophesying spoken of, 1 Cor. 14. is a gift, not an Office. 1.
Because all who have the gift of prophecy are Prophets, and they must have the
gift before they can be made Prophets by Office. 2. Because this prophesying
ought in duty and might in faith be coveted by every man who was a member of
the Church at Corinth, and so of any other Church, whereas Office might not be
so coveted by every man who was a member of a Church. 1. It is not promised. 2
Not possible to be obtained, etc. Preach. Sent. p. 91. 92.

Obj. Dr. Collings (page 66. 67. etc.) says. 1. That God in the same moment
clothed them with an extraordinary authority, and furnished them with an
extraordinary gift, so he did Jeremy, Amos, etc. 2. That the same argument will
prove it was no gift, except a promise can be shown thereof. 3. Things not
necessary to salvation should be prayed for with submission to Gods will etc.
4. They cannot be Officers to that Church, but may be in time Officers to other
Churches, there is no impossibility in this at all, yea (he says) they ought
to labor after such a perfection. Besides Universal holiness may and ought to
be labored for, yet it is not promised, nor can be attained, etc. 5. All does
not include every individual always, etc.

Ans. 1. No ordinary Officer can be orderly made, unless those gifts which
furnish for the Office be first found in him, Act. 6. 3. 1 Timothy 3. And that not
extraordinary, but ordinary Prophets are intended, 1 Cor. 14. we have largely
proved, Preach. Sent. page 100. 101. 102. and so our Argument is valid, though
extraordinary Officers, as Jeremy and Amos, should have the gift and Office
together; yet there, the gift in order of nature at least does precede the
Office, which authorize to such an exercise of the gift.

2. There is a promise of the very gift of prophecy, which is of far larger
extent then office. Joel 2. 28 I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and
your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, etc. This [all fl^sh] cannot be
limited unto Officers. This promise began to be fulfilled, Act. 2. but its full
accomplishment is not yet, as appears, Joel 3. ver. 1. The captivity of Judah
and Jerusalem is not yet recovered, the Jews not yet converted, and this shall
be [in those dayes] i. e. wherein the pouring out of the spirit shall be, for
those were the daves before mentioned.

Both sons and daughters still have a gift of Scripture-interpretation, which
is a gift of prophecy. And this promise of the gift of prophecy being so
general, hence our Argument will not prove that it was no gift, as he says.

3. Prayers for the gift of prophecy, or any other mercies which are to be
begged with submission to the will of God, cannot be in duty or faith, without
they be limited and bounded by some Divine word or promise: for it is a humane
faith which has not a Divine word to bottom upon, and if it were otherwise,
any man might pray that he might be made a King, an Emperor, or to have an
estate of many thousand pounds per annum, or to live many thousand years on
earth, or what he pleased, and this might warrant him therein, that he prayed
for them with submission to the will of God.

If a Divine word be the boundary of such supplications, then a particular man's
recovery out of sickness may be owned as a fruit of Promise, and then there
must be some Divine word for every man's becoming an officer who was a member of
the Church at Corinth, else they could not in duty or in faith covet it; and it
cannot be imagined that such a word should be limited to Corinth, and therefore
it must extend to the Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, and any other Gospel Church;
and so it must amount to thus much, That all the men who were members of any
Gospel Church were bound in duty and might in faith covet to be Church
officers, and how likely it is that this should be a truth, and how well it
agrees with our brethrens Principles who deny the Preaching of gifted men, let
the Reader judge. And if he likes not our Argument from a promise, he may take
it from a precept, and then he must say, That every man who was a member of the
Church at Corinth, and so of any other Gospel Church, was commanded to covet to
be an Officer, if prophesying were an office; for every man was commanded to
covet to prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. ver. 1. 5. 39.

4. We apprehend there is an impossibility (in respect of the revealed will of
God) of many men's becoming Officers, who are Church Members, hinted in that
place, 1 Cor. 12. 7. which we have (according to his wish) thought upon, but
although it seems to deny that all members of the Church can attain unto the
same Office, gifts, or measure of them, yet it does not deny that there may be
a joint concurrence of all in matters of common concernment, nor the usefulness
of the suffrage of the meanest members.

And by several passages in his book (page 2.) we are apt to think, that he
does not encourage the members of his Church to covet to be Officers either
there or in other Churches, though (page 68.) he says (if we mistake him not)
this is such a perfection as they ought to labor after. The London Ministers
are of another mind; for Jus Div. Min. page 85. they deny it to be a common
duty to study Divinity, in order to Preaching, Universal holiness is promised,
Ezekiel. 36. ver. 26. A new heart will I give you, ver. 29. I will save you from
all your uncleanness. If he means Universal holiness in respect of degrees,
it is promised to, and shall be enjoyed in another life, and so the attainment
of it there is to be sought for here.

We are to labor for the highest pitch of holiness which is attainable in this
life, and this is promised. But that which is impossible to be attained, is not
to be coveted. And it is considerable that no Church is exhorted to covet to be
Apostles or Evangelists, or Pastors, or Teachers, but a Church is exhorted to
covet the gift of prophecy, and therefore that gift may more generally be
coveted, then the lowest of those Offices.

5. The term all does include the generality of those spoken to, and that is
enough to our purpose. He grants (page 69.) that priority of order is no
infallible Argument where there is any other Scripture, or any found reason to
evince it, no intention of the holy penmen; and that both are found in this
case, our Arguments for their being ordinary Prophets do sufficiently prove.

We do not conclude that those Texts, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. are meant
of extraordinary Prophets, but upon this supposition that they [must be
Officers] we think it will not follow, that those. 1 Cor. 14. must be so also.
As if he lay upon the catch, he cries out, we take them at their word, etc.

But seeing its not impossible that the one place should speak of one fort of
Prophets, and the other place of another, we might use an [it may be] about it,
for that often denotes but a possibility, and leaves the matter dubious,
Ezekiel. 2. 3. Jerem. 36. 3. 7. Luke 20. 13.

Prop. 2. That some have the gift of prophecy, or that prophesying is a gift
still continuing,

This we prove. 1. Because there is no Gospel rule for the ceasing of it. 2.
Because it was ordinary.

Ob. So say the Prelates for Archbishops, and Bishops, where is there any now
that Vind. Revind. page 70. 71.
can without study and meditation infallibly give the sense of Scripture from
Revelation, or can foretell things to come? we have experience that those
pleaded for, cannot do the first, and the year 1657. being come and gone, and
the Jews not converted, proves that John Tillinghast -- - cannot do the latter.
St. Paul's charging Timothy to study and meditate, etc. was a certain proof,
that this prophesying is ceased. The gift of tongues and bealing in those days
were ordinary, yet none of them is continuing.

Answ. 1. It is not proved that the prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. was a gift of
infallible Revelation, or of foretelling things to come, and therefore the
ceasing of such gifts, and the charging Timothy to study and meditate are far
from proving that this prophesying is ceased.

Mr. John Tillinghast neither pretended to such an extradinary gift of
foretelling things to come, or infallible Revelation as he speaks of, and
therefore is very impertinently alleged here. The first stirring of the Jews
he thought in probability and greatest likelihood (from Scriptures numbers)
would be in the year 1656. vid. Generat. work. p. 50. Key to Mist. N. page 248.
Knowledge of the times. page 97. he does not speak of it as certainly and
infallibly to come to pass, that yet we find; and if he had, many worthy men
have been mistaken in the mystical numbers; and therefore it is an unworthy act
to seek thus to blemish his name after his death. That which he speaks of
Prelates, is but to cast odium, for neither Archbishops nor Bishops can show
any institution of Christ for their office: they have not an immediate
vocation, or infallible direction, or power for miraculous operation, and
therefore they cannot rationally pretend to such a general Commission as
Apostles and Evangelists had.

2. If by ordinary he intends Common, in that sense the gift of Tongues and
healing in those days were ordinary, though the way and manner of conveying
those gifts, and the end of them was extraordinary, Act. 2. ver. 3. 4. 1 Cor.
14. 22. Tongues are for a sign.

But that was ordinary which had not a temporary reason for its use, or which
did not require an extraordinary Call, to enable to, and warrant in coming up
to it, or which men are commonly in after ages gifted for, even unto this day,
and whose nature, acts and ends were not extraordinary; And whether our
Arguments do not prove prophesying in these respects to be ordinary, and so
still continuing, let the Reader judge. Mr. Rutherford says, that these
Prophets and our Pastors differ not in species and nature, and that to him,
this is a pattern of a College of ordinary Prophets. etc. which still renders
us persuaded that Mr. Rutherford thought the gift of Prophecy was ordinary;
for surely he knew that an extraordinary gift did make one differ in species
and nature from ordinary Officers; Only he judged that the way and manner of
conferring that gift was extraordinary, ordinarily it is acquired by study and
industry, then (he supposed) it was infused, But as it was an ordinary visive
faculty (as other men's) which was conferred upon the man born blind, and wine
of an ordinary species which was made, John 2 though the manner of production
was extraordinary; so the gift of prophecy was ordinary in his account, though
by a maze of words. Dr. Collings would persuade the Reader otherwise. We proved
this prophesying to be an ordinary gift, and so still continuing, because, 1.
The Rules to regulate the work are ordinary. 2. The description of it ordinary,
1 Cor. 14. 3. 3. One great end of extraordinary prophesying (viz. to be a sign)
is denied to this, 1 Corinthians 14. 22. 4. Women are forbidden this public
prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. 34. yet extraordinary public prophesying is allowed to
them, Luke 2. 36. 38.

Obj. 1. The act may be ordinary, and yet the gift not so. Extraordinary
Officers, and gifts were to come under general rules of order. 2. So far as it
is a description, it is a description of the act, not of the gift, -- -only
such ends of prophesying are expressed as were common to that with other
Ordinances and duties. 3. This Text only proves that prophecy was no sign to
them that believed not.

The only end of foretelling things to come was not to be a sign. Their chief
act (as be conceives) was their infallible interpretation of Scripture by an
extraordinary gift, which indeed to them that believed not the Scripture would
be of no use. 4. Women prophetesses are not mentioned, 1 Cor. 14. 34. we do not
find that Anna, Luke 2. 36. spoke things to come; and this liberty was
restrained, 1 Cor. 14. 37.

Ans. 1. Extraordinary acts will follow extraordinary gifts; for operari
sequitur esse. That the work of prophecy is ordinary, is not a fallucious, but
a firm Arument to prove the gift to be ordinary also, and still continuing;
none but ordinary rules are mentioned to regulate prophecysing, nothing in the
description of the work but what is ordinary, and a large chapter is spent
chiefly in directing about prophesying, and nothing extraordinary is predicated
either of the gift or act in the whole chapter, and surely this will prove an
ordinary gift or work of prophecy to be here intended, as strongly as the
enumerating only of Officers or persons extraordinarily gifted, Ephesians. 4. 11.
12. 1 Cor. 12. 28. 29. (if granted) can prove extraordinary prophecy to be
there intended, as he would have it, Vind. page 70. 77.

And extraordinary directions were given to regulate Apostles, and Evangelists
in the exercise of extraordinary gifts, Mat. 10.

2. The act (and so the description of it) must be suitable to the gift.
Exhortation is here assigned unto prophecy, and also, Act. 15. 32. Being
Prophets, exhorted the brethren with many words, where the act of prophecy is
denoted by it, and that here only some common ends should be expressed by it,
how unconceivable is it? Is not exhortation an act? Edification and comfort are
not so; and therefore what triflling is it to say the Text proves them to be
the act as well as the other? or will not the words, as rendered by him out of
the Greek, serve as well to our purpose, as the Uulgar translation? and can the
sense be perfect without [to] or some such word? we know not to what end his
high words here serve, but to make a flourish.

3. That the extraordinary gift or act of foretelling things to come cannot be
the prophesying spoken of, 1 Cor. 14. we prove, because one great end of
prediction, viz. to be a sign, is denied unto this prophesying, and that denial
is to be found, ver. 22.

Our Argument was not taken from a denial of the act (as he reports. page 73.)
but of one end, which indeed by consequence denies that to be the gift or act.
He faith this Texthat believed not that prophecy was no sign to them that
believed not. We answer, this (which he grants it does prove) enough to
evidence, that foretelling things to come is not the prophecy here intend,
for that was a sign to them that believed not, Mat. 16. ver. 3 4. The sign of
the Prophet Jonas was given to convince a wicked and Adulterous generation.
Neither is there a word in the chapter to prove that the prophesying, 1 Cor.
14. was a sign to such as believed, or that the infallible interpretation of
Scripture by an extraordinary gift was the act of those Prophets, both which he
suggesteth.

4. If he intends only, that women Prophetesses are not [expressely]
mentioned, 1 Corin. 14. 34. we might answer all his arguments at once with
this; for the Scripture does not [expresly] command all preachers to receive
Ordination; If he will say they are no way mentioned or intended.

Then, 1. He contradicts the London Ministers who use these words, [by women
here are not meant women simple, but women Prophetesses in opposition to men
Prophets formerly spoken of Jus. Divin. Min. page 100.] yea contradicts
himself; for he faith [it is to be understood of women that had or pretended
to have the gift of prophecy, Vind. Vindiciarum, page 119.]

And by this the Reader may see that it is a hard task for us to answer both
the the London Ministers and Dr. Collings, seeing they contradict one an other,
and the Dr. will rather contradict himself, then want a reply for us.

2. There is no appearance of truth in it: for, this Chapter speaks chiefly
about the gift of prophecy, stiling it [speaking] v. 29. yea, a speaking
publicly is forbidden to women, v. 34. 35. and that speaking in way of
prophecy should be excluded (without cogent reason to infer it) who can imagine
it?

And if the public speaking in way of Prophecy be intended (as doubtless it
is) then women prophetesses are mentioned v. 34: and our argument stands
firm; neither would the force of it be much abated, if it were granted (which
yet it is not) that Anna (Luke 2. 36.) was called a prophetess, or that an
othery were called Prophets from an extraordinary faculty by Revelation to
interpret Scripture; and so what he faieth is nothing to the present purpose,
for we may argue thus,

That Prophesying which was an interpreting of Scripture by an extraordinary
faculty from Revelation was permitted unto women, Luke 2. 36.

But the prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. was not permitted unto woman, v. 34. Ergo, the
prophesying. 2 Cor. 14. was not an interpreting of Scripture by an
extraordinary faculty from Revelation, which Dr. Collings would have to be the
Prophesying there intended, page 74.

There is not one sylable of proof, that foretelling things to come is the
prophesying intended, 1 Cor. 14.

We have proved (Preacher Sent. Page 103.) that this liberty is not restrained
by the Apostle; the Dr. asserteth that it is restrained, 1 Corin. 14. 37. yet
has given nothing but his bare word for the proof of it.

And this is enough to show the weakness of his answers to our arguments; we
shall only hint a few things in answer to what follows in this Chapter.

1. Prophesying is as much distinguished from Revealation as from doctrine, 1
Cor. 14. 6. except I shall speak to you cithes by Revelation or by prophesying
or by doctrine: And therefore as easily we may conclude thence, that
Prophesying is not Revelation, as he may (page 76.) that it is not speaking by
doctrine. If he will grant that it is not Revelation, then he contradicts
himself (page 66. 74.) and also the London Ministers, (Jus Div. Mini. page
98.) and consesseth the validity of our answer to the present objection. If he
faith it is Revelation, we may say, the Prophets speak not by Revelation, that
was another thing, and we have as good proof of it, v. 6. as he has there,
that they spoke not by doctrine, and therefore he can get nothing by this
arguing.

The London Ministers (page 98.) would prove from v. 26. 30. that these were
extraordinary Prophets, having extraordinary Revelations: And what is it to the
purpose, if they did not speak by doctrine? or if Christians ordinarily had not
such Revelations as they might publicly and ordinarily communicate them in
Church Assemblies, might not many unordained men have such Revelations? or how
is this to the business in hand? If prophecy should be expressed by
Revelation, v. 26 (which is not proved) yet seeing (as he consesseth) there is
ordinary Revelation, it may be understood of that: and the joining of it in the
same verse with doctrine which is ordinary, would as firmly prove the prophet
to be ordinary, as the joining of it with some thing extraordinary, would prove
it to be extraordinary.

2. His granting (page 77.) that the note of singularity will not prove the
gift was extraordinary, is enough to justify our answer, and to show that it
cannot prove what he produced it for, Vind. Min. page 50. nor does it prove
either that the Prophets were Officers, or the gifts extraordinary, but only a
not common gift wherein they are distinguished from other members who have not
that gift.

3. Whether Prophets in all the old and New Testament signify some in office,
let the Reader judge upon a weighting, Mat. 13. 57. Luke 4. 24. Mat. 10. 41.
Acts 15. 32. (...) does not necessarily denote Office, its used, Acts 14. 12.
(...) we read of another Judas, then the Apostle whose house was at Damascus,
Acts 9. v. 11. The Apostles at that time abiding at Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1. yet
the Dr. would deny that there was any Judas (page 79.) besides the a traitor
and the Apostle; and how does it appear, that Judas and Silas were of the 120.
and not of the thousands that were afterward converted?

And seeing exhorting often is preaching, and is the work of Prophets, 1
Corin. 14. 3. that it should be said Acts. 15. 32. [being Prohets, they
exhorted the brethren -- ] and it should not prove that this act was performed
by them as Prophets, who can imagine it? If it were said Steven being a Deacon,
distributed, would it not be concluded that he distributed as a Deacon,
distribution being a work of a Deacon, as exhortation is of a Prophet; and what
addition then is it to Scripture to say, their exhorting was because they, were
Prophets, though (...) does not signify because? How 2 Peter 1. 19. 20. fights
against us we know not; if he thinks that it denies the interpretation of
Scripture to belong to private men, as some have conjectured, let him read Dr.
Ames and others on the place, and he may be informed otherwise, if officers
rightly ordained do give a humane exposition of Scripture, or such as is not
according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, that is a private interpretation,
which may answer his allegations, page 78. 80.

3. It is not proved that prophecy is preferred before the gift of Tongues, in
case he that speaks with Tongues did interpret, 1 Cor. 14. 15: greater is he
that Prohesieth, then he that speaks with Tongues [except the interpreter] --
he does not say he is greater when he does interpret; and therefore when that
reason, viz. edification failed, its without proof, that another must be found.
If the Prophet were less in another respect (as he said p. ^1.) how this
helps to prove the extraordinarinesse or rarity of the gift of Prophecy, we
see not.

4. That the [ordinary gifts] of pastors and Teachers are useful to the
edifying, Comforting, Convincing, and Converting of Souls, is enough to show
that Prophecy cannot be proved to be [an extraordinary gift or office] by its
usefulness to such ends, and this was it he would have proved by it, Vind.
Min. p. 51. and his reply (Vind. Revind. p. 81.) does not hinder its proving as
much as we produce it for.

Neither does what he says (p. 82.) about a word of wisdom and knowledge prove
that Prophesic was an extraordinary gift or office, nor answer our reasons, and
so its nothing to the purpose.

We cannot but wonder at what he says, page 84. 85. in one page he calls in
any indifferent Reader, and then any Reader to judge, and adds that the
letter of Scripture is express against us, 1 Cor. 14. 22. and rehearses the
Words: one would think such a heap of high words should not be used with such
confidence, unless it were to usher in a discovery of some gross Error or
mistake, which he had found in those which he writes against.

But upon perusing those pages again and again, we cannot find any such Error
on our part; nay, we think that he has rushed himself into diverse gross
self-contradictions.

Let any indifferent Reader search our former book, (Preacher Sent. p. 115.)
and find out, if he can, how v. 22. is against us, and that expressly in the
letter. Have we either denied Tongues to be for a sign to them that believe
not, or affirmed them to be for a sign to them that believe? have we asserted
prophesying to serve for them that believe not, otherwise then the Apostle
does? v. 24, 25. or denied that Prophesying serves for them which believe? If
not, what shadow of truth is there in what he faith?

He tells us we would make them believe, that the sense is only, that
Prophecy was not for a sign to them that believed not, but for their
conversion it might be. This he would have the Reader weigh a little, and then
judge betwixt us; we desire it may be weighed.

Reader, which part will thou deny? Will thou say,

That Prophecy was for a sign to them that believed not? This Dr. Collings
himself (page 73.) denies, using these words [This Text (viz. v. 22.) only
proves, that prophecy was no sign to them that believed not.]

Will thou say that Prophecy might not be for the conversion of them that
believe not?

Does not the Apostle prove it might, v. 24. 25? and does not Dr. Collings
consesse it, when the unbeliever goes into the Church Assembly? page 85. If he
supposes that we grant Prophecy to be a sign, but not for their conversion,
he is much mistaken, he may see it denied, Preacher Sent. p. 102. neither is
there a syllable that way, page 115. to which he is now replying.

We may conclude from his words, and v. 22. that it is not a sign at all; for
that verse plainly denies it to be a sign to unbelievers; and he says (page
84.) if it were a sign at all, it must be for them who believed not, and this
confirms our argument, page 102.

And let the Reader judge whether Dr. Collings has not run into a
self-contradiction in the following expressions of the same book.

1. The antithesis 1 Cor. 14. 22. (he says) lies here, that tongues were for a
sign to heathens that believed not, but prophesying was a sign only for such
as believed, viz it was an act only to to be performed within the 1. It is
plain, that if prophesying were for any sign, it must be for unbelievers; for
believers needed no sign, Vind. Revind. page 84. Now that prophecy should be
for their (i. e. unbelievers) pale of the Churth; this text only proves, that
prophecy was no sign to them that believed not, Vind. Revind. page 73.
conversion, and not a sign for it, seems very harsh, Vind. Revind. page 85. 2.
Let any Reader judge, whether those words -- but prophesying not for those who
believe not -- do not plainly exclude the ordinance from any relation to
unbelievers, -Vind. Revind. page 84. 2. That v. 25. 26. prove that Prophecy is
useful for the conversion of unbelievers, we grant it, but it is when the
unbeliever comes into the Church assembly, Vind. Revind. Page 85.

We hope Dr. Collings understands by Prophecy, such Prophecy as the Apostle
speaks of in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, otherwise we may tell him as
he does us (page 65.) he deceives his Reader with an equivocal word. Yea our
present question is only about the Prophecy spoken of, 1 Cor. 14. and we deny
that this Prophesying was for any sign either to believers or unbelievers. As
ordinary preaching is now for the conversion of unbelievers, yet is not a sign
for it, so was that Prophesying for their conversion, yet not a sign for it.

Whereas he says (page, 85.) Prophecy is useful for the conversion of
unbelievers, but it is when the unbeliever comes into the Church Assembly, not
when the Prophet goes out to them, v. 23. 24. and adds, mark, the Prophet is
tied up to the Assembly of the Church in one place, and then blames some for
traveling up and down the country, and so page 73. 109.

We consesse we wonder that Dr. Collings should profess himself to be of this
mind. Is not this charged to be Independentism in the height of it, to tie up
some Gospel-administrations to the Assembly of the Church in one place? Is
there not as much, ver. 23. 24. to tie up from going out to any other Church
Assemblies, as from going out to unbelievers? yea, is there not as much, 1 Cor.
11 17. 18. 20. 33. to tie up the Lords Supper to the Assembly of the Church in
one place, as there is, 1 Cor. 14. ver. 23. 24. to confine prophecy to it? yet
would he not blame us if we should say, a Pastor may administer the Lords
Supper to believers of other Churches when they come into the Church
Assemblies, but must not go out to them?

The Assembly speaking of administering the Sacrament to members of another
Church, tell us, surely he (i. e. an Elder) may as well do it when he goes to
them, as when they come to him for it: Answ. of the Assem. page 7. and may not
we say, that the Prophets may go to unbelievers, as well as they come to them?
If the prophesying, Act. 19. 6. were an extraordinary gift, or conferred in an
extraordinary way, this proves not either that all prophesying, or that
mentioned, 1 Cor. 14. was so.

CHAP. IV.
Containing a short reply to what Dr. Collings says in defense of his own
Arguments.

OUr Arguments for the Preaching of some persons ordinarily in public
Assemblies, without Ordination, being now cleared from those exceptions which
he laid against them, Hence it appears that there are some Gospel Vind.
Revind. p. 86. to p. 90.
Precepts and Presidents which allow the ordinary public Preaching of some
gifted persons without Ordination, and this answers his first Argument.

Argu. 1. None of the Scriptures he alleges do prove that all Vind. Revind
from Page 86. to page 90.
those that are to Preach the Gospel, should be so solemnly set apart for that
work. And hence, some who are no Officers, nor extraordinarily gifted may
ordinarily Preach in public Assemblies, and therefore Preaching is not an act
peculiar to Office, and this answers his second argument, p. 90. 91.

Arg. 2. In our former book p. 199. we say distribution is materially an Vind.
Revind. Page 90.
act of a Deacons Office, but not formally; Barnabas and Saul distributed the
Churches stock, Act. 11. verse. 29. 30. yet they were no Deacons.

That probationers (who are no Officers) may Preach, if it should be not
ordinarily but occasionally, or only once; seeing they will not allow them to
Baptize so much as once, this is enough to prove (from their practice) that if
Baptizing be an act peculiar to Office, yet it will not follow, then Preaching
is such; and also that Preaching is not peculiar to Office; and so, his
excepting them out of the question cannot hinder the overthrow of his argument
(page 92.) thereby.

That proper acts quarto modo (as he says these are, (page 90.) should admit
of so much as one exception, is strange Logic, and as much as to say they are
peculiar to Officers, and yet not peculiar to them; and therefore his
exceptions (page 93,) cannot help him. As to, Mat. 28. ver. 19, 20. We do not
yet find that it was an Office-making Commission, but an enlargement of the
Commission of Officers to other persons, viz. to the Gentiles. If a man has
two Commissions to the same work, the latter may make him an Officer to more
persons, but does not make him more an Officer then before; and his instance
(page 94. about ejecting scandalous Ministers by one Commission in Norfolk, by
another in Norwich, amounts to no more; nor his second reply (page 94) we may
grant that this Commission empowred them, yet not to be Preachers and
baptizers, but to Preach to and baptize the Gentiles. They did not of
non-Preachers become Preachers by this Commission, and such a Commission only
is to the present question about gifted men's Preaching.

His third reply consists partly of his mere conjecture, and partly of what
is truth, but not against us. The promise proves that some in all Nations to
the worlds end may warrantably be Preached unto and baptized, but it being a
promise of Christ's presence with some in the work of Preaching, hence it
presupposes them to be empowred to Preach before the promise can be theirs,
and therefore cannot constitute them Preachers.

As to page 95, 96. we were speaking only of acts of Religious worship, which
men were warranted to perform. And is a high-way-mans pronouncing the same
sentence the Judge does, allowed by the Laws of men for the same end that the
Judges act is; as exhorting and admonishing are allowed to men out of Office by
the Laws of God for the same end that Officers perform them? or can the
sprinkling and powering water on the face of Children, or the breaking of bread
and giving it to them, be deemed any acts of Religious worship, or are men
allowed by the Lord to perform these acts for the same ends that an Officer
does, in administering baptism and the Lords Supper? if not, how does this
take off our answer about exhorting and admonishing? In what way and manner men
out of Office may perform these acts, we have proved elsewhere.

Argu. 3. As to his third Argument, from the uselesness of the Ministerial
Vind. Revind. Page 96.
Office, as to its chief act, if this practice be allowed.

We utterly deny it. The Ministerial Office is not set up as to that act in
vain, though many out of Office may Preach; neither does his instances (page
99.) in Justices, Colonels, Captains, etc. prove it. For the main end of
establishing Justices of the Peace is, the conservation of the peace, which
others may endeavor who are no Justices.

The main act of Colonels, and Captains, and the main end for which they are
established is, fighting with an enemy, and every common soldier is bound to
fight even in open field as well as they, yet their Office is not set up in
vain as to that act. If he shall say, others do not act as Justices in keeping
the peace, or that common Soldiers do not Command a Regiment or company in
fighting; we answer, no more do gifted men Preach to a Church as Officers, as
Pastors to it.

And Reader, know that he offers thee and us much wrong in telling thee (page
99.) that we say [the Preaching of a man in Office, is an act peculiar to
Office.] If this be not sense, the fault is his whose words they are.

Our words may be seen, Preacher Sent. page 203. If we say Preaching in it self
is no act of Office, surely therein we deny some Preaching to be the main or
chief act of Office, and so do speak directly to his argument. Yet we may grant
that there is Preaching which is a main and chief act of Office. Whereas he
desires to know the difference between these ways of Preaching; in the
forecited place of our former book he may see it.

That which is a main act of Office is a preaching as under a special relation
to them that are preached to, as being over them in the Lord, and having them
committed to ones charge for feeding with the word, Act 20. v. 28. 1 These. 5.
12. Heb. 13. 7. The other preaching is not after this manner. And this is not
an empty motion (as he calls it, page 102, 103) but a real difference; for,
if an officer of our Church preaches to many other Churches often, yet he is
not over, nor has the charge of many Churches committed to him, only
Episcopal men will assert that. So whosoever preaches to unconverted heathens
and Indians, cannot (with any Scripture evidence) be said to be over those
Infidels in the Lord, or to have them committed to his chaege; only a Church
of God, which he has purchased with his own blood is capable of such a
commitment, Acts 20. 28. and therefore it is one thing to preach, and another
thing to preach as over those in the Lord, -- that are Preached to, and this
may answer what he says, page 102, 103. We say gifted men by Christ's
appointment, do the same acts materially, that Officers perform in their
preaching, and that for those ends he mentions of Conviction, Convertion, and
Edification; yet there is a vast difference between their actings.

And that Christ's appointing both the one and the other, should make their
authority the same (which he asserteth, Vind. Revind. page 102.) is strange,
Colonels, Captains, etc. may have commissions from one man, yet have different
authorities. Another may be appointed by a master of a house to do some work,
yet not have the same authority that the steward has. Our Examples do plainly
show that different relations do empower for and lay under obligations to the
same acts materially; and thence it follows that the belonging of such acts to
one relation, can be no Proof that the other relation is vain, useless, or
unnecessary as to those acts.

The parental relation is not vain and useless as to instruction, if other
relations or friends be under some obligations to give instructions to the same
children; Nor will it speak the bailiffs office in a Corporation to be useless
and un-necessary, if the freemen may put forth some of the same Acts which
they do. No more will the Lords establishing standing officers for the work of
preaching or Government (both which we mentioned, Preacher Sent. page 203,
204.) argue that none else may act herein, nor will officers be useless and
un-necessary as to those acts, if gifted men may preach, and the Church act in
government. And this answers diverse of his exceptions, page 103. 104. only we
shall add; that his straining one of our similitudes to make it run on four
feet, for the drawing this out of it [That gifted men may preach, or may let it
a lone] and then adding many lines (page 103.) to disprove what himself has
wrested out of it, is far from a canded dealing with us, especially seeing the
very words of our similitude do plainly deny this sense of it, and these words
he has concealed.

Our similitude runs thus, A Christian friend or neighbor may and [ought]
to give gracious, and wholesome instructions, etc. If he had rightly applied the
similitude, he must have said, so gifted men may and [ought] to preach, -- and
then he would not have used so many words to prove that they are not at their
liberty, whether they will preach or no. Likewise our words are [the one is
under a standing obligation by the parental relation to perform such acts, the
other not] He gives our words thus;

The one is under a standing obligation, the other not, Whereas our words do
not deny friends to be under an obligation to such acts, but assert their
obligation to be indifferent from that which is parental.

He grants (page 105.) that our reason must vail to the will of God revealed
in Scripture, and whether there be any ground in Scripture for the preaching of
gifted men, let the Reader judge. That Apostles and Evangelists differed in
nothing from Pastors and Teachers, but in the extent of their power, which he
asserteth (page 105.) we apprehend is a great mistake, for besides a power of
miraculous operation, they had immediate inspirations and infalible directions
from the holy spirit.

As to their being Officers, its answered, Preacher Sent. Page 209. We conclude
that Apostles and Evangelists, and Pastors and Teachers also, were needful
then; but his argument seems to us to deny some of them to, be necessary in
those days. We might as well say, that where Pastors and teachers were
resident, there was no need of Apostles or Evangelists for preaching or such
ordinary acts, as he may say (page 106.) that when they were resident in this
or that particular Church, there was no need of Pastors or Teachers, and his
reason will be as strong for us as for him, because they could do all their
acts.

And surely when there were many Apostles at Jerusalem, and Prophets at
Corinth, 1 Cor. 14. though all did not speak at the same time, yet none were
un-necessary, no more are gifted men. We may turn his argument, page 98. upon
himself.

God does nothing in vain.

But in case the preaching of Officers could render it un-ecessary for gifted
men to do it, then he had done something in vain; for we have proved that he
has appointed gifted men to preach, Ergo, it is false that gifted men may not
do it.

Arg. 4. His fourth argument is taken from the committing of Gospel truths to
faithful men (who shall be able to teach others) by Gods Timothies, 2 Timothy 2.
2. Vind. Revind. page 106.

To what he says about men's being able to interpret the Gospel out of the
Original into their own Tongue, we answer,

1. We grant a knowledge of the Original to be a good help, yet its not
absolutely necessary, as himself confesses.

2. It is learning in Gospel mystries that the Text speaks of, 2 Timothy 2.

2. The things thou have heard of me, commit, etc.

As to what follows, we say, it is a commitment, of the word, not of persons;
they to whom this commitment was, were set over none thereby. It was to be
committed (...), the Epethite of members Ephesians. 1. 1.

The Church in other Scriptures (not Officers only) is the object of the
commitment, Romans 3. 2. called therefore the pillar and ground of truth.

1. If the ability be before commitment then he must say a man may be morally
able to preach before Ordination, for id possumus quod jure possumus, and so
his argument falls; for the committing is not ordaining.

If the ability be attained by committing those things to them, Why does he
(page 107.) deny it to be an effect or end thereof? And seeing the Gospel
owneth a committing doctrinal, and this does make men naturally able, how will
it ever be proved that a moral ability is only intended? And unless that be
proved, his argument is of no force; for men must be naturally able, before
they may warrantably be ordained, if that were a committing of Gospel truths to
men. And that the ability is subsequent, is plain, [who shall be able -- ]

2. It cannot be concluded, that the future is used for the present-tense, but
when ^special reason does enforce it, and none is found here.

3. Men ought to commitCospel truths unto others, doctrinally without a
certain rule to assure them who should be converted, strengthened or
comforted; and as well might he do it in this case, without assurance that
every one should be able; and therefore his query page 107. how could he know
who they should be? is of no concernement.

4. It must be proved not only that ordination is necessary, but that it is
the committing of Gospel truths which is spoken of, 2 Timothy 2. 2. or else this
argument is of no force.

5. He required what means the restriction of faithful men, Vind. Revind. page
40. We answered this in our former book, and shall add thus much; The Apostle
cares about a succession of truth, which might be most hopefully expected from
faithful men, and therefore he would have it committed unto them, especially
for that end; thus the restriction, Job. 21. v. 15. 17, feed my sheep, does
notify that they especially are to be fed.

6. We do not grant that the other committing is meant, but if it were, the
manner must necessarily be understood, else it will not help him at all.

We do not deny that teaching publikly is intended, but how he can tell us, its
meant of public teachers, and yet say, the Apostle plainly speaks de re of
the thing, not de modo, of the manner of performance, Vind. Vindic. page 140.
would be considered.

And if it be understood of Officers, that is not exclusive of gifted men.

Arg. 5. His fifth argument is from their requiring lawfully a maintenance,
Vind. Revin. page 109. 6.
1 Timothy 5. 18 Math. 10. 10. Gal. 6. 6.

Hespeaketh very little to our replies unto this; we say the Scriptures
alleged, speak of a constant preaching, he denies that, Mat. 10. 10. or Gal.
6. 6. hint the least of such a thing.

Why will he trouble the Reader with such words without profit? Will he allow
of any occasional? if not, why does he so much as seem to deny these to be
constant Preachers? or were not the Apostles constant Preachers? Mat. 10. 10.
and will he say those Elders, 1 Timothy 5. 18. were not constant preachers? Or in
this and the former argument, does he intend only thus much, that the
Scriptures do not speak expressly of a constant preaching? or that 2 Timothy 2.
2. do not speak expressly de modo? If this be all he aymeth at, let him show
an express Scripture to prove that all preachers must be ordained, or that
none may preach without ordination, or else give over such arguings.

His minor indeed was neither true in the matter or for me; he faith (page
109.) It is true (by a slip of his pen) instead of the Church to which they
preach, he put in the Church in which they are, but it is the same thing; for
admit that they may Prophecy, he proved before (he faith) from 1 Cor. 14. 23.
that they had no warrant to go out of their Church to do it.

To which we answer.

1. He that is so subject to false Logic himself, might be more cautious of
accusing others, especially without ground.

2. This which he calls but a slip of his pen, was the very thing which his
argument had dependence upon, and falls with; let any peruse his former book
(Vind. page 40.) and they will find it so; for he asks whether any will say
-- that a Church is tied up to that duty, which no Church is able to perform.

He supposes there may be twenty poor men well gifted, and ten rich men meanly
gifted in a Church, and enquireth whether any will say that it is Gods
ordinance that these ten rich men should allow a competent maintenance, to the
twenty others.

So that his argument takes its force from their inability to maintain them in
the Church where they are. Whereas the Churches to which they preach may be
able, though not the Church wherein they are. We would not have mentioned this
again, if he had not minced the matter, and concluded it the same thing still.

3. His assertion which he groundeth that conclusion upon, viz. their not being
warranted to go out of the Church to Prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. 23, we disproved
before; but how he is consistent with himself, in asserting these Prophets to
be extraordinary officers (page 65) and yet to be confined in their exercise to
a particular Church (page 73. 85. 109.) we know not.

Arg. 6. His sixth Argument is taken from, Romans 10 15. concerning mission,
Vind. Revind. page 109.

Because many build so much upon that place, we insisted largely upon it, he
replyeth very little to what we say, but brings an Argument to prove, that
gifted men, as gifted, are not sent, and it rises to this,

They are neither immediately, nor mediately sent, Ergo not at all.

He concludes that we must say, they are sent immediately; for if it be
mediately, it must be by his Church, commanding, Electing or Ordaining.

If it be immediately, then by Christ's own voice, or by a sign from heaven; but
he faith we have found out two others ways. 1. By his revealed will in his
word. 2. By his providence, etc vind. Revind. page 112.

Ans. 1. We say, that God sends by the me^ns of his word and providence, but
we no where call these an immediate mission. We use these words [it is not an
immediate mission, but mediate, by the word] Preacher Sent. page 130.

2. Gods commanding men to Preach, is his sending, Jer. 14. ver. 14. 15. I sent
them not, what is that? neither have I commanded them. His not commanding is
his not sending; therefore his commanding is his sending, so Mat. 10. 5. Mat.
28. 19. Christ's commanding them [go Preach] is his sending. We have proved that
gifted menare commanded to preach, and that proves that God sends them by his
word.

Let him prove that Ordaining or any act of a Presbytery is Gods sending,
unless in the sense we mentioned, Preach. Sent. page 137. which will not at
all serve his purpose, because no Authority to Preach is conferred by the
mission we there speak of.

We do not say, that Gods commanding men in his written word to believe,
repent, etc. is called sending; yet such commands in the word, are mediate
Calls to such works, though no men should urge such duties upon those that are
to perform them. So, his commanding gifted men to Preach, by his word, is a
mediate Call, and his saying by that word, go, is a mediate mission, though no
Presbytery by Ordination or otherwise faith go.

3. That sending makes them Officers we deny. That no man can send another, but
he is in Office, as to that whereabout he is sent, in a large sense we grant;
but that sending sets men over those to whom they are sent, or makes them
Officers in a strict sense, we utterly deny; neither does any thing he faith
(page 113.) prove it. The Kings Ambassador is his officer in the former, but
not in the latter sense, for every Officer properly so is superior to those
that are the object or terminus of his Office, so are not Ambassadors unto
them to whom they are sent, and however unless the mission, Romans 10 15. could
be proved to be Ordination, the Argument thence comes to nothing.

And many more words are spent about the traveling of Paul and others from
place to place, and many other matters* also which were no greater Gospel
mysteries then this, though it be understood of a mission of those who before
were made Preachers, and not of an office-making mission, especially seeing
their sending was to the Gentiles, which was a thing in those days, so much
questioned by the Jews.

His other exceptions (page 114.) against a providential sending, viz. 1. That
none can run before they be sent. 2. That then the creep. houses, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
were sent, must needs be vain; seeing in the same page he confesses that we do
not own a bare providential sending, without a command by the word.

4. What he says (Vind. Revind. p. 115.) gives no evidence that Ordination is
the mission intended.

1. That the command of God in his word is sending, we have proved. And that
Act. 13. 3. cannot in the least prove Ordination to be mission, he might have
seen proved, Preacher Sent. page 253 254.

2. That Ordination of Officers by a Church to it self cannot strictly be
called sending, proves that Ordination is not mission. If as in the case of
Deacons, Act 6. there may be Ordination without mission, then these are
separable each from other, and so are not the same.

Page 115. He says the mission mentioned, Mat. 10. ver. 5. 6. 7. and Mat. 28.
was extraordinary mission. It is true, they had it immediately from the mouth
of Christ* men in these days mediately, and so the way is different, but the
mission may be the same still. Christ by his own voice commanded his Disciples
to watch, Mat. 24. ver. 42. and 25. 13 and 26. ver. 41. and the same which were
immediate commands to them, are mediate commands to us to watch, and the
watching is the same, and so may the mission then and now be the same. And if
Mat. 28. 19. were not the same mission that others have now, why does he
allege that place to prove Preaching and Baptizing in the same Commission.
Vind. page 35. Vind. Revind. page 92. 94. and say that it does establish a
constant Office of the Ministry to the worlds end? And to be sure the Apostles
mission was not Ordination.

As for a mission to the whole Catholic Church, which he speaks of, p. 117.
it is an unscriptural notion, and no reason being produced to countenance it,
we should but waste paper to multiply words about it; and this is our answer to
his fifth chapter.

CHAP. V.
Concerning Apollo and John's baptism, as also the Texts for Election.

OUr argument, from the preaching of Apollo is such as spiritual weapons being
wanting to fight with it, he is fleeing to the carnal weapons of bitter words,
and seeks that way to prevail against it.

We had occasion to say that the baptism of John and the baptism of Christ are
distinguished each from other. Hereupon he says (page 118.) This argument (as
to the matter of it) is purely Popish and false, as to the form of it, and its
usage in this case is primarily Socinian; as to both, false, and no way
conclusive. And diverse arguments he brings to prove John's baptism and
Christ's to be the same; We grant they are the same in kind, they are not two
Baptismes, and so all his Arguments are needless and concern not us.

But that the baptism of John is (as we said) distinguished from the Baptism
of Christ, is generally asserted by Protestant writers, and may appear,

Argu. 1. From the defectiveness of that knowledge which reaches no further
then John's Baptism, Act. 18. 25. It had been in vain to say, he knew [onely]
the Baptism of John, if there had been nothing more to be known besides what
was in that baptism: and his learning the way of God more perfectly from
Aquila and Priscilla, ver. 26. does intimate the imperfection of it. Now if any
thing be to be known, besides what belonged to John's Baptism, it must belong
to Christ's Baptism, and so proves them to be distinguished.

Argu. 2. From clear Scripture, Luke 7. ver. 28. He that is least in the
Kingdom of God is greater then he, i. e. then John Baptist. So Mat. 11. ver.
11. (...) i. e. Praeftantior, nempe quoad genus doctrinae quippe quae tum erit
long illustrior and jucundior piscat. Inloc. How could the least in the
Kingdom of God be greater then John, if his Baptism were not differenced from
Christ's?

Argu 3. From the non-appointment either of Ordination, or of those Officers
which are to be Ordained, until after the Baptism of John; it was impossible
to know by John's Baptism that there should be Pastors and Teachers, or that
they should receive such an Ordination: the institution for these Offices did
not come until afterward, and are only to be found amongst the Doctrines of
Christ, and so prove a difference between the Baptismes, let any show an
institution for these amongst any of the doctrines of John, otherwise, Act. 18
ver. 25. Apollo's Preaching when he knew only the Baptism of John (which did
give no knowledge of Ordination) is a full proof, that he did, and others may
preach without ordination; Dr. Collings, Vind. Revind. p. 117. 118. uses these
words; Bellarmine and other Jesuits and Papists say, that the baptism of
Christ and John were distinguished,-but I cannot tell that any Protestants said
so, before our brethren. And page 121. he adds these words, That our
brethren may be ashamed ever to bring this argument into the field again; I
must tell them, that as the Papists laid the foundation, so the blasphemous
Socinian was the first I ever met with, who built upon it.

Reader, if the odious names of Papist and Socinian can raise such a dust as to
blind thine eyes, thou will be in danger here to loose sight of the truth, but
that these charges are altogether groundless in the present case, may appear,

1. Because we do not distinguish them as (Papists do) in the substance, but
only in the circumstance; we did not say they are diverse kinds of baptismes,
but diverse in the manner of Revelation, and in this they whom he cites
against us are for us, and Chemnitius expressly treats of, and asserts the
difference. Exam. Con. Trid. can. de Bapt. Will Dr. Collings say, that nothing
can be distinguished unless it be diversified in kind? Is not a man in a
married state distinguished from himself in a single state? Is not the new
Moon distinguished from the old, yet the same Moon? Surely as well may John's
baptism be distinguished from Christ's.

2. Because many both ancient and modern writers (who were neither Papists nor
Socinians) have asserted the baptism of John and Christ to be distinguished,
yea, some of them have gone further then we in this matter. Cyprian who
flourished about the year of our Lord 250. uses these word (...) Praeparabat
viam Domino Joannes lavando exterius Corpora, ut praecederet exterius lavacrum
secuturum baptisma, in quo conferretur animarum ablutio, and peccatorum
remissio. Praecessit quod er at ex part ut consummatio sequeretur. Cyprian. De
baptismo Christi and manifestatione Trinitatis, page 436.

And of the same mind was Tertullian and other of the Ancients.

A^^o Aretius says, Ministerium suum baptizandi distinguit a Christi baptismo.
Ipse vos baptizabit in spiritu Sancto and igni; primum fatetur baptizandi munus
utrique esse commune, sed in se plurimum differ, etc. Aret. in M^^. 3. v. 11.
pa^. 133.

Piscator in Mat. 3. v. 11. page 70. Discrimen tantum est in circumstantia
temporis quia Johannes baptizavit in Christum paulo post manifestandum, Acts
19. 4. at Apostoli illorumque successores baptizarunt and baptizant in Christum
jam manifestatum.

Spanhem. Du^. Evang. par. 3. page 72. 73. gieth a distinction, and then says,
Applicatio distinctionis est eandem fuisse baptismi Johannis substantiam,
essentiam, significationem, efficatiam quae baptismi Christi; Discrimen
reperiri tantum in circumstantiis and accidentalibus, (...) page 73. in
circumstantis temporis quia baptismus Johannis anterior, in modo
significationis, quia baptizabat in Christum venturum, in efficatia spiritus,
quae Christo jam plene manifesto major, and aliis id genus.

Calvin in Act. 19. 4. our baptism at this day does not differ any thing from
it (i. e. from John's baptism) save only that Christ is already revealed, and
in his death and resurrection our salvation is made perfect.

Keckerman. S^st. Theol. l. 3. page 453.

Johannes baptismus quoad substantiam idem fuit cum baptismo Christi,
^^iamsitempore, aut aliis quibusdam circumstantiis fuerit ^iversus.

To the same purpose speaks Vrsin. catech. p. 2. page 432.

Trelcatius Instit. Theol. l. 2. page 204, 205. Duae sunt causae cur inter suum
and Christi baptismum distinguat. Pri^r ut notet differentiam inter baptismum
extrenum aquae and baptismum internum spiritus; altera* ut distinguat inter
personam and officium suum, and inter personam and ^fficium Christi, etc. Qui
patris de discrimine utriusque baptismi egerunt, aut de circumstantiis and modo
patefactionis Christi egerunt tantum, non de substantia aut efficatia* ut
Origines, Justi^us, Nazianzenus* Chrysostom. Cyrillus: aut de baptismo sive
externo Johannis, sive interno Christi seperatim, ut Basilius, Tertul. Cypria
Hieron. aut humanitas a veritatis trumite aberrarunt, ut Agustinus, page 206.
in answer to the Papists objection from that very place, Acts 19. v: 3. 4. 5.
he uses these words, ex ambigua significatione vocas baptismi nihil sequitur.
Nec enim baptismus, a quam solum significat, sed aut re, baptismi, aut ipsam
Johannis doctrinam.

Mr William Lyford in his Apology for the public Ministry by way of reply to
this very argument from Apollo's preaching without ordination, page 26. uses
these words; The baptism of John and of Christ distinguished, Acts. 19. v. 4.
5. are not two baptismes of water, but only one with water which is called
John's baptism, Acts 19 3. and the Lord baptism, Acts 8. 16. But Christ's
baptism in distinction from John's was the pouring forth of the holy Ghost upon
the Apostles, and others in those days, as St Peter does expound it, Acts 11.
15. 16. etc.

From all this it is evident, that although some Protestant writers, as Calvin
Piscator, Spanhemius and others have strongly asserted the baptism of John and
Christ to be ^^e same, as to the substance and essence o^ them; yet even they,
and many others before them, as Cyprian, Tertull. -- have asserted, that the
baptism of John and Christ were distinguished, at least in Circumstances, and
secundum modum patefactionis Christi.

And the aforementioned Mr. Lyford (though he was against preaching without
ordination, yet) grants the baptism of John and Christ to be distinguished in
that very place which we allege for it, Acts 19. 4. 5.

Wollebius, Theol. page 126. says, there is baptismusfluminis seu aquae and
luminis seu doctrinae, Mat. 3: 11: Mat: 22: 25: Acts 18: 25: And Scharpius
Symphon. page: 37. says baptism is taken Synecdochi^e cum non tantum pro
externo baptismo, sed etiam pro tota doctrina sumitur, and ita in baptisma
Johannis baptisati dicuntur, ita Mat. 21. 25. baptisma Ioh. quod fuit pars
Ministerii pro toto ministerio vel ut sigi^^um pro tota doctrina obsignata
sumitur. And thus our assertion may diverse ways hold true; for John's water
baptism, Mat. 3. 11. is distinguished from Christ's baptism with the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, Acts 1^ 5.

And the baptism of John, i. e. his doctrine, is distinguished from the baptism
of Christ, i. e. from those doctrines which may be called the baptism of
Christ, wherein are contained many things about Gospel Churches, Gospel
Officers and Ordination, etc. which neither Apollo, nor any other could know by
the baptism of John, the revelation of them being in order of time after John's
baptism, and this difference is sufficient to clear our argument. We neither
deny (as the Papists do) that grace might be conserred by the Spirit of Christ
in or with the baptism of John; nor do we assert (as the Papists do) that all
who were baptized with the baptism of John, ought to be baptized again with the
baptism of Christ: Nor are we yet persuaded that those Acts 19. were rebaptized
with water baptism, though Musculus, and learned Za^chy and others (who were
neither Papists nor Socinians) were of that judgment, as we say with Dr. Ames.
(Bell. Enerv. t. 3. l. 2. p. 297.) Si rebaptizati fuerunt, non fuit hoc propter
imperfectionem baptismi Johannis, sed propter aberrationem scioli alicujus, a
quo baptizati fuerunt. Yet we are not persuaded that v. 5. is a continuation of
Paul's narration of John's baptism, but we shall not for the present contend
about that.

We shall add but this, who has most cause to be ashamed, we for bringing such
an argument, or Dr. Collings for giving such a reply, let the Reader judge.

The residue of his book is spent about the three Scriptures which we bring for
Election, viz. Acts 1. Acts 6. and Acts 14. and the peoples ability to choose,
John 10. we shall reply very briefly.

1. As to Acts 1. v. 15. 23. how much it speaks for the peoples Election, may
be seen, Preacher Sent. page 1^7. etc. In answer to his objection we say,

1. Himself uses a like argument from a greater Officer to a less, Vind.
Minister. Evang. p* 31, 32. for ordination he alleges, Acts 13. 3. and uses
these words. Their being Apostles makes but the argument afortiori better. If
God in his wisdom thought it fit that his Apostles that were most eminently
gifted with the holy Ghost should yet be solemnly set a part to the work of the
Ministry, how much more requisite is it for those who has no such gifts and
indowments? We may now turn his reply to us (Vind. Revind. page 122.) upon
himself, and say, because all the people of a country may choose Parliament
men by the Law, it will not follow that they may ch^se Justices of the peace,
etc. and the answer is as strong against his argument from Acts 13. 3. for
Ordination, as it can be against our Argument from Acts. 1. 23. for Election;
and so either his own argument must be naught, or else ours is good, for both
stand upon the same foot; we may put in Election for Ordination, and use his
own words, thus; If God in his wisdom thought it fit that his Apostle that was
most eminently gifted and endued with the Holy Ghost, should be chosen by the
people, how much more requisite is it for Pastore and Teachers who have no such
gifts and indowments? as to his instance we say, The people in choosing
Parliament men to make them Laws, either choose Justices of peace, who are
established by their Laws, or abridge themselves of a liberty to choose them.

2. If (...) should be translated, and two stood, (as he renders it, page 122)
it must be by Gods direction, else it would not have been followed with Gods
approbation in that after Election, v. 24. 26. neither could they have prayed
in faith, v. 24. that the Lord would show whether of these two he had chosen,
if that act v. 23. had not given them a knowledge that one of these two (and
not any other of the company) should be chosen, which must be by some visible
tokens thereof. And if God witnessed this to them mediately, we know not of any
other means besides the Election of the people which we are pleading for. If
it be said it was immediately and (as he supposes p. 122.) by an extraordinary
motion of the Holy Spirit, as they at least might think, as it is not like that
the Spirit should so stir up two to offer themselves unto aservice, which it
was certain but one of them should be appointed unto, so there is not a
syllable in the Text to countenance such a conjecture. And their thinking* it
to be from the spirit, could not have given a ground for that prayer, v. ^4.

3. Whereas he tells us (Vind. Revind. p. 122. 123.) if any did choose, it is
not said the multitude did it, and he conceives by Disciples. v. 15. only the
Apostles are meant, distinguished by this name from the (...) We answer it was
in the midst of the 120. that Peter stood up and spoke, for they are expressly
said to be (...) in one place, and therefore not only the Apostles, but the
120 were meant by Disciples, Acts 1. 15. for, those in the midst of whom he
stood up are called Disciples.

Again, it is not said that besides the Disciples there was 120. but the number
of names (...) in one place was about 120. and therefore the Apostles (being in
that same place as appears, ver. 13, 14.) were part of the 120* and of the
(...) there mentioned.

And as it were purposely to answer this objection of the term Disciple being
distinguished from (...) it is said Luke 6. verse. 17. (...) the company of ^is
Disciples. And that the directions about the choice should be given to all the
120. in that one place, and only the eleven Apostles (who least needed such
directions) should be the only choosers, who can imagine it?

4. Whereas he says (page 123.) God here chose. We answer, The Election of two
out of the company, was given to the Disciples, the Election of one of these
two belonged to God, because else he could not have had an immediate Call, or
have been an Apostle.

Suppose it were referred to the people of a County to pitch upon two, and this
determined that one of the two should be a Parliament man, or some other
officer to the County, it would be reckoned that the people had a great
privilege, yea that they did chose the Parliament man or other officers,
though the choice of the Supreme Magistrate did determine which of the two
should stand: so in the case in hand the peoples choice did determine that one
of the two should be an Apostle, though God chose the one. And if he will say
(as page 123.) that this is just nothing, let him consider that the word used
to express the peoples Election, Act. 1. 23. is (...) which is the same that
is used to express Ordination, Act. 6. 3. Tit. 1. ver. 5. only with the
addition of the Preposition (...) which (as learned men observe) does not
specifically alter the signification, and so (according to his assertion)
Ordination must be just nothing too.

2. As to Act. 6. ver. 3, 4, 5. it clearly holds forth the peoples power for
election.

We have evidenced the validity of our Argument from the less to the greater
affirmatively, Preach. Sent. page 225. 226. but if he likes it not this way,
we have argued from this Text for the peoples election, from the less to the
greater Negative, page 227. and surely it will hold one of these ways.

Object. 1. That Church, Acts 6. was the Universal Church, as well as a
particuliar Church; as Adam though a particular man, yet was at that time all
mankind, etc. Vind. Revind. p. 124.

Answ. Nothing can be said to be both particular and Universal.

1. Universal and particular are distinct species: as nothing is proper and
common, ordinary and extraordinary at the same time, so nor Universal and
particular.

2. Universal and particular are relata, nothing is both relate and Correlate
in the same relation, Ergo, nothing can be particular and Universal. Let him
not think to improve this against us upon the rule of relations, posito uno
ponitur and alterum.

Universal fundamental* we grant, not f^rma^. A multitude of Churches, and in
each the common nature, really particular, conceptively Universal, according to
the rule, Universal est unum in multis.

3. Adam was a particular man, an individuum in the day of his Creation, and
afterward nothing more, nothingless: the common nature was in him, apt to be
predicated of many, but it was not proper to say Adam was mankind, or Adam was
a Catholic man. Homo est Universal was true, not est Vniversalis.

4. He takes Universal for an integrum made up of many as parts; and how can
an integrum exist in one member, a heap in one stone, a flock in one sheep, etc?

Object. 2. The persons choosing were such as to the most of which the Holy
Ghost was fallen, and they had discerning spirits, Act. 2. Acts 4. 31.

Answ. If extraordinary gifts made the act extraordinary as to Election, then
so also as to Ordination, and therein its no president; for, the persons had as
extraordinary gifts who ordained, Act. 6. v. 6.

Object. 3. The power as to the choice of Church Officers, is moral, not
natural, viz. such a power as they have from the will of God, nothing can
demonstratively be concluded, because the will of another being the fountain of
the power, acts freely, and may make it lawful to choose the greater, and yet
unlawful to choose the less, etc. Vind. Revind. page 125.

Answ. 1. Our Argument is the same that the London Ministers use; only we
apply it to election, they to Ordination, as may be seen Preach. Sent. page
224. And therefore it is no certain Argument for them, if it be not for us.

2. The main (if not the only) argument for Church Government by Classical,
Provincial, National and ecumenical Assemblies, is taken from the less to the
greater Affimatively; and many things speak it to be invalid and non-conclusive
in that case, which cannot be alleged in this.

Thus they argue from, Mat. 18. see Answer. of Assemb. page 178.

3. An Argument from the less to the greater in some cases is so certain, that
it is a ground for ^aith to act upon, Mat. 6. ver. 26. Luke 12. 6. 7. and 11.
v. 13. as we showed, Preacher Sent. page 126.

And must it not needs be a certain Argnment when those pleaded for are
undoubtedly invested with power to put forth the same act (not distributing
only, but collectively and) in the same manner, and when an instituted
relation cannot be introduced, nor the ends of it in an ordinary way be
attained without the act, and when other grounds and reasons are more strong
for exerting the acts toward the greater then toward the less?

And this is the case in the present Argument, for the people in a Church are
certainly invested with power to choose Deacons, Act. 6. and election is
Essential (as we have elsewhere proved) unto the Pastoral relation, and so it
cannot be without it, neither in an ordinary way could there be a free
submission to, or a receiving edification by such Pastors as are imposed upon a
people, which being matters more especially of soulconcernment, do speak the
grounds to be more strong, for a Churches choosing Pastors, who are the
greater, then Deacons who are the less.

Object. 4. The height of argument from this Text is, It is probable -- -- And
we say it is not probable. 1. Because a Church is more able to judge of the
abilities of a Deacon, then of a Pastor. 2. Because this Church was more able
to judge of both then any Church is now, Vind. Revind. page 26.

Ans. 1. That Churches of Christ now are able to judge of the abilities of
Pastors, we proved, Preacher Sent page 225. 237. and so his improbabilities
vanish.

2. There is nothing in the Text to prove that the ability of that Church
(above any now) was any reason of its choosing Deacons.

And if it were, that renders it as improbable that any Officers now should
judge of a man's abilities so much as to be a Deacon; for as no Church, so no
Officers in these days are extraordinarily gifted.

Oject. 5. (...) does not in Scripture always signify, either every
individual person or thing under the genus or species spoken of, nor yet the
major part. That neither the whole, nor yet the major part of the Church was
present, be would prove,

1. This Church must consist of above 8000. souls, Act. 1. 15. and 2. 41. and
4. 4. 2. It was at this time in a faction, Act. 6. 1. Vind. Revind. page 127.
Ans. 1. Notes of Universality have their limitations and subject a materia,
but where the subject matter is Universal, there is no exception. In Act. 6.
both substantive and adjective is Universal, ver. 5. The saying pleased, or was
accepted coram toto populo. The Pharisees tythed every herb, Luke 11. ver. 42.
not every one in the world, but every herb which they possessed, Luke 18. 12.

2. It does not appear that the number was so great as is supposed the 3000,
converted ones, Act. 2. 41. were of them which came together to hear, of many
were but comorantes Hierosolymis, not dwelling there, though it be so
translated, ver. 5. So Calvin, Aretius, etc. who, the Feasts being over,
removed to their own home. Nor can it be proved that the 5000. mentioned. Act.
4. were believers, but hearers, ver. 4. many of them which heard the wor^,
believed; and the number of the men was about five thousand.

It is not probable that there ever was a greater presence of God then at
Pentecost. A conflux of many was ordinary in those days, Luke 12. 1.

It is a common thing for men at varience to meet together for the choosing
Arbitrators to end their differences, and so might the multitude (though
divided, or as he phraseth it in a faction) meet together and agree in the
choice of Deacons.

3. As to, Act. 14. ver. 23. it clearly holds forth a Churches power to choose
its Officers.

Obj. 1. Were not those that ordained or chose those that confirmed and
exhorted, ver. 22. -- if they were, it is sure enough Paul and Barnabas were
the men. He enquireth, whether (...) be not joined by apposition with (...) and
(...), or what other Syntax of the words according to any Grammatical Rules can
be endured? he says the Disciples are the persons confirmed and exhorted, etc.
Vind. page 128.

Ans. 1. That those which Ordained or chose by suffrages were, not only those
that confirmed and exhorted, ver. 22. Or that the Disciples, the Churches did
(...), and not Paul and Barnabas only, we have so fully proved (Preacher Sent.
page 230. etc.) that we are persuaded no impartial reader (who shall compare
his Book and ours together) will in the least question it, by all that he has
said.

2. (...) does answer to the question, if it be asked who did (...), Vid.
Preacher Sent. p. 243.

3. (...) is dicitur, qui praeest (...), see Dr. Ames, Bellarm. Enerv. T. 2.
page 97.

And thus Paul and Barnabas might be said (...) though they only went before
the Churches in the choice, as we proved, Preacher Sent. page 230. etc.

The people had their free Election, but least there should any Tumult arise,
Paul and Barnabas fit as chief moderators, says Calvin in loc.

And therefore if (...) be joined by apposition with (...) and (...) this might
intimate that Paul and Barnabas were moderators or directors in the choice, but
it cannot deny the people to be the choosers.

We have given arguments (and Dr. Ames did it before) to evidence that the
people must be the choosers, yet [an it may be] is sufficient to show the
non-conclusiveness of our brethrens arguments for the denying the peoples
choosing.

As to his 4. particular, Vind. Revind. page 129. 130. we say,

1. That (...) is never used either in Scriptures or other authors before Luke;
for ordination or imposition of hands is enough to prove that (without special
reason which is not yet produced) it cannot be taken in such a sense here.

As it is not granted that, Ordaining is the constituting creating act of an
Officer, so it is not proved that (...) expresses any act which is used in
ordination.

2. That (...) is, Creare per suffragria, to create by suffrages, see Stephan.

Even Dr. Field of the Church l. 5. c. 55. tells us, that (...) do originally
signify that kind of Election which is made [by many] expressing their
consent, and giving their voices or suffrages by lifting up of their hands, etc.

And why should it be a riddle to Dr. Collings, that we [according to the
common usage of the word] should express the signification by suffrages or
voices, when himself gives a signification of it (page 130.) which takes
neither (...) nor (...) into it, unless it can be proved that (...) was used
to express a choice in an assembly by the suffrage only of one or two,
nothing is said to the case, Acts 14. 23. or against our argument; Paul and
Barnabas being but two, there could be no place for suffrages, say the London
Ministers, Jus. Divin. Min. page 130.

According to their Grammar as well as ours, two persons could not make
suffrages.

He requires, why could not Paul and Vind. Rev. page 129.
Barnabas make suffrages? surely they made two, and that is the Plural number
sure.

We answer, they could not, partly because (...) is an act of many, especially
when in an Assembly, partly because whatsoever is put to suffrages may be
determined by the major voice, in case of dissent; but this was impossible
where there was but two, for Paul could not out-vote Barnabas, nor Barnabas
out-vote Paul; If Paul had given his voice for one, and Barnabas had discented
and had given his voice for another against Paul, we ask who should have
carried it*

When the word denotes the act of the indivisible God, Acts 10 v. 41. it is
not taken properly (as it is in Acts 14. 23.) but figuratively, as God is said
to have eyes, ears, hands, etc. So by a metaphor he is said (...) and this
answers his second particular, Vind. Revind. page 129. 130.

3. The greek is as strong for us as the English translation, for (...)
denotes the peoples Election by suffrages, and is not so clearly in apposition
with (...) and (...) as he supposes, but rather in di-junction, it being (...)
(...) and the article (...) habet locum in divisienibus, according to Grammar.

And if the praying and fasting related not to the constitution of the Elders
(as the Dr. says. page 130.) but to the Apostles departure, then the whole
verse may refer to the people; for it was the usual practice of the Churches,
to commend the Apostles unto the grace of God by solemn prayer in such
partings, Acts. 14. 26. Acts 15. 40. And Paul chose Silas and departed, being
recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God.

4. We had proved that the word (...) must be taken for Election or choosing by
sufferages, and not for or^ination, and thence infer that Paul and Barnabas
could not be the only persons that did (...)

Our argument for that inferrence is this;

That which is never in Scripture given to the Officers, and is undoubtedly
given to the people, cannot be the act of Paul and Barnabas only.

But the power (...) to choose officers by suffrages, is never in Scripture
given to the Officers, and is undoubtedly given to the people, Acts 6.

Ergo, The powe (...) to choose officers by suffrages, cannot be the act of
Paul and Barnabas only.

And whether this be a begging the question, or a proving what we assert, let
the Reader judge. He bids us (Vind. Revind. page 131.) see if there be one word
in the Epistle to Timothy or Titus for the peoples choice.

We turn it upon himself, let him see if there be one word in those Epistles
for the officers choice, or for the giving the power of election unto Officers.
What he adds (Vind. Revind. page 132 133.) is to deny that every particular
Church is able to judge of the abilities of a Minister.

We have proved their ability from John 10. v. 4. 5. See Preacher Sent. page
225. 237.

Ob. 1. How can they judge if a Minister be able to convince againsaying
Socinian, or Arminian, or Papist, who know not what any of them hold? Vind.
Revind. page 132.

Answ. 1. It is possible for those to judge whether a man be able to convince
gainsayers, who knows not what many of them hold: The Bishops or Presbiters,
who were administrators of Ordination in England 10. 20. 30. or 40 years ago,
could not know what Quakers and other blasphemers would hold, yet surely he
will not say that they could not judge whether those which they Ordained were
able to convince gainsayers: And why may not a Church as well be able to judge
of a Ministers ability to convince gainsayers, though it knows not what
Socinians or Arminians hold?

2. Although some Church members know not errors by the name of Socinians, etc.
yet if they hear them broached, they are able to judge that they are contrary
to sound dostrine.

As for those which turn from the faithful word in matters fundamental, as
they are unfit to judge of a Ministers qualifications, so they are not duly
qualified to be Church members.

Ob. 2. What belongs to Christ's Sheep, as Christ's sheep, belongs to every
sheep, but this does not belong to every sheep of Christ. Ergo,

I hope our brethren will not say, this belongs to the woman, yet are they
Christ's sheep too. -- Nor that every man has ability; if they do and will give
us leave, we will pick them out Twenty out of every hundred, etc. Vind. Revind.
page 133.

Answ. 1. If it does not belong to every sheep of Christ to judge of
ministerial ability, yet the reason may be, because some want a word or
institution of Christ to empower-them thereunto, as in the case of women; not
because they want ability, about which the present question is.

2. It must belong to every sheep of Christ, if John 10. v. 5. reaches so far
as he concludes it does, page 133. For such sheep as are hearers, are there
asserted to have both ability and liberty to judge what teachers they are to
follow, and who they are to avoid.

That one sold, v. 16. is one specifically, Jews and Gentiles have one kind of
Church order, not one Numerically, all do not make up one Church of Churches.

But how he can reconcile his own expressions upon this Text, and make them
agree in one, we know not; for he tells us,

The Text says, my sheep, not my fold; what is here made to belong to sheep,
belongs to every sheep, Vind. Revind. page 133. If our Brethren say, the Text
is to be understood of Christ's sheep as folded together in the Church, we grant
what they say, but say it is meant of the one fold, ver. 16.

Does not one of the expressions deny it to be Christ's fold, and the other
grant it to be his fold, that is there intended?

3. Although this or that Churchmember, taken singly, may want ability to
judge of ministerial qualifications, yet all the members of a Church (formed
according to Christ's institution) being gathered together in Christ's Name, to
wait for counsel at his mouth in such a matter, will be able (and so it may
well belong to them) to judge, whether a man holds fast the faithful word, be
apt to teach, and be able by sound Doctrine to exhort, and convince gainsayers.

CHAP. VI.
Showing that Officers stand in relation (as Officers) to a particular Church
only, not to a Universal Church in way of reply to Mr. Pooles exceptions in
the three first chapters of his Book.

THere came lately to our hands, a Book entitled, A moderate enquiry into the
warrantableness of the preaching of gifted and unordained persons, written by
Mr. Poole at the desire and appointment of the Provincial Assembly of London;
in way of reply to some part of our Book, entitled, The Preacher Sent. We
shall give some brief animadversions upon the most considerable passages of his
Book, and so leave it to the Reader to judge between us.

The Provincial Assemblies definition of Office is this, The Office of the
Ministry is a spiritual relation to the whole employment of the Ministry, in a
Person qualified, founded upon a special and regular Call, Jus Div. Min. page 3.

This we excepted against, because either it altogether omiteth or else
determines employment to be the correlate unto this relation, and either way
it is very faulty. For, it is grossly to swarve from the right Rules of a
definition, to omit the correlate in defining a particular relation, which is
Essential to the thing defined; even themselves say, that Relatives cannot be
understood the one without the other, Jus Divin. Min. p. 2. we infer, Ergo they
cannot be defined aright, the one without the other.

And there is nothing in their definition to be the correlate, unless it be
[employment,] and that this cannot be it, our four Arguments do evidence,
Preacher Sent. page 5. 6. 7.

So that Mr. Poole may see that our Arguments were not only brought to batter
down one expression brought in, only obiter and occasionally as he supposes,
page 3. but to discover a very considerable defect or imperfection in their
definition, which was made more obvious by that expression.

He says (page 3.) it was not the design of the Assembly to deny the Ministry
to be a relation to a Church, nor was it their business accurately to insist
upon the notions of relate and correlate; they never called the work of the
Ministry the correlate, but only obiter they asserted the Office of the
Ministry to be better defined, by relation to the work, then to a particular
Church, which he says we have not disproved.

Answ. We speak nothing of an accurate insisting on the notions of relate and
correlate, but we say, it is a false definition of a particular relation, if
nothing be asserted as the correlate, and therefore their not denying a Church,
nor asserting work to be the correlate, will not help, unless they had affirmed
and proved something else to be it.

Our proving (in the second question) a particular Church only to be the
correlate, is enough to disprove that expression; for Office must needs be
better defined by its reference to its correlate, then by its end.

His instance about a King (page 3.) cannot salve the business; For it were
very improper to say, the Office of a King is a relation to Ruling, and to give
this as the definition of that; and as absurd were it to say, that the Office
of a King is better defined by Ruling, then by relation to his Subjects or
Kingdom; and it is not parallel unless it runs us. And so it is absurd to
say that the abstract Ministry is better defined by relation to the work, then
to a particular Church; for we have proved that such a Church is the correlate,
work not so, but only the end.

That office is a predicamental, and not a Transcendendal or nominal relation,
and that a potential being is not sufficient in such a relation, he may see in
our reply to Dr. Collings.

But to clear the matter more fully, and make way for the next question, as a
clew leading the right way out of this controversy, we shall give this
distinction. The terms Office and Officer may be taken largely or strickly, in
a general or a special sense.

1. In an general sense, there is an Officer to man, and the (...), or work it
self is the Office wherein one man does serve another: thus a m^n may be an
Officer from an inferior to a superior, or from one equal to another, and
have no relation proper or Predicamental growing thereupon. In this large
sense, gifted men preaching, yea any Church Members exercising any gift, or
doing any work for the profit of the body or Church, may be called officers,
and the work an Office, as Romans 12. 4. (...) is translated Office.

But this is an Officer without Rule or Government, of whom in this controversy
we speak not: In this sense, though Apostles or others be considered as
Officers to heathens, it does not at all contradict us.

2. In a special sense there is an officer over man: as a Prince over his
subjects, a master over his servants, so a pastor over his flock; this is an
officer with power of Rule and Government.

Whenever the Scripture speaks of Office or Officer, notified by the Titles
of Pastor, Teacher, Elder, or Bishop, they are taken thus, Acts 20. 28. Hebr.
13. 7. 17. 1 These. 5. 12. And thus we constantly considered it in our former
book called, The Preacher Sent. In this sense Apostles were not officers, nor
did preach as Officers to the heathens; they had no power of Rule or
Government over them, 1 Corin. 5. 12. What have I to do to judge those that
are without?

Quest. Whether officers stand in relation (as officers) to a particular Church
only?

We hold the affirmative part; Mr Poole would have them officers to the whole
Church, (page 6. 7. etc.) by which we suppose he intends a Church Catholic
visible.

To his premises and preamble we say,

The Judgment of Churches is not our Rule, but the Scripture, and we can find
no such Synods as he speaks of there. Acts 15. holds forth that one Church
may send messengers in difficult cases to an other Church as Antioch did there
to Jerusalem, for help and council, but it cannot be proved that any acts of
Government were there put forth, toward any absent Churches, and therefore
this is no warrant for provincial or Occumenical Synods.

We wish that all differences in judgment amongst the Saints were at an end,
but we are not to silence a truth of Christ, because some dear friends are
dissenters, neither is the difference between congregational brethren so great
in this point as he supposes, We do not obtrude our Notions upon the world,
but have published our persuasions with our grounds, desiring that they may be
weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, and that either others may receive
light from us, or we from them.

Premise, 1. He premiseth (page 6.) a Minister may be a Minister to the whole
Church, 1. Actu Secundo, actually, immediately, absolutely, and independentlie.

2. Actu primo, habitually, aptitudinally, mediately conditionally and
dependingly, so that he has a jus or power to teach every where, but may not
exercise that jus or power every where, but by the consent of the Church or
Rulers, etc.

Answ. To assert an habitual Minister or Officer, seems to us no better then
to assert an habitual King, Justice, Constable, or an habitual husband, Father,
etc.

To be habitually and conditionally a Minister to a Church, and to be no
minister to it, is all one.

1. That Ministers have a jus or power to teach every where Office-wise, is not
proved; the place alleged, [go preach the Gospel to every creature] injoyneth
the exercise of the power, and so must prove that they ought to exercise their
power every where, if it were to his purpose; but the Scriptures frequently
witness, and himself confesses that they may not exercise that power but by
the consent of the Church or Rulers.

2. That any unblameable Officers of Christ should be justly hindered from the
exercise of all Office-power, or have none that they can (in Christ's order)
exercise it upon, whilst the Office-power continues upon them, in a strange
paradox: For all that have Officepower, are actually and immediately under a
command of Christ to do office-work; as those Scriptures which speak of the
duty of Officers do abundantly testify; and so Christ should command the same
persons, at the same time, to do, and yet not to do Office-work, and then
Christ's commands should clash one with an other. Now suppose such an Officer
has no particular flock, and all Churches and Rulers deny their consent,
either from their being full of Officers, or upon other lawful accounts; in
this case he will be justly hindered from the exercise of all office-power, and
has none that he can exercise it upon; for Mr. Poole confesses (p. 6.) he may
not exercise the power, but by the consent of the Church or Rulers.

We might show many other inconveniences that the asserting officrs to have a
habitual power over a universal Church, draw along with it, but we forbear,
saying only this; It does not look like the order of Christ, that a Ministers
power should extend to the Catholic Church, when it is impossible that he
should ever exercise that power (it may be) to the thousand part of that
Church; nay, when he is by divine right fixed in a particular Church, the
residing in which, forbids his traveling to do acts of Office to the
universal.

Premis. 2. He premiseth (page 7.) that a general respect to the whole Church
is not inconsistent with a peculiar respect to some one Church.

This he illustrateth by an instance of a vast number of sheep, which twenty
shepherds are chosen to look unto; and by the German Empire, etc.

Ans. 1. We deny that there is such a whole Church as he supposes, for which
denial we have given reasons else where. And let the Reader take notice once
for all, that when ever we speak as if there were such a whole Church or
Catholic Church, we only suppose it, but do not grant it in his sense.

2. Suppose there were such a Church, we deny that any institution of Christ
has determined ordinary officers to have a general respect (as Officers) to
the whole Church; and so his infrances of a vast number of sheep, and the
Empire come to nothing.

3 A peculiar respect to some one Church is inconsistent with the same relation
to an other: for, nothing is peculiar but that which is appropriated; Israel
was Gods peculiar people, that is, his only.

As to his instance about sheep, we say, If the Master of the sheep chooses
the twenty shepherds, and commits the whole number of sheep to them, then
the actual care of every sheep is upon every one; and if but one sheep be lost,
every shepherd will fall under blame, neither will the distributing the sheep
into twenty parcels (though some be careful of their parcels) excuse any from
blame, the distribution or division being the act of the Shepherds (according
to his infrance) not the Act of the Master. If the catholic Church were thus
committed to officers, then every Officer would be blameable for the wanderings
of any one member of that Church, though their habitations were thousands of
miles distant each from other.

But Christ has committed only a particular Church or flock of his sheep, to
the charge of any one of his officers; and if others, not of a man's own flock,
do miscarry, his not seeking their reducement to the utmost of his ability and
opportunity, is a sin against charity, but not against his office according to
any Gosple rule that yet we can find. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus is not
rebaked for the miscarriages of the Church of Smyrna; nor is the Angel of the
Church of Smyrna reproved for the sins of Pergamus, or Thyatira, or Sardis,
Revel. 2, and 3. but every Angel is reproved for the sins of that particular
Church which he was set over.

As to his instance of the German Empire (page 8.) we say it has a vast
disparity in it to the case in hand, For there are no acts to be performed in
the Church (to make a double relation necessary) answerable to those in the
Empire.

If no Emperors were to be chosen, or acts of general concernement to the
whole Empire, as such, to be exerted, those Princes or Electors would not
sustain any such general relation to the whole Empire: and there being no
universal Church Officer to be chosen, or any acts of instituted worship to be
performed, which are peculiar to a universal Church, as such, hence the cases
are vastly different, and also it is very improbable that such an order should
be of Christ's appointment. They have not one by Systeme of Laws, neither are
these Electors or Princes entrusted with a joint-power for the ordinary
government of the whole, but every free Prince has power to make what Laws he
will, and if he will allow every congregational Church as entire a power within
it self, as every of those Princes has within his own Territories, we suppose
no power beyond that will belong to any but Christ himself.

Ob. The Apostles were Pastors of the whole Church, yet the work was divided
among them, and they undertook aspeciall relation to some particular parts, as
Peter to the Jews, and Paul to the Gentiles, James to Jerusalem, etc. Mr.
Poole, page 8.

Ans. 1. The Apostles were extraordinary officers, our question is only about
ordinary officers.

2. The Apostles had immediate directions from the Lord where to labor in the
work of their office, Act. 13. 4. Act. 16. 9. Act. 10. ver. 19. 20. yea that
committing of the Jews to Peter, and of the Gentiles to Paul seems to be by
immediate ducture from the spirit, Gal 2. ver. 7. He that wrought effectually
in Peter to the Apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me
toward the Gentiles. The Lords making such a division (if it were one) was
sufficient to give them a dispensation for acting in Office-work elsewhere,
until fresh instructions came.

But ordinary Officers have no such directions from the Lord, or any thing
equivalent to them, and so are obliged to perform acts of Office to all
Churches in the world, and sin if they do not, (according to him) for they have
no dispensation from the Lord for acting in any, and without that, they must
act to the utmost bounds of their relation.

3. Apostles were not so limited and confined in their Office, unto those which
especially were committed to them, as ordinary Officers are to their particular
Churches: the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to Paul, and the
Gospel of the circumcision unto Peter, Gal. 2. v. 7. but yet Paul (to use Mr.
Pools words though improper) was actually, immediately and absolutely an
officer at the same time to the Jews, hence he is often executing his office
amongst the Jews, as Act. 21. ver. 15. 17. 18. etc. And he says expressly,
the care of all the Churches was upon him daily, 2 Cor. 11. ver. 28. Ergo, He
had an actual relation to the Jewish, as well as the Gentile Churches, even to
all the Churches, and so no double relation did arise by his being the Apostle
of the Gentiles; but as a father having many children with families of their
own, may abide and continue longer with some of them then with others, yet
stands in the same relation of a father to all. So the Apostles though they
did abide more with some Churches then with others, yet no distinct relation
was introduced thereby, and therefore this instance of the Apostles is nothing
to his purpose; For, the relation of ordinary Officers to a particular Church
is such, that if they had a relation to a Universal Church, it would not be the
same but another, and so distinct, that themselves assert a double relation,
and that one (viz. that to the Church Universal) lasts, though his particular
relation cease, Jus Divin. Min. p. 151.

Neither does it appear that all the Apostles had some Churches more especially
assigned to them, then others, and those that had not, must needs be (as he
phraseth it) actually, and equally related to all Churches, and without any
such double relation, but were obliged to travel from one Church to another;
where as ordinary officers are fixed in their particular Churches, and obliged
to abide there. Mr. Poole (p. 9.) takes notice of a remarkable difference
between Teaching and Ruling, in point of the possibility of the thing, and the
edification of the Church (which (he says) is the great rule in all Church
administrations) for a Minister may jointly with others rule a far greater
proportion then he can teach: -- -he takes notice that the Apostles could not
teach every Church, yet did actually rule all the Churches at least which are
mentioned, Act. 15. etc.

Ans. 1. The question is not, whether there be a possibility of a Ministers
ruling more then he can te^^^^ but whether by Christ's appointment a Minister is
to undertake the Ruling of more then he can teach, or o^ more then a particular
Church? we can find no institution of Christ for any such thing, and without
that, edification will not be a rule sufficient to warrant the acting in
Church-administrations, when every thing may lawfully be done that is possible
to be done, then this arguing will be good.

2. It is not proved that any act of Rule, or Government was put forth, Act.
15. and there is no syllable of proof, that the Apostles power of Government
was more extensive then their teaching power, so much as in the exercise of it.

He proceeds to lay down some Arguments to prove, that Ministers are
Officers, and act as officers, to more then their own particular Churches.

Argu. 1. If Ministers are Officers, and act as Officers toward convertible
Mr. Poole p. 10.
heathens, then they are no^ Officers only to their particular congregations.
But Ministers are Officers and act as Officers toward convertible heathens.

To prove his Minor he says. 1. That Apostles were constituted Officers before
the visible Gospel Church was erected, is undeniable. 2 Such are clearly
expressed, Mat. 28. ver. 19, 20. to be the primary and immediate object of the
Apostical Office and relation.

Answ. 1. There were multitudes baptized by John, before the Apostles were
constituted Officers, Mat. 3. ver. 5, 6. and either there must be some visible
Gospel Church then erected, to which these Baptized persons were related, and
then his Argument is untrue; or else that must be a truth which he calls a
monstrous paradox (page 28.) viz. That Baptism does not admit, or make a man to
stand in relation to any Church; for they were members of the Jewish Church
before, and so were not admitted into that by their Baptism, and if no Gospel
Church was at this time erected, then their Baptism did not admit them into any
Church at all.

2. Many did visibly stand in relation to Christ before the Apostles were
constituted Officers, or had that mission, Mat. 28. therefore either his
Argument, p. 29. must be false, or else this his position. p. 10. that Apostles
were constituted Officers before the visible Gospel Church was erected, cannot
be true, of which he says, its a plain case and undeniable.

3. If the Essence of the Church had been preserved in the Apostles in case all
converted Christians had dyed (as he supposed, page 10.) how can he deny the
Church to have a being, the Apostles having a being, in whom (he says) the
Essence of the Church was?

4. We desire our distinction formerly mentioned may be remembered: we grant the
Apostles were, and others are, in a general sense, Officers to heathens: but we
deny that they were, or that others are, Officers to heathens in a special
sense, namely as over them in the Lord; and this answers his supposition,
page 10. of Christians dying and none remaining to be Preached to but heathens,
and also takes off his charge against us in the same page, for denying
Apostles to be Officers unto heathens.

5. Apostles were extraordinary officers; our question is only about ordinary
Officers, and therefore all he says is beside the question. If Apostles were
before the visible Gospel Church was erected, and if Apostles acted as Officers
toward convertible heathens, yet seeing they were extraordinary Officers, it
will not follow thence, that ordinary Officers act as Officers toward
convertible heathens.

Object. Apostles and Pastors are paralleled in this case, Ephesians. 4. verse. 11.
12. etc. the body of Christ in its latitude is the correlatum or the object of
the pastoral Office: but the body of Christ includes heathens; Therefore
heathens to be converted are the object and correlate of the pastoral office.
That heathens are a part of Christ's body, he thinks evident, they are called
his sheep, Joh. 10. ver. 16. he laid down his life for them, which he did only
for his body, Ephesians. 5. etc. Mr. Poole, page 12. 13.

Answ. 1. If by the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. ver. 11. 12. we must (as Mr. Poole
says, page 12.) necessarily understand the whole collection of all Christ's
members in all ages of the Church, all which, in Scripture phrase, go to the
making up of Christ's body, etc. then it is the mystical body of Christ that is
intended, consisting of the whole number of the elect, redeemed, justified, or
sanctified ones, and these only.

And if the body of Christ includes heathens and visibly unconverted ones (as
Mr. Poole supposes it does here) then it must be taken in this sense; but that
ministers should be Officers, or act as officers to this mystical body of
Christ, is a strange paradox; For, all the elect and called ones which lived
before the coming of Christ in the flesh, and all the Saints in heaven, and all
the elect unborn, as well as those living in this or that age of the world,
belong to this body of Christ. And now we shall turn his Argument upon himself.

The body of Christ in its latitude is the correlatum, or the object of the
Pastoral Office; but the body of Christ includes all the elect which lived
before Christ's coming in the flesh (and so before the Pastoral Office was
instituted) and all the Saints in heaven, yea heathens, even all the elect
unborn; Ergo, all the elect which lived before Christ's coming in the flesh (and
so before the Pastoral office was instituted) and all the Saints in heaven, yea
heathens, and all the elect unborn, are the object and correlate of the
Pastoral Office.

Who will not easily see the weakness of this argument: for many members of
this body, were in heaven thousands of years before any were invested with the
Pastoral Office on Earth, and surely they were not officers to those who were
in heaven, they had no need of their officr. If body be taken in this sense,
his major is apparently false. The body of Christ in its latitude is not the
correlatum or object of the pastoral office. 2. If it be understood of the
visible body of Chr. then his minor is false; The body of Christ, i. e. his
visible Church or body, does not include heathens to be converted.

Even the Text he alleges evidenceth so much, John 10. v. 16. other sheep I
have; its true those were Gentiles, heathens sheep by election; but it is
added, [which are not of this fold] which witnesses that heathens (though
sheep by predestination) yet are not folded into the visible Church of Christ.
It would be an unscriptural and an abominable assertion to say, that heathens
are members or a part of Christ's visible body or Church, which only is the
correlate of the pastoral office.

Arg. 2. The second argument is taken from 2 Corin. 5. 20. where the
reconcilable Mr. Pool p. 13.
world, which consists of such as are yet without, and no members of the
Church, are made the chief objects and correlatum of the office of the Ministry.

To whom Ministers act as Ambassadors, to them they act as officers: But
Ministers preach as Ambassadors to heathens convertible, and to be converted.
Ergo, His assumption, he says is evident for the terms, to be an Ambassador
is nothing el^e but to be an officer, etc. His assumption he would prove thus,

1. First the scripture makes no difference between a Ministers preaching to
his own Church, and to others, Ergo, there is no difference.

2. Even heathens are bound to hear Ministers preaching to them, and that not
only ex vi materiae, because of the matter they treat of, but virtute muneris,
by virtue of their Office, Luke 10. 16. etc.

Ans. 1. We deny his Major, Ministers may act as Ambassadors to them, they do
not act as officers toward in a special sense: and it is observeable that as
the word (...) is used 1 Corin. 5. 20. for [we are Ambassadors;] so (...) is
used for the work of an Ambassador from a King, Luke 14. 22. he sends [an
Embassage]; and yet the same word is used to express the wicked act of those
citizens against their King, Luke 19. 4. ^is citizens hated him, and sent (...)
an Embassage after him. It cannot be proved that those who were sent by these
citizens were officers, or acted as officers (in a special sense) in this
message, yet they acted as Ambassadors herein.

So if gifted men, or other Ministers carry the message of the Gospel to
heathens, and the reconcilable world, upon a command of Christ to go with it,
they act as Ambassadors, yet not as Officers therein.

2. As to his minor, in a general sense we grant that Ministers preach as
Ambassadors to Heathens, i. e. as those that are warranted or commanded by
Christ to do a message of peace to them, but in a strict sense they do not act
as offfcers unto heathens.

As to his proofs of his minor, we say

1. The Scripture concludes that an officer does preach as a Pastor, Bishop,
or overseer to his own Church, Acts 20. 28. as over it in the Lord, 1 These. 5.
v. 12. it no where says that he preaches under any such relation to others,
it lies upon Mr. Pool to prove it, if he will assert it: it were strange
unscriptural language to say, that God has made officers overseers to
Heathens, or set them over them; where are heathens called a man's flock? If
they were the object or correlate of the pastoral office they must be so, for
Pastor and flock are Relatives; and Ambassadors (if in office) are the same
Officers, under an other name.

And this answers his first particular, (page 14.) and proves that the
Scripture makes a difference between a Ministers preaching to his own Church
and to others; for it concludes his being in such a relation to his own
Church, as he stands not in to others, and thence must needs arise a difference
in actings.

2. Heathens are bound to hear Ministers preach, not only for their doctrine,
nor for their Office sake, but for Christ's sake who sends them with that
doctrine: if they preach only as gifted persons (not as officers) yet it may
aptly be said as Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me, etc. because
they are warranted or commanded by Christ to do the message, and so it is not
their own but Christ's; he speaks by them, they are his words, not theirs, as
in this instance: A master of a family being from home may send a message by
some friends or neighbors to his servants, commanding some work from them, if
these servants do not hear those messengers, they do not hear their master, yet
these friends or neighbors are no Officers, nor can act as officers over them,
either in doing the message, or in case of disobedience by inflicting any
punishment, etc. So if a preachers message be not heard, Christ is disobeyed
therein; concerning maintenance we have spoken in answer to Dr. Collings, and
also elsewhere in way of reply to Mr. Pool, The pronouncing of pardon and
denouncing of wrath upon believing or disobeying in preaching, are acts (as we
have sufficiently proved) that gifted men may do, without an office-relation.

Arg. 3. If conversion of heathens, etc. be the principal ground and end why
the office of the ministry was instituted, and the principal work of the
ministry, then the Office of the ministry is related to heathens.

But the convertion of heathens, etc. is the principal end why the office of
the ministry was instituted, and the principal work of the ministry so
instituted, Therefore the office of the ministry is related to heathens, their
relation must be toward those among whom their great work lies, Mr. Pool page
17.

Ans. 1. We suppose he intends that they are related to heathens as their
correlate, else he speaks nothing to the question; and then,

2. His Major may fairly be denied; The fighting with enemies, etc. is the
principal ground and end why the office of Colonels, Captains, and other
leaders of Armies were appointed, and their principal work; yet those enemies
to be fought with, are not the correlate to the office of Colonels, Captains,
etc. It is a Regiment that is the correlate to the office of a Colonel, and a
Troop or company, that is the correlate to the office of a captain: And so
heathens to be preached to are not the correlate to the office of the
Ministry, but particular Churches. The instance of Colonels, etc. shows that
a man's great work may lie among those that their relation is not toward.

3. As to the minor, that convertion of heathens, and such as are without the
Church, is a great work of officers qua gifted may be granted; but that it is
their principal work qua officers, those texts Mat. 28. and Ephesians. 4. prove not.
The office of Pastors was not instituted until Churches were constituted, had
convertion of heathens been their principal work, the institution of them
before, would have been as necessary as then.

And that officers and others qua gifted, are appointed by Christ to preach
unto unbelievers, this sufficiently manifests Christ's care for that great
work, the convertion of sinners, though they do not act as officers in their
conversion.

Thus we have answered his argument against this Assertion, that Ministers are
officers only to their own congregations, the provincial assembly used diverse
arguments, which we answered, and Mr. Pool seeks to indicate, we shall
briefly reply to his most material xceptions.

They objected that we receive members of other congregations to the Sacrament,
yet the administration of that is a ministerial act, and cannot be done but by
a Pastor or Teacher.

Mr. Pool. is so disturbed at our answer to this, that he says (p. 20.) he
questions not but any judicious Reader will quickly discern it how we are fallen
from our own principles, and (page 21.) would have all men take notice of that,
and also that we have through incogitancy precipitated our selves into the gulf
of Annabaptisme, and he doubts not but we will retract it, etc. And all this
because we say, If they perform these acts to any, not of their own
congregations, they do not act as Past ors, as officers to them therein.

Ans. We see no ground to retract what we have said in this matter, and we
think any unprejudiced Reader who shall view our whole answer to their
objection, (Preach Sent. page 278, 279, 280.) will apprehend that there is more
strength in Mr. Pools flourish of words to dazel the Eyes of the weak, then of
argument to convince the judicious that we are in an Error. To clear the case,

1. We profess that it was (when we wrote our former book) and still is our
judgment, that the administration of the Sacrament is an act which cannot be
done but by a Pastor or Teacher. None but an Officer may perform this act.

2. Yet we conceive an Officer may administer the Sacrament (which is a common
Church privilege) unto members of other Churches without being an Officer over
them: for, if any such relation as is between Pastor and the members of his
flock, did arise upon that act, then an obligation unto the mutual duties of
the relation must follow also, else all in a relation were not bound to the
duties of it; and who will say that Pastors are to watch over the members of
other Churches, or that the Lord has made them overseers of them? or that such
members are to aford maintenance, etc. to such Pastors?

And if they be no Officers over them, they cannot be said to act as their
Officers.

And let Mr. Poole and the Reader observe we never said that he who is no
Pastor, no Officer might act in the administration of the Sacrament, but that
in administering it to members of other Churches, a man does not act as a
Pastor, as an Officer [to them] i. e. in a special sense.

As Officers in corporations, etc. may afford some privileges to such as they
are no Officers to, which none but such Officers can grant out; Or to use the
instance Mr. Poole mentions (page 16.) with some variation; many acts of a
Steward of an house, in giving entertainment unto strangers, cannot he done by
any but the Steward (except the Lord of the house) yet says Mr. Poole (page
16.) he acts not as a Steward to them whom he entertains: whence it is
undeniable that there are some acts which none but an Officer can perform,
wherein he does not act as an Officer to some objects of them; and therefore
though none but Officers can administer the Lords Supper, yet they may give it
to members of other Churches, which they are no Officers, nor do not act as
Officers toward. That Rule Quod competit rei qua tali competit omni tali,
holds true, only in materia necessaria, not in materia contingenti; and
therefore if a Pastor gives the Sacrament to those who are not of his own
Church, not as their Pastor, yet it will not follow, that every gifted brother
may administer it, or that our assertion cuts the s^news of Christian and
Church Communion, which he insinuates, p. 22. That their Argument was against
our practice may easily be seen in their Book, not against the assertion, but
as supposed (though ungroundedly) to be contradicted by our practice. And this
is enough to answer what he says, page 20. 21. 22. and may clearly vindicate
us from his aspersion for Anabaptism. He replyeth nothing to what we have said,
Preacher Sent, page 281. where we have clearly answered their third particular
in the several branches, and have proved against them, that Ministers are
called Elders of the people, etc.

There are seven consequences which they said (Jus Divin. Min. page 140.) would
follow this assertion. To our exceptions against the first and second of these,
Mr. Poole answers little or nothing; what he says (p. 23.) is but a
repetition of what he had said before, which we have already answered.

In our reply to the third, we argue against that position, that a man is made
a member of a Church by Baptism. Mr. Poole tells us it is none of their
assertion -- -that they allow Infants to be born Church Members, and make their
Church Membership the ground of their Baptism, and a pari, a heathen converted
and professing the faith, is a churchmember inchoate before Baptism, and that
this only they say, that the solemn, public and visible way of admission of
members into the Church is by Baptism, Mr. Poole, page 23. 24.

Ans. 1. They said, that every Minister by Baptism admits into the Catholic
visible Church, Jus Div. Min. page 139. and Mr. Poole says (page 25.) in
Scripture there is ne (...) quidem of any other door of admission, and calls the
contrary a monstrous paradox, page 28. And how he can deny it to be their
assertion, or free himself from self-contradiction in these expressions we know
not; for what difference is there between being [made] a churchmember by
Baptism, and being [admitted] into the Church by Baptism? and how can one be a
churchmember [before] Baptism, and yet be admitted into the Church [by]
Baptism, especially if there be not [any other door] of admission? How can
those that are within the Church already, be said (without a loss of
membership) to be admitted into it, by any after act? surely admission is of
those who are without, and no members, not of those who are within, and are
church members. The scriptures know no such thing as a being church members
inchoate; either they are church members or not; if they be church members (as
he confesses they are, before Baptism) then they are admitted, for membership
presupposes admission.

2. As well may we say, that men are Officers by a Churches Election before
Ordination, and only the solemn admission into the Office (or rather exercise
of it) to be by Ordination, as he may assert an admission by Baptism after
membership; and then the Essence of the call to Office, is not in Ordination.

3. If Infants church membership be (as he says, page 24.) the ground of their
Baptism, then they are visible church members before their being Baptized, (for
the ground of an action must be visible, before acting) and so their visible
admission into the Church is not by Baptism, but before it. And in converts,
profession of faith (which he supposes them church members by) must first be
visible, and so their visible admission into the Church is antecedaneous to,
and is not by their Baptism.

And as public as their profession is, so public is their visible
church membership, or admission into the Church, before Baptism. As to what
follows, page 24. 25. we formerly did, and still do deny, that a Minister
ejecting a man justly out of his own Church, ejects him juridically out of all
other Churches; for this see our answer to Dr. Collings Epistle.

Object. If he be not juridically ejected out of other Churches, then he is in
a capacity of being received into other Churches, which what horrid confusion
it would introduce, etc. Mr. Poole, page 24.

Answ It will not follow; for, that sin which made the ejection just, would
make another Churches admission unjust.

Yet men's incapacity to be received by other Churches, does not arise from
their being cast out of those Churches, but from the want of such
qualifications as are perquisite to admission into church fellowship.

He grants (p. 25.) that when a Minister is juridically ejected out of Office
in a particular Church by deposition, he cease to be an Officer to the
Universal Church. Whence we infer, that if he repents and becomes an Officer
again, he must have a new Ordination, or else he may of no Officer become an
Officer without Ordination, and so Ordination is not Essential to Office.

That which follows (page 25.) is but a repetition of what he had said, and
is answered before. That such as are converted from heathenisme may join as
members to some Church and so be baptized, we proved, Preacher Sent. page 289.
he replyeth nothing to the proof of it, yet charge us for obtruding uncouth
notions upon the world without evident proof, etc. And he that says (page 24.)
they are church members inchoate before Baptism, and who makes so little a
matter of admission into a particular Church, should not stumble at this
notion. And what is said to show that admission is not by Baptism, will not be
far from a proof of it.

Our Arguments (Preacher Sent. page 292.) plainly show, that their assertion
runs them upon Anabaptism; Mr. Poole, (page 26. 27.) gives a double reason
against it. 1. That an excommunicate person ordinarily is a churchmember,
though a diseased member, 2 These. 3. etc. 2. Though his Baptism cease at
present actually and really as to all the actual privileges of it, so cease
that while he repents not, he is to be looked upon after a sort as an
unbaptized person, yet when he does repent, and readmit himself to the Church,
he needs no new Baptism, forasmuch as God is pleased to impute to him his
former Baptism, and the Church accepts of it, etc.

Answ. 1. Anabaptism unavoidably follows upon their assertion, thus, he that
cease to be a member of the visible Church, his Baptism cease say they,
Jus Divin Min. page 146.

But he that is excommunicate cease (say they) to be a member of the visible
Church, for they tell us excommunication ejecteth out of that Church, Jus
Divin. Min. page 139. Ergo, He that is excommunicate, his Baptism cease.
Ergo, If he be readmitted he must be rebaptized, or else be in the Church
unbaptized.

Surely Mr. Poole will not say that one may be ejected out of, and yet remain a
member of the Church; for, it is a contradiction to say, that one is [out of]
and yet [in] the Church at the same time, and contrary to, 1 Corin. 5. 12.
which proves that those who are [without] are not [within,] yet he has no
other way to save the London Ministers from the dint of the foregoing
conclusions. To help them out of this Laborinth Mr. Poole tells us, that an
excommunicate person is a churchmember still; but this is not to defend, but
to contradict them whose cause he undertaketh to to plead; for they tell us an
excommunicate person is ejected out of the Church, and Mr. Poole says, he is a
member of the Church still. This therefore might suffice for the defense of
what we have said, but we shall add a few words.

2. It is the judgment of many, that the withdrawing mentioned, 2 These. 3.
ver. 6. 14. vastly differs from excommunication; because after the one, a man
is to be deemed as a brother, and after the other, he is to be accounted as a
heathen and a Publican, Mat. 18. ver. 17. and if so, this is no proof that
excommunicate persons are church members, seeing the Text speaks nothing of
excommunication, but only of withdrawing.

3. We observe his halting here, he does not say an excommunicate person
[alwayes] but [ordinarily] is a member; as if excommunication did sometimes
make a man cease to be a churchmember, but ordinarily not, which there is no
syllable in Scripture for, and much against it, Mat. 18 v. 17. excommunicate
persons are to be deemed as heathens and Publicans, Ergo, Not as
church members. That such as are excommunicate for blasphemy, denying Christ to
be the Messiah, or renouncing some such grand Article of faith, should still be
a churchmember, is strange doctrine, yet this must be, or else his Argument
(page 26. is naught, for it may be said,

He who is under a Church Ordinance appointed, for his good, is (according to
Mr. Poole) a Churchmember.

But he who is excommunicate for blasphemy, denying Christ, etc. is under a
Church-Ordinance for his good.

Ergo, According to Mr. Pool, he who is excomunicate for blasphemy, denying
Christ, etc. is a Churchmember. And that the same ordinance of excommunication
does pass upon some and cut them off from Church Membership, and pass upon
others and leave them members still, let him prove.

4. Neither they in their Jus Divin. Min. nor we in our former book, do speak
of the ceasing of baptism as to the actual priveledges of it, or as to men's
account, only or chiefly, but about the ceasing of the water baptism it self;
And therefore what Mr. Pool s^ith, (p. 27.) is altogether besides the question.
Neither does his instance of circumcision help him, for if any turned heathen
or Idolater, and renounced his circumcision, yet he remained a circumcised
person, and his circumcision might be a witness against him though he were to
be reputed as a heathen, while such. And so we apprehend, though a baptized
person cease by excommunication to be a member of any visible Church, yet
this baptism cease not, but if it did really cease (as they say it does)
rebaptizing would necessarily be inferred.

5. If baptism it self (about which the question is) did cease upon the
cessation of membership in the visible Church, that upon the persons
Repentance, the Lord should impute his former baptism to him, is such a notion,
as (to use his own phrase) in Scripture, there is ne (...) quidem of any such
thing.

6. If a man, ceasing to be a member of a particular Church, should make his
baptism cease, upon its being the door of admission into that, as they assert;
then a pari, a man's ceasing to be a member of the catholic Church by
excomunication or otherwise, would make his baptism ceasesupon its being the
door of admission into that, and so rebaptizing must follow upon readmission,
so that this falls heavy upon their principles; But it touches not us,
because we deny baptism to be the door of admission into an^ Church, and this
answers what he says, page 27. He says, (page 28.) we grant that baptism
was a sign of a man's admission to the Church.

Reply. He much mistaketh us; for, we do not grant that its Sacramental use is
to be a sign of admission into the Church: But in regard Church-member-ship is
pre-required unto baptism, hence as things consequential are signs of what is
antecedent, and fruit a sign of a tree, so baptism (if orderly administered) is
a sign of admission into a Church.

We grant it to be a sign of ones being engaged for the profession of the Name
of Christ.

He asks (page 28.) what is a Church but a company of men professing the name
of Christ?

Reply. 1. We speak only of a subsequent sign, which presupposech his being
admitted into the Church, and being engaged for the name of Christ, and so is
not the door of admission.

2. A company of unbaptized persons may profess the name of Christ; Ergo,
According to Mr. Pool, they are a Church, and then baptism cannot be the door
of admission into the Church. We said baptism makes not a man to stand in
relation to any Church, by which we intend only this, that baptism does not
admit a man into any Church.

Mr. Pool (page 28) calls this a monstrous paradox, which should not have
been dictated without any proof, etc.

Reply. We have not merely dictated it, but have given clear proof for it,
Preacher Sent, page 284. 286. 292, 293. himself grants that both infants and
otners are Church Members inchoate before baptism, page 24. Church Membership
is a relation, and as it were grossly improper to say that a man is a Father
or Master, etc. inchoate, but not a complete Father or Master; so, its improper
to say that one is enchoate only a Churchmember, and therefore they are
admitted not by, but before baptism. But that baptism does not make men
members of the Church, is largely proved in the answer of New England Elders to
the 32. Questions, page 12 to 20.

Ob. 1. We are all baptized into one body, 1 Corin. 12. 13. By which it is most
evident that baptism gives a man relation to some body, etc. Mr. Pool page 28.

Ans. The whole stresse of this Argument depends upon translating the
Preposition (...) [into] whereas it is frequently used to signify [in] is Mat.
2. ver. 23. He came and dwelt (...) [in] a city, etc. So 1 Peter 5. 12. Acts 2.
27. Luke 11. 7. Mark 1. v. 9. were baptized of John (...) [in] Jordan. and
hence, v. 5. (...) [in] the River Jordan That which is expressed by i^ in one
verse, is expressed by (...) in the other. All which clearly shows that no
argument can be grounded upon its signifying [into] and if it be rendered [in]
as often it is in other Texts, then his argument comes to nothing, whether it
be the visible or invisible Church that is there intended; for it runs thus,
by one spirit we are all baptized [in] one body, and then they are first in
that body and baptized after, and so baptism is not the door of admission, or
does not give relation to that body.

2. An Antecedent entrance into a relation is usually expressed by a
subsequent adjunct of that relation: as an entrance into Kingly government is
expressed by Coronation; and Genesis 45. 10. The Scepter shall not depart, etc. i.
c. there shall be one to bear the Scepter. There becoming governors, is
denoted by a Scepter, which is a subsequent sign of Government: so, if (...)
be rendered into, yet it may be only an adjunct privilege of
Church Membership, and not that which makes to stand in relation to any body
or Church.

3. There are different gifts and graces in the members of the mystical body of
Christ, and therefore these cannot prove it an Organical political body; yet
what does the Apostle say more of this one body? But whatever the body be, the
relation thereto is not proved to be by baptism; as Mr. Cartwright observes on
Gal. 3. 27. where we are said to put on Christ by baptism, it is the usual
phrase of the Scripture, which gives that unto the Sarcrament, which is due
unto the thing whereof it is a Sacrament: So here,

Ob. 2. That which makes a man visibly stand in relation to Christ, that makes
him visibly to stand in relation to the Church: but baptism makes a man
visibly to stand in relation to Christ, Ergo,

Answ. Both Propositions are false.

1. His major is untrue, because a visible relation to Christ must precede or
go before a visible relation to the Church; for, none but visible Saints or
believers are to be admitted into Church relation, Acts 2. v. 47. They were
saved ones, i. e. visible at least, who were added to the Church, therefore
they stood in a visible relation to Christ in order before addition to the
Church, for this, see more in our Epistle to our former book.

2. His minor is untrue; for multitudes (even amongst us) are baptized, and yet
do not visibly stand in relation to Christ, but to Satan; Ergo, Baptism does
not make visibly to stand in relation to Christ. Again, a man must stand in a
visible relation to Christ before baptism, Math. 28. 19. They must first be
disciples, and then baptized; And therefore it is not baptism (but some thing
antecedaneous to it) that makes visibly to stand in relation to Christ.

As to Romans 6. 3. and Gal. 3. 27. They may show that believers being baptized
in the name of Christ are solemnly engaged to profess and conform themselves
unto him, and that in his death, but they do not prove, that men cannot visibly
put on Christ in his death, or that they cannot visibly be in Christ, without
baptism; and therefore they do not evidence, that baptizing is that act in or
by which they are so much as visibly made to stand in relation to Christ.

Our answers to this objection, do also answer his next argument. We say, men
must visibly stand in a covenant relation, before admission into the Church; or
unto baptism, for visible believing or a profession of Faith is pre-required,
(in those that are adulti) unto baptism, Mark. 16. 16. Acts 8. v. 12. 36, 37.
And therefore baptism neither makes a man to stand visibly in relation to the
covenant or to the Church.

Its being aseal of the covenant, implies a precedent consederation, or
presupposes a man's being in covenant, as being but a ratification, or
confirmation of a covenant already made.

We demand whether the Lords Supper, be not as well a seal of the covenant as
Baptism? And whether that makes a man stand in relation to the covenant, and
he be in covenant as often as he partaketh thereof, and out when he does it
not? If otherwise, then it is no contradiction, that the application of such a
seal should not make to stand in relation to the covenant, and surely they must
stand in a visible relation to the covenant before a partaking of the Supper;
and then something else must make to stand in relation to the covenant.

To his last Argument (page 29.) we reply, It is not that which gives the
capacity, but that which gives the right to Church-priveledges, that makes a
man stand in relation to a Church. Nei her does Baptism make a man capable of
Church Priviledges; no not of the Supper, which he mentions; for some infants
are Baptized and excommunicate persons also, and yet are incapable of that
Church-priviledge; nay the Presbyterians will not admit to the Supper without
examination, and the Provincial Assembly plead against admitting the ignorant
or scandalous to the Supper, Vind. Presb. Govern. page 56. etc. By which it
appears, that though they donot account unbaptized persons capable of the
Supper, yet they do not judge Baptism enough to capacitate for the Supper, for
then they must deny it to none that are baptized. His Arguments thus failing
his conclusions from them come to nothing.

We denied that 1 Corin. 12. 28. or Ephesians. 4. did prove a Ministers relation (as
an Officer) to a Catholic visible Church, if such a Church were intended
there; for it may properly be said, there are set in the Commonwealth,
Justices, Constables, etc. yet they are limited in their Office to a particular
County or Parish, etc.

And it is not improper to say, God has given to or set in the Church, viz.
this and that Church, Apostles, Evangelists, etc.

Object. 3. That implies, that its one political body, wherein they are set,
etc. Mr. Poole. page 30.

Answ. If there were a Catholic Church, and that (which is not granted) a
political body to, (as a Commonwealth is) yet its being said, God has given
to, or set in the Church, Apostles, Evangelists, etc. would no more prove that
they are Officers to that whole political Universal Church, so much as in actu
primo; then its being said there are set in the Commonwealth Justices,
Constables, etc. would prove that they are Justices, or Constables to the whole
Commonwealth.

Much less can it be a proof of any such thing, where evidence is wanting for a
political Universal Church.

Ob. 2. The case wholly differs, for Justices, Constables, etc. have limited
commissions, etc. Mr. Pool. page 30.

Answ. So are Ministers limited in their office, and confined to their
particular Churches (as we have proved) and therefore this makes no difference
in the cases.

The case of the Empire we spoke to before, the Princes do not Govern in
common, but every one is distinct in Laws and customs.

Object. 3. It is not barely the phrase we rest upon, but the sense, etc.
Apostles were so set in the Church; that they were also set over the church, so
are not Justices, they are in; not over the Commonwealth, etc. Mr. Poole, page
30.

Answ. This, 1 Cor. 12. 28. is the main Text urged for a Universal origanical
Church; and yet, Reader, thou may est see when it comes to, they are
constrained to borrow help from other Texts to shore up their Argument.

We grant that the Apostles were set not only in, but over all Churches; but
that this is the sense and explication of the phrase which the Apostle uses,
or the intendment of this Text, so as the Apostle should mean, [that God has
set over the Church Apostles] when he only says [God has set in the Church
Apostles, etc.] this is not, nor ever can be proved.

And its very observable that those phrases might be used, 1 Cor. 12. 28. and
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. (the two places chiefly alleged for a general visible
orginical Church) though those Texts should not be understood of the visible
Church at all; for Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers are set in, and
given for the edifying of the mystical body of Christ, though they be not
Officers to it, or set over it.

And a poor Argument is it, that has no better ground to stand upon; this
answers what he says (page 31.) that it is that body into whith we are
Baptized both Jews and Gentiles, and one whole body, etc. for all this may be
predicated of the mystical Church or body of Christ.

But if the visible Church or body be intended the Church of Corinth (and a
pari all other true churches) is the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 27. Now ye are
the body of Christ, etc. and in the very next verse its added, And he has set
some in the Church, first Apostles, etc. seeing this immediately follows, it
need not seem strange that the meaning should be this; The particular Church of
Corinth is the body of Christ, and God has set in this Church or body, first
Apostles, etc. The Apostles were set in Corinth, though not limited or confined
to that Church.

All the strength of their Argument from 1 Cor. 12. 28. depends upon the
Apostles speaking in the singular number [the Church;] had it been said God
has set in the [Churches] etc. there could have been no shadow of an Argument
hence for their being officers to a Universal Church; and seeing in the same
chapter, ver. 12. 14. 17. etc. he speaks in the singular number, the body,
the body, and the whole body, and yet all natural bodies do not make one body,
and ver. 18. God set the members in [the body] etc. yet there is no Catholic
body; how can his speaking in the singular number [the Church] ver. 28. and
that in the application of the same similitude, prove a Catholic Church made
up of all Churches?

To evidence that the sin of a people may nullify the Office of a Minister
(which they deny, Jus Div. Min. page 146) we ask, whether if they murder him,
will not this nullify his Office? and if so, why may not their sin other ways
make void the Office also?

Object. Mr. Poole says; we confound the nullifying of the Office, and the
hindering the exercise of it. 2. He demands whether this hold of the Apostles or
no, -- whether if the Catholic Church was confined to one congregation, and
that proved heretical and voted down the Apostles, would this make their Office
null or no? he says this follows upon our principles, for the church (the
correlate) ceasing, they must needs cease also, and ejusdem est instituere and
destituere, and we allow the institution and constitution of the Apostles to
the people, in the same page he tells the world that we say the Apostles were
constituted Officers by the church, alleging, Acts 1 He adds that this
doctrine renders it in the power of men's lusts and humors to nullify the
promises of Christ, and the authority, end and use of Christ's Ambassadors; for
now there are none but ordinary Ministers, and he supposes but twenty
congregations in the world, and each of these may resolve severally to eject
their Ministers, etc. This is the sum of what he expresses in many words, Mr.
Poole, page 32. 33.

Ans. 1. We have not confounded, but clearly distinguished between nullifying
the Office, and hindering the exercise of it, as he that shall impartially read
our Book may see.

2. The Apostles were extraordinary Officers, our question is only about
ordinary Officers. The Apostles were neither of man nor by man, but were made
by an extraordinary call of Christ, and so it did belong only to Christ to
null their Office, because ejusdem est instituere and destituere. But we cannot
but complain that Mr. Poole has here offered abundance of wrong to us, in
reporting to the world, that we say, Apostles were constituted Officers by the
church; alleging Act. 1. and not contenting himself with sayit once, he
comes over with it again, toward the end of page 32. of his Book.

Whereas we have expressed the contrary, and that in express Terms, in
speaking to, Acts 1. which he says we allege for it. Let any one read our
book (Preacher Sent. page 268.) where we use these words, This was but half an
Election, and that is the reason why it did not constitute Mathias an Apostle,
as appears, because the choosing of the one (which was by God) was the
constituted act, Acts 1. 24. etc. by which any one may see that we deny the
Apostle to be constituted by the Church, and assert it to be by God; and
therefore he has done us much injury in this report.

3. Suppose a Church murthereth its Officers; either he must say that they are
officers after they are dead, which is absurd; or else he must grant that the
sin of a people may nullify the office of a minister, which the Provincial
Assembly denies.

4. No supposition may be allowed which implies a contradiction to any divine
promise; For God is faithful, and therefore will restrain from every act that
would render any promise void. Some suppositions may be admitted of, but not
such as are against Promises, otherwise we may answer his with an other,
himself supposes (p. 32.) that the Catholic Church may be confined to one
congregation, if the Elders (possibly but two or three) should excommunicate
that whole Church, they should by this juridicall act (how un just soever)
nullify the promise of the perpetuity of the Church, Mat. 16. 18. as much as
by his supposition the people should nullify the Promises about officers. In
such a case two or three Elders cannot be proved to be the universal Church,
and Officers to it also, and if there be not a Church and Officers set in it,
either the promises about officers, or the Church must fail, if suppositions
against promises be allowed; And in what a sad condition then would the Church
be in, for there would be none to appeal to; and thus we might turn his words
(page 34 35.) upon himself. Or we might suppose that persecutors (being most
of the world) might murder that one congregation (which he improperly calls
the Catholic Church) being but few: its true, the act would differ, one being
an act of horrid violence, the other a juridical act, but both are equally
possible, and so a supposition may be taken from one as well as from the other,
and therefore he can get nothing from such supposals.

The monstrous opinion follows upon his own principle; Suppose but Twenty
Ministers in the World, who only have power (according to him) to ordain, and
they through treachery and frowardness should refuse to put forth their power
for a succession, they dye and so the promise of Christ is nullified; neither
does his answer to the objection (page 33. 34.) take off this, for here the
case is not wholly different, here is not an act of horrid violence, and
therefore it is as great an inconvenience to assert, that Jesus Christ has
given to Ministers a juridical power (as they judge that of Ordination to be)
by the abuse of which they might, if they pleased, disanul an Ordinance of
Christ.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein our arguments for men's being Officers to a particular Church only and
not to a universal, are vindicated from the exceptions which Mr. Pool brings
against them.

Some arguments we used to prove, that Officers stand in relation (as Officers)
to a particular Church only, and not to a universal Church.

Mr. Pool (page 35.) den yeth the major of our first Syllogism, but medleth
not with the proofs of it, and so it remains firm still.

To prove our minor, we use this argument.

Arg. 1. All that flock or Church over which the Holy Ghost has made a man a
Bishop or Overseer, he is commanded actually to feed and take heed to, and
sins if he does not. But no Bishop or Overseer is commanded actually to feed
and take heed to all the universal Church, etc. Ergo,

Ob. Mr. Pool (page 35.) denies the major and says, a minister is not obliged
actually to feed all his flock* and adds, every Apostle was a Cathol^^^
Pastor, and so had the whole Church for his flock, Mat. 28. 19, 20. But every
Apostle was not obliged actually to feed the whole Church, and all Nations, etc.

Answ. 1. His denial of the major is little better then a denial of the very
words of Scripture, for the Apostle says Acts 20. 28. Take heed -- to [all]
the flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers to feed the
Church, etc.

Is it not plain, that actual feeding is enjoined, and that not only [some]
but [all] a man's flock is thus to be sed?

2. This does not answer our argument, but leaves us under a new seeming
difficulty.

3. If his reason should be wholly granted, we do not see how it justifyeth his
denial of our major, or takes away the force of our argument; and had he not
left out the conclusion of his Syllogism, he might easily have seen it himself:
For the utmost he can conclude from those premises, is but this, Ergo, every
Catholic Pastor, who has the whole Church for his flock was not obliged
actually to feed the whole Church, all Nations, etc.

And what is all this to the purpose? If every Catholic Pastor, or every one
who has the whole Church, for his flock was not, will it follow hence that no
officer is obliged actually to feed all his flock? May there not be some
officers who have no such large flock, and may stand under such obligations? If
every Apostle was not, yet may not every ordinary Officer be obliged actually
to feed all his flock. What shadow ofa consequence is here? This might be
enough in answer to that which he supposes to be an unanswerable reason; but
that his reason takes not away the force of our Argument, we may evidence
these ways,

1. Because the impossibility of every Apostles looking to all the Churches, is
the reason which himself gives (page 7, 8.) why they did it not. But our
argument is drawn from a command to ordinary Officers fixed in a particular
Church, all which it was possible for them actually to feed, and so the cases
run not parallel. And that a universal Church should be their flock, the
hundred, it may be the thousand part whereof (by reason of their fixednesse in
a particular Church) they can never feed, and yet be commanded to feed [all]
their flock, who can Imagine it? Or does not such a command rather determine
their particular flock to be [all]over which they are made Overseers?

2. Because the Apostles had immediate directions from God, which gave them a
dispensation for an actual feeding every Church.

3. Because if every Apostle was not commanded actually to feed [all] that
flock, or (all) those Churches that they had liberty by their commissions to
act as Officers toward; seeing every ordinary Officer is commanded to feed
(all) the flock, he is an Overseer to, Acts. 20. 28. hence his supposed
unanswerable reason fails in the main thing it should prove.

If Mat. 28. 19, 20. were spoken to this or that Apostle singly, then (that
being a command of actual teaching and baptizing) every Apostle was obliged
actually to feed or teach all Nations, and then his minor is untrue.

But if it were spoken to all the Apostles together, v. 16. 19, 20. then if
every Apostle was not obliged actually to feed all Churches, or all Nations,
yet all the Apostles together did actually feed all the Churches in that age,
and were obliged to do it, and all officers together in after ages are under
the like obligation, yet no one ordinary Officer is obliged actually to teach
all Nations, but every one is bound to feed [all] the flock over which he is
made an overseer.

Arg. 2. If Officers now were actually to feed and take care of all the
universal Church, then their power were as extensive and large as the Apostles,
etc. Pr^. Sent. p. 11.

Obj. The difference between Apostolical and Pastoral power lies not in the
extent of their relation, but in the independancy, superiority, and singularity
of jurisdiction Mr. Pool. page 36.

Answ. 1. If this were true, yet it proved what we produced it for. viz. That
no ordinary Officer is commanded actually to feed and take heed to all the
unisal Church; for himself grants (page 6.) that it was peculiar to the
Apostles, to be actually Ministers to the whole Church.

2. But that the difference between Apostolical and Pastoral power lies not in
the extent of their relation, seems to us very false; For,

1. Apostles had universality of jurisdiction: Ergo, Apostles had generality of
relation. Ordinary officers have not universality of jurisdiction; Ergo,
ordinary officers had not generality of relation. Nomans jurisdiction can be
extended beyond his relation, and therefore none can deny the Apostles
universality of relation, and that ordinary officers have so extensive a
jurisdiction, let him prove that will assert it.

2. As Apostles had general *relation, so they were under obligation to actual
discharge of the duty of the relation in like extent, 2 Corin. 11. 28. and so
were the Churches toward them.

But ordinary Officers are not under an obligation for the actual discharge of
the duty of their relation to all Churches, as we have already proved from Act
20 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. neither are all Churches under such obligations to duty
toward them as their officers either ^o submit or afford maintenance, etc. to
them, and therefore ordinary officers relation does not extend to all Churches.

3. Apostles general relation obliged them to an Itinerant execution of their
office, so as they could not fix in any Church; but ordinary Officers are not
engaged to such an execution, but by Divine appointment are fixed in some one
church, and are bound there to reside, which is inconsistent with such a
relation as the Apostles had.

4. The general relation of the Apostles was so special, as all Churches might
plead a like interest in them, and call them (their officers,) with ordinary
officers it is not so, our brethren themselves being judges, Jus Div. Min. page
143. If ordinary officers be not equally related to all Churches, they are not
at all related to them, for relations do not suscipere magis and minus, unless
the subject or foundation be mutable.

Arg. 3. Ministers are Pastors only to them, whom they can exercise Church
government toward, as well as teach.

Obj. Then the Apostles did not preach as Officers to heathens, for toward
such they could not exercise Churchgovernement. Mr. Pool p. 37.

Ans. If Apostles did Preach as Officers over heathens, it did arise from the
extraordinariness of their Office; for, no ordinary Officers civil or military
can act as Officers toward any that they cannot govern; and having the Rule
over, and being over others in the Lord, is made the specificating,
distinguishing Character of ordinary Officers, from such as are none, or from
such as they are Officers to, 1 These. 5. ver. 12. Heb. 13. ver. 7. 17. and they
cannot be said to be over those that are without, 1 Cor. 5. 12. or that they
cannot exercise Church Government toward, and therefore are not Officers to
such; for, what is it to be an Officer to any, but to be over them in the Lord?

Argu. 4. This brings in Episcopacy, to make one man an Officer over many
Churches, Preacher Sent, page 248. 283 187.

Object. The Episcopal way leaves to inferior Ministers nothing but the name
and Title of Officers, all power of Jurisdiction being engrossed into the
Bishops hands, etc. That government by Bishops is a government by foreigners,
as it were the power of ruling being neither in the hands of the people, nor of
any chosen by them, etc. The formality of Episcopacy lies in this, in the
Superiority of one Pastor to another, and to many other, and of one church to
all the rest in a Diocese, not in the Superiority of a college of Pastors, or
convention of churches over one Pastor or church, etc. Mr. Poole, page 37. 38.

A. 1. We know not that we have used that Argument, but only in the Pages even
now quoted; and in neither of those places do we assert a government by a
College of Pastors to be Episcopacy; its the Superiority of [one] that we give
that name unto; and therefore most that he says here, as about the low
countries not being a Monarchy, etc. is but to make the Reader believe that we
speak what we do not.

2. As government by Bishops was (as he says) a government by foreigners, so
is that by Provincial and National Assemblies, who must needs act (as he
tells us Bishops do) without knowing or being known to any one Church which
they undertake to govern.

And as the choice of a Bishop by a Diocese, cannot render that Government
lawful; so the choice of a College of Pastors, by a particular Church to Rule
over it, cannot warrant that; neither having footing in Scripture.

3. Episcopacy lies not only in the Superiority of one, to many Pastors; but in
the Superiority of one to, and usurped Power over many Churches: sad
experience, as well as the writings of men, do sufficiently bear witness to
this. Dr. Field of the Church. l. 5. c. 28. speaking for Bishops, asserteth a
Bishop to have Pre-eminence over diverse smaller particular congregations.

And such as plead against Bishops, speak the same thing, as Smectymnu^s, page
54. 71. 78.

And also the Provincial Assembly in answer to Episcopal pleas says (Jus Div.
Min. part 2. page 82, 83. The believers of one City made but one church in the
Apostles days, and add that the Asian Angels were not Diocesan Bishops, but
congregational Presbyters, seated each of them in one Church, not any of them
in more then one. So that its undeniable, that for one man to be an Officer to
more then one Church, for one to be set over many Churches, is Episcopacy, and
this only do we call by that name, Preacher Sent. page 248. 283. and that this
follows upon their principles we have there proved, and therefore it is no
frivolous or intemperate accusation. We may turn what he says upon himself, in
this Argument.

Those, the formality of whose Office lies in their Superiority to many
Pastors, who engrosse all Power of Jurisdiction into their own hands, and leave
to inferior Ministers nothing but the name and title of Officers, and make
them officers without Office, and whose Government is such, as the Power of
Ruling is neither in the hands of the people, nor of any chosen by them, and
who generally neither know, nor are known to those whom they undertake to
govern, they are no Officers of Christ.

Let any show any Scripture proof that Christ owneth such as Presbyters, or any
Officers of his, who so far encroach upon the Kingly Office of Christ as to set
up an Office, not equal with, but even in its formality, Superior to, and
over those Officers that Christ has instituted, yea which degradeth Christ's
Ministers, and robs his people of that Power which he has left them. But
Bishops and their Government says Mr. Poole (page 37. 38) is such.

Ergo, Bishops are no Officers of Christ. Ergo, either Ordination is valid by
such as are no Officers, or else their Ordination is null who received it from
Bishops.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein our first and second Arguments for gifted men's Preaching are
vindicated from the exceptions which Mr. Poole laid against them.

HIs fourth chapter has little in it worth taking notice of. That we do not
plead for all that conceit themselves gifted; he may see in what we say about a
Rule of Regulation; in our Advertisement to the Reader.

He finds fault with our description of the work of Preaching, yet he has
not replied any thing to our proofs of it, which may be seen, Preacher Sent.
page 20, 21, 22.

Its not proved that the end of their meeting, Act. 17. ver. 16. 17. 22. was to
hear Paul Preach to them, but he did it when they were met for other ends, and
that it is Preaching, though in private, and but to a single person, is
undeniably proved, Act. 5. 42. and Act. 8. 35. and therefore neither a
congregation Sacred, nor the publikeness of the act, does make it Preaching.
The end of the work cannot but be sacred, whoever be the workers; and if this
be all they intend, they say just nothing.

We cannot but wonder that Mr. Poole (page 41. 42.) should use these words, The
end of the actor or speak er is purely and solely the salvation of their souls,
and so it is truly and may properly be called Preaching. Surely if this be
enough to denominate it properly Preaching, then our description of Preaching
is good; and we may as well say to him, as he does to us (p. 40.) then we are
all Preachers, bond and free, Male and Female; for any of these or any gifted
men that we plead for, may make the salvation of souls the end of their
speaking; so that if he will blame us, he must blame himself also.

He says, it is public Preaching that they dispute against; and it is that we
dispute for; and so we come to the main question.

Quest. Whether some men, who are not ordained Officers may Preach? or, whether
persons who have Preaching gifts and graces, or are apt to teach, may
ordinarily exercise those gifts in public Assemblies, though they be not
ordained Officers?

Ans. We answer affirmatively, they may Preach.

Arg. 1. From the Antecedaneousness of Election to Ordination.

The major of our Argument he says is not beyond exception; yet he does not
flatly deny it, or reply any thing to our proofs of it, or of the other
proposition. The minor he says, if true, is for the trial of gifts, and that
they dispute not about, but whether out of a case of necessity, etc.

Ans. That our minor is true, we fully proved; and that they may Preach for
trials sake undeniably evidenceth that the Gospel owneth a Preaching by gift,
as well as by Office, or else neither Election nor Ordination do constitute
Officers, for they have neither of these.

And if he will grant that gifted men may Preach, until they have Election
from a Church, which they can accept of, we can grant that then they are to
submit unto Ordination.

There is not a syllable in Scripture for Ordination, before Election, and
therefore a man may Preach many years without Ordination, if he wants
Election all that time; and may plead a case of necessity as well as he that
Preaches merely for trials sake; for its necessary a man should remain
un-ordained, until he can take up Ordination in a Gospel way and order.

Argu. 2. OUr second Argument is taken, from Gospel Commands, 1 Pet. 4. 10. 11.

Obj. 1. It may look backward and relate to hospitality; it may look forward
and relate to speaking and Ministering, and the words will bear either sense,
but both senses it (it should be, they) cannot bear, that being an undoubted
truth, that sensus unius loci literalis non est nisi unicus, etc. Mr. Poole,
page 44.

Answ. 1. Let the Reader observe that the Provin. Assem. in their Jus Divin.
Min page 101. tells us expressly, that they do not limit the word gift in the
Text (as some do) only to the gift of liberality, -- but extend it -- to all
endowments of nature, -- yea to all spiritual gifts, etc.

And it is not fair for Mr. Poole to undertake the pleading of their case,
without owning their concessions. He should not put us upon the trouble of
proving hospitality not to be the gift, when they had granted that it did
extend to [all spiritual gifts:] and this concession assured us that they could
not fairly deny that the indefinite expression [a gift] was to be taken
Universally.

2. What he says for its relating to speaking and Ministering, may serve as a
full answer to what he says for its relating to hospitality; in regard he
confesses it cannot bear both senses.

3. That every gifted man is under a command of God to use or exercise his gift
as he has received, is fully proved, ver. 10. If we infer from thence, Ergo,
every man that has Preaching gifts, is under a command of God to use them; how
will this conclusion be avoided? indeed, verse 11. does much strengthen it.

4. That every man should be commanded to use his gift, and immediately some
gifts should be partiticularly mentioned, and a direction be given how rightly
to use those gifts, and yet these gifts particularized should not relate to the
general exhortation, cannot rationally be imagined; yet here is the case, there
is a general command to use gifts, ver. 10. and some particular gifts are
mentioned, ver. 11. with a direction how to use them, and let Mr. Poole show
instances of a like nature, where the verses have no dependence on each other.
Nay as we have (...) ver. 10. so we have (...) verse. 11. and a ministration of
gifts being required in both verses, what impartial Reader can think them
without a connection?

If the ministering, v. 11. be of any gifts intended, v. 10. that is it we
plead for; if it be the ministering of this worlds goods, then it refers to
hospitality, and its relation to the for egoing verses is proved either way;
and the speaking as the oracles of God cannot be denied to relate unto verse
10. as well ministering. So that our argument is firm, viz. That every man who
has graces and gifts is commanded to use them, and the gift of speaking or
Scripture-interpretation is particular zed; Therefore every man who has
preaching gifts and graces ought to preach.

We said it was (a gift indefinitely) and so may extend to all gifts.

Ob. 2. As he is called to it and in his own spear. And indefinite expressions
are limited pro subjecta materia, according to the matter in hand, Mr. Pool. p.
45.

Answ. 1. Concerning the call to preach, and the indefinitenesse of the
expression, we have spoken in answer to Dr. Collings. chap. 3. and that gifted
men do not act out of their spear in preaching, we shall show more fully, by it
self, once for all.

2. An indefinite expression we granted (Preacher Sent. page 59.) may admit of
limitations where some special reasons enforces i^; but in this Text there is
none or in other Scriptures to restrain it.

3. A gift of speaking as the oracles of God is mentioned, v. 11. and that is
enough to our purpose.

That v. 10. cannot be restrained to hospitality, and does relate to v. 11. we
have already proved; and that Ministers and Deacons are not only intended in
the latter verse, we have further shown in its place, and this answers what
he says, (p. 45) to our second reason.

He adds (page 46.) preaching gifts are to beused, as far as God does call
him forth to the use of them, but no further. We answer Gods command to
exercise a gift, is man's call to use it, as in ^he gift of prayer, etc.

There is a difference made by himself, (page 6.) between power and exercise;
and he that is commanded to exercise a power (by one that has authority to
command) he cannot be denied to have the power; now every man that has a gift
of Scripture-interpretation, is commanded to minister his gift, 1 Pet. 4. 10,
11. and ministration being the exercise, it proves that they have power, or
are called of God to preach.

As to what follows (page 46.) he cannot but know that the ordinary
signification of (...) is (even as, or as) Ephesians. 5. 25. 1 Corin. 13. v. 12. and
it being confessed by himself that gifts are to be used in a proportionable
way to the gift afforded, we wonder he should seek to draw it to an other
sense, we have proved from 1 Pet. 4. 10. 11. That every man who has grace and
public gifts, is required to preach, and this is a positive warrant for their
doing of it; and therefore those who will affirm, that there is an exception
from that general command, must show it, else the plea is in the same Court
still.

Obj. 3. Here is not only a liberty granted, but a duty enjoined, etc.

They who are by virtue of a divine precept to preach the Gospel, are to do it
necessarily, necessity is laid upon me, yea woe, etc. to give themselves wholly
to these things, etc. But all that have preaching gifts are not under such
obligations, Ergo, they are not obliged to preach the Gospel, Mr. Pool page 47.

Answ. 1. We grant it is the duty of gifted men to preach, and this text
proves it.

2. The scripture expressions which the major of his argument is made up of,
refer to such as were undoubtedly Officers, 1 Corin. 9. 16. Acts 6. 2. 1 Timothy
4. 15. and 2 Timothy 4. 2. And because a necessity is laid upon officers, and woe
is unto them if they preach not the Gospel, in season and out of season,
because officers are to give themselves wholly to these things, and not to
leave the word of God to serve tables, for any to say, Ergo, All preachers are
under such obligations; who sees not the weakness of this argument?

If Paul or other Church Officers were not free from a necessity of preaching,
by being where they were not desired to preach, or if they ought to do it, were
there but any that would hear them, as he intimates, (page 48, 49.) yet there
may be other preachers, not to obliged, they having no flock or Church
committed to their charge as officers have who may command their Church to
hear, but if a man has no particular Church, from whom can he command audience?

3. There are cases wherein officers may allowably not preach, and yet not sin,
though preaching be their duty; and in such and (we suppose) in other cases
also gifted men sin not, in not preaching; as for instance, a Pastor going a
long journey, upon lawful occasions, may on diverse Lords days cease from
preaching, if he be in such places where Churches are supplied with officers of
their own, denying their consent to his exercising among them, without whose
consent he cannot lawfully preach there, Mr. Pool himself being judge, page 6.
Here no sin arises upon his not preaching, or their not hearing. This
manifests that they who are by divine precept to preach, may and must preach,
all due circumstances concurring, not otherwise, and therefore his Major (page
47.) is not universally true.

Nor his major (page 49.) for preaching is a duty, which such a Pastor may
lawfully do, yet in such cases he is not bound to do it.

The like we may say for gifted men; the Prophets, 1 Corin. 14. were under an
obligation by divine precept to Prophecy, yet not only upon the peoples
refusing to heal, but upon diverse other accounts are commanded silence, as

1. First in the want of an interpreter, 1 Corin. 14. ver. 28.

2. For giving away to others Prophesying, 1. Cor. 14. ve. 29. let the Prophets
speak two or three, and let the other judge, so ve, 30. 31. There being many
prophets in this Church, and but two or three of them being permitted to speak
at one time, or in one day of meeting, hence those Prophets, (and so gifted men
in our days) may (without sin) frequently or commonly forbear preaching.
Prophesying was their duty; yet they were not constantly, or in every meeting
bound to do it, and so, Mr Pools argument. page 47. 49. cannot be true.

And gifted men not preaching constantly, may (in many cases) be warranted as
well upon other accounts, as the giving way to, or not hindering of others
exercising the same gifts.

His second and third difficulties (pa. 49.) that then women must preach, and
he that has a gift to be a general Magistrate, etc. may undertake those
places, have been so fully answered, that we wonder he is not ashamed to
mention them any more.

Ob. 4. Every one is to exercise his gift, but in his own Sphere, public
persons publicly, private persons privately, and so did Aquila and Priscilla,
Acts 18. etc. Mr. Pool page 50.

Ans. 1. The act of Aquila and Priscilla, Acts 18. does not in the least prove,
that such as have public gifts go out of their Sphere, if they (without
undertaking office) exercise them publicly: Church Officers may give private
advertisements, and yet it does not follow, that they may not act publicly. If
Mr. Pool by hearing one eminently gifted, should perceive him to be
un-instructed in the way of the Lord, and should instruct him in private, would
this be any proof that Mr. Pool should act out of his sphere, if he preached in
public?

He says (page 50) it is not in the least intimated that they were not gifted
to speak in public.

Ans. Nor is it intimated that they had public gifts, the excellency of them
does not prove it. The weakness of this objection we have fully evidenced,
Preach. Sent. page 41, 42, 43.

2. That Text 1 Peter 4. 10, 11. commands everyman that has the public gift
of Scripture-interpretation, to exercise it, and so determineth^ it to belong
to their place and calling to preach, and proves that they act not out of
their Sphere in preaching, and that publicly.

This we cleared in our former book by six particulars. Mr. Pool grants, that
they may do the work of preaching, open and apply Scriptures, exhort, rebuke,
but not publicly, page 51.

So that the Reader may observe, that a gifted man may lawfully preach many
Sermons privately, it is his public preaching only which Mr. Pool opposes;
we prove that they may preach publicly, first because a public gift cannot be
fully improved, if it be not used publicly; this we proved, Preacher Sent.
page 47, 48. Mr. Pool replyeth not to the proofs of it, but says (page 51.)
let them not inter-lope betwixt two callings, and enquireth whether we will
say, that the Rule is true in general, if so, he would infer, that women gi^ted
to teach, and men gifted to Rule, judge, lead an Army, etc. ought publicly to
exercise such gifts, etc.

Answ. The Rule is true in this particular case, for, this gift is
particularized, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. and a general command annexed to exercise it.

But we say the Rule is true in all other cases, unless where some particular
exceptions do limit that geneneral Rule, or where a gift cannot be exercised
without assuming an office; women are excepted; ruling and judging gifts cannot
authoritatively be exercised without assuming office; but a preaching gift may,
as is clear in the case of Probationers; Whether they may inter-lope betwixt
two callings, is an other question nothing to the present purpose.

Secondly, because publicknesse does not make an act to be an act of Office,
nor privatenesse hinder it from being so, it neither makes it preaching nor
authoritative preaching, etc.

Ob. Though bare publicknesse of speaking makes it not preaching, yet that is
a property of authoritative preahing. etc. 1 Corin. 14. 34. and 1 Timothy 2. 11.
12. conclude beyond contradiction, that to preach pubickly is an act of
authority, and inconsistent with a state of subjection, etc. Mr. Pool. page 52,
53.

Ans. 1. His disallowing gifted men's preaching publicly, when yet he grants
(page 53.) that private men may speak publicly in diverse cases, as at Synods
etc. argues him to be (at he causlesly says page 51,) merely in the defense
of a pre-conceived opinion. For he grants, publicknesse does not make
authoritative acts in other cases, and yet in this particular case, asserteth
it to be a property of authoritative preaching.

But we proved before, that it may be authoritative preaching, though in
private; and as well it may be in public, and yet not be preaching office-wise.

2. Those Texts do not at all prove, (muchlesse beyond contradiction) that to
preach publicly is an act of authority, and inconsistent with a state of
subjection.

As to, 1 Cor. 14. 34. All in a state of subjection are not forbidden Preaching
by that reason, but only women; no man was in such a state of subjection as
women, hence the Apostle, comparing Sex with Sex, prefers the man before the
women, 1 Cor. 11. ver. 3. 9. and by a covering, ver. 5. 6. signifies the
subjection of women, and ver. 3. 7. denies men to be in such subjection.
Ministers or Pastors state of subjection to Magistrates does as much forbid
their Preaching publicly, as women's subjection does forbid gifted men's doing
of it.

And the Text he alleadeth speaks not a word of men's, but only of women's
being in a state of subjection. Women's being under obedience, may be a reason
against their Preaching publicly, and yet Preaching be no authoritative act,
in his sense: the unsutableness of it to such a state, may make that a reason
against it, and unsuitable it may be, though Preaching be no act of authority.
i. e. no act of Office.

As to 1 Timothy 2. 11. 12. it neither gives this as a reason why they must not
teach in public, because they must not usurp authority, nor does it assert
Preaching to be an authoritative act; for the words are [but I suffer not a
woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man;] but more of these Texts
afterward.

His grounds thus vanishing, what he adds (p. 53.) about constant and
occasional Preaching, must needs vanish with them.

And as to that he says about Alms, that a private man gives his Alms
publicly, is enough to prove that publickness makes not an act of Office.

That the public work of a Schoolmaster may (as he confesses) be managed by
any men gifted for it, this speaks it to be a fit parallel: and as he says
(page 53.) that work is not restrained either by Divine or humane Law; so we
say, the Preaching of gifted men is not restrained, but commanded by a Divine
Law.

We grant that a man's self-designation for the Ministry is not enough to
justify his doing acts of Office; but it is sufficient (being duly qualified
and approved) unto the exercise of Preaching gifts; and this answers what he
says, page 54.

For, Heb. 5. 12. The Apostle denies the Hebrews (they being but Babes in
Christ) and asserteth, only Christians of long time and much experience to be
Teachers in the sense be intends; styles them (...) and there is nothing in
the Text to limit or restrain it (as Mr. Pool does) to private teaching of
their families or heathens; all which argues a public Teaching to be
intended, especially seeing all Babes in Christ have ability in some measure
privately to teach their families, yet have not ability for this Teaching.

The word (...) (without the addition of any other to it) frequently notifieth
public Teachers, as Act. 13. 1. 1 Timothy 2. 7. yet would this be a sufficient
answer to those Texts, a genere ad speciem non valet illutio affirmativa?
Surely the usual acceptance of the word for one species of Teachers, will deny
it to be a genere ad speciem.

And whereas the Apostle says, they ought to be (...) Teachers, Mr. Pool would
turn the Apostles word, and would have it only (...), apt or fit to Teach; if
such interpretation of Scripture may be allowed him, he may turn the word of
God which way he will; and this answers what he says. p. 54, 55. and let the
Reader judge who wresteth the Scripture, Mr. Pool or we.

Thirdly, For gifted men's Preaching in public, we allege, Heb. 10. 25.

Object. If this place prove any thing to our brethrens purpose, it will prove
that it was the duty of every one, gifted or not gifted, to Preach in the
public Assembly, etc. Their Assembling together is not the modification of the
exhortation but the matter of it, they are to exhort one another even to this,
that they would not forsake the Assembling, etc. page 56.

Answ. 1. Those that were not gifted, could not exhort in public Assemblies,
to public edification; and therefore it cannot be supposed that they are
required to do it; but this command being left in general amongst the Hebrews,
hence none that were gifted, were exempted from doing of it.

2. Exhorting one another is a work for public Assemblies, and is commanded
from them, by way of opposition unto others sinful forsaking such Assemblies,
and therefore it was to be done in public Assemblies.

If a Corporation or any other society were persuaded to keep up meetings, and
there should be added immediately an excitation to a work usually performed in
such meetings, none would deny that it was to be done there; and for Mr. Pool
to make this the meaning, exhort one another, that they would not forsake the
Assembling themselves together; is such a conceit as as deserves not answering.

That which he adds (page 57. 58. 59.) about its being understood. 1. Of
Office. 2. Of Alms, has very little weight in it.

Let any indifferent Reader peruse our former Book, and he may easily see that
it cannot be meant of Office.

And we have proved in this. that there is a connection between. ver. 10. and
ver. 11. and therefore it cannot be restrained to Alms, and so all his pains
(page 58. 59.) to prove that grace may sometimes be taken for temporal effects
of grace, is lost.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein our third, fourth and fifth Argument for gifted men's preaching are
vindicated from Mr. Pools exceptions laid against them.

Argu. 3. OUr third Argument is taken from a Gospel promise, Mat. 25 29. Master
Pool replyeth, every one is to exercise his gifts, according to his capacity
and place, and upon a Call, etc. and these things we have answered under the
foregoing Argument, and nothing is needful to be added.

Arg. 4. Our fourth Argument is taken from Gospel presidents or examples, we
instance in Apollo, Act. 18, 24. and the scattered Saints, Act. 8. etc. Mr.
Pool waveth our Argument as urged, Preacher Sent. page 68. 69. 70. from the
instance of Apollo, which alone is enough to prove the warrantableness of
gifted men's preaching, and that publicly without Ordination. But he is forced
to flee for refuge to, and seek shelter under the wing of a few groundless
objections.

Obj. 1. That Apollo had extraordinary gifts, is very probable, 1 Cor. 1. 12.
being ranked with persons so qualified. page 61.

Answ. 1. Paul is ranked with persons but ordinarily gifted, Act. 13. 1. and
ranketh himself with the least of Saints; and what more common then to mention
ordinary and extraordinary gifts together, Romans 12. 1 Corin. 12. 28. 29. Ephesians.
4. ver. 11. 12. Yet were it a probable Argument, that Pastors or Teachers had
extraordinary gifts, because ranked with Apostles who had such gifts, surely
no. And that Apollo had such gifts, there is in 1 Cor. 1. 12. ne (...) quidem.

2. Aquila and Priscilla excelled him in knowledge, Ergo, It is improbable that
he had extraordinary gifts.

Object. Those Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. were to hear and learn of others. The
Apostles had extraordinary gifts when Christ lived, yet were ignorant of his
death, etc. Mr. Pool, page 62.

Ans. We deny not that Apollo was such an ordinary Prophet as those, 1 Corin.
14. or that he was to learn of others, but that he was extraordinarily gifted:
the Apostles were unacquainted with some particular truths before the clear
Revelation of them; yet neither they, nor any others who were extraordinarily
gifted are said to be so defective in knowledge of the way of the Lord, after a
clear Revelation of it, and to be our-stripped by private persons, as Apollo
was.

3. The people at Ephesus where he preached, after his departure, were ignorant
of those extraordinary gifts, Act. 18. 24. and 19. 1. 2.

Object. He might have them, and yet neither they nor Apollo might distinctly
know them, page 62.

Answ. That one may be converted and not know it, we grant, but that one may be
extraordinarily gifted, and yet not distinctly know what such gifts are, or
that neither he, nor those among whom he exercises them, should know he has
them, is a thing, as without proof, so without any probability of truth.

4. Apollo knew only the Baptism of John, Act. 18. 25. Ergo, had not those
extraordinary gifts which appertained to the Baptism of Christ.

Object. 2. Apollo might have Commission from John.

Answ. 1. This is answered in our former Book, to which we refer the Reader.

2. It is denied that John gave Commission to any to Preach; and therefore we
had reason to desire proof of it, that we might not have the endless work of
answering groundless conjectures, yet withal, we gave grounds against it.

Obj. 3. There is a far greater necessity of gifted men's preaching where
Ministers are not, then in a Church where they are. We do not find Apollo's
Preaching in a Christian Church, but disputing in a Jewish Assembly, a liberty
which we as readily allowed to gifted men, as to write in defense of the truth,
Mr. Pool page 63.

Answ. 1. It was the warrantableness of it, not the necessity that we spoke of:
but if necessity will warrant gifted men's Preaching where no Ministers or
Churches are, their ordinary preaching must be allowed.

2. Let it be observed, that they allow unto gifted men the exercise of other
gifts in public Assemblies; they will allow them to dispute publicly in a
Jewish Assembly; and therefore it savoureth of a being wedded to an opinion, to
deny them liberty in this particular case, to use a preaching gift in public
Assemblies. We ask him, whether they will allow women and ungifted men thus to
dispute publicly, if not, this might satisfy him (if he were candid) that
there is reason against women's and ungifted men's preaching publicly, which
will not forbid gifted men's doing of it, and so might silence this trifling
objection, which is a dish we have been served with usque ad nauseam.

3. Apollo was not only disputing, but preaching, and that publicly, Act. 18.
ver. 25. he spoke and taught diligently, ver. 26. in the Synagogues, so ver.
28. And this being in a Jewish Synagogue, its a full proof that gifted men may
warrantably preach in public Assemblies of unbelievers; as our Argument from
the prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. does prove that they may preach in a Christian Church.

Our second instance is in the scattered Saints, Act. 8. who went every where
preaching. ver. 4. with Divine allowance, Act. 11. ver. 19. 20. 21.

Many batteries the provincial Assembly raised against this, but we showed that
it remained like a brazen wall, unshaken. Mr. Poole waveth their defense in
many objections, which we fully answered, yet says (p. 63.) they might easily
be vindicated from our exceptions, we might answer all his book in as few words.

Obj. 1. He says, the true state of the argument is here, because the
scattered Disciples in a persecuted state of the Church, in a time when all
Church order was broke, Preached and taught Jesus Christ to heathens and
unbelieving Jews occasionally, therefore now unordained persons may preach
publicly and solemnly to a Christian Church settled and constituted, etc. Mr.
Pool. page 64.

Ans. 1. This objection is answered in our reply to Dr. Collings, in chap. 74.
of our Book, to which we refer the Reader.

2. Way does he say they taught [occasionally] if there be not some that preach
seldom; yet such occasional preachers he could not find, page 47.

3. That its being a time wherein Church order was broken, or their being in a
persecuted state was that which made their preaching warrantable, which
otherwise would have been unlawful, is a mere conjecture, without the least
Scripture evidence: surely he will not say, that nothing may lawfully be done
in a settled state of the Church which these Christians did in a persecuted,
seattered state. Doubtless they performed many private duties then, they did
not omit prayer, meditation, self-examination, mortification of corruption,
etc. yet these duties are to be come up unto in the most prosperous state of
the Church; and as well may the other, unless it can be proved not only that
it was in a time of persecution, but that the persecution was it that made the
Preaching lawful; and if Mr. Pool will assert this, he must contradict the
provincial Assembly, whose case he pleads; for, they (though groundlessly and
contrary to the very Grammatical construction of the words, as we showed.
Preach. Sent. p. 75.) restrain the scattering unto officers, and surely
officers might have preached lawfully, though they had not bin persecuted; so
that Mr. Pool must either clash with them, or else grant that their persecuted
state did not warrant their preaching, and then his objecton vanishes.

We as much wonder that he can rest in his answers, as he does that we can be
sanctisfied in ours.

We say, persecution laid no necessity upon them to preach.

Object. Yes, it laid a necessity upon them i. e. in order to Gods glory, and
the salvation of souls, which could not be had without preaching, Romans 10. and
preaching could not now be had in an ordinary way, Mr. Pool, page 64.

Answ. 1. This necessity was in those places before the persecution; preaching
had been as necessary in order to the glory of God and the salvation of souls,
though the persecution never had been; neither did that hinder their having
preaching in an ordinary way in these places, they lost no preachers by it; and
therefore it was not the persecution that laid them under a necessity of
preaching.

Necessity can be no plea in this case, for the utmost that the persecution did
toward their preaching in these places was, to put them upon traveling
thither, and this only gave them opportunity, but did not put any necessity
upon them of preaching. If travels, where they are without preaching, can make
such a necessity, gifted men shall not need want work.

2. Preaching might now have been had in an ordinary way, viz. by the Apostles,
and doubtless would, rather then positive precepts should be broken; see more
of this in our answer to Dr. Collings, who uses a like objection.

And by this it may appear, that Mr. Pools instance of the shewbread (page
65.) can lend him no help, because here is no case of necessity to make the
preaching of the scattered Saints lawful, which otherwise had been unlawful,
as there was for the eating of the shewbread, to make that lawful.

If preaching be an act of natural worship, gifted men cannot be denied liberty
to preach. I^ it be amongst those things that are required by positive
precepts, then Ordination being (according to Mr. Pool) essential to the
constituting of a preacher, we ask, how it can be proved, that there can be any
such case of necessity of a man's preaching, when he cannot have that which is
Essential thereunto? when two positive precepts are so coupled together, as one
is Essential to the other, we suppose if one that is Essential cannot be had, a
man is not under a necessity to come up to the other.

If a man could not have what was Essential to the investing him with the
Priestly Office, then he was not necessitated to do the work of that Office;
and therefore his case of necessity must be understood with restrictions and
limitations, even when it is about such as are only mala quia prohibita.

And though the shewbread in a case of necessity might be eaten out of Gods
way, and when Election or ordination cannot be had in every circumstance in
Gods way, they must be had as they may; yet when they cannot be had in Gods way
in that which is Essential, they are not to be taken up at all: and Ordination
being but an Adjunct to Office, having dependence upon a precedent-Election (as
we have proved) hence it cannot be had without it. He says (p. 65.) if neither
Election nor Ordination can be had in Gods way, there is no necessity of their
Preaching in a Church constituted.

But he does not tell us when there is such a case of necessity as will warrant
their preaching; or what necessity he speaks of; It was a natural necessity
that made the eating of the shewbread, and the violation, Mat. 12. of the
sabbath rest lawful, and unless his instances speak of one kind of necessity,
and his application of another, he must intend that; and such a natural
necessity indeed they are not under, to Preach in a Church constituted; but a
moral necessity they are under, both of precept and means, in order to Gods
glory, and the promoting of the salvation of souls.

We put them upon it to determine whether these that preach in such
extraordinary cases be Officers or no Officers; and we showed what miserable
inconveniences will attend the determining either way (Preacher Sent. page 87.)
but Mr. Pool saw it to be his best way to wave that question.

Object. He would make use of our Argument against us. They who were scattered
abroad, they preached: but many ungifted persons were scattered abroad;
Therefore such preached, Mr. Pool. page 66.

Answ. His Argument carries with it a reason against the truth of it, viz.
their being ungifted; for the work of preaching is such as it cannot be
performed (with Divine allowance, as here it was, or to edification) but by
persons gifted. Those that had not ability, could not do it; so that his
Argument has enough in it for the confutation of it self.

But the Argument, as urged by us, has nothing in the bowels of it that does
deny, but much that does evidence the truth of i^.

For, it was the Church that was scattered abroad, Act. 8. ver. 1. and the
scattering abroad is the very Character which the holy Ghost does set out these
preachers by, v. 4. Therefore they [that were scattered abroad] went every
where preaching the word; which plainly argues that very many, or the
generality of those that were scattered, did preach.

As to what is added (page 67.) that officers might teach publicly, the rest
privately, the Officers constantly, the others occasionally: We answer, ubi lex
non distinguit non est distinguendum; There is not a sylliblein the text of any
such difference in their preaching, But of all of them in general its said,
they went every where preaching the word, ver. 4. and they did it constantly,
Acts 11. v. 19, 20, 21.

Neither had the phrase been proper, if only officers had preached, If it had
been said all Israel was scattered, and they that were scattered did such or
such a thing, it would have been grossly improper as well as untrue, to say that
only the officers of the congregation did it; and so here,

Arg. 5. Our fifth argument is taken from Gospel Rules about prophesying, 1.
Corin. 14. Our first Syllogism has the very question for its conclusion, yet
Mr. Pool says (page 68.) it may be granted; let him take it in its true
meaning, and according to our explications of it in our stating the question,
and the controversy will quickly be at an end, if it be granted.

And let it be observed that neither our premises nor conclusions speak of what
was formerly, but of what is at present. Our minor (which he excepteh against)
affirms not only that there [were] but that there [are] i. e. in these days,
some Prophets who are not ordained Officers; and therefore his exceptions from
the Apostles, and the extraordinarinesse of gifts; are vain; seeing himself
will not say, that there [are] Apostles, or persons extraordinarily gifted in
these days, and our minor speaks not of what [were] but what [are.]

So that, it is he that stumbleth at the threshold, rather then we. Our
argument in the urging of it is full enough; for we prove,

1. That these Prophets were not ordained; Indeed there is not a syllable in
the Gospel about the ordination of Prophets, neither does Mr. Pool affirm, that
they were ordained, but rather concludes them to be extraordinary officers
which needed no ordination; and therefore we shall not wast time in replying to
his exceptions against what we said about that, especially they having so
little weight in them.

2. That prophecy is a gift, not an office.

3. That it is a gift still continuing.

Pro. 1. That Prophecy is a gift, not an Office,

Our first argument is, all who have the gift of prophecy are prophets, and if
these prophets were ordalned person; he denies this, but he medleth not with
our proofs of it, Preacher Sent. p. 89.

If they were extraordinary persons, then he denies the other proposition,
because such a gift makes them extraordinary officers. For answer to this we
refer him unto our reply to Dr. Collings, and to our proofs that it is an
ordinary gift; and if he will grant them to be ordinary persons, either he must
say it is a gift, not an office, and then the question is granted; or that
there is another order of ordinary Officers for the work of preaching besides
Pastors and Teachers.

Our second argument was, that which ought in duty and might in faith be
covered by every man who was a member of the Church of Corinth, that was a gift
only, not an office, etc.

Ob. He denies the major, 1. An Office might be covered as well as a gift, 1 Timothy 3. 1.

2. Show where God promised to every member of the Church of Corinth these
extraordinary gifts*

3. If an extraordinary office might not be desired, either it is because it is
an office, and that hinders not, or because extraordinary, and then
extraordinary gifts might not be desired, but they might, 1. Corin. 14. 1.

4. It was impossible for all to be officers there in that Church, but not to
be officers in other places, etc. Mr. Pool p. 71, 72.

An. 1. The second and forth particulars are answered in our reply to Dr.
Collings, whether we refer the Reader.

The first and third particulars reach not the business; for the question here
is not whether it was an office either ordinary or extraordinary; But whether
[every man] who was a member of Corinth or other Churches might covet to be
officers?

Every man in a Church may desire to have gifts, that he may be the more
useful in the body to fellowmembers, but every man may not desire office, for
that were to desire to be over it; and if this desire should be granted, that
all should become officers, where would be the body, the Church for them to be
over? in those days if all the members of a Church desired extraordinary
gifts, and had this desire answered, they might all find use for those gifts;
but there could not be room for all to be officers.

And there is not the least intimation in any verse of the Chapter that the
intendment of the Apostle in putting every man in the Church of Corinth upon
coveting to prophecy, was that they might remove their station and become
officrs in other places, but that they might be the more useful to one another
in that Church 1. Corin. 14. ver. 22, 23, 24. 26. etc. He says they were to
desire other extraordinary gifts, ver. 1. and if those were only to render
them more servicable in that Church, with what shadow of reason can Prophecy
be singled out, and be concluded to be coveted in order to Office in other
Churches? Or does Mr. Pool think in his heart, that this was it the Apostle did
drive at? And how could all the men in that Church become officers in other
places, without a dissolution of the Church in this place, which certainly was
far from the Apostles design.

As for their being enumerated amongst officers, and before Evangelists, we
have answered it in our reply to Dr. Collings, and also in our former book, p.
93.

In that Judas and Silas as Prophets did exhort, Acts 15. 32. as himself
confesses (page 74.) and yet there were others, whose work as Prophets was to
foretell future events, Acts 11. ver. 27, 28. hence it is not so improbable as
he would seem to make it, that there should be two sorts of New Testament
Prophets; especially our reasons from 1 Corin. 14. being considered; but that
answer was added ex abundanti, the objection being sufficiently answered
before, and so was no subterfuge; he may say if he please, that one sort were
Prophets by an extraordinary gift of prediction, the other were Prophets by an
ordinary gift of Scripture-interpretation.

As for the selfe-contradiction which (page 75, 76.) he tells us we boldly
charge them with. Indeed, there being like titles given to both the books, Jus
Divin. the habitations of the Authors of both being in and about London, and
the Authors of Jus Divin. Regim. p. 123. promising a book upon the very subject
of the other, we were induced to think that they had the same Authors, but
least they should have different Authors we only laid it down by way of
supposition, not by way of charge; our words are, and here we cannot but
observe how the the Lord has left them to a self-contradiction (If the sundry
Ministers of London, publishing the first book be of the Province of London,
which published the second, etc. Preacher Sent. page 97.

By which any man may see, that if the publishers of the first book be not of
the province of London, there is no charge for self-contradiction. And though
they be not of the Provincial Assembly, yet it is very remarkable, that they
should contradict one an other about such a weighty matter; For if the Prophets
be ordinary persons (as the Authors of the first book affirm) that is
sufficient says Mr. Pool, page 75. and what he adds, (page 76.) is far from
proving it no contradiction, viz. That these Prophets were extraordinary
officers in respect of their gift, and yet the ordinary pastors of Corinth in
regard of their office and relation.

It is a new contradiction to say that the same persons at the sametime should
be ordinary, and yet extraordinary Officers; as much as to say they are
ordinary and yet not ordinary Officers. And office being a relation, hence if
they be extraordinary officers at all, it must be in respect of their relation,
and therefore what he says is very improper, as if they could be extraordinary
Officers not in respect of their relation.

And because they well knew there might be many extraordinary Officers in a
Church, yet that would not prove that there were more congregations then one in
it, therefore surely they intended to deny them to be extraordinary officers,
and their complying with Mr. Rutherford speaks as much; see more of this in
our answer to Dr. Collings.

Prop. 2. That prophesying is still continuing.

His reply to our first argument about therepeal of it (page 75.) is also
answered to Dr. Collings.

The prophesying was ordinary as we prove by diverse arguments, to which he
replyeth page 77, 78. we answer,

If the Rules agree to extraordinary Officers, and the work be such as they
performed, yet seeing the Chapter is spent chiefly in the regulating of
prophsying, and nothing extraordinary is predicated thereof, who can rationally
conclude them to be extraordinary Prophets? Neither do those Rules agree to
extraordinary officers, as such, nor is it their work as such, and therefore
it is nothing to the purpose. If he could find a whole Chapter spent in the
regulating Apostles or such extraordinary officers in the exercise of their
Office, and yet nothing should be mentioned that agrees to them as Apostles,
or as extraordinary officers, this would run Parallel; but no such instance is
found.

Arg. 3. We say one great end of extraordinary Prophesying is denied to this,
viz. to be a sign.

Ob. 1. They had an other extraordinary gift, to wit, a gift of infallable
teaching by immediate revelation. Diverse of the Apostles had not this gift of
prediction, etc. Mr. Pool, page 77.

Answ. There is not a word in this Chapter or elsewhere to evidence that these
Prophets had any such extraordinary gift of infallible teaching by immediate
Revelation; there is as great a silence about this, as the other, That diverse
of the Apostles had not the gift of prediction, proves that they were not
extraordinary Prophets; but how this is against us we know not; for they had an
extraordinary office upon them, viz. their Apostle-ship, though they were not
Prophets.

Ob. 2. I am prone to conceive that the prediction of future events, was rather
a privilege indulged to some new Testament prophets, then common to all
prophets, etc. page 77.

An. 1. We have no leisure to disprove his groundless conceits.

2. That it was not common to all Prophets, we assert those 1 Cor. 14. were
without it, but that there were many new Testament, extraordinary Prophets,
without a gift of prediction of future events, let him prove.

Our Argument is from the denial of this gift to them, v. 22. not barely from
its not being mentioned.

Though the gift of prediction was chiefly for the sake of unbelievers, yet
also for the sake of believers, Acts 11. v. 27. 28, 29. and this answers his
third particular p. 78.

Ob. 3. It is not said that these prophets were given not for a sign to them
that believe not, but that that act of their Office there spoken of was not for
a sign, Mr. Pool page: 78.

Answ. 1. The Antithesis plainly shows his denying prophesying to be a for
sign, 1 Corin. 14. 22. else it had been enough to say, Tongues are not to them
that believe; but the Apostle says, Tongues are for a sign, etc. and in
opposition to this, he adds but prophesying, etc. and therefore prophesying
was not for a sign.

2. He speaks of prophesying, not of one act only of prophets, ver. 22. but
prophesying serves not, etc: Surely prophesying includes all acts that are
proper to them as prophets, yea foretelling things to come is prophesying
(though the Apostle denies that to be here intended, by denying it to be for a
sign) Therefore his denying prophesying to be for a sign, is as much as if he
had expressly said, that these prophets were given not for a sign.

Whereas he says (page 78.) they had diverse other extraordinary gifts, as that
of Tongues, and the interpretation of them etc. We answer, That these Prophets,
1 Corin. 14. had such gifts, is not proved; and however these did not
betid-them as Prophets, but (if they had them) were a privilege indulged to
them, as they were to many others in those days, who were no Officers at all,
Act. 10. 44. 46.

Our fourth Argument is from its not being allowed to women, 1 Cor. 14* 34.
which extraordinary prophecy was, Luke 2. 36. 38. Mr. Pool thinks that Anna
did it not in a public Assembly, page 79.

We answer, Its said expressly, Luke 2. ver. 37. she was a widow which
departed not from the Temple; and v. 38. And she coming in -- -- spoke of him
to [all] them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. That she should be said
to be in a public place, [the Temple] and to speak to [all] etc. and yet
should speak only in a private way, or severally to them, is irrational to
imagine, and a mere shift.

As to what he says (page 80. 81.) it has very little weight in it, for he
grants, 1. That Doctrine is ordinary, and gives no probable grounds that
here it must be extraordinary; as for the office being extraordinary, it is
confuted already. 2. That there is ordinary Revelation; and his reasons to
prove extraordinary Revelations to be here intended, are very weak.

Object. 1. The word is of the present tense, (...) if it be revealed, not if
it have been revealed, Mr. Pool, page 80.

Answ. 1. Dr. Collings will tell him, the enallage of tenses is very ordinary
in Scripture, Vind. Revind. page 107.

It is said, Roman. 1. ver. 17. The righteousness of God (...) is revealed, yet
this does not deny either that it was revealed before, or that it should be
afterward. So if it were in the presence Tense, if it be revealed, this would
not deny the Revelation of the things to be before.

2 It is one of Mr. Pools gross mistakes, that the word (...) is in the
present Tense for (...) is the first Aorist, and it is generally rendered thus*
si revelatum fuerits si patefactum fuerit; not if any thing be at present, but
if any thing has been revealed; so that quite contrary to what Mr. Pool says,
the very Tense does intimate, that they had the Revelation before their sitting
by; and thus his Argument is built upon a mere mistake.

Object. 2. The posture in which it is revealed, when he sits by, page 80.

Answ. It only intimates what posture they were in, after the things were
revealed (as is already proved) not what posture they were in at the time of
their Revelation, one that was sitting by had the Revelation, but that he had
it whils he was sitting by, the words prove not in the least.

Object. 3. This Revelation was not common to all the Prophets, but peculiar to
one (...) some one that sits by, and therefore surely it cannot be the
Revelation by the word, which is common to all the Prophets, yea all the
Church, page 80.

Answ. 1. If this Revelation were not common to all the Prophets, then it will
prove an Argument against him, if such extraordinary Revelation be intended,
for we may argue thus,

Those to whom extraordinary Revelations were not common, were but ordinary
Prophets; for they cannot be extraordinary Prophets, without such extraordinary
gifts.

But some of the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. were such (says, Mr. Pool) to whom
extraordinary Revelations were not common, Ergo, Some of the Prophets, 1 Cor.
14. were but ordinary Prophets.

Surely therefore upon second thoughts Mr. Pool will say, it was common to all
these Prophets to have these Revelations at one time or another, though at this
or that particular time it was peculiar to one or two to have them; and then we
answer,

2. Its being peculiar to some one to have them, does not prove his having them
by immediate inspiration, but only intimates a possibility of others coming
without preparation, because all the Prophets might not come prepared by
premeditation to prophecy, therefore: it might aptly be said, if any thing be
revealed to one that sits by, etc. and so it may be meant of ordinary
Revelation by the word, which is common to to all the Church, to have in some
degree, though it be not common to all the Prophets to have at this or that
time, in such a degree as to be in readiness to prophecy. As now a days its
ordinary for many Ministers to go to a Lecture and sit by, and yet not go
prepared to Preach.

Object. 4. The effect of the Revelation is to give astop to the others
discourse, page 80.

Answ. It cannot be proved that a Revelation given to a second, was that which
caused the first to hold his peace; as if it made an interruption, or put him
upon breaking of his discourse sooner then he would: but only it intimates
that two were not to speak together, nor one spin out all the time (if others
came prepared to speak) and that this is the meaning is evident by the reason
which the Apostle adds, 1 Cor. 14. 31. For, ye may all prophecy one by one,
etc.

Object. 5. As to what he adds (page 8^.) that it fell out beyond
expectation, and therefore is brought in conditionally, If any thing be
revealed, etc.

Answ. This does not prove the Revelation ^o be beyond his expectation that had
it, but only intimates a possibility that diverse might have Revelations, or
might come with preparations to prophecy; as it is said, Act. 13. ver. 15.
[If] ye have any word of exhortation, say on. So that [It] is not needless, yet
does not deny the Revelation to be ordinary and common.

CHAP. X.
Answering some arguments brought against the preaching of men unordained to
Office, and especially that from Romans 10. 15. about mission.

WE having vindicated our Arguments for the preaching of men un-ordained to
Office, from the exceptions laid against them by Mr. Pool, and having fully
answered their Arguments (in our former book) against our assertion, we might
desist further troubling our selves about them; but we shall add a few words to
show the invalitity of them, notwithstanding all that Mr. Pool has said in
their defense.

Argu. 1. Their first and chief Argument is taken from Romans 10. ver. 15. How
shall they Preach except they be sent? Jus Divin. Min. page 68. 69.

We desire it may be observed by the Reader, that in our former Book, we have
largely and fully answered the Argument of the provincial Assembly from this
Text, and also many objections; but in this, as in many other places of his
Book, Mr. Pool says nothing, or very little in the defense of the Argument as
they lay it (though he has undertaken their defense) but by some new notions
of his own, seeks to patch up an Argument from the same Text, and replyeth to
a few (and but to a few) of our reasons, and so leaves i^.

What is said by Mr. Pool, if it were cogent will not prove what is said by the
provincial Assembly to be so. What reason has induced him to take this course,
we know not.

The Provincial Assembly would gather from this Text,

That mission is Essential to the constitution of a Preacher.

Mr. Pool says, there is an apparent fallacy in part of our reply.

Object. 1. A man's preaching may be unlawful. 1. Circumstantially. 2.
Substantially. If he wants mission, the very substantial act of preaching is
unlawful, Mr. Pool, page 83.

Answ. There is no fallacy in our words; for, It may properly be said, How can
they Preach lawfully without those that are only circumstantial requisites
unto Preaching? and this undeniably proves (against the provincial Assembly)
that this interrogation cannot evidence mission to be Essential unto the
constitution of a Preacher; and this was it we inferred from it. Had we made it
equally unlawful to Preach without Circumstantial requisites unto that work, as
without those that are substantial, what he says might have seemed more
pertinent; but the question here being, whether the foresaid conclusion can be
groundedly inferred from that interrogation, how shall they Preach, etc. we
cannot understand how his words are the to purpose, it is rather a begging part
of the question, to say, that the want of mission makes the very substantial
act of Preaching unlawful.

Object. 2. The sum of what he adds (page 83. 84:) lies in this, That sending
is sometimes taken for the mission of a person already authorized to any place
or people, sometimes for the authorization of a person to a work or office.
That a providential does not exclude, but rather presuppose a ministerial
mission. That God sends by some call. That the Apostles did send by fasting and
prayer and laying on of hands.

Answ. 1. Let it be observed that he grants there is, 1. A providential
sending. 2. A mission that does not authorize to a work or Office, but is of
persons already authorized.

2. We grant, that a providential mission does not exclude, but rather
presuppose that mission, which consists in Christ's commanding or assigning
Preachers to go with the Gospel unto such or such persons; of which we have
spoken, Preacher Sent. page 125. etc.

3. We cannot grant, that mission is the authorization of a person to a work or
office; or that a man's Call to Office is his mission: our reasons for the
denial of this may be seen, Preacher Sent, page 121. 122. where we have proved
by diverse Arguments, that sending is not a Call to Office, or any act that
does constitute a man an Officer or Preacher.

And therefore it behooves Mr. Pool to prove, that a Call authorizing men to
Preach is Gods sending men to the work of preaching. For the Scripture he
alleges (p. 83. 84.) we apprehend, either they only speak of a sending
which is after authorization to the work they are sent to do, and this is
mission properly, which indeed presupposes a Call and authorization unto that
work a man is sent about.

Or else they speak of sending figuratively, as often things Antecedent are
expressed by those which are subsequent, as Genesis 3. ver. 19 In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat bread. Sweat which follows labor, is put for the labor
which goes before, Mark 6. ver. 9. put not on two coats. i. e. do not provide
two: putting on, which is an after act, is used in stead of providing or taking
which is aforegoing act, and so it is explained, Mat. 10. 10. Thus crowning is
put for the constituting one a King* etc.

So sending, which is a subsequent act, may express authorization which is
Antecedaneous thereunto. Pray the Lord that he would send forth laborers into
his harvest; how send them? surely they were not bidden by Christ to pray, only
that a Presbytery might ordain, or a Church elect those that were already
furnished for such a work, but that the Lord would furnish men with gifts,
qualifications and all requisites unto their laboring in his harvest.

Here many things precedaneous unto authorization to the work yet are expressed
by the sending. Gifting is not sending properly, yet here that is set forth
thereby. In this acceptance of the word, the authorization of Christ, the
Apostles, Isaiah, and all the other which he mentions, may be denoted by
their sending, yet their mission was not the act that did authorize them unto
their works or Offices, but was subsequent to their authorization.

But we know not any reason against a taking mission in the other sense, in
diverse, if not all the other Texts alleged by him, John 20* 21. As my
Faether has sent me, so send I you. i. e. As the Father having before
authorized me to the Office of a Mediator, and as fruit thereof has sent me to
do the work of a Mediator, so I having already authorized you to be Apostles
(for they were Apostles before this) I now send you to do the work of your
Apostleship. So 1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ having before authorized me, has sent me,
etc. and so for Isaiah, etc. As for Jer. 23. 21. I have not sent them: we grant
it is not meant of a bare providential sending, yet we deny this to be the
meaning, I did not authorize them to be Prophets; it only intimates that the
Lord did not command them to go with that message, to that people, hence its
added [I have not spoken to them;] and is so explained. Jer. 14. v. 14. I sent
them not; what is that? [neither have I commanded them.] For, Mat. 10. Christ
first authorizeth them. v. 1. and afterward sends them forth. ver. 5.

For Luke 10. 1. The appointing of the seventy, is plainly distinguished from,
and set before the sending of them; that the Apostles used fasting and praying
and laying on of hands, is granted, but that this was mission, we deny.

4. If mission be sometimes taken for the authorization of a person to a work
or office, yet that is no proof that the mission mentioned Romans 10. v. 15. is
any such authorization.

The argument of the provincial Assembly is not from mission in general, but
for that sending spoken of, Romans 10. and seeing Mr. Pool grants, there is a
providential mission, and a sending of persons already authorized, it
concerns him to prove,

1. That the Mission, Romans 10. 15. is an authorization to a work or office.

2. That an authorization or call by man, is the mission there intended: we do
not find that mission does any where in Scripture denote the authorizing or
commissionating of a person to an office, by man, either by a Church or
Presbytery.

These two things being unproved, their argument which is built upon this text
comes to nothing.

Ob. 3. He says, we observe that it is brought in as a justification of the
calling of the Gentiles, and of the sending of preachers to them by the
Apostles; and thence he infers, it must be understood of a moral
impossibility; for if it be taken of a natural impossibility, it is false, for
though the Apostles had not sent them, they might have gone of their own
accord, or some other way, Mr. Pool page 85.

Answ. We did (Preacher Sent. page 312.) and still do utterly deny, that the
Apostles or any other men, did give an authoritative mission; and therefore his
inferrence, that it must be understood of a moral impossibility, is
groundless, it being built upon a supposition that we say, preachers were sent
by the Apostles, to the Gentiles* and could not have preached to them without
their mission; whereas we know not that the Apostles had any hand in any
mission, but that which is providential, many might (for ought we know) go of
their own accord, or some other way, that the Apostles did not send.

Ob. 4. If this be only a providential mission, then none are excluded; the
devils then may be the preachers here spoken of, Mr. Pool. page 86.

Ans. We grant, that none are providentially sent to preach, but those that are
before warranted to be preachers: mission does not make a man a Preacher, but
presupposes him to be one: and therefore Devils and all others that want a
Divine allowance to preach, are excluded.

We used arguments to prove that mission is not a call to office, or
constitutive to an Officer.

Our first argument is from the Apostles having mission after a call, and being
constituted Officers, Mat. 28. 19.

Ob. 1. They were not Apostles to the Gentiles before, Mat. 28. page 86.

Answ. 1. Then every new and solemn work, calls for a new and solemn mission;
and so as often as a Minister removes, he must have a new ordination, if that
be mission.

2. This mission did not constitute them officers, for they were constituted
officers before.

Ob. 2. Mission is taken sometimes for a bare disposal of them to this or that
particular place or work, and in this case they might have a hundred missions,
page 87.

Answ. 1. We take it then for granted that Mat. 28. 19. speaks of such a
mission as is a bare disposal of a man to this or that place, or work, else
this objection is nothing to the purpose.

2. Then he clasheth with Dr. Collings, for it being told him that Mat. 28. 19,
20. is not a commission which authorizeth to preach, he denies it, and argues
against that assertion, Vind. Revind. page: 93, 94. and how we should answer Dr.
Collings and Mr. Pool when they are against one another, let the Reader judge.

3. It concerns Mr: Pool to prove that Romans 10. 15. speaks of a mission
that authorizeth to preach, If Mat. 28. 19. speaks only of a providential
mission, why may not the other Text speak of the same also.

As to the seventy disciples, his saying (page 87.) that if they had mission
from Christ, that made them Officers, is a begging the question; it is poor
arguing, when that which is the question, is made the answer to an argument.

Whether mission makes or constituteth men officers, is here the question, yet
its brought as a reply to our argument. And seeing he grants a mission that
does not authorize, he might easily understand that there is no contradiction
in it, to say, they were sent and yet were not Officers.

Our fourth argument he alters both in the words and sense, and then replyeth
to it page 87. but according to his words, all that are instrumental in an
ordinary way to others conversion would be proved and evidenced to be Officers,
if mission were a call to Office.

He would have proved (page 88.) that mission is ordination: but he gives not
one Scripture for it.

He tells us of men's having a commission to preach two ways, the one
extraordinary, the other ordinary, by setting them apart to the work, etc.

But what is this to the purpose; he knows it is not granted, either that the
setting apart he intends, is mission, or that such a setting apart or mission
does authorize and commissionate men to preach.

He tells us (page 89.) of clear consequences for mission, being ordination,
yet shows not one of them.

Asserteth Deacons to have mission, which the Scripture never says.

Affirms that one may be said to be sent unto those that are locally present
at the time of sending, which reason forbideth.

And whereas we said mission was the end of constituting or making the Twelve,
Mark. 3. v. 14. He ordains Twelve -- that he might send them forth, etc. he
objecteth,

Ob. If one look into the Greek, it is but a mere show, for it is not (...) but
(...) acquisivit, comparavit, he got, procured, took Twelve into his family,
etc. page 89. 90.

Answ. He cannot be ignorant that (...) signifies to constitute or make, and
this very often, as Mat. 4. 19. (...), I will make you fishers of men, Mark 10.
16. Mat. 19. 4. male and female (...) made he them, Acts 17. 26. (...), Has
made of one blood all Nations, etc. Hebr. 1. 2. and so Mar. 3. 14. he made
Twelve, etc. as for taking them into his family to fit them, etc. it is his
mere conjecture with out ground.

As to (page 90, 91.) we say Acts 6. and Acts 13. hold forth something about
ordination, but that this is mission, they say not. A call to office we do not
make superfluous, but that mission is that call, we find not. Let it be proved,
that it belongs to a presbytery to give an authoritative mission; if that
cannot be done, his outcries of paradoxes and absurdities will come to nothing.

Arg. 2. Their second argument is taken from Heb. 5. v. 4, 5.

We expressly granted a call to be necessary unto Office, or that none may
assume Office without a call, and therefore Mr. Pool is mistaken if he thinks
we aimed at the shaking that assertion.

But he that shall read our book without prejudice, will find that the
provincial assemblies conclusions from that Text, are still shaken.

That Gospel Ministers are a Superior or equal order to the high Priest, is
not proved, they may be preferred before them in respect of many new Testament
privelidges, which neither John Baptist, nor any Old Testament officers did
enjoy; but that the order or Office is superior to the high Priest who
typified Christ, (not as Bulls and Goats, etc, but) as our High Priest, this we
see no proof for.

And because Christ was called to the Highest Office, therefore none may
undertake any office without a call; though we deny not the need of a call, yet
we cannot see the force of this consequence.

But these arguments he says, are not directly levied against us, and so we
shall proc^ed to their other arguments.

CHAP. XI.
Answering what Mr. Pool says in defense of the Provincial Assemblies eight
arguments against doing the work of the Ministry without Ordination.

THe Provincial assembly urged eight Arguments to prove, that none may do the
work of the Ministry without ordination.

Arg. 1. Their first argument is, that work for the doing of which God has
designed special Officers of his, neither ought nor may be done by any others,
etc. We answer, prayer, distribution of wordly goods, exhorting and rebuking
are such works, yet others may perform them.

Ob. 1. Prayer he denies to be a work for which the Office of the Ministry
was designed. The Deacons work is the distribution of the Churchs Goods, which
none but Deacons may do. The work of reproving and exhorting they may do, but
privately, not publicly, Mr. Pool. page 96.

Answ. 1. That prayer is a work for which the Office of the Ministry was
designed, is strongly intimated, Acts 6. v. 4. where (...) is appled to prayer,
as well as the Ministry of the word, and it is a word very significant, it
denotes a man's making it his work and business, and that constantly, his
attending, bending and applying himself to it, and being instant in it; to
which his instance about hospitality, 1 Timothy 3. 1. runs not parallel.

In the Bishops days, when liberty of praying was almost denied Preachers,
then it was accounted their work; and if it be not, private men may pray
publicly, as well as perform other acts.

2. Exhorting and Rebuking are the works of Pastors, and distribution of wordly
goods is the work of Deacons, and this is enough to show the invalidity of
their argument; for hence a proposition directly opposite to theirs is true,
viz. That some works, for the doing of which, God has designed special
Officers of his own, ought or may be performed by some that are not designed
unto those Offices; and so their argument is false.

That they are the Churches goods which Deacons distribute, only shows that
none but Deacons can act under that Office relation, and so we grant none may
preach under the relation of a pastor, but he that is an officer. Therefore Mr.
Pool runs to the manner of acting, They may exhort and (...) buke, but
privately, not publicly.

We tell him if an officer exhorts or rebukes in private, it may be an act
of office.

Ob. 2 That no act but a public act is an act of office, we afirme not; an
Officers private rebuke is an act of office.

Answ. 1. Hence it follows, that publicknesse is not an inseparable property
of Office, or is not that which makes an act to be an act of Office; and
therefore men cannot be charged with assuming or invading office barely for
their exhorting in public.

2. This ^overturneth their argument for private exhorting and rebuking (being
as he grants acts of office) are works, for the doing of which God has
designed special officers of his own, yet they may be performed by some that
are not designed unto those Offices.

Their exhorting and rebuking in private might as well be called a usurping
Office, as their doing it publicly.

To prove their argument they bring the examples of Saul and Vzzah.

We tell them,

1. Either these instances are impertinent, or none out of Office may preach in
cases of necessity.

Ob: 3. The case is not parallel, nor is the necessity alike; Preaching is
absolutely necessary to salvation, so is not sacrificing, page 97.

Answ. 1. Preaching is necessary, but not absolutely necessary to salvation; it
is one, but not the only means; for parental and other private instructions
may be useful to that end.

2. To prove that such as are only mala quia prohibita, may be done in a case
of necessity, himself (page 65.) ^lledgeth David's eating the Shewbread, yet
that did not make such a case of necessity as there is of preaching unto
salvation, and so our argument is as strong as his.

3. This is a mere fallacy; for he speaks of the work of preaching being more
necessary then the work of Sacrificing; whereas we speak of the necessity that
persons are under to perform those works. And if the necessity of preaching
unto salvation will justify the preaching of men out of office, they can never
want a case of necessity. What he adds about sacrifices and Sacraments, is
not against our objection, but seems to intimate that Sacraments are more
limited and confined to office then preaching, though they be not so necessary
to Salvation, and so proves their fourth argument to be false.

2. We tell him that these acts of Saul, Vzzah and Vzziah were expressly
forbidden, and some of them threatened with death, Numb. 4. 15, and 16. 40. etc.

Ob. 4. A thing may be prohibited either in express terms, or by solid
consequence; Vzzah was punished not principally, at least, not solely because
he did touch the Ark with his hands, but because he did not bear it upon his
shoulders. He argues from 1. Corin. 14. 34. That an express prohibition is
not necessary. And adds that there is no more express prohibition to
restrain men from administering the Sacraments, then from preaching, the reason
of the prohibition is the same in both, to wit, because Officers were appointed
for those works, Mr. Pool, page 98, 99.

Answ. 1. We grant that we are to be satisfied with Scripture consequences, but
that the preaching of gifted men out of Office is prohibited by any solid
consequence, we find not.

2. We wonder how Mr. Pool durst say, that Vzzah was not punished principally,
at least not solely, because he did touch the Ark with his hands, seeing it is
said expressly, 1 Cron. 13. v. 10. The anger of the Lord was kindled against
Vzzah and he smote him, [because he put his hand to the Ark] and there he died
before God.

3. For 1 Corin. 14. 34. we have spoken to it before. It cannot prohibit the
preaching of all persons under authority; for all Church Officers are under
authority to Magistrates; and all young Scholars (whose parents are living) are
under authority to their parents, yet if they have submitted to Ordination, he
will grant they may Preach; and if such a being under authority be intended, as
is peculiar to women, then nothing can be concluded thence against the
preaching of gifted men.

4. That Gods appointing officers to do a work, does not prohibit others doing
of it, we have already evidenced; and therefore Officers being appointed to
Preach, does not by consequence prohibit others preaching.

5. An express prohibition, or Gods appointing Officers to administer the
Sacraments, are not the chief, much less the only Arguments against their
doing it, who are no Officers; there are many other mediums that prove the
administration of Sacraments to be more restrained unto Officers then
Preaching; as from others not having such a Divine allowance for that, as we
have proved they have for preaching, from the Sacraments, being purely by
institution, etc.

There is no prohibition either express or by consequence, of gifted men's
preaching, and though this does not prove that they may preach, yet it
sufficiently evidenceth the weakness of their Argument against their preaching;
for the Acts of Saul, Vzza and Vzziah were expressly forbidden and threatened;
and so their Argument has color only, and no substance. As to page 100.
public preaching is not the whole work of a Minister, any more then private
exhorting or rebuking; and seeing he grants private rebuking by an Officer to
be an act of Office, either private Christians doing this, renders Gods
Officers void or unnecessary as to that act of their office, and so one
appointment of God should be vain (which it were an impeachment to to the
wisdom of God to assert, yet he says little less, page 100) or else gifted
men's preaching in public will not render Gods Officers vain or unnecessary, as
to that act of their office, viz. public Preaching.

Himself grants that men are not restrained by humane or Divine Laws from
keeping School, yet a general liberty for that public work breaks no order,
no more does a liberty for gifted men's Preaching in public.

But our instance of a Fathers and a Schoolmasters, Teaching prove, that
distinction between relations is not destroyed by their doing the same works,
and this we produced it for.

Argu. 2. Their second Argument, is from gifted persons not being appointed or
warranted thereunto: for then every gifted man that Preaches not is guilty of
a sin of omission.

We answer, gifted men are appointed to Preach, yet the want of opportunity or
a Call from others, may free it from being a sin of omission.

Object. 1. Peter was forbidden to preach, yet he accounted it his duty, Act.
5. 29. if gifted men were appointed by God to preach, no men (by negligence in
not desiring them) could disoblige them, page 101.

Ans. 1. Officers are called to preach by the Churches they are over, and if
those Churches should grow negligent and not desire them, yet they ought to
Preach, if they will hear. In some cases Officers are obliged to preach (as
Peter was, Act. 5. 29) when men forbid them, yet when circumstances do not
concur, they do not sin though they forbear.

2. Gifted men are so obliged to preach, that no men can disoblige them; but as
to the exercise here or there at this or that time, many things may hinder an
obligation to that, as we proved before. To pray, read, hear, and privately to
exhort, etc. are duties that Christians are obliged to by their general
calling, yet men may sin if they act in these, so as to neglect or justle out
the works of their special calling, for it is duty to be exercised therein
also; and therefore men's acting in such duties must be determined by the
special calling (as to the time) or by convenience, opportunity, etc. and so
for gifted men's Preaching.

Object. 2. If Preaching gifts be talents, Mat. 25. then whoever uses them not
is under a curse, page 102.

Answ. Talents (though not used) are not as talents wrapped up, unless through
slothfulness or wickedness, the use be neglected, Mat. 25. ver. 26. If one
'hath a talent of Counsel, and counsel be despised, he that has the talent is
free.

Argu. 3. Their third Argument is, no man may do the Office of a Magistrate or
Deacon who is not called to it.

Mr. Pool takes a little piece of our reply, and seeks to answer it with his
case of necessity, which we have spoken often enough to; our chief answers he
says nothing to.

Whereas he tells us of setting up our own devices in Gods worship (page
103.) we wish their way were not more guilty of this evil then ours. And if it
be a sin for ungifted men, or such as are erroneous, to preach, surely a Church
is to take care that its members be not guilty of it, and this will amount to
little less then a proof, that there may be approbation without Ordination.

Our instance of believing, which he mentions (page 104.) proves, that one
may perform a work of greater consequence, and yet may not perform a work of
less consequence, and so was no fallacy; but now he restrains it unto such
works as relate to others, we shall instance in private exhorting, this is a
work of greater consequence, difficulty and danger, then the works of
Magistrates or Deacons, and that for the reasons they mention (Jus Divin. Min.
page 87.) viz. because if they miscarry in private exhortation, they destroy
souls, yet private Christians may do that.

Arg. 4. Their fourth Argument is, none may administer the Sacrament who is
uncalled, Ergo, none may preach who is uncalled; for these two are joined
together, Mat. 28. 19. Our first reply to this, Mr. Pool again would answer
with necessity, but that in any case they may preach, but may not administer
the Sacrament, it speaks their Argument invalid. We tell him, Mat. 28. is no
commission authorizing them to preach and baptize, and so their being joined
together there is no proof, that only those may preach who may baptize.

Object. 1: Mr. Pool thinks that they were not Apostles, nor had their
Commission as Apostles till Mat 28. 19. 20. this he says is probable by these
three considerations. 1. That an Apostle was a new Testament Officer, and the
new Testament did not begin till the death of Christ. 2 They had not
Apostolical gifts before the death of Christ. 3. They wanted Universality of
jurisdiction, etc. Mr. Pool. page 105.

Ans. 1. When we urged Mat. 28. 19 20. he takes it for a mission that does not
authorize to a work (p. 87.) else his answer comes to nothing; and yet here
would have it be the Apostles Office-making Commission; how he is consistent
with himself herein, we see not, one of these replies must be naught.

2. Long before the death of Christ its said, Luke 6. ver. 12. 13. He continued
all night in prayer to God, and when it was day, be called unto him his
Disciples, and of them he chose twelve, whom also he named [Apostles.] We prove
that they were Apostles before, Mat. 28. 19. 20. by these considerations.

1. Christ imposed the name of Apostles upon them, (Luke 6. 13.) before Mat.
28. Ergo, They had the Office of Apostles upon them before. For surely Christ
would not put the name of an Office upon them, if they had not the Office that
answered that name. The seventy were sent out to preach, yet had no such title
put upon them, but the name of Apostles was constantly given to the Twelve
before the death of Christ, Luke 17. 5. Luke 22. ver. 14. Mat. 10. 2. and
therefore Mr. Pool is too bold with Scripture, to put other names upon them (as
Prophets or extradinary Teachers) when the Gospel never knows them by these
names, but by the name of Apostles.

2. Christ chose them before, Mat* 28. and the name of Apostles being at the
same time put upon them, hence they were chosen to be Apostles* Luke 6. 13. and
this was after solemn prayer. Ergo, They were Apostles before, for Election is
the constitutive act of their office.

3. They had Apostolical gifts (though not in so full measure) before the death
Christ, Mat. 10. ver. 1. He gave them power against unclean spirits to cast
them out, and to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease. And
this answers his second consideration.

4. Matthias was put into the same Office that Judas was in, before the death
of Christ, for its said, Act. 1. ver. 25. He is to take part of this ministry
and Apostleship from which Judas by transgression fell. Now Matthias undeniably
was an Apostle, Ergo, so was Judas and the eleven before the death of Christ.
Yea this Text calls the Office both of Judas and Mathias an Apostleship, and
to be sure Judas was not an Apostle after the death of Christ, for he did not
only betray his Master, but also hanged himself.

3. To his first consideration we answer, The new Testament if taken for the
doctrine of the Gospel as 2 Corin. 3. of which they were Ministers, was begun
long before the death of Christ, Luke 1. 78. and 2. v. 10. as also in other
acceptations of it; but suppose the new Testament did not begin till the death
of Christ, Baptism is a new Testament Ordinance, and this he cannot deny
seeing he makes it the only door of admission into the new Testament or
Gospel Church. (p. 25.) and it is easy to prove it upon truer and better
grounds; Yet baptism was administered by the twelve long before the death of
Christ, Job. 4. ver. ^. 2. and to multitudes by John the Baptist: And the first
constitution of Apostles (new Testament Officers) might as well be before the
death of Christ, as the first administration of Baptism (a new Testament
Ordinance) might be before it. If after the new Testament began, Apostles
became officers, and Baptism an Ordinance thereof, yet as it was the same
Baptism, so they were the same officers. viz. Apostles, before and after. And
this also may answer his third consideration, If those that were Baptized
before the death of Christ were Churchmembers, then there was a Church which
the Apostles might have jurisdiction over; if they were not, why might not they
be Apostles without jurisdiction, as well as persons be baptized without
Church Membership if Baptism be (as he would have it) a door of admission into
the Church?

Officers he says they were, and to be Officers without any jurisdiction. (as
he says these were) is as strange as to be Apostles without Universality of
jurisdiction. And if all this were not enough, the extraordinariness of their
Call or that time, might better be alleged in this case, then it is in many
against us.

Object. 2. It must needs be granted that it is a renewing, confirming, and
enlarging of their former Commission, and this double work being equally
imposed upon them, must by like reason be equally restrained to them, unless
better grounds can be shown to the contrary, etc. Mr. Pool. page 14.

Answ. 1. Any impartial Reader may see enough in our former book (Preacher
Sent, page 168. 169.) to take off this reply.

It was an enlargement of the Apostles Commission to the Gentiles, making them
capable of being preached to and baptized, but its no proof, that only those
may preach, who may baptize.

If it should be said to Elders and Deacons, Go teach, Rule and distribute to
the Church in such a place, would the joining of these together in an
exhortation, prove, that every one who may Rule may Teach, or that none may
distribute, but he that may Teach? Surely no. Thus, Mat. 28. 19. 20. Its said
to Preachers and Baptizers, Go Preach and baptize all Nations, yet this cannot
prove, that none may preach but those who may baptize; it only shows that
such as had power to Preach, might now lawfully Preach to the Gentiles, and
such as had power to baptize, might now administer baptism to the Gentiles,
which before they might not. He imposes the works on those that had power for
them, does not restrain the power to perform the one unto them that had power
to perform the other. The intendment of this Text is not (that it can be
proved) to show that all who may Preach may Baptize, but to warrant such as may
do those works, in their Preaching to, and Baptizing the Gentiles.

2. Let it be observed what their Argument is come to; it should prove, that
none may Preach but those who may adminster the Sacraments, and at last it is,
unless we can show reason to the contrary, the works are equally strained; we
have given reasons enough to the contrary, and so the Argument proves just
nothing.

Argu. 5. Their fifth Argument is, To Preach without calling and Ordination to
the work is to usurp authority over the Church; to prove which they assert
preaching to be an act of authority, Hebr. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 12.

The weakness of this argument we largely showed, Preacher Sent, page 171,
172, 173. but Mr. Pool replyeth not to what we have there said. He tells us
(page 107.) if a man preaches to heathens, he cannot usurp authority over the
Church, and this enervateth their argument. We deny that men use
office-authority toward heathens in preaching to them, they do not act as over
them; his very instance confuteth this; for an Ambassador has not authority
over him that he is sent to treat with in a large sense, we have proved that
gifted men have authority, and that from the Scripture, to preach without
ordination; and so we do not cross the golden saying of Tgnatius, which he
mentions, page 107.

As for Hebr. 7. we said (amongst other things) he that blesses, by an
original inherent power, as Christ does, he is greater then he that is blessed,
and of such blessing the Text speaks, etc.

Ob. This is very gross; the Text evidently speaks of Melchisedeck, who
blessed only ministerially, and not by an original power, etc. page 108.

Answ. 1. We did not say that Melchisedeck blessed by an original power, our
words plainly give that power to Christ only.

2. That the Text has reference unto Christ (who has an original power to
bless) we proved, and it is clear, Heb. 6. v. 20. -- Jesus made an high Priest
forever after the order of Melchisedeck, and Heb. 7. v. 11, 12. 14. 17. After
the similitude of Melchisedeck, there arises another Priest, ve. 15. Whence it
is evident that the Apostles main scope, drift and design is to set forth
Christ in his greatness and excellency, by comparing him with Melchisedeck;
for several things are spoken of Melchisedeck that do more properly belong
unto Christ, then to him; as he is said to be without Father, without Mother,
and withuut beginning, Heb. 7. 3. yet Melchisadeck was a man, and not God, and
so as to his natural being, had a Father, a Mother, and a beginning; and
therefore these things are spoken of him, (as Calvin says) as of one clothed
with the person of Christ.

Thus the Apostle declares, not only how Christ concurred in the particular
act of blessing Abraham; but the greatness of Melchisedeck, who blessed
Abraham is mentioned, chiefly to notify the greatness of Christ, who blessed
the faithful after that similitude, viz. with an extraordinary Highpriests
blessing.

From all which it is evident, that if Melchisedeck blessed only ministerially,
yet seeing the chief design of the Text is to set forth Christ's acting as a
High Priest in blessing, hence as it has reference unto him, so a blessing by
an original power is intended.

3. Melchisedeck blessed by an extraordinary authority; and this can be no
proof that all ordinary persons who bless others, have a superioriry over
those that are blessed; and so this speaks nothing to his purpose.

As to 1 Timothy 2. 12. we told them there is a plain distinction and difference
in that very Text, between teaching and usurping authority, as [nor] does
intimate.

Ob. 1. It is a familiar thing to use a word disjoyning one thing from an
other, when indeed the one explaines the other, Rev. 22. 15. Gal. 1. 12. Mr.
Pool page 108.

Answ. 1. If sometimes a word disjunctive be expositive, yet usually it is not
so; multitude of instances might be given where things disjoined by an (...)
(as in, 1 Timothy 2. 12.) must be distinct one from an other.

2. The Scriptures he alleges speak not for him, Rev. 22. 15. uses (...)
which is copulative, and so does not necessarily disjoyne as (...) does. The
things are distinct in Gal. 1. 12. I neither received it of man, neither was I
taught it, etc. i. e. I neither was taught it by others, nor did I learn it of
my self, by my own study and industry; there is a teaching, and so a learning
which is not by other men, a self-teaching, Romans 2. 21. and a natures teaching,
1 Corin. 11. 14. yea there are Satanical teachings which are not by men.

3. When the Scripture uses a disjoyning word (as here it does) the things
spoken of are distinct, unless where cogent reasons enforce the contrary: and
what a weak argument then is it to prove teaching an act of authority, when
these are disjoined with an (...) in the very Text that is produced for the
proof of it, viz. 1. Tim. 2. 12.

Ob. 2. On the one side of it, teaching is forbidden, on the other side,
silence is enjoined, and nothing can be more evident, then that he speaks of
that usurpation of authority, which consists in teaching, and is opposed to
silence. Mr. Pool, page 109.

Answ. 1* If things be never so distinct, yet one must be expressed before the
other, and therefore the putting teaching before usurping authority, does not
prove usurpation of authority to consist in teaching; neither is the injoyning
silence after, any proof of it; for women may usurp authority by private
speaking, and so silence is opposed unto usurping of authority, which is not
public teaching.

2. Many other phrases are so^ hemmed in on both sides, and yet the things are
certainly distinct one from another: as 1 Cor. 3. ver. 7. watering has
planting on the one side, and Gods giving increase on the other side; will any
say, therefore watering consists in planting; so Gal. 1. ver. 1. and Gal. 5.
6. neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith, etc.
uncircumcision has circumcision on the one side, and faith on the other side,
but will any say, that uncircumcision consists in circumcision? no more does
teaching on the one side, and silence on the other prove usurpation of
authority to consist in teaching. Mr. Pool speaks here with much confidence,
but with no evidence.

Ob. 3. The man here is not to be understood singularly for her husband, but
indefinitely, for any man; for the Apostle is comparing Sex with Sex, in the
general,-it concerns such women as have no husbands; it is authority in a
Church affair, that is spoken of, Mr. Pool. page 109.

Answ. 1. If [the man] here be understood indefinitely, [any man] then [the
gift] 1 Pet. 4. 10. is to be understood indefinitely [any gift] and this
answers what he says, page 45. about an indefinite expression.

2. If (as he says) the Apostle compares Sex with Sex in the general, then
the prohibition belongs only to women, and so it makes nothing against the
preaching of gifted men.

3. The whole sex is forbidden teaching, but only those that have husbands may
be forbidden, this usurping of authority, because only they are required to be
under that obedience of wives. The promise of salvation in childbearing
mentioned but three verses after, 1 Timothy 2. 15. does not concern all women, but
only those that have husbands.

4. That Church authority is intended, he asserteth, but has not proved.

5. Women may usurp authority, though it be not over husbands, or in teaching
publicly, and therefore their argument hence is without proof, though the man
be not only her husband, but any man.

As to what he adds (page 109.) it concerns not us, and is so far from an
improvement of our argument to the highest, that at the lowest it will be more
conclusive; but seeing he has mentioned it, we shall say thus much to it.

It precepts express be prohibitions by consequence, as Mr. Pool says they
are, (page 98, 99.) then a pari exceptions express are concessions by
consequence, and so the excepting women in the case of teaching or prophesying,
1 Timothy 2. 12. 1 Cor. 14. 34. will be an allowance to men that have the gift; we
think one is as strong as the other.

Ob. 4. A parallel place is 1 Corin. 14. 34. to speak i. e. in the Church, is
unlawful for those who are in a state of subjection, and un-officed persons are
in a state of subjection, as well as women, Mr. Pool, pa. 110.

Answ. This we answered twice before: He is so confident of the validity of
this argument, that he often mentions it and concludes it undeniable, and
dispaireth of ever seeing him convinced by man that resists such evidence;
whereas indeed it is a mere empty sound.

1. Because men may be in subjection, and yet be in power: ordinary Ministers
were in subjection to the Apostles, yet were in power, yea in power to preach;
Men not in office were in power to judge, 1 Corin. 5. 12. to pardon, 2 Corin. 2
8. much more to declare the Law in which to proceed to judge and pardon.

Women are in subjection, not in power; Women might not preach, if they should
be ordained by an abuse of power.

2. Because it is not every state of subjection that forbids preaching, 1
Corin. 14. 34. for then none who are subject to Magistrates, (and what
Ministers are not so) or parents may preach, and so it is altogether without
proof, that all un-officed men are in that state of subjection which is there
intended.

3. Because it is not an Ecclesiastical state of subjection that is is
intended, 1 Corin. 14. 34. For then all women are not there forbidden
preaching, but only such as are Church Members, because then none else were in
the state of subjection, that is the reason against women's preaching.

And because women's subjection, in one kind, viz. in a civil or natural
respect, forbids their preaching; for Mr. Pool to say by the same reason,
all unofficed men are forbidden to preach, by their being in Subjection in
another kind, viz. to Church Officers, who will not see the vanity of such an
argument?

4. Because the state of Subjection which the Apostle proves women's preaching
to be unlawful by, 1 Corin. 14. 34. is such as is peculiar to women, and no
un-officed men ever were in it, and therefore it is no reason against any men's
preaching, no men being in the state of subjection spoken of; if he will assert
they are, let him prove it.

He that reads 1 Corin. 11. will find that Sex is compared with Sex, man with
woman, and the woman said to be in subjection in way of distinction from, or
opposition to the man.

Because a woman who is one, to whom man is a head, 1. Corin. 11. 3. who was
formed after the man, 1 Timothy 2. 13. created for the man, 1 Corin. 11. 9.
subjected to the man, Genesis 3. 16. because a woman the weaker vessel, 1 Pet. 3
7. who was deceived, and was in transgression, 1 Timothy 2 14. because such a one
is to keep silence in the Church, must not prophecy there; to say therefore
the man, who is the head of the woman, may not prophecy or preach, this is a
lamentable non sequitur.

Arg. 6. Their sixth Argument is, from the Scriptures reproving un-called men
for preaching, Jerem. 23. 21, 22. I sent them not, etc.

To part of our answer unto this, he replyeth thus.

Ob. 1. This is a little too gross to say they are by God called to be
Prophets, of whom God professes, they run, but he sent them not. The prophets
had no other call then this, or at least this was Gods usual way of calling
them, be immediately inspired them with an extraordinary message, 1 Samuel 3. 20.
Mr. Pool. p. 111.

Answ. 1. Sending did not make prophets: Samuel had a revelation, yet was not
sent to Eli to declare it, he was forced to draw it out, 1 Samuel 3. 17. yet
Samuel was a prophet, as appears, v. 20.

Jeremiah was sent, Jerem. 26. 12. The Lord sent me to prophecy against this
house, and against this City, all the words that ye have heard: yet Jeremiah
was a Prophet before this sending, and not made a Prophet by it; So those 2
Cron. 24. 19. were sent after they were Prophets: So that the Prophets had a
new mission as often as God commanded them to go with any new message to any
people, and were so often made Prophets, if sending were, (as he supposes)
their call. Therefore Gods professing that they ran and he sent them not, does
not deny them to be Prophets, because sending is not the call.

2. There is a sending which does not authorize or give a call to Office (as
himself confesses, p. 83. 87.) and let him prove that their not being sent,
was their not being authorized to be Prophets, else the argument is vain.

3. Those that were authorized and called by God to be Prophets, sometimes went
with false dreams or lies, and so ran without being sent, yet when they
carried a true message, they were sent, Act. 21. v. 4.

So 1 Kings 13^ 11. There was an old Prophet, and he Prophesied a lie,
pretending it to be the word of the Lord, ver. 18. I am a Prophet also as thou
art, and an Angel spoke unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, bring him
back, etc. and this was a lie, as appears, v. 17. 22. 23.

Yet this old man was a Prophet truly called of God, Mr Pool himself being
judge; for he says Gods inspiring with an extraordinary message, was his call
to be a Prophet, and this the good old man had ver. 20, 21. as they sat at
table, And the word of the Lord came unto the Prophet that brought him back,
etc. Now he had a word from God to declare, and so was called to be a Prophet,
yet ver. 18. he ran without being sent. So that as a false Prophet may carry a
truth, so a true Prophet may carry a lie.

We granted (Preacher Sent, page 128.) that those Jerem. 23. were false
Prophets in respect of their doctrine which they then preached, but we still
apprehend that they were standing Prophets of Israel, and true Prophets in
respect of their call, and we proved it from v. 22.

4. As to 1 Samuel 3. 20. it does not in the least intimate that Gods sending a
message by Samuel was his authorization or call to be a Prophet, but only that
the answering his message by the event did give a knowledge, (which the fruits
and effects of a call may do) that he was authorized and called; the words are
plain, ver. 19. 23. The Lord did let none of his words fall to the ground, and
all Israel [knew] that Samuel was established to be a Prophet of the Lord.

5. If they were not extraordinary, yet they might be ordinary Prophets: In old
Testament times there were two sorts of Prophets; some that had an immediate
extraordinary call to foretell things to come, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc. others
that were instructed in the Scooles under the discipline of other Prophets,
whence they are called Sons of the Prophets, 2 Kings 2. 7. and 6. v. 1.

These had a faculty with dexterity to interpret Scriptures, and explain
prophesies, and a call to do it, and a word from the Lord, 1 Kings 20. 35.

Some of these might pretend to immediate Revelations, when they had them not,
and therein might run before they were sent; yet might be sent to do the work
of ordinary Prophets: and their being joined with the Priests in the same
reproof, under the name of prophets, Jer. 23. v. 11. 33, 34. speaks much for
their being Gods prophets, as well as the other were his Priests, though both
under a sad degeneration.

6. If they had no call of God, yet the argument is invalid, and cannot speak
against gifted men's preaching, seeing they (as we have proved) have a call to
preach.

To our argument from v. 22. he says,

Ob. 2. The standing in Gods counse^ and speaking Gods word implies a call.
There is another reading very conformable to the Hebrew text, If they had stood
in my counsel, i. e. If they had stood till I had sent them, etc. So that this
is an evidence that they were false prophets, Mr Pool, page 112.

Answ. 1. It does not in the least imply such a Call as they could not be
prophets without; for those that were 2 Chro. 24. ^19 Jer. 26. 12.
before true prophets, yet did stand in Gods counsel, etc. in every new message
from him; and did sometimes (as we have proved) prophecy lies, and therein
they did not stand in his counsel, or cause to hear his words; and so all that
is here said in such cases might be spoken to true Prophets; and therefore can
be no evidence, (as he would have it) that these were false prophets in respect
of their call.

2. The Hebrew does not at all favor such a reading as he speaks of; the
word does not signify mission, but counsel or secret, as Genesis 49. 6. O my
soul, come not thou into their secret. It were strange language to say come not
into their mission, and as strange to say if they had stood in my mission, but
if they had stood in my counsel, or secret, is consonant to the Hebrew, and it
is explained in the following words, and had caused to hear my words; which
plainly intimates, that their not declaring his words, but lies, as v. 25.
their broaching false doctrine not their want of a true call is that they are
blamed for.

Those who (by Gods own Testimony) might have had success and a divine
blessing in preaching Gods word, they might lawfully preach his word; for let
any prove that God has entayled his blessing upon the labors of such as (in
respect of their call) are false Prophets.

2. But the Prophets Jerem. 23. (by Gods own Testimony) might have had success
and a divine blessing in preaching Gods word, for its said, ver. 22. If they
had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from
their evil way.

Ergo, The Prophets, Jerem. 23. might lawfully preach Gods word.

Argu. 7. To what he says for vindicating their seventh Argument, we answer,

1. He consoundeth mission and a Call, which are things distinct.

2. The question even in their own stating of it, is about a particular Call;
for, they assert Ordination to be a Call, and their proposition, which all
these Arguments are brought to prove, is this, That none may do the work of the
Ministry without Ordination.

So that if their Arguments prove the necessity of a Call, yet if they prove
not the necessity of Ordination unto all ordinary Preaching (which the present
Argument does not) they do not conclude their question; and it is answer
sufficient to say, Gifted men have a Call to Preach, though they be without
Ordination; we do not say, that they have no other Call but their gifts, (as he
reports, page 112.) it is by the Law of nature and the written word that
gifted men are called.

3. Paul's immediate Call was a necessary, though not the only medium to prove
the Divineness of his Doctrine; ordinary Officers then and now have other
mediums to prove it by.

4. Gifted men now have enough to prove their Call by; and these things answer
that he says, page 112, 113. other objections we fully answered, but he waveth
them; whether our replies or their reasons be trivial, let the Reader judge.

Argu. 8. Their eighth Argument we answered, but he waveth our replies to that
also.

Object. All gifted men (though preaching) cannot challenge maintenance,
therefore they are no Scripture Preachers, Mr. Pool, page 114.

Ans. 1. We grant wages indeed due to the work to an Officer, not for his
office, but for his work.

2. Gifted men may in some cases require maintenance, and do justly receive it;
yet not as they are gifted men, but as they are employed in the work, and
maintenance is due for the works sake, as himself says, (page 115.) and is
clear, Luke 10. 7.

3. Duties of a general calling are so to be dispatched and done, as a
particular calling be not prejudiced thereby: he will grant that every man is
to follow after knowledge, hear Sermons, etc. Yet a man may sin in doing so, if
he neglects his business, charge or family; rich men therefore are under
further engagements unto this, then poor men, single persons, then married, 1
Cor. 7. 34.

Gifted men may Preach as often as (with due preparation) they can, without
neglecting their particular callings, and when gifted men's preaching is only
occasional, and so as a particular calling (which affords them a livelihood)
is not prejudiced thereby, then there is not that reason for their challenging
maintenance, as when such a calling is laid aside in order thereto, and the
work becomes constant work; for preaching, when it is only occasionally, is a
work of their general calling, and neither the Law of nature, nor the written
word (which make it so) do require their doing that work any oftener then is
consistent with that particular calling which the outward support of themselves
and families has dependence upon. Thus much shall suffice to show the weakness
of their Arguments against gifted men's preaching without Ordination.

He rehearses our Arguments, leaving out a great part of their strength, and
putting in his own exceptions against them, and then mentions the heads of
their Arguments without our exceptions against them, and yet pretends (page
116.) not to take at advantage, but to set the best gloss upon our cause, in
which surely no Reader will believe him.

CHAP. XII.
Concerning Election, as belonging to a particular Church.

THere are three Scriptures chiefly urged, to prove the power of Election to
belong to a Church, viz. Act. 1. Act 6. and Act. 14.

Many of our answers to objections against these proofs we have no reply to,
and so we shall but touch upon things here, and refer the Reader unto our
former Book, and to our reply to Dr. Collings for a fuller answer.

1. The first Scripture is, Act. 1. 23.

Object. It was not an exhortation to choose, nor a direction in choosing (here
is not a word of the piety, etc. of the person) but only a declaration that
one must be chosen, etc. however it was fit the people should consent, page 120.

Answ. 1. Here he plainly contradicts the provincial Assembly; for he says,
it was not a direction in choosing; they say (Jus Divin. Min. page 127.) they
were guided and directed in their choice by the eleven Apostles, and seek to
prove it from ver. 21, 22. how should we answer both?

2. Qualifications are set down. ver. 21. and the men and brethren in the
meeting being spoken to, ver. 16. it is clear that they were the persons
choosing, ver. 23.

2. The second place is, Act. 6.

Object. 1. Regulation by dead Laws and rules is no prejudice to the peoples
sole power in Election, but a regulation by living Judges does destroy it. If
the Apostles had refused any of those chosen by the people upon just grounds,
would they have been Deacons? if not, then the Essence of the Call consists not
in Election. Mr. Pool, page 121.

Answ. 1. Paul was as much a living Judge when he did write ^o Timothy and
Titus, as the Apostles were, Acts 6. yet he gives Rules for ^egulation, 1 Timothy
3. ver. 2. 3. Tit. (...). ver. 6^, and if Ordination be aimed at here, either
these Rules of Regulation destroyed the power of Timothy and Titus in
Ordination, or else those Rules, Act 6. did not destroy the peoples power of
Election. And we may turn his question upon him, If Paul had upon just grounds
refused any of those Ordained by Timothy and Titus, would they have been
Officers? if not, then (according to his arguing) the Essence of the call
consists not in Ordination.

2. If they chose persons duly qualified, the Apostles could not refuse them.

3. If the Apostles had a negative voice, in case persons were not rightly
qualified, yet that would not deny the whole power of Election to be in the
Church; for, their affirmitive voice might be only causa sine qua non, not
causa formalis of the Election, as himself tells us, page 13^. we may urge
his instances there against what he says here, and they will be as strong for
us, as for him.

And this answers what follows: If the Apostles refusing any chosen, would
have hindered their being Deacons, as p. 121. or the want of Ordination would
have made Election null, as he says, page 122. yet the Essence of the Call
might consist in Election; for, their approbation or Ordination might be only
Causa sine qua non; they might not be Essential, though they could not be
without them.

But it is he that forgets, not we; for the present question is about the
peoples power of choosing, not about Election, as Essential to a Call, nor of
Apostles power in Election.

As to what he adds (page 123.) about arguing a minori ad majus affirmative;
we answer, It is Mr. Pool that runs upon the gross mistake; for our
Argument is fetched from the same Canon that there is is, as any one may plainly
see, Preacher Sent. page 224.

And whether the Argument from the greater to the less affirmatively, be not
urged, in the Scriptures we mentioned, page 226. let the Reader judge.

Object. 2. There is another Canon, and that is this, Quod competit minori,
competit e^iam majori. If Ordination was required to the meaner and less
considerable office, which is that of the Deacons, much more is it required to
that which is the greater and weightier Office, and this was the Argument used
by the Assembly, Mr. Pool, page 123.

Answ. Our Argument will stand upon this foot, he can get nothing by this, for
the Canon will serve us; what he says of Ordination, we may say of Election.
If the peoples Election was required to the meaner and less considerable
office, which is that of Deacons, much more is it required to that which is the
greater and mighter office.

3. The third Text is, Act. 14. ver. 23. To his exceptions we answer,

1. That the usual signification of (...) is, to choose by suffrages, and
without special reason we must not recede from that; and many reasons we gave
against its denoting a choosing or ordaining only by Paul and Barnabas.

2. The word being applied to God, Act. 10. 44. it must needs be taken
figuratively, and as there it does not denote choosing by suffrages, so neither
can it be taken for Imposition of hands; for God has no hands to lay on.

3. The word is but once more used (that we know of) in Scripture, and then its
applied to the Church; so that according to the Scripture use of it, the
advantage is on our part, 2 Cor. 8. 19. He thinks the people did not (...)
For,

Object. 1. They are said to ordain them (...) not to themselves, Mr. Pool,
page 125.

Ans. He confesses that (...) is taken for (...), and therefore this cannot
deny it to be the peoples, or Churches Act.

Object. 2. The same persons are said to ordain in several Cities and Churches,
and so had an authority over several Churches, page 25.

Answ. 1. If the persons were the same, yet

1. They did not (as the manner of some is) ordain in one Church ^or another,
at Lystra for Antioch, but in every Church respectively; it was not all upon
one day.

2. They are said (...) who go before others, and are chief in choosing.

2. It is not evident that the persons were the same: I^ a Parliament were to
be chosen, and the Supreme Magistrate should send men into the several Counties
to observe the peoples Elections, it might be said as it is here, and when they
had chosen them Parliament men by suffrages in every County, etc. though those
men so sent had no hand in the Elections. So, if Paul and Barnabas had been
only Spectators and eyewitnesses of the several Churches Elections, yet all
might have been said that is, much more they being moderators therein.

Object. 3. They ordained, who going away, commended the people to the Lord,
page 125.

Ans. Paul and Barnabas (for ought we see) were they that were commended, and
the Churches the persons commending them to the Lord, as we have further shown
in answer to Dr. Collings. We did not insist so much upon its reference to ver.
22. but as strange references are found in Scripture.

As to the faint conclusion which he mentions, page 126. we firmly proved
(Preacher Sent, page 231. 232.) that it cannot be meant of a choosing or
ordaining only by Paul and Barnabas, and that is enough against him.

Prayer used in managing Election is no Essential act thereof, as it is of
Ordination, and so the Tautologie does not remain on our part, as he supposes,
page 127.

The Scripture neither uses such Tautologies, nor expresses imposition of
hands by that word, which signifies quite another thing; our present work was
to deny that Paul and Barnabas only did (...), and what we said (if granted)
will evince this, and this answers what is said, page 127.

What we have replied to Dr. Collings about Churches fitness to judge of
Ministerial abilities, will answer his exceptions, page 128. 129. we shall add
a few words in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
Concerning Election as Essential to a Call to Office.

THe second question is, whether the Essence of a Call to Office lie in
Election or Ordination? We prove it to be in Election; our first Argument is
grounded upon Act. 14. 23. and is vindicated already.

That the Essence of the Call lies not in Ordination, we prove diverse ways.

Argu. 1. Ordination does not set a man over a Church, Ergo,

Object. 1. This is but a begging the question, page 131.

Ans. There is not a word of setting over a Church by Ordination in the
question. Its an apt medium, that which gives the Essence of the Call does set
over a Church. Ordination does not set over a Church, for. 1. A man may be
ordained and yet be over no Church at all. 2. If it did, then there must be an
iteration of Ordination, both these we proved, Preacher Sent, page 246. 247.
etc. Ergo, Ordination does not give the Essence o^ the Call.

Obj. 2. Election may be necessary as the causa sine q^a non, and yet
Ordination may be the causa formalis of the Call, page 131.

Answ. 1. That which makes a Superior and inferior is the Causa formalis of
Office-power; and that which sets over a Church does so, and therefore must
needs be more then a causa sine qua non, even the cause formalis of
Office-power.

That which sets a man over a woman, as her head, is the causa formalis of
the conjugall relation, That which sets over servants, is the causa formalis
of the relation of a Master. So here

2. His instances cannot help him.

To that of presentation we say, 1. The Magna Charta of Christ empowereth a
Church to Elect, without submission unto other men.

2. In such a case, the essence is conveyed in Election, the Gentle-mans
approbation or representation is only a causa, sine qua non exercitii.

3. The instance is impertinent, because it proves not a call to office, but a
civil call.

As to that of Archbishops, it is a begging the question, that his call did
lie in consecration; the King did write to certain Bishops to confirm the
Election; now confirmation follows creation, nor can the essence of the call
be in it.

Ob. 3. His ordination sets him over a Church indefinitely, his Election sets
him over this or that particular Church, page 132.

Answ. 1. Three arguments we give against this, Preacher Sent. page 248, 249.
which are unanswered.

2. We would know which setting over gives the call to exercise office-power;
that which gives operari, gives esse, man can challinge neither audience, nor
maintenance, until a call to exercise.

It is a strange paradox, that one should be set over the Catholic Church,
when yet he may justly be denied a liberty to exercrse office-power in any
particular Church.

3. His instance of a Dr. of Physic is impertinent; Physicians are not Rulers,
are not over any by a choice or otherwise, neither is there a parity between
Academical and Ecclesiastical preferments.

Arg. 2. Our second argument is from ordination being consequential to a man's
having the essence of the call to Office, Acts 13. 2, 3.

Ob. 1. There is an Ordination ad munus, to an Office, and another ad opus to a
work; this text speaks of ordination to a work, page 132.

Answ. We believe that the Apostles had no ordination to office, but only to
Office-work; and therefore his ordination which came after, did not give his
call to Office, no more does it give it to any Gospel Officers in a proper
sense.

Ob. 2. They ^assert that the essence of the call lies in election; and to urge
this, they urge the Election of an Apostle, Acts 1. as in that Election, so in
this ordination, some thing was extraordinary, and peculiar to the Apostles,
viz. That the essence of their call did not lie in this ordination. page 133.

Answ. 1. This is a gross mistake, for we do not (as he injuriously reports)
urge the election of an Apostle, Act. 1. to prove that the essence of the call
lies in Election; we plainly deny it, Preacher Sent. page 267, 268. though we
improve their objection from that Text against themselves.

It is to prove another proposition that we urge Acts 1. viz. That the power of
Election belongs to a Church, Preacher Sent. page 216. and therefore Mr.
Pools argument, (page 133) is nothing to us.

2. That it can be no good plea in this case to say, it was extraordinory in
that particular, we proved, Preacher Sent. page 252. etc. 255, 256. and that it
should be a complete ordination in all the Acts and requisites belonging to it,
and yet not attain the main end, which (^e supposes) is, the giving the
essence of a call to Office, who will believe it? The Apostle needs not
ordination, if the use of that had been to give the essence of a call.

3. This clearly proves that a call to Office and Ordination are separable: a
call may be (as here) before, and yet a complete ordination in all its Acts
come afterward, and therefore the intendment of Ordination, is not to give the
essence unto a call to Office.

Ob. 5. Peradventure Paul had the essence of his call from his ordination; men
were used as instruments, yet to speak properly it was not men but God that was
Paul's ordainer, for the Holy Ghost said, separate me, etc. page 135.

Ans. 1. This is gross, for Paul was an Apostle diverse years before this
Ordination; that was after he had been at Jerusalem, Acts 12. 25. and 13. v. 2,
3. But God had revealed Christ in him, and made him an Apostle above three
years before that, Gal. 1. ver. 16, 17.

2. The Holy Ghost saying, separate me, Barnabas and Saul, etc. was a command
to men to ordain, and so (though the call were immediate, yet) men were as
properly ordainers, as they are in these days, Acts 8. ver. 29. The spirit
said unto Philip, go near, and join thy self to this Charet. He may as well
say that properly it was not Philip, but God that did go near and Joined to the
Charet, because the spirit said go, etc. or as Acts 10. 19. he might say, it
was God that was to arise, and go down, and not Peter properly, because the
spirit said, arise, etc. as he may say, That properly God was theordainer of
Paul, because the holy Ghost said separate me, etc.

Arg. 3. Our third argument is taken from the nature of Ordination, it consists
in prayer, etc.

Ob. 1. If the essence of the call did consist in Election, and prayer be used
before Election, how can they pray in faith, etc. page, 135.

Answ. Prayer before Election is for the Churches direction into a right
choice, and so may be in faith, though it be uncertain whether the person shall
be chosen or not: but prayer in ordination is for a blessing upon a man in a
work, Acts 13.. 2, 3. and so a knowledge that a man is called to it (which
presupposes his having the Essence of a call) is necessary unto praying in
faith there.

Ob. 2. In such cases our prayers have ae facit condition, that God would
bless him in the work, if he shall be set apart for it, page 135.

Answ. Prayer in ordination is the very act by which a person is set apart, and
therefore there can be no such facit condition admitted of here. If he shall be
set apart, implies uncertainety whether he shall or no, whereas in due
Ordination it is always certain, for the setting apart is by prayer.

Ob. 3. Ordination consists not in fasting nor prayer, nor laying on of hands,
but in the designation of fit persons by officers unto the work signified by
imposition of hands, and introduced with fasting and prayer, p. 135.

Ans. 1. That there is a separation of an officer to his work in ordination, we
granted, (preacher Sent. p. 258.) but the Essential act by which that
separation is made, is prayer; himself says (page 135.) imposition of hands
is such, as ordination is not null without it, and he will say as much for
fasting; and then prayer is the essential act, or nothing.

2. No Scripture does evidence that the essence of Ordination consists in any
designation to work, which is a constitutive office-making act, neither has
prayer or any other thing which belongs to ordination a tendency to produce
such an effect as our argument proved.

He uses one argument to prove that the essence of the call does not lie in
the Election of the people.

Ob. The people neither are, nor by divine appointment are necessarily required
to be in a capacity to give the essence of the call to the Ministry; for, 1.
They have no authority 2. They have not ability to judge of a man's fitness.
etc. Mr. Pool, page 136. to 141.

Answ. The people are in a capacity to give the essence of the call.

1. The people have as much authority as is necessary to their giving the
essence of the call; for, nothing is required thereunto, but a putting
themselves into subjection to a person duly qualified, it being a voluntary,
not a natural relation; and this is done by election with acception, for we
proved before, that these do set a man over a Church. He says they have no
authority, because in a state of subjection, page 139. but he answers
himself by his instance, page 138. For, in Democratical government, the
people are in subjection civilly unto those very officers to whom they give a
call, yet have authority to call them; are lesser and yet greater then their
Officers though women were present, Acts 1. yet it follows not, that they did
give their suffrage; they will allow women to be present at an Ordination, when
they act not.

2. The people have ability to judge of a man's fitness for the Ministry: it
cannot be denied that John did write to the people, 1 Ioh. 2. ver. 12. I writ
unto you little children, so they are called, little children, v. 13. 18 28.
and 1 Ioh. 3. ver. 7. and yet these little children are commanded to try the
spirits, 1 Ioh. 4. ver. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
Spirits whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into
the world. This necessarily supposes them in a capacity to judge whether they
were false Prophets or not; for it had been in vain to bid them try, if they
could not draw up a judgment upon the trial. If they be not fit to judge unto
a choice, they are not fit to judge of the doctrine of him that is chosen, and
so must take all upon implicit faith: and still the same persons are written
to, ver. 4. and both that appellation, and also the matter of the Epistle is
such as concerns all believers, and so cannot be restrained to Officers.

Also, the people have sometimes judged right when the Rulers have condemned
them for it, and taken a contrary part, undervaluing and contemning their
judgment, John 7. ver. 48. 49.

They grant that the peoples election makes a man their Minister; we ask
whether they see with their own eyes therein? It is evident that many
insufficient ones are ordained. It is not a careless people we plead for, but
Bereans; and all that are godly, that are believers, and fit to be admitted
Church members, are fit (with the rest of the Church) to judge of a Ministers
abilities, which answers what he says, p. 141. about its being a necessary
qualification in every Churchmember. If one Churchmember could not judge of
it, yet all together have ability. Some arguments against election, as giving
the essence of the call, he seeks to vindicate.

Ob. 1. As to Acts 6. the Apostles are said (...), choosing and appointing are
distinguished from, and opposed to one another, and the act of appointing is
ascribed to the superiors, etc. Mr. Pool, page 142.

Answ. 1. Choosing and appointing are not there opposed: Choosing is unto office,
appointing is unto work, Acts 6. ver. 3. whom we may appoint, but to what? it
is not said [unto this office] but [(...) to this businesse] And himself
supposes (page 132.) that there may be ordination to a work, and yet the
essence of a call not consist therein: and its evident that ordination to a
work is subsequent to (and sodoth not give the essence of) a call to office,
Acts 13. 2. and so neither of these places can prove in the least their
position.

2. It is not clear that [we] has reference to the Apostles seorsim, as if it
were their work only; but conjunctim, with the brethren as we showed, Preacher
sent. p. 326.

As to what he says, (page 142) to Tit. 1. 5. we answer, We do not call
ordination an unnecessary adjunct. The Apostles pains might have been very
useful in other places, when yet the Lord would have them abide at Jerusalem;
and so Titus at Crete.

The setting in order things that were wanting, is expressly and firstly
mentioned as the cause of Titus his staying at Crete, and as that concerned but
the welbeing of the Church, no more did ordaining of Elders in every City; for
Churches have a being before Officers, Acts 14. 23. and if Titus himself had
acted in neither of these works, but only had taken the oversight of those
Churches, and directed them therein, yet it would have been necessary enough,
(especially in that Infant state of the Church) that Titus should a bide at
Crete, but doubtless he had preaching work enough there which was greater then
his ordaining Elders.

Ob. 2. From the Nature of Election, Deu. 1. 13. look what Moses was to the
Jews that are Ministers unto the Church, etc. Here is no difference at all in
the power and authority of Moses and Ministers, only the one is civil, the
other Ecclesiastical, Mr. Pool, p. 143.

Answ. 1. The Commonwealth of the Jews was a Thearchy, in respect of the
Legislative part of Government; but it was a Monarchy in respect of the
executive part, and Moses the Monarch thereof; the spiritual Commonwealth or
Ministers not so.

2. The power of Moses was Supreme, all other powers subordinate unto him, the
power of spiritual officers not so.

3. Moses had power to appoint Officers of a new species under him, Exodus 18.
ver. 24. Ministers not so.

4. Christ is compared with Moses, Heb. 3. not so with Ministers of the Gospel.

5. Moses was over Babes, and such as were under Tutors and Governors;
Ministers over a free people.

6. Yet Moses gave to the people those that they gave to him; so Christ the
King D. 1. v. 13. 15.
of Saints, gives unto his Churches those that (according to his directions)
they choose.

That freemen in a Corporation give the Essentials of a Call to their Officers
etc. is enough to show that such as have no Office-power, yet frequently do
make Officers, which answers the Provinc. Ass. especially seeing they ground
their objection upon a general Rule, nihil dat quod non habet, etc.

That Christ's free-people may have office-power eminently in them, as well as
those instanced in, is enough for us here, we being in the defensive part. But
whereas he calls, (p. 144.) for Divine institution; we reply,

1. Many like instances lie gives, and we have as good reason to Call for a
Divine institution there, as when he tells us, page 7. of a vaste number of
sheep, committed to twenty Shepherds, etc and p. 8. of a general relation to
the whole Empire, and a special respect to their own Territories; we crave a
Divine institution for any such order in the Church: and so for his instances
(page 131. 132) about a presentation, and the Archbishop, and a D^. of Physic;
and 137. 138. of a Corporation, a Court of Aldermen, etc. let him show a Divine
institution, that it is so in the Church; and why does he require of us and not
give it himself.

The use of such examples is to clear some general rule, to illustrate and to
show that there are cases parallel, and ours go thus far.

2. We gave an institution in our Arguments to prove that Election gives the
Essence of the Call. As to Ministers being before the Church, we sufficiently
disproved it in our former book, page 303, 304. It is evident that Churches
were before Elders, Act. 14. 23. it concerns him to prove that any ordinary
Elders were before a Church, and that they act as officers to such as are no
Church, else he says nothing to the purpose; that Churches to are be gathered
and baptized by them, (...) answered in the place even now quoted.

To prove that the Essence of the Call I does consist in Ordination, they used
five arguments, he pleads for two of them. The former is taken from 2 Timothy 1.
6. stir up the gift of God which is in thee, 1 Timothy 4. 14. neglect not the gift
that is in thee, etc.

Object. He says, 1. It was an ordinary Presbytery 2. (...) are used for
Office as well as gift. 3. That a man may be said to stir up his Office, and
office may be said to be in a man. 4. That an extraordinary Office might be
conveyed by ordinary officers who were inferior to him. 5. That (...) is used
for (...) in other places. 6. That (...) may be understood of the gift, 2 Timothy
1. 6. and of the office, 1 Timothy 4. 14. Mr. Pool, from page 146. to 151.

Answ. 1. That it was an ordinary Presbytery, is not proved; extraordinary
Officers were Presbyters.

2. (...) commonly signifies an absolute gift, and its questionable whether it
be used any where for office.

3. It is a stirring up as fire, and its very improper to say that office is so
stirred up, especially seeing the gift is said to be in him, which is not true
of office. Though a man may be said to be in that which is in him, as being
swallowed up or overcome thereby, as a man in sin, in bear or drink, in joy,
etc. Yet it cannot (with any propriety of speech) be said, that is in a man
which is but upon him: office is only adherent to a man, not inherent or in
him; it were very improper to say to a Major, Bayliffe, Justice, Constable,
etc. stir up the Office that is [in you.]

4. If an extraordinary Office might be conveyed by ordinary Officers (which is
not proved) yet their Argument is of no force, unless he can prove, that it was
done here; what he adds (page 149) of its being ordinary in state and Church
for a Person to have an Office conveyed to him Ministerially, by such as are
inferior to him, etc. does plainly contradict what himself said, p. 138. 160.
That the less is called of the greater; and by this Rule, though the people be
inferior to their Officers, yet they may convey their Office to them. His
instance of a King whose Office is conveyed by some of his Subjects (if true)
proves that those who are placed in a state of subjection, yet may have
authority enough to give the Essence to their Officers, and so answers what
he says, page 139.

5. It is seldom that (...) is used for (...) and there is no evidence that it
must be so taken here.

6. That (...) is used for gift, 2 Timothy 1. 6. and for Office, 1 Timothy 4. 14. is
altogether without proof, or probility of truth; For, as the phrase were
improper, neglect not the Office that is in thee; So it would follow, that
either Timothy had the extraordinary gift, when not the Office, or the Office
when not the gift that qualified for it.

It is a feeble Argument that cannot stand unless there be a receding from the
usual signification of diverse words, and a plain sense of the Texts alleged
for it.

And himself can find their argument to amount but to an [it may be] and so we
may retort upon him, what he groundlesly says to us, page 126. all the answer
it deserves is [it may not be;] he should not only have showed, that (...) may
be taken for Office, and (...) for (...) etc. but that they must be so taken
here, else their Argument is invalid. We said one relate gives being to another.

Object. It is true in esse constituto; but consider relations in esse
constituendo, as they are to be constituted, and so somewhat else gives being
to them; the husband gives being to the wife, and the wife to the husband, but
there is something else which legally constitutes them in that relation, to wit
the act of the Justice or Minister, page 151.

Answ. Relata give being one to another in esse constituendo, especially if
they be voluntary Relations, as this between Officer and a Church is; thus a
mutual Covenant or agreement constitutes one a master, and another a servant;
and so for husband and wife, the act of the Magistrate is not constitutive of
the relation between man and wife, but Declarative. What he adds about Titus,
was answered before, he was not left in Crete to ordain only, but to Preach and
to perform other acts peculiar to his office.

CHAP. XIV.
Concerning the peoples power in some cases to Ordain.

THat in a Church which has no officer or officers in it, some believers may
lawfully or warrantably ordain without officers, we proved by six Arguments,
Mr. Pool replyeth to three of them.

Argu. 1. Else Ordination were unattainable; for there is not one precept nor
president of an ordinary officers acting in Ordination out of the particular
Church he is over.

Ob. 1. There are diverse practices lawfully used which yet we find no president
for, but such as extraordinary persons are concerned in, as excommunication,
Mr. Pool, p. 153.

Answ. If there be a precept for such practices (as there was for
excommunication, Mat. 18.) we do not require a president; our Argument was from
the want both of precept and president.

Ob. 2. It is against them, if what they say be true, then there is neither
precept nor president for the ordaining of officers, Mr. Pool, page 153.

Ans. This is a great mistake also; for, we did not deny that an ordinary
officer has precept or president for acting in Ordination in the Church he is
over, but that any of the Texts alleged for Ordination do warrant his
ordaining out of the particular Church he is over, this is it which we deny;
and so if a Church wants officers, then those Texts warrant none in
ordaining, and other general Rules authorize no officers of other Churches to
do it, more then believers without office^ And this answers also what he
adds (page 153. 154.) we grant that some acts of extraordinary officers are
presidents for us, but not such acts as are of an extraordinary nature, or did
flow from an extraordinary power. In the act it self of ordaining, the Apostles
are presidents for us, but if Ordination was upon the hands of Apostles
Ministerially in every Church, yet it does not follow it ought to be so on the
hand of every Minister; in this the Apostles are not presidents, because they
were Elders in every Church, so are not ordinary officers as we have proved.
That the proper Elders of every Church should carry on the work in their own
Churches, is according to the president, but it reaches no further.

Ob: 3. For, 1 Timothy 4. 14. we read nothing of them which was extraordinary, Mr.
Pool, page 154.

Answ. 1. Its very probable it was an extraordinary Presbytery; For, there is
not a word to evidence it to consist of ordinary persons, Apostles were
Presbyters, 1 Pet. 5. 1. 2. Joh. 1. and Paul one of the Presbytery, 2 Timothy 1.
6. we proved before that no office was conveyed, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and if it were
only an extraordinary gift, no ordinary Presbytery could convey that; himself
says the power of conferring such gifts was the privilege of Apostles and
extraordinary officers, p. 150. he that will conclude it an ordinary
Presbytery, must argue, a genere ad speciem affirmative, and say, it was a
Presbytery, Ergo, it was an ordinary one.

2. If it were an ordinary Presbytery (which yet is not granted, the Call to
lay on hands was extraordinary, by Prophecy, as themselves confess, Jus Div.
Min. p. 167. and this is enough to our present Argument.

Ar. 2. Our second Argument is taken from believers acting in a Synod, Act. 15.
and other public services.

Ob. 1. If there be Scripture precept or example for the one, and not for the
other, then they may do the one and not the other, Mr. Pool, page 155.

Answ. Where has he any Scripture precept or example for provincial, National
or ecumenical Synods invested with power of censures? he must argue from a
parity of reason, which is no good plea in that case, there being no
institution for any such Assemblies, if they were instituted, their being
warranted to do some services might by a parity of reason evidence them, to be
empowered for other services also; and thus believers (not in office) have a
warrant to act in other public and more weighty services, as Preaching, etc.
Ergo, they may act in this.

Ob. 2. I deny that the brethren acted in making the decrees; thousands consent
to acts of Parliament that have no hand in making them, page, 155.

Answ. The acts themselves are ascribed to the brethren, Act. 15. the whole
Church is said to send, ver. 22. and the letters did run in their name. ver.
23. The Apostles and Elders [and brethren] send greeting, etc.

All in whose name an act of Parliament runs, are not only consenters, but
makers of the act; so here.

As to what he says (page 156.) to Numb. 8. 10. we leave it to any
unprejudiced Reader to judge, whether their Arguments or our answers carry most
evidence with them.

Ob. 1. This was an extraordinary case, the Levites and Church officers were
not yet instituted, etc. page 156.

Ans. Though the Levites were not instituted before, yet there were other
officers, the Provincial Assembly tell us (Jus Divin. Min. page 188.) Aaron and
his sons were present, and if it proves any thing, it proves that the people
may ordain where there are Elders; Master Pool says, it is as if a man should
argue, gifted men may Preach where no Ministers are to be had, therefore they
may do it where there is plenty of Ministers; how these arguings agree we know
not.

Object. 2. No doubt they were the firstborn that did lay hands on the Levites.

Ans. This is fully answered, Preacher Sent, page 344. most that he says from
page 157 to 161. is either inconsiderable or answrable, or answered before.

Object. 1. We hear not a syllable of the peoples concurrence in ordination,
etc. p. 158. Paul in all his Epistles to the Churches speaks not a word about
ordination, surely the Scriptures silence is Argumentative, p. 159.

Ans. If this will stand, many of his principles must fall; for we hear not a
syllable in holy writ of the subordination of a Church of Christ (in point of
Government) unto Assemblies made up of the officers of other Churches, nor of
the subordination of Synods one to another, nor of its being an ordinary
Presbytery which is mentioned, 1 Timothy 4. 14.

Nay there is not a word in Scripture for an ordinary officers acting in
Ordination out of the particular Church he is over upon an ordinary Call, and
so the Scriptures silence is as much argumentative (in case a Church has no
officers in it) against Ordination by officers of other Churches (our officers)
as against Ordination by the people.

Object. 2. There is the same reason for the Apostles being a president for
Ministers baptizing and not the people, and for their ordaining and not the
people, page 158.

Ans. We have reasons against the peoples baptizing, which are not fetched from
the president of the Apostles baptizing, and which speak not against the
peoples acting in ordination, when a Church is without officers, as for
baptism being a part of worship only by institution, which (as worship) the
people are no where warranted to perform in the acts of it; whereas the
Essential act of Ordination is prayer, which (though req^^red by Gospel Rules
on that occasion) yet in it self is an act of natual worship, which the people
may perform; so Baptism is a seal of the Covenant, etc.

Ob. 3. We never find Ordination practiced, but by persons in authority toward
their inferiors, page 160.

Ans. 1. Then 1 Timothy 4. 14. cannot speak of Ordination by an ordinary
Presbytery, for Timothy was an extraordinary officer, and so was not inferior
to an ordinary Presbytery; either this, or else what he says, p. 149. 154.
must be false.

2. We never find Ordination by ordinary officers upon an ordinary Call out of
the Churches they are over, and so the case is as difficult on his part, as on
ours.

His last Argument (p. 160. viz. That Ordination is that act which constitutes
a man in office, we confuted before. And thus we have finished our reply to the
chief matters in his book; only for a conclusion he accuses us to the Reader.

1. For novel and strange passages. 2. For self-contradicting passages, Mr.
Pool, p. 160. 161. 162. 163. we shall briefly answer to these.
1. As to his list of novel and strange passages, we answer,

1. Our words (page 13.) do not so much as implicitly deny Jesus Christ to have
preached to the Jews as a Teacher by office: That Text Mat. 13. 54. 57. was
alleged only to evidence that stumblers at and opposers of the word, in
respect of him that teaches, may be said to be taught; this is all we produce
it for, as any Reader may see; and this it clearly proves, that no mere man
can be an officer to such, we prove, but it is by other mediums, not by that
Text, neither can any inferrence be drawn from our words against Christ's being
an Officer to such, especially seeing Christ was an extraordinary person, even
the Lawmakers and determiner who men should be Officers to.

As to the Apostles, in a large sense they were officers to heathens, but not
Officers over them, or in a strict sense, as we have shown in this book, Chapter 7.

2. The second we own, if the rest of our words be added to it, neither has he
disproved it, we would know from whom Apollo had a probation before his
preaching?

3. The third is proved in the pages he quoteth, and also in this book, Chap.
10.

Let him evidence that an outward call from man is any where in Scripture
styled a mission or sending, or that any but God does send in the sense we take
it in there.

We do not deny, that a Church is to give a Call to Office, but we deny that
sending is that call.

4. The fourth we own, neither has he disproved it; and the same we say to the
sixth and seventh.

As to the fist about administering the Sacraments not as Pastors; we desire the
Reader would view our former book, page 280. and this book. Chap. 6.

As to the eight and ninth, we have spoken to them, Chapter 6.

2. As to his accusation for selfe-contradicting passages, we answer. 1. We can
find nothing like a contradiction in our words, if page 20, and 149. be
compared.

For if a man may lawfully preach, yet may there not be diverse things
pre-required unto his preaching here or there.

May not a man have power to preach, and yet want requisites unto the exercise
of that power, in this or that place? do not they say, a man may have power,
and yet without the consent of some, or a special call, may not exercise that
power in such a place, Jus Div. Min. page 144? Does not Mr. Pool expressly
assert it, page 6.? Yea he says (page 48.) It is true; no preachers are in
Scripture oblidged to preach in such or such a place, etc. what do we say more;
We may turn his words (page 163.) upon himself, and say, how can a man preach,
but he must preach in this or that place? quod nusquam fit non fit. So that the
contradiction (if it be one) is as much his, as ours.

2 It is his gross mistake to say that we are guilty of selfe-contradiction in
the other two particulars which he mentions, page 163. For, what he
rehearses out of our book, page 300. to make one part of the contradiction, is
an objection of theirs, they are not our words, but the words of the provincial
assembly, Jus. Divin. Min. page 133.

And that which he makes the other part of the contradiction, is our answer to
the aforesaid objection; and so, we do but oppose them (page 302. not
contradict our selves. They are their words from, p. 300. l. 21. to p. 301.
lin. 14. and this he might easily have seen though it be not printed in a
different Character.

And now we shall put Mr. Pool in mind of some of his, 1. novel and strange
passages.

2. Selfe-contradictions.

3. Repugnancies, to the provincial Assembly, whose case he pleads, and the
Dr. 1. novel and strange passages.

1. He says, that a Minister may be a Minister, though he have no particular
Church to which he stands related, p. 11. and by Minister he intends an
officer, page 10.

2. He says that heathens are a part of Christ's body, page 13.

And therefore are the object and correlate of the Pastoral office, ib.

3. He says of an excomunicate person, that while he repents not, he is to be
looked upon after a sort as an unbaptized person, or as an heathen; yet when he
does repent, he needs no new baptism, forasmuch as God is pleased to impute to
him his former baptism. pa. 27.

4. He says that the difference between Apostolical and pastoral power lies
not in the extent of their relation pa. 36.

5. He says, Vzzah was punished not principally, at least not solely because
he did touch the Ark with his heads, but because he did not bear it upon his
shoulders, page 99. which is against 1 Chronicles. 13. 10.

6. He is not positive in it, but gives it as his opinion, that Apostles had
not their commission as Apostles till Mat. 28. page 105, 106.

2. Self-contradicting passages.
1. That a man is made a member of the Church by baptism -- is none of our
Assertion, page 23. 1. What a monstrous Paradox is this, baptism makes not a
man to stand in relation to any Church, p. 28. In Scripture there is (...)
quidem, of any other door of admission, p. 25. 2. Either a Minister ejecting a
man justly out of his own Church, eject him out of all other Churches;-or he is
juridically ejected out of other Churches, and so he is in a capacity of being
received into other Churches, which what horrid confusion it would introduce,
etc. page 24. 2. It may be said that an excomunicate person ordinarily is a
member, -- a Churchmember, though diseased, p. 26 3. If a Religious General in
speaking to his Army, principally aims at the salvation of their Souls, yet
this is not preaching, -- though his end in speaking be their salvation, page
41. 3. Speaking of Paul he says, the end of the actor or speaker is purely and
solely the salvation of their souls; and so it is tr^ly and may properly be
called preaching, p. 41, 42. 4. The less is called of the greater, page 138.
we never find ordination practiced either in the Old or New Testament, but by
persons in authority toward their inferiors, page 160. 4. He says it is not
any prejudice to the extraordinarines of Timothies Office, that it was con^ered
by ordinary officers, page 149. what more ordinary both in state and Church,
then for a person to have an office conveyed to him, viz. Ministerially, by
such as are inferior to him, p. 149.

3: Repugnancies to the Provincial Assembly and Dr. Collings.
1. Every Minister by excomunication ejecteth members out of the Church
Catholic visi*ble, Jus. Divin. Min. page 139. 1. It may be said an
excommunicate person ordinarily is a member, a Churchmember, though diseased,
Mr Pool page 26. 2. They (i. e. Apostles and Evangilists) were virtually
Pastors and Teachers, they differed nothing from them, but the extent of their
power, Dr. Collings, page 105 2. The difference between Apostolical and
Pastoral power, lies not in the extent of their relation, Mr. Pool, p. 36. And
he makes Pastors power as extensive as as he supposes their relations to be,
page 6.

Questions discussed.
Pr. S. notes the Preacher sent. Vind. notes the preceding treatise; The
number directs to the page in either of the Treatises where the question is
resolved.

1. Whether there be a universal political visible Church? Or whether there be
a Church of churches, a visible Catholic Church formed unto fellowshi^p in new
Testament ordinances? Negat. Epist: to Pr. S. p. 4. 5. Vind. of Epist.

2. Whether visible Saints be the only fit matter for a visible Church? Aff.
Epist. to Pr. S. p. 6.

3. Who are visible Saints? Epist. to Pr. S. p. 7.

4. Whether a union by covenant, consent or agreement be necessary unto
member-hood in a visible Church? Aff. Epist. to Pr. S. page 9.

5. Who may be styled Ministers? Pr. S. page 2* Vind. p. 1.

6. Whether Office be a relation to the work and employment of the Ministry,
(as is correlate) or to a Church? Preach. Sent. 4. Vindicat. page 2. etc.

7. Whether Office be a relation, secundum esse, or secundum dici; Vindicat. p.
4. 5.

8. Whether Officers stand in relation (as Officers) to a universal Church?
Neg. Whether to a particular Church only? Aff* Whether to Heathens and such as
are of no Church? Neg. Pre. S. 288. Vind. p. 12, 13. etc. p. 86. etc.

9. What is office? Pr. S. 14.

10 Whether there be a difference between Preaching ex Officio, and ex Dono?
Aff: Preach. S. 18.

11. Whether unbelievers may come into Churchm^^^ings, to hear the word? Aff.
Pr. S. 18.

12. What is preaching? Pr. S. 20.

13. Whether it be Preaching when in private? Aff: Pr. 8. 21.

14. Whether it be preaching when it is not in a sacred assembly? Aff. Pr. S.
p. 22 23.

15. What is authoritative preaching; Preach. S. 25. to 28.

16. Whether persons who have preaching gifts and Graces, may ordinarily
exercise those gifts in public assemblies, though they be not ordained
Officers; Affirm. Preach. S. 29. to 216. Vind. page 21. etc. 125. etc.

17. Whether Election ought to precede ordination? Aff. Pr. S. 30.

18. What call is sufficient to the exercise of preaching gifts? Pr. S. 37.
Vind. 26.

19. Whether from gifted men's preaching it will follow that gifted women may
preach, or that men gifted for any civil or military employment may Act therein
without any further call? Neg. Pr. S. 38, 39. Vind. 29.

20. Whether it belongs to the Sph^re, place and calling of gifted men to
preach? Affirm. Preach. S. 40.

21. Whether the Baptism of John and the Baptism of Christ be distinguished,
and how? Pr. S. 69. 70. Vind. 66. to 71.

22. Whether Teaching and preaching be in scripture phrase the same? Aff. p.
79. Pr. S.

23. Whether necessity be a good plea against the Argument from, Acts 8? And
whether the supposed necessity makes officers or no? Pr. S. 86. to 88. Vind.
33, 34, 35. 141.

24. Whether the prophesying, 1 Corin. 14. be a gift or an Office? Preach.
Sent. 90. Vind. 37. 145.

Whether it be a gift still continuing? Aff. P. S. 96. Vindicat. p. 41. 148.

Whether those Prophets speak by extraordinary Revelation? Neg. Preach. S. 104,
105. Vind. 46* 151, 152, 153.

25. What is not, and what is the mission or sending? Romans 15. Preach. Sent.
121 to 138.

Whether mission be ordination? Neg* Pr. S. 123. Vindic. 63, 64.

Whether mission authorizeth or gives a Call to be an Officer, or to preach?
Neg* Pr. S. 121. Vindicat, 156. 159, 160.

26. Whether the examples of Saul's offering sacrifice, or Vzzahs touching the
Ark do forbid gifted men's preaching? Neg. Pr. S. 154, 155. Vindicat, 164, 165.

27. Whether gifted men's preaching does make Officers void or un-necessary, as
to that act? Neg. Pr* S. 156. vindicat. 55, 56, 57.

28 Whether if gifted men may preach, will it follow that they may administer
the Sacraments? Neg. Pr. S. 165 Vind. 169. 170.

29. Whether gifted men be under any promise in their preaching? Affirm. Pr. S.
189.

30. Whether preaching be an act peculiar to Offic^? Neg. Preach. Sent. 196. to
199. Vindicat. 53.

31. Whether gifted men may require and receive maintenance when they preach?
Pr. Sent. 214, 215. Vind. 61. 183, 184.

32. Whether Election of a Minister belongs to the major part of a Church?
Aff. Pr. S. 216. to 240. Vindicat. 71, 72 185, 186, etc.

33. Whether an argument from the less to the greater affirmatively be valid,
and in what cases? Pr. S. 224. to 228. Vindicat. 75. 187.

34. Whether the whole essence of a call to office does consist in Election?
Affirm. preac. S. 241. to 321. Vind. 190.

35. Whether Ordination does give the essentials of the Ministerial Office?
Neg. pr. S. 244. etc.

36. What is ordination? preach. Sent. 257. to 266.

37. Whether imposition of hands be so necessary unto ordination, that it
cannot without sin be omitted? preach. S. 259. to 262.

38. Whether an Officer may administer the Sacrament, to some that are not of
his particular Church? pre. S. 278, 279 Vindicat. 101, 102

39. Whether baptism admits into, or makes to stand in relation to any Church?
Neg. pre. S. 284, 25. Vindicat. 109, 110. etc.

40. Whether an Excomunicate person be Ejected out of all Churches? pr. S. 284.
Vind. 104.
ib.

Whether baptism cease, when Church membership cease page 292. Vind. of
Epist. Vindicat. 105 107.

41. Whether blessing be an act peculiar to Office? pr. S. 289.

42. Whether a Churches sinful rejection of a Minister does nullify his
Office? pr. S. 296. Vin. 115, 116.

43. Whether if an officer removes and becomes an officer to another Church,
may there be an iteration of ordination? pr. S. 297, 298.

44. Whether in a Church which has no Officers in it some believes may ordain
without Officers? pr. S. 323. etc.

45. Whether the difference between apostolical and pastoral power lies in
the extent of the relation? Aff. Vind. 120, 121.

46. Whether Apostles were Apostles before, Mat: 28, 19, 20? Aff. Vind, 169,
170.

47. Whether officers be before Churches? pr. 303, 304.

48. Whether it were an ordinary or an extraordiry Presbytery, that is
mentioned 1 Timothy 4. v. 14? pr. S. 327, 3 28. Vind.

49. Whether women's state of subjection does forbid all un-officied men
preaching? Neg. Vin. 177, 178.

50 Whether it be the duty of gifted men to preac^* Aff. pr. S. 36.

Whether in some cases they may not warantably or without sin omit preaching?
or whether gifted men be obliged unto constant preaching, if they have other
callings? pr. S. 159 Vindicat. p. 129, 130, 131. 167. 184.

THE TABLE.
Some Texts of Scripture opened in the preceding treatise noted by Vind. or in
the Preacher Sent, noted by Pr. S. those places which are largely handle^, have
an Asterick note against them.

Book. Cap. ver. Pr S. page vin. p Levit. ^9 17 4^^, 4^. * Numb. 8 10 34^. to
346 * Deutr. 1 13 272. 273. * 1 Samuel 13 9, 10. 155. * 1 Chronicles. 13 9, 10. 155
165 * Jerem. 14 14. 15. 127. 130. 23 13. 21. 128 179, 22. 178 180. Malach. 3
16, 17. 189 Math. 10 1. 5, 6, 7. 122. 124. 126 13 54. 57. 13 18 17. 18. 176 25
18 25. 26. 47. 60. * 25 29 62. to 66. 29. 28 1^, 20. 121. 123. 125. 127. * Mat.
28 19, 20. 166. 167. 169. 188. 200. 170 289. 293. 311 Mark 3 14 124 4 24, 25.
64, 65. Luke 10 1 122 * John 10 4* 5. 225 82 237 * Acts. 1 17. 21. 22, 23 217
to 220 71, 72 etc. 267 185 2 41. 288 5 42. 21. 79. 6 15, 16, 20 30, 81. 152,
162. 236 268. 270, 318. 326 74 etc. * 6. v. 2. 3. 5. 221 to 228. 185 186 * 8.
1. 3, 4. 72, to 88. 32, 137. 10. 41 228. 10. 46 47. 95 11 19, 20. 74 21. 22 77
82. 83, 84 * 13 1, 2, 3. 83, 195. 251 to 257 192 267, 268, 299, 326 * 14 23 228
to 235 78 187 16, 242 243. 274. 275, 303. 15 12. 22. 352. 23 50 32 335 109. 179
* 18 24, 25, 26, 28. 56. 66. to 73 30 137 1^ 3, 4, 5. 69. 70. etc. * 20 17 7.
15 28 8, 9, 11 118 * Roman. 10 15 16. 249. 119 21, 80 62 12 6, 7. 117 to 138
154 8 33 1 Corin 1 17 50 89 202 203 7 20. 24 253 * 12 7 53 13 48 65 21, 22. 286
28 47 294 13 93 94. 8 9, 10. 113 * 14 many verses 88 to 116 36 144. 2 Corin. 8
18, 19. 23 336 Galat. 1 11, 12. 181 Ephesians. 1 16, 17, 18 105 4 11. 6, 9. 17. 12
93. 295. Philip 3 15 105. Colloss. 3 16 44. 45. 4 17 205 1 Thessalonians. 5 12 46. 205,
* 1 Timothy 2 12 175, 174. 3 1, 2. 9, 15, 16. 4, 5. 20, 32. 222, 311 * 4 14 234,
275 3^3 to 3^5 5 18 114 22 194 2 Timothy 2 2 209 to 213 59. 2 Timothy 1 6 3^3, 314.
327 * Titus. 1 5. 194, 309 329, 353 355 Hebr. 3 13 44 * Hebr. 5 4, 5. 138. to
141 161 7 12 52 135 10 174 173 13 25. 54 136 7. 17. 17, 205 247. 249. * 1 Pet.
4 10, 11. 32, to 62 23 etc. 126 etc. 5 1, 3. 61 2 Pet. 1 19, 20 110 21. 30. 111
1 John 3 16. 51.

ERRATA
In printing the book called the Preacher Sent beside those which were printed
with it.

In the Epistle,

Page 2 Read (...) and (...) page 13. line 19. for not Read now.

In the Book.

Page line 4 18. 19. Read, they say. 14 4 dele, of their 18 24 r. Acts 13 v.
16. 21 1 r. (...) 24 1 r. Preaching 46 33 r. 2 59 5 add, and 66 8 r. Argument
4. 79 13 dele, Jus Divin. 83 6 r. christians (though no officers) 83 7 dele,
though no officers 101 9 r. foretelling future-events 101 33 r. Impostors or
Seducers. 103 15 r. Object. 1. 129 20 r. undenyably 135 4 r. no mention 136 11
r. but that 137 33 dele, Acts 8. 14. page line 142 5 add Jus Divin. 72, 73. 143
17 r. break their trusty 145 35 r. make 152 30 r. his own 155 19 r. before
designation 155 29 r. did perform 160 22 r. an Officer 166 33 dele, that 173 9
r. was preached to 203 1 r. himself asserteth 203 17 r. ingenuously 24 r. or
the distinctive 217 15 r. limit it unto 29 r. needless 220 9 r. it was 230 36
dele that 239 32 r. was a stone 247 15 r. such a power 249 11 r. to prove 251
22 r. was not of the Essence of, but 273 21 r. Church officers 29 r. It is 284
11 r. not nullify 299 24 r. oblige 300 22 r. object 301 14 r. Answer 310 19 r.
(...) 315 5 r. Presbyter 31 r. fifth Page line 316 24 r. relatives 317 10 r.
Solemnities 323 31 dele, upon 325 36 r. Text in which 334 14 dele, are 338 3
dele, that 343 16 r. immediately 345 32 r. fully evidence 346 13 r. in the Tent
353 16 r. visit the 354 32 dele, or else and, r. and it must

Add [Jus Divin. Minist.] and its page, in the following pages of our book
called the Preacher Sent.

Jus Div. min. pa. Preach. S. page line 111 78 2 Add [Vind. Min. Evang. by Dr.
Collings] and its page in the following pages of our book called the Preacher
Sent. 111 79 18 111 80 33 69 131 35 77 133 4 70 133 26 73 74 144 24 74, 75 147
6

Jus Div. Min. pa. preach. S. page lin. Dr. Coll. Vin. pa. preach. S. page line
81 154 26 49 64 2. 28. 82 156 23 60 71 28 60 73 7 83 157 31 60 81 3 85 159 21
50 107 12. 30. 85 160 6 51 110 27 86 162 29 51 11^ 12. 22. 88 173 29 44 135 15
89 174 8 89 175 7 36

FINIS.

