TWO SERMONS Preached In the Tovver.

The former, On Sunday the 30. day of Ianury. 1641.

The later, On Sunday the 24. day of April. 1642.

By The Bishop of Bath and Wells.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Charles Green, and are to be sold in Ivy Lane at
the sign of the Gun. MDCXLII.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I have seen a Sermon in print, under the name of the Bishop of
Bath and Wells, (but without his Lordships consent or knowledge I am sure)
whereat I was an attentive auditor, and I find many gross errors in that
Impression; for therein many sentences are imperfect, many words are misplaced,
many passages are omitted, and the sense in many things is utterly mistaken:
whereby the Bishop suffers in his credit, and the Reader is abused in his
expectation. Albeit I do believe he that took the Sermon in writing when it
was preached, had no intention at all, by printing it, to wrong the Author.
Therefore I thought fit, for the Churches good, and to do the Bishop right, to
publish (though much against his Lordships mind) a true and entire copy of
that first, and also of this other Sermon preached since by him in the same
place, for which I stayed until now, otherwise I had played the Midwife with
the former long since; but now the work is complete, and I wish thee as much
comfort and benefit in reading both these Sermons, as I had in hearing them.
Farewell.

W.D.

The first SERMON.
The Text. 2 COR. 12.8, 9. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice that it
might depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee,
for my strength is made perfect in weakness.
WHich words have dependence upon the Verse next before, wherein St. Paul tells
us, that lest he should have been exalted above measure through abundance of
Revelations, there was given unto him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet him.

Now for this thing, what thing? Why this thorn in the flesh which did grieve
him, this messenger of Satan which did buffet him, he besought the Lord thrice
that it might depart from him.

So then the cause of his earnest prayer was the thorn in his flesh, the
Messenger of Satan; and the occasion of that thorn in his flesh, that
messenger of Satan, was the abundance of Visions and Revelations from the Lord:
no Apostle had so many, none so great.

But the greater the favor of God was to him herein, the greater was his
danger of falling into spiritual pride, and superexaltation of himself; the
most dangerous sin that the child of God can fall into Indeed Gods grace and our
humbleness of mind should go together; and the greater the graces are which
we receive from God, the more humble must we be in our selves; and me more
humbly ought we to walk with our God This is the coherence of the Text.

The parts in general are two. The first is St. Paul's petition unto God, in
the former verse, For this, thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might
depart from me. The second is Gods answer unto St. Paul, in the words
following, And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee; for my
strength is made perfect in weakness.


The petition consists of these five branches 1. The first was the cause of his
complaint, non calceus urget, it was not his shoe that did wring him, no small
matter that did trouble him, but something that went to his very heart,
whatsoever it was; propter quod, for this thing. 2. The second was the remedy
or means that he used against this thing that did so trouble him, and that was
prayer, Propter quod rogavi, for this thing I besought. 3. The third was the
earnestness or importunity of his prayer, he gave not over until he had an
answer, propter quod rogaviter, for this thing I prayed thrice. 4. The fourth
was the Physician upon whom he called to help him, and that was God himself,
no other could do it, propter quod ter rogavi Dominum, for this thing I
besought the Lord thrice. 5. The last was the end of his petition, the thing
that he did desire, and that was that he might be freed from that which did so
afflict him, propter quod rogavi Dominum ter ut discederet a me, for this thing
I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me.


In the answer I observe these 3. particulars.

1. First the effect of Gods answer, it was a denial, he prayed that the
thorn which stuck so fast in his flesh might be plucked out, that the
messenger of Satan which buffeted him, might depart from him; but it would not
be; he must be content to endure it: and this appears upon the whole answer.

2. Secondly, Gods divine aid against the thing that did so trouble the
Apostle, to make him able to encounter the same, and in the end to master it.

Wherein we have both the nature of this aid, what kind of aid it was, it was
his grace, gratia mea, my grace.

And also the measure and efficacy thereof, there was enough of it, and it was
powerful, sufficit tibi, it is sufficient for thee.

You see then God denied the Apostle that thing which he prayed for, but he
gave him another, and a better thing which he did not pray for, and that was
his grace.

3. The reason both of Gods denial, to remove that which troubled him; and
also of his heavenly aid against the thing whereof he did complain, expressed
by God himself in a maxim, or famous sentence in Divinity; which reason is
drawn from Gods course or way which he takes with his servants in his
wisdom, and in his mercy, both for his own glory, and man's eternal good. Nam
virtus mea in infirmitate perficitur, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness.

These are the several parts and Branches of the Text, and of all these in
their order, And first of Saint Paul's Petition to God, and therein I begin with
the cause of his complaint, propter quod, for this thing.

What this thing was in general that troubled this Apostle, he tells us in the
verse next before my Text, wherein he describes it two ways: First, by a
metaphor or figurative phrase, in respect of the pain and anguish it caused,
calling it stimulum in carne, a thorn in his flesh.

The word in Greek is not (...), a small sharp goad, or prick, against many
whereof Saint Paul kicked before his conversion, Acts the ninth, ver. five, but
(...), which Tertullian calls sudem, others palum praeacutum, a sharp stake or
point of a spear, vel aliquid acuminatum, or any thing that has a long shar
pe end, which sticking in a man's body, causes an intolerable pain.

Secondly, he describes it plainly in respect of the Author, framer or
contriver of it, and so he calls it Angelum Satanae, the Messenger of Satan,
which did buffet him, for God permitted Satan so to do.

Now two things are certain here; one, that it was Satan's vexation by Gods
permission; the other, that it did daily afflict him to the very heart.

So then you see it was no briar, no prickle, no nor no thorn, no small thing,
that so troubled the Apostle, but a great matter indeed; but because our
English translations call it a thorn in in the flesh; and because we have not
a better word in English to express it, I will call it still by that name.

But now what this thing, this thorn in the flesh was in particular, that's all
the doubt indeed, and this is -- dignus vindice nodus. And here I must confess
I am fallen among thorns, even the various opinions of Divines concerning this
thing, which pluck me this way and that way, so that I can sconer find an
entrance in, then a passage out.

Some Divines draw this thorn in the flesh, of which Saint Paul complains, as
far as from Adams loins, and say it was original concupiscence, which the
Apostle calls l^gem in carne, a law in his flesh, in his members, Romans 7.

But this conceit is too far fetched; for first, Original sin is general
to all the Regenerate; but Saint Paul complains here of some special thing
which happened only to himself.

Again, Saint Paul knew very well that Original sin could not possibly
depart from him, as long as he lived in this world, Romans 7. but he prayed
earnestly that this thing might depart from him.

Other Divines, with most of the Latin Interpreters, affirm, that this thing
which so troubled the Apostle was some sore disease or infirmity of his body,
as a continual head ach, or pain in his stomach, or the gout, or the stone,
or some such grief which daily afflicted him.

But this is not likely, for Saint Paul does not complain in any of his
Epistles of any disease or infirmity of his body besides this; such a malady
would have been a great impediment to him in the preaching of Gods word, and
planting of the Gospel of Christ in all Countries, which he could never have
done, if he had been continually tormented with any such infirmity of the body.

The Greek Fathers, with many modern Writers affirm, that this thing, which
Saint Paul prayed might depart from him, was his adversaries in general, as
Hymeneus and Philetus, whom Satan stirred up against him with contumelies and
persecutions to hinder the preaching of the Gospel; but especially and
particularly that pestilent adversary of his Alexander the Coppersmith, who did
him much evil, and of whom he complains, 2 Timothy 4. and he bids Tumothy to
beware of him also; for says the Apostle, He has greatly withstood our words.

It is true indeed, this Alexander was one of Satan's messengers, and his
reproaches were Satan's buffettings, but he and the rest of the adversaries of
the Gospel, were Thorns without his flesh, but Saint Paul complains here of
some Thorn in his flesh, some internal affliction that came closer to him.

But other Divines are of opinion that God did permit some evil Angel of
Satan to vex and torment the body of this blessed Apostle, as he did permit
Satan to vex and torment the body of holy Job, and that this Angel of Satan
did buffet St. Paul as one man would buffer another, and bestowed many a black
and blue mark upon him.

Like as Saint Jerome was paid with many a sore blow in an exstasie, for
reading Cicero more then the Bible, when he heard a voice saying unto him,
Ciceronianus es, non Christianus, thou art a Ciceronian, thou art no Christian,
as Saint Jerome reports of himself in an Epistle to Enstochius.

But now, although this seem to be the plain literal sense of the words, yet
I cannot believe that Saint Paul was thus bodily afflicted with any evil
spirit by fits, for then he would never have called it stimulum in carne, a
thorn so deeply fastened in his flesh; besides, if it had been so, the most
heroical Spirit of this Apostle, which was so far above all the buffettings of
Men and Devils, would not have complained of such a thing, but rather have
gloried in it.

All the Romanists both old and new are not ashamed to affirm that this thing
which so troubled the Apostle, was Stimulus libidinis, a temptation and
provocation of carnal lust, which Satan stirred up in the flesh, and in his
fancy, by such means as he knew very well would do it, against which he did
keep his body under, 1 Cor. 9 for if it had been any thing else but this,
Saint Paul would have told us plainly what it had been; but now it being a
thing whereof he was ashamed, he covered it modestly under the metaphor of a
Thorn in his flesh. So Bellarmine in his 2. Book de Monachis, cap 3.

But Erasmus rightly calls this impurum interpretamentum, an impure
interpretation, and wonders that any learned and honest Divine should go about
to cast such filth upon the face of Saint Paul, then aged, and very much broken
with the labors of his Ministry, and to entertain so unworthy a conceit of
so chaste and holy an Apostle.

Again, Saint Paul had the gift of chastity; I would to God all men were as I
my self am, but every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner,
and another after that, 1 Cor. 7. where was then this urging lust?

But if the Apostle here had been troubled with any such temptation, he knew a
very easy and an honest remedy against it, even the same which he gave to
others in the like case, Marriage.

What shall we say then? what thing was this that did so trouble him? Why
certainly in the judgment of the most orthodox Divines, who go to the very
root of my Text, it was some terior of Satan, some internal and spiritual
temptation in his soul, and a very sore one whatsoever it was.

And when St. Paul says it was in carne, in his flesh, he means in the outward
man, in the unre^^^^^^te part of the soul, as in the seventh to (...)

Although a continual temptation or affliction in the conscience, may also be
said to be in the flesh, per modum redundantia and participationis, by way of
participation and redundancy, because the flesh in such a case becomes pale and
wan, and pines away.

The best conjecture of all is this, that God did permit Satan to present
always before the conscience of this Apostle his former blasphemies,
persecutions and cruelties against Christ and his Church, and to ring always
in his ears that voice, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Gods purpose herein being to keep Saint Paul from spiritual pride with which
he might easily have swollen through the abundance of Revelations of the Lord;
but Satan's policy herein was to weaken and shake the Apostles confidence in
Christ.

But this thorn is hid so deep in the flesh that I will search after it no
further, but content my self with Saint Austines docta ignorantia, learned
ignorance in this, who ingeniously confesses that he knew not particularly
what this thing was which so troubled this Apostle, but sure he was, it was
some sore temptation or other affliction; and in this all Divines agree.

You see then here, that an Apostle, and such an Apostle as Saint Paul was, and
after so many Visions and Revelations of the Lord, had a thorn in the flesh
given him, a sore affliction from God; and no marvel, for the better the man,
the sharper and the deeper the thorn: it must be so.

As the Church of God in general, so every child of God in his Church, is
sicut lilium inter spinas, as a lilly among thorns 2. Cant. 2. the thorns of
troubles and afflictions.

Non decet sub spinoso capite membrum esse delicatum, says Saint Bernard, he
is not worthy to be a member of the mystical body of Christ, upon whose
glorious head was platted a crown of many thorns for the sins of other men,
who cannot endure the pricking of one thorn, some light affliction, if not for
his Saviors sake, yet for his own sins.

Has our blessed Savior drank so deep of the cup of afflictions before us,
and for us, and shall we be unwilling to pledge him a little, to sip after him
in the same cup? Qui erat sine flagitio, non erat sine flagello.

Since God spared not his own and only begotten Son who was without all
spot of sin, but delivered him up for us all, shall we who are but his adopted
sons, and altogether sinful, think to escape without any chastisement at
all? No, no, the Lord chasteneth every Son whom he receives, and therefore qui
non est in numero flagellatorum, non est in numero filiorum, says St. Austin,
He that is without chastisement is a bastard, and not a son, Heb. 12.8.

Give me the man, says St. Ambrose, that was never troubled with any thorn of
temptation or affliction, and I will presently conclude, that that man is not
the child of God; for every child of God must have something, one affliction
or other to humble him, and to bring him home to God, in which he must take
pleasure, and rejoice as St. Paul did.

We must not think to go a deliciis ad delicias, says St. Ierom, immediately
from the pleasures of this world, to the joys of the next: The children of
Israel went not through gardens of flowers, and Paradises of fruits, but
through uncouth deserts to the land of Candan; this was a type of our
pilgrimage through the afflictions of this world to the heavenly Canaan.

Afflictions are the infallible arguments and to kens of Gods favor unto us;
and therefore one who had been a great while without any affliction, said in
his Prayer to God, ergone Domine non sun dignus qui patiar, is it so Lord, and
I so much out of thy favor that I am not worthy of affliction?

What a large Catalogue does St. Paul reckon up of his afflictions in the
eleventh Chapter of this Epistle, In stripes above measure, in prisons more
frequent, in deaths often: Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save
one, thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered
shipwreck, a night and a day have I been in the deep; in journying often, in
perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own Countrymen,
in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren, in
weariness and painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. I am almost out of breath in rehearsing
them, and yet the Apostle was never out of breath in enduring them.

But here was his comfort, and here is ours also: All the afflictions of the
servants of God, they are but stimuli, the prickings of thorns, they are but
colaphi the buffettings causing shame and smart only, they are but (...) the
gentle punisnments of a loving father: We are troubled, but not altogether
distressed, perplexed, but not in despair, persecuted, but not forsaken, cast
down but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.8.9.

O welcome then, yea thrice welcome to our souls these bitter sweets, loving
chastisements, gentle corrections, indulgent visitations, pleasant crosses,
comfortable sorrows, wholesome calamities, profitable miseries, sanctifying
distresses, refining troubles, joyful temptations, glorious trialls, blessed
revilings, happy curses, honorable reproaches, all light and momentary
afflictions, which work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

By these we are humbled, and seek right early unto our God.

By these we are put in remembrance to sorrow for our sinnea past.

By these we become more careful of our ways hereafter.

By these Gods graces are exercised in us, and our patience, our faith and our
love are tried.

By these we are weaned from the pleasures and vanities of this life.

By these we are prepared and fitted for the world to come.

By these our desires are inflamed to be dissolved and to be with Christ.

By these we are encouraged to embrace death with both our arms: and therefore
David said unto God, I know that of very faithfulness, that is in thy
faithful love to methou have caused me to be troubled, Psalm. 119. verse 75.

I have been the longer upon this first branch, the thing which troubled the
Apostle, because it is the thing upon which the whole frame of my Text does
turn, I will therefore be the shorter in the rest.

But what did the Apostle here when the thorn of affliction began to vex him?
Why, he went presently to his prayers, the only (...) or sovereign medicine
to draw out the thorn of any temptation or affliction whatsoever. For this
thing rogavi I besought, which is the second branch of the petition, and comes
in the next place to be handled.

Is any man afflicted, let him pray, this was St. James his precept in the
fifth Chapter of his Epistle, verse 13. and this was David's practice, In my
distress I called upon the Lord, and complained unto my God, Psalm. 18. yea God
himself says, we will be sure to pray unto him when we are in trouble,
whatsoever we do at other times; For in their affliction they will seek me
early, Hos. 5.15.

We use to make prayer the last remedy and refuge only in our extremities,
when all other means fail, then to our prayers, but it ought to be the first
too, for God is a very present help in trouble, says David, Psalm. 46.1. other
helps are not always at hand, but Gods help is.

But will not God help us without our prayers? No, and why so? First, because
prayer is a part of the worship and service of God, which we owe unto him: The
great men of the world will not bestow their favors, nor grant deliverances
until they be petitioned, and shall the great God of heaven and earth bestow
his blessings and show his mercy upon us without our prayers? Secondly, because
our prayers show our confidence in Gods power and providence, in his mercy and
love: A father can give his beloved son all that he wants without his prayers,
but he will not, because he delights to have him sue to him.

Yea but Gods decrees are immutable, and his will is unchangeable, how then can
our prayers incline him this way or that way? Thus indeed have wicked wits
reasoned against prayer; but it is a true and a well known rule, subordinata
non pugnant inter se, things which are subordinate are not contrary one to the
other; and such are Gods decrees and our prayers, as God has ordained the end,
so has he ordained the means; now Gods purposes are not hindered by our
prayers, but rather executed, and our prayers are as it were the midwives to
deliver them, and the second causes and means to effect his decrees; Christ
knew that all those things which he prayed for would be granted before he
prayed; but yet he prayed for them.

But now as our prayers in affliction must be fervent, so must they be
frequent too, and therefore the Apostle prayed often, ter, thrice, that this
thing, this affliction might depart from him; which is the third branch of this
Petition.

A medicine must be often applied, otherwise it will not work the cure; here
is a certain number for an uncertain, thrice for often, as ter beatus, thrice
happy, is very happy, so when the Apostle said here, ter rogavi, I prayed
thrice, he means often, or very much, importunately, even until the Lord
answered him.

Is thy prayer denied the first and the second time? why then, it is very
likely thou have made some fault in thy prayer: Ye ask and receive not,
because ye ask amiss, says St. James, James 4.3. go to it therefore the
third time, and by often praying thou shall find out the error of thy prayer.

If God hear thee not in thine affliction at the first and second knock, it
is to prove thy patience, thy faith and thy love: Ostium Coeli forsitan
proptere^ clausum est ut ta fortius pulses, Heaven gate is therefore perhaps
shut that thou may knock the longer and the louder, give not over knocking
then until the door be opened.

Magna beneficia magnis precibus sunt comparanda, great blessings are not to
be obtained but with importunate prayers.

Did the unrighteous Judge in the Gospel yield at last to the importunate
prayer of the widow? And shall not the righteous Judge of heaven and earth,
think ye, yield to the importunate prayers of his own dear servants in their
afflictions?

The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force:
what force? Why the force of prayer, and haec vis Deo grata, says Tertullian,
and this violence is most pleasing unto Go^*

Vincunt invincibilem ligant omnipotentem, our frequent and importunate prayers
overcame him that is invincible, and bind him who is omnipotent.

But if our love and obedience to God cannot excite us to this frequency of
prayer, yet I am sure the thorn of affliction will urge us to call often upon
the Lord, who is our only refuge in time of trouble, rogavi Dominum, I prayed
unto the Lord, etc. which is the first branch of this Petition.

We have neither precept nor practice in all the canonical Scriptures for
praying to any other in heaven but only unto the Lord. Whom have I in heaven
but thee, said David, Psalm. 73.25. but the Papists are not of David's Religion
in this point, for they have their St. Franc is and St. Bennet, and thousands
more in heaven, whom they pray unto besides the Lord, nay they have almost for
every several kind of evil a several Saint; they pray unto their Saint
Apollonia against the toothach, to their Saint Petronella against a fever, to
their Saint Roch against the plague, to their Saint Liberius against the stone,
to their Saint Nicholas against a tempest at sea, to their St. Leonard against
bonds and imprisonment, and to other Saints against the like evils, as
Cornelius a lapide, one of their own writers, is not ashamed to confess in
his Commentaries upon the second Chapter of Saint Paul's Epistle to the
Hebrews. He must be a good Arithmetician that can reckon up the names of all
their Saints, upon whom they call when they are in any trouble or danger, thus
they dishonor God, and rob him of his worship by their superstitious
invocation of Saints departed, who cannot hear nor help them.

That same cantlike argument of the Romanists, that we must not, or we should
not presume to go immediately to a King with our petitions, but we must first
make our way by a Master of Requests or by a favorite, does not deserve a
scholarlike answer; for God is is every where, and his ears are open to our
prayers, and he knows the thoughts of our hearts long before they are
thought, and he has no other Master of Requests, but the Spirit it self to
make intercession for us, no other favorite to present out prayers but his
dear Son and our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, who is our Advocate at the
right hand of God. And so I come to the end of Saint Paul's Petition, which was,
that the thing which did so trouble him might go away from him, Vt discederet
a me, that it might depart from me.

Afflictions in themselves are unpleasing and contrary to our nature; and
therefore in themselves not to be wished for or desired, but to be borne with
patience, comfortand joy, when God sends them, as being profitable for us.

As medicines in physic which are made of corrected poisons are very good for
us, and therefore we are willing to take them, but we would not have them stay
with us, but when they have done their work, we would have them depart from
us, it is even so with our afflictions.

But in the mean time, although these thorns of affliction be not presently
plucked out, these messengers of Satan do not straight way depart from us, yet
they shall never make us despair of Gods goodness and mercy, neither shall
they vex us for ever.

Accepit diabolus tentandi licentiam sed non accepit subruendi capiam, says
Saint Ambrose, although Satan have leave to tempt us, yet he has not power to
overcome us, for there shall no temptation (...) affliction take us, but such
as is common to man, humane and moderate, so indulgent is God to his children,
for God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted or afflicted above
that we are able to bear, but when the temptation is at the highest, when the
affliction is at the worst, God will make an issue that we may escape, 1 Cor.
10.13. The bush that Moses saw, burned, but was not consumed, Exodus 3. The ship
wherein Christ and his Disciples were was covered with waves, but yet it did
not sink, Matthew. 8. And when Peter was walking upon the sea, and ready to be
drowned, then Christ put forth his hand and saved him, Matthew. 14. God suffers
his servants many times to come to the very brinke of destruction, and then he
delivers them.

Dejicit ut erigat, vulnerat ut sanet, ut pressura ver^^tur in gratiam and
afflictio in coronam, God has to the us, but he will heal us, he has smitten
us, but he will bind us up again, Hosea 6.1.

I have seen in my experience diverse of the servants of God, sometimes by the
violence of a fever, sometimes by the dampe of melancholy, and sometimes by
Satan's temptations brought even to the gates of hell, who have reasoned very
eloquently and strongly against their own salvation, and that for many days
together, even to the approaching of death; (and upon persons in the like case,
we must take heed we do not pass any rash judgment, but impute their
despairing speeches unto the distemper of their brains, or unto the sway of
their temptations, and not unto the desertion of grace:) And yet in the end how
have they been raised up again, how have they been restored, according to the
words of the Psalmist, in the multitude of the sorrows which I had in my
heart, thy comforts have refreshed my soul, Psalm. 94.19. I have done with
Saint Paul's petition, I come to Gods answer, which is my second general part.
And therein I observed first Gods denial.

Saint Paul had an answer to his Petition after many prayers, and in it a
denial; and this did not a little satisfy him that he had an answer, though
it were a denial. For many times the long and perhaps endless expectation of
an answer is more grievous then a denial. Et dixit mihi, and he said unto me.

But how God did answer Saint Paul here, whether immediately by himself, or
mediately by an Angel, whether by Vision or Revelation, whether by lively
speech, or by the secret inspiration of his blessed Spirit, Saint Paul has not
told us here, and therefore we must not be curious to inquire.

It is enough for us to know that God did answer the Apostles, but as for the
manner of the answer it is not for us to dispute it.

Well then the answer for the effect thereof was a denial; the Apostle prayed
often that the thorn of affliction which did so trouble him might be plucked
out, but it would not be; but yet he shall have an antidote against the anguish
thereof, My grace is sufficient for thee.

A natural man would marvel that St. Paul's complaint, being so lamentable,
and his desire so reasonable, God should deny the importunate prayers of his
own servant, an Apostle, and give him a repulse.

Exauditur diabolus petens Iobum tentandum, and non exauditur Paulus petens
stimulum removendum, says Saint Austin, Satan desired leave of God to tempt
Job, and it was presently granted him, the Apostle prayed often to God that the
meslenger of Satan might depart from him, and it was denied him, this seems to
be a strange thing: but yet neither did S. Paul displease God with his prayer,
neither was God unmercifull to him in his denial; for although God did not
grant St. Paul that thing which he prayed for, yet he granted him a better
thing which he prayed not for; and this is Gods fashion many times to his own
children. Non semper exaudit nos ad voluntate^ nostram, sed semper exaudit nos
ad utilitatem nostram, says S. Austin, God does not always hear us according
to our wills, but he does always hear us for our good.

A father denies a knife to his young child, because he knows he may quickly
hurt himself therewith, and yet he denies it him in love.

God is our Physician, and he will not give us cold drink when we are sick
of an ague, though we beg never so much for it. Coelestis medicus non facit
voluntatem, ut faciat sanitatem, our heavenly Physician will not do always
that which pleases us, but which helps us. I have done with the denial. I
come now to the divine aid which God gave Saint Paul against the thing which
did so trouble him, wherein the first thing I observed, is the nature and
quality thereof, it was his Grace, Gratia mea, my Grace is sufficient for thee.

This life begins and ends in Grace, the other begins in Glory, but never ends:
Grace is the preparation to Glory, and Glory is the reward of Grace, but let us
see what Grace of God this was whereof the Lord spoke unto the Apostle, for
there is a twofold Grace of God.

First, there is Gratia Dei extra nos, the Grace of God without us, even in God
himself, which is the eternal love and favor of God whereby he loved us and
elected us in Christ Jesus unto eternal life before the foundation of the
world was laid, Ephesians. 1. And here by the way I cannot but observe the
ungracious dealings of the Romish Schoolmen with this grace of God, which is
the fountain of all our happiness, they never discuss nor handle it at large
in their disputations, they only name it and so away, we never find them
magnifying this grace of God as they ought to do; what is the reason? Because it
makes against their proud doctrines of election for good works foreseen, and
of justification by good works done.

Now some Divines understand the answer of God here of this grace of God, which
if a man have, he is safe enough from the hurt and danger of all temptations
and afflictions whatsoever: Deus meus and omnia, says Saint Austin, give me
the love and favor of my God, and I have all things: But now although this
grace of God be here first meant, yet this grace alone is not here meant.

Secondly, there is Gratia dei intra nos, the grace of God within us, as all
the gifts of Gods holy Spirit in us which are truly called Gods graces, because
they are the fruits and effects of that eternal Grace, the love and favor of
God toward in Christ; now of this grace also infused into the soul of a
Christian man is the answer of God here to the Apostle, as that by which he was
to wrestle with, and in the end to overcome the thing that did so trouble him;
of this grace, Saint Peter speaks, We are kept by the power of God unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. What power? Why the power of this grace: and from what
are we kept? Why from the hurt of all temptations and afflictions whatsoever;
this grace was St. Paul's token in all his Epistles which he writ always with
his own hand, 2 These. 3.17.

This is the precious jewel and ornament of the soul of man, and as the soul
is the life of the body, so this grace is the life of the soul.

This stirs us up to all goodness, and restrains us from evil; this
keeps us from pride in prosperity, and from despair in adversity, this
supports us against all temptations, and comforts us in all woe and distress,
this makes all our weak endeavor acceptable with God, and without this all
our best actions are but splendida peccata, glittering sins.

It is not the grace of the body that can do us any good, for it is but
vanity, nor the grace of the world that can help us, for it is deceitful,
faith Solomon, Prove. 31.30. and in the end will deceive her greatest
favorites. All the grace of the world is not able to keep a man from the least
fit of an ague, much less from a fore temptation or affliction, and when a man
lies upon his death bed, and Satan begins to tempt him, what good can all the
grace of the world then do him?

With this grace of God we are equal to the Angels of God in heaven; but
without this grace we are worse then Toads and Serpents, and the worst of all
Gods creatures, yea we are as bad, if not worse then the Devils in hell:
although we make never so fair a show in the world: O then, let us pray for
this grace which no chance can dispoile us of, which no man, no creature can
take from us, which never fails us, but continues with us for ever, Psalm.
103. For whom God loves, he loves unto the end, Ioh. 13. And so I come to
the measure and efficacy of this grace, sufficit tibi, it is sufficient for
thee.

Sufficiency is a word of mediocrity between two extremes, want and
abundance; for where there is sufficient, there is neither too much nor too
little.

And here we may admire the wisdom of God, who is liberimum agens, a most free
agent, and does not work like a natural agent, the sun shines, the fire
burns, the water moistens, quoad ultimam sphaeram activitatis, according to
their uttermost abilities to bring forth their effects; but God gives his
grace unto every one of us according to the measure of the gift of Christ, as
seems best unto himself, Ephesians. 4.7. bestowing such a proportion of Grace upon
all, as is sufficient for all.

For with God is an ocean of grace, there is grace enough for you, and for me,
and for us all, and for as many worlds of men as God can make.

And God does give unto every one of his servants that sufficiency of his grace
whereby they shall be able to overcome all temptations and afflictions, and save
their own souls.

Wherefore then let us not murmr against God, if we attain not unto that
abundance of grace wherewith the Apostles, and many other Servants of God have
been endued above us; they have had the plentiful showrs of Gods graces; but
we will be content with the dew of his grace; they have had the full sheaves of
Gods graces, but we will be glad of the gleanings of his grace; they have had
the rich banquet of Gods graces, but we will think our selves happy, if we may
have but the crummes of his grace; for if we have but sufficiency of grace
here, we shall have abundance of glory hereafter.

It is with Grace as it was with Manna, he that has much, has nothing over,
and he that has little, has no lack, because he has that which is
sufficient for him.

And every grace of God that is sufficient, is also effectual, and the
efficacy of grace is from it self, not from the will of man; and therefore God
in his answer here unto Saint Paul, does not say, gratia mea sufficit tecum, my
grace is sufficient with thee, but gratia mea sufficit tibi, my grace is
sufficient for thee; for we are not sufficient of our selves to think any
thing that is good, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. and therefore we
must take heed we do not part stakes between Gods grace and man's will, as the
Papists do, but we must ascribe all this sufficiency to the grace of God, for
it is he which works in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure,
Philip. 2.1^.

And therefore let us be covetous after nothing but this sufficient grace of
God, let us pray that we may have grace enough, and then we shall have all
things enough. It is a true maxim in Divinity, there is nothing that can
suffice the heart of man, but only Gods grace; where shall you find the man
that says truly and from his heart he has enough: When he has a house he
says, O that I had a little land to it: And when he has that: He says, O
that I had a Lordship to it, and when he has that, he says, O that I had the
Manor that is next to it, or this Office, or that Honor, or one thing or
other more; and still as the world grows upon him, his desires grow upon the
world, his enough changes always, every year, nay every day, nay every hour
he thinks upon another enough; but let a man have grace enough, and he has
all things enough, for Gods grace is alsufficient.

This sufficient grace makes a penny seem to be as big as a shilling, a
cottage seem to be as fair as a Palace, a prison seem to be as large as a
Country, want seem to be abundance, and nothing to be all things: This
sufficient grace makes us rich in poverty, patient in adversity, strong in
weakness, merry in affliction, and hopeful in despair.

And this grace is sufficient for us against all the assaults of the world, the
flesh and the devil, against all troubles and afflictions whatsoever: and
although God could let his sufficient grace overcome all our temptations, all
our afflictions at first in a moment, yet he will not have it so, for God will
have his graces to be exercised in us, toll pugnam and non erit victoria,
toll victoriam and non erit corona, says Saint Ambrose, if there were no
conflict between our temptations, and Gods grace, there would be no victory,
and if no victory, no price: sometimes Amaleck, that is afflictions and
temptations prevail, and sometimes Israel, that is grace prevails.

Victores victique cadunt, victique resurgunt. But in the end grace always
has the upper hand, and we are more then conquerors through him that loved us,
Romans 8.37.

Be not then dismayed, O thou Christian soul, whosoever thou art, be not
disquieted within thy self, because thou art fallen into a sore temptation,
because thou art under an heavy affliction! what, would thou be better then
St. Paul?

Vide Apostolum patientem and noli te facere desperantem, says Saint Austin,
behold the Apostle suffering, and despair not; nay behold Christ himself, who
was tempted and afflicted, that he might succor us when we are tempted and
afflicted, Heb. 2.18. let us behold him then with a lively faith and sure
confidence, and he will so succor us with his sufficient grace, Vt nec caro
cum omnibus oblectamentis, nec mundus cum omnibus tormentis, nec Diabolus cum
omnibus tentamentis, etc. as Saint Bernard speaks, that neither the flesh with
all her allurements, nor the world with all its persecutions, nor the Devil
with all his temptations shall ever be able to separate us from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

I should now proceed to the third particular I observed in Gods answer, which
is the reason, For my power is made perfect in weakness: but I know I have
already overspent my time, and your patience; and therefore I will leave it to
the next opportunity. In the mean time let us commend that which has been
spoken unto the blessing of Almighty God our heavenly Father, etc.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second SERMON.
The Text. 2 COR. 12. and part of the ninth VERSE. For my power is made perfect
in weakness.
THe coherence of these words with the former, is this, Saint Paul was troubled
with a sore temptation, or some other affliction whatsoever it was, and he
prayed often unto God that it might go away from him: For this thing I
besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me.

Unto this Petition God gave him an answer, And he said unto me; and in this
answer a loving denial (for the Apostles good) of that which he prayed for,
but he gave him a better thing which he prayed not for, and that was his
heavenly aid to make him able to encounter, and in the end to overcome the
thing that did so afflict him, My grace is sufficient for thee.

So far I have already preached unto you upon this Text, and of that which I
have delivered here, I will repeat nothing; for I love not to say that twice in
the same place, and in the same auditory, which perhaps was not worth the
hearing once.

I proceed now according to my promise, to finish that which is behind, and to
handle the reason which God gives, why the thing must not depart from him which
did so trouble him, and why he must wrestle with it to master it: Nam virtus
mea in infirmitate perficitur, for my power is made perfect in weakness.

And let no man doubt of the truth of this reason, for God himself has said
it with his own mouth, as the Apostle tells us; and it is a truth, not of a
mean or ordinary matter, but of a very high point indeed, of a famous maxim
or sentence in Divinity, full of deep and divine mysteries, wherein you may
behold the way which God has always taken, and does still take with men,
especially with his Church, and in this way of God you shall see his Wisdom
and his. Goodness, both for his own glory and man's eternal bliss.

The Axiom here is general, it is of power in general, and it is of
weakness in general, but of whose power does the Text speak? Why certainly
of Gods, for man's power is not perfected in weakness, as by and by you shall
hear, and therefore the vulgar Latin translation is defective here, which
leaves out the pronoune mea; and reads only thus, Virtus in infirmitate
perficitur, for power is made perfect in weakness, whereas the Greek Text
has the pronoune also (...), my power is made perfect in weakness.

And of whose weakness does God here speak? Why certainly of man's, and of the
creatures; for there can be no weakness in God. Well then you see I must
handle this power in general, and this weakness in general. But when I come
to that particular kind of weakness under which Saint Paul did labor here,
then I will apply that particular kind of the power of God which is proper for
the same, that you may see how Gods power was perfected in the Apostles weakness.

But here is a strange (...), conjuncture and mixture both of contrary words
and matter; here is power, and here is weakness, here is Gods power, and here
is man's weakness, both together in one subject; nay more, here is Gods power
made perfect in the weakness of man.

Does the Sun appear glorious in an eclipse? is it not rather, when he shines
in his strength? is the beauty and majesty of a Queen set forth in beggars
rags, or vile raiment? is it not rather in a vesture of gold wrought about with
diverse colors.

Can a candle give so clear a light to all that are in the house through a
Lantern, as when it is set open upon a candlestick? Does a Diamond or other
precious stone yield so proper and kindly a luster lying bare upon a tray, or
set in a wooden ring, as it does when it is set in gold, and worn in the ear,
or upon the breast? In like manner is Gods strength glorious in weakness? is
it not rather in might? Can his power be increased or diminished? is not his
power per^^ct in it self? how then can it be perfected in the weakness of man,
or of any other creature? it is true indeed, the strength of man is made
perfect in might, for as the man is, so is his strength, as the two Kings of
Midian said to Gideon, and that truly, Judge. 8.21. And therefore Julius Caesar,
and Alexander the Great before him, wished for most valiant and puissant
enemies to encounter with, that they might show their warlike strength the more
against their enemies power, and so make their victories the more glorious. But
now contrarily the power of God is made perfect in weakness. How? not
essentially, for his power is ever perfect in it self, but occasionally,
because it is illustrated, and set forth in the weakness of the creature, and
so made known unto men, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 9.22. As they that are
truly patient, are always patient, but their patience is then most conspicuous
and illustrious when they are in their greatest sufferings. Well then, it is a
familiar custom with God to accomplish his greatest works by the weakest
instruments, and the most contemptible means, nay many times by contraries, as
anon you shall hear.

But for the further opening of this point which I observe upon the whole frame
of my text, to wit, the conjuncture of Gods power and man's weakness, both
together, at one and the same time in the same subject, and of the perfecting
of the one in the other, you shall see it plainly in Gods own children almost
through the whole course of their lives.

When we are weak, then are we strong.
When we are poor, then are we rich.
When we are fools, then are we wise.
When we are miserable, then are we happy.
When we are unknown, then are we well known.
When we are despised, then are we honorable.
When we are simple, then are we prudent.
When we are humble, then do we boast.
When we are besides our selves, then are we sober.
When we must please no man, then must we please all men.
When we must care for nothing, then must we provide all things.
When we have nothing, then do we possese all things.
When we are here in earth, then are we in heaven.
When we can do nothing, then can we do all things.
When we are sorrowful, then do we rejoice.
When we are mortified, then are we quickened.
When we are dead, then are we alive.
When we would do evil, then would we do good.
When we lose our lives, then do we find them.
When we are sinners, then are we righteous.
These mixtures of power and infirmity are riddles and paradoxes indeed to
flesh and blood, to nature reason, and a natural man cannot understand them,
because they are spiritually discerned; but they are Evangelicall Axioms, yea
they are principles of Faith and Religion to us that are Christians, and they
are verified in us without any contradiction at all, as you shall hear.

When we are weak in body by reason of sickness, or any distress, then are
we strong in the Lord, and in the Spirit of his might unto all patience with
joyfulnesse, Ephesians. 6.10. Colos. 1.11.

When we are poor in spirit, even in the inmost recesses of the soul to the
acknowledgement of our own unworthiness and wickedness, then are we rich in
Faith, and then do we make many rich in Christ, Iam. 2.5. 2 Cor. 6.10.

When we are fools in the opinion of the world, then are we wise in God unto
salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.

When we are miserable in enduring afflictions and reproaches, then are we
happy, being thereby tried and made fit for heaven, Rev. 2.10.

When we are unknown to the world, then are we well known and opproved of God
and good men, 1 Cor. 8.3. Romans 14.18.

When we are despised of wantons and profane persons, then are we precious and
honorable in Gods sight, Esaias 43.4. and before his holy Angels, who rejoice
at our repentance, Luke 15.10. and also in the eyes of all upright and just
men, Psalm. 15.4.

When we are simple concerning evil, then are we prudent and wise unto that
which is good, Romans 16.19.

When we are humble in our selves before God and men, then do we boast and
glory in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14. and also in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, in
the tenth verse of this Chapter.

When we are besides our selves in any heavenly ecstasy or divine rapture, and
contemplation of Gods goodness, mercy and love to us, which Saint Bernard
calls sanam and sanctam quandam insaniam, a sound and an holy kind of
madness, which Moses and Peter and Paul had, then are we sober in our selves
and toward men, 2 Cor. 5.13.

When we must please no man by flattery or for our own ends, then must we
please all men in all things (that are good) for their edification, that they
may be saved, Romans 15.2. 1 Cor. 10.33.

When we must be careful for nothing inordinately and immoderately, and with
distrust, then must we provide all things, honest in the sight of men, 2 Cor.
8.21. 1 Timothy 5.8.

When we have nothing of this worlds upon which we set our hearts and desires,
then do we possess all things in contentment, 2 Cor. 6.10.

When we are here in earth in our persons, then are we in heaven in our
conversation, Phil. 3.20.

When we can do nothing of our selves, then can we do all things through
Christ that strengthens us, Phil. 4.13. what, all things indeed that can be
done? No, but all things necessary and fit for us to do.

When we are sorrowful for our distresses, then do we rejoice in the Lord, 2
Cor. 6.10. Phil. 4.4. that is in his protection, in his favor, in his
promises, and in his service; yea when ye are sorrowful for our sins, then
do we rejoice in our repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10.

When we are mortified in the flesh, then are we quickened in our mortal
bodies by the Spirit, Romans 8.11.13.

When we are dead unto sins, then do we live unto righteousness, 1 Pet.
2.24.

When we would do evil by the suggestion of the old man, then would we do
good by the motions of the new man, Rom 7.19.

When we lose our lives for Christ's sake and the Gospells here in this world,
then do we save them in the world to come, Mark 9.35.

When we are sinners in our selves, then are we righteous before God in
Christ, being justified freely by his grace, Romans 3.24. and having the
righteousness of Christ imputed to us, Romans 4.5.8. And so having taken a
general view of the Text, I come to a particular survey thereof, My power is
made perfect in weakness.

The power of God is one and the same in it self, but it is diverse to us, in
respect of the several objects, and matters wherein it does operate; and in
this sense, I find three kinds of the power of God in the Scriptures, and but
three

First, there is virtus brachii the power of Gods arm, whereof we read in
the 20. Psalm, and the 6. verse, in the 51. of Esaias, and the 9. and in the 27.
of Jeremy, and the 5. and everywhere almost in the Scriptures.

Secondly, there is virtus gratiae, the power of Gods grace, which Saint Paul
calls in the verse next after my text, the power of Christ: of which we read
everywhere almost in the Epistles of the Apostles.

Thirdly, there is virtus gloriae, the power of Gods glory, or his glorious
power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. which shall be showed in the world to come.

But the weakness of the creature, especially of man, is manifold, yea of
infinite variety, but I may reduce all unto these three several heads or
sorts; the weakness of nature, the weakness of sufferings now, and the
weakness of corruption, of consumption, and as it were of annihilation after
death.

Now under these three kinds of power exercised by God, and under these three
heads of weakness appearing in man, I will comprise all my ensuing meditations
upon this text. And I will show first, that the power of Gods arm is made
perfect in the weakness of the creature in general, but particularly of man's
nature. Secondly, that the power of Gods grace is made perfect in the weakness
of man's sufferings here in this life. Thirdly, that the power of Gods glory is
made perfect in the weakness of corruption, consumption, and annihilation, by
the resurrection of the body out of the dust of the earth, unto life eternal.
I begin with the first.

The power of Gods arm is made perfect in the weakness of the creature in
general, and particularly of man's nature.

Virtus mea, etc. My power is made perfect in weakness.

God made man (the masterpiece of all his Creation) not of any precious stone,
nor of gold, or silver oar, nor of brass, or any other metal, nor of a
rock, nor of oak, or any other tree, nor of any fruit or flower, but of vile
and dull earth, yea ex pulvere terrae, of the very dust of the earth, Genesis 2.7.
the basest and barrenest part of the earth. Why so? to show his power the more
in man's weakness, and to teach us not to glory, or to put any confidence in
dust.

What miraculous things did God work by Moses rod, a plain stick, a
Shepherds staff, which he carried in his hand the wilderness to rule his
sheep with, which Moses afterward called virgam Dei, the rod of God, Exodus
4.20. and all this was to show the power of Gods hand in the weakness of a
small contemptible piece of Wood.

When the walls of the City of Jericho fell down flat only with the blast of
the trumpets of Rams horns, and with the shout of (...) people, Ios. 6.20. Was
not the power of Gods arm showed in weakness?

It had been an easy matter for Samson alone in his great strength quickly to
have killed many thousands with a sword in his hand; but when he slew a
thousand men only with the jaw bone of an Ass, which he found by chance, and
all before he cast it away out of his hand, Judge. 15.15. Then God showed indeed
the strength of his own arm in weakness.

When Elias with his mantle divided the waters of Jordan hither and thither,
and made a dry walk for himself and his servant to pass through the River, 2
King 2.8. and when the bones of Elizeus raised a dead man unto life again, 2
King. 13.21. (whose corpse was cast in have into the Sepulcher of the
Prophet) and that as soon as ever the dead body did but touch the dead
Prophets bones, did not God manifest the power of his hand in the weakness of
those things?

God made young Daniel and his three companions fairer and fatter in flesh,
with nothing but pulse and water, then all the children of their sort were
with the daily provision of the Kings meat and of his wine, Dan. 1.15.

The New Testament affords as many demonstrations of this maxim as the Old,
how that God has perfected the power of his Arm in poor inconsiderable and
contemptible things: by the touchonly of the hem of Christ's garment, all
diseases were perfectly cured, Matthew. 14.36. nay with handkerchers that were
brought from Saint Paul's body, not only diseases, but evil spirits departed
from men, Acts 19.12. nay with the very shadow of Peter passing through the
streets of Jerusalem, sick folk were healed, Acts 5.15. Nay more, God has
showed the power of his hand in the weakness not only of contemptible, but
also of contrary things; for Christ opened the eyes of one that was borne
blind with clay and spittle, John 9.6.11. enough to have put out his eyes if
he could have seen well before, nam lutum and sputum quid adoculum, says
Saint Austine.

And here by the way I cannot but observe how the Papists abuse and dishonor
this power of Gods hand, by transferring the honor due to God, unto the
weakness of the creature, by their gross superst^tion and idolatry, in the
veneration and worship of relics; and unto their superstition in practice,
they add error in doctrine: for they teach that there is an inherent virtue in
those things wherein God once showed the power of his hand, whereas indeed
there is none at all, no more then there is in a course canvasse bag, after the
gold is all powered out. And unto their error they add imposture, for they
deceive people with counterfeit relics: and unto their imposture they add
filthy lucre, for the great Demetrius of Rome, and his craftsmen make great
gain by their relics.

And unto their cursed gain they add their temptations of Gods power, by
their superstitious addresses unto their relics, expecting miracles, and
cures, and helps from them. But I leave them with their relics, and proceed
to show you how God has not only perfected the power of his arm in the
weakness of the creatures below man, but also and especially in the weakness
of man himself.

Who would ever have thought that Moses, an infant, exposed to destruction in
an arc of bulrushes, should afterward have been the deliverer of all Gods
people? Who would ever have imagined that Joseph being sold for a bond-slave to
strange Merchants, should afterward have been Lord over all Egypt? Who
would ever have believed that David, the youngest of his fathers sons, of
whom little or no account at all was made, and therefore his father brought him
not with the rest of his brethren to the sacrifice, but left him in the field
with his sheep: I say, who would ever have believed that he should have been
called immediately from following the Ewes great with young, and have been
anointed King over Israel, and have changed his shepherds crook for a royal
Scepter? but this was the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. And we
have seen by experience, that God has raised up mean men's sons to be very
great instruments of his glory, both in Church and Commonwealth, according to
the saying of David, God raises the poor out of the dust, and the needy out
of the dunghill, that he may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of
his people, Psalm. 113.7.8.

But the power of Gods arm was then made perfect indeed, in the weakness of
man, beyond all admiration, in the resurrection of our blessed Savior from the
dead.

Cumfactor mundi factus est in mundo, when he that made the world was made in
the world, when the Potter was made of his own clay, when he that is immense
was shut up in the Virgins womb, when the ancient of days was not a day old,
when eternity began in time, when the Word was made Flesh, an infant and
could not speak; when the incarnate God, God and Man in one person, did hunger
and thirst, and was weary, and slept, and wept, and was sorrowful, and
suffered pains, and was crucified and dyed, and was buried; then was he Deus
vere absconditus, a hidden God indeed, as the Prophet speaks, Esaias 45.15. then
was the power of his arm hidden in the weakness of man.

But when he rose again from the dead, then was he declared to be the Son of
God with power, Romans 1.4. then was the power of his arm made perfect,
manifested and openly showed in the weakness of flesh.

When Christ was dead and laid in his grave, and the stone was sealed, ne mors
exire aut vita intrare possit, as Chrysologus irronically speaks of the chief
Priests and Pharisees, least death should chance to steal out, or life happen
to creep in, the Devils thought all was cock sure, they did even laugh to
themselves, and dance as it were upon the Sepulcher for joy, singing their
(...) and triumphant songs, surely he is now so low, that he can never rise
again; then, even then did he rise again from the dead, and perfect the power
of his arm in the greatest weakness of humane nature. Gemina virtus and
revixit, and praedixit, says Chrysologus: here was a double power, he did not
only rise from the dead, but he foretold that he would rise.

It was a great power for a living man to raise a dead body to life again, as
Peter did Dorcas, Acts 9. but it was a greater power for a dead body to raise
up a dead body to life, as the bones of the dead Prophet Elisha the dead man
that was cast in haste, and by chance into his grave, 2 Kings 13.7. but it was
the greatest power of all for a dead man to raise up himself unto life again,
and so did Christ, and so did never any but Christ, neither shall any ever do
it again; he only had power to lay down his life, and he only had power to
take it up again, John 10. and he rose again from the dead, nunquam moriturus
never to dye any more, death has no more dominion over him; so then I may
truly say with Saint Austine, Non babuit divinitas quo se demitteret humilius
neque habuit humanitas quo se attolleret altius, the Godhead could not possibly
descend any lower then to take the weak nature of man, and the manhood could
not possibly ascend any higher, then to be united personally unto the Son of
God.

And so I come to the power of Gods Grace which is made perfect in the
weakness of man's sufferings here in this life, which is my second point.

Which that you may the better understand, I will show you how the power of
Gods grace is made perfect in the weakness of mankind, and of the weakest of
mankind, and in the greatest sufferings that the weak nature of man can
bear; I will touch upon all the several kinds of weakness wherein the
power of Gods grace is made perfect.

And first this power of Gods Grace is perfected in the weakness of mankind;
no creature under heaven is capable of Gods Grace but only man, men made of
flesh and blood, made of dust and slime, sinful men have this treasure of Gods
Grace in vasis testaceis in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power
may be of God and not of men, 2 Cor. 4.7. We are cophini seminis coelestis, the
baskets wherein the seed of Gods word is put which is able to save our
souls, we are the cabinets wherein the precious jewels of the blessed Spirit
of God are kept; and what singular lights of Grace has God made many men in
the knowledge of his sacred Word in works of piety and charity, and in
holiness of life.

2. This power of Gods Grace is made perfect in the weakness of young
children, for unto many of them God gave wisdom before years, and grace before
discretion, and the Spirit of God before the understanding of a man: Daniel a
young youth inspired by God, convinced and condemned to death, the two
lust-breathing Elders for their false witness against chaste Susanna; and
Samuel a younger then he, in his little coat ministered before the Lord, being
girded with a linen Ephod, unto whom the Lord revealed himself in a vision,
and told the young child what he meant to do against old Ely the Priest, for
the iniquity of his house; but children younger then these, cried in the Temple
when Christ came into it, Hosanna to the son of David; which when the chief
Priests and Scribes heard and saw, they said unto Christ in a mocking manner,
hear thou what these say, and Jesus replied unto them, yea, have ye never
read, out of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise?
Matthew. 21.15.16. which words cannot be meant of babes and sucklings in Christ
as many Divines would have them, for it is no wonder that they being of years
do praise God, but they are to be understood of babes and sucklings in nature,
as Calvin rightly expounds, and so they agree very well with Christ's answer to
the mocking Priests and Scribes, as if he should have said, it is no wonder,
that little children that can speak and go up and down do praise God, when
as out of the mouths of babes and sucklings who cannot go nor speak, God
has perfected his praise; but when and how this was so, I can better believe
then understand, and more easily admire then express.

Thirdly, the power of Gods Grace is made perfect in the weakness of the
weaker sex of mankind; you shall find in the Old Testament as many holy women
as men, and in the New Testament as many women believers, as men; and in the
Church Calenders as many women Saints and Martyrs as men, who shall be renowned
in the Church for their faith, holiness and other Christian virtues as long as
the Gospel shall be preached in the world; and Christ appeared first after his
resurrection unto women, and by them declared his resurrection unto men, and
dum Apostoli dubitant, faeminae credunt, says Saint Jerome: and while the
Apostles were incredulous, the women believed: thus has God showed the
strength of his Grace in their infirmity, and the power of his Spirit in the
weakness of their nature, that they should glory not in themselves; but in the
grace of God, and in his mercy and goodness.

Fourthly, the power of Gods Grace is made perfect in the weakness of the
lowest condition of men, in the weakness of ignorance, baseness and poverty;
there are three things which the world admires, Wisdom, Power and Riches; all
which God neglected in the calling of men to the Gospel of Christ in the
infancy thereof; for not many wisemen after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble, were called at the first; but God chose the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise, and God chose the weak things of the world to
confound the mighty, and base things of the world, and things which are
despised, did God choose; and things which were not, to bring to naught things
that were, that no flesh should glory in his presence. 1 Cor. 1.

Deus ab infirmioribus incaepit; and therefore Christ chose to be his Apostles,
no disputing Logicians, no witty Poets, no eloquent Orators, no subtlie
Mathamatitians, no deep Philosophers, no wise Statesman, no mighty Princes,
but poor simple, and unlearned fishermen, and by them he drew whole nations of
men into the net of the Church: scientia piscatorum stultam fecit scientiam
Philosophorum, says Saint Ambrose; the preaching of Christ crucified, not by
great scholars, but by ignorant men, not with wit and eloquence, but with
simpleness and plainness, not pleasing to flesh and blood, but contrary, to
nature and reason; and thereby to persuade Orators, and Phiosophers, and the
mighty men of the world, yea the very enemies and perfecutors of Christian
Religion, in the height of all their menacies, and most cruel torments, to
believe and to embrace the Gospel of Christ, and in so short a time too,
declared plainly to all the world, that the power of Gods grace was made
perfect in the weakness of ignoance, baseness and poverty: And all this was
done thus, that the conversion of the world unto Christ, might not be ascribed
to the wisdom of man, but to the power of Gods grace. But there are those now,
who misunderstanding this text, and other Scriptures of the like nature,
affirm, that as simple and ignorant men did heretofore without any learning or
premeditation at all, preach and expound the mysteries of God, by the power of
Gods Spirit, so simple and ignorant men may do the like now; and why? because
the power of Gods Spirit is the same still that it was, and blows where it
lists, and therefore may be perfected as well in their weakness now, as it
was in the weakness of others in former times; but this is no good plea, and
therefore they that put the spirit to this now deceives themselves, and tempt
the power of Gods blessed Spirit, for there is a great deal of difference in
the times: God gave the gifts of illumination, and of knowledge to simple and
ignorant men by inspiration extraordinary and miraculously, in the infancy of
the Gospel, and it was fit for those times for the reason before mentioned; but
now in a fetled Church such miracles are ceased, and God gives divine knowledge
and understanding unto men by labor, industry and study, but God does still
make perfect the power of his grace in the weakness of simple and unlearned,
by bestowing upon them the spirit of regeneration and sanctification, and
therefore the most simple and illiterate man alive, may believe as well, and as
much, as the greatest Clerk in the world: and he that wears the linen frock
may be as holy as he that is brought up in scarlet, and feeds delicatly; and
the maid servant that is behind the mill, yea the beggar that imbraceth the
dunghill, may be as rich in faith and in grace, as he that sits in a throne
of glory.

Fifthly, the power of Gods grace is made perfect in the weakness of
temptations: And (to apply the medicine to the malady) this was the Apostles
case; God suffers his children to come many times in their temptations ad
ripam, unto the very brinke of despair, and perdition, and then the power of
his grace helps them; for God is faithful and will not suffer us to be
tempted above our ability; but when the temptation is at the highest, then he
will make a way for us to escape. 1 Cor. 10. God permits Satan to tempt us, and
his temptations are the soarest of all; but he will not suffer him to overcome
us, latrare potest, mordere non potest, says Saint Augustine: He thinks by
his temptations to break us, and to take us, and hold us captive at his will;
but indeed he takes himself in his own Gins: The more weight is laid upon an
Arch, the stronger it is; and the winds which shake the trees, makes them
faster at the roots; Satan's temptations like bellows, blow and kindle that
holy fire that is within our breasts, even the power of Gods grace: let us not
then be afraid of temptations: For qui hortatur ut pugnemus, adjuvat aut
vincamus, says Saint Ambroose: He that incourageth us to encounter with
temptations, does and will help us by his grace to overcome them: Et habebimus
victoriam in eo quae nunquam victus est, and we shall be more then conquerours
through him who for our sakes was tempted and overcome, that we in him might
overcom also when we are tempted: The arrows which are often shot against a
rock, are so blunted that afterward they can do little or no harm at all; now
Christ has so blunted all the arrows and darts of Satan's temptations, by his
resistance, that though they hit us, yet they cannot hurt us.

Sixthly, the power of Gods grace is made perfect in the weakness of our
humiliation for our sins: when a man is ashamed to lift up so much as his
eyes to heaven; when a man humbles himself and afflicts his soul with weeping
and mourning for his sins; when a man denies himself and believes in his
heart, and confesses that he is the greatest sinner in the world; when a man
judges himself not only unworthy of the least of all Gods mercies, but also
most worthy of all the pains and torments in hell for offending God; when a
man loathes himself in his own sight, for the sins which he has committed;
when a man abhorres himself and repents in dust and ashes: Yea, when a man
brings himself down so low, that the shadow of death rests upon his eye lids,
and his speech whispers out of the dust, as it is Esaias 29.4. then does the
power of Gods grace begin to be made perfect in him; then does God come nigh to
him to dwell with him, and to save him, for he that is on high will dwell with
him that is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the spirit of the contrite, to heal his sin-broken
heart, and to bind up his wounds of sorrow: Esaias 57.18. Psalm. 143.3. And then
what consolation in Christ, what peace of conscience, what joy in the holy
Ghost does the power of Gods grace presently produce in his soul? which none
can understand but he that feels, and none can feel but the child of God,
the truly penitent sinner; Peccator de peccato dolet, and de dolor gaudet,
says Saint Augustine, the penitent sinner sorroweth for his sins, and
rejoices in his repentance; unam fudi lachrimam, unam inveni consolationem, I
shed one tear for my sins, and I found thereupon one comfort; december fudi
lachrymas, december inveni consolationes, I shed ten tears for my sins, I found
as many comforts for the same, and quantumcunque fuit pondus lachrymarum,
tantus fuit numerus consolationum, and as the weight of my tears increased for
my sins, so the number of Gods comforts increased in my soul according to
the saying of the Psalmist, In the multitude of the sorrows (even of the
sorrows for my sins) which I had in my heart thy comforts have rejoiced my
soul, Psalm. 94.19.

Lastly, the power of Gods grace is made perfect in the weakness of sickness,
and of all manner of sufferings unto which the weak nature of man is subject;
And first in the weakness of sickness. When Jacob was sick in his bed unto
death, and ready to give up the Ghost, and when his eyes were dim with age,
that he could not see, yet then did he foresee, and foretell what should
befall the twelve tribes of Israel in the last days; what high and mysterious
prophecies did he then deliver in the several blessings of his twelve Sons, and
with whatstrength of words, you may read in the 29. of Genesis.

When Job was smitten with sore boyls from the sole of his foot to the crown of
his head; when he sat down among the ashes, and scraped himself with a
potsheard; when his skin was black and broken, and his bones were burnt with
heat, when he could not swallow his spittle, and when he took his flesh in his
teeth, when the poisoned arrows of the Almighty drank up his spirits, and his
reins were cleft asunder; when his breath was strange to his own servants,
nay to his own wife when his sighs were the music to his meat, and his
rorings were powered out like water; then behold the power of Gods Grace was
perfected indeed in weakness; then ecce Margaritae in sterquilinio, behold
what inestimable pearls were found upon the muckhill, what an eloquent and
divine Preacher Job was upon the dunghill, what celestial sermons did he then
make of Gods power, of his providence and of his Justice? of man's misery, the
shortness of this life, and the resurrection after death; all as full of sweet
and heavenly consolation, as his body was then of loathsome sores.

Anima morbo affecta Deo propinqua; What Angelical meditations, what divine
raptures, what heavenly ejaculations, what strong consolation, what powerful
exhortations, what (...) or full assurance of faith, what victories over
temprations, what swanlike songs, what longings to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, what imbracements of death have many heart-sick and dying Christians
showed upont heir beds and dying Christians showed upon their beds of
languishing, by the power of Gods grace even to the admiration of the standers
by, according to the saying of David, Psalm. 138.3. In the day when I cried unto
the Lord he endued my soul with much strength; with what strength? but only
with the strength of grace in his soul. But questionless many of you that
hear me here this day have both seen these powers of Grace in them whom God
has brought low by sickness, and also have felt the like in your own souls
when the hand of God has been upon you, and therefore I need not press this
point any further.

And this power of Gods Grace is not oney made perfect in the weakness of
sickness, by also in the weakness of the greatest sufferings of man.

When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up, says
David, Psalm. 27.10. that is, when the nearest and dearest friends that we liave
in this world either will not or cannot come to help us, when there is no man
to comfort us, then does the power of Gods Grace begin to show it self in us;
no distance of place, no close prison, no disconsolate dungeon, no Guard, no
locks, no iron gates can keep the power of the blessed Spirit of God, the
Comforter from us, but he will come in to us wheresoever we are; as he did unto
Jonas in the belly of the Whale.

And if God show the power of his Grace in the weakness of men when they
suffer for their sins, how much more will he show the same, when they suffer
innocently and without cause; but above all when they suffes for Gods cause,
and for the Gospells sake, as the Martyrs did, who when they heard the noise of
whips and other instruments of cruelty prepared for them, though they heard
sweet and heavenly music founding in their ears, who kisted and embraced the
stakes, whereat they were burnt, playing with the flames and trying the power
thereof beforehand; as that blessed Protestant Mattyr Archbishop Cranwer did,
who burned his recanting hand in the fire, before his sold ascended toward
heaven in the flames; who laughed bloodthirsty Tyrants to scorn even to their
faces, despising their cruelties while they were more wearied in devising new
exquisite torments, and practicing strange kinds of deaths upon the Martyrs,
then the Martrys were in enduring them; yea while the tormentors were more
vexed at the patience, comfort, courage, faith, and joy of the Martyrs, then
the Martyrs were with their tortures. And what was the reason of all this? why
because the power of Gods Grace was made perfect in their weakness, Et vilis
est omnis poena ubi virtus Dei est, and gloriae culestis expectatio, and all
kinds of torments, and of deaths are despised and contemned, where the power of
Gods Spiritis, and the expectation of heavenly glory. And here I pray see the
difference, between the sufferings of Christ, and the sufferings of the
Martyrs of Christ; when Christ suffered, his soul was heavy unto death; Deus
subtraxit protectonem sed non dissolvit unionem, God did not dissolve the union
of the divine and humane nature, but only withdrew his protection, so that he
cried out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; which was
not vox desperantis the voice of one despairing, for he called him his God
twice together, but vox admirantis the voice of one admiring that God this
Father should with hold all the sweet influences of his heavenly assistance
from him in his greatest extremity, no help, no aid, no succor, no comfort at
all then from heaven; but the humane nature of Christ was then left naked to it
self: there was none to comfort me, said David, in the person of Christ, Psalm.
69.21. none at all, neither man nor God, neither creature nor Creator, but
Christ as man, was left alone to himself, and all this was done that our
Savior might fully satisfy the justice of God for our sins. But contrarily
now, the Martyrs of Christ went joyfully to their deaths, because as their
torments increased upon them, so the power of Gods grace incleased in them; and
the more their sufferings did abound the more did Gods comforts superabound in
them. But if Almighty God had withdrawn the beams of his gracious assistance
from them, but a little while, yea if God had but turned away his face from
them, but a moment, they would not only have been troubled, as the Psalmist
speaks, but they would have trembled, and their knees would have smitten one
against another, at the sight of an officers halbart, bart, and at the
apprehension of death they would have sunk down presently into the very gulf
of despair.

And so I come to the third consideration of his power, which is the power of
Gods glory; and this glorious power of God is made perfect in the weakness of
corruption, consumption, and as it were annihilation of bodies by the
renovation of the creatures generally; for the creature it self shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God, Rom 8.21. but especially the glorious resurrection of our bodies at the
last day according to the working of Gods power, whereby he is able to subdue
all things to himself, Phil. 3. And in this weak, base, and ignominious
condition of our bodies after death shall the power of Gods glory be made
perfect; yea though our bodies make such a strange and long Pilgrimage through
corruption unto nothing, as S. Cyrill speaks of; though they be devoured of
fishes, and those fishes be eaten up of men, and those men be turned into dust,
and that dust be scattered by the four winds, yet god can pick up all our
parts again, and give every one his own body: redhibentibus ea ignibus, and
undis and alxis ferarum and lactibus piscium and ipsorum temporum propria gula,
as Tertullian speaks: the fire, the sea, the bellies of wild beasts, the gutts
of fishes, and times all-devouring throat it self shall yield up their dead
again: And do not ask how this can be done; for this (...), how, in the
works of God is an argument of incredulity, as Iustine Martyr speaks;
considera authorem, and toll dubitationem, says S. Austine, consider the
glorious power of God, and this takes away all doubting.

And this glorious power of God shall be so perfected in the ignominious weak
and base estate of the body after death, that it shall raise up the same
numericall and individual bodies unto life again according to the Scriptures.
I mervaile then that Durand the Schoolman upon the 4. of the sentences, the 43.
and 44. distinctions should deny this numerical identity of the body in the
resurrection with this bold and peremptory conclusion, salva reverentis
omnipotentia divinae dico hoc fieri non posse; with reverence be it spoken to
Gods omnipotency, this cannot be done, says he; wherein he showed not only
heresy, but also blasphemy, and for both he is condemned by the Schools; yea
by the word of God: for all those pronounes in the 19. Chap. of Job and the 26.
and 27. verses, ego ipse and non alius ut mea, are pronounes of numericall
identity; although the worms destroy this body yet in my flesh I shall see
God, whom I shall see for my self, and these mine cies shall behold him, and
not another. Again Christ shall (...) change our vile bodies says the
Apostle, Phil. 3. now a change is not in the substance, but in the qualities,
(...) says Amphilochius, the body at the resurrection shall be the same still
for substance, but not the same for qualities; nam gloriae est, non tollere,
sed extollere, non interficeresed perficere naturam, says Gerson: this power
of glory shall not destroy, but perfect nature in the resurrection; alius ero,
non aliud, says Tertullian, I shall be another manner of man then, but not
another thing, and Christ shall make our vile bodies like unto his glorious
body, (...), says Theodoreo, like in the quality of glory, but not equal in
the quantity of Glory.

Moreover that is called a resurrection indeed, ubi resurgit quod cecidit,
says St. Jerome, where that very numericall body does rise again unto life
which died, as Christ did, and his resurrection is the pattern of ours. And
Tertullian gives the reason hereof, ut integru^ fiat hominis judicium, that the
same flesh which has been a companion with the soul in virtue or vice, in
holiness or wickedness in this world, may be a companion with the soul
either in bliss or in pain in the world to come, otherwise one body should
sin, and other body should be tormented, one body should shed its blood for
Christ, and another body should be glorified with Christ.

But after what manner shall this glorious power of God be made perfect in the
weakness of our vile bodies? Why in the four celestial qualities of a
glorified body, impassibility, clarity, agility and spirituality, which
Tertullian calls indumenta Angelica, Angelical vestures, and Ruffinus,
prerogativas carnis; the prerogatives of the flesh, and the Schoolmen, dotes
corporis gloriosi, the indowments of a glorified body: All which four Saint
Paul sets down particularly, 1 Cor. 15. It is sown in corruption, it is raised
in incorruption, there is the impassibility of a glorified body, nothing can
hurt it, it can suffer nothing: it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in
honor; there is the clarity of a glorified body shining as bright as the Sun
in his strength; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power, there is the
agility of a glorified body, as swift as the mind, for where the soul would
have the body to be, there shall the body presently be; it is sown a natural
body, it is raised a spiritual body; there is the spirituality of a glorified
body, not that it shall be changed into a Spirit, but that it shall be
conformed to the Spirit, it shall need no food or sleep to refresh it; sed
quasi in Angelicum habitum commutabitur, as Tertullian speaks, but it shall be
as it were changed into an Angelical state and condition in all things.

Now upon this glorious power of God we build our faith and the hope of our
resurrection out of the weakness of corruption unto life eternal: Sepulchrum
est uterus resurrectionis, the grave is the womb of the resurrection; Can a
man go into his mothers womb and be borne again, said Nicodemus? Yes that he
may, for he shall go into the womb of the earth, the mother of us all, and be
borne again immortal at the last day: Et quanto corpora nostra nunc viliora
tanto futura gloriosiora, and the more weak and vile our bodies are now, the
more glorious shall they be hereafter: And this dust of ours shall one day be
pulvis glorificatus, glorified dust, and dust shall arise never to return to
dust any more, Amen.

Errata.
PAge 8. in Tit. for first read first. page 10. line 21. Eustocnium. p. 13. l.
3. redundantia. p. 17. l. 23. sins. ibid. l. 21. (...). p. 24. l. 1. court
like. p. 25. l. 13. copiam. p. 27. l 5. come. p. 30. l. 15. justification. p.
31. l. 4. [us] is omitted. p. 57. l. 11. ironically. p. 63. l. 6. subtle. ib.
Mathematicians. ibid. l. 7. Statesmen. ibid. l. 17. Philosophers. ibid. l. 20.
menaces. p. 66. l. 15. Ambrose. ibid. l. 18. qui. p. 71. l. 12. only.

FINIS.

