A Third and Fourth Part OF PEGASUS: Taught by BANKS his Ghost to dance in the
Dorick Mood, To the Tune of LACHRYMAE.

Jn two Letters from Oxford, July 1. 1648.

ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year, 1648.

A Third and Fourth part of Pegasus: In two Letters from Oxford. 1 July, 1648.
Sir,
I Have afforded you some time of Breathing for a while an intermission of
those sad entertainments which I formerly sent you from this place.

When that huddle of violences was over upon the Earl of Pembroke's coming
hither, the Visitors sat still a while to see how that would be digested
through the Kingdom, and what encouragement they should find to seize upon
that Prey, which that weeks Nimrod-hunting had laid before them. And the truth
is, the Action was of so high an ill savor, and by themselves so apprehended
to be so, that the modester of them thought fit to depart the Scene; Master
Reynolds was called home by his Wife, and admonisht, as Pilate by his, to have
no more to do with the blood of these just persons, not to touch one penny of
the Revenues of Christ-church, nor to lie in the lodgings any longer, lest the
Fury that scourged young Jerome for being not so much Christian as he should,
(and made him cry out, Christianus ego, non Ciceronianus) should use him thus,
for taking upon him to have more of the Christianus then belonged to him. The
same Conscience (I shall not say of the crime, but shame) wrought the like
effect on Sir Not. and his son Corbet, who (though M. Reynolds has now put it
over) never thought fit to see this Place, since that Exit and Plaudite after
the Pembroke-Tragico-puppet-play of The beginning of the World, or The new
Creation. Where, by one slip of the wheel of the Engine, there was this
Miscarriage, That instead of fetching an University out of Chaos, all was
returned to Chaos again. The unsuccessefulnesse of that week, and the Devils
being (though an industrious, rampant; yet withal, like the creature, that he
most commonly transformes himself into) an hare-hearted cowardly devil, gave
us some kind of Truce for eleven weeks more, save only that now and then we
should hear of a Head dropping off upon a crack of Thunder, a Vote of the
Committee. Or that about a month ago, the Prebends of Christ-church were
seized on by the State-pursevants for that great crime of not hanging
themselves, as soon as ever they were condemned by Judge Pembroke and Sergeant
Cheynell in their bloody Circuit: For which cause the Sub-Deane, Doctor Hammond
was to be dispatched to Wallingf. Castle (though by a sudden accident that
Castle is changed into confinement at Oxford) Doctor Pain hurryed up to
London, for the crime of being Treasurer as well as Prebend. But I meant not to
mention these and the like Passages which will be no news to you, and which I
acknowledge to be absolutely necessary in order to their first great end of
Reforming the Wealth, and their second, of Regulating the Learning of this
University, which upon their late Confederation with the Independents of the
Garrison, they have promised to level absolutely; And by putting themselves
into the Head-ships, to show them a New-modell of Divinity and Latin, that
never an Independent Butten-maker in the Army, the most zealous for parity of
parts or Learning, shall except against.

The only thing that I meant to afflict you with at this time, is the Table of
Proscription, which this Morning (Saturday the first of July) was pasted, in
the Retaile on several Colleges, and now altogether in the Gross, on S.
Mary's Door; To banish out of the Town no less then the great Climactericall
of sixty three, made up (of all sorts some) of fellows, Scholars, Chaplains,
Graduates, Vndergraduates, and a taste of a Clark, a Quirister, a Steward, a
Cook, (but never an unprofitable Commoner I warrant you) to execute the whole
Body of the University in its effigies or Representative; And to give assurance
what shall become of the Collective Body, when they have, by this trial of our
Patience found cut, that it may be safe for them to set on that Rounder
Enterprise. The particular Names in the Catalogue I shall not here insert, but
only tell you that they are chosen and culled out from the rest that lay with
them in the same Mass of Non-submission, by no kind of rule or measure, made
the objects of as absolute an irrespective Reprobation (without any Intuition
of ill works, or of any thing which according to their own Rules might
discriminate them from other men) as ever their Friends, Sub-or Supra
lapsarians have fastened upon God in their bloodiest scheme. If it be possible
to observe anything of order or constancy in their Counsels; 'Twas sure, in
every place to show an example on some of the most eminent for Learning, or
Regularity of behavior. Thus in St. John's College, M. Cheynells Reformation
(preparatory to this about a fortnight since) began with two or more of the
greatest Eminence for both: And the like instance might be made of some in most
other Colleges. It Is true indeed, some others are joined with them, of whom
this cannot be affirmed; and some of eminent Deserts have Polyphemus his
kindness showed them, to remain behind for their later Bit. But this is
remarkable, that of the whole number proscribed at this time; There is not
above one scandalously ill, to the great number of Eminently Learned. And that
one, has received a greater mark of Favor from them, then any whom they have
spared (except only the most scandalous Atheist that ever this Town had, who is
picked out by M. Cheynell to be placed in his own Bosom, and that Scar-crow
Pelham, Kate's first Suter, whom the old Cornuto of Maudlins has set next to
his beloved self in the Government of the College;) For he has the Honor to
go out hansomely in that very good Company; nor to have any thing laid to his
charge but the Not-submitting to these Visitors, and so to have his
Drunkenness not only not punished, but rewarded with the favor of suffering
only for not being Perjured. So unwilling is the Devil to discourage Vice,
that whenever he is forced to sentence any of his Servants, it shall be put
off till they have done some one good thing, that that may bring the just
Vengeance upon him. And so the New-model'd University may be drunk securely,
having examples of the most special marks of Favor conferred upon the most
enormous in the University, and but that one little discouragement from the
Punishing of the one drunken Royalist, which is excused to them by this
assurance, that 'twas not the Drunkard which was punished, but the Royalist. I
need not use any Rhetoric to aggravate this, but do wish you were able to
pass Judgment upon the same knowledge that I can, by viewing and comparing the
eminence of forty, and the little blame of threescore of this number; I shall
not say with those many constant persons that yet remain; for they are sure to
follow (when ever these men's fresh appetites call for them) to the same
shambles: But rather with the small number of their chosen (not flock of sheep,
but) Herd of Swine. And then I pray tell me, if ever there were Actions avowed
by any which more owned that old saying that Campian raked Hell for, to fasten
upon Luther, [Quanto sceleratior es, tanto vicinior Gratiae] which is now, cum
Privilegio, english't thus, [The prophanest wretch in the University is a much
less dangerous person, and so more capable of the Visitours Favor, then any
that is owner of the most eminent parts and acquisitions, both of Moral and
Christian Virtues. And he that has this one qualification of being ill enough,
shall have no danger wrought him, unless he be too Nice at last, and not
swallow Perjury as glibly, as his other Sins.

This Sir, is too happy a scheme to enlarge upon. 'Twould make your heart bleed
to have my present Prospect before your Eyes. A Multitude of precious* young
Men, which have no design against any Party or Garrison, but the strong holds
of Sin and Satan; uninteressed in any plot, but only that one against Ignorance
and Perjury, against Darkness, and the Prince of it; I say, A Multitude of
hopeful Young ones thrown out of the Nest, like the Callow Ravens by the
cruel Stepmother, for no other pretense of Reason, but that they are not as
black as she. And unless God, that feeds the young Ravens which call upon
him, will be pleased to take them into his Almes-house, the Gradation of the
punishment is sure to be this; whom the Sword turns out of their Studies, the
Famine must next seize on in the Field. The same sentence condemns them to two
punishments; as among the Romans, to Scourging and Crucifying, so among our new
Christian-Heathen, to Banishment and sterving. Some of them being Orphans,
others the children of sequestered and undone Parents: And with them, The
Ingenuity (I am sure the Learning) of the next Age, is voted to the same Ruin
and Vastation. The Lord have mercy upon their Persecuters. Give me leave to
weep out the rest in private, and not send you my Ink and my Tears, my Gall
and my Brine in the same Packet.

Your mournful Friend, whom you know by the Title of Basilius Philo-Musus.
Oxf. 1 July, 1648.
Another Letter from the same hand.
SIR,
YOur friend here presents his service to you, and will needs annex to this
Relation the notice of these few circumstances.

1. That the destruction which is now wrought, is by the hands of five Divines
only, men whose calling excludes them from all Judicature, did not their being
Presbyterians give them title to it. O the mercy of the Lord Bishops in the
High Commission, which, though they had the power of Queen Elizabeth, and King
James, and King Charles among them, the Canons to direct and authorize them,
and many of the ablest Counselors and Civilians to assist and join with
them, did never, in all their reign, so horribly declamed at for tyranny,
censure to utter ruin so many guilty irregulars, as these five Musimans or
Turkish Presbyters have proscribed sober, innocent regulars in one morning! O
what a crime it was in the Star Chamber to crop three men's ears for sedition
at one Session, (and never another such in the whole age) a thing that was
never pardoned that Court, or those that sat in it, till those Stars were
fetched down from heaven, and laid in the dust, and the chief actor my Lord of
Canterbury pursued by one of those Bloodhounds, till he was permitted to lap
in full streams of his heart-blood in exchange, and by way of retaliation for
the droppings of his ears? But now the Civil murder of 63. in a morning, the
capitis mulctatio, the cutting them off from their people, the throwing them
out into the highways and hedges, leaving them none but their Father in
heaven, of whom they may beg their daily bread. This is an essay and taste of
the more moderate, refined Government, that we have swum to, through such a red
sea, or mare mortuum, the huge clemency, and mercy of these Presbyters.

2. That of all the Laymen that were of the Committee, there is not one
barbarous enough to join in this act, or so hard-hearted as to be present at
it. You remember how the Bishops were not permitted to remain in the House at
my Lord of Straffords sentence, they must not be within the scent of blood,
though 'twere only to give a stop to the effusion of it: But now none but
Divines (but remember again Divines of what denomination, Presbyterians I
warrant you) are thought fit to be, the Butchers of this Jury: No, the parties,
accusers, witnesses, and, after all that, the Judges on this Bench, to
pronounce this bloody sentence; For his third note, is,

3. That the five men are M. Reynolds, Dr. Wilkinson, M. Rogers, M. Cheynell,
and M. Wilkinson, (you know the characters of each) men voted into, and now
well-nigh possessed of three of the greatest Colleges, and five of the fairest
preferments in the town, only this slaughter was necessary to be wrought, to
smooth the passage, and facilitate the admission of these Mufti's into their
Seraglio's. And wanting Janissaries to serve, and to be pandars to their lust
and rage, they are turned the assassinats themselves, and must first lay waste
the Province, before they can dare think of ruling in it; O for an Eliah now to
these Ahabs, with his [Hast thou killed, and also taken possession?] But when
they are left to their desart-governments, Conscience I doubt not will be a
thousand Prophets to them, and present each of them daily, as that Tyrants
fancy did him with the gaping dismal head of Symmachus, etc. with the
spectacle of a young gasping Scholar sprawling at his feet, and howling in his
ears this not over-cheerfull Anthem, Thus says the Lord, in the place where
dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.

4. That every of these bloody men is so stricken already with the guilt and
shame of their facts, that each of them single disclaimes (to all that come to
expostulate it) the having any thing to do in it, when yet the number of five
is the least that can make a Committee, and so nothing can be done, if any one
dissents; and then All of them together lay it upon the Committee at London,
tying the upper link of this fatal chain to Jupiter Rouse's Chair, which
makes your friend take boldness to ask you these two questions:

First, Whether the Committee at London are all so tame Cheynell or
Wilkinson-trodden creatures as to commit all this fury upon their bare instance
and directions, and then to give them leave to cast all the odium of it upon
them: If a couple of tall raving Presbyters can thus inspire and possess them
all, as perfectly as they did their fellow-may-pole- Pembroke here, then I must
more pity them, then I have done the proscribed Scholars; these being
plundered of their Lively-hoods only, but those of their Souls; the Scholars
only fitted for Suttons hospital, but they for Bethlem.

His second Question is, if that Committee having only power from the Houses to
regulate the University at first, and since to provide effectual remedies,
etc. have so far exceeded their Commission, as to vote the Answers of these
men; High contempts of Authority of Parliament, when no one did any more, then
to profess it against his Oaths and Conscience to submit to this visitation;
and most only professed themselves to want satisfaction, and therefore desired
farther time to consider, before they were forced to give Answer. His question,
I say, is, Whether there be never an House of Lords and Commons to call this
Committee in question, for exceeding their Commission, and to repeal these
enormous acts of Arbitrary power, and return the Scholars to their Books
again, before the rest of the four hundred (sevenscore more already, they say,
picked out of their next Breakefast) be sent a grazing after them. If you have
access to any Member of either House, I hope you will let this ring in their
ears, or else you have put off your just kindness to

July the 1. 1648. Basilius Philomusus.

FINIS.

