THE SAINTS POSTURE IN DARK TIMES.

Showing what peaceable spirits they should have under dark and unexpected
dispensations.

SET FORTH In a SERMON Preached in the Cathedral in Gloucester, on the 17th.
of March. 1649.

Being the Lords day, and the time of the public Assize.

By A. PALMER. M.A.

Isa. 30.18. Blessed are all they that wait for him.

LONDON: Printed for Tho: Underhill at the Blew Anchor in Paul's Churchyard, near
the little North-doore. 1650.

Viro multis nominibus colende JOHANNI WILD, Capitali Scacarii Baroni Judici
sane aequissimo Concionem hanc De Deo expectando Gratitudinis and officii
impense Debiti pignus, humiliter, and devote. D. D. D.

A. Palmer.

TO MY CHRISTIAN FRIENDS AND READERS, SPECIALLY of the County of Gloucester.
SOme of you, the ear-witnesses of what is here (with a little enlargement)
presented to your view, were pleased in a serious judgment to protest my
obligation to publish these notes, as they might be useful toward the
quieting and composing the spirits of the godly in the complaining times we
live in; upon this account you have them; Now, on the contrary, some may fall a
judging me for this attempt; but I shall not insist upon the preventing their
objections; If God have the least glory, and any soul helped forward in his
blessed ways, by what he has here taught me, twill, with men, abundantly bear
down what ever prejudice or misprision can raise.

Only, if any will say, What make I among the Prophets? Let him answer
himself, that grace is free and boundless, and then I shall only beg this
prayer from him, that, To whom much it forgiven, he may love much: The Lord
keep all his people waiting for him, and guide them in strait paths, which is
the main import of this weak discourse, and the prayer of

Yours in the Lord Jesus: A.P.
Bourton on the water, 26. Marc: 1650.
THE SAINTS POSTURE IN DARK TIMES.
ISAIAH Chap. 26. ver: 8. Yea in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we
waited for thee, etc.


THis Evangelicall Prophet having in the former Chapter declared the great, and
blessed deliverances both spiritual, and temporal of Jesus Christ to his
people, the glorious propagation of the Gospel, ver: 6. of that chapter, His
removing the face of the covering, and the vail from off all people. v: 7. The
taking away the rebuke of his people from off the face of the earth: v: 8. His
band resling upon the mountain of his people, and his enemies trodden down under
him: v: 10. At this chap: he has composed a song for the Saints and people of
God, magnifying the strength, protection, and presence of the Lord Jesus
Christ, ascribing all the glory unto him; set forth indeed in a most sweet and
admirable holy eloquence as any Scripture we meet with.

In this letter these deliverances, for which this song and exaltation of the
Lord is calculated, may refer either to that burden of the Moabites, described
so full of woes, Chap: 15. and 16. or to that famous deliverance by the hand of
Cyrus, and so this song may be conceived to be one of those which the
Babylonians so sharply taunted them with in the captivity, Sing us one of your
songs of Zion, Psalm. 137. this the chief of those Songs. But as all that was
typical of Jesus Christ, and the Gospel Times; so this is a song for any
people saved by the Lord, when the times of Christ's refreshings are near, and
so it may be more then conjectured that the consummation of that glorious rest
of the Saints, set forth, Rev: 22.14. Blessed are they that have right to the
tree of life, and may enter in through the gates to the City, may refer to the
two first verses of this chapter and Song.

1. Here then briefly you have the Church set forth in a very glorious
metaphor, As a strong City, God appointing salvation f^ bulwarks, ver: 1. 2.
The Citizens, the Saints entering into it, described by a most excellent
character. The righteous nation keeping truth. ver: 2. 3. Their most choice and
glorious privilege at the 3d: verse, Kept in perfect peace. 4. Their lifting
up of the name of the Lord as their everlasting strength. v: 4. the rock of
ages as the original. 5. The strange revolutions and turnings of things upside
down, v: 5, 6. He brings down them that dwell on high; and the lofty City,
and the poor, the feet of the poor shall tread i^ down.
At the 7th. their adoring the righteousness of God in all his ways and
dispensations, we have several readings of that Scripture, The way of the just
is uprightness: Via justo rectitudines, as the most proper and genuine, that
is, The way of God to the just is uprightness, and thou weighest the path of
the just, thou make it to appear to be an exact regular way of
righteousness; And under all the varieties of his righteous dispensations,
they waited upon him in them: Yea in the way of thy judgments have we waited
for thee, etc.

In which words you have them minding themselves of that blessed posture, and
frame of spirit the Lord put them into, under all his various dealings; We
waited for thee; which with the context may be thus analyzed.

Thine, and our enemies charge thy ways to be anxious, implicate, and
irregular, and thence break forth and murmr, yea blaspheme. But to us whose
minds were stayed on thee, Complanas viam, thou clearest up all thy ways, as
beautiful and regular; and we have waited upon thee, for thee, in them.

Whence this plain, and I hope seasonable observation:

That when God walks in strange and various dispensarions toward his people,
and toward his enemies, his people are to wait upon him, to wait for him.

In the handling of which, I shall first open the duty, showing the excellency
of this frame of spirit; lay down the grounds and reasons of the point; and so
bring it down to the dispensations we live under; Now to make up this frame of
spirit, you have these choice ingredients.

1. It is a posture of relyance and rolling upon God, making him alone our
rock, our salvation, our defense, our refuge; as you have David sweetly giving
forth this part of it, Psalm. 62. A renouncing of all other refuges whatsoever,
no calling to Egypt, or Assyria for aid and succor; but strengthening
themselves in the rock of ages, and thence reasoning themselves into an assured
safety; therefore we shall not be greatly moved, v: 2. of that Psalm: and we
shall not be moved: v. 6. not moved at all, as David's faith there gets ground
upon God.

This is the venture, and resolved recumbency upon the All sufficiency of
Jehovah, given forth in so many clear and steadfast promises, wherein he stands
recorded the unchangeable rock of his people, a refuge from the storm, a
shadow from the heat when the blast of the terrible ones is against the wall,
v: 4. of the former Chapter; and as excellently given forth in that bottom
promise, The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath the everlasting arms.
Deuteronomy. 33.27. Now while the great God is fulfilling those upon the face of the
earth, in the beginnings of revenges upon his enemies, Deuteronomy. 32.42. his right
hand teaching him terrible things, and appearing the God of his people, under
all his various dispensations his people shall trust in him at all times: Psalm.
64.8. they shall still gather in their spirits, and answer all their fears,
with this, we will wait upon him, who is our Rock, mighty and able to save.
This is the first ingredient in this frame of spirit, it is to have our minds
stayed upon God.

2. It Is a posture of expectation; Psalm. 62.5. My soul wait thou upon God, for
my expectation is from him. A watching for God. Psalm. 130.6. A standing still
to see the salvation of the Lord. Not running before the Lord, not prescribing
unto him, or limiting him unto our ways or seasons; laying aside our own
counsels, and inventions, and waiting for the counsel of the most wise God,
having our eyes fixed, and our expectation clear and pure upon him. Though he
tarry yet to wait for him: Hab. 2.3. This the second ingredient to make up this
frame of spirit, to have our expectation clear upon God.

3. It Is a posture of submitting unto the Lord; putting our months in the dust,
yielding unto him, even when he writes bitter things against us; when he puts a
cup of trembling into our hands, humbling our selves, under his mighty hand.
Deuteronomy. 33.3. Yea he loved the people. And all his Saints are in thy hand, and
they sat down at thy feet. At the feet of God, submitting to the teachings of
God, and the outward dispensations of God. Jerome reads, we waited, Sustinuimus
te, we have sustained God, we have yielded unto thee, we have nothing to plead
against thee, out lives, our all are in thy hand. And therefore glorify thy
greatness upon us as is good in thine own eyes. This the third thing, a
submission unto God in his various dispensation.

4. Not only a submission but higher, it is a posture of contentation; thou will
keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, ver: 3. A composed
contentedness with all the ways of God, that (...), that tranquillity and
clearness of spirit which gives a man the possession of his own soul; A spirit
freed from reasonings, frettings, complainings and contendings with God, but
fetched down, and subdued by the mighty working of God, to be contented with all
his various dispensations and changes, how cross soever to our contrivements.
This the 4th. thing, A contentedness under Gods dispensations.

5. Yea farther. Fifthly, It Is a posture of admiration; so, Isa. 25.1. Thou art
my God, I will exalt thee; I will praise thee, for thou have done wonderful
things; All the ways of God are full of wonders, and he delights to have them
sought out of all that fear him, to be admired in them. So Psalm. 65. Praise
waits for thee in Zion: his people wait to praise, and admire him in all his
dealings toward them. I might instance in more particulars, but these take in
the main of the duty; Every grace of the spirit having its peculiar acting to
make up this harmony of a waiting posture; Take them then together.

Thus to rely, to expect, to submit to, to be contented, to admire, and
magnify the wise and holy God, in all his dark and various dispensations, is a
covenant frame of spirit whereby God entitles himself to any soul, to any
people; it is, in a word, to have the Lord for our God.

Now having opened the duty it self; the next thing is to clear the point, and
the grounds of it; That his people are thus to wait upon him, to exercise these
graces, when God is in a way of various and secret dispensations toward them.

I might show you the people of God frequent in this blessed posture, when God
was making bare his arm unto them; A Scripture or two to clear it. See 2 Chronicles.
20.12. O our God, will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this
great company that comes against us: neither know we what to do, what then?
why, our eyes are upon thee, we wait upon thee.

Thus when God walked in such hidden paths to his people, and brought them into
such sad depths, Lament. 3.26. we know not what to do; the Prophet at last, in
the name of the Church, resolves all their lamentations, complaints, and
sinkings into this posture of spirit; It is good that a man should both hope,
and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. In how many Psalms have you
David in behalf of himself and the Church, working his heart into this posture:
Psalm. 62.1. Truly my soul waits upon God, or notwithstanding, as the
original; abruptly breaking forth from the reasonings of his own spirit, and
the apprehensions of the depths he was in, Be it so, notwithstanding my soul
waits upon God; it shall trust, and hope, and submit, and be contented with
all his ways.

First, the ways: of God are secret ways, Reas. 1.
therefore his people are to wait upon him in them. A way full of depths. See
sa. 40.12. Who has measured the waters? or weighed the mountains in a balance?
So who has taught him in the path of his judgments? that is, who is of his
counsel, who can search them out? He walks in the waters, and his paths are in
the Sea, and his footsteps are not known: Psalm. 77. Thy judgments are a great
depth. Psalm. 36.6. As in the Psalms, so you have many full and excellent
Scriptures speak to this in the book of Job. Touching the Almighty, who can
find him out? Why do thoustrive against him? for he gives no account of his
matters. Job 33.13. And this puts Paul himself to his, (...), Romans 11.33.
sometimes he walks as tous, antipodes to his promises (although no providence
but is reconcilable to a promise) it is hard to reconcile providence and
promises, when he walks in such depths of wisdom and judgment that his people
cannot discern him, he leaves no footsteps behind him; And in such ways he
delights to walk in, that his people may wait for him in them; This the first;
Gods way in his dispensations, is a secret way, therefore to wait upon him in
them.

2. The way of God, though it be a secret way full of involutions, as to us;
yet it is an exact regular way of righteousness, mercy, and truth. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
His works are perfect, and all his ways are judgment. When Jeremy would plead
with God as to his judgment, first he lays down this as most unquestionable,
that God was righteous in them all: Jer: 12.1. His walkings may seem to us as
cross paths thwarting one with another; yet take them together, and they are
all rectitudines, all conspiring to a most regular, wise and holy end; Though
he walks in a cloud as to us, yet he shines in the light of his own
righteousness; let men find out to themselves what crooked paths they please,
as you may see Isa. 49.13. Yet God puts on righteousness as a breast plate,
and can use a crooked tool to bring about a regular work; God withdrawing his
light, he is not bound to give; and so he leaves the creature to his own ways,
and he orders a glorious end out of them: man through reasonings, darkness,
unbelief of his heart sees it not, yet still his ways are deliberately
ordered, therefore his people to wait upon him in them; that's the second ground.

3. When God gives great mercies, when his hand is open and ready to pour them
forth, he puts his people in a waiting posture for such mercies. See Isa.
30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you, and
therefore will he be exalted that he may have mercy upon you: for the Lord is a
God of judgment. Blessed are all they that wait for him. So you have the
Church moving him to be gracious upon this account: Isa. 33.2. O Lord, be
gracious unto us, we have waited for thee: yea the most glorious promise that
our eyes are upon, has in its fulfilling respect unto thy posture: Isa. 49.23.
And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers:
they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the
dust of thy feet, and thou shall know that I am the Lord: for they shall not be
ashamed that wait for me. It may be more then guest, what design God has
toward his people, by the posture they are in. He raises up the spirits of
his people to an expectation of the mercy he gives; This might be abundantly
discovered by the experiences of Gods people, had I time to show it.

4. God reveals great secrets to those who wait upon him, and for him; this
another special ground of the point. There is nothing but I will make known to
my servants the Prophets.

As the eye of the handmaid, etc. Psalm. 123. The servant that waits closely and
diligently on his master, knows much of his masters mind and secrets; So the
soul that waits closely upon God, knows much of the mind of God. Many a
precious secret has a soul, that truly waits for him.

Abrabam was an humble man, that had much converse with God, and he revealed
that great secret of destroying Sodom and Gomorrah unto him.

1. He reveals directing secrets unto his people, in the 2 Chronicles. 18. good
Micaiah, who waited humbly, and closely upon God, had a secret revealed unto
him, that Ahab, if he went up to Ramoth Gilead, he should fall, and perish in
it. When there were four hundred of the most eminent formal prophets of the
land advised him to go up, and God would deliver it into the Kings hand, ver:
10. So in that solemn waiting upon God, Chap. 20. of that book, when they were
enquiring a right way of God, Jahaziel hid a secret that the people should go
up and prosper: for God was with them. When his people are in great straits,
and brought into low depths, then they wait for him, and are guided by his
counsel; As their eyes upon him, so his eye upon them also to guide them in
all their ways.

2. He reveals strengthening, refreshing secrets to those that wait for him;
Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, and he shall strengthen thine heart. So another
choice Scripture to this, Isa. 40. last. But they that wait on the Lord shall
renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run
and not be weary, and they shall walk and not be faint. To omit many curious
glosses of some of the Fathers upon this Scripture, this I take to be the
import of it; the Eagles do loose their feathers, and renew them, and so are
said repuerascere, to wax young again; so the people of God under many
faintings and finkings of spirit, when God walks in a cloud toward them, they
renew their strength by waiting upon God, when weary, and fainting by inward
distresses of spirit, and the inundations and oppressions of enemies. Then the
Lord comes in with a refreshing secret, to bear up their spirits in waiting
upon him. Thus David, Psalm. 130.1. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee O
Lord. But what relieved him in these depths, he would wait upon his God, I wait
for the Lord, my soul does wait, my soul waits for the Lord: ver. 5, 6. as he
is there working and composing his spirit to that quieted posture. In a word,
that infinite good God that reveals the greatest secret that ever was in heaven
to his friends, the secret of the Covenant of his grace. Psalm. 25.14. and Joh.
15.15. I have called you friends, for all that I have heard of my Father I have
made known unto you. He, I say, that reveals that secret to a soul, will not
deny any directing, strengthening, refreshing secret that is fit for that soul
to receive.

This is the 4th ground, God reveals great secrets to those that wait for him.

5. It is of blessed example to all that fear God, it puts an excellency and
beauty upon godliness. This use David makes of it. Psalm. 52.9. I will wait on
thy name, for it is good before thy Saints. It is good and comely before the
Saints of God, to wait upon, to trust, to expect, to submit, to be contented
with Gods ways; that's the 5th. thing, the people of God encourage one another
in keeping close unto God, by waiting on him.

6. The Lords stay is not long to those who wait for him. See ver. 20 of the
Chap: of my text: Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee: hide thy self but for a little moment, etc. So Isa 54.7, 8.
for a small moment, etc. And in a little wrath, etc. The ready way to keep God
off, is to murmr against his absence; but quietly to wait for him, is to
bring him down with great mercies, and everlasting kindnesses, as that
Scripture. This the last ground I shall propose to back the Argument I am upon,
his stay in no condition or strait to his people is long, therefore to wait for
him.

Thus have I endeavored to lay before you the nature, extent, and excellency
of this frame of spirit of waiting upon God, with the grounds and reasons of
the duty. Now I shall endeavor to meet with such evils that oppose this frame
of spirit, and to draw forth such seasonable lessons, as may help in the
practice of that duty.

1. Appli: 1.
If such a precious duty be incumbent upon all the people of God thus to wait
upon him under his various dispensations; it then meets with four great and
abounding evils too rife among us. 1. Neglecting the dispensations of God. 2.
Misapplying them. 3. Murmuring against them. 4. Our prescribings to God.

1. Neglecting, regardlesly slighting the strange, and various judgments and
dealings of God with us. These you have described at the 10.11. and 12. verses
of the chap. of my text, when the judgments of God are in the earth, they will
not learn righteousness, neither the righteousness of God in the world, nor
righteousness for themselves.

That will not behold the Majesty of the Lord, breaking forth the glory of his
judgments in the world: That when his hand is lified up, they will not see;
they will not, they will not, denoting even an utter obstinacy, and
obdurateness of spirit, hardening their faces against the mighty God. I might
give many Scriptures to discover the wretched condition of such, need I more
then what is said of them v: 14. They are dead, they shall not live; Though yet
living, yet but as dead men in Gods account; they are deceased, they shall not
rise; rise no more, but visited, destroyed, and all their memory perish.

Are there not multitudes, multitudes to be found (much to be feared) even
given up to such a deep sleep, such a senseless, stupid obduration of heart,
while God is pouring forth his vials upon them.

What heart in any measure affected with the honor of the great God, can
choose but be astonished, and tremble to hear and observe their Atheistical
darings of God, braving it out against him, and too many, alas, of the
gallantry of our Nation, as they style themselves, men, as to a present
discerning, resolved upon the pleasures of sin for a season, and will venture
for eternity: that give not themselves the leisure to consider where they are,
to reflect upon themselves, but pass from one dark delight to another, to
stifle natural conscience, and to drown themselves in their lusts, that the
fear of an avenging God may not seize upon them. Ah, oh fearlesse souls! seek
ye out of the book of the Lord, and read, Isa. 34.16. what vials of wrath are
there stored up, and are now began to be powered forth; now the indignation of
the Lord is upon all nations, now he is come forth of his place, to Punish the
inhabitants of the earth: ver: the last of the Chap. of my text. When no place
for your excess of riot, what will you do in the day of Gods visitation? what
will you plead to the dreadful God? oh, fall down at his feet, and visit him,
while he is visiting you, least he tear you pieces, and there be none to
deliver; These are yet so far from having any thing to do with the duty of the
text, that it is but a derision with them; this the first thing utterly repugnant
to the lesson in hand.

2. It meets with our misapplying the judgments and dispensations of God, when
the enemies of God, and his people shall seem to lean upon the Lord, Is not the
Lord amongst us? Micha 3.11. Yea many that fear God have sure been too busy
here, too busy with the sanctuary of God, with the secrets of his counsel,
the depths of his walkings toward us; If we would serve providence
intentionally and regularly, it must be in Gods way, suitable to his revealed
will; but when God walks in the waters, there we cannot follow him: we can
only stand still, and admire him, and wait upon him. Though the depths of
providence are to be wisely considered of, God, I say, to be admired in them,
yet not to be too busy in unwarrantable pryings into, and determinings of his
counsel, and so misapplying his glorious dispensations.

Thus, we should attend upon the Lord with less distraction, we should be more
steady in our ways, then we are, yea we should more comfortably wait upon our
God, then we do. This the second.

3. It meets with our murmurings against the strange and various dispensations
of God, our repinings, reasonings, aestuations of spirit, against his secret
ways, some of a higher nature to be joined with the former rank of men,
growing up to an Atheistical accusing the very righteousness of God, in his
permissive ordering providence in the great revolutions that we have been
under. But I leave such to what I have said before. I shall speak to these
lesser mixtures of these murmurings, even with those that fear God; Murmuring
has like a secret canker, even eat out of the spirits of many this submissive
contented waiting upon God; how rife and abounding these are, our own mouths
accuse us one to another. This is a very great distemper of spirit amongst us;
oh what intemperate (to say no more) repinings, reasonings, impatient frettings
against the present dispensations of God toward us; and truly these do not
terminate upon men, but break through men, and ere you are aware, fall foul
upon God himself. See Exodus: 16.8.

Give me leave, I beseech you, a little to argue with you; What if there are
strange turnings of things upside down, the Lord staining the pride of all the
glory of the Nation, whose glorious beauty is as a fading flower? Isa. 28.1.
What if the ways of God be full of straits in the hands of men, cannot be
traced by you? yea more, what if you say you cannot reconcile the exact
righteousness of God, to the crooked paths of men? will you thence fret, and
murmr, and charge God foolishly? Let me be bold to tell you, you do no
better, by the impatient complaints you are still pouring forth; let me ask
you; Is not every dispensation regular as to God, and wisely ordered by his
counsel? why then do you not submit with contentation of spirit unto the Lord,
laying your mouths in the dust, justifying him with silence, but thus countend
with God? for the Judge of all the world, cannot but do justly.

Yet further, I shall be more close with you; what is become of your tears and
prayers that you mingled, and breathed up to heaven in the days of your
hardship? what is become of the frequent renewings your strength in the Lord? Yea
what is become of the magnified experiences of the presence of a gracious God
with you? crying, let this God be our God even unto death; must all these be
cancelled and remembered no more; be all lost and misspent, because the Lord
walks not in such ways that you would prescribe him, answers not your
expectations?

Yea what lookings back unto Egypt, and wishing our selves there again,
because we are kept so long in the wilderness, and meet with so many
diversions we expected not?

Lastly, what is become of your ancient zeal for the Lord Christ, his Gospel,
ordinances, and people? which was so fresh and lively, when you first vowed and
professed your selves to be the Lords people? what faintings and flaggings to
be found with such, whose zeal for the Lord of hosts was used to warm the
hearts and affections of others; even to a giving up of the work of the Lord?
Is this to wait upon our God? to have our expectations lively and pure upon
him? truly, it is no more, nor less, then to live upon God no longer; not to
wait upon him any longer, because we cannot discern nor find out the depths of
his ways. Were the inside of our murmurings opened, they would be discovered
to have all these mixtures in them; oh what have we lost by these repinings?
how are they gone up like a cloud, and eclipse the light and beauty of the
ways of God from us? yea how are they like to keep us in the wilderness, we
being now at the waters of Marah, and that none of us, who came out of Egypt,
should ever see the Canaan we expect? We are now indeed just in the condition
as the people of God, set forth in Psalm. 106. all those wilderness
provocations to be charged on us; soon forgetting the works of God, and not
waiting for his counsel. v. 13, 14. Provoking him with our inventions: v. 29.
Going ill with Moses for our sakes, v. 32. Thus we have followed our own
counsels and inventions, and have not waited for the counsel of the Lord. And
this leads me to the 4th. evil, which is to be reprooved; our prescribings to
God; the next thing.

How busy has every one been, and now is, to prescribe to God in his dealings
toward us, even to mend every dispensation of God; it had been better thus, or
twere better thus; Is not this to limit the holy one of Israel, to prescribe to
him? Oh, how full of these inventions are we? As if we were to sit in counsel
with the great God, or as if God were to give an account of his ways to us;
plainly, every one, almost, has a Church and State in this head; and if his
way take not, all is lost. Thus what do we, but even call into question the
government and sovereignty of God in the world, we would be instructors of God,
or indeed God's to our selves. And now let me demand of you, as in the presence
of God, the discerner of all our hearts, whether all these evils may not in a
great measure be charged upon us this day? and are not as a cloud witnesses
against us? and then tell me, is not this the way to kindle the wrath of the
Lord against his people, and to provoke him to abhor his own inheritance, v.
40. of Psalm. 106. Oh, in a word, Is this to have our trust, our expectation,
our submission, our contentation, our admiration toward our most wise and
gracious God? Is this all the fruit of his owning us his inheritance, and our
owning and attesting him, in the face of all the world, to be our God for ever?
Surely the Lord looked for other things at our hands.

Thus I have endeavored to set before you the evils that eat out the heart and
life of this grace, and duty of waiting upon God, and shall leave you to the
searching and proving your own hearts and ways, and to bring them to the great
refiner Jesus Christ, that they may be purged away; And indeed were all of us
as busy about the depths of our own hearts, as we are about depths that are
beyond, and above us, we should see more of the glory of God in all his
dispensations then we do, the Lord would more delight in us, to reveal himself
unto us.

That which remains then will be an Exhortation, Exhort:
backed with some few directions, that may help us in the exercise and framing
our spirits to the gracious posture of waiting upon him. Let us, as has been
showed, be convinced of all the evils that oppose it, that they bring a great
deformity upon a Christian, and consider what a luster and beauty this grace
adorns our profession with; how suitable to the soveraginty of the Lord, and to
the experiences we have had of him; and so laying our selves humbly and
composedly at his footstool, quietly waiting that he may be gracious unto us, I
shall humbly offer some brief directions, and so leave it to the Lord to work
it upon your spirits.

1. What ever the ways of men appear to you to be, look beyond them, stay not
in them; hence issues much of our disquietnesse, that we look not beyond
Instruments; but lifting up our eyes upon him, let us fall a justifying the
righteous God, what ever the paths of men are; True and righteous are thy
judgments, is the hallelujah of heaven, when the vials are pouring forth, and
so it should be the return of the Saints on earth; let men do what they will,
they do nothing but in Gods hand, though their ends do run cross unto his;
this the first.

2. Let us not always go about to bring down God to us, I mean the heights and
depths of God to our reasonings; this is it that loses us before we are
aware, and makes us at such loss with God; it is safer to say with David, Such
knowledge is too wonderful for me, I cannot attain it: Beware of being too
busy with the sanctuary of God, it is the way to make him walk at a greater
distance from us.

3. Let us be still a casting either way as to events, and be contented that
God may glorify himself upon us, as is his own pleasure; So David, 2 Samuel
15.26. If thus, or thus, here am I; as that Scripture is excellently opened by
Mr. Vines.
one whose praise is in the Gospel; if he make us an ark of safety, honor,
glory, and praise waits for him; but if he shall come with a full wind, and
scatter the wheat and the chafe together over the face of the earth; there we
are; we shall be ready to justify God in all he shall bring upon us.

4. To be humble and diligent in enquiring a right way of God, now things are
difficult before us, and full of straits; we had need closely to wait upon him,
for directing and strengthening secrets, that we may keep his way; The truth is,
the distance that the godly keep at, and the several ways we pursue, do
sufficiently witness against us, that we have not been a waiting people, else we
should sure have had such communications of the counsel of the Lord, that
should have kept us, at least, in love and peace; there would be no such waters
of Marah troubling, and over flowing our spirits; the divisions of Reuben would
not be so great; oh that the Lord by me would set something home upon your
spirits, that might quicken you to this diligent enquiring a right way of God;
that we go not into crooked paths, not to go aside from the revealed rule; but
waiting upon God, we may still keep his way. Psalm. 37.34.

5. To consider the absolute sovereignty and independencie of God; this will
keep down our spirits from rising up against him; you have David (on whose
spirit the beauty of this grace shines forth almost in every Psalm) much in
this contemplation, when he was at a loss; God has spoken once, twice have I
heard it, that all power belongs unto God. Psalm. 62.11. Be still, and know that
I am God; I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it: He had
heard and considered so, that all power belonged unto God, therefore, still,
dumb, not opening his mouth; not a word to say, against Gods dispensations: so
mightily was he overawed with the sovereignty of the Lord.

6. To be much in contemplation of the wisdom of God, there is the light and
glory of his wisdom, even in a chaos and confusion of things as we apprehend
them, could we discern the several motions and concamerations, their several
orderings, and their end in which they center; see 1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no more so
exceeding proudly, let not arrogancy come out of your mouth: for the Lord is a
God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. How hasty and inconsiderate
soever men may be in their transactions, yet by him those very actions are
wisely weighed.

7. To concentre, and gather in all our wandering discussions into this period,
that the Almighty sovereignty and wisdom of the Lord are both engaged to work
in a way of mercy, goodness and love for his people, to all that thus wait upon
him; may we reason thus? what? a people in covenant with God, and have hard
thoughts of him, and be reasoning against his methods of providence? weigh that
Scripture, Ezekiel. 14. v: last: You shall know that I have not done without
cause, all that I have done in it. Oh could we thus wait, as a people in
covenant, we should at last discover that God has not done without cause, all
that is done upon us; that he had weighty reasons for all his various and
unexpected dispensations toward us; all in order to the fulfilling of
excellent promises upon us.

And now, to close all in a word or two; what a luster and excellency would
this grace, the exercise of it, derive upon all that fear God; And at what a
deplorable distance does the want of it set us at with our God, that we know
not what to do: we fear a snare where ever we tread. Oh there is nothing in the
world but this will bring down the Lord to delight and dwell with us, to make
us his inheritance, to go before us in the wilderness we are in, till we shall
be at his feet in this posture, and willing to follow him where ever he shall
lead us.

The spirits of those in the Nation who have owned the Lord for their God, do
cast different aspects, some for great and glorious things, ready for a new
Jerusalem, even full of expectation to sing the song of the chapter of the
text, We have a strong City, and God is appointing salvation for bulwarks:
others, (and it is sad to mention you in such distinct characters) that we are
like to pass through another fire to it, if ever at all we have it.

I dare not calculate the secret dispensations we lie under, but, as to the
symptoms that are at present upon us, surely the holy God will some way or
other purge out, in some measure, the self seekings, heart burnings,
animosities, murmurings, reasoning he will bring us into strait paths, and
raise up our spirits quietly to wait for the mercies he will give forth, as
has been showed. What ever the Lord has to do upon us (now he is come out of
his place, surely to bring about a work, a strange work: Isa. 28.21.) I say,
what ever it be, twill be our wisdom to have our loal girt, and our lamps
burning. Which is the waiting posture held forth by our blessed Lord in the
Gospel, strengthened in the Lord, and shining in the beauty of holiness; that we
may enter. Arighteous nation keeping truth, with our minds stayed upon him,
making him our everlasting strength, having quietly and contentedly waited for
him; and then we shall sing, Lo this is our God, we (...) waited for him, and
he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will rejoice, and
be glad in his salvation. Isa. 25.9.

FINIS.

