CONCERNING MONEYS DEPOSITED In the Chamber of London BY Sir Richard Gurney,
Knight. and Bar. LATE Lord Mayor OF THE City of London, And since his Death, due to
Sir JOHN PETTUS of the County of Suffolk, Knight.

LONDON, Printed for the Author in the Year 1680.

The Proceedings concerning the 500 l. deposited in the Chamber of London, by
Sir Richard Gurney, Anno 1641.
SIr Richard Gurney then Lord Mayor, 13 December. 1641.
deposited 500 l. in the Chamber of London, which (according to the words in
the receipt for it) by order of the Court of Aldermen, is to remain in the
Chamber of London, until Security be given for the repayment thereof to the
liking of the Court of Aldermen, together with such costs and damages for the
same after the Rate of 8 l. per Cent. for a year, from the time that the same
is advanced, until it shall be repaid, and this is subscribed by Bateman then
Chamberlin of the City.

The then House of Commons being displeased at some of Sir Richard Gurneys
proceedings, 15 July 1642.
(manifesting his Loyalty to the King, and Fidelity in supporting the Rights of
the City) carried up an Impeachment against him to the Lords house, for which
he was this same day sent to the Tower of London, and upon several hearings at
the Lords Bar, both before his Commitment, and during his Trial, cost him above
1000 l.

He was sentenced by the Lords, 12 August. 1642.
(amongst other severities) to continue a Prisoner in the Tower during their
Lordships pleasure.

He was Plundered of all his Plate, 20 August. 1642.
, Goods, etc. to the value of 4000 l. besides the loss of Offices then in his
gift, disposed of to Pennington, of as great a value.

He borrowed 500 l. of Mr. William Chamberlain and Mr. Pettit upon the
Security and Assignment to them of the said 500 l. deposited in the Chamber of
London. 10 Septem. 1642.


He being in the Tower, 3 December. 1642.
was Assest 1000 l. for his Twenty fifth part, which he not paying, his Estate
was Sequestered by order of Haberdashers-Hall in Feb. following, and so
continued till November 1647.

Besides his Imprisonment, 19 April 1644.
and the 1000 l. assessed by Haberdashers-Hall, the Committee of
Goldsmiths-Hall, issued out Warrants to several Counties to restrain his Rents,
upon pretense of 5000 l. also assest on him by the House of Commons.

Sir Richard Gurney Petitioning to the Commons, they sent Mr. Ash to him, to
know whether he would pay the 5000 l. and he should be freed of Imprisonment
and Sequestration.

Sir Richard paid the 1000 l. to Haberdashers-Hall, 15 April 1645.
and had orders for discharging his Sequestration.

Mr. Ash reports to the Commons, 2 March 1645.
that Sir Richard Gurney obstinately refused to pay the said 5000 l. whereupon

The Commons ordered the levying it upon his Estate. 4 March 1645.


The power of Haberdashers-Hall, and Goldsmiths-Hall, as to freeing his Estate
of Sequestration, held in debate till April 1647. before he could get free of
Sequestration. Apr. 1647.


Sir Richard Gurney died a Prisoner of the Tower of London. 3 October 1647.


His Executors Thomas Lord Richardson, Nov. 1647. 1647. 1648. 1649.
and Sir John Pettus Knight, in right of their Wives (Coheirs to Sir Richard
Gurney) proved his Will, and by virtue thereof, and Deeds of Settlement made in
June 1641, his Trustees and Executors were so Industrious that before the end
of the year 1649, they sold and disposed of all his real Estate, and with the
money paid great debts which Sir Richard owed before, and had contracted during
his more than five years Imprisonment, and thereby they thought to have enjoyed
the Personal Estate in quiet, so as they did not think it safe or prudent to
stir in this 500 l. or any other of his personal Estate, as conceiving the
personal Securities, were not so visible as the real Estate.

The Executors divided the Personal Estate under Hand and Seal, 24 December. 1650.
whereby this 500 l. and the Interest fell to Sir John Pettus his share, and
upon the Account thereof, did pay several considerable debts, the other
assigned debts proving of little benefit to him. But the Executors having as
yet no discharge of the said 5000 l. although there was a Cessation, did not
think fit to stir in this, and according to their fears, so it happened; For

The Commons did order the Commissioners of Goldsmiths-Hall, 3 November. 1652.
forthwith to levy the same for the use of the Admiralty.

Thereupon the Commissioners ordered the Executors to pay it within seven days,
4 November. 1652.
or they would proceed to levy it, and notwithstanding all their applications,
25 January 1652.
Letters were sent from those Commissioners into every County where Sir Richard
had any real or personal Estate, to Sequester it (sold or unsold) accordingly
every particular purchasor of his real Estate in and about London, were
summoned, viz. Sir John Frederick, etc. to the value of 10000 l. and they did
appear, but the Executors seeing (after a long defense for themselves) that the
Committee was resolved to levy it upon the Purchasors, and the Executors being
sensible that the Purchasors had purchased the Lands without any Covenant from
the Executors against any Act of Sir Richards, the Executors were so just, that
they in discharge of the Purchasors, freely offered that they would pay the
5000 l. rather than the Purchasors should suffer, and not only so, but paid
their charges, and gave them a good Dinner besides, of which generous dealing
the Commissioners were so sensible, that they allowed to the Executors some
further time of Appeal to the House of Commons, but the time being elapsed, and
the Commissioners pressing for the money, one of the Executors, viz. the Lord
Richardson, gave Bond for the payment of 2500 l. but Sir John Pettus the other
Executor, proffering his Interest for the satisfaction of the other 2500 l. the
Commissioners refused, whereupon he suffered himself to be Sequestered about two
years before he could get his discharge: whilst the Executors were thus
transacting about his real and personal Estate, several of the Debtors to Sir
Richard Gurney, did apply themselves to the Executors, offering, that if the
Executors would make such abatements as they proposed, they would pay the
Executors, if not, they would discover the same to the Commissioners, so that
the Executors did abate at least 3000 l. rather than have their debts
discovered.

Amongst the rest of the Discoverers, April 53.
two Aldermen, whereof one is now living, informed the Commissioners of this
500 l. in the Chamber of London, due to Sir Richard, whereupon orders were
issued to the Chamber to pay in the money, which the Court was ready to obey,
but the aforesaid Assignment to Mr. William Chamberlain and Mr. Pettit, being
not cancelled, it was produced, and proved (without taking notice of the
Reassignment of it to Sir Richard Gurneys Executors) and was allowed, so there
was no further proceedings on that Discovery. By this time Cromwell took upon
him to be Protector, December. 54.
whereupon the Executors by Petition complaining of the Injustice of the House
of Commons (in punishing a man so often for one offense, or without hearing the
Executors Case, though it stood committed) gained a reference to his Council,
when the injustice and unusual proceedings were made so clear, that the Lord
Richardson was discharged of his Security given to Goldsmiths-Hall, Jan. 1654.
1655. 1656.
and Sir John Pettus of his Sequestration, with an order of restitution of what
had been taken from him, yet he lost above 600 l. on that account; nor was
there a clear effect of the order of discharging the 5000 l. till the year 1657.

These three years were years of great commotion in the City, etc. so as there
was no stirring there, 1657. 1658. 1659.
in matters which concerned money.

The Executors were advised (though the 500 l. debt was transferred to Sir John
Pettus) to Petition to the Lord Major, In 1660. 1661.
etc. in all their Names, and had some Proceedings upon it.

This Debt was looked upon to be so good, 20 Novem. 1662.
that Mr. Charles Eucrard Goldsmith of London, (who about that time fined for
Alderman) takes the Assignment of it as a good Security for above 600 l. which
the said Sir John did after Repay, so as little was done more in getting in the
money till 1663.

And then the Executors upon a new Petition, 2 June 1663.
gains a Reference to a Committee of Aldermen, and a Report from them to the
Court of Aldermen, to this effect, 20 June 1663.
viz. That they found the money to be paid by Sir Richard Gurney, but not
repaid to him, but in respect the money was issued out of the Chamber, (as was
pretended) they conceived it could not be levied without a Common Council,

Upon which the Executors prepared a Petition to the Major and Common Counsel,
1664.
but being delayed,

His Majesty well knowing the great Sufferings of Sir Richard Gurney, 16 June
1665.
by his Loyalty and Fidelity to the City, writ a Letter to the Lord Major,
Court of Aldermen, and Common Counsel, recommending the Case to them; but the
Common Counsel not sitting, and the Plague increasing, nothing was done more in
that year.

Before the Executors could bring the matters to any Resolution, the Plague
destroyed the Citizens, and in 1666, 1666.
the Fire consumed the City, (wherein Sir John had an house (let for 100 l. per
Annum, and more worth) burnt) and in 1667, 1667.
the Dutch gave a trouble to the whole Kingdom, for all which Reasons, Sir
John's Counsel and Friends advised him not to stir in it, till the City was in a
better condition to pay him.

The Executors applied themselves fresh again to the Court of Aldermen, but
soon after, 1670 1671 1672 1673
viz. in 1672 and 1673, Sir John being the only Prosecutor of it, was employed
in Suffolk about the Dutch Wars on that Coast.

Those being ended, the Executors applied themselves again to the Court of
Aldermen, 1674 1675 1676
and then some scruples were raised concerning the nature of the Debt, which
occasioned Sir John Pettus to be at great expenses and trouble in searching the
Books in the House of Lords and House of Commons, the Court not permitting Sir
John to have the view of the Chamberlines books as formerly he had.

At last Sir John (being then the sole Petitioner) found that some of the
Aldermen did favor his Lady who (had lived about Twenty years from him, and
was turned Roman Catholic) and had endeavored to make a stop of any money to
be paid to Sir John.

Whereupon Sir John pressed to know the resolution of the Court, whether they
would pay it or not, 1677
that the might take some other legal course: to which two of the Aldermen
replied, that if Sir John did go to Law for it, the Excommunication which his
Lady had against him should be pleaded.

Upon which Answer, 1678
Sir John gave over solicitation.

But now his Lady being Dead, and the Excommunication discharged under the Seal
of the Spiritual Court, and published in Form, so as the whole Interest being in
Sir John, he now Petitions singly and desires their Resolution.

Being able to prove,
1. That the 500 l. was Deposited. 2. That most, if not all others who
deposited money upon the same occasion, are repaid. 3. That Sir Richard was not
repaid in his life time. 4. That is was engaged by Sir Richard, and Redeemed by
his Executors. 5. That it was afterward purchased upon very valuable
considerations by Sir John Pettus of the other Executors. 6. That is was
engaged by him for a good sum to one that fined for Alderman. 7. That it had
not been prudent or safe for Sir Richard in his life time, nor for his
Executors for twelve years after Sir Richards Death, to press for it. 8. That
three years after his Death, it was acknowledged by some Aldermen (by way of
Discovery) to be in the Chamber) as money justly due to his Executors, and so
claimed by Goldsmith-Hall Commissioners. 9. That for Fifteen years after that
discovery, it was acknowledged a just Debt by the Court of Aldermen, but the
manner how it should be raised and paid, was the only question. 10. Sir John
Pettus did coolly Prosecute the payment of it ever after, because Sir John did
perceive that his Lady had made an Interest in some Aldermen to stop it, unless
she might have better conditions than he thought fit to allow, considering what
he had paid for it, and what trouble and charge he had been at concerning it.
11. That she is now Dead, and the right to the said 500 l. and Interest,
according to contract, is solely due to him. 12. That it is a Trust in the
Court, and ought to be performed with as much Sanctity and Integrity, as any
money due to Orphans,
Especially Considering

That Sir John Pettus can make it appear, that Sir Richard was lessened in his
Estate by his Imprisonment, Plunders, and Sequestration, etc. merely for his
Loyalty to the King, and fidelity to the City) full 28600 l. of which Sir John's
share as Executor, would have been above 14300 l. and therefore in Justice he
ought to be paid this 500 l. with Interest (which in June last past, amounted
to 2160 l.) or in Equity a greater sum for his Relative Sufferings.

FINIS.

