A PAIR OF SPECTACLES FOR THE CITY.

Printed in the Year, MDCXLVIII.

A Pair of Spectacles for the City.
WEre there not a more then ordinary stupidity possessing the hearts of men,
which God usually permits as the forerunner of heavy Judgments, after so many
real Demonstrations of damnable Jesuiticall Designs upon Religion and
Liberty; it were very unnecessary to publish any thing of this Nature; but let
this unhappy necessity be obeyed, and honest men be persuaded a little to
withdraw their thoughts from their perplexed reflections on the engagement and
Tumults at Westminster with the City-Remonstrance, which are usually looked
upon as the Grounds, but never were other then Occasions and Advantages sought
by Sectaries and Athiests, to throw us and the whole Kingdom into this
Confusion; and unless* God (who casts out the Counsels of the wicked, and
takes the Wise in their own craftiness) prevent, is like to overwhelme both,
and apply themselves to observe Affairs as they have been managed by them,
who will needs be the only Saints, and Men of the most uprightness, Fidelity
and Integrity, the greatest Denyers of themselves, the greatest pretenders to
the setting up of Christ in his Throne, the only Assertors of Peoples Liberty,
taking off Taxes, Excise, calling of Money-Merchants to Account; Lastly the
bringing of the whole Kingdom to a happy and Peaceable Condition.

Yet comparing things together, the diligent observer may easily discern^ an
evident conjuncture of Jesuits, Sectaries, Politicians, Atheists, Profane and
Ignorant Persons, for the Ruin of Religion, all Government, Order; confounding
all Distinctions of men, for the introducing of Atheism^, Anarchie,
Libertinisme, Profaneness.

The Design hatched by Phillip Nigh, Tom and John Good^^^, and the rest of the
Rabble, took the opportunity of Crumwell's being Lieutenant General to
Manchester, who being theirs in Judgment, they have made great by fathering
upon him the issue of other men's Actions and valor: So that no great Action
could be performed, though other men were as deserving as himself in it, but
the whole glory must be attributed to Crumwell, the Pamphletiers commonly
taking notice of nothing, unless Crumwell or some of his Party might
handsomely be made to own it. Thus at Marston-Moore, though Sir Thomas
Fairfax, Lieutenant General Midleton, Major General Craford deserved far
above him; yet Crumwell must be bellowed abroad the Savior of three Kingdoms,
the Great Deliverer; It Is truth, if Craford had not whispered in his Ear, he
had delivered himself out of the Field in the beginning of the day at Na^b^e,
Val^ant Skippon, Butler, and some other stout Commanders bl^ud must purchase
Honor for Crumwell, and his Cowardly Son in Law Ireton. Basing (half taken
by Dalbiere) must have the Honor of Crumwell. At Langport Massy's valor must
make Crumwell great. In all their Military matters, they have fallowed Joabs
counsel to David, when the Cities of Waters have been taken, the business as
good as finished, they must also down, that it may be called after their names.

Thus Crumwell's fame being made great, the next work is to fit him with fit
followers; to this purpose, all the Sectaries in the Kingdom are invited
together to the Army to be as a Reserve: All occasions taken to Cashiere and
dismiss all of what quality, valor, uprightness soever, who were not of
their judgment. Sk^ppon sent to Beleagrue at Bristoll, since handsomely laid
by from Acting as Major General and made Governor of Newcastle. Last of all,
that also had his Regiment snatched from him and given to Lilburne: Himself
like that valiant Roman, after he had saved his Country from a desperate Enemy
returned to lead a private life in his own Country.

Adjutant General Wray, for looking only on the City-Remonstrance, thrown out
of all. It has seemed very strange to Men of their own Party, that so gallant
valiant Gentlemen should be turned out of their Commands upon so trivial
matters.

As much Industry has been used to bring in Men of depraved Judgments and
large Consciences: Lambert, (the Anabaptist) Overton, Baxter, (a Pedling
Strand-Gold-Smith) whose greatest d^aling was in Thimbles and Bodkins, made a
Colonel: For the Profits of which place, I dare say, he shall walk in the
broadest way Crumw^ll can chalk him out. Gravener* (a broken Citizen)
Quarter-master-Generall. Stains a Quacking Mountebanck, Commissary General:
Watson, who had been hanged for Embasing Mettalls if he had his due,
Scout-master-Generall: The whole Command of the Army in the hands of Sectaries,
or broken beggarly fellows, the Principles of the one and Necessity of the
other making them ready to act whatsoever their Masters shall command them.

Hewson a Colonel, a Shoemaker, a very Knave in his Trade, as I am very
credibly informed, from some that have been upon search in his Shop, and very
often taken away faulty Commodities.

Harrison (a Poor Clerk) now a Parliament Man and Colonel of Horse, had his
Wife by a figure called Pr^ocupatio: But that is but Venial with the Saints.

Pride, a Dray-man, Colonel of Foot. Okey a Tailor, Colonel of Dragoon's. If
the chief Officers be such, what then are the rabble? And truly, what will
not such beggarly, base, dishonest fellows do, to keep* themselves in a
Condition, whereby they may enjoy the fat of the Land, the Pomp of the World;
the Accoutrements of the best Gentlemen in the Kingdom, besides the Command
they have over the poor Countrymen where they Quarter?

Care is likewise taken that the Common-Souldiers may be instructed in their
Erroneous Tenets: To this purpose, the chief Commanders get to their
Chaplains the most Haereticall, Schismatic, Blasphemous men in the
Kingdom* Saltmarsh and Dell, Hugh Peter's, Erbury. These tell the Soldiers,
that they have and ought to have all P^^er in their hands, and bid them not
part with it; (...) have right to the goods of this Life, but the Saints. That
the Saints are now styled Independents, Sectaries, Anabaptists, and the like:
That they have conquered the Propha^e-ones, but they must also trample upon the
Necks of all Carnal Gospellers, that they the Saints may Reign alone in the
Earth. That Synods and Parliaments have nothing to do to meddle in ma^ters that
concerns God's Worship. Thus Dell before Sir Thomas and Crumwell at
Marst^^-Church in Oxford-Leaguer; That the whole Scripture was not given by
Inspiration of God: Walwin Ritur, at a Conference, a hundred being present;
That Christ is not God, neither dyed to satisfy for Sin; Erbury, Hewson, who
says, the whole Army generally believe the same: That the Soul is Mortal:
That the Laws of the Land are not binding to them, having Conquered their
Conqueror. Thus having beat down all Laws, both Divine and Humane, they have
got a fit rout for the Acting of any Wicked Design whatever, and supposing
they have but Two Parties in the Kingdom able to give them any considerable
Opposition: viz. the Kings Party, and the City, from Killing the King, which
they call exceeding Justice upon whomsoever, from Plundering the whole
Kingdom, destroying the Nobility, and Levelling all Ranks and Distinctions of
Men. They, have made it their Masterpiece, first to divide them o^^ from
another, then amongst themselves to lull the Kings Party asleep; they have
pretended to re-inthrone His Majesty, settle Him in His Just Rights; case and
bring down the Compositions of Delinquents; and set up a Regulated Episcop^^^
for His Majesty, if we may conclude, any thing from the Expressions of their
Darlings: They would not have them live by them, much less Reign over them.
Peter's, in his Word to the Army, and Two to the Kingdom, calls him a Dead
Dog, and complains they are much troubled with him, and seems to request
some Agit^^^r, or other, to remove the Wicked from the Throne. They generally
require he ^^y be brought to Trial, and receive Punishment for all the blood
he has been the cause of shedding of; The second, and pulling down Excise
they fooled the poor Country People with, when they advanced to London, shall
be performed together, which for them will be at Doomes day in the Afternoon.
The third may be done, but if in their way and manner, it had been better never
have been touched. I had rather have a Pope and his Cardinals govern, then
have no Government at all. And I believe most Men are of my Opinion: But for
the City, there they have played their Masterpiece, and brought us to be the
very hilling and byword of the whole Kingdom, or rather we have brought our
selves to it; and truly it may seem very strange to Men, how such a City
should receive Check by such an Army. I shall give a very brief account of the
whole Business; and I shall take leave to be very plain; let who will ^ind
themselves aggrieved.

The Kingdom and City extremely groaning under the heavy burden of an
Everlasting-Parliament, the Unjustnesse, Perfidiousnesse, Hypocrisy, Tyranny,
Oppression, of whom will make their Names stinck in the Nosth^^lls of all
honest Men as long as they are remembered, were held in hopes they should be
delivered from their Bondage under these Aegyptiant by this Army, according to
their Promise in private, and Engagement and Declaration in public: This
took off many from Opposing them.

Secondly, This Army had won that Esteem for Religion and Piety, th^^ many
would not believe that any thing, not the fruit of both could proceed from them.

Thirdly, They had a Party of Lords and Commons basely and unworthily received
Orders from them their Servants: this gave Reputation to the Business, and
took off many, they Marching up with them.

Fourthly, The Seamen, Watermen, and Apprentices, after proffer of their
Service, Cowardly deserted us.

Fifthly, many Commanders, Sectaries, and Cowards, laid down their
Commissions, or hid their Heads just upon the Enemies approach.

Six^hly, That Tr^cherous base Skellum Hardwicke of Southwarke, who after that
he had vowed by the Honor of a Soldier, the Faith of a Christian, the
Reputa^^on of a Man, that he would resist all A^med Men whatever, who would
endeavor to enter the Line, to the loss of Life, and this several times by
the reason he was suspected: Nay, after he had plotted the betraying of it, and
both by Letter and Personal Message, invited the Army too, and promised
admission into So^thwarke: I say this Treacherous base defection of his, (for
which I hope to see him hanged) very much furthered the Enemies Design.

Seventhly, The Party they had in our very Committee for the Militia, who by
their long tedious Speeches, so much obstructed the business, that half an
hours work commonly took up a Nights debate.

Eighthly; It was just, God should lay the Pride of this City in dust, who
notwithstanding the Judgments abroad upon the whole Land, and our neighbor
Nations, sat still like a Queen never providing for the day of her own
visitation.

Lastly, The many Promises the Army made of their faithful Intentions to us
and the whole Kingdom, that they would endeavor the present settling of all
differences, the bringing the King to a Personal Treaty, and not to enter the
City: All which they have unworthily broke.

These things very much facilitated their enslaving of this great and populous
City, but having us at command, Machivilian like they break all Promises; and
being they cannot bring us to their Bow, they endeavor what possibly they can
to make us weak Enemies; to that purpose, they Order the Parliament to take
the Militia from us, which was given us by a full and free Parliament as a
mark of Honor: So then a Committee of Parliament were pleased to call for our
many great services done them and the Kingdom, and conferred it upon beggarly
Fouke, and a company of Anabaptists and Sectaries, and least these men should
have so much ingenuity left, as to be faithful to the place that bred them,
they have so divided the command of the Militia, into so many pieces, that
neither of them can scarce stand on their own legg^, much less make any
considerable defense in case of danger. They have likewise put that gallant and
faithful Coloneli, Colonel West out of the Tower, only because no Sectary,
and the City placed him there; and in his room that Thing Tichburne is put, a
fellow much below the Command, fitter for a Possit and a warm Bed, then to
keep a Cittadell, only a Peevish Sectary, for that must be Honored; They have
driven our friends out of the House of Commons, as Massy, Waller, and that much
lamented deceased Stapleton, whose blood cries loud for Vengeance, and will be
heard in the day of Enquiry, when treacherous Manchester and Harvy, who were in
the Counsel as deep as any, though they basely, now, act against us, shall not
dare to hold up their heads: our ablest, most faithful and honest Aldermen and
Commons are charged with High Treason, a word as I have heard, that prudent and
faithful Alderman Adam (though his pockets were searched when Lord Mayor to
find a King) all the blood in a man's body now scarce brings his into his face:
so trivial a thing is High Treason now adays. Can it be thought that Langham,
Adams, Bunce, Bromfeild, Jones, should Act Treason against King or State. I do
confidently aver, and thousands will make it good, there sits not six in the
Houses of Lords and Commons nor resident in the Army that have served the State
with more uprightness, faithfulness, constancy and courage, then these six
gallant Men have done, where had these Commons and Parling Lords been, at the
time when Gloucester was besieged, and so bravely defended by gallant Massy,
when that purple Jesuited Independent (vulgo dicto) Lord Say as once Melitia
gave Benhadad advise to put Halters about our Necks and go ask Mercy; truly we
had better have done it, then suffer him and his Crew to lay such fetters upon
us. I say where had these brave Men been had not these very six Men, done
beyond humanity. I speak like a Christian always submitting to Providence, I
am able to make it out, if truth had but one single Patron left, these very men
then saved the Kingdom, were the most eminently instrumental in it, when these
Fellows of Westminster sat peeking and voting basely and, cowardly left all,
and certainly would have run away had they not been encouraged by these very
six men principally. I pray God give them Grace to bewail the trouble they
have put them to; but enough of this least they be hated because beloved, And
let us see a little how our wise Committee for the Militia has disposed their
business, if we can with patience: I shall run over all I know of them, and I
believe they would not be angry if they knew me, first of the first.

The Orange Regiment Colonel Wilson an Antinomian, a Man that has more Money
then Wit or Valor, but he may serve: the next is Presto Colonel Lieutenant
Colonel (what shall I call him) Camfield, a fellow that looks as if he had
changed his face, with his place; I met him lately going up Holborne, if he had
been coming down, I should have thought he had broke his Halter and run away,
he looked so ghastly, but he did them good service at Westminster, that day
they say the the House was forced, stood looking on like a cowardly base
fellow, never offering to strike blow, though he had nigh two hundred armed men
under his command, and might have defended the House against an Army; but that
was in order to the design, or else he had been hanged before this time.

Next him is Leivetenant Colonel Major, Captain Petitoes, the sight of whom
makes me remember my Aunt Basset Swill Tub; he may do well to choose the fat
Cook in Py-Corner for his Colors, and Tripes for his Leivetenant, they will
dead Bullets, if ever he be carried in a Tumbrell into Service, else he will
never come where they are.

Then that Bartholemew Baby Major, Puny Captain Russell. Surely this is one of
the Shakers they talk of; a fellow that every Step he takes speaks him a
Tailor.

After him Colonel Leivetenant Colonel Young Captain Hey day Boswell, a
fellow lately put out for caning Train Band Soldiers, but it seems we must
come to it, and this Pricklouse employed to begin the work. All these I dare
say will never be guilty of High Treason, in raising a New War, nor except the
last be angry to be kick'st, or affronted in any manner. For the Green, I know
not what they have done, only they have turned out the discreet and faithful
Colonel Shipheard, and put in the Bull Roe, as ^lso honest and stout
Lieutenant Colonel Lane, and put that Swearing Fantastic Fool Juxon in his
piace. I suppose the rest of the Commanders of that Regiment will not be
commanded by a Knave and a Fool; for the White, Colonel Vaughan being guilty
of High Treason, of City High Treason, that is for retaining so much courage
and prudence as to defend the City that gave him his command, as to maintain
the Honor and Reputation of it: Indeed for obeying the Commands of the
Committee for the Militia that were his General, must be put of, and Player,
that Player that played the Cowards part so much at Cherriton, in his room.
Lieutenant Col. Thomson a valiant and faithful Commander laid by, and unworthy
base spirited Manby put in his Room, he that upon the routing of a forlorn Hope
at Cherriton cried and wrung his hands, what shall he do, what shall he do,
the day is lost, like a great Booby: Let them make the Puppy his Son Major,
in the room of valiant and resolute Major Milton, whom they have put out, and
then I dare promise this Regiment shall never commit City High Treason neither.
In the Red Regiment Colonel Hooker, a valiant prudent godly and faithful
Captain, is laid by; a man that stood up with the first and acted with the
best, for the safety of King, Parliament, Kingdom, and City, but he
endeavored not to be a Slave to Slaves, had a sword in his hand, and being
assaulted by a company of Thieves and Rascals, was loath to yield, but
endeavored to defend himself; this I say being City high Treason, he must be
laid by, and in his Room unworthy peeking Hays is placed: Lieutenant Colonel
Brett is turned out too, and truly I wonder at it, in my Conscience he is no
Presbiterian, but I suppose he is too much a man, too much a Soldier to act in
these base unworthy ways now on foot; they say Cushen has his Room, base
spirited Cushen to be sat upon by Hays, whom he has Commanded, I wish thou
may be sat upon, by all the foot-boyes, Tapsters, Porters, Journey-men
Tailors in the Town. This Act speaks the Tailor and the son of a Tailor to
the tenth generation. For the rest of that Regiment I hear not of.

In the blew Regiment, Shake-rag Underwood may serve their turn well enough; he
basely hid his head when he should have been at the head of his Regiment: but
Cox and Gillibrand are out; the first guilty of City-high treason, and the
second of too much honesty to serve any base design, though never so fairly
guilned over, both honest, tried, valiant soldiers, and so not fit to be
ranked with fools, knaves, and cowards; and in their stead Rogers and Coe are
brought, the one a Fool, the other a Broker. But in name of the Tower-ghost,
what have the Commanders of the Yellow Regiment done? they are all turned out,
all guilty of City-high-Treason: had ye not one Fool nor Knave among ye, nor
Cuckold neither? that is a Miracle. Let Us view you a little more narrowly, for
the rareness of the business. First, Colonel Bromfield, a Gentleman of
unquestionable faithfulness and integrity, upon whom God has conferred
extraordinary parts and abilities, and a heart to improve all to the service of
his Country; a fit man to transact any Military affair at that Council of
War where great Gustavus Adolphus sat President; a Gentleman that at the
famous Battle of Newbury proved himself a valiant Soldier, and a discreet
Commander; in the Committee for the Militia, and Court of Common Council
discreetly, faithfully and stoutly muted those Apostates Fowks, Estwick,
Player, and countermined their designs: This last I believe was his great
crime: but he is outed, and that shadow of a Soldier, Harrison in his place; a
silly weak old man (God knows) fitter to eat Pie and Custard, then lead a
Regiment; a man of no estate, and merely for the profits, which he must raise
indirectly and dishonestly too, takes it; a fellow that carried himself like a
Fool and a Coward at Cherriton, only the Colonel Harrison (being forced to
marry his daughter, having That same beforehand) is his son in Law, that is
desert enough.

Lievtenant-Colonell Leigh is the next; a man of Estate and Quality, an honest,
godly, valiant man, a man that did as good service at Cherriton as any man in
the Brigade, a man that from principles of Honesty and Piety leads the life of
a Christian in sincerity: He is thrown out, and that proud, insolent,
Schismatic, beggarly Fenton in his place: this is he that would needs have a
Committee of Aldermen and Commoners to examine whether he were a Cuckold or
not, when himself, his wife, and the Schoolmaster of Dullidge had concluded on
the Affirmative before. His father keeps a poor Country Alehouse, he bound
him to a Tagger of Points; he married his wife from the Bell at Jslington; yet
this proud Fool cries Want you any Buttons? in Scarlet and Plush: This is he
that was shot in the Arse at Caversham-Bridge, he had so much Armor on's back
he could not run away fast enough, that got that little he has by being a
Commitree-man under my Lord of Essex, that carried out a gallant Company of
London Apprentices into the Service, and used them like Dogs, ('it is their own
expression,) that must be pleased in all the rest of the Commanders, and have
power to present them, which our wise Committee granted; that has brought in a
Company of Fools, that he may be Dominus fac towm: But enough of this proud
Thing.

The next is Major Neele; he has two faults, he is an honest man, and no
Sectary; in his room is one Doyle Tichburnes Creature and once Lieutenant;
neither Man nor Soldier: This is he that was at Cherriton, and may say as the
great Julius Caesar did, Veni, Vidi; an excellent fellow to bring up a File of
Dragooners, fit to hold their horses while they fight, or to be an Ensign, he
loves to shelter himself amongst the Pikes so well: a man that will never be
guilty of breaking the sixth Commandment, nor raising a New War.

The fourth was Captain Elaine, a Gentleman as fit for Command as any in the
City, a very knowing experienced Soldier, one who has made as great
proficiencie in the Art Military as any, and been very isntrumental in making
many Soldiers; a man of very good parts, honest and conscientious, he is out,
and in his place that Kickshaw Blackwell, a fellow infinitely below the place
as man, never capable of it as a Soldier, of his Colonells complexion, takes
it merely for profit. This is he that cried he was undone when turned out last;
that put Fines for Delinquency and his Officers Pay in his own pocker, (get it
out when they can) a cowardly Fop, a silly Goose, that if he had a will, has
not parts to acquire any thing in the Art Military.

The next was Captain Widmerpoole, a Gentleman of good Account and Quality, a
very stout and valiant man, an able and knowing Soldier; one that has been
very active for the Parliament from the beginning of these troubles, was at
Cherriton fight, did as good service as any in his Command there. In brief,
has given ample testimony of his faithfulness, resolution and courage in his
place. One Stone is put in his place; truly the man may be honest, but as fit
to command a Company as to build PAUL'S, and so not very wise. Surely these
Fellows think the Office of a Captain is nothing but only to walk before a
company to Westminster. The Scholars are like to be well taught when the
Master cannot read.

The next was Captain Potter, an honest fellow and a Soldier, so much I may
say, yet be modest; I know him faithful to the Parliaments Cause; he took up a
Commission just when the Regiment went out to fight for it. I hope his heart is
upright to God too. I am confident he desires it should be so. He was at
Cherriton, and did service in the hottest work there; Gods good providence
assisting he came not away, nor shrunk from any employments he was commanded
upon: nay, he went upon some and of some danger too, when waved by others, but
he cannot be yoaked with Fenton: Exit. In his place is one White, a fellow for
whom I cannot meet with a fit Character, the most unworthy sniveling fool that
I have heard of to be a Captain. This is he that commenced an Action of
Trespass against his man, and lay him in the Compter for cutting his thin
cheese, and like a Knave would have had his maid sworn strange matters against
him; that turned off his maid for being no better house-wife in her
Kitchenstuffe: that will be a Soldier when Habedeboody his Lieutenant is one;
and truly, let simple Robin have his Colors, and it would trouble a man to
judge who were the better Soldier.

The next is Captain Hynde, a man that has done the Parliament very eminent
service at the beginning of these troubles, as a Commissary of Horse, and
Gratis too, a very discreet, prudent and stout man, and a good Soldier, that
truly fears God, and walks close with him, but will not be coupled with Oxes
and Asses, so laid by. In his room is one Sherburne, a young fellow and no
soldier. I know little of him, but it is like he is one that will be ruled by
Lievtenant-Colonell Tap.

Thus behold your walls and Bulworkes, ye men of Lacedemonia, in this we may
see their drift and design plain; but go on you Saviors, that while some of
you are (seemingly at least) lifting up your hands to heaven, others are
confulting with Hell it self, digging and designing the overthrow both of
Church and State: if they can make the City pay Taxes willingly, the work is
done, we are slaves to eternity, the Country must find meat and drink, and
the City spending-money and clothes, for these Lord-Danes; for quartering
among us is dangerous, then let Fools work, we will live by play, but
remember Nebuchadnezars handwriting.

FINIS.

