A SERMON PREACHED AT THE TOVVER, February 20. 1641.

Being upon the Sabbath Day.

By the Bishop of Bath and Wells.

London Printed for H.S. 1641.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE TOVVER.
2 Cor. 12.8. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart
from me, and he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength
is made perfect in weakness.


THis Verse it has dependancy with the Verse before, through the abundance of
Revelations he was exalted above measure, there was given a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him, and for this thing he prayed the
Lord thrice that it might depart from him: the occasion of this prayer was the
Thorn in the flesh, and the occasion of that Thorn, was the messenger of
Satan: No Apostle more greater then he, and none more greatly afflicted, none
more gracious, and the danger of that was spiritual pride, the greatest sin
that the Church of God can fall into: the greater grace, the greater humility
ought we to have, and the more humbly to walk with God.

The parts are two: First, Paul's petition to God. Secondly, Gods answer to Paul.


The petition consists of five branches.

First, the causes of his complaint, no small matter, but some great thing, For
this thing. Secondly, the remedy that he uses, and that was Prayer. Thirdly,
the earnestness of his Prayer, not once, or twice, but he did continue his
Prayer, For this thing I prayed three times. Fourthly, the Physician to whom he
sought, to the Lord. Fifthly, the end of his Petition, the thing that he did
desire, that he might be eased, In that it might depart from me.
Secondly, ye have Gods answer, and therein observe two particulars.

First, the effect of his answer, it was a denial: the Apostle prays that
this thing that did so trouble him might depart from him, but it would not be.

Secondly, Gods divine aid, God gave him a better thing that he did not pray
for, to comfort him against the things that he did pray for, And he said unto
me, my grace is sufficient for thee: Where observe the nature of this divine
aid, My grace.

Secondly, the quantity, It is sufficient for thee.

The third thing is, the reason of Gods denial, and his divine aid expressed
in a famous sentence, or maxim of divinity, and this is granted from Gods
goodness and mercy, both for his own glory, and man's good, For my strength is
made perfect in weakness: These are all the branches of the Text, of which in
order, as time and your patience will give leave, and first of Paul's complaint,
For this thing I besought the Lord: What this thing was in general, that Paul
tells you in the verse before, and he describes it in two ways: First, in a
figurative speech, in respect of the great anguish it wrought, and he calls it
a Thorn in the flesh* the word in the Original signifies a sharp stick, or
the point of a Spear, which being fastened into a man's body, puts him to
intolerable pain. Secondly, he calls it the angle of Satan: but now two
things is here, one that it is Satan's vexation, and the other that it did
afflict him to the very heart, so that you see it was no Thistle, no Bryar, no
small thing that did trouble him here, and because the English Translation
calls it by the name of a Thorn, and because we have not a better word in
English to express it, I will call it so, but what thing was that, that is the
doubt: here I confess I am fallen among Thorns: Some divines are of opinion
that this Thorn was original concupiscence, which Paul calls the Law in the
flesh: but this is too far fetched, for original concupiscence is common to
all the regenerate: but he here complains of some evil that happened only to
himself: Secondly, he knew that that could not depart from him so long as he
did live here, but he prays that this might depart from him, but other Divines
take this to be some bodily disease, as a continual pain in the stomach, as
the Gout, or the Stone, or some malady in the body, but this is very unlikely,
because Paul does no where in any of his Epistles complain of any bodily
infirmity he had. Secondly, this had been an impediment for his planting the
Gospel in all Countries, which he could not have done if he had had any bodily
infirmity: Some understand it the adversaries he had, as Hymineus, and others,
especially Alexander the Coppersmith, it is true indeed that this was one of
Satan's messengers, but this was but a Thorn without the flesh: but Paul
complains of a Thorn in the flesh, some affliction that did stick close to
him: others are of opinion that this was some evil Angel of Satan that God
did permit to vex the body of Paul, as he did to vex Job, and to buffet with
Paul as one man would with another, and bestowed many a blow upon him: others
are of opinion that it was some lustful motions stirred up in the Apostle, and
for this cause he did keep his body under, for say they, if it had been any
thing else he would have told us plainly what it had been, but being a thing
that he was ashamed of, he tells us it was a Thorn.

But Paul he had the gift of Chastity, I would all were as I am, says he: 2.
If Paul had been troubled with that, there was an easy remedy which he gave
to others, what shall we say then? certainly in the judgment of most Divines
it was some terror of Satan, some internal and spiritual affliction in his
soul, and when he says it was in his flesh, he means by his flesh, the
outward man, the unregenerate part, the unregenerate part of the soul, as Romans
7. although an inward temptation, or affliction in conscience may be truly said
to be in the flesh by way of participation, because the flesh by such a cause
becomes weak and pale: the best is this, that the Lord did permit Satan to
bring to the ear and mind of Paul all his persecutions and wickedness, God
hereby intending to humble him, though Satan's policy hereby was to have shaken
him: but this Thorn is hid so deep in the flesh, that I will search no farther
after it, but content my self with that of Austin, That he does profess he
did not know what this Thorn here was: Ye see then an Apostle, and such an
Apostle as Paul, and after so many favors he must have a Thorn in the flesh,
the Church of God in general, and every child of God in the Church is said to
be a Lilly among Thorns, Cant. 2.2. He is not worthy to be a member of the
mysteriall body, upon the glorious head whereof was platted a Crown of many
Thorns, who cannot endure the pricking of one Thorn, some light affliction,
if not for his own sake, yet for our Saviors sake: has our Savior drunk so
deep of the cup, and shall not we be willing to sip after him in the same cup?
If God did not spare his only Son for us that knew not any sin, shall we that
are his adopted* Sons think to escape without any scourgeing at all* He whom
the Lord has not chastised, is a bastard, and no son Heb. 12. Give me a man
that never was: afflicted with any affliction, says Austin, and I will
presently conclude, that that man is not the child of God, for every child of
God must have some afflictions to humble him, and call him home to God, wherein
he must rejoice: We must not think to pass from the joy of this world, to
the joy of the next: no, when the Israelites went out of Egypt, they did not
go through pleasant Gardens, but the Wilderness, to Canaan: this was a type
that we must pass through afflictions to that Heavenly Canaan: and therefore
one that was without afflictions, said to God, What Lord, am I out of thy
favor? am I not worthy to be afflicted? What a Catalogue does S. Paul reckon
of his afflictions in the eleventh of this Epistle, ver. 23. In labors more
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prison more plentious, in death often, of
the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one, I was thrice beaten with
rods, I was once stoned, I suffered thrice shipwreck, night and day I have been
in the deep Sea, in journying I was often, in perils of water, in perils of
robbers, in perils of my own Nation, in perils among the Gentiles, in perils
in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in perils
among false brethren, in weariness and painfulnesse, in watching often, in
hunger and thrist, in fasting often: I am almost out of breath in rehearsing of
them, and yet this worthy Apostle was never out of breath in suffering them,
all the afflictions of the people of God are but pricks and thorns, they are
but loving corrections of a merciful Father, we are troubled on every side,
but not distressed, afflicted, but not forsaken, cast out, but not destroyed:
Oh welcome, thrice welcome these bitter sweets, these loving chastisements,
these indulgent visitations, these pleasant crosses, these comfortable
calamities, these wholesome miseries, these glorious trials, these joyful
temptations, these honorable reproaches: all light afflictions, which work for
us a far exceeding weight of glory, by these we are humbled, and seek right
early to our God, by these our faith and love is kindled, and Gods graces
exercised, by these we are put in remembrance and sorrow for our sins, by these
we are made more careful of future walking with God, by these we are made fit
for the life to come, by these our desire is kindled to be with Christ, nay by
these we are encouraged to embrace death. I know out of very faithfulness thou
have caused me to be afflicted, Psalm. 119. I have been the longer upon the
first branch, because it is the hinge upon which the whole frame of my Text
does turn.

But what did Paul when the Thorn that was in the flesh did trouble him, this
messenger began to buffet him: he went presently to prayer, the only way to
draw out any Thorn whatsoever, For this thing I prayed: Is any man afflicted?
let him pray: Prayer was Jobs remedy, and it was David's practice, In my
distress I called upon thee: And God himself says, Hosea 5. In their
afflictions they will seek me early: We make prayer our last refuge in
afflictions, but it ought to be first, for God is a very present help in
trouble: but will not God hear us except we pray? First, because prayer is a
matter of worship and service of God: the great men of the world will not
bestow favors without they be petitioned, and shall the great God without our
prayers? Secondly, because our prayers shows our confidence in God: a Father
can bestow mercies upon his Son without asking, but he will not, because he
takes delight to hear him sue to him.

Object. But Gods will is immutable, how can we alter it, what need we pray?

Answ. It is a sure rule, things that are not contrary, work together, Prayer
is as it were the midwife to deliver Gods decree, Christ knew before he did
pray, that those things that he did pray for should be granted, yet he prays
for it: but as our prayers must be fervent, so they must be frequent, For this
thing I prayed thrice, a medicine must be often applied, or it will not work
the cure, he prayed thrice, here is a certain number for an uncertain, as
thrice happy, that is very happy, so I prayed thrice, that is often, Ye ask and
receive not, because ye ask amiss: Go then, and pray again, and then often
praying thou shall find out the error of thy prayer: if God deny thee at the
first, and second, give not over, peradventure Heaven gate is therefore shut,
that thou may bounce the longer, and louder, and therefore give not over
knocking, until that God be opening: great blessings are obtained with
earnestness: The unrighteous judge did yield at last to the importunate prayer
of the widow: And shall not the Judge of all the world yield to the
importunate prayer of his servants: The kingdom of heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force: What force? Of prayer. Unto whom? Unto the
Lord. That is the fourth branch, For this thing I prayed thrice unto the Lord,
We have neither precept nor practice in all the Canonical Scripture to pray
unto any other, but only unto the Lord in heaven, or in earth: Whom have I in
heaven but thee, Psalm. 37. But the Papists, they are not of David's Religion,
for they have Saints, S. Benedict, S. Francis, and a thousand more: He must be
a Bookers Arithmatition that can reckon up all the names of the several Saints
that they call upon in their danger: That Courtlike argument of the Papists,
that we cannot go to the King with a Petition without Master of Requests, does
not deserve a Scholler-like answer, for God is every where present, and he need
no other Ma: of Request but Jesus Christ. Then come to the last, that is, the
end of his Petition, Depart from me: Afflictions in themselves are not
pleasing, but contrary to our nature, and therefore not to be desired: but when
God sends them we are to bear them with comfort, we take them willingly, but
we would not have them stay with us, but when they have done their work, we
would have them go, but if this messenger of Satan do not straight ways
depart from us, they shall not make us depart from God.

He did elect us before the world was made, Ephe. 1. And here by the way the
Romish Schoolmen does not handle this grace at large, because it makes against
their proud doctrine of Justification by good works: Some understand this
grace, which if a man have, he is safe from the hurt of any affliction, it is
true, this grace of God is first meant, but it is not the only grace:
secondly, there is the grace of God within us, all the gifts of Gods Spirit,
which is rightly and truly called Grace of God, the love and favor of God
toward us: now of this of grace God does the Apostle speak here in my Text: We
are kept by the power of God to Salvation, by the power of God, what is that?
the power of Grace. And against what? Against all afflictions whatsoever, This
Grace is S. Paul's token. 2 These. 3. This is the most precious jewel of a
Christian, and as the soul is the life of the body, this is the life of the
soul, this stirs up to good, and restraines from evil, this keeps from pride
in prosperity, and supports in affliction, this makes all our weak endeavors
acceptable with God, and without this all our best actions is but sin: it is
not the grace of the body, that is but vanity, it is not the grace of the
world, the grace of the world is not able to keep a man from one poor little
fit of an Ague, and when a man lies upon his deathbed, and Satan begins to
tempt, and his conscience begins to trouble, then what good will all the grace
of the world do a man: but by this grace of God we are equal to the Angels,
but without this grace we are worse then Toades, of Serpents: Nay, worse then
the very devils of hell, and therefore let us pray for this grace of God, that
no man, nor creatures, nor devils can take away, but it continues for ever:
whom God loves, he loves to the end.

The second divine Aid God gave the Apostle, was the quantity of this grace,
My grace is sufficient for thee: sufficient, it walks between two extremes;
abundance and want, and where there is sufficient, there is neither too much,
nor too little: and here we may admire the wisdom of God, he is a free agent,
the Sun shines according to his natural ability, but God gives every one
grace according to the measure of Christ, what is that? according to the
pleasure of his own will: For God is an ever-flowing fountain, an Ocean of
grace, there is grace enough for you, and me, and for as many worlds as God can
make: Wherefore let us not murmr against God, because we have not that
abundance of grace that the Apostles and others have had, they had the showers
of grace, we will be content with the dew of grace, they had the full sheaves,
but we will be glad of the gleanings, they had their full banquets, but we
shall think our selves happy if we can have but the crumbs, and if we have
grace, we shall have glory: for it is with grace, as with Manna, he that
gathered much had not over: and he that gathered little had no lack, and so
every grace is sufficient as it is effectual, and this does arise from the
power of God, and not from man's free will: He does not say my grace is
sufficient with thee, but My grace is sufficient for thee, and therefore we
must take heed we do not part stakes between Gods grace, and man's free will,
for it is he alone that gives us both to will and to do according to his good
pleasure, Ephesians. 2. And therefore let us not be covetous, give me this
sufficiency from grace, for if we have grace enough, we have enough: Give me
the man that can truly say he has enough: he says when he has a house, Oh
that I had a little land, and so as the world grows upon him, his desires grow
upon the world, so that every year, nay, every day, every hour he thinks of
another enough: but if a man have grace enough, he has all enough, this makes
a penny seem to be as beg as a shilling, a prison as a country, and this
grace is sufficient against all the assaults of the world, the flesh, and the
devil, and against all afflictions: and although God could keep us from
afflictions, yet he will not, for if there were no conflict, there will be no
victory, but in the end grace has always the upper hand, and in all these
things we are more than conquerers: be not then dismayed O Christian soul,
whoever thou art under some heavy affliction: what would thou be better than
Paul? behold, the Apostle suffered and despaired not, nay behold, Christ
himself was tempted, and afflicted that he might succor us when we are
tempted and afflicted: Oh then behold Christ with a sure comfort and a lively
faith, and he will succor us in all our afflions, that neither flesh, world,
nor devil shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus
our Lord.

FINIS.

