THE PETITION Of the OFFICERS and Soldiers in the Army, under the Command of
His EXCELLENCY

Sr. Thomas Fairfax, With the several Votes of the Council Of War at
Saffron-Walden, concerning the Armies going into IRELAND: With the names of
every Officer then present.

Together with A Letter from His Excellency, to the House of Commons,
concerning the said Petition.

LONDON, Printed for Robert White, April 2. 1647.

To His Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, General Of the PARLIAMENTS Forces.
The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under your
Command.
Shows,

THat ever since our first engaging in this service, for preserving the power
of this Kingdom in the hands of the Parliament; we have in our several places
served them with all faithfulness. And although we have layn under many
discouragements for want of pay, and other necessaries; yet have we not
disputed their commands, disobeyed their orders, nor disturbed them with
Petitions; nor have there any visible discontents appeared amongst us to the
encouragement of their enemies, and the impediment of their affairs; but have
with all cheerfulness done Summer services in Winter seasons, improving the
utmost of our abilities in the advancement of their service: And seeing God
has crowned our endeavors, with the end of our desires, (viz. the dispersing
of their public enemies, and reducing them to their obedience.) The King being
now brought in, our Brethren the Scots satisfied, and departed the Kingdom;
all dangers seemingly blown over, and Peace in all their Quarters: We
(imboldned by their manifold promises, and Declarations, to protect and defend
those that appeared, and acted in their service) herewith humbly present to
your Excellency, the annexed Representations of our desires; which we humbly
beseech your Excellency to recommend, or represent in our behalfs to the
Parliament.

And your Petitioners shall ever Honor and Pray for your Excellency, etc.
The humble Representation of the Desires of the Officers and Soldiers of the
Army under the Command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Presented first to
his Excellency, to be by him represented to the Parliament.
1. FIrst, whereas the necessity and exigencie of the War, has put us upon
many actions, which the Law would not warrant, nor we have acted in a time of
settled Peace; we humbly desire, that before our disbanding, a full and
sufficient provision may be made by Ordinance of Parliament (to which the
Royal assent may be desired) for our indemnity and security in all such cases.

2. That Auditors or Commissioners may be speedily appointed and authorized, to
repair to the head-quarter of this Army, to andite and state our accounts, as
well for all former services, as for our services in this Army; and that before
the disbanding of the Army, satisfaction may be given to the Petitioners for
their arrears, that so the charge, trouble, and loss of time, which we must
otherwise necessarily undergo, in attendance for the obtaining of them, may be
prevented; we having had experience, that many have been reduced to miserable
extremities, even almost starved for want of relief, by their tedious
attendance. And that no Officer may be charged with any thing in his account,
that does not particularly concern himself.

3. That those who have voluntarily served the Parliament in the late Wars, may
not hereafter be compelled by press or otherwise to serve as soldiers out of
this Kingdom: Nor those who have served as Horsemen, may be compelled by press
to serve on foot, in any future case.

4. That such in this Army as have lost their limbs, and the wives and children
of such as have been slain in the service, and such Officers or soldiers as
have sustained losses, or have been prejudiced in their estates, by adhereing
to the Parliament; or in their persons by sickness or imprisonment under the
Enemy, may have such allowances and satisfaction, as may be agreeable to
Justice and equity.

5. That till the Army be disbanded as aforesaid, some course may be taken for
the supply thereof with moneys, whereby we may be enabled to discharge our
Quarters, that so we may not for necessary food be beholding to the Parliaments
enemies, burdensome to their friends, or oppressive to the country; whose
preservation we have always endeavored, and in whose happiness we should still
rejoice.

The Officers present at the Debates following.
Viz.
Lieut. Genesis Hamond. Commissary Ireton. Coll. Hamond. Coll. Harley. Coll.
Ingoldesby. Coll. Whalley. Coll. Fortescue. Coll. Rich. Coll. Butler. Coll.
Hewson. Coll. Lilburne. Coll. Okey, Li^ut. Col. Jackson. Lieut. Colonel Pride.
Lieut. Col. Grimes. Major Fincher. Major Swallow. Major Huntington. Major
Cowell. Major Ducket. Major Sedascue. Major Waade. Captain Brown. Capt. Groves.
Capt. Lawrence. Capt. Jenkins. Capt. Morgan. Capt. Far. Capt. Goff. Capt.
Reynolds. Capt. Nevill. Capt. Pretty. Capt. Ohara. Capt. Leigh. Capt. Coleman.
Capt. Young. Capt. Cannon. Capt. Wallington. Capt. Lieut. Audley. Capt. Lieut.
Gladman. Capt. Lagoe. Lieut. Lloyde. Lieut. Scottin. Cornet Spencer.
At the Convention of Officers before his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax at
Saffron-Walden, March 21. 1646.
THe two Letters from the Committee of Lords and Commens for Irish affairs
sitting at Derby-house, the one dated the 17. the other the 18. of March
instant, and the several Votes of the House of Commons there enclosed,
concerning the sending of seven Regiments of Foot and four Regiments of Horse
out of this Army into Ireland for the service of that Kingdom, were read:
Whereupon his Excellency, proposed unto the Officers this Question ensuing: viz.

Quest. Whether they were willing, with those under their Commands, to engage
for the service of Ireland in the number of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, now
proposed to be sent?

In order to which, after some debate, the first Quaerie propounded amongst the
Officers, was:

1. Whether they were prepared, at present, to give a certain resolution to
that Question?

Resolved, Negatively (Nemine contradicente.)

2. It was resolved, and declared by all: That whether they shall find cause
to engage themselves personally in that service or no, they shall in their
several places be ready to further, and advance it, amongst those under their
respective commands.

Next there were several things propounded by several Officers, wherein
satisfaction was desired, before they could give their certain resolution to
the main Question; which were these:

1. To know, what particular Regiments, Troops, or Companies of this Army, are
to be continued in service in this Kingdom.

2. To know under whose Conduct and Command in chief, those that engage for
Ireland are to go?

3. What assurance there shall be of pay, and subsistnece, to those that shall
engage in this service for Ireland, during their continuance therein?

4. To have satisfaction in point of Arrears, and indemnity, for the past
service in England?

Upon each of these, this Question was put to every Officer distinctly.

Quest. Whether is this a thing wherein you desire satisfaction before you can
give a certain Resolution to engage in the service proposed?

Which Question, upon the third, and fourth Propositions, was resolved
affirmatively, (Nemine contradicente.)

Upon the second it was resolved affirmatively by all, except Colonel Harley,
Coll. Fortescue, Coll. Butler, Major Fincher, Lieut. Colonel Jackson, Capt.
Far, and Capt. Nevill.

Upon the first it was resolved affirmatively by all, except the persons last
mentioned, and Coll. Rich, Major Ducket, Capt. Ohara, Capt. Audley, and Captain
Young.

Lastly, Those that were affirmative to the desiring of satisfaction in the
first Proposition: viz.

To know what particular Regiments, Troops, or Companies of this Army are to be
continued in service in this Kingdom: did declare,

That this was desired, partly to this end; That in giving the resolution to
the main Question, none that are not designed to stay in England may be
withheld from engaging for Ireland by any secret expectation to be continued in
England: And partly to the end, that those who shall engage, the rather upon
confidence of having the Company of such as do agree with them in the same
conditions, may not be deceived in that particular.

At a second Convention of Officers at the desire of Sir William Waller, and
the rest of the Commissioners at Saffron-Walden: His Excellency being present,
Monday March 22. 1646. And the results following.
Present,
Lieut. Genesis Hamond. Com. General Ireton. Coll. Hamond. Coll. Harley. Coll.
Whalley. Coll. Rich. Coll. Fortescue. Coll. Lilburne. Coll. Okey. Coll. Hewson.
Lieut. Coll. Pride. Lieut. Coll. Grimes. Lieut. Coll. Jackson. Major Swallow.
Major Huntington. Major Cowell. Major Sedascue. Major Waade. Capt. Brown. Capt.
Groves. Capt. Lawrence. Capt. Jenkins. Capt. Morgan. Capt. Far. Capt. Goff.
Capt. Lagoe. Capt. Gladman. Capt. Nevill. Capt. Pretty. Capt. Ohara. Capt.
Leigh. Capt. Audley. Capt. Coleman. Capt. Cannon. Capt. Wallington. Capt.
Young. Lieut. Scottin. Lieut. Lloyde.
At the desire of the Commissioners, who now produced the Votes of the House of
Commons of the 16. of March, concerning the raising of 60000. l. per month,
toward the payment of the Forces in England and Ireland, the same were read
unto the Officers, and after some debate, this Question was proposed to every
Officer distinctly.

Whether upon the Votes and Resolutions of the House of Commons, now read, or
any other consideration, do you find cause to alter or recede from the third
Quaere yesterday resolved on, concerning assurance of pay, and subsistence? It
was resolved in the Negative by all, except, Col. Harley, Col. Fortescue, and
Capt. Young.

The same Question being proposed concerning the fourth Article, viz. To have
satisfaction in payment of Arrears, and indemnity, etc.

Resolved in the Negative by all, except Captain Young.

The like Question being proposed, concerning the first Quaerie to know what
particular Regiments, Troops, or Companies of this Army are to be continued in
service in this Kingdom.

It past likewise in the Negatives, all referring to the several Votes upon
the same, yesterday delivered.

There being several Officers now present, who were not here yesterday at the
debates, viz.

Captain Rainborow, Capt. Persons, Capt. Rawlins, Capt. Muskett, Capt. Biscoe,
Capt. Wolf, Capt. Kirby.

The several Votes of the House of Commons, concerning the sending seven
Regiments of Foot, and of Horse into Ireland was read unto them, as also the
Votes of the House, concerning the raising of 60000. l. per month, toward the
maintenance of the forces in England and Ireland, the same Question and
Quaeries thereupon, which were yesterday propounded, were now proposed to the
said last mentioned Officers severally, and each Officer by himself, declared
his Vote to the first Question, viz.

Whether they were now prepared to give their resolution; Negative, and to all
the rest affirmative.

Captain Young coming in, declared, That he receded from these things, wherein
yesterday he concurred to desire satisfaction, and resolves upon the main
Question, that he will engage with as many of his Soldiers as he can get.

Capt. Dennizon, Capt. Bushel, Capt. Cox, and Capt. Pooley of Colonel
Fortescues Regiment, declare the same resolution with Captain Young.

A Letter from the General to Mr. Speaker.
SIR,
I Received your Letter dated the 27. of this Instant, with an enclosed order
from the House of Commons, for the making stop of the further proceed in a
Petition, which the House was informed, was carrying on the in Army: In
obedience to which, I sent out orders to the Officers of the Regiments
quartering in these parts of the Kingdom, to meet at my quarters, that I might
enquire into the whole matter, and take such course as might most effectually
conduce unto the accomplishing your commands, where having communicated your
Letter and orders to them, they did generally express a very deep sense of
their unhappiness, in being misunderstood in their clear intentions: which were
no other, then by way of Petition to represent unto me those inconveniences,
which would necessarily befall most of the Army after disbanding; desiring, That
as much, as I should judge sit, and seasonable, might be submissively made
known to the House of Commons, which otherwise (your multiplicity of business
intervening) might not be remembered: Assuring me, that they would wholly
acquiesce, in whatsoever I should judge reasonable to offer, or you to grant on
their behalf: I have also according to your commands sent up Lieutenant
General Hamond, Col. Hamond, Colonel Lilburn, Lieutenant Colonel Pride, and
Lieut. Colonel Grimes, to attend the Houses pleasure: who I hope will give you
(as f^r as they are acquainted therewith) a full and candid account of the
whole proceedings in this Petition. Sir There is one clause in your Letter,
concerning all the Regiments marching this way, which I do not understand,
except it be meant by Sir Hardress Wallers Regiment, which I have remanded
away, at the instance of Major General, Skippon upon the grounds in his
enclosed Letter, and Colonel Hamonds, and Colonel Herbets, now upon their march
from Chester, being dismissed from that service. Sir, I trust the Army will ever
manifest their affections to the Public, by their constant perseverance in
their accustomed obedience unto all your commands; which shall be ever really
endeavored, by:

Walden, March 30. 1647. For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker
of the Honorable House of Commons. Your most humble Servant, Tho: Fairfax.


