A DISCOVERY OF THE PRIESTS;

That say they are sent off by the Lord, but upon trial are found out of the
commands of Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles, and to be those that are not
the sent of the Lord, but to be such that the sent ones of the Lord did cry woe
against, and to be such that are false Apostles, deceitful, wicked,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ: and no marvail, for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light; therefore it is no great thing,
if his ministers be transformed as the Ministers of righteousness, whose End
shall be according to their works, for by their works you may know them, 2 Cor.
verses 13, 14, 15. With a few words to such professors and profane, that
together join to persecute the Righteous: and to the Ranters that do commit all
manner of sins with greediness. Darkness denied by the children of Light, and
the Babe of Christ growing up to a perfect man.

Written from one who is known to the world by the name of John Pain, who
accounts it great riches to suffer reproaches, and afflictions with the people
of the Lord, who scornfully by the world are called Quakers, Heb. 12.21. Whom
the Devil has cast some of them into prison, that they may be tried, Rev.
2.10. But draw near hither ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer
and the whore, against whom do ye sport your selves, against whom do ye make a
wrie mouth, and draw the tongue? are ye not children of transgression, a seed
of falsehood, Isa. 58.3, 4. Ye shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen,
the Lord shall slay thee, and call his people by another name, Isa. 55.15.

Reader I would desire thee to read the proofs that are quoted in this book:
Prove all things hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

Written from Starford in Hartford-shire the 7. day of the 4. Month. 1655.

London, Printed by Jo. Streater for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at
the end of Paul's, 165^.

A Discovery of the Priests.
THE Word of the Lord to you that call your selves Ministers of the Lord, and
sent by the Lord, but you are not in the obedience of the Lord, if you were the
sent ones of the Lord: and came in the name of the Lord, then would you obey
the commands of the Lord; Christ says, be not ye called masters of man, nor
call ye man master; for one is your master even Christ, Mat. 23.10
and he that is greatest amongst you, let him be your servant. This pride was
forbid by him that was lowly, and did wash the feet of his Disciples, leaving
them an example for to follow, and no man was to follow them no further then
they did follow Christ.

Now consider, you that do think this a small matter, and do make a slight thing
of the command of Christ: was not that Christ the true Prophet that all men
were to hear and obey; and those that do not obey this Prophet, is to be cut
off from amongst his people? is not this one command that you are to obey, and
whether not obeying this command, being not called of men Masters, be not the
same command as it was when it was gave forth? Surely it is, why not then
obeyed, the Lord in giving that command, did know what he spoke, and to what he
spoke, though by proud ones it is slighted. But know proud flesh, against thee
was this command gave forth, though by thee it is slighted, but whosoever does
break one of the least of the commands of Christ, is guilty of them all.

Did ever the commands of Christ, and the Ministers of Christ differ before man
came to be exalted, but now that which does stand directly against the pride of
man is not regarded. But woe be to you that breaks one of the least of Christ's
commands, and teach men so to do, you shall be called the least in the kingdom
of Heaven; but that mastership which the Lord has commanded, do I own,
Servants be obedient to your masters in the Lord, but for servants to be called
masters, this is disowned by Christ, and those that do obey Christ.

Now consider if the Ministers of Christ be not called the Lords servants and
servants of men (...) what is a steward but a servant? what is an Ambassador
but a servant? what is a messenger but a servant?

Now consider, are not the Ministers of Christ so called in the Scripture are
they called masters: but this is no great matter, will you say, this is but a
civil thing, and you say, you do not regard it, but that men will call you so.
Nay, it is no civil thing, but a thing that is uncivil, to break the commands
of Christ. But, the mastership that men do put upon us, is for our Learning,
and the Degrees which we did take at the Universities, when we did commence
Masters of Arts. This I have heard pleaded both by Priests and peopeople; see
now what fountains these streams of pride flow from, but the Lord God of power
will dry up those Fountains, that do issue forth streams against his commands,
under what pretense soever, he will famish all the gods of the heathen.

Consider this both Priest and people. Will this stand you in stead when the
Lord shall come to plead with all flesh by his sword and by his fire; no, it
will not stand you in stead, then obedience will be better then sacrifices, and
rebellion the sin of witchcraft. Are you not here out of Christ's doctrine? have
you not here obeyed man and not God? does not the Apostle John say in his 2
Epistle, verse. 9. that whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine
of Christ has not God. When did you ever declare against the breach of this
Command? no, no, your pride will not suffer you to cry down your worldly honor.
When did you ever reprove any of your hearers of whom you have a living, and
forbid them, calling of you masters? now if you are masters, why do you not
provide for your servants, and not the servants for the Masters? if you be
fathers, why do you not provide for your children, and not the chil-for their
fathers? Mat. 23.9. This is that which Christ forbids when he says, call no
man father upon the earth.
They are not only called masters by those that do provide for them, and
called fathers by those that were never begotten into the truth by them, but
these honors they take to themselves calling one another learned Fathers and
Masters, and receive honor one of another, and not the honor that does come
from the Lord: those that are his sent ones, are stewards and messengers and
ambassadors, which is Honor of the Lords own giving: but for Doctors and
Masters and such like, is honor of the worlds giving, and therefore owned by
them, because they are of the world, but those that Ministry for Christ, these
things do deny, and against it testify, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4
knowing it is better to obey God then man, but this is their many Crowns that
the man of sin who sits in the temple of God, and is exalted above the
commands of God, has put upon their heads to make them seem glorious in the
eyes of the world, and the world wonders after them; and the world fights for
them, when the Lord does send any to cry against their deceits by their
hearers; and they are persecuted, torn and rent by the heathen: be ashamed for
ever that such things should be done by you or your hearers; but now is the
Lord God of power bringing forth his Ministry, and has brought many forth,
praised be his name for ever that do obey his commands, which are taught only
by him, and led into the truth which are not made by man, nor by the will of
man, but by Jesus Christ, which did ascend on high for to beget them for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body, while they come to a
perfect man in Christ Jesus, whose sufficiency is of God that has made them
able Ministers, not of the Letter but of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. standing out
of the will of man, leading people up to the Lord out of the world or
fellowship with the world; and therefore hated by them, persecuted and scoffed
by them; and made the offscouring of the world, of whom the world is not
worthy, which does not receive friendship of the world: but scornings,
stockings, and stonings, and all manner of reviling, both by profane and by
professors, that say they are not of the world, but those that say they are not
of the world, and yet walk in these fruits of darkness, they lie and do not say
the truth. If any man seem to be Religious, and cannot bridle his tongue from
railing and evil speaking; that man's Religion is vain, let him profess what he
will.

Now consider this, professors and profane, who join together to persecute the
righteous; is this the spirit of the Lord, or the spirit of the devil, which
would if he could, murder all that do profess Jesus. When the man child is
brought forth, does not the devil stand ready to devour it, sending his floods
after it. I charge you in the name of the Lord, join not with the profane
people, but come from amongst them, for the Lord will be a Sanctuary to his
people, for a rock of offense to both houses of Israel, for a gin, for a snare
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and many amongst them shall stumble and fall,
and be broken, and be snared, and be taken.

Consider this you that are professors, it is not for you to prescribe the Lord
a way for him to manifest his own glory by, lest you stumble, fall, and be
broken, be snared and taken. Who art thou proud flesh that would limit the
holy one of Israel, to make himself manifest by: the Lord will choose his own
laborers to work in his own vineyard: therefore silence flesh and deceit.

Stop thy mouth for ever, lest thou be found a fighter against the Lord, it
will be hard for thee to kick against the pricks: behold says the Lord, I and
my children are for signs and wonders in Israel, from the Lord of hoasts that
dwells in mount Sion: has it not been the portion of the true messengers of
the Lord in all ages to suffer persecution from the world, yea not only from
the world but by those that in profession were taken out of the world. Were
there not honorable and devour women that did stir up persecution against the
Apostles?

Now consider it is not a profession of the truth that will keep men and women
from joining with the world, and being one with the world, nay it will not;
there is a worldly Religion, they can mock and scoff and scorn, Act. 13.50
jeer and jest, be wanton and proud and heady and high minded, having got the
form but persecute the power, where it is made manifest, but the pure Religion
they do not know which is unspotted of the world which does keep the heart pure
out of the defilement up to the Lord, Jam. 3.13, 15, 16.
in loliness, in love, which as pure, and brings forth fruits of purity, as
love, meekness, gentleness, not easily provoked, but bears all things: but
where there is bitter enveying and strife in your hearts; Romans 9.4, 5.
glory not and lie not against the truth; this wisdom descends not from
above, but is earthly sensual and devilish, for where envy and strife is there
is confusion, and every evil work, but the wisdom that is from above is first
pure then peacable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, without partiality, without hypocrisy: had not the Jews a very high
profession? did not they say they were Abraham's seed, and that God was their
father and that they were in bondage to no man, and for privileges and
ordinances none like them who were Israelites, to whom did pertain the adoption
and glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God
and the promises whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came who is over all, God blessed for ever.

These are very high privileges, as any of you Churches does enjoy, but did
this keep them from crucifying the Lord of glory? no it did not, therefore take
heed how you stand lest you fall, all works that are not wrought in God though
it be in the highest profession cannot free men from the spirit of persecution,
the same spirit that does act in the highest wickedness, it is one with, and of
that spirit that does act in the highest form of godliness, where the light and
power is wanting, yea it is the same and far more dangerous, for the poor has
been all along persecuted by it: this is the transformings of the devil into an
angel of light, let Priests and people say what they can; what a spirit of
persecution is sound, it is not of God, it is the fruits of the devil, let it
be under what pretense soever as I know he has many to hide his persecution
with, the root is bitter and so are the fruits; therefore as you do tender the
good of your own souls which are precious, do not go on in these practices, but
say you had warning; for the righteous God will judge and reprove with equity:
for the meek of the earth he shall inherit the earth; with the word of his
mouth and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked: the Lord will
punish the world for their evil and the wicked for their iniquity, and will
cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of
the terrible.

Consider this all sorts of people high and low, rich and poor, it does concern
you all, the hand of the Lord is lifted up against all drunkards and
whoremasters, idolaters, covetuous, oppressors, and persecuters, liars, proud
ones, scoffers and scorners, sons of Ishmael, sons of the bondwoman, yea the
sinners in Sion shall mourn fear shall surprise the hypocrite, therefore think
not the word of the Lord strange in these our days, it is that I have prayed
for, it is that I did believe would come, and now my eyes has seen and my
heart has felt the power of the Lord; ye the enemies that are now against it
have prayed for it, which of you but have prayed for it: which of you but have
prayed, Thy Kingdom come, but now it is coming, you speak all manner of evil of
it. Mat. 24.29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
Know the day of your visitation, for it is such a work of power that does
break down the earth, that nothing shall stand but that which cannot be shaken,
that his will may be done on earth as it is in heaven perfectly. The Lord is
now coming to shut the seeing eye, and to open the blind eye. Is not now the
time that the spirit of a deep sleep has closed the eyes of the prophets;
although the signs of Christ's coming the second time without sin into the world
be made manifest, yet they see it not: Is not the vision of all become as a
sealed book? is not the Lord turning Leabnon into a fruitful field, Luke 12.49,
51, 52.53.56.
and the fruitful field into a Forest, and they know it not. Consider where
you are, are you not like those that dream that you are satisfied, and behold
you are empty? is not night upon you, that you cannot see the wonders of the
Lord which he does now make manifest? but, what is manifest amongst you;
fruits of persecution, fruits of pride, fruits of covetuousness, these fruits
of the flesh are made manifest.

O repent, return to your first husband, for these are the fruits of the
adulterer, and the whoregoing from the light into darkness.

Return, return, to the light in your consciences that does convince of sin,
that does discover the thoughts and intents of the heart; this light is pure
and leads into purity and holiness. Isa. 29.13, 14.
Has not the Lord been a long time drawn nigh to with the lip, when the heart
is far from him. Has not the fear toward him been taught by the precepts of
man? therefore behold, says the Lord, I will do a mavelous work and a
wonder, the wiseman shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall be
hid, but the deaf shall hear, and the eye of the blind shall see out of
obscurity: now is this promise fulfilled, and fulfilling; and now has the Lord
chose Pastors according to his own heart, that shall feed his people with
knowledge according to his promise.

Now is the day of the Lord that he has sent forth his messengers as Lambs
amongst the Wolves, counting not their lives too dear to fulfill the work, the
Lord has sent them forth to do, but leaving all for Christ's house, that durst
not be disobedient o the call of the Lord, nor consult with flesh, Gal. 1.16.
which would save it self, but many leaving father and mother, lands and
livings, wife and children for love of the precious seed of God that is kept in
bondage, groaning for deliverance, and many a one through the Ministry of the
Lord in them can witness a living soul redeemed out of death, to praise the
living Lord; are not these the signs of the true Ministry of Christ when the
Apostles were counted deceivers by the false Apostles and the rest, some that
were professors.

How did he clear himself when they did seek a proof of his Ministry? He says
in you ward I was not weak, but is mighty in you: this mighty power many
hundreds can witness, bringing down their high thoughts and words to the
obedience, of Jesus Christ: many drunkards and swearers, many formal
professors, many high flown notionists, are brought to the obedience of the
cross which has crucified them to the world and the world to them: this is the
proof of the despised Ministry which is despised of the world, but owned by
those more dear then their lives that does embrace it; for those that are
joined to the Lord by their Ministry received from the Lord, are Epistles
write in one another heart, this leads into unity, this leads into honor in
that which is pure; every member in the body serving one another in love,
watching one over the other, the strong bearing with the weak; and here is no
rent and schism, but every one in their measures growing up to the father of
lights who does make his all of one heart and one mind they have fellowship
one with the other in that which is not of the world, but leads out of the
world up to God, leads into the light of God; therefore silence you enemies,
stand still in the light of Christ which will crucify you to the world, and
the world to you, and you shall see the salvation of the Lord as many a one
has done: praises, praises be to the Lord for ever.

Friends consider the wonderful works of the Lord, be not despisers and
wonderers, and perish, but know the Lord will do his own work by his own
Instruments though never so despised: for the preaching of the cross to them
that perish is foolishnes, but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God.
The Jews do require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, but we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness; the Jews had thoughts that the Lord would have chosen the great
and mighty, and the honorable of the world, the learned Scribes and Pharisees,
and that he would advance an earthly Kingdom, but did the Lord choose such? no,
but poor Fishermen, Herdsmen, and Tradesmen, and men unlearned, as Peter and
John were. The same. Christ is now as ever, and did ascend on high to give
gists unto men, for the work of the Ministry, and this is to last to the end of
the world.

And who art thou proud flesh, that would limit the Holy one of Israel? does
not the wind blow where it lists? does the spirit of truth that leads into
all truth, and knows things to come, confine it self to one particular sort of
men? no, know it does not, the Lord has made himself manifest, and has
discovered that false spirit: there has been much contending about the call of
the Ministry, and writing and preaching one against the other, all like
Diotrephes, loving to have pre-eminence; but now has the Lord fully ended that
controversy. But the world will not see it, but they shall at last own it, and
they shall know, Joh. 3.9, 10.
The wind blows where it lists; but you Priests, how little has this wind
blown upon your Garden for this many years, that the spices thereof flow out.

Can you beloved, as you say, come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant
fruits? Are not the Grapes of his Vineyard, devoured by the Foxes?

What fruits are brought forth to God? is not fruits of pride, and fruits of
covetousness, reviling, scoffing, and scorning.

Now the Lord comes to his Vineyard, does not these fruits appear both in
teacher and hearers: was it not high time to let his Vineyard to more faithful
laborers, that it may bring forth fruit to himself, for now it is over grown
with brambles, and briars fit for the fire: houle ye vine-dressers, now the
Lord is come to his Vineyard, their fruits are made manifest, it is just with
the Lord, to rain no more rain upon it: what could the Lord have done more then
he has done? but in stead of bringing forth good grapes, it has brought forth
wild Grapes, fruits to your selves, not to the Lord, every one seeking your
own things, and not the things of Christ: therefore thus says the Lord, An
evil, an only evil, Exek. 7.5, to 11.
be hold is come, an end is come, the end is come, it watches for you, behold
it is come, the morning is come upon thee.

O thou that dwell in the land, the time is come, the day of trouble is
near; now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish my anger
upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense thee
for all thy abominations and my eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity,
I will recompense thee according to thy ways, and the abominations that are in
the of midst thee, and ye shall know that I am the Lord that smites.

Behold the day it is come, the morning is gone forth, the rod has blossomed,
pride has budded, violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness, none of them
shall remain nor of their multitudes, neither shall their be wailing for them:
is not the rod blossomed? is not pride budded, is not violence rise up into a
rod of wickedness. Yea pride is not only buded but it blossomed, and that
amongst you that are teachers. Do not you and your wife and children exceed in
it that the eyes of all are upon you, some wondering at it, most following you
for it, learning it of you.

Thus profaneness is gone forth from you, these are the fruits they gather
from you, fruits of covetuousness and oppression, that is become a proverb in
England: Who more proud then the priests, who more covetuous then they?

Oh for shame, 1 Timothy 3.5. and 8.
for shame give over. Are you fit to rule the Church of Christ, that cannot
rule your selves and your Family; no, no, such as ruled the Church of Christ,
they were not greedy of filthy lucre, they were no proud ones, they were no
covetous ones, no, but against it did testify and said, Let not covetousness
be so much as once named amongst you. But tribulation and anguish upon every
soul of man that does evil, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; But are
not these fruits amongst you? are not you them that profess Christ in words,
but in works do deny him? what have you to do to take the name of the Lord into
your mouths, and will not be reformed? should not every one that does name the
name of Christ, depart from iniquity? thou therefore that teaches another,
teaches thou not thy self; thou that teaches another he should not steal,
Romans 2.22.
why do thou steal?

Art not thou a thief, whosoever thou art, that speaks forth the saints words,
and do not live their life? When they spoke forth those words, they spoke forth
their life. Now see all of you, who are the Thieves and Robbers that do not
come in by the door, which is Christ, but clime up another way; those that
speak from the Scriptures, Jer. 2.8.
and not from the life that gave forth the Scriptures, they are the thieves
that steal the word from their Neighbors; these are they that say, Jer. 23.30.
Thus says the Lord, when he never spoke to them; these are they that handle
the Law, and know not the Lord, therefore they shall not profit the people.

Now consider, be not deceived; though they speak the true words of the
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, that does not make them Ministers of
Christ; no, for the Devil spoke truth when he said, Christ was the Son of God:
Mark 3.11
yea, though he spoke the truth, the Lord did rebuke him and bid him hold his
peace, for he knew he spoke by his own spirit: So consider, both Priest and
People, what Spirit you speak from, and meddle not with the Saints words
without their spirit, lest the Lord rebuke you for it, but come to the life
that gave forth the Scriptures, and then every one will witness your profession
in them, and the Spirit will lead you into the truth of them, and then will you
speak from the word of the Lord made manifest in you, and then will you come to
live their life that gave forth the Scriptures, which most that profess the
Scriptures are stangers to, having got the form of them, but the (...) is
denied by them; therefore they to every good work are reprobate, knowing not
the Lord, but living in all manner of filthiness, and yet profess Scripture to
be their rule, and that does condemn them.

For shame, give over such a profession, for those that profess Scripture, and
not live the life of it, those do deny it, let them pretend what they will;
those that live in pride, in covetousness, in railing, in scorning, in foolish
jeasting, in wantonness, in the lusts of the flesh, these deny the Scripture,
for against these things does it witness.

Now consider, you that make a trade with the Saints words, and not live the
life; what is the cause of your unfaithfulness, and the unfaithfulness of your
hearers? you do not stand in the Counsel of the Lord, and therefore not profit
the people, nor turn the wicked from the evil of their ways and wickedness of
their doings, but the hand of the Lord is against you. Repent, return to your
first Husband that you may be fruitful: you do pretend that you are the
Ministers of Christ, but where is the proof of your Ministry? are not proud
ones proud still, yea more then ever, are not covetous ones so still, are not
railers, railers still? are not profain ones so still, are not drunkards so
still, are not swearers so still, are not formilists so still? what amendment
amongst you this year more then many years before, yet never more speaking then
now: the word is the same as ever, the power the same as ever, Mich. 3.6, 7, 11.
the Lord has as many to bring home to himself as ever, and the power does as
much appear as ever, but not amongst you: the Lord has hid his face from you,
as is confessed by many of you; the wise will lay these things to heart, but
scorners will go on in scorning: Fear the Lord God of power, and return from
your wickedness, and he will receive you, and have mercy upon you; but if you
go on in these ways of wickedness, the Lord will forsake you and cast dung upon
you: you have a long while pretended that what you did was by the example of
Christ, the Prophets and the Apostles, these you say have been your rule, but
are you not sound to be those that are out of the example of Christ, of the
Prophets and the Apostles?

Ye call Christ Lord and Master, and so he is, If I then your Lord and Master
have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet, for I have
given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you: Christ was meek
and loving, and did in all things obey the will of his Father that sent him: do
you follow this example? Christ spoke nothing of himself, but from his Father
that sent him; for, says Christ, I have not spoken of my self, but the Father
that sent me he gave me a commandment what I should say and what I should
speak: Do you follow this example? do not you speak your own words, and not
from the Father? do you not speak the true words of Christ, the Prophets and
Apostles, but not by the spirit of the Father? Is this to follow Christ's
example, the Prophets and Apostles example? they spoke as they were moved by
the holy Ghost, do you follow their example? but you speak even when you will,
and pray when you will, begin when you will, and end when you will; was this
their example? you shall find the Prophets, they did not so read the prophecy
of Ezekiel, and you shall there find that he did not speak many words; but the
word of the Lord came to him again, and so he spoke as he was moved, when the
Lord did not speak to him, then he was silent: Is this your example? but you
can pray by the hour, and speak by the hour, what you have patched up together
from their true words; but the Lord does not speak those words to you; if he
had, you would follow their example, and live the life of them. Those the Lord
does speak to, they are not thus limited, neither do they thus limit, but as
the Lord does give them utterance they speak, sometimes many hours, sometimes
not many words; is this your practices? no, you would think this a shame to
you. Silence flesh, that it may not speak before the Lord, but the spirit that
does lead into the truth may have the pre-eminence, that the Lord alone may
speak in his own temple; if you did thus speak the true Declaration of Christ,
and Prophets and Apostles, which is the Scriptures, which nothing is to be
added to them, Rev. 22.18, 19.
then you would witness the word to be a fire, and a hammer; wheat, and not
chaff, purifying and cleansing, the word ingrafting, the immortal seed of it,
and so witness light: so now consider, it is not they that know the will of the
Father, but those that do it, that shall inherit the blessing; no, many shall
come in that day, and say, Lord, we have prophesied in thy name, and done many
miraculous works, yet the Lord shall say, I know ye not, ye are workers of
iniquity, depart from me; they had the Scriptures, but not the light of them,
therefore friends, be not deceived with fair shows, but try all things, try
your selves, and try your teachers, whether they or you follow Christ's example;
but are not they found out of Christ's example, the Prophets and Apostles
example, which were the true messengers of Christ, Acts 3.7. and 4.5.
that did receive their power from him, and yet were questioned by Priests, the
Professors, by what authority they did these things, and who gave them that
authority; so it was, though Peter and John did do a miracle amongst them, upon
one that was lame from the womb of his mother, yet they did question his power;
and it came to pass, that on the morrow that their Rulers, and Elders, and
Scribes, and Annas the high Priest, and Caiphas, and John, and Alexander, and
as many as were of the kindred of the Priests, were gathered together at
Jerusalem, and when they had set them in the midst, they asked them by what
Power, or by what Name have ye done this: So it is now this day by the chief
Priests and their kindred, they say by what authority, and who gave them their
power, though their power be made manifest in bringing home, many a soul to the
Lord, yet none so much as by them opposed: the same spirit that was in them,
though they are dead many years agon, yet that spirit does still live, and
bring forth the same fruits of persecution; Acts 5.34.38. Mic. 3.11. Mat. 10.8.
therefore take warning how you do oppose the work of the Lord, remember
Gamaliels counsel, lest you be found fighters against him, for we cannot but
speak the things that we have heard and seen whether it be right in the sight
of God, to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye: when Christ sent
forth his Prophets and Apostles to preach or to publish the Gospel, did he send
them forth to preach for hire; no, against all hirelings they did witness,
freely they had received it, and freely they did administer it; they had not a
living provided for them of the world, or else they would not preach to them;
if they had not a settled maintenance in one place, they did remove to another,
they did not covenant with the world, and say, What will you give me; no, this
was not their example, but this was their practice: woe were they, if they did
not preach the Gospel, through necessity, persecution, and afflictions were
laid upon them; did the Apostles of Christ receive any thing of the world for
to maintain them, was it not the command of Christ that they should not stay in
any house to eat or drink, if the people were not worthy; but if they were
worthy, there they were to stay, and to eat such things as were set before
them: Is this your example? Did the Apostle Paul, when he was planting the
Church of Corinth, receive any thing from them to be a supply to him; no, he
was chargeable to no man; for that which was lacking, the Brethren which did
come from Macedony, supplied, and in all things, I kept my self from being
burdensome to you, and so will I keep my self, 2 Cor. 11.9. is this your
example, did not he plant a Vineyard before he did eat the fruit, did not he
minister spiritual things, bringing them to the faith of Christ, before he did
receive their carnal: is this your example, no yours is contrary: do not you
receive temporal of them that never received spiritual from you? was this
their example? do you plant a Vineyard before you do eat the fruit of it? no,
they are not your example, as is manifest by your practices: are you not them
that walk out of the life of the Apostles, and by their life is to be condemned
with those, that in the Apostles days did walk as you do, loving gifts, and
preaching for h^re: let your pretense be what it will, if you are found in
these practices receiving maintenance from the world, or forcing it from them,
then you are such which the Prophets and Apostles were sent to cry woe against,
did ever the Apostles take the tenth of men's labors? did ever the Apostles
take Tithe-Calves, Tithe-Pigs, or Tithe-Eggs, Tithe for Gardens, Tithe-Hay,
Tithe-Wood, and such like things; be it known to those that do receive them,
and to those that do give them than to me.

Was this their example, or were ever Tithes paid after Christ's Ascension, by
any, either by the world, or by the Saints for preaching Christ: did Abraham
ever pay Tithes, but once to Melchisedeck and those not of men's labors, but of
the spoil when he did return home from the Battle. The light has made you
manifest, that you do not follow their example, and yet you cry your selves up
to be the Ministers of Christ. Deal honestly with your own souls, how dare you
say, you follow their example, when they did practice no such things, but
against such did testify? how dare you say that you are their successors, and
yet walk in the steps of the false Apostles: for shame stop your mouths; own
your selves where you are, and deny this dishonest gain of yours.

Did ever the Apostles sue any at Law for a maintenance from them? was this
their example? does not Christ and the Apostles forbid to go to Law, but rather
to suffer? has this been your example? nay, has not there been many
imprisoned by you, paying double damages, to the undoing of them, and their
Families: lying in prison, some at this day for this very thing: where had you
this example, Mat. 5.40. 1 Cor. 6.7.
if this were either Christ's, the Prophets, or the Apostles example, prove it
if you can by Scripture: if it were not, how say you, you are their successors,
do you not rather resemble the Popes Clergy, Read and compare these together.
who has Tithes for their maintenance, and a forced living. But you will say,
the Civil power does give you them, therefore you may receive them; but I would
know of you, whether it be better for to obey God or Man.

Do not you know, that you should not receive them, if you will follow the
example of Christ, and the Apostles? has not many left them, as knowing them
not to be according to the Gospel Order, but for the Priestly Order; Numb.
18.21.
but it is your gain that will not let you follow their example: those that
were the Ministers of Christ, and the Messengers of Christ, they did cry out
against all oppression; but you strengthen the hand of the wicked, and prevent
Judgment and Justice, and makes it serve for your own lusts; or you do know
that the tenths that are given you by the civil Law, are not the Ministers of
Christ's portion, neither ever had they any such example; but this is that that
does uphold the National Ministry, Heb. 7.5.11.12, 13, 14.
which has made all Nations drunk with the wine of their fornication.

Is not this the reason why so many are put by man into the work of the
Ministry, because of their settled maintenance? would there be so many sent to
the Schools of Learning, by their Parents? if it were not for hopes of
preferment? Were there nothing of self ends, neither in Parents or Children,
Heb. 1.2.
the Schools would be many times empty: but when they have spent their young
time in idleness, without a lawful Calling, Read and compare one with the other.
and served a prentiship in the University, then are they fitted, as they say,
to come and preach to the people, although they have never learned their own
Ministry: here is the bold presumption of man; for they choose men, and fit
them, and send them forth into the work of the Ministry, they send forth
laborers into the Lords Harvest, when it is the work of the Lord so for to do;
for this was one end of Christ's leading captivity captive, to give gifts unto
men, and he did ascend on high far above all Heavens, that he might fill all
things, and he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting the Saints, Ephesians. 4.8.13.
for the work of the Ministry.

Do you think Christ is not sufficient to furnish his Messengers as formerly he
has done; but you proud flesh must teach him a way, and so be his Counselor?
will not you let him choose his own laborers, to work in his own Vineyard, and
fit them as himself pleases, is not he with his Church to the end of the
World? has he not said, he will never leave them, nor forsake them: Gal. 1.1.
is not he their King, Priest and Prophet, and has he not said, he will send
them Pastors according to his own heart, that shall feed his people with
knowledge: and now Christ promises is fulfilling; Gal. 1.11, 12.
but he is not believed by you, but you will choose, and you will send forth,
and you give them their Commission and Approbation, and none is accounted fit,
but such as are approved by you. Is this Christ's example, is not this to take
that power to your selves, that the Lord did never give you: 2 Cor. 3.5.6.
is not this to set your selves above Christ, and so are indeed the
Antichrists: come down proud flesh, the Lord will establish his Mountain upon
the top of all your Mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills, and the
people shall flow unto it, and many Nations shall come and say, Come let us go
up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he
will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the Law shall
go forth of Sion, 1 Timothy 1.12.
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, take warning, the Lord will not long
take at your hands, for you to choose his laborers, to work in his Vineyard;
for the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and
lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low: this
day of the Lord is now made manifest, though you see it not, wherein the lofty
looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bore down,
and the Lord Alone shall be exalted in that day, Luke 10.2.3.
who art thou proud man that thou should strive with the Lord. Look back to
the catalogue of Priests formerly, that were approved by man, and sent forth by
man, by the same power that you were sent forth by, and approved by, that is
the Bishops, and read what they were. 1 Timothy 2.7.


Were not they a shame and reproach to the Gospel, living in all manner of
filthiness, and in the abominations of the Heathen? But you say, you were not
chosen by them as Bishops, but as Presbyters. And were not those the like?
might not those that were chosen by them have said the same as you do? but is
your Presbytery now, or was it then as it was in the Apostles days? 1 Timothy 4.14
you have got the form of the thing; but where is the life and power, either of
your choice of Ministers, or other Officers?

Do you give the gift with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, as
those did: if you had, there would not have been so many cast out for their
filthiness, as there was; but then Ministers, and other Officers were chose by
the Holy Ghost, Act. 13.2, 3, 4.
and then offenders were cast out by the spirit of the Lord, and then Ministers
were separated to that work by the Spirit not by man, nor by the will of man
but by God, 1 Timothy 1.12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has enabled me for
that he counted me faithful, 1 Cor. 5.4.
putting me into the Ministry. See from whence you are fallen and repent, and
turn to the Lord, and yet you are exalted, and you are those that the world
wonders after, crying you up for the only Ministers of Christ, chose by man,
and approved by man, but out of the example of Christ, as has been proved
before. Do you not make the Universities the two fountains and springs, for to
send forth godly and able Ministers and Magistrates, that out of them may
proceed plants to plant the Church and State withal. Is not this your prayer
many times? do you not here limit the holy one of Israel, and confine him to
your wills? but such as the fountain is, such are the streams; and if ever any
come to be called by Christ to the work of the Ministry which has been at
those fountains, they do deny the streams of human inventions, as many in this
land do and has done, knowing they were never made for no such use nor end,
but stand directly: against Christ and the commands of Christ. Beware, says
the Apostle, lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, Col.
2.8.
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ, for in him dwells all the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete in him,
which is the head of all principality and power. Here is the Saints fullness in
Christ, and their compleatness in Christ, Christ being made to them of God
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, and so need no other
wisdom to be taught by, 1 Cor. 1.30.
nor does it teach by any other, but all his people are taught by him, and so
they are established in sure peace, not carried about with the cunning shifts
of men, whereby they may lie in wait to deceive, but speaking the truth in the
love it, they grow up into him in all things, which is the head even Christ,
and so the Church comes to know the manifold wisdom of God, which is hid from
the Learned of the world, but revealed to babes. Come lay all your Crowns down
at the feet of Jesus, and let him that thinks himself wise, become a fool that
he may be made wise: for worldly wisdom is ^^nity against God, for the world by
wisdom does not know God, from that eye it is hid, never to be revealed, and
exalt not thy self above thy fellow members; but know the same light that does
enlighten the eye, the same light does enlighten the whole body, fitly joined
together, 1 Cor. 12.12, 20, 25.
and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body unto the
edifying of it self in love, and so here is no schism in the body. Here is not
one member seeks pre-eminence above another, but he that would be greatest, let
him be servant to the body: Is this your practice? no it is to the contrary, do
not you Lord it over Gods heritage, as if you and only you did know the mind
of the Lord, Ephesians 4.15, 16.
and if any man does not take that for truth which you do deliver or shall
object against it, such a one is a dangerous fellow, he is running into sects
and Ichisme, and hypocrisy: but you make a trade of your preaching; and should
it be questioned how you came into the Ministry, your gain would be loss which
you do receive of the world for your preaching; but know the Lord is come to
pluck the skin of the lamb off the back of the wolf, that he may appear to be
so, Col. 2.19:
that men may be no longer deceived by you that profess you sollow the example
of Christ, but upon trial are found to be one with the world, entered into the
world, and the world into you, and so are at peace one with the other; but the
Lord God of power is breaking your peace, that Christ alone may reign in his
Temple.

Therefore beware you Priests of the world, how you uphold that which the Lord
will destroy, least you be found fighters against God: but the Priests ever
labored to have the power of the world on their sides.

O the running, and riding, the plotting, and contriving by the Priests to
choose a person that will side with them and their interest; what meetings and
prayings, what stirring up of the people to join with them all along, with
petitioning, and fighting, witness many both in Scotland and England, to drive
on their interest; these things are manifest, and yet would be counted the
Ministers of Christ: was this their example? are not all the ways of the Lord
hid from you? are your desires fulfilled? you have asked and received not,
because you ask amiss; ye kill and desire to have and cannot obtain, that you
might consume it upon your lusts.

I have heard many of you say, the Lord was in the cloud that you could not see
him; his ways were very dark to you, yea they were and so they are still: in
the land of Egypt there is darkness, but in the land of Goshen there is light.
Did ever Christ or the Apostles petition for aid for the Gospel; Jam. 4.2, 3, 4.
but this is your trade, and by this comes in your gain that makes you so
bestir you, you do not remember that Christ will be with his to the end of the
world, and will never leave his sheep without a shepherd, Amos. 3.7, 8.
but the Lord will have his Gospel preached to the end of the world, though
nothing but persecution, prisoning, killing, or what ever! Did ever the Gospel
flourish more then by persecution; Amos 8.11, 12.
and were not always the faithful witnesses of the Lord persecuted by the
world and worldly professors?

Thus it is now, and has been in all ages? were not the true prophets counted
the troublers of Israel? Act. 24.5.
Were not the Apostles counted the pestilent fellows, and ringleaders of Sects,
and not fit for to live? Were not the mouths of the world open against them
with all manner of revilings, scoffings, and scornings? Were not professors
gainsaying and blaspheming? Were not some hewn asunder, and some sawne asunder,
whom the world was not worthy; Act. 13.45
in prisons often, in perils often, in travels often, had no certain dwelling place,
but sent about from place to place, from City to City (yet were no vagabonds)
in hunger and nackedness, hid in caves and dens of the earth, they were halled
out of their Synagogues, they were had before Rulers for the witnessing of
Jesus. Now know, those that the Lord has sent forth now to declare the same
everlasting Gospel, their lives are not dear to them. Nay, woe are they if they
preach it not, what affliction or persecution so ever from the world they do
endure, counting it their joy to suffer for Christ, who has called them forth
to the work of the Ministry. And now is this Scripture fulfilled and
fulfilling, that God has revealed his counsel to babes and sucklings, and has
hid these things from the wife and prudent; 1 Cor. 1.27, 28*
for so it has pleased him, and God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world,
to confound the things that are mighty, and base things of the world, and
things that are despised has God chosen; yea the things that are not, to bring
to naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his sight; but as it
is written, Let him that glories glory in the Lord. Praised be the Lord for
ever; that after this long night of darkness, he has sent forth his messengers
to direct us to the true light, that does lead into purity and holiness,
bringing down all things that would exalt it self: Heb. 11.26.
this is witnessed in those that do obey it to their everlasting joy and
comfort, unto whom the reproaches of the world is great riches, this I do
witness that they do approve themselves to the conscience in the sight of God,
and approve themselves as the Ministers of God in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes and imprisonments, in
tumults, in labors, in watchings and fastings by pureness, 1 Cor. 4.2.
by knowledge, by long suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the peace of God, by the Armor of
righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left, by honor and dishonor, by
good report and evil report, as deceivers and yet true, as unknown, and yet
well known, as dying and behold we live, as chastised and not killed as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as poor yet making many rich, as having
nothing and yet possessing all things. All that are joined by one spirit to
them, in their measure this does witness against all ravenous beasts, and the
Vultur's eye.

Now consider, all sorts of men, professors and profane, that do join
together, for to scoff and scorn, revile, and persecute these innocent Lambs
of Christ, which he has sent forth among the Wolves of the world, who are rent
and torn by you, say you had warning; for know whatsoever you do to one his
little ones that believes in him, ye do it to himself; and so it will be taken,
and you judged accordingly; and it were better that you had never been born,
for the Lord will execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are
ungodly among you of all your ungodly deeds, Jud. 14.
which they have ungodly committed; and of all your hard speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against them. What you speak against the servants of
Christ, you speak against Christ, all your hard speeches, all your evil
surmisings against them, is all known to the Lord, who is just and righteous,
and will not suffer the wicked to go unpunished.

Repent, repent, and turn to the Lord, the great day of the Lord is near, it is
near, it hastes greatly, even the great day of the Lord; the mighty man shall
cry out bitterly, that day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a
day of wastness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of
clouds and thick darkness; and I will bring distress upon men, and they shall
walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the Lord, this shall
they have for their pride, because they reproached and magnified themselves
against the people of the Lord of hosts, the Lord will be terrible unto you,
then you will wish the mountains to fall upon you and hide you from the
presence of the Lord; so terrible will the Lord be to all the enemies of Sion,
for he will set his Son upon that holy hill, and he will roar out of Sion, and
utter his voice out of Jerusalem and terribly shake the earth, and he will
famish the gods of the earth, and men shall worship him every one from his
place even all the Isses of the heathen; for then will I turn to the people a
pure language, that they may call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with
one consent; Amos 3.16
and will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come.

No wart these promises fulfilled and fulfilling, praises be to the Lord for
ever, he has turned to his people a pure language, and they do serve him with
one consent; Heb. 12.2^
and now is the shaking all Nations shaking earth, and shaking heaven, that
those things that cannot be shaken may remain: therefore take heed you powers
of the earth, how you set your power against this great power of the Lord,
least he shake you out with the workers of iniquity, when he shall come to
cleanse the Land of evil doers, for at last he will make his Jerusalem a praise
upon the earth, and he will arise and have mercy upon his Sion. Behold at that
time I will undo all that afflict thee, and will get them praise and fame in
every land where they have been put to shame.

Consider this, ye persecuters, ye scoffers and scorners, ye sons of Ishmael
who scoffs the righteous, and makes a scorn of the upright, but the Lord that
sits in heaven shall laugh and have you in derision, and will mock when your
fear comes, Prove. 1.26, 27.
your destruction shall come like a whirle wind; affliction and anguish shall
come upon you, then shall you call, but he will not answer you, but shall cast
you forth with the workers of iniquity.

Repent behold the day comes that shall burn as an even, and all the proud,
yea all that do wickedly shall be stuble, and the day that comes shall burn
them up, it shall leave you neither root nor branch, and ye shall be trodden
under the soles of their feet in the day that I shall do this, says the Lord
of Hosts.

Repent all scoffers and scorners, repent all proud ones which know not what to
eat nor what to drink, nor what for to put on, but feeding your selves without
the fear of the Lord, living like fed beasts that are fatted against the day of
slaughter, setting your selves forth with every new and strange fashion to make
you seem glorious in the eyes of the world, but the Lord will visit you for it;
ye the day is near at hand, when you shall be called to an account for spending
the Lords goods upon your lusts, every steward must give an account how he has
disposed of his Masters goods whether for the use and service of the Lord, or
to save your selves.

Repent all lustful ones above your fellow creatures, as if you had not all one
father from whence you did proceed; did not the Lord, of one blood make all
Nations that live upon the face of the earth? Act. 17.26
remember from whence you came, and whether you are going: as dies the rich so
dies the poor, as dies the wise, so dies the fool; there is an end to all
flesh, as flesh. What advantage is it for you to act in all manner of
filthiness, for a time to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and after
death to be tormented for ever?

You act your parts upon the stage of this world, and make your folly manifest,
and then ly down in sorrow. O the filthy pride that is among the rich and great
of the world, the high mindedness and disdainful carriages of most of the great
ones, browbeating their inferiors, as they call them; be not high minded, nor
trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living Lord, who is an enemy against
all those that do commit such things, but turn to the light that does discover
these things to be fruits of darkness, whose end is destruction and shame for
ever; this was and is the main end of the Ministers of Christ and Ministry of
Christ, to tum people from darkness to the light, for that which does discover
darkness is light, the light makes all things manifest; Christ is the light of
the world, and the life of Christ is the light of the world, and this is the
true light that does inlighten every one that comes into the world; this light
shines in darkness, but the darkness cannot comprehend it; and therefore will
not own it; the world was made by him, and the world knows him not; and this is
the condemnation that light is come into the world, and men love darkness
rather then light, because their deeds are evil, for every one that does evil
hates the light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be
reproved, but he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be
made manifest that they are wrought in God, and he that walks in this light;
there is no occasion of stumbling in him. This light is pure as Christ is pure,
it is not of man nor nothing of man, but it is in man, it is the gift of God,
it is not of man's will but crosses the will of man, for the will of man is to
run away from the Lord, but this would lead the will of man up to the Lord; so
it is neither him that wills nor him that runs, but the Lord that shows
mercy; but the will of man running from the light into darkness, runs away
from his own mercy, and so his destruction is of himself; that which does
convince the world of sin, is that which is not of the world, but would lead
men out of the world up to God, from whence it came. This light is the gift and
talent of God which he has invested every man withal, it is not man's own, but
every man must be countable how he does employ it, this is the grace of God
that has appeared to all men, and it teaches the Saints to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly, and godly in
this present evil world: but this by the world's turned into wantonness, and
done despite unto: such by the light may come to know the way of righteousness,
which natural light cannot discover, for if they after they have escaped from
the filthiness of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and of the
Savior Jesus Christ are yet again tangled therein and over run, the latter end
is worse then their beginning, for it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it to turn from the
holy commandment given unto them, but it is come unto them according to the
true Proverb, The dog is returned to his vomit, and the sow that was washed,
to the wallowing in the mire.

And here is the worlds condemnation: did not this light reprove the world of
sin, the world would have no condemnation, but now the world has no cloak for
their sin. Man will not be condemned because he has not a talent to improve,
but because they, have a talent, and does not improve it, but hide it in the
earth, and are sloathful servants, so at the last day every mouth will be
stopped, and all the world be found guilty before the Lord, and it will be just
with the Lord to take away his talent, and cast him into outer darkness;
therefore while you have the light, walk in the light, that you may be the
children of the light. How often has Christ by his light discovered to you your
deeds of darkness, and if ever they were discovered to you, which I know they
have, it was by this light. How often has it checked you, in secret when no eye
did see you, telling you that you should not swear nor lie, nor be drunk, nor
take Gods name in vain, nor do any evil, but to do to all men as you would they
should do to you. This is the love of God to every one that would lead men up
to the Lord out of sin, out of pollution: and minding it, it would lead to the
father of light, that ye should return no more to folly, but if you slight it,
it will not always strive with you: for it is impossible for those that were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God and the powers of
the world to come, if they shall fall away to renew them again by repentance,
seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an
open shame.

If those that did despise Moses Law died without mercy under two or three
witnesses, of how much soarer punishment suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under feet the Son of God, and has done despite to the
spirit of grace?

Consider these things, you ranting spirits that has turned the grace of God
that should lead you to repentance, into wantonness, and make it your cloak for
your wicked practices, running into sin with greediness, but you shall not
proceed, for your folly is made manifest to all men, you are a stink to the
Lord, and a reproach to man; woe be to you that draw iniquity with cords of
vanity, and sin with cart ropes.

Woe be to you that speak good of evil, and evil of good, which our darkness for
light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour;
therefore as the fire devoureth the stuble, and as the chafe is consumed of
the flame, so your root shall be rottenness, and your bud shall rise up like
dust, because ye have cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and contemned the
word of the holy one of Israel: this is the will of God your sanctification,
that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in holiness and
honor, and not in the lusts of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know
not God; for God has not called any unto uncleaness, but out of uncleanness
unto holiness, for those that are Christ's have crucified the world with the
affections and lusts, every one in their measures growing into conformity to
the head Christ Jesus: the wrath of the Lord will feaze upon you, except you
return from your evil to the Lord, from whence you are fallen; the world shall
see it, and fear before the Lord, the Lord will not hide it, it shall be made
manifest to man. If your consciences be not seared as with a hot iron, or if
you are not given up to a reprobate mind past feeling, if you have not sold
your selves to work wickedness; there is that in your conscience that does
convince you, that living in filthiness in the fruits of the flesh is not to
be in conformity to Christ.

Hear what is said, O God thy Throne is for ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is
a Scepter of righteousness; thou have loved righteousness and hated iniquity,
wherefore God, even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows; and know, though your good works and holy life will not save you,
yet God has ordained good works that men should walk in them, and without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, but you will find the Lamb to be a Lion
that will render vengeance upon all that obey him not in flames of fire: truly
I can say with the Apostle, having known the terrors of the Lord against sin, I
do persuade you for our God is a consuming fire; the wicked shall not stand in
his presence.

I charge you in the name of the Lord to take warning, and to mind that pure
light which leads out of these works of impurity, lest you be like those
corrupt trees: without fruit twice dead and plucked up by the roots, and so be
cut assunder from all good, for the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men which withhold the truth in
unrighteousness; be not high minded but fear; for assuredly the Lord will not
quit the guilty that will run on in sin without repentance, and count it part
of his perfection, but snares fire and brimstome will he rain upon the head of
the ungodly: know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of
God? Be not deceived for these things comes the wrath of God upon the children
of disobedience; the Lord will not be mocked, but if you do sow to the flesh,
of the flesh you shall reap corruption: those that did commit these things, had
the light; and following the light were led out of darkness, and did see those
fruits of darkness, and were ashamed.

Now consider this, both Priest and people, that say it is a natural light:
nature does not, nor cannot discover the sin that is in nature, for this light
does convince and condemn the sin in nature many years past: now that which
does reprove of sin is not natural but spiritual, for it does convince of
spiritual wickedness and leads into holiness; it is the light of life to those
that do obey it, and condemnation to them that sin against it, yea I witness it
is so, this is the true guide, this is the door to come to Christ and the
Father those that do own the light are made the children of the light and of
the day, but those that live in sin are dead while they live; they are enemies
to the Lord, and so hate the light, and will not bring their deeds to the
light, least they should be reproved.

Now for those that do get the Saints words, steal the true words that were
given forth from the light, and not walk in the life; those are the thieves and
robbers that do not come in by the door, but clime up some other way; Joh.
10.1.10, 12, 13,
these are they that do make merchandise of the letter, and so deceive the
hearts of the simple: those that spoke forth those words they spoke forth their
life, they did live them they spoke what they had heard and seen, and not from
other men, but did believe therefore they spoke: and when you come to the
faith, then you may speak what is made manifest to you, going not before nor
beyond your measure you have received, but standing in silence in the counsel
of the Lord, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
and then you will his power (...) that gave forth the Scriptures, and then you
will know they are of no private interpretation, but holymen spoke them forth
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. This will bring you to the life that was
before Scripture was; to the beginning, to know the truth which the Scriptures
are a true declaration of, and so you will grow up to the life of the
Scripture, which the world are departed from, though they have the Scriptures,
and can talk from the Scriptures, and can preach from the Scriptures, and can
mightily plead for the Scriptures, and say, what will you deny the Scriptures,
and must ye not be ruled by the Scriptures, and mighty zealous to the sight of
the world, for the Scriptures; but to the life are enemies not having the life
of the Scriptures, and so are condemned by the Scriptures; therefore it is a
book sealed to the wisdom. The first wisdom cannot comprehend them; they were
never given forth by it, that rends them that wrests them, and stretches them
to find out their meanings, but from that eye it is hid, never to be revealed:
here, comes in the private interpretation, here comes meanings to the
Scripture, one says this is the meaning of this place, another he conceives it
means thus, and so conceivings and meanings is put upon them; from hence comes
all Sects and opinions from dark minds, not from the Scripture, for that was
gave forth from the spirit of unity and peace: but from the dark minds arises
debates and strise, vain janglings and contentions, this is from the first
wisdon, that would aspire to know the things of God, but cannot, for it is
earthly, sensual, and devilish, and none come to know the Scriptures but those
that have the life that gave forth the Scriptures, and that brings to the life
of the Scriptures, and so there is no jurring nor wresting of Scriptures to
their own destruction which those that are unlearned in that which gave forth
the Scriptures do.

Here is the subtilty of the Priests to keep the people in ignorance, they tell
them the ignorant and unlearned they do wrest the Scripture to their own
destruction, but never tell the people, It is such as are not learned by Christ
by the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures; but makes you believe those are
the learned that know the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, which they call the
Original.

Now consider all people, whether the wresting of the Scriptures be by the
learned or the unlearned: what preaching, what writtings and printings, what
wrestings and wringings are amongst the learned, so called? the one he writes
for Free Will and Universal redemption, another he writes and printes against
it; one writes for infants baptizing, comes another, and he writes against him;
one writes for a Sabbath, the other writes, preaches, and printes against them;
nay further, if learning, as they say, keep men from wresting the Scriptures:
Why do they find fault with the Jesuits for so doing, they are as learned as
any of you, and do as well know that you call the original: but not many
learned, but not many wise, but the Lord has chosen the poor of the world to
be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, and God does reveal his secrets to
Babes and sucklings; therefore silence deceivers, for Peter that gave forth
that Epistle to the Saints, did not say, those that were not Scholars, and so
unlearned, 1 Cor. 2.10 to the 3, 5.
for so he was not learned himself as the Scriptures does witness. Now who
wrests this Scriptures you or the unlearned? When Peter and John were brought
before the chief Priests, and they did perceive that they were unlearned men
and ignorant, they took knowledge that they had been with Jesus, Act. 4.13. But
this will not you do; acknowledge that Jesus Christ does now so teach the
unlearned and ignorant, but makes the people believe you are the only learned,
when the ways of the Lord are hid from you. The way of the Lord is a way of
holiness; the unclean cannot pass over it, but the waifaring man, though a fool
shall not err therein, but the Scriptures are hid from all the outward
learning of the world never to be revealed: they are a book that is sealed with
seven seals, and none can open them, but the Lion of the Tribe of Juda: never
did humane learning open one of the seals nor never shall do, but those that
are taught by Christ, are led by the spirit of Christ into the power of them,
into the truth of them, into the life of them, and so the seals come to be
opened; for the spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God, and no
man knows* the things of God, but the spirit of God, and he to whom the spirit
does reveal them: for the natural man in his highest wisdom is emnity against
the Lord, for man by wisdom knows not God. Come down proud flesh that would
aspire to know the things of God by the serpent's wisdom, from whom it is hide;
the first wisdom has a portion in them, but it is the plagues and wees that
are to rest upon it, it shall never enter the kingdom, the lake is prepared for
it, it can speak of Scripture, but persecute the power where ever it is
manifest; the woe of the Lord is upon it, it has been a murderer from the
beginning, it would murder the righteous seed wherever it is made manifest; it
is an enemy to man, it is an enemy to the Lord, it never was subject to him:
and from this wisdom do they speak, that do not live the life of the
Scriptures, and such are to be shut out from the Scriptures, and to own their
portion, which are the curses: they were not made for men that love vain
janglings and contentions, they were given forth from a spirit of unity;
therefore silence vain janglers, meddle not with them that are not your portion
the Scriptures; they are profitable for doctrine, for reproof and correction,
and he that adds his own meanings to them or takes from them, is cursed of the
Lord, as they are. They are profitable for those Ends the Lord gave them forth,
2 Timothy 3.15, 16.
without adding to them, those that spoke them forth were guided by the spirit
of truth, and they spoke forth their own meanings.

Now consider what a contradiction and confusion do both prophet, and people
run into: they do confess they were immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost when
they spoke forth the Scriptures, and yet they will put meanings and addings to
their words; as if there were something wanting in them, that the Apostles and
Prophets did not see when they did write them. Here is the subtilty of the
first wisdom that would give the Prophets and Apostles good words, but would
give forth his meanings upon their words, this is the Antichrist and the
deceiver, for to make a trade of them, giving meanings to them. Is not this
exalting your selves above the wisdom of God, and running into the invention,
and so through fained words makes merchandise of the people, selling the letter
for money, which was spoke forth freely, and by this ungodly gain, live you and
your wifes and children in pride which is manifest: but come to the first
principal that gave forth the Scriptures, and you will see the life of them,
and witness the truth of them, every one in your measures, and then there will
be no wrestings to find out their meanings: by the light you may read them,
and your selves, and know your portion in them, but not knowing the life of
them though you know all the parts of them, and can speak and preach from them,
yet you are persecuters of the life of them. For the Jews did know as much of
the letter as any, but when the Life came him they did persecute: they did know
the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, but persecuted the Original which is Christ, Luke
23.28
and were enemies against him, and yet did know the Scriptures in the form of
them, and did search the Scriptures. Be not deceived with vain shows, but come
to the life and substance of truth, as it is in Jesus, and the truth will make
you free to serve the Lord with fear which is the beginning of wisdom, it keep^
(...) it will show the deceits that does lodge in the heart, and the light will
lead you out of them: it will show you deceit under what pretense soever, it
will show you that those that are Ministers of Christ, and Ambassadors of
Christ have not their message to seek, and so run to be helped by another, and
preach from that which is made ready to their hands, 2 Cor. 10. Read the
sixteenth, but they have salt in themselves to savor withal at all seasons;
they shall not need to run to old Authors to patch and piece up Sermons, and to
write them down and tell the people this is the word of the Lord, when he never
spoke that unto them; this is their artificial preaching, that their study and
Art have furnished them with all; this is their boldness before the Lord, to
speak their own inventions, and not the word of the Lord.

The word of the Lord is life and power, the word of the Lord does sanctify,
the word of the Lord does ingraft, the word of the Lord's a sword to cut down,
the word of the Lord is fire, the word of the Lord does purify, the word of
the Lord is a hammer, Joh. 17.17
but where are these things witnessed amongst you, where is the power of the
word? Whom has it sanctified, whom has it ingrafted? Heb. 4.12.
whom has it cut down? what has it burned up? is your Lead and Tin consumed,
are you purified by it, what has it broke down amongst you, does not your high
thoughts stand still? does not your own wills stand still? does not pride and
covetousness stand still? does not wrath stand still? does not envy stand
still? do not these fruits of the flesh and such like stand? Flatter not your
selves, Jam. 1.21.
for such things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience;
those that spoke the word of the Lord, witnessed these things to pass upon
them, and so they did; first learnt their own Ministry through the death of the
first wisdom, Isa. 23.29.
and so came to witness the Ministry of death to be glorious, and so came to
witness Moses; and never none come to witness the glorious Ministry of life,
but come to witness the glorious ministration of death: death does pass upon
all men, for all men have sinned, and so come to witness deaths reign from Adam
to Moses; who is the figure of him that was to come, and so come to witness,
that as sin has reigned unto death, even so grace reigns through righteousness
unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord: and so came to witness both
states of death and life, and so came to witness the Prophets, John, and the
Apostles, and witness the covenant of peace and life, this was their way they
went in, these were the sootsteps of the flock of Christ, and then went forth
to preach to the world, and did gather a people out of the world by their
Ministry, and there were daily added to the Church, such as should be saved,
and those that were thus gathered by the eternal word living in them, were of
one heart and one mind, and they were the (...) of the Lord, and those did
edifi^ one another in their most holy faith: they were not of the world, but
chosen out of the world, and the Church was in God and in Christ, and it is
the pillar and ground of truth, the fullness of him that does fill all things,
Heb. 2.11, to the 15.
all members of his body, for both he that sanctifies, and they who are
sanctified, are all of one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren, saying, I will declare thy name among my brethren; they are begotten
by the immortal seed of God, partakers of the Divine nature, the Sons of God,
living stones builded upon the rock Christ Jesus, in whom the whole building
fitly framed together, grows up to a holy Temple in the Lord, and from his
Holy Temple does he make known his will, to the intent that now unto the
principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the Church the
manifold wisdom of God. Ephesians. 2.10.
Therefore silence proud flesh, that would be exalting it self above your
fellow members.

Now professors see and try if it be thus with you and your teachers, can they
witness this way into the Ministry? or can you witness that you are of this
Church of the first born, whose names are written in heaven, and come to the
spirits of just men made perfect. If not in your measures; flatter not your
selves with a Ministry, and a Church, and Ordinances for it will not avail
you. Remember the Jews I spoke of, before their Ordinances and their Priveleges
were very great, they had the true form, but wanted the power, they did offer
sacrifices; they did observe Sabbaths and new Moons, Isa. 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and had solemn days; they had obligations and incense; yet these were
counted by the Lord iniquity; the soul of the Lord hated them, they were a
burden to him, he was weary to bear them, and though they made many prayers,
yet he would not hear them yet these were ordinances of the Lords appointing,
there was not a ceasing to do evil, and a learning to do well, they did not
seek judgment nor relieve the oppressed, nor judge the fatherless, nor defend
the vviddovv; there was no fruits of righteousness brought forth in their
high profession, a fruitless profession, reaching at the shaddovvs, but did
neglect the substance: friends deal honestly with your selves, do you think
the profession of truth will serve your turns, and stand you in any stead
before the Lord. When the secrets of all hearts shall be laid open; they that
have the form of the truth and not the power, 2 Timothy 5. to the 7.
we are commanded from such to turn away; and will not the Lord turn away
from such which he has commanded us to turn away from; yea he will: of such
sort are those that lead filly women captive, ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth. Is it not thus in your Assemblies which
are so great, some learning ten years, some twenty years, some forty years,
some threescore years, and yet ignorant of the very first principle of that
which turns the mind to God, and so no good do know, but ever Learning: when
for the time ye ought to be teaching; ye had need that one teach you again,
the first principles of the oracles of God, these are the house creepers, for
had Paul, spoke against preaching in a private house, Act. 28.29, 20, 31.
he had spoke against his own practice, for it was his manner so for to do he
did preach in his own hired house, and did dispute in markets and reason in the
Jews Synagogues with the devout persons daily, and how often was Paul haled out,
beaten and stoned, while some supposed he had been dead; some said, what will
this babbler say: they counted it new doctrine and strange things; and thus it
is at this day, calling it a disturbance so for to do, and by the same spirits
are persecuted. Now as those were then haled, Act. 5.25.
rent and torn read the Scriptures and see if these things be not so, and there
you may find your own actions done by the same spirits; therefore boast not
your selves, but this is your Church orders; for shame disown such filthy
practices, and see what spirits you do join with: those that are of the world,
those are beloved of the world, for the world does love her own, but those that
are not of the world, Act. 17.17, 18.
the world does hate them; there is emnity put between the seed of the woman,
and the seed of the Serpent; never can those be reconciled, the evil spirit
knows the evil spirit in another, though one has got the form and words of
truth, if the life be wanting, the spirit of the profane world, and their
spirits will join together to persecute the power; but as then he that was born
after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit, Heb. 13.2.
even so it is now. It is no new thing when the Church was scattered about and
went up and down preaching the Gospel, and had no certain dwelling places, but
their habitation was in God: how were they hated by the world, and made the
very off-scowring of it, of whom the world was not worthy; they were strangers
to them; and therefore hated by them, but to entertain strangers forget not; 1 Timothy 5.10
oppress not a stranger because he is a stranger, when the widows were taken
into the Church, they were well reported of for good works; if she has brought
up her children, if she has lodged strangers; if she has washed the Saints
feet. What Church is yours that will not do this to strangers, but persecute
them, and imprison them, speak all manner of evil of them, when they offer
violence to no man.

Consider this both Priest and people, is it not thus with you? are not these
fruits made manifest, and yet you are not ashamed to call your selves a Church,
you are indeed the Synagogues of Satan, behold I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not but do lie, Behold I
will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have
loved thee: he is not a Jew that is one owardly, but he is a Jew that is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit and not in the
letter, Romans 2.32.
whose praise is of God not of men. Now where the heart is purified, fruits of
persecution does not appear, nor neither can they; but there love, gentleness
to all men does appear, doing by others as they would be done to. But if these
fruits do still remain among you, lie not against the truth, your Religion is
in vain, it will not endure the fire; but this is the National Church that are
baptized, Gal. 2.27.
but not into Christ, and here is the world made the Church, of whom Christ is
not the head, nor they his members; Romans 6.3, 4
and here the world rests, as if they were the people of the Lord, and if any
does come to speak to the contrary, then they are all of an uproare like bruit
beasts. Do not your teachers join with the world in feastings, in idle
speeches, and in foolish jeastings that do administer no grace to the hearers,
telling tales and stories which are pleasing to the flesh, which they do soon
receive, Act. 16.5.
for it is one with them, and so profaneness is gone forth from the Priests:
the Ministers of Christ, their life was an example and pattern of holiness, but
you strengthen the hands of the wicked, and dishonor the Lord of purity and
holiness. Is this to keep your selves unspoted of the world; are not these
spots in your feasts to feed your selves without fear, and join with the world;
if you did reprove them sharply when you did hear of unsavory words, not
seasoned with grace, they would not endure your company: it would be as fire
amongst them, But like Priest like people; the Ministers of Christ, they say,
have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove
them that they may be ashamed: is this your practice? no, it is not: you go
from place to place a feasting into all companies, Ephesians. 5.4, and 11.
and so get the love of all, but woe be to you: you join with the world, and the
great ones of the world, and have their persons in admiration because of
advantage, bowing and cringing and worshipping the seed of Haman, which Mordcai
would not do you: are respecters of persons, and so are transgressors of the
Law of God; this you to do get a living from them though they are not for
Christ but for their lusts and pride, most of them: these are beloved by you,
and you do not speak against them because of your gain, Jud. 16.
and the honor you have from them; you speak of sin in the general, and live
the life of it, and so it is put off from the one to the other; Jam. 4.9.
but which of you do as the prophet did to David, say, thou art the man: come
home to them, and speak in particular, and then you will try them, dealing
faithfully, not fearing the face of man which must perish, but approve your
hearts to the Lord: is this practiced among you? is not the contrary? do you
not daube the great ones with untempered mo^ter, Hest. 3.2.
speaking peace to the wicked? Did you forsake and shun their companies, and
not join with them in pride and filthiness and works of the flesh, they would
soon hate you, or their filthy practices practices: there would be no living
thus, but a separation you would see. But are not fruits of pride and
covetuousness which is idolatry, fruits of envy and malice, made manifest
among your Church and hearers; these fruits makes it manifest, that you are
one with the world, say what you will. Are not they the false prophets that are
entered into the world, in fellowship with the world, beloved of the world. Who
is it that does side with you, for to defend you, when any does come from the
Lord to speak to you, to leave your deceits? Do not the rude multitude side
with you, swearers, drunkards, scoffers and railers, and your professors al
together tearing and rending like ravenous beasts: see now where you are, what
spirit joins for you; be ashamed that ever such beasts should take your parts:
did ever such bruites and heathens take part with the Apostles when they were
halled out of their Synagogues, no they did not, as it was then, so it is now.
See now where is your Religion, the pure Religion reaches to do by another as
ye would be done by, not to tear and rend like beasts of prey your fellow
creatures, Act. 19.32, 36, 37, 39, 40.
beating and smiting of them; are these the fruits of the spirit? no, they are
not, but fruits of the flesh. Is this your Church order, be ashamed for ever,
that such should join with you: but by your fruits you are known, and the
fruits of your Ministry received from man is now made manifest, the day has
made you manifest that these are works of darkness proceeding from darkness,
and will end in darkness.

O the deceit of some of the chief professors in the Town of Starfford! when
there come one into their place of meeting to declare against the Priests
deceit: before they did know what was spoken, she was haled out by these
professors, which were then officers, and was led by them to the Cage, and
there she did sit seven hours, where she was pissed on, and spit on by those
bruites of Starfford, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
these professors knowing of it, which they did tell me, did grieve their
hearts for to see; and about two or three of the clock, did come to my house to
me to know whether I would receive her, and I did tell them I would, but they
went away and did not bring her tell six of the clock at night, here was the
deceit of you made manifest, had it grieved your hearts, as you said it did,
Why did not you sooner release her, but the double hearted man God will judge.
Know, that mercy to your fellow creature had been better then sacrifice, but
thus is the heart made manifest, that it may be known by the fruits of it. The
next day she was carried to a Justice, thinking to lase her in prison, but when
they came there, they had none to accuse her: thus was their folly made
manifest. She came a second time to their meeting where she was haled out like
a dog, and the officers did turn her out of the grave-yard, to the mercies of
the heathen, who rent her, and did tear her, pulling her head tire often, pulling
her by the hair of the head, and throwing her down in the street as she passed
along to come to a friends house, which is nigh half the quarter of a mile from
the steeple house, howling and shouting at their fellow creature? was it not
your office to see the peace kept, that these bruites might not make a prey of
her? had not a stranger which was at our meeting took her part, and rescued her
from the violence of those heathen what he could, he did see no other but they
would have killed her.

Be ashamed that ever such wickedness should be suffered in a town professing
Christ; you Magistrates had warning to deal justly to love mercy, to walk
humbly with the Lord, not to respect the persons of men in judgment, but to
deal righteously according to that righteous Law of God in the conscience: was
this a righteous act of yours to leave your fellow creature to the mercy of the
heathen. Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught, speak the word and
it shall not stand, for God is with us. Oh, all people will walk in the name
of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever,
Micha 4.6.

DARKNESS Denied by the CHILDREN OF LIGHT.
IN the fourth month, upon the sixth day of the month, I went to John Pains
house of Starford, to know of him, if he did not receive a letter of mine that
was sent me from Cambridge from James Blackly Justice of the peace, and he said
he had none of it; but James Blackly asked the Coachman that did bring it, and
he said it was delivered to Mr. Pain Minister of Starford, his name being the
same with mine, both of us being named John Pain: but if he had or has it, and
does deny it, it is his deceit: this was the cause of my going to his house.
And then when I was there with him, he did begin with me about some words that
I did say to him about the public Ministry, as it does now stand (the
National Ministry) that I did say the spirit of the Lord in their Ministry
was departed from them, that they should not convert one soul more to the Lord
by their Ministry, which thing was true, I did so say to him and so I shall do
still; and the fruits of it shall appear more and more as they stand contrary
to the commands of Christ, they shall not, as is proved they do they that
neither follow the example of Christ, Prophet, nor Apostles, they shall not
profit the people; their preaching is like the blood of a dead man, as is
manifest: they have the form of truth, but the power is denied by them, and so
the power is not made manifest among them for this many years; but this power
was by thee denied, for thou did tell me thou had not the infallible spirit
of Paul, if not that spirit, J
then another; the spirit in the Saints is but one in all, and is the spirit of
truth that leads into all truth, and shows things to come, even the spirit of
truth, Joh. 14.17.
whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not neither knows him,
but we know him, for had welleth with us, and shall be in us; and this spirit
is the same as ever; this spirit was in Paul, in the Prophets, in the Saints,
that ever were or ever shall be. From this spirit was the Scripture gave forth,
and none but the spirit can reveal the Mysteries of God in them, for no man
does know the things of God but the Spirit of God, and he to whom the Spirit of
God does reveal them, and he that has not the Spirit of Christ is note of his;
and this spirit is the spirit of Revelation now in the Saints, and no man knows
any thing as he ought to know it but what is revealed by the spirit. 1 Cor. 2.11


It is recorded in Scripture that the Spirit bears witness with our spirits,
Romans 8.9.
that we are the sons of God. How does it witness, but by revealing to our
spirits (...) it is so. This is the earnest of our inheritance; this is the
intrance into the everlasting kingdom, for there none of our names after the
flesh are set down, but this makes known the white stone and the new name
which no man does know but those that do receive it, and this spirit of
revelation and the Apostle pray for, for the Church of the Ephesians, that the
God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of (...) may (...) unto ^ou
the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: Ephesians. 1.17, 18.
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
and (...) man (...) the ^^ther but (...) Son, and he to whom the Son does
reveal him; so revelations are not ceased, as might be proved by many places of
the Scripture: yea I witness against all gainsayers that Scripture fulfilled
in me, Joh. 16.13. That he will show you things to come.

This I witness is truth, and many with me will witness the same; these things
are hid from wise men, and revealed to babes, the weak things of the world
confound the strong and might; glory be to thy name for ever and ever. 1 Cor.
12.13.
This spirit is in all his Saints, and this spirit is infallible, it cannot
lie, it is the spirit of truth, and leads into all truth and it abides with
his for ever, and is the same as ever was, and is infallible. Now, as ever,
this thou did deny, and did say, thou had not the infallible spirit of
Paul, the spirit I told thee was but one in all the Saints, and if thou had
not that infallible spirit, thy spirit I did deny: thou did stand for to
maintain it by Argument, and I gave the Bible to prove it there, but thou did
not, but thou did say thou could do it, but it must then be by some new
Scripture of thy own making by that fallible spirit of thine: the old Scripture
that was given forth by the infallible spirit will not do it, but that
witnesses and I witness with it against thee, that, this denying thou have not
the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, and art no Minister of Christ. And
here I charge thee to have a false spirit, 1 John 4.1.
for thou not having the same spirit that gave forth the Scripture, then
another, and so a false spirit, and a spirit of evil, and here thy spirit is
tried as the Scripture says, Try the spirits and it is found to be a seducing
eye, leading from the anointing in the Saints which is infallible, and knows no
difference between the infallible spirit of God in man and man's own spirit
which is fallible, but the anointing which ye has received of him abides in
you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches
you all things, and is truth and is no lie, and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him: that spirit that does draw away any from this anointing is
the spirit of eror, and the fallible spirit that the false Prophets ever had to
oppose the infallible spirit where it was manifest: thou did then tell me
thou had admonished me twice, and told me the danger that was like to follow;
Joh. 2.2 to 28.
for thou did say I was now grown obstinate; and then did tell me an
Heretic after the first and second admonition thou wast to reject, but thou
not having the infallible spirit that gave forth the Scripture.

Thy casting me out I do not regard, they are nothing to me they will not
enter, they were not words spoke forth from the life, as may be known by them.
One of the times, thou did call me Coxcomb, and the other time thou did
say, we were a company of fools: such admonitions were not given by the
Apostles, but these words came from thy fallible spirit, for the spirit of
truth says, He that calls his brother fool, Mat. 5.2
is in danger of hell fire.

And the infallible spirit says, Let no corrupt communication proceed out of
your mouths, Ephesians. 4.2 30.
but such as may Minister grace to the hearers; but thy spirit will say any
thing, thy tongue is thy own.

Judge now you that are his hearers, are you like to profit by such a one that
cannot refrain his tongue from speaking evil, and such are in the heresy.

Thou did say, he that was an heretic thou would reject, and thou did
bid me go away from thee, thou would have nothing to do with me, nor speak
no more with me, when after that thou did speak many words more to me, which
I told thee of, and did ask thee, wherefore thou did do so, when thou said
thou would speak no more to me: here was the lie found in thy mouth.

And thou did bid me have a care of the Churches power, for what they bound
in earth was bound in heaven; thou art under that Church power; but for the
power of your Church, your curse and your blessing, all is one, as was made
manifest in Scotland, when our Army went into the Land, there was curse upon
curse, excommunication one after another.

See your Churches power, or rather your blindness, to curse those the Lord
will bless, and did bless: your curses, and theirs, Number.
is like to Balaams curses (all off one power) they are the instruments, as
they are in your hands, of foolish shepherds, though Church Power I do own, and
woe be to that that is under their censure, that must be given to Satan, that
the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, but this is done by the
infallible spirit in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.

When you are rathered together, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5
and my spirit with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ to deliver such a one
unto Satan, for the destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord. But Paul's infallible spirit is denied by you, and your
Churches censures denied by me.

The Babe in Christ growing up to a perfect man. Heb. 5.13. Ephesians. 4.13.

He that has the Son has this witness in him.
THe heresies that thou did cast me our for, were these. 1. That I did hold
perfection in this life. A state of perfection I would have proved there was,
and I did take the Bible so for to do, but thou did take it out of my hand,
and did knock it many times together, as if thou had not been thy self, and
would not suffer me for to speak, Joh. 3.6.
but thou said thou would stand for the truth against all the Heretics in the
world, and maintain it that there was no perfection in this life. 1 Cor. 15.47,
48, 49.
That which was given forth from the infallible spirit will prove it, that
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit, is
spirit: the first man of the earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from
heaven: as is the earthly, Joh. 1.13.
such are those that are earthly, and as is the heavenly such are they also
that are heavenly, which were born not of blood, John 3.3.
nor of the will of man but of God; the first birth is of the earth and is
earthly and shall never enter into the kingdom: except a man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God, but being born again, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible seed by the word of God which lives and abides for ever;
this is the new birth that makes the new man; and this new man is created in
righteousness and holiness after the similitude of him that did create him, 1
Pet. 1.23.
and this new man is perfect; yea know that whosoever is born of God, sins
not, but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself, and the wicked one
reaches him not. This is the new man's state of perfection, which is the state
of life, and nothing that is not perfect shall never enter the kingdom, no
unclean thing shall enter, that which is not perfect is not clean: 1 John 5.18
and here thou have showed thy self to be ignorant of the perfect state of the
Saints, and yet thou will say thy self, there is a state of death, and a state
of life: the state of death is imperfection, there it lies; the state of life
is perfect, and, in perfection that lies. And this was Paul's Ministry, and
that which he did preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that he may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1.28.
and this was the end of the sending forth of the Ministry for the perfecting
of the Saints. There are Babes in Christ; in their growth, and measure attained
are the children of God, for they are begotten by the immortal seed of God,
partakers of the Divine nature, which lives and abides for ever; there are
young men in Christ, and there are fathers; and according to the measure that
every one has attained, so let him walk: but the state of all those is a
perfect state, Ephesians. 4.12, 13.
it is a state of life, but the old man that is begotten by the will of man; is
not perfect but he that is in Christ Jesus is a new creature; old things are
passed away, and all things are become new. Here is cleansing our selves from
all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the
Lord; this state, this new birth is witnessed by those that know the Lord,
though by you denied and called heresy; this is the seed of God that cannot
sin; this is the perfect state, 2 Cor. 7.1.
this seed of God dwells in the Saints, this is their new birth from carnal
to spiritual, and the translation from death to life: by this life they know
the Lord, and by this life are joined to the Lord, and he that is joined to the
Lord is one spirit with the Lord, and so the Church is called Christ, 1 Cor.
12.12. and is the temple of the Lord which is holy, and the Lord will dwell in
them, and walk in them, and will be their God and they shall be his people: and
for this cause we faint not, 2 Cor. 6.16
but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day,
which is the perfect man, These are they that are not defiled with women, for
they are Virgins, these are they that follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes,
Rev. 12.4, 5.
these were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God and to
the Lamb, and in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault
before the throne, Can. 4.7.
there is no spot in them, they are all fair beloved of the Lord.

Thou did tell me Paul did complain of a body of sin all his life long. I
told thee there was a time he did, and there was a time he did witness the
putting off the body of sin, and thou did say to me he did not, and did
tell me it was heresy. See what the declaration of truth says against thy
heresy, Col. 2.11. in whom ye are Circumcised with the Circumcision made
without hands in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the
circumcision of Christ, Romans 6. chapter, verse. 6. Knowing that the old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed: for this end was
the Son of God made manifest to destroy the works of Satan, Joh. 3.8.

3. I did tell thee the Saints habitation was in God, thou did it deny, and
did say it was a new word (to thee it is so) but the infallible spirit says,
Col. 3.3, 4.
1 John 4.15, 16. whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God, and he that dwells in God, Job. 17.21
and God in him, where the Saints does dwell, there is his habitation.

For ye see your calling brethren how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called but God has chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things
of the world to confound the things that are mighty, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27.

I would desire thee if thou will answer any thing that is here against thee
said, to answer it in plainness of speech by writting or some other way, that I
may know of it, and not to speak in thy Pulpit against heresy, but prove none;
and if thou know any heresy by me, that I now do hold, make it manifest,
name what it is, and that day thou have a mind so for to do, send for me, do it
not when I am absent, and I shall give thee the hearing, and answer to such
things as thou shall object against me.

He that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says, he that
overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2.11.

John Pain Shoemaker, living in Bishopstarford.

FINIS.

