Englands Murdering Monsters Set out in their Colors. In a DIALOGUE between
DEMOCRITVS and HERACCLITVS.
Weeping Heracclitus laments to see
Jack-Anabaptist in such state to be.
Democritus hopes before the Month of June,
That the Birds will sing another Tune.
Heracclitus. O That mine Eyes were a continual River
Of briny tears, that I might weep for ever,
To see the Woes that Mortals do attend
For Sin, yet men will not their Lives amend.

Democritus. I laugh to see so many men grow mad,
(Like fools) to loose what Liberty they had
By seeking more; and for believing lies,
Are come in Bondage to their Enemies.

Herac. Alas! I grieve to see that woes of Albion,
(Once happy Seat of Learning and Religion)
Now (sad) become the Stage of Villainy,
Of Vice, the Mother, under Tyranny.

Them. I nothing view upon the Stage of Albion,
At present, but a Chaos of Confusion,
Where Hell-spur'd Pluto in a godly guise,
Does play Guvanto against the Christmas-Pyes.

Herac. I much lament to see his Oylie-Head
(Whose Hand the Almighty treble Sceptered)
Upon a Block of Impudence most great,
And wilful murdered near his sacred Seat.

Them. Its not a sport to see the ignoble Groom
Swording and swaggering in his Sovereign room,
And when he please to speak but half a word,
He must reply him with an, Yes my Lord.

Herac. I melt in tears to see the Rebels reign
In Court and City with their hungry train,
That like Purse-Leeches in the Lawyers Inn,
Sucks others Wealth, to enrich their begging Kin.

Them. Who can but laugh to see the Cobling Clown
(And dirty Dray-man) in a Scarlet-Gown
Lord it along? Sure it is a wondrous Fate
To see such Monsters in a Robe of State.

Herac. O it is a grief to see that wicked weal'd
The Sword and Scepter that so long upheld
Justice and Truth; but now profound, profane
Hypocrisy, with Schism and Error reign.

Them. I burst almost with laughter when I view
So many Polips in an humble hue,
Yet under hand, with a stock of Impudence,
Strive for the Title of, His Excellence.

Herac. O, who can see the People by rebellion
Destroy the Fountain of well-ordered Union,
And their Allegiance basely basterdize
To those that over them does tyrannize.

Them. I laugh to see how Fortune (wrong or right)
Does (blindfold) make of any Knave, a Knight;
Dis-thrones a Monarch by unheard of Fate,
And lifts a Lobster to a Chair of State.

Herac. O! can thou laugh to see the Martial Sword
(At pleasure) make of any Lout a Lord,
And such as are willing to be their constant slaves,
Are forced to suffer for cowardly Knaves.

Them. Weep if you list, and I will laugh it out,
To see blind Fortune throw the Ball about;
One while a Villain she does inthronise,
And with a worse does him anon chastise.

Herac. I can but weep to see the once famous City
Slav'd to the will of an Unsafe Committy;
Threatened with throws of furious Fireballs,
And many murdered then within our Walls.

Them. I cannot well their woeful case bemoan,
That factious slaves do for their Rulers own,
Who strongly strive for to destroy the State,
And make all men believe that they do plunder hate.

Her. Woe to the Land where that the Tyrants stores,
That Parliaments and Peers they turn out of doors,
And then restore, to gratify ambition
The Rumpe thereof, in spite of all the Nation.

D^m. I laugh to see so many swaying swords
Swear that for zeal they hate a House of Lords:
When Quaking Cobblers but with half their eyes,
They hope thereby to rule and revelize.

Her. Pure zeal for peace, for freedom, and Religion,
Is made a cloak to cover damned invention:
And still the more I weep to see their folly,
That hold such lewdness to be very holy.

Them. Lament no more, Heraclitus, to see
The louzie Lobsters in such state to be,
Murdering like monsters such as them oppose,
For to maintain their Bastard Good Old Cause.

Her. The Cause was good, had they their Oaths performed,
But fickle faction has it so deformed,
Now vice is crept into our once happy Land,
But yet we hope it has not long to stand.

Them. It Is a sport to see the City be a Baud,
To any Tyrant, and his train applaud:
And some therein are so faint-heart and evil,
To save estates they will adore the Devil.

Her. Still more I grieve to see the Church despised
By Sacrilegers, that new ways devised
For their will worship; and far past all awe
Profane, presume to jeer the sacred Law.

Them. And more I laugh to hear Mr. Mend-all
Tinker and Tailot, Mr. Spare and Spend-all
Think they can preach profound as any Doctor
With their new Logic, and exceed the Proctor.

Her. What Clime, what Time, what Age, what Nation,
What grave Historian worthy reputation,
Did ever note before these days of mine,
So many wresters of the law Divine.

Them. I laugh to see such as with solemn Vows
Pluralities of Churches disallows;
Be priests, be prophets, be both Judge and Jaylors,
And for large stealing do exceed the Tailors.

Her. I much bemoan to see the crimson hands
That slew their neighbors, ther'by to gain their Lands,
Be Knaves, be Keepers, be High Chancellors,
Be Clerks, be Truck-men, and be Treasurers.

Them. It Is better for thee to preserve thine eyes,
And lament not our sad calamities:
It Is vain to weep for such as have to hell,
And so my friend Heraclitus farewell.

G. P.


