A DECLARATION Concerning the newly invented Art of DOUBLE WRITING.

Wherein are expressed the reasons of the Authors proceedings in procuring a
Privilege for the same: As also of the Time, Manner, and Price, of the
discovery of the said Art, and of the Instruments belonging thereunto.

For the satisfaction of all that desire to be partakers of the great benefit
of the same, before they adventure any thing toward the reward thereof.

Whereunto is annexed a copy of an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament,
approving the feasibility and great use of the said invention, and allowing a
Privilege to the Inventor, for the sole benefit thereof for 14 years, upon the
penalty of one hundred pounds.

LONDON, Printed by R. L. for R. W. at the Star under Saint Peter's Church in
Cornhill, 1648.

A brief DECLARATION concerning DOUBLE WRITING, by the Inventor thereof,
Chiefly to prevent misunderstanding of his proceedings in the discovery of the
same.
I Shall not enlarge upon the praises of double writing, for every man best
knows himself what use he can make of it, least I thereby seem to praise my
self, arrogating indeed what I do not deserve. For to speak truth, the
manifold, universal, and perpetual uses of it to the Commonwealth, did not
at first put me upon the design, but the fair hint of the possibility of such
a thing, which God unexpectedly put into my mind, cooperating with an
affection that I have to do somewhat new and useful (though by never so slight
means) and withal hopes to mend mine own fortunes by benefiting all, rather
then prejudicing any, encouraged me to take pains (although by the simplicity
of the Instruments it does not appear) about the invention. On the contrary, I
confess, that I rather deserve to be blamed of dullness, that it has cost me
any pains at all, to contrive so simple and plain things as my Instruments are,
and I hope when it shall be discovered to better heads to be soon made ashamed
by their improvements, that I have done no more unto them. So that according to
the nature of the thing, I have more reason to expect profit then praise for my
reward, and perhaps some men have been too apt to believe me herein, thinking
that my procuring a Patent, and deferring the discovery do argue an ambition
in me, not only of vast but unreasonable desires.

But I hope to make such men understand, that neither by procuring the Patent,
retarding the discovery, the price which I have set on it, nor by any other
proceeding, I have expressed my desires to be unreasonable, no more then the
satisfaction of them is like to be vast.

For first, I had scarce any other course to take then to procure a Patent of
Privilege according to the Laws: For should I have given it away for nothing?
the thing (as many others are) would have been contemned as of no use, because
of no price, and I my self should have been as much jeered for my prodigality,
as thanked for my industry.

Should I have petitioned the State for a reward, that course would have
disparaged the business, for if it be of the use pretended, it is able to
reward it self, and why should one petition to give away a benefit? But
besides all this, their engagements past, and imminent use of money (as I was
informed) would have made my request unseasonable.

Should I have addressed my self to any one Company in the City, it is to be
feared that after much solicitation, I should have been at last answered, That
since it concerned all Companies as much as any one, unless all would join, one
would do nothing, and to make all of them so to join, was a work beyond my
power and patience.

As for particular men, I found them generally to profess a willingness to
contribute, but many were unwilling that others should have the same benefit
with them for nothing: besides, it was impossible for me to bring any
considerable number of them together,

I propounded to some friends, to move the State to lay an additionall tax
upon writing paper, though never so small, and to employ the same toward the
advancement of Arts, somewhat (if they thought fit) according to my printed
draught thereof, allowing me in particular some small part of those profits,
not only as a reward of mineinvention, but as an engagement to labor in the
design of promoting Arts. But this proposition (being thought too subject to
debates in the Houses, and to cross too much the nature of the times, when men
complain enough already of impositions) was waved, although, could it have been
pursued, it had been the most proper and just of all other. For certainly,
according to the use and expense of paper, the use of this invention might best
be measured, and consequently rewarded, and if men paid a farthing
extraordinary in two of three quires of paper, for the accommodation of such an
Art, and for the carrying on of public, profitable, and honorable designs, I
conceive it had been no crying oppression, so that all these several
projections being full of impediments, I was forced upon this more common and
legal way of procuring a Patent of privilege for 14 years.

The reasons why I yet defer the publication of the secret, having obtained a
grant from the State of England, are: 1 To obtein Privileges also from some
other Neighboring States.

1 Because it is unjust that the burden of rewarding an universal good should
lie upon the place only where it was brought forth. 2 To make the contributions
of each particular man less considerable. 3 That I might be relieved from
other places in case the troubles should renew in England (which God avert) so
as to break my design here. 4 That I might improve this blessing and Talent of
God to the best advantage possible, thereby to effect other things tending to
his glory, and the good of the world: being still resolved not to fail of my
expectations (that is to say) never to account upon any thing but what I shall
from time to time see.
Secondly, Because I had some other contrivances standing upon the same
principles with this, which upon the discovery of this would have been
discovered also.

Lastly, Because I would take away all occasions which men might have to incur
the danger of the penalty allowed by the Parliament by hindering them so to do,
at least until I could so provide for my self, as that I need not to be
extremely rigorous against any, but such as shall contumeliously affront the
Authority of my grant.

And this later consideration (namely the avoiding of all suits and vexations
from the which clamor and trouble must necessarily reflect upon my self) is
one of the grounds why I accept of this small sum of five shillings present
payment, and another is, because it may happen (though against my wishes and
interest) that the discovery may not be made until about 11 months hence,
although, if any reasonable number shall appear, it may be done within less
then three. For it can be no disadvantage to me to make all convenient haste
since after discovery I am no longer obliged to accept the small rate
propounded. A third reason for the same is to prevent all grudgings suspicion
of injury, picking needless quarrels, and prosecuting frivolous faults against
the invention it self (whereunto the exacting of a full (though just) price
may move captious spirits, specially at first, til they have found the goodness
of their bargain) for in as much as it is impossible to foretell or divine what
each man will approve of or dislike, seeing by daily experience, that all
things (even the best) are diversely received and accepted by diverse men, so
that there are never or rarely any which all men do like in all points, and
that in the highest degree, we may not expect such perfections in this
business. Only we presume that those who shall be most froward and exceptious
against the invention, and shall have least need of it, cannot think five
shillings ill bestowed on so rare an attempt. For if a man can in a small time
learn for to write as fast and as fair by this double, as by the usual way,
all men allow that it may in the 14 years (which is the term of my privilege)
save some hundreds of pounds to some men, and exceedingly more then five
shillings to any man. Now as to the matter of fastness and dispatch, I say,
that about 20 persons of such credit, worth, and judgment (most of them
strangers to me) have so impartially attested how I have written by the help of
this art, double to other swift and expedite writers, that the great Council
of this Kingdom have acquiessed in their Certificates. As for the fairness,
many hundreds in this City and elsewhere have seen the fairness of my writings
made by it, in comparison with what I can do otherwise, and all men (nemine
contradicente) rest satisfied in its sufficiency.

Having thus cleared these two points by experiment to the senses, it remains
to consider whether any man may practice this Art according to my proposals, to
which, all that I can possibly say is, that I did it my self at the very first
sight and handling of the Instrument, having never the reputation of more then
an ordinary dexterity of hand, common to all men that are familiar with the
pen; so that if a man should not do according to my said propositions, I
should more wonder then I can now diffide. And I believe that I might have set
a longer time for the learning of this Art, but should I have done it, men may
take just distaste at me, for undervaluing their abilities so far, as not to
think them able to attain in an hours serious endeavor, what I my self did
at the first assay. But suppose, that some men could not do according to these
propositions, certainly those are most likely to fail, who are least used and
able to write, and consequently such as have least need of the invention.

Suppose none could do it within the time allotted, but should either write not
so fair, or not so fast, or neither so fair nor so fast. First, though not so
fair, the inconvenience is no more essential to a man's business, then to
write a few days longer with a bad pen, or other unfit tools. Secondly, though
not so fast; nay, but with half the promised advantage, still I say that in
much writing the advantage would be great. Lastly, though neither so fast nor
so fair, I affirm, that yet the defects cannot be so great as to weigh down the
commodities, even then, besides that those defects may be made up with a little
longer times practice. Suppose, again, that a very long time were requisitie to
reduce the hand to the same quickness and fastness in this as in the common
way, yet children might be conveniently brought up to it, and others may better
swallow this difficulty then that of Short writing and the like.

Lastly, suppose that it was for ever impossible. Nevertheless it cannot be
supposed but that a man who can write otherwise very fair, may write by this
Instrument as fair as is needful to any business whatsoever. And if there be
any writing which requires a greater beauty then the Instrument is able to
afford, yet they are very few, and perhaps such as need no copying at all, now
to write such things by the common way, will be neither a great nor frequent
labor, as for swiftness it can never come behind the ordinary way,
especially if a little of the fairness be dispensed withal, and very little
otherwise.

Now if all these conceits were any more then mere suppositions, yet there will
be still found conveniences in this Art above what are in the common way, to
repair its inconveniences, namely, the likeness of the copies, whereby the
labor of examination (no small matter in many cases) is saved; and the danger
of falsification either prevented or discovered. Besides many impediments may
be lestned by the alteration of many indifferent circumstances, about
writing-books and paper now usual, as to write in books that open well and
easily, rather in those whose backs are stubborn and stiff bound, to write in
folio rather then in smaller folds, in single paper rather then in much doubled
and boisterous, with all which particulars this Art will sufficiently consist
to practisers nor monstrously unhandy.

Lastly, other ingenious men may, and certainly will soon mend any thing that
shall be found amiss, as to any man's particular use, for mine own part I shall
never be wanting thereunto, and could at present alter the instrument in
several particulars, did I not fear that in making them more fit for one man's
use, they would be less fit for another; But if any man shall considerately
better the business, I shall be willing to gratify him proportionably, to
what I my self shall gain by it, and that by such a reasonable way as I shall
hereafter more particularly propound.

We come to explain our selves in some other Circumstances, first, concerning
the manner of discovering the Art, when the time shall come; which shall be
this: viz. I will some space before hand appoint a convenient place where all
contributers shall receive a printed paper, at large describing both by words
and figures, the fabrike, use and application of all and each part of the
Instrument, and such as have paid for Instruments shall there receive them, and
there will I also give a weeks constant attendance to resolve all difficulties
arising to the less nimble apprehensions in the practice of the Art.

Now, as for security, that it shall be so discovered according to promise, I
have taken care, That (in case of sudden death, or any like accident which may
befall me) all impediments thereof may be removed, by depositing in the hands
of trusty and able friends an Instrument exactly fitted, with a punctual and
clear description of the uses and applications thereof. Or if any very
scrupulous person shall happen to dream of any ground of suspicion, why I
should of purpose not discover it, or can imagine, where and how I can protect
my self from the discredit, the loss of all future fruits of my Privilege,
and the suits of every contributer against me (which must attend so unworthy a
piece of folly) he shall have security for his five shillings in that behalf.

As for the price of the Instruments (which men that desire to have them, are
to deposite above the five shillings) it is two shillings six pence, namely,
for those which I conceive to be of most general and common use, which if I
can between this and the time of discovery, better and improve, it shall be
done at mine own charges, although they should grow dearer thereby, so as (if
they become cheaper by my improvement) to man will think himself wronged if I
make no retribution out of the said price.

As for the Instruments of multiple writing, I would not have them expected,
because their use is not generally needful, and incomparably more hard then of
those for double only: Wherefore I have thought it rather fit to reserve them
for the peculiar use of some, who for want of better employment, may make a
trade of that practice.

To conclude all, I shall be ashamed of my judgment rather then my honesty, if
(at the worst) the discovery of a thing so rare, unheard of, thought by many at
first hearing to be impossible, so necessary, and almost of hourly use to most
men in the whole world, as well to those that live in this present age, as to
those that shall ever live after us, with 14 years license to reap the benefit
of the same, be not well worth five shillings, In all which time if it may s^ve
the writing of ten sheets only, the Contributers can be no losers by the
bargain. For mine own part, I do not doubt but that thousands will receive in
that time a thousand fold profit for their adventure, and have great cause to
thank God that he has given gifts unto men.

Sexto Martii, 1647.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, to enable the
Commissioners of the Great Seal, to grant his Majesty's Letters Patents to
William Petty or to his Assigns, for his having and quiet enjoying the sole
benefit of his late Invention of Double and Multiple Writing for the term of 14
years, according to the Proviso of the Statute of the 21 year of King JAMES
in that behalf made.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, having by several Certificats
from credible men received full satisfaction, not only of the feasibility of a
late invention of double and multiple writing, found out and discovered by the
industry of William Petty, and by him made practicable by Instruments, and
means of several natures and fashions, but also of the great use and profit
which may redonnd to the Commonwealth in general, and especially to those who
have mu^^ and frequent use of writing, and being desirous to encourage not only
the pains and labor of William Petty, but also of all others that shall bend
their thoughts to the search of such secrets as shall be profitable to the
Commonwealth, do Ordain, and be it Ordered and Ordained, by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, that the said William Petty, shall have the sole benefit
of his said inventions to him or his asignes* for and during the term of 14
years, either by teaching, or otherwise discovering the same, or by the sale of
such Instruments as are useful to the practice of the said Art: Prohibiting
and strictly forbidding all or any person or persons whatsoever for and during
the said term, the sale or use of any of the said Instrument or Instruments,
or practice of the said Art upon any other Instruments (It being an easy
matter to add unto, or otherwise to alter these, which are already contrived
by the said William Petty) without the license of him the said Inventor, or his
Assigns, upon the penalty of a hundred pound, to be forfeited to his or their
use, forasmuch as it will be very difficult to discover any such delinquents.

And it is further ordained, That Oliver Saint John Esquire, his Majesty's
Solicitor General do prepare a Bill to be signed by the Clerks of both Houses
of Parliament, containing his Majesty's Grant to William Petty, of the sole
profit of the said Art accordingly.

And the Commissioners of the great Seal are hereby required upon delivery of
the said Bill so prepared and signed by the Solicitor General, and Clerks of
both Houses of Parliament into the Chancery, to make their Receiptments and to
sign the same: to the end the said Bill may be forthwith engrossed under the
great Seal. And this Ordinance or the Duplicate thereof shall be sufficient
Warrant, as well to the said Solicitor General and Clerks of both Houses of
Parliament, as to the said Commissioners and every of them for the de^ng
hereof, and passing the said grant under the said great Seal, and also to all
and every O^ficer of the said great Seal.

John Brown Cler. Parliament. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



