Englands Season FOR REFORMATION OF LIFE.

A SERMON DELIVERED IN St. PAUL'S Church, LONDON. ON THE SUNDAY Next Following
His Sacred Majesty's RESTORATION.

By THO. PIERCE, Rector of Brington.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, at the Little North-Door in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M D C L X.

DIEV ET MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

Christian Reader,
THat what I committed the other day to the ears of Many, I now so suddenly
expose to the eyes of All, as I dare not pretend to deserve thy Thanks, so I
conceive I cannot justly incurr thy censure. For it is not in compliance with
my peculiar inclinations, (which of themselves are well known to be
sufficiently averse, from any farther publication of single Sermons,) but
partly to testify my Obedience to the commands of some Learned and pious
Friends, partly to frustrate the ill-meant whispers of some unlearned and
peevish Enemies. How far I was from a design either to please, or to provoke,
either this or that part of the Congregation, And how probably desirous to
profit both, I leave them both to pass a Judgment, not by any one part, but by
altogether. It would no doubt have been grievous to me, to suffer the
contumelies of Men for preaching Loyalty, and Love, and Reformation of Life, a
tender care of weak Brethren, and a Christian Forbearance of one another, if I
had not thought it an happy lot to suffer ought for His sake, Act. 5. 41.
who endured (for mine) such contradiction of sinners against himself; Heb. 12.
3.
some affirming, he was a good Man, and others saying Nay, but he deceives the
People. John 7. 12.


If some are yet so devotedly the Servants of Sin, John 8. 34.
as to hate me for bringing them (unwares) into the light, because the Light
has reproved their evil deeds, John 3. 20.
it cannot be from any hurtfulness either in Me, or in the light, but from
their own sore eyes, that their eyes are hurt. When Men are exasperated with
Lenitives, and throw themselves into Paroxysmes, after all our Pacifick and
most Anodynous applications, we ought not sure to think the worse, but rather
the better of our Praescriptions. That Christ Himself could do no miracles
amongst the Men of his own Country, was only the Fault of their prejudice, and
unbelief. That the heat harden's clay, is from the untowardness of the clay;
For if it were wax, the heat would melt it. Nor is the fault in the Sun, but in
the Dunghill, if the more he shine's on it, the worse it smell's.

I know that those Lovers of public Discord (whom my endeavors to reconcile
have made outrageous) as they are but few in point of Number, so in point of
Quality they are of smallest Consideration. And I know there are many most
worthy persons, whom the Virulence of mine enemies has made my Friends. So
that if I were studious to promote mine own Interest, and did not very much
prefer the consideration of their amendment, I should not endure (as now I
shall) to sue for peace whilst I am injured. But still remembering what it is,
(...). 1 These. 3 3. That no man should be moved by these afflictions; for your
selves know that we are appointed thereunto. Heb. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 6. 4. and 8.
to which as Christians we are appointed, or as Soldiers marked out, and that
we are bound to follow our leader, (even the Captain of our salvation who was
perfected through sufferings,) I shall cheerfully strive to approve my self as
a minister of God, by honor and dishonor, by evil report, and good report,
as a deceiver, and yet true; I will bless, being calumniated, 1 Cor. 4 13.
And being wronged above measure, I will entreat. The more it seems to be
impossible, (...).
to win the inventors of evil things to reconcileableness of Spirit, Diod.
Sicul. Romans 1. 30.
the more will I labor for its Attainment. For I will never quite cease to
hope, because I will never cease to pray, that by that powerful convincing
controuling Spirit, which stilleth the raging of the sea, and the madness of
the People, we may be knit together in one mind, 1 Cor. 1. 10.
and in one judgment; That the present time of our prosperity may prove the
Season for our Amendment, and change of life; that all bitterness, Ephesians. 4. 31.
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, may be put away from us
with all malice; and that as members of one Body, whereof Christ Jesus is the
Head, we may each of us endeavor (in our several stations) to keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

That this was really the intent of the Following Sermon, Ephesians. 4. 3.
the later part of the Sermon will make apparent. For what was spoken in
reflection upon the darkness of the night, was only premised as a Foyl to
commend the Day. And as a thing without which, I could not make an impartial
parallel between the Text and the Time. Besides that in the method of healing
wounds, (which a flatterer may palliate, but cannot cure,) there is as
charitable an use both of the Probe and the Abstersive, as there can possibly
be of the Oil and Balsam. The Decollation of Gods Anointed, (which was so far
a Deicide; Psalm. 82. 6. Exo. 22. 28.
as he was one of those Gods who shall dye like men,) had been declared by the
Parliament (before I made my strictures on it) to have been a most horrid and
hideous Murder. And if my censors did not think they had once offended, they
would not be candidates (as they are) for a Royal Pardon. It being so natural
for a pardon to include and connotate an offense, that unless we were
conscious of having sinned, we could not sincerely ask God forgiveness. I am
not able to ask any, for what I have said in the following Sermon, tending to
Loyalty and Union, and the establishment of both upon the only sure Basis of
impartial Repentance and self-revenge, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
until I am able to be convinced of Unsincerity in my aim at so good an End,
or of unlawfullnesse in the means which I have used for its attainment. And
therefore that which I beg from the Christian Reader, is not the favor of a
partial, but the Justice of an unpassionate and unbyassed perusal of All that
follows.

Newly Published. AN IMPARTIAL INQUIRY INTO THE Nature of Sin.

In Answer to Mr. Hickman. WITH A Postscript, touching some late dealings of
Mr. Baxter. By Mr. Tho. Pierce, Rector of Brington. Sold by Timothy Garthwait.

ERRATA.
Page 21. lin. 8. after as read our. p. 22. l. 4. for (...) r. (...). ibid. l.
16. r. (...). p. 26. l. r. (...).

ENGLAND'S SEASON FOR REFORMATION of LIFE.
ROMANS XIII. xii. The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore
cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.
TO make you see how the Text is exactly suitable to the Time, (as well to the
Time when it was written, as to the Time wherein it is read,) It will be
needful to entertain you with two such Praeliminary Observables, as without
which it is impossible to come at the meaning of the words. And yet the true
meaning must be attained, as well in their Rational, and Historical, as in
their Literal Importance, before I can handle them as I ought, without
injustice to the Apostle, or Apply them as I desire, without desrauding the
Congregation.

First then you are to take an especial notice, That in the space of forty
years after the Crucifying of Jesus, there was to happen amongst the Jews a
famous day of Discrimination, wherein Matthew. 24. 40.
one was to be taken, and another left. The cruel and the incredulous were to
be utterly destroyed, But the persecuted Believers to be remarkably preserved
from that Destruction. Preserved, not only from that deluge of Judgments,
like Mat. 24. 38.
Noah in the Ark, (Matthew. 24. 38.) But from the mischievous designs of the
Mosaical Zelots, by whom they could never be forgiven their having been loyal
unto their Lord. Which famous day of Discrimination, as the Scriptures have
expressed in those sublimer sorts of Periphrasis, [ The Kingdom of Heaven, The
Coming of Christ, the end of All things, and the Conclusion of the Age;] so in
respect of one part, that of deliverance unto the Faithful, we find it
expressed in other places, by (...), The Redemption drawing near, (...), The
Season, (...), See Doctor Hammond (of blessed memory) upon the place, and the
texts by him referred to.
The Day, (...), The Deliverance.] which Deliverance being nearer at the
writing of this Epistle, then when they first had embraced the Christian Faith,
is therefore the rather introduced with [an (...),] a consideration of the
time; and that as an Argument, or Allective, whereby to win them to the duties
of this whole Chapter; which Duties that they concern us as we are men of these
Times, and relating in particular to our late happy revolution, I foresee an
occasion to show anon.

As this is the first Praecognition, so it naturally affords me an easy
passage unto the second. For our Apostle having observed certain spots in the
Christians which dwelt at Rome, their being invelloped at once with a double
darkness, as well of their doings, as of their sufferings, no less asleep in
sin, than benighted with Persecution, comes early to them in this Epistle; And
here endeavors to awake them, not only with a Call, but a Reason for it.
Because the night does begin to be less and less dark, he tells them it is fit
that they be less and less drowzie. In the very next words before my Text, we
have an Apostolical (...), (the very thing that in English we use to call the
Cock-crow,) whereby he tells the guilty sleepers, it is more than time that
they awake. And the Reason which he gives them is very cogent; (...), for now
is our salvation nearer than when we believed. That is to say in plainer terms,
our deliverance at present is more approaching, than when we were newly
Christianiz'd. It is better with us now, than when we were Neophytes in the
Church. But to acquaint them the more distinctly how late it is that he awakes
them, The Night (says he) is far spent, and the Day is at hand; (that is) the
time of Persecution is now well over, and the day of Deliverance begins to
dawn. At the Tyrant Tyberius our Sun was set; At the other Tyrant Nero, it is
more then midnight; Do but wait for Vespasian, and you will find it break of
Day.

Nor does the vigilant Apostle merely awake them out of sleep, but also desires
that they will rise, and instructs them in the method how to make themselves
ready. They are to leave off their chamber Robes, and make them fit to go
abroad; to cast away their Bed-cloths, as only suitable to the Night; and to
appear in such habits, as are agreeable to the Day.

Let us therefore cast off the works of Darkness, and let us put on the Armor
of Light.

For a man to preach on this Text, no more is needful then to explain it. The
Text it self being a Sermon, as full and pithy, as it is short. [ The Night is
far spent, and the Day is at hand;] There is (...), the double Doctrine. [Let
us therefore cast off, and let us therefore put on;] There is (...), the double
Use.

The words apparelling the matter have both number and measure; And the matter
it self is as full of weight. From both together it is obvious to observe three
Things in this mighty Preacher; His Logic, his Rhetoric, and his Divinity.

We have his Logic in the Illative [ Therefore] which is a note of
Argumentation, giving the force of an Enthymeme, though not the form. And yet
the form is employed with more advantage than if expressed. The Night is far
spent; Therefore night-works and darkness must go away. The Day is at hand;
Therefore Light must be welcome to us.

We have his Rhetoric in the Figures, of which the whole is made up. For
besides the Isocola, and Homoioteleuta of the Text, (that is) the evenness of
the members, and musical cadence of every clause; we see the Metaphors in the
Period are just as many as the members. The first is borrowed from Darkness,
the second from the day; and both in Allusion to two things more (which are
very distant,) to wit our Armor, and our Apparel. And yet the whole is an
Allegory, most artificially carried on. For as he begins his holy Trope with
the night of trouble and Persecution, so he In Allegoria ^enendum est hoc, ut
quo in genere incipias, eodem desmas, aliter consequentia fit turpissima.
Quintilian.
shuts it up with the light of Peace. Nay, besides all these, the Text affords
us three figures more. Three (I say) in kind, but six in number. Here is a
single Anaphora, A double Epanados, and no less then a threefold Antithesis, by
which the terms of the last clauses (and there are three Terms in each) are
thus opposed to one another; Darkness to Light, Works to Armor, and Casting
off to Putting on.

After the Logic, and the Rhetoric, observe the Divinity of the Apostle; To
which his Art is but the Handmaid, and made to serve. Here is a seasonable
Advertisement, and a most useful Inference. And each of these is twofold,
exactly looking one on another, even as face answers face in a perfect Mirroir.
Observe how the later is strongly enforced out of the former. Since the night
of our sufferings is now far spent, what have we to do with the night of sin?
And since the day of our deliverance is hard at hand, what should we do but
Verse. 13.
walk honestly as in the day? The night of Error and Disorder is now well
over; Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness. The day of mercy and
Restoration begins to dawn; Let us therefore put on the armor of light. Let
us Ephesians. 5. 8.
walk in the light, as becomes children of the light. Let our light so shine
before God and men, that men may see our good works, and God reward them. That
men may see our good works, and glorify God in this present world; That God
may see our good works, and glorify us in the world to come. Thus you see
Saint Paul's Divinity, and way of teaching.

It is indeed a whole body of his Practical Divinity, how ever summed up in so
small a System. For the whole Duty of a Christian does consist in two things;
first (by way of privation) in casting off the works of Darkness, in denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts; next (by way of Acquisition) in putting on the
armor of light; Living soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.
Tit. 2. 12. For so the Apostle explains himself in the two verses after my
Text. Let us walk honestly as in the Day. And how must that be? why first he
tells us in the Negative, Not in rioting and Drunkenness, not in chambering and
wantonness, not in strife and envying, not in any of those things which were
yesterday forbid by his Majesty's excellent Proclamation; (for these are some
of the works of darkness, the very worst use that men can make of a
Deliverance,) next he tells us in the affirmative, It must be by putting on the
Lord Jesus Christ; By sticking close to his Precepts, and taking a copy from
his example; by having a fellowship with his death, and a conformity to his
sufferings; For this is here meant by the Armor of Light.

And each of these is improved by three main circumstances. First by the union
of the one with the other; they are not set with a disjunctive, that we may
take which we please, [Let us cast off, or let us put on,] as if the one would
serve turn without the other; But tied together with a copulative [Let us cast
off, and let us put on,] neither of them must go alone. We stand obliged to do
them both by indispensible necessity, nor must we flatter our selves that
salvation is to be had upon easier terms. Secondly by the inforcement of both
together, from the seasonable conjuncture of our affairs. For because the Night
is far spent, we must divest our selves of darkness; And because the Day is at
hand, we must apparel our selves with light. Thirdly by the order in which
these duties are to be done, we must not put on the Armor, before we cast off
the Works; But cease from dishonesty in the first place, and talk of godliness
in the second. For a godly Knave is a contradiction in Adjecto. The (...) has
the Precedence, we must begin with casting off whatsoever is contrary to
virtue; And then comes in the (...), we must proceed to the putting on
whatsoever is opposite to vice. We must not hope to serve two Masters, Matthew.
6* 24.
(which our Savior tells us is impossible, and which yet has been the project
of some years past,) erecting a Church for the one, and also a Chapel for the
other; But first of all we must abhor, and forsake our Mammon, that so we may
rationally endeavor to cleave with steadfastness unto God.

Thus you see how the Text is ravelled out into Particulars. And were I not
really somewhat afraid to spend too much of my time in a mere division, I would
presently wind up all into three great Bottoms. Whereof the first would
provide against Hypocrisy, the second against Indifferency, the third against
fainting, as also against Procrastination. And when Provision shall have been
made for these four Things, not only zeal and Syncerity, but also dispatch in
our amendment, and perseverance unto the end; I know not what can be wanting
either to satisfy the Text, or to Edify the souls of a Congregation.

But before I come to handle the useful Inference of the Apostle, (which to
do, will be the business of more then one or two Sermons,) the time does prompt
me to make Advantage of his most seasonable Advertisement, out of which he does
fitly deduce his Inference. So opportune is the Advertisement, as well to
these, as those Times, that I may say in the very language (though not in the
very sense) of our Blessed Savior, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in our
Ears. Luke 4. 21.
For,

We have had both our Jews, and our Gnostics too; And are in the highest
degree of hope, to be rid of both. Not (I hope) by their destruction, (like
that alluded to in my Text,) but by their happy conversion and union with us.
For mutual love, as well as loyalty, is the thing that this Chapter does
chiefly aim at. It presses earnestly for loyalty, from the first verse unto
the eighth. And as earnestly for love, from the eighth verse unto the end. By
unavoidable implication it presses for love throughout the whole, but most
expressly and on purpose in no less then four verses, to wit, the eight, the
ninth, the tenth, and the thirteenth. We must not Insult over our enemies,
though we ought to give thanks for their disappointment. The mouth of
wickedness will be stopped, when men shall see us the humbler for our
advancement. The noblest benefit of a conquest, is the opportunity to oblige.
Rejoice not (says Solomon) when thine enemy falls, nor let thine heart be
glad when he stumble^h, lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn
away his wrath from him. (Prove. 24. 17.) From whence it is obvious to collect,
That to Insult over our enemies may do them good; but all that we can get by
it, is God's displeasure. The greatest care is to be taken in the present
dawning of our day, that it be not overcast with an utter darkness. We have
already had a long and a tedious night; (though not so long as the Apostles by
twenty years,) A Night of sorrow and oppression; A Night of disorder and
confusion; A night of Ignorance and Error; A night of Error in judgment, and
practice too; To sum up all, we have been seized with a night of suffering,
which we had drawn over our selves by a Night of Sin.

It is so far from my purpose, to make or widen the wounds of any, that you
will see, (before we part) I do intend nothing but Healing. But I must make an
application, as well of the Night, as of the Day; or else the parallel expected
will be imperfect. And as it is reckoned the greatest happiness, to be able to
say we have been miserable; (nay and St. Gregory called it a happy sin, which
gave occasion to such a Remedy, as the coming of Christ into the world:) so
'twill be useful to reflect upon the darkness of the night, which (by the
blessing of God) is so very far spent, the better to relish the enjoyment of
the glorious day which is now at hand. -- Haec olim meminisse juvabit.
To recount what we have suffered, is no more then to consider how much we are
able to forgive; and for how great a deliverance it stands us upon to be
thankful.

When we were dull, and in the dark, and knew not the Happiness we enjoyed,
whilst we enjoyed it; when we could not away with so hard a lesson, as the 1
Pet. 2. 13, 14.
submitting our selves for the Lords sake, whether to the King, as Supreme, or
unto Governors, as sent by him, and whether those that were sent, were
Ecclesiastical, or Civil; when it seemed to us a Paradox, that it is the liberty
of the subject to live in subjection unto the law, and therefore in loyalty
unto him, whom to obey for conscience sake is the happiest Cappadoces, (inquit
Strabo) (...). Strab. l. 12. p. 540. c.
freedom; I say when this Lesson would not otherwise be learnt, God sent us to
School to a civil war; the severest Praeceptor, by which poor Scholars could be
instructed. Thucdy. l. 3. p. 227. (...) etc.
So it was called by Thucydides, (...) A violent Schoolmaster, and such we
found it by sad experience. For it rigidly taught us through the mouth of the
angry Cannon, and gave us terrible admonitions upon the point of the sword. A
lying spirit went forth into the mouth of the Prophets, Inspiring the Isa. 14.
23. (...) Polyb. l. 6. p. 458.
meanest of all the people to affect Dominion over the mightiest; and never
ceasing to blow the coals, which they had kindled within the Bramble, until
they saw it had devoured the lofty Cedar. A Church forsooth was to be swept,
(but with the Beesome of destruction) though the best Reformed in all the
world; and because the very Beesome was the uncleanest thing in it, it could
not choose but be the fouler for being swep^. Nay all the foundations of the
earth did presently grow out of course. In the whole body of the Kingdom there
was little to be seen, but wounds and bruises. For our Politic Chirurgions did
so follow the Letter, in opposition to the sense of the Poets Rule; as to have
sawed off most of the soundest members, which were -- Immedicabile vulnus ense
recidendum --
incurable indeed, by being faultless. Before the murdering of the King, who
was the head of our Common mother, they garbled both the Universities, which
were the eyes. This was the wit of their Impiety, first to pluck out her eyes,
that she might not see them cut off her head. They did not only (like Alcides)
cruelly bite their mothers Breast, But (like Nero) rip up her bowels. Not only
(like Tarquinius) summa papavera amputare, lopp off the chieftains of the
Nation, but like Procrustes) cut off the feet too. The public calamities were
extended, from him that sat upon the Throne, to him that labored at the
Plough. And if we extend our consideration to the Preparedness of their minds,
had all that were faithful in the land had no more then one neck, those
Caligula's I allude to had cut it off at one blow. Nay in one sense at least I
may say they did it. For the head of the Parliament is declared by law to be
the King; and the Parliament (we know) is a kind of whole Nation Epitomized.
And so to cut off the King, was to behead the Parliament; which, what was it in
effect, but to cut the Throat of the English Nation? Now if we consider the
Revolution, by which we all are transported with joy, and wonder, and do
compare it with every part of that Politic -- (...), -- (...). Polyb.
Megalop. l. 6. p. 456, 457, 458.
wheel, (that (...), as Polybius calls it,) with which this disgraced and
glorious Kingdom has been both tortured, and turned round; we cannot but hope
that many thousands have found so good an effect of their late Collyrium, that
they are not only quicker, but singler sighted then heretofore; and do make
such severe expostulations with themselves, as not to need any other censors.

With how vast an expense of blood, and conscience, and as well of Public as
Private Treasure, did we buy the sad Privilege of Paying Assessments and
Excise? How much Pains were we at, to purchase the means of our being
Miserable? What a do did we keep to find out a way to our undoing? we felt an
eminent Decay of Public Honor, as well as Trade; A Decay of Religion, because
of Unity; A Decay of what not, unless of that that decayed on every side? Nay
the more our sinews were shrunk up, and by how much the weaker our shoulders
grew, by so much the more were we laden with heavy Burdens. There was inflicted
on many thousands a Taste of scarceness; and a sight of the Plague, though not
of Pestileuce. For when did we see a new year, which did not bring along with
it a new Disease too? It Is true indeed that many of us had great enjoyments;
But how many others had right to greater, who yet were reduced to none at all?
And all we had being precarious, at the lustful disposal of fellow subjects,
we knew not how soon we might be drowned in the deepest want, how much soever
(for a Time) we might swim in Plenty. Nay even then we were to count it our
real misery, that we could see, and deplore, but could not Remedy other men's.

Such was the Darkness of the Night, which now does serve to commend the Day.
The Day by whose light we can see to read, (what was hid from our eyes when we
sat in Darkness, when the great Lamps of the Church were cruelly hid under a
Bushel, and even He was taken from us, who was the light of our eyes, as well
as the Breath of our nostrils,) I say by this light we can see to read, That
our Liberty does consist in a faithful Discharge of our Allegiance. That it is
the Interest of the subject, Not to be able to Rebel. That the Prerogative of
the King is the Peoples Privilege. That to lessen his Power, is to betray
their Rights. For unless he is able to crush, and injure, he is not able to
defend, and protect his subjects. Any Tyranny will be better, than that of a
prosperous Rebellion, by how much one is less grievous then many Tyrants; And a
Temporary Mischief, then a perpetual Inconvenience.

Blessed be God that we can say, (at least as far as our Apostle;) that our
Dark state of misery is fairly vanished, and that the Light does begin to show
it self in our Horizon. But so far are we yet from our full Meridian, that it
will never be Day with us, (I mean, not a glorious uncloudy Day,) till Magna
Charta shines forth in its native Luster. And it appears by Salvae sint
Episcopis omnes Libertates suae. Mag. Chart. c. 1. and ult.
Magna Charta, that all the Rights of the Church are the chiefest Liberties of
the Subject. To be but capable of the Honor, the 1 Timothy 5. 17.
double honor of the Clergy, (to wit, the Reverence, and the Revenue,) is an
eminent part of the Lay-mans Birthright. I pray be pleased to consider, what is
not every day observed, That all the Dignities and Endowments, which do belong
unto the Church (at once by the Statutes of God and man,) are so many Rights
which appertain to your childrens children* I must not here be thought to
forsake my Text; For if you compare it with the Context, (especially from the
first, to the eighth verse of this Chapter,) you will see the great fitness of
all I say, and that my Text cannot be satisfied, unless I say it. For he that
says in this place by the Spirit of God, Let every soul be subject to the
higher Powers, Romans 13. 1.
does also say by the same Spirit, Obey them that have the Rule over you, Heb
13. 7, 17.
who have spoken to you the word of God, and who do watch for your souls, as
those that must render an Account. And the Interest of the former is so
entwisted with the later, That until our Bishops receive their Right, though
we are glad to have our King, we may rationally fear we shall not hold him. For
ask (I beseech you) of the days that are past, Deuteronomy. 4. 32.
and ask from the one side* of heaven unto the other, if ever there were any
such thing as This, that a King could be happy without a Bishop? Lord! What an
Epoch will it make in our future Kalendars, when men shall reckon from this
Year, as from the signal Year of Restitution? But then (like that which Saint
Peter mentions, Acts 3. 21.) The Restitution is to be general, as well to God,
as to the People. And you will find in Magna Charta, (which does deserve to be
imprinted in all your memories) That all the Rights of the Church were entirely
granted unto God; They were granted unto God, and that for ever. Now of so
sacred a force is the word [ For ever,] That if a Statute shall be made against
the Liberties of the Church, The Law of the Land has provided against That
Statute; And by an Anticipation declares it Null. See the first and last Chap.
of the 42. of Edward the third.
Shall I guess at the cause of so great a Caution? It seems to be as for other
Reasons, so in Particular for This; Because to alter that Government, was as
well against the Kings Oath, as against the Oaths of both Houses, which swore
the Right of his Supremacy, as well in all Ecclesiastical, as Civil causes.
Besides that in the Judgment of the most eminent in the world (for depth of
knowledge in holy things) The order of Bishops is by Divine Institution. And if
it is so in good earnest, it will be dangerous to deal with the Laws of Christ,
as we read Cum adversus Rempublicam Lacedamoniorum conspirationem ortam noctu
comperisset, Leges Lycurgi continuo abrogavit, quae de Indemnatis supplicium
sumi vetabant. Val. Max. lib, 7* cap. 2. page 208.
Agesilaus once dealt with those of Lacedaemon, which he pretended only to
abrogate, that he might not break them. But whether so, or not so, a thing in
Being and debate is to pass for good, until the Dispute shall be fairly ended.
And if an Error must be adventured on either hand, Religion tells us, it ought
to be upon the Right.

Would any know why I insist upon such a subject in such a place? my Reasons
for it are plainly These.

First, I insist upon such a subject, because my Text (as I said) does exact it
of me; And because it is my duty at least to wish, That the day breaking forth
may be full and lasting; That the Repentance of the Nation may be impartial,
and so to our SOVEREIGNS RETURN, there may be added his continuance in Peace
and safety. I say in safety, not more to his Person, then his Posterity. Not
insafety for a season, so long as men are well humoured, but so long as the Sun
or the Moon endures. And then for you of this Place, who are an honorable
part of the English Nation, that which I take to be your Duty, I think is your
interest to endeavor. The most I am pressing on you is this, That you will
labor for the means of your being happy. If you think you cannot be happy,
with the establishment of the Prelacy, I shall pray you may be happy, at least
without it, and also wish I may be able to pray with Faith too. Only as often
as I reflect on King JAMES his motto, [ No Bishop, no King,] and withal do
consider its having been verified once, and before our eyes, I think it my duty
to desire, it may not be verified any more: But that it may rather be here
applied, what was spoken heretofore of the Spartan Laws, [ ut semper esse
possent, aliquando non fuerunt.] They only ceased for a Time, that they might
continue to all eternity. These are sincerely the very Reasons for which I
insist upon such a subject.

Secondly, I do it in such a place, because I look upon This Assembly, as on
the Head and the Heart of the Royal City. I look on the City, as on a Sea,
into which the main stream of the nation runns. Even the Parliament it self
has such a respect unto the City, that if you plead for God's Spouse, as you
have done for his Anointed (for which your names will be precious with late
posterity,) if you shall supplicate for a Discipline which is as old in this
land as Christianity it self, and stands established in Law by thirty two Acts
of Parliament, and without which you cannot live, unless by living under the
breach of your greatest charter, they will not only be apt to grant, but to
thank you also for your Petition.

Having gone thus far in prosecution of the Advertisment, That the Night of our
suffering is fairly spent, and that the day of our enjoyment begins to dawn; And
having directed unto the means, (with submission be it spoken to all
Superiors,) by which our Day is to be lengthned, not only into a year, but
into an Age of Jubilee; to be made a kind of perpetual Sabbath, a Day of Rest
from those works, which either wanted Light, or were ashamed of it; which
either borrowed Darkness for their Cover, or else which owned it for their
Cause; I humbly leave what I have said to his acceptance and disposal, in the
Hand of whose Counsel are all your Hearts. It Is more then time that I proceed
to the general use of this advertisment; to which I am prompted by the word [
Therefore] as it is a word of connection betwixt the duty and the deliverance.

Our Apostle does not thus argue; Because the Night of Oppression is now far
spent, and the day of deliverance is hard at hand, Let us therefore enjoy the
good things that are present, let us stretch our selves upon beds of Ivory, let
us crown our selves with Rose-buds, let us drink wine in bowls, and let us
dance to the sound of the viol, let us leave tokens of our joyfulness in every
street, let none of us go without his share of voluptuousness, for this is our
portion, our lot is this: I say he does not thus reason, (like the swaggerers
and Hectors in the second chapt. of Wisdom, and in the sixth of the Prophet
Amos.) but on the contrary, That the serious consideration of an approaching
deliverance should be a double enforcement to change of life, for such is
evidently the force of the particle (...), as that looks back on the (...)
Because the night is far spent, and because the day is at hand, (...), let us
therefore cast off those works of darkness, and let us therefore put on the
Armor of light. As if he should have said, At this very Time, and for this
very reason, let us live better lives then we did before, let us buckle up
close to our Christian duties; The Reformation of our manners will be the
properest Answer to such a blessing. Such also was the Reasoning which Moses
used to the People Israel. Did ever people hear the voice of God, as thou have
heard and live? (Deuteronomy. 4. 33.) Thou shall keep therefore his statutes, that it
may go well with thee (v. 40.) so again Deuteronomy. 8. 6, 7. The Lord thy God
brings thee into a good Land, Therefore thou shall keep the Commandments of
the Lord. Such was the reasoning of Zachary in his divine Benedictus, That the
use we are to make of being saved from our enemies, Luke 1. 71. 74, 75.
and from the hand of all that hate us, is to serve the Author of our
deliverance, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

What now remains, but that we go, and do likewise? Not arguing thus from our
late great changes; Because the Night of our sufferings is well nigh spent, and
the day of Restitution is hard at hand, let us therefore put from us the evil
day, Amos 6. 3.
and cause the seat of violence to come near, for now it comes to our Turn to
oppress the poor, and to crush the helpless, and to call Our strength the law
of Justice, Verse 6.
let us never so much as think of the afflictions of Joseph. Let our joy run
out into debaucherie, and surfeit, into the braveries of vanity, and the
Enjoyments of our lust; or at the best let us express it, by the making of
Bonfires, and Ringing of Bells, by solemn drinking of bealths and casting of
Hats into the Air, whereby to make the World see that we are glad rather than
thankful, But let us manifest on the contrary (and let us do it by
demonstration) that we are piously thankful, as well as glad. Because the Day
of good things breaks in upon us, Let us Therefore offer to God thanksgiving,
Psa. 50. 14.
and pay our vows unto the Lord. Our Vows of Allegiance and Supremacy, Our
Vows to assert and maintain our Charters, Our Vows to live according to Law and
obey the Canons of the Church. But above all let us pay him our Vow in
Baptism, by forsaking the World before we leave it, by subduing the Flesh unto
the Spirit, by resisting the Devil until he Flies. James. 4. 7.
That whilst God is making all new without us: we may not suffer our Hearts
within us to be the only things remaining Old; But rather (on the contrary)
that we may prove we are in Christ by that demonstrative argument of our
becoming new creatures; which until we do become, we cannot possibly be in
Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Do* the two Twin Blessings of Peace and Plenty, which
have been (for many years) at so low an ebb, begin to flow in upon you from
every quarter? Then let not your souls be carried away with the pleasant
violence of the Tide. Let not any Man seek great things for himself, but rather
study to deserve then to enjoy them. Make no provision for the Flesh, whereby
to fulfill the lusts thereof: but put ye On the Lord Jesus Christ; and adorn
his Doctrine, by a conformity to his Life. Put on his Modesty, and his
Temperance in a perfect opposition to rioting and Drunkenness, put on his
chastity and his pureness in opposition to chambering and wantonness, put on
his bowels and his mercy in opposition to strife and envy.

You know I told you in the beginning, that Loyalty and Love are the two grand
duties, at which this Chapter does chiefly drive. And having been instant for
the first in the former part of my discourse I think it a duty incumbent on me
to be as urgent for the second. For Love is part of that Armor, my Text
commands us to put on. Nay considering that Love is the fulfilling of the Law
(in the next verse but one before my Text) the armor of Light May be said to
be the armor of Love too. Love must needs be (...) the whole armor of God,
Ephesians. 6. 13.
in as much as it comprehends the fulfilling of the law. As one Scripture
tells us that God is light, Gal. 5. 14. 1 John 1. 5. 1 John 4. 8.
so another tells us, that God is Love, and therefore the Children of light
must be the children of Love too.

Then let the same mind be in us, which was in Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 2. 23*
who when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed his cause to God who
judges righteously. And let us prove this mind is in us, by our forbearing one
another, forgiving one another, Even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us.
Ephesians. 4. 32.
As we are stones of that temple in which the Head of the Corner is Christ
himself, He meant his Blood should be the Cement, to fasten every one of us to
One another, and all together unto himself. And since we see that Disloyalty,
is taking it is leave throughout the Land, lets rather shut the Door after it,
by (Love and Unity) then (by breaches and Divisions) open a way for its Return.
Let us effectually make it appear, by the modest use of our Enjoyments, Pacem
Bello quaesitam esse, That we fought only for peace, and Contended only for
Union, that the end of our strife, was our agreement; that we aimed at truth,
rather than victory; or rather at the victory of Truth and Righteousness. Let
our generous deportment become an evidence, that as the greatest of our
calamities could not bow down our heads, so the greatest of our enjoyments
cannot trip up our heels; That as Crosses could not deprive us of Hope and
comfort, so the Tide of our Prosperity shall but illustrate our Moderation.

But above all let us distinguish betwixt our weak and our wilful Brethren.
Jude 22. 23.
Of some (St. Jude says) we must have compassion, making a difference. But
Others (he says) we must save with fear, pulling them Out of the fire, That
is, we must save them even by making them afraid. 2 Cor. 5. 11.
We must show them the terrors of the Lord and fright them out of the way to
Hell. We must in any wise rebuke them, Lev. 19. 17.
and must not suffer sin upon them. It is a rule amongst Musicians, that if a
string is but True, it is to be cherisht, though never so grossly out of tune;
but to be broken, if it is false, because incapable of amendment. Some are so
Scandalous that we must not receive them into Our House, 2 John 10. 11.
nor bid them God speed: For to bid them God speed is to partake of their Evil
deeds. (2 John 10. 11.) But there is nothing more Barbarous than not to hold
from the breaking a bruized reed, Isa. 42. 3.
or from the quenching a smoking flax. Mat. 12. 20.
Nothing but Pardon belongs to Penitents although they may have sinned against
us no less then seventy times seven. Mat. 18. 22.
It is an excellent passage in Herodotus, that whilst Craesus was brewing
vengeance against the murderer of his Son, Adrastes being the man that had
killed the Son, presently threw himself down at the Fathers feet; and in the
bitterness of his soul past such a sentence upon himself as even melted the
very bowels of an enraged King, who straight brake forth into this expression
(...). Herodot. l. 1. p. 17.
Friend (says he) I am revenged; thy severity to thy self has made me kind.
And I think it fit that thou should live, for thinking it fit that thou
should dye. If we have failed heretofore in so great a duty, let us learn
from that Heathen, to love our enemies for the future. And since it is
dangerous not to love them, Heb. 12. 29.
in as much as our God is a consuming fire, let us love them at least in our
own defense. Have they persecuted us, when it was in their power? Let us the
rather not hurt them, when it is in Ours. For to Imitate their courses is to
approve them. But (...) (as Arrian speaks) not to be like them in what is
evil, is the most generous kind of revenge, Eccles. 12. 13
and conquest. Now then (if you please) Hear the sum of the whole matter. We
must demonstrate to our enemies by the most practical way of arguing, That the
night of sin is far spent, and that the day of our Amendment begins to dawn,;
2 Pet. 1. 19.
that the Day Star (in St. Peter) is arisen in our hearts; that we are
Followers of Christ, Joh. 13. 15.
and resolved to do, as he has given us an example. Which was not to call down
Fire from heaven, Luke 9. 54.
much less to conjure it up from Hell, but to call Judas Friend, Mat. 26. 50.
whilst he was executing his treason, as well as Devil, whilst he designed it;
nay to lay down his Life, even for them that took it away. Now since he is
(what he calls himself) the light of the World, and as well our armor, as our
apparel, St. Paul did fitly explain his precept for putting on the armor of
Light, by that of putting on the Lord Jesus Christ. This is the use we are to
make of the Nights going away, and the days approach, if I may not rather say
its presence with us. This is our practical, and vital (not verbal) Oratory
which next to the pleading of the Spirit who helps our infirmities, Romans 8.
26.
and makes intercession for us with groans which cannot be uttered,) is the
only Oratory with God, that will be powerful to persuade him to pass our Hopes
into Fruitions, to crown our Fruitions with an increase, to bless that
increase with a long contiuuance, and so to sanctify to us our temporal things,
as that we may not fall short of the things Aeternall.

This is the rational importance of the word Therefore in my Text, as it is a
particle of connection betwixt our Duty and our deliverance.

Now that the Duty of keeping close to the Commandments of Christ (by casting
off all our works of Darkness, and by putting on the whole armor of light)
should be enforced upon our souls from the consideration of the Time, [a Time
of Peace, and Prosperity, succeeding a time of Persecution; a very bright Day,
after a very Dark Night;] I shall the rather proceed to prove by the several
Reasons of the thing, because the Reasons making for it, will be also the
motives inducing to it. They will not only clear the Truth, but advance the
practice of my Assertion.

The first Reason is, Because it is generous, and noble, to amend our lives
with our condition; and rather out of gratitude, then sordid fear. It was and
will be the greatest glory of Titus Vespasian, (above the rest of the Roman
Emperors) that he was molded by his Empire from the worse to the better; from
having been a very cruel and a very proud person, to be as eminently mild and
humble too, as if he had listened to the precept in Ecclesiasticus, and made
his Practice an Answer to it, Ecclus. 3. 18.
[ My son, the greater thou art, humble thy self so much the more.] Happy is
the Man that can say with David, It is good for me that I have been in trouble.
Ps. 119. 71.
But he is the Man of a rarer happiness, who is inwardly the better for having
prosper'd. It Is very much worthier of a Christian to be led by Gods favor, then
to be driven into duty by his severity. A well natured people, upon the
receiving of a blessing, will be apt to bethink themselves (with David) by what
expressions of their gratitude they may signify their sense of their
Obligation. (...); Philo (...). p. 552.
Quid retribuemus? what shall we render unto the Lord for all his benefits
bestowed upon us (Psalm. 116. 12.) which of his greatest enemies shall we make a
sacrifice to his wrath? what monstrous sin shall we mortify? what darling lust
shall we subdue? how shall we honor him with our lives? and give him thanks by
our Reformation? shall we despise the Riches of his forbearance, because he is
willing that his forbearance should allure us to Repentance, and not that his
Judgments should fright us to it? shall we presume to be evil, because he is
good? And offend the more boldly, because his grace does so much abound? No, we
will not (for shame) abuse his love, and corrupt our selves with his
indulgence. Nor will we (in pity to our souls) pollute our selves with his
gifts, or sin away his graces and mercies to us, by making them serve to
incense his Justice. But by how much the greater his mercies are, by so much
the more will we tremble to provoke the eyes of his glory. Because we find by
so late experience, He is a God ready to pardon, swift to show mercy, and slow
to wrath; we will endeavor to let him see, we are a people ready to serve him,
swift to ask him forgiveness, but slow to sin. Thus you have the first Reason
of the word Therefore in my Text, as it is a particle of connection betwixt the
duty and the deliverance.

The Second Reason is, because he will otherwise repent of his favors to us,
and will punish us the more, for sining against such Obligations. We ought to
look upon our privilege with Fear and Trembling: for that which heightens our
dignity, whilst we attend to Gods service, does also aggravate our doom,
whilst we neglect it. The very things which make us capable of greater
happiness than others, may accidentally fit us for greater ruin. Remember
those Words of our blessed Savior, [ Luke 10. 15.] And thou Capernaum which
art lifted up to heaven, shall be cast down to hell. Whereby it is intimated
unto us that God will punish Malefactors, as well in respect of the mercies
they have received, as in respect of the sins they have committed. When we
shall all appear before the judgment seat of God, 2 Cor 5. 10.
to answer for the things which are done in the body, we then must render a
strict account, what use we have made of our deliverance, in how many respects
we are the better for all that good that is done unto us.

The third Reason is, because our dangers are greater in time of Peace and
Prosperity, then in time of distress and persecution; and so we have need of
the greater caution. Agur prayed against poverty for fear of stealth; but he
prayed against riches for fear of atheism. Prove. 30. 8, 9
If Jesurun wax fat, he falls a kicking, and quite forgets the God that made
him. [ Deuteronomy. 32. 15.] If Nabal is drunk with the prosperity of sheering the
Innocent and harmless Sheep, it is no time to tell him, that either David or
God is Angry. Nay David himself, in his prosperity, began to boast he should
never be moved [Psal. 30. 6.] From fullness of bread arises Idleness, and
Pride; and those (we know) were the sins of Sodom. When God rained Manna upon
his people, and gave them all that they desired, Then [saith the Text] they
were not estranged from their lusts. But when he slew them, they sought him and
enquired early after God. [ Psalm. 78. 24, 35.] If ever any mortal was (...),
and (...), (that is) the White boy of Fortune and special favorite of the
Fates, (as the heathens phras'd it) the Youth of Macedon was sure the Man. But
though he could not be overcome by the strength of all Asia, he was by the
Weakness and softness of it. It Was this made Cato cry out in Livy, Ne illae
magis res nos ceperint, quam nos illas. Live. lib. 34. p. 849.
Quo magis imperium crescit, eo plus horreo. The more our Territories increase,
the more I tremble; for fear the Kingdoms which we have taken, do prove indeed
to have taken Us. He knew that where the Soul is not commensurate with the
success, the Pride arising from the victory does so defile and sully the glory
of it, that the prize may be said to lead the Triumph into Captivity. It is so
natural for a man to be transported with prosperity, that it extorted from
Moses an extraordinary caveat, before he could safely admit his people to the
delights of Canaan. When the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the
Land, Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 11, 12. See Deuteronomy. 8. 10. to 18.
to give thee great and goodly Cities, and houses full of all good things, Then
beware that thou forget not the Lord, which brought the out of the land of
Egypt [ Deuteronomy 6. 10. 12.] and so again in the 8 chapter, when thou have eaten
and art full, and have built goodly houses and dwelt therein, Then beware least
thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, which brought thee
out of the house of Bondage. It Is a dangerous thing to be imparadis'd on Earth,
because in every such paradise there lurks a Serpent.

The Fourth reason is, Because it is better to have a conquering, then an
untempted Innocence. To live exactly in despite of solicitations to the
contrary, is more thank-worthy and more Rewardable, then only to want the
Importunity or Opportunity to offend. A man may easily be submissive, whilst he
is under a persecution, and study compliance, when he is worsted. But it is as
laudable, as it is difficult, if we who sought even for victory, whilst we were
trodden under foot, shall sue for peace in our Prosperity. That which makes us
most high (in the sight of God) is our Humility; for which there is hardly any
place in our Humiliation. But the Taller any man is, by so much the lower he
has to stoop,; and so it is the Benefit of success, to be Remarkable for
Modesty and Moderatien. That especially is the season wherein our Armor of
light is of most honorable Employment, when the Prince of darkness has most
auxiliaries within, and our Lusts are made Ablest to war against us.

The fifth Reason is, because there is no other way whereby to prevail with God
Almighty, both to complete that happiness he has begun, and to continue it to
us when so completed. I say to complete it being begun, because the night is
far spent, but not quite over; The day is dawning, or at hand, but not arrived
at its Meridian. Gods Anointed is settled, but not his spouse. Many are sorry
for their sacrilege, but do not earnestly repent; Or they repent a fair way,
(as far as Ahab) but not (with Zachae the Publican) as far as a four fold
Restitution. Many who sinned out of Ignorance in a very high and heinous
manner, do stiffly argue their being Innocent, from their not apprehending that
they were guilty. But (because Repentance is better for them, then a mere
Temporal Impunity,) they should be entreated to consider, and put it a little
to the question, whether their Ignorance was not caused by the Previous
Dominion of some great Prejudice, which had also its Rise from some Reigning
sin. Alas! The Jews were too guilty of killing Christ, although they knew not
what they did; for had they known him, they would not have crucified to
themselves the Lord of glory. But yet I say they were guilty, because their
Ignorance was not invincible. It was their guilt that they were Ignorant; they
might have known what they did, if they had not stood in their own Light. If
men will either wink hard, or fling dust in their eyes, It is not only their
Infirmity, but their fault that they are blind. Saul the Pharisee was excused
indeed a Tanto, for having blasphemed against God, and also persecuted the
Church, because he did it in Ignorance, and unbelief; But however it did
alleviate, it did not nullify his sins; For to become the Apostle Paul, he
stood in need of a Conversion. Now if we do not only earnestly, but also
rationally desire to see a suitable end, (or rather no end at all) of these fair
Beginnings, Sueton. l. 2. c. 22. p. 66.
that the Temple of Janus may so be shut by our Augustus, as never more to be
opened by any Caesar, Florus l. 4. c. 12. p. 136.
and that this Day of our Deliverance may never more be overcast with a cloud
of darkness, but happily lost into Eternity; we cannot better give Thanks to
God for the present breaking in of our glorious day, then by an annual day of
Fasting for the clamorous sins of our tedious Night. I mean the Profanation of
Holy Places, the sacrilegious perversion of Holy things, the monstrous Harmony
of Oaths, which some have fancied to arise from the greatest discord, the
effusion of innocent, and (not only so, but of) Royal blood, with all the
Preparatives and attendants of that unspeakable Provocation, which of it self
does deserve (and that for ever) a monthly day of Humiliation. (...). Philo p.
501 cenfer. cum Number. 25. and Number. 31. 16.
It was the policy of Balaam (says Philo the Jew) to make the Moabitish Women
sell the use of their flesh to the Hebrew Men; and that for no other price,
then their sacrificing to Idols. As knowing that the Hebrews were not otherwise
to be worsted, then by their own breaches of Gods Commandments. And we know
not how soon our dawning day may grow dark, if we do not cast off the works of
darkness. Which implies a good reason for the word therefore in the Text, as
it is a particle of connection betwixt the Duty and the Deliverance.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be Honor
and Glory for ever and ever. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
FINIS.

