PHYSICAL AND CHYMICALL WORKS, Composed by Geor: Phaedro, surnamed the Great,
of Gelleinen; viz. 1. His Physical and Chymicall Practice. 2. His Physical
and Chymicall cure of the Plague. 3. His lesser Surgery. 4. His Chymicall
Furnace.


Being the Chymicall way and manner of Cure of the most difficile and incurable
diseases: as also the preparing those Secrets; with the Elucidation of the
Characteristicall Celestial Physic.

Selected out of the Germane and Latin Language; By the industry of John
Andreas Schenckius of Graffenberg, Doctor of Physic.

London, Printed for William Sheares, at the Bible in St Paul's Churchyard, near
the little North door. 1654.

PErusing those Learned Pieces of Basilius Valentinus, Roger Bacon, Isaac
Holland, and other excellent Learned men, collected by Peter John Faber, Dr of
Physic of Monspelier, and published together, finding George Phaedros Works
inserted amongst them, I thought it not impertinent to prefixe the testimony of
that Learned Physician, Dr John Faber concerning him, in his own words, in the
third page of his argument of the whole Work, in his Curru Triumphaii.

Scripsit Georgius Phaedro Tractatum unicum, and doctissimum de Theoria, and
practica Lapidis sapientum, and qui eum Tractatum rite intelliget, vere and
certe sciret, totam artem nostram. In hoc enim Tractatu quicquid de lapide
Sapientum dici potest, clarissime manifestatur, inter Medicos celeberrimos and
Philosophos nominatur, and ipse Medicus Celebris vocatur.

G. I. B. M.

To the courteous or candid READER.
HAving found among the Books of my Fathers Library, the manuscript of that
Famous Physician, called George Phaedro, written by his own hand, which lay hid a
long time in darkness, as an useless burden unto the earth; I thought, that an
Art otherwise excellent and useful, is (...) and defective, unless it be put
unto the Practicke: and this is the reason why I perused and caused it to be
printed. For it is well known, that good counsels, if kept within the breast,
are for no good unless they be imparted unto those that have need of them.
Thus this Work lay hid, set down in paper, and collected for that purpose,
that those which are taken ill might be cured, and doubtless he in his Calling
did do his best he could. Why should we conceive any other, but that that
industrious and Learned man, George Phaedro, my dear Father, has intended by
these his Labors nothing else, but that they might be for the good of his sick
neighbors and fellow Christians? And that he in his experimental knowledge
has found to cure the diseased quickly, safely, and sweetly, the same
medicaments should be communicated unto posterity? There are some men indeed,
if they have gotten any secrets, they keep them for themselves, as if they had
found some rare and new invented Art, and condemn it to a perpetual silence.
How envious their mind is to the public good, is sufficiently known: I
thought it good to communicate these to the Students of Physic, that they
might serve, being published, for the good of such that are diseased, and be
helped thereby. The which to effect the better, these here and there scattered
members I have reduced into one Body, being set down by pieces, and conscribed
in a promiscuous style, (some in Latin, the most in the German tongue) reduced
them into one Language, and brought them into Order, that they might not be
tedious unto the Reader. This my small Labor I desire to be recommended unto
all good men, praying to accept it in good part.

John George Schenkius of Graffenberg, Dr of Physic.

THe Reader is advertised, not to take distaste of the strange ingrediences at
the first view, which are put into some of the Receipts (as when he writes,
take of our Mysterium, of our Liquor, of Ophirizum, of this and of that
Essence, etc.) because the manner how they are prepared and composed, is set
down in the little Treatise of this Book, called Furnus Chymicus.

A Catalogue of the Cures performed by the special good Medicaments of George
Phaedro, a Famous Physician.
The Chymcall Practicke contains these following Cures.
THE cure of Agues. The cure of the Plague. A composition of the camphor'd
liquor of the Treacle. The cure of the Headache. The cure of Delirium, or
distractedness of the Brain. The cure of Epilepsie. The several Gouts cure,
as of Apoplexy, Palsy, and of the beginnings of any such contractures. vix.
of the Chollicke, the Iliack, Passion, and of other affects, as of the Stupor,
Spasmus, tremor, etc. A description of rectified Aquavitae. A singular remedy
for the Cramp. To cure any theume or defluxion of any humor. The true way to
make the Panchimagogum. To cure all manner of defects of the eyes. To cure
deafness. To restore a lively color to the face. To purge the bleeding Flux.
To cure the Tooth Ague. To cure the scurvy or foulness of teeth. To cure the
Squiney. To cure the Hidgecock (phlegmon of the diaphragme.) The cure of the
Gout. An unguent for the dissolving of old tartareous Knots. To cure
sleepiness or Lethargy. To cure the consumption of the Lungs. To cure
shortness of breath. To cure the stoppage of the Breast. To cure the
Pleurisy. To rectify an ill digesting Stomach. To cure the Spleen. To cure the
Dropsy. To cure the Iaundise. to cure the burning of the throat. To stay
Vomiting. To cure the stone Colicke. To cure the constipation or the stones of
the entrals. To cure a looseness. To expel worms. To cure the Emrods before
and behind, and the dry chaps in hands and feet. To cure the itching unto
copulation in Women. To cure the Imposthumes of the reins and of the bladder.
To cure the gravel or stone. To cure the Carcinoma of the Matrix. To expel
the false conception. To cure the Ruptures. To cure the suffocation of the
Mother. To cure the Hystericall affects; the suppression of the monthly
courses, and their immoderate running, and of the whites. The composition of
the uterine Elixer. To cure barrenness. To cure the venereall disease. To mend
baldness. To cure an exulceration in the throat. To firm teeth that are
loose. To cure a virulent running of the Reins. To cure botches about the
privy Members. To cure Leprosy. To cure an ill colored skin, overunning the
face, and to get off some nastiness of the hair. To cure the scabs. To cure the
Cramp. To cure venomous contagious symptoms. The curing of St Antonies fire.
To cure imposthumes. To cure ulcers. To heal contumacious Ulcers, which will
not shut, by reason of a wild or rotten flesh, and other defects. To cure a
wound. A vulnerary unguent. A proper oil for wounds. A proper Balsame for
wounds. A Medico-chymicall cure of the falling sickness.
A cure of the Plague of Galenicall and Chymicall materials, containing. these
following.
PRophylacticum, or a defensive against the Plague. A potion against the
Plague. An Electuary for the P^st. A Balsame for the Plague. The Celestial
treacle against all kinds of poison. The olympic or wonderful plaster.
In the lesser Surgery the following things are to be noted, besides the noble
scope of curing.
THree sorts of open sores, and their Physical cure. The first is such, how it
is cured. The second is such, how its cure is. The third is such, and the
manner of its cure. A vulnerary decoction. A vulnerary Wine. The essence of
Imperatoria. The secret of oculi Cancrorum. The essence of the mystery of
Tartar. How the heavenly cure ought to be divided. An explication of the
Specific cure. The quality of Hypericon. The virtue of red Corals, and of the
blood of pickrels. The virtue of Sydericum. The operation of a silver money
made of Mercury. The effects of the great Comfry, of Marchmallows, of
Mercurialis, and of Chameleon the black.
In the Treatise of the Chymicall Furnace these secrets are contained.
THE liquor of Gold. The essence of Wine and of Herbas, whereof Aquavitae's are
made. The liquor of Ophirizum. The oil of Pearies. The tincture of Corals. The
essence of Antimony. The secret of the Quintessence. Of Mercurius dulcis. Of
the spirit of Vitriol. Of Tartar. Of the philosophic salts. Of the extract of
Satyrium. Of Mumia. Of the Hermaphrodite. Of the preparation of sal gemmae, and
if the water of Salt. Of the essence of Sol spirit of Wine. Of salt of Wine. Of
alcolisated Spirit of Wine. Of the essence and form of wines. The manner of
drawing the essence from herbs. Of the diaphoretick gold. Of the preparation
of Mumia. Of the Turbith Mineral. Of the Alchool of Wine. Of the oil of Gold.
Of the diaphoretick Spirit of Tartar. Of the oil of Saturn and of its sal. Of
the essence of Antimony. The use of the essence or tincture of Antimony.
Theophrastus his Laudanum Opiatum which he made use of as a specificum against
all Agues, found among the secrets of Phaedro. The oil of Arsenick and its
use. Butter of Sol for the Aeschara. Praecipitated Aquila. The purging of Sal
Armonick. Aquafort. The rectifying of Aquafort. The purging of Mercury. The
purging of Antimony. The redness of Antimony. Oil of wax is instead of a
Balsame for healing of wounds. Dissolved Unicorne. The Philosophers Acetum.
Narcotick and diaphoretick Antimony. Of Tartar. Of the use of Tartar. Of the
liquor of Tartar. Of the oil of Dwarfe-Elder.
THE Medico-Chymicall Practice OF GEORGE PHAEDRO, A famous Physician.
The Cure of Agues.
REceive Aloes Succocitrine, i, of red Myrrh, of English Saffron ana i, of our
Mysterium gr. iii. Make hereof Imperial pills N. 15, with the juice or water
of Wormwood; let the Patient take three of them before the Paroxisme, for the
evacuating of the vicious matter of the Ague, which in some part being largely
and far spread, seems to have possessed or taken the whole body.

But if that destroying Disease is gotten into the broyling blood of the Veins
and Arteries, then Phlebotomize the party before the fit, breathing the
Basilik Vein, or rather the Cephalic, which is more safe, or let the Patient
be scarified, applying Cupping Glasses: our Mysterium is as any of the
Universals, as the tincture of Sol, of Corals, Pearls, Essence of Antimonie.

The cure of the Plague.
R. Of the liquor of camphorated Treacle i s. oil of Pearl, gr. vi. of red
Corals i. of Turpentine gut. iii. of Juniper berries-oyle, gut.. of the essence
of Celandine, s. of the waters of the root of Coltsfoot, of Eringo, ana i. of
the flowers of Elder, of Hearts-ease, ana s. of red Wine which is very sweet ii
s. of our Mysterium gr. 1. Make hereof a Diaphoretick potion.

The liquor of Camphorated Treacle it made thus:
REcip. Of Treacle ii s. of red Myrrh^ x. of oriental Saffron ii. of Campher
i. of distilled wine v. Let these be distilled according to Art.

The Cure of the Headache.
REcip. Of Arsmart growing about Villages M. ii s. of Mouse-eare, of Betony,
ana M. s: of Sengreen M i. of Nightshade M i s. of Rose Water a sufficient
quantity. Let these be boiled together, and let there be added to it, of red
Corals i. of prepared Pearls s. Make of it a Cataplasme, apply it to the head
so long, till all the pain be allayed.

Recip. Of Arsmart M i. Of Mouse-eat M s. Let these be boiled in x. of
Betony-water, let one moity boil away, let it be strained, and pressed out.

Recip. Of this strained liquor v. of the oil of Juniper Berrics, gut. v. of
our Mysterium, gr. i. Make a Potion of it.

The Cure of Madness.
Recip. Of our Mysterium gr. i. of rectified Aqua vitae gut. v. of Arsmart iii.
Make a potion of it, which the party must use so long till the madness be
gone, and the use of reason be restored.

The Cure of Epilepsie, or Convulsion.
REcipe. Of our Mysterium gr. i. of prepared Pearls s. of the uterine Elixir
gut. v. of Paeonie-water a sufficient quantity. Make a Potion of it, which must
be gven to the Epileptick party before the Paroxisme; and after the Paroxism
let the hinder part of the head be anointed with a Balsame, in which is Oil of
Turpentine lb i. of Stalactic Galban lb s. Gum of Elemi or of Ivy iii. Let
these be distilled, throwing away the Feces and Phlegm.

Gutta ejusque species; the Gout and its kind.
As Apoplexy, Palsy, the contracture of any part, and their beginnings, or
the colic pain, Iliack passion, and such like Symptoms; as Numness, Cramp,
Trembling: the party is to take a Potion as well at the entering into the Bath,
as at the coming forth of it; in which Potion is, of our rectified Aqua vitae
gr. v. of Dracunculus Augustanus s. of our Mysterium gr. i. s. make a a Potion.

The Rectified Aqua vitae.
REcipe Of the juice of Dracunculus Augustanus, of Baulme, of Celandine, of
both Snees-worts ana lb i. Of all kinds of Pepper i. of Cloves ii. of Cubebs,
Ginger, ana i. ss. of Cinnamon ii. of Mace i s. of myrrh ii. of Bean-ashes v,
of honey-water vi. of rectified distilled wine lb v. Let these be infused for
nine days, and separated in a Pelican, unto the Spirits: then take this
distilled liquor.

Recip. Of Roses, flowers of Rosemary, of Sage, of Hearts-ease, of Marjoram, of
Verbascum (Mugwort) ana s. of Zedoarie, of the best Cinamom ii. of Mace, of
Nutmegs ana i s. of Cloves ii. of Cubebs i. of Amome ii. of Paradise-graines
vi. of Civet s. of Amber ii. of Mesech gr. vi. Macerate them in Ashes for three
days, separate, and keep the distilled liquor in a glass well stopped.

The following Balsam must be continued for a month.

Recip. Of the root of Swallow-wort lb ii. of ground-Dwarfe (Danewort) lb i s.
of Gentian lb i. of red Fearn iiij. The Herb of Dracunculus Augustanus, of
Baulme, of Celendine ana M. ii. of Lavender, of Arsesmart, of Eupatorium, of
Arthritick Ivy ana M. iiij. of Perwinckle M ij. of Flammula, of red Rocket ana
M. ij. s. of the Flowers of the Lillies of the valley, of Chamomil, of
Verbascum, of the lesser Centorie, of Prunella, of Betony ana M. j. of
Hemp-seeds lb s. of Poppy i. Of the Celestial water, or of our Indicum, a
sufficient quantity: after the Bath let the affected Members be anointed with
the following Unguent.

Of Opopanax lb s. of Galbanum lb i. of Sagapenum iiij. of Ammoniack ii. of
Bdellium i. Let these be dissolved in Vinegar, strained, and an oil of it
distilled according to Art; add thereunto of Oil of Turpentine lb i. s. of
the Philosophic oil iiii. of the oil of Bays, of Juniper ana lib. s. of
Spick i. of Cantharides v. of both sorts of Pepper iiij. of Cardamom ij. of
fresh Castoreum iij. of Euphorbium ij s. of Mastix, Frankincense ana iiij. of
Myrrh lib. s. Let these be distilled in the manner of an oil, add thereunto
of liquid Storax i. s. of the spawn of Frogs, of Frogs gendred in leaves number.
xx. of earth-wormes, of the grease of a Badger, of a Fox, of a Wild-Cat, of a
Bear, ana iij. of Deersuet, or of a Stag iiij. of Barrowes grease ii. of the
best Vinegar, and of distilled Wine ana i, s. Distill these again: let the
following Fomentation be used, either in stead of a Bath or of an Unguent.

. Of the grease of a Badger, of Calamitium of Frogs, of oil of Olives lib. s.
of Juniper v. of Mastix, of Myrrh, ana lib. s. of Salt ij. of Turpentine vi.
Mingle these, burn them well in a kettle, lay the affected member over it,
staying it with a convenient instrument, let it be well covered, lest the
vapors go away, doing no good: if the Fomentation cools, heat it again;
this must be continued for twelve hours everyday. Thus the juice of Flammula
being distilled, and taken mornings and evenings, will in a short time cure
that symptom.

This following Receipt is good against the Cramp.
REcip. Of the Ossicula cut in the midst of white Snailes, of Hares-knuckles
ana ij. of prepared red Corals s. mingle these:

. Of this powder i. of our Mysterium gr. 1. Water of the Ocymus Garyophyllatus
iij. Make a Potion of it, which must be often iterated, the Ossicles (shells)
must be well heated, or made hot in the hand, then the parts tormented with the
Cramp will the sooner be eased, and freed from that stretching and contraction.

Of distilling Rheumes in Man's body.
REcip. Of our Panchimagogum, of the great Frankincense, of prepared red Corals
ana i. of Chalcantin Sulphur gr. ij. of the juice of Arsmart, of the whitest
sugar, ana a sufficient quantity. Make a Chatarctick bole of it: or.

. Of our Panchimagogum, of the impetiall Pills, ana i. of the Species, of
precious stones, of Diamoshum ana s. of Opium gr. i. Make pills of it with the
juice of Lemons.

Our Panchimagogun is made thus.
REcipe. Of Spirit of Wine lib. i. Of Species of Diambra i s. Infuse these for
fourteen days, digest it in the Sun, let the Vessels be well stopped, this
spirit is tinged of a deep red: shake it every day three or four times, then
cast off the spirits from the Species of Diambra: digest it in a Balmy for a
sennight or fortnight.

The following things purge the skin.

. Of fresh Scammonie s. of the best Rhubarb iii. i. of Colocinth v. or s. of
the best Agarick iiii s. of Turbith s. of Hermodactils ii. s. of the black
sneezewort ii. Of Seen leaves i. of Mastix, myrrh, red roses, of Fennel-seeds,
of Anise ana i. s. These being grinded and steeped, must be put in a linen
bag, and pressed in a pewter Press: dissolve in this expression, of Aloes
Succotrina xii. at last let this Wine evaporate in a Balmy, and a spissitude in
the bottom will be left as thick as honey, Of this Compound may be taken half
a Scruple, or a whole one, in Malmsey, or with other pills aggregative. Add
thereunto some drops of Chalcantin oil, to strengthen its purging quality.

Against all manner of symptoms of the Eyes.
REcipe. Of white Lythargyre, of Alumen plumosum, of extinct Tutia, ana i. of
waters of Eyebright, of Speed well, of Fennel ana i s. of flowers of white
Verbena, of Succory, of Cyanus ana i. of Camphore i. s. These being beaten,
distill them: with this distilled liquor wet a linen Cloth, and thus cold wash
the eyes with it: The leaves of the Verbana bearing whitish flowers, must be
worn about the neck like a neck-cloth for nine days. With or by this Amulet
are perfectly cured Epiphora, alias Lachrymae (tears,) opthalmia, or
Lippitudo, or rheum in the eye, and other symptoms of the eye. The Pearl in
the eye is instantly cured, if a piece of the root of Taraxicus belaid on the
tongue: or if any humorous matter runs in the eye, eating and consuming the
white of the eye, is healed, if the clay of Anatolia, sealed with the hand of
the Turkish Emperor, or in lieu of it, the chalk of Malta, be dissolved in
Rose Water and applied.

The cure of Deafeness.
REcip. Of Earthworms, of Saws, of each iii. of an Oxe-Gall i. s. Distill it
per Alembick. Add thereunto the essence of black sneeze-wort i. the juice of
Rhubarbe pressed forth with the oil of bitter Almonds i. s. oil of Camphire i.
s. of the seeds of Nigella, of Hyosciamus, of Poppy, ana s. of the water of the
flowers of the lesser Centorie ii s. of Celandine s. of Hungarish Saffron i.

To restore the lost color of the face.
REcip. Of the water of the flowers of Rosemary, of the two sorts of Betony,
ana ii. of the Herbs of Verbena, iiii. of Wormwood i. of the root of
Polypodium ii. s. of our Mysterium gr. i. Make a large lotion against the
Nitrous Colors of the face.

Against Bleeding.
REcip. Of the root of whites enicle s. of Hempseed, of Milk, a sufficient
quantity: Boil these and press them out; of that expression. iiii, of
Chalcanthin Sulphur. gr. ii. of our Mysterium gr. i. Make a Potion; outwardly
apply to the thighs, if men; but if women, to the belly, the following hot
decoction so long till the bleeding be stayed.

. The rindes of the best root of Henbane s. of Vinegar of Roses a sufficient
quantity.

Against Toothache.
THe Anodyn Balsam must be used, or else let the teeth be often washed with the
following warm decoction.

. Of the root of Arsmart M. v. of Solanum M. ii. of the seeds of Staphisagria
s. Of Plantaine-seeds i. of the rind of the root of Tamar. s. of Henbane iii.
of the root of Tormentilla ii. of Rose-Vinegar lb i. of red wine lb ii. Let
these be well boiled: Phlebotomy and Scarification must be used also: and if it
be a hollow tooth which paineth the party, put into it Frogsgrease, that pain
will be allayed for ever.

Against rottenness of Teeth.
REcip. Of the juice of Plantayn, or of a decoction made of it with wine, of
Celandine, of the golden Comfry, of Dracunculus Augustan ana iii. of Oxymel i.
quart. of Aloes i. s. of Alome ii. Make a Gargarisme, which must be used daily:
if the teeth doestink and are grown black, and the gummes are swelled, full of
humors, then take the Ashes of Rosemarie-stalkes, put them into a clean
Linen, wipe them daily with it, continuing it for five or six days: if those
humors return, then you must continue the use of this Medicine.

Against the Squinsie.
REcip. Jewes-eares, grown on Elders s. Let these be steeped over night in
water of Prunella v. press it out, add to it of our Mysterium gr. i. and give
to the party this Potion: Let the party daily gargarise three or four times
with this following warm Gargarisme.

. Of Urine of man i. of the juice of Hypericon ii. of Arsemart iii. of Brunella
i. s. of Oxymel Scylliticum lib. s. In the interim* if the parties tongue be
furred, or the throat be filled with clamminesse, let it be rubbed with a
Scarlet cloth, that it bleed: if any tumor apparent and great pains be
accompanied with it, then use this Cataplasme.

. Of Jewes-Eares s. of the root of Dwarfe-Elder i. s. of Arsesmart M i. of
Rose-Vinegar, a sufficient quantity: add thereto of Camphor s. make a Pultise.
Let these be boiled, and add of our Mysterium gr. ii. This Decoction is against
the Inflammation of the throat.

Against the Heart-groaning of Children.
REcip. Of the lesser Watercresses M. i. of Wine or Water, a sufficient
quantity. Let it be boiled, and add to it of our Mysterium gr. ii. Make a
Potion against the inflammation of the Breast. This decocted Herb is applied
as a Pultise to the place affected.

To cure the Gout.
REcip. Of Aloes, being washed nine times of the Decoction of the midler Cumfry
i. s. of our Mysterium gr. xiv. of red Myrrh, of white Frankincense ana s. of
red Corals, or in lieu of them, of prepared Sarda, of transparent Citrine
Caribis, ana s. Amber, ana s.
Of the best Unicorn gr. iiii. of the best Mosch gr. ii. of ordinary Saffron.
gr. vii. Make a mass of Pills with the juice, or the dissolved Salt of
Arsemart, hereof are made Pills of the bigness of Ruffus his Pest-pills, two
whereof are ministered morning. The midler Solidage or Cumfry being boiled, and
the Arsesmart expressed, must be put between two Tiles and covered with Dung,
externally applied, if the pains be extreme; use the Anodyn Ointment heated.

. Of oil of Cloves ii, of Juniper Berries, of Sulphur Chalcantin, ana i. These
must be distilled per Alembick, all Junctures being well luted: add thereto,

Of Tile-Oyle ii. of Turpentine quar. i. of fresh Castoreum* of Opium, ana s.
of Saffron ii. Distill this again gently, you have an Anodyn Oil, wherewith
the affected place is anointed: or take a Lythargyr prepared with Alome and
Rose water lb i. boil it in water of the Spawn of Crayfishes, and May-dew, or
Rainwater to a thickness of honey, add thereto of the juice of Cray-fishes,
quart i. Gammara, quart i.
Of the Herb of Arsesmart lb s. of Solanum (nightshade,) of Sempervivum or
House-leek, of the flowers of Water-Lillie, ana i. Nenuphar, ana i.
Of Henbane boiled ii s. of oil of Poppyseed i s. Boil these again to a
thickness, at last add to it of Opium steeped in oil of Bays, and Juniper,
for some days and strained vi. of Camphore i s. of Myrrh* of Frankincense,
ana s. make of it an Anodyn Unguent, and it must be macerated in a well-stopped
Glass at the heat of the Sun for a Moves, after the place affected must be
anointed with it warm.

For the dissolving of old tartarous knots and stones; the following ointment
must be applied daily once or twice.

. Of the liquor of Mumia quart i. of the sweet oil of chalianthum (vitriol) i.
of the spirit rectified of Tartar; mix these; Or;

. Of the liquor of Mumia quart i. of the oil of Juniper berries, x. of
Turpentine. ij ss. mix these.

Against sleepiness.
REcip. Of our Mysterium gr. i. of oil of Pearls, gr. vi. of boiled Roman
cole, sweetened with the whitest Sugar. ss. make a bole of it, which must
frequently b^ used or taken.

Agaiost the rottenness of the Lungs, and stinking breath.
R Recip. Of our Mysterium, gr. i. of oil of Juniper Berries, gr. v. of the
water of the Augustan Dragon, ii. of Arsemart iii. mix these, and make a
potion.

Against shortness of breath Asthma.
REcip. Of our Mysterium gr. i. of prepared Sulphur gr. x. of the root of
Elecampane ss. a sufficient quantity of Honey: make it into an electuarie, let
the party take that whole quantity.

Against the oppression of the Chest or Breast.
REcip. Of the decoction of the Herb of Cyclamen or Saw bread in Wine, with
the Myristick Nut iii. Make a Potion for the straightness of the Breast, to be
taken fasting.

Against Pleurisy.
REcip. The juice of Tormentilla lb ss. of Carduus water iii. of wild sage ii.
of flowers of the Lilies of the Valley, of Buglosse, of Violets, of Borage
quart. i. of Cinamom iii. of the brain of a Kite qu* i. These being mingled,
are to be steeped for eight days, and distilled in a Balmy.

. Of this distilled liquor i. of our Mysterium gr. i ss. make a potion.

. Of the Herb of Baulm, of cole Mi. of Mint M ss. of Wormwood P i. Steep these
in distilled Wine, for twelve hours at a gentle heat.

. Of this liquor ss. of oil of Juniper Berries, gr. v* of Malmsie i ss. or
Camphore gr. i ss. of our Mysterium gr. i. Mingle these and make a diaphoretick
Potion, which the party is to take mornings and evenings: Outwardly to the
affected place use this Unguent.

. of the distilled and expressed oil of sweet Almonds, ana iii. oil of tiles
i. Mix these, make a soft Unguent according to art, with a quantity of wax.

Or;. Of Sallet oil quart. i. of the juice of Tormentilla ss. of the brain of
a Kite i. Wax a lineament; forget not to Phlebotomize the party.

To cure the crudities of the Stomach, and its digestion.
BEfore dinner and supper, let the party take this Bole.

. Of the oil of Juniper Berries gut. v. of conserve of Rosemary flowers i ss*
of our Mysterium gr. i. Make a bole of it. After dinner and supper let him use
this powder.

. Of pulverised water mint ss. of the dry twigs of a hasel-misleto ss. of Oak
leaves i of Galanga ii. of Sugar a sussicient quantity: make a powder of it.

Against the Spleen.
REcip. Of Man's Urine i ss. of the water of Tamarisk v. of the calcined Lazul
stone ss. of our Mysterium gr. i. make a Potion of it.

. Of Opopanax, of Galbanum, of Ammoniacum, ana ii. of the rectified blessed
oil i ss. Make a plaster according to art, which must lie on the scirrous
Spleen, for six or eight weeks.

Against the Dropsy.
IN the first place, the Dropicall party being brought to an abstinence, there
must be made a continual Potion, in which are boiled the roots of Asclepias,
or Vince Toxicum, according to our custom, in lb i. of Malmesie, let it be
strained and pressed out. In iii of this decoction, must be steeped over night,
of our Mysterium gr. i s. upon hot embers, add unto it of Rhubarbe rectified
by spirit of Tartar i. of the oil of Juniper Berries gut. v. of the water of
Speedwell ii. make a Potion, to be taken daily three or four times, and must
be followed till the cause of the disease is taken off.

For the dispersing of the humor, outwardly must be applied to the decoction
of Oedipus.

. Of Swallow-wort ii. of the herb of Dwarf Elder M i. of Mugwort M ii. of the
lesser Water Cresses M i ss. of Moss grown on stones M i. of flowers of
Nenuphar, of Verbascum, of Hypericon, ana P i. of Elders M i. of Chamomil P i.
of seeds of radish ss of Carrowie iij. of meal of Beans i. of dried Pigeons
dung lb ss of Goats dung quart. i. of Hens dung i s.

Let all these be boiled in red Wine, and Rose water, strain and press it
out; dip a linen cloth into this hot liquor, and apply it to the Tumor,
continue it till the humor be gone, and no remainder of it be left. The
Patient under the cure may use the Electuarie of Diacubebs, prepared thus.

. Of Crocus Martis reverberated very subtly i s. of Spodium v s. of all sorts
of Sandals, ana i s. of the four cold great seeds, ana v. of the seeds of
Endive, of Purslane, of Lettice, ana ij. of Sugar dissolved in the juice of
Pomgranats: make this mixture into an Electuarie.

The cure of the yellow Iaundies.
REcip. Of our Mysterium gr. i. of Earthwormes, of dry Saws, ana number. v. of
oriental Saffron gr. iij. of distilled Wine, in which is steeped Celandine and
Centory the lesser i s. of Malmsie iij. make a diaphoretick drink of it.

The cure of Soda (a heat of the Stomachs Orifice.)
REcip. Of our Mysterium gr. of washed Aloes s. of Marin Chalk s. of seeds of
Poppie s. of the oil of Myristick Nuts gr. v. Make Pills of them with the juice
of Mint, or of Cyclamen, number. ix. three at a time to be taken.

To cure Vomiting.
REcip. Of Ferment (leven) quart i. of the juice of Mint, expressed with Vinegar,
as much as is sufficient.

Boil these to the form of a plaster, which must be applied hot to the
Stomach, being cold, renew it hot; and as often the Patient has eaten or
drunk, let that plaster lie on the Stomach for one or two hours.

To cure the pain of the Stone Cholick.
REcip. Of the extract of the root of Chameleon s. of distilled Sallet oil, of
oil of Juniper Berries, ana gut. v. of Aniseedsoyle gut. viij. of the water of
Arsemart iii. of our Mysterium gr. i. make a Potion.

. Of true Zibeth gr. x. of oil of Mace gr. vi. Mix these and anoint the
Navill, laying upon it the shell of a Walnut for an hour or two. This is an
approved remedy also against the rising of the mother.

Against the Stone of the Entrals colled constipation
REcip. Of our Mysterium gr. v. of Mastix, of Mumy, ana s. of Aniseeds i. of
Diacidonium of despumed Honey, or of juice of Lemmons or Quinces, a sufficient
quantity: mix these into an Electuarie: the dose of it is s.

To cure a Lask or Looseness.
REcip. Of Plantaine water, or of the decoction of Fern-root, or of the
Augustan Dragon i s. of Camphorated liquor s. of man's Urine i s. of the oil of
red Corals i. of Crocus Martis s. of our Mysterium gr. i. Make of it a Potion.

Against Worms.
REcip. Of our Mysterium gr. i. of oil of Turpentine gut. v. of the water of
Arsemart iij. of Wormwood i. Make a Potion.

To the Fundament, apply this U^guent.

. the green Herb of Hypericon, of the lesser Centorie, ana M i. of washed
Aloes a sufficient quantity.

Make an Unguent according to art.

Against the Piles, Emrods about the Womb or Fundament; The chops in the palms
of the hands, and soales of the feet,
CHiefly must be taken the Palestin Potion, next that, that fomentation must be
used four or five times against the Chops.

. Of the root of the lesser Nettle vi. of Raponticum, of the regal Cumfry, of
Eupatorium, of Pyrola or Wintergreen, of the lesser Centorie, of Prunell, ana M
i. of Barley meal, of Wheat meal, ana i. of pure water a sufficient quantity,
for a decoction.

Or in lieu of it, let the Chops be anointed mornings ans evenings with the
following unguent.

. Of the grease of a wild Cat, of a Heart, of a Badger, of Petroleum, ana ss.
disolve or melt these in a gentle heat, add thereunto of the oil of Juniper
Berries vi. of tile oil iij. of oil of Spike i. mix these.

Against Women's Satyrials (or itching) unto Copulation.
REcip. Of roots of Radish, of oil of bitter Almonds, of oil of Apricocks
kernels, ana i. Make a Pessarie, leave it over night in the neck of the Womb.

Against the exulceration in the Kidneys and Bladder.
REcip. Seven Winter Cherries, steep them in the best Wine, or in newly boiled
Wine of ij. for twelve hours, press it out very hard, and add to this
expression, of man's Urine i. of oil of Turpentine, gut. v. of white
Frankincense ss. of our Mysterium, gr. i. Mix these and make a Potion of it.

The cure of the Stone.
REcip. Of the root of Acorus (Calamus Aromaticus) or of Gariophyllida Liliorum
Crocorum, of the Herbs of Aquilenta, of Carduus, ana M. i s. of Maidenhaire M.
ii. of white Ginger i s. Let these be boiled according to our manner, in
Alsatian Wine, strain and express them, in that expression steep for twelve
hours, of our Mysterium, gr. ii. add unto it of the oil of Juniper Berries,
gr. v. of oriental Saffron, gr. ii. Make a Potion of it, to be used three or
four times in the Bath. The Bath is this.

. Of roots and Herbs of white Turnips, of Parsenips, ana lb i. of Aquilina lb
s. of Anonis, of the Herbs of Gramen, of Speedwell, of Fragaria, of
Buphtalmus, of Maiden-haire, of Mugwort, of Verbascum, of Chamomil, of
Arispaltea, ana M. i. of Betonie of purple and white flowers, ana M. ii. of
Prunella, of Carduus Benedictus, ana M. i. of seeds of Mug-wort, of Radish, of
Nettles, ana v. of Winter-Cherries, quart i. of Snow-water, or Rainwater, or
May dew, a sufficient quantity, which serves instead of the Baths in Helvetia,
the Alps and Bohemia, and must be continued for ten or fourteen days.

Against the Carcinoma or Canker of the Womb.
REcip. Of the root of the regal Cumfry, lb s. of Aristolochia rotunda vi. of
the Herb of Agrimonie, of Sanicle, of the Lions foot. of Winter green, of both
Perwinckles, ana M. i. of the Augustan Dragon, M. vii. of Parsenips, of
Turnips, ana M. s. of new red wine two quarts: Let these boil together, and
take of this liquor iij. of the liquor of Microcosme i. of our Mysterium gr. i.
Make a Potion of it.

. Of Turpentine washed in Rose water vi. of Aloes Succotrine i. of the juice of
the great Cumfry-root, of Aristolochia rotunda, of the Herbs of Agrimonie, of
Winter green, of Plantaine, of the Augustan Dragon, of Arsemart, of the flowers
of Verbascum, of Hypericon, of Prunella, of Centorie the lesser, of Betonie,
ana ii s. of the oil of Dill, of Frogs, of Earthwormes, ana lb i. Make a
Pessarie, to be put up into the Neck of the Womb for four or five hours
every day. This may be applied to the scissures or chops of the Privities and
the fundament, and to the open Piles.

. Of Hearts suet lb s. of the oil of Mercury, of Dill, of yolks of Eggs, ana
vi. of wax a sufficient quantity. Make an Unguent for the back: these three,
viz. a Potion, Clyster and Unguent, must be used daily.

To expel a Mola (a lump of flesh
RRecip. Of Baulme-water, of Speedwell-water, of oil of Juniper Berries gut.
v. oil of Amber gut. iii. of our Mysterium gr. i. of oriental Saffron gr.
iii. of Mosch gr. i. make a Potion.

. Of Scammonie iii. of Lapis Lazuli s. of Amber vi. of artificial Chrysocolle
ii. of Austrian Saffron ii. of Opopanax, a sufficient quartitie. Let there be
made a Pessarie for the Matrix, which must be ministered at the first
opportunity for the drawing forth of the Mola, else coming to a perfect
bigness it may be the death of the Childbearing Woman.

To cure the two s^rts of Ruptures.
REcip. Of the extract of the root of the great Comfry s. of white Sanicle i.
of the Salt of Arsemart s. of the water of Swallow-wort iii. of the oil of
Juniper Berries gut. v. of our Mysterium gr. i. Make a Potion of it, which is
good against all sorts of Ruptures: Such Patients must avoid contentions.

Against the rising of the Mother.
REcip. Of the liquor of Camphorated Treacle i. of the extract of the root of
Chameleon s. of the oil of white Frankincense i. of the oil of Cinnamon or of
Cloves gut. iii. of the Uterine Elixir gut. v. of the water of Elder flowers
iii. of Chamomil i s. of Arsemart. of the Tinctus of the Balsam g. v. of Salt
of Jupiter s. Make a Potion of it.

Of Hystericall passions, of the obstruction of the Months, or their
immoderate purgation, and of the Whites.
REcip. Of the water of Baulm, of Speedwell, of Pulegium, s. of Mugwort, of the
flowers of white Lillies, of Sanicle, ana vi. of the oil of Savin-Berries, of
Bays, of Citrin Amber, ana gut. v. of the Uterin Elixir gut. v. of salt of
Wine i. of our Mysterium gr. i. of Saffron gr. ii. Make a Potion, let the party
drink of it mornings and evenings.

The Uterine Elixir is made thus.
REcip. Of the yellow flowers of Leucoum, of Rosemary, of Lavender, ana v. of
the Herb of Ocymus, of Garyophillata, of sweet Marjoram, of Sage, ana s. of
the root of Carnabodium or Deronicum Alex: i s. of Mace, of Nutmegs, of the
best Cinnamon, ana ii. of Cloves, of Cubebs, of Mastix, of Frankincense, of
Myrrh, ana s.

Put so much of essence of wine to it, that it stand a hand breadth above it:
being shaken and well mixed, distill it seven times in a Balmy, then temper
this distilled liquor with the powder of the leaves of Opirizum, number. xx. Of
Pearls, of red Corals, ana i. of garnats, Rubies and Sardies, ana s. Digest
these in a Balmy for a month, and afterward separate the oil from the
phlegm.

Against Barrenness.
RRecip. Of the extract of the root of Satyrion Erythronicum s. of the salt of
balm i. of the oil of the seeds of the lesser Nettle, gut. iii. of the liquor
of Cinnamon drawn with distilled Wine i s. of the Uterine Elixer gut. v. of our
Mysterium gr. i. Make a small Potion, which must be taken morning and evening.

The cure of the Venereall d^sease.
LEt the Patient contain himself in a warm room for two or three days, and
let him use this medicament.

. Of our Mysterium gr. i. of Treacle s. of the Electuarie of the juice of Roses
of Mes. i. of Tramin-Wine i s. Make a Potion of it, which must be used several
times; or, take of the Treacle water s. of the salt of Arsemart s. of our
Mysterium, gr. i. Mix these: the Patient having taken this, let him into a tub
of hot water, in which is put, of Alome lb v. of Salt lb x. Let these be mixed,
put to it a Cetum Scyllinum, and having stood in the air for three days,
evaporate it to a dryness, then boil that in rain water, to the thickness of
an oil, this we call artificial Thermae or Baths: Add unto it of the roots
of Swallow-wort x. of the great Comfry, of Aristolochia rotunda, ana quart i.
of white Sanicle, or in the lieu of it, Cyclamen (Sowbread) ii s. of the Herb
of Centorie the lesser, of the wild Winter-green, ana M ii. of Celandine M i s.
of the Yellow Comfry, of Arsemart, ana M iij. of Oak leaves M ii. of tops of
Juniper M ii s. Make a Bath, which the Patient must make use of as long, till
all the Porkie sores are gone, and the malignant Ulcers thereof. The Wharts,
Boyles, and bones quite rotten, and other stubborn sypmtomes, must besides the
ordinary way of curing of Ulcers, have a Bath made, which is more stypifying.

. Of oil of Vitrioll s. of water of man's Blood, of Arsesmart, ana i s. Or. Of
oil of Cloves, of Camphore, made by the white of an eg i. Mix it, and with
this unguent or liquor anoint the places affected, and apply upon them a
stiptick plaster.

Against the falling off of the hairs.
REcip. Of leaves of Wormwood, of Rosemary, of Betonie, of water Mint, of
Pulegium, of Abrotanum, ana M i s. of Roses M i. of the root of Asarabacca iii.
of the oriental Turbith s. of Cyprus Nuts number. 4. Let these be boiled in lees,
and strain it, let the parties head be washed with it, adding Venice soap, and
drying the head with warm clothes, then anoint the head thus.

. Of distilled water of Honey, of urine, ana lb s. oil of Serpents quart i. of
Cloves ii. Mix these.

For the exulceration of the throat.
REcip. Of the greater Comfry ii s. of of Aristolochia rotunda vi. of
Winter-green M. i. of St John's Wort M i. of Prunella M i s. of Barley P. i. of
white Vitriol s. of Sal gemmae i s. of the male Frankincense, of the best
Myrrh, ana s. Boil these in Raine-water to lb i s. strain it, and dissolve
in this strained liquor Oxymel Scylliticum ix. and make a gargarisme.

For loose Teeth.
ANoint them with the oil of Crocus Martis, or,. of the oil of Vitriol, gut.
v. of the decoction of Plantain, made of red wine, i s. Mix these: But those
Teeth that are ready to fall out, let them be anointed with the oil of
Myristick Nuts.

For the Virulent Gonorrhea.
REcip. of the seeds of Purslane, of Plantain, of Lettice, of Nightshade ana
ii. of the four hot seeds, ana s. of Crocus Martis very subtly reverberated,
of bole Armenic very well calcined, ana ii. of the best Sarda ii s. of Spodium
ii s. Pulverise that which is to be pulverised, add to it the Electuarie of
Gemms, a sufficient quantity: make a mixture in Ferme of a tincture, or broth,
let the party tak i. of it in the morning, at three of the clock, and at
evening, at nine of the clock.

Of botches, of or about the Privities.
REcip. Of diachilon magnum i. of Tileoyle s. or of the oil of Galbanum, or of
the oil of Ammoniacum. Mix these and make a maturative unguent for the
venereall Botch; which being opened, heal it with a stiptick Plaster. The
diet whereby bits are set down for the Palate, ought not so precisely to be
prescribed, as Nosewise Doctors have cunningly invented laws for women that
lie in: They may eat reasonably, and drink a draught of wine sometimes, and
their meats may pretty well be seasoned with salt, according as the condition
of the disease is.

The cure of Leprosy, and of Tinea.
REcip. Of the water of Baulme, of Speedwell, of Betonie, of Mugwort, of
Fumitorie, of Succorie, ana ss. of the liquor of Microcosme, of Camphorated
Treacle, ana i ss. of the oil of Juniper Berries, of Bays, ana gut. v. in
which you are to dissolve, of the flowers of Cassia newly drawn iij. of
Calabrin Manna ss. and add thereto the Syrup of Stae^has vi. of our Mysterium
gr. i. Mingle these, and make a Palestine Potion, which must be taken by the
Patient, fasting daily in the Bath, and this alone is sufficient to cure a
Lentigo.

The Bath is made thus.
REcip. Of the roots and green Herbs of Balatrachium, of Flammula (Flavel) M.
x. of Coltsfoot M. v. of artificial hot-Bath. as much as is enough. Make a
Bath, let the Leper make use of it as long, till all the impure excrementitious
scurfs are gone from the body. He may be dipped afterward in the tub (chair)
of the heavenly water, or the Indian Bath.

The cure of a deformed skin, running over the fa^e with a strange color: for
all manner of ill effects of hairs, and how they are to be mended.
REcip. Of distilled Wine lb i ss. of the white of boiled Eggs number. x or xii. of
the calx of Eg shells vi. of burnt Tartar, of alumen plumosum vel scissum, of
Salgemmae, ana quart i. Distill these into a water, add thereunto of the roots
Polygonum ii. of Asphodel, of Brionie, of white Lillies, ana i. of Aaron i ss.
of the greater Comfry quart i. of the Herb of Flammula M. iii. of Levisticum
M. i. of flowers of Beans, of Lilium convallium, ana M. ii. Distill these
again, and add thereunto of the water of young cut veins that are cut lb ss.
of Honey quart i. of Camphore ss. of leaves of Gold ii. of the filings of
Pewter, of Lead, of Copper, ana i. of the Solar and Lunar Markasite, of
Chimolea, ana ii. Let these be macerated for a month in Horse-dung, strain
and distill it, then make a Bath of the tincture, to be used outwardly, or let
the hair be washed with it for a fortnight, put of Camphore to it i. and the
party may use the Palestine Potion.

To cure the scabs.
AT the first entering into the Bath, and at the coming out of it, let the
party drink a diaphoretick potion, and so let him use the Indian Bath for a
sennight. Then let him take off the Indian Bath, lb i. of Petroleum iii. of the
Philosophic oil i. Let these be boiled, well luted, the liquor being cooled,
soak spunges in it, and so take it out, and afterward put it into the Indian
Bath; and that also must be continued for eight days.

Against burnings and parts killed by frost.
REcip. Of cocted oil of Nuts lb ss. of Hearts Suet, of Goats Suet, of oil of
yolks of Eggs, of Wax, ana quart i. Make an unguent, still moisten the sore
with it.

Against Varices, when the Arteries or Muscles are swelled and look black.
PHlebotomie must be used, after that the places affected must be anointed with
man's grease distilled for several weeks.

To cur^ venomous contagious diseases.
REcip. Of Sydericum decocted in old Alsatian Wine v. of syrup of Lemons or
Orenges i. of the liquor of camphorated Treacle ss of the liquor of Microcosme,
of the oil of Turpentine, of Juniper Berries, ana gut. v. of red Corals ss. of
the species's of Gemms i. of the Lemnian earth, gr. v. of the best Unicorne,
gr. iii. of the best Mosch, gr. i. of oriental Saffron, gr. iii. of our
Mysterium gr. i s. Mix these and make a diaphoretick potion.

The cure of St Antonies sire.
EVery year, the Sinews, Muscles, Arteries on the legs and feet must be
beaten, then this following Medicament must be ministered.

. Of the juice of Tartar gut. x. of the water of Arsemart iii. of our Mysterium
gr. i. Make a potion of it: at last dip a linen cloth into the hot liquor,
apply it frequently to Antonies fire; which is:

. Of the powder of red Myrrh, of white Frankincense tied in a bag, ana ss. of
very sharp Vinegar lb i. of Tart, or Aromatic wine lb ii. Let these be boiled.

The cure of Imposthumes.
SOme Impost humes are simple and mild, others are malignant. For the malignant
Imposthume, beside the use of Chirurgicall means, this following potion may be
ministered.

. Of our Mysterium gr. i. of the juice of Tartar gut. x. of oil of Turpentine
ss. of Juniper oil, gut. v. of the liquor of Camphorated Treacle ss. of water
of Valeriana, of Fumitorie, of Veronica, ana s. Mingle these and make a potion;
inwardly must be used a Medicament, which opens the exulceration, especially
of the Carbuncle or Anthrax, or the pestilentiall boil.

. Of the Crystallin Realgar i. of Calx vive i. of Oak misleto, a sufficient
quantity. Make an aperitive unguent of it. Afterward in the very same manner,
as usually is proceeded with a simple Imposthume, let there be applied a
concocting and attractive medicament, vulgarly a Maturative joined with an
attractive.

. Of the juice of the herb of Marchmallows, of Dwarf Elder, of Coleworts, of
Rue, of Oxylapathum, of Arsesmart, ana s. of Muscilages, of Linseed, of
Fenugreek, of Psylium, of Quinces, of Colophone, of the Misleto of the fir or
pine tree, of Turpentine, of the tops of the Larix (the lark tree,) of Juniper,
of the root of the great Cumfry, ana i. of Bdellium vi. of Figs, of Raisins
boiled, ana i. of Beans, ana s. of the powder of Rhubarbe ii. of the root of
Hermodactyls s. of Citrin Amber s. of Foxes and Cats grease, ana i s. of woman's
milk iii. of Tyle oil iii. of Juniper oil, of Dill oil, of chamomill oil,
of sweet Almond-oyle, of the oil of the yolks of Eggs, ana i s. Make a
suppurating Plaster according to Art, then with a stiptick plaster, cicatrice
it: Phlebotomie may be used also in this case.

The cure of Ulcers.
IN the first place, to assuage the grievous pain of Ulcers, as of Gangreen,
Cancer, and the running Phagedena, and the like, with a Balsame or a nodyne
Unguent, this following Chironick potion is to be given thrice in a day.

. Of Swallow-wort, of the herbs of Wintergreen, of the lester Centorie, ana Mi
i. of the Augustan Dragon, of the midler Cumfry, of Arsesmart, ana M ii. of
Celandine M i s. Boil these in a Kettle for an hour and a half, luting the
junctures very well, strain it with Beer, new Wine or new Meal, and press it
out.

. Of this expression iii. of the water of the Cervin germination ii. and
dissolve therein of granated Manna i. Then add of Rubarbe extracted with
spirit of Tartar i. Mix these and make a potion.

. Of this expression iii. of Nater of Palma Christi buds ii. of the oil of
Juniper Berries, gut. v. of our Mysterium gr. i. Mix these and make a potion;
if there be any necessity, that there must be applied a caustic Medicament to
the hard and callous mouths of Herpes, astiomenum, the wolf (as trivial
Doctors would have it) then once or twice there must be used that following one.

. Of the oil of fixed Arsenick, of burnt Allom quenched in Vinegar, in lieu of
this prepared Chalcanthum (vitriol) ana s. Mix these and make an unguent; Or,

. Of the Oil of fixed Arsenick, of of the juice of Celandine, ana ii. ss Boil
away the juice, and add of the Oil of Gloves, ii. of the Cristallin Realgar,
ss. Mix these, dip a linen cloth into it and apply it, and guard the affected
place about with a Repelling Medicament, (vulgarly called a Repercussive and
Defensive Medicament) namely, with a warm Decoction of Oesipus or lana
Succida, (the fett of unwashed wool) which is a defense and protection against
increasing symptoms: For the ripening of the scurvie, and for the taking out
the foundation of corrupt flesh, apply this following.

. Of the unguent of Ceruse, ss. Of Tile-oile, i. of Hearts suet, of Crude
Butter, ana i ss Mix these, then apply a purging Unguent (called Mundificative)
to the Ulcer, which is made thus:

. Of Turpentine boiled in the strongest red Wine, and boiled away, and in water
of Arsesmart, or Celandine washed nine times, or in Misleto of the Pine Tree
iiil. of yolks of eggs, number. x. of crude honey lb ss. of Aloes washed in water,
of Cyclamen, or Plantaine i. of Calcined Alome, often quenched in Vinegar i.
ss. of aes viride, ss. of Vitriol Chalcanth, vi. Boil these into a brown
Unguent.

. Of this Unguent, quart i. of oil of Mercury i. Mix these and use it: but if
the bones be eaten by rottenness, if the flesh be black and dead, or if any
part or member be quite and absolute dead, then let it be taken off by one
instrument or other, and the next place to it be guarded thus:

. Of Oil of Cloves, made of Camphore by the white of Eggs, ana ss. Mix these,
and bind a Stiptick Plaster to the place affected, which must be continued so
long till all be covered with flesh: at last the Ulcer is to be healed with the
following Stipick plaster.

. Of Virgin wax, of gold Lethargyr, ana lb i. of Colophonium, of Calmy, ana ii
s. of Sallet-oile, lb i. s. of Opopanax, of Sagapenum, of Bdellium, of
Ammoniacum of Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar, ana i s. of the true blood stone,
of red Corals, of Sarda, ana v. i. of Mum, of Mastix, of Myrrh, of
Frankincense, any i. of prepared Antimonie, s. of Crocus Martis ii. of the
Resine of the Lark-tree, ii. s. Let these be boiled according to Art into a
plaster, and softened with the oil of Hypericon, or earthworms.

Against stubborn Ulcers, which will not easily close, by reason of rotten
flesh, and other defects.
REcip. Of calcined Sal armonic and Tartar, as much as you please, sublime it;
take out this sublimate, and cleanse it, and sublime it again together with
the feces. Being sublimed and purified, set it in a glass in a Cellar, let it
dissolve; anoint these Ulcers with a Feather dipped into the Liquor, and lay
on them a Stiptick Plaster.

To heal a wound.
IT is found by experience, that care must had, that the lips of a wound must
be wiped, and well anointed, bones broken well set, or being out of joint, be
put in their right places, and the wound also be filled with warm Unguent; if
the wound be on the head, the Medicament must be laid on silk, because of the
tenderness, (nobleness of the skin of the Brain, or Pia matter) and our warm
Oil, or the oil of Juniper Berries) be syringed into every corner, and the
Fractures or Luxations thereof be anointed with it, round about the wound
where the Medicament of the place affected are, must be made wet with the warm
decoction of the greasy wool, to keep off any other symptoms or defluxion
falling that way; and that must be done twice a day for eight days together,
or nine, that it be firm enough, provided that always the wound be washed at
the first days with a Cerotick Laver.

A Vulneraris Unguent.
REcip. Of the green Herbs of Perwinckle, of Arsesmart, of the yellow Comfrie,
of Ophioglosson, (Lingua Serpentaria,) of Plantaine, ana m. i. of the roots of
the great Comfrey, vi. of Aristolochia rotunda iii. Let these be beaten to a
Pap, putting a little quantity of wine to it, boil it for ten hours, like a
Chironick Potion, being sufficiently boiled, then beat it very well, strain it
through a cloth, to that strained liquor put of cruce honey, or in lieu of it
of May butter, Crude lb i. of the slime of Earthworms v. of Hearts marrow iii.
of our Mumy quart i. of Fused salt, of Crocus Martis, of the flowers of aes
viride, ana s. of Citrin Amber i. Let these be boiled also, and be strained
through a cloth press it, then set it in the sun or Horse-dung to digest it.

Our vulnerarie is made thus.
REcip. Of the oil pressed from seeds of Hypericon, of our Turpentine, or Resme,
of the larix (lark trec) ana lb i. of the best red wine lb i. Let these be
boiled for an hour, then add to it of fresh sallet oil quart i. of the best
red wine lb i ss. Let these boil again for an hour, then add to it of the
flowers of Hypericon, of Prunella, of the lesser Centorie, of the best red wine
a sufficient quantity. Let it be boiled again for six hours, that the wine be
boiled away, at last put to it of Mastix, of Myrrh, of Frankincense, ana i ss.
of Mumie iii. Let these be digested for a month at the Sun, or longer; then
take a feather, dip it into the Balsame, and anoint the wound with it, and
apply a stiptick plaster, that no veins, arteries, nerves, or other ligaments
may appear.

Our vulnerarie Balsame is this.
REcip. Of Turpentine oil lb ss. of Tile-oyle quart i. of flowers of
Hypericon, of the lesser Centorie, of the yellow Comfry, ana a sufficient
quantity for to fill it up. Let these be digested at the Sun for six days,
and press it, afterward put other flowers to it, for to digest them, and that
must be iterated seven times. Then add thereunto of washed Turpentine vi.
Digest it again. If any thing of the blow remain in the wounded part, which
the Medicine could not get out or heal, as of the weapon, be it of an Arrow,
or a Bullet, gotten into the closures, or hollownesses of the bones, under the
skull, or the concavities of the eyes, the same must be gotten out by a spell.
If any bones be loose, or splinters, or the like of the weapon be left in
desperate wounds, then apply the following plaster in lieu of a common
stiptick plaster.

. Of wax lb i. of the juice of the Augustan Dragon lb ss. of Colophonie, of
Shoomakers wax or Rasom quart i. of gum Ammoniac ii. of yellow Amber iii.
Make a plaster according to art, which must be tempered with the oil of yolks
of eggs, then let the wound be bound or dressed only, with an ordinary stiptick
plaster, and so cicatrize it. Provided that by all means the chyronicall potion
be administered.

A Medico-chymicall curation, of the falling sickness.
THE best antidote (praeservative) is the most excent essence of man's blood, by
whose means is procured, that the violent influence of the Lunar course, shall
never cause any Lunatic or falling sickness, or prevail with such a party
any more. This antidote is prepared in this manner.

. Of Man's blood which is yet hot vi. of distilled wine i. Digest these for
forty days in a body, then distill it in a Balmy, and separate by a special
manual the white liquor from the yellow. One scruple of this being given at
the beginning of the New Moon, in the first fit, does so operate, that it
allayeth the fervent fury of the falling sickness, and the party will never
be troubled with that Epilepticall concussion. In like manner that glorious oil
of Cranium humanum, takes away wholly and radically the falling sickness, if
but three grains be taken of it, and the party will never be invaded with it,
and that oil is prepared in this manner.

. A Man's skull, which never was interred, and be freed from all moisture
(humor) beat it very small, force it strongly by a great fire, in a retort,
drive all its moisture over into the Receiver, which liquor must be put again
on the feces, and be driven over again; and being iterated a third time, then
is this oil of man's skull elixerated or brought to a perfection, which must be
kept safe in a glass for use: it is a most precious treasure.

There are other mysteries hidden in other Animals, as in the Elk, Kite, Bees,
which in the same manner cure for ever Epileptick convulsion: But I pass them
by to avoid prolixity.

There is used also against the falling sickness; to the party are given nine
grains of reverberated Antimonie, when the first Paroxisme is upon the
patient: If the fit comes again, then must be conveyed into the party ten and
eight grains, an hour after the fit is over, then nine grains again, if
another fit comes, after the third Paroxisme be over, the party will be
troubled no more with it.

A third means is Linterium; to the party must be given an hour before the
fit comes one Scruple of the liquor of Ophirizum or gold, and three hours
after the fit, take a scruple, and that must be used a sixth time, if the
Epileptick fits continue, afterward the party will be quite rid of it.

The last means is a most clear tincture of red Corals, at the first fit must
be given to the party half a dram, and as often as the fit returns, then
this dose must be continued, and cures this disease fully.

I pass by here by those most excellent secrets of Gemms, as of Smaragd, of
Adamant, of Garnat, of Turquois, which being used, are of the same energie, and
suffer no returns of the falling sickness.

Hitherto have we handled of the four Phylacteries, or Olympic mysteries. Now
we will come to the Euporistick Medicaments, and will speak of an exact Method,
being grounded upon a long experimental knowledge. In the first place, to take
away the causes of the falling sickness, and to keep off its returns: The
party is to be purged with three grains of black Sneezwort, being taken either
in small Metheglin, or in a decoction of Hypoglosson (tongwort,) being seasoned
with spices. Its preparation is thus:

. Of the root of black Hellebor, which bears purple flowers, being fresh and
ponderous must be cut, sprinkle it or pour on it the aethereall essence of
wine, distill it, the first must be gentle, then increase it by degrees, let
all the liquor be drawn over; again, separate the celestial essence of wine
by a gentle fire in a balmy, from the black liquor, in the liquor which
remains in the bottom of body or glass, must be dissolved Sugar Candy as
much as is sufficient: Thus our Helleborine is prepared.

After the body is purged, there must be ministered the oil of Vitriol, being
reduced into a volatile essence, which fully cures the Epileptick distention,
and brings the body to the pristin goodness: Which if it be not wanting, then
make the olympic cret thus:

. Of Hungary Vitriol lb xii. of Spodium Electum, of Camphore, ana v. pour on
these three the water of Paeonie seeds, gathered at the decrease of the Moon,
and let these be driven by a Chymick descent, even unto red feces.

. Of these red Feces lb i. of distilled liquor lb ii. of essence of wine, of
water of Celandine, Baulm, of Germander, of Valeriana, of Plantaine, ana i ss.
Let these be distilled with a strong fire in a glass retort: then:

. Of the red Feces lb ii. of distilled liquor lb i. Let these first be steeped,
then ^istill it day and night, then comes over together the phlegm, spirit
and oil, which are thus separated: The phlegm is separated in a Balmy, the
Spirit by a Seraphicum, and the red oil in an Athanor. Of the phlegm is given
to young people before the fit comes, to Aged people is given of the Spirit
one Scruple; to old people is given of the oil gr iii.

That is none of the meanest Antidotes against the falling sickness, which is
taught in the Stechomantia, used by some of the Sabaeans.

. Of the waters of the root of Nightshade, of Winter-Cherries, of the seeds of
Paeonie, gathered in the wane of the Moon, ana ii s. of fresh Castoreum i. of
the species of Diamoschum dulce i s. of Virgin Honey ii. of Anacardin Honey s.
Let these be distilled in a Balmy, to which must be added, of prepared Pearls
s. of the shavings of the Unicorn gr. iiii. of the simple oil of Vitriol. gut.
v. of Anis seed oil gr. ix. Mix these: administer i of this liquor before the
fit comes, let it be iterated for nine days together, then this horrible
disease will be absolutely cured, though the party had been afflicted with it
xx years.

More Antiodtes can be found out for the Epilepsie by him that knows (indeed
Physicians that will be perfect, ought to know) the Astronomical Arts, among
which is numbered the Magia Teurgica, Cabala Aegyptiaca, Necromantica
Orientalis, Characteristicall impression or spells the Celestial Sophia, and
others, not convenient to be inserted here.

FINIS.
The Pyricall Art for Medicinal Salts prepared Chymically; By D. George
Phaedron, that Famous PHYSICIAN.
How the Plague, that Epidomicall Discase, is cured.
WHereas the causes and signs are conveyed into men's bodies, as it were with
one fall, as daily experience shows, and is taught by, or in the Protopyrick
Art, so that by reason of your nimble and sudden quantity of destroying can
hardly be allayed, here in this place, besides the ordinary method observed in
cures, care ought to be had, by wise and diligent and industrious Physicians,
that the coming and creeping poison be expeil'd presently from the more
principal members, by special and singular Antidotes; which are had against
the horrible infection in the art called Oriental Charontick, Characteristick
impression, the perfect medicine, the Celestial Sophie, and other Arts
belonging to Mathematics. And that I might not be contrary in the cure of the
Plague, which divine Science was imparted unto me, naturally being inclined, or
by force of Nature in Astronomicall Arts, and will in few words set down, as
much as time will permit, the several cures of the said Arts, what their
efficacy is against this disease. And in the first place the Oriental
Charontica witnesses to be known among the Tharsi, Alexandrini, and in our
age, that the following purge, being taken at the beginning of the infection in
case of necessity, never missed, so that for the present in this manner might
be prepared in shops for a sovereign medicine.

. Of Euphorbium i. of the best Myrrh, Of the Masculine Frankincense ii. of
Tragacanth ss. Enclose these in brown Crude bread, let it be cocted in the
Oven, this baked matter being cold, add thereunto of red Corals, of
Transparent Citrin Amber, ana ss. of Unicorn horn gr i. of the Thebaic Opium
ss. of the best Mosch gr. iii. of Oriental Sastron ss. Make a mass of Pills in
sublimed Wine, according unto Species of Diambra. If the party be of twenty
years of age, let him take of it s. or ii. if the party be younger, then a
less quantity will serve; and if the party be stricken in years, then a
greater quantity must be taken. The party must fast for five hours after the
taking, and the parties stomach being somewhat recovered, let him take the
following potion.

. Of Philonium Persicum, or of the best Treacle i. of the Spices of Gemms s. of
red Corals s. of red wine, in which Crude steel is quenched ii. of the water of
Prunella, of Baulm, ana s. Make a Potion; which expels the Plague, Pleurisy,
Flux, Inflammation of the throat, and other mortal diseases, curing them
radically, not suffering them to return, according to the ancient experience
of the oriental Charontick.

Secondly the Characteristicall impression, before other Medicaments propounds
this Electuarie, one dram being by the Patient taken several times, and well
covered, expels that deadly poison wonderfully by sweat and Urine, if well
prepared by a good Apothecarie, it will not fail in curing the pest.

. Of Rhubarb ponticum, of Zedoaria, of Dictamn. Creticus, of Elicampane, of
Angelica, of Cardopatia, of Magistrantia, of Valeriana, of Gentiana, of Morsus
diaboli, of Tormentilla, of Pimpinella, of Bistorta, of Doronicus, of
Aristolochia longa, of the herb of Paris, of Swallowwort, of the leaves of
Scordium, of Carduus Benedictus, of Rue, of Sage, of Wormwood, of the herb of
Paris, of Cardiaca, of Hypoglostum, of Cordial Flowers, of Rosemary flowers,
ana i. of Bayberries, of the Herb of Paris, ana s. of Juniper Berries iii. of
the shavings of Nuces Vomicae i. of Anise-seed, of Fennel seed, of prepared
Coriander, of Ocimum, of Citrum, of Plantaine, of Sorrel, ana s. of Ants eggs,
living under Pinetrees s. of shaven Liquorice, i s. of Lignum Aloes i s. of
Opium Thebaicum ii. of Myrrh, of Frankincense, of Mastix, ana iii. of Ginger,
of Galanga, of Cinamom, of Mace, of Nutmeg, of Cloves ana ii. of Long Pepper,
of a grain of Paradise, ana iiii. of old red wine lb s. of scumm'd white honey
lb ii s. of Rose Sugar lb i s. make an Electuarie.

. Of this Electuarie, of syrup of Citrum, ana lb i. of Aquavitae thrice
distilled lb v. Let these be infused and stand in horse dung for a month, then
distill it gently in a Balmy.

. Of this liquor i. of the syrup of Citrus i. of Vinegar s. of Rose water i s.
of Ants eggs which are under pine trees s. of dry berries of the herb of Paris
number. iii. of Cordial species of Gemms ii. of the horn of the Unicorn, or of
hearts horn, cast at the first breed gr. iii. of gold leaves n. i. of
Saffrongr. iii. of Camphore gr. i. Mingle it for a potion.

The poison being expelled, let the parties linen be either burnt or flung
into the River with his urine. This purging Electuary being taken, let the
contagion be what it will, the party infected will find ease and help;
Phlebotomie is not to be used, being dangerous, and other ways made use of by
Modern Physicians.

Thirdly, the Perfecta Medicina for the expelling of the Plague, the following
Balsame is much commended and of great efficacy, to be made by an expert
Chemist.

. Of yellow Sulphur x. of Myrrh, of Frankincense, ana vi. of Aloes washed nine
times in water, of Prunella i. of Roman Vitriol, of prepared Salt, ana iii s.
Mix these well, sublime the Sulphur, and this sublimate must with fresh
species's mixed be sublimed again, which if iterated the third time, then you
have an excellent Balsame.

. Of this Balfame s. of Myrrh, of Frankincense, of Austrian Sastron gr. iii.
of the Syrup of Citrus i. of Baulm water ii. Mix it.

This potion being taken daily preserves and cures the Pest, without any
other Medicament, cures the desperate Pleurisy, all manner of Coughs and
corruptions of Humane bodies, expelling them more then is credited. But if the
heavenly soul and fiery virtue be drawn from this Balsame, it is of a most
noble quality against outward and inward diseases, which is much to be esteemed
by a Physician: For this Mysteriam is reduced into a more excellent Medicament,
a mighty treasure for all manner of men (diseased) which I speak of now, in
this envious, covetous, and proud Age. Lastly, the Celestial Sophie affords a
virtuous heavenly Treacle, which expels any Venom from man's body. Chymically
it is prepared thus.

. Of a part of man's body, cut small, of old and pure Sallet oil, ana lb i s.
Let it stand in putrefaction in hot horse dung for a Month, then distill it in
a retort: After this distilled liquor of lb i. add of old Mithridate v. of
Alexandrin Treacle iii. of the most fragrant Mosch s. of Ambergrease i. Mix
these and let it stand in digestion for a month in hot horse dung, then
distill it in a Balmy, then is your Celestial Treacle prepared.

. Of the liquor of this Treacle i. of Sorell syrup simplex. of Lemon juice, ana
i s. mix these. This potion must be given three times to the party, every
fifth hour, if any boil appears outwardly, bring it to maturity, and then
open it; together with this potion and other Medicaments the olympic plaster,
or our wonderful stichicum.

. Of the juice of the root of the herb of Paris, of Angelica, of Atistolochia
rotunda, of Asarum, of the greater Comfry, of Violaria, of the herbs of
Betonie, of Prunells, of the lesser Centorie, of Persicaria, of Celandine, of
Pyrola, of Agrimonie, of Plantaine, ana i of Muscilage, of Linseed, of
Fenugreek, of March-mallows, ana i ss. of white wax lb ss. of Colophonie ii ss.
of Pitch, of Rasom, ana iii. of Sallet oil lb i ss. of Turpentine, washed nine
times in water of Solatrum iii. of Opopanax, of Serapinum, of Ammoniacum, of
Galbanum dissolved. in Rose Water, ana i ss. of Citrin Amber, of Mastix, of
Myrrh, of Frankinense, of Aloes washed nine times in Rose water, ana i. of
Styrax, of Sperma Ceti, of Terra Sigillata, ana ii. of Rhubarb, of Rhaponticum,
of Calamus Aromaticus, of Zinziber, of Acrons, ana ss. of the shining Peacock
feathers, of Snake skins, ana ii. of Antimonie ss. of red Corals, of white
Corals, ana i. of Lethargyre lb ss. of Lapis Calaminaris ii ss. of Haematires
is. of Magnet iii. of Camphor s. of the oil of Hypericon, of Chamomill, of
Anethum, of Bays, of Juniper Berries, of Eggs, of Earth worms, ana i. of Spike
i. of Hearts marrow, of Capons grease, of Tithymallus, of Man's, ana i s. Boil
these to a plaster according to Art.

Thus these four Mathematick Arts, teach us to cure Pestilentiall diseases, and
the Astronomicall experience, astords no nobler thing among the simples, then
the Magic stone, or Philosophic; the soul of reverberated Antimonie, the
diaphoretick liquor of Ophirizum, the oil of Pearls, the tincture of Gemms;
these alone are held the highest and only Magnalia.

The lesser Surgerie of George Phaearon that famous Physician.
Whereas in our age from the hands of Physicians, Surgery is fallen upon Barbers
and Bathmen of no experience, the four principal parts of Physic,
Philosophy, Chimistry, and Mathematick. The love unto my neighbor has moved
me, after a long experimental knowledge, to show an easier and safer way, very
convenient and safe for all students in Surgerie, not checking my Conscience
for the doing of it.

Therefore I will prescribe briefly and perspicuously the kowledge of all open
sores and ulcers, how these methodically may be cured physically and
spiritually, which not able Symptom being discovered, which daily molesteth
mankind, the good of the universal Christendom, chiefly of the Illustrious
principality of Bavaria, be promoted, where when I was a student in Arts, and
was a practitioner, I was courteously dealt withal, by all manner of persons.

There is proposed in our protopyrick Medicina, and in our daily practice, a
threefold kind of open sores, wht a cure belonging thereunto.

First that which is hot, red, and is found about the nervous parts and
passages. And that is cured with the Vincetoxicum.

The other sort is burning, causing extreme pains, without any rednests, or in
parts full of nerves. And that is cured by Centaurium Minus.

The third and last, is accompanied with a perpetual tumor and running, this
we cure with Pyrola. Thus:

. Of this herb M. v. or of the root iii. put in lb iii of clear and old wine,
or in pure fountain water in a clean pot, luting the junctures well, set it in
boiling water, let it stay there for half or a whole hour, let one moitie be
boiled away.

. Of this water iii. with an ounce of Canarie Sugar dissolved in Cinnamon water,
to be given to the party affected, according to the judging of the disease,
being an ordinary custom among wounded men, in what part soever of the body
the Symptom be, the cure must be begun from within, and the efficacy of the
inwardly taken Medicine is felt; the wound must be washed with wine, in which
is boiled the herb Pyrolz, or the plaster of the powder of Pyrola must be
applied: The powder and Plaster may be omitted, that the wound may be cured
with one only thing.

But in the venereall disease, if application be made in the same way, among
the herbs there is none more effectual then is Hypoglossum, which prevails
more, then may be done by anointing, fumigation, or washing means; and
effects thus much, that none of the diseased curses either Surgeon or
Physician.

And because these three kinds, by reason of mixed signs are hardly discerned
or distinguished; therefore we may safely take our course to the preparation of
the first decoction.

. Of Vincetoxicum, of Centaurium Minus, of Pyrola, of Hypoglossum, ana M ii.
boil these after our way: The Surgeon will be eased of his daily labors, and
will help the party in a sudden necessity with the following wine.

. Of Hypericon, of Veronica, of Plantago Utraque, of Betonie, of Eupatorium, of
Prunella, of Vinca per Vinca, ana M i of Pyrola Sylvatica, of the lesser
Centorie, ana M xvi. of the root of Swallow wort lb. ss of of white Sanicle, of
Aristolochia rotunda, of Sow bread, ana i ss. put these herbs and roots at
the time of Vintage in a pipe of new wine, let it work together for three
months, then take out the herbs, separating the wine, put fresh herbs into,
and for to make the Wine of an Aromatic Fragrancie.

. Of Zinziber, of Calamus Aromaticus, of Cloves, ana i of Cinnamon, of Mace, of
Nutmegs, ana ss. Put these into a bag, and put it into the fat. Thus you have
in store a medicinal wine outwardly to wash the sores, inwardly to be used for
conglutinating wounds and ulcers; the patients will commend their Surgeons for
it, because they furthered thereby their cure.

But if a Surgeon be more industrious for to make a more happy cure, by a
chymicall Art of a most excellent use, he may extract the essence from
Imperatoria, which is of a most excellent healing virtue. Imperatoria being
well purged, and being beaten with a good deal of the whitest bread, being put
into a hogs bladder, well shut and tied, set deep in horse dung weekly, or at
the seventh day looking to it, when it looks like purple Mead, then press it
out in a press: the remainder must be digested again, and then be pressed out
again.

This viscous liquor is put in a body and digested in the Balmy for ten days,
at last distill it in ashes, the oil and water comes over through the Helmet.
These separate in a Balmy, with a gentle fire, then the phlegm comes over,
the essence of imperatoria remains in the bottom like an oil. Half an ounce
of it and one scruple of salt, and three ounces of the best wine, with a
decoction of any vulnerarie water or juice of Plantaine, being taken mornings
and evenings, according as occasion serves, and the necessity of the disease
requires, it heals more, and agglurinateth all manner of fresh and old
sores, then may be well expressd in a great volume, purging by sweat, urine,
stool bleeding, and an insensible transpiration.

That singular Arcanum is to be preferred also of Oculi Cancrorum, which by
Pyrick Art for daily use, may be made thus: Pulverise subtly the Oculi
Cancrorum, being calcined must be set for a month with the essence of wine in
a Balmy; still it ovenstrongly six times, at last the oil must be separated
from the essence of wine a sixth time in a Balmy. One scruple of this oil,
with a dram of Treacle, or instilled water of Fumitorie, must be taken mornings
and evenings, according to the condition of the disease, which expels all
contrary things to Nature, by the mouth of the wound, either by running,
bleeding, or other effect, not leaving the sumptome till it be cured and
conglutinated. Another nobler Medicament, is a Mysterium of the essence of
Tartar, the ancient Philosophers called it Ignis Adeptus, or Aqua
Phlegetontica; which the Chemist prepares thus:

. Dregs of wine, or Tartar calcined in a reverberatorie lb iii. imbibe it with
distilled vinegar, putrify it for seven days in a Balmy, distill it as an
Aquavitae in an earthen retort (body;) at last put a strong fire under it, a
black liquor comes over with the wine, which must be separated in a Balmy; the
remaining feces must be calcined again for 24 hours in a reverberatorie, and
must be imbibed again as formerly with distilled wine, this work must be
iterated as often, that all the tartareous substance be found to be consumed.
Afterward those rectified liquors must be exiccated, then imbibe it with oil
or spirit of Vitrioll, as formetly the calcined Vitrioll was, and must be
separated again. One grain of this Medicine, with one dram of Mithridate i ss
of distilled Succorie water, as the Patients condition requires, often taken,
extinguisheth the original and prime cause of the disease, not a cicatrice
will be seen, if any impure matter be left behind.

Here would be briefly demonstrated the true reason, whereby many could attain
unto the highest Medicine of Vulcan Metamorphosis, and the tincture of fixed
Gemms by the help of the oil Thion, but by reason of the Philosophic fire,
and of the infernal waters immense secrets, the lasiness, avarice and vain
honor of this age is not to be edged on.

At last there are most excellent universals in Medicina, as the diaphoretick
liquor of Ophirizon, that the soluble oil of Sol, and tincture of the red
Corals, which in like manner penetrate the whole body, and bring all open and
gaping sores and exulcerations to their pristine integrity and health; as is
sufficiently made manifest in out celestial Medicina.

Hitherto we treated of Physical curations, now follows that we treat of the
Heavenly, which we divide into a specificall and characteristicall.

The specificall is, which among vegetables shows admirable effects, by a
heavenly virtue of the firnament, affected with our body by a strong
impression, without any preparation, separation or auction; but is instilled by
God into these earthly bodies, by means of astrall infiuence; therefore they
ought to be applied, as they are naked before our eyes.

Hydropiper has received a marvelous quality by the heavenly influence, which
if it be green drawn through a running water, and is laid to an open wound, no
longer then one may be eating of an egg, being evaporated in hot flints, and
put into the earth and that be done in v. x. xv. days, as these herbs
successively putrify, so the wound in that space of time heals, and 18 cured,
leaving no impediment behind. Though the wound or ulcer must be kept clean from
all impurity, after these herbs are buried, however for a speedier healing,
inward and outward medicaments are to be administered; of which has been spoken.

By a like magnetic operation, Solidago Minor, or Dracunculus does its office,
that these parts may not conglutinate and unite which Nature would have open;
many attempt to cure such rashly about the legs and feet with a fearful and
dangerous limping or halting, who being forged by a timorous refuge, must take
their instruction from these three plants, seeking for them in Fields and
Acres. But if these herbs be dry, must be macerated in their own water, and
must be applied in that manner spoken of.

This admirable potencie of the Firmament, the good God has set before our
eyes to be used for other desperate diseases, as it is apparent in Hypericon,
which being gathered in its constellation, and used any way, is the greatest
Mysierium among the herbs, to expel Spectrums, Larves, and mad melancholy,
whereby men many times fall into a phrenfie, madness and despair; among the
Gemms, effect the same, the splendid red Corals; among the animal, the the
blood of Pickerels is of the same efficacy.

In like manner amongst herbs, is a most noble Medicament, which is called
Sydericum, if its root be put in a glass, full of water or wine, in which was
hid any venom, breaks it in pieces, but if the vessel be of Pewter or of
silver, the water or wine in it begins to boil, rises and runs out,
nothing stays behind: Among Metals is Numus argenreus e Mercurio uostro
confectus, being put to a dish or drinking pot, does the same: Among the
Animals Umcorxu verum does the same, proved with a double black Taffety.

The like astrall virtue to heal gaping fores or wounds, has Symphitum Majus,
the greater Comfry, which being drawn green through water, and applied to the
wound, to let it rot there, the rotten ones must be put away, and fresh
applied, heals the wound wholly.

Of the like praise and commendation are Althaea and Mereurialis, none of the
herbs can be more wished for, either by or of the patient, nor of the
Physician; I had often experience of it made at Ratisbone the last veare, in
desperate and most incurable diseases.

This also is to be added, that always as the Comfry was rotten, the salt
extracted from that herb, I dissolved in its proper distilled liquor, and
purged the wound from the matier, and used the oil of Symphitum also to anoint
it withal, a fresh leaf drawn through cold water, applied it to the wound,
proceeding with the rest ut supra. I made use also, if necessity required it,
of the essence, of this herb, separating it by circulation in a Pelican, the
dose was one Scruple in strong wine.

These virtues being joined with those of Physical and Celestial things,
never any inveterate and obstinate open sore or wound has deceived my
undertakings, especially when I made use of Hydropiper.

Therefore these Magnalia endewed with a Heavenly astrall influence, ought not
to be contemned by any Surgeon. As Chameleo Niger being gathered in the time of
the operating influence, bringing to the other health, strength, and natural
vigor, bestows by a Nymphidick reason to that, which respects its
splendour, and so on the contrary, which is the last refuge to bring the
decaying sterill stem of great houses upon another line.

I say nothing of the Magnetic Schmaragd, not of the Electrin Pyralis, of such
like marvelous thing, never any that are in Stoechomantin arts have written or
published, which had not given a hint of this astrall influence. For all things
have their praedestinated time, either of their rising or decaying,

The Characteristick cure is this, which upon words spoken, written or graven,
exercises its natural potencie, by the heavenly quality of the astrals and
several influences, standing in affinity with our bodies, consisting of
numbers, Geometrical figures, and other significations of fingers. But I omit
this last part of my proposition, by reason of the great contempt of this
ungrateful age, and its sinister and rash judgment, that I may not prostitute
these great benefits of curing any ulcers and wounds by constellated words,
into which is imprinted an influence by art. This I speak experimentally, that
seven words imprinted on a golden lamin, does actually effect, which falls
according to the expectation of the patient and Physician; and many other
constellated words of vulnerated men, being heard but of one wounded afar off,
without any medicament is healed, in case absent physician does but know the
absent patient, and the cure can be performed a hundred German miles off.
Moreover in such a cure more miraculous hidden mysteries are hid of the
Patriarchs, and ancient Prophets, and may be spoken of, these and such like
natural secrets every perfect Physician has need to know them. For in case of
necessity, what can commend and prefer a Physician without any damage of his
conscience more, then in the very moment of suffocation, by a mere speaking of
five words to help a patient, and to draw out the bones or ears without pain,
sticking to the throat? Here avail nothing, the Pharmacopolian itineraries,
and the crooked instruments of Chyrurgeons, which little avail in any such
sub^tanean case, because always things are made worse when such instruments
were used, and the Patients are very seldom eased, unless presently great and
approved secrets be in readiness to be used. What better and pleasanter thing
can happen to a soldier, who is destitute of all hope and help, by the blow
given to him in any hour upon any astrall influence whatsoever, if by the he^p
of some constellated words spoken, any crooked arrow, or other shot, or beaten
into his flesh, to take it out with two fingers by the place it went in? Here
is no need of cauteries or pyroteries appropriated for capacities fitted, the
weapon must be drawn forth freely; neither is there any need here of section,
or rather butcherie, the piece of the weapon must not be turned, nor must the
weapon that is in the flesh be cut or broken in pieces. What should refresh
more a traveling man, if any bullet had been shot into his bladder, to get it
out without pain, by some spell laid upon? Away with that tyrannical manual
investigation of Chyrurgeons; about which many of the Patients, either fall
into swounding under their hands, or die quite outright. What nobler thing can
be had in stanching of Bleeding or the running of the glutinous humors called
Sinovia, where the total virtue of the body grows defective, then when a
wise Physician with one word wearing about his neck, without any hurt or
application of any other medicaments does stay it? Thus all such desperate
diseases are cured by a characteristick way being endowed with a celestial and
astrall inflowing quality, which Arts by reason of ignorance of some, and the
contempt of some foolish Physicians, lie hid in darkness, and these
blasphemous Alastors, will rather detract the honor from God in these high and
miraculous operations of Characteristick cures, and attribute them to a bad
intention, then to God who is the only effectual cause thereof. By reason of
their impudence, I omit this Characteristicall Art, to speak of such motions
and commotions, neither will I make mention any more of the first Adams ancient
Philosophy, gotten by Semhamaphor of Rhaziell, whereby man may by a divine
means, get and attain unto all, what ever his mind may desire. For whoever
is a true and serious lover and defender of truth, he may find about me these
Megaleia and secrets at Ingolstad; wherewith I have made several experiments
in the presence of great Doct^rs, and honorable Persons, and desire these and
other writings of mine to be made approved to all such which wish well unto me,
upon pain of my body, honor, and the loss of my goods.

And thus much spoken of the physical and heavenly cure of all sores, ulcers
and wounds, to be begun by the center, beseeching Chyrurgeons, that walk on the
true way, to accept of this my faithful work for the promoting of Gods honor,
and the good of the neighbor; and thus I pray they may construe it, till I
bring forth greater and clearer matters.

The Chymicall Furnace OF GEORGE PHAEDRO. Which contains the Compositions of
the chiefest Secrets.
GOld is broken in its Metalline Nature and malleablenesse by water of Salt:
and this water is made by a sanguincous distilling, without addition. It is a
natural salt, which we daily use at our meals. This water of Salt is washed
from the Gold by sweet rainewater: The same also is distilled to the highest
degree, then the tincture of Gold is detracted from the body by spirit of Wine.
this is made merely of Wine, without any other addition: and the spirit of Wine
is made again out of Wine, without any other addition. This is abstracted
again from Gold, and thus the Gold without any addidition is graduated into a
volatility, so that it may be brought into a liquor; in this manner is made
also the Liquor of Corals, Pearls, and others, as also of Silver. And so there
is nothing added unto such Medicines, but Salt, Wine, and Water: but not a
potent Water, as some Chemists and Artists make.

The Essence of Wine and of Herbs, from which are made Aquavitae's.
TAke of the best red wine or Spanish wine lb viii. macerate it in a large
Pelican, or Circulatorie in hot hors-dung, for 2 months, or in a Balmy for
thirty days; then there will swim on the Phlegm an olagineous Liquor, which
with a very gentle fire in a Violl must be so long separated coldly, till that
tender and pure fatness, or the vegetable spirit of Wine come no more
distilling from the Alembick; digest that again in a Balmy for xxx days. Then
you have lb i. of Wine, one scruple of the Essence, the true Elixir for the
prolonging of life. From that may be made golden Water, or Aquavitae: if Plants
and Spices mixed with spirit of Wine be macerated for a Philosophic time; as,
Melitena, Celandine, Elleborus, Rosemarie, together with Cloves, Ginger,
Cinamom, Nutmegs, and the like. If you proceed in this manner in the drawing of
the Essence out of one pound of Hydropiper, you will get two seruples of the
Essence.

There is anther more compendious way to distill by a Balmy and cold Water,
with an Alembick, whose receiver has a double neck.

Liquor of Ophirizum.
THe Liquor of Ophirizum, among other Secrets, is an universal medicine so
powerful, that it defends the whole body, and being corrupted, restores it to
former health: And is made thus; Ophirizum by the regal Cement, or Antimonie
Lamin^ must be dissolved in the green Liquor of salt into a powder, which
afterward must be washed in a distilled Celestial Water, to get off all its
saltness: or if you will proceed more nimbly, cement the Lamins of Ophirizum,
together with Lamins of Saturn, covered for xxiv hours, then disjoyne them,
then is your Solar Calx prepared. Then upon the washed powder, or purged Calx
pour spirit of Wine, that it stand over it six fingers breadths, and the
junctures being well luted, macerate them in a Balmy for xx or xxx days; then
pour forth the Citrin Liquor, leaving in the bottom a most Candid powder, and
separate the spirit of Wine very subtly in a Balmy, from the yellow Liquor of
Ophirizum.

At last the extracted color of gold must be five times driven in a Retort,
then is your quintessence of Sol, or the potable gold, perfect, whose gr. iii.
are given in aqua Dracunculi. This Liquor of Ophirizum makes the spirit of
Wine as dead, alive, increases the radical Humidum, and so corroborateth the
whole body, that nothing goes beyond it. This Liquor, I say, opens the
pores, and nimbly penetrateth all the parts of the body, rectifieth the
corrupted blood, consumes superfluous humors, and confirms or strengthens
universally all the Faculties and their Funictions: Lastly, by the benefit of
this Ophrizum, to speak by particular of it, every intemperateness is cured,
even Obstruction, Phlegmon, Tumor, Putredo, Impostume, Fever, Pest, Madness,
Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, the Palsy in any part of the body, Defluxions,
shortness of breath, Consumption, Pleurisy, trembling of the Heart, Cholick,
corruptness of the Liver, of the Spleen, the Scirrhus-arquatus, Malus-habitus,
Dropsy, the Cholick, the Iliack-passion, all manner of Fluxes, the Worms,
Hemerods, the stone of the Kidneys and Bladder, the virulent Gonorrhes,
Diabetes, Ischeria, the Rupture, the Concurse of Hysterical symptoms, the
oppression of the Month, and their immoderate flowing, the Whites, the rising
of the Mother, and the falling down of the womb, Sterility, all manner of
Gouts, Chiragra, Gonagra, Ischias or Sciatica, Elephantia, or Leprosy,
Venereall Infection, the bitings of venomous beasts, the Anthrax, Cancer, small
Pox, Herpes Exedens, Gangrene, Fistula, eating Ulcer. To speak it in a word,
the Liquor of Ophirizum expels and cures radically all inward Diseases of
the body, and all outward ones, which any other Medicament cannot cure by
reason of their extreme malignity; and the fetall necessity, being Gods
pleasure, do not permit their cure.

The Oil of Pearls.
REcip. Of prepared Pearls ii. of distilled well purged vinegar lb ss. (in
stead of vinegar may be used spirit of wine, one quart of it.) Macerate it in a
circulatorie for a month, then the pearls do dissolve into a ponderous
juice, cast off the rest of the liquor. This whole dissolved mass may be
separated per alembick, in the same way as the gold was. The dose of the oil
of Pearls is gr. vi. which preserves the body in the same vigor of ill,
restores the same to its former health; it has not its fellow in curing of
frenzy, palsy in any part, the cramp, sleepiness in old people, correcting
and augmenting the milk in women, and in rectifying the seed, apostemes and
eating ulcers, and hemerods.

The tincture of Corals.
Pour spirit of wine on subtly pulverised red Corals, the spirit of wine
must stand over them a hand-breadth, and the glass being well luted must be
macerated in hot horsedung for a month. Note, it must be driven six or ten
times into a Receiver: but it may be prepared in a shorter way, namely, if once
driven over, then let it macerate again in horse dung for a sennight, so that
it be macerated four times in one month, and be driven four times in open
fire; afterward it must be distilled ten or sixteen times according to Art.
Then separate the spirit of wine in a Balmy, being poured on again six times
that spirit which is distilled, then is settled to the bottom a most red and
clear oil of Corals. The dose of it is one scruple, given in Succorie water,
in good wine, or in a decoction of Chamaedrys. This soul I say, this pearl of
Corals is one of the greatest mysteries in Medicina, and is our most rarest
treasure whereby radically are cured all inward and outward symptoms, and the
distempered body is restored to a perfect constitution. The quintessence of
Corals cures in five weeks time all manner of convulsions in young and aged
people, it stays any looseness, come it from what cause it will, in young
and aged people, though it be come unto an extremity: it stancheth blood in any
part of the body, be it used any way: it stays the monthly courses, and
reduces nature unto a good temper, and leaves not matter for recourse in the
other parts of the body, as other medicaments usually do.

As the oil of Corals is made, in the same manner is made also the oil of
Gemms, as of Smaragd, Rubie, Hyacinth, the stones of Garnets, Lycy, Cyanei etc.

The essence of Antimonie.
THere is great store of Antimonie in mines of Germany, as at Tiohtelberg, and
at Plaun, a City in Bohemia; in Italy also about Massa is found some. The best
Antimonie is found in Carinthia, and County of Tyral; where there are golden
Mines. The yellow is of the best, the next is of a Saffron color, and the
third is blackish. This among other fruits of the water, has as many virtues
and so good ones, that they scarce can be expressed by man. It has an inward
efficacitie from the first Original and creation of things unto this day, and
continued inviolably, neither has the deluge ever infringed its native power,
and stuck stiffly to heavens influence to which it was inslaved. Hence our most
noble subject is reduced to its prima materia, so that the fire does glitter
every way like the Ether. It takes away the cause of any disease, and
tranaformes the impure body so, that is seems to want nothing of its most
perfect health.

The manner of the making is thus.
ANtimonie well pulverised must be reverberated for a month in a closed pot,
and there breaths forth a volatile flower which is of a white color; then
there comes a yellow or citrin flower, after that there comes a red and of
a purple color. Take of these red flowers two ounces, of rectifyed spirit of
wine quart iii. macerate them for twelve days in a circular Pelican, and
separate them in a balmy, the essence of Antimonie stays in the bottom, which
renews unto man's body all his strength: The dose of it is gr. iii. in Baulm
water, or Celandine water, or in good wine.

It cures leprosy, and many other almost incurable diseases by insensibility;
all diseases are cured thereby radically, and whatever distempers the body,
more then any other mysterious medicines, and brings Microcosme to a most
perfect health.

An Arcanum of the Quintessence.
. Of sulphur ss. of spirit of Wine xx circulate it for a month in the Sun,
then distill it per alembick. Add thereunto of Sulphur ss. lute and macerate,
and then distill it, out of these flowers you have Mumia terrae, and such a
Balsame, which preserves from putrefaction both alive and dead bodies, and
protects them in that solidness, that no elementall corruption can hurt it. And
for that reason the Balsame of Sulphur goes beyond all other philosophic
tinctures. Its dose is gr. v. in old white wine: And if you will make it more
effectual, then take the white flowers of Sulphur gr. i. of Antimonie i. of
oil of Gold ss. of spirit of wine v. macerate it for a month, and bring it to
a hard mass: Its dose is ss.

Mercurius dulcis.
ARgent vive among metals is of a spe^ciall and admirable nature, containing a
virtue of all the rest: It is good against all manner of ulcers, purging the
body radically, renews the body, there is hardly any more estectuall
mysterium, and is made thus. First, Mercury is coagulated by common Allom
water, and is subtly pulverised: Then abstract from Mercury the water of the
white of eggs from the moity of its calx, and bring it to a corallin color: Its
dose is gr.iii. with treacle. The water of the white of eggs is made thus: The
white must be distilled, and the shells of eggs must be calcined, and the water
of the white of eggs is poured on the calcined shells; thus is your water of eggs
prepared.

Spirit of Vitriol.
THat kind of salt, which the Greeks call Chalcanthum, and in Latin is called
atramentum metallorum, is several, according to the diversity of Mines. Some
of it is white, some is greenish, others is blew, mingled with red and yellow
veins, and differ much one from another. In Germany it grows, at Goslar in
Saxony, at Cuperbach in Bohemia, at Smolnitz in Hungary, in Italy in the
Mossan ground at Senensem agrum. In Cyprus the vitriol crude, the more it
expels the worms, or transmuteth iron into copper, the more useful is it in
Medicina and Chymia. Moreover, the secret of Chalcanthum consists of a tripple
matter: The preparation of it is thus. Chalcanthum being driven with a vehement
fire nine times, then forced in a retort, in an athanor kept for four days and
nights, then you have a most noble and most effectual spirit. Then the
Cholcothar from a red viol in like manner in an athanor for three days is
distilled with a forcible fire, and in the receiver you will have lb i. of
Colcothar, vi of red oil. From the remainder is drawn the salt, which must be
dissolved four or five times, and vaporated again to a salt.

Tartar.
REcip. Of crude Tartar washed in wine lb iii. and pulverise it, and according
to the degrees of fire distill it like an aquafort, there comes over a clear
liquor and a blackish juice, each of these must be distilled apart in sand
four times, the feces must be always put away: at last for the taking away
its intolerable stink, it must be rectifyed subtly in a Pelican, then you
have a well prepared liquor of Tartar, which is of that efficacy, that it
penetrateth all the body throughout.

Lastly, take of the aethereall essence of Wine, which in the circulation has
gotten a fragrancy x. of treacle v. of red Roman Myrrh ii ss. of Austrian
Saffron, ss. Mix and distill these, then is your Treacle water prepared. For
the making of the Chalcantin Arcanum, take of spirit of Chalcanthum quart i. of
the liquor of Tartar quart iii. Macerate these again the philosophic time:
Its dose is i. to be taken in good wine. This is a divine Arcanum and Elixer,
penetrateth the whole body insensibly, nimbly consuming such matters that are
hurtful unto the body, especially if other peculiar things be added thereunto.
If it be ministered for a month mornings and evenings, cures the Gout, and the
parts pained are to be anointed with this mixture.

. Of that liquor i. of Mumie quart i. Mix it.

The Philosophic Salts.
REcip. Of the salt of Valeriana, of succorie, of Chamedris, ana i. of Wormwood
ii. of Vitriol i. of common salt lb i. Mix these. Or;

. Of the salt of Vincetoxicum, of black Chameleon, of Celandine, ana i. of
common salt lb ss. Mix these. Or;

. Of the salt of Gold, of Antimony, of Melitena, ana ss. of common salt lb ss.
Mix these.

An Extract of Satyrion*
REcip. Of the roots of Satyrion, cleanse and beat them, temper them with a
little quantity of the whitest bread, put it in a glass and lute it, macerate
it in warm horse dung, take it out weekly, and when it looks like a red
cremor, press it strongly very dry; add to the remainder more bread, macerate
again, press it, take out all the juice from it. This creme must be digested
in a balmy for x days, and then in ashes distilled, the phlegm and oil must
be driven over, which in a Balmy afterward must be separated. The dose of the
oil of Satyrion is s with one scruple of the salt of Melitena, and taken in
good wine.

Mumy.
AS in the Macrocosme things can be transmuted by some secret or other: So of
Microcosme, are things prepared which are very useful. The manner of it is

. Of rectifyed spirit of wine lb s. of the juice of Celandine, of Melitena, ana
quart i. Circulate these in horse dung for twelve days, separate them in a
Balmy, and having macerated it again for a month, the Mumy being mixed with it,
the Mumy must be dislolv'd in it, separate artificially in a Balmy Lastly add
to vi of this liquor, oil Turpentine, of the Turks sealed earth, of the oil
of Ophirizum, ana s. Circulate it again for a month; then you have a
Microcosmick Treacle of Mumie, a most rare Mysterium, very effectual against
any poison. Its dose is s.

Hermaphrodite.
IN Chymistrie is found by experience that the Hermaphrodite contains all the
virtue of the other Minerals; hence it must needs have a healing quality on
man's body. Because he is nothing then the essence of Minerals; if the Anatomy
of Microcosme be conferred with Macrocosme. Therefore the Hermaphrodite
restores man's entire body, be it corrupted by what cause it will, to a most
perfect symmetry, insomuch, that no perfecter medicine can be wished for to
prolong the life in the a perfect health. The soul of Hermaphroditus is made
thus.

. Of the Mercuriall essence of Cyprus. Vitriol, coagulate in its definite time
of Philosophers set, then arises the saphirick flower of Hermaphrodite an
admirable Mysterium of Macrocosme. One part of it put into 3000 parts of
dissolved Ophirizum transmuteth all into its own nature; one dram of this put
to a thousand drams of Copper, transmuteth it into most pure gold. So one
grain of the Hermaphrodite, and one scruple of Treacle taken now and then in
good Wine, restores a distempered body to its pristin and natural
constitution; and if you apply it outwardly unto any symptom, with distilled
water of Hydropiper, it is more effectual then any balsame, and cures any
symptom, sooner then other Chirurgicall means. This Hermaphrodite is the
tincture known to those that are busied in the Chymick Monarchy, by name
called the stone, its proper name is the aethereall Fire, involved infinitely
in obscure riddles.

I add this also, out of Phaedro Agrippa, the Philosophers Stone is a secret
of secrets, if you wish for happiness, that you may obtain the Philosophers
blessing; God lives for ever. There is one object in the World for all, which
properly is called of the Philosophers; in the shell stays the white, which
contains the red: The one is called the male, the other the female, an
animal, vegetable, and mineral: Its fellow is no where found, it has an
active and passive power, a dead and quick substance, a Spirit and Soul, which
ignorant men hold it a most vile thing, contains in its bosom the four
Elements, found every where, commonly had by every one, is of a small price;
one pound is sold for a shilling: It voluntarily ascends, grows black,
descends and grows white; increases and decreaseth; it is a thing which
the earth produces, and descends from Heaven; grows pale, and grows red;
it is born and dies, rises again, and lives afterward; has several ways
to go to its end: Its proper decoction goes beyond that of the fire; is slow,
modest, strong, and is augmented, and at last in a secure rest is it rubifyed.
This according to expectation, is called the Philosophers Stone. Read, and read
it again, over and over, you will find more plain no where: If you are still
dull in your understanding, then are you not fit for this Art to learn it.

How salt of Gemm, and the water of salt is prepared.
SAlt of Gemm, the purest of all, being subtly pulverised, being put into a
melting pot, and set in a wind-oven, standing in a gentle fire, let it stand on
melting for three hours, if the pot holds so long, let it cool of it self.
Pulverise this, and set it in a pot again into the Furnace; it must be
iterated five or six times, and pulverise it still. Take a quantity of the
juice of Radishes, as much as the salt weighs, put some of it in a wooden
dish grind it with a spoon; that which is dissolved of the salt; thus hot,
strain it. and so go on with the rest, and dissolve all the salt in this
juice, and strain it: Coagulate it, or distill the water from it; pulverise it
again, pour the distilled water on it; putrify it in a Balmy for six days
and nights, separate the water from it by distilling, let your first fire be
gentle, as you usually do at the distilling of Aquafort, let all distill over,
then increase the fire, to calcine for an hour.

This warm Salt must be pulverised, and grind it on a stone, let it dissolve
on a Marble. Being dissolved, set it in a Balmy to putrify for three days;
then put it in a strong body, distill it in Sand, use the degrees of fire
according to Art. The remaining body being pulverised, must be dissolved again
on a Marble, must be putrified as formerly, and distilled a third time: The
remainder must be very subtly pulverised, put in a body, pour on it the
three distilled waters, let them putrify for five days and five nights, after
this, distill it again in gross Sand; at last let all come over through the
Helmet, a Caput mort remains, which must be put away: But all the water for a
day and a night to be putrified in Sand, which is separated from the substance
of the Salt, then is to be distilled per Alembicum. This putrefying and
distilling must be iterated a third time, then you have the water of Salt. At
the putrefying and distilling, the Vessels must be well luted, that none of the
Spirits get away.

The essence of Sol.
TAke Gold purged three times by Antimonie, very tinnly laminated, or in its
place, take fine Gold, put it in a bolt-head, pour on it the spiritual water
of Salt, seal it Hermetically: Set it in digestion for four or five days,
that they join, then open it, take off the neck in part, and set an Alembick on
it, lute it well, set it so long into Ashes, apply a receiver, lute the glasses
junctures very well; distill it five or six times, and when it is cold, put the
Gold and all the matter in the body, into a jar glass; dulcifie it with
distilled raine-water from all its saltness; the Gold remains in the bottom
like a powder, for the Salt is not turned into the Golds substance. Pour
Spirit of Wine on this Alcholised Gold, not a simple Aquavitae, standing over
the Gold six fingers deep, proportionably unto the Gold. Putrify it for a
month in a Balmy, the Spirit of Wine drinks the tincture of Gold, which must
be put into another glass. For a further extraction, pour more Spirit of Wine
on it a second and third time, let all its tincture be extracted, the body of
Sol remains whitish and soule-less: At last, separate the Spirit of Wine in a
Balmy, from the form Gold, and use it according to the manner you heard of.

A praecipitate of Sol.
IF you intend to prepare the praecipitate of Sol, then the Gold being
dulcified with distilled raine-water, and dried, then proceed.

Spirit of Wine.
TO make the true Spirit of Wine. Take a quantity of the strongest Wine,
without any mixture, be it white or red, the white is better, leaving less
alcoll then the red, which runs in no other form or color then the white
does; cause it to be distilled like an Aquavitae, either in copper or glass,
distilling cool. Taste one drop or other, if it comes weak, then take off
the receiver, apply a blind Helmet to it, of a good bigness, lest the motion of
the Spirits break it if too narrow; set it on three foot, let it boil for ten
days. After you have opened, apply a head with a pipe, distill in a Balmy, and
the Spirits come over. The manual depends from these three. The glass with the
wine must not stand too deep in the water, and the ju^ctures must be well luted
to keep in the Spirits, and then the Spirit must not be mingled with the
burning Wine; which would easily happen, if the Balmy should be made too hot.
Therefore observe the signs well: When little veins or drops appear in the
Alembick, then cease, for the following is burning Wine, and the receiver must
be removed.

Salt of Wine.
PRoceed as you heard, according to the first distilling, when all the strength
of the Wine is gone, then comes the phlegm or waterish matter, let that be
evaporated in a Kettle by boiling, or if you fear the Kettle to be endangered
by the fire, put the matter into a narrower vessel, and force it, there
remains a yellow and impure substance, which must be dried, you have then a
Tartar of a black color, from which, being very subtly pulverised, and most
strongly calcined, with a cole or wood fire, you can have the salt.

Alcolised Spirit of Wine.
AND if you will have a most strong* and most fully graduated Spirit of Wine,
for the opening and attracting of bodies, and for gradation of forms, take of
the Spirit of Wine as much as you please, dissolve its salt in it, let it stand
in digestion well luted for a natural day, set it in Sand or ashes, observe
the degrees of fire, apply a large receiver, pour the spirit on the salt
again, this salt must be calcined again to a whiteness, pour Spirit of Wine
on it, and shake it, and distill it again; weigh the Salt to see whether it
lost of its ponderosity; if it be too much fixed, then putrify it in Spirit of
Wine in a Balmy; lastly, distill it so long, that all the salt be gone through
the Alembick; and thus you have a Noble alcolisated Spirit.

The essence and form of herbs.
THere is drawn from flowers and herbs a specificall true property and
color, the body not being destroyed, as Theophrastus demonstrateth in his
treatise de vita longa, and elsewhere: ^f the simples are put over night in the
said Spirit of Wine; if you you will separate, then do it in a wet Balmy, the
form like a liquor, remains in the bottom.

How the essence is drawn from herbs.
ANY herb being first beaten in a stone Mortar, together with the flowers,
leaves and roots to a pap, being well luted, must stand in digestion for a
month in horse-dung. Distill it dry in a Balmy; the remaining powder must be
grinded upon a stone, and must be imbibed with its distilled liquor, and digest
it for a fortnight. After that let it be distilled in ashes, phlegm and oil
comes over together, which must be separated asunder, and the oil must be
safely kept. The remaining feces must be very subtly pulverised, pour the
phlegm on it, digest them for ten or twelve days in horse-dung, separate the
phlegm in sand. The remaining black powder must be albifyed in a
reverberatorie, pouring on it its phlegm, and extract its salt.

Diaphoretick Gold.
Which purges the blood, and the marrow in bones and the whole body. Draw the
red color from the red Mercury, being prepared with the water of eggs by the
said Spirit of Wine, as you heard above: Put an equal quantity of the soul of
Gold, let it stand in putrefaction to be purged, then separate the liquor from
the Spirit of Wine: the dose of it is gr. iij vel iiij. to be taken in Malmsey,
for three days together fasting. Theophrastus says, that this liquor cures
the Leprosy, contractures, and purges the blood mightily. More of this I
spoke in the administration of Magna Chirurgia.

Of Mumy.
REcip. Of well cut Mumy, put it into a Retort well luted, adding thereunto a
like quantity of Sallet oil for a month. the Retort being taken out, then cut
some of the nose of it, set it in sand, lute a receiver to it, and drive the
stinking Mercury into it. Then set it in a place, where the people of the house
may not be annoyed, into a Balmy for five or six days; thus the residue of the
Mercury will vapor away, in that warm Balmy. Cant of the liquor, the part
indissolved is to be kept in the Balmy: Mix with it vi of Treacle, of the best
Mosch i. and keep it in the Balmy, or in hot ashes in a Furnace for a month.

Turbith Minerale.
I had two ways to prepare the Mineral Turbith, first if the water of eggs
from their calx be often digested and distilled, attracteth its sweet volatile
salt, and by this evasion it deserved among the ancients the name of Corrosivum
dulee, mortifieth Mercury, and rubifyeth like Corals, its digesting and
distilling being repeated: From this red Mercury can be drawn its essence by
the Spirit of Vitriol, extracting it as long as the Spirit takes any tincture
from it, which may be done at the xv or xvi iteration: The remaining Caput mort
must be put away.

The second way differs from the first. Put a strong Aquafort upon two parts of
tyle-meale, and add one part of salt, distill it; the Aquafort will be as red
as a Ruby, which must be abstracted to a third part from Mercury by a strong
fire, and the Mercury must be grinded on the Marble twelve times, and then
distilled, being distilled must be digested from its calx with water of eggs,
and being often distilled, then your Turbith Mineral is prepared.

. Of this Turbith gr. v. Mix it with one ounce of the juice of Roses, to be
taken before supper, mornings fasting gr. iiii. by night four grains are to
be taken. If it causes any spume in the mouth, and the Patient falls into
spawling, then add to it, somewhat of Vitrum of Antimony, or of its
reverberated powder; then a gentle purging it will give. After that must be
githe quantity of a Hasell nut of Theriaca Alexandrina, and make the Party
sweat. These Patients may use also the following Gargarisme.

. Half a quartern of burning Wine, of Sugar candy i. small pulverised, add
one spoonful of the best Honey, mix these and make a Gargarisme, as long as
the Turbith is used, nothing ought to be applied to the wound or ulcer, but
this following plaster, neither ought it to be used above three times the
Turbith, and its operation is to be waited for.

. Of Bdellium, of Serapium Colatum, ana i. of Frankincense, of Mumy, ana iii.
of Wax lb i. of Colophonia vi. Make these to an Oppodeldoch, according to Art,
it will purify the more, if one dram of our Turbith Mineral be mingled.

Turbith Mineral being ministered with Spirit of Tartar, provokes sweating in
the bed, and draws plisters and the like outwardly.

Alcool Vini.
ALcolisated wine, Centrated Wine, Essentificated Wine with Alcool, Alcool of
Wine, Essatum Vinum, Esse vini is as much as Essentificatum: That is, when the
essence of Wine comes over by distilling, then its phlegm remains in the
bottom like the dregs of Honey; which if they have any Empyreuma or fierinesse,
the phlegm must be poured on again, and is to be separated till the phlegm be
gone from the essence. Then pour the distilled essence of wine on the
phlegmes, and separate it by distilling, which must be iterated so often, till
the feces sticking to the bottom be white glittering, which are Theophrastus
his Alcool Vini, Sal Vini, or Vinum Alcolisatum.

Oleum Auri sive Axungia.
THeophrastus calls it Axungia, or butter of Sol, to be taken inwardly for the
Fistula or Cancer, and outwardly to be used for an ointment: Its preparation is
thus. Pour on the filings of gold, oil of Mastix, which having stood in
digestion a month in horse-dung, wash it off from the oil with warm water;
let it stand again in digestion in Spirit of Wine for ten or twelve days, the
Spirit being separated, you find an oleaginous matter in the bottom, like unto
butter. Take some drops of it at the beginning, in a vehicle.

The Spirit of Tartar for sweating.
LET the Tartar be well purged and washed in Wine, dry it and pulv^rise it, put
the glass with it into a wind-Furnace, distill per Alembic, as the oil of
Mastix is distilled, there comes over a thick matter, of color and fragrancy
like a Treacle.

The oil of Saturn and its Salt.
LEad in the first place is to be calcined, thus. Set a glased pan over the
fire, put the lead into it, calcine it, stirring it with a spatule, at first it
will look blackish, then yellow, at last it is of a red color, pour distilled
Vinegar on it, two fingers breadth standing over it. Boil it a little, when
the scum rises, then took it off the fire, and let it settle gently, and cant
off the Vinegar into another pot, from the calcined Saturn. New Vinegar must
be poured on the Lead, and this must be iterared as long as there is any
sweetness in the Lead. These being done, let the gathered matter or a cetum be
settled in the Balmy; let the Vinegar be gotten off, there remains a sweet
Purple body in the bottom. To this matter, pour the Heavenly water, and let it
boil, it will cast a white scum, which must be taken off, as long as there
arises any, cast away the remaining purple-dregs in the bottom. The off taken
scum must be put in a Balmy, either to be vapored away or distilled, it leaves
a dry and whitish body in the bottom of the glass, which must be dissolved in
some noble Aquafort, and be separated three or four times in a Balmy, where
you will behold a fair dissolution; on this matter pour again the distilled
rainwater separate the same in a Balmy, this must be iterated as long as there
is left any acrimony of the Aquafort, you will see a white transparent matter,
the true and sweet salt of Saturn, being put into a Cellar, or any wet place,
will dissolve into a water or oil, whereby outward and desperate sores or
cancrous ulcers are healed, and is an approved medicine.

Dr Daniell in his time, used only Lead dissolved in Aquafort, which he
du^cified with fountain water: An effectual remedy ad ulcera Cacoethe, linen
being dipped into, and put into the places, using only the water, not meddling
with the powder of the Lead in the bottom.

The essence of Antimony.
CRude Antimony being reduced into a most subtle Alcool, put it into a Retort,
evaporate it in the degrees of reverberation, then seal it, and let it
reverberate gently, provided it do not melt. The venemour humor and Sulphur
being evaporated, when it looks like a cinericious powder, then the middle
degree of fire is to be used for eight or ten days continually. Then use such
a degree of fire to it, that the Antimony look of a purple colored powder.
Take of this reverberated Antimony ii. as much of circulated Aquavitae, that it
stand over it six fingers. Let it be digested in a well luted circulatory for
twelve days, then at the distilling in a Balmy separate it, then the Aquavitae
will be tinged, which is the true essence of Antimony. The dead powder of it
stays in the bottom: Its dose is i. more or less.

The use of the essence or tincture of Antimony
THree grains of it taken in Wine, cures the Quartan, and all manner of
Agues. Mr Thomas has cured with it two Patients of the Dropsy, ministering two
or three drops, mornings in white Wine; it gives three or four stools,
penetrating and searching the whole body: It causes a faintness to the
Members for an hour or upward, but after that, it restores strength unto
them; if there be any tumor within, dissolveth the same by sweat and urine. It
disperseth the Hydropick humor diaphoretically. An excellent remedy for
bringing down the Courses, curing the jaundies and Cholick. He used
successfully to boys of three or four years old; also the Quartane and
Tertian Ague he prosperously cured with it. It is a rare medicine against the
Venereall disease, cured four such Patients with it. He cured a woman with it
which had the foul disease seventeen years, having had eleven such tumors in
the head, two in the arms; these were dissolved only by the oil of it. The
tincture of Antimony is used against the venereall Itch and Scabs. The Patient
ought not to come into the air, must be kept warm, and not walking abroad. He
cured the Scropula, which posssest the whole Face; thus: He purged the Party
several times with Vitrum Antimonii: after that, he caused a decoction to be
made of wine, in which was Vincetoxicum, both Centories, Sanicle, and sometimes
Pyrola: The potion being strained, he applied the roots warm in bags, and thus
did he restore that Patient.

He restored one Woman with the essence of Antimony, which was troubled with
three and twenty open fores in her Legs, as relics of the venereall disease.

Phaedro made use of Vitrum Antimonii twice on a most desperate Hectic Fever.
He that makes use of the essence or of Vitrum of Antimony, let him avoid the
air.

He cured a Ploughman with Vitrum of Antimony, which was much molested with
corrosions, expelling a great worm, 124 and little ones.

He cured another thus: He ministered unto him sixteen times of that Vitrum, who
had two hundred holes between the Knee and the Knockle, purging him first
downward, then by vomiting, taking away all the pains, only with calcined
Vitrioll, and a mundificative unguent.

This Phaedro has cured also one that was troubled with the Gout, and another
Woman, with the same Antimoniall essence, out of whose skull there grew scales.
He cured also two desperate Hectic Fevers, and some that had the Quartan
Ague. And so it cures Imposthumes, and malignant excrescencies, worms, the
Gout, venereall pains and tumors, the Hectic Fever; and the quartan.

Theophrastus his Laudanum Opianum which he made use of against all manner of
Agnes, as a Specificum.
Phaedro his is this.
REcip. Of the best Opium Thehaicum, being cut ii. of Mumy gr. iii. of the
juice of the root of Hyosciamus i. which must be gathered when Sol and Luna
enter Libra, which is eight or five days before St John's day.

Put it into a glaffe, and digest at the Sun for fourteen days, then is the
Opium prepared.

. Of Species of Diambra i ss of Wine rectified five times lb i. Let these also
be digested at the Sun for fourteen days, shaking it daily three or four
times; then pour some red clear Wine on the prepared Opium, make it to a pap,
and then digest it again for three days in the Sun, being well stopped, and
then let it be exiccated. Then make it to a more thick mass on a Marble, with
a little of the said Wine, unto which you must add of prepared red Corals, of
prepared Citrin Amber, ana i. of the best Mosch or Amber gr. iii. of Camphore
gr. vii. of oriental Saftron i. Let small Pills be made of it, minister seven
of them in ii. of Wine, to be swallowed; if the pain be vehement, minister vii
about six of the clock, about nine, five, about four of the clock, four of
them to be taken in Wine. they admirably assuage all pains, and are ministered
in all violent diseases for to preserve and to heal.

Note, Laudanum always does its work in six hours time, which makes the
Patient to sleep for an hour; if there be any further use of it, then allow to
its operation six hours.

The oil of Realgar, or of Arsenick and its use.
REcip. Of Realgar as much as you please, which is penderous and white, grind
it small on a stone, add to it purged Sal-niter, let it dissolve on coals,
the first fire must be gentle, that all venomous fumes may vapor away, and the
matter of it be burnt. Being burned thoroughly, then increase the fire for four
or five hours, let the Arsenick be like melting butter, all its venomous
quality flies away, and a fixed Realgar will be. Let it be in a Cellar on a
Marble, distilling into a receiver, which is the fixed oil of Arsenic. Of this
Theophrastus made use of very much, it may be better rectified, as the oil of
Sol, if made in a Retort, being poured on hot or heated Tiles. Outwardly Ulcers
are anointed with all, and new Pocky sores, twice or thrice at the most: it
makes them run as long as there is any cause for it; which cause being consumed,
the ulcer gets an Eschara, which must be anointed with the following butter of
Sol, falls off, not leaving any mark or red spot. If any such sore is to be
anointed with this oil, then the next place or skin to it is to be anointed
also.

The Butter of Sol ad AEscharum.
REcip. Of fresh May butter, as much as you please, pour it boiling into water
of Bean flowers, or the decoction of Lupini, Solomon's seal. Quench it thus a
third time, it will be very white and fair: Use it as you heard.

Aquila praecipitata.
1. The purgation of Vitriol.
REcip. Of the best blew Hungarian Vitriol sixteen lb. put it into a glazed
pot, pour on it clear Fountain or distilled raine-water, boil away a third
part of it, filter or strain it into a jar-glasse, set this strained liquor
into a moist sand to crystallizing, pour the water on again, let it boil as
formerly, iterate it so long as any Christals will shoot, then all its venomous
quality is gone. In like manner let the pulverised Salt-Niter be dissolved, and
be purged, as you heard about the Vitriol.

2. Purgation of Sal Armonicke.
REcip. Of Sal Ammonick, of calcined Tartar, ana lb i. sublime these twice or
thrice in ashes.

Aquafort.
REcip. Of the above prepared Vitriol, and rubified lb ii. of the above said
prepared Niter, and well exiccated at the Sun lb i. mix these being pulverised,
distill gently at first, then increase your fire, let all the Spirits come over.

3. To purge this Aquafort.
REcip. Of this Aquafort ii or ii ss dissolve it in the thinnest Lamins of fine
Lune ii. which being disolved, put it altogether into a glass; the feces of it
being settled, cant off the water, let none of the matter come after. Thus is
the Aquafort purged. Of this Aquafort lb i. in which dissolve one grain of the
salt Ammonick, prepared before, distill it gently in a Balmy, then you have the
prepared Arcanum Regis, or T R.

4. Purgation of Mercury.
Pour hot water on calx vive, shake it, cool and settle, filtrate the water,
and distill it hot into Flint-ashes, which if this be settled, then filter it.
In this lie made of Calx vive, and ashes of Flints, Mercury must be boiled a
sixth or seventh time, and that which boyleth away, must be applied with fresh
Lixivium. In like manner let Mercury be boiled a fourth time in salt and
distilled Vinegar, so that the salt be covered with blackness, and the Vinegar
being evaporated, fresh Vinegar to be poured on: At last let it be washed a
third time with hot water, and dried, then it is fit for subliming,
praecipitating, and for other businesses.

5. Purgation of Antimony.
REcip. Of powder of Antimony, of purged Sal-Niter, of Calcined Tartar ana lb
ss. Melt it; thus melted, cast it into horn, which being cold, take off the
Regulus, it breaks freely.

1.. Of Regulus of Antimony i. grind it small, imbibe in a jar-glasse six times
with Aqua Regis, dissolve it in it, reserve that which is dissolved in hot
ashes.

2.. Of the best Gold, laminated very thinly ss. dissolve it apart in a
jar-glasse in i. of Aqua Regis. Let it stand.

3.. Of purged Mercury iii. dissolve it in a well luted glass body upon warm
ashes, pouring on it one pound of Aqua Regis. Put these three dissolutions into
a well luted cucurbit, still it a sixth or seventh time in hot sand per
Alembicum; that which is distilled must always be put on again. At last
increase the fire, and let all come over. Then take out the remaining matter,
and reduce it to an Alcohol on a stone, and reverberate it under a muffle, rule
it with a gentle fire; the Mercury will look black, and then of several
colors. Continue the reverberation, and rubifye it, and let all the spirit of
Aqua Regis be gone. Then wash it with warm water, to take off all its saltness.
Pulverise this Mercury well, pour on it of the best rectified spirit of Wine,
let it stand over it three fingers; Standing in a warm place for three days,
and shake three times a day, then separate it.

At last pour on the pulverised Mercury of the best distilled Rose Water,
aromatized with Mosch, let it stand also in a warm place for three days,
shaking it thrice a day, separate gently unto a dryness, it will be a concin
praecipitated Aquila, alias, a purging mercurial essence.

R^beds of Antimony.
FIrst, let the Tartar be well calcined, to acquire to it an acrimony; then let
it be dissolved in warm water. Pour out the water, the earth will settle to
the bottom: If any acrimony should yet be in the Tartar, then pour water on
again, which being separated must be put to the other; which must be continued
as long as there is any acrimony in it: Put away the dead earth. These gathered
waters must be boiled away, there remains a sharp and fiery salt in the
bottom.

. Of this salt iii. boil it in a pint of water, put to it of crude Antimony
ss. boil it well in a pann, as hard eggs are boiled, and the water be clear: If
the matter congealeth, looking like a red gelly; put to it a sufficient
quantity of distilled Vinegar, separate the Tartar and all malignity of
Antimony from the redness, and dissolve it. That redness of Antimony setleth to
the bottom, Filter it is paper, the redness of Antimony abides about the Paper.
Dulcifie this redness by pouring on warm water, and take off all superfluous
impurities, let it settle, the redness being on the bottom, separate the
water. Then exiccate on quick coals: its dose is half a grain.

Of the oil of wax, which is like a Balsame in curing of wounds.
REcip. Of new oderiferous wax lb ii. melt it in a pan gently, then put it into
another vessel filled with the best wine, and very hot, let it be cold, gather
it with your hand, and press it hard, melt it again; and thus hot pour it in
Wine, and thus do seven times. The last time being melted, add of tile-meal M.
iii. Mingle it well being cooled, put it in body with an Alembick, lute it
well, that nothing may expire. The lute being dried, set it in a sand capel,
make a gentle fire under it for nine or ten hours. At first there comes over a
phlegmatic water of a citrin color, when it has done distilling, remove the
receiver, keep the Citrin-water safe in a glass: Then apply another receiver to
the Alembick, and increase the fire by degrees: At first the drops fall muddy,
which being settled in the receiver, congeale like butter, or a gelly. At last
the following drops look of gold color, which congeale not, but keep in a
liquid substance. At the sight hereof change your receiver, that these golden
drops be not mingled with the other, and must be received apart. And this is
the true oil of wax, which keeps liquid for ay. Continue your distilling with
the fire increased, which forcing fire must be kept for eighteen hours. At
last more muddy drops will fall, which when you see it, then change your
recever presently to receive the feces, which are liquid also.

A dissolved Unicerne.
TAke prepared Pearls, pour on them Vinegar, seven times distilled our way,
and dissolve in hot ashes. Abstract afterward the Vinegar in a Balmy, and if
but few Pearls, put them in a jar-glass, and evaporate in warm ashes,
afterward p^ure on raine-water once distilled, and evaporate, continue it, till
the water and sour taste be gone. At last, dissolve this powder of Pearls with
rectifyed Spirit of Wine, and make use of it.

Acetum Philosophorum.
REcip, lb viii. of the best Vinegar, distill lb iiii of it per Alembick; add
to these quart i. of purifyed Salniter, let the Salniter be well dissolved in
it, then distill in Sand strongly, that the Spirit may ascend and mix with the
Acetum. Take of this Acetum as much as you will, add Bugloss to it, called
otherwise the herb of Paris P v. put it in a violl, add to it well washed
Mercury P i. set it in digestion for xvi days or more, you shall see the effect.
This Acetum dissolveth ^l.

Narcotick and diaphoretick Antimony.
REcip. Of Antimony lb i. as much of purged Sal-Peter, calcine it circularly in
a high pot, increasing the fire by degrees for three of four hours; then
calcine again with Salniter, for some hours give a very strong fire, that the
pot be red hot. Take out the Antimony, beat it, dissolve it in water, if any of
the salt be left, filter and keep it back, and wash it. Dry the remainder, and
reverberate for some four hours, then you have a very white powder: Its dose
is from gr. ii. to vii or ix. exceeding effectual in Tertian and Quartan Agues.

Tartar.
THE liquor of Tartar and its Succus is thus separated: The Tartar is washed
several times in common warm water, leaving no impure dregs in it, at last it
must be washed in warm Wine; it must be dried at the Sun, and reduced to a
powder, put it in a glass, lute it and distill in open fire; the junctures of
the glasses must be well guarded, and the receiver must be very large. The
first liquor that comes, is stinking, which is rectified in a cellar in wet
sand, and the succus is rectified with distilled Vinegar in a retort in open
fire. Then draw it with the the Acetum, the drops come either red or citrin,
according as the Tartar was, which in a funible must be separated, and thus the
Acetum receives the Empyreuma into the oil, and the oil succeeds in a
golden color without any stink. Use:

. Of this Preparatum i of the voluble oil of Vitriol iii. of aromatized
Aquavitae, v.

These, being mixed, are circulated for a month; it is given in Wine. i. or
more, according to the persons condition.

Tartar cures the Lues Venerea, the obstructions in guts, the rising of the
mother by sweating, and all other evils.

Liquor of Tartar.
BEing given daily three times, is very good in the Palsy, it penetrateth the
whole body, strengthens the same, which ought to be in this disease. It
cures all manner of Jaundice, joined with the venereall disease. It rectifyeth
monthly courses; resists Leprosy at the beginning of it. Being taken with
oil of Mercury cures the Dropsy by Urine.

Oil of Dwarf Elder.
REcip. Seeds of Ebulus well cleansed lb iii or iiii, beat them well in a
Mortar, bring all into a paste, put it into a Kettle, add a sufficient
quantity of River water to it, let it stand infused for 24 hours, then boil
it, let your first fire be gentle, and increase the fire by degrees, continue
the boiling of it, that all the scum be gone: This scum must be gathered with a
skimmer, and all the oil swimming on it: All this you put into a long glass,
let it settle, thus warm for two or three days, there appears a green
transparent oil, unctuous, settled to the bottom under that scum, and if the
oil do not separate well from the scum, then take it together, mingle it in
warm water, let it boil a little; afterward put it in a glass, within few
days the oil will settle, take off the scumm warily, and gather the settled
green oil, and set the scum apart, let it yield the oil it has among it. Use
of this oil a little quantity against all manner of pains caused by a cold
distemper, in nervous symptoms and Arthritick pains. The manner of its use
is: Take six or seven drops of this oil, apply it warmed to the place
affected, then presently the sharp pains will be allaied.

The judgment and expeperience of Doctor GEORGE PHAEDRO of Rodoch, in some
Chymicall Medicaments.
In the Herculean disease or Epilepsie.
I used against this disease the sweet oil of Vitriol, per se without any
other addition, very successefully. For the Dropsy I used the rectifyed
essence of Hellebore.

Against Consumption, a dissolutum of Pearls of the Indian oysters.

Against the Stone I used the atereall juice of Crystals.

Against barrenness, the red extract of Satyrium of Erithonzum.

Against the venereall disease, the sweet oil of Mercury. Against the Gout,
Phaedro did use that excellent and noble Corallois, that is, the Chymicall
Hermaphrodite, and took it three times inwardly, and caused himself to be
anointed with the rectifyed Spirit of Tartar, and made it penetrate: In a
fortnights space he was healed. He was then also troubled with a great swelling
in his legs, accompianed with a fervent redness. Against Cancer he used butter
of Saturn, Against the Cramp and great Convulsions. He cured one, who was
tormented with a running pain of his members, with a purple colored tumor
joined, running from one place into another, he used no other medicament, then
twice the sanguin essence of Antimony. The Patient was recovered the fifth day.

In contractures and Consumption.
FOR the expelling of these diseases he ministered the sweet dissolution of
Microcosme, ministering it inwardly ten times, outwardly he anointed the party
with Badgers grease, mixed with the Philosophers oil. These parties were cured
within three weeks.

Against the Imposthume in the head.
IN this occult disease, which puts the Physician to great troubles, he gave to
take of Ophirizum, which being taken, a Histericall obstruction was opened, and
the Imposthume of the head broken; the patient was healed in a months time.

Against the Venereall disease and Pox.
ONE was molested with such a Pockiness, whose teeth were loose, and troubled
with great pains in the joints, the joints began to look black, full of scabs
and contractures. He cured the party with the oil of Mercury, mixed with man's
grease, and the oil of Arceutides, with this every other day he anointed
these Knots; and he anointed or rubbed the teeth with the aromatized Oleum
Moschocarium or of Mules. in fourteen days the party was recovered unto health.

Against the Dropsy.
When I intended to cure this disease with Catarcticum Mercuriale, and to
strengthen the Patient, I restored the Patient very well with distilled water
of Cinamom, which came over in xxiv hours time, or the Diacubebe of Seplasii,
which was ministered in Rhois of the most virtuous and much praised essence of
Gold in Wine of Pomegranates.

Against the gripings and torments in the belly.
HE used the anodin Sulphur, of the Vitrioll of Venus and Mars, reduced unto a
more sublime degree.

Against the Jaundies.
IN this disease my Panchimagogum is of great efficacy, the extract of Rhubath,
the Spirit of Tartar: The Stigian liquor: All which are singular mysteries for
this disease.

Against Ulcers and open sores.
THE sweet oil of Saturn, with Caphuncleum.

Against excrescencies of the body.
AGainst the great scales and excrescencies of the body, which attract to them
almost all the alimentary, substance, whereby the body comes into decay, he
used the ointment o^ilum of A^an^um Asbestinum, or ^chois, joining thereto
Chalcanthum, anointed, and tied to the places.

FINIS.

