THE TEMPESTUOUS SOUL CALMED BY Jesus Christ; BEING An Extract of several
SERMONS, PREACHED By ANTHONY PALMER, Pastor of the Church at Bourton on the
Water in Gloucester-shire.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for E. Brewster and G. Sawbridge, and are to be sold
at the Sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill. MDCLIIII

To my dear Father, Brothers, and Sisters, and others of my Beloved Kindred and
Friends, etc.
IF I know my own heart, there were two Reasons prevailed with me for sending
forth this Treatise into the light; First, to witness what the Lord (to the
praise of his abundant grace) has done for my own poor soul. Secondly, As
drawn forth by tender affections and yerning bowels, I desire more and more to
put on for your immortal souls, which my hearts desire is should be as dear
and precious to me as my own, yea, that my heart might be enflamed with that
zeal of holy Paul, Romans 11.14. If by any means I may provoke to emulation them
which are of my flesh, and might save some of them. In this brief Treatise
(though chiefly pointing at the comforting a disquieted spirit) yet there is
laid down in the former part of it what may suit with your several conditions,
and so to set up a rest less enquiry in your spirits after the Lord Jesus,
till he shall fill your souls with this blessed calm of his own presence here
shadowed forth unto you: If it should be objected by any other, that I might
have directed you to other Books before extant (of which blessed be God there is
abundant choice;) I answer, and I verily believe will you with me, that the
room I have in your affections will render something from my self (though far
short of the excellencies of other Pieces) more grateful to you, and that you
will be the more inclined to read it; Upon which account I send it to you,
with my breathings to heaven for the blessing of the Spirit of grace to be with
it; and all others to whose hands it shall come, craving a candid
interpretation with them: I Rest,

Yours, most affectionately in Christ Jesus, A. P.
Bourton on the Water, Sept. 21. 1652.
July 12. 1653.
Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryl.

The Tempestuous Soul Calmed by Jesus Christ.
MAT. 8.23,24,25,26,27. And when he was entered into a Ship, his Disciples
followed him.

And behold, there arose a great tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the Ship was
covered with the waves: but he was asleep.

And his Disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord save us, we perish.

And he says unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he
arose and rebuked the winds and the Sea, and there was a great calm.

But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this that even the winds
and the Sea obey him?


THe Words contain an entire work and miracle of the Lord Christ, so that we
need not look for coherence; They are usually held forth by Divines to set
forth the presence of the Lord Jesus with his Church in all the tempests that
come upon it; which, if I conceive, may without wresting be also used to
discover the presence of Christ calming a particular soul in all the tempests
that befall it; At least, by way of Allegory it will hold; as Austin says
there is such a spiritual use to be made of every miracle of the Lord Christ's.

And in this sense I shall make use of them, and so unfold them into these six
Ohservations. 1. When Jesus Christ draws in a Soul to himself, he usually
raises a tempest in that soul. There arose a tempest, etc. 2. The Soul when
thus in a tempest, it comes in a perishing condition to Jesus Christ. Lord save
us, we perish. etc. 3. Jesus Christ seems for a time to take no notice of a
soul in such a tempest and perishing condition. He was asleep, etc. 4. True
faith may be mixed with much weakness and fear, and yet may engage the heart of
Christ to succor; Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith. 5. A word from
Christ can rebuke that tempest upon a Soul. He rebuked the winds, etc. 6. The
Soul that is thus calmed is filled with the wonders of Christ's power and love;
They marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this that the winds and Sea obey
him?


These I shall open in their order.

When Christ draws in a Soul to himself he usually raises a tempest in that
soul.

The word for a tempest in the Original is (...), which properly signifies an
Earthquake which causes a shaking of che Earth; The same word is used by the
Septuagint in Ezekiel frequently to signify a rushing wind, a noise, a
shaking: Now then this does very well fit our purpose to discover this tempest
upon a poor soul as drawing in to Christ, which is a kind of earthquake, a
shaking of an earthy heart (whose principles and aims were earthly) as promised
by the Lord Christ, Isa. 11.4. And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his
mouth, when he comes in with a rushing, and a noise, like the voice in Ezekiels
Vision, Cap. 3.22. when the awakenings and enlightenings of the Word and voice
of God fall in (shaking the spirit of a dead sinner) like the noise of many
waters, Rev. 11.15, Thus when the fear of a miscarrying soul lays hold upon
it, such a kind of shaking and tempest is upon it. Now the Lord orders it to
be thus with a Soul for these Reasons.

1. God causes a glimpse of his holiness to pass by a Soul, that the
Creature by such a reflection from God, may see in some measure what sin has
done upon him, at what an infinite distance it has set him at with the most
holy God, how unlike unto him sin has made him; That he may in some measure
see and feel what he is, when the great and righteous God takes him in hand,
which makes him ready to cry out with Peter at the appearance of Christ to him,
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Luke 5.8. And as Moses in his
self-abasement, when God appeared to him, Exodus 3.6. Moses hid his face for he
was afraid to look upon God: And ver. 11. Who am I that thou should send me?
A glimpse of God causes such an abasement upon a soul, and even a shaking to
be upon it, That the creature may magnify the greatness and purity of God, and
be vile in its own eyes before him: This is the first Reason of it.

2. He raises such a tempest and shaking upon a sinful worm, To cause him in
part to taste what a bitter cup it was, he could so delightfully and boldly
quasse of, yea, to have a taste of that bitter cup that Jesus Christ drank brim
full of his fathers wrath, that if one dram of it be so unsupportable to a
soul, what were the full vials of it that were poured forth upon the sinless
soul and body of Christ? that thence when we come to see him we may be pierced
and be in bitterness for him.

Yea 3. That a Soul may truly and in earnest feel and discern its need of such
a Jesus to bear and deliver from that wrath; When such a glimpse of God upon
it, such a shaking, such an abasement in its own vileness, such a tasting of
wrath, then a Christ to quiet and calm a desolate soul is worth looking after
indeed.

But it will presently be enquired whether every Soul is brought into Christ
this way?

I will first open the height of this tempest upon a Soul, and then I will
satisfy this Query. It is thus, When God musters up our sins, and sets them in
order before our eyes, Psalm. 50.21. When he will make sin appear exceeding
sinful to be abounding sin; When God writes bitter things against a Soul, and
makes it to possess the iniquity of its youth; I need seek no further then the
38. Psalm, for this tempest, and the 88. In both of them you have a description
of this tempest upon a poor creature; Thine arrows stick fast in me, There is
no rest in my bones because of my sin; Mine iniquities are gone over my head,
and are a burden too heavy for me to bear; Troubled, and bowed down, and go
mourning all the day, filled with his terrors, as Heman: To this (as it may be
conceived to have been the case with David and Heman, in both these Psalms) is
usually added some sharp affliction, either of sickness, or of the imbittering
some choice creature-comfort our spirits were inordinately let out unto, which
causes this shaking and tempest to be the more grievous, that we become (as
David speaks) even as broken vessels under the mighty hand of God.

This also, by the sufferance of God, is often heightened by Satan's violent
assaults, black and horrible suggestions, blasphemous accusations, representing
sin as unpardonable, joins with an accusing conscience and all our fleshly
reasonings, that God is in a way of destroying and beginning of wrath here, and
therefore is apt to suggest self-destruction, so crossing Gods design,
persuading the Soul to fly from God as an Enemy, when Gods main design is mercy
to turn it to him.

Now then, take all these, the appearing of a great and holy and terrible God,
shaking a poor earthly creature, the powerful awakenings and enlightenings of
his Word, a sense of his fierce wrath, the dread of a miscarrying soul, the
burden of sin, the accusations of conscience, the afflicting hand of God, the
desperate assaults of Satan, these like several winds make a tempest in the
whole man, and make it to cry out, Thy waves, O Lord, and thy billows go over
my soul, who is able to abide thine appearance? These, like several winds
meeting in a cranny of the earth, make a concussion and mighty shaking upon the
spirit of a sinner, when the Lord thus takes him in hand.

Now to answer the question, whether every Soul be brought in to Christ such a
way in the height of this tempest?

This is more then I dare assert, yet that many a poor Soul comes thus
shipwracht Christ, thus tempestuous and forlorn, I know I need not insist to
prove; This I may call the storming of a Soul, when Christ takes a Soul by his
great power, suddenly breaks down all the strong holds and high things, 2 Cor.
10.5. This is usually the way of an open sinner, though not in the same height,
neither in every open sinner at his first conversion; But then sometimes Jesus
Christ takes a Soul, as I may so speak, upon easier terms, brings it in, leni
afflatu, with a more gentle gale, yet so, that in the progress of it there
will be some shakings, something of this tempest upon it, though the Soul has
a glimpse of Christ, and his hand more sensibly supporting it; which I clear
thus.

First, If the seed of grace be sown early in the heart (as sometimes it is)
that some Souls cannot remember the first work of it, yet if the Soul grow up
to any measure of experience, it must be more shaken in order to its further
subduing and purifying; It will meet with some kind of tempests ordinarily, I
never spoke with any as to this Point, but more or less did allow of it: But
when the work of God is begun at some further ripeness of years, then
certainly it shall meet with what I have set forth in some measure; Consider,
for a Soul to be awakened out of the deep sleep of carnal security, which sin
has bound him in, To have Satan the strong man dispossessed by a stronger then
he, To have the guilt and filth of sin discovered by the holy Spirit, To have
Christ destroy the works of Satan, the power and peace of corruptions that will
set against him, with all the reasonings of flesh and blood mustered up, To
have, in a word, the secure, dead, earthy, dark, hard, proud, atheistical,
unbeleeving heart of an obstinate wretch, of death to become life, of
darkness, light; of a stone, flesh; To have a grain of faith, break through
all natural impossibilities, spiritual wickednesses, all discouragements
within and without, when nothing within us to help forward believing, but every
thing against us (as I shall further show:) Though all these be not enough to
hinder the Lord Jesus, when he by his strong arm will work, Isa. 43.13. I will
work, and who shall let it? yet certainly this work is not wrought forth in a
dream (as we use to speak of things insensibly done) not without some shaking
and concussion upon the spirit, something of this tempest upon it, partly in
the beginning, and partly in the progress of conversion; Fides non fit sine
multo motu, says Melancthon, faith is not wrought forth without much motion in
the Soul; Yea, I might here show into how many tempests from without and
within, many a poor Soul (specially such whom God will most humble and fit for
some special service) falls into, how many overwhelmings of spirit and gusts of
temptations it is frequently shaken with, but I intend to keep my self chiefly
to the discovery of the souls first approach to Christ.

It may yet be further enquired, What is the lowest measure of such conviction,
in the bringing in of a Soul to Christ? In this there have been extremes,
sometimes, I presume, gracious men giving forth the tenor of their own
conversion as a general rule to all others; But in this case I may safely
assert, that the first work of the Spirit is to convince of sin, Joh. 16.7. And
that such a convincement that shall give a creature such a sight of sin, that
it must appear exceeding sinful, to be abounding sin, Romans 5.18. to be
tyrannizing fin, filthy sin, condemning sin, which must not only flote in
the head, but convince the conscience, and affect the heart, that it must needs
humble and abase a creature as he goes out of himself and rowls upon Jesus
Christ; yea, he shall come in a perishing condition, as I am to show in the
next Point; To deny such preparations and qualifications (not such I mean as of
our selves but from the spirit) is to reason against the method of the Spirit
witnessed by Scripture and experience; If the spirit of a sinner be naturally
bound up in blindness, hardness of heart, insensiblenesse, security, peace,
then it will not make out for salvation by Christ, till the Spirit of God comes
upon that blindness, etc. and so causes the Soul to discern its own
condition; and this, as the rebellions of our hearts begin to be subdued by
that spirit, causes a mutiny, distemper, some kind of tempest in the whole
inward man, till the Spirit draws virtue from Jesus Christ more and more to
work some measure of serenity and composure upon it, as we are to show in the
close.

3. Say some, This is a way to bring a Soul into bondage and tormenting fear,
No such matter, It Is the way to bring him out of it: in order to the delivery
from bondage, that bondage must be first discovered to and owned by the
captive, which naturally he feels not, as above; To show the captive his
bondage, in order to his suing for deliverance, is the way for liberty, this
clear Romans 8.17. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but
ye have received the spirit of Adoption, implying, ye are not now under the
Law, and so in bondage again, as once you were, intimating they were so, and
felt themselves to be so, and that the Spirit did reveal it, and so brought
them out of it, and wrought forth and witnessed Christ to them, whereby they
cried Abba, Father,

4. How long is a Soul to lie in his bondage humbling himself? Till he cast up
an eye to Jesus Christ to seek liberty in in him; Certainly, though a Soul is
to renew his humblings under his bondage, ye not so to lie under it, but
presently to make in to Jesus Christ to be freed from the guilt, condemnation,
bondage, service of sin, pleading his own gracious pdrposes to him, as
expressed, 1. Joh. 3.8. 'twas his purpose to destroy the works of the devil,
as I will pursue in the third point.

And thus briefly I have opened what I here mean by this tempest in a poor
soul, seeking Christ, and life, and peace in him, the way, and lowest measure
of it.

If Jesus Christ by his Word and Spirit does thus awaken, enlighten, convince,
raise some kind of tempest in a poor soul, before it truly seeks out for life
and peace in him; Let me in the first place speak to the secure peaceful soul
that persuades it self it has hope enough for heaven, good interest enough in
Jesus Christ, and yet is not acquainted in any measure with such workings of
the spirit as this coming in with an awakning voice upon the natural
blindness and security, and bondage thou art bound up in. Let me tell thee,
Soul, Better were the fiercest tempest upon thy spirit then such a calm: It Is
sitting with folded arms under the shadow of death; It Is sin in its power,
bondage, peace upon thy spirit, the strong man Satan keeping peace, that thou
may sleep the sleep of Death.

But you will say, What, will you disturb the peace of my conscience that I
have enjoyed all the days of my life?

Ah Soul, miserable peace, miserable calm, none of Christ's making; Spare me a
little, let me then freely bespeak thee; Awake thou that sleep and arise
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians. 5 Oh, awake from thy
deadly calm and peace; Hear the voice of the Son of God and live, Joh. 5.
Sinner, drowsy, careless, heartlesse sinner, that have been all thy life time
subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15. Hearken, consider, arise, thy security, safety,
and peace, is the death of sin upon thy soul: a captive in a dungeon of
darkness, and with fetters about thee, and see it not! this is thy temper,
thou have been at ease from thy youth and settled on thy lees, Jerem. 48.11.
Thou have heard the first work of the spirit is to awake to Christ and Heaven,
to hear the voice of God in thy Soul, rushing in upon thy sinful peace: So
Adam Genesis 3. when after his sin he had thought to lie hid from God in peace
covered with his fig leaves, he heard the voice of the Lord God in the Garden,
and then they were afraid, and further saw their own nakedness; What voices of
God were they? Adam, where art thou? Have thou eaten of the Tree I commanded
thee not to eat of? To the Woman, What is this thou have done? v. 8, 9, 10.
etc. So the Lord speaks to a soul at first, sometimes in an Ordinance,
sometimes in a sudden voice out of it. Soul, where art thou? what is thy state
and condition as to eternity? what provision for heaven, if thy soul should be
now taken from thee? What is this thou have done so presumptuously and
peaceably to sin against thy God? to side with the devil and the world
against the peace of thy own soul? What is this thou have done to neglect the
care of a desolate soul? what will it profit thee to gain the whole world and
lose thy own soul, and to be a castaway? a castaway from the holy, blessed,
eternal rest of God into the company of devils in endless unredeemable
torment: What Soul, what means thy eager pursuit of vanity, and so heartlesse
to the things of heaven and eternity? With some such voices God speaks, and
then the soul is made awake for heaven, and then it cries after God,
confesses, humbles, bemoaneth, charge it self, then the Lord directs that
soul to means ordinarily, whereby he will do it good, and reveal the way of
life in Christ unto it, to destroy the power of sin in it, and then though
after backslidings and much unsetlednesse, and wavering, many reasonings and
temptations, as showed, the soul settles in some good measure in the tastings of
the power and love of Christ in it, as I shall further show; Oh that such a
voice or any of these might secretly glide in the soul of any poor creature
that has hitherto withstood it, and might cause the deep thoughts of eternity
to seize upon thee: Let me reason with thee, as in the counsel of God, to raise
a tempest in stead of that peace, fear it not, for I will show thee a Christ to
calm all, to destroy sin, to set at liberty, to fill thy soul with joy and
peace that shall never be taken away, never fear to pass through such a
tempest, better go to harbor in a storm, then perish becalmed in the sands.
Why then, in thy most serious and retired thoughts be putting such Questions as
I have mentioned to thy self, if thou art moved and excited by these, and such
like: then this is the voice of God in them, if all that is within thee is
stirred up to seek after Christ and our interest in him.

First, Then Consider with thy self what it is thy heart most earnestly
pursues, (if thou have not truly found and sought Jesus Christ, and life in
him;) it is certainly to compass some such worldly design which may render thee
esteemed in the world without dependence on other men, estimation with men,
riches, pleasures, to make up (as thou think) a full contentment, these are
the goodly pearls in the eyes of a natural man, consider then how empty and
disquieted thy spirit is left after such a pursuit made good, and presently the
thoughts of some new one, or else thy spirit will languish in the former, and
grow weary of it.

Secondly, Consider the miserable uncertainty of all outward enjoyments, how
liable to spoil, lose, decay, Pro. 23. they taken from thee, or thou from them
in a moment: Much might be said to this.

Thirdly, When thou have compassed all thy designs, so much earth thou can
call thy own; thou must at last be content with just so much as will cover thy
carcass, a feast for worms. Now compare this with the salvation of a soul.

First, What it is that is to be saved, A Soul, a precious darling Soul, a Soul
worth more then the whole world, Luke 9.25. Consider what a value God puts upon
Souls, the whole could not be a ransom for one Soul; had the whole Creation
been in man's power, and he had offered it to God for the sin of his soul, it
had not been a valuable price; No, the blood of the Son of God was the high
price of Souls; Ah consider the preciousnesse of a Soul, and it will awake thee.

Secondly, Compare this with what the Soul is doing till it is ensafed in
Christ, it is treasuring up wrath till the day of wrath, and the revelation of
the righteous judgment of God, as if not wrath enough in hell already, it is
treasuring up more; that wrath that made the holy Son of God cry out as 'twas
poured upon him; the everlasting weight of wrath of the just avenging God; all
the judgments that ever thou heardst or readst of, are but as mercy to this;
Now consider with deep thoughts of heart, if all thy pursuits of outward
enjoyments here, will poize salvation from such, such wrath.

Thirdly, Compare it, with what the full enjoyment of salvation is: and here we
are swallowed up, the holy, blessed, full, eternal rest of God, with a weight
of glory, crowns of glory, transformed to be made capable of enjoying it, where
we shall never be tempted to sin, nor sin any more: Oh to be in the bosom of
Jesus Christ, filled with the fulness of love, continually satisfied, and yet
never nauseated, pleasures, peace, rest, joy, glory, God hlmseif, whose
presence thou shall as fully enjoy as a glorified creature can possibly be able!

Now then I say, consider, if the salvation of such a precious Soul from such
unsupportable wrath to such a fulness of glory with the infinite God, be
worth hazarding for disquieting earthly accomodations, enjoyments, to cause
thee so securely to neglect such salvation, Heb. 2.3. where mark, it is not
said, the open scorning the means of such salvation; but the neglecting of it.

Yet a little further, Consider 3. things as to this condition here below, that
thou may not think thy good is all in expectation.

1. That the least of Jesus Christ is better then all the world, should thou
only suffer with Christ here, more glory in it then in all the world; The
Spirit of God and of glory rests upon thee, 1 Peter 4.14. The reproach of
Christ is better then the pleasures of Pharaohs house, Heb. 11. how better that
sweet and heavenly fellowship with him, thou may here attain unto, that thou
may be able to say, Thou had rather have one hour with Jesus Christ, then
all the treasures of the world for ever; Ah, had thou one taste of his love,
how would thou thirst after him, though this be as a riddle to a dark
carnal heart that knows and savors him not.

2. Consider, That all these restless desires, affections, and windings of thy
heart, shall. be raised and refined, and meet with that abundant satisfaction
in Jesus Christ, far above what thou can propose to thy self in the pursuits
of things here below, solid and durable soulcontentment, Prove. 8.18. though
with some disturbances by reason of distempers from sinful flesh, yet it is
here, The more of Christ, the more composure of spirit, sweetness, rest; which
is not so in the more gain of earthly advantages, these do only widen and
enlarge, but not satisfy desires.

3. Consider, that with Jesus Christ thou have the promise of all other things
best for thee, Romans 8. what would thou have more, unless thou would be
thy own carver in the world, and not take in the wisdom of God to dispose them
to thee? Say, Men of the world, they would make as sure provision as they may
for themselves and families, and so contrive, design, eat the bread of
carefullnesse; but let thy purchase, gain, and interest thou aimest at, be thy
part in Jesus Christ, Count but all things loss to win Christ, and then thou
gainest right to all things, and so if thou want any outward mercy, it is not
because God thinks it too good for thee, but not so fit for thee; God sees
that mercy would happily lessen thee in the sweeter closer enjoyments of Jesus
Christ; why then, consider, if that be the reason why the Lord withholds such
and such things from thee thou will consider now I have more of Jesus Christ
for it, and so no looser by the hand, no need of repining of spirit in me, but
to want them cheerfully and gladly; yea, this will be thy blessedness, that
whereas now thou can not miss such or such things, but thy heart sinks
within thee, then thou will know how to answer all thy cares of spirit, and see
the wise hand of God ordering all for thy good; So that here is the way to
provide all, to unsafe all, to sweeten all, to have part in Jesus Christ, to be
earnest in the pursuit of him, till he will say unto thy soul, I am thine, and
a Covenant passed between thee and him, and he is fairer then the children of
men, and all beauty and goodness in him, then, whereas others, have mere
creatures, thou have the love and goodness of God in them, thou have the not by
common providence, but by a covenant of love, by Jesus Christ, by promise, the
least mercy is sweet unto thee, for the kindness of God is in it.

Take then these three together, the least of Christ better then all the world,
all enjoyments which are promised in the creatures eminently in him, with him
the promise of all other things; What can thy spirit be opened to more? O
wretched principle of Atheism and unbelief! what has sin and devils done
upon a poor worm, that he should in the darkness, deadness, emptiness,
disquietness of the creatures be seeking light, life, fullness, contentment,
which they are not able in the least measure to give, and one drop of Jesus
Christ and Grace brings them all as fountain'd up in him.

One word more, and (I trust) thou shall say thou art inexcusable, O man! Romans
2.1.

If these things be so, and there it thus but one choice in the world that can
quiet the restless spirit of man, the chosen one of God, in whom his soul
delights for ever, why do we lie doting and puzling our selves in darkness,
and disquieting our selves in vain, why do we not break off these Idols from
our hearts, and call them in, and set them to Jesus Christ? Oh let my soul
choose him, let him be the dear, dear choice of my soul, give me him or I die!

2. If he be the chosen of God, the delight of his soul, Isa. 41.1. the heart
of the infinite incomprehensible God can be delighted, satisfied, filled, from
and to all eternity, with and by him, well-pleased and never weary of him;
Shall not the finite spirit of a poor creature be overcome with the ocean of
his goodness that is in him? shall it be afraid and stand reasoning, whether
it shall have earth or him? Oh the folly of the sons and daughters of men, to
hear of such a prize, such an Indies of all sweetness and treasure, and but a
short time to venture for him; (loose him now, and give a thousand worlds for
him hereafter, and now gaining a look from him) (though now his bowels more
yearn, and his heart beats and pants after souls with more fervency then all
the creatures desires can make in one) yet that wretched creatures enslaved to
a cursed peace, kept by Satan, idolizing empty nothings, fullfilling lusts that
restlesly hurry them up and down, should have lower, baser thoughts of Christ
then of the basest thing they enjoy; for they will not miss one of them to
gain him; the poorest meanest thing they enjoy has more of their heart, more
care and thoughts of their spirits toward it, then Jesus Christ has. Consider
thy own heartlesnesse how seldom thou art in the thought of Jesus Christ, and
eternal life in him; how seldom the deep sense of salvation in him is upon
thee; and this it is, thou must needs say, it is thus with me, wretch that I am!
what do I bestow the strength of my spirit upon? why then poor creature as thou
art, what should thou do but like that wise Merchant man Mat. 12. who having
found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought
it; Ah such a pearl the pearl of God, the pearl of heaven and earth, the pearl
of souls, it is sweetest Jesus Christ, whatever is precious is laid up in him:
Now then, sell all that thou have, how so? that is, be contented to venture the
loss of all for Christ, and thou gainest ensurest all, as showed, yet all thy
riches, pleasures, enjoyments under thy feet for Christ, let all, all, and ten
thousand times more go, so thou have Christ; Ay, but how shall I buy him? Will
gold and silver do it? The meaning is, to gain him, it is spoken comparatively,
As Merchant men will sell all to buy a pearl of inestimable price; so will poor
souls that truly believe these things to be in Jesus Christ as the holy Spirit
of God, and the experiences of his own witness to be in him, divorce their
hearts from all, venture all to win, to win Jesns Christ. But must I then
cast off all, my calling, all my possessions? No, but subject them to the
pursuit of Jesus Christ, get them loosened from thy heart, let it not be a
weight upon thee to depresse thy soul from soaring after him, keep them but as
under-things, things thou must have or be without, and not be the less
blessed, and so in obedience to God and submission to his good pleasure, be
industrious in thy calling: but the motions, strength, aims of thy spirit, to
win and enjoy, love and honor Jesus Christ, and such will the Father honor,
Joh. 5. No loss of time to seek him in his word, no self-denial for him, no
motion or good word for Christ in sincerity, no witness for his Kingdom,
Gospel, People, but the Father treasureth it up, and will put honor upon thee
for it.

And now having thus a little dwelt upon this, to take off all Objections from
thy ensnared heart; Be not afraid to be awakened, and deeply considering the
state of thy poor soul, though distempers and disquietnesse arise, though it be
tempestuous with thee for a time, see the blessed and glorious recompenses of
it, by the Lord of life and glory here and to all eternity; And now I will
conclude thee as stupid as a worm grovelling in the earth, as thou do, if
these so weighty and important considerations do not upon thee, being such as
Jesus Christ left to move and pierce the Rocks of men's hearts, to lead them to
life in himself, and such as if thou putst them off, will be as Swords in thy
bones, will flash back upon thee as a thousand Witnesses against thee, if thou
receive them not into thy heart, if thou receive them not into thy heart, as
thou would do things that are most precious to thee; Why does Christ so
often knock and thou will not own him? thou art gone abroad or asleep: In a
word then, either put in thy plea to God, or submit and own it, that it is
better to pass through a small tempest to Jesus Christ, then to enjoy a world
of empty contentments here, and be a castaway, under the furious tempests of
Gods wrath for ever and ever: Ah Soul, once get hold on the skirts of Jesus
Christ, and he will anchor thee to a safe harbor; winds and waves, sin,
conscience, fears, unbelief; Satan, all obey him; A word from him quiets all;
Be not like great debtors, afraid to enter into the consideration of thy debts,
thy sinful estate for fear of disquietnesse (that is, to resist the strivings
of God with thee, and he will not strive always) but set the sins of heart and
life before thee, though they swell to a numberless sum in bloody
characters, I am yet to show thee Jesus Christ the best and safest play master
in the world. But thou will say, What is that to thee? spread them before God
and seek him to sue all thy Bonds and Debts upon Jesus Christ, and God will
take him thy Surety, 'twas the good pleasure of Jesus Christ to cancel and
kill them all, they did their worst upon him, so get to him, and in him, and
the worst is over, and all the blessedness I have pointed at is thine, but I
shall prevent my self: These I have laid down as awakening, exciting
considerations to a poor soul, to whom the experiences of these things are yet
but dark, and so the Lord bless them to thy soul, and I pass to the next
thing.

2. Says a poor soul, Well, I have had some good thoughts Christ-ward, and
have made resignment of my self unto him, but I fear I am too much asleep as
yet; That may be; Therefore be more awakened, look back to the sins thy soul
has been divorced from, but not so, as to loosen the present hold thou have on
Christ, but to humble and abase thee more, and so cause thee to pursue and
prize him more: Happily thou art a soul whom Jesus Christ takes more gently to
himself by degrees, with a softer hand, and so the tempest not so great: But if
the least of him be better then the best of all the world to thee, a Covenant
with him, He is a chosen one and pearl to thee, yea, if it be thy daily
mourning he is no more a pearl unto thee, no more precious, thy heart so dull,
and then thou call to him to come and make a more powerful and fuller abode
in thy soul, then be sure he is thine, though a trembling jealousy upon thee
to the contrary. Now if the Lord in much mercy has awakened thee by this or
any other voice, or more awakened thee then thou wast, I would still keep thee
company in this discourse till thou find in Jesus Christ what I have here
proposed to thee; And so to show thee yet further of the dealings of Christ to
thee, as thou come as a wayfaring soul to him, in the next proposition.

Doct. 2.
When a Soul comes savingly, it comes in a perishing condition to Jesus Christ:
Lord save us we perish; (...), we are lost, or are in a lost condition; lost,
do thou save us; This does rightly answer to the heart of Christ, and his
purpose revealed in the Gospel, I am come to seek and to save, (...) that which
was lost or ready to perish; that really is so, and that shall see it self to
be so, Luke 19.10. So in that threefold Parable Luke 15. to set forth such a
sinner that Christ draws in to his salvation, I have found my Sheep which was
lost, ver. 6. Rejoice with me, I have found the piece that was lost, verse. 9.
And so of the Prodigal, Let us eat and rejoice, my Son was lost and is found,
ver. 23, 24. It Is Christ's rejoicing to find sinners lost in themselves; To
this purpose Paul, Phil. 3.9. That I may be found in Christ, implying, he was
lost in himself; Now to open this, how a soul is said to come to Christ in this
lost and perishing condition.

First, Perishing in sin, such a sight of sin as before is described, if it
stay in its sin, it must certainly perish; Sin cannot ensafe; The least
sin is able to damn, much more the multitudes of them that lie undischarged
upon it.

Secondly, A Soul that comes truly to Christ, comes perishing in its own
strength; It Is likely, those who were ready to perish in the Ship with Christ
in the tempest, that they toiled long in their own strength, rowed with their
own oars, with much painfulnesle, till they saw all was in vain, and then they
throw down all, Master save, or we perish; So a poor creature after some
conviction and awakening, it is apt at first to be toyling in its own strength,
its own natural sufficiencies, sets to repentance, duties, obedience, in its
own strength, turns in the outward man from the grosser evils of his ways, but
then backslides again, and all because he would be his own deliverer, work for
and by himself, at least contribute something himself; But to come weak and
strengthlesse to Jesus Christ, helpless in it self, this goes hard, To
acknowledge to the glory of God and our own shame; That if any thing be left on
our score, to make good with God, perish we must, this goes to the quick;
indeed our pride and self-love is very unwilling to yield to this, a creature
would not be found to be at such a total loss with God, so far to have
spoiled and undone himself; to be so wholly weakened and deadned by sin, as not
to be able to help the Lord Jesus one little in saving us, but the whole
stresse must be laid upon him: yet thus it is, when we were without strength
Christ died, Romans 5.6. And so when Christ comes to give a soul the blessing of
his death, and to estate him in it; It causes the soul to know and feel that
it is without strength, and helpless, and then 'twill be at his feet perishing
in it self without him; Nothing is more strongly settled upon the spirit of a
sinner then this self-sufficiency, and opinion of its own power; He can pray,
repent, hear the Word, receive, be just, do all, and acceptably enough to God,
as he deemeth, and still on the lees of his own strength, not knowing what
belongs to the spiritual performance of any duty, and so befools himself; Now
this is the first thing a soul coming into Christ, is to perish in, in all its
own strength.

3. It is to perish in all its own righteousness; 'Twas in vain for these poor
men in the Ship, to be hiding themselves In cabins of their own, when the Ship
was so tossed and shaken; to lie nuzling in their own wares, though never so
precious; No, all the precious merchandise must overboard, pass for nothing;
So when a soul comes to Christ for help, all its own cabins of its own
righteousness must be cast away; All thy former service of hearing, praying,
being just and sober (if thou werst so) which was thy cabin, thy covert in the
room of Christ, must be looked upon as thy sins, as that which is but an
abomination in the pure eyes of God, Pro. 15.8. The prayer of the wicked (that
is, of every person out of Christ) is an abomination to the Lord; As for thy
public worship that happily thou reposest most in, What says the Spirit of God
of it, Isa. 1.13. vain oblatition, abomination, it is iniquity, the solemn
meeting, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them, And as for private
prayers, plainly says he, When you make them, I will not hear them, v. 15. And
why? because the sins of such a person are not pardoned, his person not
justified, he is not in Christ, he does not sanctify Gods Name in his
services, not directed to right ends, and so hateful to the pure and righteous
God; And yet fond man is apt to hide and secure himself in these things, as
Adam in his fig leaves; So he prays a little, in a customary dead-hearted
manner, with some kind of outward reverence: so he gives alms, goes to
public worship, is righteous to men: (things good in themselves, if aright,
and to right ends performed;) And if he slip, a little repentance of his own
added, and Christ to make up what he wants, this is the hold of the most, and
sends as many souls away empty from Christ, as any thing whatsoever; What
formal professors, I mean, the common bulk of the people of this Nation,
reach so far as a Pharisee in all the duties they boasted in? And yet observe
and do it with deep thoughts of heart, that in Mat. 23. when the Lord Jesus
preached his last Sermon to them, after he has seven times pronounced woes unto
them, he puts this confounding question to them, Ye Generation of Vipers, how
shall you escape the damnation of hell? ver. 33. Most (indeed) perish within
the pale of the Church upon this account. That in Romans 10.3. among many others
is very remarkable, They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, go about to
establish their own righteousness, and have not submitted to the
righteousness of God; 1. Ignorant, how holy and perfect that righteousness
is, in which God will accept of and justify a creature; Ignorant of the
righteousness of the Law, considering not that the holy and spiritual Law of
God reaches to the heart and spirit, and that one motion awry, if we stand to
that, damns a soul for ever, or that the worth of his repentance and duties can
make God amends for what he fails, as showed; and ignorant of the full and
acceptable righteousness of Christ (though perhaps some general notion of it
in the brain, and able to discourse of it, yet as to sound and spiritual
discerning of it, and closing with it, ignorant of it) and so goes about to
establish his own righteousness; And so is establishing that which the Lord
will destroy, establishing that which he should be perishing in, and so does
not submit to the righteousness of Jesus Christ; through ignorance and pride,
and self-conceit, does not submit unto it, never beaten out of and perished in
their own, that they might submit unto Christ, to be accepted for Christ's
obedience, and not for their own; And yet having thus submitted, to delight in
all the holy will of God also,

3. A soul must perish as to any support in its privileges, of being baptized,
a protestant, of the true Church, and the like, being no Papist, no Heretic,
nor Schismatic, as people are wont to boast themselves; Though these are
privileges, yet to build a safe condition upon them without Christ and
regeneration, is a most dangerous sin.

4. A soul must perish in all its outward comforts, as to be a refuge for him,
something has been said as to this already: The spirit of a man being an
active mover must fasten and feed upon something, and having lost God and
communion with him, it turns to the creatures, and would satisfy it self upon
them, which bearing no proportion to it, cannot afford him fullness; Therefore
convinced of this, it is resolved to throw them off, and seeing them altogether
insufficient to cover him from the wrath of God, to appease the conscience, to
give one dram of blessing to his soul, he comes to Christ, as having rested
(such a rest as it was) in perishing things, and sees if he stays upon them,
he must perish in them.

In a word, Consider all those lying Refuges, which a soul finds out to hide
himself and pacify conscience with, there does the searching God find him
our, and drive him out of them, and unfastens his hold of them, then does God
as it were throw him at the feet of Christ, then Christ's bowels yern after him,
and lays hold upon him; Then will that soul tell the Lord Jesus that he is
come to perish in his view, under his eye, if he do perish, but resolved to
look after no other helper, if his good pleasure be not toward him; I will yet
step aside to speak to a soul, that has not yet thus perished in all but
Christ.

Why then sinner Consider, here is that will take down thy plumes, thy imbred
self-conceit and self-flatteries that will undo thee, if thou any longer
hearkenest to them; and yet walks up and down as self-conceitedly, as if all
thou trustest in were as safe as heaven.

1. As to thy sin; I have pleaded with thee before, but a word more, Dare
thou pretend to be safe in thy sin an hour more? Dare thou walk upon the
brink of hell, and smile upon it? Tell me, Do thou believe sin as certainly
damnable (while thou art in it, unpardoned, not fled to Jesus Christ) as God
reigns in the heaven and is just? Do thou believe it? sure thou do not;
else thou do not give rest unto thy spirit till thou have found a Savior to
take thy sin away, and his Spirit witnessing the same effectually unto thee: Oh
then, come and be as thou art (and be not too proud to own it) a perishing
sinner at Christ's feet; How poor and trembling will a perishing man be, that
lies wholly at the mercy of another? So is it with thee, thou have not so much
as bread for thy soul till thou come perishing and hungring after Jesus
Christ.

2. As to thy own strength a word more; If it be so, that thou art
strengthlesse, helpless in thy self, not able to move one step toward God
savingly of thy self, thy heart as dead and weak as water; how poor a creature
may this make thee in thy own eyes? Is it likely that what thou have done
hitherto, and performed toward God has been in thy own natural strength, and
so not accepted? oh then go and plead with God to give thee a heart, even upon
his own free promise, Jer. 31. I will give them a heart to know me; Helpless
sinner what would thou have more? Have thou not a spiritual heart? I will
give it, says God, and give it for humble asking; Oh art thou willing to turn
at Gods reproof; then Behold, I will power out my spirit upon you; Behold, take
notice of it, as the most encouraging promise thou can fly unto; Turn thy
face to Christ, and hear what he will speak, even upon those unanswerable
arguments he lays down in his Gospel, yea, beseech him but to turn thee to
him, and himself to thee, and he will do it; O then go presently to him, while
thou see the way open, and earnestly beg his Spirit, and plead Christ's own
promise: And that spirit shall be an humbling, subduing, praying, renewing,
quickening, mortifying, guiding, comforting Spirit in thee; And so thou shall
learn to perform all in the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

3. As to thy own righteousness let me have one word more with thee; Know,
that though thou may make a good estimate of thy self, and that others do so
also, in the things thou do toward God and man, yet Consider, that what is
highly esteemed among men is an abomination to the Lord, says Christ, Luke 15.
To be round with thee, Dare thou imagine to stand and appear before the
infinitely righteous, holy, heart-searching God, in such a patcht up defiled
covering, as thy own doings and performances make? Will thou lie down wrapped in
a cobweb (such is thy hope in this, Job. 8.13.) to cover thee from the piercing
storms of God, or to hide a heart full of iniquity and hypoerisie from the eye
of God? or do thou think that Jesus Christ will join righteousness with
thine? In a word, in stead of being a well-conceited Pharisee (for it is uo
better) Go and be a poor sinner at Christ's feet, and be willing to let him have
all the glory in thy salvation; Even put on Jesus Christ by an humble, free,
total resignment of thy self unto him, to undertake thy cause, as has been
showed, to work all thy works for thee and in thee; And in stead of thy own
defiled righteousness, thou have stood a tip-toe in, the entire obedience of
Christ shall be thine, and thou shall appear before God in that full, pure,
spotless, acceptable righteousness of the Son of his, in which the soul of God
is infinitely delighted; Ah Soul, what a change is this, to part with filth and
abomination, for the glorious righteousness of the Son of God, to be clad in
it, and even shine forth before God in it.

4. Well, do the same as to any considence in all thy Church Priviledges, of
being baptized, being a Protestant, no heretic; Do the same as to all
creature-refuges, as has been showed; and being undone and shattered in them,
do not dare to be safe in them any longer, no, no pretension to safety, till
thou shall be safe in the Lord Jesus, by a clear and full closure with him,
till thou have him in thy arms by faith, thy soul embracing and twining it self
about him, till he shall say unto thee, I am thine, and thou shall find power
and virtue coming from him.

From what has been said may thou now with deep thoughts of heart say thus
within thy self; Ah wretch that I have been, fond, self-pleasing,
self-flattering wretch; how well conceited of my self, how able thought I my
self to do every thing, how confidently have I stood before the perfect God in
the performance of my carnal duties, when they were as filthy as sin could
make them, and God was loathing of them? Now I see one Jesus Christ is ten
thousand times better then them all; Now I will cast anchor into him, now I
will contend for him as for life; Now I will enquire, seek, wait upon his voice
(his spirit enabling me) till I shall find him, and all those Blessings are
reported to be in him; Now I will be diligent in duties upon a better account,
not as they are able to render me accepted and justified before God (so I do
and ever will renounce them) but as means (blessed be God) to conveigh Christ
to my soul, and as the testimony of my obedience to him.

And now, if by the Lords blessing unto thee what has been said, or thou wast
such before, even a more perishing sinner in thy own eyes, take yet what
farther is implied in the heart of these words, Lord save, I perish, which may
be enlarged in such a plea as this; Oh blessed Lord Jesus of Life and Glory,
Here Is a soul at thy feet with the weight of numberless sins upon it, but not
one dram of righteousness to cover him; a desolate, forlorn, shipwrackt worm,
that stands bound over in thousands of debts to the just and dreadful God of
heaven and earth; But has not so much as one mite to pay him, unless with the
forfeiture of my immortal soul; Here I come with thee, as thou have commanded,
and throw my self upon thee; He venture an immortal soul with thee, If thou
have not treasures enough to spare lying by thee, the infinite merits of thy
own blood, If thou will not freely satisfy for me, and take the debts of my
sins upon thee, and so stand between a just God and a condemned sinner; If thou
have not favor enough with the righteous God to prevail for me; Oh I must
perish, everlastingly perish.

Lord] It implies thou art mighty and able to do it, for all power is committed
to thee; If there be not power enough with thee, thou who art the mighty God,
the Prince of Peace, and so able to rescue my darling soul, I am contented to
sink before thee; but thou, thou alone art the Lord of Life; oh magnify thy
great power upon me, and even be my Lord, my Lord, other Lords beside thee I
would have none, Lord save, etc.

Save,] It Is for a great and weighty matter that I plead, that I come unto
thee for, No less then to be eternally saved, saved from the everlasting wrath
and vengeance of God, saved to everlasting life and glory in the glorious
presence of God for evermore; O thou Savior of men (that is thy Name and
honorable Title) did thou not pass through many abasements, when thou wast
upon earth, very unsuitable to thy glorious person? did thou not drink of a
most bitter cup, full of the wrath of divine justice? And was not this then in
thy heart, did not this then bear thee up, that thou should save? ah save
poor helpless souls, that could never have been saved without thee; Oh, had
thou not infinitely delighted in saving lost souls, thou had never been at so
much pains and travel and cost in the work; Oh therefore Save, Lord Save; Yea,
Save,

I perish;] Must, will perish, If thou do not save; Save, for the waters are
come over my soul, I am sinking without thee; Master, Master, I perish Luke 8.
Master, Carest thou not that I perish? Mar. 4. Oh let it never be told in Gath,
that even a complaining, forlorn soul perished at thy feet; What, at the feet
of a Jesus? Alas, if thou carest not that I perish, who will? If thou pitiest
not, who will or can? Oh for the honor of thy own Name pity; If I should now
perish in the view of harbor, now I have seen and cried to a Savior, Thy
enemies will speak evil of thy Name; Well, blessed Lord, thou see all the
arguments I have to move thee; That which I will stick upon and never give thee
over with is, that I must perish, perish without thee, yea, perish in thy
sight, if thou succor me not; Lord save, I perish.

Well now, Soul, If thou do in this or the like manner pant after Jesus
Christ in such a perishing posture, and thine eyes are upon him, and followest
him, and waitest what he will speak unto thee, I will a little prevent thee,
and show thee a copy or two of his tender heart in this particular: See Luke
19.10. For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost; He
came, 'twas his errand, his business, 'twas the main thing he had in his
heart: What? that which thou so earnestly look for, even to save, yea more,
to seek whom he might save; but what kind of persons? even such as thou
presentest thy self unto him, that which is lost, souls that come as lost and
perishing in themselves to seek him; Have the worst thoughts of thy self, it
can reach but to be a lost soul, and such, (says Christ) if he be worthy of
credit with thee he came to seek; If thou art seeking him, why, he was seeking
thee before; He left it upon record in his Gopel, and he is in heaven to see it
made good; So much will that Scripture afford thee, and believe it: Another
Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved; Well now, do thou look up with a
longing expectation to Jesus Christ for salvation, to hear what he will speak
unto thee? why now, says Christ to such a looking expecting soul, Be ye saved,
Be it unto you as you will; To confirm it to thee, hear him further in the same
Scripture, I am God, and none else, None but me is able: and as for his good
will and faithfulness in performing it, he further says, I have sworn by my
self, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness; And then observe,
ver. 24. what he assures thee of, how fully he answers thy errand, Surely shall
one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength; Mark, while thou art
seeking and looking for it, thou have it, while thou art perishing in thy own,
thou have found it fully in Jesus Christ; And therefore, as it follows there,
In the Lord thou shall be justified and glorified. Yea more (says Christ) that
thou may not think it a common matter to him, as if he did not care, or it
did not much concern him; Rejoice with me, says he in Luke, as showed, for I
have found that which was lost.

But yet there remains one Objection in thy heart, that as yet thou do not
taste the comfort of this, thou do not yet so powerfully hear the voice of
Christ, nor so comfortably see his face; The reasons of this are to be cleared
in the next point.

Jesus Christ for a time seems to take no notice of a tempestuous perishing
soul, though nigh unto it. -- But he was asleep.

Now this seems not consistent with all those gracious and melting invitations
of Christ, of poor wearied souls to come unto him, that bespeak the yearnings
and pantings of his bowels toward them; but yet see how consistent it will be.

1. That it is his usual way of dealing, See Mat. 15.22. The poor woman there
cried after Christ for mercy to her daughter, but it holds, and is so applied
in spiritual mercies also, for she came in saving faith; The Lord at first
answers not a word, as if he were careless of her, as if it had been no part
of his business in the world to take notice of poor sinners at his feet; and
when he did answer (for she would not from him without her errand) his words
were full of discouragement, Send her away, say the Disciples, ver. 23. I am
not come but to Israel, (yet still she worshipped him, Lord help me,) And yet a
more reserved Reply, It is not meet to cast the Childrens bread to dogs; Yet
still she pressed, and had her errand, though Christ seemed thus to chide her:
So with Mary Magdalene, Joh. 26.11. Mary was seeking Christ alone, and seeking
him in a proper notion, a crucified Christ, and she sought him in a sweet
posture, weeping after him, restless till she found him; Now, Christ seemed
for a time to take no notice of her, though he were standing by her, and his
heart full of love to her; See the Spouse Cant. 3.1,2. I sought him but I found
him not, etc.

There are many choice Reasons of the Lords dealing thus with a soul for a time.

1. This works for the heightning and drawing forth of faith; for a soul to
follow after Christ when the tempest is upon it, in a perishing condition, and
Christ seems to take no notice of it; When his present dealings seem to thwart
with his Invitations and promises, this heightens faith, as in the woman of
Canaan, and draws it forth to pursue Christ the more.

2. When Jesus Christ thus withholds his smiles and comfort for a time, he is
preparing the heart to be a fit place for him, to break the pride and
stubbornness of our hearts, to subdue the roughness of them, to make crooked
things straight, and then when our spirits are thus subdued and broken, there is
no more but for Christ to come in and dwell with us, when our hearts are thus
prepared to receive him.

3. He for a time thus clouds himself, seems to take no notice of a poor soul,
that the' soul may the more experimentally see, that all other refuges cannot
quiet the tempest upon it; A soul will be apt to be making trial in such a case
of creatures, and fly from one created contentment to another, and to try what
they are able to afford in such an hour; And when the soul can find quietness
in none, but still restless (as I have already showed it will be) Then it will
closely and strongly cleave to Christ, Then it will clearly see (when Christ
speaks) that all its quietness, comfort, peace, was from Jesus Christ alone.

4. It makes for the honor of the Lord Jesus, for a poor creature to continue
seeking and panting after him, and will not off, even when Christ hides his
face from it; This gives more honor to Christ then to live upon him, when he
sweetly reveals himself to a soul: It Is an honor to a friend to trust him when
absent from him, yea, when he seems to frown; so for a poor soul to follow and
believe Jesus Christ sweet, and gracious, and faithful, though it never tasted
him, gives most glory unto him.

5. When Christ thus withholds himself for a time, it makes his presence the
more welcome when he comes; The Lord Jesus loves to come welcome to a soul; And
how welcome is he? what a heaven is his appearance to a poor, tempestuous,
clouded, perishing soul? When we have looked for a dear frieud till we are
ready to give off expectation, and then he comes suddenly upon us with smiles
and kindness, what a joy is it? So when the poor friends of Christ who lay
hold on the Covenant of his peace, and cry after him, Ah, when Lord, when? And
then he comes with a sudden smiling voice, Why Soul, I am thine, and I have
betrothed thee unto me, yea, but one word, as to Mary Magdalene, Mary, and she
answers Rabboni, oh my Master; This reason may be further illustrated in the
case of Joseph and his Brethren, Genesis 44. When they came to him as distressed
men, Joseph reserves himself for a time, did not make known himself, though his
heart were full of yearnings after them, and what was it for but to make way
for the greater endearments of them unto him? So much unexpected love let out
upon them, that it even brake their hearts, for they were troubled at his
presence, says that Scripture, being overcome with the loving-kindeness he
showed them: whether Joseph were in this a type of Christ, I shall not dispute,
but the way of Christ is sometimes the same; His stays and reserves ere he
smiles upon a distressed soul, do make way for sweeter endearing heartbreaking
love to be let out upon it; And further indeed, As Joseph's Brethen were
troubled at his presence, between the two considerations of the injuries they
had done him, and the exceeding love he showed them; As for Joseph (say they)
we sold, etc. so poor souls seeking Jesus Christ, when he appears comfortably
unto them, They are even troubled at Christ's presence, considering the injuries
they have done him, and the exceeding great love he has showed them, and this
does kindly melt the heart, when they wistly look him; Till Christ answer as
Joseph, ver. 5. of Genesis 45. Come hither, says good Joseph to his Brethren, for
God did send me before to preserve life; so says the Lord Jesus Christ, Ah
poor soul, come hither, God did send me on purpose to preserve thy soul, to
bear thy sins, to establish a Covenant of peace for thee; And how endearing and
melting is this to a soul that so enjoys him!

6. Christ thus withholding himself for a time, as it makes way for the greater
joy and more abundant consolation to a tempestuous soul, so it will make a soul
more watchful and careful to keep Christ, Cant. 3.4. I held him and would not
let him go; If so tempestuous, perishing, and succourlesse, when I enjoyed him
not; Oh let them never take away my Lord; Here, Here, (his Soul clasping him)
let him lodge; One hour of his fellowship, is a heaven; Oh no, thou must not
go, my dearest Lord, 'till I go with thee and lie in thy bosom to all
eternity; I will love thee and honor thee while I am here, and therefore do
not, ah do not depart from me, I will not let thee go: But of this more in the
close.

Is it so then, that Christ may for a time cloud himself from a poor soul at
his feet, why then, Soul, let me return to the first posture I stated thee in,
in this Point; Art thou one that have said seriously within thy self from the
sight of thy helpless condition, I will arise now and go about, Cant. 3.2. I
have been sitting all this while in the shadow of the vain world; But now, I
will arise and seek him who has life and peace in himself, though but now, yet
I will enquire of the watchmen after him, v. 3. I will wait at the posts of his
doors, his blessed and powerful Ordinances, till my soul finds him; Well,
Take with thee this lesson, If thou find him not in joy and comfort, as soon
as thou expectest; Here Is encouragement for thee, not no give off thy pursuit,
as Satan and thy own unbeleeving heart will be still prompting thee; To return
to thy former ease and peace in sin and vanity, and the world again, or that
thou had a good interest enough in Christ before thou thus troubledst thy
self, or it may be Satan will suggest, it is too late for thee, and thy day of
grace is over, because thou have slighted many; Well (I say) let none of these
prevail with thee; Thou hear upon what weighty and endearing Reasons Christ
may for a time withhold comfort and peace; therefore let denial increase thy
diligence, and not dead and flat it: Thou see (Soul) that if thou will have
Jesus Christ, that he has other work besides filling thee with perfumes, and
staying thee with flaggons of love; And if thou be truly convinced of sin,
and so of thy absolute need of Christ, thou will be glad of him, and seek to
him for those works too; He has strongholds of sin to break down; He has
Atheism Pride, Self-love, Obstinacy, all manner of fleshly and earthy lusts to
subdue within thee, that have by nature the possession of thy heart, and these
will grapple with him, and are unwilling to let thy heart go; all these unclean
spirits must be cast out, if thou would have Christ dwell there; So that if
thou will have him thou must have him on such terms, thou must thus suffer him
to prepare his way, to have a resting place within thee, And those lusts must
not domineer with him; If thy debate within thy self be rather to venture his
loss then to part with the old guests of thy heart that he would cast out, then
thou do not yet know what belongs to the guilt, and filth, and reign of
sin, which thou will cry to be rid of, when thou truly see what mischief it
has done thee: If that be indeed the terms thou insistest on, it is but a
little stirring of mere natural conscience, and not the convictions of the
Spirit; Many souls, no doubt, from some such temporary common enlightening of
the natural conscience, go and make an essay at Christ, liking well of peace
and salvation, but finding that lusts must die for it, they give up the pursuit
again, or else will have him (pretend to have so) and make him lodge with their
unclean lusts, to protect and countenance them, and so make him a half-Christ,
divide his work, make him indeed (like those blasphemers in the Gospel) to have
an unclean Spirit, and sin to be nothing; As many wretches in this age do
assert, and indeed all carnal professors of Christ do in their conversations
imply, when they serve their lusts, and cry Christ, Christ; No Soul, yield up a
heart freely to him, and let him make one lust after another bleed for it, Let
him make good his way and possession, Let him subdue all opposition in thy
heart. and lay low all the crooked ways of it, and see what a Temple he will
make for himself in the close; In a word, follow him, and hold out in his
strength, and thou shall have more then thy errand.

2. Learn well from hence to understand Christ's meaning in his invitations, not
as if the thing promised were all to be enjoyed in a moment: Thou may rest
confident in this, that the heart of Christ will be true to thee in them,
though thou waitest for a time, considering that one hour of his joy, is worth
the waiting of an age, much more a heaven and eternity by it; And it is an
everlasting rest thou seek in him.

3. It chides the repinings of our hearts against this way of dealing by the
Lord Christ, It rebukes all our hard thoughts of him, though he stay a little
when we cry after him; Oh be contented for his wisdom and love to order all
things for his more sweeter welcome, and more sure and comfortable abode with
thee; But yet to a soul under the impatiency of anguish of spirit,

Consider 1. Do thou truly come to Christ, as before, do thou frequently
spread thy case before him, and plead his own bowels, free invitations,
promises, his interest with his Father, with him; some lie repining, but not
earnestly follow Christ for what they want, etc.

2. Consider duly, If there be no Action, lust, that holds up its head, and
would not yield, that is as a right hand, or right eye; go to God for a more
narrow search of thy heart; say, (as David) Search me, prove me, and try me; If
there be any iniquity in my heart undiscovered, reveal and mortify it at the
very root.

3. Consider, that though thou have not sensible comfort, yet thou art
supported of the Lord in thy present condition, which thou may indeed
consider with comfort, Psa. 63.8, My soul follows after thee, and thy right
hand upholdeth me; So continue to follow hard after God, and if thou find
his right hand, his power sustaining thee, thou may conclude as David, v.
last of that Psalm, But I shall rejoice in God, etc. thou shall be satisfied
with his goodness; yea, if thou find such promise breaking in upon thy
spirit, and thou gatherest support from it, it may be an evidence, a love-token
to thee, that God is in a way of love and comfort to thee.

4. Consider, that faith and sensible enjoyment of Gods love do not inseparably
go together, are not the same, as some poor creatures be apt to fancy; it is
faith and not sense, therefore learn to live by faith and not by sense.

But yet may some poor Soul say, This does not come to the height of thy
condition, the very strength of this tempest in the conscience being upon thee;
Ah thou art a forlorn, tempestuous soul indeed, thou say: why now then, I
will particularly deal with thee.

Read thy condition in Isa. 54.8,9,10,11. etc. It Is spoken of the State of the
Church, but as truly applicable to thy condition; v. 6. the Lord has called
thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in Spirit: yea, v. 11. Oh thou afflicted,
tossed with tempest, and not comforted; that fits thee; See v. 7, 8. For a
small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee:
In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting kindness will
I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer; A small moment, and a little
wrath, but great and everlasting kindness; But may not the Lord, if he
please, reserve and withhold these from poor creatures that come thus afflicted
and tossed with tempest? I answer from ver. 9, 10. For this is as the waters of
Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go
over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee nor rebuke
thee; For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace
be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee; Here Is the Oath of God upon
it, and sooner shall the waters cover the earth again, and the mountains remove
themselves, then the Lord rebuke and utterly cast off such a soul; Neither
shall the Covenant of his peace be removed, that is, as God tenders a new
agreement, and to be at peace with sinners, contented he is, yea, infinitely
desirous of it; Can he then cast off a soul that comes tendering it self for
peace with him, that lays hold on his Covenant, Isaiah 59.6.

But yet further will a weak mis-giving heart be reasoning against God and it
self; I fear, for all this, that it is in vain for me to seek, my heart sinks
within me; Now mark what the Lord says to this, Isa. 45.19. I have not spoken
in secret, in a dark place of the earth; I said not unto the Seed of Jacob,
Seek me in vain; I the Lord speak in righteousness, and declare things that
are right: This the Lord does not reserve as a secret, but would have it
proclaimed on the house top; Let it be known to every poor weak soul that seeks
me, It shall not be in vain; As if it were laid down on purpose (as indeed it
is) to answer such a fond reasoning: And further (says he) I the Lord speak
righteousness, I do not trifle with and delude souls, but speak in good
earnest the things that are right, and v. 22. I am a just God, true to my word,
and therefore not to be reasoned against by men or devils; Away then with such
debates as thou do foster in thy heart, yea, with such vile disputings
against God, as to say within thy self, It Is too late, It Is in vain, my case is
desperate, God will not hear, and therefore why should I seek? To what purpose
is it? Is not this to belie the wise and holy, and faithful God, so to add
abundantly to thy former iniquity? In a word, If thou do seek and venture,
and try what God will do, if thou art at last cast off, thou can but be
damned; And thy seeking, if thou could fail, will rather be a mitigation of
thy torment then an increase.

Well, but yet further may a Soul object (for the devil has a world of
Sophistry this way) If I should be stirred up to seek, upon these grounds, how
shall I be ascertained that these promises belong to me? Why, mark thou, do
thou not say, I am an afflicted soul, disquieted, tossed with tempest, and in
thy own thoughts forsaken? And say, moreover, that thou art contented to seek
and wait, seeing at worst, thou can be no looser by it; why then by what plea
art thou excluded, what law, or what caveat is put in against thee? perhaps
thou will say, thy sinning with so high a hand against thy God, with many
grievous aggravating circumstances; Why, finful worm, know it is written as
clear as the Sun, if thou know any thing of the Gospel and mind of Christ,
that no sinner is excluded from acceptance, from the greatness of sin, but for
want of coming to Christ that he might have life, Joh. 5. as has been showed;
The truth is, thou art unwilling to be beholden to Christ, or impatient to stay
his leisure, or else art resolved to believe the lies of the devil against him,
or else thou would not thus parley against him; Therefore bow thy self at his
feet, and plead his own arguments, that he has left for thee in his word, and
do not stand asking whether these promises belong to thee, for they are as much
thine, as any souls in the world, if thou will plead them.

But yet further may a poor soul complain; Ah, I have a dull, dead, heavy,
indisposed heart, heartlesse am I to seek and cry, etc. I have showed before,
that if thou will ask a heart, I will give it thee, says the Lord, and ask his
Spirit to raise up thy heart above that indisposed distemper: Nay Soul, let me
ask thee, Can thou truly complain of and feel such a distemper, oh what a
dull, heavy, dead, indisposed heart have I? It Is of the spirit of life within
thee, or thou could not so complain; And it is an earnest of more of the
spirit to be given unto thee, from what has been now and before said unto
thee: Soul, may thou be encouraged to seek and wait privately, publicly, be
diligent in all means, yea, with some measure of contentedness, till the Lord
shall speak, and when thy spirit is so subdued, usually comfort is not far
off; But as to thy further encouragemen, I will lead thee on to the next Point.

Thus having showed the condition of a humbled convinced sinner, coming to
Jesus Christ in a perishing condition, and waiting for the voice of comfort and
assurance, I shall in the next endeavor to state such a faith which Christ in
the Text calls a little faith; Why are ye fearful, etc.

Doct. 4.
True faith may be consistent with many fears and weaknesses, and yet may
engage the heart of Christ to succor.

By what has been opened, we may give forth this description of faith; It Is a
coming to Christ in a perishing condition for salvation; which Divines usually
style faith of recumbency, relying and rolling upon Christ, which is not
always accompanied with assurance, this being but the height and excellency of
faith, not of the absolute being of it, that is, that without which faith
cannot be; So assurance is not of the nature of faith.

That which I am to clear, is, That this Faith may be consistent and mixed with
many fears, and that yet it may engage the heart of Christ to succor.

1. From example, Mar. 9.22,24. Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief; Faith
so weak, that he knew not whether he might venture to call it faith or not; I
believe, but straight takes himself off, as if he were afraid to style it
faith, Lord, help mine unbeleef; or if I do not believe, Lord help me to
believe, In such a suspense the words imply him to be, and yet 'twas a faith
that sped in its errand; So Mat. 8.2. In the case of the Leper, Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean; I believe thou have power enough, but whether
thou will receive and help such a miserable creature, that is a hard question,
He only viewed the power of Christ, but much doubted what his heart might be
toward him; In the commended faith of the Centurion, v. 6. he only spreads the
poor creature before him, comes to him, and 'twas enough, v. 13. As thou have
believed, so be it unto thee, and he was healed the same hour; So Mat. 9.20,
etc. in the case of the diseased woman; first, she came behind him from her
self-unworthinesse, and so doubting and fearing to come before his face, she
said within her self, she had many parlies and reasonings within her self,
whether she should go to him or not, but at last resolved on it, and to do it
by stealth; see the same laid down by Mark 5.33. it is there expressed, she came
fearing and trembling, no question, as doubting of her acceptance, fell down
before him in acknowledgement how unworthy a creature she was for his notice,
and told him all the truth, what a despicable creature she was, how she had
spent all she had, and now must be helped by him, or perish, and so misery had
made her bold, and she ventured to come to him, hearing what a merciful man he
was; The very posture of a poor humbled soul in its need, a poor open-hearted
sinner coming to him; and then observe, how ready the Lords answer was, no
accusing her and reasoning the matter with her, to tax her of her
unworthiness, but bespeaks her kindly, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy
faith has made thee whole, go in peace, and be whole; The very errand a poor
soul comes to Christ for: And it is very remarkable what Christ answered to the
two blind men coming to him, Mat. 9.28. Believe ye that I am able to do this?
Only if he was able, not whether he was willing; If it be objected, all these
were for temporal blessings, I answer, That under these, spiritual mercies and
salvation are couched, or if not there is the same reason of both; yea, further
to clear this, if you will look into the histories of those eminent believers
and Saints, Heb. 11. do but mark what weaknesses you may find in their faith,
Sarah her self, if you look to Genesis 18. she laughed within her self, and said,
Shall it be so? a high questioning of the word of the Lord, and that upon which
she rested, was the power of God only, which the Angels gave forth in that
confirming word, Is there any thing too hard for the Lord? and so of Abraham
himself, that God was able to preserve, Concerning his heart and willingness,
of that no mention.

Reasons.
We shall enquire into the Reasons of this, Why Faith is mixed with such fears?

1. Because flesh and blood is against believing, the wisdom of the flesh is
highly against it; for a soul to go out of it self to another for
righteousness; the wisdom of flesh and blood is full of these (...), 2 Cor.
10.5. imaginations, reasonings, and disputings against it; it is against the
pride of flesh and blood to be beholden to another for righteousness against
all those issues of pride, self-love, self-sufficiency, and self-confidence;
Now flesh and blood being thus set against believing in the Lord Jesus, it is
disputing and reasoning against it, as Joh. 1.12,13. which were born, not of
blood, nor of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; So when Peter Mat.
16. had confessed his faith, says Christ, Flesh and Blood has not revealed
this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven.

2. Man is naturally under a power of unbelief, Romans 11.31. concluded under
unbelief; not only a heart unapt to believe, but under a power of the contrary,
Heb. 3. ult. They could not enter in because of their unbelief, a (...), an
impossibility from unbelief, while remaining so; Now this power is not wholly
vanquished, and subdued, but will still be mixing and rising up, and opposing
more or less in all believers, etc.

3. A Soul finds nothing in himself to encourage him to believe, as in the
case of Peter at his conversion, Luke 5.8. Depart from me Lord, for I am a
sinful man; so when the voice of the Lord is heard in the soul, it fears
before him, and begins to see to purpose, that he is a sinful creature, it is
ready to depart from the Lord, and to bid the Lord depart from him; that which
indeed should have been Peter's ground of going to Christ, or to have besought
him to come to him, his being a sinful man, he uses as a reason to bid the
Lord depart from him; Lord can thou endure to look upon such a sinful worm,
such a filthy wretch as my self; Oh 'twill offend thy pure eyes but to glance
upon me: So the Centurion, Master, I am not worthy thou should come under my
roof; Sense of unworthiness causes a Soul to put up hard pleas against it
self, and so the heart being taken up and overwhelmed, and abased in the sense
of self-vilenesse and unworthiness, forgets and dares not so heartily plead
Christ's free grace and tenderness to receive it.

4. The accusations of conscience being awakened as before, mustering up sin
upon sin, joined with the aggravations of Satan, like a cunning disputer, who
musters up all his forces, to make sin as horrible as ever he argued it
pleasant and commodious, yea, his chief darts lie at the faith of a believer,
to be reasoning against the grounds of believing, questioning their election,
severing the promises out of their sight, mudding and darkening their sight of
Christ, accusing them for unsound and hypocrites, tempting them from means
which make for strengthening of faith; Peter (says Christ) Satan has desired
to winnow thee, but I have prayed that thy faith fail not, implying, Satan's
design lay most against his faith; through the malice and subtlety of Satan
faith is put hard to it, till the Lord rebuke him.

5. Faith is wrought forth gradually in the soul by degrees, at first sown as a
grain of mustard seed, a small seed; corruptions and reasonings like
overspreading tares ready to choke it, therefore being sown, as I may so speak,
in weakness, at first, it is thus put to it for comfort; therefore Paul tells
the Thessalonians, 1 These. 3.10,13. that there was something lacking in their
faith, and the establishment of their faith is much prayed for by him.

6. The Lord suffers it to be so, that his power in the supporting of a weak
soul may the more appear: Faith is called the operation of the Son of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. and that your faith might stand in the power of God; when a soul is
full of fears and mis-givings, and ready to sink under them, theu the hand of
the Lord is more visible in sustaining, then we see by his power alone we
stand; Had we a strong settled faith presently, we should rather be lifted up in
our selves, or rest upon grace received, and so not glorify the Lord Jesus,
and live upon him for strength as he requires; Therefore the Lord suffers these
fightings and reasonings within, that we might have continual recourse to him
for support, and that we might see that the beginnings, life, and growth of
faith, it is all in and from Jesus Christ as the Author and Finisher of it.

For these Reasons, viz. the wisdom and pride of flesh and blood, the natural
power of Unbelief not being wholly subdued, sense of unworthiness, the depth
of guilt, accusations of conscience, and the disputings of Satan, faith sown in
weakness at first, and all this suffered to ends of glory to the Lord Jesus
Christ, that his power and grace may be the more magnified, therefore true
faith is mixed with many reasonings, doubtings, misgivings, disputings, fears,
which do annoy it.

I will first endeavor to apply this before I prove further that such a faith
may engage Christ to succor.

1. If true faith be thus mixed with fears and reasonings; It meets first with
the easy faith that the most of people please themselves in, as I thank God I
always believed, God forbid but I should believe in Jesus Christ; It Is easy,
very easy indeed, to presume away a precious soul, it is easy to flatter a
man's self with an opinion of believing, and indeed it is nothing else but a
customary opinion of Christ; But to believe in Christ Jesus, and savingly and
effectually to apply his blood by his Spirit enabling, this is hard, ah hard
indeed to a poor convinced soul, that has deep thoughts of heart about the
pardon of sins; Lord, help my unbelief, and Lord, if thou will, and the like;
This easy believing is the dead sleep of sin upon the conscience, and a
general opinion in the brain, that Christ died for sinners, even for all
sinners to whom he is preached, heightened by the strong delusion of the devil,
whose work it is to persuade souls that have nothing but a dead, general
faith, that they believe well, and on the contrary to dispute against the faith
of true believers, that they do not truly believe. And this among others may be
a discovery of true faith, unbelief is still mixing, and Satan disputing
against it, as in the reasons showed. If so much faith against believing pardon
of sin in the Lord Jesus, how can it choose but be so, but it must be a hard
thing to a poor soul to fasten upon Christ in a promise for remission of sins,
when so much opposition to it; Therefore this is an infallible note, true
believers deeply feel and are humbled for unbelief; Oh it is the deep evil of
their hearts, and that they most tremble at; but take a carnal, formal,
dead-hearted Protestant, and no such matter with him; He could believe a
thousand years together, and if he have any scruples, they be as nothing, a
little prayer or the like will quickly hekl it.

And herein also is another great snare; Natural conscience, that is, a
conscience not savingly enlightened and sanctified, may give some checks before,
in, or after the commission of a sin, and then unregenerate persons do most
usually gather, that they have truth of grace, because they have some little
conflicts within, which they fasten upon, from Romans 7. the thing that I would
not, that do I, but that former (I) is meant of the regenerate nature, distinct
to, and warring against the fleshly part, and not a little conflicting of the
natural conscience from common enlightenings of the word; So also as to
doubting and some small mis-givings, these argue not a truth of says, unless
these are only allayed by the going out of the soul to Jesus Christ, and the
evidence of the work of says, with power wrought forth in us; If thy doubtings
be such, that do not settle again till thou have made a true entire close with
Jesus Christ in self-renouncing, then they are of the spirit, subduing sin and
unbelief in thee; Therefore look narrowly to unbelief, as true faith interests
the soul in Christ, and all his grace and promises, so unbelief excludes while
unsubdued, from all of Christ: It sins against totum dei, every attribute of
God; So then they could not enter in because of unbelief; An utter
impossibility upon it. And this may reign through deluded mis-perswasion of
true faith, though the conversation in the eye of men civil and regular. I
desire to acknowledge to the praise of the rich grace of God, that the opening
of the power of unbelief by a holy Preacher of the Gospel, was the first time
of the Lords speaking to me in powerful convincement that I was in the state
of unbelief, though before full of confidence of the safety of my condition. Oh
therefore Soul, whoever thou art, be jealous of thy own heart in this
particular, unbelief is a close, spiritual, undiscerned evil, till the Lord
come in and show thee what the strength of it is, by casting in a grain of
faith to grapple with it, which without the continual supply of his Spirit,
will be overwhelmed by it. Therefore let me press thee with a serious trial
of thy self this way, that this is a dangerous snare, easiness to believe
pardon of sin and peace with God; So that unless thou can make out a work of
faith with power by the word and spirit; Question all, and so in the sight of
thy mere naked condition, make out for Christ, as has been before directed, as
if thou were before a stranger to him.

2. If true Faith may consist with so many fears and reasonings; why then a
word yet more to the convinced poor soul in its perishing condition in it self,
that has got a view of Christ, and is pressing after him, but fears, ah sad
fears and mis-givings arise. Why consider this well, If it were not so thou
might justly question all indeed, whether any thing saving in thee; Tell me
Soul, would thou be again in the supposed safety thou wast once in, when no
such conflicts in thee; No, thou will say, not fot a thousand worlds, for then
I was as a dead worm in sin and unbelief; But thou will say yet I fear, Ah
find it hard to believe and fasten upon and apply one promise, so thou see
do all Gods children; Read of and ask of any the holiest and graciousest, they
will tell thee many a serious experience of this, what travels the poor soul
has had through doubtings, fears, sinkings, cloudings, and yet all calmed,
sweetly calmed again, as has been showed, and am yet further to declare, the
stays and the props of a poor soul in this case have been opened. But a word
more, Is it no further with thee then this, then questioning of faith, with the
Lord, help my unbelief; know, it is impossile to cry after Christ with
complaints of Unbelief, without some truth of faith; Can thou reach but unto
the power of Christ, to give him the glory of being able to succor thee, but
doubtest of his willingness what his heart may be unto thee; Ah, thou sadly
doubtest; Is it with thee, Lord, if thou will? still an If, know Faith on the
power of Christ, as in the examples showed, may be saving; Remember also
Christ's melting answers, I will, be thou clean; Be it unto thee as thou will,
Go in peace; And this to such souls who came believing in his power to save,
though trembling what his heart might be toward them; I am now further to
show, that such a weak pursuing Faith may engage Jesus Christ to succor, which
has received some demonstration already; but it is further cleared from these
reasons.

1. Faith though never so weak, be it faith (that is, such that resolves the
soul to venture all with Christ, and pursue after him) is a beam from Christ
himself, shed by his own spirit; It Is the spirit so enabling the soul to choose
and follow Christ, therefore Christ will own such a faith, and 'twill engage
his whole heart to more.

2. It Is that grace by divine appointment which engages all the privileges
and blessings of Christ to a soul; Not from any worthiness in it, but by Gods
own Ordination; So that a Soul is not so much to reason thus, Can such a poor,
weak faith engage Christ? but he is to look to Gods Ordination and promise that
it shall. In a word, Not to be poring upon the weakness of faith, but to be
eying and considering the free promise, and so not to make an estimate of thy
faith by present sensible enjoyment and feelings of comfort, but by thy going
out to Christ in the indefinite free invitement and promise to all humble
comers for life and salvation; and then say and reason within thy self; The
Soul that according to Christ's own invitement, command, and promise, renounceth
all other, and comes and follows him for life, shall have and find life in
him; But so does this poor trembling soul of mine (if I know any thing of my
own heart) renounce all other, and flies to a powerful, free-hearted Jesus,
mighty to save; Therefore I shall find him, yea, I have him; And this a true
Scripturall spiritual reasoning, grounded upon Christ's own words, Isa. 55.1.
Joh. 5.40. Joh. 6.37. Rev. 22.17. 1 Timothy 1.15.

But now, if thou yet fear and art jealous whether thy self-renouncing and
coming to and closing with Chtist be full and entire; The next and every time
thou go to him and pleadest with him (and do it often) protest against all
other helps, and now there is no witness but God and thy own conscience, that
thou do perish in all opinion of thy self or any other, all the strength and
righteousness that thy self and all the world to help thee has, being but as
dead water to thee, and that thou do protest against them, and so make an
entire close with the Lord Jesus alone, that he may be thine and thou may be
his, in Gospel terms, and that thou art willing to take up his yoke and follow
him; Know also that such jealousies of thy self are a good argument of
something sound within thee.

3. Further, If through thine unacquaintance with the Scriptures thou runst
upon a mistake, and conceivest that true faith consists in a full persuasion
and assurance of salvation; Thou must understand that it is not so; for
assurance is the height and excellency of faith, such a degree that many
gracious souls are long ere they attain to it, yea, have only some short
glimpses of in this life; And though some arrive to a greater measure of joy
and assurance in the holy Ghost, yet not enjoyed by any in a constant renour,
while a bitter root of unbelief remains in us.

I do not here intend to give forth the consequent evidences and fruits of
faith, only a word or two, as to the management of a weak faith, while thou art
thus in thy doubtings, or if faith lie as it were dead, and does not act lively
upon Christ; Though in such a case thou art to be stirring up every grace, yet
do not stand poring upon such a heavy frame of heart, nor do thou think to lift
up the hand of faith by thy own power, but go and lie before Christ, go forth
from thy own heart to him, to requicken the habit of faith, that thou may
draw new life from him, and this follow him for: And then though faith be even
as a withered hand (as sometimes it is) Christ will speak to thy soul, as to
the man with a withered hand in the Gospel, Mat. 12.10. Stretch forth thy hand,
and thou shall do so, and embrace Christ in thy arms, and thine affections run
forth lively upon him. It may be objected, Is it safe then to let doubtings and
fears lie and be careless of them, seeing thus mixing they do evidence truth
of faith; No, but labor to get them suppressed and subdued by the power and
spirit of Christ; Though it be not absolutely thy duty to have assurance, yet
it is thy duty to labor and give all diligence to gain it, 2 Pet. 1.10. But
especially beware of such things which do deaden and stagger faith, and some of
those I will point out to thee, as to the case of a young convert.

1. After conviction, enlightening, and in some measure a self-emptying and
renouncing, as has been showed, and so a sight of free grace and Christ to
justify from sin, and a rolling the soul upon it, and also some delightful
savor of it; Then the main temptation is to become negligent in duty: As to
neglect humble, awful, diligent, waiting upon God in prayer, and other
Ordinances: This reasoning being upon a young convert, because our duty and
obedience does not justify us before God, therefore for no other purpose; But
this is a dangerons snare, and too many poor souls endangered with it; Neglect
of duty begets a vain and a wanton spirit, and causes the Lord to withdraw
from us, and will stagger faith, and cause thee to question any work upon thy
spirit.

2. Sleightnesse of Humiliation for former sins in our unregenerate state
begets a dead and slight spirit; Though they are not to be remembered after
effectual calling, as now able to condemn us, and God declares in his Covenant
of grace to forget them also, to remember them no more against us, yet they are
not to be forgotten to other considerations, viz. that we may be the more
humbled and abased before the Lord, that we may loathe our selves in our former
detestable ways, and the sense of the pardon of them may the more melt our
hearts; Eze. 36.31. Zech. 12.10. Therefore after grace received it is good to be
frequent in the renewing of serious and through, and as particular as may be,
humiliation for sins of unregeneracy though pardoned to us and changed from
them.

3. Too familiar converse with carnal company, happily such which before our
calling we did most frequently converse with, this will deaden our spirits, and
beget discomfort, when a convert will not own and acknowledge to the praise of
the rich and free grace of God, the change and work the Lord has wrought upon
him; And so the want of that serious, composed, reserved, wary carriage and
demeanor answerable to a change upon the inward man, which will also quickly
beget deadness, staggering, discomfort.

4. Either a neglectfull, or a curious, critical hearing the Gospel preached,
as to judge of the gifts and parts of Preachers, which will at last grow to a
matter of fancy, rather then to a trembling at the word, that it may purisie
and assure the heart; This joined with a negiect of reading the Scriptures, or
reading them out of a curious enquiry to be able to speak discerningly before
others, to have praise of men; This will also quickly cause a staggering.

5. As consequentiall of this latter, a self-conceit of knowledge and parts,
growing to an over-weaned conceit of our selves; This self-conceit is the main
bait of Satan in young converts, and the cause of many after-trials, till a
through discovery of it, and so a mortifying of it, usually by afflictions,
temptations, or desertions, or all; No evil more natural then to be lifted up
in our selves, to have an itch to appear to be some body, and to excel others,
and to seek for gifts and graces, not so much to honor God with, as to please
others, and to gain a repute with men; This to be looked to with a godly
jealousy, as that which will cause a staggering upon thy spirit at last.

9. The want of diligent searching our own hearts, from whence the former and
other evils get strength, and lie close, specially as to pride and hypocrisy,
and so not attending to that main grace, which is the soul of all, sincerity
and simpliciy of heart, to aim at God and not at our selves; A slight practice
of searching the more close and spiritual corruptions begets an unsafe temper,
and when they appear and the Lord gives a deeper discovery of them, will
stagger thy faith, and bring all afresh into question, whether any soundness
at all in thee.

7. Not attending to growth in mortification, sincerity, zeal, and holiness,
but to content our selves we are (we trust) converted, therefore safe enough,
much carnal joy mixing with that of the spirit; This growth upon a young
convert is apt for a time to be neglected, whereby faith is overgrown ere they
are aware, and begin to be at a loss, till the Lord have a way to awaken them
to it.

8. Inordinate enjoyment of any creature-mercy, be it what it will, either by
too affectionate pursuit, or delight in it, staying upon and feeding upon the
creature, and not carried up to Gods goodness by it, and so not using it with
a loose heart; This is apt to bring many snares upon our spirits and ways, and
at last to cause us to loose the favor of God.

9. Want of a holy fellowship with such who are godly, either by frequent
conference, and communicating their experiences of God, specially in a more
holy Church Fellowship then the mixed Congregations are yet reduced into, which
will abundantly quicken and strengthen faith, and every gift and grace of
believers, and makes much for the retaining and increase of comfort.

10. In a word, a slight frame of spirit, the heart not being daily awed with a
holy fear of God, whereby lightness and vanity, and discomposure arises; As
also negligence in a man's calling, or in some duty to some relations.

These are the special things which are apt to stagger and deaden Faith, to
cause the Lord to withhold or withdraw comfort, that we are brought to question
all again, whether any true saving work upon us, to cause the Lord to let out
sore temptations upon us; or to lay his hand upon us, very usually sickness,
or crosses in our estates or friends; And indeed, by these, a sounder and
deeper humiliation is wrought forth, even a second conversion, when a narrower
search is set up in our hearts, and sincerity, watchfulness, and other graces
come more in view.

Now as all those evils, negligences, and defects do thus startle, weaken
faith, and hinder comfort, so a diligent care, opposite to all those, as thou
may particularly review them, or means blessed of God to strengthen faith and
comfort, which I shall only mention, viz. Diligence in prayer and every other
duty, renewing of humiliation, avoiding much converse with carnal men,
careful attending upon the Word preached, not with curiosity but humility; Not
to be pufft up with self-conceit of parts, search for hypocrisy, attending to
growth, enjoying the creatures with a loose and mortified heart, the fellowship
of the Saints, a serious frame of spirit, joined with wisdom and care as to
all relations toward God or man, these are the ways wherein God usually
sheddeth comfort upon his people.

It may further be enquired, Whether faith will ever cast out all fear? I
answer.

It may in good measure keep under servile, base, disheartening fear; But there
is a fear which is vigil animae, the watchman of the soul, a Servant to faith,
which makes the heart not over-despondent, and bears off security, and keeps
all awake as the Centinell of the heart, Heb. 4.1. Let us therefore fear, etc.
And when the blessed intervals of joy and assurance come, then let this fear be
stirring, and 'twill preserve thee from wantoning with thy joy, that it mix not
nor break out into carnal joy; And indeed, when such a holy fear does arise
and mingle it self with our joy, then it is most spiritual and does best
distinguish a fleshly joy from a spiritual.

And now having thus far stated the case of a poor, willing, hardly-beleeving
soul, as coming in a perishing condition to Christ, with such considerations,
which may be for a stay unto it, till Christ speak as in the Text, Why art thou
fearful? We will now set the tempestuous Soul in this perishing condition, in
weakness of faith before Jesus Christ, and so briefly consider what this
rebuking voice of Christ is able to do; Only I will first question with this
fearful soul, in Christ's words, Soul, why art thou fearful? thou will answer
readily, From thy sins and unbelief.

1. Has Jesus Christ power enough to subdue them? Sure he has, I will subdue
them, and Isa. 43.13. I will work, and who shall let it, or turn it back? When
he will work in any business his Father has committed to him, whereof this is
one of the chief, even to receive and comsort weak souls that come unto him,
Isa. 40.10,11. Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm
shall rule for him, behold his reward is with him, and his work before him;
What work is this he owns with so much power, and puts such a Behold upon? See
in the next verse, He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, He shall gather the
Lambs with his arm, and carry them with his bosom, and shall gently lead them
that are with young: Now, mark Soul, Here Is his power to work, and none, none
shall turn it back, and the work thou have for him to do is his own work and
business, therefore with encouragement spread it before him, commit it to him,
and neither sins nor unbelief shall stand before him.

2. Is It his will and purpose to receive such a weakling? This has been opened
in part before; But consider, Soul, 'twas his very purpose in coming down from
heaven, 1 John 3.8. and having wrought forth his purpose in order to it here
below, Now he is passed into the Heavens to make it good to poor souls; to
whom? to such who come on set purpose for it; Therefore when it is Christ's great
purpose, that which his heart is full on, and also thou go and seek to
him on purpose for it, what needst thou stagger and be fearful?

Now that this is the work that is still before Christ to do, and his purpose
not changed, is left upon record in his last words to John, Rev. 22.17. Let him
which is athirst Come, which was spoken after his ascension into glory.

But still it may be thy mind runs upon this, This power and purpose of Christ
toward my self, I believe in the general to be true of the Lord Jesus Christ,
but whether I am one of those to whom it is meant. Mark, whosoever will,
answers that, as I have reasoned before; Show me how thou can exclude thy
self from that general invitement, or thou must grant it takes in thee also,
that desire to come to him; And if thou still reasonest, as to thy particular
case, as receiving such aggravations which every ordinary sinner does not; I
answer, There is no stating of cases, but Whosoever will, and whosoever is
athirst, know in a word, That it is written as with a beam of the Sun for
clearness, that the Gospel excludes no soul from salvation, because he is such
or such a sinner, but for not coming, in the sense of it, to Christ, that he
might have life in him; If thou should catch at that, and say, Thou fear
thou art not sensible enough; know that is a measure of sensibility of sin, and
such as may upon a true account send to Christ; And therefore Soul, say what
thou will within thy self, and reason from thy self, and so may put in these
demurres, do but eye Jesus Christ in his power, purpose, free and general
invitement, and thou have no ground to be fearful: And therefore why art thou
fearful? Thou have no reason, if thou eyest Christ, to be so; specially if
thou consider what is next to be opened.

Obs. 5.
That Jesus Christ can with a word rebuke all the tempests and fears upon a
poor soul coming and seeking to him; In the handling of which I shall be very
brief.

He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still, Psa. 107.27.
True in this case also; In Mar. 4, the parallel place to the Text, He said unto
the Sea, Peace, and be still, and 'twas enough; He that could command the
winds and Seas by his word, can much more still the troubles and fears of a
poor soul coming to him: This has also in part been confirmed by observing the
answers that Christ gave to those who in such difficult cases came to him: Be
thou clean, Go in peace; and these were presently effected by the word of his
mouth: As in the Creation of the word, God said, Let there be, etc. and it was
so; Now as to this work upon a poor soul, there is the same mighty power
promised, and goes along with his word, which he speaks in and by, in the
Gospel; Thou have the words, says Peter, of eternal lise; It Is often called,
The Word of Life, The power of God, The arm of the Lord, The red of his
Strength, even such a power as is described Psa. 29. The voice of the Lord upon
the waters, The voice of the Lord is powerful and full of Majesty, it breaks
the Cedars of Lebanon, and shakes the wilderness, etc. So is it able to subdue
all the high things, all the reasonings, (...) and (...), the strong holds and
heights of our Spirits, It can make the wilderness and the solitary place, the
place of singing and of joy; even what the Psalmist concludes in that Psalm
mentioned, at verse. 11. The Lord will give strength unto his people, The Lord
will bless his prople with peace; And this is spoken as a conclusion to all
those mighty things that are spoken of the voice of the Lord.

Much might be said for the further explication of this; but being a truth so
clear and granted, I shall only briefly apply it.

Use.
I might return here to the dead-hearted professor, and inform him of his
misery by this Truth; That so much virtue and might in the holy Word of God,
and he never felt this shaking or quickening him: And thence that he might come
under this, that no work of God with power upon his heart to this day, and so
to counsel and encourage the poor, dead, blind, deaf sinners with diligence
to attend upon Christ's voice, says Christ, Isa. 43.8. Bring them to me; Have
thou a heart like a wilderness? come to him, and it shall blossom as the
rose; Have thou a heart of earth? I will smite it, Isa. 11. Nor sins, nor
lusts, nor barrenness, nor earthlinesse, nor deafness, nor blindness, shall
stand before him; Come then, oh come with such and expectation, and thou shall
know the mighty power of his word.

But to the fearing Soul; I need not I hope further encourage thee to come to
Christ's Ordinances; Only a word, Have thou waited on them, but not a
comfortable answer yet? Consider well, Have thou come to hear Christ speak: I
will hear what God the Lord will speak, Have thou not too much hanged on the
Preacher, upon his lips? This may be a snare: Eye the promise, Isa. 57.19. I
create the fruit of the lips, Peace, Peace, says the Lord, and I will heal
them, So Is. 55.10,11. speaking of the word, It shall accomplish that which I
please; know: If all the host of glorified Saints and Angels should join with
all the holy Preachers of the Earth, and should encompasse thy soul, to speak
life or peace unto it, and beseech thee to be comforted, unless Christ speak
by them, 'twould be all fruitless; Therefore get thy heart into a clear
expectation for Christ to speak to thy heart by the Preacher, that is, to
distill the dews and consolations of his spirit by it, or all to no purpose. So
the Spouse Cant. 2.8. The voice of my Beloved. v. 10. My Beloved spoke and said
unto me, Rise up my Love, and fair One, and come away: So Gant. 4.16. Awake O
North-winde, and come thou South, and blow upon my Garden, that the Spices
thereof may flow out; which is the Spirit of Christ blowing upon the
Ordinances, causing the virtues thereof to flow out; Therefore if thou still
continuest a disquieted, fearing, perishing soul, and pants after comfort and
assurance; Pray thy heart may be raised up to abstract from any power as the
voice of man, but wait that the Spirit of Christ may breathe in the voice, and
then thou art in a readier posture for the Lord to rebuke the Tempest of fears
upon thee. A poor Soul may take further encouragement beside the promises, from
the blessed experiences of many and many a comfortless creature, who after
many tempests, perishings, fears, sinkings of spirit, have at last by waiting
publicly and privately for Christ's voice, found the rebuking power of it, and
their distempers sweetly allayed; And even a sudden heavenly calm upon them,
There was a great calm, says the Text, (...) to smile; such a calmnesse,
stillnesse, such a wonderful serenity that is after a storm, when the heavens
and the earth seem, as it were to smile; So Christ smiles upon a soul, having
withheld his face and beauty, and causes a blessed serenity, clearness,
quietness, to be upon it, sometimes by a sudden breaking in, sometime by a
secret graduall illapsing into a soul, that it becomes comforted it knows not
how, ere it was aware: Oh blessed, for ever blessed the souls that wait and
find this, And find it Soul thou shall if thou art in this posture described;
Let the Storm be what it will, the clouds never so dark, one ray and beam from
Christ shall raise even a heaven in thy Spirit, etc.

Thus far have I brought a Soul bottomed upon free and faithful promises, to
the immediate expectation of Christ to rebuke the tempest and fears upon it, to
succor its perishing condition; The Lord grant it may settle thee upon the
power, promise, purpose, delight of the Lord Jesus to do it; I will a little
speak of the wonders thou may expect.

Obs. 6.
The calmed Soul is filled with the wonders of Christ's power and love; They
marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this, that the Winds and the Sea obey
him?

His Name Isa. 9. is called Wonderful, described to be Wonderful in Counsel,
Excellent in Working, Isa. 28. last. We may view those Meditations of the
Saints, when thus in the admiration of his wonderful goodness and sweetness,
Psalm. 90.5. Many O Lord my God are thy wonderful works which thou have done,
and thy thoughts which are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto
thee, If I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered;
So Psalm. 34.2. etc. My Soul shall make her boast in the Lord, etc. Oh magnify
the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together; I sought the Lord and he
heard me and delivered me out of all my sears; This poor man cried unto him,
and he saved him out of all his troubles: Oh taste and see that the Lord is
good, Blessed is the man that trusts in him: Psa. 36.7. How excellent is thy
loving kindness, O God? etc. Psa. 116.7. Return unto thy Rest O my Soul, etc.
And what shall I render unto thee? So Mic. 7.18,19. The Church is brought in so
admiring Christ, Who is a God like unto thee (why?) that pardonest iniquity,
and passest by transgressions? etc. He will turn again (though he hide his
face) he will have compassion upon us; yea, it will break forth, Come, and hear
all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my Soul; yea,
then Soul, thou shall know, what is the exceeding greatness of his power
toward them that believe, according to the working of his mighty power, Ephesians.
1.19. These wonders of Christ's power and love will be thus enlarged in thy
soul: Oh the wonders of his power! Who is like unto thee Indeed, Lord, who wast
able at first to lay hold of me, and take me as a brand out of the fire? Oh, Am
I not saved as a brand out of the fire? Zech. 3.2. Thou who wast able to say
unto me, Live, when I was in my blood; dead as a stone in my sins: Thou who
wast able to subdue all the strong rebellion and obstinacy of my heart; to turn
the violent stream of it from earth to heaven; yea, thou wast able to deal with
all mine iniquities and corruptions, the least of which had been too strong for
me: yea, thou wast able to rebuke all the tempestuous assaults of Satan, such
tempests, such a perishing condition, such fears upon a poor soul, to command
the waves to be still, and they were so; Oh who is like unto thee my Almighty
glorious Lord? Join this to the greater wonders of thy free-love, who had
love and bowels enough to regard such a rebellious wretch, when thus in his
blood, serving his lusts, and loving pleasures more then God; When I was
daringly and delightfully sinning against thee; Oh infinite Love! to pity and
support, and succor such a poor, tempestuous wretch as I was after thou had
awakened me, when fitter, my self being Judge, to have been a castaway from
thy presence for ever; Oh the Ocean of grace! Oh the wonders of thy love! Oh
the unfadomed heights and depths of it! Eternity will but serve to admire and
adore thee in it: So sings the Spouse in the Song, c. 3.6. filled with the
loves of Christ, Who is this that comes out of the Wilderness like pillars of
smoke, perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, with all Powders of the Merchant,
etc. A little to enlarge this, I will show what considerations they are that
make any work appear wonderful, and they will be found in this of the Lord
Christ's to his People.

1. A repugnancy in nature to the effect wrought forth, this causes wonder; So
is it in the whole work of Christ for us and in us; That which was for us,
being but as one continued, rich, glorious mystery, Col. 1.26. All of nature
against it; As to his work in his people; what reluctance, obstinacy, strivings
with the holy Spirit, before a proud, hard, rebellious, self-exalting heart
will yield to bow before the Lord Jesus? Not only listnesnesse, heartlesnesse,
impotency, but a strong enmity and resolute opposition against the work of
grace; yea, as to our case in hand, the quieting of the tempest upon a soul,
what resistency to comfort by the carnal part? what putting up of fresh
reasonings and doubtings, and will not believe Jesus Christ upon his word, till
the spirit of power persuade, command, enables to do so?

2. Such things do beget wonder, which are unexpected or unhoped for; so is the
first appearing and work of Christ to and in us; When a Soul securely sits with
folded arms in the shadow of death, in the gross darkness that is naturally
upon it, the strength of the heart after vanity, when little expectation of
such a voice of Christ, as has been showed in the first, Arise, Awake, Come
away, etc. Matthew sitting at the Receipt of Custom little expected that the
Lord Christ (whom he never looked after) should come and speak to him in such a
commanding voice, and he should presently leave all, so wealthy an income, and
follow a persecuted Christ; He would have been like enough to have spit in the
face of him who should have prophesied such a thing to him, as every sinful
wretch is, till the Lords voice be heard within him; And so in the matter of
comfort, when poor, and languishing, and complaining a tempest is up, then even
before we are aware, above what we durst to expect, comes a Christ and speaks
and calms all.

3. Things formerly unknown to us, when they appear, beget wonder; so are the
things that Christ works and reveals to us; we are utterly ignorant, and know
not what preciousnesse in Christ, rill he open his heart to us; What
refreshings, what treasures of all goodness and sweetness are in him.

4. Things that are seldom done beget wonder, so comparatively with the world
of souls that are passed by, it is but seldom and rare work for Jesus Christ to
lay hold upon souls, here and there a soul he chaseth forth; And says a poor
delivered soul, What was I more then another, that the Lord should pass by
abundance of poor creatures, who happily never dishonored God so much as I have
done? Oh this consideration makes grace appear abundant and admirable, this is
a heightning, enlarging Meditation upon a poor calmed soul indeed; In a word,
the Lord Jesus so convays himself to his own, that it shall be mavelous in
their eyes; That they may attribute the first motion of light and life in the
soul from him, the perfecting and continuing of it; That his children may be
kept humble and lowly before him, and ascribe all to him, and depend upon him,
that they may have nothing to rejoice in, but only in the name of the Lord
Jesus.

Use.
If a calmed soul be thus full of the wonders of Christ's power and love; first
By this any soul may know whether the calm that is upon his spirit be from
Christ or not; If so, then his hand, his power, and love, is admired and
extolled in it: Consider therefore, any soul, by the way, What are the wondrous
things upon thy Spirit? what are the things thou have deep thoughts of heart
about? Can thou feelingly say, Oh how wonderful have been the thoughts of
Christ toward me? what wonders has he wrought for me and in me? Who is a God
pardoning iniquity like unto thee? Mic. 7.18. That Is the temper and voice of a
pardoned soul; So he breaks out into the admiration of him: A pardoned Soul
cannot have such slight thoughts about it, as the pretenders to a dead hope of
it have; If it be not so with thee, let me once more counsel thee to go to
Christ and tell him what wonders thou hear he can do; And plead with him,
that there is an object before him to manifest one upon, even by raising up such
a worm, dead in sin, as thou art, unto life; Tell him, he shall have the glory
of the Miracle; Oh let him say unto thee, Live, and thou shall live in his
sight.

2. If Jesus Christ be able to work forth such wonders upon and for poor souls,
Videant quam tuto se committunt Sancti, etc. says Bucer; See then how safely
we commit our selves to such a Pilot who can guide and anchor us through all
storms and difficulties, can cease our tempests within or without, to make way
for sweeter Sun-shines and calms; And therefore should not the Saints pierce
through the thickest, darkest tempests, and hang upon him when all appears but
in a perishing way; yea, will not the Lord Jesus pierce through them all to us,
and make our hears melt with chiding us for our little faith? Say not, Fainting
Soul, within thy self, that because 'twill be a wonderful thing for thee to be
raised up, comforted, (whatever thy condition be) and therefore it will not be;
No, No, Say, thou hangest upon a Christ whose works are all wonders, and
therefore it shall be so.

And now what will this poor Soul do that is thus through the abundant grace of
Christ silled in some measure with such precious wonders of Christ, when it is
blessedly calmed by Christ's refreshing voice, (For so I will now suppose that
soul either already, or shall be so, who has been or is in this tempestuous
perishing condition at Christ's feet) and is or shall be thus calmed, Will it
not to this purpose break forth, O welcome ten thousand times sweetest Christ,
Come, Lodge for ever in my soul (though a mean habitation) for I cannot let
thee go; Ah, will not that soul study returns of love and honor to Jesus
Christ? Will it not love him and love him more abundantly? Will it not lay it
self at his feet to be disposed by him? Will it not smile upon and embrace
reproaches for him? Shall any thing be too dear and precious to part with for
Christ? No, It shall not: Shall the pursuit of empty creatures come in
competition with him? Let me ask thee Soul in earnest, Will thou? can thou
seek great things for thy self, and let Christ's honor be slighted? Go then and
daily treat with Christ to this purpose, Say unto him, Master, Master, what
shall I do for thee? For whom shall I live and die but for thee? Dear Lord, let
me some way or other bring honor to thy tender glorious Name among the living,
before I come to thee, and adore thee for ever.

Now Soul, to point thee out thy particular duty, that live in the sense of
the favor and love of Christ, is more then I designed in this brief Treatise,
only I will mind thee with a word or two, and so have done.

Art thou a Soul that have been by the strong arm of the Lord carried through
some of these experiences, as have been set forth in this Treatise (If thou art
a poor Soul not yet attained to this measure of comfort and joy, I have
endeavored to lay down Directions to thee, and what may (by the blessing of
the Spirit with it) uphold thee till these wonders shall be made good upon thy
soul: But now to a Soul that in some measure enjoys them,

1. Consider, that though Jesus Christ has made such a calm upon thy Spirit,
yet know that there is more than enough in thy heart to distemper all again,
though at present kept under, Therefore thou art to look up to the same mighty
hand, to keep all in peace and in a comfortable frame, as well as at first to
create it, and to give in new refreshings, else that which is within thee
already will decay and wither; If Jesus Christ withdraw his hand, all is in a
mutiny again; Oh therefore walk humbly and jealously before him, and still be
committing all to him, and be drawing fresh supplies from him, or else the
sense of this blessed calm will grow dead in thee.

2. Beware how carnal joy mixeth with thy spiritual, by fetching in too large
additions from Creature Comforts, whence will follow lightness and vanity of
spirit, and then comes a Cloud ere thou art aware.

3. Be vigilant (as I have before hinted) and diligent in such ways wherein
thou have special communion with God, By which thou shall find greater
wonders by the strong arm of the Lord, then thou have yet felt; The danger of
this neglect is spoken before.

4. Do not sit down in a slender stock of Grace and the Knowledge of Christ;
There are depths in Christ, and depths in thy own heart to be searched, which
happily do yet lie close undiscerned upon thy spirit.

5. Be in the frequent remembrance of how much is forgiven, and this will raise
up thy love and zeal, and quicken it when it begins to slack.

6. Beware of venturing on the least sin, do not say it is a little one, and
thou may venture, 'twill like an Achan disturb all: The fear and hatred of
the least evil maintains a solid, settled communion with God; vain and carnal
company (as has been showed) dulls a man's spirit, as also a frothy carriage,
and liberal jesting.

7. Much might be said, but in a word know, It Is the hardest work of a Believer
to manage comfort and assurance; The heart, the carnal part of it is apt to be
lifted up in it; Indeed a comforted Soul at the first coming of it, is apt to
conceive, that such a temper can never be lost; But this is a vanity.

Lastly, Get the aims of thy heart more raised after purity and likeness of
God then joy and comfort; To be like God and see him at he is, 1 John 3.2. is
the highest aim of a gracious Soul; which the blessed, holy God give thee and
me to aspire after, till we shall be fully with him, and so see him as he is to
all eternity. Amen.

FINIS.

