THE PETITION OF THE Mayor and Inhabitants of GRAVESEND, TO THE HONORABLE CITY
of LONDON:
SHOWS,
THat now at last, the long expected Plate-Fleet is safely arrived at this
Town, and having undone the Spaniard, is in a fair probability to ruin this
place: The which Cargo and Lading is Chalk, which is Landed and Ware-housed in
every house throughout this Port, to our exceeding rejoicing and utmost content.

That we are of opinion, this place should be called the Worlds-End; for this
must needs be the Day of Judgment upon us, for all our former Unconscionable
Reckonings and Extortion. This is a second Ninive to which the Jonas's cry
Repentance; and so we would, but that their hearts are so hardened, they will
run on the Score Everlastingly.

A Seaman without Money, is as great a Paradox, and a more perplexing Riddle to
us, then all the late Intricacies of State are pregnant: Would to God we had
some of the Qualifications here with us, we would make use of them; for now
every pitiful Saylor thinks himself fit, and ought to be trusted in the grand
Concernments of Life, Eating and Drinking.

Was there ever such a thing known, as a Navy of the Kingdom to lie sucking our
Block-Houses? That Devilish Committee of Safety made this the New Mode; their
Sins and Exorbitant Practices must be landed at our Doors, and we must expiate
their Extravagancies, with Want and Indigencie: Every one here pretends to be
the Commonwealth Searcher, and will pry into our Cupboards; we have forgot the
word Cocquet, and are for the backside of the Book, we are all cleared, and are
Kentish Gentlemen: Adieu Custom-House, we are to be redeemed by the
Navy-Office; for here is nothing but Ballast and Guns, that makes us appear
like the Siege of Cales.

God Bless the Collier-Trade, for there is no hope of any other Merchandising;
when that Fleet arrives, we intend to stay it, and make an Embargo, till we
have Reparation and Amendment.

Be advised therefore, upon consideration of the Premises, to forthwith
expidite the payment of the Assessment, for the present maintenance of the
Fleet, as you will answer the contrary at your pleasure; or else send for the
Ships up, and receive them for Pageants at your next great Magnificent Show, or
Bulge them and break them up, and let the broken Timber repair your Gates; let
that and the Walls of the Kingdom make up your Breeches.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
LONDON, Printed for James Nidale, 1660.


