A Petition presented by the Inhabitants of Nevvport-pagnell and the parts
adjacent to his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, and the General Council
at White Hall on Tuesday, December. 26. 1648, Desiring the person of the King
might be brought to speedy Justice, and other matters of the like Nature.
To the Right Honorable His Excellency the Lord Fairfax, General of the
Parliaments Forces, and to the Officers of the Excellencies Army now met in
General Council.
The Humble Petition of the well-affected in Newport-Pagnell, and the Parts
adjacent.
Humbly shows,
WE are very sensible by whose means, and to satisfy whose Prerogative
Fancy, our Lives and Liberties have bin ruined and almost destroyed, which our
Representatives well resenting (at their first Convention) did by several
Declarations sufficiently satisfy the Kingdom: And for prevention of future
Arbitrary Practices over our Persons and Estates, did dismount the tyrannical
Courts of Star Chamber, High Commission, and Councell-Table; going yet further,
that if the King (in dislike of their just endeavors for the Peoples safety)
should make War upon the Parliament, it should tend to the dissolution of his
Government: In order to which (the King guilty of breach of the Trust
aforesaid) That satisfactory Declaration of no more Addresses did abundantly
witness their just Proceedings, putting us upon expectation of their candid
intentions to a just settlement of Peace and Freedom: But now (to our greatest
grief be it spoken) we have found resolutions in our Electives, implying a
notorious contradiction of their former just and equitable Principles, giving
the King that by Vote which by all the strength and policy of His Royal Party
he could never yet attain to by the sword. All which mischiefs we do
interpret to obnoxious humors (hoping no errors in the Vitals) But in case
these Votes should arrive to their intended accomplishment, we are given to
believe (notwithstanding all the Blood and Treasure (since the Wars began) that
has been exhausted) we shall be left in a worse condition then before; and by
so much the more the rage of that professed Tyrant and his Creatures incensed
against us. And in the midst of these our fears and jealousies, there appeared
not from our Representatives the least hope of Recovery (notwithstanding
Petitionary means has bin used to rectify their judgments)

All which, as the subject matter of our saddest thoughts, we humbly present to
your Excellency and Officers under your Command: Beseeching you, by all the
Deliverances and Victories that God has duplicated upon this Army, That you be
not deluded by the sophistry of a corrupt Party, but to improve your power to
the utmost for the establishment of Justice and Freedom: And that your
Excellency will be pleased to mediate the Parliament in our behalf, for these
our just desires; And in prosecution hereof, we shall assist your Excellency to
the utmost of our Lives and Fortunes.

1. THat the Author of the Blood and Ruins of the three Kingdoms (as we
conceive) the Person of the King be brought to speedy Trial. 2. That a strict
Enquiry be made after all Persons (of what quality soever, that had a hand in
the first or second War, and Justice done according to their demerit. 3. That
the heavy burden of free Quarter be wholly taken off, and effectual care
taken for constant pay of the Army, and provision thought upon for payment of
their Arreares. 4. That the Capital and most Antichristian oppression of
Tithes be taken away, and that Gleabe-Lands be sold to satisfy Impropriators:
Provided their Tenure be not: from Bishops, Deanes and Chapters, or Colleges,
or their Estates under Sequestration; And Gospell-Ministers to be maintained by
a free Contribution, according to Gospell-Order. 5. That no Law be made or
continued for the punishing of our persons about matters in Religion, seeing
every soul shall stand or fall to his own Master, no need of tormenting
before the time. 6. That the Laws of this Land be translated into English; And
that there be a Court of Judicature in each Hundred of every County, where
Causes may be equally determined by twelve sworn men Annually chosen by the
Freemen of the said Hundred, and not left to depend upon Prerogative Lawyers
for Justice, the Obstructors of the Peoples Freedoms. 7. That a speedy course
may be taken for the suppressing of Alehouses; They being the very Receptacle
and Nursery of Rogues to plot and contrive all manner of villainy, and Cause of
the great dearth and famine in this Kingdom; And unless it be timely
prevented, will occasion the starving of many thousand Families. 8. That the
Desires of the large Petition presented Sept. 11. be taken into speedy
Consideration; That it may not discourage the well-affected from making future
Addresses. 9. Lastly, we protest against Community or abridgment of the least
title of any man's Property. This being the period of our desires, That the
Laws being grounded upon Reason and Religion, all Persons may be bound alike
to subjection.
And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

The Answer of the General Council in White Hall on Tuesday, December. 26.
1648. To the Petition of Newport-Pagnell, and the Parts adjacent.
THat they had read the Petition, and did very kindly resent and thankfully
accept those Expressions first in the preamble of the Petition, of their
affections and faithfulness, in relation to the public Justice and Liberties
of the Kingdom, and for their desires in the Prayers of the Petition
concerning the prosecution of Justice and Freedom: We do heartily close with
your desires in it, and shall endeavor to prosecute the same, as God shall
direct and enable us in all honest ways. And for the last part of the Prayer
of the Petition, for mediating with the Parliament concerning those particulars
following, They were acquainted, that the most part of the particulars are such
as do relate to public Justice, and a general settlement of the Liberties
of the Kingdom. The Council has taken many of them already into
consideration, and are in consideration of some other things remaining; which
so soon as they have passed the Council, you will see public, and we hope
to your satisfaction; and the other particulars that you desire mediation in,
either concerning the Reformation of Laws in being, or the making of new,
Particularly the Council do let you know, that such things as those are
matters of public Justice and of the Kingdom; they shall so far as they
are proper for their Cognizance take them into consideration in their places
and time.


