MOCK-MAJESTY: OR, The siege of Munster.

BEING A TRUE STORY OF THOSE fine things, wherewith King JOHN BECOCK, At first
a Botcher of Leiden by profession, and his companions the ANABAPTISTS, pleased
themselves after they were become Masters of that City.

You shall here likewise have the issue of the whole MOCK-SHOW.

C. TACITUS. Quidam, ut imperium subvertant, libertatem proferunt; si
subverterint, ipsam aggredientur. Idem, Histor. lib. 1. Malignitati falsa
species libertatis inest. ELEUTHEROPOLI, ANNO 'ANAAPTISTOANI'AS, C.XIIX.

Imprimatur,

James Cranford.



London, Printed for J. S. and L. C. 1644.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, Mr. RICHARD LITHGOLD, Mr. JOHN CHILD, Bailiffs of the
ancient Corporation of Kingston upon Thames:

For their endeavor for the public good; For their vigilance in their Place,
and Office:

Especially, For the assistance, and encouragement, of their Minister, in
preaching the Word, and suppressing novell Fancies:

THIS IS DEDICATED, Willingly, Deservedly.

TO THE INTELLIGENT READER, Baptized, or Rantis'd.
THou must excuse me for this pretty new stamped word. It is pity but it should
signify something in English. Whether it do or no, it is not a week since I
first met with it, and that in a way of scorn, and contempt, of the Baptism of
our Church. Chapter Blackwood in his book entitled, The storming of Antichrist in
his two strongest holds, etc. very lately published.
He that goes about to naturalize it, and make it a Denizen, is one that ^^kes
upon him also to question the truth of that Relation, which we have in Joan.
Sleid. Commentary X.
Sleidans commentaries, concerning Blackwood praef. page 12.
the tumultuous carriage of the Anabaptists in Germany, as himself speaks;
making the Author thereof, for differing opinions sake in matter of Religion,
to make no conscience of violating that sacred rule, which directs and binds
every Noble Historian, Ne quid falsi audeat; nequid very non audeat.
That he dare speak nothing false; nor yet conceal any thing that is true.
Not a little troubled to see so injurious, and false an imputation, laid upon
the truest History; that ever was written since the Acts of the Apostles; I was
the more incited, to communicate again to the public view, and that in a
language which we all can understand, that part thereof, which concerns those
tumults more especially: and I do look for better grounds, for the confuting
thereof, then such weak surmises, and exceptions, that he was Blackwood, b. p.
12.
a contrary minded Historian; or, that (d) it is not lawful to believe an
History, from the mouth, or pen, of an enemy. More Christian, and rational
charity, Gal. 4.16.
I am sure, has been observed to direct the souls and actions, even of
Heathen men themselves. And I forbear not to make use of St. Paul's question
herein: Is he therefore become your enemy, because he speaks the truth? As for
our Author, he has as faithfully, as ever did any, observed what the Fl.
Joseph. contra Appion. lib 1. (...). Herodian. l 1. (...), etc.
learned of the Jews requires in a good Historian, To relate nothing, which
he could not maintain from his particular, and certain knowledge thereof, by
Tot rerum, qu^^ gesserat, aut a fide dignis acceperat, notitia fretus, Comment.
scribere aggressus est. Thuan. lib. 17, de Sleidano. Vid. Meich. Adamum. in
Philosoph. German. in Sleidano.
personal employment in the action; or else had not received it from the hands
of such, whose truth ought not to be called into question. What, in this
respect, is objected against him by Matthaeus Orat. de Ordat usu Histor.
Dresserus, upon the bare word, and assertion, of his friend Christop.
Carlevilius, has as much weight in it, as Mr. Blackwoods surmises. And of what
spirit Dresserus was, learned men, who have perused his books, certainly cannot
be ignorant. Only I am sorry, to see any Reformer join, or at least, agree
with so great a stickler for the Sea of Rome; and that in a censure against a
Protestant, of such known piety and integrity. It is hard to gainsay what the
noonday looks upon and witnesses: And now to deny, what our forefathers, and
all Christendom well-neere took notice of, with no less wonder then shame,
were to endeavor to swagger truth out of the world. The great respect and
entertainment, which Sleidan had here, when he was Jo. Sleidanus in Anglia
communi Protestantium nomine legationem obiit, Theod. Beza in Ie^.
Embasadour to the Court of England in the general name of all the Protestants
of Germany, shall be both a testimony of his prudence, faithfulness, and other
abilities in pablique affairs; and also an assurance, that this (...), or
fragment, of that his most excellent History, shall find welcome with us in an
English, though somewhat a courser dress. How sacred and venerable he esteemed
Diligentissime fimul and verissime historia perscripta. Beza, ibid. Historiam
huc illuc usque exacta fide, and diligentra pertexuit. Th^anus An. M.D.LVI. v.
Gesner. in Biblioth. Henr. Pantaleon. Prosopograph. lib. 3. and alios sexcentos.
truth to be, and how religious a thing he accounted it to swerve in the least
matter from the nice observing of it, if any man be not Christian enough to
have charity to believe the man himself herein, others then in this case shall
more then abundantly witness it. Thuanus, (k) Beza, etc. Papists, Calvinists,
Lutherans, and men of what Religion soever, that are not yet more blinded by
faction, then led by reason, will give satisfaction in this behalf, even to
such as are extremely scrupulous. And if all these will not work in Mr.
Blackwood a belief of Sleidans truth, in respect of this Relation, then let
his own namesake, and Countreyman, and perhaps kinsman, Lib. 2. De Vinculo
Relig. and Imp.
Adam Blackwood, Omnia nude, simpliciter, and bona fiderprout quaeque res acta
fuit, re^ito: nec enim de meo quicquam addo ^nec in ullius hominis invidiam,
aut gratlam aliquid scribo. Ego sane, quod sine ostentation^ dictum esse velim,
ita sum affectus, ut siquid in hoc opere minus vere perscriptum esse scirem
dispecturus illud sim, and lectorem iple moniturus ultro, ne fidem habeat. Sed
plane confido, futurum, ut nulla mihi vaniras objici possit, etc. Sleidan.
praefat. ad Elector. Saxoniae.
a very learned writer tell the story; and what both his credit and judgment
was concerning the same. Now you must pardon him, if he do perchance.

Pers. sat. 1.
Auriculas teneras mordaci radere vero:

And here you have his own words, rendered as nearly as conveniently would
permit. (n) Lindenius quidam (falsely printed for Leydensis) Sarcinator, etc. A
certain Botcher, says he, of Leyden in Holland, having by his Sermons gotten
to be King of the Anabaptists, stirred up a rebellion of the common sort of
people, He means. Thomas Muncer, and his accomplices, whom Luther terms
Importunos concionatores, and Sanguinarios doctores, Sleid. lib. 5.
as formerly others had done, who for ten years space destroyed and laid waste
Germany, and occasioned the death of many thousands. But here I cannot
sufficiently admire the sottishness of those men, who placed over themselves
such a King as preached nothing else to the people, but the destruction of
Kingdoms, the abrogation of Magistrates, and that all men were created by that
great and powerful God to a like condition. Who either from those wild
conceits he had gathered out of the Talmud, or other Judaicall forgeries; or
else, from absurdities taken out of the Alcoran, did teach them, that the
enemies of their religion, or rather indeed of their rebellion and treason,
were to be dealt withal by banishment, and imprisonment; by bonds, and
stripes, and by death it self. Fidem huic sermoni res ipsa facit: Vtinam
mendacio ista confingeremus, and rerum ab iis gestarum veritas nostram
orattonem refataret.
The truth of the matter procures it self belief. And I could wish, that all
were but lies, and merely feigned; and that the truth, of the carriage of the
whole business otherwise, might confute what I say. At first, when this
doctrine, newly raised from hell, was scattered and spread among the people,
nothing could seem more meek and simple then these kind of men. They desired
nothing, forsooth, but Reformation of the old discipline, and liberty of
conscience. But, I pray you, what liberty of conscience call you that, which
breaking down all pales and boundaries, endeavors what it can to ruin
Kingdom, and Commonwealths, and to suppress all manners and Laws? This
conscience is a wolf in a sheep clothing. And as the Seahorse, according
to ^ib. (...).
Plutarch, kills the sire, that he may more easily couple with the dam; so these
mad men, that they may with more freedom abuse the Commonwealth, which is the
mother of us all, to their own lusts, they strive to disenthrone, and put
down all Kings and Magistrates, who are the common fathers of the people. And
as the Viper is not borne, but by eating out a way to life: so neither is this
new profession, but by the destruction of the Commonwealth, our mother. For, as
Macrobius says of the Epicures sect, this whole faction, carried away from the
truth with a full swinge, cannot by any means subsist, but by the corruption
of manners and Laws, and the utter ruin of States. For where good Laws are in
force, how possibly can any scoundrell fellow Abjectissimus quisque de faece
vulgi ce^do, impudentissimus quisque sycophanta, perditiss. apostata, etc.
, any dunghill cobbler, any talkative, ignorant, impudent coxcombe aspire, and
aim at Principality, and a Kingdom, and Tyranny it self? They, that were
first indeed misled by this way, might be somewhat excused, as being, through
their folly and simplicity, enveagled under a fair pretense, and show of
Evangelicall truth. But now, if any one at this day, and in so great a light of
the Gospel, suffer himself at noontide to be blinded, and seduced; he shall
not be conceived to offend out of folly, and simplicity; but out of
stubbornness, and incurable madness; and therefore must by no means think
to deprecate that judgment, which he has voluntarily, and with his own hands
plucked upon his own head. Thus far out of that learned man, the contrary
minded Mr. Blackwood, if I may borrow the expression, in his book dedicated to
the Excellent Prince HENRY, and inscribed, Of the bond of Religion, and
government.
De Vinculo Religionis and Imperii. A writer, to say no more, (for it is
testimony sufficient) very highly esteemed of, for his In his Speech of the
Post-nati.
singular learning, by that great and eminent Lawyer, Chancellor Egerton L.
Ellesmere.

Farewell.
JUDGE. 9.15. And the bramble said unto the Trees, If in truth ye anoint me King
over you, then come, and put your trust in my shadow; and if not, let fire come
out of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon. Mock-Majestie: OR, The
Siege of MUNSTER. Anno M.D.XXX.III.
NOT far from Munster, one of the chief Cities of Westphaly, is a Church
dedicated to Saint Maurice, wherein one Bernard Rotman in the year M.D.XXXII.
Preached the Gospel to a very numerous auditory. And when as the Citizens
thought of some course to bring him in among them, they were hindered by the
Papists, who gave him some small piece of money, to go some where else, and
exercise his Talent. He hereupon goes his ways* and having touched at several
places, casting about for his best profit and advantage, after some months
absence, returns back to Munster. They that were not well pleased there with,
did what they could to keep him out of the Pulpit: but to no purpose, the
people were already so much taken with him. Therefore presenly some of the
abler and wealthier sort got him in among them into the City: and finding the
Church doors shut up against him, they set him up a Pulpit without doors in the
porch. And being now become confident of their strength, and presuming on their
numbers, they make bold to demannd the keys of the Church from the Priests,
threatening otherwise themselves to break open the doors. Not long after,
Rotman, by the counsel and consent of some, who were chief of his party,
sends setters into the Land-grave of Hessens Country, being not far distant
thence, requesting that some able, and learned men might be sent to assist him
in the plantation of the Gospel. They of Marpurg sent him two; who with
himself and three others, straightway enter into consultation, how with best
speed they might rid all the Papists out of the City, that by this means the
Gospel might be preached with more freedom and liberty. The best way they
could think upon was to sum up all the Popish errors: and so digesting them
into thirty heads, they delivered them to the Magistrates, assuring them all to
be repugnant to the Word of God, offering to make it good out of holy
Scriptures, even with the hazard of their own lives. Hereupon the Magistrates
cite the Friars, and Priests to appear before them in public, exhibiting the
same Articles of their errors alleged against them. Now whereas they had ever
borne the people in hand, that their Doctrine was according to purity, and
grounded on the Word of God, which notwithstanding those Preachers denied,
undertaking to maintain it with their utmost peril; the Magistrates demanded
of them, whether they could confute by Scripture what was objected against
them. This being in such manner proposed unto them, as that they might well
perceive thereby how the Magistrates stood affected, they answered in brief,
that they had nothing to urge for their own defense; but that whereas hitherto
they had made the people believe their Doctrine to be sound and warrantable,
all proceeded either from opinion or ignorance. Wherefore the Magistrates, upon
conviction of their falsehood, and errors in Doctrine, having nothing to answer
for themselves, but the bare confession of their own lewdness, commanded that
for the time to come, they should cease preaching to the people, and yield up
their rooms every where to these new Teachers, who had detected and laid open
their ignorance and impostures. Afterward, by a joint agreement of the
Magistrates and people, they had each of them particular Churches appointed to
teach in, which the Friars in general took very scurvily, but they especially
of the Cathedral, being most of them descended of good Families. They, when
they saw no other remedy, departed in an anger, making their address to the
Bishop; the result of their consultations with whom was, to beset all the ways
and passages, whereby provision might be brought into the City. Which being
done, the Bishop with the rest, went to Telget, a small town some three miles
distant from the City, to take further Counsel there. At length they
dispatched a Messenger with letters to the Magistrates, warning them to cease
from their intended courses, and to restore all things to their former state
and condition; otherwise, that they should be declared as enemies. The Bishop
then was Count Francis Waldecke, and before him Frederick, brother to the
Archbishop of Collen: But he, either for his healths sake, or foreseeing the
storm that was like to fall, had not long before voluntarily quitted both
office and place; contented to lead a private life rather in his own Country,
then to hazard his quietness among a factious and seditious people.

They of Munster, upon deliberation, detayned the messenger, and issuing out
upon Christmas Eve, some nine hundred of them came unexpectedly upon the Town,
which instantly they took, besetting every way, that none might make escape:
but the Bishop had departed thence the day before. Thus they brought the
prisoners into the City, among whom were the chief of the Clergy, and others
of very noble descent. The Magistrates demanded of them, what they intended to
do, and whether they purposed any more to hinder the preaching of the Gospel
for the time to come? They freely answered, they would do what in them lay to
further it. By this means they fell to an agreement, a Copy whereof the
Magistrates sent to the Landgrave of Hessen, withal entreating him, that for
the Gospels and Commonwealths sake, he would not be wanting to help on a
business of so great moment.

Here upon he disparcheth some to them, by whose intercession a reconcilement
was made; But all wrongs and injuries being forgotten, a firm peace was
concluded of; that in six Churches the Gospel should be taught; that
whatsoever was unbeseming or superstitious in matters of Religion, should be
abolished; that in the Cathedral nothing should be altered, that the Citizens
should not think that it any way belonged to them. These Articles of agreement
were subscribed and signed with the seals of the Landgrave, the Bishop and his
Officers, the Nobility, Gentry, and people in general, February the
XIV.M.D.XXXIII.

Things being settled in this manner, there came to Munster one John of Leyden,
an Hollander, and a Botcher by profession, a stiff Anabaptist. He having
cunningly insinuated himself into the acquaintance of the Preachers there,
began at first, in private discourse, to ask them, whether they thought it fit
to baptize Infants? which they affirming, he wholly carried with the contrary
opinion, fell to scoffing and contemning of them. Whereupon Bernard Rotman, of
whom there is former mention, in a public assembly of the people, exhorted
them all to pray unto God, that they might enjoy the Doctrine of Christ in
purity, not polluted with the corruptions of fanaticall and hot-braind men,
especially the Anabaptists, who secretly crept in among them, and frequented
their Assemblies: whose opinion, if it should once but get the upper hand, was
like to prove destructive both to Church and Common wealth. About the same time
came thither also one Herman Stapreda, who being appointed colleague, or partner
in the Ministry with Rotman, began publicly to inveigh against the Baptism
of little ones.

This fellow had been sometime a heater of one Henry Roll, whom they of Vtricht
had not long before this, put to death for his preaching of Anabaptisme. And
this was another degree and step, whereby to advance this new doctrine; the
matter being already brought to such a pass, that all the talk of the Town
was now concerning the Anabaptists. Yet what they did was all in private; none
being admitted into their assemblies, but such as were of their own Sect;
their Teachers likewise forbearing to maintain any thing in public, venting
their doctrines in the night time when others were asleep, then only
performing their misterious works of darkness. But matters could not be
carried so close, but that the people must needs take notice thereof, who took
great exceptions at it, and cried out shame that new doctrines should be sowed
and scattered abroad by night, as if they feared the reproof and confutation
of the day light. Hereupon the Magistrates made an Ordinance, that the chief
authors thereof should quit the City: which indeed they did; but were no sooner
gone forth, but they returned back by another way, being now so bold as to give
it out, that God had commanded them to continue there still, and to play their
parts with a deal of bravery and confidence. This somewhat moved the
Magistrates, and indeed struck them with no small wonder: Therefore to avoid
greater uproares and commotions in the City, as well the Ministers of the
Anabaptists as of the Gospel, are cited to appear in their Town Hall, and a
set number of learned men appointed besides. Here Rotman bewrais of what spirit
and temper he was, and having for so long together kept himself close, he now
in a general concourse publishes his opinion, and with a great deal of
bitterness, he declares the baptism of Infants to be a thing both ungodly and
execrable: but Herman Busch, a very learned man, so ably maintained the
contrary in presence of the Magistrates, that they by a public decree were
strait way commanded to forsake the City. They finding no remedy, pretended
how unsafe it was for them to pass the Bishops Country; whereupon the
Magistrates gave them safe conduct and provision for their journey. But having
formerly resolved never to change their abode for any other, but to nestle here
still, after a while returned privately to their proselytes here, lurking
closely in their houses for a time. The Magistrates in the mean while, before
such time as they began to peep out of their holes, shut up the doors of all
their Churches save one. For their fear was, lest the Anabaptists, whose
numbers daily increased, having once more got the company of their Teachers
there, might wholly shut out the Ministers of the Gospel.

Upon this in November, the Landgrave at the request of the Magistrates, sent
two Ministers more to preach among them, Theodoricke Fabricius and John
Melsinger. But Melsinger, apprehending the commotions in the City, and the
danger which might ensue thereon, returned home again presently. The other
zealously exhorted the Citizens that they would heedfully beware of the
doctrine of the Anabaptists; in which course like wise he held on courageously,
and continued in it, till such time as the Anabaptists getting the upper hand,
made all fly before them out of the City, as you shall hear anon. And to
make all sure, as he thought, the Landgrave prescribed a set form of doctrine
and administration of Discipline, and that by consent of the Magistrates and
people: by whose permission also Peter Wirtem had leave to begin again to
preach; but after a few Sermons, by Rotman's instigation, he was expelled by
the Anabaptists; who being now become more insolent and daring, took upon them
to challenge Fabricius and others to dispute with them. The Magistrates gave
way hereunto, ordering withal that they should use no arguments or authority,
but such as they brought out of Scripture, or the writings of Orthodox men;
appointing some sufficient and learned men, who, as Judges, hearing and
examining what could be alleged on both sides, should decide the
controversy; and what they determined should stand ratified, and acknowledged
by all, for the speedier abolishing of contentions and quarrels, and the
restoring and establishing of peace in the Church: but Rotman and his fellows
would not stand to these conditions. When as therefore they would not agree to
this ordering and decision of the matter in hand, they came to be slighted
generally, and scorned by the common sort of people. To wash away which shame
and contempt, they devised a more effectual and compendious course, and it was
thus. One who was sufficiently instructed to act his part, was suborned by the
rest to counterfeit himself inspired on the sudden by the holy Ghost, and to
run to and fro up and down the City, calling out upon the people, as he went
along, to repent, and be baptized again; that otherwise, the heavy wrath of
God would suddenly fall upon them all. What tumults happened among the people
hereupon, is easy to imagine, every one that had been rebaptized crying up the
same amain, and that too in the same manner. Many therefore fearing the fierce
anger of God, so much threatened by them, were persuaded, being otherwise men of
an honest meaning, but herein betrayed by their own simplicity and weakness.
Others also yielded to them; but to no other end, but to save what they had:
for the Anabaptists handled them that stood out in a very rough manner, turning
them quite out of all. This happened about the end of December, whereupon their
Teachers now began to look out again, having concealed themselves as I told
you before, in their several lurking holes: and so gathering a great concourse
of people in the Marketplace, they cried out amain to slay all such as had
not been rebaptized, esteeming them in no better a condition then Pagans and
Infidels. Next they seized upon the public magazine of Arms, and the Court
Hall, besides the violence they offered to the houses of private men, and those
of best quality. There were some, who to save themselves and theirs, had got
them into a place of the City, which was naturally disposed for defense, and
by this means they took many of them. This bickering with the Anabaptists,
who had fortified themselves in the Market house, lasted so long, till at
length, giving Hostages on both sides, they came to a composition; wherein it
was agreed upon, that every one should enjoy their own Religion, depart to
their own houses, and keep the peace for the time to come. Rotman in the
mean while, and Bernard Knipperdoling, the ringleaders of the faction,
although they seemed outwardly to advance the composition, yet under hand
sending letters to the neighboring Towns, they invited them of their own Sect,
that leaving all they had, they should forthwith repair to Munster; telling
them withal, that what they lost thereby, they should speedily regaine again
with ten-fold usury. Moved by these large swelling promises, they came thither
in great numbers, women as well as men, every one devouring great matters in
their hopes, especially they of meaner condition. The Citizens, especially they
of the wealthier sort, perceiving the City to fill with strangers, withdrew
themselves as conveniently as they could, leaving the Anabaptists and
promiscuous multitude behind them. This was in February, a little before
Shrovetide, in the year M. D. XXXIII.

The one side being by this means weakened, the Anabaptists fell to choosing a
new Magistracy, all of their own faction. They made likewise two new
Burgomasters, Knipperdoling being one of them. And not long after, they set
upon St. Maurices Church, firing it, with all the houses near it. Then they
fell to robbing and spoiling all the other Churches, especially the Cathedral.
And after all this mischief, in the last place, running through every street
of the City, they called out upon the people to repent. Then changing their
note, they warned all the wicked, (as they termed them) straightway to quit the
place, except they had a mind to run the hazard of their lives. Then taking
arms, they presently forced all such as were not of their own Sect, out of
the City, making no reckoning of either age or sex; insomuch, as many women
great with child, miscarried in this heady and tumultuarie flight. Next they
seize upon the goods of them they had driven out. And although this happened,
but the day before the Bishop besieged the City; yet some in their flight
thence, falling into the Bishops hands, were entreated no better then enemies;
and it cost some of them their lives, and among them one or two were Ministers
of the Gospel. Peter Wirtem, of whom I spoke before, being in some danger, was
delivered by intercession of the Landgrave. The other Townsmen warned with the
fear hereof, seeing what danger they that had left the City had run
themselves into, being well meaning men, were forced in a manner against their
wills to stay there still. About this time John Matthews a Prophet, for that
term they use, of high esteem among them, commanded that every one should
bring into the public what gold, silver, or other movables whatsoever they
were possessed of, threatening death to such as should fail hereof. And a house
was publicly appointed for the same purpose. The people being terrified with
the severitie of this Ordinance, were fain to obey. And to avoid all deceit
herein, by keeping back any part of what they had, two maids forsooth, and they
Prophetesses, were suborned, pretending to reveal whatsoever couzenage any one
should commit therein. Neither brought they together only what was their own,
but their goods also were brought in common, whom they had turned out of the
City. In the next place the same Prophet commanded, that no body should have,
or keep by him, any other book, save the Bible: that all other books should
be brought and burnt in public. This commandment he said he had received
from God. Books therefore were brought together in great number, and consumed
in the flames. A certain Smith by chance at the same time, called Hubert
Truteling, had cast forth some jesting speeches against them they called their
Prophets. This coming to be known, they called together the multitude, and
appoint others to be ready in arms; here they accuse and condemn the fellow:
this moved the people exceedingly. The first that laid hands on him was the
Prophet I told you of, throwing him down, and then running a pike into him, yet
the wound proved not mortal, although he ran at him with his full strength. Then
he commanded him to be removed to another place, where he shot him with a
musket which he snatched out of a young man's hand that stood by. But when as
this neither could speed him, he said God had revealed it to him, that the time
was not yet come that he must dye; and that moreover God had revealed his grace
unto him. However he dyed within a few days after. Hereupon the Prophet
taking a long spear, and running violently through the City, cried out, that
God the Father had commanded him to beat the enemy off from the City; but
coming necre the enem es quarters, he was met by a common soldier, who
presently ran him through. And although his predictions fell short, and failed
him now in a second business; yet his fellow Prophets had so infatuated and be
witched the people, and set out the matter in such a dress, that they much
lamented the loss of him; fearing withal, that some heavy judgment hung over
their heads, having so worthy and eminent a man taken from among them. But John
of Leyden being also a Prophet, and of next esteem to him, bids them all be of
good cheer; for that it had been long before revealed to him, that he should
come to such an end; that he would take his Widow home to himself, and make
her his wife.

Two days before Easter they ran into the Churches, and there fell a ringing
all the bells at once. Not long after Knipperdoling prophesies that they who
were now in high place and dignity should be brought low enough; and that
others again should be preferred and raised from an humble and mean condition:
and that he commands all the Churches should be destroyed, maintaining with a
great deal of gravity, that this Commandment proceeded from God himself.
Wherefore upon this asseveration, he was obeyed with a great deal the more
cheerfulness and diligence. About the same time John of Leyden delivers a
sword to Knipperdoling, and orders him to be the common Headsman: for that it
pleased God to have it so, that he who had lately borne the highest office,
having been Burgomaster, should bear now the meanest, and be no better then a
hangman, he being so far from refusing it, that he seemed to entertain his new
place with a great deal of joy and thankfulness.

The Bishop of Munster had for some Months maintained the war alone, upon his
own charges: but now Herman, the Archbishop of Collen, and John, Duke of Cleus.
sent him Money, Ammunition, some Troops of Horse, and Companies of Foot. The
Archbishop also came to the siege, to sit in council with them; and not long
after they made some assaults upon the City in several places; but seeing no
hopes of storming it, they raised seven Forts about it, thereby to keep all
manner of provision from coming to them; intendng that some Companies of Horse
and Foot should lie there all the winter. The Bishop of Munster in the mean
time demanding aids for the contimance of the siege, of all the Princes and
Cities lying upon or near the Rhine, as being his neighbors, and whom the
hazard and danger might in some sort concern, as well as himself. Hereupon a
meeting was appointed at Coblentz, December. XIII. M. D. XXXIV.

After an assault made upon the City to no putpose, John of Leyden composes
himself to a sound sleep, and there for sooth he dreams for three days: being
wakened, he vouchsafes no man a word, but makes signs for paper, and therein
he writes down the names of twelve men, and among them some of the best Gentry
that were left; these were now to govern the Commorwealth in chief, and to have
the ruling of all in his Israel. Now when as by means of this reverend Jury, he
had made way to become King himself, he proposes to the Teachers some certain
tenants of his own devising, which he requires to have confuted by them by
testimonies out of Scripture, which if they could not do, he would then commend
them to the multitude to be approved of and established; the chief of them was
this: That a man is not hound to one wife, and, that a man may have in marriage
as many wives as he pleased. But when as the Teachers seemed to impugn this
his opinion, he calls them all into the Court, and that in presence of his 12.
men; here in a general Assembly he plucks off his cloak, and flinging it upon
the ground, together with his New Testament, he swears, and bears witness by
these tokens, that this Doctrine that he had caused to be published, was
revealed unto him from Heaven, and in terrible words threatens them with the
heavy displeasure of God, in case they consented not. At length they agreed,
and the worthy Teachers, for three days together, preached of nothing but
Matrimony. So he on the sudden got him him three wives, whereof one was the
great Prophets John Matthews, whom we spoke of before. There were others
likewise that followed his example, so that at length it came to be a matter of
the greatest credit, to have many wives: but some of the Citizens were mightily
displeased hereat, and giving notice one to another through the City, they
called together all such as loved the Gospel, into the Marketplace, where
they apprehended the Prophet and Knipperdoling, and all the rest of the
Teachers. Which was no sooner known, but the common people broke in strait with
Arms to their rescue, killing out of hand some fifty of the Citizens, with
several torments: some they bound to trees, and others to stakes, and so shot
them, whilst the chief Prophet cried aloud, that they that made the first shot
at them, did God very pleasing service: the rest they put to other manner of
deaths, but all savouring of exact cruelty.

Toward the end of June there arose another new Prophet, a Goldsmiths, he
calling the whole multitude into the Market place, acquaints them all, that it
was the will and command of their heavenly father, that John of Leyden should
be made King of the whole world: and that setting forth with mighty forces, he
should promiscuously slay all the Kings and Princes of the earth, only he
should spare the common people; that is, such as had loved justice and truth,
and should at length sit on the throne of his father David, till such time as
the father should again require the Kingdom at his hands: that in the mean
while the ungodly being every where suppressed and utterly destroyed, the
righteous generation only should reign in this life. This was no sooner
proclaimed in public, but John of Leyden strait way fell down upon his knees,
and lifting up his hands to heaven; men and brethren, quoth he, I have had,
these many days since, all this revealed unto me; and was my self very
unwilling to have it made known, but now to confirm it, the heavenly Father
has made use of another Minister. Thus he became King: the first thing he did
was to abrogate the authority of his twelve men he had chosen: and as the
fashion of Kings is, he makes choice of his Peerage and Nobility to attend him:
he commands likewise two Crowns to be made him, besides a Scabbard, Chain,
and Scepter, and and other ornaments of Royal Majesty, and all of the purest
and choicest Gold. Then he appoints set days, on which he would hear all
kind of suits and complaints that should be brought before him. As often as he
came abroad, he was attended by his Officers and chosen Nobility: next unto him
followed a couple of youths, both on horseback; he on the right hand carried
the Crown and Bible, the other bare a naked Sword: his chief wife went in the
same pomp and state: For I told you he had many at the same time. In the
Market place he had a throne raised for him, all covered with cloth of Gold.
All actions and complaints which were brought before him, were for the most
part concerning wives and divorces, and these were wondrous often, in so much
as many that had lived to a good age, one with another, came now to be parted
for being man and wife. It happened as the people stood in the marketplace,
thick and close together in the crowd to hear, that Knipperdoling getting up
upon their backs and heads, and creeping along on his hands and knees among
them, and breathing in their faces, would say to every one as he passed, The
Father has sanctified thee; Receive the Holy Ghost. On another day dancing in
the Kings presence, (for so we must now call John of Leyden,) Thus was I wont,
says he, in former time to dance with my whore; but now the Father has
commanded me to perform the same in sight of the King. Being troublesome, not
knowing when to make an end, the King went his ways displeased. Then gets he
into the Chair of State, and plays the King too, till the other returning in
the interim, quite turned him out of his seat, and so into prison for three
days.

During the Siege they wrote a book and published it, calling it the
RESTITVTION. Among other matters in this book they maintain, That the
Kingdom of Christ shall be such here on earth before the final day of
judgment, that the godly and elect shall reign, the wicked every where being
quite destroyed and consumed. They say also that it is lawful sor the people
to depose their Magistrates. Also, although they had no express command from
the Apostles, for the usurping of such jurisdiction, yet they who were now
Ministers of the Church, ought to assume to themselves the power of the sword,
and by force to constitute a new form of a Commonwealth. Moreover that none
excapt he be a true Christian indeed, ought to be endured in the Church. And
more yet, that none can possibly be saved, that brings not in all he has into
the public, reserving nothing for his private possession. Luther and the Pope
of Rome they term to be false Prophets, but Luther to be far worse then the
other. Marriage also they esteemed to be polluted and impure, where the parties
were not enlightened with true faith; accounting it no better then fornication
or flat adultery. These fond opinions of theirs have specially been confuted by
Melancthon, Justus, Menius, Urban King, and that learnedly and at large, in
their several writings of this subject.

After some weeks, the new Prophet as I told you of, blows a Trumpet through
every street of the City, and commands all the people to appear armed before
the Cathedral Church doors; for that they intended now to drive away the
enemy from before the City; and being come thither, they found good cheer
ready prepared and dressed. Whereupon they sat down, as they were bid, some
four thousand of them; and after them some thousand more feasted, who had been
in the mean while upon the watch. The King and Queen with their followers
were the chief waiters at this feast. Having eaten their meat, and almost
made an end of their good cheer, the King comes and gives every one of them
bread, with these words. Take ye, ^at^ ye, decl^^^ ye the death of the Lord.
Then the Queen taking the cup, gave it about saying: Drink ye and declare ye
the death of the Lord. After this, the Prophet before mentioned gets up into a
pulpit, and thence he asks the people whether they would obey the Word of God
or not, then they all affirmed they would. It is the command said he then, of
our Father, that some Teachers of the Word, some 28. should be sent abroad, who
going forth to the four corners of the world, should preach the same doctrine
which is taught in this City. Upon this, he names such as should go, and
appoints them which way they should steare their course. To Osenburg were sent
VI. as many to Warendorf. To Lusat IIX. and so many more to Cosfield. After
this the King and Queen supped with the rest of their Officers, and them that
were designed to be sent abroad. In the midst of supper the King rises,
pretending he had forgotten some weighty business given him in charge by the
Father. By chance they had a soldier in their hands lately taken; to him the
King goes and accuses him of Treason, as it were another Judas, and himself
cuts off his head: Then he comes again to supper, and here he relates his
bloody deed, passing it over with a jest. After supper they that were appointed
were sent away about shutting in of night; besides provision for their
journeys, every one had a piece of gold given him, which they were commanded to
leave in those places, that would not admit of their doctrine, as a testimony
of their ensuing destruction, and everlasting perdition for their refusal of
peace and so wholesome doctrine.

When they were come to the several places whither they were directed, they
first raised a great cry every where about the Town, warning all men in
general to repent, threatening destruction to them otherwise in a short time.
This plain trick effecting nothing, they took their cloakes and spread on the
ground before the Magistrates, casting thereon the money which had been
delivered to them: then assuring them that they were sent by God the Father,
they freely ^ffered them peace, which if they would entertain, they must bring
together and communicate all their possessions: if they refused this proffer of
theirs, then that the piece of money should remain as a token to witness
against their heinous unthankfulness and unbelief. For that now the time was
come, foretold by all the Prophets, wherein God would have justice to be
observed over the whole face of the earth. And when as their King should by the
diligent execution of his office, have brought matters to that pass that
justice might reign every where, that then Christ would again deliver up the
Kingdom to his father. Upon this their wild preaching, they were apprehended,
and at first dealt with in a friendly manner; but this doing no good upon them,
they were afterward questioned upon the rack concerning their faith and course
of life, as also concerning the strength of the City. But their ansers were,
that they only were the men, whose doctrine was true; which likewise they would
make good with the very hazard of their lives. For that since the Apostles age
hitherto, the word of God was never taught aright, nor any justice to be found
among men. That there had been but four Prophets at all since Christ; whereof
two were just ones, David and John of Leyden; the other two unjust ones, the
Pope and Luther; but of the two, Luther the worst. Being questioned why they
forced innocent men out of the City, and from their estates, contrary to their
agreement, and promise past unto them, taking into their possession their
wives, children, and all they had; and by what places of Scripture they could
defend this justice forsooth of theirs? To this they replied, that the time was
now come, wherein Christ had promised, that the mock should possess the earth.
That so of old God gave to the Israelites all the goods of the Egyptians. After
being examined concerning the forces and store of come they had in the City,
and withal about their wives they made several answers; but to the last that
most of them had above 5. Moreover that they daily expected fresh forces from
Frizland and Holland; that as soon as they came, their King would issue forth
with all his army to conquer the whole world, and stay those Kings who had not
administered judgment and justice. After their trial, when as yet they would not
acknow ledg any other Magistrate, saving their own King, but persisted stubborn
in their own, wilful humor, they were all of them beheaded but one, who by
chance made an escape.

But now the City was so straightly besieged, that there was no passage out
left any where. Therefore the Citizens fearing a famine and apprehending the
danger they were in, entered into a consultation of laying hands upon the King,
and delivering him up bound to the Bishop. But the King having notice given him
thereof, chose out twelve from among all the multitude, whom he imagined would
prove most faithful to him to these he committed the chief care and charge of
the City, assigning them every one their particular place to defend, besides
these he appointed himself a guard to suppress al kind of commotions and
seditions that might arise among them. Having done this, calling the whole
multitude before him, he promises them, they should be freed from the siege,
and all kind of want which might ensue thereupon, before Easter next. But for
his twelve chief Commanders. to them he promises far greater matters, they
forsooth should be Marquesses, and Dukes, and Princes, and I know not what,
assigning them every one their Provinces by name, what Signiories and Castles
they should be made Lords of; resolving only to spare the Landgrave, for that
he hoped, as he told them, that he in time should come to be one of themselves.

We told you before, that there was a meeting ordered of the Princes and
Cities of the Rhenish Provinces at Coblentz in December. John Frederick the
Prince Elector of Saxony came of his own accord to this Assembly. After
deliberation, speedy aids were assigned to the Bishop: 300. horse, and 3000.
Foot for three months. These forces, and the managing of the whole War was
committed to Wirich Count Oberstein as General. Here also they agreed, that
other States of the Empire should likewise be solicited for aides; And, because
the Emperor was himself in Spain, that Ferdinand therefore the King of the
Romans should be requested, that a public Diet, upon this occasion might be
appointed against April following. Then they sent Letters, earnestly advising
the besieged to yield themselves up, and to desist from an enterprise, then
which the Sun it self never beheld any more detestable, and to be abhorred:
withal threatening them unless they did obey, and submit themselves to their
lawful Magistrate, that the Bishop who how besieged them, and whose rights they
detained, should not want the assistance of the whole Empire for his just
relief, and redress of his losses. This was about the end of December.

They returned an answer toward the middle of Ian. CO. IO. XXXV. and that in
many words, but nothing to the purpose: yet so, that they still justified and
maintained what they did. As for what they were charged withal, about setting
up a King, they made no answer at all to that. But in their private letters to
the Landgrave, they endeavor to excuse it, adding moreover many things else
concerning the utter destruction of all the ungodly; and of the deliverance and
Kingdom of the godly in this life. Withal they sent to him the book I told you
before they published, entit'led the Restitution, counselling him to repent,
and not as the other ungodly Princes, to make war against them who were
innocent men, and the very people of God. The Landgrave having perused, as well
their book as their letters, and himself noting down with his own hand, what
he conceived amiss therein, he orders his own Divines to make answer
thereunto. And because themselves had signified unto him in their letters,
although but in few words and that too somewhat obscurely, that their King was
not so much set up by themselves, as appointed and placed over by God himself,
he demands of them why they urged not those places of Scripture, upon the
authority of which they imagined it lawful for them so to do; withal what
fore-running signs and prodigies they had to approve and make it good by? For
that God by all his Prophets, long before hand foretold of the coming of
Christ; and that with that evidence and plainness, that not only the Tribe or
stock of which he should be descended, was manifestly expressed, but also the
very time and place where he should be borne. They had desired likewise in the
same letters that their Cause might have a fair hearing: whereunto the
Landgrave answered, that there was now no place left for that; seeing that they
had assumed to themselves the power of the sword, and had been the authors of
so much mischief and calamity; that every body began now plainly to perceive
what was their main drift and aim, the suppressing of all Laws, the overthrow
and utter ruin of Commonweals. And that as their attempt for the maine of
it, was altogether ungodly and execrable; so this their request, to have a
hearing of their Cause, was wholly feigned and counterfeit. That for his part,
he had formerly sent unto them faithful Ministers of the Gospel, by whom
without all question, they had been rightly instructed. But whereas they now
rejecting the wholesome doctrine of such Teachers, had fallen from their
obedience to the Magistrate; had with violent hands seized upon the goods and
possessions of their neighbors; had taken to themselves variety and choice of
wives; had elected and set up a new King among them; had denied that Christ had
taken on him humane nature from the Virgin Mary: had maintained and asserted
the freedom of man's will; had forcibly constrained the people to a
communication of their goods in public; had denied pardon and absolution to
lapsed sinners; that in all these they had foulely violated the Laws, as well
humane as divine.

They having received this Answer from the Landgrave; made their reply, and
withal set him a book, composed and written in the high Dutch, concerning the
Mysteries of Scripture. And in their Letter they set a fair and specious
gloss upon their own cause, together with a defense and justification of their
opinions. But in their book we spoke of, they made a division of the course
and succession of all times, of the whole world, into three parts or ages: That
the first world, from Adam to Noah, perished indeed by the deluge of waters:
That the second, which is that wherein we now live, shall be destroyed by fire:
But their third and new world, which they maintain shall be hereafter, is
that, wherein righteousness and justice shall bear the sway; but before this
last shall begin to dawne and shed its light in the eyes of men, it must
necessarily be, that this old one that now is, be first purged by fire; which
shall not be neither, before Antichrist is revealed, and his power utterly
suppressed and trodden down under foot. That then it shall come to pass, that
the throne of David which was cast down, shall be reared up again and
established; and Christ shall again receive his kingdom here upon earth, and
so shall all the sayings of the Prophets be accomplished. That this present
world is like the age wherein Esau had the power and sway in his hands; for
that now righteousness and equity are put to silence, and the godly ones only
afflicted: But as from the Babylonish captivity, so from the great miseries and
calamities of this present age, there shall at length appear a day of ransom
and restitution, a day of freedom and liberty for the righteous; wherein the
wicked shall abundantly receive the reward of all they have done maliciously
against the Saints of God, as is foretold and threatened in the Revelation. Now
this Restitution is to happen immediately before this blessed age of the world,
which is yet to come; so that all the ungodly and wicked ones being suppressed
all the world over, the seat and dwelling place of justice shall be adorned
and beautified. The Landgrave having perused this book of thei^s, imployes some
of his own Ministers to write and publish an Answer against it.

There was a meeting of some Cities of the Empire at Esling, who among
themselves made a Decree and agreement, that those who formerly met at
Coblentz, had no power or right to impose any burdens upon them, for that the
consent and authority of the Emperor, and all the States of the Empire were to
be required therein. Whereupon they wholly reject that Order, promising mutual
aid and assistance among themselves, in case my one of them should be called in
question, or endangered hereby. Withal they make Remonstrance, that whatsoever
should be ordered and decreed by the public convention of the Princes and
States of the Empire, in a lawful manner, in behalf of the Commonwealth, that
therein they would most readily express their duty.

Now in February, there happening a great penury and scarcity of Come, insomuch
as many perished by reason of h^nger and want; one of the Queens pitying the
sad condition of the pe^p^e in her discourse to her companions, expressed her
mind so far, that she could not once think it, that it was the good will and
pleasure of God, that poor people should daily be destroyed in this manner for
lack of food. The King, who had his Storehouses sufficiently replenished, not
only for necessity and use, but even for Riot, having notice given him hereof,
brings her forth into the Market place, together with his other Queens, and
commanding her to kneel down, strait way he strikes off her head, disgracing
her dead body, as if she had been some common strumpet. The rest of them
applaud the action, giving thanks to their heavenly Father, upon which the King
fell a dancing, encouraging the people also, who had nothing left them but
bread and salt, to dance likewise, and to be merry.

Easter being now come, and no sign of deliverance yet appearing, the King,
who had made them many glorious promises, to devise some thing; whereby to
excuse himself to the people, for six days together counterfeits himself
sick: After this he comes abroad into the Market place, and there he tells them
how he had bin riding upon a blind Ass, and that the Father had laid upon him
the heavy burden of all their sins; that now therefore they were become
clean, washed and purified from all their offenses. And that this was that
deliverance, which he had promised them, and that here with they ought all to
remain contented.

Among other things, which about this time Luther published in the High Dutch,
Alas, says he, what, or how shall I complain, and bewail the sad condition of
these wretched and forlorn men? Most certain it is, that evil spirits in
abundance have taken up here their habitation and refidence. Howsoever, we
ought deservedly to praise the infinite Mercy, and goodness of God herein. For
although by reason of the contempt of the Gospel, and the reproach of Gods
Name, and the effusion of godly men's blood, Germany has deserved to suffer the
fierce wrath and displeasure of God; yet for all that, he did restrain the
rage and furious attempts of Satan; and suffered him not to go on with full
swing, and carreere; but in mercy gave us gentle warning, and admonition; And
especially by this Tragedy, or play, of Munster, which had but little skill, or
cunning in it, he fairly invited, and called us to the amendment of our lives.
For without all doubt, except God had held him in with a strong bridle, he
being so subtle a spirit, and so much his crafts-master, had certainly acted
his part in a far more dangerous manner. But now, seeing the goodness of God
had curbed him in, and abated his power, he rages not, and plays his prancks,
according to his own will and desire; but only so far, as the Divine
permission had given him leave. For this evil Spirit, all whose endeavor is
to subvert the Christian Faith, would not likely make use of such means, as to
persuade the marriage of many wives at once, thereby to effect, and bring about
what he aimed at: because the heinousness, and foulness of the thing it self,
being confessed of all hands, he knew full well how all men, not yet bereft of
their right reason, would abominate it, and cry it down with shame. The Civil
polity indeed, and government, may in some sort be troubled and shaken hereby;
but Christ's Kingdom must be assaulted by other kind of battery then this. He
that will undertake to inveagle, and draw men into snares, must by no means
affect Empire and command, much less act the Tyrant. This being detested alike
by all men, and all eyes being broad open to observe and interpret whereto such
counsels tend; they must go to work by more hidden means, as is were by-way
paths, if they intend their designs shall obtain wished for issue, and take
effect. A sordid and uncouth attire, a behavior of the countenance to
composedness, and austerity; a hanging of the head, with dejected looks;
frequent fastings, and an utter refusal of the very touch of money; abstinence
from flesh-meats, and marriage; a denial of obedi^nce to Magistrates, and a
general disrespect to all kind of temporal, or civil dominion, with an
outward profession however of extraordinary humility in themselves. By these
means indeed, and by such close policy as this, even wise men have been
overreach^t; and by such dark, and mysterious courses, some have made a way and
entrance to great sway and Power. But, as here, by extreme impudence, to
arrogate and usurp the power of a King, and according to the unrulinesse of
unbounded lust, to take away wives; that this was the trick of some shallow and
untaught Devil; or else, if he had all his cunning, and sl ghts about him,
that he was so fettered, and chained by an overmastering Power, that he c^uld
not make use of his tricks at his own pleasure. Which no doubt God does to no
other end, then that we should entertain a more reverentiall respect of the
Divine Providence, and be the sooner excited to Repentance, and amendment of
our ways, before God give him liberty for the full ex rcise of his practices;
who certainly then will set upon ut wi^h redoubled forces. For if this same
poor, and contemptible Scribe-Devill, can of himself raise such Tumults and
Vproares; what shall we do, when the great Devil himself, with all his
knowledge and Arts about him, shall come with full sail against us, and give
us a broadside; being both a cunning Lawyer, and a crafty Divine? Wherefore no
such great fear, or thought, ought to be entertained concerning this so
untrim, and untutored a Devil. Besides I am fully persuaded, that this
Paegeant, and meck-show is not so well approved of by all in the City; but that
it occasions great grief, and sad thoughts of heart, to most there; who no
doubt with tears, and sighs, daily Petition for, and expect a deliverance
from Gods hands; as formerly happened in that tumultuary insurrection of the
Rusticks, and ill advised people, lately among us. And I could w sh from my
heart, that there were no spirit in the whole world, more cunning, and crafty
then is this Munster-Devill: For so long as God does not quite take away his
Word and Gospel from among us, there can certainly be but few, and those not
very wise, who will suffer themselves to be drawn away by so sot^ish and
unsober a master. Notwithstanding I must confess, that when the wrath and
anger of God is kindled against any people, there is no error so unreasonable
or absurd, which the Devil cannot easily persuade them unto; as we plain y
see it happened in the Doctrine of Mahomet. For though the whole composition,
and frame thereof, be but a continued piece of extreme folly, and sensuality,
yet upon the removal, or rather putting out of the divine light of Gods Word
among them, it assumed to it self that strength and vigor, and spread it self
to that large extent and power, which at this day Christendom beholds, and
witnesses, with no less wonderment them ^ha^^. And indeed, except God had by
his Goodness and Providence, repressed the attempts and insolences of Muncer,
Thomas M^^cer. Sleida^^ l. 5.
Germany had now been in no better a condition. For although the Devil, by
Gods permission, can sometimes blow a small spark into a general flame, and
scath-fire; however there is no more compendious way of extinguishing it, then
by the Word of God. For seeing all the Armor of our enemy is uncorporeall, and
spiritual, it is not Troops of Horses, or other warlike preparations, that
can quell and overcome him. Now as for those Books written, and published by
them of Munster, wherein in lively colors they paint, and set forth to view
their own folly and madness; In the first place, their Doctrines contain in
them extreme forpperies, and absurdities; and that in matters of faith. For
speaking of Christ, they say he is not sprung of the seed of the Virgin Mary,
to use their own words; although they confess him to come of the seed of David.
Here they unfold not the matter sufficiently, as it requires. And certainly the
Devil herein conceales some monstrous mystery for his own ends, intimating
unto us, and that too not obscurely, that the seed or flesh of Mary, can not
deliver and save u^. But he loses his labor: For the Scripture tells us, that
Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary, which word in all Languages, Isai. 11.1.
Gal. 4.4.
is understood of the Child, which being conceived and fashioned of the flesh
of the Mother, is brought forth into the World. Again, whereas they condemn
former Baptism, as profane and unholy; therein also they show their little
skill. For they conceive, and think of it, not as a thing of Gods appointment,
but only as the work of man. Wherefore if whatsoever the wicked confer or
receive, ought thus to be slighted and rejected; I wonder indeed why they also
refute not, and fling away, gold, and silver, and other treasures, plundered
from the ungodly; and devise not, and coin for themselves some new invented
materialle. For Baptism is the work and creature of God, as well as all
these. When an ungodly man swears, he does wrong to the Name of God: but if
the Name of God be not a true Name to him, he offends not. He that robs or
steals, or commits rapine, breaks the Law of God: But if the Law be not a
true Law to him, he trespasses not. So also, if the former Baptism be
nothing, neither do they sin any thing that are baptized therewith. Why
therefore do they detest this Baptism, as an ungodly thing, when as according
to their own confession, it is nothing? If the Marriages of former times are,
as they say, to be accounted for fornication, and adultery, seeing they were
contracted, as they will have it, by those that wanted faith; do not they, I
pray you, confess themselves to be the children of Harlots? Now if they be
illegitimate, and bastards, I would feign know, by what right they come to
inherit, and enjoy the privilege of those places they live in? Truly it would
be but reason, seeing they are such, that they should be made incapable of
inheriting; and that in this their new way of marriage, they should find
themselves also some new means and possessions, which as least may have a
fairer and honester title. For it is not seemly methinks, that such good and
godly men forsooth, should maintain themselves upon such whorish and unlawfully
gotten goods; or else be forced, poor souls! by plain violence, and robbery,
to pillage and plunder from other^. As for that ridiculous Kingdom of theirs,
which they cream of, there are so many, and so mani^est impieties in this one
business alone, that I need not make any more words of it: and indeed perhaps,
what I have already said concerning it, may be thought unnecessary, and too
much; especially seeing the whole subject thereof has abundantly enough been
discussed, and laid open, by the labors of other men.

At the Diet, which at the request of the Princes of the Empire, Ferdinand King
of the Romans held by his Deputies at Worms in April, the Cities which
hitherto had contributed no moneys to the War, in the first place made their
Protestation, that they appeared not here, out of any consideration of the
Decree passed at Coblentz; but out of obedience to the Emperor and King
Ferdinand. Whereupon there happened a great debate between them, and the
Princes about the contribution. At length supplies were appointed for five
months; and twenty thousand Crowns ordered to be paid in monthly. Likewise
it was decreed, that upon storming or taking in of the City, the innocent
people should be spared; and that honest men, who were either kept in by the
Siege, or had formerly quitted the place, should have their goods restored
them. Upon the publishing of this Decree, the Bishop of Munster delivers over
his Army to the command of Oberstein. But these public sums being
negligently collected, and indeed not before it was too late, the General was
not able to perform any extraordinary service. Besides, the Commanders, in a
general mutiny of the Soldiers for want of pay, were many times brought in
hazard of their lives.

But when as things were brought to that wretched and lamentable pass within
the City, that very many died daily of the famine; and many also stole away,
and escaped from thence, but so starved and spent with hunger, that they were
pitied by their very enemies, into whose hands they sell; The Commanders
persuaded, and promised the Townsmen, that if they would deliver up their
King, and some few more besides, they should be excused from all particular, as
well damage and danger. The Citizens, although they were wondrous willing so
to do, yet deterred by the cruelty, and watchfulness of their King, they
durst not attempt any thing. For he for his part, was so resolute and
obstinate, that so long as any thing was left, whereupon himself, and some few
others might be kept alive, he never intended to yield up the Town. The
Commanders therefore in the Army send to them the second time, and forewarn
them, that they send out no more, no not so much as women, or children. This
was the first of June.

Next day, they of the Town return an Answer; complaining, that they could
not be admitted to a lawful hearing; adding withal, how hardly, and
grievously they were dealt with, and that without any deserving on their parts
at all; That if any body would take upon him to demonstrate their error, they
would be ready in all dutiful manner to acknowledge it. Then they expound a
place in Daniel, concerning the fourth Beast, which was far the fiercest of all
the rest. Dan. 7.7.
But their Letters ended with this close, that by the help and assistance of
God, they would continue in the confession of that Truth, which hitherto they
had maintained. Now all this was penned according as the King had appointed, and
directed it.

Things in the City being brought to this extremity, and as it were to the last
cast, there were two men, who had made an escape thence, who falling into the
Soldiers hands, one of them passing his own word for his faithfulness, was
suffered to go to the Bishop; and both of them set down a way how to gain
the City. Oberstein, and the Bishop having heard what these fugitives could
say, entered into Counsel thereupon, and June the 22, demanding a Treaty with
the Townsmen, they exhort and persuade them to yield themselves, and save
alive the multitude, which by this time was ready to perish with famine. They,
their King being present, made answer by Rotman; but so, as that they meant not
to forgo their former resolution.

Two days after, about eleven of the clock at night, Oberstein, without any
noise, draws up some of his forces close to the City, and by means of one of
the fugitives, some Soldiers chosen of purpose, creeping along the Trench, at
length got into their worked, killing the Corp du Guard. Others followed close
at their heels, and finding a small gate open, some five hundred of them, with
some Officers and Colors, got into the City. But the Townsmen gathering into
a body, stopped the passage, that the rest could not break in; and yet with much
ado it was that they kept them out. So making good the gate again, they
straightway affaulted them that first made the breach and entry, and slew many
of them. Thus for an hour or two, there continued an eager skirmish on both
sides. But they that were shut in, finding by chance another gate, with no
strong guard at is, forced it open, and so made an entrance for their fellows,
who presently broke in like a sea. Howsoever at first the Townsmen made head
against them, fortifying themselves in the Marketplace. But at length
despairing, having lost many of their men at the first encounter, they all
cried out for Quarter, which was readily granted them. At this very bout the
King, and Knipper doling were taken. Rotman forsaking all hopes of life, and
running desperately into the thickest of the enemies, was slain; utterly
refusing to (...) himself alive into their hands.

The City thus taken, the Bishop seized upon half the booty, and the
Ammunition belonging to it: and so dismissing the Army, he only reserved two
companies as a guard for his own person.

There was this year in July, another diet also of the Empire held at Worms,
wherein K. Ferdinand, by his Deputies, made a motion, that now the City was
taken, the Anabaptists through the whole Empire, should every where be
destroyed and made away. Also that the Princes would move the Pope of Rome for
a General Council. They made reply, that order had been taken by former
Edicts, what was thought fit to be done with the Anabaptists: And as for a
General Council, that the Emperor himself had diverse times solliciced the
Pope therein; and that therefore, for their pares, they could say no more to
it. At the same meeting, the Bishop of Munster demanded reparation of damages,
and the costs he had been at during the war; complaining withal, that the
moneys agreed upon, had not as yet been paid in to him.

When as nothing could certainly be determined of, there being but few of the
Princes and States there present, another Diet was appointed there, to begin
the next November following, where then should be a full hearing, both
concerning the Account and expenses of the War; and also it should be
determined, what form of Government should be established In the City for the
time to come. When the appointed day was come, King Ferdinand's Ambassador
first relates, and makes known the causes of thi^ present Assembly, and moves
among other things, that they would conclude upon an agreement, that the City
now lately regained, might con^i^ns, and enjoy its former Religion. The Bishops
Agent lays open and decla es, how great charges and expenses he had been at
for the whole time of the War; h^w great a debt he had contracted thereby; how
having regained the C^^y, to prevent more stir and danger, he was
constrained to raise two fortresses within it, and to put Garrisons in them; of
all which he desired that a speedy consideration might be had. Hereto answer
was made; That the Bishop had taken into his hands, as well the greater part of
the booty, and all the Ammunition, as the Citizens goods; all which belonged to
the common right of the Empire; that it was fitting an even estimate being
made, that all this should be considered in the bill and account of his
expenses: and what else was desired, should have a reasonable and fair
consideration had of it. Next it was determined, that the Bishopric of Munster
should be at the disposing of the Empire, according to the ancient custom,
That all the Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens, except such as were Anabaptists,
should be suffered to return, and freely to enjoy their own; That the Bishop
should order matters of Religion, according to the Decrees of the Empire: That
at the Spring next ensuing, the Agents of the several States, and Princes,
should meet at Munster, and there taking-examination of the Citizens behavior,
should acquit the innocent; and level all such Forts and Works, as the
Anabaptists had raised: That the Bishop likewise should raze those Fortresses
he had built, and should with all convenient speed deliver out of Custody, and
punish according to their demerits, the King, Knipperdoling, and Crechting, who
were his Prisoners.

As for the Decree about the exe^cise of Religion, the Elector of Saxeny, the
Landgrave, the Princes of Wittenberg, and Anhalt, openly declared, and
protested, against any assent thereto: Some Cities likewise did the same;
Neither would they agree to the laying level of the old Works about the City;
as for demolishing those lately raised, they made no great matter of that. The
King, and his two fellow Prisoners were led up and down the Town in sight of
the Princes; and that more for sport, and pastime, then for any thing else.
Upon this occasion, and opportunity, the Ministers that came along with the
Landgrave entered into discourse with the King, and disputed with him
concerning some of his opinions; as about the Kingdom of Christ, and the Civil
Magistrate, concerning Justification, and Baptism; of the Supper of the Lord,
the Incarnation of Christ, and of Marriage; And by the Testimonies of holy
Scriptures, they did so much good upon him, that though they could not wholly
allter him, he with some reluctance still defending his own; yet they so
weakened him, and turned him, that at length he in a manner generally yielded
unto them; which some thoughs, he did more out of a hope to save his life,
then that he was thoroughly convicted by their Arguments. For the second time
they came to visit him, he made them promise, that so he might receive his
pardon, he would bring the business so about, that all the Anabaptists who were
in Holland, Brahant, ENGLAND, and Frisland, in great numbers, should be hush'c
and silenc't, and in all respects yield obedience to the Magistrate. Then they
disputed with his Companions, both face to face, and by writing, concerning
Mortification, the Baptism of Infants, the Communion of goods, and of the
Kingdom of Christ.

When they were brought to Telget, the King being demanded by the Bishop, by
what authority he had arrogated, and assumed to himself such Power and License
over his City and people? The King demanded likewise of him again, How he came
by any such command, or right of possession? The Bishop replying, That he had
it conferred upon him by the consent of the Princes, and People; Why and I,
answered the King, was called thereto by God himself. The 18. of January they
were brought back again to Munster, and every one committed apart to several
custody. The same day also came the Bishop thither, together with the
Archbishop of Colen, and the Ambassadors of the Duke of Cleve. The two days
following were wholly spent in wholesome and godly admonitions used unto them,
to reduce them from their idle conceits. And the King indeed acknowledged his
offenses, and sought to Christ, by Prayers, for the forgiveness of his sins.
But the other two would by no means confess any fault; but continued with a
great deal of obstinacy maintaining their errors. The next day the King was
brought forth unto an high place, raised from the ground, and there tied to a
stake. Here two Executioners tore his flesh with red hot Pincers. For the three
first plucks, he was silent, and made no great expression of what torment he
felt: but afterward incessantly, with a great deal of vehemincy, he besought
God for mercy, and pardon. Having been tortured and torn in this manner, for a
whole hour and more, he was at length run through the breast with a sword, and
so dyed.

His two Companions were put to the same torment, and execution. Their dead
bodies were trust up in Iron hoopes, and hung out for the public view, from
the highest Tower in all the City; the King indeed in the middle; but so, as
that he hung the full height of a man above the other two.

And thus Knipperdoling found his own Prophecy made good agains, Vide page 8.
and that too in regard of the second part of it.

(...).
(...).
FINIS.

