VERITAS INCONCUSSA, OR, A most certain Truth asserted, THAT KING CHARLES THE
FIRST, Was no MAN OF BLOOD, But a MARTYR For His People.

Together with a sad, and impartial enquiry, whether the King or Parliament
began the War, which has so much ruined, and undone the Kingdom of England:
and who was in the defensive part of it*

By FABIAN PHILIPPS Esquire;

Exoritur aliquod majus e magno malum. Nondum ruentis Ilii fatum stetit. SENEC.
Tragoed. in Troade Act. 3. LONDON, Printed by Richard Hodgkinson, in the Year
1649. and reprinted by Thomas Newcomb, and are to be Sold by William Place at
Grayes-Inn-Gate, 1660.

portrait

Though CHARLES be added to their heaps of slain
They cannot prove that Abel murdered Cain.
He died a Martyr for his Peoples good,
Vote what they can, they are guilty of his blood
But their's the sin; His the eternal Glory,
And Truth commends to Time his lasting Story.
TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
IT having been the Cardo quaestionis, or too much a question, betwixt your
Royal Father, and His Parliament, to whom the sin of our late Civil Wars and
miseries, with the bloody and horrid consequences thereof, did belong; though
without question He was no way guilty of it, but was a Martyr and sufferer in
it, and the guilt and profit of that great and crying sin being so inlaid and
riveted in the promoters thereof, as it was not only by time and successes,
which are not seldom the encouragers and supporters of it, become to be the
interest of a great part of that Faction or people, but to be miscalled Piety,
Religion, good affection and Godliness it self, and yet sticks as a Leprosy to
those and their seed that were more wicked then the covetous but unbloody
Gehazi; and if God of his mercy do not cleanse them from it, will transmit it
with an impenitency to boot (which we do not find entailed upon Gehazi's) to
their posterities.

The ensuing vindication of your Royal Father, that he was not the Contriver,
Author, and Beginner of that War, which has so undone and Harassed these three
Nations, was for the most part written by me a little before His Martyrdom, and
finished and published about the month of April 1649. in the midst of a fiery
persecution, and ruining of all that did but act, or write, or do any thing on
His behalf, and now reprinted and come abroad again, may, if publicly owned
under your Majesty's gracious Patronage, after Your happy restoration, and the
peoples sense and sight of their sin and follies, be more instrumental in the
conviction and converting of many of those misguided zelots or thriving
sinners, then it was or could be before they had tasted and been so long
acquainted with miseries, and release them out of the prisons of that
self-conceitedness and opiniastrete wherein Satan has cunningly lodged and
imprisoned their deluded Souls, making them believe that they are in the Church
way to Heaven, when as without a timely repentance they are but going down to
the place of everlasting burnings: and is now the more necessary for that no
longer ago then in April last a printed and public Address was as impudently,
as wickedly, made by a Seditious party, calling themselves, the most faithful
friends and servants in the Common-cause, to the Lord General Monck, and the
Officers of the Army under his Command, to persuade them, upon false and
mistaken grounds, out of their Loyalty, by telling them, That though it were
possible that they should forget the public Interest, and their own, yet
certainly God would not all the injuries and oppressions done by that Family,
which pretends to the Government of these Nations, to His Church and people in
these and other Nations: And though the Inscription of Exit Tyrannus, which was
fixed over the place where the Statue of the late King formerly stood at the
Exchange, has been blotted out by the Rabble, yet it was written with the Pen
of a Diamond in the hearts of many thousands, and will be so hereafter in the
Adamantine Roles of Fame and History.

And that one of the great Incendiaries and Capital Offenders could very lately
and since the Parliaments voting of him to be excepted, desire and make means
for a Pardon, but being put to show his repentance by a public retractation,
in order to the obtaining of your Majesty's favor, would rather be without it
then forsake his former opinions; and that there are too many amongst those
many that made acclamations and seemed to rejoice in Your Majesty's return to
Your Throne, and most ancient and undoubted Rights, who have not changed their
Spots, but counterfeiting Loyalty to get blessings they never deserved, can
outdo a Proteus, or the greatest of Dissemblers, and only keep their vomit to
make a Cordial of when they shall but espy an opportunity to lick it up again,
and think themselves as infallible as they fancied the Spirit to be which
deluded them.

To convert whom, if possible, and those too too many who have exceeded the
gainsayings of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and been greater gainers by it, and
to lead them into the right way, and guard as well as I could Piissimi Regis
Cineres, the ashes and memory of my late Sovereign from the violation,
scandals, and injuries, which those who are rightly called Phanaticks, are
never a weary to put and cast upon them, has been and is the design as well as
the duty of him, who having not come in only at the eleventh hour, but labored
all that he could in the other part of the morning, or day in the vineyard of
Loyalty, shall never cease to be a lover and servant of that Truth and Reason
which enjoins it; And

Your MAJESTY'S Loyal and Obedient Subject, FABIAN PHILIPPS.

TO HENRY BELL A PRINTER. Arrogating to himself to be the Author of this Book.
HENRY BELL,
YOu might have contented your self with that unjust, and now too common
liberty, taken by some Printers and Booksellers in abusing of Authors Readers
and People, by a false imposition of names, and many counterfeit pieces, and
selling of one thing for another, which in the want and absence of the good and
Kingly Government of England, and a Court of Star Chamber, (which in the
thirteenth year of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, had limited the
Printers in the City of London not to exceed the number of twenty, two of which
who were then named, are now only left alive) our late unruly and licencious
Times allowed you, for in our formerly well-ordered days of a peaceable
subjection to a most gracious King, Books were as in most other Kingdoms of
Europe to be licenced before they could be printed, and the Printers and
Stationers knew not at least, durst not put in practice those grand Cheates,
which of late too many of them have put upon the people, nor did use as many
tricks in their Trades, as the devil could invent or provide for them, by
printing and publishing books, manuscripts, and broken pieces or fragments of
manuscripts under the name of some worthy men that were long before dead, or
were mere strangers to them, to make them sell the better; insomuch as old
books are usually set forth with new Titles, and the Titles of unsaleable books
changed and altered; a part of one book and a part of another clapped together,
under the name of an Author which had no acquaintance at all with them; several
old Pamphlets bound together under a new Title of one of them, to carry of the
other, and deceive the heedless or hasty buyer; which with many other deceipts
not here enumerated (for it must be only some Renegado knavish Printer or
Stationer that can discover all of them) are no better then forgeries and
cheatings, which are almost weekly dressed and sent abroad by them or by the
means of some, who at pityfull rates are hired to be their Epistle makers, and
Title contrivers, and deserve a mark to be set upon them for Spurious and
illegitimate.

And not have done that which you, or he, which confederated with you (for you
said there was a Citizen which went a share with you) have adventured to do
unto me (whilst the second edition of this book was almost finished) by
printing of it, and calling it your own, thereby exceeding them all in villainy,
for though your servant confessed that you had only printed this book by a
book formerly printed, and that your self acknowledged to me and Mr. Newcomb
the Printer that you were not the Author of it, and understood not Latin, and
that other men of your trade can tell, as well as your self, that you
understood so little of English, as that you were formerly only a Press-man,
and had not abilities enough to be a COMPOSITER; yet you could have the
impudence in the printing and publishing of my book, which two Eminent and
Learned Gentlemen, now His Majesty's servants in the Court of England, can
attest to have been a fruit and effect of my Loyalty in the beginning of the
year 1649. when you would not have been so forward to have stolen the danger
and hazard of the Author and Printer, to leave out half the Title, and make
some additional title of your own or some other man's composing, and dedicate it
to his Majesty as a mite of your loyalty, and say that it was written in the
midst of his and our sufferings (whereas it was in the very beginning of his now
Majesty's Reign, and finished within few weeks after his Royal Fathers death.)
And though you as if your conscience had forbid you directly to own, that which
was none of yours, did only subscribe your self W. H. B. and to make the book
and the price the bigger, had bound up with it a Lift, very often before
printed, of the Names of the late Kings Tryers, and the thirty five witnesses
which swore against* Him, and some Orders made in that business; yet adding to
that also a short History, as you call it, of His now Royal Majesty Charles the
Second, you are found in the beginning thereof to use these words, Having, I
hope, sufficiently cleared His late Royal Majesty from that execrable sin of
Blood guiltiness. And the History beginning with what you or some other for
you, have picked and taken out of other men's works and relations, when you came
to mention the Kings escape out of England after Worcester fight by the help of
Mrs. Jane Lane, you have stolen out of Mr. James Davies the Author of the
History of our gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second, from the later end
of page 177. unto the beginning of 185. more then seven whole pages with scarce
four or five words difference, (which might be only the Errata's of the Press)
by which your abuse of me in taking from me that which was mine own, and of His
Majesty in dedicating that unto Him which was none of your own, and your
falsities and ill dealing with me, you have as all men may perceive, enforced
me to bestow this Epistle upon you, wherein doing my self right, I shall do you
no wrong to give notice to the world how much you have gone beyond your last;
what a Lurcher, a Kite, and Filcher of other men's labors you are, and seeing
you cannot be taken to be like the mad man of Argos, who would make it his
business to go every day to the Haven, and when he saw any ships come in
rejoice very much, and call them his own; but rather to be like one of the
Spirits, as in detestation they are called, who steal away children to sell
them away to foreign plantations, and will needs act again the part of Aesops
Crow in the fable, who making himself very gallant with the feathers of other
Birds, was by them at last dispoiled, and left a ridiculousnaked Squob. You may
now measure your shadow, and see how much bigger this your doughty exploit has
made it, and are only to thank your self for, being thus exposed to a naked
view, and if you be capable of any blushing or credit, may be ashamed of it,
and forbear to walk any more in the sinful paths of those men of your Trade,
who being to Scholars and men of learning like those foul and Ravenous birds
the Harpies do by such or the like Tricks; so abuse, pollute and stain all kind
of learning, as no man knows how to write, or any man how to buy without being
grossly abused or cheated; and he which is or has been the careful and
painful Author of a book, be it never so good or profitable for the
Commonwealth of learning, shall be in danger to have it transposed or owned
when and by whomsoever a naughty and juggling Printer or Stationer pleases;
which calls for a speedy remedy, as well as punishment, in part whereof you and
your fellow Gypsies may receive this animadversion, until a more smart and
legal one may be provided for you.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. WHo first of all raised the fears and jealousies? page 6 CHAP. II.
THe proceedings betwixt the King and Parliament, from the Tumultuous and
Seditious coming of some people to the Parliament and White Hall, until the 13.
of September, 1642. being 18. days after the King had set up His Standard at
Nottingham. 13 CHAP. III. WHether a Prince or other Magistrate laboring to
suppress or punish a Rebellion of the people, be tied to those rules, are
necessary for the justifying of a war if it were made between equals? 83 CHAP.
IV. SUppose the War to be made with a neighbor Prince, or between equals,
whether the King or Parliament were in the defensive or justifiable part of it?
93 CHAP. V. WHether the Parliament in their pretended Magistracy have not taken
lesser occasions to punish or provide against Insurrections, Treasons, and
Rebellions, as they are pleased to call them. 177 CHAP. VI. WHo most desired
Peace, and offered fairliest for it. 186 CHAP. VII. Who labored to shorten
the War, and who to lengthen it. 192 CHAP. VIII. Whether the conditions
offered by the King would not have been more profitable, if they had been
accepted; and what the people have got instead of them. 205
ERRATA. Which escaped the Press.
Page 120. l. 15. read, their for they. p. 118. l. 20. Saxon for Sixon. p. 122.
l. 22. interfere a.

KING CHARLES The first, No Man of Blood: BUT A Martyr for his People.
THat there has been now almost seven years spent in Civil Wars, abundance of
Bloodshed, and more Ruin and Misery brought upon the Kingdom by it, then all
the several Changes, Conquests and Civil Wars it has endured from the time of
Brute, or the first Inhabitants of it; every man's woeful experience (some only
excepted who have been gainers by it) will easily assent unto.

No mervail therefore that many of those who (if all they allege for
themselves, that they were not the cause of it, could be granted to be true)
might either have hindered or lessened it, would now put the blame of so horrid
a business from themselves, and lay it upon any they can persuade to bear it:
And that the Conquerours, who would bind their Kings in Chains, and their
Princes with fetters of Iron, and think they have a Commission from Heaven to
do it (the guilt of it being necessarily either to be charged upon the
Conquerors or conquered) are not willing to have their triumphant Chayres, and
the glories (as they are made believe) that hang upon their shoulders, defiled
with it; but do all they can to load their Captives with it. But howsoever,
though the success and power of an Army has frighted it so far out of
question, as to charge it upon the King and take away his life for it; by
making those that must of necessity be guilty of the fact, if He should have
been (as in all reason He ought to have been) acquitted of it, the only Judges
of him;

It may well become the judgment and conscience of every man that will be but
either a good Subject or a Christian, not to lend out his Soul and Salvation so
much on trust, as to take those that are parties, and the most ignorant sort of
men's words for it: but to enter into a most serious examination of the matter
of Fact it self, and by tracing out the footsteps of Truth, see what a
conclusion may be drawn out of it. In pursuance whereof (for I hope the
original of this Sea of blood will not prove so unsearchable as the head of
Nile) we shall enquire who first of all raised the Fears and Jealousies.

Secondly, represent and set down the truth of the matter of Fact, and
proceedings betwixt the King and Parliament; from the tumultuous and seditious
coming of the People to the Parliament and Whitehall, until the 25. Aug. 1642.
when he set up his Standard at Nottingham, and from the setting up of his
Standard until the 13 September. 1642. when the Parliament by their many acts of
hostility, and a negative and churlish answer to his propositions, might well
have put him out of hope of any good to be obtained from them, by messages of
Peace sent unto them.

Thirdly, whether a Prince or other Magistrate, laboring to suppress or
punish a rebellion of the People, be tied to those rules are necessary to the
justifying of a war if it were made between equals.

Fourthly, suppose the war to be made with a neighbor Prince, or between
equals, whether the King or Parliament were in the defensive or justifiable
part of it.

Fifthly, whether the Parliament in their pretended magistracy have not taken
lesser occasions to punish or provide against insurrections, treasons and
rebellions, as they are pleased to call them.

Sixthly, who most desired Peace, and offered fairliest for it.

Seventhly, who labored to shorten the War, and who to lengthen it.

Eighthly, whether the Conditions proffered by the King, would not have been
more profitable for the People if they had been accepted, and what the Kingdom
and People have got in stead of it.

CHAP. I. Who first of all Raised the Fears and Jealousies.
THe desiring of a guard for the Parliament because of a tale rather then a
plot; That the Earl of Crawford had a purpose to take away the Marquis of
Hamiltons life in Scotland; the refusing of a legal guard offered by the King;
and His protestation to be as careful of their safety, as of the safety of His
Wife and Children; The dream of a Tailor lying in a ditch in Finsbury fields,
of this and the other good Lord, and Commonwealths-men to be taken away; The
training of horses under ground, and a plague-plaister (or rather a clout taken
from a galled horseback) sent into the House of Commons to Mr. Pym; A design
of the Inhabitants of Covent Garden to murder the City of London; News from
France, Italy, Spain and Denmark, of Armies ready to come for England; and a
supposition, or feverish fancy, That the King intended to introduce Popery,
and alter Religion, and take away the Laws and Liberties of the people, and
many other the like seditious delusions, the People (so much as their misery
will give them leave) have now found out the way to laugh at; either came from
the Parliament party, or were cherished and turned into advantages by them. For
they had found the way, and lost nothing by it, to be ever jealous of the King;
And whilst he did all he could to show them, that there was no cause for it,
they who were jealous without a cause, could be so cunning, as to make all the
haste they could to weaken Him, and strengthen themselves by such kind of
artifices.

But He that could not choose, but take notice that there were secret ties and
combinations betwixt his English and Scottish subjects, the latter of whom the
Earl of Essex and Sir Thomas Fairfax themselves understood to be no better then
Rebels, and therefore served in places of Command in His* Majesty's Army
against them; That Sir Arthur Haselrig had brought in a Bill in Parliament to
take the Militia by Sea and Land away from him, saw himself not long after by a
printed Remonstrance or Declaration made to the People of all they could but
imagine to be errors in his government, arraigned and little less then
deposed; The Bishops and diverse great Lords driven from the Parliament by
Tumults; Was enforced to keep his gates at White Hall shut, and procure diverse
Captains and Commanders to lodge there, and to allow them a table to be a guard
for him, and had been fully informed of many Traiterous Speeches used by some
seditious mechaniques of London, as that, It was pity He should reign, and
that The Prince would make a better King, was yet so far from being jealous, or
solicitous to defend himself by the sword and power which God had entrusted him
with, as when he had need and reason enough to do it, he still granted them
(that he might not seem to deny what might but seem to be for the good of his
People) every thing they could reasonably ask of him, or he could but
reasonably tell how to part with (though he could not be ignorant, but an ill
use might be made of them against himself) As the putting down of the
Star Chamber, and high Commission Court; the Courts of Honor, and of the North
and Welsh marches; Commissions for the making of Gunpowder, allowing them
approbation or nomination of the Lieutenant of the Tower, and did all and more
then all his Predecessors put together, to remove their jealousies. And when
that would not do it; stood still, and saw the game played on further; Many
Tumults raised, many Libels and Scandalous Pamphlets publicly printed,
against His Person and Government: and when he complained of it in Parliament,
so little care was taken to redress it, as that the Peoples coming to
Westminster in a Tumultuous manner, set on and invited by Pennington and Ven,
two of the most active Mechanic Sectaries of the House of Commons, it was
excused and called a Liberty of Petitioning: And as for the Libels and
Pamphlets, the licensing of Books before they should be printed, and all other
restraint of the printing presses were taken away, and complaints being made
against Pamphlets and Seditious books, some of the Members of the House of
Commons were heard to say, The work would not be done without them; and
complaints being also made to Mr. Pym against some wicked men which were ill
affected to the Government; he answered, It was not now a time to discourage
their Friends, but to make use of them. And here being as many jealousies and
fears, as could possibly be raised or fancied without a ground on the one side;
against all the endeavors could be used on the other side to remove them, We
shall in the next place take a view of the matter of Fact that followed upon
them, and bring before you.

CHAP. II. The Proceedings betwixt the King and the Parliament from the
Tumultuous and Seditious coming of the People to the Parliament, and
White Hall, till the 13. of September, 1642. being 18 days after the King had
set up His Standard at Nottingham.
WHen all the King could do to bring the Parliament to a better understanding
of Him, did, as they were pleased to make their advantage of it, but make them
seem to be the more unsatisfied, that they might the better mis-represent Him
to the People, and petition out of his hands as much power as they could tell
how to persuade him to grant them, and that he had proofs enough of what has
been since written in the blood and hearts of His People, That the five Members
and Kimbolton intended to root out Him and His Posterity; subvert the Laws, and
alter the Religion, and Government of the Kingdom, and had therefore sent His
Sergeant at Arms to demand their persons, and Justice to be done upon them. In
stead of obedience to it, an order was made; Order 3. Jan. 1641.
That every man might rescue them, and apprehend the Sergeant at Arms for doing
it; which Parliament Records would blush at. And Queen Elizabeth (who was wont
to answer her better composed Parliaments upon* lesser occasions with a Camden
Annals Eliz. 99. 103.
Cavete ne patientiam Principis laedatis, and caused Parry a Doctor of the
Civil Laws, and a Member of the House of Commons, by the judgment and advice
of as sage and learned a privy Council and Judges as any Prince in Christendom
ever had, to be hanged, drawn, and quartered for Treason, in the Ibidem p. 391.
394, and 395.
old Palace of Westminster, when the Parliament was sitting) would have wondered
at. And 4 January 1641. desiring only to bring them to a legal trial and
examination, went in Person to demand them, and found that his own peaceable
behavior, and fewer attendants (then the two Speakers of the Parliament had
afterward when they brought a whole Army at their heels, to charge and fright
away eleven of their fellow Members) had all manner of evil constructions put
upon it, and that the Houses of Parliament had adjourned into London, and
occasioned such a sedition amongst the People, as all the Trained bands of
London must guard them by Land, when there was no need of it, and many Boats
and Lighters armed with Seamen and murdering pieces by water, and that unless
He should have adventured the mischief and murder has been since committed
upon him, by those which at that time intended as much as they have done since;
it was high time to think of his own safety, and of so many others were
concerned in it; having left London but the day before, (upon a greater cause
of fear then the Speakers of both Houses of Parliament in July 1647. to go to
the Army) retires with the Prince His Son (whom the Parliament labored to
seize and take into their custody) in His company toward York. 8. January
1641. A Committee of the House of Commons sitting in London, resolved upon the
question Vide the vote in Mr. Viccars book entitled God in the Mount. p. 78.
That the actions of the City of London, for the defense of the Parliament,
were according to Law; and if any man should arrest or trouble any of them for
it, he is declared to be an enemy to the Commonwealth. And when the King, to
quiet the Parliament, 12 Jan. 1641. was pleased to signify, that for the
present he would waive his proceedings against the five Members and Kimbolton,
and assures the Parliament that upon all occasions He will be as careful of
their Privileges, as of His Life or His Crown: Yet the next day after, they
Declared the Lord Digby's coming to Kingston upon Thames but with a Coach and
six horses in it, Collect. of Parl. and Decl. and Kings Mess. and Decl. p. 50.
to be in a Warlike manner, and disturbance of the Commonwealth; and take
occasion thereupon to order the Sheriffs of all Counties in England and Wales,
with the assistance of the Justices of Peace, and trained bands of the several
Counties, Ibid. 51.
to suppress any unlawful assemblies, and to secure the said Counties and all
the Magazines in them.

14 January, 1641. Ibid. 52.
The King, by a second Message, professes to them he never had the least
intention of violating the least privilege of Parliament, and in case any
doubt of breach of Privileges remain, will be willing to clear that, and
assert those, by any reasonable way His Parliament shall advise him to. But the
Design must have been laid by, or miscarried, if that should have been taken
for a satisfaction; and therefore to make a quarrel which needed not, they
Order the morrow after a Charge and Impeachment to be made ready Ibid. 53.
against Sir Edward Herbert the Kings Attorney General, for bringing into the
House of Peers the third of that instant January, by the Kings direction, a
Charge or Accusation against Kimbolton and five Members, etc.

Ibid. 77. and 78.
In February 1641. Seize upon the Tower of London (the great Magazine and
Storehouse of the Kingdom) and set some of the trained bands of London,
commanded by Major General Skippon, to guard it.

1. March 1641. Petition for the Militia, and tell him; If he would not grant
it, they would settle and dispose it without him: And the morrow after Resolve
upon the Question, That the Kingdom be forthwith put in a posture of Defense;
in such a way as was already agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament; and
Order the Earl of Northumberland, Lord High-Admiral, to Rig, and send to Sea
His Majesty's Navy; and notwithstanding that the King 4 March 1641. by His
Letter directed to the Lord Keeper Littleton, had signified that He would
wholly desist from any proceedings against the five Members and Kimbolton: Sir
John Hotham, a Member of the House of Commons, (who before the King had accused
the five Members and Kimbolton, Vide the Petition of some Holderness men to the
King; 6 July 1642.
had by Order of Parliament seized upon the Town of Hull, the only fortified
place of strength in the Kingdom, and made a Garrison of it) summoned and forced
in many of the trained Soldiers of the County of York to help him to guard it.

Eighth of March 1641. Before the King could get to York, it was Voted, That
whatsoever the two Houses of Parliament should Vote or Declare to be Law, the
People were bound to obey: And when, not long after, the King offered to go in
person to suppress the Irish Rebellion; That was Voted to be against the Law,
and an encouragement to the Rebels; and they Declared that whosoever should
assist him in his Voyage thither, should be taken for an enemy to the
Commonweal. And 15 of March, 1641. Resolved upon the Question, That the
several Commissions granted under the great Seal to the Lieutenants of the
several Counties, were illegal and void, and that whosoever should execute any
power over the Militia, by color of any such Commission, without consent of
both Houses of Parliament, should be accounted a disturber of the peace of the
Kingdom.

Ibid. 153.
April 1642. Sir John Hotham seizes the Kings Magazine at Hull, and when the
King went but with a small attendance to demand an entrance into the Town,
denies him; though he had then no Order to do it: Notwithstanding all which,
the 28 of April, 1642. they Vote, That what he had done was in obedience to the
commands of both Houses of Parliament, and that the Kings proclaiming him to be
a Traitor, was a high breath of Privilege of Parliament; And Ordered, All
Sheriffs and Difficers to assist their Committees sent down with those their
Votes to Sir John Hotham. In the mean time the Pulpits flame with seditious
invectives against the King, and incitements to Rebellion, and the People
running headlong into it, had all manner of countenance and encouragement unto
it; but those Ministers that preached Obedience and sought to prevent it; were
sure to be imprisoned, and put out of their places for it.

Sir Henry Ludlow could be heard to say in the House of Commons, Ibid. 550.
That the King was not worthy to Reign in England; And Henry*s Marten, That the
Kingly Office wa^ forfeitable, and the happiness of the Kingdom did not depend
upon him and his Progeny: And though the King demanded justice of them, were
neither punished, nor put out of the House, nor so much as questioned or blamed
for it.

The Militia, the principal part of the Kings regality, without which it was
impossible either to be a King or to govern, and the sword which God had given
him, (and his Ancestors for more then a thousand years together had enjoyed)
and none in the Barons wars, nor any Rebellion of the Kingdom since the very
being or essence of it, durst ever heretofore presume to ask for; must now be
wrestled for, and taken away from him.

The Commissions of Array, being the old legal way by which the Kings of
England had a power to raise and levy men for the defense of themselves and the
Kingdom, Voted to be illegal. The passage at Sea defended against him, and his
Navy kept from him by the Earl of Warwick, whilst the King all this while
contenting himself to be merely passive, and only busying himself in giving
answers to some Parliament Messages and Declarations, and to woo and entreat
them out of this distemper, cannot be proved to have done any one action like a
war, or to have so much as an intention to do it, unless they can make his
demanding an entrance into Hull, with about twenty of His followers, unarmed,
in His company, and undertaking to return and leave the Governor in possession
of it, to be otherwise then it ought to be.

5. of May, 1642. The King being informed, Ibid. 169. 170.
That Sir John Hotham sent out Warrants to Constables to raise the Trained
bands of Yorkshire, writes His Letter to the Sheriff of that Country to forbid
the Trained bands, and commands them to repair to their dwelling houses.

12. of May, 1642. Perceiving himself every where endangered, and a most horrid
Rebellion framing against Him, and Sir John Hotham so near Him at Hull as
within a days journey of Him, moves the Collect. Par. Decl. 183.
Country of York for a Troop of horse, consisting of the prime Gentry of that
Country, and a Regiment of the Trained bands of foot, to be for a guard unto
Him, and caused the oath of Allegiance to be administered unto them. But the
Parliament thereupon Vote; Ibid. 259.
That it appeared, the King seduced by wicked Council, intended to make a war
against them (and till then, if their own Votes should be true, must acquit
Him from any thing more then an intention, as they call it, to do it) And that
whosoever should assist him, are Lraytors by the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom. The Earl of Essex Lord-Chamberlain of the Kings household, and all
other of the Kings household servants, forbid to go to him, and the Kings
putting some of them out, and others in their places, Voted to be an injury to
the Parliament. Messengers were sent for the apprehending some Earls and Barons
about Him, and some of His Bedchamber, as if they had been Felons. The Lord
Keepers going to Him with the Great-Seal when He sent for him, Voted, To be a
breach of Privilege, and pursued with a Warrant directed to all Mayors and
Bailiffs to apprehend him. Caused the Kings Rents and Revenues to be brought in
to them; and forbid any to be paid Him; Many of His Officers and Servants put
out of their places for being Loyal unto Him, and those that were ill affected
to Him, put in their rooms; and many of His own Servants tempted and procured
by rewards and maintenance to tarry with them, and be false and active against
Him.

The twenty sixth day of May, 1642. A Declaration is sent to the King, but
printed and published before he could receive it: That, Ibid. p. 297. and 298.
Whatsoever they should Vote, is not by Law to be questioned, either by the
King or Subjects; No precedent can limit or bound their proceedings. A
Parliament may dispose of any thing wherein the King or People have any right.
The Sovereign power resides in both Houses of Parliament. The King has no
Negative voice. The levying of War against the Personal commands of the King,
though accompanied with His presence* is not a levying of War against the King,
but a levying War against His Laws and Authority (which they have power to
declare) is levying of War against the King. Treason cannot be committed
against His Person, otherwise then as He was entrusted. They have power to
judge whether He discharge His trust or not: that if they should follow the
highest precedents of other Parliaments paterns, there would be no cause to
complain of want of modesty, or duty in them, and that it belonged only to
them to Judge of the Law.

Ibid. 301.
27 of May, The King, by His Proclamation, forbids all His Subjects and Trained
bands of the Kingdom to Rise, March, or Muster. But the Parliament, on the same
day Commanded all Sheriffs, Justices of Peace and Constables within one hundred
and fifty miles of York, to seize and make stay of all Arms and Ammunition
going thither: And Declaring the said Proclamation to be void in Law; Ibid. 305.
command all men to Rise, Muster and March, and not to Muster or March by any
other Authority or Commission; and the Sheriffs of all Counties the morrow
after, commanded with the posse Comitatus to suppress any of the Kings
Subjects that should be drawn thither by His command, secure and seize upon the
Magazines of the Counties, protected all that were Delinquents against Him,
make all to be Delinquents that attended him; and put out of the House of
Peers, nine Lords at once, for obeying the Kings summons, and going to Him.

Ibid. 328.
3. June, 1642. The King summoning the Ministry, Gentry, and Freeholders of
the County of York, declared to them the reasons of providing himself a guard,
and Ibid. 333.
that he had no intention to make a War, and the morrow after forbad the Lord
Willough by of Parham to Muster and Trayn the County of Lincoln, who under
color of an Ordinance of Parliament* for the Militia, had begun to do it.

Ibid. 339. 340. 342.
10* June, 1642. The Parliament by a Declaration signifying, That the King
intended to make a War against His Parliament; invited the Citizens of London,
and all others, well affected (as they pleased to miscall them) within 80*
miles of the City, to bring money or plate into the Guild Hall London, and to
subscribe for Men, Horses, and Arms, to maintain the Protestant Religion; the
Kings Person and Authority, free course of Justice, Laws of the Land, and
privileges of Parliament; and the morrow after send 19. propositions to the
King; That the great affairs of the Kingdom and Militia, may be managed by
consent and approbation of Parliament, all the great officers of Estate, Privy
Council, Ambassadors and Ministers of State, and Judges be chosen by them; that
the Government, Education and Marriage of the Kings Children be by their
consent and approbation, and all the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom put under
the Command and Custody of such as they should approve of; and that no Peers to
be made hereafter, should sit or vote in Parliament without the consent of
Parliament; Collect. of Parl. Mess. and Declar. 307, 308, 309.
with several other demands (which if the King should have granted, would at
once in effect, not only have undone, and put His Subjects out of His
protection, but have deposed both himself and his posterity) and then they
would proceed to regulate His Revenue, and deliver up the Town of Hull into
such hands as the King, by consent and approbation of Parliament, should
appoint.

But the King having the same day before those goodly demands came to his hands
(being a greater breach of His Royal Privileges then His demanding of the five
Members and Kimbolton, if it had not been Lawful for him so to do, could be of
theirs) Ibid. 346, and 348.
granted a Commission of array for the County of Lecester to the Earl of
Huntington, and by a letter sent along with it, directed it for the present
only to Muster, and Array the Trained bands.

Ibid. 349. 350.
And 13. June 1642. Declared to the Lords attending Him at York, That He would
not engage them in any War against the Parliament, unless it were for His
necessary defense: whereupon the Lord keeper Littleton, who a little before had
either been affrighted or seduced by the Parliament to vote their new Militia,
The Duke of Richmond, Marquis Hartford, Earl of Salisbury, Lord Gray of Ruthen,
(now Earl of Kent) and diverse Earls and Barons engaged not to obey any Order or
Ordinance concerning the Militia which had not the Royal assent to it.

14 June, 1642. Being informed, Ibid. 350.
That the Parliament endeavored to borrow great sums of money of the City of
London, and that there was great labor used to persuade His Subjects to
furnish horse and money, upon pretense of providing a guard for the Parliament:
By His Letter to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London, disavowing
any purpose of making a War, declared, That He had not the least thought of
raising or using of forces, unless He should be compelled to do it for His own
defense; and forbids therefore, the lending of money or raising of horses.

Within two days after, the Lord Keeper, Duke of Richmond, Marquis Hartford,
Earl of Salisbury, Lord Gray of Ruthen, with 17 Earls and 14. Barons, the Lord
Chief Justice Bancks, and sundry others of eminent quality and reputation;
attest His Majesty's Declaration and profession that He had no intention to
make a War; but abhorred it; and, Ibid. 356, 357.
That they perceived no Councels or preparations tending to any such design;
and send it with His Majesty's Declaration to the Parliament: In the mean time
the Committee of Parliament (appointed to make the propositions to the City of
London, for the raising of horse) viz.

15 June, 1642. Made report to the House of Commons, That the Citizens did very
cheerfully accept the same, there being (for indeed there had been some design
and resolution a year before concerning the melting of plate to raise moneys)
already great store of plate, and moneys brought into Guild Hall for that
purpose; and an Ordinance of Parliament was made for the Earl of Warwick to be
Lord Admiral, and keep the Navy, though the King had commanded him upon pain of
Treason to deliver up the Ships to Him: And the Lord Brook sent down into
Warwich-shire to settle the Militia*

17 June 1642. A Committee of both Houses was appointed to go to the City of
London, to inquire what store of Horse, Moneys and Plate were already raised
upon the Propositions.

18 June 1642. The King by His Proclamation, Disclaiming any intention to make
War against His Parliament, forbids all levies of Forces without His
Majesty's express pleasure signified under His Great Seal.

And 20 June, 1642. Informing all His Subjects by His Proclamation, of the
Lawfulness of His Commissions of Array, Collect. Par. Decl. 373, and 374.
That besides many other Warrants and Authorities of the Law; Judge Hutton and
Judge Crook in their arguments against the Ship Money, agreed them to be
Lawful; and the Earl of Essex himself had in the beginning of this Parliament
accepted of one for the County of York: Gave his People to understand, That He
had awarded the like Commissions into all the Counties of England, and Dominion
of Wales, to provide for, and secure them in a legal way; lest under a pretense
of danger, and want of Authority from His Majesty to put them into a Military
posture, they should be drawn and engaged in any opposition against Him, or His
just Authority.

But 21 June, 1642. Ibid. 376.
The Lords and Commons in Parliament Declaring The design of their Propositions
of raising horse and moneys was to maintain the Protestant Religion and the
Kings Authority and Person, and that the Forces already attending His Majesty,
and His preparations. at first colored under the pretense of a guard (being
not so great a guard as they themselves had constantly for 6. months before)
did evidently appear to be intended for some great and extraordinary disign (so
as at this time also they do not charge the King with any manner of action of
War, or any thing done in a way or course of War against them:) and gave just
cause of fear and jealousy to the Parliament (being never yet by any Law of
God or man accounted to be a sufficient cause or ground for Subjects to make a
War against their Sovereign) did forbid all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and
other Officers, to publish His Majesty's said Letter to the City of London; And
declare, that if He should use any force for the recovery of Hull, or
suppressing of their Ordinance for the Militia, it should be held a levying War
against the Parliament* and all this done before His Majesty had granted any
Commission for the levying or raising of a man; and lest the King should have
any manner or provision of War to defend himself, when their Army, or Sir John
Hotham, should come to assault Him; Powder and Arms were every where feized
on, and Cutlers, Gun-smiths, Sadlers, and all Warlike Trades, ordered not to
send any to York; but to give a weekly account what was made or sold by them:
And an Order made the 24. day of June, 1642. That the Horses which should be
sent in for the Service of the Parliament, when they came to the number of 60.
should be trained, and so still as the number increased.

4. July, 1642. The King by His Letter under His sign Manual, commanded all
the Judges of England in their circuits, Ibid. 442.
to use all means to suppress Popery, Riots, and unlawful assemblies, and to
give the People to understand His Resolution to maintain the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws of the Kingdom, and not to govern by any Arbitrary way;
and that if any should give the King or them to understand of any thing wherein
they held themselves grieved, and desired a just reformation; He would speedily
give them such an answer as they should have cause to thank Him for His Justice
and favor. But the same day a Declaration was published by both Houses of
Parliament, commanding, Ibid. 449.
That no Sheriff, Mayor, Bailiff, Parson, Vicar, Curate, or other (Sir Richard
Gurney the Lord Mayor of London, not many days before having been imprisoned
for proclaiming the Kings Proclamation against the bringing in of Plate, etc.)
should publish or Proclaim any Proclamation, Declaration, or other Paper in the
Kings Name, which should be contrary to any Order, Ordinance or Declaration of
both Houses of Parliament, or the proceedings thereof; and Order, Ibid. 450.
That in case any forces should be brought out of one County into another to
disturb the Peace thereof, they should be suppressed by the Trained bands, and
Volunteers of the adjacent Counties. Shortly after Sir John Hotham fortifieth
the Town of Hull, whilst the King is at York, Ibid. 453
seizes on a Ship coming to Him with provisions for His household* takes Mr.
Ashburnham, one of the Kings Servants, prisoner, intercepts Letters sent from
the Queen to the King, and drowneth part of the Country round about the Town;
Ibid. 459.
which the Parliament allows of, and promise satisfaction to the owners.

5 July, 1642. They Order a subscription of Plate and Horse to be made in every
Countey, and list the Horse under Commanders; and the morrow after, Order 2000.
men should be sent to relieve Sir John Hotham in case the King should besiege
him; to which purpose Drums were beat up in London, and the adjacent parts to
Hull. The Earl of Warwick Ordered to send Ships to Humber to his assistance;
instructions drawn up to be sent to the Deputy Lieutenants of the several
Counties, to tender the Propositions for the raising of Horses, Plate and
Money. Mr. Hastings and diverse of the Kings Commissioners of Array impeached
for supposed high Crimes and misdemeanors; and a Committee of five Lords and
ten of the House of Commons ordered to meet every morning, for the laying out
of ten thousand pounds of the Guild Hall moneys, for the buying of 700. Horse,
and that 10000. Foot to be raised in London and the Country, be employed by
direction of the Parliament; and the Lord Brook is furnished with 6. pieces of
Ordinance out of the Tower of London, to fortify the Castle of Warwick.

And 9. July, 1642. Order, That in case the Earl of Northampton should come
into that County with a Commission of Array, they should raise the Militia to
suppress him; And that the Common Council of London should consider of a way
for the speedy raising of the 10000. Foot, and that they should be listed, and
put in pay within four days after.

11. July, 1642. Ibid. 452.
The King sends to the Parliament to cause the Town of Hull to be delivered
unto Him, and desires to have their answer by the 15. of that month, and as
then had used no force against it: But Ibid. 457.
the morrow after before that message could come unto them, they resolve upon
the Question: That an Army shall be forthwith raised for the defense of the
Kings Person, and both Houses of Parliament; and Ibid. 457.
those who have obeyed their Orders and Commands; in preserving the true
Religion, the Laws, Liberties; and the Peace of the Kingdom; and that they
would live and dye with the Earl of Essex, whom they nominate General in that
Cause.

12. July, 1642. Declare, That, they will protect all that shall be employed in
their assistance and Militia.

And 16. July, 1642. Petition the King Ibid. 465. and 483.
to forbear any preparations or actions of War; and to dismiss His
extraordinary guards, to come nearer to them, and hearken to their advice; but
before that Petition could be answered, (wherein the King offered, when the
Town of Hull should be delivered to Him, He would no longer have an Army before
it, and should be assured that the same pretense which took Hull from him, may
not put a Garrison into Newcastle (into which after the Parliaments surprise of
Hull, He was enforced to place a Governor and a small Garrison) He would also
remove that Garrison, and so (as His Magizine and Navy might be delivered unto
Him; all Armies and Levies made by the Parliament laid down, the pretended
Ordinance for the Militia disavowed, and the Parliament adjourned to a secure
place) He would lay down Arms and repair to them, and desired all differences
might be freely debated in a Parliamentary way, whereby the Law might recover
its due reverence, the Subject his just Liberty, Parliaments their full vigor
and estimation, and the whole Kingdom a blessed Peace and prosperity, and
requiring their answer by the 27. of that July promised, till then, not to make
any attempt of force upon Hull;) they had Armed their General with power
against Him, given him a Commission to kill and slay all that should oppose him
in the execution of it, and chosen their General of the Horse.

8. August, 1642. Upon information, That some of the Town of Portsmouth had
revolted to Colonel Goring, (being but sent thither with a message from the
King) and Declared for His Majesty; Order Forces to be sent thither speedily to
beleaguer it by Land, and the Earl of Warwick to send thither 5. Ships of the
Navy to prevent any Foreign forces coming to their assistance: and upon
Intelligence that the Earl of Northampton appeared with great strength at
Banbury, to hinder the Lord Brooks carrying the pieces of Ordinance to Warwick;
Ordered 5000. Horse and Foot to be sent to assist Him.

9. August, 1642. Upon information, That the Marquis of Hartford, and diverse
others, were in Somersetshire, demanding obedience to the Kings Commission of
Array, and to have the Magazine of the County to be delivered unto them; Gave
power to the Earl of Essex their Lord-General, the Lord Brook and others, to
apprehend the Marquis of Hartford, and Earl of Northampton, and their
accomplices, and to kill and slay all that should oppose them. And the day
following gave the Earl of Stamford a Commission to raise forces for the
suppressing of any that should attempt for the King in Leichestershire or the
adjacent Counties.

And on the eleventh of August, 1642. Upon the Kings Proclamation two days
before, Declaring the Earl of Essex, and all that should adhere unto him in the
levying of Forces, and not come in and yield to His Majesty within 6. days, to
be Traitors: Ibid. 509.
vote the said Proclamation to be against the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom;
Declare their resolutions to maintain and assist the Earl of Essex; and resolve
to spend no more time in Declarations and Petitions, but to endeavor by
raising of Forces to suppress the Kings Party, (Though all that the Kings Loyal
Subjects did at that time for Him, was but to execute the Commission of Array
in the old legal way of the Militia) and within a day or two after, Ordered the
Earl of Essex, their Lord General, to set forth with his Army of Horse upon the
Monday following; but not so much as an answer would be afforded to the Kings
message sent from Hull, where, whilst He with patience and hope forbore any
action* or attempt of force, according to His promise: Sir John Hotham sallied
out in the night, and murdered many of His fellow Subjects.

12. August, 1642. The King, though he might well understand the great leavies
of Men and Arms ready to march against Him, by a Declaration published to all
His Subjects, assures them, as in the presence of God, That all the Acts passed
by him in this Parliament, should be as equally observed, as those which most
of all concerned His own interest and rights, and that His quarrel was not
against the Parliament, but particular men; and therefore desired, That the
Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, Sir Henry Ludlow, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Strode,
Mr. Martin, Mr. Hampden, Alderman Pennington, and Capt. Venne, might be
delivered into the hands of Justice, to be tried by their Peers, according to
the known Laws of the Land, and against the Earls of Essex, Warwick, Stamford;
Lord Brook, Sir John Hotham, Major General Skippon, and those who should
exercise the Militia by virtue of the Ordinance, He would cause Indictments to
be drawn of High Treason upon the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. and if they submit to
trial, and plead the Ordinance, would rest satisfied if they should be
acquitted. But when this produced as little effect as all other endeavors He
had used for peace; He that saw the Hydra in the mud and slime of Sedition, in
its Embryo, birth and growth* and finds him now erected ready to devour him,
must now (though very unwilling to cast off His beloved Robe of Peace, forsake
an abused patience, and believe no more in the hopes of other remedies which
had so often deceived Him: but if He will give any account to the Watchman of
Israel of the People committed to his Charge, or to the People of his
protection of them, or any manner of satisfaction to his own judgment and
discretion) betake himself to the sword which God had entrusted Him with* and
therefore makes the best use He could of those few friends were about Him, and
with the money which the Queen had not long before borrowed, and the small
supplies He had obtained of His servants and friends about Him (who pawned and
engaged their Plate, Jewels and Lands for Him) with those Lords and Gentlemen
that willingly offered to bear him company in His troubles; provides what men
and arms He could in his way toward Nottingham, where He intended to set up
His Standard.

But the Parliament about the 23. of August, 1642. having received some
information that He intended to set up His Standard at Nottingham, Declare,
Ibid. 573, 574, 575, and 576.
That now it appears to all the world, that there is good ground of their fears
and jealousies (which if ever there had been any, as there was no cause at all
of any, more then that, some of them meaning to murder or ruin Him, they were
often afraid He should take notice of it, and seek to defend himself; there was
by their own confession, till this time, no manifest or certain ground
appearing that He intended to defend himself against the Parliament) and
therefore Order, That all that shall suffer in their Estates by any forces
raised by the King, without consent of Parliament, shall have full reparation
of their damages out of the Estates of the Actors, and out of the Estates of
all such Persons in any part of the Kingdom who should persist to serve the
King in this War against the Parliament; and That it should be Lawful for any
number of persons to ioyn and defend themselves; and that the Earl of Essex,
their General, should grant out Commissions for levying and conducting forces
into the Northern parts; And Sir John Hotham the Governor of Hull assist them;
and Command also the Sheriffs of the County of York, and the adjacent Counties,
with the power of the Counties, and Trained bands to aid them, and to seize
upon all that shall execute the Commission of Array for His Majesty: who thus
sufficiently beset by those that intended, what since they have brought to pass
against Him;

25 August; 1642. (being some days after the Earl of Bedford had marched with
great forces into the West) that His Subjects might be informed of His danger
and repair to His succor; sets up His Standard at Nottingham; Vide the
Kings Declaration printed at Oxford, and ordered to be read in Churches and
Chapels. Cokes 1. part Institutes 65. 11. H. 7. 18, and 19. H 7. 1. Collect.
Kings Messages. 579.
being a thing of a mere legal necessity, if He would have any at all to come
to help Him, and not forfeit and surprise those that by tenure of their Lands,
or by reason of offices, fees, or annuities enjoyed under Him, were more
immediately bound to assist Him.

And yet here He must weep over Jerusalem; and once again entreat the
Parliament, and His Rebellious subjects to prevent their own miseries; and
therefore sends the Earls of Southampton and Dorset to the Parliament to desire
a Treaty, offering to do all on His own part which might advance the Protestant
Religion, oppose Popery and Superstition, and secure the Laws and Liberties of
his Subjects, and just privileges of Parliament: Which after several scorns
put upon those Noble Messengers, as denying the Earl of Southampton to come and
sit in the House of Peers (a right by birth and inheritance due unto him) and
causing the Sergeant at Arms of the House of Commons to go before him with the
Mace, as they use to do before Delinquents: They refuse to accept of, unless
the King would first take down His Standard, and recall His Declarations and
Proclamations against them. To which the King the 5. September. 1642.
(notwithstanding the Earl of Bedford had with great forces in the mean time
besieged the Marquis of Hartford in the Castle of Sherborn in Dorset-shire)
replying, That He never did Declare nor ever intended to Declare both His
Houses of Parliament to be Traitors, or set up His Standard against them; much
less to put them and the Kingdom out of His protection. And utterly Ibid. 583.
protesting against it before God and the World, offered to recall His
Declarations and Proclamations with all cheerfulness the same day that they
should revoke their Declarations against those that had assisted Him: and
desiring a Treaty, and conjuring them to consider the bleeding condition of
Ireland, and the danger of England, undertakes to be ready to grant any thing
shall be really good for His Subjects; which being brought by the Lord
Falkland, one of His Majesty's Secretaries of State, and a Member of the House
of Commons, and not long before in a very great esteem with them (all the
respect could be afforded him being to stand at the Bar of the House of
Commons, and deliver his Message unto them) had only an answer in a printed
Declaration of the Lords and Commons returned unto him, That it was Ordered and
Declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the Arms which they have
been forced to take up, or shall be forced to take up, for the preservation of
the Parliament, Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, shall not
be laid down until His Majesty shall withdraw His protection from such persons
as have been voted by both Houses of Parliament to be Delinquents, or that
shall by Ibid. 585.
both Houses of Parliament be voted to be Delinquents, (which after their mad
way of voting mig^^ have been himself, his Queen or His Heir apparent) and
leave them to the Justice of Parliament, according to their demerites, to the
end that those great Charges and damages wherewithal the Common wealth has
been burdened since His Majesty departed from the Parliament, might be born by
the Delinquents and other Malignant and disaffected persons, and that those
who by Loans of money, or otherwise at their charges, have assisted the
Commonwealth, or shall in like manner hereafter assist the Commonwealth in times
of extreme danger, (and here they would also provide for future friends and
quarrels) may be re-paid all sums of money le^^ for those purposes, and
satisfied their charges sustained out of the Estates of the said Delinquents,
and of the Malignant and disaffected party in this Kingdom.

And to make good their words 8. of September, 1642. Before their answer could
come unto the Kings hands, Ordered certain numbers of horse and foot to be sent
to Garrison, and secure Oxford; and the morrow after (before the King could
possibly reply unto it) their Lord General the Earl of Essex, marched out of
London against him, with an Army of 20000. men, horse and foot, gallantly
Armed, and a great train of Artillery to attend him.

Notwithstanding all which, and those huge impossibilities which every day more
and more appeared of obtaining a Peace with those who were so much afraid to be
loosers by it, as they never at all intended it;

The King must needs send one message more unto them, to try if that might not
give them some occasion to send Him gentler conditions; and therefore 13.
September, 1642. (Being the same day they had impeached the Lord Strange of
High Treason for executing the Kings Commission of Array, and Ordered the
propositions for furnishing of horse, plate, and money, to be tendered from
house to house, in the Cities of London, and Westminster, and to be sent into
all the Shires and Counties of England to be tendered for the same purpose, and
the names of the refusers to be certified) Mr. May, one of the Pages to the
King, comes to the Lords House in Parliament, with a message from Him, bearing
date but two days before; Ibid. 586.
That although He had used all ways and means to prevent the present
distractions and dangers of the Kingdom, all His labors have been fruitless,
that not so much as a Treaty, earnestly desired by Him, can be obtained,
(though He disclaimed all His Proclamations and Declarations, and the erecting
of His Standard as against His Parliament) unless He should denude himself of
all force to defend Him from a visible strength marching against Him; That now
He had nothing left in His power, but to express the deep sense He had of the
public misery of the Kingdom, and to apply himself to a necessary defense,
wherein He whoily relied upon the providence of God; and the affection of His
good people, and was so far from putting them out of His protection, as when
the Parliament should desire a treaty He would piously remember whose blood is
to be spilt in this quarrel, and cheerfully embrace it.

But this must also leave them as it found them, in their ungodly purposes, for
the morrow after being the 14. day of September. 1642. Mr. Hampden one of the 5.
Members (by this time a Colonel of the Army) brings letters to the House of
Commons from the Parliaments General, that he was at Northampton in a very good
posture, and that great numbers of the Countries thereabouts came in daily unto
him, and offered to march under him, and that so soon as all his forces that
are about London shall come unto him, which he desires may be hastened, he
intended to advance toward His Majesty: and it was the same day voted, That
all things sealed by the Kings Seal, since it was carried away by the Lord
Keeper Littleton, should be Null, and of no force in the Law, and that a new
Seal should be provided.

The King therefore seeing what He must trust to, 19. September, 1642. being at
Wellington in Shrop-shire in the head of such small forces and friends as He
could get together, (for the Parliament that very day had received letters,
That the King, but the week before, having a muster at Nottingham, there
appeared but about 3000. foot, and 2000. horse, and 1500. dragoons; and that a
great part of His men were not provided with Arms) made His protestation and
promise as in the presence of Ibid. 614.
Almighty God, and as He hoped for His blessing and protection, to maintain to
the utmost of His power the true Reformed Protestant Religion, established in
the Church of England, and that He desired to govern by the known Laws of the
Land, and that the Liberty and property of the Subject should be preserved with
the same care as His own just rights; and to observe inviolably the Laws
consented to by Him in this Parliament, and promised as in the sight of
Almighty God, if He would please by His blessing upon that Army raised for His
necessary defense, to preserve Him from that Rebellion, to maintain the just
privileges and freedom of Parliament, and govern by the known Laws of the
Land. In the mean while, if this time of War, and the great necessity and
straights He was driven to, should be get any violation of them, He hoped it
would be imputed by God and man to the Authors of the War, and not to Him who
had so earnestly desired and labored for the Peace of the Kingdom, and
preservation thereof; and that when He should fail in any of those particulars,
He would expect no aid or relief from any man, nor protection from Heaven.

And now that the stage of War seems to be made ready, and the Parliament party
being the better furnished, had not seldom showed themselves, and made several
traverses over it (for indeed the King having so many necessities upon him, and
so out of power and provision for it, might in that regard only if He had not
been so unwilling to have any hurt come to his people by his own defending of
himself, be backward and unwillingly drawn unto it,) we may do well to stand by
and observe who comes first to act upon it.

22. of September, 1642. The Earl of Essex writes from Warwick that he was
upon his march after the King, and before the 6. of October following had
written to the County of Warwick with all speed to raise their Trained bands
and Volunteers to resist his forces if they should come that way, and to the
three Counties of Northampton, Leicester and Darby, to gather head and resist
him if he should retire into those parts; and by all that can be judged of a
matter of fact, so truly and faithfully represented, must needs be
acknowledged to have great advantages of the King, by the City and Tower of
London, Navy, Shipping, Arms, Ammunition, the Kings Magazines, all the strong
Towns of the Kingdom, most of the Kingdoms plate and money, the Parliaments
credit and high esteem, which at that time the people Idolized; the fiery Zeal
of a Seditious Clergy to preach the people into a Rebellion, and the people
headlong running into the witchcraft of it: When the King on the other side,
had little more to help him, then the Laws and Religion of the Land, which at
that time every man began to mis-construe and pull in pieces, had neither
ammunition, ships, places of strength, nor money, nor any of his party or
followers after the Parliament had as it were proclaimed a War against Him,
could come single or in small numbers through any Town or Village, but were
either openly assaulted, or secretly betrayed, no man could adventure to serve
or own him, but must expose himself, and his Estate to be ruined, either by the
Parliament or people, or such as for malice or profit would inform against him.
All the gains and places of preferment, were on the Parliaments part, and
nothing but losses and misfortunes on the Kings: No man was afraid to go
openly to the Parliaments side, and no man durst openly so much as take
acquaintance of his Sovereign, but if he had done a quarter of that which Ziba
did to David when he brought him the 200. loaves of bread, or old Barzillai, or
Ittai the Gittise when he went along with him when his son Absalom rebelled
against him; They should never have escaped so well as they did, but have been
sure to be undone and sequestered for it. So much of the affections of the
people had the Parliament cousened, and stolen from them, so much profit and
preferment had they to persuade it, and so much power to enforce those, that
otherwise had not a mind to it, to fight against him; Who thus every way
encompassed about with dangers, and like a Partridge hunted upon the Mountains;
marches from Shrewsbury toward Banbury, persuading and picking up what help
and assistance His better sort of Subjects durst adventure to afford Him: in
the way to which

On Sunday the 23. of October, 1642. (for they thought it better to rob God of
his Sabbath, then lose an opportunity of murdering their Sovereign) The Earl of
Essex and Parliament army pouring in from all quarters of the kingdom upon him,
had at Edgehill compassed Him in on all sides; and before the King could put
His men in battle Array (many of whom being young country fellows had no better
Arms then Clubs and Staves in their hands cut out of the hedges) and put His
two young Sons the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York in the guard of a troop
of horse at the further end of the field, and had finished a short prayer, a
bullet of the Earl of Essex's Canon grazed at His heels, as He was kneeling at
His prayers on the side of a bank (for Blague a villain in the Kings Army
having a great Pension allowed Him for it, had given notice in what part of the
field the King stood, that they might the better know how to shoot at him.) But
God having a greater care of his Anointed then of their Rebellious pretenses;
so ordered the hands of those that fought for the King; as the Earl of Essex
was so laden with Victories, as he left five of His men for one of the Kings
dead behind him; lost his babbage and Artillery, retired back to Warwick, and
left the King to bless God in the field; where He supped with such Victuals as
the more Loyal and better natured neighbors sent him, when the worser sort
refused to do it, and lying there all night sent warrants out the next day to
the neighbor Parishes to bury the dead; drew off His Ordinance and marched to
Banbury, and yet he could not forget to pity those which were at such pains,
and hazard the day before to murder him; but before he went out of the field
sent Sir William Le-neve Clarencieux King at Arms to Warwick, whither the Earl
of Essex was fled, with a Proclamation of Pardon to all that would lay down
arms, which though they scornfully received, and the Herald threatened to be
hanged if he did not depart the sooner, cannot persuade him from sending a
Declaration or Message to the Parliament to offer them all that could be
requested by Subjects; but all the use they made of it; was to make the City of
London believe they were in greater danger then ever, if they lent them not
more moneys, and recruited the Earl of Essex his broken Army; and to cosen and
put the people on the more to seek their own misery, a day of thanksgiving was
publicly kept for the great Victory obtained against the King. And Stephen
Marshal a Factious bloody minister, though he confessed he was so carried on in
the crowd of those that fled from the battle, as he knew not where he was, till
he came to a Market Town, which was some miles from Edgehill where the Battle
was fought, preaches to the people (too little believing the Word of God, and
too much believing him:) That to his knowledge there was not above 200. men
lost on the Parliaments side; that he picked up bullets in his black Velvet
cap, and that a very small supply would now serve to reduce the King, and bring
Him to His Parliament.

And here ye may see Janus Temple wide open, though the doors of it were not
lift off the hinges, or broken open at once, but picked open by those either
knew not the misery of War, or knowing it will prove to be the more guilty
promoters of it. That we may the better therefore find out (though the matter
of Fact already represented may be evidence enough of it self) who it was that
let out the fury and rage of War upon us, we shall consider.

CHAP. III. Whether a Prince or other Magistrate, laboring to suppress, or
punish a Rebellion of the People, be tied to those rules are necessary for the
justifying of a War, if it were made between equals.
WAr where it is made by any rules of justice between equals, is to be for
necessity, where the determining of controversies cannot otherwise be obtained,
or when between two Princes of equal power it cannot be had, because they have
no superior: A Rebel therefore cannot properly be called an enemy, for Hostis
nomen notat aequalitatem; and when any such arms are born against Rebels, it is
not to be called a War, but an exercise of jurisdiction upon traitorous and
dis-loyal persons: Alber. Gentil. 223.
atque est ratio manifesta, says Albericus Gentilis; qui enim jure judex est
and superior, non jure cogitur ad subeundas parts partis and aequalis, and non
est bellum cum latronibus, praedonibus aut piratis, quanquam magnos habeant
exercitus, and proinde nec ulla cum illis belli jura, says Besoldus in
dissert. de jure Belli 77. and 78.
Besoldus: The Romans who were so exact and curious in their public
denouncing of War, and sending Ambassadors before they made War against any
other Nation; did not do it in cases of rebellion and defection, and therefore
Albert. Gent. 23.
Fidenatibus and Campanis non denunciant Romani: And Cicero that was of
opinion, that nullum bellum justum haberi videtur nisi nunciatum, nisi
indictum, nisi repetitis rebus, stood not upon those solemnities in the
Cataline conspiracy; for the rules of justifying a War against an enemy or
equals as demanding restitution, denunciation, and the like, are not requisite
in that of punishing of Rebels; Lucan. lib. 2.
Pompey justifies the war maintained by the Senate against Caesar (not then
their Sovereign) with neque enim vocari praelia justa decet, etc. Cicero did
not think it convenient to send Ambassadors to Anthony, nor entreat him by fair
words; but that it was meet to enforce him by Arms to raise his siege from
Mutina, for he said, Cicero Philippic. 5.
They had not to do with Hannibal an enemy to the Commonwealth, but with a
Rebellious Citizen. The resisting of the Kings Authority when the Sheriff of a
County goes with the posse Comitatus, to execute it, was never yet so much as
called a War, but Rebellion, and insurrection or commotion, were the best terms
which were bestowed upon it. (For such attempts are not called wars, but
robberies, of which the Law takes no other care of but to punish them) And the
haste that all our Kings and Princes in England have made in suppressing
Rebellions (as that of the Barons Wars by Henry the 3. and his sending his son
the Prince to besiege Warren Earl of Surrey in his Castle of Rygate for
affronting the Kings Justices, saying, That he would hold his Lands by the
Sword: That which Ri. 2. made to suppress Wat. Tiler, H. 6. Jack Cade, H. 8.
Ket and the Norfolk Rebels, and Queen Eliz. to suppress the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland) may tell us that they understood it no
otherwise then all the Kings and Magistrates of the World have ever practiced
it, (by the Per Prisot.
Laws of England, if Englishmen that are Traitors go into France and
confederate with Aliens or Frenchmen, and come afterward and make a War in
England and be taken prisoners, the strangers may be ransomed, but not the
English, for they were the Kings Subjects, and are to be reckoned as Traitors;
not strangers:) And the Parliaments own advise to the King to suppress the
Irish Rebels that ploughed but with their own Heyfer, and pretended as they did
to defend their Religion, Laws, and Liberties: and the opinion also of Mr.
President Bradshaw, as Sir John Owen called him, in his late sentence given
against the Earls of Cambridge, Holland and Norwich, Lord Capel and Sir John
Owen, whom he mistakenly (God and the Law knows) would make to be the subjects
of their worser fellow subjects, may be enough toturn the question out of doors.

But lest all this should not be thought sufficient to satisfy those who can
like nothing but what there is Scripture for, we shall a little turn over the
leaves of that Sacred Volume, and see what is to be found therein concerning
this matter.

Moses who was the meekest Magistrate in the World, and better acquainted with
Him that made the fifth Commandment then these that now pretend Revelations
against it; thought fit to suppress the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram,
as soon as he could; and for no greater offense then a desire to be coordinate
with him, procured them to be buried alive with all that appertained unto them.

When Absalon had Rebelled against his father David, and it was told him; 2 Samuel 15.
That the hearts of the men of Israel were after him, David a man after Gods
own heart, without any Message of Peace or Declaration sent unto his dear son
Absalon; or offering half or any part of his Kingdom to him, sent three several
armies to pursue and give him battle.

When Sheba the son of Bichri blew a Trumpet and said, 2 Samuel 20.
We have no part in David, every man to his Tent O Israel; and thereupon every
man of Israel followed after him and forsook their King: David (who knew that
Moses would not make a War upon the Amorites, though he had Gods commandment
for it, without offers of Peace, and messengers sent first unto them) said to
Amasa, Assemble me the men of Judah within three days: and when he tarried
longer, said unto him; Take thou thy Lords servants and pursue after him, lest
he get him fenced Cities and escape us.

For they that would take heed of Cockatrices, have ever used to kill them in
the shell. And Bodin. page 736.
diligenti cuique Imperatori ac magistratui danda est opera (says Bodin) ut
non tam seditiones tollere quam praeoccupare studeant. For sedition (says he)
once kindled, like a spark of fire, blown by popular fury, may sooner fire a
whole City then be extinguished. Et tales igitur pestes opprimere derepente
necesse est, Princes and Sovereigns who are bound to protect, and defend their
Subjects, are not to stand still, and suffer one to oppress another, and
themselves to be undone by it afterward.

But put the case that the Parliament could have been called ^ Parliament when
they had driven away the King, which is the head and life of it, or could have
been said to have been two Houses of Parliament, when there was not at that
time above a third part of the House of Peers, nor the half of the House of
Commons remaining in them, and what those few did in their absence was either
forced by a Faction of their own, or a party of Seditious Londoners (for indeed
the War rightly considered was not betwixt the Parliament and the King, but a
War made by a Factious and Seditious part of the Parliament, against the King,
and the major part of the Parliament) and had been (as it never was nor could
be by the Laws and constitution of the Kingdom) coordinate and equal with the
King, and joint tenants of the Kingdom; it would have been necessary to make
the War as just as they could, and to have done all that had been in order to
it: and therefore we hope they which pretend so much to the Justice of the
Kingdom, will not be offended to have the Justice of their War something
examined.

CHAP. IV. Suppose the War to be made with a neighbor Prince, or between
equals; whether the King or Parliament were in the defensive or justifiable
part of it.
PLerique, H. Grotius de jure pacis and belli.
says learned Grotius, tres statuunt bellorum justas causas, defensionem,
recuperationem, and punitionem. Three causes are usually alleged by Princes or
States to justify wars, viz. in the defense or recovery of their own, or for
punishment for a wrong done. For any defense the Parliament might pretend a
necessity of; The King neither assaulted them, nor used any violence to them
when they first of all granted out their Propositions and Commissions of War,
unless they can turn their jealousies into a Creed, and make the Kings
demanding the five Members and Kimbolton (being done by warrant of the Law of
the Land, and the Records and precedents of their own houses) appear to be an
assaulting of them. Or if any reasonable man knew but how to make that to be an
assault, or a necessary cause of War for them to revenge it; the Kings waving
and relinquishing of his charge afterward against them, might have certainly
been enough to have taken away the cause of it, (if there had been any)
howsoever, a War made only to revenge a bare demand or request of a thing was
neither so much as forced or a second time demanded of them, but was totally
laid aside and retracted; can never be accounted just.

As for the recovery of things lost, or taken away, the Parliament it self, had
nothing taken from them, for both they and the people were so far from being
losers at that time by the King, as Collect. of Mess. Remonst. and Decl. 15.
the Remonstrance of the House of Commons made to the people 15. December,
1641. of the Kings errors (as they pleased to call them) in the government (but
indeed the errors rather of his Ministers and themselves also, in busying him
with brawles and quarrels, and denying to give him fitting supplies,) Ibid. 45.
50. 52. 55. 67. 98. 91. 94. 103. 104. 106. 109. 110. 114. 127. 255. 327. 353.
442. 472. 562. 580. 484. 686.
mentions how much, and how many beneficial Laws the King had granted them. And
so the Parliament and people being no losers, and the King never denying them
any thing which could in honor or conscience be granted them; That part of the
justifying of a War will no way also belong to them.

But if the punishment for offenses and injuries past (if they could be so
properly called) being a third cause of justifying a War, could be but imagined
to be a cause to justify the Parliaments War against the King; Yet they were
to remember another Rule or Law of War, Besoldus in dissert. philolog. p. 58.
Ne nimis veteres causae accersantur, That they do not pick quarrels by raking
up past grievances, and that it be not propter leviusculas injurias; or for
trifles. For when the King (who if he had been no more then coordinate with
them) had called them to counsel to advise him, followed their advice in every
thing he could find any reason for, taken away all grievances, made a large
provision to prevent them for the future, by granting the Triennial Parliament,
and so large an amends for every thing they could but tell how to complain of;
there was so little left to the people and the Parliament to quarrel for, as
they were much behind in thankfulness for what they had got of him already.

Or if any other causes or provocations should be imagined, as mis-using the
Parliaments Messengers, or the like: we know the King (unless it were by his
patience and often Messages for Peace) was guilty of no provocations; but on
the contrary, though he had all manner of scorns and reproaches cast upon him,
and his Messengers evil entreated by them, could never be brought to return or
retaliate it to any of theirs.

But nothing as yet serving to excuse them; it will not be amiss to examine the
Causes as they are set down by themselves, to justify their war, and so we may
well suppose there are no other.

A War against the King for safety of His own Person was needless (and then it
comes within that rule of War and Law of Nations, Ne leves sint causae belli,
not to make a War unnecessary) for the King would look to that himself; and, as
they were His Subjects, they, as well as every honest Subject, were bound to
defend and assist Him, but not whether he would or no; and in such a way of
defense, as would tend to His ruin rather then His safety. For surely should
any stranger of another Kingdom or Nation have casually passed by Edgehill
when the Kings and the Parliaments Armies were in fight, and have been told
that the King shot at them for the safety of His own Person, and that they also
shot against Him for the safety of His own Person; and being asked which of the
two parties he believed did really, or most of all intend the safety of it? we
cannot tell how to think any man such a stranger to nature, reason or
understanding; as to think the King should not fight as the Dictates of nature
persuaded him to; or that the King could tell how to fight against those that
fought for him: or that if he should be so hugely mistaken in that one year or
Battle, he should be in several other years and Battles after.

To fight for the defense of the Religion established (as they made also the
people believe) was as needless; when the King offered to do every thing might
help to promote it: and they are so little also to be credited in that
pretense, as we know they did all they could from the beginning to ruin it;
took away Episcopacy the hedge and bounds of it, brought in Presbytery to
preach up and aid their Rebellion, and when their own turns were served,
encouraged Conventicles and Tubpreachers to pull down the Presbytery: And being
demanded at the treaty at Uxbridge by the Kings Commissioners what Religion
they would have the King to establish, were so unprovided of an answer, as they
could not resolve what to nominate, nor in any of their propositions afterward
sent to the King, though ofted urged and complained of by the Scottish
Commissioners, could ever find the way to do it, but have now set up an
Independent extemporary enthusiastic kind of worshipping God, (if there were
any such thing in it) or rather a religious Chaos, or gallimaufrey of all manner
of heresies, errors, blasphemies and opinions put together, not any of the
owners of which, we can be confident will subscribe to that opinion that Wars
may be made for Religion, or that conscience ought to be forced by it.

As for the restrictive part of the Laws to keep the people in subjection, we
can very well persuade our selves, no such War was ever made yet in the World,
nor any people ever found that would engage in a War for that they obeyed, but
against their wills: And for that part of the Law that gives them the Kings
protection, privileges, immunities and certainties of deciding controversies
(which are more fitly to be called the Liberties of the people, then to have
45. of the House of Commons, or a Faction, to make daily, and hourly Laws,
Religion, and Government, and vote their estates in and out to pay an Army, to
force their obedience to it) if we had not outlived the Parliaments disguises,
and pretenses, saw them now tearing them up by the roots, that there may be no
hope of their growing up again, and setting up their own as well as the
ignorant and illiterate fancies of Mechaniques, and Soldiers in stead of them;
we might have said that also had been needless, when the King had done
abundantly enough already; and offered to grant any thing more that could in
reason be demanded of Him.

And as touching their privileges of Parliament, They that understand but any
thing of the Laws of England, or have but looked into the Records, and Journals
of Parliament, can tell that all privileges of Parliament (as King James said)
were at first bestowed upon them by the Kings and Princes of this Kingdom: That
privileges of Parliament extended not to Treason, or Felony, or breach of the
Peace. That 32. Hen. 6.
32. Hen. 6. Sir Thomas Thorpe Speaker of the House of Commons being arrested
in execution in the time of the prorogation of the Parliament, the Commons
demanded he might be set at liberty according to their privileges: whereupon
the Judges being asked their Council therein; made answer, that general
supersedeas of Parliament there were none; but special supersedeas there was;
in which case of special supersedeas, every Member of the House of Commons
ought to enjoy the same; unless in cases of Treason, Felony, or breach of the
Peace: After which answer it was determined, that the said Sir Thomas Thorpe
should lie in execution; and the Commons were required on the behalf of the
King to choose a new Speaker, which they did, and presented to the King
accordingly. That Queen Elizabeth was assured by her Judges, that she might
commit any of her Parliament during the Parliament, for any offense committed
against her Crown and dignity, and they showed her precedents for it; and that
primo and tertio Caroli Regis, upon search of precedents in the several great
cases of the Earls of Arundel and Bristol, very much insisted and stood upon,
the House of Peers in Parliament allowed of the exception of Treason, Felony,
and breach of the Peace.

For indeed it is as impossible to think that there can be any privilege to
commit Treason, as to think that a King should privilege all his Nobility, and
every one of his Subjects, that could get to be elected into the House of
Commons in Parliament, to commit Treason, and to take away his life in the time
of Parliament, whenever their revenge, or malice, or interest should find the
opportunity to do it; or that if it could be so, any King or Prince would ever
call or summon a Parliament to expose himself to such a latitude of danger, or
give them leave to sit as long as they would to breed it: or that privileges
of Treason can be consistent with the name or being of a Parliament to consult
and advise with the King for the defense of him, and his Kingdom: or that when
Felony and breach of Peace are excepted out of their privilege, Treason that
is of a far higher nature, consequence, and punishment, should be allowed them:
or if there could have been any such privilege, and a meaner man then their
Sovereign had broke it, a small understanding may inform them, that they could
not without breach of the Peace, have fought for it against a fellow Subject,
and then also could not their privileges have reached to it, but the King
might have punished them for it: and if they cannot upon a breach of privilege
18 Eliz.
as it was adjudged in Halls case) without the Kings writ, and the cause first
certified in Chancery, deliver one of their own servants arrested: It is not
likely any warrant can be found in Law to enforce the King to reparation,
though he himself should have broken it; but to petition the King for an
allowance of that, or any other privilege, as well in the middle, or any other
time of their sitting in Parliament, as they always do at the presenting of
their Speaker in the beginning of it. Wherefore, certainly the People never
gave the Parliament Commission (if they could have given a Commission to make a
War against their Sovereign) to claim that was never due to them, or to fight
for that was never yet fought for by any of their forefathers, nor ever
understood to be taken from them, much less for their ayrie innovated
pretenses, rather than privileges, which have since eaten up all the peoples
Laws and Liberties, as well as a good part of their lives and estates with it,
and are now become to be every thing which their representatives will and
arbitrary power have a mind to make it; who have so driven away their old legal
privileges by setting up illegal and fantastique Privileges (as they are
pleased to call them) in stead of them, as there is nothing now left of the
Parliament like a Parliament, neither matter, nor form, nor any thing at all
remaining of it: For, the upper, and lower houses have driven away and fought
against the King, who was their Head: the lower after that, have driven away
the upper, and fourty-five of the House of Commons (whereof eleven are great
Officers and Commanders in the Army) have after that imprisoned and driven away
four hundred of their fellow Members: And from a degenerate and distempered
piece of a Parliament, brought themselves to be but a representative, or
journey-men voters to a Council of War of their own mercenary and mechanique
Army; and may sit another eight years before ever they shall be able to find a
reason to satisfy any man that is not a fool or a madman, or a fellow Sharer
in the spoils of an abused and deluded Nation: Why the Kings demanding of the
five Members and Kimbolton by undeniable warrant of the Laws of the Land, and
the Records, and precedents of their own houses, upon a charge, or accusation
of Treason, for endeavoring amongst other pieces of Treason, to alter the
Government, and subvert the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, which the
Parliament, and they themselves which were accused, have more then once
declared to be Treason, should be taken to be so great a breach of privilege
in the King their Sovereign; when the forcing, and over-awing the houses of
Parliament by the Army, their servants and hirelings, demanding the eleven
Members, and imprisoning and banishing some of them, upon imaginary and
fantastical offenses committed against themselves, or they could not tell whom;
shall be reckoned to be no breach at all of privilege, and the forcing of the
Houses by the same Army within a year afterward by setting guards upon them,
violently pulling two of the Members of the House of Commons out of the House,
and imprisoning them, and 39. of their fellow Members all night in an Alehouse,
and leading them afterward to several prisons, with guards set upon them, as
if they had been common malefactors, can be called mercies, and deliverances,
and a purging and taking away rotten Members out of the House of Commons.

But now that we can find nothing to make a defensive or Lawful, nor so much
as a necessary war on the Parliaments part; for ( causa belli, Besoldus
dissert. philog. pa 88.
says Besoldus, correspondere debet damno and periculo) the Parliament fears
and jealousies were not of weight enough to put the people into a misery far
beyond the utmost of what their fears and jealousies suggested to them did
amount unto, we shall do well to examine by the rules and laws of war and
Nations, the ways and means they used in it.

C. an quid culpatur 23.
Injustum censetur bellum si non ejus penes quem est Majestas authoritate
moveatur; a War cannot be just if it be not made by a Lawful authority: Armorum
delatio and prohibitio ad Principem spectat; Dn. D. Bocer de bello cap. 5.
Besoldus de juribus Majestatis cap. 6.
It belongs to the Prince to raise or forbid Arms: and the Records of the
Parliament (which we take to be a better sense of the House then their own
purposes) can inform them, that the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of
the Realm did in the seventh year of the reign of King Edw. the first, declare
to the King, 7. Ed. 1.
That it belongs, and his part is, through his Royal Signory, straightly to
defend force of Armor, and all other force against his Peace when it shall
please him, and to punish them which shall do the contrary, according to the
Laws and usages of the Realm, and that thereunto they were bound to aid their
Sovereign Lord the King, at all seasons when need shall be.

How much ado then will they have to make a War against their Sovereign to be
lawful? or (if by any warrant of Laws Divine or Humane they could but tell how
to absolve themselves from their oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, and their
very many protestations and acknowledgements of subjection to the King) find a
Supreme Authority to be in the people, at the same time they swore an
Allegiance, and obedience to the King, and at the same time they not only
styled themselves, but all those they represented to be his subjects?

Or, how will they be able to produce a warrant from the people, their now
pretended Sovereigns (till they shall be able sufficiently to enslave them) to
authorize them to make a War to undo them, when they elected them but to
consent to such things as should be treated of by the King, and his Lords for
the defense of the King and his Kingdom? Or how could a tenth part of the
people give warrant to them to fight against the King, and the other nine parts
of the people? Or can that be a good warrant when some of them were cheated,
and the other by plunderings and sequestrations forced to yield to it? Or could
the pretense of a war for defense of the Kings Person, and to maintain the
Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the people, be a warrant to the Parliament
(which never sought any thing for the King and people, but to take away the
Sovereignty from the one, and the Liberties of the other) to do every thing was
contrary unto it? But if that could have legitimated their actions; as it never
did or will be able.

By the rules of Justice in the practice of War and Nations Facius axiom. 35.
si bellum geratur sine denunciatione in captivos tanquam latrones animad verti
possit; It is a thievery, rather than a War, not to denounce or give notice of
it beforehand: and in this also the Parliament was faulty, for they took Hull
and Portsmouth, and the Kings Navy and Magazine from him, when He hoped better
things of them, and sent out their Armies and the Earl of Essex against Him,
whilst He was in treaty with them, and offered all that He could for to have a
peace with them.

Besoldus dissert. philolog. 88.
Bellum item impium injustumque sit si modus debitus non observetur; A War is
unjust if there be not a due way of proceedings held in it; which especially
consists in not hurting the Innocent, Churchmen, Husbandmen, weak or impotent
People, as old men, women, and children; and in this also they will fall short
of an excuse. For how full is every Town and Village of the truth as well as
the complaints of the unchristian usage of old and sick people, women and
children, beaten, wounded, or killed upon no provocation; women and maids
ravished, and their fingers cut off for their rings; old Best of Canterbury
hanged up by the privities, others tortured, and had burning matches tied to
their fingers to make them confess where their money was; women and children
and sick and aged persons starved for want of the sustenance they had taken
from them, husbandmen had their corn and hay spoiled in the fields, and barns;
their sheep, cattle and provisions devoured, houses ruined or burnt, and their
horses that should help to plough, and do other works of husbandry, taken away,
in so much as some were enforced to blind and put out their horses eyes that
they might not be taken from them; Churches that escaped defacing, profaned
and made Stables, or Gaoles, or Victualing, or Bawdy houses, Monuments defaced,
and Sepulchers opened, as were those of the Saxon Kings at Winchester, and the
Priests and Ministers not so much as suffered to weep betwixt the Porch and the
Altar, but their benefices and livelyhoods taken from them by Wolves put in the
Shepherds places; had their books burned, and all their means and maintenance
plundered from them; and those that were newtrals, and meddled on neither side
but lived as quietly as they could, either totally undone, or cast in prison,
not for that they did them any hurt, but because they might do it; and if they
were not imprisoned, their Lands, Money, or goods were sure to be in the fault,
and taken away from them.

Besoldus Ibid. 95.
Ut bellum illaesa conscientia geratur necesse est ut adsit intentio bona;
There ought to be a good intention to make the War conscionable; which in this
appears to fail also: For the Charge against the five Members is now as true as
it was then, they meant to ruin the King, and they have done it, and to alter
the Government, and subvert the Religion, Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom;
and they have done a great part of it, and as fast as they can are pulling down
the remainder.

Dn. Picart observat. decad 10. code and Facius axiom. bell. 10.
Quaerere debemus victoriam rationibus honestis, ne salutem quidem turpibus; We
ought to pursue victory and the just ends of War by honest and lawful means,
and not to do soul and dishonest things to procure our safety; from which, they
made fears and jealousies which the Parliament made use of to usher in their
pretenses, their faining of victories, and scandaling the King and his actions,
not to insist upon their buying the Kings servants and secrets, Battles, Towns
and Garrisons, and making too many Judases of all that were about him, will
hardly be able to free them; or if they could, the making use of men and money
intended for the support of Ireland, and leaving them wallowing in their blood
for seven years together, whilst they were ruining their King that would have
helped them, violating of their oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which many
of their members had taken six or seven times over, breaking their oaths,
taken in their Protestation and National Covenant, and not so few as one
hundred solemn promises, and undertakings in their several Petitions,
Remonstrances, and Declarations; forcing the People to take the Protestation
and Covenant, and compel them as soon as they had taken it, to break them, and
by cousening and forcing them into Rebellions and perjuries, cheat them out of
their Religion, Loyalty, Laws and Liberties; will be sure enough to condemn
them: and if the great Turk carrying the Covenant which Lad^staus the
unfortunate King of Hungary was persuaded to break with him as an ensign of
public detestation in the battle wherein he slew him, invoked the God of the
Christians to help him to revenge so great a treachery; there will be more
reason now for all that are but Christians, or but pretend to any morality, to
carry in their banner, the pourtraict of the Kings bleeding head, as it was cut
from His shoulders, and make War in revenge of the masterpiece, and totum
aggregatum, of all manner of wickedness and perfidiousness, who besides all
their own and the peoples oaths taken to defend him, when those they called
Delinquents (some few only which were specially named and excepted) for
obeying the known Laws of the Land as well as their Oaths and Consciences, were
never questioned for their lives, but suffered to compound for their Estates;
would not suffer the King, that was neither a Delinquent or Excepted Person, to
enjoy either His Life or Estate, though to save his people, and keep them from
killing one another, He had yielded himself and became a Prisoner upon the
public faith of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

Pax aequa non est recusanda licet victoriae spes adsit Besoldus in dissert.
philolog. p. 83.
says Besoldus) A good or fitting Peace is not to be refused, though the
victory were certain: And in this also the Parliament will be as far to seek
for a justification as in the other: For in stead of offering any thing which
was likely to bring it, they caused men and women in the first year of their
War to be killed, because they did but petition them to accept of a Peace; and
in the third and fourth year of their War plundered and robbed others that
petitioned them but to hearken to it, and put out of office, and made all as
Delinquents in the seventh year of their War, that did but petition them for a
Treaty with the King, and refused all the Kings many, very many Messages for
Peace, not only when He was at the highest of His success in the war, but when
he was at the lowest, and a prisoner to them, and conjured them as they would
answer at the dreadful day of Judgment, to pity the bleeding conditions of His
Kingdoms and people, and send propositions of Peace unto Him: and quarters and
half years, and more then a whole year together after the battle of Naseby
(insomuch as their fellow Rebels the Scotch Commissioners did heavily complain
of it) were at several times trifled away, and spent before any propositions
could be made ready, though those which they sent to Oxford, Uxbridge,
Newcastle and Hampton Court, were but substantially and materially the same
with their nineteen Propositions which they made unto the King before the Earl
of Essex was made their General; and in all the Treaties made Propositions for
themselves, and the Sovereignty, and great offices and places of the Kingdom,
but would neither for Gods sake, or their Kings sake, or their Oaths or
Consciences sake, or the Peoples sake, or Peace sake, which the people
petitioned, and hungered and thirsted for, alter or abate one Iota or tittle of
them, but were so unwilling to have any Peace at all, as six or seven
Messengers or Trumpeters could come from the King, before they could be at
leisure, or so manerly as to answer one of them, but this or that Message from
the King was received and read, and laid by till a week, or when they would,
after: and the Kings Commissioners in the Treaties must forget their due titles
of Earls, Lords or Knights, because the King had made them so since the
beginning of the War, or else there must be neither Treaty nor Peace.

At Uxbridge the time of the Treaty limited for 20. days; and at Newcastle for
10. and though the King and His Commissioners at Uxbridge almost petitioned for
a cessation in the interim of that Treaty, as they had done before in that
which was at Oxford, it could not be granted, nor have a few days added to it;
and if the King could in Honor and Conscience have granted all the other parts
of the Propositions, must grant them an Act, not only to confiscate the
Estates of His Friends, and those that took Arms to save his Life and Estate,
but to take away their Lives also, and not only that, but to condemn them of
high Treason, and attaint their blood, when they fought against them which were
only guilty of it, a thing so unfitting and unusually stood upon, as it was
never asked in any treaty or pacification among the civilized or more barbarous
heathen, and amounts to more then Adonibezeks causing the thumbs and great toes
of his captive Kings to be cut off, and making them to gather the crumbs from
under his table, or Benhadads demand of Ahabs silver and gold, his wives and
children, and whatsoever else was pleasant in his eyes, which the elders and
people of Israel persuaded Ahab not to consent unto, but was a thing purposely
contrived and stood upon to hinder a Peace, and was not to be asked or granted
by any that could but entitle themselves to the least part of reason or
humanity; a demand Bajazet would not leave his Iron cage to yield unto; a thing
nature it self would abhor, and the worst of villains and reprobates rather
lose their lives then yield to; would never be demanded by any but a Devil, nor
granted by any but his Equals.

And if their desiring of a War more then a peace, and to keep the King out of
his own, had not been the only cause of such unnatural and barbarous
propositions it may well be wondered, why they that have made to themselves (for
we cannot believe they have found any law or warrant to ground it upon) a power
to take away the Kings life upon a color or pretense of an unread, as well as
unheard* of piece of Justice; should need to strive so hard with the King, to
give them a power to do that which they are now so busy to do of themselves:
and as if they had been afraid, all this would not be enough to keep the doors
of Janus, or the Devil open, for fear lest the King should trouble them with
any more offers or Messages for peace: a vote must be made in February, 1647.
that it should be treason in any man to bring or receive any more Messages from
him without consent of Parliament. But suppose (that which is not) that the
Parliament could have but found any thing but somewhat like a cause or
justification of a war against their Sovereign (for notwithstanding all their
hypocritical pretenses, so it was at first intended, and so it has proved to
be ever since) to whom their Masters the people (we mean as to the House of
Commons) had sent them to consult with, not to make a War against him: they
might have remembered that saying of Cicero (if they had found nothing in the
book of God, and their own consciences to persuade them to it) That Cic. 1^* de
offi.*
duo sunt genera decertandi, unum per disceptationem, alterum per vim, and ad
hoc confugiendum non est si uti superiori licebit: There are other ways to come
by pretended rights, then* by a War, and we ought never to make use of a War
(which is the worst of all remedies) if we may obtain it by a better. Hen. 2.
King of England was made a Judge betwixt the Kings of Castile and Navarre. Jov.
lib. 1.
The Rebellious Barons of England in the reign of King Hen. 3. referred their
controversies to the decision of the King of France and his Parliament at
Paris: And the blood of this Kingdom which ran so plentifully in those unhappy
differences, was by that means only stopped. Charles Polydor. 13. 20.
the 4. Emperor was made a Judge of the differences betwixt the English and the
French Kings: For as Albericus Gentilis says well; Albericus Gentilis cap. 3.
Intelligendum est eos qui diffugiunt genus hoc decertandi per disceptationem,
and ad alterum quod est per vim currunt, ilico eos a justitia ab humanitate, a
probis exemplis refugere, and ruere, in arma volentes qui subire judicium
nullius velint: They that rush into a War without assaying all other just means
of deciding the controversy for which it is made, and will judge only
according to their own will, and opinion do turn their backs to Justice,
Humanity, and all good Examples. And in that also the Parliament will be found
faulty: For the French King, and the States of the United Provinces did by more
then one Request, and Embassy, severally and earnestly mediate to make an
accord betwixt the King and His Parliament, and desired to have all things in
difference left to their arbitrament; but their Ambassadors returned home
again, with a report, how much they found the King inclined to it; how
satisfactorily he had offered; and how much the Parliament was averse to their
interposition, and altogether refused it.

But we have tarried long enough among the Parliament party, from thence
therefore (for it is time to leave the company of so much wickedness) we shall
remove to the Kings party (and yet that may cause a Sequestration) and examine
for a fuller satisfaction of that which by the rule of contraries, is clear
enough already, if he were not on the defensive and more justifiable part of
the business.

The King as He was defensor and protector subditorum suorum, and sworn to see
the Law executed; had not the sword nor his authority committed to him in vain:
And if he had no manner of just cause of fear, either in His own Person or
authority, or no cause given him in re laesae Majestatis: the imprisoning of
His Subjects, and plundring and taking away their Estates from them, long
before He had either armed himself, or had wherewithal to do it; had been cause
as sufficient as to cause a Hue and Cry to be made after a fellon; or raise the
posse Comitatus to bring Him to Justice, and might by the same reason do it in
the case of more, and by the same reason he might do it by the help of one,
nothing can hinder but by the same reason he might do it by the help of more.

When Nathan came to David with a parable, and told him of the rich man that
had taken the poor man's only Sheep, he that understood well enough the duty of
a King was exceeding wroth against the man and said; As sure as the Lord lives
this man shall surely dye. And can any man think that the King when He saw so
much Sedition and Treason among the People countenanced and cherished, Tumults
grow up into outrages, outrages to parties and Warlike assemblies, propositions
made to bring in Horse and Money to maintain an Army against Him, and many of
His Subjects daily imprisoned, sequestered, undone or killed; can be blamed if
he had a great deal sooner gone about to defend both himself and His people?
For who Jerome. ep. 47.
(says St. Jerome.) did ever rest quietly sleeping near a viper? and lex una
and perpetua salutem omni ratione defendere and haec ratio doctis, necessitas
Barbaris, mos gentibus, feris natura ipsa prescripsit, and haec non scripta sed
nata lex, says Cicero pro milone.
Tully, (that great master of morality) Reason, Necessity, Custom, and Nature
it self have made self-preservation to be warrantable.

Nemo exponere se debet periculis obviam offensioni eundum, non modo quae est
in actu, sed quae est in potentia ad actum, and justus metus justum facit
bellum; say the Civil Laws, and where there was not nuda cogitatio, or a bare
intention, only to ruin the King, but so much over and over again acted, as
might well occasion more then a fear, and apprehension in him of what has
since been brought to pass against him; no man certainly without much blindness
or partiality can think it to be a fault in Him to seek to defend himself, when
the Parliament did not only long before He raised any forces to defend himself,
but at the same time when He was doing of it, make the people believe His
Person was in so much danger, as they must needs take up Arms to defend Him.

And how much more warrantable then must it be in the Kings case, when it was
not only an endeavor to defend himself, but all those that have been since
slain, and undone, and ruined for want of power enough to do it?

Defense is by the civil Lawyers said to be either necessary, profitable, or
honest: Baldus 3. consid. 485. and confid. 5.
Nec distingui vult Baldus sive se, sua, suosve defendat, sive prope, sive
posita long; A man is said to defend himself when it is but his own Goods,
Estate, or People, whether near or further of; Necessaria defensio ejus est,
and factum ad necessariam defensionem contra quem veniat armatus inimicus, and
ejus contra quem inimicus se paravit; It must needs be a necessary defense
against whom an armed enemy is either marching or preparing.

Utilis defensio, quum nos movemus bellum verentes ne ipsi bello petamur, When
we make a War to prevent or be before hand, when War or mischief is threatened
or likely to come upon us; For as Nicephorus the Historian says, He that will
live out of danger must occurrere malis impendentibus, and autevertere, nec est
cunctandum aut expectandum, etc. meet and take away growing evils, and turn
them another way, and not to delay, and be slack in it.

Honesta defensio quae citra metum ullum periculi nostri, nulla utilitate
quaesita, tantum in gratiam aliorum suscipitur. Alberic. Genti. lib. 1. 25.
When for no fear of danger to our selves, and for no consideration of profit
to our selves, but merely in favor or help of others the War is undertaken.
Wherefore certainly when the King may be justly said to tarry too long before
he made the second and third kinds of defenses, either to prevent the danger
and fury of a War against himself, or to help those that suffered and were
undone in seeking to defend him, and was so over much in love with Peace, as he
utterly lost it; and could never again recover it, and was so much mistaken in
the Love and Religion of His Subjects and Parliament promises, and the seeming
impossibilities of such horrid proceedings against Him, as all His three
Kingdoms were in a flame of war, and strong Combinations made by two of them,
and the Pulpits every where flaming; Seditious exhortations against Him, His
Navy, Magazines, Ports, Revenues, Mint, strongest Towns and Places seized on,
Armies marching against Him, and He only and a few friends, and followers pend
up in a corner, had an enemy and a strong Town at His back ready every day to
surprise Him, and several Armies marching and in action before, and round about
Him, before He granted out any Commission for War, or had or could make any
preparation for it, and had so many to help and defend besides himself: It
would be too much injury, and too great a violence to all manner of reason, and
understanding, to deny Him a Justification upon the first sort of defenses, if
the second would not reach it, for the first cannot by any interpretation go
without it. For Bald. 5. Cons. p. 439.
haec est necessitas (says Baldus) quae bellum justificat quum in extremo loco
ad bellum confugitur. Or if with Grotius we look upon it another way, and make
the Justice of War to consist, First, in defensione. Secondly, in recuperatione
rerum. Thirdly, in punitione. The King before ever He went to demand Hull, or
before ever he desired a guard of the County of York; had cause enough and
enough to do it; and it would be hard if a great deal less then that should not
be able to deliver Him from the censure or blame of an offensive or unnecessary
War. When that which was made by David upon the Children of Ammon, and that of
the late glorious King of Sweden against the Emperor of Germany; the former for
misusing, the latter for encroaching upon Him, and not receiving His
Ambassadors, found warrant and necessity enough to do it. But what could the
King do more in His endeavors and waiting for a Peace; or less in His
preparations or making of a War? when the least or one of the hundred
provocations or causes, we dare say plainly here set down in the matter of
fact, has hitherto among the wisest Princes, and Commonwealths in the World,
been reputed a just and warrantable cause of war.

Homicide by the Laws of England shall be excused with a se defendendo when the
assaulted has but simply defended himself, or retired in his own defense so
far till by some Water or Wall he be hindered from going any further. Death and
destruction marching toward the King, Hull fortified and kept behind him, and
all manner of necessities compassing him in on every side, could then do no less
then rouse him up to make his own defense; and he must be as much without his
senses, as care of his own preservation, if he should not then think it to be
high time to make ready to defend himself, and necessity enough to excuse him,
for any thing should be done in order to it.

The Parliament and he (as this case stood) could not be both at one and the
same time, in the defensive part; for, they had all the Money, Arms,
Ammunition, and strength of the Kingdom in their hands, and multitudes of
deluded people to assist them; and so hunted and pursued him from place to
place, as it was come to be a saying and a byword among the apprentices and new
levied men at London, they would go a King-catching: and were not likely
therefore to be guilty of so much patience as the King, who was so much in love
with Peace, and so thirsted after it, as that, and his often sending Messages,
and Propositions for it, would not permit him to make use of any victories or
advantages which God had given him. But twice suffered the Earl of Essex to
attempt to force Him from Oxford, and Sir Thomas Fairfax once to beleager Him,
when He had power enough to have made London, or the associate Counties, the
seat of the War, and it would be something strange that He, who when He had
raised forces against His Scottish Rebels, and found himself in the head of so
gallant an Army, as He had much ado to keep them from fighting, and His enemies
so ridiculously weak, as He might have subdued them, but with looking upon them
but a fortnight longer, could not be persuaded to draw a sword against them:
would now begin an offensive war without any power or strength at all against
those that had beforehand engrossed it: Or what policy or wisdom could it be
in Him to begin a War without Money, or Men, or Arms, to go through with it? Or
to refuse the assistance of His Catholic Subjects, and Foreign friends and
forces? or to spend so much time in Messages, and offers of Peace, to give them
time and ability to disarm Him, and arm themselves? If He had not utterly
abhorred a War, and as cordially affected peace, as He offered fair enough for
it: Or can any man think that the King did begin the War? when what he did was
but to preserve His Regality and the Militia, and protection of His people,
which the Parliament in express terms, as well as by Petitioning for it,
acknowledged to be His own; (being but that which every private man, that had
but money or friends would not neglect to do.)

Did He any more in seeking to preserve His Regality, then to defend and keep
himself from a breach of trust they sought to make him break? Or could there be
a greater perjury, or breach of trust in the Kingly Office, then to put the
sword which God had given him, into the hands of madmen or fools? or such as
would kill and slay, and undo their fellow Subjects with it? or to deliver up
the protection of His people into the hands of a few of their ambitious fellow
subjects? who did as much break their own trust to those they represented in
asking of it; as the King would have done if He had granted it? Or why shall it
not be accounted an inculpata tutela in the King to preserve and defend that by
a War, which the Laws of God and Man, His Coronation Oath, Honor and
Conscience, and a duty to himself and His Posterity, as well as to His people,
would not permit Him to stand still, and suffer to be taken away from Him.

But if the King by any manner of construction could be blamed, or censured, for
denying to grant the Militia; which was the first pretense of beginning of the
War by those that sought to take it from him, (for till the besieging of Hull
the 16. of July, 1642. after many other affronts and attempts of as high a
nature put upon Him, the most malicious interpretation of the matter of Fact,
cannot find Him so much at all to have defended himself, as to have done any
one act of War, or so much as like it) who shall be in the fault for all that
was done after, when he offered to condescend to all that might be profitable
for His people in the matter of Religion, Laws and Liberties? Was it not a just
cause of War to defend himself and his people against those who would
notwithstanding all He could do and offer, make a War against Him, because He
would not contrary to His Oath, Magna Charta, and so many other Laws which He
had sworn to observe, betray, or deliver up his people into their hands to be
governed, or rather undone by a greater latitude of Arbitrary power, then the
great Turk or Crim Tartar ever exercised upon their enslaved people; and put
the education and marriage of his own Children out of his power; which was
never sought to be taken out of the hand of any father, which was not a fool or
a madman; nor yielded to by any would have the Credit to be accounted
otherwise; or because he would not denude himself of the power of conferring
honors, or vilify, or discredit his great and lesser Seals, and the Authority
of them, from which many men's Estates, and Honors, and the whole current of
the Justice of the Kingdom had their Original; or perjure himself by abolishing
Episcopacy, which Magna Charta, and some dozens of other Laws, bound him to
preserve? Or if that be not enough to justify him in his own defense; had he
not cause enough to deny, and they little enough to ask Liberty of Conscience,
and practice to Anabaptists, Blasphemers of God, deniers of the Trinity,
Scriptures and Deity of Christ? when the Parliament themselves had taken a
Covenant to root them out, and made as many of the people as they could force,
to take it with them? Or had He not cause enough to deny to set up the
Presbyterian authority, which would not only have taken away his own authority,
but have done the like also with the Laws, and Liberties of the Nation, and the
ruling part of that which they now call the Parliament did utterly abhor; Or if
all that could not make the war which he made to be defensive, and lawful; had
He not cause enough to deny, and they none at all to ask that He should by Act
of Parliament consent to make all those to be Traitors that took His part,
their Blood and Posterities attainted, and their Estates forfeited? when as
some of the Parliaments own Members were heard to say when those Propositions
were sent unto him; That if he yielded unto them, He was the unworthiest man
living, and not fit to be a King.

For certainly, if the Laws of God and man, and the understanding of all
mankind be not changed; there was never a juster, more defensive, unwilling,
and necessitated War then that of the Kings part, since man came out of
Paradise. And if such a War should not be lawful (after so many provocations
and necessities for the defense of himself, and his people, and so many after
generations, which this War of the Parliament, and the curse of it, is like to
ruin and leave in slavery) under what censure and opinion may that of Genes.
14.
Abraham's with Chederlaomer the King of Elam, and Tidal King of the Nations be,
when he fought with them to rescue his Brother Lot, and his goods, and was
blessed by Melchisedec the Priest of the most high God, for doing of it? Or if
the Judges 20.
War which the Tribes of Israel made against the Tribe of Benjamin, and the men
of Gibeah for committing lewdness and folly in Israel; that of 1 Samuel 30.
David to rescue his wives that were carried away captive by the Amalekites; or
2 Samuel 6.
to fetch home the Ark of God from the Philistines; that which 1 Reg. 20.
Ahab made with Benhadad the king of Syria, who was not half so Tyrannical in
his Propositions as the Parliament, were approved of in sacred Story; or that
which was made by Judas Maccabeus and his Brethren, to rescue the decayed
Estate of the people of the Jews; or that which was used to be made by the
heathen pro aris, and focis, were never yet so much as suspected to be
unlawful: How shall this of the kings be condemned, that had as much as
Abraham, David, Ahab, against Benhadad, 1 Mac. 3. v. 43.
Judas Maccabeus, and the tribes of Israel, or those heathens that made it pro
aris and focis, put them all together, to warrant it? Or by what reason or Law
is any man by the Laws of England excused for killing a man in his own defense,
when he is necessitated to it, or for killing thieves that come to assault or
rob him in his House or Castle? If the King shall be hunted from his House
through all the parts and corners of his Kingdom for his Life, and not only for
his Life, but his Honor, and not only for his Life and Honor, but his
Conscience? and yet must never draw his sword, or seek to defend himself, or
have any body else to do it for him? Or how have all the Kings, Princes and
Magistrates of the world hitherto governed, and defended themselves, and their
people? or shall ever be able to give an account of the people committed to
their charge, if they may not be at liberty to make a Legal use of the sword,
power, and reason, which God has given them? Or how can those State riddles
(like those of Sphinx only made to destroy men withal) that they fought for the
King and Parliament, as is alleged in many of their Orders and Declarations?
and that the war on the Kings part was a Rebellion raised against the King and
Parliament, as is expressed in the 8. June, 1644.
Ordinance of Parliament for association of the Counties of Pembroke, Cardigan,
and Caermarthen; be ever understood by any rules of sense, or reason; if he had
been (as he was not) on the offensive part of the war, and had begun it against
them? Or how the Earl of Essex and Sir Thomas Fairfax could (as there was Law
and reason enough to persuade them to it) believe that the war made by the King
against the Scots, wherein they served and took command under him, was lawful;
and that a War in his own defense against the forces of the Parliament, wherein
they were shortly after successively one after the other Generals and
Commanders against him, should be unlawful; or that they which seized the Town
and Magazine of Hull, and first began the war against the King, who only
defended himself and the people, committed to his charge, can possibly be
understood to have done it in their own defense; or that what they did could in
the means and way which they used or took unto it, and the sad and dire effects
and consequences of it, receive any other interpretation then that they began
and made a war against the King, upon a color only and pretense that they made
it for him?

But if any shall be so in love with the sense of the House of Commons, as to
be out of their own senses, and think that though there be no manner of evidence
or proof to be had for love or money, that the Parliament were constrained to
defend themselves by a war: yet the Kings admitting of the Preamble of the
Parliaments Propositions presented to him at the Isle of Wight, that the
Parliament was necessitated to take up Arms in their just and lawful defense,
makes him (who must needs be best acquainted with his own actions) to be so
clearly guilty of all the blood that has been shed in these wars, as it puts
to silence all that can be now alleged, or said in his behalf.

They that made the preamble, and placed it in limine and the threshold of the
Treaty, on purpose to catch and ensnare him (for either he must have denied it
at the very beginning and entrance into the Treaty, and leave his Kingdoms and
people to wallow in the blood and misery which their Parliament Idols had
brought them to; and have all the blame laid upon him for hindering a Peace,
which he had so much longed and labored for, or put himself, and all his Loyal
Subjects that helped to defend him, under the burden of those Sins and Shames
which the Parliament themselves had all the right to) can tell their undone,
and deluded Proselytes; how much the King stuck at it, how unwilling he was to
break off the Treaty, and was unwilling to wrong his own Innocence; and that
when the Parliament Commissioners had not any thing either in Law, Truth,
Reason, or Argument to persuade him to yield unto it, but laid it only as a
case of necessity before him (though there was no such preamble at the Treaties
of Oxford and Uxbridg, nor any such necessity at those times insisted upon)
that unless he would take the guilt upon himself, his two Houses of Parliament
and the People had engaged with them, must necessarily be guilty of Treason,
and could not have any security from the guilt and punishment of it. The King
bemoaning himself and people that must be thus shut out from any hopes of
peace, entreated some expedient, or medium might be found out to reconcile the
differences: But Cains sins being greater then could be forgiven him, unless
Abel can be brought to say he killed Cain; they that could afterward find an
expedient for 21. of their great Council of State that refused to subscribe to
the lawfulness of murdering the King; after it was done, could find none at
all for the King to purchase a Peace for the people (though many kinds of ways
and expedients, as allowing Him to make a preamble to his own propositions,
that the war made by Him, was made in his own defense, or the like, might have
been easily contrived and thought upon. For the truth was, the Independent
party desired no Peace at all, and the Presbyterian desired it only to get into
their hands the Kings Power and Authority, and lay the guilt of all the blood
they had shed for it upon Him; and both of them were so well content to have
Him allow of the preamble, as the latter thought himself safe and out of
controversy if the King took the blood upon Him; and the former, that it would
prove no small advantage or color to take away his life if he should confess
himself guilty of it by allowing of the preamble. In this unparalled demand,
never before stood upon by Subjects to their Prince, or Conquerors to their
Captives; Nero himself was so far short of, as though he had cunning enough
when he set Rome on fire to lay the fault upon the Christians, he had not
Villainy enough to torture and seek to draw them to a confession, that they had
done it.

The King therefore after Protestation that He could not without a manifest
injury to the Truth, and a violation of His Honor and Conscience, take upon
Him a guilt, which could no way be charged upon Him, or those that appeared in
His defense, was yet for Peace sake, and His peoples sake content to say, It
will be a great self-denial to take this supposition of a guilt upon my self,
and a Christian virtue to undergo any affliction that may be for the good of my
People: and I am confident those that have adventured so much for me, will be
content to share with me for so good a purpose in the suffering for it. I shall
therefore Conditionally consent to the Preamble; so as there follow a
conclusion upon the whole matter in Treaty and Propositions betwixt us;
otherwise it is but sub modo, and conditional; as it is always to be understood
in this Treaty, that nothing agreed in part betwixt us, shall be binding unless
there be a conclusion upon the whole.

And here let the Truth be judge if the King did not abundantly endeavor to
save His people, and if the Parliament had not need of a justification, when
they used all manner of force and shifts, to have the King take the fault upon
Him.

Wherefore they that shall consider that the King was a close prisoner, robbed
and bereaved of all that He had (but His Honor and Conscience, and a great
measure of knowledge and understanding, and the hearts of His Loyal Subjects)
was debarred of all friends and comforts, penned up and used with all manner of
hardship and extremities, and every day like to be murdered, that conditions
adimpleri debent priusquam sequatur effectus; and are but inserted or added, in
casum incertum qui potest tendere ad esse, aut non esse; and depend on
subsequences or following effects, which not happening or coming to be
performed according to the intent of the conditions, makes them to vanish and
expire, as if that no such matter at all had been acknowledged or expressed in
them: That Cook his accuser, who when he comes to be hanged for it, will never
be able to prove that the people substistuted, or gave him warrant for to
accuse Him. And Bradshaw who sat higher in the pageant of Justice, and the rest
of his fellow-murderers took the Kings conditional consenting to the Preamble
to be so little for their purpose, as they never so much as mentioned it: must
not only acquit him of any Confession or guilt to be inferred from his
conditional yielding to that Ambuscado Preamble, but dissolve into wonder and
admiration; that He who in His Royal Meditations, and Conference with death
upon the Parliaments Votes of non address, and his closer imprisonment at
Carisbrooke-Castle, had clearness of Conscience enough to say (for as for his*
judgment we hope it cannot be suspected, when Mr. Caril the Independent, and
Mr. Vines a Presbyterian Minister could say, He was a second Solomon: and the
Parliaments Commissioners at the Isle of Wight reported him to be the master of
the greatest wisdom and understanding) That He had (...). ca. 28.
the feast of a good conscience, and the brazen wall of a judicious integrity
and conscience! doubted not but His Innocence would find God to be His
Protector! rejoiced in the comfort of imitating Christ's example in suffering
for Righteousness sake! and thanked God He could pray for them, that God would
not impute His Blood to them, further then to convince them what need they had
of Christ's blood to wash their souls from the guilt of shedding His! And was
afterward in the face and view of Death and His murderers (when such a Prince,
and such a Christian, cannot be thought to dissemble) heard to say upon the
Scaffold, He never did begin a War with the two houses of Parliament, and
called God to His witness (to whom He was shortly to make an account) He never
intended to incroach upon their Privileges, but they began upon Him: It was
the Militia they began upon; though they confessed it was His, and that any that
would look into the date of their Commissions and His, might clearly see that
they began these unhappy troubles, and hoped, God would clear Him of it! Could
be so much more then a man, and so great a Protector of His people, as not
only to be content to be robbed and despoiled of all that He had for their
sakes; but to save the lives, liberties, and estates of His people, when there
was no other way to do it; deliver up himself (so as a Peace and Agreement
might have followed upon the Treaty) to the unjust Censure of Robbing and
Spoiling, those that had robbed and undone Him.

But now that we have hunted this Parliament Proteus through all his disguises
of Parliament privileges and pretenses, and are lamentably assured that a
great and accursed thing is committed in our Israel, and that the anger of the
Lord is kindled against us, it may be labor well bestowed (though here is sure
enough already said and proved that the King was in the defensive and
justifiable part of the War) to send into Achans* tent, and search and see what
is there to be found concerning this matter; and there we find that the Lord
Brook, and his Accomplices, had not long before the King had summoned* them to
that which is now called the Parliament settled, and conveyed their Estates to
prevent any dangers which might happen upon their intended enterprises. Peard
the pragmatique Parliament man was heard to say a little before this holy War
began to break out, That the Government of the Kingdom would within a year or
two be altered.

A little before the second Scottish invasion, History of the Marquis Montrosse
his actions in Scotland.
Hinderson the Scotch firebrand confesses that the Covenanters* of both
Kingdoms were unanimously agreed to bring the King to their lure before they
laid down Arms: the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms in January 1643.
professes, they will never say down Arms till the pretended Reformation be
accomplished; many Declarations and Remonstrances of the Parliament, (if they
may be so called) and the Army mention the original power and Sovereignty to be
in the people, the common Rights and Freedom of the Nation, and the
opportunities God had put into their hands. An Ordinance of Parliament 20.
October 1645. concerning rules and directions for Tryers and Judges of the
ability of Elders, declares it was the wonderful providence of God in calling
them (which He never did by force of Arms, Hypocrisy, Treason, Rebellion, and
usurping of regal Authority) to the great and difficult work of Reformation and
purging the Church. The Lord Fairfax and his general Council of Officers in
their Remonstrance of the 16. November, 1648. made to the Parliament, did call
the putting down of Monarchy, and the establishing of their unjust ends, the
public interest originally contended for on the Parliament part, and the
Declaration and Votes of those that call themselves the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled, 15. January 1648. Affirm the bringing of Delinquents to
punishment (which if any who had assisted the King had been Delinquents, is
certainly a part of the Kingly office, and were never refused to be brought to
a due and legal trial) to be one of the pretended causes of making this War.
And in another place thereof acknowledges the rooting out of Episcopacy, and
bringing Delinquents to punishment to be the only motives which induced them
to undertake this War.

Wherefore though our Achans will neither confess nor be brought to punishment,
till the wrath and never failing judgment of God shall bring them, and their
sons, and their daughters, and their successes, and the asses that follow them
to be consumed in the field of Achor: the Fig Leaves which they have patched
together to palliate and hide their nakedness, cannot keep out the eyes and
understanding of a ruined Nation, bleeding under the burden of their iniquity,
but whether ever confessed or never, it will be as plain as the most infallible
demonstration; that they were never necessitated to make a War, but were so far
from the Justification of a defensive War, as that they were altogether in the
offensive. For beside all that which has been said to prove them guilty of the
blood and misery of this Nation, who can think, or be believed (if he should be
so mad as to say it) That they were forced to make a war for that which was
none of their own; or for Laws and Liberties when they did not want them, and
might have had as much addition made unto them, as the good of the Nation and
right reason could have desired* or that they were constrained to make a War
because he would not un-King or un-man himself, and give away his Negative
voice, and undertaking by his Oath to do justice to his people, and protect and
defend them, quit his Militia, and put himself out of all power to do it; or
because he would not leave the care, education, and marriage of his children,
which every man that is not horse du sens and sans raison, out of his wits, or
a very great stranger to the most ordinary and common parts of understanding,
was never yet denied, or were enforced to make a War to; take away tenures in
Capite, which was a principal flower of the Kings Crown; or for a Reformation
of Religion, which was already the envy and ambition of the best of the
Reformed Churches; or to commit sacrilege, or abolish Episcopacy, which at the
least was of Apostolical institution; or to preserve the Statute of 25. E. 3.
concerning what was Treason; when they themselves committed most of the
Treasons, were mentioned in it, and more then their forefathers, and the
makers of that Statute, ever thought on? But that we may do all the right we
can to those which have done so much wrong, and the better carry on our
judgments to a certain conclusion of that which God and all good and just men
know to be true enough, it will not, we hope, be impertinent in this our search
and disquisition of the truth to proceed to the enquiry.

CHAP. V. Whether the Parliament in their pretended Magistracy have not taken
lesser occasions to punish or provide against Insurrections, Treasons and
Rebellions, as they are pleased to call them.
ALl in the Neighborhood of their proceedings, that know but any thing of
them, can tell it: The Parliament have not been wanting to their own
preservations and purposes in the exercise of the greatest Jealousy*
Vigilance, Terror and Authority over those they could but get within their
pretended Jurisdiction, witness Edward Archer, who was whipped and punished
almost to death for speaking but his ill wishes to the Earl of Essex, when he
was marching out of London with their Army against the King; the Imprisonment
of their own Members for speaking against the Sense and Cabal of the House of
Commons; men and women, old and young shut up under Decks, ready to be stifled
a shipboard, upon suspicion that they affected the King; hanging of the two
Bristoll Merchants, Mr. Bourchier and Mr. Yeomans for an endeavor to deliver
up Bristol.; putting Colonel Essex out of the Governmen of that Town upon
suspicion of favoring the enterprise; hanging of Master Tompkins and Master
Chaloner for a purpose to force the delivery up of some factious men to
Justice; banishing Master Waller, an eminent member of the House of Commons,
for the contrivance of it; searching the Houses of Foreign Ambassadors; and
intercepting and opening their Letters; Beheading Sir Alexander Carry for an
intention to deliver up Plymouth, and Sir John Hotham (who adventured first of
all to set up their authority, and was magnified, and almost adored for it) for
an intention only to deliver up Hull to the King; executing of his Son for
joining with his Father in it; hanging Master Kniveton, one of the Kings
Messengers, but for bringing his Majesty's Proclamation to London for the
adjourning of the Term (being a greater misusage then David's messengers
received from King Ammon;) imprisoning, starving and undoing of any that durst
but own the King, or write any thing for or in his behalf, or send or bring any
message from him or his party, or that did but give any aid or assistance to
him, to which their Oaths and Consciences and the Covenant (which they
themselves took, and forced upon the people) did oblige them; shooting and
cannonading of the Queen when she came but to aid her husband, and chasing and
shooting after her at sea a year after, when she was going back into France
from him; sequestring wives and mothers that did but relieve their husbands and
childrens wants when they returned out of the Kings service; putting thousands
of Orthodox Ministers out of their benefices and livelyhoods for using the
Common Prayer Book, preaching true Doctrine and obedience to the King, or
praying for him at the same time when they pretended liberty of conscience, and
preservation of Religion; voting the Prince a Traitor for wishing well or being
in company with his Father (for he was too young to do any thing else for him)
and making, or rather supposing charges of high Treason against those that
either fought for the King, or counseled him how to defend himself; in obeying
the known Laws which they themselves made the world believe they made some part
of the war for, ordering all to die without mercy that did but harbor the King
when he fled in a disguise before their Armies; condemning men by a Court
martial after the War was ended, and Shooting them to Death but for words or
intentions.

And if this and many things more which might be said of it, be not enough,
what means so many Sequestrations, and the bleating and lowing of men's Sheep
and Oxen taken away from them since the War was ended, but for words spoken
either for the King or against them? husbands and fathers undone for what their
wives or children did without their privity? the Mayor of London and diverse
Aldermen Imprisoned but upon a suspicion of joining with the Scots, or acting
in pursuance of the Covenant which they forced them to take, or else would have
undone them for refusing of it? Garrisons and Armies with Freequartering and
Taxes kept up, and the people like sheep devoured to maintain them? so much
complaining in our streets? and the taking away from some all their lands and
from others what they pleased and enforced many thousands to compound for their
lands and estates for joining with the Kings forces, or for being forced to
send provisions to them (when they took up Arms some in pursuance of the
Covenant, and others of them to deliver the King out of prison) and causing the
Soldiers not only to cut and kill diverse of the County of Surrey in the very
act of petitioning the Parliament for a Treaty of Peace with the King, and
Sequester many of them for putting their hands unto it; with disabling the
Citizens of London for bearing any Office in the City or Commonwealth for but
putting their hands to the Petition for the Treaty, though Cromwell himself had
not long before set on some to petition for it, and the ruin and undoing of
two parts of three in the Kingdom, very many of whom did nothing actually in
the Wars, but were only sacrisiced to their pretended reasons and jealousies of
State, and do sufficiently proclaim and re^ain the woeful Registers to after
generations of this lamentable assertion. If the King could have gotten but so
much leave of his mercy, and tender-heartedness to his people as to have used
but the five hundredth part of the Parliaments jealousies, and sharp and
merciless authority in the managing of this war, so much of his Kingdoms and
people had not been undone and ruined, nor the Parliament put to so much labor
to coin faults and scandals against him, nor to wrest the Laws to Nonsense,
and the Scriptures to Blasphemy to justify their most horrid act of Murdering
him, but for seeking to preserve the Laws and Liberties of his people, who are
now clearly cheated out of them. And here our miseries tells us we must leave
them, and in the next place shall remember (for indeed it is so plain it needs
no enquiry,)

CHAP. VI. Who most desired Peace, and offered fairliest for it.
THe abundant satisfaction which the King had offered them from his first
summoning of the late Parliament, to their dissolving of themselves, by
dissolving Him who gave them all their Life and Being; that which he did, and
all which he would have done: So many Declarations, Answers and Messages penned
by himself, intending, as much as his words could signify, and were believed
and understood by all at that time that were not interessed or engaged against
him, and by many of the eagrest of them also that had no hand, or looked to have
any profit in the murdering of him (for a Trial of a King without either
Warrant or Color of Scripture or the Laws of the Kingdom, or the consent of
the major part of the people (if that could have authorized it) cannot, nay,
will not by all the world and after ages be otherwise interpreted, unless we
shall say Ravillae might have justified his killing of Henry the Fourth of
France, if he had but had the wit to have framed or fancied a Supreme Court of
Justice, and have Sentenced him before he had done it) will be as Pillars and
lasting Monuments of this Truth, The King was the only desirer of Peace, and
labored and tugged harder for it then ever Prince or King, Heathen or
Christian, since Almighty God did his first days work, did ever do with
Superiors, Equals or Subjects: and it will be no wrong certainly to David
(whose sufferings are so much remembered in all Christian Churches) complaining
so bitterly, That he sought peace with those that refused it, and in the mean
time prepared for War against him, Yo say the King did suffer more, and offer
more and oftener for peace then ever he did (for any thing is extant or
appearing to us) for surely so many messages of peace, as one and twenty in two
years space, from the 5 of December 1645. to the 25. of December 1647. sent to
the Parliament after so many affronts and discouragements, must needs excuse
him that offered all could be imagined to be for the good and safety of his
people, and condemn those that not only from time to time refused it, but
adhered so much to their first intentions, as all the blood and ruin of the
people could not persuade them to depart with the least punctillio of it,
though the King before the Isle of Wight Treaty offered so much for the
Olive Branch, as to part with the Militia for the term of his life, and in a
manner to un-King himself, and was afterward content to do all that his
Coronation, Oath, Honor and Conscience could possibly permit him to do; and to
purchase a peace for his people, would have persuaded his Innocence to have
born the shame and reproach of what his enemies were only guilty of, in so much
as the Lord Say himself, and most of his ever craving, never safe enough
Disciples, confessed that the King had offered so much, as nothing more could
be demanded of him. They therefore that can but tell how to divide or put a
difference betwixt white and black, night and day, and the plainest contraries,
must needs also acknowledge, That the King offered all, and the Parliment
refused all; the King was willing to part almost with every thing, and the
Parliament would never part with any thing; the King was willing for the good
of his people to give away almost every thing of his own, but the Parliament
would never yield to part with any thing was not their own. And thus may the
account be quickly cast up between the King and that Parliament, who would have
saved and kept the people from misery, and who was most unwilling to make an
end of it. But that we may not too hastily give the Sentence and try the
business, as they use to do at the Council of War, or the new invented way of
Justice, sitting with their will, or the Sword only in one hand, and no Balance
at all in the other. We shall in the next place examine,

CHAP. VII. Who labored to Shorten the War, and who to Lengthen it.
THe odds was so great betwixt what the Parliament labored to get, and the
King to keep, as that which swayes the balance in most men's actions will be
argument enough to conclude, They were more likely to loose by a peace then a
war, therefore the more vvilling to continue it. And if their own interests
would not put them so far upon it, their vain glory and ambition would be
forvvard enough to persuade them to it; and if not that, the success of their
arms, or miscalled Providence, would make them look (as experience tells us
they did) upon any tenders of peace; as Alexander the Great did upon Darius his
offer of half his kingdom: and if not that, their fears and iealousies now
grown greater by wronginge of the King, then ever they were when they without
any cause suspected him* could never think it safe to let an enraged Lion into
his Den they had so long kept out of it. But the King could not fight for his
own, but he must adventure the undoeiug of his own; and could not but know
that so much as was lost of his Subjects, would be so much lost of a King; and
therefore does all he can to preserve a People, who had no mind to preserve
themselves; and the morniug before he was enforced to fight in his own defense
at Edg-hill, did not only scnd his Proclamation of Pardon to all (except the
Earl of Essex) which would lay down their Arms: but before he had gathered up
the Bays which he had there won, sends afterward a like Proclamation of
pardon to all those that the day before did all they could to kill him: And in
all his actions of War afterward behaved himself like a weeping Father,
defending himself against the strokes and violence of disobedient Children. For
had the Parliament accepted of his offers before he came to Beverley or
besieged Hull, he had never set up his Standard at Nottingham; or had they
loved his people but half so much as he did, their Armies had never seen his
Banners displayed at Edgehill. Had they hearkened to his many endeavors for
peace after that battle, and not sought to surround or ruin him when he came
so near as to their very doors to entreat for it, they had never been troubled
to frame an accusation against him for defending himself at Braynford: had his
Treaty at Oxford been proceeded in with the same desires of peace he brought to
it, the blood that was shed at Caversham bridge had been kept for better
purposes; had he sought his own advantages he had not besieged Glcoester; or
had he not been so unwilling to put the people in it to the hazard of a storm,
might have taken it; had they not sent their General to assault him at
Gloucester, whilst he was as David besieging the strong hold of the Jebusites
that withheld it from his obedience, and sought to ruin and undo him as well
as his Loyal Subjects, he had not fought with them afterward at Newbury, had
not his Olive branches been flung in the fire by those he sent them unto, he
had not been put to defend himself at Cropredy bridge: had any thing been able
to prevail with the Parliament to pity their fellow Subjects, he had not taken
such a tedious and dangerous march to relieve those they would have ruined at
Bodmin in Cornwall: had the Treaty at Uxbridge taken effect, he needed not
afterward have adventured so much to defend himself at Newbury: had not the
new modeled Army after so many tenders of peace refused by their masters, been
sent out to destroy him, he had not been put to the trouble of taking Leicester
for his security: and had not he been surrounded and almost surprised by them,
he might have reserved himself to a better success and advantage then he had at
Naseby: had his voluntary resigning up of the remainder of his Armies and
Garrisons been able to persuade any thing with them, there had not been so much
as a Relic of War left in the Kingdom; or could so many messages for peace,
and so many Petitions of the people for it, have made but any impression on the
Parliament, so many divisions, parties and insurrections had not since broken
the Harps of the Children of Israel, nor had the drums outgone the voice of the
Turtle. He that could not bring himself to the common actions of War to hang a
Spy, but when one was hanged before he knew of it, was entreating the
Governor of Oxford to spare him. He that when he had in his power John
Lilborne one of the most factious that were against him, Wingate and Darley
Parliament men, Col. Ludlow an actor of that Treason his father had not long
before spoken against him, and Dr. Bastwick one of the bellows and principal
factours of this horrid Rebellion, did no more then imprison some of them, and
giving the rest a legal Trial, showed them what the Law they made silly people
believe they took up arms to maintain would judge of them, and suffered them to
be exchanged to do what they could afterward against him: He that when he had
taken 400. Prentise-boies in the Fight at Brainford did but dismiss and pity
them; and when he had compelled the Earl of Essex, the Parliaments General, at
Lestithiel in Cornwall to fly away by Sea in a Cock-boat, and leave all the
Artillery and foot of his Army to his mercy, did no more but only disarm them,
and take an Oath of them never more to serve against him: And being then in the
hight of his prosperity, sent a Message and offer of peace to the Parliament,
who were low enough at that time (if their designs would have given them
leave) to have received it: He that could say, He should be more afraid to take
away any man's life unjustly then to loose his own, was not likely to be guilty
of blood-seeking or the sheding of it: He that had experience enough how much
his Life and Crown were sought for, yet to show them the way to peace, and to
take off all pretenses to hinder it, could sheath his own sword, and put
himself into the hands of those he had so little reason to trust, as he knew
them to be the great contrivers of the War against him, caused the Marquess of
Montrosse, one of his mighty men of war, to disband, when he was master of a
strong and (not long before) fortunate Army in Scotland; commanded Newarke,
Oxford, Wallingford and Worcester, very strong and almost impregnable Towns and
Garrisons in England to be delivered up, and all acts of hostility by sea and
land, and all the preparations his friends could make either in foreign parts
or at home to cease: He that could endure five years Ballading, Libelling, and
preaching against him, and such heaps of numberless affronts and injuries of
all kinds done unto him, and two years imprisonment afterward; yet so long as
he enjoyed but the liberty of pen and ink, or a messenger to carry it, did so
tire them with messages and offers of peace, as they Voted it to be Treason for
any to bring any message from him; and notwithstanding all that made shift to
throw a message or Declaration to his people, made up like a ball out of the
place of his close Imprisonment at Carisbrook was not like to desire the
lengthening that war which he did all he could to avoid, and offered so much to
make an end of: but on the contrary if we take inour consideration the more
then Gothish unheard of inhumane cruelties acted and done by the Parliament
against their better fellow Subjects, their Plundrings, Sequestrations, and
racking of every man's estate they pleased to call Delinquents; severities in
all their actions, standing upon every punctilio or word, or superscription of
a Letter, and not abating a tittle of their demands, as if they had been the
Decalogue or some other place of Scripture (though rivolets of blood, hundred
thousand of ruined families, and thronged hospitals of sick and wounded men,
Widows and Fatherless cried aloud to them for peace) and their killing and
murdering those that but Petitioned for it, and a foundation laid of a new War
may last as long as that of the Netherlands and Germany. There will be enough
and enough again to insure us of this most clear and evident truth, That the
King did all he could, and more then any man else would have done to obtain
peace, and the Faction or Parliment all they could to avoid it: for certainly
if there be any rules of Learning, Truth or Reason left us to judge by, He must
be sequestered of all his brains that can but endeavor to make a doubt whether
the King did not more resemble the true mother of the Child in the case before
Solomon, who did so much, and offered to part with so much to save the life of
it; then the Parliament that would have it more divided, and to be cut and torn
all to bits and pieces, and would do nothing at all to save, but every thing to
destroy it. And now we have seen a King undone and imprisoned for his
endeavors to protect his people, and bring again beloved Peace to those that
would not entertain it; and heard the report of his murder (for most of the
peoples eyes have not seen it, nor have their hearts acted in it) we shall as
most men do (after they have lost a good offer or opportunity) enquire,

CHAP. VIII. Whether the conditions offered by the King would not have been
more profitable, if they had been accepted; and what the people have go^
instead of them.
IN order to which, though so woeful and over-and-over-bitterly- Tasted, Seen,
Felt, Heard and Understood-experiences of the miseries which have come unto us by
the Parliaments not accepting the gracious offers and conditions which the King
made unto them, may make it to be as needless to enquire of them, as for a man
to ask where to find Paul's Steeple in London when he is in Paul's Churchyard,
or to enquire for the Sun in the Dog-dayes, when he and every man else may see
or feel the effects of it, we shall be content to consider what the King
offered, and what the Parliament would have had him to grant. What the King
would have done, and what the Parliament have done, and by that see which would
have been the better bargain.

The King like a pater patriae offered over and over to grant all manner of
Laws and Liberties which might be good and wholesome for his people, and only
denied to grant those things the granting whereof (as he said himself) would
alter the Fundamental Laws, and endanger the very foundations upon which the
public happiness and vvelfare of his people were founded and constituted, or
to give them stones instead of bread, or Scorpions instead of Fishes. But the
Parliament meaning to feed the people neither Collect. Kings Messages and
Answers.
with bread nor fishes, ask the Royal Svvord, Crown and Scepter,
Coronation Oath and Conscience, and an Arbitrary power to Govern and Domineere
over their fellow Subjects, and to enslave those that trusted them. And though
the King had already granted enough to preserve the Laws, Lives, Religion and
Liberty of the people, and was so vvilling almost at any rate to purchase a
peace for himself and his people; as he was content to part with his Svvord
and Militia, and diverse other parts of his Regality during his life: Yet that
would not serve the turn, 'tvvas Naboths Vineyard, not Ahabs Fast which made
all the business: The Faction or Party in the Parliament that pretended so
much to deny themselves, and to dote upon the people, do notwithstanding all
they can to continue the War, and to cozen and force the peoples blood,
estates, and conscience out of them; and they must never give over paying of
Taxes, fighting and fooling till they enable them to imprison their King, and
not only murder him, but thousands, and many ten thousands of their fellow
Subjects, and the Laws, Religion and Liberties of the people.

And now that they have done more then the men of the Gunpowder-treason ever
intended to do, and that all England are become like sheep without a Shephard,
wandering on the mountains, and thousands of Wolves by Votes and Ordinances, and
mis-called Acts of Parliament appointed to feed them; four or five years sad
experience in the Wars of the Parliament against the King, and almost as much
more time spent in settling and subduing the people, making them like Camels to
kneel down to take up their burdens, labor, and travel hard, and endure hunger
and thirst under them: yet yield up the veins to be pricked for blood to
enable their drivers to furnish them with a new supply of burdens, when they
shall be discharged of what they have laid upon them: may easily show us a
difference as big as a mountain betwixt our old good Laws and Liberties enjoyed
under a gracious King, who had an Estate of inheritance large enough of his
own, besides an Oath to oblige Him to protect us: and a Hell upon Earth, and
the most Slavish of all the governments which were ever yet put upon a Nation,
by men of as little Wit and Estates as they have honesty; having no other
obligations upon them but their own abominable designs and interests. For
which of the people unless those that have traded in their neighbors blood and
ruin, but has made their complaints of their undoing?

The Religion of the Kingdom once so glorious, is now cut into fancies and
blasphemies; the Churches where God was wont to be worshipped, either defaced,
pulled down, or made Stables for horses; the Laws of the Kingdom which were
consonant to the Word of God, and had in them the Quintessence of all which
could be found to be extant in the Laws of Nature, Nations, Civil Laws, or
rectified Reason, and whatsoever the wisdom and care of all former Kings in
Parliament, or the usage and customs of this or any other neighboring Nations
could bring to its perfection, and were wont to nourish and preserve peace and
property among us, voted out, or into that sense, or the other interest to that
every thing or nothing, or to that nonsense according as the Lawless,
Unlimited, Unjust, and Ignorant will of fellow subjects, shall please to
mis-use them in the Voting-house, or place of bandying aies or noes: (For a
Parliament which in its legal and primitive institution consisting of King,
Lords and Commons, and the right use of it, is so venerable as no man (as our
Laws say) ought so much as to speak, or think dishonorably of it, we cannot
without violence to the Laws and our own reason and understanding call it)
where Public orders are made without hearing of all, or any parties
interessed, a piece of a cause heard by some, and none at all of it by others;
votes and parties made and packed and lent to one another beforehand, and the
best of the Faction, and juglers, carry all the business as they have a mind to
it. A way of Justice worse then that (if there were any in it) of a lawless
Court said to be kept yearly on a Hill betwixt Raleigh and Rochford in Essex,
the Wednesday after every Michaelmas-day, where the Steward or Judge sits
Weavers Funeral Monuments pa. 605.
in the night after the first Cockcrowing, without any light or Candle, and
calls all that are bound to attend the Court with as low a voice as possibly
he may, writes orders with a coal, and they that answer not, are deeply
amerced: For that being a particular punishment long ago inflicted upon the
tenants of certain Manors in Raleigh hundred for a conspiracy against a King,
is but once a year, and some shift, change or mercy of the Steward, or an
appeal may take away the inconveniency of it. A way of government worse then
to be subject to the rule of so many fools, for they might perchance do that
would be just; or so many Knaves, who but in playing the Knaves one with
another, or for reward, might sometimes do that which was right; or Madmen
which at intervals might do something which was reasonable, worse then for
every subject of England to be put to play at dice for his Life, or Estate, or
any thing else which he should crave a Justice to get or keep; for then he
might by skill or chance obtain some thing: In fine worse then any example or
way of Government the World has as yet produced, and can have nothing worse
but Hell it self.

The Parliament and privileges of it are destroyed, and every man's Life and
Estate in no better a condition then at the pleasure of the next pretenders to
it. All the Charters and Liberties of Cities and corporate Towns, Corporations
of Trade, and Companies of Merchants made void; all Merchandise, Trade, and
manufacture of the Kingdom laid open, and in common, to every one that will
intrude upon it; all that is in the Law concerning our Lives, Estates,
Liberties and Religion, made void and dependent upon their Arbitrary
Independent power; all that is in the Law concerning Navigation, the Kings
protection of His people; certainty of Customs, Trade and intercourse, leagues
and correspondencies with Foreign Princes expired or anihilated, and all that
our forefathers have obtained by way of Laws and Settlement, and certainty of
Estate, are now at the dispose of our Votemongers; who instead of a most Pious
and Gracious King governing by known Laws, have set us up 43. or 50. Kings; and
ten times as many more Knaves and Fools, who will govern by no Law but such as
they shall call Laws and make themselves; can be accusers, witnesses, and
Judges at one and the same time, and if need be, condemn and take away men's
Estates first, and try them after two or three years Petitioning for it: a
bondage and slavery in the general more then ever any of our ancestors tasted
of. For the Romans whose Justice and morality at home, and virtue and
temperance abroad, made them free enough from Tyranny; did but make them as
Tributaries: The Picts made but temporary incursions, and a wall could be made
against them: The Saxons and Danes brought us good Laws; and William the
Conqueror was contented to restore them. And all that succeeded him since,
understood a government by Laws to be their own as well as the peoples
security: but this which they have now brought upon us, and would keep us
under, is a misery beyond that was suffered under the 30. Tyrants of Athens,
Spartan Ephori, or Romes Decemvirat, for there were something of Laws and Rules
to govern by: The Children of Israel in the Egyptian slavery had a property in
their goods and cattle, and were at liberty to serve a better God then that of
their masters, and though they had their burdens doubled upon them, were not
killed, imprisoned or sequestered for petitioning against the sense of Pharaoh.
The Jews in captivity had so much liberty of conscience allowed to them, as to
play upon their Harps, and sing the Songs of Sion in a strange Land. The frozen
Russians, though so dull and ignorant as when they are asked any matter of
State or difficulty, make answer, God and the great Duke knows, breath not
under so arbitrary and lawless a government: The Grecians had not their Laws,
Religion, and Liberties, as we have, all at once taken from them; nor can the
sufferings of them, or any other vassals of the Ottoman part or those that live
under the Crim Tartar equal the one half of our English Slavery.

Into which we had never fallen, or come at all, or so long groned under, had
we but served God and the King, as we ought to have done; and not wrested the
sense as well as the plain words of the Scripture and the Laws of the Land, to
enable the sons of Zerviah to be too hard for us, and bring all manner of
mischief, confusion and wickedness upon us, more then Romes or Constantinoples
Antichrist ever brought upon a people, and from which the King had delivered us
if we had not Cursed, Reviled, Prayed, Contributed, and fought against Him for
endeavoring to Protect us. How gracious then was he who endured the heat of
the day and cold of the night, to preserve a great deal more for us then Nabals
Sheep could amount unto: yet being worse used then ever David was for it; could
not tell how so much as to threaten to do that which David had so great a mind
to do, but fought as long as he could to protect them, would not so much as
defend themselves; but did all they could to ruin those that defended him. And
how much was he beyond Codrus the Athenian King, the Roman Curtius, or Decii
(if all that the Ancients wrote of them were true) who sacrificed themselves,
but not their Estates and Posterity to preserve the public, and how good
beyond example, or the Credit of any history, who made himself a Martyr for His
peoples lives, and liberties; and endured so many deaths, and suffered more
indignities then all the Kings of England put together have ever endured to
preserve a people, who have (for a great part of them) either by Rebellion, or
an accursed* Newtrality helped to ruin him: and when he knew whatsoever
Conditions or Propositions he should be forced to yield unto, would by the Law
of God as well as the Civil and Common Law, the Laws of Nature and Nations, and
the dictates of every common man's reason and apprehension have been void in the
very making of them, and could not have reached to his posterity, and that if
he would but have surrendered up his people, and gone along with their new
masters in their Arbitrary and Tyrannical government, as some of His last words
upon the Scaffold plainly intimate, and sided with 20. or 30. of the Faction,
and delivered up the Sheep to the Wolves; he might no doubt have had a good
part of the Fleece to his own share; or but have pleased himself with revenge,
and delivered up a people to Slavery, who were at so much expense of Treasure
and Blood, and their own Souls, to bring their Sovereign to it; might have worn
the title of a King, and played the wanton with Sardanapalus in the company and
delight of women, pleased his palate with Vitellius, his pride if he had any
with Bassianus, his cruelty if he could ever have been guilty of it with
Commodus, and with Childerick the lazy King of France in a Chariot decked with
garlands, whilst others governed for him, been at certain times of the year
only exhibited to the people; and like the Minotaure of Creete wallowed in the
labyrinth of Parliament privileges and devoured his people, did
notwithstanding refuse to do any thing that might help himself either to
purchase his own quiet, or so great a Liberty; and would neither for any good
which might come to himself, or any evil that might be cast upon him and his
posterity, be persuaded or threatened from the protection of His People, who (if
He had not taken more care for them then they did for themselves) must, if He
had yielded to all the Parliament Propositions (for then they might have
imagined mischief by a Law) have from time to time been engaged in any War that
their taskmasters had a mind to put them upon, must have been excised,
plundered, sequestered, ruined, and undone; sworn and forsworn; constrained to
swear to do a thing to day, and the next day swear not at all to do it. The son
set to kill his Father, and brothers forced to fight one against another, and
have all their holy days turned to thanksgiving days, that they are undone,
or fasting days that they may be undone soon enough. And if at any time that
thing they call a Parliament, should think it fit to make a directory to the
Alchoran, and to order every man to turn Turk, and the King as their Henry
Scobel or Town Cleark, but subscribe it, their Spiritual as well as their
Temporal Estate, and their Souls as well as their Bodies must be voted and
forced to it.

And now let the People that have tasted too much of such a kind of happiness,
and are like to continue in it, as long as their misery-makers can by any help
of the Devil or his angels hold them to it; consider whether they or their
forefathers (though some have thought themselves to have wit enough to
adventure to call them fools) were the wiser, whether they that settled the
government, and were contented with it, or they that pulled it in pieces, and
whether the tearing up of the fundamental Laws of Monarchy, Peerage Parliament,
and Magna Charta, ever since the day the King was murdered for defending of
them, which every one but themselves desired to uphold, be not enough (besides
the Scottish combination, and the plots to ruin Monarchy, and the King and His
posterity, before they had so far engaged themselves in it) to inform them, if
nothing else had been demonstrated unto them: That the King did all He could to
preserve the Laws, Religion, and Liberties of the people (which diverse pieces
of His coin will help to perpetuate the truth as well as the memory of) and the
Parliament all they could to destroy them: And that as He actually endeavored
to defend them, so they have as actually undone and destroyed them. And let the
greatest search of History that can be made, or time it self be Judge, if ever
any War was more made in the defensive, or upon juster grounds, or greater
necessities, or if ever any King before fought for the Liberties of those He
was to govern, and for Laws to restrain himself withal; or if it were possible
for him to suffer so much in any man's opinion, as to have it thought to be
unlawful, or that He was a murderer of His people for seeking to protect them.
How shall any King or Magistrate be able to bear or use the sword, when they
themselves shall be in continual danger to be beaten with it?

King Edward the 2. of England, was not murdered for the blood that was shed in
the Barons wars, though some of them had drawn their swords, but in performance
of his fathers will to take away his favorite Gaveston from him. King Rich. 2.
in those many devised Articles charged against him, was not deposed for the
blood was shed in Wat Tilers Commotion; nor Hen. 6. publicly accused for that
of Jack Cades rebellion, and the most bloody differences of the White and Red
Roses; nor Queen Elizabeth for all that was spilt in reducing Ireland, when her
favorite the Earl of Essex made it to be the more by his practices with Tyrone;
nor for the blood of Hacket who pretended to be Christ; nor of Penry, and other
Sectaries (lesser Incendiaries then Burton, Bastwick, and their disciples) for
disturbing the Commonwealth: the great Henry of France was not endeavored by
his Catholic Subjects to be brought to trial for shedding so much of their
blood to reduce them to his obedience, nor by his Protestant Subjects after he
was turned Catholic, for spending so much of their blood to another purpose
then they intended it. Nor have the stout-hearted Germans, though many of them
great and almost free Princes (in their late peace and accord made betwixt the
Swedes and the Emperor, thought it any way reasonable or necessary to demand
reparation for those millions of men, women and children, houses and estates
which were ruined and spoiled by a 30. years war, to reduce the Bohemians and
Prince Elector Palatine to their obedience.

For what rules or bounds shall be put to every man's particular fancy or
corrupted interest, if they shall be at Liberty to question and call to account
the authority which God has placed over them? Shall the son condemn or punish
the father for his own disobedience? the Wife her Husband for her own act of
Adultery? or the Servant the Master for his own unfaithfulness? or can there be
any thing in the reason or understanding of man, to persuade him to think that
the King was justly accused for the shedding of His Subjects blood, which the
accusers themselves were only guilty of? When Bradshaw himself (like the Jews
High Priest confessing a truth against his will) in the words which he gave in
stead of reason for murdering the King against the will and good liking of
more then 9. parts in every ^0. of the people of England could make his Masters
that call themselves the Parliament of England to be no better then the Tribuni
plebis of Rome, and the Ephori of Sparta* the former of which for manifold
mischiefs and inconveniences were abrogated, and laid aside, and never more
thought fit to be used, and the latter (not being half so bad as our new State
Gypsies) killed and made away to restore the people again to their Liberties.

But the opinion and judgment of the Learned Lord Chief Justice Popham (who
then little thought his grandchild Colonel Popham should join with those that
sat with their Hats on their heads, and directed the murder of their
Sovereign: and if he were now living would sure enough have hanged him for it)
and those other learned Judges, in the case and Trial of the Earl of Essex in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, That Camdens Annals Eliz. pa. 798.
an intent to hurt the Sovereign Prince, as well as the Act of it, was Treason:
And that the Laws of England do interpret every act of Rebellion or Treason to
aim at the death or deposing the Prince. For that Rebels by their good will
never suffer that King or Prince to live, or Reign, that understands their
purposes, and may revenge them, agreeable to that of the Civil Law: That they
that go about to give Law to their Prince, will never suffer him to recover
Authority to punish it; and the opinion of Mr. St. John the late Kings
Solicitor General in his argument against the Earl of Strafford at a
conference in a Committee of both Houses of Parliament.

That the intending, advising, or declaring of a War is Treason of compassing
the Kings death; that an endeavor to subvert the fundamental Laws and
Government of England, and introduce a Tyrannical Government against Law, is
Treason; that an intention to alter Laws or Government, is Treason; that the
insurrection of Wat Tiler and some of the Commons in the Reign of King R. 2.
though varnished and colored over with an oath, quod Regi and Communibus
fidelitatem servarent, That they would be true and faithful to the King and
Commonalty, was in Parliament declared to be Treason; and that a machination or
plotting a War, is a compassing the death of the King, as that which
necessarily tends to the destruction both of the King and of the people. That
it is Treason to counterfeit the great Seal; and that the exciting of people to
take Arms, and throw down all the enclosures of the Kingdom, though nothing was
done in pursuance thereof, was in Easter Term 39. Eliz. resolved by all the*
Judges of England, to be a war intended against the Queen, are now written in
the blood of the King, and those many iterated complaints of the King in
several of His Declarations published to the people (in the midst of the
Parliaments greatest pretenses and promises) that they intended to take away
His life, and ruin Him, are now gone beyond suspicion: and every man may know
the meaning of their Canoneers levelling at the King with perspective glasses;
at Copredy bridge, the acquitting of Pym, the In-keeper who said, he would wash
his hands in the Kings Heart Blood, stifling of 15. or 16. several indictments
for treasonable words; Rolfe rewarded for his purpose to kill him, and the
prosecutors checqued, and some of them imprisoned for it. For, the Sun in the
Firmament, and the four great quarters of the Earth, and the Shapes and
Lineaments of man are not so universally known, seen or spoken of; as this will
be most certain to the present as well as after ages. The end has now verified
the beginning, and Quod primum suit in intention ultimo loco agitur, Seven
years hypocritical Promises and Practices, seven years Pretenses, and seven
years mistaken, preaching and prattling have now brought us all to this
conclusion as well as Confusion. The blood of old England is let out by a
greater witchcraft and cousenage then that of Medea when she set Pelias
daughters to let out his old blood that young might come in the place of it;
the Cedars of Lebanon are devoured, and the Trees have made the Bramble King,
and are like to speed as well with it as the Frogs did with the Stork that
devoured them; they have not only slain the King who was their Father, but like
Nero ripped up the belly of the Commonwealth, which was their Mother: The light
of Israel is put out; and the King, Laws, Religion, and Liberties of the people
murdered, an action so horrid, and a sin of so great a magnitude, and
complication, as if we shall ask the days that are past, and enquire from the
one end of the Earth to the other, there will not be found any wickedness like
to this great wickedness, or has been heard like it. The Seavern, Thames,
Trent and Humber, four of the greatest Rivers of the Kingdom, with all their
lesser running streams of the Island in their continual courses, and those huge
heaps of water in the Ocean and girdle of it in their restless agitations, will
never be able to scour and wash away the guilt and stain of it, though all the
rain which the clouds shall ever bring forth, and impart to this Nation, and
the tears of those that bewail the loss of a King of so eminent graces and
perfection shall be added to it.

Quis cladem illius diei? quis funera fando
Explicet? aut possit lachrymis aequare dolores?
Gens antiqua ruit, multos dominata per Annos.

FINIS.

