A TRVE RELATION Of all the SKIRMISHES between Our Forces and the Cavaliers AT
OWLNY.

Sent in a Letter From Captain GEORGE PAIN, (one of the Captains of the Red
Regiment) who was an Eyewitness of every several conflict, to a Dear friend
of his in London.

Wherein Each Particular is exactly set down, for the satisfaction of such as
are desirous to know the Truth; and to stop the mouth of blasphemous Malignants.

This is Licenced and Entered into the Hall Book according to Order.

London, Printed by E.G. 17 November. 1643.

A True Relation of all the Proceedings between the Parliaments Forces and the
Cavaliers at Oulney, sent in a Letter from a Captain of the red Regiment, to a
dear Friend at LONDON.
I Promised in my last, to give you a more full Relation of the Enemies beating
up the quarters of our City Horse at Oulny on Saturday morning last, about
seven or eight of the clock in the morning there came news of an alarm, and
that about five hundred of the Enemies Horse were hard by the Town. Colonel
Harvey supposing that according to the report there was no more, made all the
speed he could, and got out some troops to face the Enemy near the
Towneside, which proved much to our disadvantage; for if his information had
not been false, he would have quit the Town upon the approach of the Enemy,
and have drawn all his Horse on this side the Bridge, and then the foot to
maintain the Bridge: which, they might have done against both the Armies, had
they been joined together. But when he came forth, he found contrary to his
information, above two thousand Horse, four hundred dragoneers, and a
commanded party of musketeers, ready to charge those few that were drawn out:
which struck such a terror in some of our newmounted Horse men, that they
faced about and ran away as fast as they could with such confusion, that
notwithstanding all that their Colonels and Captains could do or say to stop
them that thus disordered our foot, and carried away our men in a throng over
the Bridge, and thrust some of them off from the Bridge (for the Bridge and
Causey was as long as a man might hardly fling a stone from end to end) without
any railes or walls on either side: Colonel Harvey and Major Manwaring did what
they could to stay them, insomuch that (as I heard) Colonel Harvey fired upon
some of our own men: the Major broke his Pistol about their heads, but such
was the spirit of fear that had possessed them that nothing might prevail. The
Cavalliers pursued them into the Town, where our poor red coats were put to
their shifts, being broken before all to pieces by our own Horse, that they
had no ways nor means to be gotten together again. Captain May was amongst
them in the Town, and they took him for one of their own men, and seeing him
once near some of our forces, warned him to take heed of the Roundheads:
Captain Lock coming over the Bridge, was thrust off into the water, and the
Cavaliers came so close after that they fired upon him, and he to save himself
got under one of the arches of the Bridge, and stayed there until he heard the
Cavaliers come powdering back again over the Bridge, and thinking he had
heard Captain Langham he came forth, but was no sooner up in the way, but was
demanded who he was; he answered, for King and Parliament, they presently took
him, and one bid prick him forward: he smiled upon uhem, supposing they had
been our own men, in the mean time Colonel Harvy having got together some of
the scattered troops, made a charge upon them with such violence, that he
forced them off the Bridge again. And coming up where Captain Lock was, one
of those that had taken him was shot, the other hasted away, and left Captain
Lock to thank Colonel Harvey for his liberty, and so got away.

All this while Colonel Turner, Captain Norwood, Captain Tompson, etc. were
supposed to be lost, and indeed were in much danger, having not above twelve or
fifteen men, yet bravely made charge upon three Colors of the Enemy, and
forced them out of the market place: Colonel Harvy came up and cleared the
Town of them, with about forty or fifty Horse with him: yet the Enemy forced
them all back again out of the Town, and drove them all over the Bridge
again, and began to draw up in in the meadow on this side the Bridge, where
Colonel Turner and some few of our men were mixed among them upon the Bridge,
and durst not discover either to other who they were: for though their fingers
itched to be doing one with another, yet durst not stir for fear of falling
off the Bridge: at last Colonel Turner came clear off without any harm. By
this time Colonel Harvy had again gained some of his forces, and charged those
that were drawn over the Bridge so violently, that they (to make haste) fell
some of them besides. The Colonel pursued them and cleansed the Town and kept
it. In this service, both the Colonels, Captain Norwood, and Captain Towpson
performed bravely: but Colonel Turner was so much troubled to see his troops
make such a long wheel, as never all day to come back being lead by his
Cornet; that after, neither his own Cornet, nor any of the Yellow Colors were
scene in the field, which much discouraged him. In the mean time our poor men
paid for it, diverse of them being sorely wounded, some taken, I cannot hear of
above three or four slain Ensign Bartlett is missing, we doubt, taken. Major
Manwaring through the negligence of his servant lost four brave Horses of his
own, and his sumpters, yet his boy saved his money and some clothes: there were
slain on both sides about twenty six: slain of Colonel Harveyes troop, one,
and wounded eight: about twenty five or twenty six of our red-coates wounded:
seven or eight of Captain Norwoods slain. I believe the Enemy has little
cause to boast of their gain, which will not make good their loss: many of
them being sorely wounded, above twenty of them were dressed at a house about a
mile off, fifteen orsixteene taken, and about as many slain.

George Pain.


