THE ARTICLES AND CONDITIONS OF THE PERPETVALL PEACE, Concluded between the
most Potent King of Spain, etc. on the one party, and the High and Mighty
Lords, the States General of the United Netherlands, on the other party,
Subscribed and Sealed the 13th. of January, 1648.

At MUNSTER.

Printed at Rotterdam by Haest van Voortganck, Printer of the Articles of the
Peace, 1648. And Reprinted at London by Robert White, 1648.

The Lords States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries.
IN the name, and to the honor of God, Know all men, that after a tedious
prosecution of bloody wars, which so many years have oppressed the poople,
subjects, Kingdoms, and lands, being under the obedience of the Lord the King
of Spain, and the Lords the States General of the United Netherlands; the
said Lords, the King, and the States, moved with all Christian compassion, and
desire on both sides, to make an end of the common miseries, and to avoid the
sad prosecution, destruction, damage and perils, which might follow by a
further proceeding in the Low-Countrie wars, as also by spreading it to other
cities and countries, and lands and seas lying far off, and to change the
evil effects of the same into an acceptable good and upright-peace, and the
sweet fruits of a full and firm rest, to the comfort of the people and
countries which are under their obedience, and the reparation of the damages
past; for the general welfare, not only of the Low Countries, but also of all
Christendom, enviting and entreating other Princes and Potentates, that by the
blessing of God they may be moved to the like compassion, and eschewing of
destruction, spoil and disorders, which the heavy plague of war has so
long and so heavily caused them to feel; for the obtaining of so good an end,
and wished eye-marke; the said Lords, Don Phillippo the fourth King of Spain,
and the States General of the United Provinces, have deputed Commissioners,
viz. the said Lord King of Spain, Don Gasper de Bracamonte, and Gusman Earl
of Penaranda, Lord of Aldea, Seca, and Forteran, Knight of the Order of
Alcantare perpetual Administrator of the Command of Dayniel, of the Order of
Calatraia, Gentleman of the Chamber of his Majesty, and of his Counsel and
Chamber, Extraordinary Ambassador for his Emriall Majesty, and the chief
Plenipotentarie for the Treaty of general Peace the honorable Anthony Bruyn,
Knight, and Counselor of his Catholic Majesty in his Council of State, and
high Council for the afaires of the Low Countries, in Burgundy about his
person, and his Plenipotentiarie for the Treaties of peace of the general
Peace: And the Lords the States general of the United Provinces; the right
Honorable Bartholt van Gendt, Lord of Loenen and Meinerswiick, Amptman and
Dyckgrave of Bommel, Tielre, and Bommeler-weerde, deputed for the States
General by the Province of Gelderland, the Right Honorable John van Matenesse,
Lord of Matenesse, Riviere Opmeer, Souteveen, deputed for the Assembly of the
States General by the order of the Knighthood and Gentry of Holland and
Westfriesland, High Privicouncellor of Schieland; the Honorable Adrian Pauw,
Knight, Lord of Hamsted, Hoogersmilde, etc. chief Presiding Counselor and
Treasurer of the Earldom of Holland and Westfriesland, and deputed on the
behalf of the same Province for the Assembly of the Lords States General; the
Honorable John de Knuyt, Knight, Lord of Old and New Vosmer, chief representing
the Gentry in the States, and the Council of the Earldome of Zealand, and the
Admiraltie the chief Counselor of his Highness the Lord Prince of Orange,
Ordinary Deputy in the Assembly of the Lords the States Gen the Honorable
Godert van Reed, Lord of Nederhorst, Vredeland, short Houff, Orermeer, Horst,
Waert, etc. President of the Honorable Gentry and Knighthood of the land of
Vtretcht, and in the name thereof appearing at the Assembly of the Lords the
States General; the Honorable Francis van Donia, Lord of Humena and Hielsum,
etc. Deputed for the Assembly of the Lords the States General, on the behalf
of the Province of Friesland; the Honorable William Ripperda, Lord of Hengeloo
Bolbergen, Cabulo, and Russenburg, etc. Deputy of the States General for the
Knighthood and Gentry of the Province of Over-Yssel, the Honorable Adrian
Clant at Stedum, Lord of Muttersum, etc. Ordinary Deputy in the assembly of
the States General on the behalf of the Province of the City of Groeningen
and lands adjacent, all extraordinary Ambassadors in Germany, and
Plenipotentiaries of the said Lords the States General for the Treaty of the
general peace, all of them furnished with full power or procurations, inserted
at the foot hereof; who being assembled together in the City of Munster in
Westphalia with common consent -- for the Treaty of the common rest in
Christendom, by virtue of their said Letters of Attorney and in the names of
the said Lords the King and States, have made, concluded, and agreed on the
Articles following.

Articles of the Peace concluded at MUNSTER.
IMprimis. The said Lord the King does declare and acknowledge, that the said
Lords the States general of the United Netherlands, and the several Provinces
of the same, with all their associated countries, cities, and lands belonging
to them, are free and sovereign Cities, Provinces, and lands, of and against
whom, nor their associated countries, cities, and lands, the said Lord the King
does not pretend any thing, nor now, nor hereafter, for himself, his
successors, and posterity, shall pretend any thing, and in sequel hereunto is
content to treat with the same Lords States, as he does by these presents, for
a perpetual Peace, on the conditions here underwritten and declared: to wit:

2. That the said Peace shall be good, firm, faithful, and infrangible, and
that in order hereunto, there shall be a cessation of all Acts of hostility
whatsoever, between the said Lord the King, and the States general, as well at
sea, and other waters, as at land, in all their respective Kingdoms, Countries,
Lands, and Dominions, for all their subjects and Inhabitants, of any quality
or condition whatsoever they be, without exception of places or persons.

3. Each one shall keep, and presently occupy the countries, cities, places,
lands, and dominions, which they do at present enjoy, without therein to be
troubled or hindered directly nor indirectly, in what manner soever it be,
wherein is understood to comprehend the villages, towns, high-lands, and
low-lands depending thereon: and in the sequel thereof, the whole Maioralty of
Busse, as also the Lordships, cities, castles, villages, towns, high lands,
and low-lands depending on the said Maioralty of the Busse, the City and
Marquisate of Bergen op Zoam: the City and Barony of Breda: the City of
Maestricht, and the confines thereof: as also the Earldome of Proonehoffe: the
Earl and land of Cuyck, Hulst, and Bayliwick of Hulst, and Hulster-Ambacht;
and as also Axele-Ambacht, lying on the south and north of Geule, as also the
Forts, which the said Lords States have in the Land of Waes, and all the other
cities and places which the said Lords the States hold in Brabant, Flanuders,
and elsewhere, remain to the said Lords States, in all the rights,
soveraignities, and superiorities of the same, nothing excepted, and every of
them, as they do hold the Provinces of the United Provinces: Provided that all
the rest of the Land of Waes, except the said Forts, shall remain to the King
of Spain: for what concerns the free Quarters of Over-mase: to wit,
Valckenburge, Dalen, and S'Hertogenrade: they shall remain in the condition
wherein they at present are: and in case of dispute, and controversy, the same
shall be sent to the Bipartite Chamber, of which is hereafter spoken.

4 The subjects or inhabitants of the said Lord the King and the States, shall
have all good correspondence and friendship together, without remembering the
offenses or damages, which they have formerly suffered: they shall also come
and abide in the countries, the one of the other, and there use their trade and
commerce in all security, as well at sea, other waters, as at land.

5. The navigations and commerce for the East and West Indies, shall be
maintained, according and in conformity to the Grants therefore already given
or yet to be given; and for assurance thereof, this present treaty (and the
ratification on both sides to be performed,) shall reach: and under the said
treaty shall be comprehended all Potentates, Nations and People, with whom
their Lordships, or those of the East or West-Indy company on their behalf,
within the bounds of their Patent are in friendship and alliance: and each one,
to wit, the said Lord the King and the Lords and States respectively shall hold
and enjoy such dominions, cities, castles, strengths, trade, and lands, in the
East and West Indies, as also in Brazill, as also on the coasts of Asia,
Africa, and America severally, as the same Lords the King and the States
respectively have and hold; among which are specially contained the places
since the year 1641. taken from the Lords Sates, and occupied by the
Portingalls, or which they hereafter without the breach of this present Treaty
may get and hold: And the governors as well of the East and West India company
of the United Provinces, as also the Ministers, high and low officers,
soldiers, and mariners, being, or which have been in actual service, as also
those which continue out of the same services respectively, as well here in
this Country as in the limits of the said Company, and may hereafter be
employed, be free and untroubled in all the lands which are under the obedience
of the King of Spain in Europe, they may travel, trade, and go as all other
inhabitants of this State. Further it is bespoke and stipulated, that the
Spaniards shall remain in their voyages in the same manner as they yet hold the
same in the East Indies, without extending themselves further: as likewise the
Inhabitants of the United Netherlands shall forbear to frequent or occupy the
Spanish places in the East Indies.

6. And what concerns the West Indies, the Subjects and Inhabitants of the
Kingdoms, Provinces, and lands of the said Lords, the King, and States
respectively, shall forbear to sail and trade in all the havens and places,
with the lodges, castles, and all other places, held and possessed by one or
the other party, to wit, the Subjects of the said Lord the King shall not sail
unto, and trade in the havens and places which are held by the said Lords
States, nor also the Subjects of the said Lords States in those places which
are kept by the said Lord the King; and under the places which the said Lords
States do possess, shall be also comprehended the places which the Portingals
since the year 1641. have taken from the said Lords States, in Brazill, as also
all other places which they at present hold, so long as they shall be under the
Portingals; without that the aforegoing Articles may derogate the contents of
this Article.

7. And since a good long time is needful to advertise those that are out of
the said limits with power and ships to desist from all acts of Hostility, it
is agreed that the peace, for the bounds of the Patent formerly granted or yet
by continuance to be granted to the East-Indie Company of the United
Netherlands, shall not begin till a year after the date of the conclusion of
the present peace: And what concerns the bounds of the Patent formerly by the
Lords States general agreed, or yet by continuance to be agreed to the
West-Indie Company, that the peace there shall not begin till a half year
after date as above. Provided, that in case advise of the said peace shall
sooner become public on both sides within the said several Limits, that then
hostility shall there cease: but in case after the said time of one year, and
half a year, respectively, any Acts of Hostility shall be done within the said
Limits of the said Patents, the damage shall be restored without delay.

8. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the said Countries of the said Lords, the
King, and the States trading in these Countries, the one not be bound to pay to
the other more duties and imposts then the own Subjects themselves, so that the
Inhabitants and Subjects of the United Provinces, shall be and remain exempt
from the twenty per cent, or any less, or any other Impost which the King of
Spain during the twelve years of truce leavied, or which he hereafter directly
or indirectly would leavy on the said Inhabitants and Subjects of the United
Provinces, or to charge them with more or above his own Subjects.

9. The said Lords, the King, and States, may not receive any duties of
importation or exportation or any other, without their several Limits, on
goods passing either by water or land.

10. The Subjects of the said King and States, shall reciprocally enjoy the
ancient freedom of customs, in the lands the one of the other, of which they
had peaceable possession before the beginning of the Wars.

11. The commerce, passage, and trade, between the respective Subjects, may not
be hindered, and in case any hindrance may happen, the same shall seasonably and
actually be removed.

12. And from the day of the conclusion, and ratification thereof, the King
shall forbear the leavying of all Tolls on the Rhyne and the Mase which were
before the wars, under the Command and Limits of the United Netherlands,
especially also the Zealand Toll, so that this Toll shall not be given to his
Majesty in the City of Antwerp or elsewhere: Provided and on condition that
from the said day forwards, the States of Zealand reciprocally at their charge
shall take and pay first and foremost from the same day forwards, the annual
rents, which before the year 1572. were confirmed on the said Tolls, and of
which the owners and rent-farmers had the enjoyment and receipt, before the
beginning of the said war; the which also the owners of the said Tolls shall
likewise do.

13. White boiled salt coming out of the United Provinces into the Countries of
his said Majesty, shall be there received and admitted, without to be taxed
higher then as bay salt is, and also that salt coming out of the lands of his
said Majesty into the United Provinces, shall be admitted and vented, without
that the same be higher taxed then the salt of the said Lords the States.

14. The river the Scheld, as also the Channels, and the Sas, Swyn, and other
sea gaps belonging to them, shall remain blockt up on the side of the Lords
States.

15. The ships and goods coming in and out of the havens of Flanders
respectively, shall be and remain taxed by the said Lord the King, with such
Imposts and other charges, as the goods of the Scheld, and other channels
contained in the article above, are taxed or rated in coming and going
respectively; and shall be hereafter agreed between the parties on both sides
at the foot of the said equal taxations.

16. The Hans-cities, with all the Burgers, Inhabitants, and territories of the
same, shall in matter of navigation and commerce in Spain, the Realms and
Countries of Spain, enjoy all and the same rights, freedoms, Immunities, and
privileges, which by this present Treaty are agreed, or hereafter may be
agreed, for and on the behalf of the Subjects and Inhabitants of the United
Netherlands; they shall enjoy all the same rights, freedoms, immunities,
privileges, and capitulations, as well for making of Consuls in the ports or
sea towns of Spain, and elsewhere, where it shall be needful, as for the
Merchants, Factors, Ship-masters, Mariners, or otherwise, even as the said Hans
towns in general or particular have formerly had and practiced, or shall
hereafter get and practice, for the security, profit, and advantage of the
navigation and commerce of their Cities, Merchants, Factors, Assigns, and
others, which depend on them.

17. Also the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Countries of the said Lords the
States, shall have the same security and freedom in the lands of the said Lord
the King, as is granted to the Subjects of the King of great Britain by the
last Treaty of Peace, and secret Articles made with the Constable of Castile.

18. The said Lord the King shall with the first good opportunity grant that
civil places be ordained for the burying of the bodies of such of the said
Lords States party as shall happen to dye under the obedience of the said Lord
the King.

19 The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Countries of the said Lord the King,
coming into the Countries of the said Lords the States, shall carry themselves
with all civility in matters of the public worship of religion, without
giving any scandal by words or actions, and without any reviling speeches, and
the same shall be observed by the Subjects and Inhabitants of the lands of the
said Lords States, coming into the lands of his Majesty.

20. Likewise the Merchants, Ship-masters, Pilots, Maryners, their ships,
merchandise, ware, and other goods belonging to them, may not be stopped nor
arested, by virtue of any command, general or particular, and for whatsoever
cause it be, either for war, or otherwise, yea not under pretense to have
them serve for the conservation and defense of the Country: by which is not
meant to contain, the stops and arrests of Justice, in the ordinary way, by
reason of any debts, bonds, and obliging contracts, of those against whom the
said stoppings shall be made, but therein shall be proceeded, as is usual
according to law and reason.

21. On both sides shall be appointed some Justices in number equal, by way of
a Bipartite Chamber, who shall reside in the Low-countryes, and at such a place
as is fit, and that by turns, sometimes under the obedience of the one,
sometimes of the other, as it shall be thought good by joint consent; the which
Judges appointed on both sides, according to the Commission and instructions
which shall be given them, and upon which they shall make oath according to a
certain form, to be for that purpose framed by both parties, shall overlooke
the dealings of the Inhabitants of the said Low-countryes, and the customs and
imposts which shall be leavied on goods by one side and the other; And in case
the said Judges chance to find that excess be used, by either one, or the
other, or on both sides, the said Judges shall examine the controversy on the
not performance of the said Treaty, as also the contraventions thereof, which
may chance to arise in any time and place, as well in the Countries here, as in
the Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces and Islands lying far off in Europe, and
thereof summarily and plainly to dispose, and declare what they shall judge fit
in conformity to the Treaty: and the sentences and dispositions of the said
Judges shall be put in execution by the ordinary Justice at the place where the
breach happened, or else against the persons of the contraventors, as the
occasion shall require, and the said ordinary Justice or Court may not remain
in default of doing the said execution, or suffer it to be done, and to repair
the said breach within the time of six months, after the said ordinary Court
shall be thereunto required.

22. In case any sentences and Judgments be denounced between persons of both
parties, being not grounded, either in matters civil or criminal, they shall
not be put in execution against the persons of the condemned, nor their goods;
And no letters of Mart or reprisall shall be granted, but upon knowledge of the
business, and in such matters for which it is permitted by the Imperial
laws, and constitutions, and according unto the order thereby made.

23. They shall not arrive, come in, or remain in the Havens, Bays, Ports or
roads of the countries, the one of the other, with ships, and men of war in any
number, that might cause suspicion, without the leave and permission of those
under whom the said Havens, Bays, Ports, and roads are, except they are forced
by tempest, and forced to do the same through need, and to avoid any perils of
the sea.

24. Those whose goods are seized and confiscated by reason of the war, or
their heirs, or those who have their right, shall use the same goods, and
shall take the possession of them by their own authority, and by virtue of this
Treaty, without that it be needful to have recourse to Justice,
notwithstanding all incorporations of the Fiscall, morgages, gifts made,
treatyes, agreements, and transactions, and whatsoever renuntiations may be
inserted in the said transactions, for to exclude from a part of the goods, and
those whom the same right should come to; And all goods and rights, which in
sequel of this present Treaty are restored, or are yet to be restored
reciprocally to the old proprietors, their heirs, or those that have their
right, shall be sold by the said proprietors, without that it be needful to
obtain particular consent therefore, and in order hereunto the propriety of the
rents, which have been constituted on the behalf of the Fiscall, in stead of
the goods sold, as also the rents or actions, which are laid upon the Fiscall
respectively, may also be disposed of by the proprietors of them, by sale, or
otherwise, as their own goods.

25. The which shall take place for the use of the heirs of the Lord Prince
William of Orange, yea for the rights which they have in the Salines of the
County of Burgundy, which shall be restored and left to them, with the Woods
which depend therein, in regard of that which shall not be found to be bought
and paid for by his said Majesty.

26. In which is also meant to be comprehended the other goods and rights,
lying in the Countries of Burgundy and Charlois, and what in order to the
Treaty of the ninteenth of April 1609. and the seventh of January 1610.
respectively, is not yet restored, to the said proprietors and their heirs, or
those who have their rights on both sides, shall every where with the first be
restored in good faith.

27. As also therein is meant to be comprehended the goods and rights, which
after the expiration of the League of 12 years, by sentence of the high
Council of Mechleu, to the prejudice of the Fiscall were adjudged to late
Earl John of Nassau, or in what manner the said Earl had the possession of
them, in whatsoever places, lands, or dominions, the said adjudged goods and
rights may lie, and by whomsoever they may be possessed: the which sentence, by
virtue of this Treaty, is, and is held as void, and all other possession gotten
as aforesaid, is made void.

28. And what concerns the suit of Castelbelijn, commenced in the life of the
said late Lord Prince of Orange, before the high Council of Mecheleu against
the Atturny general of the King of Spain, forasmuch as the said suit was not
ended within the term of a year, after the prosecution made therein, as in the
fourteenth Article of the League for twelve years was promised to be done, it
is agreed that presently after the concluding and ratification of this present
Treaty, the Fiscals in the name of his Majesty, or in whose name soever the
same may be, shall presently make assignement of all the goods claimed in the
said suit, and by whomsoever and by what right soever the same are possessed,
also in the name, and on the behalf as before, shall renounce all actions and
pretenses which the said Fiscall may any wise have, or could pretend on the said
goods, for presently after the conclusion and ratification of this Treaty, and
by virtue thereof, and without any recourse in Law, to be received by the
present Lord Prince of Orange, his heirs and successors, or those having his
right, and taken into free and unincumbred possession, but the profits received
and enjoyed, with the charges of them, unto the day of the concluding of this
Treaty, shall remain to the use of the Fiscall.

29. In case difficulty be in any place found, in the restitution of the goods
and rights which must be restored, the Judge of that place shall without delay
cause the restitution to be effected, and take the shortest way therein,
without that the restitution may be delayed under pretense of the non-payment
of the principal or otherwise.

30. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the United Netherlands, may where ever
they are in the Countries under the obedience of the said Lord the King of
Spain, be assisted with such Advocates, Atturnyes, Notaryes, Sollicitors, and
Executors, as they shall think good, whereunto they shall be also chosen by the
ordinary Judges, when it shall be needful, and the said Judges shall be
thereunto required: and reciprocally the Inhabitants and Subjects of the said
Lord the King, coming into the Countries of the said Lords States, shall also
enjoy the same assistance.

31. In case the Fiscall has caused any confiscated goods of the one or the
otherside to be sold, of those to whom the same must belong by virtue of this
Treaty they shall be bound to be content with the Interest of the price, at the
rate of the sixteenth penny thereof, to be annually paid by the proximity of
those who possess the said goods, else it shall be permitted to them to
address themselves to the Lands of the Inheritances sold, with this proviso,
that in stead of the goods sold, the rents or interests redeemed, or the
principal thereof, by and in the name of the respective Fiscals letters
patents, shall be granted to the use of the owners, their heirs, or such as
have their action, which shall serve them for a declaratory evidence, in
conformity to the Treaty, with an assignement of the annual payment on some
Rent-master in the Province, where they are sold or remitted: the which
Rent-master shall be named therein, and the price shall be accounted according
to the first sale, being done publicly, or otherwise as is fitting, the first
year of which rent shall be ended a year after the date of the conclusion and
ratification of this present Treaty.

32. But in case the said sales were done by justice, for due and lawful debts
of those to whom the said goods used to belong before the confiscations, it
shall be permitted them, or their heirs, and those that have their right, to
take them to themselves, paying the price within a year to be accounted from
the day of this present Treaty, after which time they shall not be any more
receiveable for it, and the said allowance and sale being by them done, they
may dispose thereof as they shall see good, without that it be needful to
obtain any other leave for it.

33. Yet it is provided, that the said retaking shall not have place for houses
sold, which lie in Cities, which for that cause have been sold the dearer,
because of the great inconveniency and notable damage, which the purchasers
would have, by reason of the change, and repairing, which may have been done in
the said houses, for which the Liquidations would be too tedious and heavy.

34. And for the reparations and amendments done to other goods sold, of which
the sale is permitted, in case they be claimed, the ordinary Judges shall do
right upon knowledge of the business; the Lands and inheritances remaining
morgaged for the sum whereunto the amendments shall be liquidated, without
nevertheless giving leave to the said purchasers to use the right of
Arentment, for to be paid and satisfied therefore.

35. All undiscovered goods and rights, movables, and immoveables, rents,
actions, debts, credits, and other things, which have not been seized by the
Fiscall, upon due knowledge of the business, before the day of the concluding,
and ratification of this Treaty, shall remain to the free and full disposal
of the owners, their heirs, or such as have their right, with all the
Interests, rents, revenewes, and benefits; and those who have concealed the
said goods and rights, or their heirs, shall not be troubled for the same by
the respective Fiscalls, but the owners, their heirs, or such as have their
right, may have an action for the same against every one, as for their own
goods.

36. The trees cut down, after the finishing of this Treaty, and which at that
day are yet standing on the ground, as also the trees sold, which are not yet
cut down by the said day, shall remain to the owners, notwithstanding any
sale made, and without being bound to pay any price.

37. The Interests, hvre, Farms, and revenewes of the Dominions, Countries,
Tithes, Fishponds, houses, rents, and other revenewes of goods, which according
to the Treaty must be restored, due from the day of the conclusion of this
reaty, shall come to the proprietors, their heirs, or such as have their
action, for the whole year.

38. The hyre which has been made of confiscated or seized goods (although the
same be made for many years) shall expire with the year from the conclusion
of this Treaty, according to the use of the several places where the said
goods are situate, and the hyre shall end from the day of the end of the
Treaty, and shall be made good and paid to the owners, provided, that in case
the occupier of the goods has been at any charge before the spring of that
year, that the same charges shall be paid by the owners and occupiers,
according to custom, or the discretion of the Judge of the places where the
same goods are situate.

39. All sale of confiscated or seized goods, done since the conclusion of the
Treaty, shall be held null and void; as also the sales made before such
conclusion, which were made against the Covenants, or agreements with any
Cities in particular.

40. The houses of particular persons, which are restored, or are to be
restored according to the Treaty, shall not reciprocally be charged with
Garrisons or otherwise, any higher or lower then the houses of other
Inhabitants of the like convenience.

41. None, on the one side nor the other, directly, nor indirectly shall be
hindered in changing of their dwelling place, paying the duties which are
imposed there, and in case any hindrances happen after the Treaty, they shall
be presently removed.

42. In case any Fortifications or works, on the one or the other side, with
leave, and by the Authority of the Governors, be made in such places as by
this present Treaty should be restored, the owners of them shall be bound to
content themselves with the value which shall be made thereof by the ordinary
Judges, as well of the said places, as of the Jurisdiction they are under,
except the parties agree amongst themselves about it, as also satisfaction
shall be given to the owners of the goods which have been used for
Fortifications, public works, or Hospitals.

43. Concerning the goods of Churches, Colleges, or other pious places, lying
in the United Provinces, which were Members depending on Churches, Benefices,
and Colleges, under the obedience of the said Lord the King; whatsoever has
not been sold before the closure of this present Treaty, shall be given again
and restored to them; and they shall come into the possession of them, by their
own Authority and without help of Law, for to use the same, and without
disposing of the same as is here aforesaid: But for such as shall have been
sold before the said time, or have been given in payment by the States of any
of the Provinces, they shall be paid the annual rent of the price, at the rate
of the sixteenth penny, by that Province which has made the said sale, or has
given the said goods in payment; and shall also have such assignement, as they
may be assured thereof; and the like shall be done and observed on the side of
the said Lord the King.

44. For such pretenses and Interests, which the Lord Prince of Orange may
have, touching some parcels which he does not possess, the same shall be
accorded by a particular Treaty, to the satisfaction of the said Lord Prince of
Orange, but what concerns the goods and effects which the said Prince is in
possession of, by the grant and concession of the said Lords the States
General, in the Bayliffwick of the Hulster Ambacht, and elsewhere, of the
which the said Lords States a while since have made him a confirmation; all the
same parcells shall remain in full property to the said Lord Prince, and his
successors, or who have his right, without that any thing can be pretended to
the said goods, by virtue of any Articles of this present Treaty.

45. Those to whom the confiscated goods must be restored, shall not be bound
to pay the arrerages of rents, and charges annually taken, and assigned on the
said goods, for the time that they have been used, and if they be prosecuted
and troubled for the same, by the one side or the other, they shall be sent
back and discharged; and where it is found known, that all goods of any one of
the one side or the other side have been confiscated, or seized, so that he
has kept no means wherewith he could pay the rents and Interests of his
debts, which are fallen due during the confication or seazure, they shall be
acquitted not only from the charges and rents, according to the Treaty, but
also from general and personal impositions of the rents and Interests fallen
due in the said time.

46. Concerning some other points, which besides the contents of the before
going 44.th Article, are especially treated and agreed upon, and subscribed in
two several writings, one of the 8.th of January, the other of the 27th of
December, 1647. for, and in the name of the said Lord Prince of Orange, the
said writings, and all the contents of the same shall have their effect, and be
confirmed, performed, and executed according to their form and tenor, more or
less, as if all the said points in general, or each of them in particular
were word for word inserted in this present Treaty, notwithstanding any clauses
of this present Treaty to the contrary hereof, the which clauses it is
understood to be derogate, and are expressly derogated by this present Article,
and which clause in respect of the said two writings, are, and shall be held as
not made, and without that by reason thereof the performance and execution of
the said two writings, of the 8.th of January, and of the 27.th of December,
1647. may be hindered, or in any manner withheld.

47. Also nothing may be pretended for the goods which are sold, or agreed for
to be dycked, or redycked, other then for the upstalling or reparations for
which the possessors have bound themselves by the Treaties made thereof; with
the Interests of the moneys furnished, if any have been given, also after the
rate of the 16.th penny as above.

48. Sentences given for goods and rights confiscated, with parties which have
known the Judges, and have been legally defended, shall hold, and the
condemned persons shall not be received to gainesay them, but by ordinary ways.

49. The said Lord the King does acquit, and renounce all pretenses of
Redemption, and all other Laws and pretenses which he can have, or pretend in
any manner, against the City of the Grave, the Land of Cuyck, it is
apertenances, and the dependencies of the Barony of Brabant, formerly held in
morgage by the late Lord Prince of Orange; the redemption of the which morgage
is discharged and converted into property, and delivered over to the use of the
late Lord Prince Maurice, in December, 1611. by the Lords States general of
the united Netherlands, as Sovereigns of the said City of Grave, and land of
Cuyck, in sequel and conformable to the Letters Patents granted thereof, and
by virtue of which Conversion and assignement, the said Lord Prince of Orange
that now is, his heirs and successors, or such as have his right, shall
always use the full and whole property of the said City, and land of Cuyck,
with all its apertenances and dependencies.

50. The said Lord the King does also acquit and renounce, all and every the
rights and pretenses, either of propriety, Assignement, or otherwise, which he
may in any manner pretend to the City, County, or Dominion of Lingen, and four
Kartsspelen, and other rights belonging thereunto, as also to the Cities and
Dominions of Bevergard and Kloppenburg, and other pretenses, on and against
whomsoever they may be, for really and actually for ever to remain to the said
Lord Prince of Orange, his heirs and successors, or those that have his right,
in full right of propriety, according to the Letters or deed of gift and grant
of the Emperor Charles the 5.th dated the 3.d of November, 1546. and the
agreement made afterward between the Earl of Bueren, and the Earl of
Teeckelenburg, dated the 15.th of March, 1548. and finally, according to the
assignement made thereof in November, 1578. which the said Lord the King, for
what concerns him has confirmed, and does confirm by the aforesaid Treaty.

51. The said Lord the King, and Lords States, shall appoint (each in their
own) the Offices of the Magistrates for the administration of Justice and
Policies, in the Cities and strong holds, which by this present Treaty are to
be restored to the owners for to use them.

52. The farrther quarter of Gelderland shall be exchanged for it is equivalent,
and in case they cannot please one another about the said equivalent, the same
shall be put to the Biparty Chamber, to be decided within 6. months after the
conclusion and ratification of the Treaty.

53. The said Lord the King, does bind himself effectually to perfect the
continuance and observance of all Neutrality, friendship, and good
neighborhood, on the behalf of his Imperial Majesty and the Empire with the
said Lords States, unto which continuance and observance, the said Lords States
do also reciprocally bind themselves, and the Confirmation of his Imperial
Majesty shall be had thereupon, within the time of two months; and on the
behalf of the Empire within a year after the conclusion and ratification of
the present Treaty.

54. The movables which are confiscated, and the profits which are fallen due
before the conclusion of the present Treaty, shall be subject to no restitution.

55. The moveable actions, which shall be remitted by the said Lord the King,
or the States, to the use of the particular debtors, before the conclusion of
this present Treaty, shall remain cancelled on the one and the other side.

56. The time which has run from the beginning of the war, since the year
1567. till the beginning of the truce of twelve years, as also, the time which
has run since the expiration of the said truce, till the conclusion of this
Treaty, shall not be accounted, for to wrong, or otherwise to prejudice any one
thereby.

57. Those who during the war, are gone into Neutrall Countries, shall enjoy
the fruits of this present Treaty, and may dwell where they shall please, yea
return to their old dwelling places, for to live there with all security,
observing the Laws of the Countries, without that by reason of their dwelling
(which they shall keep in any place whatsoever) their goods be seized, or they
deprived of the use of them.

58. They shall not make any new Forts in the Netherlands, neither on one side
nor the other, nor dig any new passages or ditches, whereby they might shut in,
or exclude the one or the other party.

59. The Lords of the house of Nassau, and also the Earl John Albert of Solms,
Governors of Maestricht, shall not be sued or molested in their persons or
goods, for any debts contracted by the late Lord Prince of Orange, since the
year 1567 until his death, nor for the Interests fallen due during the
seazure and sequestring of the goods which were charged therewith.

60. In case any breach or contravention of this Treaty be made by any
particular person, without command of the said Lords the King or States, the
damage shall be repaired, at the very place where the breach shall be done, in
case they be there apprehended, or else at their dwelling places, without that
they may be sued any where else, in their persons or goods, in whatsoever
manner it be, and they shall not be suffered to take up Arms, or break the
Peace for it, but they shall have leave (in case of public denial of Justice)
to help themselves with letters of Mart, or reprisall, as is usual.

61. All disinheritings and dispositions done in hate of the war are declared
void, and held as not done; and by disinheritances done in hate of the war, is
meant, to comprehend those which are happened by any cause, from whence the
war is risen, and which depend thereon.

62. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the lands of the said Lords the King or
States, of whatsoever quality or condition they be, are declared capable to
succeed one an other, as well by Testament as without a will, according to the
custom of the places, and in case any Successions formerly befell any of them,
they shall be received and preserved therein.

63. All prisoners of war shall be discharged on the one side and the other,
without paying any Ransom, with a distinction or exception of such prisoners
as have served out of the Netherlands, and under other Standards and Colors
then those of the States.

64. The payment of the arrerages of the contributions, which at the time of
the Treaty shall remain payable, in respect of the persons and goods of the
one and the other side, shall be regulated and determined by those who on both
sides have the superintendance of the contributions.

65. Whatsoever during the Treaty has been propounded, or alleged on both
sides, verbally or in writing, shall not reach, nor may any wise be expounded
to the benefit or detriment of any one, directly or indirectly, but as well the
said Lords, the King, and the States general and particular, as also all
Princes, Earls, Barons, Gentry, Citizens and other Inhabitants, of the
Kingdoms and Countries respectively, of whatsoever condition or quality they
be, shall remain in their rights, according to the contents of the Treaty, and
the conclusion thereof.

66. The Inhabitants and Subjects of the said Lords, the King, and States
respectively, shall really enjoy the effect of the 16.th Article of the expired
12. years truce, and the effect of the 10.th Article of the Agreement, which
followed thereupon the 8.th of January, 1610. and that for as much as the said
effect was not performed by one or the other side during the time of the said
Truce.

67. The bounds of Flanders and other parts, shall be regulated in such manner
as shall be found fitting, under the command of the one and the other side, the
informations whereupon shall be expected and delivered, for to regulate the
said Limits in due time.

68. On the behalf and on the side of the said Lord the King of Spain, shall
be demolished the Forts near and about Sluys: to wit, St. Jop. St. Denis,
Sterre-schans, the Fort of Teressre, St. Frederix-Fort, the Fort St. Isabelle,
St. Paul, the Redouts Papemuts; and on the side and on the behalf of the said
Lords States, shall be demolished the Forts following; Namely, both the Forts
in the land of Casant called Orange, and Frederick, the two on the passage, and
all those which lie on the East side the river the Schelde, except Lillo, and
the Fort on Kieldrecht called Spignola, for the demolition whereof on both
sides there shall be an agreement made between both parties, for to regulate it
equally.

69. All Registers, Charters, Deeds, Proofs, and Papers, as also business of
suits, concerning severally any of the United Provinces, associated Countries,
Cities, or members of them, as also any particular Inhabitants of the same,
remaining in the Courts, Chanceryes, Counsels, and Chambers of Policy, Justice,
Exchequer, Manors, or Arches, either at Avenues, Mechelen, or other places
under the obedience of the said Lord the King shall in good says, be delivered
to those, who from the side of the said Provinces respectively, shall have
commission to demand the same, and the like shall be done on the side of the
said Lords States, belonging to the use of the Provinces, Cities, and
particular persons under the obedience of the said King.

70. The water duty shall be left to the City of Sluys, as it belongs to it.

71. The Dam made at Saint Denis for stopping of the river Sonte, shall be
taken away and opened, provided a sluice lie and be made there, for the keeping
of which sluice shall be equalized, as is here aforesaid, in respect of the
demolishing of the Forts.

72. In the present Treaty of Peace shall be comprehended those which before
the inter-changing of the opprobative ratifications, or within three months
after, shall be named on both sides, within which time the said Lord the King
shall nominate whom he thinks good; on the behalf of the said Lords States
were nominated the Prince Landgrave of Hassia, Cassel, with his Towns, Cities
and Countries, the Earl of East-Friesland, the City of Embden, the County and
Country of East Friesland, the Hans-towns, and particularly Lubecke, Bremen,
Hamburge, and the said Lords States do reserve to name within the said time all
such others as they shall see good.

73. Concerning the pretense of the Earl of Flodorp for restitution to be made
to him of the house or manor of Leuten, with the goods which may depend
thereon, and all other goods and towns which may thereabouts belong to him, and
are seized on the behalf of the said Lord the King: the said restitution is
granted him, as also of the house, provided that between the conclusion of this
present Treaty and the ratification thereof, a disposition shall be made for
the maintenance of a garrison on the behalf of the said Lord the King, and for
the demolishing of the new fortifications made since the possessing of the said
house.

74. Concerning what was treated and agreed on between the Extraordinary
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries of the said Lord the King, and States, on
the eighth of December 1646. concerning Rutger Huygens, for and in the name of
his wife Mistress Anna Margareta van Stralen, it shall have such force and
effect, and shall be performed and executed, in all points, as if the same were
inserted word for word in this present Treaty.

75. And to the end this present Treaty may the better be kept, the said Lord
the King and States do severally promise to assist, and each one in his place
to use their might and means, to make the passages free, and to make the sea
and rivers navigable, and sure against the incursions of Pirates, sea rovers,
vagabonds, and thieves, and if they can apprehend them, to punish them with
rigor.

76. They further promise, to do nothing against or in prejudice of this
present Treaty, nor suffer to be done directly or indirectly, and in case it be
done, to cause reparation to be made without any trouble or delay, And for the
performance of all the premises, they bind themselves severally (yea, the Lord
the King his own self, and his successors) and for the stability of the same
obligation, they renounce all laws, customs, and all other things to the
contrary.

77. This present Treaty shall be ratified and approved by the said Lords, the
King and States, and the Letters of ratification on both sides shall be
delivered up from one to the other in good and due form, within the time of
two months, and in case the same ratification can come sooner, all acts of
hostility between both parties shall cease from that time, without tarrying the
expiration of the term: Provided that after the concluding and subscribing of
this present Treaty, the hostility shall not cease before and until the
ratification of the said Lord the King of Spain shall be produced in due
substance and form. and inter changed for that of the said Lords the States of
the United Provinces.

78. So that in the mean time things on both sides shall remain in such state
and condition as they shall be found at the time of the concluding of this
present Treaty, and until that the said reciprocal ratification shall be
inter-changed and delivered.

79. The said Treaty shall every where and where it is fitting be published,
presently after that the said ratifications on both sides shall be
inter-changed and delivered up, and then all Acts of Hostility shall cease.

A COPY Of the full power of his Royal Majesty of Spain which was delivered
to the Ambassadors of the High and Mighty Lords the States General of the
United Netherlands, being at present assembled at Munster; wherein his royal
Majesty declares the United Netherlands to be free and frank, without that
he has any pretense on them in any manner; as follows.
DON PHILIP by the grace of God King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, the two
Sicilies, Jerusalem, Portugal, Navarr, Granada, Toledo, Valentia, Gullicia,
Majorca, Minorca, Sivill, Sardinia, Cordua, Corsica, Murcia, Jaen, the
Algarves, Algerica, Gibraltar, the Canary Islands, the East and West Indies, the
Islands and firm land of the Ocean Sea; Archduke of Austria, Duke of Burgundy,
Brabant, Millaine, Earl of Absburg, Flanders, Tiroll and Barcelona, Lord of
Biscaye and Mechelen, etc.

Whereas I do so far and so much desire to advance the rest and tranquillity of
the Subjects and Inhabitants of the Provinces of the Netherlands, that they may
cease from such a long cruel war, for the better attainiug of a general Peace
in Europe, for the good of Christendom; And having by common and mutual
consent chosen and appointed the City of Munster in Westphalia, for the
Assembly and Treaty of the said Peace, I have found it convenient to nominate
persons, who may in my name assist at the said Assembly with all authority and
full power, and especially with the States of the free Provinces of the United
Netherlands, or their Ambassadors, and Plenipotentiaries, particularly
authorized and deputed, and taking into consideration the sufficient
integrity, circumspection, experience, judgment and zeal to my Service, and
the good of the rest of Christendom in general, which do concur in the
Persons of Don Gaspar de Braccamonte and Gusman Earl of Peneranda, Gentlemen
of of my Counsel Chamber, and of the Chamber of Justice, as also of my
Extraordinary Ambassador in Germany, Friar Joseph Ergaigne Arch Bishop of
Cambray, and Anthony Brun of my High Counsel in Flanders; and for the
satisfaction they have always given me in several and great negotiations
which were laid upon them, and by them severally treated, therefore fully
believing, that they all together, and each one in particular in the absence or
inconvenience of one or the other, will have regard to the best welfare of
Christendom, and my particular interests, I have nominated them for my
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, and by virtue of these presents, I give them
jointly, and to each one in particular in the absence or inconvenience of any
of them, full and absolute power to make an overture to the States of the said
free Provinces of the United Netherlands, or to their Ambassadors, and
Plenipotentiaries, who shall be thereunto especially authorized and
constituted: As also to hear what shall be propounded to the pacifying of the
said long and cruel war, moved in the Provinces of the Netherlands, and such
which have grown from thence against the said States General in other lands
and seas, lying far off, And in sequel thereof to enter into an accommodation
with the said States general of the said free United Provinces, or with their
said Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries to confer, propound, agree, capitulate,
and conclude, a good, firm, and inviolable Treaty of rest, either of Peace or
of a Truce, promising for my Self and my Successors for ever, to hold firm and
valid, precisely and punctually, without any default, whatsoever by my said
Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries jointly, or by each in particular in the
absence or inconvenience of any of them, shall be agreed and capitulated in the
said Treaty with the said States General, or their said Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries of the said United free Provinces: And also to approve and
ratify it my self, within the time which shall be reciprocally appointed,
with corroboration of an oath and all solemnities in such case needful and
usual; In witness whereof I have commanded to dispateh these presents,
Subscribed with my hand, and counter-signed with the Subscription of my
Secretary of State;

Given at Saragossa the 7th. June 1646. I the King. P. Coloma.

The Contents of the Procuration of the Plenipotentiaries of the Lords the
States General.
THe States general of the United Provinces, to all those who shall see these
Presents, or hear them read, greeting, Do make known, That whereas we have
heretofore upon all occasions showed our selves very ready, with an upright
will and intention, that the long-during, destructive, and bloody War in the
Low Country Provinces, moved many years since, and continuing till this
present, might have been laid aside, for the common good of the said Provinces,
and comfort of the good Inhabitants of the same; and whereby have also followed
and grown the Wars in other places, and seas, lying a far off, which have
risen against our Adversary, out of the said Low Country War; And having by
common consent chosen the City of Munster in Westphalia, for the assembling and
treating of a general Peace in Christendom; We have thought good to nominate
persons who with all authority and full power should assist at the said
Assembly and Treaty, for to help to put an end to the said tedious,
destructive, and bloody War moved in the Low Countries sa aforesaid:
Therefore fully trusting on the wisdom discretion, circumspection, fidelity,
and zeal to the service of the said United Provinces, of the Lords Bartholt
van Gendt, Lord of Loeven, Meynerswyck, etc: Amptman and Dyckgrave of Bommel,
Tielre, and Bommelerweerde, deputed for the Assembly of the Lords States
general out of the Province of Gelderland; The Lord John van Mathenesse, Lord
of Matenesse, Ryver Opmeer, Souteveen, deputed for the Assembly of the Lords
the States general by the Order of the Knighthood and Gentry of Holland, and
West-Friezeland; The Lord Adrian Pauw Knight, Lord of Hamsted, Hogersmilde,
etc. Chief presiding Chancellor and Treasurer of the County of Holland, and
West-Friezeland, and on the behalf of the same Province, deputed for the
Assembly of the Lords the States general; The Lord John de Knuyt, Knight, Lord
of the old and new Dosmer, chief and representing the Gentry of the States,
and the Counsel of the County of Sealand, and of the Admiralty there, Chief
Counselor of his Highness the Lord Prince of Orange, ordinary Deputy at the
Assembly of the Lords the States geuerall; The Lord Godart van Reed, Lord of
Nederhorst, Uredesant, Short-hoofe, Orermeer, Horst, Waest, etc: President of
the Honorable the Gentry and Knights of the Laud of Vytrecht, and in their
names appearing at the Assembly of the Lords States general; The Lord Francis
van Donia Lord of Humena, and Hialsum, etc. deputed for the Assembly of the
Lords the States general on the behalf of the Province of Friezland; The Lord
William Ripperda, Lord of Hengeloo, Bolburgen, Cavulo, and Russenburge, etc.
deputed for the Assembly of the States general by the Knighthood and Gentry of
the Province of Over Ysel; The Lord Adrian Clant at Stedum, Lord of Muttersum,
etc. ordinary Deputy in the Assembly of the Lords States general on the
behalf of the Province of the City of Groningen, and lands adjacent; the
respective Deputies in our Assembly, and extraordinary Ambassadors in Germany,
giving unto them jointly, or at least to the greatest part of them (in the
absence or inconvenience of the other) full power and authority, general and
special Command, for in our names, and on our behalf in the quality of
Plenipotentiaries of this state, in the said city of Munster, to hear and
understand from the Lords Plenipotentiaries of the mighty and most excellent
Prince Don Phillip the fourth King of Spain, the overture of what the same
Lords Plenipotentiaries of the said King shall produce, for the removing of the
said tedious, destructive, and bloody War, moved in the United Provinces of
the Netherlands, and which has caused war against our adversaries, in places
and seas lying a far off, and in order hereunto to enter into a Treaty and
Accommodation with the said Lords Plenipotentiaries of the said King, and to
conclude a good, firm, just, and infrangible Treaty of Peace, as the Lords
Plenipotentiaries of this State shall judge fit, for the most service and
assurance of the United Provinces, the good Inhabitants thereof, and their
Associates, and the interested in the said several tedious wars; And we have
promised and do promise by these Presents in good faith, and under obligation
of our selves, and our successors, in general and in particular, always to
hold good, firm, and of value, what by our said Plenipotentiaries concerning
this shall be agreed and concluded, and to ratify the same, and infrangibly to
keep it, and cause it to be kept, without ever to do, or suffer to be done
against it in any manner directly or indirectly: In witness hereof we have
caused these Presents to be paraphed, caused it to be sealed with our great
Seal, and to be subscribed by our Secretary.

In our Assembly in the Hage, the twentieth of March 1646. Parafied: Johan van
Reed: on the fold was written, by Order of the said high Lords States general
and subscribed Corn: Musch.

Having the great Seal of the Lords States general in red wax, under
appending, at a double ribbon of gold and red silk.

In witness of all that which is before said, we the Extraordinary Ambassadors
and Plenipotentiaries of the said Lords, the King of Spain, etc. and of the
States general of the United Netherlands, by virtue of our several
Procurations or Letters of Attorney, have subscribed this present Treaty, and
corroborated it with the Seals of our Arms.

Done in Munster in Westphalia the 30th. of January, 1648. was Subscribed and
Sealed:
The Earl of Peneranda. A. Brun. Bartholt van Gent. John van Mathenesse. Adrian
Pauw. I. de Knuyt. F. van Donia. William Ripperda. Adrian Clandt.


FINIS.

