St PAUL'S Late Progres Upon Earth, About a Divorce 'twixt Christ and the
Church of Rome, by reason of her dissolu^enes and excesses.

With the Causes of these present Commotions 'twixt the Pope, and the Princes
of Italy.

A new way of Invention agreeable to the Times.

Published by James Howell, Armig.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Heron for Matthew Walbancke at Grayes-Inne Gate.
1644.

THE ARGUMENT of the whole Work.
CHrist, in regard he perceives the Church of Rome (his Spouse) to prostitute
her self to the lusts of diverse Popes, and particularly of Urban the eight,
resolves to be divorced from her, and to cohabit no longer with an adulteress.

The reasons are distinctly handled, which induce Christ to such a resolution,
viz. the repute she has lost amongst most Nations; The wealth she consumes
ever and anon to satisfy the greedy appetite of her Adulterers; and lastly,
the dishonor which the Son of God receives from that dissoluteness which is
so impudently practiced in his House, Rome being now become as it were a common
Bordell.

The Divine Justice being satisfied with these reasons, determines the divorce;
but his pleasure is, that, according to his wonted circumspection for the
example of man, a Process be first formed of the offenses of the said Spouse:
thereupon His Majesty commands Saint Paul to repair to earth for this purpose.

Saint Paul being descended in this lower World, arrives in Lucca, in Parma, in
Florence, in Venice; and lastly, in the territories of the Church, and so in
Rome her self; where having discerned the abuses, and heard by sundry sorts of
complaints the misdemeanors of the Church, he perfects the plea, and afterward
for some accidents befallen him, he is forced to get away from Rome by flight,
and so returns to Heaven, where, there being nothing wanting to the full
justification of Christ's complaint, the Decree for a Divorce issues out.

From this separation which Christ made with his Church, it comes to pass,
that there are no more any legitimat children engendered, to wit, holy men, and
persons truly honest: As on the contrary side, by the commerce she has with
Adulterers, are generated such Bastards in Christianity, as Hypocrites, in
whose number the Jesuits are understood, and others, who under a specious
veil of holiness, and Religion, are in effect the worst, and most perverse
race of people upon Earth:

The same Divorce being published through all the Universe, Marcus Effesus,
Martin Luther, and others, run immediately, and offer their Church for a
Spouse to Christ; But Our Savior calling to mind the wrong done him by the
Church of Rome, chose rather to live single, than ever after to join in
Matrimony with the most perfidious nature of man.

To my worthily honored Friend, Sir Paul Pindar, Knight.
SIR,
SAint Paul having descended lately to view Italy, and other places, as you may
trace him in the following Discourse, He would not take his flight back to
Heaven before he had given you a visit, who have so well deserved of his Church
here, the goodliest pile of stones in Christendom of that kind.

Of all the men of our times, you are one of the greatest Examples of Piety and
solid Integrity, which discovers a noble soul to dwell within you; so that, me
thinks, I see Saint Paul saluting and solacing you, that those constant works
of Charity you daily do (and them in such a manner, that the left hand knows
not what the right does) will be as a Triumphant Chariot to carry you one day
up to Heaven, to partake of the same beatitude with Him.

Amongst those multitudes that honor you, I am one, and have done so a long
time; and as a small testimony hereof, I send you this new kind of Discourse,
composed lately by a noble Personage in Italian, of which Language you are so
great a Master.

For the first part of this Discourse, which consists of a kind of Dialogue
'twixt the two first Persons of the Holy Trinity, there are Examples of that
kind in some of the Fathers of the Primitive Church; as Apollinarius, and
Nazianzen, and lately Grotius has the like in his Tragedy of Christ's Passion,
which may serve to free it from all exception:

So I most affectionately kiss your hands, and am Your very humble and ready
Servant, James Howell.
Fleet 25. of March.
To my very noble Friend, Sir Paul Neale, Knight.
SAint Paul cannot re-ascend to Heaven, before he gives you also a salute: My
Lord, your Father, having been so great a Light, and a Star of the highest
magnitude in the Firmament of the Church.

If you please to go along with him in this his Progress, by the guidance of
this Discourse, you shall discover many things that are not vulgar, by a
curious mixture of Church and State affairs: You shall feel herein the pulse
of Italy, how it beats at this time, since the beginning of these late wars
'twixt the Pope and some Princes, with the grounds, procedure, and success of
the said wars, together with the interest and grievances, pretenses and
quarrels of every Prince against Rome.

I must confess, my Genius has often prompted me, that I was never cut out
for a Translater, there being a kind of servility therein: For it must needs
be somewhat tedious to one that has any freeborn thoughts, and genuine
conceptions of his own (whereof I have a few, though poor ones) to enchaine
himself to the sense of another. Moreover, Translations at the best, specially
in Languages which have an advantage one of the other, as the Italian has of
the English, which may be said to differ as Silk does from Clotb, the common
wear of both Countries where they are spoken, though Cloth be the more
substantial (as the English, by reason it is so knotted with consonants, is
more sinewy and stronger then the Italian) yet Silk is the smoother and
sliker: I say, Translations are like the wrong side of a Turkey Carpet, which
is fuller of thrummes and knots, and not so eeven as the right side. Or I may
say, Translations are like Wines (as I speak elsewhere) t'ane off the Lees,
and powered into other vessels, which must needs lose something of their first
strength and brisknesse, which in the pouring (or passage rather) evaporates
into air.

Touching this present Translation, I may say, it is a thing I did, when I did
nothing; 'twas to find something to pass away the slow hours of this sad
condition of imprisonment, wherein I have been so long plunged. I pray take
this as a small token of the true respects I owe you, and to my noble Lady,
whose hands I humbly kiss, wishing you both, as the season invites me, with a
good New-yeare (which begins but now in Law) a holy Lent, and a healthful
Spring.

Fleet 25. of March. Your much obliged and ready Servant, I. H.

The Contents of the several Sections into which this Discourse is partition'd.
Section 1. Gods reasoning with Christ, touching a reconcilement with the
Church of Rome. SEC. 2. Christ's answer, wherein are expressed the distastes
that have been given him by the Church of Rome, and so requires a Divorce. SEC.
3. The commands imposed upon Saint Paul, to repair to Earth, to hear the
grievances of Mortals, and to frame an exact process of the life and
demeanures of the Roman Church. SEC. The complaints of the Republicke of
Lucca. SEC. 5. The grievances of the Duke of Parma. SEC. 6. The discontentments
of the gran-Duke of Florence. SEC. 7. A caution given the Republicke of Venice,
touching perpetuity of Legacies, and the multiplicity of Pensions they give the
Court of Rome. SEC. 8. Reasons alleged by the Signiory of Venice, why she
undertakes the punishing of Ecclesiastical Delinquents. SEC. 9. The complaint
of Venice, why that ancient Elogy of hers, which was engraven in the Vatican
was defaced. SEC. 10. A narration of the oppressions which the secular Subjects
do groan under in the state of the Church. SEC. 11. The judgment of an
Armenian and a Turk, upon the Church of Rome. SEC. 12. The Confession of a
dying Cardinal. SEC. 13. Motives for the late Marriage 'twixt the Cardinal of
Savoy, and the young Princess his Niece. SEC. 14. Touching prohibited Books.
SEC. 15. A Character given by an Angel, of the capricious soul of Urban the
eight. SEC. 16. A Relation what Paul negotiated in Rome, and how he left his
sword behind him. SEC. 17. The complaint of a Nun, who describes the
infelicity of that condition of life. SEC. 18. A cursory Relation of these late
distempers in Italy.
The Authors Caution to the tender - conscienc'd CHRISTIAN.
THe Author who composed this present Book, has peradventure more religious
thoughts, and fuller of piety than thou caust imagine hereby, O serupulous
Christian: But the malignity of the times is come to that height, that he is
cried up in a manner for a Heretic, who consents not to the operations
(whatsoever they be) of the Court of Rome. The cause hereof is thy simplicity,
which confounding in one, the authority, and the affections of Popes, can not
distinguish, which are the operations of the one* and which are the operations
of the other. The Bishop of Rome may err as he is a man; and being subject to
error, who dare maintain but he may be reprehended? Christ, who knew no
sin, could be content to be crucified; and a Bishop, who is composed of
peccable humanity, and who perhaps sins every day, must think it strange* if
he be but censured by any just reproof? David was not so dainty; the most
ancient Pillars of the Primitive Church, who were went with humble retribution
of thanks, not with proud disdain, to listen unto the zealous corrections of
others. Poor St Bernard, if he had corrected the exorbitances of these times,
with that liberty, as he inveighed against the abuses of his own, assuredly
his name should be seen registered in the Index of prohibited Books, rather
than in the Catalogue of Saints. But such dangers cannot dastardize me, neither
am I induced to write this to justify my own intentions, it being sufficient
for me, that God only knows the intrinsicals of my meaning. But I thought
fit, O scrupulous Christian, to offer thee this present Book, as an
Instrument, which happily may have power to unbeguile thy simplicity from those
too credulous opinions, whence the presumption of some, is fomented to disturb
Italy, and to scandalize all such that have a right understanding in
Christianity. If things which bring profit with them, do use to be grateful,
I despair not altogether of thy good acceptance of this. I know that at first
sight, the Title will appear unto thee somewhat irreligious, and the Argument
not savouring of much piety; but the Palate must not be Judge of the Physic.
I desire thee not to frame any judgment upon it, till thou have perused the
whole Book, wherein if any thing conduce to make thee despise the true
Catholic Religion, or her Tenets, I am content thou should condemn both
the Work and the Author: But if thou be taught to detest only the ill
practices of those that infringe the Law of Christ, thou must not impute any
profaneness to that zeal which deplores the abuses in Religion. Many were
condemned for Heretics, who have writ against the Rites of the Church of
Rome, but he must not incur the same censure, who writes only against them,
that do not rightly observe those Rites; for there is a great deal of
difference 'twixt the blaming of externe observances, and the violation of
religion her self. O but thou will say, this Book is against the Bishop of
Rome; thou must distinguish, O scrupulous Reader, it is against the affections
of the said Bishop: I reverence the authority, but Christ has not obliged me
to reverence any earthly exorbitant passions of his. And if others do lawfully
take the sword in hand against such passions, I hope it is venial for me to
take the pen. Nor think it strange, that I have imagined a Colloquy 'twixt the
Persons of the Holy Trinity; for it is the style of sacred writ, to accommodate
it self to humane capacity. Live happy.

The Heavenly Divorce occasioned by the looseness of the Roman Spouse.
The PREFACE.
THou deceiv'st thy self, O misbeleeving man, if thou art persuaded that thy
impieties mount not up above the Stars, to disturb the repose of Heaven. Turn
thy eyes (if thou have not altogether lost thy faith in holy Writ) and thou
shall see the Son of God dragged and nayl'd upon a Cross, by the sin of one
man, who might in some kind have made himself excusable for his transgression,
in regard it was his first fault; as also because he was then but a Novice in
the World. But what shall we say now? Iniquity being found to be so multiplied,
and spread through the whole Universe, that to sin, and consequently to offend
God, cannot be said to be a thing accidental, but the very natural property
of man. O perverse World! which under the title of natural property, do
lessen that wicked transgression, which was enough to bring down from life to
death thy own Creator. If thou then giv'st credit to this, wonder not to hear
those new changes, which being stirred in Christ, by the faylings of the Roman
Spouse, have produced those strange effects, which thou shall find represented
in this Book.

Saint Paul's late Progres upon Earth.
SECT. 1.
The Eternal Father does reason with his Son, and asks whence proceeds the
Original of his distaste with the Roman Church his Spouse, persuading him to a
reconcilement.

NOt by the Embassy of an Angel, as at other times, O Eternal Word, but it is
necessary now, that by this paternall voice, the will of Heaven be manifested.
In a business that presses so much, it is fitting the Father should discourse
freely with his Son, and that the Son should hearken with attention to that
which concerns the glory of his Throne. It Is a good while since, O my only
begotten Son, that I observed that amorous flame which was used to be so ardent
toward the Church of Rome, thy Spouse, to go cooling within thy heart. Were it
fitting for the Deity to wonder, I would without doubt much wonder at so great
an alteration in the person of the Eternal Word. I know well 'twas he, who for
the love of his Spouse, went under a servile shape, as far as upon the Cross,
to expose his life, to gain valuable merits to purchase her affections. 'Twas
he, I say, who loved before he was beloved, who dyed, not for any other greater
necessity, than to make it appear that he was a Lover.

Is it possible then, that that love being turned to dislike, he should now
live discontented with a Spouse obtained by his own blood, and got by so many
Martyrs?

I deny not, O Son, that the time was when the Divine Justice exhorted you
never to turn your eyes of love upon the ungrateful nature of man, who was
introduced to the world with contempt of his Creator. But since thy love
prevailed over the rigor of just revenge; since for the accomplishment of thy
benign desire, the Divine providence decreed a reconciliation, What new reason
does now estrange from her thy affection, and disquiets all Heaven with this
alienation? Remember, O Son, the contentment of this Empyrean Heaven, when the
Roman Church being advanced to be thy Bride, there sprung daily such a numerous
and blessed off spring out of those reciprocal Embraces betwixt you, that I
hoped to see Heaven peopled in a short space, and the end of humane Creation
fulfilled. But now what is become of that happy time? that time when thy
Beloved, vying with thee for love, did correspond daily with the death thou
did undergo for her, and by the suffrance of so many thousand innocent
Martyrs, who in counterchange of thy blood, did continually expose their veins
to be opened, and pierced by the merciles instruments of tyrants. Son, I
patronize not her cause, I recount not her merits passed, to sweeten thereby
the bitterness of this present distaste: But it is very true, that if any ill
Spirit, daring per adventure to tempt the Deity it self, has sowed any tares
amongst you, I should be sorry, that once so delightful a Spouse, lying now
under the cloud of a sudden disdain, should by this repudiation find her bed
widdowed, and her womb barren. This would tend too much to the prejudice of
peopling this Heaven, with equal advantage to Hell it is Enemy. And if this be,
what fruit can thy passions passed produce?

This, this in conclusion is that Spouse for whom thou did make no reckoning
of this Empyrean, of the decorum belonging to thy Divinity, of life it self.
What conceits will people frame to themselves, to see thee so repenting? Forget
not, O Son, that it becomes not the Deity to repent.

SECT. II.
The Eternal Word answers the Father: He unfolds in general the cause of his
disgust with the Roman Spouse, and pleads for a Divorce.

REpentance, O Everlasting Father, entered into this Heaven, ever since the
time that thy Majesty having granted a being to man, he was necessitated
afterward to be destroyed for his wickedness. And so this creature proving so
ungrateful for Divine favors, not long after his Creation, deserved those
doleful words from his Creator; Paenitet me fecisse hominem, I repent me to
have made man. Nor does that clash awhit with the immutability of his most
gracious nature, since it was decreed so from the beginning, that his
disfavours should necessarily succeed the demerits of man. Then what wonder is
it? if I being grievously offended with the ingratitude of this Apostat, have
changed my love into dislike, and that I repent to have exalted him so high
with the expense of my own blood? It belonged to you, O Father, to create man,
To me it belonged to redeem him, And to both of us, to be sorry, that he has
showed himself so unworthy either of your Creation, or my redemption.

But to reduce my self particularly to the Church of Rome, my Spouse, I beseech
your Majesty to cast your eyes upon her a while, and doubtless you will find my
disdain to be just, and this alienation to be necessary. Behold her, O Father,
most vily prostituted to the lusts even of those to who^ the Holy Ghost has
consigned her to be governed: Behold, how she continually hugg's in her bosom
these adulterers, who using her like a lawful Husband, do corrupt her, and
together with my honor, contaminat her Customs. Let thy divine Eyes see, how
gay she goes in gold, how embellished with gems, how full of excess and luxe:
The Spouse of Christ was never used to go so, until the time that she began to
study how to please her adulterers But what excesses does she not commit now
adays, by letting the reins so loose to a reprobat sense! What dissolutnes!
What impudence, al shamefulnes being lost, does she not give way unto in my own
House! yet nevertheles, to affront me the more, she goes still by the character
of my Spouse; her Adulterers, by the title of my servants, and those which
trample upon the dignity of my Name, by the style of my Ministers. The time
was, when I called the Temple in Jerusalem, a den of Thieves, because I found
it full of Buyers, Brokers, and Sellers: What may I now call the Roman Church,
which harbors such a multitude of those that do not buy but plunder; Of those
that do not sell but power out so wastfully to fulfill their own lusts and
ambition, that, which being bought with my blood is so unworthily provided for
them? These are they, O Father, which my Spouse idolatrizeth; and I being
mocked and vilipended, must suffer them to sit in my Throne, to receive the
honor of faithful Innocents. I will not discourse of the use of my substance,
which being bequeathed by the piety of ancient Christians for the sustenance of
poor Believers, is now reduced to the property of one alone, and he so
insatiable, that he seems to take away the credit of that miracle described in
the Gospel: That Christ with so little bread, and few fishes did satisfy so
many thousand persons, whereas now adays, it is found, that he cannot fulfill
the gourmandizing-appetit of one only Bishop, with so many millions of gold.
Let your Majesty behold Urban the eight, how he has swallowed all the wealth
of the Church, which he imployes only to nourish the pride, the avarice, and
tyranny of his Nephews; and this in such a height of scandal, that it is
publicly reported, that Julian the Apostat, who robbed the Church of all her
riches, was more beneficial to the increase of Christianity, then the pious
Constantin, who, endowing her with such large incomes, ministered fuel to
foment such pernicious abuses. But I marvel not at it, in regard when I was
upon Earth, my self, my garments were parted, even by them who crucified me.
But I am not a little aggrieved, that the dishonest pranks of my Spouse are now
more than openly apparent to all the Universe: the public murmurings of people
do grieve me: Her infamy runs through the mouths and pens of every one, though
she study never so much to cover it. Some call her a greedy Babylon, others a
nest of hypocrisy, others the School of wickedness, the refuge of all
impieties, the public Brothell, where without any modesty are practiced the
basest kinds of lusts in the world. Can divine honor therefore cohabit with such
an opprobrious Adultres without spotting it self? The time was, O Father, that
I drank the bitter cup of passion for my Spouse; but now her deformities have
so nauseated my stomach, that I cannot swallow another. I died then for her,
because I might rise up glorious again: I will not live with her now, because
she daily practices the loss of my repute and honor, I should become the
scorn of people, should I by a longer dissimulation bear with her
Exorbitances; Her demerits cannot admit any reconciliation: I desire therefore
a Divorce; nor do I hope will your Majesty deny it me, in regard the whole
Trinity would be partaker of my dishonor.

SECT. III.
The Almighty Father being persuaded by the reasons of the Son, is disposed to
satisfy him; but to proceed with the wonted circumspection of divine Justice,
he commands Saint Paul to transfer himself-to Earth, to understand the
complaints of Mortals, and to form a diligent Process of the actions of the
Roman Spouse accordingly: And he speaks to him as follows;

PAul, great are the discomposures which arise from an unchaste woman; This very
Heaven cannot glory it self to be free of them; my only begotten Son himself is
troubled and aggrieved at the dishonest actions of the Church of Rome his
Spouse. I hoped she had bin capable of reconcilement, but He holds himself so
much offended, and finds her nature to be so perverted, that he thinks her
incorrigible; therefore with a constant resolution he seeks a Divorce. What can
be denied to my only Son, specially when Justice favoreth his reasons? But I do
not intend to determine any thing upon the business so hastily, though the
Eternal Word cannot tell an untruth; and though besides, her loose carriage be
not unknown to me. The divine Justice in the fulmination of it is punishments
uses to proceed with much caution for the example of man; Therefore, to the end
that our Decree may have a good foundation, we command thee to betake thy self
to Earth, to hear what Mortals can say, and to frame an exact process of the
life and carriage of the Roman Spouse. The enterprise will prove somewhat
difficult; because she uses to smother her errors, to persecut those men
bitterly, that write against her proceedings: But we assure our selves, that
the approved virtue of Paul, which heretofore knew how to support the
persecutions of the wicked for the honor of Christ, will not shrink awhit in
this employment.

SECT. IV.
Saint Paul does readily obey the Lord, and descends to Earth in humane
disguise. He comes to Lucca, where understanding the contumacy of thai
Republic, he would know the grounds of it, for to commence the Preces, and a
Citizen answers him thus:

AMongst the Popes of our age, Urban the eight, has bin most Prodigal of
Jubilees and Indulgences, until these his latter years. But to show
peradventure, that he has jurisdiction no less over curses, than over
benedictions, he has at last by altering his style, put forth his hand to dart
out Excommunications. It was the fortune of this small Republic, to bear the
brunt of his first censure; He thereby imitating those who use to try the
virtue of poison first upon the lesser sort of animals. The connivency whereby
other Princes dissembled this our disaster, gave him scope to thunder out the
second against the Duke of Parma: Nor must Christendom hereafter expect other
then excommunications, in regard if the affairs of this world use to succeed
one another in equal vicissitudes, it is necessary that Excommunications be as
frequent as Jubiles have been. Now touching the grounds of the papal distaste
with us, they are already sufficiently manifested to the world. I must say
(though very sparingly) that the original of every accident sprung from the
insupportable licentiousnes of Churchmen, who did necessitat us to a just
resentment. It seemed strange to the Roman Bishop, that so small a Republic as
ours, durst resent the outrages of Ecclesiastics, who should rather comply
with them, considering that this State is too narrow to be capable of such
insolences. And so persisting in an obstinat censure, he chooses rather to see
our perdition hastened, than the Exorbitances of his Clergy moderated. But we
being not conscious to have committed any delinquency, which might deserve to
exclude us from the face of God, we comfort our selves in this case, with the
memory of ` Balaam, who injustly cursed the people of Israel: Nor have we ever
rested since, to procure a right understanding, by the interposition of persons
of credit with the Cardinal Nephews, that they would be pleased to appease
his Holiness displeasure (expecting still a miracle from the words of some
Ass,) but to this hour there has nothing come of it.

But the Barberini are in Arms, and this temporal interest they think will
enforce us to desire a reconciliation; As for the rest which concerns the
soul, if an Excommunication has power to cut us off from the union of the
present Church, why should we think it capital to be separated from so
infected a body, and freed so by continual examples of a sacrilegious life,
and from the despair, wherinto the Clericall Tyranny would plunge us?
Confiding therefore in the justice of our Cause, and in the assistance of those
wise Princes, which cannot away with the ravenousnes of this Pope, we hope to
receive some fruit of the introducement of these censures, in regard that if
this course would go on, to be Master thereby of another Estate; the World may
bewel assured, that as Jubiles passed, were pretexts for some new impost,
herafter Excommunication will serve for a pretext for some new rapine.

SECT. V.
Saint Paul having understood the grievances of the Luqueses, passes on to
Parma, where in the habit of a Friar having gained the affection of the Duke, he
endeavors to understand from his mouth the disagreement which he has with the
Roman Church, and the Duke answers him thus:

THe World has already understood too much, the causes of the quarrel I have
with the Court of Rome, being published not only by my Manifests, but by the
writings of other particular pens, who have willingly protected the justice of
my cause: But since it pleases you (good Friar) to hear from my own mouth the
grounds of these traverses, which have kept such a noise, I will relate them
unto you, with that brevity of words, which may suit more with the present
encumbrances that trouble me, than with the nature of the business it self.

Know then, that the particular urgencies of my House, have erected already in
Rome a Bank called the Farnes bank, which obliges my fortunes to contribut an
annual cense to my creditors. Now Urban the eight being assailed by some
turbulent spirits, in these last periods of his life, thought with himself to
build a little new Fort, of diverse pretenses upon this bank, thereby to set upon
my Duchy of Castro But I had good reason to hope now in these my troubles some
support rather than any oppression of that Seat, of whom the ashes of my
Progenitors do yet glory to have merited so well; But all gratitude being
utterly extinguished in the breasts of Ecclesiastics, Charity is also much
diminished amongst them, which neither moves them to any compassion, nor to be
a whit aggrieved, though they see mountains of miseries heaped on one's back. A
desire to enrich the Nephews, the primum mobile in these times of the Popes
mind, prevailed over all reason, and the pre-potency of plundring did facilitat
the way to dispossess me of mine own; Nor did the tyranny of Urban the eight
stop here; but he thought that I would take it nothing ill if he did
excommunicat me, that being so segregated from the Communion of the Faithful,
none durst hear my grievance, or reach me a hand. Agreat cruelty in a
Shepherd, that flaying his Sheep alive, would not have them have natural
affection to resent the grief. Moreover, to varnish the pretext of his
censures, he publishes me for a disobedient Son to the universal Father of
Christianity: But whether he is to be acknowledged for a Father, who Enemy-like
robb's his children, judge you? Can he pretend to be reverenced as Successor to
Saint Peter, when diffring from Saint Peter, he stops his ears to the words of
Christ, who commands him to sheath his sword? Christ did institut a peaceful
Kingdom; Nor did he ever ordain, that his cause should be handled with Arms.
Nevertheless, the present Bishops make use of them, because they are ready to
meddle with any other cause, than that of Christ. In the interim (good Friar)
my fortune is worse than that of Malchus; for if Malchus was offended with the
weapon of Peter, he was healed again by the hands of Peter: But I find my self
hurt by Peter's sword, yet cannot perceive his hand is disposed to cure me, or
to restore me mine own.

SECT. VI.
Saint Paul being departed from Parma, goes to Florence, where being brought to
the Court, he heard the Gran-Duke much transported with choler, speaking to a
Counselor of his in this manner

THen Urban the eight, intends that the Clergymen shall go exempted from the
imposition of the millstone, whereunto the interests of my State oblige me to
subject without Exception any one that lives under my government. And who is he
that arrogats temporal Authority over another jurisdiction? In the time of
Christ, secular Princes had their tribut; and shall they be now refused in
Urban the Eights time? By this means, the credulous simplicity of the Laity
shall be continually-taught to contribut so many gabels to the Clergy, and the
Clergy shall be free from all taxes to them. And who at any time leaves any
possessions to the Ecclesiastics, they must be free from such contributions,
which the Law of Nature awards every protecting Prince*

Who did ever affirm that the Legacies of private men can derogat from the
public jurisdiction of Princes? These are new Statuts, which tear the World in
pieces, being introduced by those Bishops, which together with the Evangelicall
Doctrine, have forgot that Christ himself, when he was upon Earth, paid tribut
to Caesar, professing, that he came to fulfill the Law, not to abrogat it. And
we shall admit into our free States an Authority, which beyond the order and
example of Christ, pretends to have power to control, and transvolve the
dominion of others, yea, to trample upon the Princes themselves. Is this the
Paradis that Christ promises to them who observe his Law? or rather a Hell,
which they worthily deserve, who believe too much in an adulterated Church. But
I observe, that the Ecclesiastics, by too many styles, do subject the simple
seculars, to pay the contributions of indulgences, of dispensations, of the
Word of God, of sacrifices of the Altar, and in sum of all the Sacraments,
which the divine bounty has granted gratis to all the Faithful. But what do I
say? the avarice of the Clergy is come to that height, that it does not permit
those poor souls that are under the agonies of death, to depart from this world
to the other, till they conjure them under the pretext of pious Legacies, to
contribut a toll for their safe conduct, and constraining them to bargain for
their very graves, they sell them for ready money, the Embraces of our Common
Mother, the Earth. And I, in my free State, cannot impose the least toll, as
that of the millstone upon them. But let Urban the eight practice what he
please, let him thunder what Excommunications he will upon my Gabelleers, I
shall learn well enough how to fence away his blows: I will make the Jews my
Receivers, nor shall I ever suffer that Toscany be oppressed by such rapacious
Tyrannies, which under the mantle of Religion are exercised in Christendom to
rob us of our own.

SECT. VII.
Saint Paul having from the words of the Gran-Duke comprehended the cause why
he was so moved, resolves to steer his course for Venice, where being scarf
arrived, he found casually upon the way a writing, the tenor* whereof was as
follows:

A Memorandum for the most renowned Republic of Venice.
AMongst those Princes which reverence Rome, your serenity is She, most
renowned Republic, which being free from all superstitious credulity, do
conserve your Christian Empire from every insidious Religion: By a most sage
Law therefore you did constitut some years since, that the Clergy should be
made incapable to inherit any stable possessions; for the dead daily
multiplying, and consequently, the number of Legacies every day increasing, In
process of time, the Ecclesiastics would become Masters of all that wealth,
which giving a subsistence to all kind of Subjects, are destinated for the
service of your serenity. Whosoever lives free from all passion to the
affections of Rome, is bound to applaud the maturity of your deliberations in
this point: And he who professes himself a friend to the greatness of your
dominions, must needs ackdowledg, that your high wisdom is warned by public
necessity to regulat two other no less important abuses.

The first consists in the perpetuity of Legacies: For what avails it to
prohibit, that stable goods pass not under the possession of Ecclesiastics?
When by the multitude of perpetual Legacies, which use to be bequeathed, and
charged upon stable possessions, it will fall out in time, that all the Rents
shall be drunk up so? And what difference can there be then I pray, 'twixt a
perpetual Legacy, and a stable possession! Or what benefit should your
Subjects receive from the foresaid Law; who though they cannot be dispossed of
the propriety of the Land, yet they rest deprived of the usufruit of it? This
redounds to the greater advantage of the Clergy: For while the refiduary
seculars of the Testator undergo the weight of all public Assessements, by
keeping in their hands the Fee, The Clergy do in virtue of the annual Legacy
sweep away the rents without any burden at all. The zeal of your public
prudence will stir the rather for regulating this abuse, when you will
consider, that the perpetuity of legacies was introduced at first rather by the
cunning of the Ecclesiastics, than for the need of souls in Purgatory: For if
the pains in Purgatory are said to be but temporary, wherefore should the
simplicity of people be persuaded to bequeath in the behalf of their souls
perpetual Legacies and Mansionaries? Moreover, your serenity ought to
consider, that the obligation of Masses multiplying every day, with the number
of Legacies, a necessity seems to arise hence, either to increase the number of
Clergy men, who are useles for public service, or to defraud the wills of the
well-devoted Testators, whereon, if the public Eyes would fix themselves, they
should see that the Ecclesiastics do not perform, no not the least part of
these daily sacrifices which they are tied to; but they salve their
consciences, by saying, that the Mass being of an infinite value, one Mass may
supply the necessity of many souls: Whence may be inferred, that if one Mass
may supply the necessity of many souls, one Mass also may suffice to relieve
the urgencies of one soul alone, and the remainder shall be thought a number
superfluous, not from the necessity of the souls, but rather from the cheat
arising from the avarice of the Priest

The second abuse consists in the multiplicity of Pensions, which are paid
annually to Rome, from the State of Venice. Touching this, it comes into my
mind to remember your serenity, that the Court of Rome is like the middle
Region of the Air, which is wont to make her thunderbolts against Earth, out
of the Exhalations She draws from the Earth it self: so the Roman Court is
accustomed to form it is power for oppression of other States, out of the
rents, contributions, and pensions which it receives from those States
themselves. And let this suffice for the high wisdom of your serenity, in this
point.

SECT. VIII.
Saint Paul sojourning in Venice, sees a Priest dragged into prison by order of
the secular power, and the cause being asked why the temporal Authority
exercised jurisdiction over a person Ecclesiastic, a Venetian answered him
thus:

THe Repub. of Venice, nor for any other men's threats, or insinuations ever
deviated from that constant path her own prudence has pointed her out, for her
own safety from the beginning. Amongst other jurisdictions which she has
always conserved in the face of Romes pretensions and power; one is, to have
authority to punish the persons of Ecclesiastic Delinquents, esteeming that
dominion to be absolut and universal, which Heaven has afforded her within
her own territories.

This Republic knows well, that when God did institut Sovereign power, he
conferred it upon Saul over all the people, and all the Tribes of Israel
without Exception; and there was amongst the Tribes, you cannot deny, a great
number of Levits and Priests. Ought the Priests then dissuade the people from
that obedience which was ordained by the Divine Majesty it self toward their
natural Princes? The Sacraments were ordained by God, to wash away the
pollutions of sin in the soul, but not to deface the characters of subjects on
the body; Nor was the Law of Christ ever incompatible with the jurisdiction of
Caesar, but in their opinion only, who seek pretenses to traduce and calumniat
it. The Ecclesiastics, who interpret all things to their own advantage,
pretend to under-draw themselves from the secular power by those words of
Christ, Nolite tangere Christos meos. But he who is of a sound understanding,
discerns how much they are deceived in the sense of those words: For although
the same God forbad murder to all men by an expres commandment, yet it is
lawful for Magistrates to take away the lives of Malefactors. In the
administration of justice, Lay-Princes also represent God, and for one to
pretend to withdraw himself from their Authority, is no other thing, then to be
unwilling to be under divine obedience. If the Ecclesiastics would interpret
Scriptures with more reason, then passion, and partiality, they would discern
that those words, Nolite tangere Christos meos, bear no other sense, then to
prohibit an injust outrage against those Ecclesiastics; which for the goodness
of their lives, and innocence of their manners, deserve the title of Christ's.
When a Church man is naught, he falls from that Title, and so from the privilege
of it: Nor can the Clergy of these times pretend to be exempted from the power
of temporal justice, by those words, unless it had been in case that Christ
had said, Nolite tangere Anti Christos meos.

This Signory, which can discern things in their true Essence, does not admit
the falsehood of any interessed opinion, to purblind her own proper
understanding: If a Clerk may err temporally against the State, the state
thinks it reasonable, that he may be punished temporally, by no other, than by
that hand to who^ God has transmitted the care of the State. The danger of a
State would be too evident, and the confusion also, if the crimes that are
committed against the conservation, and the common tranquillity thereof should
stand in fear of no other punishment, then what shall come from a foreign
Prince, who regulating himself by certain politic interests, in lieu of
correction, would tolerat perhaps and connive at the crime, to the public
damage, and disturbance thereof, and his own advantage.

Behold, for example, how diverse States in Italy, where the Pontificiall
Authority raign's, are disquieted ever and anon, and corrupted, by reason of
the impunity of Clericall Libertines. And what other thing can be hence
expected, but that the Ecclesiastics being exempted totally from secular
justice, may arm themselves, and join in Bands, and turn their Cloisters, when
they please, to so many Castles, that trampling so under foot the Authority of
their Princes, they may stablish another Kingdom within a Kingdom? That wisdom
which sits at the stern of the Republic of Venice, will never suffer her own
Subjects to be able to bandy against her, by the protection and support of any
foreign Authority. Clerks are punished when they offend temporally against the
tranquillity of the State, not else. And if it seems strange to the Pope, that
the Venetians assume to themselves temporal jurisdiction over Ecclesiastics;
much more seems it strange to the Venetians, that the Ecclesiastics should
usurp worldly Dominion over the persons of Seculars. In the mean time, they
know well, that Christ professed openly to have no Kingdom in this world.

SECT. IX.
Saint Paul desiring to understand the last differences which have been
controverted 'twixt the Republic of Venice and Rome, is informed by a noble
Venetian, in these words:

THe Church of Rome was reverenced by us in that manner, which was fitting for
Christ's lawful Spouse. But she corresponding with little gratitude, has not
only oftentimes conspired our ruin, but at last has thrown out of doors the
monument of our services, which have been proclaimed to the world for so many
ages, by the trump of fame, by the true narration of Historians, and approved
in public Elogies by all her precedent Bishops. This Lion can hardly endure to
have that glory eclipsed, which was always the food of his generous thoughts:
And it seems very strange to us, that Venice having rescued a fugitive Pope,
and placed him in his lost Chair, with the expense of so much Venetian gold
and blood, the memory of this high desert should be now thrust out of Rome. Yet
the Republic being very unwilling that any incongruity should arise 'twixt
her, and the Roman Church, consented that the Crown of France should be umpire
of the difference. But Urban the eight, since he diffreth so much from Peter,
will not confess when he denies the truth; Per le voci del Gallo. But
persevering in an obstinat opinion, not to restore the Elogy, is contented by a
foolish Capricio of his own, to usurp this glorious attestation for the Church,
that she was ever served by Princes of al sorts: So that ancient inscription
which was seen registered in the Vatican, as a Monument of Ecclesiastical
gratitude toward Venice, that which time it self could not deface all this
while, the Barberini have annihilated at last, because peradventure that having
banished all virtue from Rome, it displeases them to see gratitude lodged
under the roof of their House: Or rather, because the Barberini do not hold
themselv's beholden for those services, that the Church received from St. Mark,
because they are more her Betrayers, then Governors. In the interim, we cannot
but be sensible of this ingratitude; yet we comfort our selves, to see, that
the Popes disaffection has no means to do us any hurt, that is able to extend
it self further then the walls of his own House.

SECT. X.
Saint Paul being departed from Venice, resolves to go toward the State of the
Church, and so embarques for Ancona. In his Voyage he is accompanied with a
subject of the Church, who after a long absence returned to see his Parents,
Saint Paul asking him of his being, and the cause of his so long exile,
declared his miseries in this manner:

I Was born a subject under the State of the Church, and that is enough, O good
Friar, to pronounce me unhappy. The Civil Government administered in my Country
by Ecclesiastics, the Authority abused by them that govern, and custom
degenerating daily into cruelty and rapine, have made the subjection
insupportable, and the lives of those most miserable, who live under the
temporal Scepter of the Roman Ecclesiastics. My voice cannot sufficiently,
expres the corruption of their government. Let every one comprehend by the
Tyranny they do exercise abroad, what they do at home. I was enforced to
forsake my House for a Tax imposed upon me for living well. This Tax is a new
way of confiscating for every light occasion. When a rich young man is
discovered by greennes of age, and heat of blood, to be prone to any lightness;
presently comes a new Edict, which will make him lie under a gross sum of
money. Herby it comes often to pass, that a small fillip does, equal murder,
and words are as dangerous as deeds: For all comes under the title of
transgression, though the fault be oftentimes be no otherwise than a slip of
youthful lightness. Furthermore, the Ministers which govern our State of Rome,
under color of zeal to our salvation, are wont to send often certain
Catchpols, to search mean blind places and Cottages, to see whether any subject
cohabit with a Concubin: Every thing lies under the curiosity of the prowling
eyes, and insolent hands of these Ragamuffins I will say no more then this, that
under the dominion of other Princes, the Jews are more gently used, then we are
under the regiment of Ecclesiastics. Nor is it a wonder for some
Ecclesiastics of our times, are happily greater enemies to the Gospel of Christ,
then some Christians are to the Talmud of the Hebrews.

SECT. XI.
The Ship that carried Saint Paul toward Ancona, happens by distress of
weather, and contrary winds, to be beaten upon the Coasts of Dalmatia, and
striking into Ragusi, Saint Paul meets there with a Maronit Passenger, who some
few weeks before had come from Rome, Saint Paul begins to mingle speech with
him, and asks him of his Country, and the motives that induced him to come to
Italy, and what opinion he had formed within himself of Rome, whereunto he thus
answers:

MY Country is Armenia, and my Religion is the Christian; the cause which
brought me to Italy, was no other then a desire to learn the true Tenets of
that Catholic Doctrine, which in our Regions is adulterated with such a
multiplicity of Sects, that they confound one another.

The eleventh year is now come almost about, that I have breathed under the
Climes of Europe, and I sojourned most in Rome, being led thither by Fame,
which sometimes uses to represent things otherwise than they are in their own
Essence. I imagined within my self that City to be she, who as she pretends, so
she had deserved, to be the head of all Christian people, as being the school
of sanctity, and pattern of all innocence. And truly at first sight, I thought
I was not awhit deceived by any extern appearance, which oftentimes does dazzle
and inchant the eyes of the simple. The magnificence of her Temples, the grea*
number of pardons, such a confluence of people flocking to Church, and to the
visit of holy places imprinted within me such an opinion of the Roman piety;
that when afterward, I fell to observe the lives and luxury of the Cardinals
(little compatible with the Doctrine of Christ) I ascribed the cause of my
mistake rather to mine own ignorance, than to want of Religion in others. But
when I seriously descended into my self, I thought I was not born sencele.
Process of time, and mature reflections made me discern afterward, that the
Roman Religion consisted most in Ceremonies of exterior worship, which were it
properly defined, might be called, a kind of practice of life in the smaller
sort, and an hypocrisy in the greater: For the rest, every action being
judiciously examined, you will find it tending to objects of private interest,
and temporal benefit. Profit and delight are the two Poles, whereon the
Firmament of Roman designs does wheel about. If Christ and his Law be embraced,
it is not embraced for the true final end, but as means to compass some
terrene business, which transformed me to wonder, while I observed, how much
Christ was vilified amongst the Romans, considering how much he serves their
turn for the increase of their temporal interests. You shall find all vices
reduced in this City, as to their proper center, and which is worse, blanched
over with specious titles of Holiness. Their pomp appears under the name of
Church - decorum, their ambition under the title of Majesty, their tyranny
under the semblance of zeal: Nay, most scandalous lusts are brought into the
Houses of the greater sort, under the mantle of spiritual recreations.

Adulation has founded here her Palace, for you shall hear it preached most
impudently, that the Pope cannot err, notwithstanding, that his actions are
the very topps of error. Tell me, O reverend Friar, if the Pope cannot err,
wherefore are there Decrees and Ordinances of Councels instituted? 'Twere enough
for every one to be regulated by his will only, without importuning any Synod,
or attending any rules from the universal consent of Christianity. But to
unbowell unto you my true meaning, I hold that the Ecclesiastics now that they
see, they cannot fit the customs of the Pope to the Laws, they procure to fit
the Laws to his Customs. God furgive them, who somenting a Parasiticall
Doctrine, introduce so many abuses to Gods House, so frontles and void of shame;
These being dandled with ambition, have transported Saint Peter's Seat from
caves, to thrones of gold. These being carried away with avarice, do declare
this magnificence to be necessary for the dignity of the Church, together with
those worldly dominions, so expressly forbidden by Christ. Poor Church, to what
a case art thou reduced! The time was, when the Clergy were reverenced for the
sanctity of their lives. for the profoundnes of their learning, for the fame of
their miracles. Now they raise to themselves respect by worldly rule and
greatness, for nothing else makes the^ to be reverenced in these days. But to
compass this mundangrandeur, which is founded most commonly upon the basis of
gold, what unlawful path is not trodden? what iniquity is not praetis'd? The
Law of Christ being turned by the ministry of the Romans; to be a Law of ruin
and rapine. There is no action exercised in the Roman Church, but you shall find
it conjoined with the interests of earthly emolument. O how deplorable are
these times, were they paralelled with those of the Ancients, yea, when the
world was deprived of Evangelicall Light. Then, amongst the Pagans, if an
Alexander rise up, who with an immense kind of cupidity snatched at every thing,
Nature who is a friend to Counterpoises, created a Pholosopher, who glorying in
his poverty, contemned the possession of all mundan greatness. But now amongst
the Christians, if a Pope starts up, which with insatiable appetit goes about
to grapple all, we do not find that virtue has that force as to dispose any
Ecclesiastic, to show a counter example of that poverty which is commanded him
by Heaven. Good Friar, if you have ever been in the dominions of the Church,
you will be astonished at such abominations, wherewith the worship of God is
daily profaned.

Moreover, you shall hear nothing else preached in the Pulpits but Paradoxes,
the delight, not the utility of souls being the scope of their matter; And so
the ears being tickled with this Doctrine, the collections use to be greater,
which under the name of alms is afterward drawn from the hands of the
Auditors. But their sacrilegious greedines stops not here, you shall often see
many lame miracles published for gain: You shall often see a number of those
inspired Fathers use certain acts of conjuraration, rather, to drain money out
of the purse, then to cast Devils out of the body: You shall see sometimes many
neglected Images, making themselves miraculous upon a sudden, to enrich the
Ecclesiastic Possessors, deluding by this trick the simplicity of those who
hold, that the virtue of doing miracles being lost in men, is retired now into
Statues and Pictures. In sum, the abuses are so many which are introduced by
the avarice, and rapacity of the Romans, that I prognosticat, that that
appearance of Religion will be quite extinguished ere it be long, and faith it
self also as much as remains; for I have observed, that Christ did not live
long upon Earth, when he was put between thieves. There is an opinion that is
current amongst some Theologues, that when the Host begins to moulder, the
divine presence departs immediately from the Eucharist: Now, if Christ cannot
stay, no not the least moment in corrupted bread, how shall we think he can
abide to stay amongst a corrupt people? Friend, if your salvation be dear to
you, turn face about, and never go to Rome; cast your self rather upon the
remotest shoares of India, whither they say all virtue and Religion is retired,
perhaps to be the further off distant from the Roman vices. One cannot sojourn
in this City, without endangering the Christian faith. Take example by me, who
being come from amongst the Mahumetans, to learn how to lead the life of a
Catholic, do now go away hence with strange kind of confused imperfect
thoughts to turn Turk.

SECT. XII.
The Sea being calmed, Saint Paul makes sail, and arrives at Ancona, whence he
goes to Loretto, and while he passed in a Friars weed hard by a Village, he was
earnestly called in to confess a Cardinal that was a dying: He goes in, and
hears the confession he made expressed in the words following:

FAther, I feel the pangs of death come upon me, God summons me to satisfy the
debt of human frailty. My soul finding her self in these extremes, trembles to
appear before the face of God, in regard she is so full of mundane spots. It is
your function, to help me to wash them off, while these eyes of mine shall
aford you tears, and this panting spirit, though struggling with the assaults of
death, shall endeavor to declare unto you in short periods the sum total of
all my offenses passed.

Know then, that I was born to a poor fortune, but Nature, who has also her
portion of goods in this World to dispense among Mortals, was pleased to endow
this body with such Prerogatives, that my parents might well formalize some
hopes within themselves of my greater advancement at Rome. Being grown up to
twelve years, devoting my self not to God, but to ambition, they clothed me
with the habit of an Ecclesiastic, and to stablish the foundation of their
hopes the better, they applied me to the service of a Cardinal: Where the end
is crooked, the means tending to that end, can hardly prosper. Hence comes it
to pass, that now adays in Rome, to arrive to the pervers ends of their
designs, they do not use for means, learning and virtue, the effects of a true
heavenly vocation; but courtship and flattery, which are the base parts of that
interest, that has an eye always to the worldly advantage of ones self. I
applied my particular study to be a proficient in the garb and fashions of the
Court, which is no other thing, then to devote ones person to any pleasure of
the great ones. He who confesses, must conceal nothing, but be pleased, O
Father, to comprehend in your imagination all wherein an engaged, and well
respected youth may sin, and suppose it in me, and so my feeble tongue shall be
exempted from the labor of long narrations. Only this I tell you, that I knew
how to gain the entire affection of the Prelat, my Protector, and he for my
sake was not ill looked upon at Court. Pensions did reign upon my person, which
made me wonder at that which the Ancients write, that Jove should metamorphose
himself into a shower of gold only for Danae, when he converts himself so, more
often for Ganimeds. This my youthful age was free from those passions, which
use ordinarily to transport the minds of young men, viz. to love women: I do
not deny to have tried it, and I suddenly left it off, it seeming to me very
strange, that I should pray, who was used to be prayed unto; but I continued
not long in that state* my humor altered with my age, then I entangled my self
in feminine love, and in a short space I tried what was adultery, fornication,
and incest: In the mean time, I arrived to that age which is capable of
Priesthood, then taking Orders* I lived awhile retired within my self, being
persuaded to a moderation of life, by that Synderesis, that touch of
conscience, which comes sometimes by nature, and teaches some sort of respect
to be had to such a Sacrament: But at the end, too much familiarity turned to
contempt; for whereas at first, I began to sin with some scruple, those scruples
quickly flew away from my conscience, And so I came to such a reprobat sense,
that fornication, rebellion of the heart, and and celebrating of the Mass, was
in my person but the act of one hour. Father, 'twas no Sacrament, 'twas a
Devil that then entered into my soul, when I took the character of a Priest: It
was an infernal spirit that persuaded me not to fear that Christ which was
daily to pass through my hands: I found my self immediately disposed to every
wickedness: And whereas at first, no other affection molested me, but that of
lust, me thought, that all vices assayl'd me in a moment: Nor is it to be
wondered at; for if Judas found himself disposed to betray Christ after he had
taken the sop unworthily, though but once, much more must it be supposed, that
those impious Priests must be inclinable to all motion of prophanenes, who
every day receive the sacramentated Redeemer, peradventure more unworthily than
Judas: And covetousnes came to be my inseparable companions, fomented chiesly
by occasion of that command and authority I began to get in the state of the
Church; where while I exercised the office of a Shepherd, I learned quickly the
art to shear my sheep close: All that belonged to the subject, was created, me
thought, by nature for the service of my affections; my favors were still
exposed to the highest offerer; nor did I ever refuse a present from any hand;
I did wonder at the custom of the Priests of the old Testament, which rejected
many oblations, as unworthy for the saciifice, and so concluded within my self,
that because the times and laws were altered, the Priests of the new Testament
ought to receive any thing offered them. But this was the least; for if the
Parishioner did not do it voluntarily, I found ways to snatch it from them.

I remember, that amongst other passages, taking occasion once to visit a
Gentleman, who was within the compass of my jurisdiction, I observed in his
house some pictures of good value, and giving him an inkling of my desire, he
with many humble complements answered, that he would be very unwilling to
dispossess himself of them; I kept this denial in my breast, and having
traced a way, by means of the holy Inquisition, to clap him in prison, he
presented unto me those Pictures, that he might only be removed to a gentler
jail; and afterward, for his full liberty, he was forced to suffer the better
part of his Estate to be confiscated. But, feariug that by his appeal to Rome,
this act of mine might be too narrowly winnow'd, and so I might run a hazard of
the precipitation of my fortunes not yet so firmly grounded, to secure my self
from after-claps, I called him to me, and rebuking him for his coorse carriage
toward me at first, it made me, by right of that incumbency I held over him,
to reform all misdemeanors, to teach him how to comply with Church-Governors
for the future. In fine, for the reparation of his losses passed, I made him a
friendly promise, to point him out a way how he might be made capable to wear
an Ecclesiastic habit, and so ascend to the dignity of a Prelat; for they
under the Roman State, amongst the multitudes of their miseries, have no other
comfort but this, that they may easily arrive to such a condition as may enable
them to revenge upon some others the wrongs they receive themselves.

By these means I knew how to feather my nest so well, that I returned
afterward to Rome, to live in the luster of a conspicuous Prelat, by
introducing into my house the wonted pomp and exces of the old Romans* I
paralleled any other in ornament of rich hangings, of magnificent Coaches, in
number of Grooms and Laquays, and specially, in multitude of Courtiers, and
gelded Musicians; The greatness of Rome being ambitious to show her self
barbarous, yea, in the pomp of Eunuchs. Eleven youths did undergo the martyrdom
of Origin, of purpose to devote themselves to the luxury of my pleasures: Poor
boys, by what a strange effect does the lusts of others make you chaste! While
I did lead this splendid life, the Cardinal, my Protector, came to the
Popedom. By this exaltation, my hopes soared very high, nor did there much time
pass, when I saw my person, being a creature of the Popes, advanced to the
dignity of the Hat; so I mounted to the degree of Cardinal, wherein I stand now.
Now if my voice had strength to unmask every particular thing, you would be
struck with amazement, to discover a life so impious in the persons of them who
glory in the title of Christ's Disciples. I Will tell you in a word, that from the
time I obtained the Cardinalship, I never kept Lent, I never recited my howrs,
I never confessed to God, but now, in these extreme agonies of my sickness: Such
being the custom almost of all Cardinals, who finding themselves in a posture
to aspire to the keys of Heaven, do think perchance to be able one day to find
a way to enter there, without any necessity of good works. But woe is me, I
perceive now to have deviated from the way of Heaven; I discern too well by the
light of divine grace (which knows not by what exces of mercy may please to
save me for all this) that to lead an Ecclesiastical life, as is now
accustomed, is nothing at all to live like a Christian: But if Pagans, yea
Atheists perceiving their own errors, have hopes to be saved, why should I
despair? This is the only argument of my hopes, although I think the salvation
of an Infidel more easy, then that of a perverse Christian; because my soul
finds at this very moment, that the understanding is more easily illuminated,
then the will humbled and rectified, being too tenacious of her delights in
those pleasures, which she must now relinquish with the Hat,

But Father, my spirit fayles me, give me an absolution, for I feel my self
upon point of expiring.

SECT. XIII.
Saint Paul having comforted the dying Cardinal* goes to Loretto, where he is
detained some days by the rain, there he falls into the friendship of a
Minister of Savoy, who returned from Rome, with a dispensation obtained for a
marriage 'twixt the Prince Cardinal Maurice, and the Princess his Nee^^, and
being questioned about it, he makes that following relation:

THere are not many years, that the Houseof Savoy has complied according to
the custom of Princes, with the ambition of the Court of Rome, by receiving a
Cardinals Hat in the person of Prince Maurice, not by way of vocation, that he
should have this for an Ecclesiastical life, but to secure the posterity of
the elder brother, from all aspirings, and (...)* jealousies and dangers. This
Prince then did frame his Customs suitable to the life that he had proposed to
himself, and to shun the better the troubles of those warlike spirits, which
use to be naturally of his race, he resolved to retire himself to Rome,
esteeming this City the rendevouz of repose, and center of tranquillity, for
all Churchmen. Poor Prince, he was herein mightily deceived, for he was put to
suffer such terms of incivillity from the indiscretions of the Barberini, that
oftentimes he repented to have underlaid the decorum of his nativity, to the
handling of persons so meanly born. The ill satisfaction which he received
happened every day, so that one time breathing out his passions unto me, he said
thus: I cannot but blame the Roman Church, because she uses to confer the
Papacy most commonly upon men, that for the obscurity of their birth, cannot
adapt themselves to treat with Princes: Whereunto I answered, you cannot blame
the Church, while she follows the institutions of Christ, who conferred the
ministry of the Apostleship upon people of the meanest rank: But they rather
are to be blamed, who with the ministry of the Apostleship, receive no more
that holy Spirit, which at other times did sanctify and indoctrinat poor
Fishermen in the art of catching the benevolence of Princes, and the
affections of whole entire Provinces. So I answered. But the distasts of this
Prince required further satisfaction; A fancy took him at last to return to
Savoy, where being come, he found the Court so rent into faction, by the
domestic grudges betwixt the brother Tomaso, the Cousin Mother, and the Tutres
of the pupil Duke, that he concluded within himself, that some Princes may be
born never to find peace. He was constrained, not being able to stand neutrall,
to declare himself for the Brothers side, whereupon he obtained the government
of the most important County of Nizza.

Many accidents well known to the world fell out since, from the disunion of
this Cosins blood, the interesses of two Crowns, now in Enmity interposing,
when the Stars changing their Aspects, turned discord into love, and hatred
into union. Some sparks of amorous complacency began to kindle in the breast of
the Prince Cardinal toward the tender person of his Niece; And he was
solicited so far, that at last he resolved to renounce the Hatt, to get her for
his Spouse; Nor did the regards of affinity of blood, or of disparity of years
oppose this resolution; because as the one was held feasible in Rome, though
with some expense: so the other did not fall under any consideration amongst
them, who with the eye of prudence and policy foresee the benefit which will
arise out of this marriage, to settle the peace of Savoy. Matters then being
brought to such terms, I, an ancient servant of the House, was employed to
Rome, as a Messenger of the Renunciation, and a procurer of the Dispensation,
which having obtained with more facility, and less charge then I could expect,
I determined at my return, to pass by this holy place, to give Heaven thanks
for the successful issue of my negotiation, and for the consolation which I
reap by the peace of others. But me thinks, O Reverend Father; to see you
listen to this story with too austere a look, as if you judged it strange for a
Cardinal of the holy Church to renounce the Hat, to marry with his own Niece.
Father, excuse me, if you were versed in the practices of Rome, you would thank
the divine providence, and ascribe to an effect transcending human virtue, that
that Cardinals Hat did not infuse into Prince Maurice his head worse affections
than these.

SECT. XIV.
Saint Paul directs his course from Loretto to Rome: In his lodging by the way,
he over-hears two persons reasoning one with the other, in this manner:

FRiend, you afflict your self too much for the prohibition which was lately
made of your Books in Rome, if laying aside the heat of passion, you will lend
your ears to my words, I shall perchance make you know, that, as the times are,
a more desiderable fortnne could not befall the pains of your pen, nor a
greater glory to the sweat of your wit.

The title of prohibition, considered in it is own essence, is not as every one
imagines, either shameful or infamous; for were it so, the Tree of Life which
was prohibited to our first Parents, and the Terrestrial Paradise which was
prohibited to all mankind, should partake of the infamy and shame; As also the
holy scripture vulgariz'd, which is prohibited to the simple, and certain
relics which are prohibited to all profane hands. In sum, all those things
which are prohibited, either by nature, or by the Law, to our appetit or
desires, should be infamous: He is deceived who breaths with such an opinion;
for prohibition of it self can bring with it, neither honor nor dishonor; but
he that considers this point seriously, will find that it is not the
prohibition, but the cause of it that renders a man glorious or infamous;
therefore it behooves you to know why the Court of Rome has prohibited your
Books, and then to frame a judgment, whither such a prohibition may bring you,
in the opinion of men of sound understanding, either discredit, or a good name,
and so either affliction, or contentment.

The causes have bin diverse, why Rome has accustomed from time to time to
prohibit Books; The most ancient causes were, a zeal to preserve the purity of
Religion, and a care that the lives of Christians should not be corrupted with
those Doctrins, that an ill Author may suggest: The modern causes are, an
aversion that some great ones have, that their vices should be reprehended, and
exposed to public censure. He that first left the ancient use of the Cane, to
bring in the quill, did, in my judgment mysteriously allude, that as it is
natural to the quill to fly freely up and down; so the conceits that go along
with it, should partake of the same liberty. That quill which falls upon the
dunghill of some base respect, falls from it is own natural prerogative; Nor can
that Author be ever famous, who with an opinion enslaved to the sense of
another, discovers himself to have servile intellectuals. But tell me Rome, if
an Author be a liar, what greater infamy and punishment can befall him, then
that his lies be published to the world: If he write Truth, why should that
Truth be kept from the eyes of the people? We read that Christ did open the
eyes of the blind; but we do not read, that he ever made any body blind to
bring him to Heaven. But shall I tell you my opinion, the Ecclesiastics have
wished all men blind, since their vices have grown so visible.

SECT. XV.
Saint Paul arrives at Rome, at the gates whereof he meets with an Angel
standing very melancholy, and he was the guardian Angel of Urban the eight, he
makes himself known to the Angel, and expostulates with him, why he had
abandoned the care of the Popes person, whereunto the Angel makes this answer:

I Stand here, O holy Paul, to guard the gates of this City, because it is not
in my power any longer to preserve the soul of Urban: It is impossible to
bridle his Capricio's, nor can any Angelical strength do it; I having tried
all means imaginable to reduce him to the way of reason, but all in vain; I
will not expose to scorn any longer the divine inspirations, so I intend to
take my flight to Heaven, to give God an exact account of the deviations of
this soul, to supplicat afterward his divine benignity, that he will be
pleased to disburden me of the weight of so heavy a charge, which has in a
manner perturb'd the whole peace of my Angelical state. It is a great happiness
for holy Paul to be made an Angel; but he that knew, how heavy the Ministry of
garding human souls, wherein we Angels are employed, falls out sometimes,
specially when we encounter refractory humors in a soul, as in that of Urban
the eight, he would peradventure esteem the happiness of man to be more, who
having traveled but one age only in this lower world, goes afterward to
enjoy, without any disturbance, the repose of Heaven. Nor do I repine at the
state of others; but you well know, that he must needs be somewhat moved, who
sees he cannot serve his own Lord in such a manner as he desires. You who have
had the incumbency to instruct people, and convert whole Nations, know it by
experience, how uncoth it is, to observe the humors of men. And now that you
have understood the grounds of my grievances, tell me freely whither I complain
without cause, for perchance God has sent you hither, either to correct me, or
comfort me.

The twentieth year runs now, that Urban the eight holds the Papacy, whence
one may easily calculat how few years of his life are left behind, if it be
true what is commonly spoken, that no Pope shall see the days of Peter. But I,
if I may unfold my own thoughts, do believe, that he who spoke those words,
seemed to prophecye, that none shall see the Church of God in that state of
Christian perfection, as it was in the days of Peter: But be it as it will, the
more years come on, the faster every man runs headlong to that pit, which is
the center where all Mortals terminat their course, being drawn down by the
weight of that earth whereof humanity is composed. Most commonly old men, when
they come to such a period of years, use to check within themselves those
spirits which in their youth were used to lash out into a thousand inordinat
passions, endeavoring, being now as it were abandoned of the world, to acquire
unto themselves by means of a true repentance some sort of shelter in the
Sanctuary of divine grace, which at all times is ready to receive those that
are forlorn. Be astonished, O holy Paul! Urban the eight the older he grows,
the more loose he leaves the reins to his own senses, and the nearer he
approaches to death, the further he is from good operations: He excessively
loves the pleasure of his nephews, nor does he operat any thing, but what aims
at their interests. He never reflects upon the incumbency of his charge, and if
at any time some flying thought represents unto him his own duty, he discerns
well, that a kind of relation passes 'twixt the Papacy, and his person; but he
flattereth himself with this fond conceit, that the Papacy is more bound to
serve his person, than his person the Papacy. He detests in the extreme the
memory of his excesses, the most effectual means that the garding Angels use
to tame the proudest souls. He will not as much as think on death, or if
sometimes he is brought to think on it, by converting the physic into poison, he
applies his cogitation presently, in ruminating how he may aggrandize his House
before lie goes. If I should tell you how often I found him chymerising within
himself, how he might make it possible to render the Popedom Electif, and to
depend no more upon the Consistory, but solely upon the person regnant, that he
might establish it in his posterity, you would be amazed at those extravagant
imaginations, that often possess the mind, even of the Vicar of Christ. But
would God were pleased, that such wishes did terminat altogether in the vanity
of the design. They end commonly in more practicable resolutions, to drain the
patrimony of Saint Peter, for to enrich their own Houses with the spoils of
the holy Church. But the avidity of Urban stops not here. He little esteems the
millions of gold purloyn'd from the Altar, to leave his Nephews the possession
of an independent principallity, where they may lay up the unsecured Trophyes of
their own rapines. There was was ever yet in the world a greater number of
those, who wish to be Princes, then Principalities themselves. Hence it comes,
that to purchase these from the tenacious hands of others, there must be force
necessarily used, because hardly any reasons can be found which may persuade
the mind of man to lay down voluntarily the right of a free dominion, which
makes Urban the eight, being transported by his passions, to machinat violent
means for to invest his Nephews in another Princes Estate.

I could tell you some further designs and fury of his. He accounts often upon
the Kingdom of Naples, but he finds the Enterprise to be fuller of desire,
than hopes: He thinks upon the Duchy of Milan, lending his ear unto the
glosing offers of some Minister of a Tramontane Crown; but he dares not trust
to that, for if others should intervene, he cannot leave all to the Barberini.
He fixes his eyes upon Lucca, but perceiving it a petty State, he doubts
whether the benefit will countervaile the charge. He has a months mind to
Mirandola, but being feuditary to the Empire, and a place that breeds some
jealousy 'twixt the neighboring Princes, he is afraid to draw Germany or
Lombardy on his back; Lastly, he turns his eyes to Parma, and this enterprise
being made less difficult by the advantage of some pretenses, he purposes to
deprive the poor Duke (beginning with Castro) of all his possessions. I put him
in mind how much it did misbecome Bishops, and other Prelates of the holy
Church, who make profession of a life diffring from swordmen, to change the
Crosier into Musket-rests, Rockets into Corslets, and their Myters to murrions.
I put before his eyes, the scandal that would redound to all Christendom
thereby, the scorn that Infidels would couceive of it, and the danger the Church
would incur, foretold by our Savior, who positively warns, That every
Kingdom divided in it self bath it is dissolution near at band: But it is to
beat the air, to tell Urban of all this, which has every thing for his aim,
but the indemnity of the Church. Finding that these arguments were of little
force, I applied unto him the spur of nature, alleging, that the events of
war were dubious and dangerous, to raise in him thereby some apprehensions of
fear, which commonly takes place in old men's breasts: But nature could
prevail little, reason less, and the inspiration of an Angel nothing at all
over the hair-brained humors of Urban.

He that now enters Rome, sees a Pope turned Armiger, now in his decrepit
times, one that takes up arms then, when he should meditat how to lay down his
life to nature; And which his worse, he thinks all this to be according to the
dictamen of reason, so that Urban the eight never does that which he believes,
but believes in that which he does, insomuch that at the same time, when he
tears Italy to pieces, and snatcheth the State of another, he publishes his
actions to be right, his intentions holy, and that all tends to the service of
God, and the object of good, as if the formality of good in his Idea, were
different from that, it is in the opinion of all other men. But I omit many
Extravagances wherewith this capricious soul has abused my last patience. Once
he settled a resolution within himself, not to give any satisfaction at all to
the Princes of Christendom, notwithstanding, that I often put him in mind,
that this was the basis whereon was founded the conservation of the Christian
obedience. Another time he resolved to creat no more Cardinals, it may be to
merit the more of the Church of God, by abolishing so perverse a generation;
but he repented himself afterward of this, for no other reason, but because I
opposed him in this resolution. If a tutelar Angel can suffer greater
contempts, tell me, O thou Apostle of God.

I find that the reputation of Angelical custody, is too much engaged in
continuing to stand about him thus. Therefore in despair of his amendment, I
have given over all care of his person, that I should not delay my return to
Heaven.

SECT. XVI.
Saint Paul having understood the complaints of the Tutelar Angel of Urban the
eight, enters Rome, where he attends the perfecting of the Process, but an
accident befell him, which enforced him to fly, as he was going along, another
Angel comes in his way, whom he encounters with these expressions:

YOu come, O heavenly Messenger, peradventure to charge me from his divine
Majesty, that I should avoid Rome. Behold, how I have left her already before
your coming; for divine inspirations fore-run the very flight of Angels. But
now that I am come out of Rome, let us repose awhile, and I will relate unto
you the unexpected cause of my hasty departure.

You know already, O Angel of God, that I was sent from Heaven to Earth to
hear the complaints of Mortals, and to form a Process against this adulterous
and naughty Spouse. I lighted to this purpose in many places, where having fully
understood by all degrees of people her dissolut deportments, to confirm with
my own eyes what came from other tongues, I resolved at last to come to the
City of Rome it self. I passed too and fro at first in the froc of a Friar;
There, as I went through a little blind Hamlet, I was called in to confess a
dying Cardinal; which gave me warning, that the habit descrying me to be a
religious person, it was likely, that entering so to Rome, I might (according to
the custom) be questioned for the Patent of my Orders, or the license of my
superiors; I herupon, to evade the telling of any lie, held it expedient to lay
down the Froc, and take my sword. So I came into Rome, intending to lodge in
some Convent of Friars, who being used to thrust themselves into worldly
affairs, more than the Seculars themselves, I thought I could there very
leisurely have a free and exact information of all things, specially, because
the freedom of speech is retired now into Cloisters for more security, in
regard of the extreme rigor which is used to punish those who speak any thing
against the Court. The Monastery where I was lodged, was famous for the study of
Letters, and so it was frequented by many learned men; (But the greatest
concourse was of strangers, who so abound in Rome of all Nations) where desiring
to know what conceit Forreners had of that Church, I disputed often upon some
points of Religion. There happened to come thither a Turk, rather to hear, as I
imagine, the noise of the disputation, and see fashions, then to inform his
judgment; so I asked him his opinion of Christian Religion, whereunto beyond all
expectation, he answered thus:

Amongst the Turks it is held for certain, that God does favor those people
most, where he is truly adored, so, from the prosperity of the Turkish Empire,
we infer, that our faith is good, and the observance of it not displeasing to
God. Touching the Christian Religion, we have an opinion, that she was not
naught, until she was adulterated, and made naught by Christians themselves.
But in the state she is now in in this City, we believe her to be abominable to
God Almighty, specially, since we see that of late years she goes
annichilating, and mouldring away by little and little, by her own inward and
endless discords. Such was the conclusion of the Turk, which made me, I
confess, to marvel not a little, while I observed, that even those who
profess not much knowledge, can deduce from far fetched Principles,
consequences so near the truth. Having had his opinion, I went on in making a
further scrutiny, and I fell to expostulat with a Greek, who was usd to repair
to Rome for the opportunity of studying in Clementin College, who answered to
my interrogatories thus:

The Roman and Greek Churches are Sisters issued from one Father: But the Greek
is the first born, and I know not by what wiles the Roman came to take away her
birthright. For this cause they live in most grievous disgusts one with the
other: But the one enjoyes the possession of all her paternall goods, whereas
the other lives as Esau did; excluded, and under the dominion of another.
Touching the particular customs of the Roman Church, I say nothing; for he that
censures her in this City, shows he knows not his own danger, and he who
approves her carriage, understands not the Law of Christ. With such words the
Greek satisfied my demands. As touching the opportunity which was offered me,
to mingle speech with a Frenchman upon the same subject, I understood his
conceit thus:

The name of the Roman Church is reverenced by a great part of the Kingdom of
France; but the wisdom of our Governors has never permitted the Pope to
extend that excess of pre-dominion beyond the Alps, which he does exercise in
Italy, for our policy is supported by particular Gallican Rites: And the reason
is, because the French being naturally impatient, and now that almost half
France (to withdraw it self from under the Roman yoke) is infected with
Heresy, certainly if the Pope should exercise upon the consciences of that
spritfull people the tyranny he does exercise in Italy, the rest of that great
Kingdom would fall from him quite. Such were the expressions of the Frenchman,
which did stir in me a curiosity by way of opposition, to hear what the
Spaniard would say. Nor was it difficult for me to obtain my desire, by meeting
with a Nobleman of Sevill, who frequenting the same Convent, I entered into his
friendship, and he rendered me satisfied by such discourse.

Friend, to serve you, I will speak, beyond my custom of this Nation, with all
ingenuity of heart: The reverence which the Spaniards do profess to the Roman
Church, may be considered in two manners, inward and outward. If you ask me of
the inward reverence, suppose it to be not unlike that of other people, who
have full knowledge of her customs; (The Spaniards being of a genius apt to
esteem things as they are in value) But if you ask me of the outward reverence,
know, that the Spanish Nation in extern appearance show themselves very
observant of the Roman Church, because, that having found her always most
partial to the interests of their Crowns, they hold themselves obliged by
terms of gratitude to correspond with her at least in outward observance. My
King knows well how available for the depressing of the suspected greatness of
his Subjects has bin the pretext of the holy Inquisition: He lives mindful of
that promptitude showed in the Court of Rome, to deny an absolution to the
House of Borbon, until he had conformed it self to the Austrian satisfaction;
And lastly, he knows how much to this very hour, the pragmaticall Jesuits have
served him to dilate in every part, with their own advantage, the bounds of the
Castilian Empire; So that in contemplation of all these respects, the Spaniards
hold themselves obliged to reverence the Roman Church, in exterior appearance
at least, though she were far worse then she is.

Here the Spaniard did terminat his period, while my diligence, which desisted
not to procure all punctual advertisements, brought me to discourse with an
Englishman, who gave this modest answer:

Sir, I am declared an Enemy of the Roman Church, therefore my words, I presume,
can gain no credit with you, but if you desire to know what respects this
Church finds Northward, read our Doctors, and perchance your curiosity will be
fully satisfied.

Thus, O Angel of God, I endeavored in Rome to bring to perfection the process
which was committed ^o my charge against the adultresse Spouse; And passing one
morning by a Church, where they were casting out a Devil, I went in, because of
the noise, and then the ill spirit knew my person, and began to cry out, here is
Saint Paul, here is Saint Paul; Truly, he is come in an ill time from Heaven, to
view the state of that Church for which he shed so much sweat: Good Saint, what
motives brought him to this lower world? Was it to see how his labors
fructified? Ah, the pure grains of that Doctrine which his Eloquence sowed in
the Vineyard of the Lord, are turned to tares, and become food for ravenous
birds, such as these are, who stand about me now, to disconjure me with their
hideous noise. Upon this cry, the Priests began to fix their looks upon me,
whereupon, fearing to be discovered, I softly retired; but the words took such
impressions in the mind of the Exorcist, that he did conjure the spirit by
violent threats to manifest who I was, who, not being able to resist the
violence, confessed I was Saint Paul, who by resumption of humane shape (he
knew not why) wandered now upon earth. The Priest had no sooner knowledge hereof,
but he presently found means to give notice to the Pope; A little after, my
lodging being found out by Spies (whereof the^ are a multitude in Rome) I
suddenly perceived a Courtier making toward me, and breaking into these words:
O holy Paul, in the name of Urban the eight, I come to do you reverence; He is
well informed of the condition of your being here; He earnestly desires that
you would please to favor his House with your presence, for he is ambitious to
have a stranger of so high a quality for his guest. The Courtier, O Angel of
God, spoke to me thus in very proper phrase; for in these times, Saints use to
be called Strangers in the State Ecclesiastic; whither I was astonished or no,
to see my self thus surpised and discovered, judge you; I thanked his
Beatitude in the best manner I could, for his courteous offer, and excused my
self not to be able to receive that honor, in regard I was of necessity to
depart from Rome within a few hours; when I had dis-intangled my self thus
from the Courtier, I called my thoughts to counsel, and feeling, that my heart
did presage me some sinister accident, I resolved upon flight; And I was gone
but few paces further, when the same Courtier came again, and told me, thus:
Urban the eight does remand me to you, O holy Paul, to second his first
invitation, but if in case you are resolved not to grace his Palace with your
presence, I have order to propose another request to you: In your Epistles we
read, O Apostle of God, certain passages which manifestly contradict the humors
of our holy Father, Urban the eight, he prays you to mend them, because it is
not fitting that Paul should gainsay the will of Peter's Successor; And if you
desire to know which are those passages, one amongst the rest is, that, Let
every soul be subject to the higher powers. Urban the eight would, that from
this so universal a proposition, the souls of Popes should be exempted; He
thinking it not fitting, that the Popes should be subordinat to any other Law,
but that of their own affections and fancy, for so their actions should not be
censured by every sensles man, as they are ever and anon now adays: His Holiness
also much desires, that these words be utterly expunged, which assigning to
every Bishop in his own incumbencies, do speak in particular. Diaconos habeant
non turpe lucrum facientes, Let them have Deacons not given to base lucre.
These periods displease in a high measure Urban the eight, for he of necessity
must have about him his Nephew-Cardinals. Here the Courtier stopped, when I
poor Paul fell to discourse with my self thus: See, thou art in danger to be
entrapp'd, notwithstanding that thou have been confirmed in the state of grace,
but what could be expected less in Rome? perceiving at last that he attended
no answer, I put my self to reason with him thus: O Papal Messenger, the
business which you propound to me, is of no light moment; for he who is tender
of his own repute, cannot be easily induced to un-say himself: You know that my
Doctrine has run through the world till this day without alteration, Now what
will people say to see it now differ from times passed! And who will not
persuade himself, that the alteration proceeds rather from the malignity of
some convicted Heretic, than from Paul's pen. Moreover, to what purpose will it
be to vary Apostolical Doctrins, when the Popes, without any regard to them,
do operat still according to their own fancies? But now, that his beatitude
does desire this superfluous alteration, I will not fail to serve him in the
best manner that God shall inspire me. The Courtier departed with this answer,
which he took for a promise; but I, to reserve my self to execute what God had
enjoined me, did immediately fly away from Rome, being warned from Heaven so to
do. I was scarce out of the City, when I remembered to have left my sword
behind, and being in suspense with my self, whether I should return to fetch it
or no, I spy coming after me, one who was also a Forrener in the same Convent
where I had lodged, and often showed me arguments of love, who coming near me,
cried out, friend, be gone, be gone, I come after you of purpose to tell you,
that you were scarce gone, but another Courtier came to seek you, and being
informed of your flight, he carried news thereof to the Pope, and a little
after the Pope himself came to your lodging, who finding not your person, took
away your sword, saying in a kind of choler, that if Paul's pen refuse to serve
me, his sword shall. This sword shall force Princes to bend and bow at my feet;
This, this shall conserve Castro, subdue Parma, and show the world that there is
no necessity of reason, where the edge of a slashing sword can make way.

Giving a thousand thanks to my friend, who knew not what Paul, nor what sword
the Pope spoke of, I took my leave of him, and continued my flight, being
troubled in my thoughts, that my arms should be left in such a hand, which
imployes them to the service of such tyrannical affections to the universal
scandal of Christianity. Nor knew I well what resolution to take.

If it were possible, O Angel of God, to bend him to the voice of the
Almighty, I could wish you to go and inspire him to peace: But Urban has too
too refractory a soul; therefore I hold it more expedient, that you would please
to employ your inspirations amongst the Princes of Italy, to incite them to
take out of his hand these arms, which were taken from me without reason, and
are now drawn out against them without justice. To this end I have framed a
Letter, addressed to the Italian Princes, whereunto I held it not much necessary
to affixe my name* because it is known already I am on Earth, and it is of this
tenor.

Saint Paul to the Christian PRINCES.
URban the eight, O Princes, transported with the violence of an injust wrath,
took possession of my sword, of purpose to make use of it against the quietness
of your States: If you will not resolve to take it out of his hand, I do exhort
you in the name of the Divine Majesty to do it, because it is not fit, that
that that blade which is designed for the conversion of Infidels, should be
stained in your blood; Nor let that idle scruple amuse you, that he is your
Shepherd, for the true Shepherds do guide their flocks with gentle wands, not
with weapons. Remember, that Isaak suffered himself to be slain by the hands of
of his Father, to be sacrificed to GOD, not to the fury and passions of his
Father. And Saint Peter left a Fishers knife behind him, to be used against
Fish, which are not creatures of our Element, to intimat to the Church, that if
at any time she takes up arms, she must employ them against Infidels, which
living out of her fold, may be called animals of another Element. Encourage your
selves therefore by this counsel of mine, neither think ye the design
difficult; for although Urban seem furious, yet he that is not habituated to
handle weapons, may easily let loose his hold. God inspire your hearts, and
prosper your resolutions.

This is the tenor, O Angel of God, of this Letter, which I beseech you to
carry (with your inspirations) to the hearts of Christian Princes. I, in the
interim, before I return to Heaven, must go and visit Jerusalem, to kiss again
that place, where the very inanimat stones being more grateful then men, keep
yet fresh the memory of divine mercy.

SECT. XVII.
The Angel readily offers to do Saint Paul's will, but first he relates to him
what he overheard in a Parlatory of Nuns, whither out of curiosity he betook
himself

I Shall obey, O holy Paul, your instructions, and will instantly carry your
Letter consigned to the Princes, inspiring them for the recovery of your sword
from Vrbans hand: But be pleased to hear what I lately understood in a
Parlatory of Nuns; for perchance it will not be impertinent for you to annex
this to your process, expressing the grievances of the unhappiest creatures,
living under Christ's Law.

You know already, O Apostle of God, that I am of those Angels, which never
descended before to Earth, and if in strange Countries the curious mind of the
Passenger desires to satisfy it self, I confess that amongst other things which
I desired to see, one was a Monastery of Nuns, who were so much spoken of in
Heaven, that I took them to be Angels on Earth. Being come therefore to one of
the prime Cities of Italy,, I took the form of a strange youth, and entered at
the privatest hour I could into a Monachall Parlatory. I found at the windows
a young Nun, which had no other business it seems, but to attend the coming of
some body. I was scarce spyed by her, when she asked me an account of my
Country, and what fancy took me to traverse the world up and down in that
manner, I, bethinking my self of Heaven, answered, my Country, most gentle
Sister, is too far distant from this place, and whereunto few of this Region
arrive Touching the fancy that leads me thus to traverse up and down the world,
it is no other, then a curiosity, which often draws youthful lightness to
neglect their own profit, and to regard others. Foolish youthfulnes, which
can not learn how to value thy Countries good but afar off; then I added,
happy are they, who never departing from within the Paradise of these holy
walls, seem as so many Angels always appearing before the face of God. She
being as full of spirit as she was, of beauty, answered thus:

O how many os us would willingly change our Paradise for your Peregrination,
wherefore then do you complain so causlesly of your Travels? which being no
other then the motions of a civil life, it cannot choose but be so much the
sweeter to elevated minds, by how much the higher the motions of their souls
are: Behold the Sun, behold the Planets, which never staying still in one
place, delight to be continual Travelers in the Universe. I being much taken
with the vivacity of her spirit, replied:

It is true Lady, that the Sun and the Planets are in a kind of continual
peregrination; but there are in Heaven fixed Stars also, which, because happily
they are more noble, are superior to the other, and consequently nearer to the
Throne of the Almighty. Those Nuns then, who to serve God are always permanent
in one place, like the fixed Stars, may more then any other Mortals, comfort
themselves with an assurance that they are nearer God. The beautuous maiden
sighed at these words, and then answered:

God, I deny not, dwells nearer to the fixed Stars, but not to desperate souls;
And now you discover your self to be a true stranger, that you are not
acquainted with our miserable condition. The cruelty of our parents, and the
rigor of our destiny has penned us in here for ever; the Church of Rome
concurring herunto by admitting any pretext whatsoever, bear with me Sir, that
I speak thus. It is a hard fate to be borne to a perpetual prison, while it is
seen, that all other living creatures have the whole world to solace themselves
in; And that prison, which it seems the very Infants do fly from, when they
sally out of their mothers wombs, before they have as it were any sense of
life, we are constrained to endure, after that nature has given-us the perfect
use of sense, and life, and the knowledge of our own miseries; the destiny of
that Mortal must needs be a hard one, who is born to live in restles
infelicity. This Cloister, which surrounds our liberty, is not as you imagine,
a Paradise; for in Paradise there dwells no coffeehouse; It is rather a Hell,
where in the flames of inextinguishible desire, the natural affections of our
humanity are condemned to be tortured every minute. I will not stand to
express the cause why our Parents are so inhumanly cruel unto us, for it is
too well known, that for to spare that dowry which is due to our sex, they
condemn us 'twixt these walls, to be deprived for ever of any worldly delight,
for no other cause, but because we are borne women. Yet you must know, that the
shutting us thus by force between these stones, cannot deprive us of those
carnal affections, which may well be covered, but not quenched in that
religious habit which you see about us; Nor can this kind of life conduce to
Heaven, considering there is no concurrence of the will, which is so acceptable
to the all-knowing Lord. We are rather destinated to an Abisse, by a course
clean contrary to our genius, being bereft also of that common privilege,
which other souls use to have to go to Hell what way they please. In ancient
times it was the custom to slay the Victimes first, and then sacrifice them to
good, because happily the principal Seat of the corporeal affections lying in
the blood, 'twas not held convenient to offer his divine Majesty any Holocaust,
which was not first purged by effusion of that blood from all earthly passions;
But this is not observed in us by our Parents, who do make sacrifices of us,
with all our blood and passions about us* then how can we believe that it is
grateful to God? and being not grateful to him, consider in what a despair
our souls are plunged in, which see themselves shut out of the world here,
without any assurance to enter Heaven herafter, in regard we have not power to
extinguish our natural affections, and so are in danger to precipitat our
selves headlong into Hell, through a kind of supposed innocence, If Christ died
to reduce us to such a hard condition, O how better were it for us that he had
not died. Be not offended, O stranger, at these words, for the toungs of the
damned can bring forth nothing but blasphemies: Yet we know that Christ has no
hand in this our hard condition, for* his death had for it is principal object
the freedom and enlargement of souls, not their captivity. The Popes are most
in fault, by yielding to the cruel covetousnes of our Parents, to transvert
the keys of Paradise iuto the keys of a prison. It was not Christ, no, it was
the impiety of Herod, that, by reason of the humanation of our Savior caused
so many Innocents to be slain. Behold, we are in a case equal to theirs,
because we being yet innocent children, under a mark of holiness, we are
segregated and cut off from the society of the living, there being no difference
'twixt us and them, but that they died before burial, and we are buried before
death. Nor can our innocence, or our fears prevail any thing; nor are those
privileges sufficient, which nature has granted these faces of ours (for
which peradventure you styled us Angels) to implore from others piety any
succor, having found the Church of Rome so ungrateful, while we consider that
the time was when Saint Peter was freed by an Angel out of prison; but now
clean contrary Angels are cast into prison by the Successors of Saint Peter.

But whither does the violence of a just passion transport me thus to rave?
Helas, the name of Angels does not suit with our condition, and less with our
operations: For although we are brought Innocents hither, yet we cannot
preserve our selves long in this Monastic life from the motions of desperate
passions; The Religion which clapped us in here is not adored, but detested by
some of us; vanity and feminine wantonness is here in the height; Here dwells
curiosity in exces, and desire of knowledge in worldly matters without end;
Ambition, envy, discord, and hatred, is never wanting amongst us: Lastly, here is
observed neither constitution, Law, or vow, but out of pure necessity, and
unavoydable violence. But what shall I say of that maiden chastity for the
conservation whereof we are principally penned in here? I leave that for you to
imagine, it being not permitted to femal modesty to make any further
expressions in this kind; I only tell you this, that we procure all means
possible to outrage and abuse it, and not without reason, for if this chastity
has bin the principal thing that has retrenched our Liberties in this
manner, we ought to aim and bend our chiefest forces to be revenged of our
chiefest Enemy. And here this beautuous Nun blushed, and broke the thread of
her discourse.

I confssse unto you, O holy Paul, that if I had a breast capable of terrene
affections, I would doubtless have tenderly resented the misery of this
discontented soul; but compassion is vain, where there is no power to comfort;
therefore I held it expedient to take my leave, that I might not imbitter her
passions any further; so at my departure I said, when I came in hither, O most
beautuous Nuns, I looked upon you as on so many Seraphims; but hearing the
state of your hard condition, I find you to be the unhappiest creatures that
live under the Law of Christ. Were it permitted me to help you, I promise you I
would batter down these walls, and give you that liberty which others take from
you; but since it is not lawful for any to do so, comfort your selves at least,
that Heaven is reserved for your suffrances. And although you protest not to
suffer for Christ; yet Christ is so merciful, that he can give beatitudes to
those Cyreneans, who carry his Cross, though forced thereunto: And I dare
assure you, that if you cannot gain Heaven as Virgins, you shall gain it at
least as Martyrs.

SECT. XVIII.
Paul being arrived in Messina, does imbark himself for Jerusalem, in the mean
time the Angel carries the Letter to the Princes, and so takes his flight to
Heaven, where having received new Orders, he descends in Jerusalem, and
retrieves Saint Paul, to whom with the divine Commission, he declares the
affairs of Italy in this manner:

I Return, O holy Paul, from the execution of your Commands, I come to give
your curiosity an account of the Estate of Italy, and to your desires, an
information of the divine will.

Know then, that I did invisibly represent to the hearts of Christian Princes
the contents of your Letters, and I found them so disposed to take your sword
from the hand of Urban the eight, their eyes being opened to foresee their own
danger, that I had more need to advise them of the means, than excite them to
the enterprise. The Pontificiall Army did display their Colors already upon
the Frontiers of Modena, and imperiously demanded passage, to go on to the
ruin of Parma, when the demand was understood by the confining Princes, upon a
sudden, the spirit of a sleeping resentment was seen to stir. Flying Couriers
did immediately fly up and down, and upon a sudden, as it were in a moment, a
league was miraculously concluded against the insolent pretenses of the Pope:
Now let every one know the difference 'twixt the present army of the Church,
and the ancient Army of the people of Israel; for at the marching of the one,
the Sea it self divided to let it pass, but at the marching of this, all the
world seemed to close together to hinder the passage. Don Tadeo, one of the
Popes Nephews, had the supreme direction of this Church-Army, but with martial
dignity there joins not always that generosity which arises from birth, or
experience. Don Tadeo, that was not used to other atchievments than to those of
Castro, wherein he had no opposition, when he heard the report of this League,
he turned his back, whereby he discovered the nature of a thief, rather than of
a soldier.

In the interim, the Duke of Parma could not contain the vigor of his innated
hereditary courage, within such short and narrow bounds; but he unites his
Cavalry, and puts spurs to his horse, and so enters like a whirlwind into the
Papal Territories, in scorn of the Barberini, and so on toward the walls of
Rome.

The generous Prince expected, that either Front or Rere on the Enemies side
would have appeared, but at his voice all vanished as it were; Nor could the
Inhabitants of the State Ecclesiastic imagine what became of their militia,
nor the militia what became of Don Tadeo, nor Don Tadeo what became of his
heart, or whither it was fled, when God wrought a kind of miracle: For the
Duke, who a little before found himself at the last period of an irreparable
ruin, enters triumphantly with three thousand Horse only into the Enemies
Country; He encamped the first night not far frm Urban Fort, which
questionles, had it been capable of motion, had followed Don Tadeo when he
fled; but because of it is natural immobility, it could not stir an inch from
it is own trenches, therefore it stood quiet, and without the least noise, for
fear the Duke should over-hear, nor was any soul seen to peep out all the
while.

From the felicity of this beginning, the spirit of the Duke being heightened,
he resolved to push on to the very walls of Rome, to present to the Pope the
crying offspring of his immoderat passions, all Forts and Towns at the Dukes
approach did open their gates to receive him, ratther for a Father then a Foe;
And alalthough the Country could not choose but be damnified by the march of
such a tumultuary unfurnished Army; yet the vassals of the Ecclesiastic state
are accustomed to such hard usage from their own Governors, that the damages
which the hostile Troops did them seemed but light; The Duke with unexpected
fortune advances toward Rome where he found nothing but fear and confusion; I
want words to set down the strange effects that the tidings of his approach did
produce.

Questionles, the Castle of St Angelo had not bin capacious enough to hold all
those that ran into it, unles the hearts of the fugitives had bin much lessened
and shrunk. The Pope, and the chiefest of Rome, began for more security, to
stowe into the said Castle their tresure, and all their costly movables,
adorning, as one may say, that Capitol, with the triumphs of their cowardice,
where valor was used to hang up the Trophyes of her victories. In fine, a just
sword is formidable, what hand soever does weld it. That Rome, which in ages
passed could look Hannibal, and the Gauls in the face, does now fall into a
shaking palsy at the approach of three thousand Horse only, which came to
vindicat the affronts done to the Farneses. In this confusion, there was not one
that would offer to propose the facing of the Enemy, every one was so busy to
stand upon his guard; Every gate seemed a Diocese, each having some Bishop
appointed to keep it. And such was the timorousnes of the Romans, that finding
themselves not able to secure their City with walls, and bastions, they went to
do it with Breviaries, for all preparations raised and regulated with fear, do
terminat in acts of simple defense. Now what would Christ have said? who told
his Disciples, O you of little Faith, why have you doubted? rebuking the
weakness of their Faith, and consequently of their fear, when the boat was
tossed with waves, and upon point of sinking. In such a confusion Rome was
involved at this time, and tidings thereof coming to Hell, the chiefest
Cacodaemons began to sit in Council, and one amongst the rest smoked out this
following speech: Brethren, the state of the Roman Hierarchy is now in apparent
danger, it is not fitting we should suffer a friends Kingdom to perish, for
thereby there would follow some reformation in Christianity, which would hinder
the peopling of this Kingdom; Therefore we must lend our wonted help and
Counsels, since that the pusillanimity of Urban can do little good: At these
words there starts out a Demon, that was most practiced in policy amongst them
all, and offering to support the common cause, he took a flight to Earth, and
came invisibly to the soul of Urban, who was in extreme anguish, and used this
speech:

Urban, what do do thou? behold thy temporal dominion is tumbling down,
thy mundane greatness is upon point of extinguishing, what do thou pawse upon?
fear cannot repair thy losses, nor thy squandred and baffled squadrons thy
honor, it is needful to have recourse to craft. Empires use to be conserved by
the same artifices they are got. Treat of an accommodation, propose hostages,
and promise restitution, In the mean time the Dukes forces may waste, break thy
word, what matters it? it will not be the first time; Thou art a Pope, And so
can dispense with Oaths, as thou shall think most convenient.

This parley the Demon held with Urban, who immediately followed his counsel. In
fine, Hell oftentimes executes that which Heaven determines, but for differing
ends.

The Princes of the League might in this confusion, and tremblings of Rome,
have seized upon the whole State Ecclesiastic. The Duke of Modena might have
gained the City of Ferrara, to which he has so just pretensions. The Duke of
Florence might have made himself Master of the Duchy of Vrbino, the Fees thereof
appertaining to his House by dotall right. The Republic of Venice might have
vindicated those outrages which have bin so often offered her upon her
confines. Lastly, those colleagu'd Princes might have redeemed from Papal
tyranny the unhappy vassals throughout all the Roman dominion.

Now the omnipotent Majesty says, since these Princes cannot husband the
opportunity which Heaven offreth them, I decree for the punishment of their
irresolution, that the settling of peace be prolonged, and that in the interim,
Urban have means by a new breach of faith to work upon their credulity. So the
counsels of Hell joining with the Decrees of Heaven, Urban the eight, by the
mediation of Cardinal Spada (sword) found a way to spin out the business at
length, and to amuse the Duque, till his Troops (which could not be idle) being
diminished by these dead delays, he was enforced to abandon the enterprise,
having reaped no other fruit by this march, but the glory to have displayed his
colors almost in the face of Rome.

In this case I left the affairs of Italy, when to stay no longer on Earth, I
re ascended to Heaven, whither I came in a fit conjuncture of time, for amongst
those bliss'full spirits it was discoursed, that a proposition was made in
Rome, to lay hands upon Sixtus his Tomb, every one concluding, that these
garboiles would much redound to the expense of the Church, and consequently, to
the exhasting of Peter's patrimony. And Saint Peter concurring in the same
opinion with the rest, went one day before the Lord with his hand upon his
cheek, crying out, oh Sir, The Barberini who have unsheathed the Ecclesiastic
sword, in lieu of hurting the Enemy, have hit me upon this ear, whereunto the
Lord said, that he understood well what he alluded unto: The time was, that
Peter with the arms of the Church cut off Malchus his ear, and now it is not
to be wondered at, if to fulfill the Law of retaliation, the Barberini with the
same arms, cut off a member of Saint Peter's; this being said, the Lord turned
toward me, and commanding me to him, said, I intend now to come to the
expedition of the Spouse, therefore go and retrieve Paul, and tell him from me,
that he consigne the Process to you, which he has already framed, which you
shall cause to be published, that in case she will defend her self, she may
produce her proofs; Let Paul in the interim continue his sojourne on Earth, and
make an inquisition upon all cloistered Regulars, that when the Divorce is
granted, the world may know who are spurious, and who are my true and legitimat
children.

(...).
A CAVEAT TO THE Knowing Reader.
EVery Language has certain Idiomes, Proverbs, and peculiar expressions of
it is own, which are not rendible in any other; therefore he over-acts the office
of an Interpreter, who does servilize himself too strictly to words and
phrases. I have heard of an excess amongst Limmers, called, Too much to the
life, when one aims at similitude, more then skill. So in version of Languages
one may be so over-punctuall in words, that he may mar the matter; The
greatest fidelity that can be in a Translator, is to keep entire the true
genuine sense and design the Author drives at; And this was the thing chiefly
observed in this version.

Moreover, think it not strange, that there are some Italian words made free
denizons of England in this Discourse, for by such means our Language has grown
to be so copious, and grows every day more rich, by adopting, or natularizing
rather the choicest foreign words of other Nations, as a Nosegay is used to be
made out of a tuff of flowers, gathered from diverse beds and banks.

I. H.

FINIS.

