Chiliasto-mastix. Or, THE PROPHECIES IN THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT CONCERNING
THE KINGDOM OF OUR SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, Vindicated from the
misinterpretationes of the Millenaries and specially of Mr. Maton in his book
called Isreal's redemption,

By ALEXANDER PETRIE Minister of the Scots Kirk at Roterdame.

The epistle shows the ground and pedigree of the mistake. To show the
original of an error is a convincing of it. AT ROTERDAME, Printed by Isaak
VVaesbergen, at the sign of Fame on the Steiger, 1644.

To the VVorthie and his beloved, the Scotes and Englishes of the Scots
congregation at Roterdame; AlexanderPetrie wishes constancy in the faith
which was once delivered.
SOme prophecies speak plainly of CHRIST, and can not be understood of another;
Esa. 9.6. Unto us a child is borne, unto us a sone is given, -- his name shall be
called Wonderful, etc. Some ar typical or delivered with coveres of things
signifying Christ, his offices and benefits. And of these some ar spoken of
the type or thing signifying, and can be understood only of the thing
signified, and some ar true both of the type and of Christ either in the same or
in a different manner, that is, some ar true of both in a proper sense; some ar
true of both in a tropical or figurative sense; and some ar true of the one
properly, and of the other figuratively. All these sorts ar manifest in
sundry prophecies: here I touch one for all. 2 Samuel 7.12. When thy days be
fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers, (says the Lord unto David) I
will set up thy seed after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowelles, and I
will establish his kingdom. This was true in the person of Solomon and of
Christ too properly. V. 13, He shall build an house for my name. This was true
of Solomon in the proper acceptance of the word house, and figuratively of
Christ, who said Mat. 16.18, Upon this rock will I build my Church. It
follows; I will establish the throne of his kingdom for ever. This was not
true of Solomon in respect of his person (for he died) nether of his
posterity, from whom Jacob had foretold that the scepter should depart at the
coming of Shiloh Genesis 49.10, but of Christ it is true: for his throne is
established for ever and ever Heb. 1.8. v. 14. I will be his father, and he
shall be my sone. This is true of Solomon in respect of adoption, and of Christ
in respect of eternal generation. Fifthly it is said there; If he commite
iniquity, I will chasten him with the rode of man -- but my mercy shall not
depart from him, as I took it from Saul. This is true of Solomon, and not of
Christ (who was free of sin) unless we underst and his members, or their sines
imputed unto him. V. 16, Thy house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever. This can not be understood
of David or Solomon's house or kingdom (as experience proves now for the space
of 1600 years and more) but of Christ's house and kingdom, which shall never
fail. By this one passage it is manifest, 1. how miserable ignorance it is, to
expone all the prophecies after one and the same manner or in a proper sense
only; 2. that the Evangelists and Apostles exponing these prophecies in a
spiritual and figurative sense, do not wreste them, even albeit these have
been fulfilled some way before; but according to the intendment of the Spirit
they bring them unto CHRIST, who is the end of the law and scope of the
Prophets. So the promises of deliverance from Babel hade their own
accomplishment in the days of Ezra and Nehemia: but that was not all the
meaning of these prophecies, which were in another manner and more fully
performed by Christ: for this cause it is said Col. 1.12, Giving thanks unto
the Father, who hes made us meet to be partarkers of the inheritance of the
Saints in licht, who hes delivered us from the power of darkness, and hes
translated us into the kingdom of his dear Sone, in whom we have redemption
through his blood: and Rev. 5.9. thou have redeemed us unto God by thy blood
out of every kindred and people and natione. There is our Redeemer more
glorious than Ezra or any other: there is our inheritance and kingdom better
than Jerusalem: and there is a redemption from all nationes. Now when these
prophecies ar fulfilled once in respect of the type, and again in a more
transcendente manner by Christ; If we deny what God hes done, we are false and
ungrate: and if we expect them to be fulfilled yet again in the type, it were a
worse returning than that of the Galatianes c. 4.9: that was unto the types of
his priestly, and this unto the types of his kingly office:) and Christ is
become of none effect unto such. The elect Jews did not rest upon the Mosaical
types, but all the Prophets gave witness unto Christ, that through his name
whoseever believes in him shall receive remission of fines Act. 10.43. they
believed that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ they should be saved
even as we, Act. 15.11: in this faith they all died, Heb. 11.13, I say, This
faith, because as faith is one in respect of the object, Ephesians. 4.5, so the
Apostle declares our faith by the exemple of the antientes. Neither did they
rest on the promises as only earthly, but they desired a better country, that
is heavenly, Heb. 11.16: and when they were tortured, they would not accept
deliverance from their torments, that they micht obtain a better resurrection
v. 35. Was that an earthly hope? no: they believed the redemption of their
souls by the Messiah Psalm. 34.22; that he was to be wounded for their
transgressiones, and bruised for their iniquities, and the chastisement of
their peace was to be upon Him, and that they were to be healed by His stripes,
Esa. 53.5. And Symeon waiting for the consolation of Israel, when he saw Him,
blessed God, and said, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace -- for my eyes
have seenethy salvation, Luke 2.29. He craves not longer life to reign with
Christ on earth, but was content to depart, having seen the salvation of God,
the licht of the gentiles and glory of Israel. And nevertheless many Jews
sought richteousnesse by the works of the Law, and not by faith, Romans 9.32,
and they looked upon the promises with a bodily ey only, as if the Messiah were
to erect an earthly Monarchy at Jerusalem: and looking through these spectacles
they could not think that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, and so they stumbled at
his worldly baseness, and being miscarried in their brains they could not see
His spiritual power and benefits. After their miserable exemple others
acknowledging Jesus Christ to be the promised Messiah, and not considering the
difference of the promises have not attained fully unto the truth of them, and
so have erred in mistaking His natures and benefits. Thus Ebion thought him to
be a man and not God, as if all the promises could been performed by a man
endowed with singular grace. Cerinthus lykwise held that Christ is only a man,
and because he saw Him not sitting on the throne of David, he held that Christ
is not risen from the dead as yet, but shall rise and reign in Jerusalem 1000
years, and all His subjectes shall be satisfied with all manner of pleasures in
meat, drink, marriage, festival days, and offer oblationes and sacrifices,
Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 25. Upon this occasion the Apostle John wrote the gospel
again, and more largely than any other of the Evangelists speaks of Christ's
Godheid, his wonderful works, his kingdom, resurrection and his coming
again, especial that the Sone of man is now glorified c. 16.33. that he hes
overcome the world c. 16.33. that his kingdom is not of this world, and if his
kingdom were of this world, his servantes would feight that he should not be
delivered unto the Jews, but now is his kingdom not from hence c. 18.36: and
of the condition of his subjectes he says, Remember the word that I said unto
you, the servant is not greater than the Lord: if they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute you c. 15.20: Verily I say unto you, Ye shall weep
and lament, and the world shall rejoice, and you shall be sorrowful, but your
sorrow shall be turned into joy: these things have I spoken unto you, that in
me ye micht have peace i^ ^he world you shall have tribulation, but be of
good cheer c. 16.20.33: And of his coming again he says, In my Fathers house
ar many mansiones -- if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again,
and receive you unto myself, that were I am, there you may be also c. 14,2: now
you have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and
your joy no man takes from you c. 16.22. All which words were written flatly
aganst the errores of Cerinthus, and teach us that Christ's kingdom is not an
earthly kingdom, nor delayed for one or two 1000 years, but now is his
kingdom, now he hes overcome the world, his subjectes are not to live on earth
without persecution and sorrow, and when he comes again, he will receive them
with him into his Fathers mansiones, and their sorrow shall be turned into joy,
that shall never be taken from them. After Cerinthus we read nixt of Papias, of
whom Eusebius. lib. cit. c. 39, writes thus; He reports strange parables of our
Savior, mixed with fabulous doctrine, where he dreameth, that the kingdom of
Christ shall corporally here on earth last the space of 1000 years after the
resurrection of the dead: which error (as I suppose) grew heerof, in that he
received not richtly the true and mystical meaning of the Apostles, nether
deeply weyed the things delivered of them by familiar exemples: for he was a
man of small judgment, as by his books plainly appears: yet heerby he gave
unto diverse Ecclesiastical persons occasion of error, who respected his
antiquity, namely unto Irenaens and others, if there be any found lyk minded.
Then lib. 7, c. 22 and 23, he writes of Nepos, Coracion and others in Egypt
infected with this error about the year 250: whom Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria did convince in a synod by Demonstrationes and doctrine of the holy
Scripture, and did reclame them from their error. Thus he speaks ever of
these opiniones as of erroures contrary unto the holy Scriptures. After
Lactantius (who lived about the year 320) this error was univer sally
abhorred, so that Hierome on Esa. l. 18, and Augustine ad Quodvultd haeres. 8,
write of it as a damned error, and we read of few or none in this opinion till
in this last age it comes apace with the Anabaptists and some English
Novatoures: few write aganst it, because the arguments ar so silly and
ridiculous, that every understanding person reading them, finds not only the
weakness of the grounds, but even out of them do gather pregnant arguments
in the contrary. Albeit these Authors do aggrie in the time and place of
this imagined Monarchy, yet they write one aganst another in many
circumstances thereof, as is marked hereafter. They speak not now of feasts and
sacrifices, as Cerinthus did but if they will mantaine this opinion, I see not
how they can e: ject them, seeing the Prophets speak als expressly of them,
asof Christ's kingdom, Jer. 33.17, Thus says the Lord, David shall never want
a man to site upon the throne of the house of Israel, nether shall the priests
the Levives want a man before me to offer burnt-offeringes, and to kindle
meat-offringes, and to do sacrifice continowally. See v. 21.22. Zech.
14.16.21. But that these and such other textes should be exponed spiritually,
it is plain by Mal. 1.11: where incense and offeringes are not restrained unto
the Jews at Jerusalem, but made commune unto the gentiles every where: and
more plainly in the New Testament. If the Millenaries will ex pone with us
these textes of spiritual sacrifices, they can not show any probable reasoun,
why the prophecies concerning Christ's kingdom should not lykwise be exponed
spiritually. And Hierome in Esa. 65, lib. 18 says, If we grant these words to
be exponed carnally, let them hear the lyk promises made unto Sodom as unto
Jerusalem Ezekiel. 16.53. When I shall bring again their captivity, the
captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her
daughters, then shall I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst
of them --: when thy sister Sodom and her daughters shall return -- then thou
and thy daughters shall return. Wherefore (says Jerome) these houses [mentioned
Esa. 65.21] must be understood virtues, or the diverse mansiones beside the
Father -- and of such houses our Savior speaks Mat. 7.24, I will liken him to
a wise man, who buildes his ho^ ^n a rock. And the Apostle says 2 Cor. 5.1,
we have a building (...) house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
Because we (...) heaven in such manner as it is, it pleases (...) our
affectiones by similitudes of things (...) teach us faith by sensible things:
and therefore we (...) on these borrowed words, but know that the thing desc^
goes beyond the earthly similitude. I know, some Milleraries will take it
hardly, that they are called the offspring of Cerinthus, seeing they differ from
him in sundry particulares; and some say, It Is no matter, who hes said it
before, whither Cerinthus or Swenkfeld, if it be true. I answer, Scarcely any
heretic did ever renew an old heresy in all the particulares; and
nevertheless it is truly called the same heresy: and we call them so, no
more than they be such: And when any opinion hes no other father nor abetoures,
but heretics, it is odious. By this historical narration, Beloved in the Lord,
you may see that this doctrine is no new licht reveled in this last age (as you
have heard some teach) but an old Jewish fancy and Cerinthian fable: old
erroures ar like old whoores, that is, the more to be abhorred. What I have
done here, is for your good, for 1 you have heard this error preached in stead
of the doctrine of Christ (albeit it was first broached by the enemies of
Christ) by some of the Authoures of the Apologeticall narration for
Independencie, who hade in their congregation not only Millenaries, but gross
Anabaptists: and so their practice manifestly declares what they write
obscurely in that Narration page 12, saying, We took measure of no man's
holiness by his opinion, whither adverse unto us, etc. Towit, whatsoever
Noveller is welcome unto them. Their Dinah is libertie-of-co^science: their
grand ammunition is anarchie or no-discipline; and they call it a bondage to be
tied in the faith. 2. the book of M. Maton called Isreal's redemption, hes been
often put into your hands, and upon several occasiones of my declaring the
truth in this point, you have been entreated to put that book into my hand:
wherefore you had need of an antidote. Peruse this plain refutation of it:
whereby (I hope) you shall see, that the reward of your serving Christ is not
meat that perishes, but everlafting life, which the Sone of man shall give unto
you, Joh. 6.27, and that the kingdom of God comes not with observation [or
wordly respect and attendance] but behold! the kingdom of God is within you,
Luke 17.20; and as the wicked can not have hope of long immunitie from just
punishment of their bodies and souls in hell, so our deliverance from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the childeren of God,
shall not be long delayed. Walk you therefore in holiness with sincerity and
cheerfulness, as it becomes the heirs of so great salvation, and give all
diligence to make your calling and election sure: for so an entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly, not into an earthly Monarchy, but the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

Auguste 1. 1644.
THE PROMISES OF CHRIST'S KINGDOM cleared.
THat Christ is already come as a Prophet -- is the faith of the Christianes,
and the infidelity of the Jews: bot that he shall come as a King to reign on
earth, and restore again the Monarchy of Israel, is the faith of the Jews,
and infidelity of Christianes. Ans. 1. What new spirit is this? whither be
such persons Jews or Christianes? they oppose themselves unto all Jews and
Christianes. 2. Whither do they understand the differences twixt Jews and
Christianes? It was never yet heard, that the Jews do believe, that Christ
Jesus shall come as a King: they said, away with him; we will not have him to
reign over us. They say, that the Messiah shall come, bot they speak not of
his coming twyce or thrice? look all the Jewish Rabbis, and ask them who ar
alive: they will say, bot once: This conceit of Christ's coming to reign on
earth, is neither Christian nor Jewish, seeing Christianes believe not such a
coming, nor do the Jews believe in Christ: and therefore it is abhorred of all
Christianes and Jews; so far ar they both from embracing it. Page 2. and yet
(with submission to impartial judgments be it spoken) I find not more voices
for the one then for the other. Ans. Who ar these impartial judgementes? on the
one side ar Christianes, and on the other ar Jews: it may be, that he
submittes unto Turks: bot the Turks believe, that Christ is come, and will
not say, that he will come again. These impartial judgementes then must be
heathenes. 2. If the Millenaries find not more voices for the one than for the
other, it is no meruell: any who hes the jaundies finds every thing yallow,
and who have an ague finds every meat and drink bitter; not that every thing
is such, bot their senses ar distempered: another who has not distempered
senses finds in the same things a diversity of color and relish. 2. Why
dout they here, whither there be more voices for the one than for the other,
seeing afterward it is said page 50, as all the Prophets speak of no thing
more so they have nothing (which can be applied to our Saviors second coming
as a confortable effect so generally foreshewne) bot this. Any who is not
distempered in brains may see the ground of this monarchy very unsure, to
wit, a mere quere: the disciples asked him, Lord will thou at this time restore
the kingdom of Israel? a querie nether affirms nor denies: and nevertheles
how great a kingdom is built on it! If they can find a surer ground, why will
they not chose it for their text? better they have not, and therefore they must
be doing with this. Page ead. The subject comprehendes in it two asertiones 1.
that the kingdom of the Jews shall be restored again unto them. 2. That our
Savior at his coming shall restore it. Ans. The querie comprehendes neither of
the two, because (as I said) it affirms nothing. And the asked matter
comprehendes them not; not the first, because it is of the kingdom of Israel,
and not of the Jews: and as all are not Israelites, who ar of Israel Romans 4.6.
so neither ar they all Israelites or the children of God who ar of Israel
according to the flesh, bot the children of the promise ar counted for the
seed: therefore the kingdom of Israel mentioned there may be another than the
kingdom of the Jews. Nether is the other assertion comprehended in the
question, because it asks not of his second or third coming, bot of nou: Will
thou nou restore the kingdom. Page 3 So evidently do these words express an
earthly kingdom (I mean a kingdom only to be held on earth) that no
expositour which I have met wit does deny it: And therefore seeing they could
not, bot embrace the sense, me thinks, they should not so rashly have
rejected the consequence. Ans. Me thinks, you speak nonsense. Many
expositoures expone these words otherwise: seek and you shall find. 2 Why may
we not think, that the Apostles meaned as Simeon did Luke 2.30.31.32. or as the
repenting thief did Luke 23.42. or as Christ did v. 43. certanly these did not
mean of an earthly monarchy: nether is there any word in this text showing
that they meand otherwise. 3. Albeit no expositour would deny, that the
Apostles did understand an earthly kingdom, yet it follows not, They thought
so, therefore it shall be so, No more than it follows, The Apostles did not (for a
time) believe the calling of the gentiles Act. 11.3. therefore the gentiles are not called. Bot the consequence hes reasounes, says he, whereof the first two
ar to pical and by way of probability page 5. When the author says, The
reasounes ar probable, and I may say, childish: will any Christian change his
faith for them? certane faith should have sure grounds, lest the wind of
tentation blow it away: and therefore I micht leave these probabilities as not
worthy of reading or answer: nevertheles consider them. Page 3 First because
the authoures of this demand were not babes either in years or understanding,
bot the Apostles themselves: men who had followed our Savior -- men to whom he
had showed himself after his passion -- and speaking to them of the things
pertaining unto the kingdom of God. And yet that these men should nou at their
last conference with him be mistaken in a matter of such importance -- is (as I
believe, and as I think, you will all say) a thing altogeder unlykly. Ans. 1.
It is unlykly they could be mistaken, and therefore it is lykly, that they
understood of the true kingdom of Israel, as Christ did. 2 And nevertheles
seeing after that last conference they were mistaken in a matter of great evidence
so many times foretold, as the calling of the gentiles; it is not unlykly that
before Christ's ascension they micht been miscarried with that opinion of the
Jewish monarchy, which was not a new opinion invented nor vented by the
Apostles. Page ead. A second reason which makes me distaste the censure here
cast on our Apostles, is because our Saviors answer is alleged as a sufficient
ground for it, whereas it will appear even to a weak judgment, by that his
answer the Apostels opinion is as much established, as their curiosity is
reprehended etc. Ans. This cause is a mistaking, as if the question were
granted: for albeit they did mean so, yet Christ's words have nothing of that
point, bot only taxes the disciples of their curiosity: and therefore the
partaphrase following in this reason is vain. Page 4. Another reason which
makes for our Apostles is the answer our Savior gave to the sons of Zebedee,
when they besought him, that they micht site one on his richt-hand, and the
other on his lest in his kingdom, or as Mark paraphraseth it, in his glory,
Ye know not what ye ask, says he: this reproof, you will grant, goes nearer
to the quick, than that before used to the Apostles; and yet if ye mark what
follows, you shall find that the matter of the petition is allowed of, and only
the motives thereof condemned -- and therefore seeing this is all, that these two
were rebooked for, by such a sharp reply, how can we mistrust, that more than
this should be included in a milder answer? Ans. These two spak of Christ's
kingdom in his glory: and therefore we may justly think, that they meaned of his
greatest glory or of his kingdom in heaven; and not of an earthly kingdom, 2
if Christ in his answer had spoken of an earthly kingdom, how was it not in
his power to choice his princes in that kingdom? and seeing they were only taxed
for their ambition and unadvisednesse concerning the glorious kingdom of
Christ, and the Apostles were taxed for their curiosity concerning the
particulare time of that kingdom, how shall we mistrust that they understood
any other kingdom. Page 5 That which seems to me clearly to quite our
Apostles from error, though not from oblivion: from error (I say) in the
subject, though not in the circumstance; in the thing demanded, though not in
the season of its performance, is, because I find my text to be a lesson read
to them by our Savior before his passion. For speaking of the destruction of
the Jews, they shall fall (said he) by the edge of the sword -- Luke 21.24.
and v. 28. having before shown what signs should immediately foregoe his
appearing, he left them this cordial, When these things begin to come to
pass, then look up and lift up your heads for your redemption draws nigh.
Behold here, the casting away of Gods people for a time, which we see at this
day verified, and their receiving again for ever, which shall all certanly come
to pass, as planely foretold, the redemption (I say) not only of their soul es
-- bot consequently of their bodies too, from their general captivity to the
repossessing of their country by a miracalous deliverance: for if no more
should be meant by the word Redemption, bot the mere conversion of the Jews in
these places where now they live, it can not be conceived why this action should
be accompanied with such wonderful tokens and perplexitit of all nationes, as
is here mentioned etc. Ans. Who being richt in his wit will learn of that one
word Redemption, that the Jews shall have an earthly kingdom over all
nationes? Our Savior is not speaking there of an earthly kingdom, nor of the
Jews conversion, bot as he speaks and expones himself v. 31. know ye that
the kingdom of God is nigh at hand and this is a matter of greater encouragement
than any eartly kingdom can be unto spiritually minded persons: and therefore
when they wrestle against the understanding of the Jews conversion in these
words, they feight against their own fancies. Now if they can not find clearer
textes in the New Te. for this earthly monarchy, every understanding
Christian will reject the misapplying of the prophets, seeing every ground of
faith is reveled more clearly in the New T. than in the old. Nevertheles let us
hear the particulare proofs. Page 6 The first is Mic. 5.13. What I pray, is
meant hereby smiting the Judge of Israel, bot the crucifying of Christ? -- and
what by until the time that she that travelleth has brought forth, bot the
whole time of the surrogated gentiles vocation? And on the margin he says for
proof; To this interpretation of the prophecy (suiting so well with our
Saviors sufferinges) the very nixt verse, which shows the place where Christ
the ruler of Israel should be borne, does to my thinking directly lead us.
Ans, To the thinking of any judicious reader the words of the same verse may
lead us unto another interpretation: for he is speaking there not of the
doings of the Jews, bot of their enemies, whom he calls daughter of troops
and he shows what these enemies shall do, they shall gather themselves in
troops and lay siedge against us (says the prophet) that is, the Jews, and
they shall smit the Judge of Israel upon the cheek: which is a proverbial
phrase, as ps. 3.8, and signifies to entreat shamefully. Now seeing the
prophet speaks thereof the enemies laying siedge against the Jews, and
smiting their Judge, these words can not be under stood of the smiting of
Christ, albeit it be true, that the jews did smit him: in the second v. he
confortes the Jews against the fear of that calamity, with a promise of a
more powerful Ruler. Then by her that travelleth v. 3. the same prophet gives
us to understand another thing, than the calling of the gentiles; c. 4.10, Be
in pain, and labor to bring forth O daughter of Sion lyk a woman in travel.
And who may not think that the same prophet repeting the same words in the
same prophecy understands the same persons? that is, the Jews and not the
gentiles, unles we understand the daughter of Sion spiritually. And therefore
this exposition not aggrieing with the text, all that follows upon it hes no
ground in this text. 3. it is said v. 3 Then the remnant of his brethren shall
return unto the children of Israel: here the children of Israel ar
distinguished from his brethren, and the brethren ar said to return: which is
a plain interpretation, that the prophet there speaks not of the Jewish
monarchy, bot that the gentiles shall adjoyne themselves unto the Church of
God, as they be called the brethren of Christ Heb. 2.11.12. Page 7. And this
the next verse does confirm, Which tells us that at the time of this
return, he (that is, the Judge of Israel before spoken of) shall stand and
feed or rule in the strenth of the Lord his God, and they that is, the Jews
shall abide: for now (that is, at this coming of our Savior) he shall be (not
as when he took our nature upon him, of no form nor comeliness, a man
despised and rejected of men -- bot he shall be) great unto the ends of the
earth, that is, over all the world etc. Ans. 1. he is the ruler of Israel,
mentioned v. 2. and not the Judge mentioned. v. 1.2. They, at not the Jews,
bot rather the brethren of whose return he spoke in the words immediately
preceding. 3 Nou signifies not the time of Christ's second coming, bot the time
of the abiding or of the Christianes constant persevering in the faith: and in
this sense is our Savior great over all the world, seeing all the gentiles
praise him, and all people do laud him, as it is written Romans 15.10.11: bot
at his second coming men shall not built a throne to him, bot he shall judge
the quick and the dead. 2 Timothy 4.1.

Page ead. Another prophecy much lyk unto this Amo. 9.8.9.10.11. Nou although
this prophecy took effect on the ten tribes at their transportation --; yet
who is able to mantain, that it was fulfilled on the other two (for not the
house of Joseph, nor the house of Judah only, bot the house of Jacob wholly, is
here spoken of: and why else is the tabernacle of David afterward expressed, as a
prime agent in the restoration, if it were not before included as a succeeding
patient in the dispersion of Israel?) who then (I say) is able to mantaine,
that this prophecy was fulfilled on Judah and Benjamin, until their overthrow
by the Roman emperout Vespasian, ever since which time they also remain
forsaken, scattered and despised captives? yea who dares affirm it, when God
hes said, that at their return from this universal captivity, he will so
plant (...) in their land, that they shall no more be pulled out of it, which
yet should not be true if it had been spoken of any deliverance before our
Saviors coming to suffer. Ans. It is alyk ground for such a kingdom: 1 how
can it be denied, that the house of Judah was destroyed, when their kings and
people were carried out of their land? 2 how can the tabernacle of David be
called a prime agent in the restoration? it is said, I will raise up the
tabernacle of David; and not, The tabernacle of David shall raise up: it is a
patient, and not an agent: and none denies that it is included in the
dispersion of Israel: and therefore that part of the prophecy was, fulfilled
even before the overthrow by the Roman Emperor, and so before that
overthrowe was it restored again, and afterward also were they scattered. Bot
that promise of restoration is not of the house of Judah, bot of the people of
Israel v. 14: and who these be, we have a sufficient interpreter Act. 11.16.
where the Apostle James expones these words of the enlarging Christ's kingdom
by the calling of the gentiles, which was begun at that time by the preaching
of the Apostle: And To. Stephanus in his notes on this text of Amos says,
Almost all the Hebrews do consent that this is meant of the time of Messiah,
and especially of the calling of the gentiles: and by bodily houses and
benefits the prophet understandes spiritual: and these who ar begotten unto
this lively hope ar kept most savely through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5:
so that the gates of hell shall not prevail against them Mat. 16.18. Whereas it
is asked, Who dares affirm it: Z^charias hes not spared to affirm it Luke
1.68, saying, Blissed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hes visited and
redeemed his people, and hes raised up an horn of salvation in the house of
David his servant as he spak by the mouth of his holy prophets etc. Dare any
Millenarie contradict this testimony? And here for understanding this and such
other prophecies I add these undouted rules 1 The land of Canaan was a type of
the kingdom of Christ: and so was Jerusalem and Sion: and because these were
types of this kingdom, so glorious things were spoken of them Ps. 46.4.5, and
48.1.2. and 87.1.2.3.5: Which textes ar more savelye understood of Christ's
kingdom than of that earthly Jerusalem and Sion: yea very hardly can they be
understood of them. 2 As the priests were types of Christ in respect of his,
priestly office, so were the kings of his kingly: and therefore as the kings were
anointed, so Christ is called David, Eze. 34.23. (which is exponed Ioh. 10.11.)
and was typifyed by Solomon Ps. 45. And he is said to site on the throne of
David, and not of Nebuchadnezar or of any other, because ^h^ir kingdoms were
cursed kingdoms, and were not established on richteousnesse and knowledge of
the true God, as David's throne was: and for this cause when he is said to site
on the throne of David, it is not to be understood that he hade or shall have
the same earthly throne of David, bot that which was typified: so Mat. 2. he is
called a Nazarite, not that he did use their rites and customs (for he drank
wine, and they did not) bot because he was typifyed by the Nazarite Samson: for
he slew more by his death than by his life, and was severed from all sin and
pollution. 3 It is usual in the Scriptures to name the type, and understand the
thing signified by the type. And therefore as it is said Heb. 8.2, Christ is a
Minister of the sanctuary and of the true Tabernacle, that is, of that which
truly was signified by the Tabernacle: so he may be said the true David, and
his throne the true throne of David, and his kingdom the true Jerusalem and the
true Sion. 4 As Christ is said to be the lamb of God slain from the beginning
of the world Revel. 13.8, not only in the decrie of God, bot by virtue and
efficacy, seeing by virtue of his blood (at that time to be shed) were Adam and
Abel reconciled unto God, and delivered from the power of Satan: So Christ's
kingdom began then: for in Christ Adam, Abel and we are one body and members
of the same kingdom, howbeit in extent and largeness it did most floorish and
appear since the incarnation, in which respect it is said to begin at or after
his incarnation. 5 The promise made to Abraham Gen, 13.16, I will make thy seed
as the dust of the earth: and c. 15.5, look toward heaven, and tell the
stars if thou be able to number them, and so shall thy seed be, These
promises (I say) are not to be understood of the children of Abraham, according
to the flesh, bot as they are exponed Romans 4.15, not of that only which is of
the law, bot of them who ar of the faith of Abraham, which is the father of us
all, as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nationes; and Gal.
3.28, there is nether Jew nor Griek, nether bond nor free, nether male nor
female, for ye ar all one in Christ lesus: and if ye be Christ's, then ar ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. And therefore the promises
made unto the children of Abraham, Isaak and Jacob are not to be restricted unto
the Jews according to the flesh, (as the Jews and Millenaries expone all
these promises) bot of the faithful. And hither belongs that distinction of
the Jews Romans 2.28, he is not a Jew, who is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh, bot he is a Jew, who is one in
wardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit. And of such
inwardly Jews must the promises be understood (at least, in part) that make
mention of Judah. And therefore it is a great mistaking of the prophecies, if we
shall still make an opposition twixt Jews and gentiles: believing gentiles ar
true Jews (as we see, they are called in the New Testament) and unbelieving
Jews ar gentiles, and so ar called Isa. 1.4. and elswher 6 All the prophecies
cannot be understood of the church on earth only, For of both togeder, or
partly of the one, and partly of the other, and partly of both: and so prudence
must be hade in the application of the promises. Yea and there is a gradual
performance of them, and the accomplishment of them is in serveral points of
time, so much as shall give content to Gods children, yet always leading to a
further and further performance. As for exemple, God showed mercy to these
Israelites when they were in captivity: he brought them home again: they were a
poor and afflicted people, and were much bettered by their bondage: there was a
degrie of performance. There was another degrie in Christ's time, when he joined
the gentiles to them, and both made one church. Bot when it is said, The
remnant shall do none iniquity, and a deceitful tongue shall not be found in
their mouth; Zeph. 3.13: These promises shall have their time, when the people
shall be more thoroughly purged: and certainly the full accomplishment shall be at
the day of judgment, and so long as we are in this life, we are under an
imperfecte and unperformed estate. 7 Here that general rule is also to be
remembered, When the words of Scripture being properly taken, teach any thing
contrary to the analogy of faith or honesty of manners, or any thing
frivolous that belongs nothing to godliness, or dissonant from the scope of
the text, or contrary unto other clear textes of the same purpose: these
words must be exponed figuratively, and a figurative sense is the literal or
primarily intended sense of these words. And contrarily unto this rule the
Jews and others expone the descriptiones and prophecies of the glory and
power of Christ and his church after an earthly manner, and so straying from the
true meaning, they transform his spiritual kingdom into an earthly and
temporary: which as it is ungodly, so it is repugnant unto Scripture
testifying plainly, that his church is all glorious within and not of this
world: and therefore these comparisones that are taken from earthly kingdoms,
must be understood figuratively and in a spiritual sense, at least it must be
diligently observed what portion of every passage is to be understood
properly, and what figuratively, seeing many times that which is spoken
figuratively, is exponed by the words preceding or following, and all
figurative speeches have some tokens of the use, unto which they are directed,
or another text may be found where the same matter is more clearly handled. These
general rules being premitted, it shall be the easier to expone all the promises
of Christ's king some: and especially that text Amo. 9.15, They shall no more be
pulled out of their land, which I have given them, says the Lord thy God. For
these words may be cleared, by the words of Iere. 4.1. If thou will put away
thy abominationes out of my sicht, then thou shall not remove. Where we have the
same promise, bot expressed with a condition: and it is usual in the Scriptures
that earthly promises ar expressed sometime with a condition, and somtymes
without it, bot always ar understood conditionally. 2 by the acceptiones of
the word land: which as it is not always exponed of the earth, so somtymes it
is put for the grave, as Job 10.21, the land of darkness and shadow of death,
and for the heaven: Ps. 27.13. I had fainted, unles I had believed to see the
Lord in the land of the living. And especially that land was a type of the
kingdom of Christ (as is said in the first rule) and of the true inheritance
of the saints, and true gift of God Deuteronomy. 4.1.38. And so whither the word land
be taken properly or typically, the promise is manifestly true both before and
after the coming of Christ to suffer, for they were brought again into their
land, and they who were brought were not pulled out of their land, and they are
planted in their true land, whence they shall no more be pulled out: and heerby
the large note on the margin of page 9 is frustrated.

Page 9. The nixt propheeie shall be that of Joel 2.28.31. and 2.14.15. Ans. The
Apostle Peter not only makes use of these words, bot expones them, and shows
the accomplishment of them in some degrie (as it is said in the sixte rule
before) for Act. 2.16. he says. This is that which was spoken by the prophet
Joel, And it shall come to pass in the last days etc. And v. 22. Ye men of
Israel hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth a man approved of God among you by
miracles, wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye
yourselves know. Inst. 1. I am not ignorant, that the darkning of the Sun and
Moon is sometimes taken allegoricalley, and by way of allusion: bot that
therefore it should be so understood here, it does not follow: for what it is
figuratively applied, it signifies the judgment it self --: bot where it is
literally used, it is put only for a sign of an eminent destruction, which
shall suddenly follow it, as the great and terrible day of he Lord shall do at
the accomplishment of this prophecy. Ans. Where the darkness of the Sun (and
so i^ may be understood of the Moon) is used properly, it is not put only for
a sign of an eminent and imminent destruction, as it is manifest Luke 23 45.
which was a testimony from heaven of Christ's innocence for conviction of the
murderers: and c. 21.25. the signs in the Sun and Moon and in the Stars,
and the distress of nationes upon the earth with perplexity, and the roaring
of the Sea and waves ar all to be understood properly as signs before the
great and terrible day of the Lord. So what is promised in the 28 and 29
verses of the second chapter of Joel, was truly (albeit not altogeder) fulfilled
in the days of Peter (even howbeit the words of the 30 and 31 verses be
properly understood) and not wholly fulfilled till the time immediately
preceding the last coming of Christ Inst. 2 The chief and most remarkable
effect of the Spirit in the Apostles at this time was the gift of tounges, of
which the prophet makes no mention. Ans. 1 If this exception were true, it would
prove, that the Apostle cites the words inpertinently, and the Jews micht
have challenged him of babbling: and so these authoures fight against the
Apostle and the Spirit of God, who hes registered this argumentation of the
Apostle, as good and valide. 2 the chieff and most remarkable work of the
Spirit at that time was a sound from heaven as of a michty rushing wind, which
filled all the house, and there appeared unto them cloven tounges lyk as of
fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all silled with the holy
Ghost: and this was noised abroad. Whereby it is evident that the Apostle
speaks especially not only of the effect (which is their speaking in strange
languages) bot of the cause, the pouring down of the Spirit, of which Joel
speaks expressly: and therefore Peter cites the words pertinently. Inst. 3 as
the prophet reveled, so (Peter) repeates this pouring out of the Spirit as a
contemporarie event with the wonders, which shall be shown in the heavens and in
the earth before the great and terrible day of the Lord come: which day can no
way be referred to the first coming of Christ, when he came to save sinners and
not to destroy them -- for then it must been an antecedent of his birth -- and
not a subsequent of his death. Ans. 1 Joel says not, that the pouring of the
Spirit shall not be till the great and terrible day of the Lord come, bot he
shows so many things preceding the coming of our Savior: nether may we think
that all these things shall be fulfilled in the same juncture of time: if all be
accomplished, even in several times: the prophecy abides true. 2 That day or
time was terrible: for it is written Act. 2.6, the multitude came togeder and
were confounded or troubled in mind, because that every man heard them in his
oun language, and they were all amazed and mervelled, and v. 22 a man approved
among you by miracles, wonders and signs. Whereby it is manifest that even to
the sicht of these Jews that time of Christ's coming was terrible, albeit his
second coming shall be more terrible in regard of the general destruction, which
shall be on all nationes, not for opposing themselves against the Jews (as they
imagine) bot for their not acknowledging God and not obeying the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Inst. 4 And to put it out of dout, that Gods bringing
down the heathen into the valley of Iehosaphat, is meant only of this gathering
them togeder to a battle, and consequently of a judgment on the living and not
on the dead; to put this out of dout (I say) the prophet makes it to be a
concomitant of the Jews return from their captivity. Ans. That these words
are not meaned of the temporal Monarchy after Christ's coming, it may be
learned by the parallel text in that same page, where it is said, And for my own
part I am persuaded, that this great army here spoken of, is the very same
that shall be gathered together to the battle of the great day of God Almichtie,
by the thrie unclean spirits lyk frogs, which St John saw come out of the
mouth of the Dragon and out of the mouth of the false prophet Rev. 16.13. If he
be persuaded, that this is the same battle, he micht lykwise be persuaded, that
the text of Joel 3. is not after the coming of Christ; nor immediately at his
coming: for that battle is in the time of the sixth vial, after which follows
another vial and time of trouble mentlioned in the rest of that chapter of the
Revel. And here by the way we observe that the renouned Author of Clavis
Apocaliptica is mistaken in his seventh Synchronisme, wherein he says, that the
pouring forth of the seven viales is contemporarie with the end of the Beast
and Babylon: for albeit it be said c. 15.2, that they who had gotten the
victory over the Beast sang the song of Moses, it follows not, that the Beast
was then destroyed; nether albeit the first and fifth and last viales be powered
on the Beast, follows it, that they were not powered till the last time of the
destruction of the Beast; Seeing the Saints in heaven (and on earth too) may
rejoice for their particulare victory over the Beast as yet reigning, and the
viales may be powered on the Beast at several times, even some of them on the
Beast in the hight of her pride, to the end, that men may have warninges of the
judgementes of God on the Beast in her greatest pomp. And the rather may we
judge so, that we find such aggriement in the principal terms of the seven
Trumpets and seven viales; the second Trumpet with the second vial, the third
Trumpet with the third vial: the fourth Trumpet with the fourth vial: the sixth
Trumpet with the sixth vial, and the seventh Trumpet with the seventh vial. Now
seeing the first Trumpet is of the same time with the beginning of the Beast (as
he says Synchron. 1 par. 2.) the first vial must be of that same time also;
and all the other Synchronismes and expositiones of textes that are grounded on
that seventh Synchronisme of the first part ar wrong. Which I mark, because
these late Millenaries have been moved by the appearance of these
Synchronismes, to embrace this opinions. 2 We may be persuaded, that the
gathering of the nationes Joel 3.2. is not to be understood of a batle after
the coming or at the coming of Christ, if we consider the words of the first
verse, For behold in these days, and in that time etc. He kniteth this chapter
with the preceding, and shows the contents of both to be at the same time:
which is not any particulare year or age, bot comprehendes the whole
deliverance of Israel or people of God, which was begun, when the captive Jews
were brought from Babylon, and continowes till Christ's second coming, as if the
prophet had said, When the Lord shall deliver his people, it shall not be a
short and momentanie deliverance, bot his protection shall continow till he
have avenged him of all the enemies of his Church. As for the name of the
valley of Iehosaphat, there is no necessity to understand thereby the valey of
blessing 2. Chro. 20.26, seeing that valley never hes this name in the
Scriptures: nether is it possible, that all the nationes of the world can
conveen in that place: bot the name may rather be taken appellatively for the
valey of Gods judgment, as the Hebrew word importes and the words following
allude thereunto; whereby the prophet teaches us to consider the etymology of
the name: and nevertheles he would lykwise have us to consider the gracious
deliverance of Jehoshaphat, that he will als certainly deliver his people in
all ages, as he did Iehoshaphat. And this is a more glorious trophee, than if
any one nation were kept a 1000 years in wordly prosperity. After the adding
of more such prophecies, it is said, page 14 How can we forsake the literal
interpretation of these prophecies, if we do bot consider, that the Jews ar
here distinguished from all other nationes, of which we gentiles who ar now
converted, were then apart: and ar by this name in the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles still distinguished from them, if we consider what
gross absurdities would follow from the tropical construction of these or the
lyk prophetical revelationes, wherein the event of things is so plainly and
distinctly attributed unto the Jews. Ans. We forsake not the literal
interpretation of these prophecies: for that is the literal interpretation,
which is principally intended, whither it be proper or figurative: bot we
forsake that restricted interpretation, as only be longing to a temporal
monarchy of the Jews. 2 The Jews are not to be understood (in these promises)
in way of opposition unto all nationes: for then all other men without
exception shall be consumed in the valley of Iehoshaphat: bot the Jews and
Israel ar to be exponed of the elect people of God, according to the fifth rule
mentioned before; and the gentiles ar all the enemies of the Church. And the
saithfull ar called Jews, not only typically, bot lykwyse for the special
confort of the Jews, because they were hated of all nationes every where: which
might have been unto them occasion of despair: and therefore the Lord says unto
them to this purpose, How many or great so ever your enemies shall be, I will
judge them. And for the same ar the Jews often named in the promises of the new
Testament to show their particulare interesse in the Kirk of Christ,
notwithstanding their unworthiness and contempt of the Gospel at the first
preaching thereof. Now if the prophecies be exponed this way (as they must be)
of believers whither Jews or gentiles: and their enemies whatsoever, the
enemies of the faith in any age, none of these absurdities shall follow, which are rehearsed here as in a catalogue: to wit: 1. The Jews did never since the
Apostles days return from any captivity with such an high hand and such a
wonderful victory over their enemies, as is here prophesied. Ans. Nether ever
shall they return in such a manner, if ye understand a worldly and civil
pomp: for these promises can not be understood (as I have said) of any one
exploite nor of any age. The promises of God ar more glorious and more large. 2
As for the Church that now is, let the lamentable experience of all ages
witness, whither she hes not been more often crowned with martyredome than
victory. Ans. This is als bad an opposition as the former: for Christ in
suffering did triumph over his enemies Col. 2.15, and martyredome is victory,
Romans 8.37 in all these things we are more than conqueroures. Spiritual victory
consistes with bodily suffering: nixt albeit the Church were oftener crouned with
martyredome than victory, yet in several ages she hes been crowned with
glorious victory, and her full glorification is a coming, and her enemies have
been and shall be smiten and brought into subjection, and the house of David is
exalted in the person of Christ and his members, and all the wealth of the
nationes hes been employed or shall be employed for the use of the faithful
(albeit not in any particular year or age) and the Lord shall descend and all
the saints with him. 3 If this be not to cry peace, peace, when there is no
peace, if this be not to call evil good, and good evil -- I know not what is.
Ans. This is a pitiefull exclamation, if it were true, bot exclamationes are not
always victorious. When we teach, It shall be weel unto the children of God, and
there is no peace unto the wicked, and fet your hearts on things above, and not
on things on earth; Is this to cry peace, when there is no peace, or to call
good evil? Or is it not rather to put darkness for licht, when spiritual
promises ar restrained to a temporal prosperity of a carnal people? and when
God teaches faith by sense, that because we can not understand heavenly things
till he insinuate them into our affectiones by pleasing and known things,
should we think that God hes no higher sense in these promises? All the earth
belongs unto Christ, and in the midst of Scythia some have lived happily,
even more happily than many have done in Iudaea. The promises then are not tied
to Iudaea, bot belong unto all them who ar mentioned Ioh. 11.51, he prophesied,
that Jesus should die for that nation, and not for that nation only, bot that
also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scattered
abroad, that is, through the world, as the same Apostle expones himself, 1 Ioh.
2 2. Bot it may be, that this exclamation was made against the conjecture of
Cornelius a lapide; then he should distinguish the persons.

Page 15 Again of the Jews return and of their prosperity which then shall
happen, he adds more passages, as Esa. 11.11 till 16 Yowsee (says he) that the
Prophet here speaks of a miraculous recoverie of Gods people; of the recoverie
of Judah not from Babylon, bot from the four corners of the earth, and that
together with Ephraim, with the ten tribes from Assyria, which as yet never
came back, and therefore this is not yet fulfilled. Ans. 1. There is no mention of
returning here, bot of recovering the remnant of his people. 2. Who be these
his people? Look the tenth verse, In that day there shall be a root of Iesse,
which shall stand for an ensign of the people: to it shall the gentiles seek,
and his rest shall be glorious: And behold how the Apostle expones these words
Romans 15.12, Esaias says, There shall be a root of Iesse, and he that shall rise
to reign over the gentiles, in him shall the gentiles trust. Now whereas the
Apostle expones his people to be the gentiles, may they not be ashamed, who
will understand only the Jews? So that there is meaned the recoverie of Gods
people or the gentiles from Assyria, Egypt or whersoever they be. Obi. It is
said, he shall assemble the outcastes of Israel, and the dispersed of Judah.
Ans. The Gospel (which is Christ's standerd) hes been preached unto them Iam.
1.1. and so their assembling is into the bosom of the Church. Obi. 2. It is
said, The envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be
cut off, etc. Ans. The meaning is, Whereas there had been contentiones twixt the
tribes one against another, and both against the gentiles, and gentiles against
them both: under Christ shall be an end of that malice: 2 In the citation of this
prophecy, the fourteenth verse is omitted, because they can not see, how it
can be verifyed of the peaceable kingdom, which they imagine: bot seeing the
words preceding and the words following conteene one and the same prophecy,
and these words in the middle part can not be exponed of that monarchy, it is
evident that no part of this prophecy can be understood of that monarchy: bot
the meaning is plain, if they be exponed of the Christian Church, thus, The
Apostles did flee, that is, quickly preach unto other nationes, and brought
them in a short space unto the obedience of Christ: not going in troops from
Province to Province, bot at the same time they went one by one into several
nationes. 3. This verse being omitted, the fifteenth verse is quoted, and out
of it they do imagine, that a way shall be made for the Jews through the Sea,
and all floodes shall be dried up before them. Bot if these words shall be exponed
properly, what kind of miracle shall that be? shall the Jews who ar scattered
into all the corners of the earth, have a dry passage through every river? and
the Egyptian or Read Sea be destroyed? Or is it not rather in a spiritual
sense, that the Lord will remove all impedimentes, which may hinder the course
of the gospel: and he hes opened a way into that kingdom of heaven from which
we were exiled in Adam, and spiritual Pharao is drowned or destroyed in the Read
Sea or bloody death of Christ; and by a michtie wind of preaching the Lord hes
made his power known every where, even als sensibly, as when he brought Israel
out of Egypt.

Page 16 Such another prophecy is that of Ezekiel. 37.19.21. and 27 and Hos. 1
10.11. In both which prophecies he Lord hes promised, that the Jews shall
again live under one king only (as they had done before the division of the
tribes) and that in their own land too: which hes not been yet performed: and
therefore the time of these prophecies is yet to come. Ans. The like prophecy is
lykwise exponed: bot for further clearing of these ladde. That of Ezekiel. 37 is
exponed by Christ Ioh. 10.14.16, I am the good sheepherd and know my sheep --
and other sheep I have which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold and one sheepherd. Where we
see, that Christ is the sheepherd (and by consequence the king too, unless
they will understand the 24 v. of Ezekiel. 37 of two different persons) and the
people over whom he reigns ar his sheep, not only of the Jews, bot of
another fold, whom Christ brings into the same, fold, that is, into the same
Church. 2 the same words speaking of Christ and calling him David and king and
sheepherd, show that they must be spiritually understood. 3 the 25 verse may be
more easily understood in the spiritual then earthly sense: to wit, the land
that I have given unto Jacob, and they shall dwell therein for ever, and my
servant shall be their Prince for ever: for that land was not given unto Jacob,
nether do the Millenaries say, that the Jews shall dwell for ever in
Jerusalem, bot for a 1000 years, and then Christ's kingdom shall cease. Bot
expone that one word land typically for the thing typifyed thereby, and all the
other words go currently, even to the end of the chapter, as we see the
Apostle expones the 27 verse of the Corinthianes as a part of these people 2
Cor. 6.16 Now seeing certainly Christ is the king and sheepherd, and the people
ar the Jews and gentiles, who were strangely divided, bot now ar one Church by
faith in Christ, therefore the people of Israel and Ephraim (who after the
division were alwyse idolatrous) may weel be exponed typically for the gentiles:
and so the union is easily understood, which otherwise very hardly or scarcely
can be conceived, seeing now through many ages Ephraimites are not known in any
part of the earth. As for that text of Hosee, it is exponed of the gentiles
Romans 9.25.26: and therefore the Prophet changes the word Israel into Iezreel,
that is, the seed of God; signifying that the time wherein the Lord shall gather
his seed or the faithful in all nationes from the bondage of the devil,
shall be very great and wonderful unto all the world.

Page 17 Though this of Hosea be understood by some expositoures, of the
vocation of the gentiles -- yet doutles they are much mistaken in this
exposition. Ans. This is a quarrel against the Apostle: and now let all the
world judge, whither he or the Millenaries being contrary shall be followed,
especially seeing now we have found, that our Savior exponing the former
prophecy of Ezekiel, and the Apostle exponing this lyk prophecy of Hosee, do
accord harmoniously. Inst. How can that belong unto the gentiles, which was
prophesied only of the Jews, as is declared by the prophets wife of
whoredoms, which he took of purpose to upbrayd the idol worship and
spiritual whoredoms of the Israelites v. 2? and therefore when she conceived
and bare him the second Sone, God said, Call his name, Loammi: for ye are not
my people, and I will not be your God. Ans. It was not prophesied of the Jews
only: for it is plain that Hosee speaks of the Israelites alsweell as of the
Jews: and generally the Apostle speaks Romans 10.12, there is no difference
between the Jew and the Greek: for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that
call upon him. So that albeit the prophet was sent personally unto the
Israelites, yet his words were no less true and meaned of the gentiles, who
then were not the people of God, bot now through Christ ar the people of God, for
whosoever shall call upon the name of God shall be saved. Inst. 2 the place where
they were told so, was their own land, and therefore in that place it shall be said
again unto them, Ye ar the sons of the living God. v. 10. Ans. 1. where it is
said v. 10, in that place, ye may read on the margin, In stead of that it was
said, etc. and therefore that word proves nothing. 2. it is no less true, that
the gentiles ar the people of God even in the same lands where they did not
serve God. 3. this is no applying by way of similitude, bot accommodating (as
Piscator speaks) to another particulare, that as the Israelites by idolatry
became like unto the gentiles, so the gentiles receiving the Gospel ar Jews
or the people of God. And this exposition is not only likely, bot very
certane, seeing the Apostle expones these Prophecies of Gods mercy toward the
gentiles, as you may see by the authorities, which are urged to this purpose in
the 10 and 15 chapter of the Epistle to the Romans and elswer. And albeit this
Author say, that Paul cireth these words for establishing the freeness of
Gods election by an instance of the Israelites, whom God had for a long time
rejected, and would again receive; this subterfuge will not serve, for 1. he
says in the preceding page, that the Prophecy Hos. 1. is meaned only of the
Jews; and if that were true (which I have proved to be false) it is not meaned
of the Israelites. 2. the Apostle v. 24. is speaking expressly of the
faithful not of the Jews only, bot also of the gentiles, and hitherto he
uses the testimony of Hosee. 3. of the gentiles dceth he expone these same
testimonies in other textes, where he is not speaking of election nor of the
freeness thereof, as 2 Cor. 6.16. Inst. 3. And this the 27 v. seems to
confirm, where it is said, Esaias also cries: for what makes the copulative
also here, if the Apostle understood not the former prophecy of Israel as well
as this? Ans. The copulative knitteth the testimonies, and shows that they
must both be understood of these people, which are named v. 24.2. this is yet
more cleared by the 30 v. What shall we say then? that the gentiles who
followed not after richteousnes have attained to richteousnesse, bot Israel who
followed after the law of richteousnesse, hes not attained. There it is
manifest, that he speaks of the gentiles attaining to richteousnesse, and of
Israel not attaining it: and nevertheles the opposition is not simply of the
two people, bot of their seeking richteousnesse two contrary ways, towit, by
faith, and by works of the law. And now ye see it sufficiently declared,
that these prophecies do not belong unto the Jews or Israelites only.

Page 19. There is yet in Hos. 3.4. one more material argument for the Jews
deliverance -- which prophecy can not possibly yet be fulfilled: for if it be
meaned only of the ten tribes, among whom Hosea prophesied, it is confessed
that they did never yet return: and if of the other two, it must be meaned of
their captivity since our Saviors coming: for till then the Scepter could not
depart from Judah, as Jacob foretold Genesis 49.10. and there for till then they
could not be without a Prince or Governors of that tribe, although they were
long before tributarie to other nationes: and this is also intimated by these
words, The later days, which are no where put for the time before the
incarnation, of Christ. Ans. This argumentation fails in both parts: bot
first mark, that all these words can not be meaned properly: for the word
David can not be understood of Salomons father, bot of Christ the sone of David
or typifyed by David: and therefore that prophecy could not be fulfilled till
the incarnation of Christ, and then it micht be fulfilled. 2. And consequently
these words, The later days, though they be no where put for the days before
the incarnation, yet they are often put for the da yes of the Gospel, seeing in
the last days God hes spoken unto us by his Sone. Now the first part of the
dilemma is false: for if that prophecy be meaned of the ten tribes, as they
abode many days without a king, etc. so who dar deny, that they did return
and seek the Lord their God and Christ their king? When the Gospel was
preached to the scattered strangers not only through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia
1 Pet. 1.1. bot lykwyse to Syria, Assyria, etc. and expressly to the twell
tribes scattered abroad Iam. 1.1. who can hold the negative, that the children
of Israel did never return and seek Christ? and the other part is no less
faulty: for Christ came not till the Scepter was departed from Judah; and these
words The later days, are not to be referred unto the fourt verse (as if the
Israelites should abide many days without a king and sacrifice in the later
days, and then return) bot unto the fifth v. in the end whereof they are, and so
in the later days they shall return (not into their land; this text says not
so, bot) and seek the Lord their God and Christ their king, as they did Act.
2.41. and 4.4. and in several ages. And so both the parts of this argument
being false, the words of Hos. 3. ar more against the temporal Monarchy than
for it. What is here interiected of the Antichrist upon the conjecture of the
Papist is not to our purpose.

Page 22. We ar to show the Jews peaceable and prosperous estate after their
return. Read what Jeremy hes written c. 23.3.4. etc. 31.10.27.31. till 35.
and. c. 32.37. till 42. and c. 33.6.7.8.9. and c. 46.27.28. and c. 50.19.20.
Ezekiel. 28.25.26. and c. 34.12.13.14.15.16. and v. 24. till 30. etc. 36.8-16. and
v. 24-37 etc. 39.25. till the end. Zach. 10.6.7.8.9.10. And on the margin of
page 22. he says, I appeal here to the consciences of all men, that shall read
these or the like prophecies in the word of God, whither they can think it
possible, that the time appointed by God for the dispensation of such
extraordinary blessings, should be the very same, in which the world and
especially the Christian part of it was to groan under the continowed plagues
written in the Revelation: which yet we must grant to be so, if we rest on
these interpretationes, by which all such prophecies ar only or chiefly applied
to the anticipated conversion of us substituted gentiles. Ans. 1. All these
prophecies ar to the same purpose, and therefore it was needless to have
rehearsed so many of them, unless he hade a mind to muster them all: bot number
prevails not in this case. 2. none says, that these prophecies were only
accomplished at the same time of the plagues: bot we deny, that the plagues were
continowed, seeing the Christianes have their own times of joye alsweel as of
mourning, and the woman is clothed with the sun, howbeit at other periodes she
be forced to flee into the wilderness: and therefore both the appeal in the
beginning, and the supposition in the closure of this marginal note, is a vain
brag. Why should one appeal in this manner to the consciences of al, seeing all
interpreteres from the beginning of the Christian Church (except a few
Millenaries) till this time have exponed these textes not of the Jews only,
bot of the Christian Church? and it may be easily understood, that these have
written according to their consciences: and therefore if these be Judges, this
author hes losed the cause. Page 29. Which prophecies, as they conteen many
evident and unanswerable arguments for a future restoration of Israel, I
mean, a restoration yet to come; so they have such correspondence with that of
Isa. 59.20. and Amo. 9.11. (both which are alleged by the Apostles Act. 15.16.
and Romans 11.26.27. for the conversion of the Jews after the fullness of the
gentiles is come in, that is, after all those of the gentiles, which are
appointed to be called before Christ's coming again, be converted or rather
perhaps, when the fullness of the gentiles shall come in, that is, when the
time shall come, in which (not a part, as now, bot, all the gentiles that are
left, shall through the wonderful deliverance of the Jews, together with them,
fear the Lord) that seeing these are not yet fulfilled, nether can any of the
other: betwixt which and that of Amos there is not any material difference, and
no other betwixt them and that of Isaiah, than there is betwixt a comment and
the text, etc. Ans. We grant that these prophecies conteen evident arguments
for a future restoration of Israel, if you will acknowledge that which is
before clearly proved by the testimonies of the Apostles, and by experience,
that is, that they are begun already in part: we grant also, that they have
such correspondence with these textes of Esaie and Amos and many more too: bot
we deny 1. your manner of restoration, and we hold that the spiritual
restoration is more glorious for the honor of God and weel of Israel. 2. we
deny that the Apostle James alleges the prophecy of Amos for such a
conversion of the Jews: for he speaks expressly of visiting the gentiles, to
take out of them a people unto His name Act. 15.14. and of this visiting he
expones the words of Amos and the other Prophets: he speaks not only of
Amos, bot says generally, and to this aggrie the words of the Prophets. 3 we
deny that the Apostle Paul alleges the prophecy of Elaie to that pretended
purpose, for he says not, and then all Israel shall e saved, bot, and so all
Israel shall be saved: he shows no order or difference in time, bot makes a
conclusion out of the former words, where he says, Blindness in part is
happened to Israel, until the fullness of the gentiles shall come in: and then
he infers, And so all Israel shall be saved: and therefore the conclusion must
be exponed according to the proceeding words, that is, all Israel ar the called
of Israel and of the gentiles: there is a distinction twixt Israel, and all
Israel; and all Israel is more than Israel, seeing it includes lykwyse the
faithful gentiles: and in this signification the proof following in the cited
testimony must necessarilye be understood, and not of a calling of the jews
after the full calling of the gentiles: and far less of that calling, which
(he says) shall perhaps be (not in part but) of all the gentiles that shall be
left. Yea these conjectures destroy one another: for if the calling of the
Jews shall be after the fullness of the calling of the gentiles, then all the
gentiles that shat be left can not be called through the wonderful deliverance
of the Jews. And this last conjecture destroys a maine tenete of the
Millenaries, who say, that the Jews shall rule over all the nationes, and hold
them in subjection till the end of the 1000 years, and then these profane
nationes shall rise again in arms against the Jews. Now seeing betwixt these
above named prophecies of Jere. 23. and 31, etc. and these two of Esaie and
Amos, there is not any material difference, and no other difference them betwixt
a brief intimation and a large explication of the same thing: and seeing these
prophecies of Esaie and Amos ar to be understood of the Christian Church and
estate thereof from the beginning till the end, as the Apostles James and Paul
expone them, this conclusion follows, These above named prophecies give no
ground for the earthly monarchy of the Jews. And so much the rather may
every one embrace this conclusion, that we find the greatest part of these
prophecies so exponed in other passages of the New Testament as that of Jere.
31.1. in 2 Cor. 6.18: and Iere. 31.31. till 35. in Heb. 8.8. and c. 10.16.17:
and Iere. 32. conteenes the same words which c. 31.31: so does that of c.
33.8, and to the same purpose is that of c. 50.20: and that of Ezekiel. 34
concerning the gathering and feeding the sheep is exponed by our Savior Ioh.
10.11.16: and that of c. 39. is correspondent which the prophecies of Joel,
whereof we spak before: and that of Zach. 10. is one which Iere. 23.6.8, and
other that are handled before. It is to be marked that in the testimony Ier. 33
is omitted v. 12.13: where is prophesied, that in all the cities of that land
shall be an habitation of sheepherdes, causing their flocks to lie down there,
even in the cities of the mountains, the cities of the valeyes, the cities of
Benjamin and the cities of Judah. What? is this the glory of Christ's kingdom,
that sheep shall lie in his cities? Or does not rather the Lord understand the
spiritual shiep of Christ, whom he will have gathered by his spiritual
pastoures every where? as he exponeth it Ezekiel 34.31. Ye flock of my pasture ar
men, and I am your God, says the Lord. Lykwise this author slippeth over v.
18. and 22, where perpetuity of sacrifices and Levites is promised als plainly,
as the throne of David. Shall in the last days the meat-offeringes, and
burnt-offeringes, and the house of Levi be restored? I think, They will not say
it, lest they contradict the gospel, which has abolished that order. And
nevertheless the Lord says so in Jeremy. Hes the Lord said it, and will he
not perform it? Yea, he hes performed it, as the Apostle witnesses 1 Pet.
2.5. ye also as Livelie stones ar built up a spiritual house, an holy
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ. And as
the promises of the priesthood ar fulfilled spiritually and not in a proper
sense, so we must think of the promises concerning the kingdom, seeing they
both ar conjoined and mixed after the same strain, as we have them there v.
17.18, and v. 21.22, Thus says the Lord, David shall never trant a man to site
upon the throne of the house of Israel, nether shall the priests the Levites
want a man before me to offer burnt-offeringes, and to kindle meat-offeringes,
and to do sacrifice continowally, etc. But all this evidence can not satisfy
selfconceites: therefore it is added.

Page 30 in marg. The words in Act. 15.14. (upon which the prophecy of Amos
is inferred) ar taken by Do. Mayer, to be meaned of the song of old Simeon, and
not of the speech of Simon Peter. Ans. Is there not a difference twixt Symeon
and Simon? James names Symeon, and not Simon: wherefore not without reasoun it
may be thoucht, that he meaned old Symeon, especially seeing Luke is the writer
of both books, and if the words of Symeon do heerunto aggrie more than the
words of Peter, who should dout that James spak of him? Wherefore consider the
words of old Symeon Luke 2.30. It is said of him, not only that he was a just
man and devote, waiting for the cousolation of Israel, and the holy Ghost was
upon him, bot like wise, It was reveled unto him by the holy Ghost, that he
should not see death before he had seen the Lords Christ, and he came by the
Spirit into the temple. All which particulares serve very much to purchase
credit unto his testimony, who says: My eyes have seen thy salvation, which
thou have prepared before the face of all people, a licht to lichten the
gentiles and the glory of thy people of Israel. We may see, that he declares
there the fulfilling (at that time) of the prophecy Esa. 49.6, And he said, Is
it a light thing, that thou should be my servant, to raise up the tribes of
Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a
licht unto the gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the
earth: and c. 52.9. Break forth into joy, sing together ye wast places of
Jerusalem: for the Lord hes conforted his people, he hes redeemed Jerusalem:
the Lord hes made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all nationes, and all the
ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. To the same purpose is
c. 60.1.3 19, and c. 62.1.2.11. Where we see, the faithful ar bidden rejoice at
the coming of Christ; and so did Symeon, when he saw him: Christ is called the
salvation of the Lord, and Symeon speaking unto God, says of Christ, My eyes
have seen thy salvation: the Messiah is called a licht unto the gentiles into
all the ends of the earth, and Symeon says, Which thou have prepared before
the face of all people, a licht to lichten the gentiles: Christ is called the
glory of Sion and Jerusalem; and Symeon says, Christ is the glory of thy
people of Israel. And so by the testimony of old Symeon (which is approved and
registered by the Spirit of God) these and the like prophecies should not be
restricted unto the second coming, bot were in part fulfilled at the first
coming of Christ, and therefore also all that follows in that long tailed note
is a frivolous discourse, as we may see by the unanimons consent in the true
worship of God, betwixt the Jews and other nationes in the same 15 chapter of
the acts, where the Jews and gentiles conueen in the general synod, howbeit
the ods continowe twixt the obstinate both Jews and gentiles on the one part,
and the seed of Abraham, believers both the Jews and gentiles on the other
both in their opinion and practice of religious duties. Inst. It can not be,
bot that the words after this in the prophecy being applied to the foresaid
visiting of the gentiles by the preaching of the Gospel, must needs conclude,
that the excraordinarte restoration of the Jews, forshewn by the Prophet, was
to follow the calling of the gentiles then begun by the Apostles. Ans. The
Prophet Amos in that chap. before the v. 11. speaks not of the calling of the
gentiles, and the Apostle cites the same words of v. 11. for the calling of
the gentiles: nether hes the Prophet these words, after this, but, in these
days: and howbeit the Apostle cite them so, yet they must be understood of the
order of things mentioned by the Prophet, which is a restoration after the
destruction of Israel, and not a Monarchy of the Jews after the calling of
the gentiles. Whereby it is manifest that in this note is a twofold error; one
inserting the words in the prophecy, which are not in it; another in
misinterpreting the words of the Apostle. Inst. 2. God could not at that time
be said to return unto the gentiles, whom he had bot then received; no, nor to
the Jews, whom he had then (and not till then) quite forsaken. Ans. This is
mere cavilling. Before the calling of the gentiles, was not God averse from
them, and they from him? and therefore when he looked graciously upon them, he is
truly said to return unto them. Again in the words of Amos immediately
preceding we see that the Lord was offended with Israel, and when he sent the
salvation of God and glory of Israel among them, it may be als truly said,
that he returned unto them. Thridly it is often in this note repeted, that he
had quite forsaken the Jews: bot the Apostle can not suffer this phrase Romans
11.1. Hes God cast away his people, God forbid, for I also am an Israelite,
etc. bot more of this purpose hereafter. Inst. 3. And yet there want not some,
who by the words all Israel Romans 11. understand only the church of the
gentiles, to which some of the Jews should be united. Ans. All this section
feightes aganst vain imaginationes for (as it is said) by all Israel we
understand not the gentiles only, but the seed of the promise, that is, the
faithful Jews and others in all nationes. As for that prophecy of Esa. 66.8,
was it not fulfilled truly (albert not fully) when the believing church
traveled and brou^ht forth so great multitudes in one day, as may be called a
nation, as 3000 and 5000 converted in a day Act. 2.41 and 4.4, and the people
with one accord gave heed unto these things, which Philip spak, and they who
all had given themselves unto Simon Magus from the least to the greatest,
believed and were baptized both men and women c. 8.6. and c. 19.17.18. this was
known unto all the Jews and Greeks dwelling at Ephesus, and fear fell on
them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified, and many believed, and
v. 20. so (...) grew the word of God, and prevailed not only at Ephesus, bot
almost through out all Asia v. 10 and 26, besides many other passages and other
great and miraculous conversiones, whereof we read in Ecclesiastical Histories.
So that what was a wonderment unto Esaie or the faithful in his time (Who hes
heard such a thing!) hes been truly done many a day before these our days.
The evidence whereof, me thinks, should be motive en^ugh to make any partial
or unpartiail Reader understand that prophecy generally; and so much the
rather that (by this Author's own confession page 33.) it implies not so much
the return of the whole nation to their country, as to their God. It is
certane, it was in part fulfilled at their returning from Babel: for then they
reared up their walls, they planted wineyardes, etc. bot it is a gross
opinion to think, that all the particulares of these prophecies should be
fulfilled (in a proper acceptance of the words) at one and the same juncture
of time: and it is als vain to think, that that prophecy of Joel concerning
the plentiful pouring down of the Spirit could not be fulfilled by
accomplishment of our Saviors prophecy, Mat. 21.43. there is no dependence of
this prophecy on the words of Joel, and every one who hes eyes may see, that
our Savior speaks not there of the temporal kingdom of the Jews, bot of the
Gospel, seeing he calls it the kingdom of God, and he says, It shall lbe
taken from them, and another nation shall bring forth the fruits of it: their
temporal kingdom was taken from them already, and these last words can not be
understood of any temporal kingdom: nether was these Romans, who destroyed
Jerusalem, more devote than the stubborn Jews.

Page 33. You have heard of the deliverance and happiness of the Jews: I
shall acquaint you now with their partakers. Ans. It is now manifest that these
forenamed prophecies are not of the earthly prosperity of the Jews only, and
we know certanly that the gentiles ar partakers with the Jews; so that the
proof of this point is needless, and nevertheless he fills up same pages
with prophecies to this purpose, and he says Page 37. I know, that most of
these prophecies ar chi fly interpreted of the joining together of the Jews
and gentiles in one Church, and richtly. Ans. If they be chiefly and richthy
interpreted so, why should we not acquiesce? shall we go about to interpret
them unrichtly? that we^ to put out our eyes, and deceive our selves and
others. Inst. Bot to say, that this is now fulfilled in the time of the
substitute gentiles vocation, is to overthrow what was before affirmed --: for
Paul tells us plainly Romans 11. that the Jews ar broken off from their olive,
and tha we are graffed-in for them, that they are cast away, that they are
hardened, that God hes concluded them all in unbelieff, and through their fall
salvation is come to us, to provoke them to jealousy: and therefore it can not
possibly be manteened, that the Jews and gentiles ar as yet one shiepfold.
Ans. The Apostle says not, that all the Jews are broken off, bot rather the
contradictorie v. 1. and 5: nether says he, that God hes shutt up all the
Jews in unbelieff, that he micht have mercy upon all the Jews: bot (as our
former translation says conform to the original) God hes shutt up all in
unbelieff that he micht have mercy on all: whereunto aggrie the words of the
same Apostle Gal. 3.22, The Scripture hes concluded all under sin, that the
promise by faith in Jesus Christ micht be given to them who believe. Here the
Apostle is not speaking of the Jews only, bot generally both of Jews and
gentiles; and so far must his words be extended there too, seeing he is
speaking of them v. 30 and 31, and so the meaning of v. 32 is, It was the
counsel of God to suffer both Jews and gentiles fall into unbelieff or
disobedience (as the word Apeitheia lykwyse importes, and the word sin teaches
Gal. 3.) that he micht save all his elect both of Jews and gentiles after one
way, not by their works, bot of his mercy only. And therefore I can not
possibly conceive, how a man of understanding, can bring or receive such a
conclusion out of these words, as this, It can not possibly be manteened, that
the Jews and gentiles ar as yet one sheepfold. For besides the fallacy of the
consequence, the conclusion is contrary to the express words of Scripture,
especially, Ephesians. 2.11. Remember, that ye being in time past gentiles in the
flesh, who were called uncircumcision by that which is called the circumcision
in the flesh made by hands, -- bot now in Christ Jesus ye who somtymes were
far off, ar made nigh by the blood of Christ: for he is our peace, who hes
made both one, having broken down the middle wall -- for to make in himself of
twain one new man. And who will deny, that the believers now living among the
gentiles ar members of the same body and church universal, whereof Abraham,
Jacob, David, Ezekias, Paul and others ar members also? Now then, even now
Jews and gentiles ar one fold. Inst. 2. As for these, who were converted at the
first preaching of the Gospel, and at other times since, they are bot the first
fruits and root (as I may say) of the branches and lump, which shall follow
after them by a general conversion: and therefore the calling of these can not be
more accounted a conversion of the Jews, than the calling of the gentiles, who
were gathered to the Church before Christ's nativitie, can be taken for the
conversion of the gentiles, who were (as time hes shown) bot the forerunners
and pledge, etc. Ans. These who were converted at the preaching of the Gospel,
howbeit they may be called the firstfrutes of the Gospel preached since the
incarnation of Christ, yet they can not be called the firstfrutes of the
sheepfold, seeing the Patriarchs ar the root and members of the same body of
Christ, as they are expressly called Romans 11.16. being conferred with v. 28,
they are beloved for the fathers sake. Nixt there is a vast difference twixt the
calling of the gentiles under the old Test, and the calling of the Jews under
the New: for very few gentiles were converted, even nothing in comparison of
the converted Jews: and albeit not so many 1000 have been converted as may be
converted, yet that is no impediment of the union twixt the two people, which
consistes in the union of the church under the old and new Test. even albeit
never a Jew were converted. Inst. 3. And besides how the bringing of the Jews
out of all nationes upon horses and in litters and in charets and upon mules
and upon men's shoulders; can bear any other bot a literal sense, or how the
vail that is spread over all nationes, can now be said to be destroyed, when as
so many of them run a whooring after their own inventiones, I can not
conceive. Yea unto this day (says S. Paul of the Jews in his time) when Moses
is read, the vail is upon their heart; nevertheles when it shall turn unto the
Lord, the vail shall be taken away 2 Cor. 3.15. bot we see not yet Israel
returned -- and therefore the vail ^s not yet taken away. Ans. Whither he can not
or will not conceive, it may be douted: many 1000 have conceived both these: he
gives no reasoun of his douting in the former; and the cause of his douting in
the other is naught: for albeit the vail be not taken away from all the Jews
and from all of all the nationes (in which sense it shall never be taken away,
seeing the church on earth is always a mixte company) yet certanly it is taken
away from the Jews and all the nationes, towit, so many of them as turn unto
the Lord, which are so many as the stars of heaven, that is, innumerable to
men: for the grace of God that bringes salvation hes appeared unto all men Tit.
2,11, and God who hes commanded the licht to shine out of darkness, ^ath
shined in our hearts, to give the licht of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ: So writes a Jew unto the gentiles 2. Cor: 4.6.
Inst. 4. I know no reason, why we should give more credit to the metaphorical
interpretation of these prophecies, than to the figurative exposition, which
some presume to put upon these words Zach. 12.10, although S. John c. 19.37.
hes alleged them as the only cause that our Saviors side was peirced: of which
fact doutlesse there had been no necessity, if the prophecy were not to be
understood in a literal sense, etc. Ans. 1. He uses here Rhetorical terms,
but certanly it can not be conceived by his words, whither he takes them
properly or improperly: bot we give no other interpretation of the prophecies
than be literal, that is, chiefly intended, as he confesses page 37.2. The
Evangelist shows that prophecy of Zachary to be properly fulfilled in that
part, that the sides of our Savior were peirced, and no interpreter says,
that the rest of that prophecy was fulfilled at that instant: but we may
justly think, that many of them who consented unto his death, did mourn for
that their fault; seeing our Savior prayed unto his Father to forgive them,
Luke 23.34, and the same Evangelist bears witness, that they who had crucified
him, were at the preaching of Peter pricked in their hearts Act. 2.23.37.
Whereby we conceive that that prophecy was not fulfilled in the disciples,
nether in respect of the peircing his sides, nor of looking to him at that time
(for they all fled away, excep John) but in the Jews, who indeed by wicked
hands did crucify him, and looked upon him, and afterward did mourn for
him, as one who mourns for his only sone: and the mourning was great, when
3000 were together pricked in their hearts. Now consider whither this exposition
be more consonante unto these words of the Prophet, or that other, werby it is
alleged, that all the Jews who did not see him peirced, shall after so many
hunder years mourn for their fathers cruel and malicious contriuance: the
former is fulfilled in the same persons within the space of seven or eicht
weeks; and the other is not of the same persons, nether within the space of
1600 years, if at any time it shall be verified. Inst. 5. It is said there, They
shall mourn every family a part, and their wyfes apart. Ans. It is said v.
11. there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, and v. 12, and the land shall
mourn, every family apart, etc. whereby is intimated a distinction of the
mourning in respect of place: and as thy did mourn at Jerusalem publikly, so
we may easily conceive that these who had resorted at these publik feasts unto
Jerusalem, did lykwyse mourn apart after their returning, and were not
contented with one days mourning (all factes that are very credible are not
written) And therefore as this prophecy does concern the Jews (bot not only;
seeing even the gentiles may be said to have peirced his sides by their sines
meritoriously, and to look on him by faith, and mourn for their guiltynesse,
etc.) and chiefly the persons that crucified their Savior; So doutlesse it is
great impudence to affirm, that the same Prophet c. 14.5 and 9 verses says,
Christ shall descend unto the Jews to restore their kingdom, for there is not
one word of restoring nor of the Jews kingdom in these two verses.

Page 40. And this much of the felicity of that remnant of the nationes, who
shall out live the rest at the Jews return: now a word or two of the
alteration of the sensitive and senseless creatures at that time. Esa. 11.6,
the Wolve shall dwell with the Lamb, etc. ^. 65, the Wolve and the Lamb shall
feed together, etc. Where we may observe, aganst such as understand by these
expressiones, the effects of preaching on the hearts of cruel minded men,
that they are a part of these prophecies which concern the Jewish deliverance;
and therefore can have no relation to the calling of the gentiles. Ans. As we
have nothing as yet of the felicity of the nationes at that imagined time; so
these ensuing prophecies make nothing to that purpose, for in Esa. 11.10
immediately after the forecited words it is said, In that day there shall be a
root of Iesse, which shall stand up for an ensign of the people: to it shall
the gentiles seek, etc. Mark 1, he says, In that day: so he conioyneth the
preceding and following things in to the same time. 2. he speaks expressly
of the calling of the gentiles, as it is also cited Romans 15.12. 3. in the
words preceding v. 1. he speaks of the first coming of Christ; a rod shall
come forth out of the stem of Jesse, and a branche shall grow out of his
rooles. 4. in the words following that testimony, he speaks of the calling
of the Jews and gentiles together, as was exponed before. And therefore this
Prophecy concerns not the Jewish Monarchy, and these words may be better
exponed allegorically than properly. Inst. Is there no destruction in all the
Christian world, that we should flatter our selves with such vain fancies? or
rather when was their none? etc. Ans. Albeit this Author will not give glory
unto God in fulfilling his promises, yet we see, that others at not so ingrate:
as Act. 9.31, then hade the Churches rest throghout all Judea and Galile and
Sama^a: and in other times we find, that the Christianes hade their halcyonian
days twixt these ten great persecutiones, and afterward in the days of
Christian Emperoures and godly Kings. 2. Nether do the Prophets or
Revelation speaking of these times say, There shall never be hurt, nor shall
ever man destroy ane another: bot rather the property of the Church in this
world is to be militante, and nevertheles Wolves and Lyones forsake their
cruelty in the person of many convertes. And therefore these hyperbolical
complaints micht weel been spared. 3. It does puzle the Author, that Esaie
says c. 11.9, For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord: and
therefore he fancieth a private conceit for exponing these words, of which he
gives no reasoun: bot we have given sufficient reasounes for the allegorical
interpretation, which is confirmed by these words, towit, that the abundance
of the knowledge of the Lord is the cause, why wicked men leave their
wickedness, and adjoyne themselves unto the meek of the earth: as our Savior
says Mat. 10.16. I send you as Sheep among Wolves. Of whom certanly many becam
sheep of Christ's fold, which is a more proper effect of knowledge than the
changing of beasts affectiones.

Page 41. By which sense I am sure, that passage of Sa. Paul Romans 8.21. is so
well explained, etc. Ans. The truth of God needs not the boulstering of man's
devises. 2. the Apostle is speaking there of the final deliverance of the
creature from the bondage of corruption: which is not cleared by that
cohabitation of beasts, unless we will content with a small portion of
deliverance for the general deliverance of the creature: which kind of
contentment these Authoures will not acknowledge in the accomplishment of the
promises, no, no^ in a fuller measure. The Author collecteth nothing
particularly from that text of Esa. 65.25. nether is there any word there of the
Jewish Monarchy; and seeing it bes the same allegory with that former c. 11,
we go foroward.

Page 42. Another prophecy touching the renewed estate of the creatures is to
be seen Esa. 30.23, Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shall
sow the ground withal. Ans. Here he shows no argument for his purpose, bot
gives a buze for reconciling the 26 verse with c. 60.19: bot all this travel
micht been saved, if he had considered, that Esaie in c. 30. hes a particulare
warning for the Jews in his own time: he speaks not there of any returning of
the people, but in the beginning he reproves them for their confidence into
Egypt, and for their contempt of the word, and in the midst he foretells the
mercies of God on them, and lastly assures them of the destruction of their
enemies the Assyrianes by name: all which were accomplished in his own time; as
we may find in c. 37. and for these causes nothing in that 30 chap, can make
for the restoration of the creatures at that imagined monarchy. Inst. It is
more lykly to be so here, because the happiness which the Jews shall then be
made ^eives of, shall never again be interrupted by any misery: for the
ransoned of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and gladness, and
sorrow and sighing shall flee away, Esa. 35.10. And lest we should conceive,
that the judgment of the dead (plainly described Rev. 20 11.12.) shall either
suspend or disturb this joy, Saint Paul 1 Cor. 6. hes told us, that the
saints shall judge the world, that is, the wicked men that have been their
oppr^ssoures, and judge the angels, that is, the evil spirits, that have been
their tempters: and therefore shall not be thrust down to the bar amongst them,
bot advanced to the bench aganst them: An addition doutlesse to their
happiness, and no abatement of it. Aus. Some word of that Esa. 35.10 must be
taken in another than the proper signification: for if the word Zion be not
taken for the Christian church, bot for that hill within Jerusalem, and the
word Return be meaned of bodily returning of the Jews, the words of
everlasting joy (being taken for worldly joy) contradictes the tenete of the
thousand years monarchy, which shall end with an insurrection of the gentiles
aganst the Jews: but if the redeemed of the Lord be exponed for the faithful,
whom Christ our Lord hes redeemed with his blood, and their returning and
coming to Zion, be their repenting, and joining to the society of the saints,
then the everlasting joy is clear by the words of our Savior Ioh. 16.22, ye
now have sorrow, bot I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and
your joy shall no man take from you. And as the judgment is unquestionable, so
it is justly douted, whither the Apostle means the Jews 1 Cor. 6.2.3. seeing
our Savior says Mat. 19.28, Ye who have followed me in the regeneration,
when the sone of man shall site on the throne of his glory shall site upon 12
thrones, judging the 12 tribes of Israel, Where the 12 tribes are not judges, but
the judged. Bot certanly he means not of their judging in the temporal
monarchy, seeing the angels shall not be judged before the universal
judgment: and the Apostle says, how much more things appertaining unto this
life? whereby it appears, that in the first part of the verse he understandes a
judgment not in this lyff. And in both respects these words of the Apostle
ar a diminution doutlesse unto that imagined monarchy.

Page 44, is a protestation of God out of Ier. 31.35, and a complaint of Israel
in Mic. 7.8. Ans. We acknowledge both in their own sense and truth; bot
nothing is in them, nor collected out of them for proof of this purpose.

Page 45. And so I pass from the thing to be restored, which is the kingdom of
Israel, to the person by whom it is to be restored, which is Christ the Lord
at his nixt appearing. Ans. If the temporal kingdom of the Jews could be
demonstred out of the Scriptures, the question anent the king micht more easily
be resolved: and nevertheless these few Millenaries can not aggrie concerning
the person of their king: for Mr. Matoun thinks, that Christ shall continow
visible king of this kingdom, and M. Archer thinks, that Christ shall restore
the kingdom unto the Jews, and return into the heavens till the 1000 years
be expired, and in the mean time the Jews shall be kings. Till these two
questiones be decided, we micht superside, and nevertheles let us hear what
they can say for a temporary kingdom of Christ whither over Jews and
gentiles. Page ead. That our Mediator Phath undergone the offices of a priest
and prophet, the gospel is our witness bot considering that the Jews ar yet
to receive askingdome, a kingiome in which they shall hold them captives whose
captives they are, and ^n which peace and richteousnesse shall floorish Isa.
14.1.13. considering this we may justly dout, whither our Savior has as yet
executed the office of a king: and so much the rather, because he cook our
nature on him, as well to perform his kingly office herin amongst us, as
either his priestly or prophetical; the glory of this being indeed the reward
of that contempt and torment which he suffered in the other: and though it can
not be denied, that he has already spoiled principalities and powers (that
is, the evil spirits) and hes made a show of them openly, triumphing over them
in his cross, nor that he is ascended up on high, and hes led captivity
captive, and given gifts unto men: nor that he is become the head of all
principality and power (that is, of the saints and holy angels) and ^s set
down at the richt hand of the throne of God, so that he is able ^o subdue all
things unto himself. Yet that he does not now reign in that kingdom, which
he shall govern as man, and consequently in that of which he prophets speak,
his own words in Rev 3 21. do clearly prove, To him that overcomes (says he)
will I grant to site wit me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set
down with my Father in his throne. From whence it follows, that the throne
which he calls his own, and which he hes not yet received Heb. 2.8, and
10.12.13 must needs belong unto him as man, because the place, where he now
sittes, is the Fathers throne, a throne in which he hes no proper interest, bot
as God. Ans. He grantes, that Christ is now a king, and that he hes execute the
kingly office, bot he denies that he hes reigned in an earthly kingdom as
man: in all which we aggrie: bot we disaggrie in two particulares, 1. that the
Prophets have spoken of such a kingdom. This remains as yet to be proved.
2. that he sittes on a throne in heaven as man. If these words as man be
understood according to the Logical acceptance, it may be granted: for what
aggrieth unto any man as man, belongs unto all man, and indeed it belongs
not unto all men to site on the throne of Majesty: And nevertheles Christ
sittes at the richt hand of the Father as God-man or Mediator; and in this
sense we deny this assertion, as (it seems) this Author takes it. And in
this sense consider his considerationes: whereof the first is, that the Jews ar
yet to receive a kingdom, in which they shall hold them captives, whose
captives they are. Ans. Here a little change of a little word makes a great
difference: for the text says, Whose captives they were, and now they say, They are. The Prophet is speaking by name of the Assyrianes, whose Monarchy is now
destroyed, and the Interpreters show the accomplishment of that prophecy
according to the Prophets meaning: bot that prophecy speaks not of them,
whose captives the Jews now ar: nether know we whose captives they are, seeing
they live as free subjectes whersoever they live. Consider. 2. He took our
nature on him as weel to perform his Kingly office amongst us, as either his
Priestly or Prophetical: the glory of this being, etc. Ans. It is manifest,
that he reigns in us, seeing the faithful can say with the Apostle Gal. 2.20.
the life which now I live, I live by faith in the Sone of God, and, Christ
lives in me: bot that the glory of an earthly kingdom is the reward of his
contempt and torment we can not think, seeing such a glory is not answerable
unto his sufferinges, who being equal with God made himself of no reputation,
and humbled himself even to the death of the cross. Wherefore his reward is not
differed so long, bot now God hes exalted him highly and given him a name,
which is above every name Phil. 2, and he for the joy that was set before him
endured the cross and is set down at the richt hand of the throne of God, Heb.
12,2, which is a greater honor than of an earthly throne. Consid. 3. His own
words do clearly prove it, Rev. 3.21. Ans. Can any man see in these words
any thing for an earthly kingdom? for albeit the throne of the Father and the
throne of our Savior were diverse, yet may they not both be in heaven? Cons. 4.
That which he calls his own throne he hes not yet receired Heb. 2.8, and
10.12.13. Ans. The words Heb. 2,8 ar, Thou have put all things under his feet:
for in that he put all thing in subjection under him, he left nothing that is
not put under him, but we see not yet all thing put under him. Here is a
twofold universalitie, al thing is put under him, and, nothing is not put under
him. What more would ye have? The last words say, all thing is put under him.
If the last words say so, they must be contrary to the former words: bot the
words ar, We see not all thing put under him: nether is the word Receive
there, which is the point in hand. Now these two ar far different, We see not
all thing put under him, and, he hes not received all thing to be under him. So
this text in stead of proof convinces the foolish Tenete. It may be, this is
more clear in c. 10.12.13, where it is said, He sat down on the richt hand of
God (There the hight of glory) expecting from hencefurth till his enemies be
made his footestoole. What is here for an earthly throne or another throne? his
enemies ar made subject unto him, even his greatest enemies, as it is granted
before: but so long as this world continowes, new enemies shall be arising, and
can he not subdue them, as he hes done others, unless he erect and site on an
earthly throne? Consi. 5. Seeing he sittes now on his Fathers throne, therefore
nether is this the time, nor that the place, in which his throne is to be
erected: not the place, because in one kingdom there can be but one throne; and
not the time, for then he should site on his own throne, which now he does
not. Ans. If this be not to deceive with words, I know not what it is to
deceive. One and the same throne is called the throne of God and of the Lamb,
Rev. 22.3. and therefore his Fathers throne is his own throne, as he says
generally Ioh. 17.10, all my things ar thine, and all thine ar mine: and so
both parts of the proof fall to the ground: in one kingdom is bot one throne,
and that throne belongs unto the Father and unto the Sone, and now he sites
on his own throne, as it is said expressly unto the Sone Heb. 1.8, Thy throne
is for ever and ever: and he prays for no other glory, bot that which he
hade before the world was Ioh. 17.5. Consi. 6. He has a throne which belongs
unto him as man, and to the throne of the Father he hes no proper intereste,
bot as God. Ans. Show then any text that speaks of his two thrones: yea if he
have or shall have any throne as man, and not as God, it must be given unto
him: bot it is uow given unto him to site on his Fathers throne, and his given
throne is the throne of his Father. Inst. The reasoun of it (as is intimated in
the first words) is because the time in which all that shall overcome is to be
called, is not yet at an end, and this also the answer, which was made unto the
souls under the altar (which cried for vengeance against their persecutiones)
does fully confirm: for it was said unto them, they should rest yet for a
little seasoun until their fellow-servantes also and their brethren, that
should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled Rev. 6.11, and when this is
done Rev. 11.15. then shall Christ site on his throne, an they that overcome
shall site with him: for he that overcomes and keeps, etc. Rev. 2.26. Ans. The
force of this reaseon is, Christ shall not be a king till all his subjectes be
called and overcome, bot his subjectes are not all yet called: which form is
alyk with this, Ferdinand shall not be Emperor till all his subjectes be borne
and be victorious, where as some of his subjectes ar coming daily into the
world, and (it may be) more of them ar daily departing. This is a ridiculous
reasoun, and so is the other. 2. Nether does that prayer of the saints make
mention of his earthly kingdom, bot of subduing or revenging their enemies,
which shall be without an earthly Monarchy, towit, by punishing them in hell. 3.
That text Rev. 11.15 speaks not of a proper kingdom of Christ, (and farlesse
of an earthly kingdom) bot of the kingdom of our Lord and his Christ: if it
had been said, Of our Lord and Christ, or, of our Lord Christ, if micht be
thought to be the proper kingdom of Christ which he as man governes or shall
govern: bot when it is said, Of our Lord and of his Christ, we see a
distinction of persons, and unity of power: And therefore it is clear, that the
text Revel. 2.26. is impertinently cited for proof of that thing which is not,
and is imagined to be on earth; whereas that power is in heaven. Inst. 2. The
like encouragement he gave also to his disciples before his passion; Ye ar
they (said he) who have continowed with me in my tentationes, therefore I
appointe unto you a kingdom, etc. Luk 22.28. Ans. It micht been more for his
purpose to have conceiled this text, which makes the 12 tribes of Israel the
persons judged: and all the textes quoted on the margin speak of the kingdom
of God, excep that of Luk 24.42,43. where is mention of no kingdom, but of
eating and drinking after Christ's resurrection: and if that be the kingdom,
whereof our Savior speaks c. 22.29, that kingdom is come already. Inst. 3. I
know those words ar taken by interpreters for a metaphorical expression of
those joys, which he shall receive in heaven: bot it is a current axiom in
our schools, Non esse a litera seu propria Scriptura siguificatione
recedendum, nisi aliqua necessitas cogat, and Scripturae veritas in ipsa litera
periclitari videtur. Ans. It may be douted, whither this Author hes been bred
in schools, or what he calls our schools, seeing he so abuses rhetorical
terms (as literal sense for proper sense; metaphorical sense
contradistinguished to figurative sense) and keeps no logical canones in his
arguing, and I think, he did never learn such interpretation of Scripture in
any approved school. As for this rule, he may see pattly by that is said, and
shall see more hereafter, that these words can not be understood of an earthly
kingdom: nether do these forecited Scriptures compel us (as he boldly says)
to stick unto the earthly senfe of this text in hand. Inst. 4. For besides that
there is little analogy and resemblance betwixt a perpetual praising and
worshipping God, and the business of a politic government here spoken of;
besides this (I say) we are already informed that though out Savior be now in
heaven, yet he sites not there on his own throne, and consequently is not yet
in the kingdom, which the Father hes appointed him. Ans. What impudence is
here! does not David say Psalm. 16.11, In thy presence is the fullness of joy:
at thy richt hand ar pleasures for evermore? and Psalm. 17.15, I shall be
satisfied, when I awake with thy lyknesse, and Psalm. 36.8, they shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fullness of thy house, and thou shall make them
drink of the river of thy pleasures. These and many more ar spoken of the joys
in heaven by resemblance with earthly kingdoms. And we have already showed
that he hes been misinformed (or misinformeth) of another throne and another
kingdom. Inst. 5. It is plain from S. Paul 1 Cor. 15.22, that it shall not
be there after the judgment of the dead: his words ar these, as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive: bot every man in his order:
Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. And on
the margin he adds, They that are Christ's, If there were not to be some
distance of time betwixt the resurrection of these and other men, it had been
as casie for the Apostle to have said, They that are dead, or, all that are in
the grave. Ans. 1. Whither the Apostle micht have said so, or so: can any man
gather necessarily out of these words so great a distance of time betwixt the
resurrection of the godly and of the ungodly? Here the Apostle names the
godly, and not the ungodly, not importing any notable distance of time; but
because he had said v. 22. In Christ all shall be made alive: which words can
not be properly and univocally meaned of the ungodly, whose rising shall be for
the acco^plishment of their second death; therefore here v. 23, he justly omittes
the mention of the ungodly, and speaks of the godly, as also he does 1 Thessalonians.
4.16.17: where we find expressly an order among the godly, saying, The dead in
Christ shall rise first, and then we who ar alive and remain shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. The Apostle in
both textes speaks of the same coming of Christ, (as this Author acknowledges
and applies the words to the same purpose p. 50) as none will say, that there
shall be any notable prioritie in time twixt the one and the other sort meeting
Christ; so and far less do these words speaking only of them that are in
Christ, importe two resurrectiones different the one from the other the space
of 1000 years. Yea and the Apostle saying, that we shall be caught up and meet
the Lord in the air, and so shall be ever with him; how can any imagine that we
shall come down again from the air to abide so long a space on the earth: and
therefore he speaks there of the general resurrection, when they who ar in
Christ shall be ever with him, not in a temporal but everlasting glory. And
seeing the Apostie speaks both there and here of the same resurrection,
certanly he speaks not here of a resurtection before that time of the general
judgment. 2. page 49 after the words of Paul, at his coming; Mr Matoun
inserteth, and not the Martyrs only. Why inserteth he these words? does any
(who denies this earthly monarchy) say, that the Martyrs and no more shall
come with Christ? no, but some Millenaries say so? and here he would mark a
word aganst them. Be it so, 3 he wresteth the words thus; Then comes the end
(what presently after his coming? no bot) when he has delivered up the
kingdom to God, even the Father: and when shall that be, when he shall have
put down all rule and authority and power, etc. Here in stead of explication
is a very contradiction of the text by inserting a negative, and conueying it
closely with a querie: the particle Then hes a relation to the words
preceding, and the word Comes is not in the original, as ye may see by the
diverse characters in the translation, and it may alsweel be rendered Then or
at that time is the end, when he shall have delivered up, etc. so that the
very time when he shall deliver the kingdom, is when they who ar Christ's
shall rise at his coming: and therefore there shall be no notable distance of time
twixt the resurrection and the general judgment and consequently these words
of Paul do clearly prove, that the reign of Christ as Godman does not
begin after his nixt coming, nor can (without contradiction unto the Apostle)
any notable space of time be betwixt his nixt coming and the last subduing of
all things. The 25 verse proves the same: for when it is said, For he must
reign till he hes put all his enemies under his feet; thereby is teached (more
clearly in the original language) that now he reigueth and continewes reigning,
and consequently he is not to begin his reign, (even as it is said Heb. 2.8.
Thou have put all thing under his feet) and when they who ar in Christ shall be
made alive, death the last enemy shall be destroyed, and then is the end of
administration. Inst. 6. Betwixt the time that now is and his kingdom, our
Savior hes put an irreconciliable distinction, calling this the time, not of a
kingdom bot of tentation, that is, of persecution for richteousnesse. Ans.
What God by his word and experience hes conjoined, let no man call
irreconciliable: for he says Psa. 110.2. reign thou in the midst of thy
enemies: and Romans 8.37. in all these things (that is in the midst of our
sufferinges) we are more than conqueroures. So that when the enemies do rage
and persecute, even then does Christ reign, and the godly ar kings, or if
there be any title more transcendent. Inst. 7. And shall not their bodies
asweell reign with Christ, as their souls? bot these (we know) ar and shall be
yet captives to the grave. Ans. When Christ shall come, the last enemy shall be
destroyed, and the bodies (and not the souls, which die not) shall be made
alive, and both shall be with him for ever. Inst. 8. Ar the saints that shall be
found alive at Christ's coming, exemted from his coming? for if he should reign
then, and then give up his kingdom to his Father, they are exempted. Ans. He is
king till then, and governs all who ar and shall be; and when he shall come,
they who shall be found alive, shall be caught up to meet him. And because the
clearing of this point may serve for clearing the whole matter, I add by way of
explication; As the sin of Adam was committed aganst God the Father, and his
revolting or apostasy was a diminution of the Fathers kingdom, so the
bringing of the faithful into his obedience is the rendering of that kingdom.
It is true, the offense was aganst the Sone and H. Spirit; bot the work of
creation being the work of the Father in a special manner (as it is intimate in
the Creed) the sin was directly aganst the first person: When obedience was
not given, the Father micht have execute his justice on the offendres, as he
did on the Angeles. Now as when a part of an earthly kingdom rebelleth aganst
the king directly, and indirectly aganst his sone as a friend and heir of his
fathers croon: the sone may undertake to regaine the rebels unto his father,
and the father may be weel pleased to commit unto his sone that part of the
kingdom for that effect with full power: which the sone acceptes, and reigns
and prevails powerfully, so that, albeit the archtraitour ganestand in malice
to the honor of the king and his sone, yet many of the rebels ar reconciled
with the king, who by this means regaineth his king dome: So the Sone of God
hes undertaken for so many as it pleased him, and beseeches men to be
reconciled with the king of heaven and earth, showing that he hes appeased the
Fathers wrath, and hes power to receive into, and exclude from the kingdom of
heaven: which power he hes received of the Father: and he shows that there is a
time determined fot receiving men into grace again; so that if that time shall
expire, there is no more grace to be she wed unto any: Satan envyeth the glory
of God and man's reconciliation and therefore opposes by deceiving some, and
vexing others who hearken unto the word of reconciliation: nevertheless Christ
prevails by his preaching, so that a great many repent and crave mercy, and
others not: when the determined time comes, these who have been received into
mercy ar presented unto God the Father, and as if they had not rebelled, he
acceptes them into his kingdom: when the Sone says, Here I am and these whom
I have brought into acknowledge meant of their offenses; I have satisfied
Justice for them, Thou O Father have thy own subjectes, and let them have the
kingdom prepared for them; The Father will not say, Thy reward is not in
heaven bot on earth: therefore let them go again unto the earth, and inherit
glory there for 1000 years: Bot receives them into the inheritance reserved
for them in the heavens.

Page 50. Of this kingdom also speaks Sa. Peter Act. 3.19.20.21. Where if by
the time of refreshing and restitution of all thing, naught else be meaned, bot
the Jews inhabiting again of their own land, and the bringing of all other
nationes into subjection to them; then it is evident that Christ's coming at
this time, shall be to accomplish this thing to Israel, and consequently to
receive his appointed kingdom: bot that these words can have no other
meaning, a small acquaintance with the Prophets will inform you: who as they
speak of nothing more, so they have nothing which can be applied to our
Saviors second coming, as a confortable effect so generally foreshewne, but
this. Ans. I am sure, No man can imagine, that these words in themselves
importe, that our Savior shall reign among the Jews as an earthly monarch:
which is the point page 45, and therefore this, if by the time, etc. is as if
one would say, If I be a king, I am a king. 2. that the Prophets have another
meaning, may be seen by all the Interpreters, and partly by that is said here.
3. it is a wonder, if any Jew will say, that the Prophets speak of nothing
more: for if his meaning be, They speak not more of any other thing, it is
question able seeing there is much spoken of Gods precepts: Bot if he do mean
(as it seems) that they speak not of any other thing that can be applied unto
our Saviors coming, I will cite one Prophet for all Daniel 12.1.2; where is
mention of the great Prince, of great trouble even to the time of deliverance,
and then awaking of some (not for a space of time, bot) to everlasting life,
and of others (at the same time) unto shame and everlasting contempt. And is
not this a more confortable effect forshewn generally unto every one, that
shall be found written in the book? Now the cause, why the Prophets write so
much of Jerusalem and that kingdom to be restored, was, that the godly hearing
of the destruction of that kingdom, did greatly fear, that that communwealth
should never be restored, wherein Christ our Savior was to be borne and
perform the work of redemption: we may justly think, that their fear was not
so much the want of bodily liberty, as the not coming of our Savior: and
therefore the Prophets insist much upon that point for the confort of the
godly, that howsoever that kingdom shall be ruined, yet it shall be restored, and
all nationes shall by the preaching of Jews come into the obedience of Christ,
and so receive laws from the Jews, as being captives unto them, whose
captives they micht be for a time. Bot to imagine that the faithful did
expect, and the Prophets did speak of no other thing, bot this earthly
Monarchy, is too gross, and directly contradicting the Apostles bearing
another testimony of them, Hebr. 11.16, they desire a better country, that
is, heaven: and 1 Pet. 1.9.10, receiving the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls, of which salvation the Prophets have enquired and
searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, etc.

Page eadem. And here we may call to mind our Saviors words to James and
John, vvhon they request that one micht site on his richt hand, etc. Ans. We
may call to mind too his words, Ye know not, what ye ask, Math. 20.22, and
the words of the Evangelist, verse. 24. when the ten heard it, they were moved
with indignation against the Brethren. Which words show, that howbeit Christ
had spoken of his Kingdom, yet at that time James and John were both ignoraut
and ambitious. Inst. Bot his words following do intimate, that his kingdom
is to be held on earth, where only this may be fulfilled: for in heaven it can
not be done, unless we will grant, that other men shall be as highly e xalted,
as our Savior is. Ans. 1. Albeit never one shall site on his richt hand nor
his left, yet nothing in these words is for this purpose, seeing he says not
there, that any shall site, bot only, To site on my richt hand -- is not mine
to give. 2. Mat. 19.28. he speaks of sitting on the throne of his glory
(which must be in heaven, seeing he speaks absolutely, his glory, and his
glory is greater in heaven, than can be on an earthly throne) and he says
unto his disciples, When he shall site on that throne, ye who have followed
me in the regeneration, shall site upon 12 thrones: And may not some of these
thrones be on his richt hand, and some on his left hand? I enquire not now,
what these thrones may be, bot there ye see multitude of thrones in glory,
as kings in their State may have thrones for their greatell. Peers. Inst. 2.
To site on a throne is to site at the richt of God: which is a prerogative
peculiar to the Sone alone, which the chiefest of the angeles never enjoyed:
for to which of the angels said he at any time, Site on my richt hand? Ans.
Christ sitting on a throne sites on the richt hand of God: bot to speak
absolutely, To site on a throne in heaven, is not to sire on the richt hand of
God, no more than any Prince is advanced to the richt hand of a king, albeit he
site on a throne, and inferior to the king and his eldest sone.

Page 51. The Apostles words 2 Timothy 4.1, may not be forgotten, I charge thee
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at
his appearing and his kingdom. Why should Christ's appearing and kingdom be
joined together; yea why should his kingdom be added as the end of his
appearing, unless both were to contemporale? unless his kingdom were to
begin at his appearing, and not before it? Ans. The mentioning of these two
together and in that order does no more importe such a beginning, than the end
of glory is the beginning of virtue, because the Apostle says in the same
order, he hes called us unto glory and virtue 2 Pet. 1.3: howbeit glory be
named before virtue, glory is after virtue. Page ead. And in my seeming that
prophetical image Dan. 2.31, which represents both the orderly succession and
diverse condition of all the then following kingdoms of this world, unto the
kingdom of Christ (shadowed there unto us by the stone that was cut out
without hands) does give good licht unto this of Saint Paul: for in what
manner these kingdoms have succeeded each other, in lyk manner is the kingdom
of Christ to succeed them, as appears by the same phrase of speech, which is
attributed as well to the setting up of this kingdom, as to any of them,
towit, that it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms. Ans. In
the seeming of many milliones that image does not signify a temporal
monarchy of the Jews, which is the point in hand: and the seeming of so many,
contrary to the seeming of one, micht satisfy for all that lohg discourse
following: nevertheles I add, albeit these four kingdoms did succed one
another, yet the kingdom of Christ did not succeed or was the last of them, or
after them in time: for it is written v. 41, In the days of these kings [not
after them] shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed, and it shall break in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, silver
and the gold. It shall break the silver and the gold; then it shall be before the
brass and the irone. And of what king can that be understood, but of Christ,
who says Esa. 10.12, I will punish the stout heart of the king of Assyria,
and c. 37.29, because thy rage against me -- I will put my hook in thy nose,
etc. 2. Whereas it is alleged that the 35 verse does fully declare that
succession in time and place, certanly the 35 verse is not contrary to the 44
verse, which shows plainly, that this kingdom shall be in the days of these
kings, and break them in pieces: and therefore these words Shall break them in
pieces, signify a conquest by power, but nether by succession in time nor by
force of arms. Inst. The falling of the stone upon the feet of the image, upon
the last and divided kingdoms of the irone empire, does probably implie no
less. Ans. The dream implies nothing contrary to the exposition: and therefore
leave probabilities that are contrary to certanties. Inst. 2. If the kingdom
of God there spoken of, were to be understood of a kingdom, which should be so
set up in the days of these kings -- then doutlesse it should be represented
by some part of the image it self -- and not by a thing so different from it
and adverse unto it. Ans. 1. Then teach God, how he should revele his will. 2.
it is reveled in express words v. 44. 3. there was reasoun to express it by a
different thing, because the four were of one quality, and this was of another
quality: My kingdom (says he) is not of this world Joh. 18 36: it is more
wonderful, more powerful and more general than any of them, and all the
kings who will not serve this king shall perish, he shall break them with a
rode of irone Ps. 149.8, he shall strike them through in his wrath, Psalm. 110.5,
and bind them with chains, and their nobles with fetters of iron Ps. 149.8.
Inst. 3. And that noucht else is meaned by the world to come Heb. 2.5, bot the
kingdom of our Savior, it is evident by the authority there alleged out of
Ps. 8. Ans. None denies it. Inst. 4. If there be yet a world, which is yet to
be put in subjection unto Christ as man, then it must be a distinct world from
that in which as man he shall give up the kingdom to his Father. Ans. The
kingdom or the world, whereof the Apostle speaks there, was then to come, not
in respect of Christ, but of the Apostle: for he means the kingdom of
heaven, as appears by these words [wherof we speak], which have relation of
the words preceding v. 3, If we neglect so great salvation: Where he opponeth
the euangelical promises unto the typical promises: these was an earthly
Canaan, and this is heaven. Christ at the time of writing this epistle was in
possession of it, and the Apostle did then hope for the house not made with
hands, eternal in heaven 2 Cor. 5.1: and therefore that world is not a distinct
world, but even the same in which as Mediator he shall give up the kingdom to
the Father. Inst. 5. That which is given up, is already past. Ans. That which
shall be given is not past as yet: nether shall it be given up altogether, but in
some manner, as the Millenaries acknowledge, it shall be at the end of their 1000
years. Inst. 6. It is no where said, that the new Jerusalem, the city of
eternal glory shall be subject to Christ as a creature, but that he as a
creature shall (after the judgment of the dead) be there subject to the
Father. Ans. He as God-man says Mat. 28. To me is given all power in heaven
and on earth. And thus all the consequences for proving the earthly monarchy
of the Jews ar naught.

Page 45. You shall hear it directly and expressly affirmed Luke 1.31.32.33.
Ier. 23,5.6. Zach. 6.12.13. Ezekiel. 34.22.23.24, and c. 37.24.25. Esa. 9.6.7, and
c. 52.13.14.15. Mic. 4.6.7. Ps. 72.6.7.8.9.10.11, and 102.13.14.15.16. Now that
these prophecies concern the reign of Christ alone, I think no man douteth;
and that they are already fulfilled, it can not be proved. Ans. These textes
may prove some thing against your fellow Mr. Archer, who thinks, that Christ
after he hes put the Jews in possession of their Monarchy, shall ascend again
into the heavens, and Jews in the mean time shall reign till his third
coming: But they prove nothing aganst us, who hold, that Christ reigns on the
true throne of David. Inst. Nether did Christ at his first coming site on
David's throne, nor any other of David's Image -- for the scepter was departed.
Ans. He fittes on the richt hand of the throne of Majesty in heaven Heb. 8.1
which was typified by the throne of David. Inst. 2. Nether were Judah and Israel
then in the land together. Ans. There is neither Jew nor Griek, nether bond nor
fre, nether male nor female, but we are all one in Christ Jesus: and if ye be
Christ's, then aryee Abrahamis seed and heirs according to the promise Gal.
3.28. Inst. 3. Nether was the temple then destroyed, bot afterward. Ans.
Christ said, destroy this temple, and in thrie days I will raise it up again:
Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and will
thou rear it up again in thrie days? but he spak of the temple of his body,
says the Euang. Ioh. 2.19. So the true temple is Christ's body, which the
Jews destroyed, and he raised it up again: and in this sense the disciples did
believe the Scriptures after the resurrection of Christ v. 22. And therefore the
things spoken in these Scriptures ar accomplished at his first coming not only
in heaven bot on earth according to the different portiones thereof; In heaven
and on earth, I say, and in true Jerusalem and on the true throne of David: for
his feet stood in that day [towit, when he went to receive the fuller
accomplishment of his kingdome] on the mount of Olives, which is by Jerusalem
on the east [from which also he ascended] and the mount of Olives hes been
cloven in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west [when not only
the members of the church, but all the world was shaken at the powerful
preaching of the gospel, (even more gloriously than at the giving of the law,
Heb. 12.26) so that nothing could hinder the course therof] and the Jews have
fled to that valey of the mountains [when they did embrace the gospel, which
is low in worldly men's estimation, and of high esteem before God] and the
valey of the mountains hes reached unto Azal [for the preaching of the gospel
hes been an excellent stone-mark showing the richt way, (as it is exponed 1 Samuel 20.19, on the margin of the late translatione) to the kingdom of heaven]
yea they have fled lyk as they did flee from before the earthquake in the days
of Vzzia king of Judah [towit, they have been astonished at the wonderfulnesse
of Gods workes] and the Lord hes come; and so forth as it follows in Zach. 14.
where he shows the perpetual licht of the glorious gospel v. 6.7, and the
continowall flowing of wholesome waters in the kingdom of Christ v. 9.8, and the
removing of all impedimentes for the security of the electes conversion and
salvation v. 10.11. You see here, that our Savior came not only to conquer
death (which is the last enemy that he shall destroy, and therefore not to be
destroyed till the last resurrection) bot also to tak the kingdoms of the
world unto himself, and hes made them all acknowledge his authority, and hes
put down all contrary power and authority (for all nationes have praised
Christ, and given laud unto him Romans 14.9.10.11.) that there is one sheepherd
and one sheepfold, that the dominiones, kingdoms and greatness of the
kingdoms under the whole heaven have been possessed by the people and saints
of the most high, that is, (as the gospel hes exponed it) by the faithful
Israel Romans 14.12, howbeit all hes not been possessed at the same periode of
time.

Page 58. This, as I think, is the time of which he spak these Words, Verily I
say unto you, Hereafter shall you see the heavens open, and the angels
ascending and descending upon the Sone of man. Ans. That these words shall be
fulfilled or have been fulfilled, it is most certane; and it is als certane,
that they shall never be fulfilled in the proper acceptance of the words,
seeing the body of Christ is not so tale, as that it shall reach from heaven to
earth: for this cause some (as Cyrill on this place) have exponed unto for upon
in this sense, as if the heavens were open, the angels shall come down and
ascend unto my service: so does Chrysostom apply these words to the angels
ministering unto Christ in time of his passion and resurrection. Others think it
to be an exposition of that vision of Jacob Genesis 28, whereby was signified, that
Christ is the Mediator making way twixt heaven and earth Col. 1.20: and these
expositiones (for the matter) do aggrie with other Scriptures. Inst. That this
may be fulfilled, it is requisite, that he be on earth, whither these
messingers may descend unto him, and from whence again they may ascend. Which
argues too his continowance here for a greater space of time, than the
judgment of the dead requires. Ans. A poor proof: for as it is requisite, that
he be on earth, whither that these messingers may descend unto him, so I may
say, it is requisite, that he be in heaven whence they may descend on him, and
whither they may ascend to him: and so taking the words in that sense, they
may be fulfilled, albeit he never were on earth; even as they may be fulfilled
when he is on earth and not in heaven: but according to the first exposition he
was on earth, when they were fulfilled, farlesse is his continowance on earth
necessary for these words.

Page ead. Although it be said, that Christ shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, and that of his kingdom shall be no end, yet it is not meaned,
that he shall always reign as man, or that the earthly Jerusalem, the place
of his throne as man, shall always stand. Ans. They will change the
signification of the words, when they please, and so far as it makes for their
purpose, and no more: but when they shall prove by Scripture, that the earthly
Jerusalem shall be the place of Christ's throne, we may aggrie on the exposition
of the words for ever, and shall be no end: and till that be shown, I omit
further inquiry of them: but as yet we have seen nether necessary consequence
nor evident expression for it, Follows another point, that the restoration of
Jerusalem and resurrection shall concur.

Page 6. You see that when our Savior comes to reign over all the earth, he
comes not alone, bot bringes all the saints with him. Ans. We see nether that
he shall come to reign (after that manner) over all the earth; nether that he
shall bring all his saints with him, and for this last point he alleges no
text of Scripture, but will have it to be taken on his bare word: which we
refuse to do, We read, that when he shall come to judge, he shall bring all
the holy angels with him Mat. 25.31, and all nationes shall be gathered before
him, and that he shall send his angels to gather the elect from the four
winds: but that they shall come with him into an earthly monarchy, we find no
where. And nevertheles as if it were unquestionable, he adds; Which words as
they do establiso the lideral sense of the first resurrection mentionet Rev.
20, so they make the kingdom of Israel and the 1000 years reign of the
saints to Synchronize and meet together for why shall the samtes come with
him, but because they have a share in this kingdom, and ar to be his
assistentes in it, as he told his Disciples? Ans. The first resurrection of
bodies imports a second resurrection; and so eiher these who rise shall die
again, and rise again at the second resurrection; or they who shall rise at the
first shall not die at all, and others shall rise again at the second
resurrection. This Author makes it no where manifest, which of these two he
holds, and Mr. Archer holds the first opinion: but neither of them hes any
warrant from Scripture, and the testimonies that are cited here on the margin,
show that there shall not be such a resurrection of the richteous: for it is
said Luke 20.35, they who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world and the
resurrection from the dead nether marry nor ar given in marriage, nether can
they die any more, for they are equal unto the Angels, being the children of the
resurrection. If they can die no more, and be equal unto the Angels, then they
shall not rise at a second resurrection, nether shall bey live an earthly life,
which in the best degrie is inferior unto the life of the Angels. Ioh. 6,39
This is the Fathers will, that of all that he hes given me, I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up at the last day; and v. 44. No man can come
unto me, excep the Father who hes sent me, draw him, and I will raise him at
the last day. If the last day be the day of the general judgment (as
certainly it is, even supponing the temporal Monarchy for 1000 years) and the
elect shall not be raised til the last day (as these words imply) then there
shall not be a first and second resurrection, unles the second resurrection be
after the last day: and consequently, there not being a resurrection of the
children of God till the last day, the first resurrection mentioned Rev. 20 can
not be understood of the bodies, but rather a rising from sin, whereof mention
is made Ephesians. 5.14 and Col. 3.1. He cites also Phil. 3.11 If by any means I
micht attain unto the resurrection of the dead. These words name the dead
generally, and make nothing for a first and second resurrection: bot v. 20 it
is said, Our conversation or freedom is in heaven, whence also we look for the
Savior, who shall change our vile body, that it may be like unto his glorious
body. If the freedom [POLITTVMA] of the godly be in heaven, then they expect
not a Monarchy on earth; and if the bodies shall be like unto his glorious
body, they shall not live an earthly life nor die again. He quoteth, 1 Thessalonians.
3.13 and c. 4.14, etc. but the first hes nothing of a second resurrection, and
c. 4.14. says, We shall be ever with the Lord, towit, in another manner than
nou; nou by grace, and then in glory. If we shall be ever with the Lord, then we
shall not die again and rise again, unless the Lord die too: which, I think,
they will not say. Lastly he cites Ezekiel. 37,12,13, which words certanly ar
allegorical, and show the return of the Jews from their captivity, not
withstanding the extremity of their misery, and after these words he takes
occasion to speak of the spiritual kingdom of the Church, as is said before:
but nether first nor last speaks the Prophet of a first and second
resurrection at or about the last day. And so in all these testimonies nothing
is to this purpose of the concurring of the Jewish Monarchy with the first
resurrection. Inst. The elders Rev. 5.10 said in the hearing of Saint John,
Thou cast made us unto God kings and priests, and we shall reign ou earth:
And on the margin he cites Romans 4.13 Luke 19.17,19.

Ans. That these words Rev. 5.10. signify the honor and privileges of the
godly on earth; it is out of dout: bot the question is, whither John saw these
elders in heaven, and whither they shall come from the heaven to the earth
again; or whither John signifies by them the godly on earth? If these words
make any thing for this purpose, these elders were in heaven: but all the
Interpreters (even the Author of Commentat. Apocalypt. page 8.) expone them to
be the godly on earth. The words Romans 4.13, ar, The promise that he should be
the heir of the world, was not to Abraham and to his seed through the law, but
through the richteousnesse of faith. Certanly albeit the land of Canaan was
promised to Abraham and his seed, yet he (never having possession of that land)
and his seed or the faithful ar more properly called the heirs of eternal life
Tit. 3.7, and heirs of that kingdom, which he hes promised unto them that
love him, Jam. 2.5, and heirs of God and joint-heires with Christ Romans 8.17:
which kingdom was typified by Canaan: and of this promise without dout speaks
Paul there. The words of Luk 19.17.19. ar a part of a parable, and we know,
that every part of parables is not argumentative. These textes then serve
nothing for this Monarchy. On the margin is cited also a testimony of
Windelin: bot we regard not the testimony of parties in their own cause, (and
far less do we regard the consequences of that testimony, wherewith the nixt
page is filled, and with that question of the essential or accidental change of
the elements) seeing for one we may bring 5000 testimonies in this purpose.

Page 62. This will appear to a diligent ey out of the controversed place Rev.
20. for besides, that the opposition betwixt the first and the second
resurrection, does impose the same sense on both; besides this (I say) the
vision represented not unto Saint John perfect men at the first, that is, men
that should be beheaded for the witness of Jesus, bot souls only, and that as
of men already beheaded: which manifestly shows, that the resurrection after
mentioned, did follow their death, and not go before it. Ans. This form of
discoursing shows manifestly that the Author is a strange wrangler: for 1.
there is no more opposition nor aggriement twixt the first and the second
resurrection, than is twixt the first and the second death: but none will say,
that the first and second deaths ar in alyke sort bodily: and therefore there is
no necessity to expone the first and second resurrectiones in the same sense.
2. what perfection of wit is it to imagine, that men who shall be beheaded for
the witness of Jesus ar more perfyte than the souls of them that are beheaded?
3. if by these souls he understandes the spiritual part of men ere they were
made perfyte, then he must understand the souls either before they entered into
the bodies, or after they entered the bodies before their regeneration: but both
these conditiones ar before the first resurrection. 4. if the first
resurrection be their forsaking of Antichristian erroures or (as it is said
there) their not worshipping the beast, and their not receiving the beasts
mark (as all Interpretors, excep Millenaries expone it) then the first
resurrection follows not their death, bot goes before it. Inst. It is said,
that they lived and reigned with Christ 1000 years: bot how can it be, that
they should reign after their resurrection or begin their resurrection all at
once, or continow it but 1000 years (which things these words imply) if by
their resurrection should be understood their regeneration, and by their reign
their being in heaven; or if by the word, they lived, should be meaned only
They were converted; how can they reign so long as 1000 years, seeing the place
of their reign must be on earth? Ans. If by their living and resurrection be
meaned their constant profession (as is said) and by their reign their
prevailing over these heresies, all these mistes ar soon scattered; towit, they
reign before their death and not after their resurrection; they began their
reign not all at once, but in their several ages (even as the Millenaries do
imagine, that the saints in that conceited monarchy shall not live all at
once, but in their several ages die again, and succeed one age to another for
the space of 1000 years) and so they reign not every one throghout the 1000
years, and so long space have ever some opposed the erroures of the beast: and
they reigning on earth have been encompast with war again, as it was
foretold, and Ecclesiastical Histories declare.

Inst. 2. The reign of Christ does not begin, till Antichrist is destroyed,
so that a metaphorical interpretation of the first resurrection would make good
this conclusion, that most of the saints shall rise many 100 years before
their reign, there being no less distance of time betwixt the hour of their
calling and Antichrists confusion. Ans. I have before made it clear, that
Christ's kingdom is already begun: for he reigns in the midst of his
enemies, not only by his power overruling, disappointing and turning all their
plotes upon their own pates, but also in conforting the hearts of the godly,
so that they are a terror to the whole earth, even to their enemies (who ar many
times more afraid at the prayers of the godly, than at the cannones of other
enemies) and subdue the spirits of the world, and bind kings in chains
stronger than iron: And therefore that assertion falls, The reign of Christ
begins not till Antichrist be destroyed: and that absurdity following that
assertion is falsely imputed unto that interpretation. Inst. 3. The assumption
[he would say, assertion; but it is marked before, the Author is not a
Logician] is grounded on Rev. 11.15, which shows that till the time of the
sevent trumpet (with the beginning whereof the last vial does concur) the
kingdoms of this world do not become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his
Christ. Ans. The words ar, The kingdoms of the world ar become the kingdoms
of our Lord and of his Christ. Here it is not said, Our Lord and his Christ
shall not reign till this time; bot this is all that the words importe, Now
is no kingdom but our Lord's and his Christ's. And if it be objected, It is no
where said so of Christ's reign till this time of the sevent trumpet: and
therefore it can not be true, that our Lord and his Christ do reign till then;
I answer, ye have heard before, that in the midst of these kingdoms does
Christ reign, even among them and over them, but all their kingdoms shall be
utterly destroyed, and his kingdom shall be for ever; for ever and ever, says
John, and therefore not for 1000 years only. ^. That synchronisme of the seven
viales with the last trumpet is confuted before. Now if we lay together what is
said of the Jews reign here, and this answer, we shall lykwyse see the
vanity of that observation on the margin upon these cited words; which is;
It is not said, the kingdom of heaven, to wit, of the third heaven -- or of
another world, I say, of another in substance, but, the kingdoms of this
world, that is, which is now, and shall till then be divided into many
kingdoms, shall wholly become Christ's, and be made by him one heavenly
kingdom, etc. For if ye remember what is said, that here John speaks of the
kingdom of our Lord and his Christ; he speaks not of the kingdom of the Jews
on earth: seeing he makes a distinction of two persons our Lord and his
Christ's, that is, the Father and his Sone, and that kingdom is for ever and
ever. Inst. 4. This also is intimated by the binding of Satan 1000 years (with
which the reign of the saints contemporates.) Ans. He said before, This
chapter is controverted, (to wit, by the Millenaries on the one part, and all
Christianes on the other) and now he says, This his conceit is intimated in
the binding of Satan: which is as if he had said, It is all undouted what he
says, and all is false that all Christianes say; whereas Christianes have given
better warrantes of their exposition, than Millenaries ar able to do. Inst. 5.
This vision as it is nixt to that of the battle, wherein the beast and the false
Prophet ar taken, so doutlesse it shall not till then receive its
accomplishment: for seeing Antichrist is but the Deviles instrument, we can not
imagine that his power shall outlast the Deviles liberty, especially if we
consider that whil Satan is in hold, there shall be a general peace over all the
world, as the Prophets say expressly, Esaias 2.4. Mich. 4.3. and as it is
here employed in that as soon as he is loosed again, presently he shall gather
all the rest of the world to fight against the saints: hot their malicious
attempt shall find no better success, than that of the beasts, etc.

Ans. This vision is nixt to that battle in order of writing: but it follows
not, that it shall not begin to be accomplished, till the former vision be
fully accomplished: for albeit Antichrist be the Deviles instrument, it may be
understood (as Histories do verify) that his power may be in the time of
Satan's imprisonement, that is, whil Satan is not permitted to rage and
persecute openly, as he did in the days of the heathnish emperomes, in the
mean time Antichrist may site in the Church of God, and deceive the world with
lies and fained miracles; so that even when peace is in the world from wars,
there be not peace from the children within (as Bernard complains in his time
in Cantic. ser. 33.) and wen he hes deceived the greatest part of the world or
all the world (excep some few persons in comparison of them, who ar deceived)
then Satan may stir up Antichrist to wage war aganst the disclosers of his
deceites, as he did against the Albigenses and Tolosani about the year 1220,
and against the Bohemianes about the year 1420, in the days of the Emperoures
Sigismund, Albert and others: and so the malicious attempt of Satan may have
the same success with that of the beast; I say not, the like, but, the same
both in place, time and number. And here add, that the fyst synchronisme in
the second part of Clavis Apocalyptica is false, which says, The 1000 years of
Christ's kingdom, and the last trumpet or space after the slauchter of the
beast do contemporate: and the reasounes thereof ar wrong: for 1 he says, do
not these words qui non adoraverant bestiam -- show, that this kingdom of
Christ did succeed unto the kingdom of the beast, his image and them that were
marked with his mark? for why should it be said of the sons of that kingdom,
that they had not worshipped the beast unles the beast had gone before? and
truly the good office goes before the reward in time. Ans. 1. Our former
translation is more consonante unto the Griek, which says, They did not
worship the beast: which is not the plusquamperfect time, but so, that at the
same time the beast is deceiving the world, and the children of God do not
worship the beast. 2. the reward of them, who worship not the beast is in
heaven, and they follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Reas. 2. This
appears yet more by the song of the elders and beasts sung at the destruction
of Babylon c. 19.6. Haleluiah, for the Lord God almichtie reigns, etc. for I
dout but there is one kingdom in both. Ans. When the Bohemianes saw the armies
of the pope and the Emperoures, turning their backs at the touck of Zisca's
drum, hade they not just reasoun to sing, Halleluiah: for the Lord God
almichtie reigns, let us rejoice, etc. And so may the godly at every
victory over the popish armies, even before the resurrection. Reas. 3. but
most of all clearly in c. 11.15.16, where at the sound of the sevent trumpet,
the days of the witnesses and the months of the beast and nationes being
outrunne, were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world ar
become the kingdoms of the Lord, etc. This is the consummation of the mystery
of God foretold by the Prophets, etc. Ans. This indeed is the consummation of
all the promises foretold by the Prophets and Apostles: and therefore it is not
to be understood of any earthly kingdom: seeing the full accomplishment of the
prophecies is not on earth. And so this synchronisme being false, all the like
synchronismes and all expositiones following upon them must fail with it. But
to return unto our author, when he hes said all that he can allege, at
least, all his strongest proofs; he will resolve the doutes against his
conceits; and me hopelsy, with no better success.

Page 64. Now against this which hes been said touching our Saviors kingdom,
his own words Ioh. 18.35, may be objected: for there he says planely, My
kingdom is not of this world. And Mat. 25.31, he says, When the Son of man
shall come in his glory -- With which aggrieth that of 2 Pet. 3.7, but the
heavens and the earth that are now, etc. and many other places of the like
nature. But to these words of our Savior I answer, They do only distinguish
the time and condition of his kingdom from the time and condition of the
kingdoms of this world, at the setting up of whose kingdom there shall be such
an alteration, etc. Ans. Our Savior distinguishes not betwixt the time of his
and other kingdoms: for he says in the same verse, My kingdom is not from
hence, that is, my kingdom is at hand, as he said unto his disciples, Mat.
15.28, Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here, who shall not taste of
death till they have seen the Sone of man come in his kingdom, that is,
reigning powerfully by the preaching of the gospel: and Mat. 24.14, this
Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a witness unto all
nationes, and then shall the end come. There is his kingdom before the end of
this world; and now is the time of his reign, albeit no humane policy be the
pattern thereof. 2. if he had said to that purpose (as the Millenaries say) that
in time of his kingdom (being so nigh) the kingdom of the Romans should be
no kingdom, they micht hade more pretext of law for condemning him: wherefore
he distinguishes the condition of the kingdoms, and not the time of them; so
that Caesar micht been Emperor, and Christ a michtly king, both at once. Non
eripit mortalia, qui regna dat coelestia.

Page 65. And to all such places that mention only the dissolution of the
elements and the last judgment, I answer, that these ar but a part of these
things, which shall be done by Christ at his nixt appearing, and that as other
Scriptures show, that he must reign on earth, and what shall be done at the
beginning of his reign, so these show only what shall be left undone till the
close of his kingdom, when he shall deliver it up. Ans. This shift will not
serve their turn: for the Scriptures teach us, that at Christ's coming shall be
the end, and he shall deliver up his kingdom 1 Cor. 15.23.24. 2. that he shall
come in a time when men look not for him, and all shall rise again, both godly
and ungodly, and then is the shutting of heaven, as the parable of the ten
Virgins teaches, Mat. 25. 3. that where he is, the faithful then shall be with
him, Ioh. 14.3. 4. that the heavens must conteen him till the time of the
restitution of all things, which God hes spoken by the mouth of all his
Prophets since the world began: But the Prophets have foretold the last
judgment, and that he shall convince all the ungodly, Jude v. 14.19. therefore
he shall not return till that time. And that is most plain, Psalm. 110.1,
Site at my richt hand till I make thy enemies thy footstool: That sitting at
Gods richt hand is his reigning, and it is not said, His enemies shall be subdued
and then he shall reign, but, he shall reign till then; so that he reigns
conquering, and he conquereth reigning. 5. that his kingdom is an heavenly
kingdom, 2 Timot. 4.12, and the reward of the godly is in heaven, Mat.
5.10.11. as our Savior spoke of it, and never of an earthly kingdom, unless
by way of aversation, Who made me a Judge? says he, Luk 12.14. and the godly
have prayed and wished to be with him in the heavens, and never prayed to
reign in his earthly kingdom, 2 Corint. 5.1.6. Phil. 1.3. 6. that God hes
raised up Christ from the dead, and set him at his richt hand in the heavens
far above all principality and power and every name that is named not only in
this world, but also in that which is to come, and hes put all thing under his
feet, and gave him to be the head over all things. Whence it is manifest, that
seeing our Savior governs his Church, and all spirits ar subject to him
(which authority is given unto him, and so as God-man;) his kingdom is not to
begin as yet, 7. that when Christ shall deseend from heaven with a shoute and
voice of the Archangel, with the trumpet of God, the dead in Christ shall rise
first, and they who ar alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall be ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. Here he is speaking of the same resurrection, whereof he speaks, 1
Corint. 15, as appears by the 52 verse: and here he shows the rising of the
dead and change of the living to be together, and that they both together shall
meet the Lord, and be ever with him. And that the saints being raised shall
not abide on earth to reign with the Jews in earthly pleasures, it is
manifest, because the Apostles teaches us, 1 Corint. 15.42, they shall rise in
incorruption, v. 43. in glory and in power, v. 44, in spiritual bodies: and
when Christ shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4. but it
is certain, that incorruptible, glorious, powerful and spiritual bodies can
not live a natural life. Nether can the faith of Christianes, that Christ is
come already, stand with that imagination of Jews and Chiliastes; seeing Jacob
said, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come, and unto him
shall the gathering of the people bec. This place can not be understood of the
departing of the scepter for a time, as it was in the captivity of Babylon;
which because it was but for a short time, and the Scepter was restored agine,
it was not thought to be the acco^plishment of the prophecy: but nou seeing the
scepter is departed, and the nations have been gathered unto Christ, who should
dout of the accomplishment thereof? and so that scepter can not be restored unto
the Jews. 2 The Apostle says 1 Thessalonians. 2.6, wrath is come upon the Jews to
the uttermost. This is not understood of spiritual wrath, seeing as yet the Lord
hes mercy upon them, as the Apostle witnesses Romans 11.5.28: and therefore it
must be understood of temporal wrath: and consequently a temporal kingdom
shall not be restored unto them. Lykwyse the estate of the Church is descrived
such, that the godly shall be mixed which the ungodly even till Christ come, and
gather the tares from the wheat to be burned, Mat, 13.39. All these and lyk
passages the Millenaries willingly pass over.

Page 66 In my conceit Saint Peter in the very nixt verse does intimate as
much: for having before used the word, day, he warns them not to be ignorant
of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and 1000
years as one day, as if he had told them, that the day he speaks of was indeed
a 1000 years -- And indeed to what purpose had this sudden and serious
advertisement been inferred, if the Apostle had not heerby discovered unto them
(besides the largest definite and limited acception of the word) such a
spiritual relation of 1000 years to one day, as could not belong to any other
number? Ans. Whatsoever be your conceit, you may see, that the Apostle hes
another purpose there: for v. 4 he tells of scoffers jeering at the promise
of Christ's coming, because all things continow as they were, and so all things
seem to have subsisting in themselves: he refutes this imaginatione, and shows
that the world both was made and continoweth by the word of God, who is able to
destroy (as sometime he did) and hes appointed a day of judgment and perdition
of ungodly men. Here he puts the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly
men, fot that the scoffers say, Where is the promise of his coming? so that at
his coming he will judge and punish the ungodly: which is contrary to the
opinion of the Millenaries, Then v. 8 he answers to that opinion of delay,
saying, One day is with the Lord as 1000 years: He says not, One day is 1000
years (as the Millenaries make the commentary shorter than the text) but, is
as a 1000 years: and therefore here is no exposition, but comparison, as if he
had said, albeit a 1000 years seem a long time to us, and so the world seems
to have continowed long, yet it is not so with the Lord, to whom all time is
short or none. And then he shows the end, why God delayeth that coming, towit,
in longsuffering toward men, awaiting the repentance of the last of them.
Whereby you see another meaning and another purpose, even contrary to that
conceit of the Millenaries. The Apostle micht have named many milliones of
years as one day in respect of Gods eternity: but according to the usual
custom of speech he names a round great number for any number. And
nevertheles in the end of that page it is said; This being so, I see not, but
that Gods foreappointment of 1000 years to the world, for each several day of
its first week, micht in all lyklyhood be the ground of this prophetical sense
of the word, wherein it was afterward delivered by the infallible penmen of the
holy write. Ans. The certantie of all the appointmentes of God we acknowledge,
and the infallibility of his penmen: but where is it reveled, that God hes
appointed 1000 years continowance to the world for each several day of the
first week? On the margin he cites R. Ketina and Comment. Apoca. par. 2. p.
287, where ar some testimonies of the Rabbines to this purpose. Let Jews follow
Jewish fables; to us Christianes hes God spoken in the last days by his Sone
Heb. 1.2, whom he hes bidden us here, certanly with a limitation, to hear none
others. Inst. It is said Mat. 24.31, he shall send his Angels with a great
sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect -- at which time
two shall be in the field, the one shall be taken, and the other left -- and Luk c.
17.34, records, two men shall be in one bed -- But if our Savior at his coming
presently shall give sentence on all that are not written in the book of life;
if he shall make no stay on earth, before he undertake this business, then why
shall the elect only be gathered together, and the rest left behind, seeing that
great Assise is to be held chiefly for condemnation of the ungodly men? Ans.
Here is nothing to prove the monarchy of the Jews. 2. the two Evangelists
speak there of the gathering the elect, and taking them up (als also 1 Cor.
15.23.) yet they speak not exclusively, as if the ungodly shall not be judged
nor raised, but they speak of separation, and thereby of taking up the elect
into the air and heavens; whereas the wicked shall not be taken up, but left on
the earth, and be condemned and sent to hell, Mat. 13.40.41: and it follows
v. 43. then shall the richteous shine forth, etc. The particle then shows that
the wicked shall be cast into the furnace of fire, as soon (if not sooner) as
the richteous shall shine in the kingdom of their Father. 3. If the richteous
shall be taken up, and the ungodly left on the earth; that is, the one taken away
from the earth, and the wicked left on the earth; then the godly shall not have
earthly dominion. 4. if Christ at his coming shall hold that great assise
chiefly for condemnation of the wicked; how then shall the godly be quickened,
and the wicked be left in their graves after them for the space of 1000 years?
These things can not aggrie. Now such suppositiones being laid, it is no
wonder, that many doutes arise thereupon; as whither the good angels be able to
gather the reprobates, or whither they shall be fetched by the wicked angels; and
they shall be left either to perish in the general destruction that shall come
upon the enemies of the Jews, or ey-witnesses of Gods wonders. What can either
good or evil angels do without the Lords authority? and what can they not
do, when he wills? but certainly the wicked shall both be witnesses of Gods
wonders, and lykwyse perish in that general destruction; that cause of their
condemnation is touched before.

Page 67. For that by Christ's judging the quick and the dead mentioned, 2
Timoth. 4.1, can not be meant the last and complete, bot rather a former and
inchoate judgment, it appears out of Revel. 20. where it is shown that the
saints enemies shall be all slain before the last resurrection. And we can not
say, that these who ar to be left, shall be a part of that army there spoken of,
because that Gog and Magog is to be destroyed at the end of our Saviors
reign, that is, immediately before the last resurrection: whereas these shall be
alive at the time of that general distress, which shall light on the world at
his entrance into that kingdom, as the gathering of the elect, who ar to
reign with him, does declare. Ans. Here (as before) ar strange imaginationes;
1. that text 2 Timoth. 4.1, can not be meant of the last, bot a former
judgment. Who ever said before, that Christ shall yet appear twyce to judge
the quick and the dead? For suppone, that only the godly shall be raised at
Christ's coming, yet they will not say, that he will judge them, seeing they say,
that they shall not stand at the bar. 2. The judging of the quick and the
dead shall be before the time of the last resurrection, as that form of arguing
importes: whereby it follows, that Christ shall judge the quick and the dead in
a former and inchoate judgment. Who shall remain then to be judged in the
complete judgment at the last resurrection? 3. I will say no more of that
fancy concerning these that shall be left, and the destruction at the entrance
of that kingdom: but mark that Gog and Magog is to be destroyed at the end of
our Saviors reign, that is, immediately before the last resurrection, or
(which is one) after the reign of the Jews. But that army of Gog and Magog
is the same with the army mentioned, Revel. 16.14, as Napeir proves Prop. 32.
and Mr. Maton proves in his treatise of Gog and Magog, page 49 95. and I have
schewed before, that the sixth vial mentioned, Revelat. 16.12.13.14, is the same
with the sixth trumpet; yea, and Clavis Apocalyp. in par. 1. synchro. 7. makes
it to concur with the destruction of the beast and Babylon, which shall be
before the Monarchy of the Jews, as all the Millenaries hold: and therefore in
this point M. Maton is contrary to himself, and to Clavis Apocalyp. alsweel as
unto Christi^es who deny that Monarchy of the Jews. Whereby it i^ ^anifest,
that what he speaks here without reasoun must (...) wrong, and amended by
these reasounes which he has lo. cit. and consequently that great batle shall be
foughten not after, but before the Jews shall reign, if ever they shall
reign in that manner.

Page 68. This conjecture Esaie c. 27.12.13. does confirm sufficiently: for
the great sound of the trumpet before spoken of in Saint Math. as a warning for
the gathering together of the elect, is there said to be a warning also of the
Jews return. The words ar these; It shall come to pass in that day, that
the Lord shall beat off from the chanel of the river unto the stream of Egypt,
etc. Ans. If this be a conjecture, how is it sufficiently confirmed by the
Prophet? or if it be sufficiently confirmed, why is it called a conjecture? A
conjecture it is, and hes no warrant from the Prophet: for the Prophet and the
Evangelist are not speaking of the same purpose: the Prophet is speaking
particularly of the Jews deliverance out of Assyria and Egypt, and of the
trumpet that did sound at the proclamation of Cyrus for their return, which
was past before the days of the Evangelist. And nevertheless our Author
concludes triumphantly, saying, and thus being thoroughly satisfied by this
cloud of witnesses, the double jurie of Prophets and Apostles, etc. Ans. If
you be thoroughly satisfied, why have you so often used the words of probability,
conjectures, my conceit, it may be thus or thus? these words smell not of
satisfaction, nor of that certane knowledge and steadfastnesse, which is
required 2 Pet. 4.17. As for that double jurie, it may evidently appear that
both Prophets and Apostles ar contrary to such fancies. It may be, the Uses
of this doctrine ac commendable, yes, if wrong premises be powerful to
persuade. Nevertheless hear all.

Page 69. First to praise God for his abundant mercy, who through the fall of
the Jews has brought salvation unto us gentiles, that together with them we
may partake of the root and fatness of their olive tree. Ans. Whither is it
more to the praise of Gods mercy and bountifulness, that the godly shall come
again from the heavens to abide so long on earth; or to abide in that glory
of heaven for ever and ever? certanly the gift of the greater and interrupted
glory deserves the greater praise, and whil they were on earth, they professed
themselves to be strangers from home, and Pilgrims on their journie toward
their home, Heb. 11.13, and shall they come as Pilgrims again? Use 2. to
bewarre of unbelieff: which was the cause, that the Jews were broken off from
their olive: and if God spared not the natural branches, much less will he
spare us, if etc. Ans. It is greater unbelieff to despise the reveled truth of
God, than to despise the fancies of men, as this monarchy is proved to be. Use
3. not to contemn or revile the Jews; a fault too commune in the Christian
world, etc. Ans. Whither serves more for to move us to love the Jews, to
know that the Jews and gentiles ar one in Christ, whenever they shall e
converted; or to think, that the Jews shall not be converted, till Christ come
again, and then they shall be Lords over the gentiles 1000 years? The former
doctrine presently throws down the partition wall, and this opinion still
holds it up, at least for 1000 years. Use 4. and lastly, earnestly to beseech
God, that he would speedily put into execution the means, which he hes
appointed for their conversion, etc. Ans. Whither can these more confidently
beseech God for the conversion of the Jews, who think, that the Jews may
daily be converted; or these who think, that they shall not be converted till
the coming of Christ? the former sort may be confident to be heard daily, which
these others can not. And moreover the former sort sees (as the Fathers did
see, Heb. 11.13,) everlasting glory presently at hand; and thereupon they do
mind and seek heavenly things, as they are commanded, Col. 3.1.2: and the
other sort ar out of hope of glory in heaven (at least) yet for the space of
1000 years, and they set their affectiones on the things on earth. Yea and it
gives encouragement unto the wicked, that they shall not be judged, nor their
bodies tormented these 1000 years to come yet; and on the other side the fear
of imminent judgment and punishment is a more powerful motive to depart from
iniquity. For which cause the Lord would not give unto men the knowledge of
that time, but will have us to be always preparing and waiting for that coming
to judgment. Wherefore we pray unto our Lord Jesus, who even now is king of
kings, and reigns in the midst of his enemies, and is offended at the
foolish conceits of unstable hearts, That he would make his power manifest by
confirming them whom he hes called and gifted with the knowledge of his eternal
gospel, and by reducing all his elect both Jews and gentiles who go astray;
and that he would now, even now give us heavenly hearts, and tie us all
together in the acknowledgement and obedience of his truth, To the praise of
his name, and our spiritual conforte both now and evermore. Come Lord Jesus, and
charge our vile bodies, that they may be tyke unto thy glorious body according
to thy working, whereby thou art able even to subdue all things unto Thy self.

Textes of Scripture cleared.
Act. 1,6. p. 2. Luk 21,28, p. 4. Mich. 5.1.23. page 5. Amo. 9,8,9,10,11. p. 7
and 28. Ps. 46,45 and 48,1,2 and 87,1.23. p. 8 Genesis 13.16 and 15,5. pa. 9.
Zeph. 3,13 pa. 10. Joel 2,28,31 and 3,14. pa. 11 etc. 2,3. pa. 13. Esa.
11,11,12-p. 17 v. 6 and 9. p. 34 etc. 66,8. p. 29 etc. 35,10. p. 36 etc. 14.2.
p. 39 etc. 27,13. p. 68 Ezekiel. 37,19,21. pa. 19. Hos. 1,10,11. p. 20 and c. 3.4.
page 22. Jer. 33,12,13. p. 26. Act. 15,14, page 26. Romans 11,32. page 30. Zech.
12,10. p. 32 etc. 14,4. p. 51. Rev. 3,21. p. 39 and 40. Heb. 2,8, p. 39 and v.
5 p. 50. 1 Cor. 15,22. page 42. Dan. 2,31,35. p. 49. Ioh. 1,51 p. 52 etc.
18,36. p. 61. Genesis 49,10. page 63. 2 Pet. 3,8, page 64.
Good Reader Excuse the escapes in printing: the Printer understandes not this
language: and if thou willest, correct these.
Page 2. lin. 17, after quere add, Act. 1.6, lin. 23. read, sertiones pa. 4.
l. 8. r. paraphrase. pa. 5. li. 3. r. als. l. 6. r. miraculous, pa. 5 li. 24.
for 13 read 1,3. pa. 10, unto li. 2. add, nether of the church in heaven only,
p. 11, li. 30, after and for 2 read 3. p. 14, l. 6, read mentioned, p. 17. l.
3, after saints add, shall be. pa. 21, li. 12, read elswher. pa. 34, li 29,
read roots. p. 35, li. ult. read foreward. p. 38, li. 4, for 13 read 2 p. 39
l. 22. read differred. p. 40, l. 1, after is add not. p. 4, l. 10, read
reasoun. l. 22, for if read, it. p. 51, l. 3, for 45, read 54. p. 54, l. 1, for
6, read 60. page 61, li. 19, for me hopelsy, read I hope. page 62, li. 11, read
michty.


