A REPLY TO A CONFUTATION of some grounds for Infants Baptism: AS ALSO,
Concerning the form of a Church, put forth against me by one THOMAS LAMB.

Hereunto is added, A Discourse of the Verity and Validity of Infants Baptism,
wherein I endeavor to clear it in it self: As also in the Ministry
administering it, and the manner of administration, by Sprinkling, and not
Dipping; with sundry other particulars handled herein.

By George Philips of Watertown in New England.

MATTHEW. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in
Sheeps-cloathing. A parvulo recens nato, usque ad decrepitum senem, nullus
prohibendus est a Baptismo, August. Enchirid. cap. 42. Dic quaeso and omni me
libera quaestione, quare infantuli baptizentur? Orthodox: ut iis peccata in
baptismate dimittantur, Hieron. advers. Pelagian. Dialog. ter. LONDON, Printed
by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley. 1645.

To the Reader.
WHO is so ignorant, but sees what Satan's Masterpiece, and greatest work in
the kingdom of Christ is at this day, viz. to divide and sow Tares of discord
between man and man? And truly whose heart bleeds not to behold the present
divisions, by sword, by pen, in affection and in opinion, under which the land
of peace lies now a bleeding? Among which divisions, none more lamentable nor
grievous to a tender spirit, then those that are between persons professing the
fear of God, especially in those times when all their strength and spirits
should be wholly taken up against the common Adversary, watching their
destruction at their very doors; yet such is the malice of Satan to set them
especially at a distance, and at variance, whom the precious blood of Christ
has been shed to reconcile. And this he does especially when he has started
a controversy (according to the old observation) In re Sacramentaria, in
matters of the Sacraments; and therefore it is no wonder if he troubles the
world, and divides the minds of some piously affected about the baptism of
Infants; although withal one would wonder in other respects, how any godly men
who have better things to mind, should hold up the Buckler in defense of such
a stigmatized doctrine, by the pens of so many of Gods Worthies, from the
Scriptures. If indeed there were any new light concerning it, that was never
yet discovered to the world, this present age might have second thoughts, and
learn the more by others errors; but when in this controversy men dig up
only the old Sepulchers, and heap up little more then the dried bones and
sculls of other men's examined, condemned and corrupted devices: this is very
uncomfortable, and very unbeseeming the spirit of a prudent and humble
Christian; who will never suffer himself to be removed, much less attempt the
moving of others, from the ancient received opinion and practice of the most
sincerely godly in all ages, without mountains of arguments, and light as
clear as the Sun from the holy Scriptures, to alter his mind, or make him to
remove the ancient Land-markes; and therefore he that writ the life of Doctor
Whitaker, prudently observes of him, that he was Academiae oraculum, the Oracle
of that University; and, Mundi miraculum, the miracle of the world in his time:
because, though he was a man of such eminent parts, yet he ever kept the
ancient received Doctrine, and had nothing proper, nor did he in veteri via
novam semitam quaerere, he did not seek a new path in the old way, as almost
all Divines of great parts do use to do, as from Hierom he observes.

The Author therefore of this Reply, (in which we wish he had a stronger
Adversary to honor,) well known in the gates of his people, and among the
Churches of Christ in this Western world, for his learning, godliness, and
peaceablenesse of disposition, cannot be justly blamed as any Firebrand of
contention in returning this Answer, it does but defend the Walls and Trenches
of the ancient received Truth; nor would he have made any resistance, had he
not been assaulted on that ground where himself with Gods truth, have had just
and quiet possession so long: Nor has he published it to increase disunion;
but for satisfaction of his conscience,

Firstly, who has given him this occasion to reply; or if not of his, yet of
some others godly and tender, who in simplicity have been, or may be suddenly
taken in the snares of the Fowlers of these evil times. I remember it was
Luthers prayer, seconded often by learned, holy, and aged Paraeus, A Doctore
glorioso, and Pastore contentioso, and inutilibus quaestionibus, liberet
Ecclesiam suam Dominus. To start this controversy about Infants baptism, I
fear upon sad examination, will fall under the head of those inutiles
quaestiones, especially in these unsettled and troublesome times; and though
pretended to be a work of Reformation, yet will give as sad a blow to that
which is firstly and principally to be attended in it, as almost any opinion I
know; and the end will speak as much: And therefore a sober strong defense of
the baptism of Infants, may be very profitable and useful against an
unprofitable questioning of it now; and the more, because it is much to be
feared, that the doctrine of Anabaptisme, especially in this controversy
concerning Infants, will gangrene far, and leaven much; and that for these
Reasons:

First, because there is not that express word, nor such manifest cleernesse
in such full and express sentences of the Scripture, as in many other
practical points: For the practice of this; there is sufficient Scripture to
satisfy a sober humble mind that loves the truth in sincerity in this point;
yet they that are contentious, and love scruples, and questions, (a disease
Paul would have cured, 1 Timothy 1.5, 6.) will be always touching upon that string,
viz. Where is your commandment? I see not any express Scripture; Yes, that
you may by just and full deduction from the Scripture; and that is a good proof
from Scripture; or else our Saviors proof of the resurrection was bad, from I
am the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which is not expressly contained in
these words, but deducted from them.

Secondly, (if conscience and experience may speak) there are but few
Christians that have tasted the sweet and comfort of their baptism; and
therefore are very apt to question this ordinance, if they meet with a fit
tempter to deceive them: For this is a certain and everlasting truth, viz. that
that truth which a man has received without love to it, by some sense of the
sweetness of it, in times of temptation, he will quickly cast off: A man will
not care for that bread that does not feed him, nor will keep on those clothes
in Winter time that do not warm him; nor love that truth which does not refresh
him; and consequently will be ready to cut down that barren baptism under
whose covert he has so long lived, but never tasted of the fruit of it, never
felt the comfort of the shadow of it; and assuredly, what ever reasons men
pretend against baptizing of Infants, this is generally the root of those
evils; they never felt the benefit of it, they never received this truth in
love; and for this cause God sends strong delusions about it, 2 These. 2.10, 11.
And it is Calvin's observation, concerning the Libertines and Anabaptists in his
time; the Lord, says he, never suffered a wicked man to fall into a strong
delusion, but because he did not love the truth at all; nor leaves a godly man
in a delusion for a time, but because he did not love the truth enough. Some
have therefore thought the best way to stop the spreading of Anabaptisme, was
for some holy and able men to leave the controversall part; and more plainly,
clearly and positively to set out the nature and use of baptism, and what
benefits a Christian may reap thereby, and how he may suck out the milk and
honey from this Rock; and then he that once tastes the good of it, beholds the
infinite riches of Gods grace therein, will not be easily persuaded to cast
away that, which he feels of such daily use and precious virtue to him.

Thirdly, in regard of the unsetlednesse and ungroundednesse of so many godly
Christians; partly through the want of settled and able Ministers among them;
partly through a carelessness of spirit, in taking truths upon trust of other
men's judgments only, not laboring to be grounded in them themselves; and
hence, when they are strongly assaulted by Familists, Anabaptists,
Antipsalmists, etc. they fall down, heaps upon heaps, and most miserably
wounded, because they want armor and weapons, strong grounds, and clear
principles from Scripture, to defend themselves; and therefore it was the
ancient complaint of zealous Gildas, that the Arrian heresy, and other
poisonfull opinions, like so many poisonfull Serpents, infected the ancient
Britains, because they were a people always desirous of novelties, and
stablished in nothing; and therefore let the Reader make much of such books,
and of this in special, whereby the judgment may be convinced, and the heart
established in the blessed truth of Christ; try all things herein, and weigh
them in the balance of the Word; what thou find to be of weight, receive in
love, and remember to take heed of rejecting, that, if some things herein
should want some grains, and seem too light; do thus for the truths sake, and
so embrace this truth in these divided times for peace sake, that they that
have one God, and one and the same Jesus, may have one faith, and one and the
same heart, as in other, so in special in this point, and not set the whole
house on fire, to roast their own Eggs; and that this may be, let sober minded
men attend but unto these general rules.

1. First remember the blessed Apostles Golden rule of peace, Phil. 3.8.9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Let every Christian make it his chiefest study, his
greatest business, to prize Jesus Christ, to be found in him, to know him, and
the power of his death and resurrection, to press toward the mark for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; here is work for you (says
Paul) sufficient to take up all your lifetime, and thoughts all your life
long; let us therefore (says he) as many as be perfect (i. that think our
selves most perfect and exact Christians, knowing more then all others) be thus
minded; and then, if in any thing you be otherwise minded, and differ one from
another, God will reveal the truth unto you. On that God would give those that
are most zealous against Paedo-baptisme, to consider of this rule: How useful
is it for many to trouble themselves and the churches with these conceits; who,
if well catechized, would be found extremely ignorant and ungrounded in the
most necessary matters about their union and spiritual communion with Jesus
Christ? and if they were well busied in matters of that heavenly nature, they
would have little desire to spend their time and thoughts about less weighty
and more doubtful points.

2. Secondly, labor for holiness of mind, and a mean esteem of your gifts,
parts, knowledge, wisdom, etc. The Apostle does beseech the Philippians, if
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, that they would be like minded, Phil. 2.1, 2. and the means to this he
sets down, verse. 3. In lowliness of mind, let each man esteem of others better
then themselves; You that contend against Paedo-baptisme, think thus, viz. that
as you are to prize Christ, so every truth of Christ; and you are persuaded in
your consciences, that you have herein the truth on your sides, otherwise you
would not strive for it; and that though many, nay most godly men have been,
and are otherwise minded; yet you think they are but men, and therefore may be
deceived: I answer, it is very true, they are men, and I had thought you had
been so too, and therefore may not you be deceived? Is not lowliness of mind
of use now? to think how foolish thou art, and apt to be deceived, and to
esteem of others (very godly) better then thy self; did never see the folly
of thine own counsels? had never experience how blind thou have been many
times, not able to see things before thy very feet? Did the Lord never acquaint
thee with thy extreme ignorance and uncapablenesse of spiritual mysteries even
about such as none question or doubt of? and may not thou be woefully deluded,
and blinded about that thy opinion with so many (as much acquainted with God as
thy self) yet dare not but question and do fully condemn? have not felt thy
heart naturally disliking truth, and embracing error, and through the
hollownesse of it, returning many echoes to one false noise? Fear therefore
thine own weakness, deny thy own wisdom, think meanly of thy self, and this
difference will soon cease; Little threads may be easily tied together; you can
hardly do so with cables ends, they are too big to fasten: be little in thine
own eyes, and thou will soon cease contending about these points.

3. Thirdly, observe the fruit of this opinion; for by the fruits (not of false
teachers lives, for they are in sheeps clothing, but of their false doctrines)
ye shall know them, Mat. 7.6. First, it leads men to destroy the extent of
Gods free grace in that everlasting covenant he has made with Abraham and all
his seed, Jews and Gentiles, to be a God to him and his seed; and hence come
those audacious cries of a carnal covenant God made with Abraham, and not
Evangelicall, nor a covenant of grace; and is it nothing to destroy Gods grace?
Is it not a crying sin, to refuse God to be thy God, and is it no sin to refuse
his promise of being the God also of thy seed? which (but that I dispute not
now) is as much Evangelicall as the first branch is; if the first branch be,
but what follows after this? The next is, they condemn all the best reformed
churches, forsake all Gods faithful Ministers (this is that Satan chiefly
aims at) by whom happily they have been called and long edified, then they
confusedly gather into private churches, set up and commend an unlearned
Ministry; it may be they like of none at all, because they can edify
themselves best by promiscuous prophecies; and any that can preach or
prophecy, (as every one they say in his measure can) has commission also to
baptize; I will mention no more, nor do I mention this to offend any, but to
humble and put a holy fear before the Saints eyes; But when I consider of
these and such like fruits, I cannot but cry out with Calvin, having published
the opinions of Servetus, these they are, (says he) Vae autem eorum stupori
qui ad ejusmodi portenta non exhorrescunt. Let it be therefore the care of all
the faithful ones of Jesus Christ, to study peace, and follow after it;
contend against the common enemies of faith, but let it be more bitter then
death, to contend one with another; nothing more lamentable, then for to see
Christ's sheep scattered one from another; a sad token of the Lords forsaking a
people, when they will not come and agree togethe under his wings. Most
certain it is, that abuse of liberty for every man to think what he
pleases, and speak what he list, for Christians to contend and hang together
like ropes of sand; to make little other use of the light, breaking forth
gloriously in these latter days, then drunkards do of candles in the night,
when they are fallen out, which serve only to show them on whom and where to
lay the greatest blows; these things cry to heaven for a renewed tyranny of
blasted Prelacie, or of that which shall be worse to this generation. When the
staff of bonds was broken, Zach. 11.14. the Lord immediately set over his
people an idle Shepherd in the land, verse. 16. which should neither visit
those that were cut off, nor seek the young, nor heal the broken, nor feed
that which stood still, but only eat the fat, and tear their claws in pieces:
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ therefore pity his poor scattered
flock, bring back them that are driven or drawn away, seek out them that are
lost, heal them that are broken, feed and stablish them that stand, destroy the
enemies of his peoples peace, until that kingdom come in all his peoples
hearts, both from East to West, in old England and new, which is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; that when the floods of
Gods displeasure shall overwhelme the Christian world for that universal deep
corruption of their own ways, the waters of effectual baptism (being locked
up in the Arc of Gods eternal Covenant) may lift us up in peace.

Tho. Shepard.

The Author to the Christian Reader.
IF it were in my choice, I would not trouble you with reading any thing of
mine, being privy to mine own insufficiency to do any thing in this kind,
that may be worth your pains; yet seeing I cannot avoid it, being provoked by
one who has made himself my adversary without a cause, and especially in a
matter of so great weight and consequence, wherein he goes about to wrong the
truth of God professed by us, I desire you would hold me excused in undertaking
the justifying so precious a truth of the Lord, and maintaining the cause by a
reply unto his confutation of some grounds, wherewith I am satisfied in my
conscience, about our practice in the case of baptizing of infants of
believers. I know you will meet with some things of no great weight, I desire
not that you should think better of any thing then it is; only my request is,
that you would cover any weakness of mine in that kind, nor let it at all
prejudice your esteem and approbation of that which is according to God, and
deserves acknowledgement. Something you shall find which may be profitable to
an humble and tractable spirit. Concerning the question it self debated, this
seems to be a great matter with many, that there is no express command for
baptizing believers Infants; and nothing will stop their mouths, but still
they call for a commandment to be produced for practicing hereof. To answer
this; First, Mat. 28.19. Go, make Disciples in all nations, baptizing them,
etc. seems to want very little of an express commandment to baptize Infants of
believers, because they are certainly a part of all nations, and that as
opposed to one nation of the Jews, from whom the Gospel and Church estate was
taken and given to all nations, a part of which nation Infants were, and under
the same state of Gods dispensation of his grace, and partakers of all the
privileges thereof. And this may be further cleared from Mat. 21.33. -- 43.
where the Vineyard and King dom taken from the Jews and given to the Gentiles,
are the Church estate and covenant. Now that infants were plants in that
vineyard, subjects of that kingdom, as well as men of years; and so must it be
now, in this vineyard must be young plants, as well as old, and Infants
subjects in this kingdom as they were before. It is true that the text says,
Make them disciples, and then baptize them; and I fully believe, that none but
a disciple may be baptized; but I am out of doubt, and do not in the least
question, but that an infant of a now believing parent, is a disciple as well as
the parent, which I have fully cleared, I hope, to any judicious readers
judgment in the explanation of the arguments grounded upon these Scriptures, I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, etc. 1 Cor. 7.14. Secondly, let them
press for a command in all things also, and do nothing further then they have
an express command for every thing else that they do or will do; and then I
shall think they may show forth more justice and upright dealing, then
otherwise I can conceive. And let any man give me an express command of
baptizing women, or admitting them to the Lords table, besides many other
things of weighty consideration in our practice, that may upon the same ground
be called into question. And let them in good earnest give an express command
for a man that is no Prophet, nor son of a Prophet, to take upon himself the
office of teaching the word of God, and administering the public ordinances,
Amos 7.14. To. 10.14. Thirdly, if there be no commandment nor example in the
state of the new Testament for a person unbaptized to baptize any other; then
it is unlawful for an unbaptized person to baptize any other. But there is no
command nor example in the state of the new Testament for an unbaptized person
to baptize others. Ergo. And so baptism can never be administered by any unto
any. For concerning the instance of I. Baptist, it will not satisfy conscience
in this cause, both because he had an immediate calling, nor was he under the
state of the new Testament, his Ministry being opposed to the Ministry of it
by our Savior, Lu. 7.28. John was the greatest among the Prophets (in the
state of the old Testament) before Christ; yet the least in the kingdom of
heaven (in the state of the New) after Christ, is greater then he. Nor can it
ever be proved, that John was unbaptized. Last of all, this cannot be denied,
that a just deduct from the Scripture is of equal force with an express
command. But by just deduction from Scripture it may be proved, that believers
infants may be baptized. Ergo, it is of equal force with a command. Now
whether the Assumption be not evinced by the scope and issue of my arguments, I
leave to all impartial readers to judge. And let this be further well
considered, whether the denying baptism of infants of believers, does not tend
to overthrow all Christian religion, and throw down all able Ministry of the
Word, and set up an unlearned Ministry, and cast all Evangelical order into
desperate confusion. Though I will not take upon me to determine, yet this is
my apprehension, I am persuaded that this mistake here, has forced many to
fall upon such ungrounded courses, as themselves cannot rest in, let any man
follow this principle close, and see where it issues. Some denying this, and
yet under conviction of the necessity of the ordinance, they have sought a new
baptism to be conferred upon them by some formerly baptized when they were men
of years. Others not able to make that good, take another way, and one
baptizing himself, after baptizeth others. Another sort not content herewith,
maintain, that any one converted, and coming to the knowledge of Gods ways, may
teach others, and converting them, may baptize those whom he so converts,
though unbaptized himself; alleging for this purpose, Mat. 28.19. which place
will give no ground to such an apprehension, because all those were officers
chosen to who that was spoken, and were all baptized themselves, and not
unbaptized, as they who allege it must understand it, otherwise making no jot
to their purpose. Some other perceiving all these insufficient to settle
conscience, waving all, do give up all solemn and religious public worship of
God, and travel with expectation of some new revelation, and wait for some
immediate raising up of some extraordinary officer to begin all anew. And last
of all (not to go beyond mine own observation) there is a generation, who
questioning all the former practices (as they justly may) fall flatly to deny
all ministry, and the use of it; Baptism, the Lords Supper, etc. as but for a
time, and not now required; speaking contemptibly of the Ministry, as Sorcerers
and Magitians, and of all the ordinances of the Gospel, as shadows, I dols,
and not to be regarded, (horrescens refero). Now dear Christian Reader, as you
love Gods truth, and desire the blessing of it upon your own souls; consider if
it does not deeply concern you all, to tremble at the calling into question
such a precious and comfortable truth as this of baptizing believers Infants
is: The denying whereof puts men upon such unwarrautable and unsatisfiing
practices as these be. And let me entreat you in the bowels of Jesus Christ, to
labor for an humble heart, and to walk closely with the Lord, praying mightily
and earnestly to him for his grace and holy Spirit to keep you in these evil
and dangerous days: For blessed is he that keeps his garments, that men may
not see his nakedness, Rev. 16. Acquaint your selves with the worth of
baptism; study to enjoy the full fruit of it, that your hearts being
established with the power of Gods grace, you may walk worthy the sacred Laver
of regeneration, wherewith you are washed; And bringing up your children in the
discipline and instruction of the Lord: you may make good this truth, that your
Infants are the baptized Disciples of the Lord Jesus. If my weak endeavors may
be blessed of God for any furtherance and help unto you herein, I shall expect
no other recompense for my pains, but your thanks to God, and prayers for my
self. And so commending my labors and you all by my earnest prayers unto Gods
gracious blessing in Christ Jesus your Lord and ours, I rest

A fellow servants of all Gods Saints, GEORGE PHILIPS.

A REPLY to a CONFUTATION of some Grounds for Infants Baptism, etc.
HAving met with a Book, entitled, A Confutation of Infants Baptism, or, an
Answer to a Treatise written by George Philips of Watertown in New England, in
defense of Infants Baptism, etc. it put me into a kind of wonderment, to see
my name put forth in print, and as Author of a Treatise, who never writ any
such Treatise, nor ever desired or intended the publication of any Discourse
upon that, or any other subject; being privy unto my own disability to do any
thing in that kind, that may be to the glory of God, or the edification of all
into whose hands such a Treatise must needs come; and therefore do really judge
that he has not only wronged me, but the truth, and all Gods people, and
done contrary to just and Christian dealing, in publishing such a thing under
my name, and making that common which ought first to have been cleared by
private dealing; the rule being evident, that if any offend another privately,
the offended should first seek to gain the offender, in convincing him of his
fault, betwixt themselves, and thereby prevent further scandal: This I am
confident of, that I never writ one word to him (being altogether unknown to
me) nor to any other in England about this matter. Yet seeing I cannot deny my
name, nor wholly disclaim all that he has put forth under it, howsoever he
came by it, I hope none will condemn me, if I shall endeavor (by Gods
assistance) to justify the cause, in returning an Answer unto his Confutation,
but rather think that I am necessitated thereto, by this his proceeding,
unless I would give my self up to the censure of all, as not having a good
cause, or being not able to give any clear grounds to maintain it. But before I
proceed thereto, I think it fit to give an account how this business has been
carried.

One Nathaniel Biscoe coming from England, and sitting down with us at
Watertown, upon a time desired some conference with me, and especially about
these two things: The Churches constitution, and Infants Baptism: I judging he
did intend no more then he pretended (a private conference about those
particulars for further light, being not well resolved on either side) yielded
to his request, and in my chamber with him alone, agitated those two points,
both hearing what he could say, and answering unto every objection he made; and
also propounded unto him some of those grounds which in that Book are expressed;
diverse hours we spent in that discourse, and how I carried my self toward
him, I leave to him to manifest, or to be revealed when all secrets shall be
made known. The issue was, that he had nothing to say, only for his better
consideration, he desired that I would pen down those arguments that had passed
betwixt us on my part; I willingly (not suspecting such an event) yielded, and
in a piece of paper sent them unto him, expecting that he would have attended a
further conference with me about the matter; but having got my paper, and
transcribed it, he communicated it to some that were contrary to my
apprehension in these points, and either himself, or some other by his means,
sent them into England, whether to this confuter, or who else, I know not: but
this I am certain, it has been thus divulged, and not written with my own
hand, nor subscribed by my name, so far as I can remember. And concerning the
Propositions themselves, and arguments here expressed, I cannot say that here is
all I writ, or that I wrote all that is here (having not the writing I gave
him, nor a copy thereof, that I can find with me) only so far as I shall
question any thing, I will give notice thereof, as I shall meet with it: And
having premised thus much, I come to the Book, and therein (pasfing by the
title page): First, to the Epistle prefixed, and secondly, to the Discourse it
self. Concerning the Epistle, I observe these things:

First, the means of Gods glory and man's happiness.

Secondly, the order how these means are o be improved and dispensed.

Thirdly, the grounds of his writing this Book, with the conclusion.

Touching the first, the means of Gods glory and man's happiness, these things
are noted: first, it is Religion: secondly, that men's care and study should be,
principally how they should exercise themselves in Religion, that they may
attain that end: Thirdly, that this Religion must be pure and true Religion,
otherwise men may not only miss the right end, but effect a quite contrary:
Fourthly, that this true Religion is only to be Gods appointment in his Word:
Lastly, that the Word sets forth Christ the Mediator as principal, and all
other subordinate unto him, for the attainment of the end, Gods glory in men's
happiness: from all which in the general, and according to that sense, they
seem to bear, I see no reason to dissent. Nor from the intimation of Satan and
his ministers policy to corrupt true Religion, and counterfeit a false
Religion, under pretense of the true, to cosen, cheat and deceive poor souls
with chafe instead of wheat, etc. It being a certain truth, as the Scriptures
and experience of all ages, and of this wherein we live, do too woefully
manifest. And I wish him self were none of the number, as heartily as I pray
for my self. From this Discourse he deduceth nine Conclusions, to which I can
subscribe, under these Considerations. To the first, taking Religion, and
pleasing of God in a strict and peculiar sense, otherwise I do not see a ground
of difference between sins and duties materially: To the second and third, the
bond of obedience lies upon all men, who therefore are to be taught in the
law, that they may become dead to the law through the law, and so glad to fly
to Christ for righteousness and life: To the fourth, the word Commission,
added to the rest, seemed to make all actions of Religion common to all (as to
preach, baptize, etc.) or to restrain acts of Religion to them in office only.

To the ninth; If he intend by these words, no man ought to perform any act of
Religion, unless Christ be all in all in that action, that therefore no man
may or must pray, etc. be exhorted thereunto, etc. I agree not with him. And so
I come to the second thing in the Epistle: The order how this Religion is to be
wrought in men's hearts, and this is set down thus: First, preaching the Gospel,
to convert men from sin to grace, and then to baptize men converted, professing
their Faith, and not before; by which (as the end of baptism) they may be
distinguished, as by a badge or livery to belong to the Church of Christ: To
this in a word, I say thus much; that there is a distinction to be made,
between a company to be converted, and to be constituted, and a Church now
constituted; in a company to be converted and to be constituted, that which is
said is true, the Gospel must first be preached, and by faith received and
professed, and then they are to be sealed, and not before; but in a Church now
constituted, the like is not required, but the Churches are propagated by
continual succession, till God out them off. Thus was it with Abraham and his
family, the Gospel was preached to him and his, he and his believed and were
circumcised, and after they did not believe before they were circumcised, but
were propagated and continued a Church till Christ's time; and so when the
Gospel was to be preached to the Gentiles, they were not to be baptized till
they believed, but believing they were joined to the Church, and then baptized,
and that Church continued by succession till God cut them off again. But
because this is the point in difference, I shall spare farther speech, till I
come to reply unto the answer in the Book: And touching the complaint is made
again of Satan and his Ministers, Policy and Malice, to set up a false
religion; I join in it, only I dare not account that to be any part of humane
religion or of Satan, the baptizing of Infants (and I hope I shall prove it) is
no humane device for any thing we cannot prove to be divine in the
administrations in England, I suppose our former practice and present state,
does fully acquit us from giving our allowance thereto; but I shall have
occasion to speak something likewise about this afterward. And in a word,
concerning the occasions of his writing this Treatise, he expresses amongst
others, the miserable witchery and delusion of Satan, which he had spoken of
before, and intends to wrap up my self and all other Gods servants and Saints
in old England and here in new, with all our way of religion and worship,
wherein we desire to glorify the Lord; To all which, I shall spare to answer,
leaving any that desire satisfaction in the case as it concerns us here, or
them there, to a Discourse I have written about that matter, in justification
of Infants baptism, with the calling of Ministers here and there, and their
adminstrations; and leave him to the Lord, who shall judge us all; only I wish
him to consider his own words, that if it be without cause, that he thus
traduceth and powers out his distaste against us, he hurts himself more then
he does us, and will be found to kick against the pricks; and it may be he
shall not find it so easy a matter to answer all that he has here at random
written, and in his Confutation put out against me, before that Judge, as he
seems to be bold in troubling the world with it. And so passing the Epistle, I
come to the Book it self, wherein I shall endeavor (by Gods good help) to
justify what he takes upon him to confute, and follow him step by step
accordingly, as he goes along, letting pass his Preamble; only I can say, he
speaks not truth, in saying a Writing written by Georg. Phil. came to his hand,
and subscribed by him as Pastor of Watertown, when as I writ it not; and what I
writ was not subscribed by me at all, and therefore let him that sent it, and
himself take it betwixt them, and see whether they may not justly repent of so
speaking: But to proceed, he sets down some Propositions, which it seems, that
Writing expressed; for the clearing of the Arguments:

To the first and second, whereof he says nothing, and therefore according to
the second, yields, that though there be no express literal commands for
Infants baptism in the Scriptures nor example, yet if by just consequence from
thence it can be proved and cleared, that is as sufficient as if it were
literally commanded.

To the third Proposition, about the tender of happiness to man two ways
dispensed: First, to the first Adam, and all mankind by the law and works; the
other to the second Adam, and all the elect in him, which being one eternal
covenant from the first promulgation for ever in substance, yet varied by
diverse circumstances in a fourfold period manifested, first from Adam to
Abraham, called the Promise; secondly, from Abraham to Moses in a visible
outward covenant; thirdly, from Moses to Christ, called the old Testament; the
fourth from Christ to the end, called the new Testament. To this, I say, he
has diverse exceptions, and of such weight in his apprehension, that he is not
able to forbear my person and calling, as that I am not worthy the name of a
Pastor, and it does very ill agree to me, as the doctrine delivered in this
Proposition does declare, being not wholesome food, but a barren wilderness,
or rather hurtful, effecting nothing but noisome diseases, and tending to
death. In answer whereunto, in a word, I freely acknowledge my self not worthy
the name of a Pastor, and that it very ill agrees to me, and many reasons
there are, which force me so to acknowledge, though the censure of this
Confuter makes me not think so at all, nor the doctrine there delivered by me,
which is good and wholesome, whatsoever he says to the contrary, if that be
wholesome that is contained in Gods sacred Scriptures, as I shall clear by and
by: But let all take notice of this, that for a man to leave his cause, and
fall upon men's persons or callings, it is an argument of a bad cause, or a
corrupted heart, or both; for I suppose he will not challenge universal
authority, and who made him a Judge over me? in regard of his own private, I
confess he has liberty to judge of what I say, or any other; and if I had
written to him, he might rightly have answered, nor should I have taken it ill,
if he had written to me about them, I think I should have taken it well; but
the man will be a Judge over me, and that without as much as a word of
intination that I had offended him first, but he says he must have leave to
tell me so: As concerning his exceptions, they are so weak, and of no value, as
he must give me leave to tell you all, that the name of a wise and reasonable
man does not (or very ill) agree to him, and be your selves Judges: For, first,
he put an if; If I limit reprobates from the tender of happiness, made to the
second Adam, and all the elect in him, he conceives I err, because they could
not then be said to refuse the call of God, etc. but if I did not so limit it,
what then? will he confess he did ill to blot the paper with such needless
suppositions? Or that he wanted charity to think that I never read those
Scriptures by him alleged, and many others: as also that of Heb. 3. and 4.2?

To the second exception against the third period; when I said that a vail of
shadows were drawn over the Covenant, he says it was not a vail simply, but
because Christ contained under them was not understood by the Jews, which
rested in the deed done. To which I answer, that I did not say a vail simply,
but it was a vail, and so the Scriptures, Col. 2.16. Hebr. 9.1.8, etc. Ezr.
10.1. 2 Cor. 3.13, etc. where the Apostle speaks of a double vail, one upon
Moses face, signifying the obscurity of the ministry, (which in the ministry
of the new Testament is done away) another upon their hearts, which remains
unto this day upon them, (and upon too many other) but that shall be taken away
when they turn to the Lord; so that it was a vail, and a vail simply, so that
he might well have spared those two, and not said he had many, there remaining
but two, which are not many.

To the third exception and fourth, whereas I said that the Scriptures speaking
of the old Testament, of the abolishing of the old Testament, are to be
understood of that dispensation from Moses time to Christ's, and the opposition
made in the Scriptures between the old and new, is of those two times, from
Moses to Christ, and from Christ afterward, and not of the former; he sees no
reason why I should so conclude: I confess, so great is our sinful nature, we
think that to be good reason that is not so, and judge not that reason that is:
but I may see a reason why I so conclude, though he sees it not; and if I
thought he would see it, I should set it down, but if he will not, yet some
may, for their sakes therefore, this is the reason (yea, more then reason) why
I so conclude: First, the Scriptures mention two, an old and new Testament:
Secondly, the Scriptures express the old to be that from Moses to Christ, and
the new, that from Christ and after, as I hope any will see clearly by viewing
these places: Exodus 24.4.8. Heb. 9.15. to 24. Jer. 31.31, etc. Heb. 8.6.8. to
the end, Heb. 12.18. to the end, 2 Cor. 3.16. etc. and the whole course of the
Apostles dispute in removing the Law, Tabernacle, Service, Priesthood, etc.
which he calls the old, and establishing Christ and the true Tabernacle, and
limiting his whole discourse to these two, cleers it to me beyond exception;
and this is the reason grounded upon these Scriptures, and other considerations
why I said as I did. He further says, that the two first periods are the old
Testament, as well as that of Moses time till Christ; and first, because they
offered sacrifices till Abraham, and then they circumcised till Moses: and
secondly, because those sacrifices before Moses time and circumcision then used
are abolished by Christ's coming. To which I answer, though they offered
sacrifices before Abraham's days, and they after Abraham's days circumcised,
yet before Moses time, God manifested not his will in a testamentary
dispensation, nor can we properly say that those were abolished by Christ's
coming, being removed before by Moses, at least altered by a new institution;
nor were the sacrifices of Melchisedec, nor his Priesthood abolished, which was
before Moses, as was Aarons, but unto Melchisedec our Savior succeeded: so
that these exceptions might well have been spared, seeing the doctrine
contained in the Propositions is sound and wholesome, and the contrary unsound,
and hurtful; yet before I go from this Proposition, let me commend this unto
you all, that the reason why they would weaken this Proposition, is because
they would maintain that opinion that the Covenant made with Abraham was a
carnal covenant, and of the flesh, applying all those Scriptures that speak
by way of derogation hither, when as they are spoken of the old Testament, and
not of this period, from Abraham, which was the everlasting Covenant of God,
continued with Jews, and now to us Gentiles, and the same for ever; and so my
Proposition is not answred, nor refuted.

To the fourth, of childrens capacity to receive all grace necessary to union
with Christ, and justification to life thereby, as well as men of years; he
yields, only denying it to be manifest to us, which; this or that; nor of
Believers children more then Infidels.

I answer, I grant it, we cannot conclude it of this or that, but of all alike,
yet otherwise of Believers children then of the Infants of Infidels; for as
Infidel parents are without God in the world, so their children are also, and
we have no ground to think an Infidel man or woman is elected of God, adopted,
etc. and so we can judge no better of their children, but as the faith of the
parents professed is a sufficient ground to me, to think according to the rule,
that he belongs to God: so Gods taking hold of a Believers child to be his, as
he does, (and we shall show it afterward) is a sufficient ground to me to think
a Believers child to be justified and sanctified, which though I may be
mistaken, and my judgment in this case is not infallible, yet it is as much as
I can have of any man of years, of whose state I cannot judge infallibly.

To the fifth, where I say Baptism is not the first grace, but a second, being
a seal of the righteousness of faith, as circumcision of old, Romans 4.11. which
must be presupposed, or else baptism not to be administered; he answers that
it is well to be heeded of all, especially those that maintain Infants
Baptism, having no ground to conclude that Infants have a first grace; Romans
4.11. will prove no such thing, it will only prove circumcision was in the
nature of it a seal of the righteousness of faith, and did seal it to Abrham
that had faith, but not to them that had no faith; nor was it a ground why we
should presuppose faith in all, upon whom it was administered, or why it was
administered.

To this I reply (1.) Baptism is not the first grace, but something precedes
it, to which Baptism is added as a seal; and if children have not some former
grace to which Baptism does seal; then I cannot see that they are to be
baptized. This former grace (though many other things might be expressed, yet
having so plain a Scripture, I rest in it) is this righteousness of faith,
which what ground we have to conclude children have, I shall labor to clear
under these distinctions: First, the righteousness of faith is to be
considered, either as it is dispensed by God in an offer, or as it is received
by them to whom it is offered: Secondly, in applying this offer, God makes some
partakers of it before the seal is put to, as in Abraham, the men of years in
his house, and Proselytes (at least in our judgment) some he makes partakers
of it at the time of sealing, both concurring, some after, and some never at
all. 3. That circumcision was (not in the nature of it, but by institution) and
Baptism is the seal of this grace, and is to be attended, either on Gods part
or ours: On Gods part, signifying and confirming, that he will make good his
offer; on our part, that we believe this offer, and abide in it; And to apply
all God offered Abraham the righteousness of faith he believed, God sealed and
Abraham both; again, God continued the dispensation of this offer to Esau and
Jacob; and so all Infants of the Jews after was willing to bestow it upon
them: God sets his seal to confirm he is willing; Esau had not the rites
before, nor was it conferred at that time, nor ever after, and so it was with
most of the Jews, as is clear in them, in the wilderness, who had it not
before, nor at the time, nor ever after; for the Gospel was preached unto
them, but they believed it not, and so it profited nothing; yet they were
circumcised Infants, though they had no faith before, nor then, nor ever after:
what was then the former grace that this seal was set to? nothing in them, but
the offer of righteousness on Gods part, which he said, and sealed, he was
willing to bestow on them; so I conclude the like in Baptism. The seal now of
the righteousness of faith, and that there is the same former grace in Infants
now, that was in Infants then; namely, the continuance of the dispensation of
Gods offer of righteousness with which their fathers at first closed, and were
partakers of, and which was one special ground, why those Infants were
circumcised, and is now a ground of Infants baptizing; and though many then
were not, and many now are not partakers of that grace offered and sealed, yet
that does not make it no grace; but on Gods part offered and sealed, it is the
same without alteration, that it is to them who receive it; and the difference
lies only in the subjects: for I suppose no man will deny, but God offered
unto Ismael the righteousness of faith, and that he shall be punished for
refusing of it; and so the rest of the Jews that slighted Gods grace so
offered: nor will any affirm that Simon Magus and others had not the offer of
righteousness made unto them, but they that refused shall surely perish for
it, as they, Acts 13.38. Further, it is not right which is said of them, that
circumcision to them was a sign only, and to this end administered, to
distinguish them, and to interest them in those Laws and Ordinances, etc.
which were means to typifie and lead to Christ that was to come, wherein they
were to be trained up: For though this were one end, yet not only, nor all; for
as it was a sign distinguishing, so it was a sign of justification, and that
God would thereby circumcise their hearts; yea, it was a seal as well as a
sign, and did not only signify, but confirm. And may I not say the same of
Baptism? (mutatis mutandis) and for that end to be administered to Infants now,
that they by this means may be distinguished, and thereby interested in all the
privileges of Laws and Ordinances, and Ministers, etc. which are means to set
forth Christ come, and to mind us of his obedience to the Father, and that
they may be trained up therein; where I add, that by Baptism, I mean that
outward part of Baptism (by a lawful Minister) with water, in the name of the
Father, Son and holy Ghost, which is often separated from the inward, in the
party baptized, and conclude this to be true Baptism, else Simon Magus, and
those false brethren, Gal. 2. were not baptized, (having not that inward) and
if they had repented must have been baptized anew.

To this he answers, that it is true, because false brethren are brethren,
though false, and they seem to be true, and make such a show by manifestation
of themselves, and therefore according to us are to be judged true, and
therefore to be baptized, though they be false, yet their baptism is true
baptism; but to administer it to one no brother, nor giving any manifestation
of such an estate, that is not commanded of God, and so a humane devise to
baptize such an one. I grant this last; but if he mean Infants are no
brethren, nor can give any manifestation thereof, and therefore God has not
commanded them to be baptized, and therefore to baptize them is a humane
invention, I dissent wholly, and in a word reply, children are brethren; for if
God be their father as wll as to men of years, then they are brethren as well
as men of years, but God is their God, and calls them his children, Ezekiel.
16.20, 21. And though God has not expressly said, ye shall baptize Infants;
yet if by good deduction from Gods Word, it may be made good, it is sufficient
to clear it from being a humane invention; but of these afterward.

Now I come to the sixth Proposition, as more was required of Abraham, and of
men of years ( viz. faith) before circumcision, then of Isaac and other Infants
successively circumcised, so now no more is required of men of years, ( viz.
faith) that they may be baptized, then of Infants of baptized persons.

To this he answers, that he grants more was in Abraham then in Isaac, when
circumcised, but not more required of the one then of the other, without which
he might not be circumcised, and therefore concludes, that all the males of
Abraham's family were circumcised, whether they had faith or no faith, nor was
any condition pre-required: and so Proselytes, that all males were to be
circumcised before they might eat the Passover, but nothing required of them
before circumcision, Exodus 12.49. nor was there any ministerial and teaching
office ordained to circumcise himself and all his males, and thereby become a
proselyte, without any other condition.

But now in the new Testament, a teaching Ministry must precede the parties
baptizing, Matthew. 28.19. and faith in the Word taught, Acts 8.26. and 10.47.
From whence he gathers a double difference: first, then was required no
Minister, nor faith to go before circumcision: secondly, even in the
constitution of the visible Church, which then was constituted by natural
generation of Abraham's natural seed, but now is constituted by spiritual
regeneration of Abraham's spiritual seed.

To all which I reply: First, if circumcision was the seal of the
righteousness of faith, then more was required of Abraham then of Isaac, for
Isaac could not actually believe, and if Abraham had not actually believed
before, he had not been circumcised, which was the seal of that faith he had
before he was circumcised, Romans 4.

Secondly, concerning Abraham's family, that they were all to be circumcised,
and all the men of years also, without any condition prerequired, whether they
had faith or no faith, I might pass it by, because he says, it is but
probable, though far more probable, yet in a word, is it so much as probable?
had Abraham's males no faith, at least in outward show and manifestation, so
that Abraham judged they had? 2. Does not God give testimony that Abraham
taught his house to fear him, and keep his commandments? 3. And I conclude
it very probable, that they professed subjection to the same God, and his Word
with Abraham, and were not Atheists, or worshippers of a strange God, which
would ill beseem Abraham's family and faith. To conclude, this is unfound to
say, faith was not required of the grown males, and yet all circumcised with
the seal of the righteousness of faith which they had not.

Thirdly, touching the proselytes, that nothing was required of them before
circumcision, is taken for granted, without the least proof, and contrary unto
the Scriptures, which show before they were accepted of God into the liberties
of his House, they were to take hold of his Covenant, join themselves to God,
and the people of Abraham, to fear the Lord, and to love him, etc. 1 King.
8.41. Ruth 1.16. Isa. 56.3, etc. Besides, as before, they should receive
circumcision, not as a seal of the righteousness of faith, which were a great
abuse: and hereunto I might add the testimony of Jewish Writers, who record
diverse things to be done before they could be circumcised, as Ainsworth
relates upon Genesis 9.4. Exodus 12.48, 49. and other places: the difference made
therefore in this respect is void, nor is that exception of teaching Ministers
now prerequired, but not then, of any value; the Proposition speaking of more
required then of men of years, then of Infans.

Touching the other difference he seems to make in the Churches constitution,
then of Abraham's carnal seed, but now of Abraham's spiritual seed; I conceive
it very unfound: For,

First, were there not many proselytes in the Churches then? and that of the
constitution of it? were they Abraham's natural seed by natural generation,
and all the males of his house, which amounted to the number of three hundred
and eighteen trained men born in his house besides others?

Secondly, the Churches constitution then consisted not of them as Abraham's
seed in the flesh, but in being the people of God by covenant, and thereby a
peculiar people, a royal priesthood, though this state was continued by
natural generation from Abraham's days till Christ. The Jews indeed pleased
themselves with the fleshly prerogative; but our Savior condemns them, John
8. and the Apostle clears this point fully, Romans 9.1. to 9. and Chap. 10.2,
3, etc. 11.1. to 10. wherein the Apostle shows plainly, the reason why they
were not spiritual as others were, and they should have been, because a spirit
of slumber fell upon them; so that the Churches constitution then consisted of
many proselytes, and all Jews, not as carnal or a natural generation of
Abraham in the flesh, but as a spiritual seed of Abraham, by following the
steps of Abraham, in regard of Gods intention, offer and dispensations; but
with many of them God was not well pleased, because they were not spiritual as
he would have had them; and now the Churches constitution is of the like
spiritual seed, though many be carnal, the Church then and now consisting of
elect and reprobates, the elect only obtaining, and the rest being hardened;
and let me ask him now in his own words as he does me in his first exception
to my third Proposition, How can God blame them for refusing his call, etc.
were they not Abraham's seed in the flesh? And is not this their true
constitution, according to his apprehension? One thing more he observes, and
that is a contradiction betwixt the fifth and the sixth Proposition, which he
cannot but take notice of: The contradiction is this, that in the fifth I should
say, faith, and the first grace must be presupposed, or else Baptism not to be
administered; and in the sixth, that in a man of years faith is to be required,
and must be, that he may be baptized, but not the same of Infants: and framing
a solution, which he conceives I might make, viz. that grace may be in
Infants, though not known; but in men of years, who are able to manifest what
is in them, such manifestation is to be required from them, without which, they
are not to be baptized, and concludes this does not reconcile, but an apparent
contradiction remains: To which I add this short reply:

First, that I said not, faith, or a first grace, but a first grace is to be
presupposed; nor did I mean it of faith, for they are not capable of actual
faith, though they may have habitual, which cannot be discerned; and I
conceive that we must look upon some known grace, from which we may judge
(though not infallibly) that baptism does belong unto them.

Secondly, therefore (as in my reply to his fifth Proposition) grace is either
foederall, or covenanting grace, or of the things contained in the covenant:
foederall grace is that whereby God out of his free love does take a people,
and make them his, without any deserts of their own, that were not his, Deu.
4.34.37.7. Ezekiel. 16.2, etc. And Infants were partakers of this grace, as well
as men of years. Grace freely given is either general to all in covenant (as
the offer of all spiritual good contained in the Covenant, which he is
willing to make them partakers of; nor does their refusal derogate from the
grace of God on his part offered unto them) or proper to some, and that either
common to many, or particular to some; namely, the elect, as all grace
accompanying and completing salvation, Heb. 6.4.9. God in all preventing the
creature, in beginning with them, and going before them, without which they
neither first, nor last, would seek after, or receive any thing in the least of
all: Now then, to apply this, by first grace, I do, and did mean foederall
grace, and the dispensation of the offer of the benefits in the Covenant; and
to this grace he seals, and thereby confirms, that he is willing to make
all good unto them all on his part, and if they be not partakers of it, it will
prove their own fault and sin; and thus the contradiction was but imagined, and
not really in my expressions. And then he comes to my arguments, whereby I
prove, that Infants now are to be baptized: The first whereof is taken from the
oneness of the covenant, from Abraham to this day, and lies thus; If the
covenant made with Abraham, and continued to the Jews, and since to the
Christians, be one and the same, then as Infants were in the covenant then, and
received the seal of it, circumcision, so are Infants now in the covenant, and
must receive the seal thereof, baptism; but the first is true, therefore the
second. To this he answers by denying the Antecedent, that the covenant is
one and the same; and to clear the grounds of his denial, he undertakes to
show, concerning the covenant of Abraham, 1. What it was not. 2. What it was.
3. That we have no such covenant since Christ's coming concerning our seed. In
showing what it is not, he lies down three things:

First, that God did never promise to save any of Abraham's seed for Abraham's
sake.

Secondly, nor yet for his fathers sake. I know none that say so, and therefore
this might have been spared; yet Ishmael was partaker of the same blessing,
because he was Abraham's seed, Genesis 17.20. and 21.13. And many times the
Israelites fared the better for their fathers sake; nor yet was Abraham or his
faith any efficient, or meritoriously a cause thereof, but Gods free grace
alone.

Thirdly, he says, that God did never promise to give faith to all Abraham's
posterity in the flesh, and sets down two reasons hereof: 1. Because then God
should lie, because he did not that he promised, but it is impossible for God to
lie. 2. Because it is a contradiction, to say that God had promised to work in
them that he required of them, and yet blame them for not profiting in respect
of the means vouchsafed them: To which I reply; first, what is the meaning of
the promise, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and Ezekiel. 11.19. and the like? does not God promise
here that he would give them faith? and what is the meaning of that
threatening, Genesis 17.14. where God denounces cutting off all such as did not
circumcise themselves for breaking his covenant? does it not hold out their
despising and neglecting the righteousness of faith, which God thereby sealed
his promise of making them partakers thereof? And for the first reason, that
God should then be a lier, I see no force in it; for did not God promise to
bring them into Canaan, yet not one of them came in, being shut out by
unbelief, Heb. 3.7. Jer. 18.9. At what instant I shall speak to any (which is
by promises) to build, and plant, and yet to repent of the good wherewith he
had said, he would benefit them, I hope no man will say God is a lier, nor in
threatening Nineveh to destroy it in forty days, yet spared it, was he a
deceiver? To say no more, the Apostle, Romans 3.1. etc. and 9.5. cleereth that
Gods faithfulness in promising them all good, was not blemished on his part
promising, though they came short by unbelief, nor is there any contradiction
in Gods promising to work faith in them, and yet blame them for not profiting,
for he was willing to work it in them, but they resisted his holy Spirit in the
Ministry, Act. 7.5. only this I desire all to consider, whether in denying God
promised to work faith in them, and yet blaming them for not profiting, he does
not intend they had power of themselves to do what he commanded, without any
concourse of his in the work, but only persuasion, the words seem to conclude
of much, and others do stiffly maintain the same, with whom he consents in
denying Infants baptism. Next he proceeds to show what this covenant made with
Abraham was, and he says that it was Gods command of circumcision upon
Abraham's posterity in the flesh, whereby he did separate, consecrate, and
distinguish them to be by his favor possessed of the land of Canaan, and
diverse privileges therein, which he particularly describes, and thus he
says he declares, what it is.

I reply, first, he shuts out Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all his posterity,
many hundred thousands, that never were possessed of the land of Canaan nor any
of those privileges mentioned, they being not brought into the land, nor any
of those privileges instituted or revealed, till four hundred years after this
covenant made with Abraham, and what was Gods covenant with all these, all the
time, or was it disanulled as soon as it was made?

Secondly, he seems to confound the covenant and circumcision the sign of it,
as if there were no other covenant, but circumcision in the flesh, God calls it
indeed his covenant, but it is sacramentally, the sign for the thing signified;
for the Lamb is called the Lords Passover, which was but the sign of it: so
the bread and the wine are called the body and blood of Christ, being but the
sign of the Testament and of communion of his body and blood; so likewise the
Lord himself, Genesis 17.11. calls circumcision the token, and the sign of the
covenant betwixt him and them, and so the Apostle calls it, Romans 4.11.
Circumcision is asign and a seal, etc.

Thirdly, the covenant was, that God would send his Son in the flesh, and by
his righteousness, (called the righteousness of faith) justify all that
would believe it, and receive him and his righteousness. This God preached to
Abraham, he believed, and enjoyed Christ, and righteousness by him, and was
justified thereby, Romans 4. Gal. 3.8. God preached this to all the posterity of
Abraham in the wilderness, in the land of Canaan, till Christ came, all that
believed and received Gods offer, were justified, as Abraham; all that did not
believe, and were not justified, should have been justified if they had
believed, and were not justified, because they believed not the Gospel being
preached unto them, and God promising he would justify them if they would
believe, but it profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in those
that heard it, Romans 9.31. Gal. 3.18. Heb. 3, etc. 4.2. Joh. 1.11, 12. And all
these particulars which he expresses, were added by Moses from God, to
typisie and lead them to Christ which was to come; so that it was Christ and
his righteousness which was held out unto them, and offered, and that properly
and principally, God intending not the sacrifices and the rest for themselves,
but Christ by them, and circumcision first and last was the sign and seal
hereof on Gods part administered, whereby he signified unto them, and confirmed
his gracious readiness to justify them, and sanctify them in and through his
Son; so that all that he says in this case, though in some sense it is true,
yet it is but a part of the truth; and so he comes to the third conclusion,
which is this: That we have now no such covenant since Christ's coming in the
flesh, concerning a fleshly seed, as was that of Abraham. This he labors to
prove by a pretty large discourse, the sum whereof is gathered into these
Propositions.

First, that the fleshly seed of Abraham was a type of Christ to come; which he
proves from Gal. 3.16, 19. where he says, by seed there, is meant Christ,
and therefore spoken in the singular number, Seed, as of one, that is, Christ;
and not Seeds, as to many, and shows that the word Seed may be interpreted of
Christ two ways, mystically for true believers in Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. or
typically, or ceremonially for the fleshly seed not believing, as the Lamb,
etc. were types of Christ.

To this I reply, First, the fleshly seed was not a type of Christ; what was
instituted by God are to be acknowledged: but God never instituted the natural
and fleshly seed of Abraham to be a type of Christ to come: Some of that
natural seed did typifie Christ, as Aaron and his sons, but not as natural
seed: Not as natural seed, but as Officers in their offices and
administrations. But neither they nor the rest were ceremonially Christ, and
types of him, it is a doctrine of man's invention, Gal. 3.16. will prove no such
thing. First, by seed we are to understand Christ individually, and not
collectively: for by him alone individually, we have the blessings of God upon
us, and it cannot be communicated unto mystical Christ, and to make the
members of Christ sharers in the work of blessing of us. Secondly,
interpreting the seed to be Christ, either mystically or typically, he excludes
all true believers that were mystically Christ (believing now being no
otherwise but mystically) from being a type of Christ, though Abraham's fleshly
seed. Thirdly, in saying the not believing posterity of Abraham by fleshly
relation, was a type of Christ, he concludes it of Esau, and all after him, in
all their idolatries, witchcrafts, etc. to be types of Christ throughout their
whole state till he came, which cannot be true of them before Moses, till when
there was no institution of types of Christ, nor yet safely nor honorably
propounded.

The second Proposition is; This fleshly seed, not believing, were in the
Covenant, and a true Church, till Christ's time and death; the absence of the
thing typified, necessarily requiring the presence of the type.

Reply: First, as I said before, they were not a type of Christ, and therefore
in that respect were not necessarily to be in Covenant, and a Church, till
Christ came.

Secondly, If the fleshly seed not believing, as such were in the Covenant, and
of the true Church, then Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with all believing Jews
were not in the same Covenant, and parts of the same Church, being not
homogeneall parts, i. of the same, but of a diverse kind.

Thirdly, If the fleshly seed were typically Christ, and a true Church, then
either those many hundreds in Abraham's family, Isaacs servants, and all
Proselytes, after being circumcised, were not of the Church, or else should
typifie Christ with the Jews, and yet not Abraham's fleshly seed, so as the
conclusion of Abraham's fleshly seed, being ceremonially Christ, is not right.

The third Proposition, That when Christ came and died, then they were no
longer in the Covenant, nor a Church, but were broken off by unbelief; and he
makes, this to be the reason (in answer to a second objection he makes why
then?) the presence of the thing typified necessarily requiring the absence of
the type.

Reply. This is no reason of their breaking off, they being no types of Christ;
and the Apostle gives a certain and a sure reason, Romans 11.11. and 19. etc.
That salvation might come to the Gentiles, for to provoke the Jews to
jealousy, etc. 2. Himself confesses they were broken off by unbelief, which
necessarily implies, that either they had not been cut off, if they had
believed, and so were not types, or else if types, they should have been cut
off, though they had believed.

Two Objections he raises:

First, Were they not under unbelief before? and he answers yes, no doubt.

Secondly, Why were they not broken off before? and why then? He answers,
because till Christ came they were in the Covenant, and a true Church typically
by being circumcised, and observing the ceremonies of the Law. This is his
answer.

I reply to both: First, They were in unbelief before.

Secondly, most of them were broken off many hundred years before; as the ten
Tribes in Hezekiahs days; And God said, Lo-ammi, no peaple, Hos. 1.6.8. And
Lo-ruhamah, no mercy. I will no more have mercy upon them, but will utterly
take them away; But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah: these ceased
before Christ was come, and therefore are not a type, and so that no reason of
their continuance.

But thirdly, The Scriptures give us a true reason (besides the former, Romans
11.) why any of them continued till Christ came, and were not cut off before.

First, Because a remnant of them were to be saved, Isa. 1.9. Mat. 24.22.

Secondly, Because Christ was to come of them according to the flesh, and borne
under the Law, Gal. 4. which he could not have been, if the Church estate had
been disanulled.

Thirdly, Because they were to be rejected for casting off Christ, Zach. 11.10.
to 15. and Mat. 21.33. to the end, and 22.1. At last he comes to his inference
from all this discourse, and concludes the Covenant then and now is not the
same; that was typical in the fleshly seed; and this of spiritual seed, and
not typical. To this I have replied enough. Secondly, The standing of them in
that Church and Covenant, was by Circumcision, and observing the rites of the
Law; the standing in this Covenant and Church is by faith and Baptism, and so
upon different grounds.

I reply, First, Circumcision and observing of Rites being not the Covenant,
but additions to the Covenant, and profession of Faith; and Baptism also being
not the Covenant, but additions, the Covenant may be the same, though the
circumstances differ: As the covenant made with Abraham till Moses, and after
to Moses and the people, though to the latter were many additions, which were
not in the former. Secondly, their standing then, and our standing now, is the
same in substance (though much differing in circumstances, viz. faith in Gods
covenant; this is clear, Romans 11.20. they were cut off by unbelief, thou
stand by faith: if they continue not in unbelief, they shall be ingraffed
again, v. 23. We stand by faith, and so should they have done if they had
believed; and shall stand again when they shall believe. They were cut off for
unbeleefe, and we shall be cut off for unbeleefe, if we give way to it: their
falling and ours from Gods covenant and the Church estate, our standing and
theirs in the covenant and the Church Estate, is not upon different, but the
same grounds. Thirdly, if the covenant under Christ be the same with that
before Christ; then by the same right Abraham and his posterity possessed the
Church estate then and circumcision, by the same right they might possess the
Church estate and Baptism now: But they could not possess the Church estate
and Baptism now, by the same right they possessed it. Ergo. I answer: they
might, and that right was and is partly the grace of God offered, and partly
their acceptance of that grace by faith working by love, though I might deny
the consequence, for that the covenant may be the same, and yet in some respect
the right to be a member, in the one and in the other, might not be the same:
But I have said enough before to clear my Argument, and to make it good
(notwithstanding any thing in his answer against it) In his further proceeding
in this Argnment, he grants two things; First, the covenant of God makes a
Church then and now, a Church being nothing else but a people in covenant with
God: and that as the covenant whereby a Church is made, differs; so the Church
differs which is made by that Covenant, but the covenant then and the covenant
now differs, therefore the Church differs: for the covenant which made them a
Church, was Gods taking them (being circumcised) to participate of all those
outward means which leads to Christ who was to come. That covenant which makes
a Church now, is Gods admitting men to be baptized, making profession of faith
in Christ.

I reply in one word, I consent that the Church then and now is made by a
covenant. Secondly, I say, that circumcision was not, baptism is not, the
covenant, but signs and seals of the covenant, circumcision then, baptism
now. Thirdly, that the covenant then was, God would be their God, justifying
and sanctifying them, through his Son whom he would send, if they would
believe in him, and the same is the covenant now. Fourthly, the sign and the
seal of it then was circumcision, whereby God confirmed he would circumcise
their hearts in his Son, by cutting away their sins, in justifying and
sanctifying; the sign and seal of it now, is washing with water, etc. whereby
God confirms he will wash away their guilt and stain of sin. Fifthly, the
people then that were of years, did restipulate and make profession of faith in
Christ before circumcised: And let any one show me any one of Abraham's family,
or one Proselyte ever after, that was admitted into the Church estate without
some restipulation (which is necessary in the nature of a covenant) and
subjection to God and his righteousness, and so circumcised without it. In a
word then, as the covenant differs, the Church made by it differs; if the
covenant differ essentially, then the Church differs essentially: but if the
covenant differ but circumstantially, then the Church differs circumstantially,
and not essentially. And so much is clear, as I said, unto which also himself
consents in the next passage, granting it, as that Christ is, and ever was
the Mediator and means of salvation, both before and since Christ's coming,
dispensed by the covenant of God, Christ being called the Covenant, Isai. 42.6.
In whom also the promises are Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 11.18. It is true that he
says, that the outward means of making Christ known, does depend differently
upon his being yet to come, and upon his being come, the one being more dark
and carnal, the other more plain and spiritual; and therefore the
participation of these means do make the state of the participants to differ;
but this difference is not in regard of the thing it self, but in regard of
the manner of the thing, more dark, and more clear, do not change the thing,
or make it diverse, but only circumstantially, the substance is the same, the
circumstances differ. And thus much all his eight differences following, which
he sets forth to be between those two states, agree to also, they being not
substantial, but accidental differences; yet so as they are not to be
distinctly limited to one time in respect of the substance, and things
themselves, and the effects thereof: for all that he says belongs to the new
Testament, were communicated unto many of them under the Old, (as Moses, Aaron,
and all the elect of God) and none of them are made good to many in the New.
But on the contrary, all that is spoken by him of the Old, may be verified of
men in the New, as experience witnesses, and the Scriptures affirm, Gal. 4.29.
The fault why all did not enjoy all these privileges in the new Testament
(dispensed under shadows in the Old) being in themselves, 2 Cor. 3.13.14. Heb.
3.7.8.22.4.2. and 8.8. and many now deprive themselves of these privileges,
Heb. 4.1. and attain to no more then they in the Old, to establish their own
righteousness only, Romans 10.3. And therefore as none are to be admitted to
the privileges of the new Testament, or Gospel now, but such as are suitable,
though many prove otherwise. So none ought to have been admitted, nor were, in
the Old Testament, (the same Gospel preached unto them, and the new Testament
shadowed under the old) to enjoy the privileges of the Old, shadowing the
privileges of the New, but such as were suitable, even such as are required in
the New, though few of them proved such, with this difference, they were to
believe in Christ to come, to whom the Law and shadows directed them; we are
to believe in Christ already come, to whom the Ordinances do direct us. And
therefore what he further repeateth, (having said the same all before) that
whosoever circumcised themselves, and their Males, and observed the Rites of
the Law, they and their children (though Proselytes) were the seed (and fleshly
seed too, for so he says all this time) and in that covenant, and of that
Church. But now only such as believe in Christ, and be thereby regenerated,
are the seed, and in this covenant, and of the Church, might well have been
spared, and have been answered before; yet seeing he adds six other reasons
to prove this latter (clearly proving as he says) I shall be willing to
follow him.

And he says, First, believers regenerate only, are in this Covenant, and of
this Church, because none of the natural seed of Abraham are in this Covenant
by virtue of natural relation, though they remained in the Jewish Churches
till Christ's death. But their being in the Churches by natural relation, then
ceased as the Church ceased: I reply, First, I have showed that their standing
in that Covenant and Church, was not by fleshly relation, but by spiritual,
who were counted for the seed, Romans 9.8. 2dly, Those few that were added to the
Gospel Church, were not cut off as the rest, but remained natural branches
still in their own Olive tree, and what natural relation they had, they put
not off; and when the rest be added, the Apostle says, the natural branches
shall be ingraffed into their own stock: For if the root be holy, the branches
will be so too, Romans 11.16, 17.24. 3dly, The Scriptures by him quoted, prove
not the thing he alleges them for, Acts 10.28. Romans 9.8. Gal. 3.7, 9, 28, 29.
and 4.28.

His second Reason: The Gentiles have no natural relation to become his seed
by, and therefore their infants cannot become the seed of Abraham, by being the
seed of a believer, but must believe themselves, otherwise they cannot be
partakers in the Covenant made with Abraham.

Reply. First, there needs no such relation natural, nor were the Jews (as
natural seed only without faith) counted for the seed, Romans 9.8. Secondly,
the Gentiles Proselytes need not that natural relation before to be in the
covenant then, but were ingraffed into the body by faith, and thereby their
Infants: Thirdly, all now are not children of promise, but many always are
deceivers, and deceived, as many then, but not all; only this may be noted,
that he yields that Believers now are partakers of the covenant of Abraham,
and therefore that then and now is the same. And yet in the next and his third
Reason, he denies the covenant under Christ to be the same with that which was
made with Abraham, because the three thousand converts, Acts 2. when they were
baptized, did not baptize their Infants; this he says is plain, Acts 2.41. and
8.12. where it is, they that gladly received the Word were baptized, they and
they only, which the Infants could not do.

Reply. In the old Testament, they that submitted themselves to the Jewish
covenant, and would take their God to be theirs, were circumcised, but Infants
could not do that, yet they were circumcised: Secondly, it is not said they
were baptized, and then it is not a perfect relation.

Reply. It follows not, for all is not written that was done, they might be
baptized, though it is not said they were: For, were not Christ's Apostles
baptized? yet it is not written where, when, or who baptized them; it is no
argument to say it was not done, because it is not set down, but take it for
granted, their Infants were not baptized then (which yet I will not grant, for
some considerations I shall afterward set down in another place) does this
difference make that the covenant with Abraham and now is not the same? It is
not the same in this respect, as all can be concluded, which is but a
circumstantiall difference.

The fourth Reason follows, if Paul and others, writing to the visible
Churches, calls them Saints, faithful Brethren, the Sons of God by adoption,
Romans 16, etc. and the Prophets (notwithstanding they were led by the same
Spirit) were wont to speak otherwise of the visible Church of the Jews (as
Isa. 1.16. Jer. 1.2. Ezekiel. 3.4.4.12. and Chap. 16.48.51.) then natural Infants
were not in the covenant and of the Churches which the Apostles wrote unto, as
they were in that covenant and of that Church the Prophets spoke to: But Paul
calls them Saints, and the Prophets the other sinners; yea, grievous sinners,
and bids them wash themselves, etc. therefore natural Infants were not in the
Churches which the Apostle wrote unto, as they were in the Jews.

Reply. I deny the consequence in the Reason, as no way following, and the
proof of it as invalid: For as the Apostles do call the Churches Saints, etc.
and the Prophets the Jews sinners in the places alleged; yet in other places,
the Scriptures call those sinners Saints, Believers, Brethren adopted, etc. as
in many places may be made evident; one or two may be enough: Exodus 19.6. A
kingdom of Priests, a holy nation: Deuteronomy. 33.2, 3. Psalm. 22.22. and 122.8. Romans
9.3, 4. etc. And the Apostle, 2 These. 2. calls them, sinners, carnal, bids
them repent, etc. to whom they wrote unto, as Saints: as Galat. Corinth. where
were many gross things and sinfully amiss, and most of the Epistles to the
seven Churches, Rev. 2. and 3. Therefore there is no difference in those
Churches the Apostles wrote to, and that the Prophets spoke to: and natural
Infants may be in the covenant, and of the Churches now, as they were before
Christ, notwithstanding. The fifth argument is the same with the first and
second, and therefore was then answered. The sixth is taken from Hebr. 9.8.
where, from Jer. 31. the Apostle says, Behold, I will make a new covenant with
the house of Judah, not like the covenant I made with your fathers, when I
brought them out of the land of Egypt, etc. where he notes, that the principal
difference is in the subjects of the covenant: and let it be noted, that
therefore it is not in the covenant it self: in his proceeding, he notes two
differences; the first in the writing of the Law, which in the former state was
in a table of stone, not in their hearts, as without which they might not be
the house of Israel; in the latter the law is written in their hearts.

Reply. First, that this difference falls not in the time from Abraham to
Moses, as is clear; for Jeremiah expresses the time of their coming out of
Egypt, and then that time began, whence the difference between that state and
this must arise; nor was the Law written before that time in tables of stone,
and therefore either Abraham, and all those following, to Moses, had no Law at
all, or it was written in their hearts; and indeed so it was, as well as it is
now written in any of our hearts; but it is not written in all now, but only in
such as belong to Gods election, and so it was then; and therefore there is no
difference betwixt that period, and this under Christ in the writing of the
Law, nor in the subjects.

Secondly, the promise that God made to Abraham continued to all till Moses
time, and then was not abolished, but continued still to them, till Christ, as
is evident, the Gospel being preached to them in the wilderness, Heb. 3. and
to them in Canaan, Psalm. 95. the Gospel and the Promise are taken for the same,
Gal. 3.8.18. and fince contimued to the Gentile Churches; and this promise is
the covenant which is one in all times: Again, this is to be attended, that the
Apostle speaks not of the Covenant, but of the Testament, as is clear by his
whole discourse, in the 8. and 9. Chapt. where he speaks of one and the same
thing in all, and it is of a Testament; and therefore Jeremiah speaks of a
Testament also: And therefore, though it be commonly translated covenant, yet
it should be testament, at least covenant should be understood testament. This
testament in both places is twofold: the first from their coming out of Egypt,
till Christ; the second from Christ ever after: the first is called the old,
and is antiquated or done away: the second, called the new, is established and
remains. Nor are the times of the old and new Testament so to be attended in
the differences, as if they under that had not the Law written in their hearts
many of them, and all should, (it being their sin that it was not) or that
these under the new Testament had every one of them the Law written in their
hearts, many of them always being destitute of the grace of God through their
own default; so that the difference made by him is none at all; all the elect
then having the law written in their hearts as well as in tables of stone, and
none but the elect having it now written in their hearts, the reprobate having
it then and now written but in tables of stone, for the Gospel abolisheth not
the Law, and ten words, but establishes it rather, Romans 3. last.

The other difference he makes is from the effects of the Law then and now; in
the former many of them were destitute of the knowledge of God: At the first,
Infants circumcised the eighth day, and therefore were to learn God in Christ
afterward coming to years; but in the latter, all do know God from the least to
the greatest, have the Law written in their hearts, possess remission of sin;
in so much, that it is a great shame for the Church of Corinth, that any of
them should be destitute of the knowledge of God: 1 Cor. 15.34. which could not
be, if Infants were the subjects of this covenant and Church; therefore the
covenant since Christ is not the same with that before Christ.

Reply. First, he grants that some then had the knowledge of God, though many
had it not; but why had they it not? Did he not give them his Spirit to write
it in their hearts? (which now writes it in whose hearts it is written) if he
knew it not, let him read Nehem. 9.20. Isa. 63.10. Acts 7.51. And to say all
know God now, is contrary to experience, and Scriptures, and that in one of the
first and eminent Churches, as his quotation shows, 1 Cor. 15.

Secondly, God promises then and now, to write this Law in men's hearts,
offers himself to do it by his Spirit, gives all means necessary thereto
then and now; but they did not all then, they do not all now know God, because
they resist his Spirit in the means. There were then false Prophets, there are
now false teachers, who then led away, and now seduce many; but all the elect
then and fince obtained, though the rest were justly hardened.

Thirdly, it is a great shame, that any in the Church of Corinth, or any else,
under the new Testament, know not God; and so it was before, and they were
always blamed for it, which therefore they might, and ought to have had, else
why blamed? Or were they blamed because Infants were then in the Church, and
knew not God? Were they not blamed for their own want of knowledge, though
their Infants were incapable? And may not we now be blamed if they know not
God? because Infants be in the Church, as he concludes? The covenant therefore
with Abraham, and after till Christ, and now since, is the same in substance,
though it differ much in circumstances; it being the same Law there written in
stone, and now in flesh, which was written in many men's hearts then as now it
is; but not in all men's hearts now no more then before, though it ought to have
been in all then, and now should be, and is only their own fault then and now,
in whom it was, and is not written, and they all justly perish for want thereof.

The difference lies not therefore in Gods dispensation, the matter dispensed,
or the subjects to whom it is dispensed, but in the manner and measure of
dispensing, then more darkly, now more clearly; then more sparingly, now more
fully, Heb. 1.1. And this shall suffice for reply to what he said against my
first argument.

Next, he comes to my proofs: and first the Antecedent or Assumption, That
the covenant made with Abraham and his posterity before Christ and this since
Christ is the same: This I proved by three Reasons: The first this; the Gospel
is the Doctrine of the covenant; but this was preached to Abraham, to the Jews
in the wilderness, and in David's time; Ergo, the covenant is the same in all.

To which he Answreth, is this a good proof that the covenant is the same?
surely no: For then to whomsoever the Gospel is preached, they are in the
covenant, though they be scoffing Athenians: as Act. 17. and concludes, that
there is no more in my proof.

Reply. First, is this a good answer? and does this confute what I said, that
the Gospel was preached to Abraham, etc? Surely no; for there is no more in all
he says then this, that it was not a covenant to scoffing Athenians who
received it not by outward subjection unto it.

Secondly, there is therefore a difference to be put between people to whom the
Gospel is preached; to some it is preached to be received: so to Abraham,
Athenians, etc. to some as having received it; so to the Jews succeeding, and
to the Churches of the Gentiles.

Thirdly, the Gospel is the promise, the promise is the covenant, (he grants
this afterward) the sum whereof is, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed, if thou will accept of it, and will bless thee and thy seed with
forgiveness of sin, and life in my Son, whom I will send in the flesh, if you
will believe in him. This God preached to Abraham and the Athenians; Abraham
accepting, he was in the covenant; if he had not accepted it, he had not been
in the covenant; as the Athenians were not, because they accepted it not, yet
should have been, if they had received the offer of God as well as Abraham.

Fourthly, the Gospel is the doctrine of the covenant, or materially the
covenant it self, and being from first to last but one, Gal. 1.6. on Gods part
dispensed to Abraham and his family to be received, and on their part received,
continued to the Jews till Christ on Gods part, (being that which made them
his people in covenant, and of the Church in all Apostasies and Idolatries,
etc. till God cast them off) and after derived to the Gentiles, and believed by
them, it cannot but be really the same covenant on Gods part, to all to whom it
was offered, and on their part who receive it, as offered by God, and they that
receive it not will be guilty of refusing Gods covenant of grace and life, and
perish justly. More therefore there is in the proof then he would take notice
of; or knew how to answer, and therefore thought it his best way to say nothing.

My second Reason to prove the second covenant was the same in all the three
periods is this: If Abraham be the father equally of Jews and Gentiles, as he
believes, and they his children equally, as believing the righteousness of
faith, then the covenant is the same. But Abraham is equally father of Jews
and Gentiles, equally as he believes, and they his children equally as
believing, Romans 4.11. Gal. 3.7. Ergo, The covenant is the same, because the
promise of the righteousness of faith is the covenant on Gods part held forth.

To this he answers; The argument has no force at all to prove that the
covenant made with Abraham and his posterity before Christ and this since
Christ is the same.

Reply. What force there is in this argument let others judge, and that they
may more fully do it, I shall set it down in clear terms thus: If the matter of
the covenant, and the conditions required of all that will be partakers of the
covenant be the same, then the covenant is the same in all the three periods.
But the matter of the covenant, and the conditions required of all that will be
partakers of it, are the same in all the three periods; Ergo, The covenant is
the same.

The first Proposition is evident: For, as all to whom the Law is prescribed,
and the condition of works and self-righteousnesse is required of them, they
are all under the covenant of works: so all to whom the righteousness of faith
is held forth, and the condition of faith is required of them, they receiving
it and submitting, are all under the same covenant of grace.

The second Proposition is as manifest: Romans 4.13.14.16. that faith was
required of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, will not be denied, and was performed by
them, Heb. 11. That Gods righteousness was offered, and faith in it required
of the Jews in Moses time, and after, is evident, because they were blamed
every where for not believing; and the Apostle, Romans 9.31, 32. showed that they
came short of Gods righteousness, because they sought it not by faith; and
himself has said before, and presently after says again, that they were cut
off by unbelief. If they were cut off by, and for unbelief, then certainly they
stood by faith, and that was required of them: and so they in the wilderness
were shut out of Gods rest (that is, Gods righteousness in Christ) because
they mixed not the Gospel with faith where they heard it, Heb. 4.2. That the
righteousness of God is preached to the Gentiles, and faith required of them,
himself every where affirms; therefore the conclusion, that the covenant in
all the three periods is the same, is undeniable. Yet seeing he sets down
sundry considerations, upon which he said as he did; I shall attend to hear
him: And first, he says, if none be Abraham's children but such as believe the
righteousness of faith, then none but such as believe are within the covenant
and to be baptized; but the first is true, Ergo, the second.

Reply. First, What is this to the argument? How does this clear that there is
no force in it to prove the covenant now and then to be the same? If I should
grant him all this, yet my argument is of force, the covenant may be the same,
though none but such as believe in the righteousness of God be in the
covenant, and so to be sealed: for, secondly, any are said to be in the
covenant in a twofold respect:

First, as to take God to be their God, and of their seed, to work faith in
them who can never believe of themselves, unless God give them to believe,
which he works in all in whom it is wrought, in the first instant, without any
actual concourse of power to make the dead sbul live, and become active
through his assistance.

Secondly, as none actually believing and professing the same, which to
men-ward may seem to be true, but is not always so indeed; If he mean that
none but of the second sort are in the covenant, and are to be baptized, I deny
it, and do affirm, that Infants of such as do actually believe and profess,
are under Gods covenant and promise with their parents, to work the faith in
them that he has wrought in their parents, as I shall make further proof of
afterward.

Secondly, he says, the body of the Jewish nation were the posterity of
Abraham, according to the flesh, were commanded to be circumcised as so in the
covenant, and otherwise could not have been of the Jewish Church. They were not
to bring their sacrifices to the Temple, nor eat the Passover; therefore these
were legally in the covenant, though but the posterity of Abraham according to
the flesh; yet none of the uncircumsion might before Christ's time partake of
those privileges, though they did believe. The difference therefore was very
great.

Reply. That the Jewish Nation was Abraham's posterity according to the flesh,
who knows not? yet that they were thereby of the Church is not true, and that
they were in covenant before, and Church Members, is certain, though he affirm
the contrary never so often, without any proof at all; for circumcision
follows the covenant at Church state, being a sign of it, does not go before
it, as is evident in Abraham's case and his families; as also in Isaacs case,
and all following him, who were not circumcised at the 8th day, but as in the
covenant before; and how could a Jew, being uncircumcised, be cut off from his
people, and despise Gods covenant, if he had not interest in that estate
before? And were not those many hundred in Abraham's family, and all proselytes
after in the covenant, and of the Church, though not of Abraham's posterity in
the flesh? This is not required therefore to make them of the Jewish Church,
nor was it sufficient to be Abraham's posterity, and circumcised, to make them
in the covenant and in the Church, and no more required, as in Esau's case, and
the rest of Abraham's children by Ketura, where he says, they were legally in
the covenant, though but Abraham's posterity. I reply, More was required of them
to be in the covenant, then to be Abraham's posterity in the flesh, even to be
the Lords to have Abraham's faith wrought in them, without which they could not
be, or continue in the covenant. If he mean by legally in the covenant, they
were in a legal covenant, a covenant of works, it is contrary to the
Scriptures, Galat. 3.17, 18. Now was there any such covenant dispensed unto
them by God? But if he mean they were in the same covenant we have, but legally
being perverted by them contrary to the doctrine of God, he grants what I said,
and contradicts himself. Further, he says, none uncircumcised before Christ's
time, may partake in those privileges, though they did believe.

Reply. It is not true: For Enoch, Noah, Melchisedec, and many others, were
partakers of some of them, before circumcision was instituted, and all they in
the wilderness during the forty years travel there. Though therefore the
difference was very great in many circumstances, yet it was the same in
substance; which is that I said.

A third consideration he has, is this, No Gentiles are Abraham's seed at all,
but by believing the righteousness of faith, although he be the child of
believing parents.

Reply. First, I deny it: For the infants of believing Gentiles in covenant,
are Abraham's seed, though they do not actually believe; as the infants of
Proselytes Gentiles before Christ, were Abraham's seed with their believing
parents.

Secondly, none of the Jewish parents or children, were Abraham's seed, but by
actually believing the righteousness of faith, or under the promise of God to
work it in them, Romans 9.6, 8. But what is this to the disproof of my Argument,
That the covenant with Abraham then and now is the same? I see not a word to
that purpose.

A fourth consideration he thus sets down, None of the Jews themselves,
Abraham's natural seed, and partakers of all the orders of the Old Testament,
by virtue of that natural relation, could be admitted to be baptized, but
upon manifestation of faith. Therefore the covenant before, and this since, is
not the same.

Reply. First, all Abraham's natural seed, were not partakers of all ordinances
of the old Testament, by virtue of that relation, as Esaus posterity, nor was
that relation necessary: for then no Proselyte could have enjoyed them.

Secondly, the natural posterity of Abraham did partake of those ordinances by
virtue of the covenant, or their actual faith; and therefore enjoyed them no
longer then their covenant and faith continued.

Thirdly, it follows not that the covenant now and then is not the same,
because the Jews of years were not baptized without manifestation of their
faith: for the difference only is circumstantiall; viz. the manifestation of
their faith in Christ the Messiah now come, which before they believed should
come: nor will he ever prove, that the infants of those Jews, believing and
baptized, were not also baptized with their parents. And this of his
considerations to my second Reason; my third Reason follows.

The standing of the Jews, and of us Gentiles in the grace of God, is the same
with Abraham's, therefore the Covenant is the same.

To this he answers, First, distinguishing of the word Grace, which is taken
(says he) particularly for the covenant of life, generally for any effect of
Gods goodness, whereby he freely communicates any benefits unto the sons of
men: which must needs be by grace, seeing no man deserves any thing.

Secondly, he applies this distinction, and says, that if grace be taken in
the first sense, and particularly for the covenant of everlasting life unto
free justification, he denies that the Jews were required to manifest their
interest therein, before they could be admitted to stand members of the Jewish
visible Church state; as all both Jews and Gentiles must now since the death of
Christ, and yet none saved but by grace in this first sense. But if grace be
taken in the latter and more general sense, for some effect of Gods goodness
communicated freely to any in any kind of benefit, then he grants that the
Jews stood under the same grace of God with Abraham, and had circumcision and
other ordinances to lead them to Christ to come, yea to be born of their seed,
according to the flesh: And in these respects the Jews standing was the same
with Abraham's; and these respects are spoken of by Mary, Luke 1.54, 55. and
Zachary, Luke 1.72, 73

Rep. First, the distinction is not necessary: for though in a general sense
any thing from God may be called a grace, as it is a free gift of God to them
them that never deserve it; yet in this discourse, and usually in the
Scriptures, it is not used in this larger sense.

Secondly, to make those privileges of the Jews to be but effects of common
grace, he wrongeth the grace of God, as dispensing nothing more of particular
favor to the Jews then to the Gentiles, though they had more and larger
matters then the Gentiles. Yet being from common grace, it alters not the state
of them under Gods grace from the Heathens, whom in this case God leaves not
without witness of himself.

Thirdly, in that he says, the Jews had circumcision and other Ordinances
leading them to Christ, and that Christ should be born of their seed after the
flesh. And in these respects they stood in the same grace with Abraham.

Reply. First, Abraham had not those ordinances which they had, their standing
therefore in these things differ.

Secondly, these were not all the respects: for the passages in Luke 1. verse.
54. speak of other things; namely, remission of sins, justification and
sanctification. In a word, did not Christ come of Terah as well as of Abraham;
yea, of Noah, Sem, etc? read Luke 3. And did they not believe in him to come?
Heb. 11.7. and how can any exclude them before Abraham, of this privilege,
(yea and the Gentiles also with them, before the time of distinction of the
people) more then them after, in the due and proper consideration of the thing
it self?

But to say no more, I come to the other sense of the word Grace, and did, and
do intend my reason in that acceptance. But here he denies that ever the
Jews were required to make any such manifestation to make them members of that
Church before Christ, as all Jews and Gentiles since must do to make them
members of a Church now.

Reply. First, Abraham and his Males made such a protestation, and all
Proselytes that ever after joined, without which they had not been members, as
having no other relation; and besides, the seal should have been set upon
them, as the seal of the righteousness of faith which they had not.

Secondly, the Jews after Moses time were required first and last to make such
manifestation of their faith in Gods righteousness, and they sinned and were
liable to Gods displeasure when they failed, were often punished, and at last
cast off for want of it, which could not have been, if it had not been required
of them.

Thirdly, suppose that there was not the like manifestation required of them,
that is now, yet the same thing was required of them that was of Abraham, and
is now of us, namely faith in Gods righteousness. And therefore though they
then and we now, should differ in this respect, that there was not such a
manifestation of faith required, as is now, yet the covenant may be, and is the
same now and then, the manifestation being not the covenant, but a circumstance
about the covenant.

To conclude, if the matter propounded in all these three periods, not
excluding the first in the time before Abraham, be the same, viz. Gods
righteousness, the Word of Gods grace and the Gospel, if the condition
required of all be the same, viz. faith in Gods righteousness; And if the
effect be the same in all that do believe, viz. that they that believe are
freely justified by Christ, without the deeds of the Law, though the elect
only obtain, and the rest refuse, are hardened and perish for ever for their
sinful unbelief; then the covenant is the same in all these three periods, as
I first propounded, and my proofs are full and clear for this purpose, come
not short at all, nor are taken away, as he would persuade himself: but I
question not but others will see that he is much mistaken, many of the things
he speaks, being not only unsound, but absurd and uncongruous to wholesome
doctrine. It follows, that I next go on with him about the consequent from
this antecedent, which he supposes he has taken away, and so the consequences
therefrom will fall and fail also; and certainly so they would, if he had
taken away the antecedent, and therefore he might have spared his labor in
seeking to disprove them, and the proofs I added. But it seems he thought not
as he said, and therefore he sets down my consequence, and the proofs
thereof, and seeks to overthrow them all, as he has done my antecedent.

My first consequent was, that seeing the covenant with Abraham, the Jews and
us Gentiles, is the same: Therefore as infants were then in covenant, so they
are now in covenant since Christ.

To clear this consequence to be just, I added (as he sets them down) four
reasons.

The first; Else the covenant were not the same, in all, as I have proved it
is. He answers, he has disproved my proofs of that particular, and
therefore this reason is nothing.

Reply. How he has disproved my proofs, others shall judge, and I have
removed those disproofes of his; and therefore this Reason is something, and
the Consequence thereby certain.

My second Reason; Else the state of Gods grace should be straightened, and made
of less extent by Christ's coming, then it was before; whereas it is more
enlarged, and of greater extent, there being then no more in the state of
persons to interest infants into the covenant, then now.

To this he answers diversely, denying the consequence, that is, that unless
infants be now in the covenant, as they were then, the state of Gods grace is
straightened, and made of less extent by Christ's coming.

First, says he, because the preaching of the Gospel is as full, as large and
ample a testimony of Gods grace, as any of the fleshly seed of Abraham had by
the covenant, and larger. The Gospel preached now is a fuller declaration of
the grace of God, and the benefits that come by Christ, then ever circumcision,
and the ordinances of the old Testament did declare to them. The fleshly seed
had but the declaration of the grace of God by the covenant: now the seed of
the Gentiles, believers and unbeleevers, are made partakers of the preaching of
the Gospel, though they be not in the covenant.

Reply. First, he seems to oppose the preaching of the Gospel now, to the
former times, as if the Gospel were not preached unto them all that time: for
in this passage (Gospel now preached, and Covenant then) is a direct
opposition: And so in the next branch he opposes Circumcision, and the
Ordinances of the old Testament, to the Gospel preached now; as if the Gospel
preached, were peculiar to the new Testament, contrary to the Scriptures.

Secondly, I affirm, and none can deny, that there is not any point of
doctrine held forth by the Gospel in the New Testament, nor any grace of God,
or effect thereof, but it was held forth then in the Old, though more darkly
then and sparingly, yet the same in both. And therefore it is not right that he
says, The Ordinances of the Old Testament did not make so full a declaration
of Gods grace, as the Gospel preached now does, unless he mean it of the
measure and manner, and then it is not to the purpose he should aim at.

Thirdly, I suppose it is evident, that since Christ's coming for many hundred
years under the state of the Apostles, there was a little preaching of the
Gospel, and declaration of the grace of God, as ever was by the dispensation of
the old Testament, for the most part.

Fourthly, whereas he says, that Abraham's fleshly seed had but a declaration
of Gods grace by the covenant (adding though the believing seed of Abraham had
the grace of God in Christ declared them, of which I confess I can make no
sense; and besides, they include a flat contradiction: but now the seed of the
Gentile believers, and unbeleevers, have the Gospel preached to them though not
in covenant.

Reply. First, I understand not what difference he would put between the
declaration of the grace of God in Christ, and preaching of the Gospel; in my
apprehension there is no more then in preaching the Gospel and preaching the
Gospel: for surely the preaching of the Gospel is the declaration of the grace
of God in Christ, and declaration of Gods grace in Christ, is preaching the
Gospel, and Circumcision and the other Ordinances together, with the Word
preached, did as truly hold forth Gods grace in Christ, and the benefits
thereof, as the Gospel now preached does, and the Ordinances of the new
Testament: only the difference lies in Christ to come, and now come; as also
in the measure and manner of the dispensation, and not altogether in the matter.

Secondly, he says, that the seed of the Gentiles, believers, and unbeleevers,
are made partakers of larger graces in having the Gospel preached unto them,
being not in covenant, then the fleshly seed had been in covenant.

Reply. First, Abraham had the Gospel first preached unto him, when he was an
unbeleever, and not in covenant. But was it larger grace to have it preached
unto him when he was not in covenant, then when he was? Surely no.

2dly,, that the Gentiles were made partakers of greater grace by being out of
covenant, then the Jews by being in covenant, is an unreasonable speech: for in
that respect they are set one against another, the Gospel was preached unto
them both; and therefore unless he deny this, he cannot avoid the blame of the
former.

Besides, the Jews had the Oracles of God, the adoption, the promises, etc.
Romans 9.4. by being in covenant; but the Gentiles had nothing visible, whereby
they might be accounted partakers of Gods grace, till they were in covenant:
and therefore the Jews had larger grace then the Gentiles believing or not
believing, not being in covonant, etc.

A second answer he gives to overthrow my Consequence, That if infants be not
in the covenant now, the grace of God is straightened by Christ's coming, is this;
The grace of God is now revealed to more people then before: Then it was
confirmed to the people of the Jews only, but now it is commanded to be
preached to all Nations. Therefore the exclusion of Infants does not straiten
the grace of God at all.

Reply 1. That the declaration of the grace of God was limited to the Jews,
but now is common to all Nations, I grant; as also, that there is a more full
and clear declaration of that grace of God now, then in former times. Yea, if
he can lay down more respects, wherein Gods grace is enlarged now, above what
it was then, I should well approve of it, yet this touches not my argument
that I alleged, and still affirm, that the grace of God is now more straightened
then it was then, if infants be not now in the covenant, as then they were. And
that besides others in a twofold respect: First, in respect of Infants
themselves, who in this abounding of grace dispensed, are excluded and shut out
by the God of that grace, when before they were not; and therefore to them it
is straightened.

Secondly, in respect of Parents, who then looked upon their Infants as the
Lords equally with themselves; but now they look upon their Infants as aliens,
without God and Christ: and have no more interest in them then an Indian child
has: nor are any Parents or others to account of their children any otherwise
then they do of the Infant of an Indian.

So that this discourse medleth not with my Argument, nor the scope of it, nor
are his answers to the purpose, that should clear this, that the grace of God
is not straightened now more then then; though Infants were excluded, which were
not then.

It may be yet his third answer will do that, which is this;

If by extension of grace I do conceive that ever God accepted any into the
covenant of everlasting life, as the fleshly seed of Abraham, without inherent
faith, and thereupon conclude, that much more now are the seed of believers
taken into the covenant, by their parents faith, I err, and he absolutely
denies any such thing then or now, etc.

Reply. First, here is not one word to my argument, he forgets what he was a
doing, and falls into a suppofition, he does not show, that if Infants be not
now in the covenant, the grace of God is straightened, because then Infants were.
Secondly, that Infants were then in the covenant, is not, cannot be denied.

That the covenant on Gods part dispensed, was the covenant of everlasting
life, is evident, because it was an offer of God unto them, to become their
God, and their seeds God, to bless them with the forgiveness of sins in his
Son, called the righteousness of Faith.

Though it was not a covenant of life to all, through their own default, and
they will be guilty of refusing everlasting life offered unto them.

That all Infants had not inherent faith in them when they were Infants, and
yet accepted of God into covenant of everlasting life, to work that faith in
them; yea, though elect, as Paul for instance; but had it wrought in them
afterward by God in the mean he vouchsafed, and that from and according to the
covenant he had taken them into: And if God then did thus dispense his grace,
as to take Infants into that covenant, the covenant of everlasting life, not
having inherent faith in themselves, but that he might work it in them; Then if
now Infants be excluded, it argues that Gods grace is not so large as it was
then, he does not give himself to be the God of our Infants to bless them in
his Son, as he did give himself to them to be the God of their Infants for to
bless them.

That God received none of Abraham's posterity into any covenant as his fleshly
seed, and in that respect, because they were so, is so certain, that I conceive
it to be a certain error to affirm it, Abraham being set forth as the father of
all nations, in that transaction between God and him, and not as the father of
the Jews only, who were his fleshly seed. Nor do I think that Infants now are
received into covenant as fleshly seed of Gentiles, nor by their parents faith,
as being any cause of it, but only as Isaac, etc. were of old by Gods free
grace, taking the believing parents with their children into a covenant, in
whom he works faith, to close with him, and undertakes to work the same in
their children after; for which purpose be takes hold of them by his
covenant; and let all that know the truth, judge whether he or I do err, I in
affirming, or he denying these things, though he do it never so absolutely.

Last of all to this consectary which I added; that there was nothing then in
the state of persons to interest Infants in the covenant more then now; he
gives this answer: Though there was nothing in the state of persons, yet there
was something in things and order of times, Christ being yet to come; and here
he concludes two things:

First, that the whole fleshly seed of Abraham separated by ceremonial
holiness was a type of Christ to come, and therefore Infants then in the
covenant, and but ceremonially holy.

Secondly, that Christ the thing typified being come, all that typical state
is utterly abolished, etc. Infants now not to be in it.

Reply. First, I deny that the fleshly seed of Abraham was a type of Christ,
and have spoken to it before, and do conceive it a very erroneous conceit, and
full of absurdities.

Secondly, we must then exclude grown men also upon the same ground from the
covenant and Baptism now; for if they were a type, therefore children then in
covenant and circumcised, but now not in covenant and baptized; men also being
a part of the type must now not be in covenant, nor be baptized; or else
Infants may.

Thirdly, all proselytes could not be a type of Christ, because not of the
fleshly seed of Abraham, nor Abraham and his family, with all those succeeding
till Moses time, because the ceremonial ordinances were not yet instituted,
nor does the circumstance of things and time put any essential difference
between them and us, it being the same Christ, then by those things, and in
that time dispensed, that is now by these things, and in this time, not any
other, nor any thing else; but I have said enough for this in some Reply
before, and so much to his answer to my second Reason.

A third Reason, whereby I proved Infants to be in the covenant now as they
were then, was this, as he has set it down: for I cannot remember that I used
it here, Abraham being the root, and Jews and Gentiles the branches, as when
the Jews were broken off, as well Infants as men of years were broken off; so
the Gentiles being planted in their stead, they must be Infants as well as men
of years. And so the Jews, when they shall be again implanted, as well infants
as men of years shall be so.

To this he answers: First, he conceives Christ to be the root here meant.

Reply. Then they were in Christ, with, of and from Infants, also without
actual faith or unbelief. Again, that Christ is the root of Abraham himself,
and all else I question not; but that Christ is not meant here, Romans 11.4. I am
confident, and no man will affirm that reads the Chapter with understanding:
Romans 11.28. they are said to be beloved for the Fathers sake; not that Abraham,
or Christ are equally a root, or at all in the same respect and sense, but in a
diverse: Christ the real and efficient root, Abraham but foederally, and in
regard of Gods covenant made with him as a father of many nations; but I shall
say no more hereto, because himself admits it, and answers:

Secondly, the Gentiles are not branches in a natural relation, nor the Jews
branches in a spiritual relation, but by personal faith. To make Jews and
Gentiles equally branches, therefore of the root of Abraham, we must make the
relation spiritual which is proper to them both.

Reply. First he contradicts himself in these words, saying the Jews are not
branches by a spiritual relation, and yet they and the Gentiles cannot be
equally branches, but by a spiritual relation: Further, if he mean by faith
personal, habitual as well as actual, and excludes not habitual, I consent,
for Infants may have habitual that cannot have actual; while Infants and many
men may seem to have actual saving faith, that have not true saving habitual
faith.

Secondly, if he mean by spiritual relation foederall, I also grant what he
says; but if he mean by personal faith actual, and by spiritual, saving
faith. I reply, all the Jews had not actual faith then, nor Gentiles now, who
yet profess actual faith then, and now, nor had Infants their actual faith
no more then they can have now; and yet they were branches of the Olive then,
which he concludes cannot be but by personal faith, (it being not by natural
relation) which now Gentiles Infants may have, as well as they had, or
whatsoever else those Infants had, whereby those Infants were branohes of their
own Olive tree.

To that I say, that when the Jews were broken off, as well Infants, as men of
years were broken off: he answers, it is true; because the natural
relation in the covenant ceased, when Christ the promised seed came, and now
there is no relation in the covenant with Abraham, but by faith in Christ.

Reply. First, this contradicts that which in the foregoing answer he seemed
to set down; that there must be such a spiritual relation as is possible to
them both, and that is faith; for no otherwise can the Jews and Gentiles suit,
nor could they have been broken off by unbelief (which makes not the Jews
cease to have a natural relation to Abraham) unless faith was required of
them; and yet here he says they were in covenant by natural relation.

Secondly, the Jews were not in covenant by natural relation, and as a type
of Christ (which he said before, and I have disproved) but Abraham was the
father of Jews and Gentiles, as he believed, and they his children, as
believing, and no otherwise, as is clear, Romans 4.9.14. the Apostle showing that
he was heir of the world, not through the Law, but the righteousness of
faith, to the Gentiles, though uncircumcised, and not to the Jews, though
circumcised, but as they walked in the steps of that faith of Abraham, which he
had, being yet uncircumcised; besides, if they had been in the covenant by
natural relation, how could those many hundreds in Abraham's family be in the
covenant, who were not of Abraham's flesh? or how could Ishmael or Esau cease to
be in the covenant, being Abraham's natural seed? Whereas I said, when the
Jews be again implanted, as well Infants of such as believe, as men of years
shall be implanted: He answers; as unbelief did break them off, so faith only
must graffe them in; but that Infants of the Jews being members of that Church
before Christ's coming shall be planted, so as to be members of a Christian
Church without manifestation of faith lawfully, can no way be proved, but is an
absolute error.

Reply. Dictator-like; but first, Why may not Infants be now implanted without
manifestation of faith, and so be of a Christian Church, as then they were of
that Church without such manifestation of faith?

Secondly, such a faith may graffe Infants in again, as is opposite to the
unbelief that cut them off; that faith therefore (or whatsoever it was) that
made them branches of that root, and for want whereof they were cut off, the
same may graffe them in; nor can any man render a reasonable cause, why he
should deny it. It is therefore too peremptory to say it is an absolute error,
and his bare saying will never prove it to be so, but himself to be too rash,
and unadvised.

My fourth Reason to prove Infants are now in the covenant, as they were then,
is thus: If the Jews and Gentiles be incorporate into one body in Christ, and
the Jewish Infants were in the body, then so may and must Infants of believing
Gentiles now be verum prius. To this he answers two things:

First, the Jews had means before, and some of them faith by those means, and
so true members of Christ, he the head, and they the body, there being no
other members known but the Jews. The Gentiles by Christ coming, had this
special benefit, to have the means, and faith by the means, and thereby united
to Christ the head, and so to Jews the body, and the Jews had no other
relation to Christ the head, but by faith, and the Gentiles to Christ, nor them
but by faith.

Reply. First, where he says some of the Jews had faith, and were true
members; if he means saving faith, and savingly, his argument runs not,
because the faith of the Gentiles and their union with Christ was not saving,
and savingly in all, as Simon Magus, Judas, etc. If he means it generally,
according to charity, then more Jews had faith then some, that had true faith,
and were true members, even all foederally in regard of profession; nor is it
true, that there were no members known, and of that body then, but Jews, for
the many hundreds in Abraham's family, and very many proselytes, were known
members of that body, and yet were not Jews.

Secondly, there is two ways of being united to Christ the head, and to the
body Jewish then and of the Jews and Gentiles now; the first is foederally,
sacramentally, outwardly, and visibly, so all the Jews were then the body, and
all of it, as is clear, 1 Cor. 10.1, etc. all baptized, all eating and drinking
one and the same Baptism: Manna, Rock (as the Apostle says, we are one body,
by being baptized into one Christ, and by eating and drinking one bread and
cup, by one Spirit a body mystical, 1 Cor. 12, 13. Acts 7.38. The second is
really, spiritually, and effectually, inwardly, and invisibly. In the first
sense, the elect and reprobate are both considered; so many as the Lord calls
by means: In the second sense, the elect only are to be considered, whether of
Jews or Gentiles; that there are these two sorts of being in Christ, is evident
from many Scriptures: Joh. 15.1. two sorts of branches, one fruitful, and
shall be saved, the other unfruitful, and shall be damned, Mat. 22.14. Many
are called, but few are chosen; Many are called, and not chosen, many are
called, and chosen: and all this is true of the Jewish state before Christ, as
is clear in the seven first verses, and all is true likewise of the state after
Christ, as is plain in the rest, and of both, 14. All the Jews therefore
(though not savingly) from Abraham to Christ, were that body successively, and
the Gentiles since Christ's time added to that body, by being made near; no
alteration of the Jews, as the body in the real and essential consideration
of it, but an access of the Gentiles to them, which our Savior also in
another place expresses, John 10.16. Other sheep I have which are not of this
fold, and I must bring them into it, that there may be but one fold, and one
Shepherd: For Romans 11.17. some of the branches were broken off, not all, and
thou were graffed in amongst them; therefore as Jewish Infants were then in the
fold, and members of the body all along; so it must be granted, that the
Infants of Believing Gentiles now added to the body and fold are in it.

His second answer is this: First, that the Gentiles by conversion, did not
enter into the Jewish national Church.

Secondly, if neither Jews nor Gentiles were the body of Christ, considerably
as a nation, but only by consersion, then were not the Jews as Jews of the
body, and consequently not their Infants. But neither Jews nor Gentiles were
the body of Christ considerably, as a nation, but by conversion, therefore
neither Jews as Jews were of the body, nor their Infants; and consequently
not the Infants of the Gentiles.

Reply. First, he seems to restrain the being of the body to the present
Jews in Christ's time, which is erroneous, and denies it of the former.

Secondly, the proselytes of the Gentiles before Christ, did by conversion
enter into fellowship with the Jewish national Church, and their Infants with
them.

Thirdly, the Jews were not the body, as a nation, yet the nation was the
body, and that foederally, God taking hold of them by his covenant, and making
them unto himself an holy nation, as well Infants as others, Exodus 19.6. Deuteronomy.
29.11.14.15. at the first constitution they were the body by conversion, at
least appearingly; But ever after, all succeeding were the body; for to be
truly converted, on Gods part promised, though on their part not always
enjoyed through their own default. Next, he comes to my other consequence,
which is this; seeing Infants are now in the covenant, as these were then in
the covenant, therefore Infants ought now to be baptized, as then they were
circumcised, sealed with the sign of the covenant now, as they were sealed with
the sign of the covenant then. To clear this, my first Reason was thus, else
the covenant were not the same, and Infants in it: He answers that it is not
the same in respect of natural relation to Abraham, as he had showed, and
therefore Infants not in it.

Reply. First, he here holds the Jews to have fellowship in the covenant
before Christ by virtue of natural relation; and yet he said before that they
were not the body (which they were by covenant) as Jews, that is by natural
relation.

Secondly, I have showed before, that the Jews were not in that covenant by
natural relation, but by faith, which is the only condition of the covenant.

Thirdly, it no way follows it is not the same, in respect of natural
relation, therefore it is not the same at all, nor does it hinder Infants being
in it, because they now have no natural relation to Abraham; for the proselyte
Infants were taken in of old into fellowship with the Jews in that covenant,
but not in respect of natural relation, which they have not; the reason there
remains firm, and unanswered.

My second was this; if they had the thing and substance, they cannot be denied
the seal and circumstance, if the first grace, then the second, and confirming.
He answers, it is true, when they or any other for them can manifest, that
they have the thing and substance, then let them have the seal and circumstance.

Reply. First, he denies not that they have the thing, though they cannot
manifest it.

Secondly, if I may conclude they have the thing, and cannot (by a rule)
conclude they have not, then though they cannot manifest it, yet I may feel
them, and what more can be, when they do manifest; I may be mistaken, I cannot
conclude infallibly they have the thing.

Thirdly, the Jews Infants were not able to manifest the thing, yet
circumcised; and why may not Infants be baptized, though they cannot manifest
the substance, seeing they may have it.

Last of all, there is a double consideration of our being in Christian state,
one foederall, and outward, the other spiritual also, and inward: there is a
double consideration of Baptism, (as of Circumcision) the one outward, the
other inward also; now man applies on his part the outward baptism, to one
that is outwardly in Christian state (as Infants are) it belonging to man to do
no more; and if he should commonly apply it to them that are not spiritual in
that state, nor ever shall be, yet herein he sins not, but does that he ought
to do, in applying to the subject what belongs to it in respect of that, which
in the subject is proportionable to what he does.

My third Reason to prove that infants, being now in the covenant as theirs,
and therefore ought to be now baptized, as then circumcised, was this: By
virtue of this word to Abraham, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed,
Infants of old were included, and therefore circumcised, and the same promise
belongs to the Gentiles in the same state, as to Jews, therefore the Infants
of Gentiles are included, and must be baptized.

He answers; first, that the Jews, till Christ's time, were under that
promise, by natural relation only, and then they ceased to be under it by
natural relation, and so circumcision ceased also.

Secondly, neither to Jews nor Gentiles, is that promise continued in the same
state, the Gentiles being not Abraham's seed by natural relation, and that of
the Jews ceased, and so he concludes thus; if the covenant touching the
natural seed be ceased, then Infants are neither to be circumcised, nor
baptized: but the covenant touching the natural seed ceased at Christ's death,
Acts 10.28. Gal. 3.25. Ephesians. 2.14, 15. Romans 11.20.21. Gal. 4.25, 26. therefore
Infants are neither to be circumcised, nor baptized.

Reply. First, it is flat contrary to Scripture, to say, that the Jews were
under the promise by natural relation, Romans 9.6.8. the Apostle fully
concludes, that all are not Israel, nor under that promise that are of Israel,
that is, as they were of the flesh, they are not the children of Abraham under
that promise; and therefore, though Abraham had other children, yet the promise
was limited to Isaac, yea, though Esau came of Isaac as well as Jacob, yet was
the promise limited to Jacob 10.11. though both of one father and mother, Romans
4.11. the promise is made to Abraham to be the father only of them that
believe, and therefore none first, or last, then, or now, are under the promise
by virtue of natural relation.

Secondly, circumcision was not applied to Abraham's posterity as his natural
seed in that respect: For,

First, it was the seal of the righteousness of faith, and therefore not be
administered to any, but as believing the righteousness of faith, or such as
God promised to work it in them.

Secondly, otherwise the proselytes, and their Infants could not have been
circumcised, being not Abraham's posterity in the flesh.

Thirdly, all the Scriptures alleged by him speak not of the abolishing of the
covenant, but of ceremonies and shadows dispensed unto them for a time, which
in Christ's death were done away; those that seem to speak of the covenant, Romans
11.20, 21. add 7. Gal. 4.25, 26. speak not at all of the abolishing of the
covenant, but of the continuance of it altogether as the same then and now;
Romans 11. speaks of the Jews being cut off by unbelief from the covenant, and
not of disanulling the covenant, and the Gentiles instated in that they were
cut off from; that of Gal. 4. speaks not of a change of the state of the
promise, but of the difference of persons now, and then, under the same state
of the promise then and now, as it was, and is on Gods part dispensed: From all
in brief, we may gather these particular conclusions:

First, God made a promise to Abraham, to be his God, and the God of his seed,
as many as should believe, Jews or Gentiles, which was accepted by Abraham and
his family, and thereupon sealed by God.

Secondly, God continued to hold out the same promise in the same state to the
Jews, and Proselytes, till Christ's time, that he would be a God to them, and
their children, as he promised to Abraham, and perform all that good he
promised to Abraham; or promised him to perform to them, and sealed their
Infants to confirm all this on his part, giving all means necessary thereunto,
nothing wanting, Isa. 5.4.

Thirdly, some always received this good in this promise, through all that
time, till Christ, and in his time, (viz all, and only the elect) the rest were
punished with a spirit of slumber for their neglect; and at last cut off (viz.
all, and only non-elect.)

Fourthly, God continues the same promise in the same state unto some Jews,
and offers it also to it he Gentiles, if they will believe, and so to have
Abraham their Futher, and their Infants father; (for seed includes Infants all
along.)

Fifthly, that amongst them before Christ, there was many had a work of the
spirit of bondage wrought upon them, and some a work of the spirit of adoption.
Ishmael in an Allegory, was the type of the children of Bondage, and Isaac of
the children of Adoption: And so it is now in the times after Christ, there are
some of Isaacs rank, and some of Ishmaels; there were always two Jerusalems;
Ishmael and such as he was, are of the Jerusalem below, Isaac and such as he
was, are of Jerusalem from above, the two mothers, or Jerusalems being not two
several dispensations of one and the same Covenant in a twofold Testament any
way No change therefore is in the promise in the state of it, but it is the
same from the time of revealing it, till now. And Infants all that time from
Abraham to Moses, and from Moses to Christ, were of that seed, and Proselyte
Gentiles and their Infants; and so now Gentile Infants are of the seed also:
and as Infants were then circumcised, so now are they to be baptized. And thus
I have done with his answer to my first Argument, the second follows, thus:

If in the whole body of Israelites, as well Infants as men of years, were
baptized with the same baptism that ours is, then Infants are now to be
baptized as then they were: But in the whole body of Israelites Infants were
baptized with the same baptism spiritually that ours is; therefore Infants are
now to be baptized as then they were.

He answers first, the Argument is a Sophisme (that is, deceitful) because
in the first Proposition I leave out spiritually, as if I intended they were
baptized corporally, as now since Christ's time men are: And to help me, he
frames an Argument for me, putting in materially and formally, in stead of
spiritually, which he grants I used in the second proposition; and then he
answers by denying the Minor, that is, that we are baptized with the same
baptism materially and formally, that they were baptized with; and so putting
in materially and formally, which was not in mine, he leaves out spiritually,
which was in the second, and should have been in the first proposition, had not
he that writ it, left it out: And if this be not a false argument, yet it is an
argument of his false dealing. Again, granting that that and ours were the same
materially and formally, yet he denies that it will follow thence, that now
Infants may be baptized as they were then, no more then this will follow, Adam
might not eat of the forbidden fruit; therefore some kind of fruit is
forbidden us to eat. Or this, Infants were then circumcised: Ergo, Infants
must now be circumcised.

Reply. First, all this might have been spared: for I used spiritually in mine
argument, and in all the discourse following. And further, he had not the
writing from me, nor written with my hand; and therefore if the word
spiritually were left out, it was not by me; and what wisdom is it, or
honesty, to blame me for another man's fault? But let this pass.

Secondly, he says, I seem to intend they were baptized corporally, as now we
are.

Reply. Yea, doubtless, and so they were, having their bodies sprinkled with
those signs of the spiritual things, which are signified now by these signs
now instituted. And to his Argument, that ours is not the same materially with
theirs, I grant it; but that theirs and ours were and are sacramental signs
of one and the same spiritual grace, I affirm: and therefore it follows,
that as Infants were then baptized with the same spiritual baptism that ours
is, though they had no actual faith: For now Infants are to be baptized with
the same spiritual baptism that theirs was: And the comparisons that he uses
to weaken the consequence, are not available. For as Adam might not eat of the
forbidden tree in the garden, no more might we, and then sinned in, and with
him in his eating, and should now sin in eating of any sacramental Tree, if
God should appoint one, and forbid us to eat of it. And as infants were then
circumcised spiritually, signified by that outward sign of cutting the flesh:
so now Infants are to be circumcised spiritually by that outward sign of
washing the flesh. And if our and their circumcision spiritually the same, were
also materially and formally the same, I should not question the circumcising
Infants now.

But secondly, he setting down my argument aright, by putting in spiritually in
the first proposition, he then denies the consequence, that is, though Infants
were then baptized with the same spiritual baptism that ours is, yet ought
not Infants to be baptized now; because that was a miraculous work of Gods
providence, and no sacrament instituted by God, and called baptism by way of
comparison only, that being as great a token of Gods love to them in Christ,
as baptism an instituted ordinance was to the Corinthians, summing up all in
this Enthymeme, God did baptize spiritually the Infants of Israel, therefore we
may baptize Infants materially and formally, without Gods command.

Reply. First, I grant that Gods miraculous works of providence are to be
admired of us, not imitated by us.

Secondly, that every sign is not a Sacrament, though every Sacrament consists
in part of something that is a sign.

Thirdly, there being many other miraculous works of God, and tokens of his
favor, which the Apostle might have taken and applied them to the Corinthians,
as well as these: if they had been no more then a work of providence, it is not
for nothing that he takes these rather then others.

Fourthly, though the things were wonderful works of God, yet they were not
barely so, but by his institution set forth to be Sacramental signs of their
putting on Christ, eating and drinking his body and blood, which they could not
be without institution, nor would or could the Apostle say, they put on Christ,
or by these means, as signs, if they had not been instituted, though there be
no mention of it in Moses writings, it is something that the Apostle says,
They were baptized into Moses, which means thus much, Moses was Gods instrument
from some word of his made known unto him, whereby he applied these signs to
them, to signify these things. And his Syllogism that he makes, is a mere
Sophisme; which (to do as much for him as he did for me) I shall set down in
full terms, and then mend it for him, his Enthymeme in an entire Syllogism is
thus: If God by his providence did baptize the Infants of Israel spiritually,
then may we without Gods command, baptize Infants materially and formally: But
God by the work of his providence did baptize the Infants of Israel; Therefore
we may, without Gods command, baptize our Infants materially and formally. And
who sees not this a mere false Sophisme, speaking in the first Proposition of
baptism spiritually, and in the second of baptism materially and formally? To
mend it for him, thus it must run; If God did by a work of his providence
spiritually baptize the Infants of Israel, then we may baptize our Infants
spiritually without Gods command; but the first is true, therefore the second
also. But in this there are many faults also: for he says God baptized them,
when as the Text says, Moses, they were baptized into Moses: Again, he
compares things together as unequal, which are equal, and speaks first of
Baptism, so called only, and not so indeed, and then of Baptism so called,
and so indeed: in all which he goes about grossly to abuse the Reader, and to
make him think, that I had no better ground to raise my argument on, then what
he would seem to hold forth; let me therefore set down the truth of this place
in this argument. If God instituted those works of his to be sacramental
signs of the same spiritual baptism, that our signs signify, and Moses
from Gods appointment applied, then to that body as such, then as the same
spiritual baptism were applied to Infants, as well as men of years by those
signs; so may the same spiritual baptism be applied to Infants now, as well
as to men of years by these signs.

His third answer is to the same purpose, where going about to set down the
scope of the Apostle he sums it up in this form: If miracles (which yet were
as great as ordinances) did not secure them, but when they sinned they were
punished, then ordinances will will not secure you, but you shall be so
punished, if you so sin; but miracles ever did not secure them, but when they
sinned they were punished; Ergo, ordinances will not secure you ever.

Reply. The drift of the Apostle is, to deter them from Idolatry, and other
sins, lest they be punished as their fathers were. If they object and say,
though they were punished, yet we may hope for more grace, because he has
given us two sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and thereby has given
us to have the Son on us, and in us, as pledges of his love and favor; the
Apostle takes away this pretense, by telling them, they can promise to
themselves no more security herein, then they might promise unto themselves,
because they had the same signs of Gods favor spiritually, the same Sacraments
by other signs dispensed, but the same Christ, and therefore you can be no more
secure then they might be; and that these miraculous works were set apart by
Gods appointment to be sacramental signs to them of the same thing that
water, bread, and wine are now to us an evident, because:

First, the Apostles argument should not be of things equal, and so not of
force to convince the conscience of the Corinthians.

Secondly, there were other works of God, that held proportion with these (as
their passing through Jordan, their eating Quails, etc.) but the like is not
said of them by the Apostle, nor can be said of any man.

Thirdly, these works of God cannot of themselves signify Christ, but were
only as all such works of providence of that nature are, demonstrations of Gods
power, presence and goodness to the people, but cannot of themselves signify
such a thing, but by some clear appointment, no more then bread and wine could
signify now the body and blood of Christ, if they were not set apart for that
purpose, by, and according to an institution.

Fourthly, in going through the Sea, eating Manna, drinking of the rock they
could not put on, eat or drink Christ as they were natural things, having no
such virtue in them, either to signify, or convey him unto them of themselves;
neither was Christ bodily applied unto them: as therefore it must be
sacramentally, as now in these signs we have. If any shall object, and say:
first, the Israelites understood no such thing: secondly, they did not all eat,
drink, and put on Christ: I answer:

First, that all did not understand it is like, nor now do all understand the
mysteries of salvation now, but they ought to have understood them, as we ought
now. Moses, Aaron, and all truly regenerate, did understand as it is now; now
do the understanding, or not understanding of the things of God then, and now,
alter the nature of them; but so they are of themselves, as Gods appointment
makes them, whatsoever men's understandings are.

Secondly, they did not all eat, etc. I answer, they did all eat, and put on
Christ sacramentally, and some of them sacramentally and really; and now all do
not put on Christ, eat and drink him really, but only sacramentally; yet some
did both, and the rest then did, and now do make themselves guilty of the death
of Christ in unworthy receiving, and did and shall bear their judgment.

But to come to the Confuter; having showed what the scope of the Apostle was,
he next shows what it was not, and that says he, is this, the Apostle
intends not to show that the Corinthians should administer the Sacraments to
themselves and their Infants, though they do not believe in Christ, because
then God did exercise such miracles to the Israelites, which did not believe,
which says he is the sequel of my argument.

Rep. First, he makes of my argument what he pleases; before he said this was
the sequel, that we may baptize Infants now without Gods command, as God by
his providence baptized Infants then.

Secondly, the Apostles purpose is not at all to prove who are to be baptized,
men or Infants, believers or unbelievers; nor did I say a word that way, and
therefore he shows himself to have but a little understanding in him, to say,
that is the sequel of my argument, I brought it not to prove that the
Corinthians might baptize themselves and their Infants, though they did not
believe, but that the Corinths, and all Gods people may baptize their Infants,
if they, and we whose Infants they are, be Gods people; and the Antecedent,
from whence he would make the sequel, is untrue, which is thus: because God
did exercise such miracles to the Israelites, who did not believe: For,

First, he says, they were miracles, which is true, considered as bare acts of
God, but they were not only miracles, they were sacramental ordinances also, as
is evident by the Text, and what I said before.

Secondly, he says, they did not believe, whereas the Scripture says, With
many of them God was not well pleased; some therefore did believe, yea, the
whole body were Gods people, and therefore were not unbelievers, in a proper
sense, though they did not so believe as they ought: and Psalm. 106.12. They
believed his Word, and sang his praises; yea, those, they presently are said,
they forgot his works, and waited not for his counsel. But it seems he little
regarded what he said, for he said any thing; let all now consider, that my
consequence was this: That vifible believers, may now baptize their Infants
with these signs of spiritual baptism, and following from this Antecedent,
because believing Israelites Infants were baptized with those signs of the
same spiritual baptism; yet he goes about to prove, that that he said was
the sequel of my Argument, from my proofs added; the first whereof is this:
the other ordinances there mentioned, are the same spiritually with ours; Ergo,
this of baptism was the same spiritually with ours, (this I said, because the
Apostle does not admit spiritually the same with ours, as he said of the other)
my proof is of this, that that baptizing and ours is the same spiritually, and
not of this, that the Corinths may baptize themselves and theirs, though
neither do believe; and therefore this was not my sequel, that he says, but
it may be his answers will make it good. And,

First, he says, that by consequence belike the Corinths must baptize
themselves and their Infants, though neither of them do believe, because God
did baptize them with the same spiritual baptism that ours is, though they
did not believe, the which thus laid open, he hopes I will not affirm.

Reply. This is the same with the former, and therefore is answered fully; that
the Corinths did believe, that the Israelites did believe; and does this sense
convince that to be my sequel, which he said by my proof? I hope all will see,
that I might justly say, the believing Corinths might baptize their Infants,
because the Israelites baptized theirs, with the same spiritual baptism that
ours is, and shall hold it still, for any thing he says to the contrary; yet
not trusting to this he gives another answer.

Secondly, says he, you err in calling there the other ordinances, whereas
they are the other miracles, and concludes, that if I had well weighed the
Scripture, I would not have made it a ground to justify Infants baptism.

Reply. And what is this to that he should prove; namely, my proof evinceth
that to be my sequel, which he said was my proof was not, who was to be
baptized, but that all the ordinances there mentioned were the same with our
baptism, as well as the rest.

Again, where he says, they were the other miracles, and not the other
ordinances, and that I err in calling them so.

I reply, it is too much bodlnesse in him to prescribe how others shall speak,
and he erres grossly, in saying as he does; for if that showed that these
miracles were ordinances also; Ergo, may be so called: for could these
miraculous works signify such things, unless they had been ordained thereto?
and whatsoever is ordained is an ordinance. In a word, I have upon his
expression better viewed this place then ever I did, and doubt not, but every
one that shall weigh how ill he confutes it, will see that there is a just
ground in it to defend the baptism of Infants, which is the question.

A fourth answer he gives to my Argument is this: If the Israelites were not
baptized with these signs, nor with any other after they came into the land of
Canaan, then this was not a perpetual sign of the practice of baptism, but
they were not baptized with these signs, nor any other after they came in to
the land of Canaan; therefore it was not a perpetual sign of the practice of
baptism.

Reply. First, it is the mind of the that they had another baptism continued
unto them: And Hebrew Writers affirm, that three things concurred to make a
Jew, or Proselyte male a stated member, circumcision, baptism, and sacrifice;
and to females, baptism and sacrifice. And some conclude from hence, that the
Jews therefore questioned John Baptist, calling to baptize, but not his
baptism, being used to it before; but to pass that.

2ly, What time will he prescribe to make an example sufficient? it must have a
period, and why may not a month serve as well as a longer time, and those forty
years in the wilderness as well as a thousand?

3ly, How many things in the Scripture are recorded, done in a short time,
which were examples of things done in a longer time? Eze. 4.5, 6. the acts of
Abraham's justification by faith, Genesis 15.6. an example of perpetual
justification, Romans 4.24. Jude 7. the instances in the Scripture, 1 Cor. 10.
and many others; so that this answer is of no force.

The fifth and last answer is this, Baptism of different kinds depend upon
different grounds, and are to be ministered upon different subjects to different
ends: but the baptism of the cloud and Sea are of diverse kinds, therefore
they depend upon different grounds, and are to be administered upon different
subjects for different ends.

Reply. I shall say no more but this; baptismes of the same kind depend upon
the same grounds, and are to be administered upon the same subjects to the same
ends; but baptism of the Sea and cloud is the same spiritually with ours,
therefore they depend upon the same grounds (divine institution) and to be
administered upon the same subjects, (Gods people, men and Infants) and to the
same ends (to put on Christ Jesus). Another proof I added to my Argument was
this, otherwise the Apostle should link things together that are not equal;
nor would it be of force against the Corinthians, if they were not the same
Sacraments spiritually: now the conclusion is certain, that the Corinthians
should be punished with like punishment, if they committed the like sins. His
answer hereunto denies the consequence, because although the Cloud, and Sea,
Manna, and Rock, were Sacraments of the same Christ, that Baptism and the
Lords Supper is, yet they were not the same Sacraments; and it suffices the
Apostles purpose, that the cloud, etc. were as effectual tokens of Christ (as
they were in the nature of them) as Baptism and the Lords Supper is, though
they were different Sacraments of the same Christ, and not the same Sacrament.
And except they were dipped in water, did eat and drink bread and wine, as we
do, I cannot say they were the same Sacraments with ours.

Reply. First, he should say sacramental signs, and not Sacraments; for
neither the seal nor bread and wine are the Sacraments, but sacramental
sigues, the things signified, concurring to make them sacraments; nor can any
be guilty of the body of the Lord in eating the bread, if that alone were the
Sacrament.

Secondly, it is true, that the sacramental signs then and now were not the
same, and in that regard the Sacraments are not the same, but to say absolutely
they are not the same therefore, is not right: For a man, though dressed in
never so many fashions differing one from another, yet he is the same man
still, although his fashions differ; and in that respect he is not the same,
yet the man is the same in all: So Christ is the same yesterday and to day, and
for ever, though set forth by diverse signs then and now, 1 Cor. 5.7. Christ
our Passover is offered for us, he is the Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world, their Lamb and ours, their Passover and ours, theirs and ours dispensed
the same, but not by the same signs; and therefore to what subjects the same
Christ was applied then by those signs, to such subjects may the same Christ
be applied now by these signs; but I have spoken to these things before: now
is my Argument refuted by any thing he has said?

My third Argument follows, which is this; there is one and the same
consideration of the root and branches, of the first fruits and lump: but the
first fruits and root believing parents are holy, and must be baptized,
therefore Infants the lump and branches are holy, and must be baptized.

To this he answers, denying the Assumption, viz. believing Parents are the
roots and first fruits, and the Scriptures that I bring will not prove it: Romans
11.16. 1 Cor. 7.14. which he considering apart; and,

First, Romans 11.16. concludes, that parents are not the root, because they are
branches of the root, they bear not the root, but the them; therefore they
cannot be this root, nor their children naturally descending from them
branches, and concludes this first place to be abused in so applying it.

Reply. Grant that believing parents are branches, and not the root; yet
Infants as well as men of years are branches, and Abraham, and the Fathers are
the root, and that of the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, 1 Cor. 10.1. Now the
Argument holds as well here in this respect as in the other: For, if Abraham
the root be holy, so are the branches; as is the state of the one, so is the
state of the other; and this the Apostle concludes of all the body of Jews,
(yea, counting them are cut off natural branches still) and let believing
Gentiles be counted branches, yet Infants then were some of the branches, when
they were in the Olive, or root, and so were branches cut off when their
parents were cut off; as long as the parents stood branches, so long the
Infants were branches; nor were any parents branches but from that state they
had when Infants; Gentiles Infants therefore are branches with their believing
parents, and stand in the same state with them.

Secondly, we know that the Scriptures do not so appropriate the words, root,
and first fruits, as not to apply them to others, besides the particulars:
Jerem. 11.16. God called the Church there an Olive, and the people branches; so
she is called a Vine, Isa. 5, etc. So others are called first fruits: as, 1
Cor. 16.15. Rev. 14.4, etc. And if parents had no relation to children, nor
Infants to parents in this respect, how could Infants, being branches with
their parents to Abraham the root, be cut off with their parents, seeing they
could not be cut off for their own unbelief? and their relation to Abraham was
entire, in respect of any thing on their part to the contrary. This place
therefore is not abused in the application of it, but fully concludes what I
brought it for.

Next he considers, 1 Cor. 7.14. which he says, neither suppresseth roots
nor first fruits; nor has it any such meaning, as that the holiness of the
parent should cause a holiness in their Infant.

In a word, I reply, root and first fruits are not expressed, but necessarily
employed; and so much is expressed as amounts to that: For, if the children be
holy upon their parents believing, and if the parents did not believe, the
children should not be holy, it is as much as if he had said, the root is holy,
and the branches are holy, not in the parents believing, any cause of their
childrens holiness, but Gods free grace. But not to strive about words, in the
view of the place it self, before he comes to express his Reasons, negative
and affirmative, he conceives it necessary to observe what I say, which he
thus sets down:

I suppose it is mistaken, when expounded of the same holiness, spoken of
before, of an Infidel person, sanctified to a believing yokefellow. And the
Apostle speaking of a twofold holiness, the one not in the thing it self, but
to another use; the other of the thing it self, it cannot but be sinful to
confound them: He answers, he^ will not contend, nor gainsay any thing of
this.

Reply. Herein he makes himself an Adversary to some of his judgment in this
case of Baptism, who maintain that state of holiness to be meant in the
children, that was in the parent, that is holy to the believers use. Further,
he says, I say the Apostle says two things; that to the pure all things are
pure; Ergo, a believing person may dwell with an Infidel yoke fellow.

Secondly, that by virtue of a believers state in grace, all the fruit is holy,
and partakers of the same state in grace, unless they do by some act of theirs
deprive themselves of it, as Esau and Ishmael, etc.

In answer to this he grants the former, but denies the latter wholly, and that
it is not the purpose of Paul so to speak, and therefore he gives diverse
reasons.

First,

Reply. I deny that the Apostle intends to conclude such a holiness as is
inseparable to their very being; for then it would be common to all Infants,
whereas this is appropriate to an Infant of at least one believer. In a word,
there is a twofold holiness of a person: one is external, and is the
separation of him from common state to be the Lords, and bound up in covenant
with him, which is foederall holiness. The other is internal, and is the
special separation of a man from the state of sin, by inherent sanctificaon
from justification in Christ, which is inseparable from them that have it: The
other is separable, as in the case of Jews, who by this were called a holy
people, when yet they were not really sanctified by inherent grace, and the
holy city called an Harlot; and of this in his place, which fully will prove
what the Apostle intends, as we shall see afterward; His second Reason
follows, which is this:

Abraham and all believers do possess by faith, then he says, first Ishmael,
Esau, etc. were never of it, Romans 9.8. and therefore could not by any act of
theirs deprive themselves of it.

Reply. First, by the state of grace is meant that covenant that Abraham and
all believers do possess by faith.

Secondly, I say Ishmael, Esau, etc. were of that covenant dispensed on Gods
part unto them, and to be received on their part by faith at present or
afterward. And if Ishmael and Esau were not so in that covenant, as well as
Isaac and Jacob, then how could they be circumcised with the seal of the
righteousness of faith? they had the same seal set unto them that Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob had, and if it were not the same covenant, then Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob were in one covenant, and sealed to that; and Ishmael and Esau, and
the like, were in another covenant, and sealed to that, with the same seal that
the others were sealed to the other.

Further, whether or no shall Ishmael, Esau, etc. be judged according to that
covenant of Abraham, and punished for refusing it? if so, (as it is certain)
then they were under that covenant, though they enjoyed not the benefit of it,
which is the meaning of Romans 9.8. and deprived themselves of it by hardening
their hearts, and had a spirit of slumber inflicted upon them, as a just
punishment of that their refusing, Romans 11.7.

Secondly, he says, that if Ishmael and Esau were deprived by some act of
theirs, then we must fall upon Arminius tenet of falling from grace, which all
understanding Christians do utterly abhor.

Reply. First, it is well known, that many holding with the Consuter, in this
point of paedobaptisme, do maintain that a man truly elected, and in state of
salvation, may, and do fall away and perish; if he dissents in this, I will not
blame him.

2ly, What understanding Christian did ever deny that some men fall from grace?
and are there not many Scriptures that do testify as much? Christians do deny,
that any elect of God, and made partakers of saving calling, can fall away from
that estate, they thereby are made partakers of. But there is another state of
grace, whereof many non-elected are partakers of, by the covenant on Gods part
dispensed, and of many effects of Gods operation in their hearts, some more,
some less, and from this all of them may, many of them do fall away, the
Scriptures affirming, no understanding Christian denying it, Heb. 6.4, etc.

3ly, He answers, then the being under the everlasting covenant of grace and
peace with God by Christ should be conveyed by natural descent, and not by the
Gospel, which is absurd, and contrary to many Scriptures; Romans 1.16, 17. and
10.17. Gal. 3.2. 2 John 3. 5, etc. These Scritpures, says he, shows: first,
that the Gospel is the power of God, to save every one that believes:
Secondly, that faith comes by hearing the Word preached, by which conversion
is wrought, whereby we become sons of God by adoption and grace. But the
Position says, that some are partakers thereof, by virtue of their parents by
generation, directly contrary, yea, to the whole Gospel of Christ, Romans 4.14.
where, if they of the Law (naturally descended and circumcised only) be heirs,
the promise (the whole Gospel and covenant of grace) is made of none effect.

Reply. First, they were all under the everlasting covenant of Gods grace,
equally on Gods part dispensed, offering unto them thereby all the Gospel to
peace and life.

Secondly, this offer was not made unto them for any natural respect, but
freely of Gods grace. The natural generation (though many Gentiles also) were
taken into covenant, and had the grace thereof offered unto them, and to be
bestowed upon them, but not out of any respect to them, (natural, civil, or
religious, Deuteronomy. 17.7, 8. and 9.5.) but merely out of his good will and
faithfulness.

Thirdly, the Gospel was preached unto all the posterity of Abraham, all along
to Christ, and his time, by himself and Apostles, preaching no other thing then
Moses and the Prophets had preached before them, to all that then believed, it
was the power of God to save them, Act. 15.11. all ought to have believed it,
and if they had, it would have been the power of God to their salvation also;
and they that did not believe, it was not the power of God to their salvation,
because they believed not, Heb. 4.12. and it was their sin, and will be to
their punishment. Now it is the power of God, not to salvation of all (though
Church Members) to whom it is preached, but many came short through unbelief.
All the Scriptures therefore by him alleged, are hereby answered; nor is there
any footing for his distinction, in regard of Gods part dispensing, but from
them who received not what God offered, but refused it. He proceeds thus: If
by grace I mean that favor of God, whereby he made the Jews partakers of
circumcision and ordinances, as the fleshly seed of Abraham, leading them to
Christ above other nations, then he grants that Ishmael, and such were
partakers of that grace.

Reply. First, this is not all they were partakers of, but of the former also,
and of this from the former; nor were they partakers of this, or any thing
else, as they were Abraham's seed barely, but from his grace to their fathers,
and therein taking them above others to he his peculiar people. Secondly, they
were partakers of these ordinances as leading to Christ, therefore not of
ordinances barely, but Christ offered unto them by these ordinances, and of
these ordinances for Christ's sake given unto them. I would ask whether they
were to believe in Christ or no, and so to be saved? If so (as certain it is)
how then can he make good this distinction, or deny that they were under the
everlasting covenant of Gods grace, and by these ordinances to be partakers of?
But granting this unto them, he says, But this was taken away when Christ
came; all which I have spoken to before, more then once.

Secondly, he says, that the Apostles purpose is not to conclude those
children spoken of, 1 Cor. 7. within the limits of such a distinction, because
the Lord there in that state did count children borne of one believer, unclean
and polluted, and to be put away with their mothers, being Infidels, Ezra 9.2.
and 11.3. Therefore that state, even while it lasted, did not allow children to
be of that state, when one of the parents were forreiner to the Church, much
less has it any force now to conclude it should be so, when that the state it
self is disanulled.

Reply. First, it is the Apostles meaning to conclude such Infants under the
covenant with their believing parents, whereby they were foederally holy; nor
can there be any other holiness here intended, as we shall see afterward. And
the reason which he gives to disprove it, is not sufficient, because it is of
an instance of a diverse nature from this of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. though he
would confound them, whether willingly or no, I leave others to judge. His
Reason is this: That state did not allow of children born of one believing
parent, but accounted them unclean, and required them to be put away with their
mother.

Reply. That of Ezra speaks of a believing Jew, married to an Infidel
Heathen; this of the Apostle speaks not of a believing Christian, marrying an
Infidel, but of one who being married, when they were both Infidels, the one
being converted after marriage, the other remaining unconverted. That in Ezra
was an unlawful marriage first or last, this in Corinth was a lawful
marriage: Secondly, that in Ezra therefore being unlawful, was not to be
continued, but the wife and children to be put away; but this in Corinth is not
so; the Infidel here may be continued, if contented to dwell with the believer,
nor are the children unclean; but both the instances being of two cases so
different, thence is no ground for this reason, and so that he grounded on
that reason falls with it.

A third Reason that he gives against that I said,

First, that a Proselyte in the time of the Law, by circumcision was made a
member of the Jewish state, as one born in the land.

Secondly, he was to circumcise all his males, and thereby they were admitted,
and with the males, wife, females, children; (there being no other Sacrament of
entrance for them) and unless he did circumcise himself and all his males,
though neither he nor they believed, he could not be a member of that state.

Thirdly, no president can be, that ever one parent coming to be of the Jewish
state, and leave their married yoke-mates out, did possess their seed of the
same state; and therefore now in this state, whereof men are partakers by faith
only (and thereupon a believer admitted, and the unbelieving yoke-mate left
out) the Infants cannot be admitted into this state, no more then the wife,
which in that state was brought in, by the care of the husband being a
proselyte, and in this left out till she believed.

Reply. First, a proselyte was not made a member of the Jewish Church by
circumcision, but by accepting the God of Israel to be his God, and submitting
himself to their laws, receiving circumcision as a seal thereof, that being
not the first, but a second grace, not the covenant it self, but the sign of
the covenant.

Secondly, I deny that all the males were to be circumcised, or else their
parents might not be admitted; but only Infants were admitted and circumcised
with the parent, and those of years were not admitted and circumcised, but upon
their own voluntary acceptance of, and submitting to the covenant, and so the
believing proselytes yoke fellow: For, if they had no faith, though they had
circumcision, yet how could they partake in the Passover, or sacrifices to the
remission of sin? And therefore, though there were no Sacrament for females
entrance, yet there must be faith, either potentially by being under the
covenant with their believing parent, or actually by their own profession. And
(as I have answered before to the like allegation) they should receive the seal
of the covenant (which in order of nature follows it) and were not in it, and
be admitted to circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of faith, which
they had not.

Thirdly, touching a president or rule of a believing proselyte, admitted with
his Infants, leaving out the yoke fellow, I need say no more then this:
Whatsoever is not of faith, is, and ever was, sin, Romans 14. ult. and, without
faith it is impossible (and ever was) to please God, Heb. 11.6. But this answer
says, that a proselyte might be admitted and circumcised with all his males
and females, by virtue of his admission, though neither he nor they believed,
quite contrary to these Scriptures; and so some should become one with Abraham's
people, neither by flesh nor faith, which himself has said are the only two
ways, whereby any may be instated in such a condition. As therefore in that
state proselytes were admitted by faith into the fellowship thereof, and
therein Infants with them, by virtue of Gods covenant, accepted for themselves
and their seed, but those of years, and their yoke-fellows excluded, unless
they did believe: So in this state now, abeliever and his Infants are admitted
into fellowship of it; but such children as are of years and unbelieving
yoke fellow excluded, till they believe.

A 4th reason of this is this:

Reply. First, the Apostle speaking indefinitely; I grant children of any or no
years may be understood.

Secondly, children of twenty or thirty years, or Infants have a state of
holiness upon them by virtue (not of natural relation, but) of foederall, as
children of a believer; for that must be noted, that one of them must be a
believer, that being the case, that the Apostle resolves.

Thirdly, children of twenty years more apparently wicked, were born either
before the parent believed, or after; if after, then they are holy seep, a seed
of a believer, and so remain, notwithstanding their wickedness, till they be
cut off from that relation by God, in his usual way, and then that holiness
is taken away from them, their natural relation still continuing, they are
children still of those parents, whose they were; if they were born before, I
say then they are unclean, notwithstanding their parents believing, and are not
holy at all, nor can be partakers of it, but by their own faith in Gods
covenant: but for Infants, as I said before, they are holy, and by virtue
thereof may be baptized as a holy seed, and so remain, till by some act of
theirs they be cut off, and deprive themselves of it, as Ishmael and Esau. This
exception he excepted against, saying, the Apostie speaks positively, of a
conclusion drawn from the state of the relation, which can admit of no
exception: For, if it could, then will it be of no absolute validity to enforce
the conclusion. Again, if the children do deprive themselves by some act of
theirs, of their state in grace, then their believing parents can have no
sanctified use of the believing yoke-mate; but that may be, whether the
children be in the state of grace or no.

Reply. First, the Apostle speaks positively of a conclusion, drawn from the
state of the relation, that is not natural, as children, but foederall, as
holy children of a believing parent.

Secondly, it may, and does admit of an exception, and yet is of absolute
validity, to enforce the conclusion, because the exception lies in a diverse
respect of the thing; if it lay against the thing it self, viz. as a believers
child, then indeed it would not force; but it lies here, that when it comes to
years, and stands by its own faith, in regard of personal relation acted to
the covenant, also by personal sin, deprive it self of the personal state it
had by personal relation to the covenant; yet, though the children cease to
be, and deprive themselves of that foederall holiness, which they had in
regard of their personal, the relation they had of children of believers, and
thereby holy, remains still; they were holy as born of them, as is evident in
the Jewish Infants, cut off with their parents, who were a holy seed, before
they were cut off. But more of this afterward.

The fifth answer he makes, Corinthians scruple, nor proves the thing in
question by them.

Reply. To clear this discourse, two things are to be attended: First, what was
the Corinthians scruple, and the state of the question amongst them: Secondly,
by what argument the Apostle, answers this scruple and question.

To the first, he says: The scruple that troubled the Church, was, whether
their marriage were lawful or no, and shows that such a state of holiness
of Infants in grace, whether inward or outward, will not prove whether the
parents were lawfully married or no, because the childrens state in grace
cannot prove the unbelieving parent sanctified to the believing yoke fellow.

Reply. First, Grant the holiness here spoken of, must be such as must prove
the unbelieving parent to be sanctified to the believing yoke fellow, yet to
argue that such a holiness of children in a state of grace will not prove
that, is but a mistake: For, if the children be holy, then certainly the
believing parents from whom they proceed, must needs be holy: For no man can
bring that which is clean out of that which is unclean; a Thorn brings not
forth Figs, nor a Fig Tree bramble-buries; a Turk bears not a Christian, nor a
Christian a Turk; Ergo, if children be holy, the unbelieving parent is
sanctified to the believing yoke-mate; so that they may enjoy society one with
another, otherwise children born of them could not be holy. In a word, the
scruple of the Corinthians was not whether the marriage was lawful or no, but
whether a believer might continue to cohabite and enjoy marriage society with
an Infidel yoke fellow, and not be polluted. This was the case that troubled
the Corinthians, and not whether their marriage were lawful or no; and there
is a great difference between a lawful marriage and a holy pure marriage; the
marriage may be lawful, but not pure; To the impure all things are impure, but
not unlawful. And their marriage being made when they were both unbelievers,
how can they question it now? but they must question whether there was any
marriage in the world ever lawful, unless they were both believers.

Secondly, the Arguments the Apostle gives, will none of them prove that the
question was of the lawfulness of the marriage.

For first he says, the unbeleeving is sanctified to the believing, does this
prove the marriage lawful? No, certainly, marriage of unbeleevers is lawful,
yea altogether as lawful as marriage of believers, but their marriage is not
so pure as of believers. For a lawful marriage does not sanctify unbeleevers
one unto the other, nor does it sanctify believers one to another: for then it
would sanctify unbeleevers also, but it does not, but their marriage remains
impure, though never so lawful, only believing makes all things pure, and so
marriage unto them that believe, but not more lawful.

A second Argument of the Apostle is from hope of gaining the unbeleeving
party. Now what argument is in this to prove that their marriage was lawful,
and that was their scruple?

Thirdly, the Apostle would have every one to abide in his calling and state
wherein God called him to faith, and how will this prove the marriage lawful?
or how if the marriage had been unlawful? Not a word of all these arguments
will prove that he said to be the question, nor give any satisfaction unto it,
if it should be the question. But this was the question, Whether they might
continue in their lawful married estate, and not be polluted from the Infidel
party. This is clear in the Text, the arguments prove it to be the question,
and fully satisfies the scruple.



Reply. I deny it, but it must be such a holiness as is derived only from
parents, whereof one at least is a believer: now legitimacie is not such a
holiness as is derived only from parents whereof one at least is a believer.
But the other is such a holiness. But says he, it must be meant of such a
holiness as is derived from all parents lawfully married. Because the Argument
stands in the children which were born before one of the parents came to the
faith, which therefore could receive from them unbeleeving, no other holiness
but legitimacie in the course of generation.

Reply. This holiness here comes not by generation, though concurring with it,
but flows from the parents state of being in grace.

Secondly, the Argument stands not in regard of the children born before one
was a believer, but of those after, as is clear from the Text: For a believing
person sanctifies the unbelieving party, else the children (not born before
either believed) but born of a believer and an Infidel were unclean, but now
they are holy, born of a believing and Infidel parent; and therefore
legitimacie cannot be meant here by holiness, because it is not necessary to
make a child legitimate, that one of the parents be a believer. It must be
such a holiness of children, as is proper to children of believers, at least
one of them; and this may also answer what he further adds, that taking
holiness for legitimacie, there can be no objection made why legitimacie
should not prove the unbelieving yoke fellow to be sanctified to the believing
parent. To which I add this further, that legitimacie will not prove that,
because legitimacie may be, and is in the children of both parents,
unbelieving, and lawfully married; and yet it will not prove that they are
sanctified one to another, there being as much legitimacie in Infidels children
as in Believers, unless he will conclude, that such marriages of Infidels are
lawful, and all their children bastards; legitimacie cannot be understood
therefore here by holiness, but foederall holiness: (as shall be further
cleared afterward) and thus his refutation of my third argument is cleared to
be of no validity, I hope fully.

My fourth Argument he thus sets down: If baptism succeed circumcision, then
as Infants were circumcised, so Infants must be baptized: But baptism succeeds
circumcision; Ergo, as Infants were circumcised, so Infants must be baptized.
To this he gives four answers: Denying the consequence, that is, that though
baptism succeed circumcision in a sense, that therefore the same subjects are
to be baptized now, that were to be circumcised then.

In his first answer, he gives diverse instances, to show the weakness of the
consequence in this, by the inconsequences in them, as the Gospel succeeds the
Law. The sons of Aaron were Ministers of the Law; Ergo, they are to be
Ministers of the Gospel: Baptism succeeds circumcision; grown males, though
they had no faith, were circumcised; Ergo, males now having no faith must be
baptized; females were not circumcised; Ergo, females must not be baptized. The
Lords Supper succeeds the Passover, their little children eat it with the rest
of the family in one house; Ergo, Infants may now eat the Lords Supper, now
with the rest of the family in one house. And he asks if this be good reason?
and concludes, that no objection can lie against these, but will lie against
mine also.

Reply. First, he says baptism succeeds circumcision in a sense, but sets
not down what sense it is that he means, which had been necessary. For
things succeed one another many ways, and there is not the same consideration
of all things that succeed one another. The sense that I intended it in is
this, That baptism succeeds circumcision by Gods institution, as a sign of
Gods covenant, and a seal of the righteousness of faith, held forth in the
covenant; and if baptism succeeds circumcision in this sense, (as it does)
then necessarily follows; that look who were subjects of the covenant then,
and received the seal of it, under those fignes administered, the same subjects
are now in the covenant, and are to receive the seal of it under these signs
administered: unless therefore it can be proved, that God by some manifest
word, has excluded Infants now; the consequence cannot be denied, and the
argument fully concluded.

Secondly, the instance that he brings to show the inconsequence of this, by
the inconsequence of them, are not paralleled and subject to exceptions that
this will not admit of: As first the Gospel succeeds the Law, therefore Aarons
sons are to be Ministers of the Gospel as they were then of the Law.

Reply. This comparisons suits not, the Law and the Gospel succeed one another
not as circumcision and baptism; nor will it follow, because baptism
succeeded circumcision, therefore Infants are to be baptized as they were
circumcised, so the Gospel succeeds the Law; Ergo, Aarons sons are to succeed
themselves under the Gospel: For I do not say cirumcision succeeds
circumcision; but thus it will follow: As then there were sacrifices and
services, and none but Aarons sons might not administer; so now, no man must
administer these services appointed, but such as are called, as Aaron was. His
second, that circumcision was administered to grown males that had no faith, is
false, as I have shown before, more then once, nor were females excluded then
from circumcision, no more then they were excluded from the covenant, but
should have been circumcised, if they had been capable, as the males; that
females had the inward circumcision, cannot be denied; and whether they had not
something analogicall to the outward, may be questioned, although it be not
expressed: Last of all, it is true, that the Lords Supper succeeds the
Passover, but that all Infants did eat the Passover with the rest, will be
denied, many being not naturally capable, by reason of age, and none but such
as were able to understand the nature of the ordinance might partake of it, (as
now none but such inay partake in the Lords Supper) and therefore they were
required to instruct their children in the nature and use of the ordinance; and
although every family were to eat a Lamb together in a house, yet after they
were settled in the Land, they were to eat it at Jerusalem, and it was to be
killed at the Tabernacle first, Deuteronomy. 16.6, 7. Nor was every family bound to
eat it alone; if they were too many, or too few, they were to have so many, and
no more, nor might any uncircumcised, or unclean, or apostate eat thereof, (and
females might, although not circumcised) for there are many objections to be
made against these instances, that cannot lie against the consequence of my
Proposition.

A second answer he gives is this: The body of the Jews were subjects of
circumcision, according to the Law, even when Christ dyed, yet the same were
not subjects of baptism, according to the Gospel, till they gladly received
the Word, Acts 2.4.

Reply. First, they were not circumcised before, but as they gladly received
the Word, and thereupon circumcised, and their Infants with them, by virtue of
Gods promise.

Secondly, it is true, no Jews of years were baptized till they received the
Word, but that was not because any might be circumcised before without
receiving the Word, but because of the change of the manner of adminstration of
one and the same word in a different manner; as the parents receiving the Word
under that dispensation they were circumcised, and their Infants with them; so
now parents receiving the Word, are to be baptized, and their Infants with them.

His third answer is this; as baptism succeeds circumcision, so the command
and subject of baptism succeeds the subject and command of circumcision: the
command of circumcision was of males only, and that on the eighth day; the
Proseylte must circumcise all his males, although they have no faith, the
females must not be circumcised, although they have never so much faith; but
the commandment of baptism is only of Disciples, men and women, a description
of whom ye may see, Luke 14.26.27.33. therefore the consequence follows not.

Reply. First, it is the command of God that sanctifies circumcision and
baptism in their several times to be administered.

Secondly, Gods command must sanctify the subjects to whom they are to be
administered; and therefore to circumcise any then, or baptize any now, but such
as God commands, is a sinful error.

Thirdly, it is not the command of circumcising why we baptize any, but a
command of baptizing them, why they are baptized; and therefore the commandment
of baptizing being not to baptize at any set time, we do not baptize any on
the eighth day as they circumcised; we likewise baptize females, the command
including them, though they were not circumcised, being not capable of it as I
said.

Fourthly, Then the case is this, Whether Gods command be to baptize Infants
now, as it was to circcumise Infants then; this he denies, upon this ground,
circumcision was not administered unto them as Disciples, but Disciples only are
now to be baptized, and a Disciple is he that denies himself, father, etc.
takes up his cross daily and follows Christ, Luke 14.26. But then they that
did none of these, yea, Proselytes and their males were circumcised, though
they did not believe.

Reply. First, that Proselytes and their males were cirumcised, though neither
he nor they believed, has been often said, but never proved, nor ever can be,
and I have showed the contrary.

Secondly, That none are to be baptized now, but Disciples, I grant it; but I
say also none but Disciples were then circumeised, as is evident from the
description of a Disciple, Luke 14. For whatsoever is required of any to be a
Disciple, agrees to them then, as may be seen, Psalm. 44.22. with Romans 8.36.
Psalm. 45.10. Heb. 11.8. with this, Luke 14. Genesis 4.8. with John 1.3.18. Genesis
21.9. with Gal. 4.29. where the Apostle says, as it was then, so it is now,
and as it is now, so was it then; and therefore there is no difference in that
respect, although the word was not then used, yet the matter being common, we
may make the word common also; and if all were not true Disciples then, but
many degenerated, so it is now also.

Thirdly, Disciples are now, and were then of two sorts: First, such as begun
(when God, as I may so say, first set up his School in in any place) as Abraham
and his grown males, Heb. 11, etc. taking in their Infants with them; for upon
this condition he admitted them, that he would have their Infants also; and so
in time of the Gospel to the Jews and Gentiles at first setting it up:
Secondly, Disciples are those, that being entered with their parents into the
school and profession, continue successively so till God turn them off; and no
otherwise were the Jews from Isaac till Christ's time Disciples, and so also it
is now; to say therefore there is no command to baptize Infants now, because
Disciples are to baptized, is not upon any just consequence. Besides, let any
show me a command of baptizing females, there being no command to circumcise
them, (examples there are of baptizing them, but I suppose that without a
command will not suffice) If any shall say, it is commanded, Mat. 28. where
under the term of nations they are included.

I reply, Are not children a part of all nations, as they were a part of the
Jewish nation? But ye will say, they must be made Disciples first?

Reply. First, Disciples, as I said, are made two ways, actually by
profession, or foederally by imitation, as Infants were then, so Infants may be
now.

Secondly, God takes care of Infants now, and requir^^ they should be
instructed in the discipline and admonition of the Lord; now God never took the
care of any that were not his, and in that he commanded them to be nursed up in
his discipline, it plainly argues, they are his Disciples.

His fourth and last answer is the same with the former, from the difference of
the subjects that were circumcised, now to be baptized, there being the same
reason of changing the subject, that there is of changing the Sacrament, viz.
Christ's coming; and if it were absurd to circumcise children now, because they
were circumcised then, then it is absurd to baptize Infants now, because they
were circumcised them; because Christ's coming does put an end to the subject
also, and has put another subject to be baptized; namely, believers and only
believers.

Reply. First, there is not the same reason of changing the subject, that there
is of the change of the Sacrament, God changed the Sacraments he gave to Adam
in Paradise, but he changed not the subject, but continued the same offer of
happiness to Adam, the same subject; but he continued not the same Sacrament.

Secondly, the Sacrament is not changed into another of another nature: For the
grace signified in both is the same, the manner of signifying is the same in
both sacramentally, but the signs only are changed.

Thirdly, the subjects are not changed, by reason of Christ's coming, as being
types of him, (which I have disproved before, though here again employed) but
because of their unbelief, the kingdom being taken from them, because they
refused to submit, Mat. 21.22. and now the subjects shall be cut off, if they
cease to be loyal, and they should not, if they had been loyal.

Fourthly, the change of Gods administration of his grace has been diverse; but
the subjects to whom the grace was offered, were never changed, from Adams time
to Abraham's, where were the same subjects, men, women, and Infants, none will
say Infants were excluded, if they died before they came to years of
discretion: From Abraham's time to Moses, the administration of grace was
changed, not the subjects; Infants also; from Moses time it was more changed,
till Christ's time, the subjects were not changed, Infants not shut out, no, not
Infants of Proselytes; and why should Infants be shut out since, seeing the
offer of grace is the same, though the administration of it differs? but
especially with more enlargement. Upon all that has been said, it may appear,
that the consequence of mine Argument is not weakened, and so the point proved
by it certain, that as Infants were then circumcised, so Infants are now to be
baptized, baptism succeeding circumcision.

The second Part.
AND thus for reply to his full answer to the discourse touching Infants
baptism, it remains that I proceed with him in the rest, about the form a
Church; wherein first he says, I speak of agreement in this, that matter and
form do constitute a Church. Also, that the matter is a company of visible
Saints, professing faith in the righteousness of Christ, and living
accordingly. To which he answers, First, this definition agrees not to
Infants, which I would make to be subjects of baptism, who are born in sin,
and are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Psa. 51.5. Secondly, nor does it agree
with the Jewish Church, which I would make to be a pattern for ours, in
bringing grounds from them for baptizing infants, who never were required to
make such profession at the time of their admission, as all Churches and
members added do since Christ's time, Acts 2.41. and 8.12, etc. Thus he.

Before I come to reply, let me give notice of this, That I cannot own these
words thus expressed, That he and I with whom I had this discourse, agreed of
this; that matter and form do constitute a Church I am consident; and before
we accorded had many passages to and fro, but proceeded not till we consented
there, nor can I say that I writ it down. And touching the definition of the
matter of a Church, as is there expressed, I am confident so far as I can
remember, it was none of mine, nor do I now own them; and therefore let all
observe how vain and rash he is, so ungroundedly to publish these things under
my name unto all the world. Yet because some things in the discourse, I well
remember to be mine, I shall clear my way in passing this in a word or two,
and setting down such a definition of a Church as I have by me, and go along
with him in the rest, and to what he says I make this reply. First, I would
say that the matter of a Church is a company of visible Saints: And this I
conclude to be clear in every place where a Church is styled Saints, Believers,
and the like. Secondly, this definition agrees to children as well as grown
men, being Saints also, and holy seed of holy parents: though it is true they
be born in sin, and children of wrath by nature; so were infants in the old
Testament as well as now, as the place Psalm. 51. by him alleged, evinceth: and
the same is true of the holiest men of years, and Paul confesses himself
with others to be the children of wrath by nature, yea then when he said it,
there is no hinderance then why that description may not agree to infants.
Thirdly, it agrees right well to the Jewish Church, who were not a company of
profane persons, but a holy people unto God, a company of Saints, and no
otherwise a Church, but as such, or believers; and we are upon these terms
admitted and continued members of that Church, so long as it continued a
church, as has been showed before. So that the description of the matter of a
church, does well agree to all churches and members of churches always, nor
are Churches to consist of, or admit others unto them. Now a Church, I conceive
to be an institution of it, whereby a company of men and women called by the
word of Gods grace, and some work of Gods Spirit upon them, do join themselves
unto the Lord and one to another, by entering into covenant with the Lord, to
have him to be the God of them and theirs, and they and theirs to be the Lords
and his Christ's: as also one with another, to meet together to worship God for
his glory and their mutual edification to life, according to Gods revealed
will. Now as I tie no man to my expressions, so I shall be willing to learn of
any that shall help me to a better understanding in this point: yet in this
description all the causes concur. The efficient (an institution of Christ)
with the isntrumental, the Word in some effects upon their hearts; the
material, a company of men and women so called, and from thence Saints and
believers: the formal, (joining themselves to the Lord, and one with another)
by entering into covenant, whereof there are two branches, one called, Zach. 11.
The staff of beauty, taking the Lord to be the God of them and theirs, and
giving up themselves and theirs to be the Lords: the other called, The staff
of bonds, or brotherhood, and both the covenant, the final to meet together to
glorify God the supreme, and edify one another to life, with the means
worshipping God according to his own appointment revealed in his word: only I
would be understood of a Church in the constituting of it, which is continued
in the same state by succession, till the Lord the efficient dischurch them.

But to proceed, this confuter next says, That I make this quaere, Whether
baptism be not the form of a church; and answering, No, giving reasons of my
denial, I affirm a covenant acted is the form of it. To all which he answers
first in general; And here he distinguishes between the form and the thing
formed, and says, That a Church being an Assembly, the form or fashion thereof
is the relation that every member possesses from Christ their head, and each
with other, whereby every law and service is communicable and executed;
concluding, that neither a covenant or baptism is the form of a Church: but
baptism of a believer is an isntrumental means by which a Church is made
partaker of that form which it has, as by which it becomes a Church. Further,
that the isntrumental means of the being of a Church, both of matter and
form, is by consent of love issuing forth from the covenant of grace made in
and from our Lord, through one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
And if any of these be wanting, and be not supplied, the Church can have no
visible existence and being. From whence it follows, though baptism be not
the form of a Church, yet being an essential means, and the last too of the
visible Church, where true baptism is wanting, there can be no true visible
Church.

Reply. First, to let pass his distinction, only this I say, that he
confounds form and figure as one thing, which are diverse. For water in a
round glass or square, has this or that figure, or fashion; but it is not the
form whereby water is water, and not another thing; and therefore form differs
from figure and fashion.

Secondly, whereas he denies a covenant or baptism either to be a Churches
form, he contradicts what he said before in his answer to my first argument
to prove the covenant before Christ and after to be the same. It is true (said
he) that the coventnt of God makes the Church both in the time of the Law and
Gospel too: and a Church is nothing but a people in covenant with God. That
saying of his here and there cannot be both true.

Thirdly, he says, that the form of the Church is that relation that each
member possesses from Christ the head, and each with other, which is by
consent of love.

Reply. First, the relation that each member possesses from Christ the head,
and each the other, is either internal (as Spirit, Faith, Love,) or external,
the manifestation of these: as they are internal, they cannot be the form of
an external visible church: as they are manifested outwardly, they cannot make
the churches form, because they may manifest these graces; and yet be no
church, nor members of a visible and this particular church. And indeed they
are neither matter nor form (though he makes them both;) but the manifestation
of these makes them to be fit matter for a church, which yet cannot be a
church without the form added to the matter, and that is a covenant, (or as he
calls it, a consent, which indeed is a covenant) by which alone every Law and
Service is communicable and excecuted.

Last of all he says, that consent of love from one Spirit, Faith, and
Baptism, are essentially necessary means of the being of a church for matter
and form, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. And if any of these be wanting, then there can be no
visible church.

Reply. First, in making all these to concur to the matter and form of the
church as means thereof, he necessarily yields the form and matter to be
something else differing from them all.

Secondly, he confounds baptism with faith and love, which are internal
graces, unless he means the external profession of them flowing from the
covenant of grace; which if he do, then I conceive he yields as much as I
require, that in a covenant or mutual engagement of all parties, and one main
part by profession of faith and love through one spirit, without which a
covenant cannot be in the state we speak of it.

Thirdly, that of Ephesians. 4. intends not to describe the form of a church, but
persuades to unity by a sevenfold unity, that they are already church members,
were all partakers of. Lastly, if baptism may be wanting for a time, and yet a
believer essentially a churchmember, as Abraham and his many males and females
were before circumcised for the space of at least 14. years between the
covenant and circumcision, and therefore does not concur to the constitution
of a churches matter and form, but for the confirmation of a church constituted
in matter and form before. And when a man of years is baptized in a church,
is the baptized a visible Saint, or no? If yea, for he may be no real Saint,
then his baptism does not give him matter and form, but he has both before,
or else he ought not to be baptized. And thus much to his general discourse.

In particular he goes on, and says, First, as it is in natural birth, so it
is in spiritual; but in natural birth we have the beginning of our natural
being among the world, and in the affairs of this life by our birth from our
parents; therefore we have the beginning of our spiritual and visible being
among the church, as in the affairs of life eternal by our spiritual birth:
and this spiritual birth is baptism, and for that cause called the birth of
water, Joh. 3.5. Tit. 3.5. Therefore by administration of true baptism, the
church is is truly stated and constituted in her true being.

Reply. Regeneration and natural birth hold proportion in many things together,
but not in all, yet I will not trouble the discourse there, the great mistake
is, in making baptism regeneration, and that which answers natural birth,
and the places quoted will not prove it: For first, it will ask more skill then
it may be he has, to recover them out of the hands of many godly judicious,
that deny those places to be meant of baptism, but indeed of the new birth or
regeneration by the Spirit putting forth the same effects upon the regenerate
party that holds some proportion with the effects of water. But secondly, grant
they be meant of baptism, yet it follows not that baptism is regeneration,
because in John there is the Spirit also, and in Titus, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and a full work of regeneration wrought before baptism, and themselves
also will necessarily require it, before they will baptize any; and therefore
baptism is not regeneration, being not to be administered but to regenerate
persons known before to be so. Thirdly, it is not therefore called the birth
of water, but as bread and wine are called the body and blood of Christ,
circumcision the covenant, the Lamb the Passover: as therefore the Lamb or
Christ is the Passover, circumcision the covenant, bread and wine the Lords
body and blood; so baptism is the new birth, that is, a sign or seal of
regeneration, and not regeneration it self. I dislike the phrase, The birth of
water. Secondly, he argues from the form of baptism, which is dipping, and
in that repect called a burial with Christ, Romans 6.4. betokening our death and
refurrection. Ergo, as the rising out of the grave at the last day, is the
beginning of our state of glory in our bodily being; so the rising out of the
water of baptism, is the beginning of our visible state of grace, and the
beginning of our visible spiritual life, is from that day, etc.

Reply. First, here is the same mistake with the former, making baptism the
beginning of the spiritual visible state, whereas it is the sign and seal of
it only, which they are to have before: for do they baptize a grown person
dead, or alive? If alive, then visibly or invisibly in the state of spiritual
life: not invisibly, for himself has said, they must profess their faith
first, and receive the word, Acts 2. else not to baptize any: their faith in
Christ, their union thereby to him, their communion with him in death, burial,
etc. are to go before their baptism. And himself says, it betokens how it
is then the thing it self.

Secondly, whereas he makes dipping the form of baptism, he is in a double
mistake: First, it is not the form, but the matter of baptism: Secondly, he
seems to conclude sprinkling unlawful, whereas it is lawful, as shall be
seen afterward. Lastly, he makes it a Sacrament of our last resurrection to
glory, the Text making it expressly a Sacrament of our dying to finne, and
resurrection to new obedience.

Thirdly, he argues from the end of baptism, which amongst others is to unite
them to the visible body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3.27.28. Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
and to distinguish them from the rest of the world, Col. 2.12. with 20. as
circumcision did distinguish the Jews from the Heathens. But except baptism
be administered to believers, subjects only capable of such union, communion,
and distinction; they cannot have that end effected, to be united to the body
of Christ, and distinguished from the rest of the world. Ergo, baptism is to
be administered to believers for that end.

Reply. They be believers first; (for so himself says) but to believe, is to
be in Christ, and by his faith forsaking sin and the world, chooses God to
be his God, and Gods people to be his people: and as by the inward grace this
is done effectually invisibly; so by actual profession thereof (without which
he were not to be baptized) he visibly declares, and effects the same ends,
and is baptized as a sign and seal thereof, baptism there does not effect
those ends, but signify and seal those ends before effected. This Argument
still labors of the former mistake, making the sign to be the sign and the
thing signified by it. Again, there are other ends of baptism besides these,
as himself confesses, and therefore the church may be formed a church before
and without these ends to be effected by baptism, one end is to be a sign and
seal of the covenant, which precedes baptism it self, and therefore baptism
comes too late to do that which was done before. Last of all, Ephesians. 5.25.27.
the party to be baptized, is and must be a member before, because the church
is to be washed, not made a church by washing, but being a church to be washed.

A fourth argument he has, is from the not iteration of baptism, it being to
be administered but once, the Lords Supper often, in which respect baptism is
the sign of our birth, and initiation, the Lords Supper of our growth and
conservation in the visible body of Christ; and if a man may be conceived to
have a being for a time in a visible church without baptism the sign and
Sacrament of his entrance and initiation, he may have a continuance there
also, and so consequently baptism needless. But baptism is needful, as a
means of the beginning of our visible being in the visible body of Christ.
Ergo, without baptism they have no visible being in the church, and so
baptism is the form of it.

I answer: First, he says baptism is a sign and Sacrament of the beginning
of our visible being in the body of Christ; then, say I, it is not the
beginning it self of our visible being in the body, the sign and the thing
signified being really distinct the one from the other, and the thing signified
preceding the sign and seal of it. But of this before.

Secondly, he plainly contradicts himself in saying, it is a sign and
Sacrament of our entrance, and yet there is no visible being in the church
without baptism.

Thirdly, where he says, If a man may have a being for a time without
baptism, then may he have a continuance also; it follows not: for they had a
being in the Jewish state before they were circumcised, but circumcision was
not needless, neither should they have continued in that state without
circumcision.

Again, as the males had a being, and continued members of that church seven
days, so if God had not commanded them to be circumcised the eighth day, but
left it to their own wills, they should have continued visible members without
it always, as women did, being not commanded: Abraham and his family fourteen
years, and they in the wilderness forty. In like manner Gods command makes
baptism necessary for all these ends which he has appointed it for, and so
for those ends it is to be administered, and the omission of it is a grievous
sin. But none of these ends is to give them a visible being in a visible
church, but by way of signification and confirmation; Ergo, baptism is not the
form of the church.

A 5th Argument is from the nature of Baptism, as it is the seal of the
Covenant, if there be no visible Ordinance before Baptism to note out their
visible being in the covenant whereby they may be known, then it is baptism
that does it: But there is no other visible ordinance before baptism to note
out their visible being in the covenant whereby they may be known; Ergo, it is
baptism that does it; and so it is the form of the Church.

Answ. 1. If he really grant it is the seal of the covenant, then it is not the
covenant it self, for which he has formerly argued.

Secondly, it must be considered, to whom baptism must note out their visible
being in the covenant; if to themselves, they may know it before: for he that
believes has the witness in himself; if to others, either Christians, they
must know it before, or not baptize them; or else the world and baptism can no
way notify such a thing unto them, they cannot take notice thereof, nor will
they; they know them not, because they have not known Christ, nor the Father.
And if a man truly baptized fall off from his profession, to whom does it note
that he is in the covenant, though it be known he was baptized? And our Savior
gives a rule whereby all men shall know his Disciples (not if baptized, but) if
they love one another, and keep his commandments; and if any say he has
fellowship with God, and does evil, he lies, and all the world may know it,
though they know he was visibly baptized; Ergo, baptism cannot be the form of
a church, seeing it does not note out their visible being in covenant, which is
notified before; and by other means, both before and after: Last of all, again
he contradicts himself, in saying here, that baptism is the form of the
church, and yet before denying baptism or the covenant either to be the form
of it.

The 6th Argument is taken from the commission given to the first, Matthew.
28.19. where the Participle baptizing, concurres to making them Disciples: and
Mark. 16.16. Faith puts a man into the state of salvation before God, Baptism
before men; the reason runs thus: If from commission to the first planters,
baptism was required to make a person a Disciple, in a visible state of
salvation, and stated in all other ordinances of Christ's kingdom, then baptism
so administered is that which gives being to a true visible Church. I answer,

First, the Scripture requires, first that they be made Disciples, and then
being Disciples to be baptized, and therefore baptism does not make them
Disciples: Again, faith makes them Disciples in the state of salvation before
God, and profession of that faith (and not baptism) does make visibly and
outwardly Disciples in the state of salvation before men, Romans 10.9, 10. They
that baptize any, must know them to be visibly such before they baptize them,
else not baptize them, as himself has says, from Acts 2.21.8.12.

Secondly, Baptism is required to state them in the observation of all the
ordinances of Christ's kingdom, not by making them a church, or member to whom
only such ordinances; yea, baptism it self does belong, but to make them fit
to observe them, being members; and there are other things, though they be
baptized, that may hinder them from observaton of those ordinances; as in the
old Testament circumcision did not make them a church, but being a church they
were to be circumcised, without which they might not observe the Passover, but
there were other things also which did hinder them from observation of the
Passover, though they were circumcised.

And thus, of his Position, and the grounds of it, That baptism is the thing
that forms the church; only if I understand his close, he flatly contradicts
himself, in saying baptism is the means and thing that forms the church, and
yet it is not the outward form of our church formed: For, either it forms the
church withan outward or inward: but not inward before God, Faith does that,
and therefore the outward form it must be; and so he said in his last Argument
baptism puts a man into the state of salvation before men. Again, he grants
the church to be formed with an outward form without baptism, in saying
baptism is not that outward form of the church formed. If a formed church, it
has a form that formed it, but the form is not baptism; Ergo, he overthrows
all that he has argued for, or else the church has two outward forms; one he
grants the church has without baptism, the other by baptism, which these six
arguments plead for. It were well if he agreed with himself.

Next he answers the Reasons I set down (as he says) to prove that baptism
is not the form of a visible church; The first whereof is this: That which
gives being to a church must be removed to make a church cease to be a church;
but Baptism cannot be removed from a church whilst it remains a church; Ergo.
He answers, It is as easy to remove baptism from a church, as to remove a
church from being a church.

Reply. First, this is a very easy answer, and touches no part of the
Argument. Again, a church is unchurched not by unbaptizing the baptized (as it
must be, if it were the form of a church) but by destroying the church it self.
The church must first in reasan be made no church, before ordinances can cease
to be ordinances in that church; but destroy the church, and baptism will not
be baptism; as the Edomites circumcision was not circumcision when they were
not the church; the Jews circumcision, and all that they do, are nullities to
this day, since they ceased to be a church.

A second Reason is this; That which being wanting to a church constituted,
does not cause the church to be no church, that cannot be the form of the
church; but baptism may be wanting to a church constituted, and yet it be a
church: As circumcision to Infants seven days, always to all females, to them
in the wilderness forty years, Josh. 5. Ergo:

Answ. He denies the second Proposition; That baptism may be wanting to a
church constituted, his Reason, because a church is constituted by baptism;
and so Josh. 5. he says, that case was extraordinary, having special
dispensation from God himself, supplied by miraculous Sacraments, during the
time of their necessary forbearances of circumcision and the Passover, while
in travells, unless we can show a like case, and supply of miraculous
Sacraments, we cannot conclude, that a church is a church, or men members of a
church without baptism by which they are constituted.

Reply. First, the Reason he gives, that baptism cannot be wanting in a church
constituted, because it is constituted by baptism, is of no force, because a
church is not constituted by baptism, as I have showed before, and he begs the
question.

Secondly, To that of Joshua the 5th, the case was not extraordinary, nor need
they be hindered by their travells, no more then they were hindered by the danger
they were in, after they were over Jordan, for all the fighting men 60000
thousand, were now all sore by circumcision; easy had it been for the
Canaanites to have come upon them and slain them, as Jacobs two sons did the
Sichemites. If any shall say, that God could, and did defend them: I say, was
not God as able to defend them in the wilderness where the most of them would
have been always well? To say that God dispensed with them, is not proved; it
is as easy to say he did not, and who so reads Josh. 5.2, etc. shall have
cause to conclude, that they sinned in omitting it (though God imputed it not
unto them;) besides, they stayed sometime a year in a place; and often long
enough to have been healed: I rather think God did not dispense with them; and
that they sinned in omitting it, and therefore called the reproach of Egypt;
and for the miraculous Sacraments they had, it was not to supply the absence of
the other ordinances, for then they should not have begun before these were
taken away as they did; nor should these have been continued after those were
given them, as they were, especially the Passover celebrated the second year,
Numb. 9.1, etc. and for any thing I know continued all the time, till they came
into the land, yearly according to institution: and so Calvin upon Johshua the
5th thinks, and that God did tolerate them, though not circumcised, and a
reason he gives, because they offered sacrifices continually, which was not
much less then to eat the Passover, no man being to bring a sacrifice that
was unclean, as all uncircumcised were; nor is it probable that all were
circumcised, who celebrated the Passover, Numb. 9. and therefore Manna and the
Rock did not supply the absence of the Passover, but they were both together
for a time, as circumcision, and the sea, and cloud to all that were
circumcised; some whereof came into the land: And therefore, though I show no
extraordinary case, nor miraculous sacraments to supply the absence of
ordinary; yet from that place (especially adding the case of Infants always
seven days without circumcision, and sometimes more, and females always, and
yet members) I see nothing that is said, but as then the church was a church,
and all members, though many not circumcised: so a church may be a church now,
and yet baptism for a time wanting (though it ought not to be) and then
baptism is not the form of the church.

A third Reason I give (as he says, for I cannot remember I used a word of it)
is this: That which is an adjunct to a thing, cannot be the form of it; but
baptism is an adjunct of a church; Ergo.

To this he answers: This is not against his question as he stateth it,
because that which is an adjunct may be a means of forming the thing to which
it is adjoined, and so baptism is.

Reply. First, how he states his Question is nothing to me, his Answer must
be to the question as I stated it; seeing he takes upon him to refute it: In
altering the state of the question therefore, he shows he had nothing to say
against it as I set it down; But,

Secondly, I grant an adjunct may be a means of forming the subject, so as it
is by the adjunct, and without that adjunct the subject could not be so formed
and denominated: As freedom is an adjunct to man, and is necessary to make him
be, and named a free man, but it is not necessary to make him a man; he may be
a man without it: So baptism is necessary to form a church, or member, to be,
and named a baptized church and member, but it concurres not therefore to make
a church or member to be a church or member, and therefore that form whereby it
is, and called a church, or member, arises from something else. A subject may
have twenty adjuncts, but not one, nor all make it a subject, that it is before
the adjuncts, and without them.

A 4th Reason, That which is the seal of the covenant cannot be the form of the
church; but baptism is the seal of the covenant; Ergo. His answer is, That the
seal of the covenant may be a means to constitute and put the church into an
outward visible form, and referres to his fifth Argument, where he has spoken
something before.

Reply. He answered to neither Proposition here. That baptism is the seal of
Gods outward covenant, cannot be denied, that baptism therefore cannot be the
form of a visible church, is evident: as a seal cannot be the form of that
place, or honor which a man has by the kings grant under writing, it is the
grant and contract that makes the man to honor this state or that from the
king, and not the seal, though the seal be useful and necessary: So here,
baptism makes not the church to be the church, but it is added to Gods
covenant made with the Church before, whereby it is a Church, and this seal
added to the covenant made for confirmation, without which the state would be
the same, though not so authentical to us, in regard of our weakness: For his
reference, see my answer to it.

A fifth Reason, That which remains when a man is excommunicate, and is not to
be administered to restore him again, when cut off, that cannot be the form of
the church; but baptism remains, when a man is excommunicated, nor is to be
administered to restore him to membership when cut off; Ergo.

To which he answers, by denying the Assumption, that is, that baptism
remains when a man is excommunicate, nor is to be administered again when he is
to be restored; and denying this, he must affirm that baptism does not remain
where a man is no member by excommunication, and such a man must be baptized,
that he may be restored again. To make this good, he gives a long answer,
which I contract into these Propositions:

First, that by faith a man possesses Christ, and so baptism and membership
with the Church.

Secondly, that some have true saving faith, and so they have Christ, baptism,
and membership in the truth of all and savingly, and some have but seeming
faith, and so have Christ, baptism, and membership, not in truth, but
seemingly, (yet accounted by others true that cannot discern them to be but
seeming.)

Thirdly, that a true believer excommunicate for sin, is not really deprived of
faith, Christ, baptism, and membership, but seems only to be cut off; but
he that seemed to have faith, but had not indeed, excommunicate for sin, is
cut wholly and really from Christ, etc. which he only seemed to have, and no
faith, Christ, etc. can be said to remain, being neither believer, nor
baptized, nor member indeed, because he forsaking the grounds and ends of his
baptism, he forsakes baptism, which was administered upon these grounds, and
for these ends.

Fourthly, he that by the renewall of his repentance returns to his faith
again (by which he is to be restored to communion with the church again after
excommunication) returns thereby to his baptism and membership again.

Reply. Granting the first Proposition, that faith possesses a man of Christ,
etc. and likewise this in the second, that some have faith in Christ, etc.
really and saving, in the truth of all; but where he says some have but
seeming faith, (and yet baptized, etc.) and seem to have Christ, baptism, and
membership, but have none in truth, I deny that these are seeming, unless as
opposed to saving, spiritual and supernatural; thus indeed many have not, nor
can any have these things, but only elect persons, and so their says, and all
is seeming: But faith considered in it self, it is certain that many have that
faith they profess they have, as the devils, and do believe as they say they
do; nor do I think, that if a man knew one to be a reprobate, (unless in the
case of fin unto death) yet having and professing faith, he is not to be
rejected, without some special word of God: Thus Abraham and Isaac,
circumcised Ishmael and Esau, though they knew before they were reprobates: And
our Savior put Judas into Apostleship when he knew what he was to the full.

Secondly, a man having such a faith, is in Christ, in a sense, John 15. has
baptism and church membership indeed, and in the truth of it, though not
spiritually and savingly, I cannot say these are all, or any of them seeming,
but in opposition to saving; so they seem to be indeed, but are not, Heb.
6.4.9. they are really enlightened, they taste of the heavenly gift, and fall
away, and perish for ever; but they had no part in those as accompanying
salvation, these are distinct one from another: The one sort are acquired by
natural powers, and are moral only, those will never save them; the other are
infused, spiritual, supernatural, and always accompany salvation.

To the third Proposition, I say, that a believer to salvation excommunicate
for some sin, is not deprived of the faith he had, but that he is cut off from
membership (and so from baptism, if it be the form of his membership,) it is
most certain, as much as the other is, and it is more then a seeming to be cut
off, being ratified in heaven (his everlasting estate remaining with God
inalterable) and he that seemed to have saving faith, etc. but had not, is not
deprived of that faith he had, by excommunication, nor cut off otherwise from
his baptism and membership then the former, (in foro humano) being things that
he had as really as the former, though not of the same kind, nor to the same
benefit. And if all were but seeming in the Refuters sense, certainly, his
excommunication will be but seeming roo; and does this seem to be a seemly
thing, to speak thus of the things of God?

To the fourth, he that by repentance returns to his faith again, that is, in
true meaning, to an entire standing in the profession of faith, returns to his
baptism and membership again. I grant, that by renewall of repentance, he is
to be restored from under the censure unto communion with the church again: And
hence I gather, that faith and repentance professed, are the means whereby he
was stated in the covenant and membership, and therefore now required of him
again, to set him in his former state, and not baptism, which certainly would
have been under some prejudice by excommunication, and must have been cleared
as well as his profession, if that had constituted his membership, especially,
if he had but seeming faith, baptism and membership before; for let me put
this case, which certainly may, and sometimes does fall out; that a seeming
believer, having seeming baptism, etc. (to speak his language) is
excommunicated, and so is cut off from all that he only seemed to have, he had
no baptism and membership indeed, but seemed to have; and from all that is
really and wholly cut off, nothing remains; this penson was not before really
converted, but under the state of censure he is really converted, and gives
full satisfaction to the church, shall he be restored to his seeming baptism
and membership that he had before by his seeming faith? (rather he cannot be
restored to that seeming state, because he says nothing remains) Or shall he
have a new membership, and real in the truth of it, for his real faith and
repentance? but this must be by a new and real baptizing; (the former not
remaining) and therefore, though repentance of him that was a true believer,
recovers his former standing in the covenant, and so his baptism, which he was
not really deprived of; yet it must needs be, that he that did not truly
believe, being now really converted, can not receive his former seeming
baptism (nor were it worth the recovering) by his repentance, but must have a
real baptism added to him for his real faith instead of that seeming
baptism that he had by his seeming faith. The truth is, neither true believer
nor seeming (as he speaks) have either of them their baptism taken away by
censure, but both their memberships really, and not seemingly, and by
repentance are restored to their former rights and membership.

That therefore that must be to make a man a member, and the destruction
whereof makes a man no member, and the renewing whereof must be to restore him
to be a member again, that is the form of a churchmember, and so of a church;
but baptism does not make a man a visible member, nor is baptism nullified to
make him no member, but remains still true baptism; nor is it to be renewed to
restore him to his membership again; therefore baptism is not the form of the
church: For to make a thing to cease to be that it was, must necessarily be by
taking away of the form, by which it was that it was: for so long as that form
remains, you cannot make the thing to be any other, or not that it was, but in
making a member no member, there is a destruction of that form whereby he was a
member, that is, a real casting him out from being the Lords, or having the
Lord to be his, and to be delivered up to Satan, likewise a casting him out
from being one of Gods people, to be of the world again (as Demas,) and the
contrary hereunto must be reacted to restore a member. Therefore this alone is
the form of a member, and so of a Church. And this is no other thing but a
Covenant acted (as before I described,) therefore a Covenant is the form of the
Church.

This I affirmed, and he proceeds to disprove, setting down a Proposition,
and the proofs of it that I alleged. The Proposition is this: An outward
covenant acted between God and a company of believers to be one another, and
for the like among themselves, is the form of the visible church. I cannot say
these were my expressions, yet I shall justify the Proposition, That a visible
Covenant (according to my former distinction) is the form of a visible church.
His answer to this is, That the covenant of God makes the church; but that any
can be concluded to have an outward being in the covenant of the Gospel now
without baptism, he denies, requires me to prove it, and says, he has
proved the contrary before. To which, with my answer to it, I refer you.

He goes on, and says, Whereas I say a company of believers acting a
covenant to become one another amongst themselves, to be the form of the
church. He answers, By the same reason (if without baptism at present) they
may receive the form of the church without administration of the Gospel for
the future, which he conceives will be absurd to affirm.

Reply. First, the administrations of the Gospel do not concur to the form
of the church, and therefore she has her form without them, nor could she be
partaker of them, but being a church first. They are necessary for her
well-being, not her being: And if she should neglect the administration of the
Gospel, and administer the contrary, yet she should be a church still by her
first constitution, till God cast her off, which without question in time he
will do, though she do but neglect his.

Secondly, a church receives her form to be a church for administrations sake,
and to enjoy those administrations to be exercised therein according to Gods
word; and therefore she will not be wanting to her self herein. If I shall
say, If baptism be the form of a church, then by the same reason she may
receive the form without all administration of the Gospel for the future. I
conceive it would be absurd to affirm it. There is nothing in what he said
therefore worth answering. And the same has been said and answered before.
Secondly, he says, God has appointed no such thing for men to act such a
covenant for any such end; and therefore so to do, is will worship, invention
of man, and in Gods worship plain superstition, and flat breach of the second
commandment; and therefore if it be the form of a Church, it is a
superstitious church, which is so formed by such a superstitious action.

Reply. I grant, all humane inventions in Gods worship, are sinful,
superstitious, and flat breaches of the second commandment, and added to Gods
worship, do pollute the same. But secondly, it does not disanull a church that
some inventions of men are joined (which ought not to be) to Gods worship; nor
do I think that himself thinks as he says, that God has not appointed men
to act such a covenant for any such end; because he has said many times, and
granted, a few lines before these words, that the covenant of God makes the
church. Now a covenant of God is that which is acted between him and believers
outwardly with whom he first makes it (any other I suppose he understood not by
it) and so continued in by them following, till God cut them off. If thus, then
suppose it should be a mistake to say (to become one another also) that cannot
so alter the covenant as to make it superstitious, or a humane invention. And
when they baptize a man in years, will they not first require him to take God
in Christ to be his God, and to submit to him in all things, etc. And is not
this a covenant acted, and the end of it to be to form him a churchmember?
What invention of man is in this? But if the proof be found good, this will be
found his mistake so to say; and therefore I shall stay till we come to them.

Thirdly, he says, A covenant acted by believers to become one another,
cannot be a form of a true visible church; because it may be with ignorance
both of the nature and duties of a true church, as is proved by presupposing it
to be the form of the church before Baptism.

Reply. First, I see no force in this reason: for none ought to be ignorant of
the nature and duties of a true church before they be joined, but to be well
catechized first, nor is there any color of reason to prove that such may be
ignorant as are joined by a covenant, by presupposing it to be the form of the
Church before baptism.

Secondly, a covenant acted by believers, and baptizing them, are not supposed
to be so distant in time, as that they may not go together, but the covenant
must proceed in order of nature and time, baptism being but the seal of it,
and is but an idol with out it; the covenant making them capable of baptism,
and nothing else: and baptism being a visible and outward seal, it must needs
be an outward and visible covenant to which it is added, and so makes a member
to be a formed member. The Scriptures quoted by him, 1 Cor. 1.15, etc. to prove
that all their external relations must flow from their relation and union in
baptism, are absurdly alleged; and there is no relation and union in
baptism, but by way of signification and confirmation. The union must go
before, if they do not profess faith in Christ, (whereby they are united unto
Christ) before baptized, they must not be baptized, as himself has often
said, and is truth.

But to come to the proofs I added to my proposition, the first he says, was
this, If the Kingdom of heaven, that is, the Church state that we now have, be
the same that the Jews had; then if such a covenant as I have above expressed,
was the form of that Church, it is the form of ours now: But the Kingdom of
heaven (that is, the visible Church state that we now have,) is the same they
had. Ergo, If such a covenant was the form of that church, it is also the form
of these now. And the form of the Jewish Church was such a covenant. Ergo. He
answers first, If the Church state then and now be not the same, then the
form of that is not the form of this, (and so my Argument grounded upon an IF,
is nothing.) But the Church state then (constituted of a natural seed) was not
that we have now (constituted of a spiritual seed.) Ergo.

Reply. In denying the Church state then and now to be the same, he flatly
contradicts the Scripture, Mat. 21.33, 43. where it is clear, that the
Vineyard and Kingdom of heaven being the Church state they possessed, is
threatened to be taken away and given to other nations. It is the same Vineyard
and Kingdom taken away and given.

Secondly, it is a gross mistake to say, that they were a Church stated of
Abraham's natural seed, which has often already been gainsaid by me: Gods
intention in entering into covenant with them, was to have them all spiritual,
he constituted them not a church as a natural seed, but as spiritual; and if
all were not spiritual, it was their sin: And all now in Church estate are
not spiritual, many are carnal. And the Jews still remain natural branches
to be graffed in again, though not as natural seed, but as believing, etc.
Secondly, he says, where I said, A covenant acted by believers amongst
themselves, to become one another, to be the form of the Church, and here
arguing from the state of the Jews to prove this form, which did never form
themselves so; in so doing I overthrow my self, and argue from my proof to
overthrow my principle.

Reply. First, let all observe, that he constantly leaves out a part of my
words, and that of greatest weight, ( viz. A covenant acted between God and
themselves, though I add these words also.)

Secondly, I say, the Jews were formed a Church estate, and only by such a
covenant, and this will be evident by clearing those four particulars I
brought to prove that part of my argument.

The first is this, The entrance into it with Abraham, his family, and seed,
was by a covenant acted visibly, and outwardly: This was that which
distinguished them, and made them differ from other people, and whereby they
became the Lords, and the Lord theirs. This was a visible and outward covenant,
because the seal of it was outward and visible, and Ishmael and Esau were in
it, and reprobates as well as elect, and this covenant was made with Abraham
and his family, at least 14 years before they were circumcised, Genesis 17. that
being but the renewall of the covenant made before; only let this be noted,
that Abraham and his family were all this time in covenant, and a called
people, and so a church visibly formed: for no man can think that he and his
were all that time under that covenant without a form. A foederall form they
had certainly, (that is, a church form) and circumcision did not put the
foederall form upon them, but was added for confirmation on both parts: Yet his
answer is, that this proves not the form of the church to be such a covenant
as is by me expressed, acted by a company of believers to become one another.
For Abraham and his feed, reprobates and elect enter into it; now Abraham was
but one believer, Ishmael his seed, who entered in with him was a reprobate.

Reply. First, it was a covenant, acted between God and Abraham, and his
family, because they were signed and sealed to the covenant fourteen years
after.

Secondly, though reprobates and elect were in the covenant, yet that does not
disprove a covenant acted by believers, to be the form of a church, seeing many
reprobates do believe for a time. I do not mean they are known to be so, but
many prove so afterward, and himself does confess that they have not
infallible judgment, but may be, and many times are deceived; and if he
should not confess, yet the Scriptures clear it in Simon Magus case, Judas,
etc.

Thirdly, though Abraham was but one believer, and Ishmael a reprobate, yet
they might join together in covenant, because at first Ishmael was but an
Infant, and not presently known to be a reprobate, and more then Ishmael entered
into the first covenant, as Sarah his wife; and above three hundred males, who
therefore had the seal of the covenant set upon them, which could not have
been, if they had not been in covenant. Where I said, circumcision was not the
covenant, but the token of it, Genesis 17.11. He answers, it was not only a
token of it, but a part of the covenant it self, being that whereby the parties
were bound to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. and therefore God said, Let every
man child be circumcised; and he that was not, brake Gods covenant therefore
the covenant here spoken of, was such as was entered into by circumcision, but
not such as was acted by believers, and so to be the form of the church.

Reply. I deny circumcision to be a part of the covenant, as without which the
covenant is not entire and a real formal covenant, else Abraham, Sarah, and
his family, were not in the covenant all these fourteen years before
circumcision; he grants it is a sign of the covenant, and I will grant him,
that as the sign of the thing may be a part of the thing signified, so may
circumcision be a part of the covenant, and no otherwise; and as a seal is a
part of the thing sealed, and not else, and though it be called covenant
oftentimes, yet it is by impropriety of speech: As in the Lords Supper bread
and wine are called the body and blood of the Lord, and baptism regeneration,
because they signify and seal those things to faith which are signified by
them; where he says, the parties were bound thereby to keep the whole Law,
Gal. 5.3. it is a gross mistake, for it did seal to the righteousness of
faith, and not to the righteousness of the Law, nor bound them more, nor
otherwise to fulfill the Law, then baptism does us now. It Is true, the Apostle
says as much, but,

First, he speaks it in respect of the times then and after, not with respect
to times before.

Secondly, he speaks it in a certain sense, that is, when men make it an
ingredient unto justification; they that do so renounce justification by Christ
alone, and seek to be justified by their own righteousness, and so they are
bound to fulfill the whole Law, or never to be justified; how else could Paul
circumcise Timothy? Act. 16. Would he do that then which he condemns here? or
did it oblige others otherwise then it did Timothy or David, Isaiah, etc. It
was Gods ordinance and institution, it bound them to no such thing; but that
arose from their corrupt understanding of the things, turning the covenant of
grace into a covenant of works unto themselves; and the same may be said of
baptism now.

Let this therefore be attended, that God did never dispense a covenant of
works to the Jews, but it was a covenant of grace, and circumcision the sign
and seal of it, and not the covenant it self; and the covenant was acted
between God and Abraham, and his family and seed believers, they and theirs to
be the Lords, and to take God to be the God of them and theirs, and so to
become one another in the Lord, whereby they were made the people of God, and
a visible church truly constituted.

My second particular was this; the establishment of it in the plains of Moab,
but this establishment was by a covenant acted, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. and 29.10, 15.
In which God avouched them to be his people, and they avouched him to be their
God, and their young children also with them; nor could circumcision be the
covenant here, nor part of it, or ingredient into it, because they had not
circumcised in forty years, ever since they came out of Egypt; nor did they
circumcise any now, nor afterward, till Moses was dead, and Joshua had brought
them through Jordan, into the land, Joshua 5.

To this he answers diverse things.

First, that this was but a renewall of the covenant made with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob before, which they entered into with God in behalf of them and their
children, by being circumcised; and therefore, they being before did not now
begin to be a church, and therefore this does not prove, that a covenant acted
by a company of believers should be it that did constitute them a church now.

Reply. First, I grant this was but a renewall of the covenant made with
Abraham, etc. and upon his grant, infer that this was a spiritual covenant,
and not carnal; and the same with Abraham's and ours, which before he opposed
me in.

Secondly, he says they entered into the covenant by circumcision.

Reply. It is false, Abraham and his were not circumcised till fourteen years
after, and now few of them in years were circumcised before, nor any now.

Thirdly, they did not now begin to be a church, being one before. It Is true,
but the renewall of their church estate here (after many provocations of God,
and many declarations against them of Gods anger, whereby they might fear that
God would own them no more) being by a covenant acted formally and outwardly
between God and them (as is clearly expressed in the Text) does fully show,
that both now and then they were found Gods people as believers, acting a
covenant betwixt God and them, and one another; and seeing he grants this to
be the same with that of Abraham, etc. that was also thus acted is out of
question as this here; though therefore a covenant acted now did not constitute
them a church, yet a covenant is acted now, and is for the renewing of their
church estate; therefore much more was it so in the first constitution, every
thing decayed in the true form of it, being made the same it was by renewing
the same form, and otherwise cannot be the same: Nor did circumcision here
concur, nor any thing else, and yet perfectly stated a church, and so called,
Acts 7.1.

Secondly, he answers; whereas I say circumcision was no ingredient here,
having not circumcised, during the forty years, nor now. He conceives,
notwithstanding that circumcision was an ingredient in their parents, who
thereby entered into covenant for themselves and these their children, as the
covenant here expressed did comprehend the posterity to come.

Reply. First, howsoever they stood entire in the covenant and church estate
without personal circumcision; for except Moses, Caleb, and Joshua, there was
not a man of those 600000. that came out of Egypt alive, and all born in the
wilderness during the forty years were uncircumcised, and at the time of this
covenant making not one was circumcised, and so the church consisted of a
company of men personally uncircumcised, and performed services to God and each
other, which ought to have been done by circumcised persons only. In like
manner, men and women believing the Word of God, and doing as these did, may
become thereby a true visible church, though they were not baptized before, nor
are baptized at present, covenanting, and perform services to God and each
other.

Secondly, if they enjoyed their perfect church estate (being not personally
circumcised) by virtue of their parents circumcision before them, then
certainly, as much may be granted now; that by virtue of a parents believing,
and being baptized, their Infants may be counted, and really are, in the
covenant before they be baptized. If it be said, these were grown men, and
expressed their faith in God? I answer, All were not grown men, many were
Infants; yea, posterity, for, and with whom this covenant was made, were not
yet born; and for the rest, what faith the most of them had, may be seen, Deuteronomy.
29.4.

Thirdly, he answers, it was an extraordinary case, and they had miraculous
sacraments in stead of circumcision and the Passover, etc.

Reply. To all this I have spoken before; yet a word or two:

First, he calls them miraculous sacraments here and before, but he found
fault with me for calling them ordinances, (which is all one) sacraments they
were therefore, though extraordinary; nor did the sea continue with them all
this time, being a transient act, and many hundred thousands never past through
the sea, nor did the cloud baptize them all, till circumcision was administered
to them all, Josh. 5. The cloud ceased on the other side Jordan, and continued
not till they came into the land; therefore all the members were not personally
constituted members by that miraculous sacrament of baptism, which gives them
(he says) their imitation. Further, he says, that the acting of a covenant
by a company of believers, was not the same of that church then, but the
communication of Gods covenant by circumcision ordinarily with the whole nation
believers and Infidels, and whosoever of any nation that would be circumcised
and join with them to worship, much less has it any consequence to prove it
so now.

Reply. First, I have proved that a covenant acted by them as believers, did
make them to be the people of God, and circumcision was ordinarily added as a
sign and seal thereof: But in that he says, the whole Nation, believers and
infidels, it is an unchristian speech, nor ever will he prove, that any of the
nation were infidels, nor any of any nation joining with them, though many of
them did not believe as they should, yet believers they all were, and God
manifested it in accepting their sacrifices, pardoning their sins, and making
an atonement for them by the Priests administrations. It is therefore injurious
to the grace of God so to speak, and justly to be blamed.

Nextly, he comes to my third particular, by which I conceived the form of the
Jewish church state outwardly, was by a covenant acted by a company of
believers, etc. which is from the renewall of their estate after some
apostasy, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, 16. and 34. chap. 30, 31. Nehem. 9.3. and 10.1.
from whence I collected, that without which they could not stand in a right
church estate visibly, that was the form of that church; but without the
renewall of their covenant they could not stand in a right or pure church
estate, (but without renewall of circumcision they might.) Ergo. His answer
hereto is, First, he grants they made a covenant, and did well in so doing; but
secondly, that they could not be in a church estate without so doing, nor have
I proved it, and he will prove the contrary; first, because they were a church
before; secondly, this covenant was but an animating them to do that which
they were engaged to do before by their circumcision, Gal. 5.3. Ergo. As the
renewall of their covenant is not by me proved to be the form of the church
then, much less has it any consequence to prove that it is the form of a
church now.

Reply. He denies not what I affirmed, to wit, that they could not stand in a
right and pure church estate, without renewall of their covenant, he denies
that they could not stand in a church state without it; and great difference
there is, between a church and no church, a pure and impure church; he says
nothing therefore to what I said and proved: yet I am willing to hear what he
says.

First, they were a church before, and I say so too, but much degenerated, and
much transgressing the covenant.

Secondly, he says, they did no more then they were bound to do by their
circumcision.

Reply. I have answered that, Gal. 5. before, that it did not engage them to
keep the whole Law, it being the seal of the righteousness of Faith, nor did
the seal bind them to any thing but as in relation to the covenant, which
only bound them. Hence Levit. 26. where God threatened to send a sword to
avenge thequarrell of his covenant, he did not plead with them about
circumcision, but for not believing (circumcision of the heart, as Jerem. 9.
last) and testifying their faith by obedience, and so they did now mend this by
attending to the covenant, and thereby setting themselves visibly in a right
church state again, which therefore proves that the form of the church was a
visible covenant: for that which makes a church impure to be pure, according to
the right constitution, that is it which gives it the constitution; but the
renewall of the covenant makes an impure church pure, according to the right
constitution. Ergo, the covenant gives it a constitution.

Again, if failing in the covenant causes a true church to be otherwise then
according to constitution, then the covenant gives her her constitution: But
the first is true. Ergo the latter; and circumcision the seal, remains the same
without any alteration. As in men's covenants the seal annexed remains the
same, though the covenant to which it is adjoined, may in many things be
violated.

My fourth and last particular to prove a covenant acted by them as believers,
was the form of the Jewish church, was this; That which being taken away, made
that church cease to be a church, that was the form of that church: But the
dissolving of their covenant made that church cease to be a church. Ergo. The
first Proposition he meddles not with, and I raise it on this ground, That
nothing can cease to be that has a being, but by annihilating the matter and
form of its being; nor can any thing cease to be that it is, but by taking away
that form of it, whereby it is such a thing rather then another. And therefore
if any thing cease to be that it was, it must be by taking away the form of it.

The second Proposition that the dissolving of their covenant, made that church
cease to be a church, which I cleared from Zach. 11.10, 14. take a view and you
may see it clearly, the chapter declares the rejection of the Jews from being
a church (no man can deny it,) and that at Christ's time, and for rejecting of
him, and upon their rejection, they ceased to be a visible church, and Gods
people, as they had been.

First, therefore, it is to be observed how God will effect this, that they
shall be no church, nor his people, and that is by breaking his covenant with
them, verse. 10. That I may break my covenant which I had made with this people.

Secondly, this covenant had two branches, one, the staff of Beauty, and this
is the covenant between God and them mutually, called Beauty, because God
making a covenant with them, did adorn them with all excellency and
comeliness, whereby they became beautiful above other people, Ezekiel. 16.8,
etc. yea in the eyes of the Heathen, v. 14. which could not be circumcision,
nor any invisible covenant, but outward and visible. The other branch of the
covenant is called Bonds, and that is the covenant on their parts one with
another, whereby they joined together in a brotherhood to worship God; called
Bonds, because they were thereby knit and bound together, to be a compact body
and brotherhood Ecclesiastical.

Thirdly, that God by breaking these two staves, did break his covenant with
them, and thereby they ceased to be his visible people, and a brotherhood
amongst themselves: all these are evidently foretold in the Text, and
accomplished after our Savior his death, when they were wholly rejected of
God, and never since enjoyed that estate. From whence it follows plainly,
that their constitution in that Church estate, was by that covenant, which
being disanulled, their Church estate, and constitution is altogether
annihilated.

Now let us see what he answers to this reason: First, he says, the covenant
of Gods grace is eternal; the Kingdom, or Church state that comes by it,
cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28. baptism the fruit of it, a church constituted by
it, remains eternally, John 11.26. He that believes in Christ, shall never die.

Reply. First, I grant that the covenant of grace is eternal, and that as well
in the time before Christ, as since; but I speak of it as it is made with men,
in which respect though it be eternal in it self, yet it is not eternal to
all that it is made with, but may and does cease to this or that man, to this
or that Church.

Secondly, the Kingdom shaken, and that cannot be shaken, is not the covenant
of grace applied to the Jews or Gentiles, but the manner of administration of
one and the same covenant in it self, but from the diverse administration of
it, one way to them, the old Testament, another way to us, now the new
Testament; the former is shaken and removed, and changed into this, that cannot
be shaken or changed, but shall remain till Christ's coming, 1 Cor. 15. yet this
or that church may be shaken out of it, and many have been, and that this
shaking is meant of the former manner of administration only, is evident by the
Scripture it self, and not of the covenant, else the covenant with them was not
the eternal covenant of grace, but a covenant of another nature; this
particular church therefore may be disanulled, yet the covenant remains
eternal and unshaken. Again, the kingdom of Heaven is taken two ways in
Scripture:

First, as before, for the manner of administration of the covenant, and so it
may be, and has been shaken, and of this, Heb. 12.

Secondly, for the church estate, and the covenant of grace by laying hold
whereon a people became a church. This can never be shaken so, as that there
should not be a visible church visibly in covenant with God; and of this,
Matthew. 21.43. which may be taken from one company and given to another: (as
from the Jews to the Gentiles) but never cease to be with one people or other,
hells gate being not able to prevail against it, Matthew. 16.

Thirdly, baptism, the fruit of it, or church estate, by partaking thereof
(not by baptism, but by the covenant) is eternal to all the elect; and so he
that believes in Christ shall never die, but these are not eternal to any
else at all (for reprobate members dying, remain not members, etc.) so that
here is nothing in this answer that proves the Jews were not a church estate
by an acted covenant.

Secondly, he answers, the covenant is a ground of a churches being a visible
church, that the visible participation in the covenant, is by some visible
thing, which was circumcision then, is baptism now; other visible
participations there was not, nor is any; therefore by circumcision then and
baptism now, they are a visible church. And as the taking away of the covenant
causes the church to cease; so it causes their circumcision and baptism to
cease also, whereby they had visible participation in the covenant and church.

Reply. First he says, a covenant is the ground of a visible, (for the
question, says he, speaks of a visible church) and so say I, and a visible
ground of any man's being circumcised then, or baptized now; if it be a ground
of a visible church, then a church cannot be a church without it, and so
constituted a visible church by it.

Secondly, there must be some visible thing whereby a man may have visible
participation in the covenant, I grant it; but, says he, there is no other
visible thing whereby any are partakers of the covenant, but circumcision then,
and baptism now; I deny it, and affirm there is some visible thing preceding
circumcision, then baptism now: For when they baptize a man, do they baptize
him as out of covenant or in it? If in covenant, then it is as he is invisibly
in it, or visibly, not invisibly, that they cannot know; therefore visibly by
something they can discern and know, and upon that baptize him, and that is the
profession of his faith in the covenant, which as it must go before baptism,
so it makes him partaker visibly of the covenant before he be baptized or
circumcised; therefore circumcision then, baptism now is not the only visible
participation in the covenant, nor indeed any participation at all; but a
visible sign and seal of his visible participation: and this appears further
from the description of a Sacrament, an outward and visible sign of an inward
and spiritual grace which must be there, or the outward is not to be applied;
but it cannot be concluded to be there, but by some outward evidence, therefore
something visible, and thereby visible participation in the covenant must go
before visible baptism: As then the covenant must be taken away before the
church cease to be a church, and not circumcision nor baptism, which cannot
cease until the church cease (all which himself grants) so as long as any
continue visible profession of faith, so long the covenant continues and
visible profession must cease before the covenant cease in respect of men;
Ergo, by visible profession of faith in the covenant is obtained and declared
visible participation in the covenant, and so is the church estate constituted
thereby.

Further, he says, the covenant before Christ, did ceremonially lead to
Christ, and in that respect is dissolved, and circumcision by which they had
participation in that covenant is dissolved; and therefore the visible church
ceased, as was prophesied, Zach. 11. and accomplished at the death of Christ,
the partition wall being broken down, Ephesians. 2.13, etc. the covenant since
Christ ratified by the death of the testator, cannot be dissolved, (as I affirm
in my third Proposition and fourth poriod,) and so baptism by which they have
true visible being in the covenant cannot be removed, nor the visible
church state.

Reply. Here is nothing said that has not been said before, again and again,
and so answered; yet in a word:

First, he confounds covenant and testament, there is but one covenant, but
yet two Testaments, and the covenant was dispensed to Abraham, before there was
any testament instituted, and the Scriptures that speak of abolishing the old,
and establishing the new, are not to be understood of two covenants, (there
being but one) but of two Testaments, as I showed in my third Proposition, and
fourth period; and he much mistakes himself, abuses his Reader, and cannot but
know that he speaks not truly, in saying I affirmed the new covenant cannot be
removed, when as I said, the new Testament cannot be removed.

Secondly, the covenant before Christ did not ceremonially lead to Christ; for
the covenant always (from Adam) held forth Christ, the same yesterday, to day
and for ever; but the old Testament before Christ, did ceremonially lead to
Christ, and was abolished at Christ's coming, that the new confirmed by his
blood might be established.

Thirdly, the covenant and visible church state thereby did not cease at
Christ's coming in it self, but was taken away from the Jews, and given to the
Gentiles, and that not because the covenant and church estate typified Christ,
but because they believed not; for had they believed, they should have enjoyed
the covenant and churchstate still (though the old Testament should have
ceased, and the new be put in the room) and now it shall be taken from such
Gentiles so often as any of them cease to believe, as is already fallen out to
many churches. Yet without any prejudice to the covenant of God or visible
church estate which ever remain.

Last of all, I have showed before, that circumcision did not give them a
visible being in that covenant and church estate; nor baptism us, but outward
profession of subjection to the covenant gave them, and gives us a being in the
covenant and visible church state, circumcision then, and baptism now being
but signs and seals of it.

Further, against his conclusion, that the true visible church, in respect of
the ground of it, cannot be removed or dissolved, he puts two exceptions,
and seeks to clear it from them.

The first is this: The true Church may possibly die, and none survive them in
that estate; Ergo, the true Church may cease to be: His answer to this is, the
true Chrch cease to be, but only to our outward view, for to our faith it is
no more ceased then their relation to the covenant cease, which does not
cease to the faithful when they die, but it remains as the covenant it self,
which is as firm as God that made it.

Secondly, as their outward view to the church cease so their relation to the
church by baptism cease, by which they had visible participation with the
body of Christ, therefore the exception hinders not, but that the true visible
Church remains undissolved.

Reply. Whether this were mine or no, I cannot say, as also many other things,
the which he puts forth in my name; a word or two:

First, he changes the State of the Question, speaking of a visible state,
whereas he speaks of an invisible state, and of the elect only, whereas
himself will confess, that many may be in a visible, with whom the covenant
cease, and church estate when they die, if it cease not before.

Secondly, this or that true visible church may die, and none succeed them, and
then the visible church cease for ever, the outward covenant also, and
baptism the seal of it cease, and that not only to the outward view, but to
our faith also: For I suppose none have so much faith, as to believe that a
company of dead men, and ceasing to be, are a visible church in covenant, and
baptized; that they were such may be believed, but that they are such, and hold
their relation still, with the visible church by their baptism, as members
thereof, is but his dream, as any that are dead and saved may be accounted a
part of a church, it is of the church predestinate from all ages, from the
beginning to the end; a part whereof are in heaven triumphant, and a part on
earth militant; and otherwise to make them in heaven a part of any church, or
of this or that visible church, is but a devised thing: Nor does it follow,
that this or that visible church ceasing, and none surviving; Ergo, the visible
Church of Christ cease; so this his exception might have been spared: Nor
does his answer clear his Proposition from it, but it is wholly overthrown
thereby.

A second exception is this; persons may seem to be true members of a visible
church, and yet not be so, and may show themselves not to be afterward, and so
the church may cease.

He answers, that when such do manifest themselves what they are, they
declare thereby, that they never were in covenant, nor church at all, nor
baptized: So the church thereby cease not to be by being dissolved; but they
are discovered never to have been in that covenant nor church, and so never
were baptized, 1 John 2.19.

Reply. This exception savoureth of himself, but briefly, where hypocrites
discover themselves to be such, they thereby declare they never were of the
number of Gods elect, and so not in the covenanted visible church, and baptized
as the elect of God; but that they were not truly members of that visible
church to which they belonged, in the covenant, and truly baptized is not true,
but cross to Scriptures affirming such to be branches in the Vine, Joh. 15.
(or else now cut off) and members of the church, as in the Epistles to the
churches in Asia, etc. And if such an hypocrite, after his discovery should
repent, and be truly converted, then he must be joined to the church, not by
restoring, but by a new covenant, and be new baptized, having no covenant,
baptism, or membership before; for that place, 1 John 2.19. it does not say
they went out from us, because they were not with us, (for how could they have
gone out from them if not with them, and really with them, or else they
seemingly went out from them) but because they were not of us, that they might
be made manifest that they were not of us, the Text therefore does not deny
them to be truly members with them visibly, but they were not true members of
them; so that all he has said, does not wave the exception: From all which it
does appear, that baptism (even of God himself) cannot be the form of a
church, but only it is a seal of the covenant by which the church is
constituted: it is constituted by participation, and visibly by visible
participation, and that is only by visible and outward acting to subjection in
the covenant: the continuance also in a church is by the continuance of the
manifestation of the same participation possessed, their visilbe profession of
subjection to the covenant; therefore baptism of believers is not the
constitution of church visible, but a covenant acted, as from all these four
particulars I argued, gathered up into this sum: If a covenant acted by
believers was the form of the visible church before Christ, then it is the form
of visible churches since Christ; but the first is true, (as will appear by
all these four particulars) therefore also the latter.

This he answers by denying both Antecedent and Consequent, his Reason
against the Antecedent is, because if God himself was not the form of the
church of the old Testament, much less can it be said that an outward covenant
acted by the people of Israel was the form of the church, as is manifested by
what is above said; his Reason of denying the Consequent is least of all, nor
does it prove such a thing to form the churches now.

Reply. This Reason of denying the Antecedent is not reasonable; for what was
the covenant of God himself, but an outward covenant acted between God and the
people of Israel? I know no other covenant of God, but that which he made with
Abraham between Abraham and his seed, and himself, which was also continued to
his posterity; and that covenant was acted between God and them, and one with
another (and so the form of that Church) is evident from the former four
particulars considered together, notwithstanding all that he has said to the
contrary.

The covenant God made with Abraham his family and seed, was an outward acted
covenant, the renewall of which by them in the plains of Moab, was such; so was
that in Asa's, Josiah's, Nehemiah's days, all these were outward and visible
covenants, acted outwardly. Of this covenant under which the Jews stood, does
Zacharias speak, Zach. 11.10.14.

This Zachary shows how it was in two branches, the staff of Beauty acted
betwixt God and them, and the staff of Bonds acted between themselves to be a
brotherhood, by which title a Christian Church is frequently styled in the new
Testament: by all which it appears, that it was such a covenant spoken off, by
which they were Gods people and church, and by the dissolution whereof, they
were no Church. Besides, there was a visible Church from Adams restitution till
Abraham's time, by their profession of faith in Gods righteousness, and neither
circumcision nor baptism, yet a true constituted visible Church, out of which
Cain was ejected and cast out. The consequent from hence is this, That a
covenant outwardly acted by believers, with God and one another, is the form of
the visible Churches in the new Testament, because it was the form of the
Church before Christ, and there can be but one form of one and the same thing:
as a man grown, and a child, is but the same man, and has the same form that
makes him a man now when he is grown, that he had when he was a child. Even so
the church before Christ is compared to a child under age, and churches since
Christ, to grown men, Gal. 4.1, etc. Further, to prove that we have the same
Church Estate (not in number but in kind,) I alleged, Matthew. 21.43. where it
is said, The Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from them, and given to another
Nation, that Church estate was not dissolved, but taken away from them ( Heb.
12. speaks not of the covenant as Church estate, but of the manner of
administration, as I have showed before, a Kingdom is not to be taken there in
the sense that it is here in Matthew) it ceased to them, but was not dissolved
in it self, nor in respect of others to whom it was given, not another Kingdom
and Church estate given to others diverse from that, but the very same.

So Matthew. 22.1, etc. the marriage Supper in one and the same continued all the
time of that church estate before Christ, and in these churches since Christ.

They were invited and called from time to time, but they would not come, at
last they were therefore destroyed, and the Gentiles called in their stead:
therefore that then and this now was but one covenant, and the same church
estate, the form of it then and now the same, which then was an outward and
visible covenant, acted between God and the people mutually; and therefore this
same is the form of churches now.

Having passed through the Argument which I gathered out of the old Testament,
I next added some others, and first from Mat. 18.20. where the word used in the
Greek, is commonly used for church assembling, or Synagoguising taken from the
Jews, whose assemblies, and places of assembling, were called Synagogues, John
20: 10. Acts 4.21. and 11.26. and 13.44. and 14.27. and 20.7. 1 Cor. 5.4. and
11.18, etc. and other places many, though some by him set down, are misquoted.
His answer hereto was this, that the assembling of persons merely in the
Scripture, was not the cause of that denomination, nor will any Scripture
prove, that that name Church is given to a company of unbaptized persons, but
the assembling of a company of persons baptized in Christ's name, is the reason
why they are denominated a true visible Church.

Rep. I grant, that according to the intent of the question, that the
assembling of a company of men unbaptized, is not the occasion why they are
denominated a church (yet the word (...) is generally applied to a company of
unbaptized persons, as Act. 19.31.39.41. thrice together, but that a church so
meeting, is of baptized persons; yet the reason why a company of baptized
persons meeting together, is called a Church, is truly and only because they
meet together, and that not accidentally (for so many thousands meet together
in one place) because they constantly meet together in one place by agreement
to perform the solemn duties which they are bound to perform to God and each
other. Such a meeting together is that which only gives them the denomination
of a Church, nor is baptism any reason of their meeting together: for then all
baptized persons must meet together in one place; nor could this or that
company be called a church for that reason, much less several companies
churches, if there were nothing else added, Matthew. 18.19. Whatsoever two of you
shall agree together in: where the word agree is properly by a consent
manifested by concurring voices, and paction so used, Matthew. 20.2.13. To say no
more to this (though I might say much more,) because I am not privy to my
self that it was used by me, I come to the next reason, which was, That
whatsoever makes a man a member of a church, or no member; that makes a
company of men to be a church or no church (there is the same reason of the
whole, that there is of every part;) but the making or unmaking, or restoring a
man to be a member, is by a covenant acted, Esaias 56.4, 6. Ergo, that is the
form of the church.

His answer grants, that the covenant of God is the ground upon which the
church and every member thereof is stated; but he denies that a covenant acted
to become one another, do form the church or member either; nor does Esa.
56.4, 5. prove any such thing, but only that the Eunuch or stranger that took
hold of Gods covenant, that is, were circumcised, and performed the duties,
which they were thereby bound to perform, Gal. 5.3. should have a place in his
house, not by acting a covenant, and neglecting circumcision.

Reply. What he says here, has been said before and answered, and I am
confident, that he cannot make good what he grants, that a Church is grounded
upon Gods covenant, and thereby stated; but in this sense I speak of a covenant
acted by believers between God and them (which he always leaves out) and
between themselves; and therefore a covenant acted does form the church or
membership thereof, Esaias 56. does prove it sufficiently, where the Lord says,
If an Eunuch or stranger shall take hold of, and embrace my covenant, that is,
shall submit themselves to enter into covenant with me, taking me to be their
God, and becoming one of my people, by joining themselves to me and them
thereby, and receive circumcision as a seal thereof, and do my works, shall
have a place in my house; whereas he expounds the covenant to be
circumcision, he does but run in a common mistake, it being but a sign and
seal of the covenant, and cannot be the covenant it self, no more then a
signeor seal of a thing can be the thing it self that it signifies and
seals: and is not only an error in religion, but against manifest reason
too. But of this often before, though therefore they were to be circumcised,
yet that was the first thing before which there was nothing acted visibly, and
that they did not first make some outward profession and expression of being
one with them, and having their God to be theirs, will never be proved by him;
and if he will not yield the contrary by what is and has been said, let him
be content that other men be of another judgment, and have his leave to be
quiet, or else convince me of his calling he has to deal in such matters as
he does, with arrogance enough. He adds, not by acting a covenant, neglecting
circumcision. I grant it, and so also, not by acting a covenant, or
circumcision, and neglecting sacrifices, etc. but acting a covenant does form
the church, and gives them right to circumcision, and the rest, which must be
added, or else they will be found despisers of Gods covenant, which they had
made, whereby they were bound to observe circumcision, and all other
appointments of God before they were circumcised, as is manifest in all them
that lived before Abraham's days, and in Abraham's days, by Gods expressing
himself to Abraham, Genesis 12, 13.15. chapters, which was before he was
circumcised. As for that, Gal. 5.3. it has been fully answered before, and
therefore I omit it.

My next reason was taken from the comparison of a church with a Candlestick,
Rev. 1.12.20. such as is the form of a candlestick, such by proportion is the
form of a church (as the matter signifies the matter of a church
proportionally;) but the form of the candlestick is the joining together of the
shaft and branches, signifying the uniting together of many members and Christ,
which cannot be but by agreement, and covenant. Ergo, a covenant acted is the
form of a church.

His answer first grants the comparison, and proportion also. But secondly,
denies that a covenant acted by believers, or agreement mutually, is necessary
to form the church to be one body, and concludes, that persons may be united to
Christ by faith and baptism, and so stated in the covenant of grace, and
members of the visible church, proportionally, as the form of the candlestick
is the joining together of the shaft and branches.

Reply. First, where he denies mutual agreement, or a covenant acted, is the
form of the church, he does it without any reason given, which is an easy
way of confuting; for where he says it may be by faith and baptism, he should
prove it is, and must be, or else he shows himself to hear himself speak.

Secondly, in saying faith in Christ, and baptism may unite them to Christ,
and so state them in the covenant of grace. I affirm faith alone does it: But
it is faith professed, that may make a man capable of baptism, in those that
they themselves will admit members; and therefore it must be faith professed
that unites a man to Christ visibly, and so he is a member of Christ visibly
before baptism comes; nor could be baptized without that visible union, and
therefore he is not made a visible member of Christ by baptism, but is so
before.

Thirdly, though by faith professed a man is visibly united to Christ, and may
be so acknowledged; yet this does not unite him or make him a member of this or
that particular church, but there must be something whereby he may be united to
this or that church, and make him a member thereof, rather then of another;
baptism does not so make him, for then all baptized should be of one and the
same church, and not of Ephesus more then of Smyrna; nor can they be any other
things then mutual agreement or covenant acted, a^ we know it to be certain in
all consociations, a mutual covenant is the bond and form of them, as in
marriage, commonwealths, 2. Rev. 17.21. and so of other societies and bodies
incorporate: so also in this mystical body of Christ, a church visible being
an Ecclesiastical body politic, consisting of many members consociated, it
must needs be by covenant acted mutually; and by this comparison of marrying,
the Apostle sets forth the relation of Christ and the Church, the bond tying
the members each to other, that uniteth them all to the head, which is a
marriage covenant, Ephesians. 5. baptism being but the seal of it: And thus we
are come to the last Argument.

If the removing of the candlestick, and so unchurching of a church be by
dissolving the covenant and their fellowship, (as to them by dissipation, Zach.
11.) then a covenant acted is the form of a visible church: But the removing of
the candlestick is the dissolving the covenant and their fellowship thereby (as
to them by dissipation:) Ergo, a covenant acted is the form of it.

To the second Proposition he answers two things:

First, because the covenant in the new Testament established in Christ's blood
is everlasting, and cannot be shaken and dissolved, and differ from the
covenant which was before Christ, which was shaken, dissolved and taken away,
therefore their kingdom of Heaven was shaken, and church estate was taken
away; but the kingdom and church state now cannot be taken away, Heb. 12.27.
Matthew. 21.43.

Reply. Here is nothing which is not said before and answered; yet observe that
he declines the true question, which is of a visible church, and flies to the
invisible state; for to visible churches there is an end many times of their
visible state, and yet the covenant of God remains eternal to all the elect of
God, and never is taken away from them; nor indeed is the visible kingdom of
Christ altogether taken away, but it has, and does remain somewhere upon
earth, though many particular churches are often ruinated and destroyed. Again,
he speaks to the state before Christ, and the difference of this since Christ;
whereas the Proposition speaks of this since Christ only: and the argument is
taken from the state of churches since Christ, as the expressions fully
declare, Rev. 2. and 3. where churches compared to candlesticks are threatened
dissolution for their faults, Ephesus, Rev. 2.5. I will remove thy candlestick,
that is, I will make thee no church: Rev. 3.16. I will spue thee out of my
mouth; noting an utter undoing of them: and an allusion was made to Zach. 11.
to intimate the way how God would unchurch them, not by taking away their
baptism, but by destroying them, and dissipating their fellowship in the
covenant; nor was that of Zachary any part of the argument that he could have,
nor advantage from that to fetch in the state of the old Testament in his
answer: And whereas I say the destruction of the church of Ephesus or Laodicea,
was not by taking away their baptism from them; so that who so remains alive
of them at the time of dissipation, should not be accounted baptized persons
(having received baptism, though it will do them no good in the state they are
in) for let me put this case, a whole church is dissipated and unchurched, yet
one or two of them that live still after a few days, are truly converted from
their hypocrifie and apostasy, justifying the Lord, and seeking, the one to
join to Philadelphia, the other to Smyrna, and each give such satisfaction to
the church of their faith, and repentance, as they dare not deny the right hand
of fellowship: Shall these two be now anew baptized, having received true
baptism before, whilst they were members of Ephesus before she was
destroyed? If any shall say as he did before in his answer to the first Reason
against baptism, being the form of the church, that all before being but
seeming, was nothing indeed; and so account he was not baptized at all, and
never had any capacity of being baptized truly till now: Besides, what has
been replied there, I add, that the same state must be then of a man that is a
member, but an hypocrite in the church unknown so to be, who in continuance of
time by Gods Spirit in the Word, is convinced of his unsound estate; repents of
it, manifests this to the church, and so cleers it, that the church is
satisfied, that she was before mistaken, and he was but seemingly a believer,
and so had but a seeming membership and baptism; I say likewise, that this man
also must be baptized, if he were not before truly baptized: And how fearful a
thing is it thus to dally in Gods matters, and to make Gods ordinance descend
upon our apprehension, to be or not to be: humanus intellectus non est mensura
institutionum Dei, the ordinance administered to such a man before, was Gods
ordinance, and true baptism, but he did not receive it savingly, which now
upon this work of grace he does; and baptism in it self applied unto him is
not truer baptism now then it was before, it proves only unto him more
profitable: But I go on further, where he says the covenant before Christ
might be, and was dissolved, shaken, and removed; this covenant since Christ
cannot be dissolved, shaken, or removed. All may easily see, that either
wilfully or ignorantly he confounds covenant and testament, which are diverse
things: for the kingdom before Christ spoken of, Heb. 12. is not the covenant,
but manner of administration; that before Christ the old Testament, to be
shaken and removed; this since Christ the new Testament established, and never
to be shaken, nor removed; and this kingdom shaken, was not taken away from
the Jews and given to the Gentiles, but utterly abolished, and a new kingdom
given and set up that shall not be abolished, nor end, till Christ shall give
it up to the Father, 1 Cor. 15. Last of all, the covenant before Christ was the
eternal covenant of God and remains the same for ever, and cannot be shaken;
this covenant God made with Abraham continued to the Jews till Christ's time,
and this also is called the kingdom of God, Matthew. 27.34. which cannot be
altered, nor was it disanulled nor abolished then, but only taken away from the
Jews (whereas kingdom in the other sense was utterly abolished) and given to
the Gentiles, and a new or another, but the same; and therefore, though the
Jewish people were cut off, yet the covenant and church state remained and was
given to the Gentiles, yet so as that many of the Gentile churches have been
cut off, and may be, and shall be cut off for the same cause that the Jews
were cut off, (viz.) if they continue not in faith, Romans 11.

His second answer is this, the removing of the candlesticks, and unchurching
of them is only by discovery or manifestation of a people to be void of any
participation in the covenant, which formerly they professed, were esteemed,
and had a name to have, 1 John 2.19. Rev. 3.1. and not dissolving or taking
away of covenant which once they had and enjoyed; much less is it a dissolving
of an outward covenant acted by believers; such a covenant is willworship, and
the churches constituted thereby merely Antichristian; the dissolving of such a
covenant cannot be the unchurching of any true churches; Jesus Christ having no
true visible church so constituted.

Reply. All has been said and answered before that here he speaks; yet a word
here: If the removing of the candlestick, and unchurching of such be nothing
but only a discovery that they were in no covenant before, then the Jews
before Christ were in no covenant, but only seemed to be so, etc. Ephesus and
the rest were in no covenant, but had a name only to be in it, who are long ago
rejected; nor were the Saints in Rome graffed branches into the true Olive, but
only were esteemed so to be; and the cutting, breaking off, dissolving of all
those and the like, is but a declaration, and manifest discovery that they were
never in covenant; and what great punishment is it for these and the like, to
have that taken away from them which they never had? But I doubt not, but that
all that have any judgment to discern of things aright, will easily see, as
the unsoundnesse, so the unreasonablenesse of what he faith.

Secondly, the places alleged by him are not to his purpose; the first not
speaking of their membership and state in the covenant which they had and
departed from, but of the soundness of their state therein, and of saving
grace from the Father, election in Christ, which they had not, and hereby
manifested that they had not, in that they departed from the fellowship of
faith. The other place, Rev. 3. speaks not of them as having a name to be a
church, for that they were, and Christ so called them, and would not have so
acknowledged them, had they not so been; but it speaks of the condition they
were in in this church estate, as having a name to be alive in faith and
holiness, but indeed were in this respect dead, and yet not quite dead, but
almost; and therefore are bidden to strengthen the things that are ready to
die: these places therefore do not at all speak of their being in covenant, or
church estate, but only of the unsoundnesse of their estate in faith and
godliness.

Thirdly, whereas he opposes a covenant, and a covenant acted by believers, as
diverse things, or contrary, if he understood himself, he should have done
well to express himself what he meant by them both, that others might
understand him: For can there be a covenant, and not outwardly acted? Is not a
covenant between two parties? Or is it a covenant unless all parties agree?
there is no covenant of God, but it is outwardly manifested to men, and by
visible means made known to such as he would have to be in it; nor is that a
covenant made with them, but as they outwardly receive it, and by some visible
act answer the Lord therein, and so make themselves partakers thereof, and
visibly by visible participation, which cannot be but by acting or passing
consent to the covenant, whereby God and they become one another, and they
visibly Gods people, which being once done, they remain a church and Gods
people as long as this state continues, and when it cease, then they cease to
be Gods people, forsaking each other again mutually, which also is further
evident, in that God uses this expression to note out his dissolution, giving
them a bill of divorcement, and so dissolving that marriage covenant, which
they were joined together in, Jerem. 13. I cannot but therefore conclude, that
he does speak unchristianly, in saying an outward covenant acted by a company
of believers, is will worship, and churches so constituted are Antichristian;
or the dissolving of such a covenant cannot be the unchurching of any true
churches, because Jesus Christ has no other true visible churches, but those
only that are so constituted.

A Discourse of the Verity and Validity of Infants Baptism in it self
considered: As also it has been administered in the Church of ENGLAND.
WHEREIN, Besides the Arguments duly propounded, and clearly explained for the
proof thereof, occasionally: The calling of the Ministers in England, and here
administering that ordinance; Likewise the manner of administering it by
sprinkling and not dipping, is handled and justified.
AS it has ever been the fruit of Satan's malice to pervert the right ways of
the Lord, and if not utterly to abolish, yet greatly to corrupt the worship and
ordinances of God: So there have never wanted men of evil minds, who give
themselves to promote his sinful designs. A proof whereof beyond exception,
is, that man of Sin, with all that Apostasy, wherein the prevailing efficacy
of Satan is not so much to be wondered at, as the severe judgment of God is to
be adored, who thereby punishes the wanton spirits of men, giving them up to
make and believe lies, because they receive not the truth in the love of it.
And no less is his mercy to be admired to these latter times, in dispensing
from heaven such beams of light and grace, as he has thereby enlightened the
horrid darkness which overspreads the world, and put many upon reformation of
what they saw amiss; yet here again, Satan envying our good, by his wiles and
subtlety has prevailed, that some have not gone so far as the light
revealed called for at their hands. And some making more haste then good speed,
have gone beyond the truth in many things, so that there is scarce any truth of
God that the adversary attempts not to vilify, nor any ordinance which suffers
not prejudice by some or other. To reckon particulars would be over tedious,
my intentions being bounded in respect of that ordinance of Baptism, then
which there is scarce any part of Christianity more sophisticated and mangled.
It deeply therefore concerns all that love the common truth, or have a care
of their own salvation, to try all things, and to hold fast that which is good:
To lay a sure foundation, and be understandingly principled in these necessary
matters, that they may be able to stand fast; and having done all, to obtain
the happy issue of all, Eternal life.

In Baptism it self I know nothing respecting the essence or rites belonging
to the essence which is not contradicted by some or other. I shall now speak of
the persons baptizing, and to be baptized. And to this purpose, first,
concerning the persons baptizing. This is a question, To whom the right and
power to administer does belong: Whether the power and authority to baptize be
not common and promiscuous, that any one may not baptize, or be proper only
to such as be called to labor in word and doctrine: And that it is unlawful
to any else to administer it. Here men be distracted into parts. First, some
maintain, that in case of necessity, not only an Officer, though but a
Deacon; but he that is no Officer, if baptized; yea, though unbaptized, if they
can speak the words, and know the rites and order: And not only a man, but a
woman also may baptize, if a man cannot be procured.

To prove these conclusions, many Arguments are pressed. First, Zippora's
example. Secondly the 28. of Matthew, Go, teach all Nations, etc. Though the
words be spoken to the Apostles, and their Successors, yet to teach is lawful
to all; yea, in case of necessity, all are bound to teach, as Aquila and
Priscilla. So also, though to baptize belong chiefly to Ministers, yet in case
of necessity, others, no Ministers, may baptize; yea, and with greater reason,
because it belonged more to the Apostles to preach, then to baptize, 1 Cor.
1.17. Thirdly, Acts 8. Philip baptized the Eunuch, chap. 9. Ananias baptized
Paul, neither of them were Apostles, or Pastors.

There being yet no Pastor ordained besides the Apostles: So Acts 10. Peter
commanded them to be baptized of some brethren that went with him, which were
neither Apostles nor Deacons.

Finally, Acts 2. three thousand were baptized on the day of Pentecost. This
could not fitly be done by the Apostles alone, therefore some body else must
help them, and these must needs be Laici, private men.

Fourthly, from congruence, because Baptism is of chiefest necessity in
respect of all men, therefore it was expedient that the administration of it
should be committed to all, especially in case of necessity. The matter also is
common, and easy to be had every where, the administration consists in a most
simple action and words: Therefore it was convenient that the Minister of it
should be very common, and to be granted to every one.

Fifthly, from humane testimony, Tertull. de Baptismo, Laicis jus est
baptizandi, quod enim ex aequo accipitur, ex aequo datur: Alexander confirming
and ratifying the act of Athanasius, a Laick, and a boy, administering baptism
to boys in sport. The Nicene Council ratified the baptism of heretics, but
they could have no true Office. Concilium Elivertin.

To answer these Arguments briefly: First, in general; not one of these
places, or considerations will prove an unbaptized person may baptize; because
all their instances are of persons circumcised, or baptized, or in church
estate, and therefore argue not that part of the resolution of the question
given.

In particular to each: First, to the instance of Zippora, it was not limited
to any by any word of God to circumcise: there were none appointed to perform
this ordinance, as in other cases afterward; and in this, from the first
institution: and therefore it might be lawful for her or any other to do it,
but it follows not that it may be so in this.

Secondly, it was a singular and extraordinary practice, and therefore the
consequence is not sound: for not one instance more can be given, and it was
extraordinary, in extreme case of necessity; whereas there is not the like case
fallen out. For it was not to prevent the child's dying uncircumcised, but to
prevent the dying of her husband, who had neglected the command, and was in
danger of death, by Gods hand.

Thirdly, the case of necessity pleaded for it nothing so: for where does the
Lord say, that an unbaptized person shall be cut off from his people? And
there is as great necessity to eat the Lords Supper, John 6. as some expound
it, yet children have not that.

Last of all, Zippora did it in presence of her husband, therefore it will as
well prove that a woman may baptize praesente Presbytero.

To the second, from Matthew. 28. This may as well prove, that they may do any
thing else as well as baptize, but that will not be granted; therefore this
should not be pleaded for. Secondly, therebe two kinds of teaching, one by
office, as an Elder; the other without office and authority, as any private
person, yea women, Titus 2. Matthew speaks of the first only, therefore it
will not follow, because Ministers are put into an office to teach and baptize,
therefore every one that may teach, may baptize.

To the third, Philip was not Laicus, therefore it will not prove that any no
officer may baptize. Secondly, he was an Evangelist, Acts 21. it will not prove
therefore that a Deacon may. Thirdly, he had an immediate calling, and
therefore was extraordinary; Ananias also had the same, the consequence fails
therefore. Again, Ananias was the Pastor of that Church at Damascus, who
certainly were not here all this time without an officer. Peter commanded they
should be baptized: but it follows not that he might not baptize them
himself. Again, who can say, there were no officers besides him? When was Paul
without an officer in company?

To the fourth, from convenience; the reason will prove it to be convenient at
all times, as well as in case of necessity, and therefore why should it be
limited to any case? yea, and for any person, and as well in presence of an
officer, as absent, and therefore should not be limited.

Last of all, there is no more necessity of being baptized with water, then of
eating the bread and drinking the wine: yet it is not allowed to be common, but
appropriated to Ministers, and yet the reason will as well prove commonnesse of
this as the other.

To the fifth, humane authority without Scripture is of no force to argue
points of Christianity.

That of Athanasius done in sport, is absurd, and shows the boldness of
superstition.

Concerning heretics baptism, they had Ministerial calling, and therefore
it is beside the state of the question.

Secondly, some again stating the question after Antichrists exaltation,
propound three ways as professed in the world:

The first, by such as hold a succession of Ministers from Rome, or less, and
so of Baptism.

A second, of Familists, and the scattered flock, that none may meddle
therewith lawfully, till there come some extraordinary men, and condemning both
these.

A third, is holding forth and affirming, that any Disciple of Christ, in what
part of the world soever, coming to the Lords way by the Word and Spirit of
God, preaching that Word of God unto others, and converting them, he may, and
ought also to baptize them.

To prove this, they bring three Arguments:

The first is taken from the re-building of the Temple, after the captivity in
Babylon, by proportion, thus: As every Israelite then, with whom the Lord was,
and whose spirit the Lord stirred up, was commanded to go to build, Ezr. 1.3,
5. though some were more excellent in the bufinesse then the other; so now,
every spiritual Israelite, with whom the Lord is, and whose spirit the Lord
stirs up, is commanded to go and build the spiritual Temple, which they do,
by begetting men anew, by the immortal seed of the Word, so making them living
stones; and then couple them together a spiritual house upon confession of
their fins by baptism.

In brief, an Israelite circumcised in flesh, God stirring up his heart, was
commanded to build the Temple made with hands, from the first stone to the
last. Therefore an Israelite circumcised in heart, (not baptized in the flesh)
God stirring him up, is to build the Temple made without hands, from the first
stone to the last: Go preach and baptize, teaching his Disciples to the end of
the world.

The second Argument; If John Baptist, being unbaptized himself, preached,
converted, and baptized, then may any man else do so too; but John Baptist
unbaptized, preached, converted, and baptized; Ergo, any man unbaptized may
preach, convert, and baptize. The consequence they prove thus: All things
written before time, were written for our instruction, Romans 15.4. The same God
that spoke with John in the Wilderness, speaks now to us in the Scriptures,
the same word he spoke to John; and therefore, seeing the Lord has spoken,
who shall not preach and practice according to his Word; seeing God now
speaks to no particular person, one more then another?

The third is from humane authority: Mr. Perkins, and others confess, that if
a Turk should come to the knowledge of the truth in Turkey, he might preach the
Word to others, and converting them, might baptize them, though unbaptized
himself.

Now, these are their Arguments; to which I answer:

First, in general the apprehension falls in with the Papists determination in
the point, and herein differ; that they hold it may be lawful for any, yea,
unbaptized, in case of necessity, and extraordinarily to baptize, when no other
can be gotten; but these hold that any unbaptized may do it, in any case, at
all times, and ordinarily; nor do their Arguments exclude women, whose spirits
the Lord may stirup; and the instance, that the captives returning include them
fully: for of that sex, there were some forward in the work, Neh. 3.12 as of
old, in building the Tabernacle, Exodus 35.22.

In particular I answer to the first Argument: First, the consequence is false;
for the comparison is not of things alike: The Temple signified Christ's humane
nature, and Heaven, and sometimes it signifies a Believer, and not a
church estate, as is clear, Joh. 2. calling his body the Temple, Heb. 8.2.
Chap. 9.1. Chap. 11.24. A Tabernacle more excellent, not made with hands, nor
of this building, which were figures of the other, and true Tabernacle and
Temple which God had builded, and not man; to argue from the Temple to the
Church (whereas it was a figure of Christ) cannot be allowed.

Secondly, the builders were all Gods visible people in covenant with him, and
circumcised; but the argument speaks of them that are not Gods visible people,
nor baptized, etc. therefore not to be admitted to build, as Neh. 2.20. Ezr. 4.

Thirdly, they went up, the whole body together to build, but they did not all
actually build, but some workmen only, whom God had made able and skillful, the
rest of the people encouraged, contributed and oversaw the rest, Ezr. 3.7. to
the 10. So by proportion, every one may not, every one cannot actually perform
this thing, only the Carpenters and workmen whom God has gifted, and justly
officiated to that purpose; the rest must encourage, contribute and forward the
work, according to their place.

Fourthly, they had Gods Word by Cyrus to set them on; and being hindered, had
Haggai and Zachary to press them to it; but these look for no such allowance.
Besides, it is incongrnous to oppose the Temple made with hands, to the Church
as made without hands, and also that the church is wholly made without hands,
being made by men's endeavors; yea, effecting sometimes no true infallible
spiritual stones.

Last of all, it dissolveth and overturneth that institution of Christ, Ephesians.
4.11. Who gave some to be Apostles, etc. for the gathering and perfecting of
the Saints; whereas they say every man may do it, and apply at random that to
every man, no officer nor baptized person.

That of Mat. 28. was spoken but to the eleven who were baptized and especial
officers already chosen and set up officers in the church.

To the second from John Baptist, etc. the Antecedent affirms John unbaptized;
but no word of proof given, nor one syllable of reason: For though it be not
expressed of whom, when, and where he was baptized (nor is there mention of
Christ's Apostles baptism,) yet it follows not that John was not baptized. If I
shall affirm the contrary, viz. that John was baptized, and infer from
hence, no person unbaptized may baptize; for John was baptized, and say it is
written for our instruction: this will not be granted. And why might not John
baptize himself, being the beginner of the new Testament, as Abraham
circumcised himself, though after some body circumcised did it? And if John
Hell. (or Smith) baptized himself first, and then baptized others, John Baptist
might do it as well as he. Or what if God baptized him, as he buried Moses? Or
what if he were baptized in the Jewish church, they practicing a baptism to
every proselyte, to make them members incorporate into the commonwealth of
Israel?

But secondly, I deny the consequence. For suppose John unbaptized, yet it
follows not, what John did, every man may do, because there is a vast
difference between the beginning of things, and in constituting, and a thing
now constituted. And the proof of the consequence is invalid and unsound: For
if whatsoever be written, be written for our learning, and the same word spoken
to them in the Scripture formerly, is now spoken to us in the same
consideration, then let every man go sacrifice his son, as Abraham did, rob
the Indians as the Israelites did the Egyptians, kill an unbeleever striving
with a Christian, as Moses did, go to Rome as Paul did, and a thousand the
like: for it is written for our instruction, and the same word spoken to them,
is now spoken to us in the Scripture: who sees not gross absurdity here?
Again, if all may and must do as John, how is it that John did it alone, and
none else but he? Not a man before or after him, baptized, or unbaptized,
except they had an especial calling thereto, as Christ's Apostles. And John
himself took it not upon himself, but was sent, and commanded so to do, John
1.33. Not by a motion of his own spirit or willingness, but by an immediate
revelation, and divine appointment: so that the consequence from John, having
such a calling, so evident and heavenly, as the Pharisees durst not oppose, to
any man, upon a willingness of mind, and inward motion (not heroical and of
divine inspiration, but) private and common to all, is as bad as from a lawful
Magistrate to an Usurper.

To the third Argument from Mr. Perkins, and others (which are not named) I
answer in a word: First, it is unjust to use humane authority to press others,
yet to reject it our selves: Mr. Perkins says, Infants must be baptized.
Secondly, humane authority, though the men be never so many, never so eminent,
is no foundation of divine disputations. The Argument from humane authority is
as easily rejected as propounded, though otherwise much good use may be made of
their writings, and by the ablest gifted.

But thirdly, what other men say (except I read them, or some relate them) or
what Mr. Perkins says in other places, I know not, (for no place is quoted)
but what I read in him upon Galat. 1.11. page 172. is nothing to this purpose:
and what he says, is quite contrary. His words are these: If in Turkey,
America, or else where, the Gospel should be received of men by counsel and
persuasion of private persons, they shall not need to send into Europe far
consecrated Ministers; for they have power to choose their Ministers within
themselves: For where the Lord gives the Word, he gives the power also. Where
he speaks not a word of a person unbaptized, converting and baptizing others.
But first, if they should be converted by endeavors of private persons, and not
stirred up in their own minds to convert others Secondly, he says not, these
private persons are unbaptized, but implies and intends they are baptized;
as I have read the case thus stated: If some private Christians cast there by
Shipwreck and should do such a thing, the case now stands thus: Who (...)
Minister to these new converts by these private men conve^^^^ (...) may
administer to them in office, the things of God? (which (...) out as necessary)
and there being but two ways, either (...) where be Ministers already, or else
setting up some of themselves; He denying the former, concludes the latter,
viz. they should choose one of their own company, and set him up, that must be
by rule, and questionless would be that private brother, a baptized Christian,
cast there by providence, having been a means of converting them: Otherwise if
a Pagan should by any private means be converted, and convert others, I
suppose they have no power, (unless extraordinary calling can be made good for
it) to administer baptism, but must either go to churches already gathered,
as in the old Testament they incorporated themselves into the Jews body, or
else send for some who may join in a church there, and choosing Officers admit
them to them so joined, etc.

Thus of the question, as some take it. Now on the contrary I affirm, that it
is not lawful for any man now to baptize another, being himself unbaptized;
or though baptized, yet unless he be lawfully and truly called thereto by
men according to Gods word, more or less. And that I may not nakedly affirm
it, besides the proof from the disproofe of the former, I add these arguments.

1. They only may baptize, to whom the commission of baptizing is given. But it
is only to the officers of churches. Ergo, they only may baptize. The Major
is manifest of it self, because institution of baptism depends upon the sole
will of the Institutor, and is to be measured according thereto: As of the
Eucharist. The Minor is clear from Matthew. 28. Go, teach and baptize, etc.

2. The Analogy of the other Ordinances Ministerial, which none may meddle
withal but Ministers, Romans 10.15. the administration of the Lords Supper,
Censures, etc.

3. In the first times noneunbaptized, or out of office, did baptize, then
ought it not to be otherwise now. But in the first times none out of office, or
unbaptized, did baptize: Therefore it ought not to be otherwise now. The
consequence is true, that we must do as they commanded us from Christ, and
having received from Christ, delivered to us. As also they are patterns and
presidents, and therefore the Apostles names are in the walls of the new
Jerusalem. The Minor, or Antecedent is clear, by an Induction of such as did
baptize in those times, as John Baptist, Christ and his Disciples, John 4.12.
Ananias, Acts 9. Philip, Acts 8. Peter, Acts 16. Paul, etc.

4. If Christ have set in his churches by institution, Apostles, etc. to gather
and perfect the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and knowledge of
Jesus Christ to a perfect man, then all should be done by them, not by any man
or woman, whose spirit God stirs up; but Christ has set these up, etc.
therefore all must be done by these officers, and not else: The first is true,
else these are in vain, and not sufficient: the Minor is clear from Ephesians.
4.11, etc.

5. If no woman but a man, nor a man but baptized, nor a man baptized but an
officer, nor no other officer but he that preaches the Word, by office may
baptize, then a baptized man and in office called thereto, may, and must only
baptize. Verum prius, from the disproof of the former apprehensions; Ergo, the
latter is true also.

Secondly, concerning persons to be baptized; this is the question, What
persons are to be baptized?

I answer, They are of two sorts:

1. Men of years, or Infants: Touching men of years, I think there is no
difference, but all agree that they being converted to believe and repent, may,
and should be baptized; and that none of years are to be baptized till they be
converted and believe, and repent; nor does the baptizing of Infants prevent
the baptizing of men of years, where any such are converted from Paganism to
Christianity, no more then circumcising Infants of old prevented the
circumcising of men of years, which were converted from Gentilisme to Judaisme;
though it prevents the baptizing of believers children, when they come to
years, because they are baptized Infants: As the Jewish Infants circumcised,
when they were Infants, could not be circumcised when they came to years. It is
a weak and feeble consequence, to say, where we maintain baptizing Infants,
who do not actually believe, that we can never baptize any that do actually
believe, being only true of them that are baptized Infants, and Infants of
believers. So we come to the other sort of persons to be baptized, viz.
Infants, where I shall endeavor two things:

1. What Infants are to be baptized.

2. That infants are to be baptized.

First, Infants (briefly) are either of Infidels, or believing parents: The
Infants of Infidels (under which term I comprehend, Jews, Turks, Pagans, and
all but those that are true visible Christians) are altogether strangers to the
covenant of God in Christ, and so can have no right at all to this ordinance;
yea, though the parents consent, much less against their consent:
Notwithstanding others undertaking for them; I except only two cases:

1. Slaves and servants bought with money, these being Infants, may be
baptized, for ought I know.

2. When Infidel parents are converted, and desire churchfellowship, and
thereby themselves and Infants are to be baptized, I conclude in these two
cases; that Infants born of Infidel parents may be baptized; and therefore I
judge that Infidel Infants are in no wise to be baptized, because they are
unclean, 1 Cor. 7.14. therefore such are to be deferred, till they be
converted, and give testimony of their own faith and repentance.

Two Questions may be here resolved:

1. In case of excommunicate persons; Whether an Infant born of parents, both
under the censure of the church, and the state of excommunication, may be
baptized, if any will undertake for them:

I answer, No.

First, because they are in that estate, as Heathens, and neither of them in
visible covenant.

Secondly, if by others undertaking, why not Infants of Indians also?

Thirdly, if by faith of forefathers, as I see no Scriptures for it, so, where
will you limit it? Suppose a converted child of Esau in David's time could
prove successively, and to all evidently, that he came of Esau the son of
Isaac; whether should it have been circumcised as a Proselyte, or as Isaac's
seed?

A second Question, is concerning Infants baptized of Heretics, whether
lawful?

I answer: If the person baptizing had a true calling, though stained with some
corruption in the person or calling; and in the administration of baptism,
nothing essential omitted in matter, or form, those persons are not to be
baptized again; because baptism is not to be administered twice to any: But if
any of the essentials were omitted, such persons are to be baptized, as not
baptized before. And now I come to the other particular; that Infants of
Believers, and visible professors, are to be baptized; yea, though but one of
the parents be in church fellowship, which I shall prove after I have premised
a few things.

1. The Scriptures containing the books of the new and old Testament, are full
of perfection, containing a most perfect rule of all things concerning faith,
and order: So that in these respects, nothing is to be urged as necessary, nor
allowed as lawful, but what is justly comprehended in them.

2. There are two ways whereby we may find what Gods will is in all cases,
concerning the premises; either in express terms, or by just consequence drawn
from thence. So that whatsoever is not literally expressed, or drawn from the
letter by necessary consequence, is to be rejected, as not the Lords mind.

3. Whatsoever can be collected by true deduction from any part of Scripture
expounded in the largest sense, is as truly contained in them, as that which is
set down in express terms, and so is of the same force with that which is
expressed: So our Savior urges the Devil, Matthew. 4. with that word (only)
from Deuteronomy. which yet is not in the Text, but truly drawn from thence. So the
Protestant urging justification by faith only, oppose the Papists, yet (only)
is not expressed, but necessarily drawn from thence: For if there be but two
ways of justification, (as there is not) and we be not justified by works, as
the Text says, then by faith only: And Exodus 21.28, etc. under the case of an
Ox in all those particulars clearly by consequence any other creature that may
do hurt, in the like case is intended, as Cow, Dog, Goat, etc.

4. The tender of immortality, and happiness of God to mankind, has been two
ways dispensed:

First, to Adam, and all mankind in his loins by the Law, upon condition of
perfect obedience thereto in man's own personal righteousness.

Secondly, Adam transgressing, lost immortality and happiness in himself and
all mankind, and involved them and himself in sin, and eternal wrath thereby,
God the Father, for the praise of his grace, having predestined some to that
adoption of sonship in his Son, and given them to his Son to be saved by him,
(that he might be glorified with the Father) and he receiving them at his
Fathers hands, because they were partakers of flesh and blood, he himself also
took flesh and blood upon him, and in that humane nature fulfilled the Law for
them actually, and so reconciled them all to the Father in himself, that so God
might be just, and the justifier of the ungodly, that should believe in Jesus.

From hence the Father makes a new tender of life, setting forth his Son to be
a propitiation through his blood, offering him and his righteousness, (in his
humane nature, and performed by it in obedience, active, passive, to his holy
will) to all which shall believe, and by that faith be found in him, having his
righeousnesse upon them; accounting them thereby righteous, and no sinners, and
making them from thence, through the life of his Son manifested in them by
sanctification of that holy Spirit partakers of life and immortality again.
This tender being one and the same in substance for ever, from the first
promulgation to Adam and Eve in Paradise, till this day, and to the end, yet
has it admitted of variation in the circumstances thereof; as is clear from
four several and remarkable periods.

1. From Adam fallen to Abraham, under a promise of the seed of the woman to
break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15.

2. The second, from Abraham to Moses time in the wilderness, in substance the
same with the former, yet differing from it:

First, in promising the seed of the woman to proceed from Abraham's loins
according to the flesh successively.

Secondly, by passing the promise into a solemn formal visible covenant, as
the father of the blessed, and all-blessing seed, and of all believers of all
nations.

Thirdly, confirming it by circumcision, the sign and seal of the
righteousness of faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised.

3. The third from Moses to Christ's coming in the flesh; this is the same in
substance with the former, the same Christ, and doctrine, and grace dispensed,
but differing from the former in the manner of dispensation, in diverse
circumstances:

First, in adding these ten words in tables of stone, and drawing a vail of
shadows over it, consisting of all those Laws and Ordinances delivered to
Moses on the mount, according to the pattern showed him, and by him
communicated to the people.

Secondly, in adding the Ordinance of the Passover, with diverse rites thereto
belonging; all which were to continue till the time of Reformation; and this,
and not the former, is the old Testament, ratified by the death of Bulls and
Goats, etc. Shadows of better things, without the application whereof, the
other purified the flesh, and not the conscience.

4. The fourth begins with the manifestation of the Son of God in the flesh,
and still continues, and is the new Testament, ratified by the death and blood
of the Lord Jesus, the testator, who being come, the veil of shadows was
utterly removed, and the Mosaicall administrations quite abolished; the old
being done away, that the new might be established, which cannot be removed.
And this is to be attended, that all the Scriptures that speak of the removal
of the old, and setting up of the new Testament; or that declare the abolishing
of the old, and establishing of the new, (as was foretold) is to be understood
of these two periods, from Moses to Christ, and after; not of that from Abraham
to Moses; and he opposition in this case made in the Scriptures, is of that
under Moses and Christ only.

5. The covenant that God made with Abraham, and continued to his seed, the
Jews, and us Gentiles, has two parts in it; the first respects God, the
other respects us: In the first, concerning God, is contained all that
concerns our good, temporal and eternal, and himself held forth, as the sole
efficient of all; preventing us with his grace freely, and performing all the
good pleasure of his grace in us, according to his own will; nor does any
thing, that he is pleased to work, depend on us, nor requires he any thing of
us by way of efficiencie or causality; yet so, as that he works something in
us without us; even being merely passive in the act of working, till it be
first wrought; something he works by us, stirring up and assisting that which
he has first wrought in us; nor can we at first do any thing, till he has
principled us by supernatural grace; nor first, or last, more then he helps
us, who works all, the will and deed according to his will.

6. Infants are passively capable of the dispensation of God, and of the Spirit
and grace of the covenant, and what ever men of years are capable of, though
not wrought in the same way, or by the same means, yet the same things, and by
the same Spirit, so far as is necessary to union with Christ, and his
justification to life thereby, else no children dying Infants, are elected, or
shall be raised up again in their bodies, and saved; nor is the judgment that
we can have of men of years infallible, as in Simon Magus, etc.

7. The Lord having taken hold of any man or woman, by outward dispensation of
means, to call them out of Infidelity, into visible profession of faith in the
Word of his grace and obedience to his commands, they are hereby made partakers
of his covenant, and all the privileges outwardly belonging thereto; yea,
though they have not saving faith, but be hypocrites; and so themselves, and
all that ever proceed from them, continue in the same state, parents and
children successively, so long as the Lord continues the course of his
dispensation; nor can any alteration befall them, whereby this estate is
dissolved, but some apparent act of God breaking them off from him.

8. Baptism is not the first grace, but the second; nor does it confer grace,
but confirm the former, which therefore must be presupposed; and it is the seal
of the righteousness of faith in the new Testament, to all that receive it, as
circumcision of old was to them, Romans 4.11. By baptism I mean the ordinance of
the church administered by a just calling, which is too often, (though it never
should be) separated from inward grace, yet remains true baptism so
administered, else Simon Magus, and those false breathren, Gal. 2. being not
inwardly baptized, were not truly baptized, and if they had repented, must be
baptized anew.

9. Last of all: as of old more was required of Abraham, and of men of years,
turning Proselytes, when they were to be circumcised, then of Isaac and their
Infants, continually afterward circumcised: So now, in administering baptism
to persons, more is required of men of years, then of Infants. God required
faith of Abraham in the blessing seed, before circumcised; but he required not
faith of Isaac, nor of any one of Abraham's seed after him, before circumcision;
but that they should believe afterward, which he promised to work in them. So
now, of men of years, faith is to be required, and must be, that a man of years
be baptized, but not so of Infants of baptized persons, who are to be baptized,
that they may believe afterward, etc.

Having premised thus much; I come to the proof of the question, that Infants
of believing parents, and in covenant with God, by visible profession, may and
ought to be baptized.

ARGUMENTS.
Abraham and the Jews before Christ; then, as Infants were in that covenant,
and partakers of the sign thereof, circumcision; so are Infants now in the
covenan, and should receive the sign thereof, baptism: But the covenant now
under Christ, is the same with that before Christ, with Abraham and his
posterity in the flesh: Therefore as Infants were then in the covenant, and
signed with circumcision, so are Infants now in the covenant, and are to
receive baptism the sign thereof.

In this Argument three things are to be cleared: First, that the covenant made
with Abraham and his posterity before Christ, and this under Christ, is the
same.

And secondly, that Infants were then in that covenant, so they be now in this.

And thirdly, that all Jewish Infants were then partakers of the sign, and
circumcised; and so should Infants now receive baptism, the sign of it. Of
each of these I will set down particular grounds. 1. That the covenant with
Abraham and the Jews before, and the Gentiles now, is the same, is evident by
these reasons:

First, the Gospel is the doctrine of the covenant, but this is but one, Gal.
1.6. and was preached to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. Romans 4.11. and to the Jews in the
wilderness, Heb. 3. and 4. and in David's time, Heb. 4.7. from Psalm. 95. and
during their whole state, Romans 9.31. and 10.2. This Gospel is now preached to
us, Heb. 4.2. Therefore the covenant is the same in all, and it is an injurious
thing to Gods grace, and utterly against the Scriptures to affirm, that that
covenant was of nature in the flesh, and of earthly things: This is of grace,
in the spirit, and of heavenly things. And as little understanding do they
show in Gods word, that say Gods covenant was in their flesh, because
circumcision outward was in their flesh. For though God calls it his covenant,
yet it is not, but the sign of it, as he after expresses, and outward
baptism is no less on the flesh, then it, and so may be called Gods covenant
on the flesh.

Secondly, if Abraham be the Father of the Jews and Gentiles equally, as he
believes the righteousness of faith, and they his children equally, as so
believing, and no otherwise, then the covenant is the same: But Abraham is the
father of Jews and Gentiles equally, as he believes, and they his children
equally, as so believing, Romans 4.11, 12, 16, 17, 23, 24. Gal. 3.7, 9, 26.29.
Therefore the covenant is the same. By [beleeving] I mean the profession of
Faith.

Thirdly, the standing of the Jews under the grace of God, was the same with
Abraham, as is clear from Gods often expressing himself to be the God of
their Fathers, Abraham, etc. and dispensing himself according to the covenant
made with Abraham, etc, and to his posterity, Exodus 2.24. 2 Reg. 13.23. And
their praying to the Lord to remember his covenant made with Abraham, etc.
acknowledging the accomplishment of it to them, Luke 2.54. and 72.74. And let
not any say, it was a covenant of giving the Land of Canaan: For if that were
all, why did David, so long after Joshuah, possess them of Canaan, when they
had rest there, yet still provoke them in his time, to enter into Gods rest,
lest they should be shut out as their Fathers were in the wilderness, as the
Apostle argues, Heb. 3.4. was this the land of Canaan (unless as a type?) was
it not Christ, and Gods free grace? Now our standing is the same with the
Jews, as is evident, Matthew. 21.4. chap. 22.1.

2. That the Infants of the Jews were then in the covenant, will not be
denied. That Infants are now in the covenant, whose parents profess the faith,
I prove thus: (1.) Else the covenant was not the same with the former, but
another: But it is the same with the former, and not another diverse from that,
as I have proved. Ergo, etc. Else the state of the grace of God should be
straightened, and made of less extent by Christ's coming, then it was before;
whereas it is more enlarged, and of greater extent.

3. If Infants be not now in the covenant, as well as then, either it is
because God has excluded them expressly, or there was something more in the
persons of believers then, then now, to interest Infants in it: But God has no
where expressly excluded them, nor was there any thing in the persons then, more
then now, to interest them. Therefore Infants are now in the covenant, as then.

4. If Jews and Gentiles be incorporated into one body in Christ, and the
Jews Infants were in the body before, and so continued; then so must the
infants of Christian Gentiles be now. But the Gentiles and Jews be incorporate
into one body in Christ, (by the Gentiles being made near, and Citizens, which
they were not before, as the Jews were, but strangers and far off) Ephesians.
2.11, 13, 20. and 3.6. and the Jews Infants were, and continued in that body,
therefore so are the Infants of believing Gentiles.

3. Infants should now be baptized, as then they were circumcised. To clear it
further, I add these considerations.

1. Else the covenant was not the same then and now, nor Infants in it now as
then, which I have proved to be otherwise.

2. If they have the thing and substance, they cannot be denied the sign and
circumstance; if the first grace, then the second and confirming: But Infants
have the thing and substance, for they have the same covenant, and the Kingdom
of heaven which was taken from the Jews, of which Infants were subjects, as
well as elder men, is now given to the Gentiles. Therefore, as Peter, Acts 10.
so say I, Who can forbid water, that Infants should not be baptized as well as
men of years, seeing they are subjects of the Kingdom as well as they?

3. Else there should be no difference between the Infants of Gentiles
believing, and Pagans and Infidels, as there was before between the Jews
Infants, and the Gentiles, which as it is uncomfortable, and without just
ground, to say so, so it is contrary to the word of God, which affirms, that
the Infants of believing Gentiles are holy, and not as the Infants of Infidels,
which are profane. This is manifest, 1 Cor. 7.14. where the Apostle resolving
this scruple, Whether a believer might continue to cohabite and enjoy
marriagefellowship with an Infidel yoke fellow, and not be polluted; and he
affirming it, clears his affirmation by three Arguments:

1. First, from the privilege of the state of grace to a believer himself,
that being by faith pure himself, all things are pure to him, and so the
society of marriage with an Infidel. And this to be so, he clears, viz.
That an Infidel is sanctified to a believing yoke-mate.

2. From a privilege of the state of grace to their children, that they
themselves being pure by faith, their children are thereby born pure of them,
and holy in that estate; which could not be, if the society of marriage was
polluted. This is the true meaning of the words; yet what holiness is here
meant, has troubled men, who have traveled with variety in expounding or
torturing these few words: Some will have them understood politically, and that
two ways: 1. In respect of the present children born of them, which could not
be legitimate, if their marriage was not lawful. 2. In respect of those
children they might have by others, if they should forsake this marriage, and
betake them to another, those children would be bastards.

Some ceremonially, of uncleanness of children begotten in time of the woman's
disease, and are holy, when the Infidel party forbears that time; which is
absurd and groundless.

Some take it religiously: But here they differ, some will have it to mean
future holiness, which the Parent by cohabitation may make the child partaker
of: either obtaining it may be baptized, or by counsel when they come to age.

But if they forsake the Infidel party, then the children will remain in
infidelity still.

Others take it for present holiness, yet not in one sense: for some conceive
thus: That the believer abiding and gaining the Infidel party, the children
shall be holy, that is, both parents that dedicate and devote them to God.

Others take it of foederall holiness, and is nothing else but that the
children do belong to the covenant of God, as well as the parent, and as well
as if both parents had been believers. Thus diversely are the words taken. To
issue all, note these things:

First, that it pertains to children of one at least believing, which is
evident, because he speaks to a case not of all mankind, but of an Infidel
with a believer: Therefore the argument must be taken from some thing proper
to a believer: so it is in the first Argument. Though all things natural, in
regard of the use of them, be common to Infidels with believers, (as to eat,
sleep, etc.) yet the impurity of conscience defiles the use of every thing to
an Infidel; and the purity of conscience purifieth the use of every thing to a
believer, 1 Timothy 4.4. And as this is taken from something proper to a believer,
so in this of childrens holiness: Therefore legitimation cannot be meant,
because that is no more proper to a believer then an Infidel. Pilat was as
legitimate as Paul, though not so holy. Never was it heard that Infidels
children were called holy, nor can an instance been given of this notion, viz.
that an holy child should signify legitimate. Again, to make marriage
lawful, it is not necessary that the parties, at least one of them, be a
believer, (else there were no lawful marriage among Infidels.)

The question is not therefore of legitimate marriage, but of legitimate
marriage polluted. It were to no purpose to argue from legitimacie of children
to prove that: for children are always legitimate from lawful marriage,
whether the marriage be unclean and impure, or not. Therefore it cannot be
meant of legitimacie.

Secondly, it is spoken of something present, notwithstanding the disparity of
religion continue. This is manifest, because the believer must not depart from
the Infidel willing to cohabite, because the children are holy.

Now, if he should mean when the Infidel party is converted, or the children
afterward, this being uncertain, whether ever it should be or no; the question
is left unresolved, the scruple is not removed, and it is uncertain from
thence, whether ever it shall be a pure marriage or no, and in the mean time is
not: The exposition therefore of holiness of children in respect of future,
and what may be, is not sound. I take it therefore of foederall holiness,
whereby the children are with their believing parents taken by God to be his,
and by him put under his covenant, and so they continue when men of years,
though they never have any further grace wrought in them; nor have any other
state upon them, then what they had when they were born: nor are they right
that do expound it, to be all one with the former, of the Infidels sanctified
to the believing party, as if he should say, you need not question your
dwelling with the Infidel party, no more then you question your dwelling with
your children: For,

First, there is a twofold holiness, the Apostle speaks of the one, not of
the thing it self, but to the believers use; the other of the thing it self,
and not in regard of the believers use, and it is unjust to confound them.

Secondly, the dwelling with the Infidel party was not scrupled, but the
enjoyment of marriage society, and therefore children are not to be compared
with them in that respect.

Last of all, the words are brought to prove that a believing party sanctifies
the Infidel party, and therefore that cannot be the sense of it, and it were
to prove the same by the same, etc.

If in the promise made to Abraham, both Jews and Gentiles are included, and
of old, Infants as well as men of years, and therefore circumcised, then
Infants now also, and so to be baptized; but under that promise, both Jews and
Gentiles are included, and their Infants, and for that cause circumcised; Ergo,
so are Infants now, and for that cause to be baptized.

First, the promise was made to Abraham, and to his seed, which are both Jews
and Gentiles, and therefore made unto him in the state of uncircumcision, and
after that circumcised, Romans 4.11. to 16. Gal. 3.8.

Secondly, Infants were then under that promise, and for that cause
circumcised, because God was their God, as well as of men of years; yea, from
thence he was their God, when men of years; Nor did God actually first require
faith of any Jews (after Abraham's time) to become their God; but God freely
vouchsafed them that grace from an act of their own; nor did the unbelief of
men of years frustrate that grace of God, but still he made it good, and
continued it unto them in all their apostasies, until by some manifest act he
cast them off, as he did at last the ten Tribes; and finally, all in the days
of his Sons manifestation; nor might any Infant but a Jews be circumcised,
except himself first was incorporated into the Jewish body Ecclefiasticall.

Thirdly, that Infants now also are under that promise, and so to be baptized
as a part of that seed; they were in it till Christ's time, and why should they
be now excluded? or let any show who did it, or where it was done, it shall be
sufficient. If any shall say, that believers are the seed of Abraham. I answer,
so it was among the Jews, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. the children of promise are counted
for the seed; and therefore our Savior argues them not to be the children of
Abraham, but of their father the Devil, Joh. 8. Let this then be noted that
our Savior and his Apostle speaks thus of them in a certain respect; and we
are to consider them; first, as Abraham's seed foederally, continuing in outward
profession, and so they were all Gods people, men and Infants, and were all
under that promise, and so were partakers of all promises and privileges given
unto that people on Gods part offered, Romans 9.4, 5.

Secondly, as under Gods election of grace, and so the elect only obtained the
things promised, whether Infants, or men of years, Romans 11. But the want of
obtaining did not make them not to be the seed, nor under that promise in
another sense: Abraham had two sons, the one obtained, the other not, of his
posterity there were always of them two sorts, the one bound after the flesh
(not naturally, but in another sense,) the other after the Spirit, and so it is
now, Gal. 4. But being after the flesh, did not make that God was not their
God, and they Abraham's seed foederally: So then it remains, that as the Jews
Infants were included under that promise, and for that cause circumcised, so
the Gentiles believing are with their Infants under that promise, and for that
cause to be baptized, though only the elect, whether Infants, or men of years,
Jews or Gentiles, do obtain the rest are hardened, and take we heed that we
increase not the number of them.

If in the whole body of Israel, as well Infants as men of years, Israel
Infants were baptized with the same spiritual baptism that ours is; Ergo,
Infants are now to be baptized; I mean, Infants of believing parents, and not
any other.

1. First, that it was the same spiritual baptism with ours, is evident, 1
Cor. 10.1, etc.

1. The other ordinances there mentioned, were the same spiritually with ours;
they eat the same spiritual meat, and drank the same spiritual drink, on Gods
part dispensing, and whosoever eat and drank unworthily, not discerning the
Lords body and blood, were guilty on their part of his body and blood,
therefore they were baptized with the same spiritual baptism with ours.

2. Otherwise the Apostle should link things together in his argument that were
not equal, nor would it be of force with the Corinthians, if they were not the
same with ours spiritually; nor the conclusion certain, that they should be
punished with the like punishment, if they committed the like sins.

2. Secondly, it cannot be denied, but those Infants were baptized with the
same spiritual baptism, though they could not actually repent and believe,
for they were a part of all Israel; nor had all men of years faith and
repentance; God baptized them all, one as well as another, though all obtained
not the full benefit of it, but only the elect. If then Infants were baptized
with the same spiritual baptism, signified and dispensed by those signs, no
reason can be given, why Infants may not now be baptized with the same
spiritual baptism dispensed by other signs; and here were have an example of
Infants baptism, which some call for so much.

There is the same reason of the first fruits and the lump; Ergo, Infants the
lump and branches are holy, and must be baptized.

1. The first is clear from the Law of sanctifying the lump, by offering the
first fruits, there is nothing more required, and so Romans 11.16.

2. The second is clear also, from Romans 11.16. where note:

1. Abraham and the Father are the first fruits and root, and so all believing
parents, 1 Cor. 7.14, etc. Infants having no actual unbelief, could not be
cut off with their parents.

2. That Infants of believing parents are branches of that root, and men of
years no otherwise branches then as they were branches first, when Infants.

3. The branches then broken off, are those men of years, and Infants then
rejected, with all their posterity to this day.

4. That all the Jews were not rejected, but some branches continued on, and
they men of years, with their Infants, and were baptized, that all those Jews
not broken off had no Infants is unlikely, without question they had many; that
they were branches before their parents closing with the way of the new
Testament, cannot be denied; that they were broken off for actual unbelief,
could not be; that their parents continued on branches, and the Infants broken
off, will never be proved; but it is manifest that they continued branches of
their parents, or of the fathers with their parents, and so were baptized, else
their parents condition should be worse under the state of grace administered in
the new Testament, then it was in the old, and they should change from the
better to the worse; their children who before were branches of the root, and
now should be broken off, their parents continuing still, and should be in no
better case then Infidels Infants; and God who was their God before, now should
not be their God: and before they were circumcised, and that being abolished,
they are left destitute of all signs of Gods grace, and may not be baptized; O
woeful change, if so, or rather a finfull charge upon Gods grace.

5. When Jews shall be ingraffed again, as Infants with men of years were
broken off, so Infants shall be again implanted with their converted parents,
else such branches should not be ingraffed as were broken off, which is quite
contrary to the Text, and their case should be far worse then it was, which to
hold, is to lay a stumbling block in the way of the Jews, to hinder them from
closing with Christ.

6. The Gentiles being implanted in stead of the Jews broken off, as they were
Infants, as well as men of years, so Infants of Gentiles believing, are
ingraffed with their parents, else such branches are not ingraffed as were
broken off: As then Jews Infants, while branches, were by virtue thereof
circumcised, and such as continued, when others were broken off were baptized:
So also must Infants of Gentiles be baptized, which is in part to be made
partakers of the fatness of the Olive, Romans 11.16, 17.

If baptism succeeds circumcision, Ergo.

1. That baptism succeeds circumcision, is clear, Col. 2.11, 12. where the
Apostle speaks of two circumcisions, the one outward in the flesh, made with
hands, the other inward in the heart, made without hands. And though they had
not the outward, which of old was the sign and means of the inward; yet they
needed it not, because in Christ they were complete, and through him made
partakers of the inward, conveyed unto them by baptism, as the sign and seal
thereof.

Again, either baptism succeeds circumcision, or something else succeeds it,
or it has nothing to succeed it. But it has something to succeed it, (as all
other ordinances of the old Testament) and nothing else can be shown; Ergo,
baptism succeeds it.

Finally, the thing signified in both, is the same without alteration, which is
cleansing from sin, by justification and sanctification; Ergo, the sign in the
former being removed, baptism must needs succeed it in place, as the sign of
the same thing.

2. Infants are therefore to be baptized, as they were circumcised, there being
nothing more required now, nor any thing that may hinder that Infants should be
baptized, then was required then, or that might hinder that they should be then
circumcised. If then their outward circumcision, the sign of the same
spiritual circumcision with ours, was applied to Infants then: So outward
baptism the sign of the same spiritual circumcision with theirs, may be
applied to Infants now; nor do I know of any objection that need trouble any
judiciously godly: For the two principal, that we have no command for
baptizing them now, or any to be baptized, but Disciples, are fully taken away
in this Discourse by the truth of it. And though I account not of humane
testimony without Scriptures, of any authority to satisfy in divine matters,
yet added to the former, it is not to be slighted. I shall therefore propound
to consideration, what I have observed, intending not to say all, nor to quote
their sayings at large, but to give some references only, and in this order:

First, I will set down the judgment of single learned men in their writings,

Secondly, the consent of whole assemblies: And,

Thirdly, the practice of all churches in all ages.

First, that Infants have been, and ought to be baptized, receives confirmation
from testimony of all ancient Writers, which I have been able to take notice
of, as appears by these places: Justin Mart. in quaestion. Orthodox. Tertul.
lib. de baptismo, cap. 18. page 225. See Junius notes also upon it, page 157.
Dionysius, Areop. quoted by Thom. 3. qu. 68. art. 9. Origin affirming that the
church had it from the Apostles, hom. 2. in Ps. 38, and in Levit. hom. 8. and
in 6. ad Romans Cyprian. Epist. lib. 3.8. Epist. ad Fidum: Item. Epist. in the
first Tome of Councels, page 240. Cyril. upon Lev. 8. Syricius epist. in first
tome of Councels, Capit. 1. page 493. Hieron. lib. 4. in Ezekiel. 16. Idem lib. 3.
contra Pelag. Idem Epist. ad Laetam. Aug. in Enchirid. cap. 42.43.51.65. In
lib. de definit. Orthodox. fidei, cap. 21. de fide ad Petrum cap. 24.27.38.
Idem. lib. 4. de baptismo contra Donatist. cap. 14. and in many other places,
and against Donatists, lib. 4. cap. 23. he has these words: The baptism of
Infants was not derived from the authority of men, nor of Councels, but from
the tradition and doctrine of the Apostles. Greg. Nazian. de sacro Lavacro
orat. 3. Ambros. de Abraha. lib. 2. cap. 11. Jeron. Critobul. contra Pelag.
lib. 3. etc.

Secondly, the attestation of whole assemblies declare as much, not ordaining,
but bearing witness unto it upon special occasions, as the day and time of
the year, etc. when they should be baptized, Apostol. constitut. lib. 6. cap.
15. sub finem. page 92. Council. Melevitan. cap. 2. p. 555. Council. African.
cap. 77. pap. 584. Epist. concilii Carthag. contra Caelest. and Pelag. p. 542.
Council. Carthag. quint. cap. 6. page 520.

Thirdly, the practice of all churches consent hereto. In the African churches
they used to baptize Infants, as Athanasius testifies, Quaest. 124. The same
was used in the Asian churches, as Nazianzen affirms: And the Magdeburgens.
in their Centuries observe, that in the first hundred years after Christ,
Infants were baptized; nor was it taken notice of in that age, that Infants
were excluded from baptism: and so continued in all ages to this day; and
though the Eastern and Western churches separated, and did hold several
opinions and rites differing one from another, yet neither omitted the
baptizing of Infants: Among the Eastern and African Christians, whereof there
are some whole kingdoms, and very many in several kingdoms scattered here
and there in companies, and divided amongst themselves into eleven observable
factions and fractions, yet have they all successively holden and do hold
baptizing Infants: with some difference, I confess; some not baptizing males
before forty days, nor females before eighty, though they die before: some not
before, except in case of necessity: some sooner, but none later, that I have
observed. In like manner, the Western churches have had, and have some
difference in some rites and ceremonies, yet not at all in the point of
baptizing Infants: And as in the Eastern churches before and after separation
from the rest, and never yielding subjection to the Pope of Rome: So in the
Western it is evident, that it was every where, and always practiced before
the exaltation of that Antichrist; upon which considerations I count it a
defect of modesty and charity, to call this practice Antichristian and humane
invention, and to wave such light of all ages, in so weighty and plain a case,
agreeable to the evidence of former arguments.

For cloze of the Arguments, I shall say this more: The first that denied the
baptism of Infants, and opposed the practice of the churches in this case, was
one Auxentius an Arrian, with his adherents, who died about 380. years after
Christ, as Mr. Philpot the martyr of Jesus, notes in an Epistle of his,
written out of prison, to a fellowprisoner of his, about the point; so Mr. Fox
relates in his Book of Martyrs, ad an. 1555. Bullinger after affirms the
same. Tom. 3. sermon. 8. decad. quint. After him, the Pelagians and Donatists
opposed it, against whom Augustine, besides others, wrote and defended it. The
Pelagians denied it upon this ground, that Infants had no original sin: And in
Bernards time, one Peter Abilaird. amongst many other gross opinions, wherein
he says, he was magis Arrius quam Arrius, held this also, that Infants were
not to be baptized, Epist. 190, etc. And it is not unworthy consideration, that
in the several ages, wherein this practice was gainsaid, it was by such, who
in other things were grossly erroneous, as most Anabaptists at this day.

And thus far of my grounds for baptizing Infants; I next come to speak of a
few things to the manner of baptizing; whether it ought to be with dipping, and
may not be with sprinkling only.

That dipping has been in use in some ages and places, is out of question, and
dipping thrice also, stories relate but that it was instituted, and so belong
to the essentials of baptism, I am not convinced: For, as I would have no man
to yield to humane apprehensions without Gods Word; so, unless it can be
proved from Scriptures, I desire I may have the same leave I give others, to
reserve my faith for divine authority, to captivate my faith hereto. I observe
these things pressed:

First the word (...), which they say, signifies to dip, and therefore to
baptize, is to dip, and not to sprinkle; many places are brought to this
purpose, wherein the word is so translated, and must be so taken.

To which I answer: The word I grant is so translated, and must be so taken in
some place; but it is not always so translated, nor can be so taken: as Heb.
9.10. with diverse baptismes; some of these were with sprinkling, Heb. 9.13.
compared with Numb. 19.11. 17, etc. 1 Cor. 10.2. They were baptized into Moses
in the cloud, and in the sea, it is not, they were dived and dipped into them,
Mar. 1.8. I baptize you with water, but he shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost, and with fire; now, this was not to be dipped with the holy Ghost, and
with fire, but sprinkled, as was foretold. And why may it not be translated, I
sprinkle you with water, as well as it must be sprinkled with the holy Ghost
powered on you. Again, Acts 1.5. and 10.16. in the last places of both clauses,
it must be understood sprinkling, not dipping; and why may it not be taken for
sprinkled in the two former? Howsoever, the word is not always to be
translated dipped, appears by these places, but may and must be translated
sprinkled; and so the force of the word does not enforce my belief, that a man
must dip, or else he does not baptize.

Secondly, they urge consent to dipping, from John's practice baptizing in
Aenen, because there was many waters that he might dip them; from Philips
baptizing the Eunuch, and others also, who they conclude baptized with dipping:
To these I answer,

First, the word will not necessarily enforce it, That they were baptized is
our of question, but whether by dipping or sprinkling, is questionable; for the
word may signify either, as I have showed, and the Text does not determine
which, by any other expression: For, as for that of many waters being there,
some say that it is not meant of a great deep River, but of many rivers, (
Piscator) and the reason of his choosing that place, may be, because other
places might not so well continue; and many other reasons there may be, and yet
this none, that he might dip them, for that might as well have been done in
other places: and it is said, that was the reason without proof, which may be
as easily denied as it is affirmed: nor is there any such necessity in
translating the Preposition (...), that it must needs be into Jordan, and
signify dipping over head and ears, but it may be well enough translated, to
Jordan. I think that if the Eunuch dived over head and ears, that Philip did
not douze himself so too; yet it is said equally of them both, they descended
(...), from the Charet to thewater, not into it, and that they both came (...),
from the water, not out of the water.

Secondly, it is not probable that they dived the parties under water when they
baptized them; partly, because at some times, and in some places, it was
administered in a house, and suddenly, when there was no thought aforehand to
prepare fit instruments, as in Cornelius house, the Jailer and his household,
Lydia and her family, Acts 10. and 16. so that they might have water enough to
dive them in: partly, because it was not easy for a man to take a grown man in
his arms, and dive him under water: Otherwise I see not how the Minister
should baptize them, but rather they should baptize themselves, nor should the
administration be ministerial, if the baptized person should not be passive in
receiving it.

Thirdly, if they should be wholly dipped into water, it will hazard often some
men's lives, by being strangled under the water; and who can so exactly carry
the action, as not to do too much, or too little, to hold them under too long,
or not long enough?

Lastly, it is not seemly, nor agreeing to common, much less religious
modesty, to take them and dip them naked, before others; nor can I be
persuaded, that Jesus when he was baptized, or any other baptized by John, or
any body else, stripped themselves naked. If any shall say, they covered their
unseemly parts, or that it was done in their clothes; I shall say, it is as
easily denied, as affirmed: the Scripture gives not the least hint of such a
thing, which I suppose it would have done, if it had been so; as in other cases
it tells us of Saul's stripping himself among the Prophets; the executicners of
Steven laying their garments at Paul's feet, etc. Especially it being in so
weighty a matter as should concern all ages.

Again, if all their clothes were on, or but some of them, then certainly
their flesh was not washed (as 1 Pet. 3.21.) but their clothes: Only this I
shall acknowledge, that I see not but dipping ( consideratis considerandis) may
be lawful, nor can I say, that they that use it, do worse then they that use
it not. But that it is absolutely necessary, or the omission of it makes
baptism null. That sprinkling is unlawful, Antichristian, of humane
invention, etc. and that baptism for administration, is invalid, evacuateth
the death of Christ, etc. I cannot yield, I have given some considerations why
I think dipping not absolutely necessary, I shall add a few, why I think
sprinkling with water is unlawful, and that baptism so administered, is true
baptism. First, because the word (...) will yield it, and may be justly so
translated, and must be so taken in the places by me quoted before, to which I
might add more, as Mark 7.4. etc.

Secondly, from the types of our spiritual washing, which were done by
sprinkling, as Exodus 12. the sprinkling of the blood of the Lamb, Exodus 23. the
sprinkling of the Altar, Book, people, Levit. 16. sprinkling the unclean by the
water of the red Heifers ashes, Number. 19. All which typified unto them the blood
of Christ, and the application of it unto themselves for their justification
and sanctification. If sprinkling were then sufficient to them for the same
purpose that dipping is now urged, I see nothing to hinder, but that sprinkling
may do the same now: for though that was commanded, yet this is not forbidden.

Thirdly, the Prophets foretelling this grace of God communicated unto us by
that ordinance (and I think this ordinance it self is forespoken of therein)
they do set it forth by sprinkling, as Esa. 52.15. My servant shall sprinkle
many Nations. Esai. 44.3. Exek. 36.25. I will power clean water upon you. From
these Prophesies I conclude, that sprinkling, or pouring on, may be justified.

Fourthly, in the new Testament the grace of God is set forth by the very word
sprinkling, as Heb. 10.22. Having your hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and your bodies washed with pure water, which notes baptism, and
this washing, as also 1 Cor. 6.11. may be with pouring on, as the same word is
so to be taken, Acts 16.33. The same hour he took them, (...), washed their
mounds, which was not with dipping certainly, but with pouring on. So Heb.
12.21.24. To the blood of sprinkling, 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect, etc. through the
sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ. By these expressions certainly the holy Ghost intends to hold out
the administration of the signs of Gods grace. So that upon these
considerations, I am well persuaded, that though dipping may be lawful, yet
sprinkling is not unlawful, and question not but the ordinance administered by
sprinkling, is as valid, as the administering of it by dipping. And if they do
not forget themselves, that condemn sprinkling as Antichristian, humane, etc.
they do and will grant, that in some cases it may be lawful, and then it is
lawful in it self morally, or certainly, no case can make it morally lawful,
but it is a sin so to do in what case soever: I argue therefore from thence,
thus:

Fifthly, if sprinkling in some case be lawful, then it is not morally
unlawful in it self at all. But in some cases sprinkling may be lawful (as
where there is but little water.) Ergo, it is not morally unlawful in it self.

Sixthly, I shall add here the judgment of Chamier, Tom. 4. lib. 5. cap. 2.
sect. 6. and the rather because he is quoted by one as affirming, Tom. 1. p.
347. that immersion was changed into aspersion after the time of Gregory 1.
which was about 500. years after Christ, which if he did, then it is clear he
altered his judgment afterward: for thus in the place quoted by me, he
writes, Incertum quando immersio met at a fuit in aspersionem, aut unde facto
initio, etc. It is uncertain when dipping was changed into sprinkling, or
whence it had beginning, unless it may seem that 3000. could not be baptized
of a few Apostles, and that in our days if every one should be dipped; nor was
there sufficient water to douze the Jailer in the prison, if he was baptized
by dipping; use shows sprinkling to be more meet, both in regard of the
incommodiousnesse of the season, as also in respect of modesty: for which cause
it is manifest that Deaconesses were employed in undressing of women; nor is
the nature of the sacrament thereby altered: for seeing all the force of water
is in signification by washing, certainly it is not much to purpose how much
one is washed: as in the Supper of the Lord, how much one eats or drinks;
for the washing of one part is of the same nature with washing the whole. Thus
far he: Nor does the sprinkling of a few drops of water, more tend to
evacuate Christ death, or to nourish this dangerous error, that any should
be hereby occasioned to think that a few drops of Christ's blood shed for his
people, is sufficient to wash away their sins, then the eating of a bit of
bread, and drinking a few drops of wine does evacuate his death, and tend to
nourish the same error; and what river may not in this consideration be
excepted against, or what quantity must it be limited unto? Thus I have run
out my thoughts concerning this rite of administering baptism, I come in the
next place to consider the administration of baptism in England, and the
authority by which baptism was there administered. And I believe it is
necessary to be resolved, that was done by a lawful power, and just authority:
For though an officer of State do a thing by virtue of his office, and
according to law makes the thing authentical and of force civilly; yet it
will not follow, that if any private man not in office, shall do the same
thing in the same form of words, and every way else without any difference,
that such an act is legal, and will be allowed; but rather it will expose the
doer, and for whom such a thing is done, to danger of just penalty: So in this
case, and therefore if the authority by which baptism was there administered,
be not lawful and of God, I confess I cannot see how the thing it self can
be in force and justifiable. I add, that all Antichristian power, and
administrations by it, as Antichristian, cannot be lawful. And being it self
an Idol and humane invention, it cannot give being to an ordinance, or add
any thing to it, but corrupt it, and make it rather worse then better. The
ordination of a Pope, or Prelate, the presentation of a Patron, etc. give not
the Minister a calling, nor are necessary at all to make a man a Minister, they
corrupt the calling and the purity of it, but the essential of a caling is
from some other power, which is necessarily required to make the practice good
and authentical. If John's baptism was of men, certainly it was unlawful; but
if of God, so it was lawful, and so I say of ours. To clear my self here, I
shall premise these things, and so come to the conclusion.

First, a calling may be lawful, and of God, and yet corrupted many ways; as
first, by unfitness of persons in regard of their qualifications: for the
Pharisees sat in Moses chair, Matthew. 23. Malac. 2.8. Secondly, by the manner
of entrance into the calling: so the high Priesthood administered by them who
took upon them the Kingly dignity, many of them also purchasing the Priesthood
by money given to the heathen Kings, who often put out one, and put in another,
and whereas the, high Priest was to continue during his life; yet Caiaphas was
high Priest but a year. Thirdly, by their ungodly and wicked acts in it, as
Elies sons, Aaron yielded to the people to make a Calfe, and kept a festival
day; yet did not these things nullify the calling of the Priest hood, nor did
their administrations prove null thereby, and invalid. In the new Testament,
the church of Thyatira had corrupted the Ministerial calling grossly, in
suffering a woman under color of a Prophetess, to teach, yet did not this
destroy the calling of Ministry in that Church, but that the calling of
Ministry in that Church was lawful.

Secondly, a Church becomes a Church, or a company of men and women become a
Church, not by usurping the things of God of themselves, nor by imitating
others in their Church practices, as the Edomites, Ishmaelites, etc. or
Manasseh, the son in law of Sanballat, who builded a Temple in mount Gerizim,
after the fashion of that in Jerusalem, or Onias, building one in Egypt, and in
both of them setting up such services as were in Jerusalem) but by Gods
dispensation, and that performed by these two acts: First, on Gods part,
sending the word of his grace, offering it unto a people, thereby opening their
eyes, and turning them from darkness to light, and takes hold of them by some
effect of his power; so that he turns them from Idols to God: Secondly, from
that act he produces another, by that effect of his power, whereby such people
takes hold on Gods offer, and taking him and his Christ to be theirs, and
submitting themselves unto Christ, as their Lord and King, yield themselves up
together in joint and public visible profession, according to his laws and
ordinances.

Thirdly, such a church thus constituted is a true church, and a real
Ecclesiastical body, polity or corporation in it self, and so many companies
as thus join together, are so many churches of equal power, rights,
privileges, and jurisdictions; nor is any one a mother church unto others, but
all are sister churches: and though civilly the people may be distinguished
into many commonwealths, and many may be subject unto one, yet the several
churches of every subordinate commonwealth are not hereby subject unto the
church of the commonwealth, to which the rest are subordinate, but they remain
entirely equal among themselves, and all equally subordinate unto Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, such a church or churches, so remain still true churches, so long as
God continues his dispensation toward them, and no longer: but when God
forsakes them, and gives them a bill of divorce, then they leave off to be a
church; and not before; nor is it in the power of any other church or churches,
to unchurch any one such church, but Christ himself must do that. This church,
or these churches, notwithstanding, may much degenerate, and be defiled, in
their doctrine and government, desperately corrupted with error and sinful
practices (as the Jews before Christ commonly, and most of all in Christ's
days; after Christ, the churches of Corinth, Galatia, the churches of Asia,
Rev. 2. and 3. etc.) yet, till Christ remove the candlestick, and come himself,
and unchurch them, they still abide churches of Christ, and are so to be
acknowledged of all.

Fifthly, such as the state of the church is, such is the state of the Ministry
of that church and administration, and so long as the true church remains a
true church, so long the ministry remains a true ministry, and all the divine
institutions, authentical administrations, and truly the Lords ordinances,
notwithstanding the mixture of humane devices with them, making the
commandments of God of none effect, through their traditions. To clear all
these in each particular by the light of divine revelation, would require a
larger discourse then I intend, and not so difficult as tedious. I doubt not,
but any truly judicious, considering the state of churches in the old and new
Testament, will yield without any other travel, what is here set down, and
that the church, ministry, and administrations, stand and fall together.

To come then to the question, I affirm; that if there be true churches in
England, then there is a lawful ministry there, and true authentical
administrations. But there are true churches there; Ergo, there is a lawful
ministry there, and authentical administration. The Consequent is clear,
because it is the true being of a church that gives being to the truth of
ministry and ordinances, and not the ordinances that give being to a church.
Lot any company set up preaching, and administer the Sacraments, (I so call
them for discourse sake) that will not make that company to be a church, but
because they are not a church, therefore they are not Gods ordinances. The
antecedent, that there are true churches in England, I prove thus: If the true
visible state of Christ's Church be to abide from his time unto the end of the
world (as it must, Dan. 7. Luke 1.33. Mat. 16.16. and 18.18.20. and 28.19, 20.
1 Cor. 11. Heb. 12.29, etc.) then it is in England, and places of like
consideration, that it has continued in some other places of the world. But it
has not continued in any other places of the world, (it will be grateful to
all that desire truth, if any man can show where) also in England, and places
of like consideration has Christ's visible church continued: Again, if there be
no other churches in the world, nor have bin for many hundred years, but those
that are infected with Papisme, (that is the dominion of the Pope and
traditional doctrine) or reformed churches, and England amongst others, then
either the churches infected with Papisme are the true visible churches of
Christ, or the reformed. But there are no other churches in the world, nor have
been for many hundred years, but those that are infected with Papisme, or the
reformed; Ergo, the one or the other, must be the true visible churches of
Christ. But notwithstanding those that are infected with Papisme, few grant it,
as now they stand; Ergo, the reformed, and England amongst others. Further, if
Antichrist must fit in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2.4. and the courts of the
Temple be given unto the Antichristian Gentiles for a certain time, Rev. 11.1.
to 15. to tread under foot, then there was a true church estate where he sat,
and whilst he sat there, and the true measured Temple, whose courts he treads
under foot; nor can there be Antichrist, unless there be the Temple and courts
thereof where he is. And if Antichrist ever sat in England, then there was the
Temple of God there before he sat in it; and whilst he sat in it, as also in
other reformed churches. The Temple or church is the subject wherein he must
sit. The Antichristian seat is not the subject nor constitutes it, but is an
accident, vitiating the subject, the removing thereof Antichristianity does not
destroy the subject, or make it cease to be, but changes it into a better
state. I shall add this: If ever there were true churches constituted in
England, then they remain so still, or God has by some manifest act unchurched
them; unless therefore they that deny true ministry in England, and baptism
there, can, and do prove, that churches were never constituted there, or make
good some manifest act of God unchurching them, suitable to such acts of his in
Scriptures in the like cases, and whereby we may clearly discern the like
effects, all that can be said to disprove the lawfulness of ministry there, or
to prove the unlawfulness of administrations there, so far as they are
prescribed in the word, will not be available. And yet I shall be content to
speak a little farther of the church estate and ministry in England. And
concerning churches, it is to be considered, that a companny become or are a
church, either by conversion and initiall constitution, or by continuance of
the same constituted churches successively by propagation of members, who all
are born in the church state, and under the covenant of God, and belong unto
the church, and are a church successively, so long as God shall continue his
begun dispensation, even as well, and as fully as the first; and though in
respect of the numericall members, they are not the same; yet truly they are
the same in kind, Romans 11.16. 1 Cor. 7.14. Gal. 2.15. even as man continues
the same in kind from the first man, though not the same in number; so the
church estate continued from Adams time till Abraham's in the world by
succession of generations: So the Jews continued a church from Abraham's time
till Christ's.

Secondly, the way to prove churches to have had true constitution, is no way
to be attained, but either by Scriptures, or humane testimony: By Scriptures,
we may take notice of many churches planted in Judea, Syria, Galatia, Achaia,
Macedonia, etc. and by name, Rome, Corinth, Cenchrea, Philip: Coloss. Thessal.
Ephesians. Smyrna, etc. of any other by name I know not. That the Apostle preached
from Jerusalem to Illyricum, and that he mentions his coming into Italy by
Spain, is evident, but whether any churches were planted there or no, divine
records manifest not: And as clear it is, that those churches mentioned in
Scriptures are destroyed; nor can we by Scriptures prove the continuance of
Christ's visible Kingdom in the world for many hundred years upward, but in
Rome, which few will plead for, to have any truth of church estate; and I see
no need of proving any such thing in this case. So that by Scripture testimony,
I know not where we may cast our eyes, to look upon any Church now, or for many
years past, existent: By humane testimony, we may take notice of the Gospel,
preached in many places, and amongst other, in Britain, by Apostolical
authority, where the Word has ever continued since, more or less, and
therefore it is false for Rome to challenge the conversion of the English
nation, and no less absurd and injurious for us to draw and derive our
succession from them: As the Gospel was received there, so it has not been
without fruit, as also in other places; but under the tyranny of Ethnic
Emperors, and apostafie of Antichristian Bishops, many there have witnessed
unto the truth of Christ, and suffered for the testimony of Jesus; nor has it
been at any time, nor is now ineffectuall there, but the Lord has been pleased
to bless those means of his, notwithstanding persecution or corruptions, with
conversion of many thousand souls from Satan to himself; yea, he has not
only reserved successively even in England unto himself thousands that have not
bowed their knees unto Baal, but amongst others, some of the most famous lights
that he vouchsafed to raise up in the time of that horrid darkness
overspreading the world, have been of English Christians, as Mr. Wickliffe,
Pastor of Lutterworth, (though corruptly called in part) in Lincolnshire. It
cannot be denied, that as in all other places of the Western world wheresoever
Christianity settled, the whole world went after the Beast, and all churches (I
know not one excepted) with that apostafie were corrupted, and the courts of
the Temple were not measured, and the holy city was given to be trodden under
foot of the Gentiles Antichristian 42. months; yet all this time the holy city
remains a holy city, and after too, unless God himself rejects her. In the
same condition amongst others, were the churches in England corrupted as the
rest, with false doctrine, Idolatry, etc. and usurped upon by Antichrist,
against which, God even there also had his two witnesses, some few prophesying
in sackcloth. At last it pleased God more fully to clear up the light, and
caused his truth to prevail; so as many thousands were redeemed from amongst
men Antichristian, and they were the first fruits unto God and the Lamb; nor
was the churchestate altered essentially all this time, nor are these first
fruits unto God, new constituted churches, but members of some churches,
clearing themselves from corruption, and by reformation recovering themselves
out of a desperate diseased condition, into a more healthful and sound estate.
In which course the Lord went on mightily in many places, especially after
Luthers time, yea, even in England; something by Henry the 8th, more by Edward
the 6th. and Queen Elizabeth, who did not constitute new churches, but reformed
the churches, (as Geneva, Scotland, etc. in a further degree) deeply
degenerated from the first constitution, and the pure state thereof; as they
did the like in the state of Judah often, sometimes better and more fully, and
sometimes not so fully in the days of Judges, David, Asa, Jehosaphat,
Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezra and Nehemiah.

To conclude this, as I believe firmly Christ's visible Church has continued in
the world from his time to this day, though not always in one estate, nor ever
in like purity: So I know not how it may be better cleared in the general, or
any thing more be said for any other church or churches, then I have here set
down, for the continuance of the visible church estate in England in
particular; if any can, I think they shall do well, and that which is
necessary, especially in these times; and therefore, as I said before, unless
they that deny true ministry in England can show that there never was
church estate in England, nor constituted churches; or that God has given them
a bill of divorce, I shall desire all that will not be satisfied herewith, that
they will be content not to disquiet themselves with disturbance to others.

I come now to propound some things about the ministry there in particular. To
this purpose, we know all, that no man can have a lawful Calling but of God,
and that in one of these two ways: Immediately by himself, without concurrence
of man: or mediately by men, using them as instruments, other way of calling I
know not any according to the Word; accounting all callings, or way of calling
not set down in the Word to be humane and Idolatrous.

Concerning the way of calling by men (for of the other I know not any, but the
Apostles, that ever were, or are to be called) two things I desire to speak to:

First, who has the power of applying a calling to a man.

Secondly, how it is applied.

1. Who has the power of applying a ministerial calling to a man? some say
the Pope, some stand for in mediate revelation, both which I conceive to be
alike contrary to the Word; some say the Christian Magistrate, qua Magistrate,
at least approbation; but I see no warrant for this neither; some say the
Church, but by Chuch they understand a Presbytery or Classis (a company of
Presbyters of several churches) or Council, but of these we have no clear
evidence in Scriptures to evince such a church, or such a practice: For, though
there be mention of laying on of the hands of Presbyters, yet that was not the
actual calling of a man, but a ceremony of confirmation, as I shall show
afterward.

By church therefore, I judge is meant a company of Saints, joined together in
profession, and successively, standing up in the same estate, and this company
has power to apply the office to such a man as may be according to Gods Word:
Thus I judge, partly from Scriptures, partly from reason; the Scriptures are
these, in the old Testament the Jews chose their own officers: Deuteronomy. 1.13. and
16.18. In the new Testament, Act. 1.26. The word signifies, he was
incorporated into the society of the eleven, by common suffrages.

In the context I note two things:

First, the whole company did choose two from out of themselves, and set them
before the Lord, because the applying of that kind of calling depended only on
God; yet they bring it thus far, as to single out two.

Secondly, God having chosen one of the two, they subscribe to it by joint
suffrages; nor did any other thing concur in that man's calling, no imposition
of hands, which if it had been necessary, certainly should have been,
especially there being eleven Apostles present; and inferior persons, in a
case imposed hands on Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13. Again, Acts 6.3, 5. The
multitude, that is, the church, and it seems, without the assistance of the
Apostles, did look out by examination and trial, and choose seven men amongst
themselves, and then set them before the Apostles, who prayed, and laid their
hands on them, Acts 14.23. They set no Elders in every church, by lifting up of
hands, that is, they assisted the churches in ordaining Elders, who were chosen
by peoples suffrages, manifested by their lifting up their hands; and 2 Cor.
8.19. he whose praise is in the Gospel was chosen by the churches, testifying
their suffrages, by lifting up their hands; from which Scriptures I judge, that
the power of choosing and setting apart a person for church-office, is in the
church it self. Hereunto I add these reasons:

First, that which concerns all the church, it is reason it should be done by
all the church; but to have this or that man an officer, to administer,
concerns all the church; Ergo, it is reason it should be done by the church,
to choose him to office.

Secondly, no adjunct in order of nature, is before the subject, nor is capable
of receiving any thing, but as it adheres to, and so from the subject; but
ministry is the adjunct of the church, and the church is the subject; Ergo, the
ministry is not capable of any power, but as it adheres to the church, and so
from it; as the eye in the body, etc.

Thirdly, the Church is the Spouse of Christ and his body, but a Presbytery is
not the Spouse, not the body, but a part of the Spouse, or body, Romans 12.1 Cor.
12. Ergo, the power is in the church primarily, and not in the Presbytery,
else the head should not derive power to the body at all; and though the
Presbyters, qua Believers, are a part of the body of Christ with the rest, that
make up the whole; yet as Presbyters they are parts of Christ, and not of the
church: the mouth and eyes of Christ, and not of the church; so they and the
church, as believers, have no power, but they derive it immediately from
Christ; which I cannot see how it may be made good.

Fourthly, if the church has power to refuse a man, and to put him out, then
she has power to choose and put him in; but the first is true, else she sins
not in suffering false teachers; nor can she decline a vicious Elder, or shut
her self of him, invito vel non curante presbyterio.

Fifthly, there is no power that any can have from heaven ordinarily, but by
some transaction between God and them; but there is no such transaction between
God and the Presbytery primarily, the covenant is not made with them, but with
the church, Romans 9. v. 4. Ephesians. 2.12, 13.19.20. Ergo, the power is hers
primarily, and as the first subject of it from Christ.

Sixthly, if the church and not the Presbytery be the kingly nation, royal
priesthood, and Kings and Priests unto God, then the power belongs to the
church, and not to the Presbytery; but the church is the kingly nation, etc.
and not the Presbytery; Ergo, the power belongs to the church, and not to the
Presbytery. The Antecedent is true, Exodus 19.1 Pet. 2.5. Rev. 7.6. and that as
a church. The Consequent is evident: Because, etc. they should be titular
things only, and have a naked name only, without power; and they that are not
Kings and Priests, etc. as the Presbytery, qua tales, they should have the
power.

Last of all, if the words, Go tell the Church, be meant not of the presbytery
only, but of the church of Saints, the whole body consisting of flock and
Elders, then the power belongs not to the Presbytery, but to the whole: But
the words, Go tell the church, are not meant of a Presbytery, but of the
whole, consisting of flock and Elders; Ergo, the power belongs to the church,
as totum, and not to the Presbytery, distinguished from the church. All this
is manifest from the use of the word church, which in the new Testament is no
where used for the Presbytery alone, but sometimes for the members alone
without, or distinct from Presbytery: as Acts 14.23. and 15.4.22. 1 Cor.
12.28. frequently for the whole flock and Elders together. Junius, etc.
Some, I confess, allege those places: Acts 14.27. and 18.22. to prove the
word church to mean Presbytery, and the reason they give is this: That it is
not probable that the Apostle there saluted all the church, or gathered all the
church together, but rather the Presbytery: But there is no force in this
reason; for it is like, will I say, that he gathered the whole church, and
saluted the whole church, and might do it well enough without any
inconvenience; yea, and the Text says, he did, and therefore it is more then
likely, even a most certain truth. The places therefore will not prove that the
word church does mean Presbytery, nor argue, that Go tell the church, is tell
the Presbytery.

Secondly, from the relation of the party offending, which is to the church,
and not to the Presbytery; for their fellowship is with the church as church,
the covenant and brotherhood is with them; and therefore, though the
Presbytery orderly exercises the power; yet it is in ordine ad Ecclesiam;
there is no particular relation between the party and Presbytery, as may
advantage the Presbytery to exercise such an act of power over the party, no
more then they may administer the Sacraments to a private person, but to him as
a church member, and with the whole church.

Thirdly, the Presbytery consisting of three or four Elders, are ofsended by a
brother, bound up in fellowship with an hundred private brethren; now the
Presbytery admonishing, they can go no further, if they be the church, and the
brother not hearing the Presbytery, is to be accounted as a Publican and
Heathen, though not one of the hundred know of it; and so if a private brother
offend, and bring it to the Prebytery.

Fourthly, the Presbytery may be the party offending, and then you must tell
the Church that the Church offends, that is, go tell themselves. If you say,
I may tell the Classis; I answer, Take for granted, there is such an ordinance,
yet I will suppose they may take in with the offending Presbytery, and I must
stay at a general Council, if it may be had, which is not free from error
neither. And I shall as willingly stay at a Church of Saints, unless I see
more convincing grounds to enforce the institution of them, as divine
appointments. And if a Church offend, there is another course to be taken; this
rule will not reach here.

Fifthly, if by Go tell the Church, be meant the Presbytery, then there being
but two or three of the Presbytery, a brother offended cannot take one or two
of them for witnesses, because then he should tell the Church before the turn
come, and could make no further proceeding. But a brother offended may take one
or two Presbyters for witnesses. Ergo, Presbytery cannot be the Church. And if
it cannot be taken for a Presbytery, much less for a Classis, Synod, Council:
Nor do I observe any of Christ's Apostles in any directions given by them to
Timothy, Titus, or any Churches or people, or Christ himself in his Epistles to
the seven Churches of Asia, speak one word of going to a Classis, or
Provincial Synod and Church, and which certainly they would have done, if
there had been such an institution.

Again, Christ would have blamed the Classis, or Presbyteriall Church, and not
every particular Angel, and the particular church to which he belonged. And I
verily think he would have spoken some word of Council in one or other, that
they should have gathered a Synod, or some of each Churches Presbyteries at
least, to have met about it, and to have taken some course to rectify things,
if he knew there were, or ought to be such a constitution or ordinance binding
all ages. And he had left them without advice in seeking some help without
their own limits and bounds, within which he terminates all his instructions
and counsels; upon these considerations I conceive it is not a well grounded
apprehension, nor to be made good by force of argument, that every one of these
seven Churches were Classical or Synodall churches, that is, many churches in
a consociation; and the Angel in each to mean a company of Presbyters belonging
to all those churches, as the particular Elders of each, but here attended as a
Classis, or collection of all the Presbyters of each church, and that the seven
Angels should be seven Classes, or Synodall, Presbyteriall assemblies;
notwithstanding I conceive there may be good and necessary use of such
assemblies in a way of prudence, and brotherly helpfulnesse. Thus of the power
of applying, to whom it belongs; a little now of the way of applying of this
calling to a man, which is done by these particular acts: First, by trial
consisting in a right understanding of Christ's rule, and applying it to such a
man, as they shall discern the rule to fit to: and herein though the help of
Presbyters, as better gifted, be especially useful, yet not excluding the
people, as if their part in trial were nothing, whereas they must try all
things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. the spirits, 1 John 4. are able to discern the voice of
Christ from a stranger, Joh. 10. and prove the verity of Paul's teaching by the
Scriptures, Acts 17.2ly the party thus tried, is propounded and presented to
the church, or multitude, who by their suffrages do consent to choose and set
apart that man for that office. And that this belongs to the people, none
that I know will deny. And upon the peoples manisestation of themselves, if he
shall accept it, and yield himself up for that office to which they have set
him apart, I count this the chief part, and most essential of a Ministerial
calling, and true, though there should be no more.

Thirdly, ordination, by imposition of hands upon the head of the elect party,
which was practiced sometimes by the Apostles, Acts 6. and by the Presbytery in
Timothies calling, 1 Timothy 4. Yet to clear this a little further, two things
may be cleared: First, of the necessity of this ceremony, which some hold must
be, or else no calling, and that it alone gives the essence of calling to a
man. But I do not think it is so necessary, or of such consequence; first,
because it was not used by Christ in ordaining his Apostles nor instituted by
him for ordaining others. That Christ imposed his hands upon many infirm, and
commanded his Apostles to lay their hands upon the sick for their recovery, is
clear, Matthew. 9. Mark 5.6, 7, 8, 16. Luke 4.13. but we never read that Christ
commanded imposition of hands to ordain an officer. In this case we read that
it was also sometimes used, 1 Timothy 5.
Acts 6. and 1 Timothy 4. and not any where else that I know of: for Acts 13. is
of a diverse consideration. There are but two places therefore that speak to
this case, neither of which proves an institution; they laid their hands upon
many sick, and upon others, to confer the holy Ghost; but these prove no
institution in these things. Our Savior breathed upon the Apostles, and they
received the holy Ghost, but he made not that an institution. Secondly, Divines
judge it a thing indifferent, and therefore not essential, as Polanus,
Tilenus, that the act of trial and choosing is much greater then the laying on
of hands. Calvin. Instit. lib. cap. 3. sect. 16. yet I count it a comely and
convenient rite, and not to be neglected where it may be had in Gods way; nor
do they that hold it necessary, so maintain it, but that in some cases it may
be wanting, and yet the calling lawful, which I judge disputable.

A second question is, to whom it belongs to impose hands? I answer, to a
Presbytery if it may be had: but that the want of it makes the calling
invalid, I see nothing to conclude: for then no calling to the Ministry can be
cleared from that time that one being chosen out of the rest of the Presbytery,
and called peculiarly Episcopus, and performing this action alone, afterward
usurped by the Hierarchy; but all these Ministries must be null, and there
should be no true Ministry in the world: and how can now any at this day have
power legitimate to do this first, and being done by such as were no
Presbyters, or Antichristian Idols, how can the act and acts of any following
Presbytery be comfortably cleared? In a word, I think that as in the
presentment of the Levits at first to the Lord, Numb. 8.9, 10. all the
Congregation was gathered together and laid their hands on the Levits: it was
the act of the whole company, yet performed (...) them, and in their stead by
some of them, not the Elders, (they were too few) but by the first born, in
whose stead they were given up to God: So it may be now in the like case,
there being no Presbytery, the people choosing one for Office, according to
rule, this rite may be at first performed by some chief in stead of the rest.
And if it be not practiced at the first, I see no such danger, the rest
concurring. As in their return from Babylon after the 70 years captivity,
things were not so exact as at first institution; yea, five special things
were always wanting from that time in the second Temple, that had been in the
first. But I cannot prove, may some say, all these, nor the first two, which I
hold to be of the essence of Ministerial calling, in reference to the Ministry
in England? I answer, First, things are done either explicitly and in express
terms, or implicitly and by a tacit and virtuall consent. Secondly, every
company meeting in one place for worship successively from the first
constitution, remained a true Church, though much corrupted; and still so much
purer as they did or do reform themselves in their standing and worship
according to the word of Christ. Thirdly, the calling of Ministry in each
church, though greatly corrupted, is essentially a true calling, as the church
is essentially a true church, consisting of Saints foederally, though they be
not such Saints as they should be. Fourthly, the manner of calling is not the
Bishops ordination, etc. that makes it not a calling, but marres the goodness
of it, adds nothing unto it, but derogates from the purity of it. But the
people receiving a man, sent unto them in a corrupt way, and joining with him
to worship God, though here also with much corruption; and not exercising their
power in refusing him (though they do not explicitly exercise their power in
choosing) they do implicitly choose him. I say, by these three acts of receiving,
joining with, and not refusing, they do virtually and really give him all the
just calling that he has, which is a true Ministerial calling, and so all the
ordinances, administered by him there, which God has prescribed (as baptism
amongst others, notwithstanding humane additions corrupting the purity of any
of them) are really Gods ordinances, and of divine authority, and validity. As
of old, Jer. 5.30, 31. There is a horrible thing committed in the Land, the
Prophets prophecy falsehoods, the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so: Yet this did not make them no Church, or take away
the lawfulness of Ministry, or nullify their just administrations; so in this
case I judge the same, and therewith conclude this Discourse.

FINIS.

