THE Divine Philanthropie Defended Against the Declamatory Attempts of certain
late-printed Papers Intitl'd A Correptory Correction. IN Vindication of some
Notes concerning Gods Decrees, Especially of Reprobation,

By THOMAS PIERCE Rector of Brington in Northamptonshire.

Augustine. l. 6. Hypognostic^n ad Calumn. Pelag. p. 880. Non miramur Vos de
Nobis, id est, Homines de Hominibus, falsa posse confingere.

We do not wonder that men are able to bear false-witness against their
Neighbors.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane, 1657.

To a Person of Honor and Integrity.
Sir,
YOur most obliging Resentment of the late un-Neighbourly usage which I have
publicly received from that strange Person, whom you mention so severely under
the Title of Mr. Waspe, is that for which I must thank you, but chide you too.
For what use do you make of your Philosophy, and that Government of the Will
which we are wont to talk of, whilst you appear to be so deeply and
oversensibly concerned in any man's swaggering against the innocent and careless
MOON? The very worst that you can say of my Dear Antagonist (whose precious
Soul I do protest is dearer to me then my Eyes) is in effect and substance no
more then this, that he is vehemently Angry without a Cause, and bitterly
reproachful without a Reason, and most Inventive of Accusations without the
least Ground. But what necessity could there be that you should express his
misdemeanors by such an austere Hypotyposis, as [That He foames upon my Name,
and offers violence to my Closet, and committed great lewdness with my
bashful-reluctant-unwilling-Papers, and that now in a Libel of above thirty
sheets He even tears and scratches and incessantly biteth my Reputation?] might
not this have been clothed with cooler words, if you had not been a little
heated by his great Fire? I for my part will not answer him according to his
Folly. And whilst in Revenge of my Doctrines, [That Sin is none of the Objects
of God's Absolute Decrees, but of his real Hatred and sincere Detestation; that
God decreed to punish no man without respect unto his Sins, nor to save him any
otherwise then as being in Christ; that Christ is intentionally the Savior of
all; and that none can continue to have an Interest in Christ without Obedience
as well as Faith, or without Repentance, New Life, and Perseverance unto the
end,] I say, whilst Mr. Barlee does, in Revenge of these Innocent Doctrines,
load my Person and my Papers with such unfriendly Appellations, as
[unconscionable, and Graceless, Proud, and Stomackful, Insolent, and Malepert,
Frontless, and Impudent, of an Adulterous Forehead, and Atheistical, Slanderous
Dragon, and Satanical Blasphemer, raging against Heaven, and belching out
Blasphemies against the Scriptures, Poisonous, Triobolarie, and Diabolical,
nay, worse then Diabolical wittily wicked,] with an innumerable company of such
like things, I am content to express them after the manner of the Psalmist, by
saying that he has Psalm. 35. 21.
opened his mouth wide against me, and Verse 20.
devised deceiptfull words against them that are quiet in the Land. A Verse 11.
12.
false witness is risen up, and (rewarding me evil for Good) has laid to my
charge things that I knew not.

And I pray Sir tell me, why should you be so offended with his irreverence
toward me, who (in his Doctrine of Decrees) speaks much more If you desire
some examples without the labor of searching for them, you may turn to that
which I have spoken in my following discoveries, Chap. 1. Sect. 5. p. 23, 24,
25, 26. and chap. 3. Sect. 31, 34, 35. and chap. 4. Sect. 21. 24. 28, 29. and
from Sect. 33. to the end. and Sect. 28, p. 110, 111, 112, 116.
hardly of his Creator? If he has been so unhappy as to abuse himself, and me,
(but most himself, because me,) the first should only serve to exercise your
pity, and the second only your pardon. For in this we should follow the example
of David; who however impatient of a profane Goliath that offered indignities
to his God, and affronts to his Religion, yet he slighted the railings of
cursing Shimei, because they reached no farther then to his Person. I confess
it is my duty, when I find a slander cast upon the will of our God (whom we
have the honor and the happiness to serve and worship) to be affected as
David was, and as you your self now are, with equal resentment and Indignation.

But, Sir, you know who tell's us, that Muliebre maxim and puerile est vitium,
Sene^. de ira, c. 16.
Testiness is an unmanlike and childish vice. They are feeble and sick bodies
which groan and complain upon every touch. Though we cannot say with Seneca, or
with Maximus Tyrius, that a wise man and virtuous cannot be (...). Max. Tyr.
Dissert. 2. In sapie^tem non cadit Injuria. Sen. ad Serenum.
injured, yet we may venture to say with So^rates, that such a man cannot be
(...).
hurt. Indeed a judgment that is blinded with Pett and Passion is not wont to
distinguish betwixt Injury and Harm. Because anger (as well as Fear) Wisd. 17.
12.
betrayeth the succors which Reason offers. But that that there is a
distinction appears by this, that God himself may be injured, who yet (we know)
can take no harm. He has communicable Attributes, as well as Attributes
incommunicable; not only Impassivenesse, but patience too. And if we will but 2 Timothy 1. 6.
stir up the gift of God which is in us, we are able to be patient, though
not impassive. Why should you or I be troubled at those extravagant inventions
and bitter speeches, which are only cast at me, but do not hitt? of what
concernment is it to me, that an Enemy is sick with the overflowing of the
Gall, so long as I (God be thanked) enjoy my health? if he * wearieth himself
to commit iniquity, the more is Jer. 9. 5.
his misery, and my compassion. My compassion (I say) of him, who has done me
the wrong, and not of my self who have reciev'd no harm by his injustice. For
though he aims at my head, he strikes nothing but my Helmet. That he has
provoked me above expression, (as you rightly phrase it) inferr's nothing on my
part, but an occasion to forgive him. And the excess of his injustice does but
add to the Luster of my forgiveness. Mine indeed is the injury, but his the
mischief.

Besides, we may learn so much Christianity among the (...). etc. Arrian Ep. l.
1. c. 29. (...).
Stoics, as not to make our selves unhappy by our not being Masters of an
other man's Tongue. If a man in Music shall call Nete, Hypate, or discoursing
of Geometry, shall say the Lines are not equal which are drawn to the
Circumference from the very same Center, will a Mathematician be therefore
Angry? why then should you, or I, because my Neighbor mistakes my name; I am
not sure the less Orthodox for being called a Pelagian, a Socinian, a Jesuit,
or a Ranter, any more then the Apostles were the less sober, because they were
said to be Act. 2 13.
full of new wine; and not only said, but Ver. 25.
supposed to be drunk. St. Paul was not the worse for being said to be a Acts
28. 4.
Murderer, nor yet the better for being said to be a Ver. 6.
God. I am no more a Heretic for being said by Mr. Barlee to lay Correp. cor.
p. 22.
a snare for the worthy Gentlemen of the Country whereby to bring them into
Boggs and praecipices, then God himself is a Seducer, for being said by Mr.
Barlee to p. 79. he says he is not at leisure fully to open in what sense. But
he had partly told us, but 14. lines before, where he says expressly, God
determins that sin shall be done, not as a duty; but as a fact, that shall fall
out by the sinful will of the creature. Nor can he mean a conditional
determination who is all for absolute. And he says p. 86, 87. God does not
only determine all things and actions, but their several modalities too, as to
the manner of their being, whether as necessary, contingent, or voluntary. Now
sin must needs be a thing, or action, or a modality of thing or action. And
withal it must needs be either necessary, contingent, or voluntary. And of all
such modalities, he says that God is the supreme cause, p. 87. Again he says,
(p. 60, 61.) that God does stir up wicked men to acts as acts which to the
Actors are and will be unjust. As if God could stir up David to pollute
Bathsheba, without stirring him up to his adultery, or else that Adultery
become no sin. See what I shall say. chapter 4. p. 42, 43, 44.
tempt men unto sin. who instead of excusing, does commend the expressions of
other men, whilst they say that the wicked do run into sin, by God's Impulse,
by his command, by his will, by his compulsion, by his Decree, and
Prostitution. All which I shall display (with a desire to convince, and not to
shame him, unless I shame him by accident in his refusing the glory of true
Repentance) when I discover the sad estate of his 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59,
60. and some following pages. All which shall be considered in the ten last
Sect. of my 4th. Chapter.

The use that here I make of it is only this, that we should not think our
selves hurt by being railed at. Every man is not thunderstruck by a long
suffering God that brings up an ill report of his ways and dealings. And
although we may punish any libeller by making it appear that he is such, yet at
the very same time, we must give him our pity and pardon too. The truth is,
that if he had done me no greater injury, then to drag my name through the
dirt, by telling all the world I am in a state of Correp. Cor. p. 43. and 174.
damnation, and (which is more to my prejudice) that I am nearly allied to the
p. 15.
Jesuits and Socinians, and express my reverence to the Augustan Confession
(which is well known to be Protestant) merely out of love to the * Mass of
Ceremonies, that ** p. 92.
ceremonious * litter, thereby making me liable (as much as in him lies) not
only to sequestration, but death it self (for you know that Michael Servetus,
procurante id Calvino, vivus exustus est Genevae, Anno 1553. libenter fateor
(inquit Calvinus de se) ac prae me fero, ex me prodiisse Accusatorem, Gro. in
Vo. pro. pa. Ecc. Spero capitale saltem feret judicium. Calvin. in Epist. ad
Farellum.
Servetus was burnt at Geneva for less then being a Socinian, and what would
be done to that Papist that should hold a Parsonage here in England) I say if
this had been all, I had not now put pen to paper. For I consider that breeding
people are ever apt to be pettish, and I should easily have hoped that all that
frowardness of Mr. Barlee had been merely the effect of a teeming brain.
Which I can as heartily forgive, as men do their Wives the Qualmes of breeding,
or torments of Childbirth. I mean the peevishnesses and petts, which are
usually incident to such as bear and bring ^orth. I know, that my Neighbor
has had very hard labors; once he terribly miscarried with what he had long
been impraegn'd against a Manuscript Copy of what I printed (if yet a thing so
mangled may be called mine,) and it is much more then nine months, since he
has been traveling with that which he has now brought forth. And whether we
consider the great This I should never have said or thought, if Mr. B. himself
had not assured me under his hand and seal, [that being a Prebsbyterian he
affected much to proceed by the common counsel of the Presbytery.] Which makes
me amazed at the injustice of his Dedicatory Epistle (p. 7.) where he accuses
me for suggesting that thing to him, which had been more then suggested by him
to me. As if he thought it m^crime, to believe the truth of what he told me:
and which however he told me in words at length, yet have I a better opinion of
those men, then to think them all guilty of what they were so very early
accused to me by Mr. Barlee.
company of friends who were employed in his assistance, or the many and long
Teeth with which the child of his Invention did eat its way, we cannot choose
but conclude that his pangs and throws were very tedious, and that the effects
of his Impatience should only be matter of good men's Pity. Which was indeed one
Reason, why I resolved at the beginning only to punish him with my silence. For
commonly those punishments are most useful to the Offenders which are most
opposite to the offense. And therefore as I approve of the Senate at Ephesus
which decreed that his At been consuluerant Ephesii, Decreto memoriam teterrimi
hominis abolendo: n^si Theop^mpi Ingenium in historiis eum suis
comprehendisset. Val. Max. l. 8. c. 14.
name should not be mentioned, who had burned their Temple, merely to be
talked of; so that ambitious sort of weak scriblers, who (like unclean and
ravenous Birds) are not affrighted with the stench, but love to feed upon the
Carcass of Reputation, and have an impotent desire that their Names should
live, and be immortal, by the woeful preservatives of being loud, and
troublesome, deserve (I think) to dye in silence, and (to prevent ill smells)
to be quietly buried in Oblivion.

But now in consideration of these few things, first, that my Neighbor has
committed a public Riot (I do not say upon my Name and Papers only, but) upon
all that is dear and precious to me, my Friends, my Religion, my Reverend
Fathers in God, my dearest Mother the Church of England, my Conscience, my
Faith, my Savior, and my God too; Secondly, That he has quoted my private
Letters by scraps and pieces, not as he ought, but as he pleases, and as he
hopes may tend most to his Advantage; Thirdly, that he pretends my Necessity of
sending my Notes into the world was not given me by him, but page 9.
selfe-created; Fourthly, that under color of confuting my little Book, he
has only used Tricks to write a great one, which he has filled (not with
Arguments, but) with Invectives and Railings against my Papers; nor yet so much
against my Papers, as against my Person, and my Party, (to use the cleanest of
all his phrases) against my Name, and my Principles, my Parishioners and my
Parsonage; Lastly, that he referrs his Reader to such and such pages of my
Book, where I say the very contrary to what he would have me, (nor do I speak
of any written, but printed Copy, which he falsifies as boldly, as if he took
it for granted, either that no body that reads him would read me too, or else
that every body would trust before they try him,) and as if that were not
sufficient, is feign to father some There is a notable example p. 39. where ^he
pretends me to have baosted, that I am above Sin, and by my own power could
abstain from it. And p. 73. That I am against all second Marriages of
Ministers. And very many the like in other places, which are as groundless as
these two, (enough to let you taste what is likely to be your entertainment.)
Fictions upon bare Report, which have not only no ground, but no similitude of
Truth, and for which he cites nothing but a simple Hearsay, and which if the
Reader should believe upon his bare word, would render me as odious as any
Antichrist; I say in consideration of these five things, I do consent to
publish the discoveries which I have made at twice Reading over the seventy
first pages of his voluminous Invention. It being fit that my Judgment should
be conformable to yours, which is in this, as in other things, so conformable
to Reason. Why I trouble the Press with no more, I shall satisfy my Reader
before we part. And shall say to you at present no more then this.

Ajax took it so heavily that Ulysses should be preferred Sophocles in Ajace
flagellifero. Erasm. in Adag.
before him, and that in the Judgment of Agamemnon, as that with overmuch grief
he ran quite Madd. Nothing now would content him but sweet Revenge; both on the
wicked Ulysses who had gotten the Armor of Achilles (which was the subject of
their Contention) and on the filthy Agamemnon, who had decreed it. Ajax drew
out his sword, and (Fancy succeeding in the place of Reason) he valiantly
charged a Herd of Swine, supposing them to be the Grecian Army. There were two
great Sow's of extraordinary Bulk, which he singled out as a peculiar sacrifice
to his Displeasure, taking one for Agamemnon, and the other for Ulysses. These
foure-footed Grecians he hung up on a Beam, and gave them such Correptory
Correction with Tongue and Whipcord, as made them utterly incapable of any more
such Combats. This act of vengeance did so affect him with insultation and
laughter, that [(...)] became a Proverb.

What think you, Sir? should the Grecian Army have face't about, (and have
quitted their main Project toward which they were marching,) to revenge
themselves upon Ajax, because (in enmity to them) he had fearfully mangled a
Herd of Swine? or should Ulysses and Agamemnon have set their wits against
Ajax, for having cruelly insulted over a couple of dead Sows? was it not
punishment enough, that he lost the Armor of Achilles, and after ran out of
his wits? mistook a Herd for an Army, and a Sow for an Enemy? Nay, when he
came out of his Reverie, and found the grossness of his mistake, his vexation
and his shame made him Impatient of his Life. For having drawn his Sword at his
Fancy, he put it up into his Bowels.

To apply this story were long and needless, and I must now take care, that my
Gate be not bigg enough for my City to run out at. Lest Mr. Barlee tell me once
more, (who yet had surely less reason then any man living) that Correp. Corr.
p. 44.
I am terrible long ere I can get into my Trappings or Geers. I have perhaps
already worn out your patience, and presumed too much upon your leisure. The
usual freedom which you allow me must be attended with respect, as well as
kindeness; for although you are not either a Lord, or a Lady, (as the shrewd
Hariolator does seem to think) yet you are certainly a Person as well of
Honor, as of Integrity. And since I have been so observant of all your strict
precepts, That I should never reveal your Name, I may say without danger of
interessing your modesty (how much soever to the displeasure of our Correptory
Corrector) that I honor your virtues and Erudition, more then your Fortune,
and your Blood. And that I am equally obliged to speak my self

Sir, Your very Affectionate

An Advertisement to the READER.
WHen I found a Volume of about thirty sheets, addressing it self in
particular to Mr. T. P. in the very express Form of a Declamatory Epistle,
and almost totally composed of the most bitter railings, or the most
groundless inventions that in all my life I ever heard of, (interlarded with
but a few, and those few very unskilful, and unscholarlike Reasonings against
the subject of my Notes concerning God's Decrees) I awhile debated within my
self, which would be the most prudent and Christian course. Whether to suffer
in deep silence under his personal abuses and imputations, or to discover to
the World what an Incomparable Adversary I have to deal with.

If I should venture on a discovery, I thought I might give some distaste to the
less considering sort of Readers by my bare Saepe gravius vidi offendere
animos Auditorum, eos, qui aliena flagitia aperte dixerunt, quam eos qui
commiserun^. Cicer^.
discovering of his commissions, as well as He by committing such heinous
things. And yet if I should not discover them, the several men of his It is
his own expression of himself in his p. 48.
Combination might make advantage of my silence, and urge it as an Argument of
my Consent.

I stood ballancing (for a time) somewhat like Buridan's Ass, knowing not
which of the two I should prefer. To show him a very gross Christian, and a
very Thinn Scholar, were to reflect upon the Credit of those aged Praefacers,
who have publicly commended his undertaking; and yet to indulge him an escape,
were to suffer the common people to stumble and fall down into some foul
Errors, (of Judgment first, and then of practice) by the reverence which they
bear to the Learned Author of the first Epistle; whom as I seriously respect
for his Gravity, Learning, and comparative Moderation, so I design to make it
appear by conferring with him in a peculiar season. For His Name, and Mr.
Barlees bound up together, are like the Couples of Mortua quin etiam jungebat
corpora vivis. Virgil.
Mezentius, whose Cruelty it was to yoke the living with the dead; nor will I
be so severe or disobliging unto him, as I find in this matter he has been
unto himself. But I had not yet determined what course to take with Mr. Barlee.
For to denudate his misdemeanors, might seem severity to a Neighbor; and yet
not to do it, would be a cruelty to my self. Once I thought that Mr. B. had
very sufficiently bewrayed himself, and that the first of his Patrons could
not preserve him from Contempt, much less the Second, much less the Third.
But yet it came into my mind, that it is as true now, as it was at the time
when Nullus imperitus scriptor est, qui Lectorem non inveniat similem sui,
Hieron. Epist. 36.
Saint Hierome wrote it, that There is not any Writer so very unworthy to be
READ, who does not meeet with some Readers just like himself. One while I
considered the noble meekness of a Savior, who endured (even with silence)
such (...). Heb. 12. 3.
contradiction of Sinners against himself. But again I laid in the other Scale
of the Balance, his great Severity and Sharpness at Matt. 15. 3, 7, 9, 14.
etc. Matt. 23. 14, 33.
other times. I remembered that Charity 1 Cor 13. 7. and 5.
endures all things, and is not easily provoked. But yet I could not be
forgetful, that it is also allowed to begin at home; and that my (...) apud
Aristot. Ethic.
knee is nearer to me then my shin. I looked with one eye upon the (...). etc.
happiness and bliss of being reviled, and persecuted, and having all manner
of evil falsely spoken against me, for his Names sake for whom I pleaded. But
I looked also (with the other eye) upon the very great Misery of suffering Jer.
9. 3.
Truth to fall in the midst of the Streets, without so much as endeavoring to
hold her up. I gave an ear to that of Solomon, [ Prove. 8. 16.
strive not with an angry man,] And thought the very repetition of his
Reproaches might be looked upon by the unwary as a kind of As indeed in this
case* difficile est Satyram non scribere. It is hard to say any thing which
will not look like severity, where such enormities must be detected.
(...). But I would not be deaf to that saying of the Apostle, Jam. 5. 20.
that he who converteth a Sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a Soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. Whilst I was standing thus in
Bivio, (suspended by an indifference which way I went,) I was determined to
this course which I have now waded through, by the distinction which I made
betwixt a Greater and Lesser evil. I thought it dangerous to speak, but more
dangerous to be silent; and though of two Moral Evils I may not choose either,
yet of two evils not Moral I may and ought to choose the (...). Aristot. ^th.
least. As rather to suffer some Envy by making this vindication, Then the
sadder events of making none.

It has been matter of trouble to me, that being tied up to such subjects as
my Correptory Corrector has laid before me, I have been under a necessity of
spending whole Sections upon things extrinsecall to God's Decrees. And
therefore I have attempted to requite my Reader and my self, by making a Table
of those things which are most material and pertinent to the several Questions
in Debate betwixt my innocent Notes, and my angry Neighbors; that if any man
shall desire, without the expense of much time, to examine how matters do stand
betwixt us, as to any particular under debate, he may be able to find it out
with very great ease and expedition; and so be freed from the danger of losing
his pains and his Leisure upon that which he thinks does least concern him.

Concerning the Praefacers or Encomiasts who have bewrayed their Affections, if
not their Judgments, by way of prolusion to Mr. Barlee and his incomparable
attempts, and so have done a public Penance by making it known unto the world
what kind of things they do approve, I shall only offer to my Reader these
general Observations.

First, that in all which they have spoken, they have not adventured one
syllable against any one Argument in all my Book. But only have told their
several Tales after their several Manners of Expression, showing whom they are
for, and whom they are against, which way they lean and are Byass't by their
respective Interesses and Passions; How they are friends to Mr. Barlee for
being no friend to me, and would have his Book find Buyers by way of
Encouragement to the Cause, which they presumed would fare the better amongst
one sort of Readers, for being furnished and trick't up with their Names and
Notions.

Secondly, as the whole Drift of their Epistles is to praei^gage and
praeoccupie the Readers Mind with some very favorable and false Conceits of
Mr. B. and his Book, (as well as with some unkind Prejudices of me and mine,)
so there are many single Paragraphs in this my present Vindication, wherein I
doubt not but those Prefacers will find their several Disappointments. And if
my Reader would have experience of what I say, by some more compendious and
easy Course, then that of reading me quite through, He will not need to look
farther then the Ten last Sections of my Fourth Chapter. Or if those are too
many, he may content himself with the 35th Section of that Chapter, and with
the 31. 34. and 35th Sections of Chap. 3d.

Thirdly, there is something in Mr. Whitfield, of which I think it my Duty to
give the Reader some Notice; I mean his uncharitable Endeavor to create me
some Enemies amongst my Friends. For such are many Anti-Remonstrants, whom I
know to be Learned and Pious men, and upon whom I never meant to fasten any ill
Names, but do really pay them every whit as much Reverence, as if I were of
their opinions, or they of mine. So far am I from being able to call them [the
halfe-witted Rabble of Absolute Praedestinarians] as this Poetical old Man does
slily intimate. Who as he pretends to Observations upon I know not what
Manuscript of my Printed Notes, which he is pleased to call [The un-Correct
Copie] which neither I nor my Readers have ever Seen, (thereby running Parallel
with DON QUIXOT, who valiantly confuted the Barber's Basin under the Notion of
a Helmet, which he fancied to be the spoil of some unconquerable Knight,) so
by the minting of that Contumely [Halfe-witted Rabble etc.] He is ambitious to
have it thought, that I am altogether such a one as himself. And yet he
tacitly confesses it the very Child of his Invention, by not pretending to
name either the time when, or the place wherein, or the Person to whom such
words were spoken; which he would greedily have done, if he had had the least
shadow of Reason for it. It is very well known, that there are many Absolute
Praedestinarians, (as well Dominicans and Jansenians of the Church of Rome, as
Presbyterians here in England) who are all far enough from being Halfe-witted.
Had I been willing to charge them, it should have been with greater Crimes, for
which they have no want of Wit to be their Apology or Excuse. I am now tempted
to suspect, that this was the Reverend Divine whom Mr. B. quoteth, without a
Name, to put a Color on his matchless Fiction, to which I have spoken in the
21st Section of my Third Chapter. And why Mr. Whitfield should have taken such
an uningenuous course (to say no worse) whereby to gain me their Hatred toward
whom I harbor nothing but love, I cannot guess at any reason, besides this one
(which will not excuse, but rather aggravate his Injustice,) That I once took
the veil from off his Eyes, and made him see very clearly (what it seems he
could not until that Instant) That upright JOB WAS NOT A JEW.

I either know or am Confident, that this Man and Mr. Barlee will be apt to
take it very unkindly at my hands, that I should vindicate my self from those
great offenses whereof I am not only uncharitably, but also unskilfully
accused; as I shall show in my 3d. Discovery. But with their favor, or without
it, I may better be allowed to clear my self, then they can be to feign me
guilty. If they may publish the Defamation of an Innocent, much more may I
publish the great Injustice of the Defamers. If they may be permitted to cover
and hide their works of Darkness by their matchless confidence of bringing them
forth into the light, much more may I be permitted to find them out, and make
them seen by that light by which they hoped to be conceald. As for Mr. Barlee,
who alone shall be considered in my following Account, I do heartily wish his
faults were fewer. For he is more obnoxious in all kinds in every part of his
book, then I am able to wish my greatest Enemy. Whom I would have so worthy as
to deserve resistance, and to be [(...)] not below a confutation. If any
unpassionate and knowing man had addressed his endeavors against the matter of
my Notes (without committing any Riots upon my Name or Person) I should have
taken great pleasure in such a friendly contention as that would have proved.
And should have thought my self happy either in receiving, or giving light to
the Truth; which if I do not possess, I do syncerely covet. And will be ever
thankful to that Antagonist, that shall by beating my Flint, produce so much
Fire, as I may light my Candle by. (...) (...). But to cast away my Hours upon
a Correptory Correction, which like straw set on fire, does blaze a little, and
end immediately in smoke; to strive with a man that is full of Prove. 8. 3.
Tongue, which (in Solomon's Judgment) is heaping Wood upon his Fire, (a giving
Nurse to that strife which is (...) He^^od. (...). l. 1.
begotten of the Night,) This I confess is grievous to me. And such, as, were
it not a duty, I should not be able to endure. But where there is Poison, there
must be Antidote. And there being much of it in our Declamators very Title
(which is more likely to do mischief then his whole book besides) I shall
secure his plainest Readers with so much a larger Prophylactick.

The GENERAL TITLES of the CHAPTERS.
Chap. I. A Discovery of the Frailties and Misadventures in Mr. Barlee's
Triumphant-Title-page, and his Dedicatory Epistles. Chap. II. A Brief Discovery
of Mr. Barlee's Style and Temper. Wherein is exhibited his Second way of
Confutation. Chap. III. A Discovery of Mr. Barlee's Extraordinary Invention,
showing it self in mere Calumnies and Falsifications, both on the Person and
on the Papers with which he deals. His Third way of Confutation. Chap. IV. A
Miscellaneous Discovery of Mr. Barlee's other strange Failings in several
kinds. The Conclusion Gives some Reasons, why no more Time is to be lost in
representing the other weaknesses of this Incomparable Antagonist.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for Rich. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane,
London.
Books written by the Author of the Divine Philanthropie.
A Correct Copy of some Notes concerning Gods decrees, especially of
Reprobation. The 2. Edit. Now at the Press with some Additionals. The Sinner
Impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great discouragements
from Sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self.
Books written by H. Hammond, D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotataions upon all the Books of the New-Test. by H.
Hammond D. D. in fol. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English
Treatises of H. Hammond D. D. in two volumes in 4. 3. Dissertationes quatuor,
quibus Episcoprtus Jura ex S. Scripturis and primaeva Antiquitate adstruntur,
contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum Authore Henrico Hammond, in 4. 4. A
Letter of Resolution of six Quires, in 12. 5. Of Schism. A defense of the
Church of England, against the exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of
Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, by H. Hammond D. D. in 12. 7.
Six books of late Controversy in defense of the Church of England, in two
volumes in 4. Newly published.
Books and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D. D.
(...), Course of Sermons for all the Sundays in the year, together with a
Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity and Separation of the Office
Ministerial, in fol. 2. The History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed
Jesus Christ, 2 Edit in fol. 7. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12: 8.
The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12. 10. The Golden Grove, or, A
Mannual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of the week, together with a short
Method of Peace and Holiness. 11. The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance
rescued from Popular Errors, in a large 8. Newly published.
A Compendious Discourse upon the Case as it stands between the Church of
England, and those Congregations that have divided from it, by Hen. Fern. D. D.
New. The History of the Church of Scotland, by Job. spot-sword Archbishop of
S. Andrews in fol. New. Dr. Cousins Devotions, in 12. The Quakers wild
Questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel, and many sacred Acts
and Offices of Religion. etc. by R. Sherlock. B. D. in 4. New. The persecuted
Minister, in 4. New. The Excellency of the Civil Law, by Robert Wis^man Dr. of
the Civil Law. New.
CHAP. I.
A Discovery of the Frailties and Misadventures in Mr. Barlee's Triumphant
Title Page, and his Dedicatory Epistles.

1. AS there is one sort of Creatures whose chiefest strength is in their
Tail, and another sort of Creatures whose chiefest strength is in their Teeth,
and a third sort of Creatures whose chiefest strength is in their Tongue; so
amongst the many skirmishes whether of truly-polemical, or of
meerly-troublesome and wrangling writers, it is easy to observe their several
strengths, their sundry weapons and ways of hurting. There is one sort of
writers, who are not for threats, but Execution. All their premises are fair
and Candid, they only sting in the Conclusion. There is another sort of
writers, who are incessantly biting in every part of their Discourses. In every
page and period, they leave an evident Impression upon the party with whom they
deal. But a third sort there is, whose chiefest strength is in their Title:
with that they bite very shrewdly, (in the thoughts of some who look no
farther,) whereas in every thing that follows and does denominate a Book, they
appear to do little more, then only to wagg and to show their Teeth. (As we
know some Insects, though they sting very smartly, yet they presently leave
their sting behind them, and from that time forward, they will buzz and be
angry, but cannot hurt.) And truly this is the Reason, why I ought to consider
the very Title of Mr. B. before I enter upon his Book. For it speaks more in
two words, then his Book can attain to in 30 sheets. His Title is magisterial,
and gives me Of his Correptory Correction.
Correptory Correction; whereas his whole Book does render him liable to the
lash. They that are of his Paste, who either cannot, or will not read him, but
only hear of his Title [a Correptory Correction] may take it for granted that I
am beaten in my Notes, (stat Bellum fama,) and so his Title may do him service.
Whereas his Book (like the wicked ungrateful Vrchin that sucks the milk, and
spoils the udder at the vary same Instant) does sadly betray both it, and him.
So that if I were sure, that all the Readers of his Title would be the Readers
of his Book too, I should not desire any other Vindication. But because I am
assured by very intelligent and practical Persons, that very few will buy his
book who are not prodigal of their money, and that fewer will read it who are
not prodigal of their Time, and that hardly any will compare it with the
particulars of mine, and that almost all who are abettors of his Cause and
Doctrine will help to propagate his Title, (that is, his strength*) and
endeavor so to work upon the letterless multitude in their Reports, as to
make his Confidence to pass for Courage, his Impatience for Zeal, and his
Ovation instead of Conquest; I think it not useless to admonish my Reader, as
Polybius did his concerning Fabius, (...). Polyb. l. 3.
that they gaze not so much upon his Title, as consider the matters of his
book, to which his Title is but a vizard.

Indeed Mr. B. does but do his endeavor to make good his promise. For he sent
me a message long since by a Neighbor Minister, that I should be whipped. And
now in his book he somewhere tell's me he brings a Corr. Corr. p. 10.
Rod. And professes in his Title, to give me Correptory Correction. Thus the
(...). Herod. in Melpom. c. 3. p. 226.
Scythyans in Herodotus did encounter their slaves, not with spears and arrows,
but with whips and switches. Whilst they fought as with a just Enemy, their
Army of slaves still got the better; but immediately fled away when they saw
their Masters came Armed with switches, it did so mind them that they were
S^rvants. In the very same manner my Master would be, being utterly out of hope
that he can vanquish my Notes by force of Argument and Reason, (the proper
weapons of a polemick) has thought it fitter for his purpose, to use a Rod.
Perhaps supposing I will not dare to turn my Pen upon them, who take themselves
to be Masters in this our Israel, and (if my Author has mustered his men
aright) did vanquish seven or eight thousand in less then three or four years.
Indeed Favorinus did so far gratify the Emperor Hadrian, as to yield him the
better in Disputation; preferring the favor of an Emperor before the Truth of
his Cause. And being chid by his friends for that compliance, he ask't them
this Question, Familiaribus suis, qui illam, quod non recte cederet, arguebant,
non recte suade^is, inquit, qui non patimini me illum doctiorem omnibus
credere, qui habe^ 30. legiones. Ael: Spart: p. 14.
[will ye not suffer me to yield that he is more learned then all the men in
the world, who has thirty legions at his command?] perhaps my Master does
consider, that it lies in his power to do me shrewd turns; and believes that I
am of his opinion; and that by way of prevention, I will give him leave to
confute me (I mean) in his way. A little Correptory Correction he may hope will
be borne, to shun a great deal of mischief. And therefore all his chief weap^ns
are Drums and Trumpets. The very Title of the book is Io p^^n victoria, a
Correptory Correction. That Is the motto held forth in the Triumphant Flagg,
whereby the Reader must understand, that He comes not to combat, but to
chastise me.

And that the credulous unwary Reader may not take up his Title by the wrong
handle, it will not be amiss to tell him truly what it means. Correptory
Correction (in this Authors acception of the phrase) is the singing an (...)
before a Fight. A way of Conquest by mere Contempt. When the great Goliath 1 Samuel 17. 42.
disdained David because he was but a youth, and made no doubt of giving
David's Verse 44.
flesh unto the fowls of the Air, and to the Beasts of the Field, it was a
Correptory Correction. When * Hanun took Davia's servants, and shaved ** 2 Samuel
10. 4.
off the one half of their Beard^, and cut their Garments in the middle, e^e^
to their * Buttocks, and sent them away, it was intended to King David as a
Correptory Correction. When Jezebel suborned the two sons of Belial to swear
that Naboth blasphemed God and the King, and so to rob him of his Vineyard, it
was a Correptory Correction, When Son^re and minitabundus cum Jove Capitoline
fabulabatur. -- (...). -- Sueton. l. 4.
Caligula the Brave did thunder back against Jupiter, and threaten to banish
him into Greece, it was a Correptory Correction. When he condemned a Gallis
Graecisque simul condemnatis, gloriatus est, se Gallo-graeciam subegisse. Id.
few Gauls and a few Grecians to be killed, and then gave out that he had
conquered Gallo-Graecia; That was Correptory Correction. When he marched with
his Army against the Ocean, and took abundance of Cockles Captive, and devoted
them to the Capitol as spoils of a routed and plundered Ocean, and erected a
In victoriae memoriam Turrim extruxit ad Phari imitationem and usum. Idem.
mon^ment to the eternal memory of the Fact, it was a Correptory Correction.
When my Excellent Neighbor has called me all the ill things that he could
Name, and set me up on a Gibbet in the ugliest guise that he could fancy, and
reformed my little Book as He and others would do Religion, he tells the world
it is a Correptory Correction.

I find that [Correptorie] is a new-coyn'd word, sent out into the world from
Mr. B. his Mint to signify something in himself, peculiarly differing from
other men. He is indeed an extraordinary Writer; I believe the Sun in all his
Course never saw his peer. His book was entered with the Title of a
Castigatorie Correction, and now it is mended into the worse.

2. Post-Destination] is another cast of his Invention, and Of his
Post-destination.
evinseth in its Author a threefold weakness. First, because a Decree before
the Creation of the world is as much and as purely 1.
a Predestination, although conditional, as his absolute Decree can be supposed
to be, and That the word Praescience does very suffic^ently enforce. 2. His
term of Post-destination, according 2.
to his way of reasoning, will fall foul upon all his most venerable Masters,
who follow the sublapsarian way, for that is founded in praescience of Adams
fall, which does infer a Decree not altogether irrespective. And though Mr. B.
has not, yet Dr. Dr. Twiss. Vind. Gra. l. 1. part. 1. Digr. 4. Sect. 4. cap.
4. p. 87.
Twisse had sagacity enough, to discern this Truth which I am speaking. Who
therefore rebukes the Sublapsarians (and by consequence Mr. B.) in as severe a
manner, as any Molinist or Arminian has ever done. Yea, even all the bitter
speeches which Mr. B. has vented against the respectiveness of Gods Decree,
will by an easy Violentum (as Logicians speak) belong directly to himself, and
to all the whole College or Combination of Postlapsarians. For that Decree is
respective which is made in Intuition of Adam's sin, as well as that which is
made in Intuition of a man's own. The Difference betw^xt the Postlapsarians, and
us, as to the object of Gods Decree. Reprobatio non procedit (ut Molinaeus
contendit) nisi expeccatis actualibus praevisis, perseverantiaque finali in
iisdem. Twiss. Vind. Great. l. 1. part. 1. Sect. 4. Digr. 6. c. 1. p. 92. 1.
Postlapsarian Absurdities arising from their Post-destination, as Mr. B. in his
Title has used that word to his undoing. 2. 3. 4.
Where then lies the difference betwixt them of the Consistory, and us who are
of the Church? God (say they) decreed to reprobate the greatest part of
mankind in consideration of no other then Original sin. But say we of the
Church of England, (and the famous Moulin of France) it was in consideration of
all the sins that were future; not only of original, but actual also. And which
of these two respective Decrees is most agreeable to the nature of God Almighty
revealed to us in his word? That which determined the Reprobation of Cain, of
Pharaoh, of Judas, and the like, in regard of nothing but Adams fall, or that
which determined their Reprobation both in regard of Adams fall, and of their
actual sins besides? (viz. the murder of Cain, the manifold wickedness of
Pharaoh, the filthy treachery of Judas, and the final Impenitence of all who
were eternally the objects of Reprobation? The man that labors at the Plough
may here demand of Mr Barlee, (and Mr. B. may answer when he is able,) was God
less able to fo^esee the actual sins of wicked men (when he decreed their
Reprobation) then their Original sin which was actually committed by ^one but
Adam and Eve, many thousands of years before these Reprobates were born? or was
he able to connive so as by con^ivance to conceal any thing from himself, so as
to have no foresight or Intuition of actual sins, and yet to have it of
original? Was he able, for a time, not to be Omniscient, which is only a power
of becoming weak, and by consequence of not being God? Could he eternally
foresee the sin of Adam, and not foresee (at the same Instant) the actual sins
of his Posterity? Or so^eseeing both together (which by virtue of his
Omniscience he could not but 5.
do) could he consider the former, and not consider the later? Or did he hate
Original sin in Cain (which he drew only 6.
from his Parents,) more then the murdering of his Brother, (which he wilfully
acted without his Parents?) Or could he 7.
be willing to reprobate the soul of Cain in respect of that sin which was
committed by his Parents before his Birth, (and which by consequence he could
not hinder from being naturally derived upon himself) and at the same instant
be unwilling to decree his Reprobation in respect of his murder and
impenitence, which were actually and wilfully committed by himself? (and which
by consequence he might have hindered, as being a free and voluntary, not a
necessitated and fatal sinner?) was original sin only the Condition, or the
Cause, or the object of Reprobation, and are all actual sins to be punished
only by the By? what need the Cause of Cains Ruin be thrown entirely upon
Adam, or his being considered as lying in the loins of Adam, when he has
sin enough besides which is peculiarly his own? Did Cain receive the greater
damnation for his murdering 10. A Dilemma for Mr. Barlee to which he is desired
to speak distinctly without eruption into virulent language upon my person.
of Abel, or did he not? if Mr. B. say [not] he must deny the words of our
blessed Savior, Mat. 23. 14. and if he say, [yes], he must first confess
'twas in respect of his heinous fratricide, that he was decreed unto the
greater damnation, and not only in intuition of Original sin. Or secondly,
else he must say, (to wind himself out of that) that God finding Cain in Massa
Corrupta, or Adams loins, decreed him simply to damnation, and not to the
degree of it until his murder was committed. Or else thirdly, he must say (to
wind himself out of both) that Cain's damnation was not the greater for his
murder; and (by consequence) that God rewards not according to works: which
absurdity also did follow upon the first part of the Dilemma. Let him choose
which he will: if the first, he is my Convert, and must publish his 1.
Recantation, if the second, he is literally for post-destination, 2.
and so his whole Book is against himself, (or else his Title is in opposition
to his Book.) If the third, He is a downright 3.
enemy to the cleerest passages of Romans 2. 6. Rev. 20. 12. 2 Cor. 11. 15. Jer.
17. 10. Rev. 18. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Luke 12. 47. and 20. 47. Mat. 11. 20, 21, 22.
Mat. 10 15.
Scripture, and then he is not a chosen vessel (as he pretend's p. 10.)

But by the word [post-destination] he does evidently bewray a third sort of
weakness, for here he gives us a specimen what kind of stuff we must look for
from such a Writer, when the denial and refutation of irrespective Decrees,
especially of Reprobation, (which was the chief subject of my Book) is by him
disguised upon the front of his Book into this so ugly and odious shape,
without the least shadow of reason for it. He know's that I, as much as any, do
assert eternal predestination; only I prove it, against him, to be respective
of final impenitence in all that shall be damned, respective of Faith, and
Repentance, and perseverance to the end, in all of ripe age who shall be saved;
and for such as die infants before they can actually believe or repent, God's
eternal predestination or purpose of electing them unto bliss, was also
respective of their being in Christ, they having committed no actual sins
whereby to forfeit their interest in the 1 John 2. 1.
propitiation for the sins of the whole world; as well for original, as actual
sins, and for all sins of all men as well actual, as original, as to the grief
of Mr. B. the Artic. Eccl. Angl. 2. 7. 15. 31.
Church of England has taught us out of the Scriptures. I say to his grief,
because he is such a Zelot for the Correp. Corr. p. 39.
damnation of Infants, as to be angry with me for being their Advocate, which I
shall ever be so much the rather, because being harmless they never hurt me,
and being speechless they cannot rail at me, and being senseless of my love
they cannot thank me. But to proceed.

. 3. Mr. B. accuses me in his Title page of Pelagianism, Of Pelagianism and
Massilianism.
Massilianism, and Arminianisme] he cunningly guessed by the difficulty of
getting his Book to be printed (for he confe'st to very many, that it must cost
him a round sum of money) that most of his Passengers, rather then Readers,
would probably look upon his Title page, and would probably look no farther,
and at least a few of his own principles might believe him upon his word. But
what he affirms nakedly in his Title, he as nakedly affirms throughout his
Book, where he is not able to name one period in any one paragraph in all my
Book, which looks any more like Pelagian, then what has been written even by
those who have made it their business to confute the heresy of Pelagius: was
St. Paul a Pelagian for having exhorted his Philippians, to work out their own
salvation (Phil. 2. 12.) or forbidding Timothy to stir up the gift of God which
was in him? (2 Timothy 1. 6. was it not God who said to a wicked rebellious Israel
[wherefore turn your selves and live? Ezekiel. 18. 32.] where do I say more, or
where so much, unless I speak the words of Scripture, and though it might be
sufficient to deny his aspersions with the same ease that he affirm's them, yet
that he may cease from such calumny's from this day forward, or at least that
he may choose them with more advice, I will antidote his Reader with these few
things. 1. That against 1.
the two former, [Pelagianisme, and Massilianisme, I have spoken so fully and
expressly in the laying down of my opinion (p. 55, 56, 57. etc.) that Mr. B.
might as well have called me any thing, (a Presbyterian, or a Quaker, an
Anabaptist, or a Witch,) as either a whole, or a half Pelagian: if every one is
a Pelagian who believes with Pelagius in any one thing; all Christendom is
Pelagian, and even Mr. B. in more instances, then I can be. How much more a
Pelagian was * Dr. Twisse, who said expressly that many do abstain from
fornication, theft, and murder without Grace? 2. As he has 2.
no where produced any one passage out of my Notes which has any the least
sound of Pelagianisme in it, ^o he has diverse out of Austin (who confuted
Pelagius) which he professes to be Pelagian. He Twis. vin. Gr. l 2. p. 1. Se.
1. Digr. 2. c. 14 p. 155.
says it was a Pelagian maxim [that all sin is voluntary] which the Pelagians
snatched out of Austins own mouth, He tel's us Correp. Corr. p. 185.
farther, that Austin spoke (a) Corrept. Cor. p. 154. usque adeo peccatum est
voluntarium malum, ut nullo modo sit peccatum, nisi sit voluntarium, Aug. li.
de verra Relig.
some things which he knocked in the head with his own Maxims, and some things
which were even literally Pelagian, and that the Pelagians, or Massilians
twitted him with it. He tel's us farther, Correp. Cor. p. 186.
there was a time, when Austin knew not that faith was the gift of God, (nor
was it before, but even after his conversion,) farther yet, (d) he does (for
want of skill and caution) call S. Austin himself by the name of Pelagius, for
he says I spoke that out of Pelagius his mouth which I cited merely from St.
Austin ad Note, that S. Aust. in his last writings, commends his writings to
Simplician as very sufficient to confute the heresy of Pelagius.
Simplician. 1. 2. and though he tell's me I do it simply, and am a Simplician
in doing it, and delights so much in this Quibble as to repeat it extremely
often; yet when I shall have taught him this new lesson, that St. Astin was a
Bishop when he writ to Simplician, which cannot therefore be one of his
babelike writings (as Mr. B. cal's them in his abuse of that Father) he will
discern his little jests are quite and clean spoiled. Lastly, he says that
St. Austin, as a Correp. Corr* p. 34.
child, does call the quality of the free will occultissimum meritum, and that
he often Idem p. 229
beshrew'd himself. But (3.) Mr. B. himself is the Pelagian (rather then Austin
or my self) for these four Reasons. First, he denies universal redemption,
which was a consectary, if not a part of the heresy Aug: Epist: 106. Tom: 2.
confer: cum Hist: Nar: etc p. 9.
of Pelagius, which he was fain to recant in the Council of Palestine. Pelagius
denied original sin. And so does Mr. B. by the unavoidable consequence of his
Doctrine, that Christ died only for the Elect. For Christ died for all that
were dead in Romans 5. 15 18. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
Adam, (as I proved in my Notes, p. 19. and Mr. B. confesses by not disproving
it) but Christ (says Mr. B.) did not die for all, which inferr's that in Adam
all did not die, and had not (by consequence) original sin. Secondly, Mr. B.
speaking of power to repent, says in plain terms Correp: Cor: p. 163.
posse est naturae, the power to do it is from nature: and though he speaks of
potentia remote, yet there is nothing so like Pelagian in all my Book. 3. He
confesses that his sinful nature is most inclinable to Pelagianisme (in his p.
39. lin. 11. 12.) to which I profess I had never any temptation. Yet this is
the man, who dares say even in print, Corr^p: cor: p. 202. and 103.
that I may as well deny Semipelagianisme, as that my nose stands in my face,
and so (according to him p. 103.) I am no Christian, or but a piece of one. 4.
If Mr. B. had had so much knowledge, or integrity, he should have showed what
it is which does denominate a Pelagian. For Pelagius was Orthodox as to the
maine, I mean the Articles of the Apostles Creed, and Clari and ^gregii omnium
virtutum studio viri, quorum magna est de probitatis Contemplatione reverentia.
Pros. ad Augustine. de Relig. pelag. Haereseos p. 880. possumus quidem ad non
credendum esse constantes, sed ad Auctoritatem talia sentientium non sumus
pares, quia multum nos and vitae meritis antecellunt, and aliqui eorum adepto
nuper summo sacerdotii honor supereminent; nec facile quisquam, etc. -- tantis
superiorum disputationibus ausus est contraire. Id. ibid. p. 884.
Prosper himself commends the Semipelagians for men of admirable life, and
conversation, excelling those that were Orthodox, and of such Authority in the
Church for their sanctity of life, that very few durst contradict them. Idem ad
eundem.
S. Hilarie was one, and he Archbishop of Arles. The famous Arausican Synod
would not exclude them from their Communion, S. Austin called them brethren;
Cassia^us (a chief one) is called a Divine, and a Catholical person, by Photius
and Prosper; and if all are Massilians or Pelagians who agree with them in any
point, the whole Christian world, (the Apostles themselves not excepted) would
be as liable as I am; who am as little liable to the heresies of the men, as
any man living this day in Christendom. I have compared my opinions with the
several Canons of the great Council of Council. Carthaginense 418 contra
haeresin Pelag. and Caelest. Can. 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116.
Cod. Can. Eccl. Afric. p. 289, ^90. and de inceps.
Carthage against Pelagius and Caelestius; and with the Rec^tals of Prosper in
Epist. ad Demetriad. p. 867.
Prosper in his Epistle to Demetriades; and with S. Austins accounts of
Pelagian doctrine both in the August. de bono persever. cap. 2.
Great, and in the Idem in Epist. 106. Tom. 2
Retaile; and with the Pelagian History of Learned Vossius; and I find my self
as clear from the least stain of that Heresy, as from any other that can be
named. Nothing is spoken by Papae Coelestini Epistola de Gratia ad quosdam
Gallerum Episc. in fine operum Prosp Aquit.
Pope Celestine in defense of Hilary and Prosper, to which my Notes were not
agreeable; and they are just as agreeable to the Council. 2. Arausic. in Calce
Prosp. p. 896.
Arausican Canons which are annex't. All better Touchstones whereby to judge
what is Pelagian, then our Correptory Corrector's being angry with a Doctrine.
5. Now since from all that I have spoken, it appears that Mr. B. (and he alone)
is really the fouler for all that Dirt, which he has weakly endeavored to
fling on me, I will please my self, and punish him, with this final
consideration, that this Admirer of S. Austin, and especially of himself, has
hurt himself, and S. Austin, much more then me, and Calvin. Inst. l. 2. c. 2.
Sect. 4. fol. 78, 79.
it is much for my advantage, that what he laye's to my charge, has also been
laid in effect upon (t) all the Fathers of the Church; I mean the Latin, as
well as Greek. The truth is (says Saints everlasting Rest, edit: 2. p. 158. in
marg:
Mr. Baxter) 'till Pelagius his days all spoke like Pelagians: and he had said
a little before, that [most, if not all the Fathers of the first 200. or 300.
(he might have added 400.) years, do speak in a language seeming to lean
strongly that way, and therefore Calvin and Scultetus in Medul. Patr. charge
them with no less then Pelagius his error. Yet perhaps (as he goe's on) their
laying the blame of evil actions on man's will, and persuading men's wills, may
occasion men to charge them too far, as if therefore they supposed natural
sufficiency; or they spoke of free will as opposed to Fate, Nature, and
coaction, as interpreted by Chamier Panstr. To. 3. de li. arb. l. 3. c. 16.]
thus he shows how the Ancient Fathers have been slandered both by Calvin and
Scultetus (as I am now by Mr. B.) with flat Pelagianism, though they did but
speak like Pelagians, (and so does Scripture Ezekiel. 33, 11. and chapter 18. 32. and
so very many the greatest Truths are like very many the greatest falsehoods;
but nullum simile est idem,) and did only use a language which seemed (and but
seemed) to lean that way. But as Mr. Baxter also points at the probable ground
of Calvin's Error, so I will add this observation, that both Calvin and
Scultetus by those their Censures of S. Austins Teachers and Predecessors, have
even given the flat lie to S. Austin himself. Aug. de bon^ perse. c. 19. 20.
Who vindicates them all from any the least stain of the Pelagian heresy, as I
long since showed in my Notes page 73.. 59. Thus the Fathers have been
calumniated, and thus am I. For as neither Mr. B. nor his Prefacers have named
any one passage in all my Book, which they can tolerably pretend to be Pelagian
or Semipelagian, but only have framed an Accusation in general, (as if they
should say I am a Horse-stealer, (in imitation of Calvin who accused Castellio
himself of Theft,) but not give any Instance of the time wherein, the place
from whence, or the man from whom I stole a Horse) so I do solemnly make a
public challenge to the ablest Abettors of Mr. Barlee in this his Calumny, to
transcribe any one period from any part of my Book wherein they will affirm
that Pelagianisme does lie. And if they cannot do this, that they will
publicly condemn so gross a Calumny, and make a Competent satisfaction to me
and the world for having publicly encouraged so foul a sin. I require nothing
of justice in this kind from them, more then what I am ready to perform my
self. If I say they make God to be the Author of sin, (and I wish that their
expressions were not worse then so too) I will fairly lay down their very
words. And if they can prove I do them wrong, I will give what I require, a
very public satisfaction. What I shall perform in this particular of proving
them to make God the Author of sin (which the right Reverend Bishop Bp. Hall
select Thoughts 34. p. 103. and 104.
Hall affirms in plain terms to be no less then Rank Blasphemy, and against
(Psalm. 5. 4.) will be in part seen now, but more apparently hereafter, when I
shall vindicate my self from the Imputations, which without the least show of
proof, are laid upon me by D. Reynolds, in his Epistolary Preface to this
Volume of Mr. Barlee. 6. But our Of Arminianisme.
Correptory Corrector has one Reserve, that if his Reader will not believe I
am so bad as a Pelagian, no nor half so bad, (not so much as a Massilian) he
yet may swallow me down whole in the glibber Notion of an Arminian. When a
great deal of Calumny is cast upon me and my papers, he hopes that something at
least will stick. The vulgar sort do take Arminius to have been some foul
Monster, though they never yet learned whether that Monster were fish, or
flesh; or from what part of Africa the Thing was brought. And therefore they
who have been taught rather to hate Arminius, then understand him, may very
usefully be told some few things of him. First, he was plainly a Presbyterian,
and so is Mr. Barlee, so am not I. Next he taught and believed that the (...)
does justify, so I suppose does Mr. Barlee, so do not I. Thirdly, Arminius was
for free will; and so is Mr. B. as well as I. So (as he confesses) are Correp.
Corr. p. 218. Voluntas est semper libera sed non semper bona. August.
all his Party, who are ready to take up that with Austin, that the will is
always free, but not always good. (yet in a fit of forgetfulness p. 219. he
says that Austin and Note that Melancthon dares do, and does, what Mr. B.
says he scarce dares, in loc. Comm. de libero arbi^rio, p. 56. and seqq. and
in Defin. Theolog. p. 478. and in Confess. Augustana. Nor was Siracides an
Arminian though he was for free will. E^cclus 15. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
Melancthon scarce durst to name the free will of man since Adams Fall. Not
knowing perhaps, or perhaps concealing, that Arminius was a Follower and
Admirer of Melancthon.) 4. Arminius was of opinion, that the considerations of
sub and supra (in stating the object of Gods decree) were but ingenti figmenta,
mere tricks and devices in the Anti-Arminians. And Mr. B. confesse^h the very
same in his p. 114. where though he says that they are honest ingenious
devices, yet Dr. Twisse calls the former by very Haec sunt monstra illa
opinionum and Portenta quae nobis parturit and parit ista sententia, scholis
Jesuiti^is digniora, quam nostris. Twisse vind. Gra. l. 1. part. 1. Sect. 4. c.
4. p 88. Digr. 4.
foul names, as inferring God (says he) to be the Author of sin; the very
thing they would avoid in the supralapsarian way. 5. Arminius disputes against
Gods Absolute Power or Will, as it is separate from his Justice; and Mr. B.
Correp. Corr. p. 166.
confesses that Sorbonicum illud Dogma, in que sibi plaudunt Papales
Theologastri, detestor, quod potentiam absolutam deo affingit. Calvin. de
Divin, Praedest. p. 72. B.
Calvin himself does do the same; yea, that he bitterly declaim's against it.
6. Though Mr. Barlee most times affirme's God to decree, and praedetermin that
sin shall be done, (as I shall largely show anon) yet forgetful of himself (in
his p. 138.) He says that God's decree is only permissive and governing of
every sinful thing: in which he jumps with Arminius extremely well. 7. Mr. B.
confesses that he and his party do in 7.
part admit of some Arminian Principles, p. 106. and yet he makes a clear
distinction betwixt me, and the Arminians, p. 66. But 8. Arminius denied the
working of 8.
Grace irresistibly; and Mr. B. Correp: cor. p. 211. especially p. 213. 215.
professes, that the terms resistible and irresistble were never willingly
owned, by him and his party. (I am sure they use extremely often the word
[irresistibiliter;] if not willingly, it seems they do it unwillingly, and why
then do they do it? if they are ashamed of it, they should not be ashamed to
mend.) 9. Arminius hold's that God never Correp: cor. 157.
intended to punish any one with temporal, and 9.
then less with eternal death, but for sin. And Mr. B. professes to hold the
same even in those very words. (What God decreed, he intended, and vice versa,
and so Mr. B. is an Arminian (perhaps) before he is aware, or understand's not
the things whereof he speaks.) 10. Mr. B. is a Calvinist, 10.
and says that Calvin and Melanchthon did but seemingly, not Correp. cor. 46.
really differ. Yet Arminius was so much a follower of Melanchthon, that we may
call him a Melanchthenian. (Sure Mr. B. will agree, as soon with Pelagius, as
with himself.) 11.
11. To conclude, where Arminius is in an Error, Mr. B. is sure to err with
him; but hates Arminius where he is Orthodox, although he is constrained to
speak like him there too, when the necessity of his affaire's does drive him to
it, or when he is forgetful of the part which he is acting. 12. For my self I
do declare, that I was then in the opinions I now am in, when I had not read
one page of Arminius his works: nor do I agree with him any farther, then he
agree's with Scripture: Antiquity, the Church of England, and Melanchthon
(after the time of his Qu^mvis ab initio Luthero tanquam praeceptori ad
haesisset, -- attamen agnito postmodum errore, and quod prius scripserat
emendavit, and contrariam sententiam propugnavit. Felix Turpio in Praef: ad
Castle:
conversion from the Errors of Luther, and Mr. Calvin) this Melanchthon at
first had been as it were the Scholar of Lu her, and drew from him his first
Errors: But being apious, learned, and unpassionate man, (pursuing Truth, not
Faction) he saw his Error, and forsook it: embracing those opinions concerning
the liberty of the will, the cause of sin, the universality of Grace, and the
respectivenesse of God's Decrees, which I asserted in those Notes, which Mr. B.
now declaims against. This Melanchthon was, and is still the Darling, (more
then any one man) of the Reformed part of the Christian world; so much the
rather, because besides his vast learning, unbyass't judgment, and
transcendent piety, he was almost proverbial for moderation. For this was he
chosen to write the Augustan Confession, for this he was much considered by
them that composed our Book of Articles, and our other book of Homilies, which
shows us what is the Doctrine of the true Church of England. For this he was
imitated and admired by the glorious Martyrs of our Religion in the days of Q.
Mary: for this he was esteemed far above Mr. Calvin by Jacobus Arminius, the
famous professor of Divinity in the University of Leyden, who however a
Presbyterian as to matter of Discipline, did yet so very far excel the other
Divines of that sect, in exactness of learning, as well as life, that we may
say he became Melanchthon's Convert. If Mr. B. would needs call me by any new
Name, it should have been a Melanchthonian, not a Pelagian, or an Arminian,
much less a Satanical and diabolical Blasphemer, and Atheist, an a what-not.
But neither am I a Melanchthonian in any other respect, then as I apprehend
Melanchthon to be a true and an Orthodox and a peaceable-minded Christian. I
leave it to M. B. to give up his Faith to Mr. Calvin, and to follow him at
aventure through thick and thin; but neither Melanchthon nor Mr. Calvin did dye
for me, no was I baptized in the name of either. It is my sole desire and
ambition to be a follower of Christ, and one of Christ's school, to imitate the
example, and adorn the Doctrine (not of Calvin or of Arminius, but) of Jesus
Christ. Let Mr. B. be a Calvinist, an Ae^ian, or what he will; I have vowed,
for my part, not to be any thing but a Christian. And if that is good logic,
to say that I am an Arminian, because in some things I do not differ from
Arminius, then Mr. B. (by the same Logic) is not only an Arminian where I am
none, but he is also a Papist, because he is at agreement with the Jansenians
and the Dominicans, and (in many respects) with the Jesuits too. Yet 13. I was
in my childhood 13.
of those Opinions, which Mr. B. does now contend for. So was Melanchthon
himself, as well as I; but through the infinite mercy and Grace of God, I have
obtained conversion, as well as Melanthon; and being converted from the
practice, as well as from the opinion which I was of, I will, (to my poor
utmost) at least endeavor to confirm, or convert my brethren. 14. The chief
head of Arminianism (as Mr. B. will 14.
call it do what I can) is Universal Grace and Redemption, (with which the
other opinions in debate must stand, or fall, as I conceive) a point so clear
both from Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity, that the most learned
Anti-arminians have been fain to assert it, as well as Arminius or Melanchthon.
Among us, Bishop Davenant, and the late Bishop of Armagh. (This latter a little
before his Death having also professed his utter dislike to the whole Doctrine
of Geneva in these affairs and the former is plain enough in his parcificatory
to Dureus.) So in France the learned Testard, and Amirald, and Daille lately in
his defense of Amirald. Mr. Baxter himself in this point must be an Arminian
with Mr. B. and so must Prosper, (c) or St. Hillarie, (which soever of them
(Prosper vel Hill de Vocat Genesis l. 2. c. 16. p. 844.
writ the Books De vocatione Gentium,) and so must Dr. Ward, and many a noble
Divine besides in the confession of Correp: cor. p. 169.
Mr. B. who says [they have so many hardsome Orthodox putoffs, that he will
inquire farther, before he pass any damnatory censure upon them.] thus does he
speak (like some Pope out of his porphirie chair) of no less men then Bishop
Davenant, and Dr. Ward, and other noble Divines, as he himself call's them. 15.
Arminius held the respectivenesse of 15.
God's Decrees, yet is it so far from being Arminianism to do the same, that
it is Prosper apud Episcop. Vedel. Rhap: c. 11. p. 222. Melanchthon apud eund:
ibid p. 223. Prosp: ad Aug: Epist. p. 886. Calvin: Institut: l. 2. c. 2. Sect.
4. fol. 78. Beza in Rom: 11. 2. Edit: 2. Gra: l. 1. part. 1. Sect. 4. Digr. 8.
p. 110. col. 2.
confess't to be the doctrine of all the Fathers of the Church (before St.
Austin) many hundreds of years before Arminius was borne; and that as well by
the Enemies, as by Friends of this Doctrine. Beza is feign to say, the Fathers
are not to be heard. And Twiss: Vin:
Dr. Twisse professes to consider none but S. Austin; and yet his single
Father S. Austin will fail him too, who places the object of election in Fide
praevisa in Augustine: de perscverantia. l. 1. c. 14. Enchirid c. 98. ad
Simplician: l. 1. qu. 2.
diverse places of his no-babelike writings. And so does Prosper in Respon. ad
Gal: cap. 3. 12, 14, 15.
Prosper as well as He. And therefore they must fall into the Catalogue of Mr.
Barlee's Arminians. Nay, his beloved Polanus Syntag: Theol: l. 4. c 9. de
Elect: ad vit: aeternam. Argum. 9.
Polanus will not escape him, any more then Molineus in Anat. Arm. citat. a
Twiss. l. 1. part 1. Sect. 4. Digr. 6. c 1. p. 92.
Du Moulin could escape Dr. Twisse; or any more then Mr. B. can escape himself
p. 121. 130. (if I or my Reader were at leisure to show how he is entangled, as
well in that, as in other places, by the necessary sequels of his unskilful
Talkings.) To conclude. 16. Mr. B. and his Masters have fastened the Name of
Arminianisme upon so many very good, and very necessary Doctrines, that some of
the wisest of their own Party have been heard to say; that [ when all comes to
all, if they intend to preach to the people, so as to do them any good, they
must preach Arminianisme do what they can.] For if the will of man is not free
to avoid the sins which are preached down (by the mighty assistance of Gods
free grace) and to perform the duties which are preached up (by the same
assistance of the same Grace) but so tied and fettered and predetermin'd, that
it cannot possibly be one jot better, or one jot worse then now it is, Sic in
Articulis nostris, multisque publicae leiturgiae locis, Gratiae Necessitas
astruitur, ^t tamen sub Gratia, voluntas libera relinquatur; sine qua, frustra
leges, praecepta, consultationes, conditiones, exhortationes, admonitiones,
promissiones, comminationes, lauds and paenae proponerentur; omnisque Curae
and diligentiae, studij, consilii, and laboris ratio tolleretur. Overallus in
exposit. Sent. Eccl. Anglic. cap. 3. and 4. p. 51. 52.
all our laws and precepts, consultations and conditions, exhortations and
admonitions, promises and threats, praises and dispraises, rewards and
punishments, would not only be useless but ridiculous things. And therefore as
we tender the good of souls, and desire to be useful in what we speak, or
write; we must be so far in danger of being called Arminians (by such a
Correptory Corrector as lies before us) as to endeavor by our doctrines of
Grace and liberty (of liberty by, and under Grace) that all care and diligence,
and Circumspection, may not be banished out of the world, as nothing else but
Names and Notions. And Mr. B. does very ill in saying that Bishop Overal does
Correp. Corr. 130.
play upon Calvin and traduce the Puritans for heterodoxie about
Predestination; siince the most learned of his own party are grown ashamed of
their Doctrines; and that Incomparable Bishop does but speak the very mind of
the Church of England. Which does put me in mind of another great and strange
Calumny in Mr. Barlee's Title Page. viz.

4. That the Church of England will exclaim against me Of the Church of England
compared with his superscription of his Dedicatory Epistle.
to my shame.] This (they say) is such a jest as nere was heard of. That he
should jeere me so often for my overgreat Correp. Corr. p. 15. 19. etc.
Constancy to this my persecuted Mother, (and publish himself a Presbyterian,)
and yet not allow me to be a dutiful Son. 2. If we will hearken to the voice of
the Church of England, we must hear her speaking to us in the public monuments
of her Doctrine. Such are the 39 Articles, the Homilies, the Liturgy, the
Catechism, the book of Ordination, the book of Canons and Constitutions. All
which will prove, that I (if any man living) am a dutiful son of the Church of
England, and that the Correptory Corrector is nothing less. Well he may be of
the Consistory of Geneva, or of the Kirk of Scotland; but (as a most learned
Doctor has lately told us from the Press) he, and such as he is, are as much
of the Church of England, as the Irish are English. 3. He has by much the
worst luck of any Subsannator I 3.
ever knew. For as if he had forgotten what he here speaks of me, he speaks a
great deal worse of his beloved self, and of all his Sympresbyters to whom he
Dedicates his Book. For whilst he tells them, in his Address that they do
still adhere to the Dogmatical part of the 39. Articles of the Church of
England, he proclaims to the world that they adhere to a part only, and not to
the whole; and that there is another part of those 39 Articles, from which they
have Apostatized; the particle [Yet] is very emphatical, and im-ports thus
much. That whereas heretofore they did impartially subscribe to all the 39
Articles without exception, and have since accommodated their principles to the
great Turnings of the Times, so as to viola^e their former faith, they are not
yet so totally fallen off from the Church, but that they Note, that if that is
not the Importance of his particle [Yet] his meaning must needs be worse. viz.
that they do hither to adhere to the dogmatical part, though he knows no^ what
they may do hereafter Asif when times shall have another turn, they might^all
off from that part also, as they had done from the other since these last times.
still adhere to the dogmatical part of the English Creed, (as Mr. Thomas
Rogers himself does call it.) which is to say in effect, that though they are
Schismatical in some points, yet they are not in all; though they believe the
Church of England is a very false speaker in many things, yet in many other
things they believe she speaks truly; though they have cast off their obedience
to their common mother where her commands are not pleasing (at least in these
times) yet to this very day they are loyal to her in part, (as far as it is
safe, or useful, or secularly convenient.) Though they are not wholly of the
Church of England, yet they are half way. And what a complement is this from
Mr. B. to all his Sympresbyters, (to the Seniors of them especially) to tell
them they have receded from their subscriptions? What greater reproach could he
have fastened on them? And how little have many of them deserved this usage at
his hands? I will take upon me to be an Advocate for the better sort of those
Persons whom he has thus publicly stigmatized, as if they were men of his
Paste, and Patronizers of his Project, and whom for their learning, civility,
and moderation, I do really love and honor. I can name many Ministers, and I
believe there are others, whom (from my knowledge) I cannot name, who
notwithstanding they have frequented one or both of those Lectures which Mr. B.
does mention in general Terms, (as if he were willing to involve them all
together in his Guilt, not sparing the Reputation of any one) are so ingenuous
and well disposed, as to abhor the blackness of His Design; and withal so
rational, as to despise the weakness with which it is managed. But 4. Since Mr.
B. his memory would not serve 4*
him from the later end of one page to the beginning of another, I desire the
Readers of his Title Page to judge betwixt us, against which of the two the
Church of England is most likely to exclaim; whether against him, who makes a
public confession that he adheres to no more then one part of her Articles, or
against me who do cordially adhere to all? But 5. 5. Of the ^9. Articles.
What does he mean by the Dogmatical Part? If the Articles of the Trinity, the
Incarnation, the Resurrection, and the like, he might have said as well that he
adheres in part unto the Articles of the Church of Rome, unto the Greek, and
Lutheran Churches, or that he adhereth to the Articles of every Church in the
world in all those parts and particulars wherein he does not differ from them.
if he means those Articles concerning the matters in Debate, his absurdity is
greater. For universal redemption is asserted in no less then 4 distinct
Articles. viz. the second, the seventh, the fifteenth, the one and thirtieth.
So also in the Catech^sm, the Nicene Creed, and in several other parts of the
Public Liturgy, as is evidently showed by the right Reverend Doctor Sente^.
Eccl Anglic. cap. 2. de mor^^ christi. p. 46. 40, 47, 48.
Overall, whilst he was public Professor of Divinity in the University of
Cambridge. And to this agree the consessions of the Protestant Churches beyond
sea reckoned up by Mr. Rogers upon the 31. Article; if not rightly, it is his
fault. Again the liberty of the will, and the cooperation of Grace are asserted
in the tenth Article, wherein there is not the least sound of irresistible
working; as it is excellently explained by the same Dr. Id ibid. e. 3. and 4.
p. 49. 50, 51, 52. de libere Arbitri^ and Grati^ operatione.
Overall (a person for Temper, Piety, and Moderation, as well as for wideness
and depth of learning, as fit to tell us the very mind of the Church of
England, as any man that can be named.) Again, the possibility to fall from
Grace after the reception of the Holy Ghost, and to fall into damning sins, (or
into a state of Damnation,) is clearly asserted in the sixteenth Article, and
in the Homilies of our Church concerning the Danger of falling away from God,
and in the Administration of Baptism, as the same Id ibid c. 5. de
perseverantia. p. 53, 54, 55.
Doctor does demonstrate; Affirming the contrary opinion to have been rejected
by all antiquity, and too much confu^ed by the experience of all times, and
only brought into the Church by the late dissentions which passed betwixt
Zuinglius, and Martin Luther. Lastly, con litional Predestination is
s^fficiently, though implicitly* asserted by our Church in her seventeenth
Article. Where it is clearly to be collected, that Gods eternal Decree of
electing men to life eternal was made in In^uition of their being in Christ.
Which is as clearly also to be inferred from the Nature of the Promises which
are conditionally expressed in Holy Scripture. And the Promises of God are
merely the Transcripts of his Decrees, revealed to us in time after the pattern
and proportion of what he decreed from all eternity. Which Mr. B. himself does
very strongly aknowledge by the very great weakness of his denials. For whilst
to this, (as to other things) he has no more to say then a Bare [Noe,]
embellish't with many contumelious words, or emboldened with the suffrages of
such as are of his opinions, (or rather of such whose opinions he is of,) he
declares he is worsted, but will not yield. But of this I shall speak
hereafter; and (not to dwell overlong upon the threshold) mind the Reader of
that which he knows already, the Exposition of Bishop Over all, Id. ibid. c. 1
de praedestinatione p. 41. 42, 43, 44.
and the accurate Analysis of Mr. Playfere in his part. 3. ch^. 21. p. 350. etc.
[Appello Evangelium.] Besides that, when the Church says (Art. 31.) that
Christ is a perfect Redemption, Propitiation, and Satisfaction for all the sins
of the whole world both original and actual, she does irrefragably prove (that
Article being granted) that God's Eternal Decrees of man's end were respective
and conditional. 6. I will not here reckon 6.
up how many other Articles of the 39. exclaim against Mr. B. (which I would
not say, but that it is his own word) or how many Articles of our Church M. B.
has often exclaimed against. Nor will I largely insist on the three eminent
Articles, to which all that entered into sacred Orders (and by consequence Mr.
B. if he is lawfully ordained) were strictly enjoined to subscribe. viz.
Concerning first, the Queens Supremacy. Secondly, conformity to the Book of
Common prayer, and the Book of ordaining Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
Thirdly, the Book of the 39. Articles of the Church of England (not a part
only, but the whole) which three Injunctions were composed by Archbishop
Whitgift himself, and added to the English Canons by the command of Q.
Elizabeth. I have already said more then Mr. B. his Calumny required. What he
is, let others now judge by what I am, and by what he has professed himself to
be. 7. If Arch Bishop Cranmer, Bishop Latimer, Bishop Hooper, and others, who
suffered Martyrdom in the days of Queen Mary, were Orthodox sons of the Church
of England in their Doctrines of God's Election, and Universal Redemption,
etc. (of which occasion will be offered to speak anon) then it is worse with
Mr. B. then I wish it were, and better with me then he would have it. By what
has hitherto been spoken it will be easy to judge of his Next Invention. viz.

. 5. [ That Scripture, Antiquity, Schoolmen, and all Orthod^x Neotericks will
exclaim against me.] Here is matter for a whole volume, if I would expatiate as
I might upon each of these particulars. But by how much the longer I am tempted
to be, I will endeavor to be so much the 1. Of Scripture used by Mr. B. and by
me.
shorter. And first, for Scripture I will observe, that he uses that as he
does the Neotericks. So many Texts as in the letter do Note, that they do not
so much as seem to make for his opinion of Gods being the Fountain or cause of
sin, to any other sort of Readers then such as he is. For Act. 4. 28. is spoken
only of God's determining, not to binder what he foresaw men would do if they
were not hindered. But Mr. B. will not allow either such conditional decrees, or
such idle permissions, for so he call's them, p. 63.
seem to make for his opinion, [that sin is absolutely willed by God Almighty
(as p. 78. and 88.) that God did voluntarily decree it (as p. 73.) that God
does determine it shall be done (as p. 79.) that God does tempt men into sin,
(as p. 79.) and the like,] so many Texts, in the letter, do pass for Orthodox
with Mr. Barlee. But so many Texts as do evidently make for my opinion [that
Christ is the Savior of the Joh. 4. 42.
World, of the 1 John 2. 2.
whole world, of 1 Timothy 4. 10.
all men, of Heb 2. 9.
every man, and the like] so many Texts, in the letter, do pass for Heterodox
at least, if not for Note, that for this part of my opinion, as well as others,
he calls me heretic in several places.
Heretical, with Mr. Barlee. Such places of Scripture as are plain and easy,
(as plain and as easy as the wit of man can imagine,) Mr. Barlee will needs
interpret in some figurative sense, that so he may drag them to vote on his
side. But such other places of Scripture as are obscure, or doubtful, or
notoriously known to be spoken by an Hebraisme, he will needs understand in a
literal sense, and all in homage to his Caprices concerning God's Correp. cor.
p. 63. compared with 60. and 61.
Agency and Ibid page 53. 54. The first exexample of universal redemption.
efficaciousnesse in sin. It may be of good use to the unlearned sort of
Readers to give them an example in either case. When God Ezekiel. 33. 11
swears he has no pleasure in the death of the wicked; nor is willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, and will have 1 Timothy
2. 4.
c 2 Pet. 3. 9.
all men to be saved; and tasted death for Heb. 2. 9.
every man; and is the 1 John 2. 2.
propitiation not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world;
and commands Act, 17. 30.
all men every where to repent, My sense
I say that these words ought to be simply understood, after their native
signification, without any mental Reservations, or other tricks whatsoever. So
as my sense is plainly this; That God sincerely does desire the health and
welfare of all mankind, I mean their Obedience, Repentance, Renovation of life,
perseverance in well doing in this present world, and Glorification in the
world to come; that he hates nothing which he has made; nothing but sin,
which he has not made; that when he command's he is sincerely willing to be
obeyed, and therefore gives a passive power to receive his grace, and by that,
an active power to perform such obedience as he will mercifully accept. But he
forces no man, compels no man, necessitateth no man, by Grace irresistible,
to be eternally happy, do what he can to the contrary; any more then he forces
or necessitateth any man, by any irrespective unconditional Decree, to be
eternally miserable, do what he can to be otherwise. So that such as are not
saved, cannot say, they are not saved for want of means and possibility, for
want of a Ransom or a Savior, or for want of God's willingness that they
should be saved; but for want of their willingness to do their duties, the
conditions of the Covenant, upon the performance, or nonperformance of which,
Salvation either may, or may not be had. Mr. B. his put-offs, and their
absurdities.
But Mr. B. on the contrary derides my simplicity in the literal acception of
such plain Texts. He has either a Synecdoche for the word [All] to make it
signify no more then [some] and those not the greater, but by very much the
lesser part of mankind. Or else he has a distinction of [sufficienter, non
intentional^ter] Christ (says he) was sufficient to have been a ransom for all
the world, but 'twas a thing he never meant, or intended. Or else he has the
common abuse of voluntas signi, and Voluntas beneplaciti is rendered by Mr. B.
the will of liking; and by Mr. Prin, (in his translation of the Lambeth
Articles) the will of the w^ll pleased God, how absurdly, let others judge.
Beneplaciti; that is, the revealed will of God (which, they say, is Twiss.
Vind. Gra l. 1. part. 1. Digr. 10. Se. 12. p. 140. and Correp. cor. p. 67.
not properly his will, but only a token what ought to be aone and the secret
will of God, (which, they will have to be properly his will, as that by which
he decrees a thing shall actually be done) In so much that although he
professes in his word; He is not willing that any should perish, but [very
willing] that all should come to repentance; yet he is secretly willing that
the far greater part of men should perish, and secretly unwilling that all
should come to to repentance. He having absolutely decreed (say they) to leave
the major part of man kind without the very possibility of Repentance or
Salvation; and determined their Reprobation without respect unto their sins. So
when he is said to command all men every where to repent, it is not meant (say
they) as if he intended they should repent indeed, (for he had absolutely
decreed the Impossibility of their Repentance, as say the men of Mr. Barlee's
temper) but only to show what ought to be done if the doing of it were
possible. So again when God reveals his great unwillingness that men should
sin, they say it is but a sign that men ought not to sin; whereas his secret
will is (which alone is properly his will, says Dr. Twisse) that men shall sin
of necessity do what they can to the contrary. Which is as much as to say,
[that voluntas signi is but signum voluntatis, non voluntas ex part rei, nay
worse,] That voluntas signi is but the will of not willing what he wills, and
of willing what he wills not with his secret will. Or (which by way of refuge
they are fain to say) that what we call the will of God, revealed to us in his
word, we do but call so. It being not properly his will or the revelation of
his will, but many times contrary to his secret or real will, and so rather the
concealing then the revealing of his will; or only a making show as if he were
willing, when his secret will proves that he is very far from it. And this may
suffice for the first example of the first case, wherein I am for a literal,
and Mr. B. only for a figurative Interpretation of Scripture. But 2. there is a
time too, when I am for a figurative, and he 2. The second Example of Gods not
only permitting, but exciting men to sin.
is only for a literal sense. E. G. When God is said in Scripture to 2 Samuel 16.
10. etc.
command Shimei to curse David, to Ezekiel. 24. 21.
profane his Sanctuary, to 2 Samuel 12. (...).
give the wives of David unto Absolon, to Eze. 20. 26.
pollute men in their own gifts, and the like, I say that such words must be
expounded by an Hebraisme, whereby many verbs which are active in sound, are
only permissive in signification. And herein I agree as well with Certum est,
^ebraica phra^i significare eas [figuras verborum] permissionem, non voluntatem
efficacem. Melanc. loc. Com. de Causa peccati. p. 49.
Melancthon, as with Saepe apud Hebraeo^ verba so^o activa significatu
permissiva sunt. Grot. in Jer. 4. 10.
Grotius, and all other the most learned Interpreters of Scripture; and with
the judgment of common sense. My sense.
So as my apprehension of such Texts is plainly this. That God did permit, or
that he did patiently suffer, or that he did not hinder those wicked acts, viz.
the cursing of David, the profanation of his temple, the pollution of his
people, and Absalons violation of his Fathers wives. Nor do I say that thus it
may be, but thus it must. For nothing can actively Quicquid efficit tale, est
ipsum magis and
pollute but what is unclean in it self. (as nothing properly can Nihil dat
quod non habet.
moisten, but what is wet,) Now God (we know) is the spirit of holiness and
purity, who hates sin with a real, not with a Cum igitur non sit simulatum
odium peccati in voluntate divina, nequaquam sent^endum est, Deum velle
peccatum. Melanct. ibid. p. 48.
counterfeit hatred, (as Melancthon speaks.) And cannot decree what he hates,
because he cannot be willing of that, of which he is unwilling. It would imply
a contradiction, and therefore the Parce derechef que tell est le style de l'
escriture, que celui qui n'oste point quand il le peut est souuent dit donner,
oster celui qui point ne done. Mornay du Pless. en medit. sur le verse. du chapter
19. des Proverbes p. 167. 170.
Seigneur du Plessis, however of Calvin's judgment in other points, had more
Grace and more Wit then not to acknowledge the necessity of the Rule
abovementioned in the exposition of such Texts as do seem to some men to imply
the Divine will to be efficacious of sin. Mr B is here for the literal sense.
But Mr. B. on the contrary, is for literal expositions of such Texts, and
chides me for being otherwise, and upon this very occasion proposes this
Question, [Know you not that bonus Textuarius est bonus Theologus? and that
sensus Scripturae est tantum unicus isque grammaticus? and (it is in his p.
69.) he jeers Correp. Corr. p. 70. and 61.
my milkie mild way of understanding those Texts, and calls them
Socinio-Grotio-Percian Glosses (ibid.) professes to be as incredulous as any
Jew, that by receding from the words of those Scriptures I can approach nearer
to the genuine sense of them. And what does he mean by [those Scriptures] but
the forequoted places? (as he confesses but 4. lines before p. 70.) and what
were the places forequoted, but the cho^sest The Catalogues which he makes of
them are in his p. 56. 59, 60, 61, 62.
Texts of Scripture that he was able to pick up, whereby to prove God to be the
Author of sin? as needs he must be in the very worst manner in which an Author
can be expressed, if all those Scriptures were to be literally expounded, which
our correptory Corrector does there so earnestly desire. But would we not think
that man were mad, who should conclude our Savior to be a Plant or a Tre^,
from Joh. 15. 1. 5. because he there says, [I am the true Vine? or that he is
a wooden Savior from John 10. 7. 9. because he there says, [I am the door?]
or that he is an irrational Savior from John 1. 29. 36. because the Baptist
there calls him [the Lamb of God?] and is it not much a greater madness, to
conclude that God is a Tempter, a Deceiver, and a Father of lies, from 1 King.
22. 22, 23. where he says to the lying spirit, * Go forth and *** Note, that
these and all the like expressions which are but figures of speech (as
Melancth^n knowingly calls them) are very easily and naturally to be expounded
of Gods Permission, or sufferance, and God is only said ((...)) to do those
things which he permits to be done, because they cannot be done without his
sufferance or permission. And because he has determined not to cancel his Law
(the transgression of which is sin) nor to change the course of Nature by
making Man (like Beast) an involuntary Agent, but to let him continue a free
and rational Agent (and so capable of sin) his permission and sufferance of sin
is not only a just but a necessary thing.
prevail? or from Ezekiel. 14. 9. where he is said to have * deceived the erring
Prophet? or from Isa. 63. 17. where God is interrogated, [Why have thou * made
us to err from thy ways?] yet Mr. B. does plead for a literal signification
of such passages in Scripture. And in justification of such blasphemies as I
had quoted from his Oracles (in my p. 9. and 10.) affirming men to do wickedly
by the force or impulse of God Almighty, and by his positive command, and the
like he alleges many Texts (in his p. 56.) against which he says, I might as
well have cried out, that they make God the Author of sin. And then asks if
those Texts do fall any thing (t) short [of those sayings which I produced out
of the chieftains of his opinion,] nay, if they go not beyond the highest
expressions of those blasphemers. And to help excuse this abuse of Scripture,
he has in his page 57.
learnt to say from Dr. Twisse, that the Jesuits and Dominicans have done so
too, (as if the blasphemy were the less for the greater number of blasphemers.)
But the same Dr. Twisse (tt) Correp. Corr. p. 56.
does there confess, Twisse in vind. Gra: l. 2. p. 1. Sect. 1 Crim. 3. Digr. 2.
c. 4. p. 52. col. 2.
that from such Doctrines of the Jesuits and Dominicans [The act of sin is
from God, and God determines the will of the Creature to every act, yea even
to every act of sin] it was very easy for the unlearned, such as the
libertines then were, to conclude God to be the Author of all the sins which
are committed by men. Upon which confession of Dr. Twisse it must inevitably
follow, that if Mr. Barlee and his Masters, and Dr. Twisse in particular, have
spoken sometimes as ill, and sometimes worse then the Jesuits and Dominicans,
they must needs be liable to the very same crime. But that Doctor does
contradict, and condemn himself, when he says Dominicani etiam imperfecte and
ob^^ure veritatem hac ex part enuntiant dum: praeter concursum Dei, nihil
aliud requirunt ad viam peccato sternendam, quam negationem gratiae efficacis,
cum tamen manifestum sit ulteriorem aliquam per occasiones agendi suppeditatas,
ad peccata (ut ita dicam) prostitutionem requiri, quae sine tentationibus ad
peccandum inducentibus absolvi non potest, etc. Twiss. Vin. Gr. l. 2. p. 1.
Sect. 2. Cri. 3. Digr. 2. c. 15. p 156.
else where, that the Dominicans do imperfectly and obscurely relate the truth,
whilst besides God's concurrence to the making way for sin, they require
nothing but the Negation of efficacious Grace. Whereas the Dr. himself goe's
much beyond them and is bolder then they were, (as I have showed in my Notes,
p. 10. in the last quotation.) And though Mr. B. says, p. 56. that they
profess some fearfulness of their being enforced to express themselves in
the language they cannot but do; (therein acknowledgeing the checks of
conscience, and yet alleging a necessity for such expressions) yet Dr, Twisse
has Quoties quenquam impelli a deo aut cogi dicunt, rhetorice potius loquuntur
quam logice, and non tam proprie quam figurate, ut ^o divinae mo^ionis
e^ficaciam illustrius repraesentent. Id. ibid. Sect. 1. Crim. 3. c. 1. p. 29.
col. 1.
pleaded that they speak Rhetorically, rather then logically, nor so properly,
as figuratively, that they may the more clearly represent the efficacy of the
divine motion. It is an obvious observation, that Dr. Twisse in this place does
speak directly against Mr. B. For first, a figurative interpretation is is not
a literal one. 2. Men are not enforced to speak improperly [in saying that men
are compelled by God to sin] when it is so easy for them to speak properly [in
saying they are not compelled but only permitted by God to sin.] 3. It cannot
be said with any 3.
Truth, that they cannot but speak rbetorically, when they speak of man's
coaction from God to sin; for Melancthon, and all such do speak logically true,
when they speak the quite contrary, and if they will, they can speak as truly
as any Melanchthon whatsoever. Yet Mr. B. says plainly, that (when they speak
of God's Impulse or coaction to sin) they are enforced to do so; and though
they do it with some fearfulness, yet they cannot but do it. (As if absolutely
decreed to speak such frightfull and horrid things.) 4. Dr. Twisse confesses,
that what 4.
Bellarmine there urges is very true, [viz. that Calvin does say, and say in
Print too, that wicked men are coacted or compelled by God as with a bridle to
do wickedly.] But only pleads in his excuse, that when he and others do Id.
Ibid.
say [quenquam impelli a deo, aut cogi, that any man is enforced, or compelled
by God] they speak rhetorically. Sure it is not only a needless, and a wicked,
but a very unhandsome and dull kind of Rhetoric, to say that God who hates
sin and does earnestly forbid it, does compel and constrain men to its
commission; it being worse then to say, he is the Author of sin, because less
then coaction or compulsion will make an Author. And the Doctors reason
spoile's all he had said before. For [Efficacie] sure is a word of force, ab
efficiendo, to effect. And if God does efficaciously move men to sin, they need
not seek for assistance to words of coaction and impulsion to express his
motion by; especially since the Doctor is wont to explain the word
[Efficacious] by Twiss. Vin. Gr. l. 1. part. 1* Sect. 12. p. 140
[irresistible.] Besides, 5. if these are Orthodox put-offs, (as Mr. B. speaks,
p. 169.) and as honest and ingenious, as they think them necessary devices, (as
Mr. B. phraseth it again, p. 114.) they may say as well that God is the Author
of all the sins in the world, and tell us when they have done, that they speak
not logically and properly* but Rhetorically and figuratively, the better to
express the efficacious motion of the Almighty. And the same may be urged for
any blasphemy whatsoever. 6. If their meaning is not blasphemous when their
words are so, let them publicly confess that they acknowledge 6.
the Hebraisme above mentioned, as well as we; and that all those Texts which
are alleged for God's stirring up to sin, are only meant of his permission.
When this is done, the Scripture will exclaim no more against Mr. B. in this
particular, then (as he says) it does against me. But I must hasten to his
next invention, viz. That Antiquity, as well as Scripture will exclaim against
me.] 1. What he means by Antiquity 1. of Antiquity.
we may guess by his Catalogue to which he recommends me (p. 194.) where
amongst his Ancient Authors he reckons Historia Gottescalci written by the late
Bishop of Armagh about 25. years since. Yet to that Author I will give ear, if
I may also be allowed to read the Predestinarian heresy set set out lately by
Sirmondus, and also Vossius his Pelagian History. 2. His very antientest
Author there mentioned is no more ^ntient then St. Austin, who lived above 400.
years after Christ, whereas I derive my Antiquity in behalf of my opinions from
as far as St. Ignatius who lived together with the Apostles. And 3. even
Austin, Prosper, Fulgentius, and Hilarie, (who are in effect no more then one
Austin, the three latter 3* Of S. Austin.
following him, as Scholars commonly their Master) are as exactly for my
opinions, as Mr. B. can pretend them to be for his, as I have, and shall show
upon just occasion. And if they speak on both sides, let them signify nothing
with him, or me, but let us be tried by their Fathers to whom they will humbly
submit themselves, and who are granted to be for that which I asserted in my
Notes by the very Enemies of my opinion. But 4. if this one Austin had been
only for Mr. B. his opinions, it had not been argumentative that they are true.
4.
For that Father was subject to diverse errors as himself Ego a^tem cum per eos
qui meos labores legunt, non so^um doctior, verum etiam emendatior ^io,
propitium mihi Deu^ agnoseo. Et hoc per Ecclesiae Doctores maxim expecto, si
and in ipsorum manus venit, dignenturque nosse quod scribo. Augustinus ita
concludit libros de praedestinatione sanctorum et de bon^ perseverantiae.
confessed, and his very admirers cannot deny. It was one of his Errors, that
Infants as soon as they were baptized should receive the other Sacrament of the
Lord's supper. (Which Mr. B. sure will grant was no small error, since he
himself withholds it from men of ripe age.) And that was founded upon another
error far worse then the former; viz the Augustine. l. 6. Hypognostic^, contra
Pelag mihi p. 895.
damnation of Infants dying unbaptized. From whence he worthily was styled
Durus pater Infantum. Besides, 5. It is the judgment even of Grotius (that
wonder of this age, much more of the next, for his profoundnesse of judgment,
as well as learning.) Sed utdicam quod sentio, puto Augustinum, ne secum quidem
per omnia posse conciliari, ita contranitendi studio sc in illas ambages
indult, ut non invenerit qua se extricaret. -- clarioribus scripturae locis
interpretationes dat violentas, and nunc has, nunc illas, incertus quo se
vertat. -- ad interpretanda^ scripturas satis infelix, etc. Grot. Apol. Rivet.
p. 97, 98.
That Austin is not reconcilable with himself, that he cast him self into
Ambages in the heat of disputations, from which he could not disintangle
himself; that he used violent interpretations of many clear Scriptures, now
one, anon another, as being doubtful which way to turn himself; that he was
useful for instruction, but unhappy in interpreting Scripture, and far
inferior to the Greeks. This is the upshot of Grotius his judgment, which I
do not set down in derogation to that Father (who speak's as much for my
opinions as he can possibly speak against them) but that the plain Reader may
know what he ought to think of Mr. B. his notion of Antiquity. 6. Though 6. Of
Prosper.
Prosper did err the same error with his Master, touching the De Voc. Genesis l.
2. c. 21. 23. and ad Aug. Epist. p. 882.
Damnation of unbaqtized Infants, yet he sufficiently overthrowe's it by his
other opinions. As of predestination, being founded in in Respon. ad Cap. Gal.
c. 3. 12. 14. 15.
prescience. Of Cap. 4. de Voc. Genesis l. 2. c. 16. and Resp ad Gal. cap. 9.
universal Grace to all that are baptized. Of universal Red^ption to all
without exception as well to the wicked as to the just. Of falling cap. 2. et
3. et 7.
away from sancttity. Of free will to cap. 3. 6. et 7.
evil, and withal to (h) good per divinum adjutorium. Of Gods cap. 7. 11. 12.
14: 15. l.
not impelling any man to evil. Of Gods prescience cap. 12.
not being his will. Of God's not forsaking cap. 7.
until he is forsaken. And very much more I could allege, (to show him
speaking for me against our Correptory Corrector) out of his Answers to the
Objections of Vincentius. And from his choice Sentences collected out of St.
Austin's Works. And it ought to be remembered, that Austin and Prosper are no
where so likely to declare in plain terms their true opinions, as where they
wipe off such Calumnies as their Correptorie Correctors 7. Of S. Hillarie
had laid upon them. 7. St. Hilarie was so far from Mr. B. his opinions, that
he was contrary to them, (as Mr. B. himself must say) if that is true which
Prosper himself speaks of him in his Epistle to Austin concerning the Relics
of the Pelagian Heresy. For when Prosper had reckoned up (what he there does
call) the Pelagian Relics, he Nam unum ^orum praecipuae Authoritatis and
spiritualium studiorum virum, St. Hilarium Episcopum Arelatensem sciat
Beatitudo tua admiratorem sectatoremque in aliis omnibus tuae esse doctrinae:
and de hoc quod in querelam trahit jam pridem apud sanctitatem tuam sensum suum
per literas velle confer Prosp. in Epist. ad Ang. de Relig. Pelag. p. 886.
concludes that St. Hilarie Arch Bishop of Arles, a great man and a good one,
was one of their number who taught those Doctrines, however in all other things
an absolute follower of Austins Doctrine. (And if Prosper were not one himself,
he must be acknowledged to have receded from what he spoke (in Resp. ad excerp.
Genuens. ad Dub. 8. p. 356.) nay, Hilarie says farther, that that very Nec de
hac ^ide dici potest, Quid habes quod non accepisti, cum in eadem natura
remanserit licet vitiata, quae prius sana ac perfecta donata ^it. Hilar. Arel.
Edit. Basil. p. 679. And let it be noted, that though Hilarie desired not to be
thought by Austin to write his own Doubts to him, (p. 681.) yet Prosper says
expressly, that he was one of those Massilians there spoken of in the place
before cited.
Faith in the praescience of which men were praedestinated to life, is a man's
by Nature, and not by Grace. Which though he says they gather from Austin on
the Romans [Quod credimus nostrum est, quod autem operamur, illius;] yet do I
utterly disapprove it (and so am less Pelagian then Austin or Hilarie) for
certainly Faith is the gift of God, wrought by his Grace, as well as good
works, although the one is before the other. This Epistle of Hilarie as that
other of Prosper (two Admirers of Austin) were written upon occasion of many
things which were disliked in Austin's Books [de Correptione and Gratia, and
contra Julianum] and wrought upon him so much as to occasion his writing those
other books [de Perseverantia sanctorum and de bono Perseverantiae.] Thus
unlucky and unskilful is Mr. B. in his pretensions to Antiquity from but a few
noe very ancient Fathers, who cannot stand him in any stead neither. And 8.
what he boasts 8.
of the Neotericks does show his Infirmity as plainly, because by Of Neotericks.
adding the word [Orthodox] which is (like Manna with the Israelites) of
several Tastes to the several Palats of them that taste Of his latin sentence
out of Austin.
it. And so the profound fetch of Mr. B. is merely this, [That they only are
Orthodox who are exactly of his opinion, and they that are of his opinion are
not of mine; and they that are not of my opinion will exclaim against me,
because I am not of theirs.] Lastly, his Quomodo dicuntur negare liberum
Arbitrium voluntatis, qui confitentur omnem hominem, quisquis suo cord credit
in Deum, non nisi sua libera credere voluntate? cum potius illi op pugnant
liberum arbitrium, qui oppugnant Dei Gratiam, qua vere ad bona eligenda and
agenda ^it liberum. Aug. Epist. 107. ad Vital. Carthag.
sentence out of S. Austin, wherewith he shuts up his Title Page, does plainly
argue these 5 things. 1. That Austin is a strong Assertor of free will, (even
as well as Arminius) 2. That the free will of man does consist very well with
the Grace of God. (and so he confirms my whole fourth Chapter.) Nay 3. That the
will is truly made free by the Grace of God. (in perfect agreement with what I
said p. 58.) Nay 4. That they who oppose the free will of man do also oppose
the Grace of God. (and Mr. B. is a Pelagian, if he is not so far an Arminian as
to assert the freedom of the will.) 5. The whole sentence is an argument, that
our Correptory Corrector either does not understand the sentence it self, or
that he wholly mistakes my Book. For the sentence is directed by its Author
against the Massilians, who allowing the spirit necessary to all after-graces
and performances, did yet deny it to be so to Faith. But I have always said
and believed, that Faith, as well as other Graces, is the free gift of God,
(which is more then Austin himself did always believe) and therefore that
saying of that Father does less make against me, then against himself. Such a
woeful Antagonist is Mr. B. even in his very glorious triumphant Title Page,
which (according to their Custom who are wont to set the fairest foot
foremost, and the most creditable dish at the upper end of the Table, the best
wine first, and then that which is worse, John 2. 10.) is the strength and
substance of all his Book.

6. And whereas there is added the mention of two Epistles Of Mr. B's. two
Preface^^ in his Title Page.
subscribed with the Names of two Ancient Ministers in this County, (and why
the third was left out it is not hard to conjecture,) either that the Book
might sell the better, or be preserved from contempt (at least with some of his
own party,) I shall say at present no more then this. First, that where the
Vintner knows his Wine is good, he needs not hang out an Ivie-Bush to tole in
Customers to his Debauches. Secondly, that if ten thousand times ten thousand
such men as they should subscribe to this Doctrine, [That two and two do make
seven; and that it is but afurlong from Northampton to London; or (which is yet
more impossible,) That God could decree without omniscience, or be omniscient
without a prescience of all events, or have a prescience without a
consideration, or predetermin and compel, and necessitate a man to commit that
sin which he hates and forbids, and therefore forbids because he hates
or that He died only for foam few men who tasted death for every man, or that
He is only the propitiation for the lesser part of the world who is the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, or that he who gives his
commands to all is secretly unwilling to be obeyed by all, when he openly
profeseth that he is willing,] it ought to seem no more True, by being Preached
or Penned by men of Note, then it can be by being printed by W. H. for George
Sawbridge at the sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill.

7. After the lamentable successes of Mr. Barlee's Triumphant Of Mr. B. his
Dedicatory Epistles.
Title Page, it were very great Pity to pursue him (...) throughout his
Dedicatory Epistles. Where there is hardly any period but what I find liable
to some severe Animadversion. And since he does publicly acknowledge in the
first of those Epistles, that he is [ page 6.
Rusticus Corydon, and a poor page 7.
Sympresbyter, and again a mere page 10.
Pigmee, I will not contradict him in every one of his Assertions, by observing
more of his Epistles then a poor Sympresbyter may well deserve. It was not
possible for me to have fastened upon him any one of those Names; but since he
has freely imposed them upon himself, I shall not complain that he has done
Correp. Corr.
himself wrong. For who but a very poor Sympresbyter would a a Epist. Ded. 1.
p. 9.
think it a Pleasantness or a Playfulness in confuting the Arguments of a Book,
to tell his Antagonist that he is Idem. p. 174.
damned; that he plays the Idem. p. 119.
Lucian and Carpocratian against Heaven; that he is a Idem. p. 102.
Satanical Blasphemer; and Qui Diabolum ipsum blasphemand^ superas. Id. ibid.
exceeds the Devil himself in Blasphemy? yet after a world of such logic
clothed over with such language, He is afraid of being judged too Idem Epist.
Ded. 1. p. 16.
soft and Playful; as if his Presbyterian Drolerie were not sufficiently
picquant, because it seems not to him so very rudely Abusive as he would have
it. But (to come from the fashion of his wit to that of his reason and
discourse) He very valiantly takes it as an unquestionable thing, that His is
the Cause of Id. ib. p. 8.
Grace and Truth. But has no more of Truth in it, then that (h) Zachaeus was a
Pigmee, or that he hh Id. ib. p. 10.
got upon (h) shoulders, or that Id. ib. p. 9.
Tart and Pleasant are all one to any Taste but Mr. Barlee's. Which were it not
admirably debauched, he would not gratify its longings by persevering in a sin
which he fears Id. ib. p. 8.
every body will blame, and even his very Id. ib. p. 9.
Sympresbyters as well as others. And (which shows how this sin has got the
Dominion over his Soul) he will rather come to an Id. ibid.
open penance with a peccavi fateor, then lose the pleasure and sensuality of
being scurrilous. This is an Essay of that Practice which is consequent to his
Doctrine. [Veniam Id. ibid.
peto si unquam posthac] he asks a pardon, upon condition that hereafter he
will not wallow in such mire; and yet in his Dedicatory p. 13. 14, 15. etc.
Postscript he wilfully suffers a Relaps. If the equal Reader will but compare
the ninth page of his Epistles with the fifteenth and sixteenth, he will find
a rare Instance of that temporary Repentance which S. Peter has expressed by
two Returns, to wit, of a 2 Pet. 2. 2^.
Dog to his Vomit, and of a sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.
Or if from the last line of the eighth page and the beginning of the ninth his
Reader will heedfully attend him to what immediately follows page 10. he will
find him (in a breath) asking forgiveness for his Commissions, and promising
to do so no more, until the next time. A man that should swear never to
swear, and (without provocation) confirm his Promise with some great oath,
would make a competent mirroir for Mr. B. to see himself in. Whilst he peccavi
fa^^or. p. 9.
confesses that he has sinned, and yet is obstinately bent to sin the very
same sin which he confesses, he seems to be of this opinion, That such a naked
Confession as [peccavi fateor] is a sufficient expiation for all sins past, and
an Antidote sufficient for all his wilful Transgressions from that time
forward. Such is the horrible effect of his believing irrespective and
unconditionate Decrees.

8. In his second Dedicatory Epistle which he calls his Postscript, he begins
with a specimen of his Calumniating Vein, and holds it on in such sort as if
he were willing to teach his Reader by that one Trial or Endeavor, what an
able man he is in his way. My [Sinner Implead^d] which was sincerely by me
intended to avert my Reader from Sin which is the way to Reprobation, our new
fashioned A^tificer does call the Reproba^es Epist. Ded. 2. p. 13.
Ple^ for ^ning. And by that one sentence so perfectly opposite to the Truth,
it will be obvious to conjecture of all the rest. Had he repented in good
earnest when he cried Peccavi p 9. he would not now (as he professes) think it
very allow^ble to Id. ib. p. 14.
^all in his Apology, that is, to repent of his Repentance. And therefore very
unfitly did he liken himself to Id. ib. p. 10.
Zacheus, who did so repent as also to make Restitution to every man whom he
had injured. Which was such a Repentance as was 2 Cor. 7. 10.
not to be repented of. Whereas Mr. B. was only sorry in a sudden Fit of
Humanity, which did not last to the end of the very same page, as if at the
Instant of his Confession he had resolved not to mend. And it seems he had such
need to express his sorrow for having been sorry, and to Apologize for his
Apology, that he could not hold from breaking out into his Dedicatory
Postscript, whereby his Readers might have notice that his Fit of good Nature
was at an end, that he was not Patient of Reformation, that he was big of some
Contumelies of which he must instantly be delivered, and therefore retracted
his Retractation. He thought that [Insolency Ep. Ded. 2. p. 14.
belched out against Gods absolute Decrees and Counsels] was a prime piece of
Drolerie which ought not utterly to be lost; though he knew I disproved that
Gods Decrees of Reprobation were any other then conditional, and only gave
Antidotes against the poison of them that Teach them to be otherwise. His Id.
ib. p. 15.
Demon Meridianum is another Instance of his p. 9.
Pleasantness. Not only Devil, but the worst sort of that kind, a (x) Noonday
Devil. And false Latin besides, to make it yet more filthy. (as if he thought
that D^mon had been of the neuter gender, by virtue of [Graecula vel in on vel
in um, ut Barbiton ovum etc.]) and as if this raillerie were not pleasant
enough, he makes great haste to call me Id. ib. p. 16.
slanderous Dragon, which is again the worst sort of Devil. For he professes
to mean that very Dragon or Serpent spoken of in the Revelation by referring
his Reader to Rev. 12. 15. and yet he is not at ease by being disburden'd of
his Conceptions, until he has rank't me with Elymas the famous * Sorcerer,
giving this reason for his Resemblance, that ** Act. 13. 8.
I have d^awn away the * Deputy from the Faith. What he means by the Deputy, I
will not publicly conjecture. But I am told he is angry that I am not thought
worthy of Sequestration, and that (for my sake only) he would be rev^ng'd upon
the memory of one that is Dead. And to fill up the measu^e of his Comparison, he
will have me to deserve as Id. ib. p. 16.
cutting a Reproof, as that which Elymas received from Paul. Which is to call
me in plain Terms [The Act. 13. 10.
child of the Devil, full of all subtilty and all mischief, the Enemy of all
righteousness, who never cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord.] For
he refers his Readers to Act. 13. 10. And having said these things, he thinks
it a piece of Civility to stay himself in his Carriere with a kind of
unseasonable Sed reprimam me p. 16.
Aposiopesis; as if his Conscience had given him a sudden check. But he will
rather g^gg the Importunities of a Conscience, then not persevere in evil
doing. For after a Id. ibid.
wailing with Flood; of tears that my (c) Triobulary Pamphlets (as he was
pleased to call them) had received the (c) Applause of no mean Persons, and
drawn Disciples from c c p. 10.
their School; he presently (d) stirrs up his Brethren to finish the Plot which
they had hegun of an Ecclesiastical Association; that by their Presbyterian (d)
Censures such a Sorcerer as I may d d p. 17.
be delivered up to the Devil.

9. When I compare these things with many like Passages in his book (especially
page 232.) I cannot choose but conceive that he would threaten me into a^
silence; and hopes I may think it my safest way, to make as if I were nonplus't
by him, and his Seniors. Much indeed might be done, if I were able to be afraid
of such as fear not the Lord of Hosts. But I seriously profess I do not know
which way to do it. For I have learned to distinguish betwixt things
Necessary, and things Convenient. I hold it Necessary to keep a good
Conscience, whereas it is but Convenient to keep a good Living. I know a man
may be persecuted, and yet be saved; and in adherence to my Principles I can
despise those Buggs, wherewith my Correptory Corrector does strive to awe me.

It Is true, the Emperor Caligula having an itch after Victory, but not a
Courage to Endeavor it by Dint of Sword, hired the Gallum quemque procerum,
and (...), sermonem Germanicum addiscere coegit, ut triumphui inservirent.
Sueton. l. 4.
tallest of the Gauls to learn the language of the Germans, and so to adorn his
Mock-Triumph by a Counterfeit Confession that they were Captives. But our
Correptory Corrector has never yet bribed me with a Sum of Money, either to
manage my Cause as may be most for his turn, or to own those Inventions which
he has Minted in my Name, (as seemed most for his Convenience.) And since I am
not so much as his stipendary Captive, nor am afraid of those Mormos wherewith
he hopes he may fright me in several parts of his Declamation, I will not
fail to preadmonish his Reader, That because he despairs of ever having any
Victory, he comforts himself with some Ovations. And what ever Insultations he
may make over Germany, all his Captives and Trophies came out of France.

CHAP. II.
A Brief Discovery of Mr. Barlee's Style and Temper, wherein is exhibited his
second way of Confutation.

1. THe chief particulars of his Charge in the first nine sheets of his
Indictment (for I cannot pretend at once-reading to graspe them all) he has
exhibited against me to posterity (if yet they fortune to live so long) in the
pithy expressions of this following Bill.

That my correct Copy is uncorrected of most of the Pelagian, Semipelagian,
Arminian Tenants, p. 1.

That Pelagius and Arminius are my true Doctrinall Proparents, p. 6. 7.

That I am spightfull against Gods Truth and ways, p. 7.

That none is better affected to my cause then the Devil, p. 10.

That I make God to be worse then the Devil himself, p. 10.

That I am the very Captain General of all the Arminian Rout, p. 11.

That I am stiff in the instep, p. 12.

That my conscience told me, I thought my papers fit to be burnt for Heretics,
p. 14.

That I am too nearly allied to that proud, haughty, and daring Generation of
the Jesuits, Arminians, and So^inians, p. 15.

That I dote on the Authority of the Mother Church, p. 15.

That I am a stately Orator, p. 16. And of truly Gallant parts, p. 6. Yet there
is not one in a thousand of the Laity but is able to teach me, p. 21.

That I, like Grotius, do in words fawn upon two different parties, p. 17.

That my forehead is sufficiently steeled. p. 18.

That I am superciliously scornful upon the confidence which I have of my own
great natural wit, p. 19.

That my Book abounds with Arminianism as much as any ulcerous body with
Botches, p. 19.

That I am an admirer of Prelates, and that qua tales, p. 19.

That Arminianism is my great Diana, p. 19.

That I am the Trim, finicall, lean clerick of the Country, p. 20.

That I lay the snare to bring the worthy Gentlemen of the Country into boggs
and praecipices, p. 22.

That my Book begins with Calumnies, goes on with jirks, and squibs, and ends
with Complements, p. 23.

That my secret belongs to the depths of Satan, p. 23.

That I cast in Texts by dozens, as if Baker-like I were bound to throw in so
many fine Manchets into a Buttery Hatch. But when I crumble them, either they
fall into my own crude dictates, or be turned into sippets fit for none but
Pelagian, Massilian, and Arminian palates, p. 26.

That my falsehood and my impudence are to be detested, p. 26.

That my first and second Tome are most agreeable to the Analogy of
perfidiousnesse, p. 26.

That I am no Babe in Grace, nor yet in malice, p. 27.

That I take my self to be wiser then Austin; whose manlike writings I confute
by his more infantile and Babelike writings, as to my shame shall be seen, p.
27.

That I must consider if I have not altogether made shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience, p. 28.

That the genuine Successors of the Semipelagians are the Jesuits, Arminians,
and my self; Still devising Chimaericall shifts, and setting up the rotten
Dagon and proud Idol of man's will against the never missing determinations of
God, p. 30.

That I am a close Votarie to Pelagian, and Arminian secrets, p. 32.

That I must be allowed to pelagianize even whilst I declaim against it, p. 34.

That I talk against them as if I were spit out of their mouths, p. 35.

That he can, has, and shall prove my Doctrine to be full of those proud
errors, hatched by one who was styled of old the proud Divel's primogenitus, as
like the Father as he could look, who in his words, doctrine, and deeds, was
the very emblem and paradigma of pride, from all which the Lord deliver Mr. T*
P. p. 36.

That I am not the smaller thief, but the more sacrilegious, p. 32.

That my crafty and ve^satil head is suspected to be stuffed with the usual
Pelagian captions and aequivocations, p. 38.

That I am like to be looked upon as some of the Planets spoken of Jude 13. (to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever) if I repent not the
sooner, p. 43.

That I am unmercifull in my dealings with the names and writings of others,
therefore I shall have no mercy, p. 45.

That I appear like Pelagius, and Pelagius sometimes in an Ethnic shape,
sometimes in a Semiethnick, sometimes in a Judaick; sometimes in a
half-Christian shape, p. 45.

That I am proud and malapert, p. 48.

That my malice occasions my stupefaction, p. 48.

That I am a great Cassandrite, p. 46.

That I rage and ramp it against the names of men (whom the Reader know's I do
not name,) p. 50.

That I undertake to be a Ringleader, and appear in the van of my Faction, p.
50.

That through the fine, thin, aulicall complemental lawn of my civility, I make
my hypocrisy to be very conspicuous, p. 51.

That I do up and down in my last papers whip and strip the Masters of the
Assembly, p. 51, 52.

That never any before my impudent self was so foolhardy, p. 52.

That I look into Books, as Spiders suck flowers, to gather poison, p. 52.

That I am malicious, (52.) bespattering others names, 53.

That I am full of Gall and Spleen, 55.

That I have odiously and enviously altered my Method, p. 57.

That I am fell and fierce as the Batavian Remonstrants, p. 58.

That I am upstart Mr. T. P. p. 58.

That two pages in my Book is a Libell of slanders, wherein I do as the false
witnesses against Christ, p. 59.

That J. Good. W. is a very brother of mine in diverse of my wild opinions, p.
59.

That I am a finical Rhetorician, p. 64.

That I dissuade others from their Combination, and scorn to be conversant with
them, p. 48.

That I am the great (...), and formidable Zan Zummim, inter fraterculos
classiarios rusticanos, p. 64, 65.

That Dr. Twisse would have put me into Dr. Lopes his condition, p. 65.

That I am intoxicated with passions, p. 66.

That he can upon certain knowledge tell how little conscience I have, p. 69.

That I act the Tragedian part of a Stage Player. And call in Poets if not
Devils to help me to blaspheme, p. 69.

That Mountebank-like I thrust my self upon the Stage, and will not stick to be
beholding to very thieves, viz. such roguish Pamphlets as fur Praedestinatus
and others are, p. 69.

That I imitate the Jesuit Bellarmine, p. 70.

(These are some of the first Articles which he preferr's against me to the
Reader, as one single Malefactor. But bebesides this, he implead's me together
with others of my * Faction, or Dogmaticall * sires; Naming such as Bishop
Mountag^e, ** Correp. Corr. p. 1.
Grotius, G. Vossius, Bishop Andrews, Dr. Weston, Castellio, Dr. Jackson,
Innocentius, Adolphus Venator, my Batavick Brethren the Remonstrants, Arminius
Pelagius Junior, and the like, in conjunction and relation to such as these,
his farther process is managed thus.)

That I and my party are sharpning our Tongues and pens against Gods
Sovereignty, Grace, Counsels, Servants, p. 12.

That the pious men of my way have eloquence and learning, but not Faith or
Religion. p. 8.

That they are poor Ratts, lazy Hierarchick, non-residential, non-preaching
Lubbers. p. 20. (which though not spoken of me, is spoken of I know not whom,
to be revenged upon me, for speaking diminutively and scornfully of my
Neighbor Clergymen, (as he is pleased to say, and fancy, p. 20.)

That they are Arminian clerical Ceremonialists. p. 25.

That the profane spawn of the English Arminians, from Montacutius to this day
downwards, have shipwrackt more in few years upon the Rocks of Atheism, etc.
then any of their opposites of any considerable Note have done at any time p.
28.

That (he does not say who) are unhappily kept and fed in a place where
profaneness and superstition makes matches. p. 33.

That I and my Accomplices do say such things as he thinks the Devil himself
might blush to object against their Tenants. p. 34.

That we are presumptuous Teachers. p. 34.

That the Remonstrants grew shameless. p. 37.

That we are fools, carnal, madmen. p. 44.

That the thousands of thousands of my side are either the crowd of Carnal
Idiots, or such as wittingly or unwittingly suffer themselves to be fooled by
the polite and politic sons of the Devil, the Jesuits, and their followers, or
indeed the Devil and his Angels. p. 49.

That I and my Faction do fret against the Almighty, and cry out Fate, Fate. p.
50.

That we slander the footsteps of the Anointed, and Julian-like, throw up darts
against Heaven, as if we were resolved to breath out our last with a vicisti
Galilaee in our mouths. p. 50.

That the slanderous Arminians (p. 52.) are wrangling sophisters, taking an
unscriptural, unecclesiastical, illogical course. p. 57. All these particulars
being brought in against me, and against all that think otherwise then he would
have them, It concerns us in the next place to take a view of his Arguments or
ways of proof. And those we shall find to be several maxims or Postulata,
which are not themselves to be proved (as he supposes) but to be granted him
by the Reader upon the irrefragable Autho^ity of (...), and (...), Mr. Barlee
has said i^, and woe be to that Reader that will not believe him. For in his
53 page he conjures the Reader, as he has any Candor, Conscience, Piety, and
true Christianity left in him, that he will favorably heed him. Most
unavoidably implying this Papal Bull, that whosoever will not heed him, and
heed him favorably whilst he declaims against Mr. T. P. many whole pages
together before he speaks one word to the matter in hand, shall be ipso facto
concluded to be a person given over to a Reprobate sense, void and destitute of
all Candor, Piety, Conscience, and Christianity. Now the Readers obedience
being secured upon no less then the pain of his displeasure, and of the utmost
perils that may e^sue, he e^deavours to prove his whole Charge from these
following succinct axiomatical Topics.

First my Insolency against God's Truth. p. 4. My Insolency against Mr. B's.
Ministry, Flock, and name. page 4. 5. The Bandogs of my Rhetoric. p. 13. The
Altitude of my Spirit, and Luxuriant Rhetoric. page 16. My Cassandro-Grocian
strain, and my aspiring to a Moderatorship betwixt the contending Parties. p.
16. My Bold Impudence which he admires (which he civilly introduces with sweet
Sir, and so craves pardon for a bugs word. p. 19.) My contemning the Clergy. p.
20. My Pelagian and Arminian Faction. p. 20. (styled before all my good men
Cassandrians, Grotians. p. 3.) The fierce impetus of my (...) and (...). p. 21.
My Snakelike motions. p. 22. My mischievous poisonous papers. p. 22. My late
modest Jesuits. p. 28. My miserable (...), p. 29. My feats of Activity, as a
Rope-dancer. p. 29. The lucky devise of scientia media. p. 30 My desperate
Doctrines, miserable and merciless comforters p. 35. My believing my self to
be above sin. p. 39. My prevaricating Portals. p. 42. My whifling Pamphlets. p.
46. a crowd of carnal Idiots. p. 49. My palpable Jesuitical Calumny and loud
lie. p. 50. My evil finger and sore Eye. p. 61. My virulency and spleen. p. 63.
My parcel of little wit. p. 64. My Sermons at Daintry and at Northampton. p.
20. My Socinio-Grotio-Persian Glosses. p. 69.
2. The Reader must not imagine that these are all the ill things that I deserve
to have spoken concerning me and my Book. Nor that my Neighbor speaks this out
of any ill will. For he professes to forbear me in hopes of my amendment p. 7.
And again, for to sp^re me, he would not blabb out what the cause of my silence
and secrecy was (in the concealment of my papers which he compelled me to
publish.) p. 21. And a third time he spares me p. 28. He professes to show (p.
203.) how kind hearted he is to me. And (p. 6.) That as near as he can he
does call things by their proper Names. That the Reader may infer from the
qualities of his Mercy what his Cruelties would have been, if he had given way
to his Indignation. But he (good man) in the midst of all his severities, puts
on bowels and mercies, even tender mercies, spoken of by Solomon Prove. 12. 10.
And how often soever he places me in Hell, yet he frequently endeavors to
help me out by a set form of Prayer, as [I pray God I be out in it p. 68. and
pray God that for ever hereafter I become not Lupus in Fabula p. 16. The Lord
deliver Mr. T. P. p. 36. And having ranck't me and my faction together with
Julian the Apostate in the consummation of all his blasphemies, he immediately
prays, the Lord be merciful unto us. p. 50. As 'twere to give us an
experiment of that great Truth, Jam. 3. 10. Out of the same mouth proceeds
blessing and cursing. In the mean time it is evident, that yielding Mr. Barlee
his demands he will easily prove what he pleases. (...). And my best way of
reply to all his Premises will be only this, to note the manifold Conclusions
which those Premises do infer. For though I must not say, that I will do to him
as he has done to me, (Prove. 24. 29.) But commit vengeance to God, (Deuteronomy. 30.
35.) yet I am sure it is lawful, and I am told it is necessary' at least to
vindicate my self by meerly-shewing how I am injured.

3. The first thing conclusible is his unimitable Impertinence. For how does it
follow that I am a Jesuit, because I am lean, or have been beyond Sea? How
does it follow that I am finical, because I preach in a Gownd and a pair of
Cuffs? or admit I were (...), that is, as decently cladd and as well behaved,
as Saint Paul would have every Bishop (1 Timothy 3. 1.) would it follow from
thence that all my Book is erroneous? or if I am not vehemently either a
sloven, or a clown, must it therefore be an Ingredient in the confutation of my
opinions, to tell the world from the Press, that I am the trim Clerick of the
Country? and superlatively fine Mr. T. P. and in my proper element of Courting
my noble Patron? how does this prove that I am an Arminian? This is confuting
my Bandstrings, more properly then my Book. Suppose I had a great wit, a fine
and elegant tongue, (as my Neighbor says when he is pleased to give us a cast
of his drolery. p. 1. 2. 23. 29.) Must it therefore be followed with my
disputing against God? (p. 29.) Do I power out a world of human Rhetoric
because my Rhetoric is not inhuman? or in case it were true, yet how does it
speak me a Socinian? His undertaking is to prove that I am a Pelagian, and in
stead of that he maintains, that there is a sixth Edition of a practical
Catechism. I expected to be showed how Reprobation is irrespective, and he will
needs tell me instead of this, that I am Insolent against his Ministry, of
which he offers no proof, but that his chiefest parish^oners do come to my
Church. And because I suffer them so to do, he inferrs me insolent against his
Flock. Whether this is not impertinent to the confuting of my Book, and whether
his 232. pages are not spent in such extravagances, I leave it to every man's
Judgment who will consider, as well as read him.

4. The second thing conclusible is his deplorable guilt. For a Railer is
reckoned by the Apostle amongst the worst sort of persons to be converst with,
If any man that is called a 1 Cor. 5. 11.
brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a RAILER, or a
drunkard, or an Extortioner etc. with such a one no not to eat. Michael would
not Jude 9.
Rail against the Devil himself in their Dispute about the body of Moses. And
so far will I be from being like my Mr. B. in the unchristian practice of
scurrility, that I would not use those words [unchristian and scurrility] if it
were not necessary in the discovery of a vice, to use some word whereby to
express what we discover. For whosoever accuses another person of a Commission
(be it of Theft, of Murder, of D^unkenness, or the like,) he is obliged by
Necessity to use such a word, as may signify the thing which is the subject of
his Indictment. And I say it so much the rather, because in the Third Discovery
I am to make, I shall detect such things as I shall not be able to express, but
by saying that they are Calumnies, Falsifications, and Inventions. If they are
found to be such in a high Degree, I shall be acquitted by God and man from any
passionate use of such expressions. But if they are less then what I call them,
I will publicly confess it upon conviction of my fault, and endeavor to make
full satisfaction. For I can never believe I have sufficiently repented of any
injury to a Neighbor, unless I add to my sorrow my utmost endeavor to make
amends. By the same proportion of Justice, if I am all those things which Mr.
B. does suggest, let the word Railer be transferred from Him to me. But if I am
quite another thing, let his own Jer. 2. 19.
backsliding be his reproof. Though I am wronged in great measures, and have
been so from the beginning of my appearing to differ from him in judgment, and
of his In his first letter it appears, that this was the Ground of all his
Correptory correction.
chief Parishioners being of my Congregation, (however at first, not without my
knowledge only, but to my dissatisfaction) yet I acknowledge I am a party, and
must not be heard to speak alone. And they that are Strangers to him and me
will probably be fitter to judge betwixt us, then either his Friends, or mine.
In their judgments (I suppose) I am allowed to be sensible, (at least) of that
part of Calumny, which strikes at my liberty and my livelihood, if not at my
life. For the tongue in these times has been a dangerous weapon, and perhaps
has ruined as many men, as either the Pistol, or the sword. There is an Jer.
9. 3.
Assembly of treacherous men, who ben^ their tongue like their Bow (says the
Prophet Jeremy) and Psalm. 64. 3.
hoot their Arows, even bitter words (says the Psalmist.) and all the favor
that I desire, is, that when I am shot at, I may break the arrows, and
sometimes show how they recoile. If the Reader shall but consider, that Mr.
Barlee was praeadmonished by Jam. 3. 5.
my self and others, not to prejudice his Cause, and his private credit by any
intemperance of the tongue, but to direct all his strength against the (...).
Polyb* lib. 3.
matter of my Book concerning Gods Decrees, and (notwithstanding our
admonitions) that all that Muster of his aspersions which I have hastily
collected, have been found within the compass of 8. or 9. sheets, and that the
farther we wade into his very foul ink, still the fouler we find our way; he
will undoubtedly conclude (though I should not) that our Author has written as
if he had written for a wager; and as if he would prove by an experiment, by how
Ver. 6.
little a member how great things may be boasted; of how little a fire how
great a matter may be kindled; and of how clean a subject how much impurity may
be spoken. We find the Tongue many times is not only the unruliest, but the
Ti^. 2. 10.
filthiest member; for S. James says expressly, that it d^fileth the whole
body. Which should methinks have discouraged my angry neighbor from that very
strange Method of confuting my Papers, by falling so fowly upon my Person. It
is neither to to adorn Christ's Doctrine, nor to assert his own. But rather on
the contrary

5. A third thing conclusible is the infirmity of his Cause. Which had it been
strengthened with Truth, had been better defended by its own Nakedness, then
by such a weapon as the Tongue, which the Psalmist affirms to be a Psalm. 57.
4.
sharp sword. If he by setting down my words, as I had set down the words of
Mr. Calvin, Zuinglius, and Dr. Twisse, (p. 9, 10.) could have shown as ill
effects of my Doctrine, as I did of the contrary, he would have spoken as
little against my person, as I did against theirs. I did not call either of
them by an ill N^me, nor give an ill character of any of their persons; I only
translated their very words, and concealed their Names, and concealed them so,
as none but Scholars could find them out; nor all Scholars neither, but only
such as would take the pains; nor all such neither; for Mr. Barlee himself
after all his search, has (either wittingly or unwittingly) mistaken the
Authors of the fowlest of those C^tations, and misreported them to the Reader,
as I shall demonstrate when I come to that place. Indeed I say they are
frigh^ful sayings as inferring God to be the Author of sin. But first, I
speak of sayings only, and not of Persons. Secondly, I set down the sayings, to
be judged of by the Reader, and not taken upon trust by a mere general
invective. Thirdly, I said no more of those sayings then I am able to justify,
and intend so to do in what I now am designing. Fourthly, I appeal to the
indifferent Reader, whether it is not a frightfull saying, to affirm that
wicked men do commit their wickedness by the just impulse of God. These are
some of those sayings which I called frightfull; and for the confutation of
which all my Notes were written on Gods Decrees. And my proving these sayings
to be false and blasphemous, is confessed by Mr. Bar. to be the Pillar on which
my Book does rest, Corr. Cor. p. 68.
That the Devil and wicked men cannot conceive, nor contrive, nor execute any
mischief, nor so much as endeavor its execution, any further then God does
himself command them. And that they are compelled to perform obedience to such
commands. That Adultery, or murder in as much as it is the work of God the
Author, Mover, and Compeller, it is not a crime; but in as much as it is of man
it is a wickedness. That besides God's concurrence to the making way for sin,
there is a farther prostitution to sins required, and many the like. Now when I
shall have shown how Mr. Barlee does so strive to mend the matter, as to make
it rather much worse; I hope the Reader will acquit me in that part of my
Enterprise for which I have been ^o much reviled (I cannot say by many, but) by
this one man. Who as often as he railes at any one of my Arguments, does seem
to betray a confession that he cannot answer it. For what imaginable Reason
should he use all ways to fill up forty and two pages against my portall (as
he call's it) which is not quite 5. leaves, before he came to the purpose, (to
wit, a vindication of those ten sayings which I premised in the extrance of my
very first Chapter) unless it were to this end, that he might not presently be
discerned to stumble even at the threshold? mali ominis in principio lapsus.
Rather then be discovered to fall and flownder in the beginning of his Course,
he would spend so many pages in pure invective; very rationally hoping, that
his Reader would be tired with so much drudgery, and not endure to read on to
the sadder state of his affairs. (...) etc. Polyb. l. 2. and passim alibi.
Polybius tells us of some Writers, that they are not careful to set down what
is truest, or most pertinent, but what is most apt to affect the Reader, either
with horror or delight, as may be most for their turns. And perhaps my
Declamator not confiding overmuch in his disputative faculty, did choose to
furnish out a volume with those subjects of discourse, wherein he was aware his
chiefest excellency did lie. But the same (...). Polyb. (...).
Polybius does also tell us in his Embassies, that when the Roman Army had been
routed by Perseus the King of Macedon, the Romans determined not to be the
more, but the less inclinable to a peace; to give them bitter words in
requital for their silent blows, and at least to be the bolder for being
beaten. They having found by experience (and so they did then no long time
after) that confidence many times, though in an overthrow, has been the Mother
of good success.

6. And truly this seems to me to be a fourth thing conclusible, that my
Correptor is shrewdly hurt, because he labors with such impatience. Noise and
clamor are commonly the effects of some acute pain; there is nothing more
natural then the love of victory, or Revenge, (I speak of Nature in its
Corruptions.) And therefore Zeno Eleates had no little satisfaction, that
(being bound hand and foot) he had it left in his power to spit out his Tongue
in his Lictors face. And though I say not this with a design of applying it to
my Correptor, yet I am of opinion that he sits not at ease, because I find him
so very angry. Besides, Mr. B. marches out against me, and every thing that
either is, or is called mine, (as Darius did against the young man of Macedon)
as if he came not to fight, but conquer. And endeavors to conceal his
despairs of victory, by the excess of his Triumphs and Insultations.

7. The fifth thing conclusible is the unkindnesse of his design (not so much
upon my papers, as) upon my person; which I should not dare to affirm, if I
were able to imagine another reason why his first Care should be to
praeoccupate and fill the every man that shall read him with the worst
character of me that he was able to invent. Solomon tell's us of a man, who
with his Tongue destroys his neighbor, Pro. 11. 9. He could not be ignorant
of the late Declaration upon which so many had been ejected. And he knew very
well, that whilst others have been questioned and e^ected too, who yet have
been of his party,) I have sat very quietly under mine own vine. No man
living has appeared to speak against me. Whether because I wanted enemies, or
because I wanted some able crimes, let who will judge. But that I may not
escape so, my Co reptor (not content to have preached against me at Daintry, as
well as at Northampton) thinks fit to do that himself, which after all his
incitations he find's none other would yet do for him. He makes proclamation
with a kind of noverint universi, that the Rector of Brington is Arminianly,
Massi^ianly, Pelagianly, Socinianly, Prelatically, Popishly, Jesuitically,
Atheistically, and even divelishly inclined. That these are some of those
Articles put up against me before as great a Tribunal as he shall have readers
here on Earth, (and may they never rise up in judgment against himself at that
greater Tribunal which is in Heaven) is but too too manifest by the Epitome
premised. With which may be compared his profession of hearty good affections
to me in his p. 231. and his m licious instance of those affections not many
lines after, viz. p. 232. If Mr. Barlee did not believe that I am all these
things which he affirms, why would he sin against his knowledge? and if he
did verily believe it, of what unspeakable punishments did he not think me to
be worthy? if he is willing to have me live, and to have me live in my Living,
why must I and my Doctrines be made legible to the world in the blackest and
bitterest ink that can be made of Gall, and Copras? and if he is willing to
have me dealt with, as Mr. Calvin dealt with Servetus (for far lesser crimes
then are laid to my charge) why did he tell me in his Letter that he was a In
his first Letter to me.
true lover of my person and my parts? If bitter words were to be spoken, he
should rather have bestowed them upon the dangerous consequences which he
should have shown might arise from the several matters in my Book, and not
have taken the ready way to confute me with Sequestration in stead of
Syllogism. Which to effect the more surely, he seeks to heighten my
condemnation by a terrible Paralepsis. He pretends to be sparing in the very
midst of his profuseness; and will not blab out (to use his words) what he is
able to inform (if he were not mercifully minded) the Reader is lef to
conjecture, that I am some way obnoxious to public Censure, which my
charitable Neighbor will not reveal. But I am a little confident that my
Correptory Corrector will be Jer. 2. 19.
Corrected by his own Correctorie Correction. For his mere excesses of
Malediction forbid the Reader to believe him. So that taking it for granted
Jer. 2. 19.
that he is punished more then I would have had him, by having taken so much
pains to lose his labor, I cannot wish him to * suffer (...) Arrian l. 3. c.
26.
more, then from the things which he has done.

8 And therefore I shall shut up this Discovery by importuning the Reader in
his behalf; That Christian Pity and Forgiveness may be the only * coals of fire
to be heaped upon his head, with a charitable design, not to burn, but melt
him. Whilst there is a possibility, there should be Hope that he may mend; I
have many things to plead in favor of him. First, that though he endeavors to
Romans 12. 20. Psalm. 140. 5.
break my head, yet many times it is with Balsam. Though he says I make God a
great deal worse then the Devil (p. 10.) yet he confesses that he was never
half so good as my self. (p. 6.) although he says, there is not one in a
thousand of the Laity but would even instruct and teach me, (p. 20.) yet he
tells me for my comfort, I am superlatively fine, (p. 1.) of a sparkling wit,
and truly gallant parts, (p. 6.) though he says in all my Book or body there
is not one grain of salt (p. 19.) yet to keep me from crying, he gives me
Gingerbread, by saying I have a ^ine and an elegant Tongue, (p. 23.) and
withal a great wit, (p. 29.) though he says I am nearly allied to the
Jesuits, (p. 15.) yet he calls me good brother, (p. 28.) and confesses it
impossible that they and I should agree. (p. 79.) Besides he uses me no 2.
worse then he uses Grotius, and Doctor Jackson, and other venerable persons,
(alive, or dead,) most eminent in the world for transcendent Integrity, as well
as learning. And so (before he is aware) he does me greater honor then I could
ever have aspired to; even enabling me to say, [Nemo mihiper hos annos, nisi
qui Grotio, qui Jacksonio (...), Inimicus.] I do therefore say Nemo, Because
(to the best of my Remembrance,) I cannot say I have an Enemy who is not an
Enemy to Grotius, and to every other Person whom I extremely honor and admire.
The Prophet David had not so many Psalm. 69. 4.
hairs upon his head, as Enemies that hated him without a cause, whereas (above
board) I have but one, that I know of, in all the world. And he (by chance) my
Benefactor, of whom I might say (with as great reason as one did) Nolo
maledicere, ne maledicere desistat, hoc est, ne laudare desinat. To be reviled
by such a person amongst such persons as Bishop Andrews, and Grotius, Bishop
Overal, and Vossius, Dr. Jackson, and Castellio, with many other such learned
and pious men, will be looked upon by the best, as no small mark of my
proficiency. For men of Judgment and Integrity do already say of those Scias
illum profecisse cui Cicero valde placuit. Quint. 3.
Authors what Quintilian of Cicero* that a man may be known to have profited by
his very delectation in such men's writings. Thirdly, my Correptory Correctors
great Need may be alleged to the Reader, a little to mitigate his wrath. For
had he had any weapons from the Armory of Reason, he would not have made his
Pen so picked. Could he have brought hard Arguments, he would have given soft
words. But when he found me so unkind in every passage of those Notes, as not
to be liable to just exception, it was hard for him to conceal his keen
resentment of such unkindness. What would you have a man do in such an
exigence as he was in? Retreat he could not who had set up his Trophies before
he fought. Repent he would not who was impatient of a repulse, then which there
is not any Dysaster more vnagreeable to the Flesh. Having resolved upon the End
he was obliged to use some means. Having peremptorily decreed that my Book
should be a Reprobate, he found a Necessity to make it guilty, for fear the
world should call him cruel. And he could not fly from what he threa^ned, for
fear the same world should call him Coward. Had he not first been engaged by
rash expressions, and resolves, to represent me to his Readers as a very foul
thing, he had never besmeared me with so much Dirt. And till we can cure him of
his Principles, we must (I think) deplore his Practice.

9. I have now pleaded for him in the best manner that I am able in so much
haste as I am in. For as I think it my duty, to show the heavy things which
Truth and Innocence have suffered, which could not be but by showing the
heinous things which he has done; so do I think it my duty to show mercy even
to him, who has publicly Correp Corr. p. 45.
threatened to show me none. I look for no satisfaction, but his amendment. And
would gladly suffer the loss of any worldly thing to the very destruction of my
Body, if that could be available to (...). Jam. 5. 20.
save his soul, Which every man is affirmed by S. James to do, who converteth
a sinner from the error of his way. Though in many places of his Book he has
allotted me my portion in the bottomless Lake of Fire and Brimstone, yet I
cannot but hope better things of my self, and that the rather, because I find
in my self more charity for him. I hope to meet him a Saint in Heaven. And may
I have the very least, I have not any* unwillingness that he enjoy the higher
mansion. If that Doctrine were not concerned by which I am made thus to hope, I
would not now show how I am injured. And even now I distinguish betwixt the man
and the malefactor. For I am of opinion, that to discover the Malefactor (in
this case) is a sufficient punishment to the man. Less then this he cannot
suffer, and I do truly desire no more. I cannot choose but foresee, that my
second Discovery will make him sadder then my first. But sober sadness is very
wholesome. And it is my Duty, to show how much he fails in his.

CHAP. III.
A Discovery of Mr. Barlee's Extraordinary Invention; Showing it self in mere
Calumnies and Falsifications both on my Person, and on my Papers. His third way
of Confutation.

1. I Will not wear out my Time in disposing his Inventions, whether raised
upon my Person only, or only upon my Printed Papers, into their several Ranks
and Classes, but set them down in that order wherein they meet my observation.
Nor will I pretend to name them all, but only as many as I espied in the
perusal which I have made of his first Nine sheets. His first artificial
mistake is this,

[ That a matter of 600 Copies of my Notes within less then two months were
almost sold in this very County, as says W. C. p. 1.] Thus in his very first
page (the fairest part of his performance) he gives his Reader a specimen both
of his Logic, and Ingenuity. Here are two gross Forgeries in less then three
lines. For first I can prove from many Topics, 1.
that in more then three months (which is not less then two) there were not
300 Copies (which is not a matter of 600) so much as almost sold in this very
County. And (2) W. C. tells 2.
me, that he never said any such thing. But complains on the contrary, that Mr.
Barlee has done him so great an Injury, as to publish in his Name so great a
Falsehood. Or (3) if it 3.
were as true, as I wish it had been, can it follow from hence, that Christ
died only for the Elect? Or that God did decree men's Reprobation without the
least regard or respect unto their sins? such as these were the things, of
which our Correptory Corrector did pretend, in his Title, to be the
Hyperaspistes. 4. Is it a probable Token that my Book was worth 4.
nothing, because it found so many Buyers, and because the Buyers caught it up
in such Haste? The very Bible by this Logic would be blaspemously concluded
the worst Book in the world. Yet this is one special Instance of Mr. Barlee's
skill in confuting Books. And having nothing else to say against a Book which
he mentions in his p. 8. he lays to its charge its having been the sixth time
Published. I hope he shall live to see it published six or seven times more. And
if he thinks it a fine thing to Print such a Book as very few men will buy,
much good do it him with his felicity; let his Correptory correction lie and
sleep upon the stall, as unregarded as he can wish it. I do not envy the
little This he confesses [he does feel full well] but comforts himself with
[veritas ^dium pari^] nothing comes amiss to him. If but a few men love him,
it is for his Excellence. If most men hate him, it is because of his Deserts. 5.
favor, which he confesses his Parrhesia has procured him in the world (p.
6.) but do heartily wish that he may use his Tongue better, and in tract of
Time be better thought on. Nor am I displeased with my self, that the whole
Impression of my Notes was dispers't so soon, or that a Second Edition has
been so many times desired, when I have not had leisure to set it out with any
the least variation, or addition, which perhaps a greatter vacancy might have
suggested to me. But 5. it were well for Mr. B. if his memory were as strong as
his Invention. He would not then have told me (in his p. 51.) that the very
memory of my Book shall Rot, and serve for nothing but wast-paper.] As if a
matterof six hundred men had bought Copies of my Book in less then two months,
even in this one County, (where yet the buyers were fewer then in other
Counties more remote) not to read them, but let them rot. If he means by my
Book, his own Manuscript Copy which he and old Mr. Whitfeild are pleased to
call mine, or if he only means the few particulars of my Book which he has
mumbled as he listed in his Correptory Correction, I am exactly of his opinion
that 'twill become wast-paper, among those that do vendere Thus and odores.
This is just such a Synecdoche by which Christ's dying for the sins of the whole
world is expounded by Correptory Correctors of very much the lesser (perhaps
the twentieth or fourtieth) part of the world. Such kind of stuff (and very
much worse in the kind) Mr. Barlee's Reader is like to trust to. And by his
utmost endeavors of launching forth to his advantage, I leave it to any man's
conjecture in what a Weather-beaten state we shall find him landed.

. 2. His 2. [That I allow no other will to God then a Hypothetical Of absolute
Decrees.
one, p. 4.] yet he knows on the contrary. 1. That he nether does, nor can show
any one passage in my Notes where I deny that God Almighty has as well as an
Absolute a Conditional will. 2. That I distinguish (p. 49.) betwixt an absolute
necessity, and a Necessity ex Hypothesi, whereof the former does infer a very
absolute will in the Almighty. Such was his will that all men should be mortal;
that heavy Bodies should tend downward; and innumerable the like. 3. That I
distinguish betwixt his Threats under his Oath, and under his word only (p.
52.) implying his will not always Hypotheticall. 4. That when I speak of
conditional or respective exclusively of Absolute, it is only in relation to
eternal punishment, or reward. Which is no more then his Agnoscimus and
docemus, Deum non decrevisse quenquam damnare, nisi justissime propter ipsius
peccata. Et hoc respectu decretum hoc non posse ita absolutum vocari, ut Deus
fine ullo peccatorum respectu decreverit quemquam damnare. Suarez in 3. Disp. 5
p. 103. Cor. Cor. 117.
Suarez, and Dr. Twisse, and even Correp. cor. p. 121.
himself is fain to say; as anon shall be showed. 5. That Arminius himself
denies not Absolutu^ Dei decretu^, quo decrevit filium ponere me diatorem, etc.
Armin. in Declarat. s^ntent. p. 95, 96.
absolute Decrees, as he confesses p. 60 nor can I believe, that any Christian
ever did. So as I cannot but admire the extreme untowardnesse of this
invention; which affirms me to allow but one sort of Decrees, because of two
sorts I assert the (b) Dr. Twisse says that sin is the cause of Reprobation
quoad res volitas p. 49. against Mr. Hoard as Mr. B. confesses p. 145.
one as well as the other; as well the Respective, as Irrespective.

. 3. His 3. [That I have fulfilled my Insolency against his Ministry, Flock,
and Name, etc. p. 4. and. 5.] This in each particular is not only as different
from truth, as a Horse is from a Man; but as opposite to Truth, as sight is to
blindness; and as contrary to it, as white is to Black, or as we are to our
Anti^odes. For first, it was not my insolency, that he railed against me to all
sorts of people, and cursed me to some, and preached me down in his two
Lecture-Sermons, whilst I held my tongue, and ke^t silence, like a dead man out
of mind, as if I knew not, or had forgotten, that there was any such thing. 2.
Be it so that his Parishioners have been as little his friends, 2.
as he has been theirs, (before I had the least knowledge of him, or them) is
that my fault? when his chiefest Auditors (whom he call's his Flock) were
frighted by him out of his Fold, and thereupon came to mine by way of Refuge, I
was an absolute stranger both to their Persons and to their Names. Yet he told
me by Epistle, that he was robbed of a considerable part of his Auditors, and
(by a Paralepsis) called me the Thief. But not content with that assurance
which I privately gave him in a Letter, that I was perfectly innocent from that
great offense of being a Spiritual Abgregarian, he publicly tell's that I am
Insolent against his Ministry and Flock. Am I insolent against his Ministry,
because I am not very Barbarous to his Flock? or am I insolent against his
Flock, because I am not so like a Gaderene, as to bid them de^art out of our
Coasts? unless he thought the word [Insolency] denoted courtesy and
Reverence, Civility, and Candor, how could he say I have been insolent against
his Flock, whom I was never heard to mention without expressions of Love and
Honor? if persons of Quality, and Judgment, and not only of an umblamable,
but of a most imitable converse, fearing God, and hating Covetousness, (a
worse Idolatry amongst many Christians, then most of the Heathens were guilty
of, for the Heathens who worshipp'^ the Sun or Moon made no man a Beggar by
that Idolatry, whereas the Christian that is Covetous, and so an Ephesians. 5. 6.
Idolater, becomes very hurtful by that Colos. 3. 5.
Idolatry to every one who is the object of his unsatiable eye.) I say if
Persons so inoffensive and so generally obliging as not to be hated by any
Creature besides one Correptory Corrector, cannot endure at the same instant to
be his Auditors and his Text too, (spoken to and against from the very same
Pulpit) and are not railed at by me for being weary of his railing, all the
world must be told (upon occasion of God's Decrees) that I am insolent against
his Flock. This (as far as I can guess) is the true original of all my
Correptory Correction. M. B. is the Preacher that must be followed; or if he is
not, the world must know his indignation. 3. But this is not all For though a
thousand Readers at least are able to witness in my behalf, 3.
that I did not name Mr. B. in all my Book, yet for that I must be insolent
against his Name too. 4. This is as true, as what 4.
he add's but five lines after, concerning [my threatening that I had lived long
unanswered.] When he cannot but know, 1. That it is impossible for any man to
threaten a thing past. He might have told me as well, that he will confute me
the last year; or that he has already done it in time to come. 2. He neither
does, nor can prove, that I did threaten any 2.
thing future. And 3. my Letters to him do testify that I 3.
most friendly dissuaded him from doing himself so ill an Office, as to whet
his pen against my papers. And 4. I am sure it 4.
was ever my serious wish, that my Notes might cost me no farther trouble. 5.
What he add's of my friendly Daniel (p. 5. lin. 5.) I suppose is spoken at a
venture, not only without 5.
that Gentleman's knowledge or consent, but with his great displeasure and
indignation. Whom because he has dishonored with so rude a mention, in such
an oblique and Malignant manner, I will briefly vindicate by saying this of
him, that had Mr. B. been worthy of that Gentleman's friendship, or so happy as
to have profited by his converse, he had learned a better way of answering
Books, then by throwing scurrility upon their Authors. I wish Mr. B. and his
Abettors no worse then this, that they may im^^ate rather then envy that
Persons Learning, Candor, ^harity, Moderation, and be able to be as friendly,
as he has been, to such as differ from them in judgment. If he dissuaded me
(some weeks too late) from sending my Notes into the light, it was not because
he disapproved the thing, but because he was a stranger to my necessity, and
considered nothing so much as my ease or safety, wherein he was so far
mistaken, as to think I should best have provided for it, by giving way to
those Calumnies which were prepared for the Press by Mr. B. etc.

4 His fourth, [ That it is wondered (by one without a name) I should deny Note,
that (in his p. 5. l. 8 9.) he confesses he can give no honest reasons, though
some other he thinks he can give, (which must be sure dishonest reasons, since
he confesses they are not honest) why I should peremptorily deny my former
papers (speaking of the forged misshapen Manuscript in his Study) to have been
mine.
my first Papers to be mine, p. 6.] How can he say I d^ed that to be mine which
I publicly owned and subscribed. And called a Copy, though a correct one? That
what I published was a Copy of my private Manuscript, he does in many places
confess, affirming here, a consanguinity of Matter, Stil^, and very words. And
saying elsewhere, (p. 134.) that from Chap. 3. p. 32. unto the very end, (which
is above half my Book) my Book is almost verbatim the very same with my first
renounced Papers.] Why then does he say that I renounced those Papers, which he
confesses me to have printed in the very same breath? did I deny it to be a
Copy by affirming it to be a Copy, adding withal that it was a true correct
Copy, not a false, Surreptitions, disfigured Copy? are there not diverse Copies
of God's own word, and diverse Readings in those Copies, some things left out,
and some thrust in, yet all Copies still, whether more, or less correct,
through the carelessenesse, or the care, the malice, or the Integrity, of the
several Amanuenses by whom transcribed? what wonder is it then, if my Papers
falling into such unkind hands, and conveyed by light fingers from one enemy to
another, and transcribed by some who could not possibly understand them, and
confessed by Mr. B (under his hand and seal) to be perfect nonsense in some
places, and found by my self to have been so altered in the two first
Transcripts, of which I had ocular inspection, as I could not pick out any
sense in the very first Pages (which Mr. Bernard of Abingdon can sufficiently
attest, and he is a Person so full of honor, as not to be able to speak a
false thing) I say, what wonder if my Papers were made by many Transcribers so
unlike my Autograph, as to need my correction before they went into the light?
and again, what wonder, if I d^sown'd them as they were false, and publicly
owned them as they were true? in respect of what was fo^sted in, I said the
thing was none of mine, yet I say it was mine in respect of what was
uncorrupted. Thus the Nazarens Gospel, in several respects, is very truly
said to be, and not to be the Word of God. But 2.
2. the Correptory Corrector makes a lamentable confession, that he has
Correp. Cor. p. 6. lin. 20, 21.
need to ^ast about for Topicall Arguments to prove me the Father of the first
Papers.] He does not know that his Manuscript is mine, any farther then it
agrees with my Printed Copy; but he would make it as lawful as is possible to
lay his child at my door, and professes to cast about for Arguments, to make
it probable or like Truth, although not true. For such are Topical Arguments,
which he is feign to cast about for. Nor has he any way to get out of this
confession, but by making another confession (as much to the prejudice of his
Learning, as this of his Integrity.) That he used the word Topical, because it
seemed a fine word, and not because he understood it. Yet he says (p. 5. lin.
11, 12.) that he must say, think, and write the former papers to be mine,
though he confesses he wants even probable Arguments (which he says, he had
need to cast about for) to prove them mine. And now (3) let him give some
dishonest reasons 3.
(since he confesses he can give no honest reasons. p. 5. lin. 8. 9.) why I
denied all false Copies to be mine, in as much as they were false. Or (4) let
him give some honest Reasons 4.
(since Reasons dishonest are unavowable) why He, and Mr. Cawdry, and Mr.
Whitfield, have tacitly confessed to all their Readers, that my Printed Copy
is very unblameable, by spending so much Paper, Time, and Strength, (however an
argument of the greatest weakness in the world) against I know not what
passages of their manuscript Copies, to which I am a perfect stranger, and
which they only call mine, that I may be thought to be the Author of whatsoever
they can invent.

5. His 5t. [ That there are some who love me but too well, whom in my
Epistles, as well as in my public writing, I accuse of Ignorance, Malice,
Forgery, etc. p. 6. lin. 13. 19. 20.] A strange crime, if it were true. But (1)
unless by 1.
[some] he means himself, I cannot guess whom he means. And 2. how much too
well he loves me, and what I said of him 2.
in my public writing, my Book and my Readers can bear me witness. Every body
can tell, that I was more merciful to him and others, then they have been unto
themselves. Had he been as tender of his reputation, as I was, he had had the
favor of passing nameless out of the world. 3. What I 3.
said in my Epistles I am best able to certify. And am sorry in his behalf
that he has forced me now to do it in my Justification. I told him, that
having voted me to be a Papist, and a Pelagian, and a Socinian into the
bargain, he might as well accuse me of having said Mass, or of any thing else
which may be matter of Sequestration.] To which he answered, that I fancied him
so, as if he had nothing of an This is in the last Epistle of Mr. Barlee, which
I had etertally concealed, had he not publicly laid his own faults to my
charge.
Ecclesiastic, of a Christian, of a Gentleman, of a Scholar, or of a Neighbor
left in him. That he was for Ecclesiastica Ecclesiastice. And though his
Principles might seem to lead him to the liking of Sequestration, yet he blessed
God for it, he never had, nor ever would have any hand or finger in that Pie.]
And to this I replied, [that I had reason to believe he never preached against
that, from which he blessed God he had been personally free. Nor that he ever so
much as privately rebuked his brethren for what he called an unchristian,
ungentlemanly, unscholarly, unneighbourly, unecclesiastical thing.] From hence
it will publicly appear, that Mr. Barlee had accused his own Dear Brethren of
what he judged to be heinous in five respects, and that I very justly rebuk't
him for it; I mean, for giving their practice so black a character behind
their backs as he durst not own before their faces. So well has he requited
his three special Benefactors for their commendatory Epistles before his Book.

6. [ That I make God to be worse then the Devil himself, p 10.] quoting my 24
page. Where he knows as well as I. 1.
1. That there are no such words in all my page. 2. That 2.
what I say of Gods being (...) is only inferred from that Doctrine which I
resist, and he defends. 3. Mr. B. does make this inference to the reproach of
his own opinion, (which I could never have done,) that if Gods absolute Decree
does necessitate the misery of all the reprobated Crew, and by consequence slay
them from all eternity (as Christ is said to be slain from the foundation of
the world Rev. 13. 8.) he is not only inferred to do more then the Devil, but
to be worse then the Devil himself. In what a lamentable case is my
Declamator, if he be now observed to say (115.) that Punishment must needs be
decreed before the permission of sin. And (p. 87.) That God is the determiner
not only of all things and actions, but of their several modalities too. etc.
And Nonne ad eam quae nunc pro damnati^nis causa obtenditur, corruptionem, Dei
ordinatione praedestinati^ ante fuerant? etc. fateor etc. and inferius -- de
Angelorum Defectione loquens; -- Cuius^ rei causa, inquit, ^^n pote^ alia
adduci, quam reprobatio etc. Calvin Inst. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 4. p. 323.
Mr. Calvin, That Reprobates were predestined to that corruption which is the
Cause of Condemnation. And that no other Cause can be given for the apostasy of
Angels, then that God did reprobate and reject them. Never did I infer so
foul a consequence from any doctrine, as the Declamator has from his own,
propriis perire pennis, grave. He could not have miscarried worse, if I had
hired him.

6. His 7th. That I (in my 24th page) have tartly and sarcastically gibed
against Calvin p. 14.] Yet 1. I only name his words [a Calvin Inst. l. 3. c.
23. Sect. 7. 1.
horrible Decree] not bestowing on him any one of those terms, which my
liberal Corrector bestows on me in all the pages of his Book. 2. Having spared
his Person, it was my Duty to show his words, and to observe their
Inconvenience. 2.
Why else are Books printed on either side? Let the Reader be judge how I could
have said less, unless by losing my advantage, which had been Treason to my
Cause. 3. Is it not strange that Mr. Barlee should reprove a man for 3.
being bitter? How men do hate their own vices when they but fancy them in
others, which in themselves they love most dearly? 4. How unsound are those
words confessed to be, 4.
when he that does faithfully repeat them is thought to gibe? if I had not said
the Truth, he would have told me that I had Lied; and yet because I said the
whole Truth, he calls me Giber.

8. His 8th. that (in my 70 page) I give out Faith Of eternal Election and
Reprobation.
and Infidelity to be the causes of Election and Reprobation. p. 15.] Still my
amazemen* grows more and more, that any man even in Print should speak so
clearly against his knowledge, and contradict his own Eyes, and the Eyes of as
many, as ever have, or shall read me. For 1. there is not any such 1.
word in all that page which he cites, or in any other which he cites not. 2.
In the page going before, 55. (not many 2.
lines before the passage which Mr. B. cites,) I had said expressly, [that our
Election is not of works, but of him that calls; that good works are required
as a necessary condition, though ^erly unworthy to be the Cause of our
Election.] 3. In the page which he cites, I say that Christ is the 3.
means, the meritorious Cause, and the head of our Election. And that upon the
condition of believing in his Son, God gave the promise of eternal life; from
Joh. 3. 26. what I called the condition, why does he say I gave out to be the
Cause? I.
A very gross Ign^rance.
if he knew no difference betwixt the cause and the condition, why would he
meddle in these affairs for which he is not qualified with any tolerable skill?
it is indeed for my Humiliation, that I must be Correp. Cor. p. 10. compared
with his message. II.
whipped by that man whom I must Teach to distinguish betwixt the Cause [propter
quam res est] for which a thing is, and the necessary condition [sine qua non
est] without which it is not. I have no way to help him out in his great
extremity and distress, but by saying that such a condition is causa-sine-qua
non. Yet that will do him but little service. For Gods Commandments (written or
unwritten) are not the Cause of sin, and yet they are the Causasine-qua-non,
without which it is impossible that there should be a Transgression. My
Declamator (it seems) cannot write a great book without Calumnies and railings,
but it follows not they are the Cause, unless he will have them a material
Cause, of which his book is Composed, as of a very essential part. Suppose a
man should say, that without a Magistrate there can be no Rebellion, who is
therefore a condition without which it is impossible for any Rebellion to be
committed; can we affirm with any Truth, that he gives out the Magistrate to
be the Cause of the Rebellion? Or else a wilful deceit.
if Mr. B. shall allege, that he knew the difference betwixt the Cause, and
Condition of our Election, and needed none of my Teaching, his case is worse
then before; and he confesses it a studied or wilful misdemeanour. If he
mislik't my words, why did he not faithfully repeat them, and show the reason
of his mislike? But if he did not, why would he proclaim that my page was
innocent, by showing he needed to forge it guilty? 4. If I had spoken 4.
that which he knows I did not, I had not spoken no more then what Conclusio
istius Argumenti [se. Deum ab aeterno decrevisse, illos his ipsis causis (inter
quas and fides est) salvos facere] non contradicit nobis, atque adeo totum
illud argumentum lubentissime concedimus. Credimus cord and confitemur
quicquid in isto argumento dicitur. Polan. Syntag. Theol. l. 4. c. 9. de elect.
ad vit* aeter.
Polanus himself has yielded. Who to the ninth Argument brought to prove,
that Faith is one of those Causes for which God decreed to make men safe, he
gives a willing concession, and professes to be of that opinion, and reckon's
it as a calumny to be said to speak otherwise. So that Polanus (an
Anti-Remonstrant I am sure) is more that which is called Arminian then Mr. T.
P. or perhaps then Arminius himself; Let Mr. B. contend against him. 5. As if
Mr. B. 5.
took care not to speak a true word, he add's the word [Reprobation] for which
he quotes the same page. When first, there is not any mention, nor any the
least occasion for it. Secondly, If I had said it elsewhere, why did he not
refer us to it? Thirdly, I had never so little Logic, as to say that any thing
in man (which is the object) could be the Cause of God's Decree; but that man
is the cause of his sin, and of his punishment, because of his sin, with which
Mr. B. does quarrel, because he cannot disprove; and he cannot so much as
endeavor that, because he cannot or will not comprehend my reasonings. Mr. B.
Confession (before he is aware) of Conditional Reprobation.
The most that he can say in his excuse of this, is, that he thought I had
meant it in my p. 21, 22. but then he must confess he is a short-sighted man,
who can mistake man's punishment for God's Decree. For though punishment is
Decreed, yet it is not a Decree, and many things are Decreed which are no
punishments. 6. If here as before, he takes a Condition for a cause, he woefully
becomes his own accuser, for (in his p. 121.) he says he knows not any one
either of the Ancient, or Modern Orthodox Writers, who will not readily yield,
that God did not absolutely Decree the Reprobation (positive) of any Creature,
but upon prescience and supposition, of wilful rebellion and impenitence. I
will now take him at his word. He is as perfect an Arminian as I have ever
heard speak, or else he confesses he is not Orthodox. In these few words he
has ruined himself and his Cause for ever, unless he will say, that he is my
Convert, and the best of his Book a long impertinence. He cannot escape at any
crevice. Not by saying he means Note, that Piscator himself affirms God to
have decreed the damnation and punishment of men without any condition or
respect to their sins, merely because it was his pleasure. (And this Mr. B.
must confess is positive Reprobation) Piscat* Resp. ad Dupl. Vo^st. par. 1. p.
25. and p. 106.
Damnation only, (as he complains I did in the Title Page of my Notes) for he
says distinctly [Reprobation.] Nor by saying he means the execution only of
God's Decree (as in other places) for he says distinctly [the Decree of
Reprobation] and the Eternal Decree is before the temporal execution. Nor by
saying, that he adds the word (positive) in a parenthesis; for he says not
distinctly [the Decree of Damnation] which yet he chid me for not saying, when
I said Reprobation in the Title of my Book; but the [Decree of Reprobation]
that is to say, of rejecting or passing by whom he did not elect.

Nor is there any real difference betwixt not choosing and refusing, or
betwixt not saving, and damning, (in Gods Decree.) For not to choose, and to
refuse, are aequipollents in Grammar, as well as Logic. And it is cleared by
experience, that when two things are put to our choice, the choosing of the one
is ipso facto the refusing of the other. Or when the same Of the distinction of
positive and Negative Reprobation.
thing is put to us to be accepted, or rejected, the not accepting is
rejecting, and the rejecting is not accepting. And every Freshman can tell,
that they are Identical Propositions, [quae etiam in recto dicuntur ad
convertentiam] which are mutually reciprocated in the Nominative Case. The
distinction therefore betwixt a positive and a negative Reprobat on appears to
be nothing but a Note here, that Mr. B. does either inwardly acknowledge that
this distinction is but a shift (in his p. 197.) or else in that place he must
outwardly acknowledge something or other which is worse. For to excuse Mr.
Calvin from making God's Reprobation to be the cause of the Angel's defection,
he there says, that he means [God's Reprobation is the cause of his
Dereliction. Upon which I offer him this Dil^mma. He understands either the
negative or the positive Reprobation. If he say the negative; he makes the same
thing to be both the cause and the effect of the very same thing. For what is
Dereliction but negative Reprobation (in his way of speaking) and how absurd is
it to s^y, that God's Dereliction, or negative Reprobation is the cause of his
Dereliction or negative Reprobation? if he say he means the positive
Reprobation, the speech is yet more absurd. For that were to put the positive
reprobation as the cause of the negative, and so before it in order of nature.
The decree to damn, before the decree to pass by, or to relinquish. And then
according to his concession (p. 121.) God's first Decree would not be absolute,
but upon praescience and supposition of wilful rebellion and impenitence,
which is to confess the thing which he so vehemently denies. So that what
course he will take to get out of this dilemma, I leave the Reader to imagine.
shift; or a tacit confession, that though they are non-plust, they will not
yield. They confess they are of our opinion, but they will be of another side.
And rather then not differ from us, they will distinguish Jacobus from
Arminius, and Judas the Traitor from Iscariot. And Iscariot archipodialiter,
from Iscariot refl xive. But since the Correp^ory Carrector is accustomed in
all parts of his Volume to make what Prolepses he thinks are fit, and to beg
the question when need requires, I will allow him in this place to be as sturdy
a Beggar as he pleases; and yet I shall show him to be as naked and as bare
after the granting of his Petition, as if he had never demanded any thing. For
let him fancy a negative and a positive Decree of Reprobation (I speak his own
words) to be as different as he can fancy, yet malgre his fancy, the one will
still infer the other. For his Decree of rejection being absolute (as they
suppose it) must imply Damnation, and his Decree to damn (whether absolute or
not) must imply a rejection, And then I demand, 1. how the one could be made in
foresight of sin, and the other not, when they are both eternal, both in the
very same instant, (as Mr. B. confesses p 114.) both equally objected in what
is future, both equally Divine? does it lie in God's power to lay aside any
part of his perfection for a time to one end, and resume it to another at the
very same time? God cannot cease to be Omniscient no not for a moment; his
foresight of all is as necessary to him as his perfection; and that, as his
being. It was therefore impossible (as implying a contradiction) that he should
decree to reject (or to Reprobate) his Creatures without the least intuition of
their sins; and at the same instant decree to damn them, (not without, but)
with an intuition of their sins. Besides secondly, it is the confession of Cum
vero ^inis, quem intendit Deus, sit gloriae suae patefactio per modum justitiae
punientis, hinc sequi tur, non nisi damnatione hominis peccatoris ejusmodi
gloriam posse patescere. Twiss. in praefat. ad Vin. G^. p. 3. col. 2.
Dr. Twisse, (and indeed of the most amongst that party) That the reason why
God did not decree to damn any without respect unto his sins, is, because he
could not otherwise have showed his Justice. And the same reason holds for the
one as for the other. For if he would not Decree to damn any irrespectively,
because he would be just; he would as little Decree to Reprobate any
irrespectively, because he would be just too. It being always his intention to
glorify his Justice, in whatsoever he Decreed which was in order to
pnnishment. It was a punishment with a witness to be rejected to all eternity;
and if every least punishment implies a sin, much more must that which is none
of the least. 3. I demand, is Reprobation 3.
negative, before the positive, or not? if he says it is not, then at the same
instant that God rejects, he has an intuition and respect of sin. If he says
it is, then according to his own Rule, p. 115. (which he mistakes, and
misuseth, as did Dr. Twisse, and incurr's the same most deplorable absurdities)
the reprobate must be damned before he is rejected, because the Decree of his
Rejection was before that of his Damnation. For so sath Nullus habetur
intentionis ordo, nisi qualis intercedit inter intentionem finis, and mediorum
ad finem, etc. Twiss. ibid. Correp. Cor. p. 115.
Dr. Twisse, and out of him Mr. B. what is first intended must be last
executed. And they apply it so as to infer, that because eternal punishment is
last in execution (after sin) it was first in God's intention (before sin.) And
by the same Logic, he that first intends to take Ship at Dover, and afterward
to sail into France, must needs sail in to France first, and after that take
ship at Dover. Because (says Mr. B. out of Dr. Twisse) what is first intended*
must be last of all executed. Had I used that ax^om in such an ignorant manner
when I was a Raw Sophister, I had been hissed out of the Schools. And how
extremely weak is that Cause, which could betray so strong a Disputant as Dr.
Twisse into so strange an inconvenience? that saying [nullus habetur
intentionis ordo, nisi qualis, etc.] which is the very Pillar upon which all
his vast Book does lie, is as strangely false, as any thing he could have
spoken, and (that I may not seem to boast only) I will demonstrate it to be so,
when I (...) find a convenient season, or when any man shall require (...) of
me. 4. When Mr. B. does distinguish betwixt a Negative and positive
Reprobation, he is a pure Sublapsarian with Mr. Calvin; and yet to excuse Mr.
Calvin (in his p. 117) he is as pure a Supralapsarian, as any in the Church of
Rome; and as In Angelis nullus occurrit locus massae coruptae, and cur null:
ratio habeatur, etc. Twiss. in Praefat. p. 3.
every one must be, who makes the fall of the Angels to be a mere Calvin.
Inst. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 4. and 7.
effect of God's rejection. But he is any thing to serve his turn; and
professes to be a friend to both (in his p. 113.) although Haec sunt monstra
illa opinion^m and portenta quae nobis parturit and parit ista sententia,
Scholis Jesuiti^is aut Arminianis digmora quam nostris, etc. Twis. Vin. Great.
l. 1. cap. 4. p. 87.
Dr. Twisse is a bitter enemy to the Subl^saria Doctrines, and by consequence
to Calvin's, and Mr. Barlees too, calling them Monsters of Opinions, and such
as inevitably infer God to be the Author of sin, and worthier of the Arminian
and Jesuit schools, then of their own. Nor is he a friend to the Idem. l. 1.
Digr. 1. p. 55. to p. 58.
other supralapsarians, and therefore utterly out with Mr. B. (who yet will
have him to be his, and his Fathers friend in several places of his Correptory
Correction) who does by consequence call him Atheist. (p. 118. lin. 1.) but I
have dwelt too long upon his sixth Invention, and the many absurdities which
follow it. I will endeavor to requite my Reader for this length by using
brevity in those that come after.

9. His ninth, that (in my p. 56.) I do not so much as Of Free Will.
seem to deny that when two men are equally called, whereof the one converts
himself, the other miscarrieth, it is not God, but man that puts the
difference. p. 15.]. When yet he knows, 1. In that page my words are these. [If
I am be^ter then any 1.
man, it is God that makes me differ. And in my p. 70. I said, it is God that
makes the difference as well as God that chooses.] 2. When I said any man, I
must needs have comprehended, 2.
not only any that has equal Grace, but any that has less. 3. I also said in
that page, [we owe it wholly to God, not only 3.
that h^es us his Grace, but that he gives us the Grace to desire his Grace, as
well as to use it to the advancement of his glory. etc.] Whosoever will read
over my 56. page, will find it so contrary to Mr. B's. Invention, that he will
hardly ever trust him in any one citation, before he tries him. 4. St. 4.
Austin never spoke more unlike a Pelagian against Pelagius, then I have there
done. Nay, he speaks more toward the way of Pelagius in lib. de spiritu and
litera ad Marcell. c. 33. quoted in my Notes p. 28. Yea 5ly, Mr. B. himself
confesses 5.
(in his p. 113.) that objective considerations are the causes of Gods temporal
transient acts, and of the execution of his Decrees; which is more Pelagian
then I durst speak, for the saints glorification is one execution of Gods
Decree; and is it not Pelagianisme in Mr. B. to in^err that any thing in the
Creature can be the Cause of that? I had said not the Cause, but a Necessary
condition. But Mr. B. says the Cause; and the proper Cause, Ibid. So inventive
is he in reporting my words, and so unwary, or unskilful in the management of
his own.

10. His tenth, [ That I mention slightingly (in my p. 4.) those Remonstrants
that have deserved so well of me. p. 19.] Yet 1. I there mention the
Remonstrants as the 1. 2. 3. 4.
Anti-Remonstrants in a most equal manner. 2. There is not the least slighting
of any Author in that page. 3. I there speak slightingly of my self and
respectfully of others. 4. How could he say two such contrary things in the
same page, as that the Remonstrants had deserved well of me, and yet that I had
never vouchsafed to look into any Remonstrant Author? (ibid.) he has sure the
worst luck of any man that ever meddled with Pen and Paper.

11. His 11th, [ That contrary to my promise (as some say) I vented my goodly
Argument (in my p. 72.) about the universality of Christ's Death. p. 20.] 1.
Breach of promise 1.
is dishonesty. Which because he cannot evince in me, he says [some say.] 2. I
do affirm to all the world that I never 2. 3.
made any such promise. 3. On the contrary, I told that person who was employed
to overcome my unwillingness to preach in that place, that my unwillingness was
grounded upon my knowledge, that I should certainly displease a factious part
of the Congregation, (as I had formerly done,) if I appeared to be otherwise
then they would have me. And that as long as I lived I would be single and
unmixt; that it was a wickedness below me, to dissemble my principles, and to
Preach in a Disguise. That if my Livelihood or my Life should depend upon it, I
would not seek to please men in things of that nature, wherein if I should, I
could not be the Gal. 1. 10.
servant of Christ. 4. Several persons of the Presbytery 4.
can bear me witness, that I have avowed an abhorrence to the doing or saying
of any one thing, which might betray me into the danger of being thought a
Presbyterian, however dangerous it might be (in a carnal sense) to be thought
otherwise by some of that persuasion; as our Corrector would make it appear by
his Correp. Cor. p. 131.
Presbyterian Rodds if I were not exempted from the smart of their Discipline,
by some Ibid.
* Erastian Politicians, as he calls all them that are Antipresbyterians.

12. His 12th, [ That in my Sermon at Daintry and in Of Hell.
my p. 26. I affirmed God to have prepared the Torments of Hell for the Devil
and his Angels, Note that in his p. 123. he abuses the words of that Sermon in
a new manner.
but not for any wicked men. p. 20.] It falls out very well, that what I
Preached at Daintry is since in public, and was published by me so much ^he
rather, because it was abused by Mr. B. with the name of Pelagian. But with
what Degree of Charity, or show of Reason, I appeal to all honest and ingenuous
Readers. My words were these; that See The Sinner Impleaded etc. 132.
those dark Territories, (in their primary design and Institution,) were
prepared (not for men, but) for the Devil and his Angels. (as Origin,
Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Theophylact, expound those words of our Blessed
Savior.) 1. Mr. B. leaves out those words [in their primary Design.] 1.
2. He adds [wicked and any] to [men] which alters the Case 2.
the most that may be. For God did not prepare Hell for men as men, no nor for
Angels as Angels, but for wicked Angels, and wicked men, in as much as they
were wicked; and so had prepared themselves for Hell (in order of nature)
before that God prepared Hell for them. For in order of nature, sin is first,
and punishment second. Sin inferrs Punishment as that which is naturally to
follow; but punishment presupposes the commission of sin, as that which of
necessity must go before. Romans 6. 23.
The wages of Sin is Death [and Hell.] But sure the paying of the wages implies
the doing of the work. 3. Melancthon says, that a Causam Reprobationis certum
est hanc esse. viz. peccatum in hominibus. Melancth. in loc. Theolog. de praed.
man's sin is the cause of his Reprobation. And Mr. B. will have Melancthon to
be one of his party p. 129. yea, in effect he says the same p. 113. (where he
quotes Austin against himself, and Rivet nothing to his purpose.) Now I hope
the Cause is before the effect, and therefore sin before punishment. Though Mr.
B. elsewhere (p. 115.) affirms God to have decreed punishment first, and that
men should sin afterward. His word is permission of sin. But he means an
efficacious permission, (as has been showed.) by which God determines that sin
shall be done. p. 79. of which hereafter. 4. I produced the Authority 4.
of no less then four Fathers, which Mr. B. wittily conceals. 5. I spoke more
warily then Origin did, by adding 5.
those words, [in their primary design etc.] which either Mr. B. did know, or
he did not. If he did, why did he not honestly allege my own words? if he did
not, why would he accuse me without a knowledge that I was guilty? what Texts of
Scripture might not Helvidius have accused either of Nonsense, Blasphemy, or
Falsehood, if he would have added, or altered, or have taken away from Gods
words, as the Declamator has done to mine? And 6. Let it be considered, that 6.
when our Saviors words were directed to men, and to men accursed on the left
hand, he did not say [prepared for you] but Mat. 25. 41.
[prepared for the Devil and his Angels.] Our blessed Savior had reason for
what he spoke; and I can give many Reasons, if this were a place convenient for
it. 7. There is 7.
another deceit very signal in my Declamators ordering of this matter. For he
knew very well, and does confess, (in his p. 133.) that in the twenty ninth
page of my Notes (he should have said the 31.) I do use the word especially,
thus. [Everlasting fire was prepared especially, (not for men, but) for the
Devil and his Angels. Nor for them by a peremptory irrespective Decree, but in
praescience and respect of their pride and Apostasy. And he putting his trust
in the idle credulity of his Reader, makes bold to add, that by my eagerness to
defend Origin, I leave some kind of suspicion behind me, as if in process of
time, I would go on with him, to maintain Redemption from Hell it self, yea
salvation of Devils. p. 133. Here he proves what before he Correp. Cor. p. 8.
professed, that he is a very jealous man. For 1. in all my Notes I do not
plead for Origin at all, much less with eagerness. Though Bishop Hall commended
Origin for a good Interpreter. As Mr. B. confesses in his p. 123. 2. All the
Auditors of my Parish, (and some of his) are my witnesses, that I have made it
my solemn business to confute that Error to which he would have me be thought
inclinable. 3. I sufficiently show my aversion to that Error in the 143 page of
my late The Sinner Impl. part. 1. c. 3. Sect. 15. p. 143.
Printed Book (which the Reader will now think that some enemies, as well as
friends, did persuade me to publish.) and so the Declamator is every whit as
unhappy in his Dexterities, as he is able to make himself much more unhappy
then I can wish him. For if he were less liable, I might be able to dispatch
him with greater brevity.

13. His 13th. [ That he does by one half with those few under him, take more
pains, then I do with my more numerous Flock, p. 21, 22.] though this is no
more pertinent to the Decrees of God Almighty then other parcels of his
volumes, yet because he does endeavor to depredicate his diligence by
preaching down mine, (in hope that some will look upon me as one of the lazy,
Hierarchick, non-residentiall, non-preaching Lubbers, whom he so railes at, p.
20.) I will discover how unlucky he is in this too. For first, it is not a very
commendable 1.
thing, that he is feign to commend himself. Nor will his Reader think it any
excellent sign, that he is fain himself to commend his own Preaching. For so he
liberally does, (p. 22.) And withal crave's leave to magnify himself and his
Sermons without boasting, (p. 21, 22.) Nor can I guess at the reason, why he
takes an occasion to tell the world, that he has very few Hearers of all his
good Preaching; as if it were a fine thing to be insufferable in a Pulpit, and
to Preach men out of their patience. But if he is in good earnest, so much more
painful and more wholesome in his Preaching, then I am, why do the chiefest and
most intelligent of his Parishioners take the pains to go from him no less
then two miles as well in the winter, as in the Summer? but that he said was my
insolency against his Ministry and Flock. If he is not already, I do wish with
all my heart he were as much beyond me in every thing that is good, as he can
imagine, or desire; upon condition I might not be worse then I am, I would be
glad if every Creature might be abundantly better. And it had been for my ease,
if others had thought as well of Mr. B. as he does of himself. For then I had
not been called by ill Names, nor been put to this drudgery of cleansing my
self from his aspersions. 2. Though a Pastors pains should not be measured by
his Preaching (there being many other duties incumbent on him) 2.
yet he knows I am a weekly Preacher. And if he is more, I cannot think the
better of him, or that he takes the more, but (perhaps) the less pains. For
many have found it by experience, (excepting the labor of lips and lungs) a
much easier thing to preach twice every week in one manner, then once a
fortnight in an other. 3. Must all those Glories, and 3.
Ornaments, those venerable supports of our English Church, (the very latchets
of whose shoes, we weekly Preachers are hardly worthy to untie) be either
hinted or held forth to be lazy Lubbers, because their lips do not labor
twice a week in a Pulpit? let those Learned, Industrious, and righteous men
(not to be named, or thought on without a preface of highest Reverence and
Honor) be once restored to those places, from which they were thrown by none
other then Presbyterians, and they will preach more in one day, then any
Correptory Corrector can do in twenty years. And whilst they are not
preaching, they are doing things of greater moment.

14. His 14. [ That I did not dare to mention the confession of faith,
Catechismes, etc. of the late Westmonasteriall Assembly, p. 24.] Here the
Correptory Corrector gives us a Specimen of his Logic. Because I did not name
his Authors he inferrs I did not dare to mame them. By his own way of
reasoning, how many thousand Books are there, which he did not dare to name? 2.
How should it lie in my way to name Confessions of Faith, or Catechismes, which
I never saw, and seldom heard of? I suppose the Assembly had more wit, then to
think they could make a better Creed then the Apostles; or teach their Mother
the Church of England, any better Catechism, then she had taught them. 3. I
never saw those things which Mr. B. says I durst not mention. But I durst have
named any thing that I had known, and I durst have showed my dislike if I saw
occasion. And I dare now say in the words of Mr. Cheynell (upon another
occasion) that they might have contented themselves with that Catechism [which
was before in the Church of England] unless they could have made a better. And
if this false saying of Mr. B. was cast out purposely by him, to draw me into
the danger of saying what I have said, I am well pleased with my self that I
have not spoken like a Hypocrite.

15. His 15 [ That (in mp 13. 17. 34. pages) I cast in Texts by dozens, as if
Baker-like, I were bound to throw in so many fine manchets into a Buttery
hatch, p. 26.] I have surveyed the three pages, but cannot find where lies the
jest. For in the first I find but six Texts, in the second I find but seven,
and but eleven in the third. But suppose that I had thrown in Texts by dozens;
Had it advantaged his Cause, or hindered mine? (...) etc. Polyb. l. 16. p. 732.
Polybius pardons such falsities as are invented for the good of Religion, (as
he thought they might be in certain cases, wherein he spoke like himself, a
Politician, and a Heathen.) But what excuse can he have, who speaks untruly to
no imaginable end? when he gets nothing by the bargain?

16. His 16. That (in my p. 35.) I have a charitable wish, that the absolute
Reprobatarians should be shipped over for Turkey. p. 27.] 1. There is no wish at
all. 2. There is nothing spoken of any person, but merely of an opinion. 3.
That opinion there mentioned was no other, then that all we do (however
sinful) is by an absolute Decree; which I said, and said truly, (as I yet
conceive) came out of Turkey into Christendom, or was at least a Transcript of
the Heathen Stoics (...). But 4. I spoke not a word of shipping thither, only
said that that opinion would be rooted out in the next Reformation. So manifold
is each Forgery, that if I did not omit many of them, and study brevity in
those I mention, I should be as tedious as the Correptory Corrector.

17. His 17. [ That I take my self to be wiser then Austin, Of S. Austin's
writings, and the Fathers before him. 1.
whose manlike writings I confute by his more infantile and babelike writings.
p. 27.] Here the unhappy Corrector has bewrayed himself many ways. For 1. I
no where confront S. Austin to himself, but always allege him in behalf of
that Doctrine which I assert. 2. He calumniates that Father and gives 2.
him Correptory Correction, calling him a babelike and infantlike writer,
whenever his writings are not pleasing to Mr. B. 3. That very passage of S.
Austin in my p. 44. (which is referred 3.
to by Mr. B.) was written by him in that book which he writ being a Bishop,
(and not a bare Presbyter) and which S. Austin himself commended as very
sufficient to confute Pelagius his opinion. And was Austin the Bishop a very
babe and Infant in the sight of Mr. B. who is at the most but a Presbyterian?
4. did Mr. B. know that Austin was a Bishop when 4.
he writ to Simplician, or did he not? if he did, why did he meanly prevaricate
with me and his Reader, by calling those his babelike writings? if he did not,
why was he so dogmaticall in what he did not understand? but parachronismes
with him are his very best faults. So in his p. 117. he would have Calvin be
thought to say no more, then what multitudes of Schoolmen, some hundreds of
years before Calvin was born, had said, quoting only two men, and who should
they be but. Scotus and Suarez. 5. He does forget, or conceal, that in 5.
my p. 28. I mentioned 4 expositions which Austin made on 1 Timothy 2. 4.
preferring that which was written after the time that the heresy of Pelagius
was on foot. Which was I hope no babelike writing. 6. I hope that Austins
Retractations (being 6.
the last thing he writ, as I suppose) are no Infantile or babelike writings,
where yet he speaks for me against Mr. B. as much as I could desire him. His
words are Et quod paulo post dixi, nost^u^ est enim credere and velle, illius
autem dare credentibus and volentibus facultatem been operandi per spiritum
sanctum p^rquem charitas di^^unditur in cordibus no^tris, verum est quidem; Sed
eadem regula and utrumque ipsius est, quia ipse praeparat voluntatem, and
utrumque nostrum, quia non fit nisi volentibus nobis* Augustine in Retract. l.
1. c. 23.
these in the Margin, which I thus translate to Mr. B. [what I said, It belongs
to us to will and to believe, But it belongs to God to give unto us so willing,
and believing, the ability of well-doing through the holy Ghost, by whom his
love is shed abroad in our hearts, is indeed very true. but by the same viz.
utrumque nostrum est propter arbitrium voluntatis, and untrumque t^men darum
est per spiritum Fidei and charitatis. Id. ibid.
rule, they are both pertaining unto God, because it is he hat prepares our
will, and both partaining unto us too, because they are no^ wrought in us
unless we are willing.] If I had used these expressions as mine own, they had
been branded with Palagia ^sme at least; But since the words are Austins, and
in his book of Re^racta ions, and if not more, yet at least as much sounding to
the displeasure of Mr. B. as any thing I ever spoke, I know not how our
Corrector can either swallow them down, or cast them up. Calvin Inst. l. 2. c.
2. Sect. 4. p. 78. 79.
Mr. Calvin, Beza in Romans 11. 2. Edit. 2.
Beza, and Dr. Twiss. vind. Gr. l. 1. part. 1. Digr. 8 Sect. 4. p. 110.
Twis^e, have very publicly confessed, that all the Fathers before S. Austin
(a very great number) are quite against their way. Only they make much of him
(and of his Disciples,) by misexpounding some places which fell from him
unawares, who yet declares himself so plainly even in his Retractations, (as I
could show more largely if my desires of brevity would permit, and may have
occasion to do it hereafter) that they have not left them so much as one.
Semper apud latin^s liberi arbitrij nomen extitit. Graecos vero non puduit
multo arrogantius usurpare vocabulum: Calvin ibid. p. 98.
Mr. Calvin confesses in effect that all the Latin Fathers did own free will,
and that all the Greek ones did speak more arrogantly then the Latins. Using
the word Siquidem (...) dixerunt, ac si potestas sui ipsius penes hominem
fuisset. Id. ibid.
(...), as if it were in man to do what he pleased. Nay farther. The Greeks and
the Latins were so far from speaking as Mr. Calvin would have had them, that he
even rails at them, Long plus aequo Philosophis accesserunt. ibid.
as drawing too near the very Heathen Philosophers (as in his Anger he is
pleased to say when he finds their Doctrine does ruin his,) Nimis
Philosophi^e hac de re loquuti sunt, qui se Christi jactabant Discipulos ibid.
who boasted themselves the Disciples of Christ; and speaking of man's will,
Quasi adhuc Integer staret homo, Latini etc. ibid.
as if he were yet in a stare of Innocence. He there particularly singles out
S. Chr^s^stome from the Greeks, and S. Hierome from the Latins, and bestows
upon them both some such Correptory Correction, as Mr. B. bestows on me. As
that they Videscerte ijs sententijs homini plus quam par erat ad virtutis
studium illos e^^e largit^s. -- quas retulimus sententias, esse fal^issimas,
paulo post constabit. Id. ibid.
ascribed more to man toward the study (or desire, or love) of virtue, then it
was just for them to do. Which was to accuse them of Pelagianisme, or
Massilianisme at least; although the words of S. Hierome were spoken in his
book against Pelagius. (and indeed did more sound toward it, then any thing
the Declamator can find in me.) Farther yet. It was the saying of Pene omnium
par invenitur and una sententia, qua propositum and praedestinationem. Dei
secundum praescientiam receperunt, ut ob hoc Deus alios vasa honoris, alios
vasa contumeliae fecerit, quia ^ine^ unius cujusque praeviderit, and sub ipso
gratiae adjutorio in qua futurus esset voluntate and action praesciverit*
Prosper apud Episc. Vedel. Raps. c. 11. Vide Prosp. ep. ad Aug. p. 886.
Prosper (who breathed nothing but S. Austin) that almost all do unanimously
agree, that God's Predestination was according to his foreknowledge, so as he
made some vessels of honor, and some of dishonor, even for this cause,
because he foresaw their several ends, of what wills they would be, and what
would be their Actions, under the assistance and help of Grace. Lastly, the
excellent Scriptores veteres omnes praeter unum Augustinum putarunt aliquam
causam electionis in nobis esse. Melancth. apud eund. ibid.
Melancthon (whom Mr. B. is so ambitious to have of his party) has hurt the
Anti-Remonstrants as much as he was able, by this one saying, That all the
Ancient writers, except one Austin, did believe some Cause of Election to be in
us. (had I said as much, I should have heard of it with both Ears.) Had he not
said [some Cause] (which was more then I would ever have wished or desired,) he
needed not have excepted Saint Austin neither. Both because of that passage
which I cited out of his Retractations, (and very many more to be produced) and
because he August. de bono Persever. c. 19. and 20.
vindicated the Tenent of conditional Election in all the Fathers that went
before him. Upon all which it follows, that when Mr. B. pretends, either that
Antiquity is for his opinions, or that it is not for mine, he does (before he
is aware) bestow his Correptory Correction upon Calvin, Beza, and Twice, which
are his own dear Authors; and besides, upon Austin, Prosper, and Melancthon,
whom he would make to be his own, but is not able. But 7. Suppose that Austin 7.
the Bishop had retracted those opinions of which he was being a Presbyter, (as
Mr. Barlee betrays an Ignorance to that effect, p. 17.) does it follow that
the last opinion a man takes must be the truest? if so, Mr. B. is quite undone.
For how many (besides my inconsiderable self) have been for absolute Decrees
in their days of Ignorance and Childehood, who growing to riper
understandings, and reading better books, as well as conversing with better
company, and obtaining some Degree of manumission from Passions and prejudices,
have discerned those fallacies, wherewith (before) they have been blinded? Ph.
Melancthon at first was of Luthers opinion in these points. But growing in
Wisdom and Grace, he saw his Error, and persevered in his conversion unto the
end. So the late Primate of Armagh was though a late, yet a serious convert.
And affirmed not long before his Death to several persons of great worth (whom
I can name) that he utterly rejected all those opinions of Mr. Calvin. Besides,
I may ask, Will Mr. B. turn Montanist, Photinian, Apollinarian, or Nestorian,
because Tertullian, Photinus, Apollinaris, and Nestorius, were very Orthodox in
their younger days, (when they writ their babelike things,) and fell at last
into their several Errors, when in respect of their age, they should have been
wisest? shall their latest writings be called manlike, merely because they were
their latest? Yet men will thus reason who see but a little way before them. Or
8. Suppose 8.
that Austin had said nothing in behalf of that Doctrine which I assert, but
all against it, (whereas I can prove, that if he speaks against me in any
place, he speaks it all against himself too, and so his suffrage shall be due
either to both, or neither,) yet he will willingly give place to all his
Teachers and Tutors, which for four hundred years together had showed him the
way in which it behoved him to walk. It is as vain to urge Austin against
conditional Decrees, as Jerome the Presbyter against Bishops. Who besides that
he was but a single man, and overheated by a Deacon, is as little a friend to
the Posterity of Aerius, as any other of the Fathers, If we may give credit not
to the tacit, but loud confessions, of Blondel, Salmasius, Lud. Capellus, and
diverse others of their persuasions. 9. The babelike writings of Austin, are
such as he 9.
pend next after his conversion. Such as de Praed. Sanct. and how liable Mr. B.
himself is to his own Inditements, any man may see by his citations.

18. His 18th. That we so far teach men to rely upon Of Free Will.
their own wills, as that for Grace and Glory, they are more beholding to them,
then Gods. p. 34.] This is so far removed from truth, that it did not lie in
his power to drive it farther. And since he has fathered this Calumny upon noe
page in my Notes, I will do that for him. I said in my p. 55. and 56. That no
man can go to heaven any otherwise then by Christ, nor to Christ unless it be
given, that is, unless the Father draw him. That God (by glorifying) does crown
his gifts and Graces in us. Not acquired by us, but infused by him. That we
cannot pant after the waters of life, unless he gives us our very thirst. That
there is no good thought arising in us, unless suggested by his preventing
Grace; no nor increased, unless strengthened by his subsequent Grace; (...) no
nor consummate, unless perfected by his Grace of perseverance. And (in my p.
70.) that there is no matter for man to boast on; he having nothing which he
has not received, no not so much as his (...). It is God that makes the
difference, as well as God that chooses. etc. I am troubled to recount (what
yet I must in my own Defense) by what improbable immoderate and ridiculous
falsifications he incurs the detestation of all good men, and (I am confident)
of his own party, who cannot approve of such dealings in any imaginable Case.
It Is plain that I am more then innocent as to this particular, and that if any
man is guilty, it is himself, in his p. 113.

19. His 19th. [ That upon he cannot tell what occult Of Free Will.
quality in the freewill, I and my party do lean upon, as a broken reed, that
we may be called, nay chosen. p. 34.] This being near of kin to the former
needs no more for its discovery, then is there set down. Yet because he
referrs to my p. 69. I will have the patience to say a little. As 1. That in 1.
2. 3.
all that page there is not one word toward it. 2. That all in that page does
directly overthrow it. 3. That there is an argument in that page ( 55.) which
because Mr. B. can only rail at (for being impossible for him to answer) I
wish the Author of the Preface would undertake for him. 4. He does 4.
implicitly confess he frames a slander, by confessing he cannot tell what etc.
For if I had told him, he might have told from me. 5. He is himself more
guilty of this charge in 5. 6.
his p. 113. 6. he confesses that S. Austin spoke more like a Pelagian, by
ascribing a secret merit to the will, then I can be any where found to do. And
for so doing that Father is only called child; whereas if I had said
occultissimum meritum as Austin did, I had been a Heretic at least in the
account of my Corrector.

20. His 20th. [ That (in my p. 70.) I affect to be an Of Free Will.
elector, and determiner of Grace. p. 36,] It seems his Invention begins to
fail him, when he is fain to slit one slander into three. This in substance is
the same with the two former. And I referr the Reader to my former returns.
Yet because he cites my p. 70. I will 1. assure my Reader (what he 1.
may, if he please, assure himself) that all things in that page are directly
contrary to his fiction. And because I am not sure that every Reader will take
so much pains as to peruse that page, I will transcribe a line or two of what
I there say. [God does give us the advantage of our being in Christ, as well as
choose us for that advantage. First he gives us his Son, next he gives us his
Grace whereby to believe in his Son, and so believing he does elect us. etc.]
2. Though I say that election implies 2.
a difference, yet I say at the same time, that it is God who makes the
difference. 3. Though I say it is a preferring of 3.
the better before the worse, yet I say at the same time, that God does choose
his own Gifts. And that such men as are in Christ by faith, are better then
such as are out of Christ by Infidelity. (which whosoever shall deny, proclaims
an Enmity to Christ.) And I would know (I do not say of Mr. B. who has small
skill in these matters, but) of the wisest of his Abettors, 1. Whether God
elected any man any otherwise then 1.
in Christ. 2. whether any man can be in Christ, or be Elected 2.
as in Christ, without the Qualification at least of Faith, or something else
whereby he is considered as having an Interest in Christ. 3. Whether Faith is
not better, then Infidelity, 3.
and the faithful then the Infidel, or whether to be in Christ (by what means
soever) is not absolutely better then to be out of Christ (by what means
soever.) 4. Whether 4.
God electing some as considered in Christ, and rejecting others as considered
out of Christ, does not elect them as different from those whom he rejects; and
the better before the worse. 5. Whether I who thus hold, and hold besides, that
it is God 5.
who gives Christ, God who gives us to be in Christ, God who gives us
whatsoever it is by which we are in Christ, and God who electeth us from all
eternity in his prescience and consideration that we are thus gifted by himself
to be in Christ, (whether I who thus hold) can be said to affect to be an
Elector, and Determiner of Grace. 4. I said no more in that 4.
place, then I proved also by Oecumenius, assented to by the most Reverend
Bishop Andrews. Yea, by the words of Saint Austin which he writ when he was
Bishop, and so no Babie, (as Mr. B. would have him when he is angry.) Lastly,
if that 5.
57.. be thought by any to be more unwarily delivered by me then any other in
my Notes, I shall be glad if the Author of the first Preface will deal with
that very Section, in case he wants leisure to try the rest.

21. His 21. [ That first it was by a Reverend Minister Of being above sin.
told him alone, and afterward by the same man, delivered before many more
Ministers in his hearing, and as heard from my own mouth, viz. that I believe
no sin to be in me, that I was above sin, that by my own power I could abstain
from all sin, p. 39.] First, this is not a confutation of any argument 1.
in my Notes, but in default of reason, a flying for Refuge to pure Invention.
2. This Invention pretends to no better 2.
Author then bare Report, and this again is received from an indefinite (...),
a Reverend Minister without a Name, who being added to Mr. B. makes a
Resemblance of the two Elders, who accused Susanna of Fornication, or Adultery,
for no other reason then her being more chaste then they would have had her. 3.
It is the strangest Invention, and the most 3. 1.
unskilfully chosen of any one I ever heard of. For 1. He cannot but confess,
that when he has heard me out of a Pulpit (which has been 5 or 6 times) he
has heard from my mouth a full confession of my sins. And 2. His Invention is
2.
contradicted by several passages of my Notes the most that may be, as p. 6. in
the two Grounds of my belief. And p. 55. 56. where I declare my meaning in the
second of those Grounds, to be as Anti-Pelagian as can be wished. 3. I have as
many witnesses 3.
as weekly Auditors in my Church, and as daily Auditors in my Family, that I
affirm the quite contrary to that Invention. 4. Mr. B. himself does
acknowledge in his very 4.
next words, That I made a profession (p. 56.) never to have lain under the
least degree of Pelagianisme. Which how could I say, if I could say any part of
that Invention? and yet he is so overseen, as to use those words to prove me
guilty, which do most loudly declare me innocent. 5. Unless he can 5.
suborn some Reverend Minister (as he phraseth it) to say I spoke such words in
my dream, (who yet do not remember I ever slept in such company,) I cannot
imagine what color he can allege for this fiction, which is as contrary to
probability, as well as to Truth, as the wit of malicious men can possibly
contrive. It was an easier Invention for the Enemies of our Savior, to say,
That he was a winebibber, because at a Matthew. 11. 19.
Marriage Feast he turned Water into Wine. And they might be prompted to call
him glutton, because he was seen sometimes John 2. 9.
to eat, and (which is more) to make his Loaves and his Mar. 6. 43.
Fishes even to grow much more as they were eaten. But Mr. B. is such a Poet,
that he needs no hints for the holding forth of his Inventions. He might with
more ease, as well as color, have called me Drunkard or Glutton upon supposal
of my confession; because I cannot deny, but that I have often in my time both
eat, and drank; but that I am above sin, or by mine own power can abstain
from all sin, or that I believe no sin to be in me, I never once said or
thought since I came into the world; I have ever said and thought and found the
contrary. 6. How much better might Mr. B have charged this 6.
upon himself? for he is one of the brethren who are faithful, chosen and true
(in his p. 10.) as he supposes, and presum's (by consequence) that he has
Grace irresistible, and is secu^e he cannot fall. (p 35.) and may abuse to that
purpose those words of S. John (as others have done upon the same principles)
whosoever is born of God, carnot sin, because he is 1 John 3. 9.
born of God. Besides; he maintains a necessity of all events in many places
of his book (as shall be showed in its proper place) and so by consequence of
sins, and that from the absoluteness of God's Decrees, which will infer that
his sins are very excellently good, or if they are not, that they are not his,
because from all eternity they were determined to be done. Thus I argue from
his Doctrines, merely to show him with how little reason he has made me a
Ranter, with his Invention. 7. He says, p. 38, 39.
perchance he should be stupid, if he should 7.
absolutely disbeleeve, what he pretends to have heard of the foresaid
Invention. Is this the charity that hops all things? and that thinks none
evil? even from this one Instance 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7.
let my greatest Enemy pass a Judgment, how much Mr. B. is to be trusted with
his Manuscript Copy of my Notes, which he so much talks of throughout his
book.

22. His 22d. [ That I neither do nor can maintain any Of special Grace.
special Grace as derived from God, for I dispute strenuously against it all
along, (especially in my p. 70.) so says he in his p. 41.] Yet in that very
page which he referrs too, there is 1.
not a footstep, no not a shadow of any such thing. 2. But on 2.
the contrary my words there are, [It is God that makes the difference, as well
as God that chooses.] 3 I ever did, and 3.
do maintain special Grace, such is the gift of Jesus Christ, and all other
Graces in him, (all given by God by a certain, absolute, gracious decree;
praevenient Grace, when we were Ezekiel 16. 22.
naked and bare and as yet polluted in our blood. And subsequent Grace, which
although according to our Savior's Rule [Habenti dabitur Mat. 13. 12.] is
granted as a reward of using well the former Talent, yet still is it
gratuitous, because our good use is no merit of ours, but an effect of Gods
free Grace. I am for Grace exciting, sanctifying, minutely assisting, both to
will, and to do; and so to every single action or Thought of good, I clearly
plead a special Grace. Lastly, a special Grace of perseverance to every one
that does continue and abide unto the end. This is the proper notation of
special Grace. Properly Grace, because gratuitous and free. And properly
special, because it serves [ad speciales actus and habitus] to every habit, or
act, or thought of good, that is done by man, or required of him. So that I
utterly disclaim the merely light Coruscations or irradiations of Grace, which
without the least ground he charge on me. 4. If Mr. B. does 4.
mean, that by maintaining an universality, I do also maintain an equality of
grace, it argues a strange shortness of Discourse. For may not all have some,
and yet some have more then many others? The Master in the Mat. 25. 15.
Parable gave to every servant some part of his goods, to be employed unto
advantage* Yet to one he gave five Talent, to another two, and to another he
gave but one. And to him that made good use of what he gave him he gave much
more; as on the contrary he took from him that had not made such use of his
Talent. But I am prompted by my charity, to think that this mention of Mr. B.
is more the child of his Ignorance, then others were. He has not probably yet
learnt what is the genuine acception of special Grace. If by it he understands
I know not what irresistible or unquenchable Grace, much good do it him with
his own Notions, he only sings to himself, and to his own dear Muses.

23. [ That I am not for any special Grace, as particularly, Of special Grace
and Redemption. 1.
and specially procured for me by Christ's blood, more then for all the world
besides. For this in my p. 38. I count a pernicious heresy. p. 41.] 1. there
is no such thing in all my Notes, he only speaks from his Con^ecture. 2. In my
18 2.
page, I distinguished of a general and special Savior; (yet not with Mr. B.
but) with S. (...) Tim* 4. 10.
Paul, who affirms our Savior to be the Savior of all men, [but] especially
of them that believe. If S. Paul will teach me, that Christ in general is the
Savior even of them that do not believe, but especially of them that do, I
may believe him in one thing, as well as in another. And since I spoke of this
matter even as fully as that Apostle, Mr. B. his Accusation does equally lie
against S. Paul. 3. I cannot endure to be of their leven, who do 3.
arrogate a Savior wholly and only to themselves. Nor can I hope to enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, by Mat. 23. 13.
shutting it up against other men. but I hope I am a sincere believer, and I
know that the Savior of all the world is especially the Savior of them that
believe. But if Mr. B. by [especially] will have me mean [only] I am not so
void of fear or wit, as to yield my consent to any such guilty prevarications.
4. To 4.
my Naked word heresy p. 38. he adds pernicious, and applies it to special
Grace etc. Whereas my words were plainly these. He is called the propitiation,
not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world. The Apostle
foresees and confutes 1. Joh. 2. 2.
the Heresy of Christ's d^ing only for the Elect, with a [not only, but also.]
And whether that is not a heresy which is a flat contradiction to the words of
St. John, let Mr. B. himself be judge. 5. Now we clearly discover what Mr. B.
understands 5.
by special Grace, and special Redemption; he means Grace only, and
Redemption only for the Elect. And he must confess that this is really his
meaning, or that he did prevaricate against his clear light of knowledge. For
when my words were [the heresy of Christ dying only for the Elect] why should
he say, that [ I Correp. Cor. p. 4. lin. 13. 18 19. 20.
neither do nor can maintain any special^ Grace, as particularly and specially
procured for me by Christ's blood, more then for all the world besides, and that
this I account
a pernicious heresy,] if he did not conceive it to be tantamount to [Christ's
dying only for the Elect?] this being the very thing to which I fastened the
word Heresy, and to which he himself refers the Reader. And therefore till he
acknowledge that he did wilfully ^deavour to abuse my Notes, and deceive the
Reader, or else shall publish a Recantation, we must take his opinion to be
barely this, That [Christ died only for the Elect.]

This I said was a Heresy when I desired to speak mildly, Concerning the Great
error of Christ's dying only for the Elect. Of which see more, Chapter 4. Sect. 26.
and since Mr. B. has called me to it, I will show it to be a pern^cious
Heresy. For it is as contrary to Scripture (and to the clearest Scriptures that
can be named) as any thing could be invented by the wit of Julian or Helvidius.
A little patience in the Reader (let his present persuasion be what it will)
will be likely to be sufficient to make him exactly of this opinion. For
Universal Redemption is exhibited to us in Scripture by all expressions of
Note here a saying of Mr. B. from Dr. Ames: [That to speak properly and
Theologically, no one Text has any more then one sense, in his p. 172.] And in
all such Texts as are cited for God's Agency in sin, he is altogether for a
literal interpretation, in his p. 69. where he says, that there is but one
sense of Scripture, and that is the Grammatical. Yet at other times (when it is
for his turn) he will have Scripture interpreted (...), so as is most suitable
to the Majesty of God, p. 173. And why not as well (...), sa as may be most
suitable to the mercy of God? he con^esseth the Scripture does plainly say,
Christ's flock is but a little one (p. 174.) but forgets, it says as plainly,
He tasted death for every man. Supposing that Christ was not offered unto all,
because the major part refuse him.
Universal, which the Tongue of men and Angels is possibly able to express.
1. By a Universal Collective, (He is the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4. 10.) 2.
By a Universal Distributive, (He tasted death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. 3. By
a Universal indefinite (He is the Savior of the world, Joh. 4. 42.) 4. By an
Universal express (He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
(an universal Subject Syncatagorematicall, 1 John 2. 2.) 5. By Vniversals
affirmative) as in those now mentioned, and many more.) 6. By Vniversals
Negative (He was not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3. 9.) 7. By an
Universal command to use the means of Salvation, and that Universal as well
to places as to persons. Not to all men in some places, nor to some men in all
places, but [he commands all men every where to repent, Act. 17. 30.] 8. By a
particular in the Negative, and an universal in the affirmative in opposition
to one another, and joined together by a Discretive [not for our sins only, but
also for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2. 2.] From hence 1.
let us make these Observations. 1. That an universal Creation is not asserted
to us in Scripture by so great a variety of plain 2.
expressions as an universal redemption is found to be. 2. That they who teach
that Christ intended to be the Savior of a few only, 2 only of the Elect, 3
only of the lesser part of the world, 4 only of them who are Joh. 15. 19. chapter
17. 14. 16. 1 John c. 3. etc. 4.
not of the world, and 5 not of all men, 6 not of every man, 7 not of the 1 John 3. 1. 13 compared with 1 John 4. 14.
world, 8 not of the whole world, do speak as much in contradiction to the word
of God, as the affirmation and negation of the very same Term, wherein the
Essence of contradiction is defined to consist. 3. That to extricate 3.
themselves from the inevitable odium of such a Fact, they fly for refuge to
equal mischief's (as (...). -- (...). etc. Zosim. (...) l. 2.
the Emperor in Zosimus is reported to seek for cure from one wickedness to
another) interpreting affirmatives by Negatives, and Negatives by Affirmatives.
And then 4. The very plainest Texts of Scripture are made by them to be the
hardest. For such Texts sure must needs be ha^dest whose sense is made to be
contrary to the signification of the words, whose proper end it should be, not
to conceal, but express the meaning of the Speaker. Now when 4.
God says expressly (as if he would make it impossible for any mortal to
misconceive him) that Christ is the Savior, the Propitiation, the taster of
Death, not only for all men, but for every man, not only for the world, but for
the whole world, and to prove he speaks of ** God's intention is showed to
prove the sadness of their distinction, when they say he is sufficiently, but
not intentionally the Savior of the whole world. Compare Joh. 1. 7, 9 with
Joh. 3. 15.
an * intention to save them all without exception (if by the wickedness of
their wills they do not frustrate his * Inten^ion, as the greater part of men
do, by not accepting his offer, and not performing the conditions on which his
offer is made) he professes he is not willing that Mr. Hooker says, God has
a general inclination that all should be saved, Eccl. Polit. l. 5. ect. 49.
any should perish, but [on the contrary] that all should come to repentance, 2
Pet. 3. 9. what other man then Mr. B. could imagine the meaning of it to be,
that he is verily and indeed the Propitiati^n, and Savior, and taster of Death
for a very small number, for here and there one, perhaps not the twentieth, or
fourtieth, or hundredth part of the world? and that he was very willing (so as
to Decree it from all E^ernity, and that by an absolute and necessitating
Decree) that almost all the world should perish, and perfectly Note here that
Dr. Twiss does affirm God's will revealed to us in his word, to be improperly
called his will. But he seigneth another will, to be properly called his will,
which is contrary to his will revealed in his word, I. 1. pat. 1. Digr. 10. c.
12. p. 140. and this Mr. B. asserts in his p. 66, 67. as I shall show anon.
unwilling that the far greater part of mankind should come to Repentance? (so
as to leave them in the state of a most desperate impossiiblity, which cannot
but be followed with unavoidable impenitence?) thus they ch^^ge God Almighty
with mental Reservations, and tell the people, he does not speak as he means,
but that his meaning is contrary to what he speaks; that when he says he is
willing that all should come to repentance, it is no more then his revealed
will, or volunt as signi] which is not properly called a will, for it only
signifies what men ought to do by right, whereas his secret will is ^roperly
called a will, and with that he decreed that very few should come to
repentance. And though Mr. B. is feign to say (for want of better excuses) that
Dr. Twisse does speak of those different wills as belonging to different
Objects (in his p. 67.) yet I shall prove when I come thither, that he could
not but speak against his knowledge, if he consulted the place (as I have done
a second time) and if he did not, his case is every whit as bad, in that he 5.
spoke as if he knew, what he knew he did not know. 5. If the Holy Ghost shall
be affirmed not to intend what he speaks in those plainest places of
Scripture, where he says [all men, and every man, the world, and the whole
world, not only, but also, not willing that any, but willing that all, etc.]
How are men taught to disbelieve him in all his other affirmations where his
expressions are not so plain? how will they preach any man into any one duty,
or dehort him from any sin, when they have once showed the way by certain
tricks and distinctions to elude such Texts as are the plainest, and do yet
explain each other the most that can be imagined? how will they be able out of
Scripture to prove their right to Tithes, or to the Ministry, the Sunday
Sabbath, Infant Baptism, or indeed the Trinity of persons in the unity of the
Godhead, for all or any of which they cannot bring either so many, or so
direct, or so univocall, or so easy affirmations of Scripture, as I, or any man
will urge for Universal Redemption? 6. If any man 6.
will pretend to hold by Scripture, [that Christ died only for the Elect] for
which there is not a word in all the Scripture, with how much a greater force
of Reason will the Arian hold his heresy, having the plain letter of the Text,
[my Joh. 14. 28
Father is greater then I?] or the Romanist his Transubstantiation upon his
better pretensions from [ Mat. 26. 27 7.
This is my Body?] 7. When Christ is said to be the Savior of the world, and
(more emphatically) the Lamb of God that takes away the sins (d) Joh. 1. 29.
of the world, it must be meant of the whole, or of a part only* If Mr. B. will
say of the whole, he grants the all that I desire. If he says a part only, 1.
He flatly contradicts the very words of the same Apostle, 1 John 2. 2. where to
the world he adds whole. 2. He must grant it to signify a major part, both
according to the Analogum perse positum stat pro famosiori Analogato.
maxim which is in every man's Logic, and because it is ever so used in 1 John 3. 1. 13. c. 4. v. 5, 15.
Scripture. And then 3. he must confess that the Reprobate^ make up the major
part, and by consequence that Christ is the Savior only of the Reprobates;
which abominable Absurdity he cannot possibly escape but by a full confession
of Universal R^lemption. 8. But he will possibly 8.
grant my premises, and yet by the help of distinction hold fast his
Conclusion.

For he may say Christ died for every man in the world, and was the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, Of the famous subter^e of
sufficienter, non intentionaliter:
Sufficienter, but not intentionaliter. Yet this is a Refuge which does but lay
him more open, as I shall show many ways. (For since I am upon this subject I
am willing to speak of it this once for all, and it is the main hinge upon
which all turns and does depend.) First, if that distinction has sense in it,
1.
the meaning of it must needs be this. That Christ had merits sufficient to
have ransomed all and every man, (the least drop of his blood was more worth
then a world) but he did not Note here that saying of the most learned Bishop
Overall -- quod vulgato scholae dicto sat is (...) ecte traditum erat,]
Christum pro omnibus mortuum esse sufficienter, pro electis and credentibus
efficaciter, [nisi isti corrupissent exponentes per hypothesin, [fuisset mors
christi sufficiens pro omnibus, si Deus and Christus it a intendissent.] Cap.
2. sent. Eccl. Angl. de morte Christi. They corrupted the distinction by their
expounding it thus. The Death of Christ had been sufficient for all, if God and
Christ had so intended. That is, it was not sufficient for all, because it was
not so intended.
intend to ransom all and every one, he in^^ d^d all the benefit of his Death
and P^ssi^n to no^e but those few persons who were elected from all E^e^nity
out of Massa Corrupta, and left the greater part of men who were eternally
^e^ected or passed by in that Mass, to be utterly incapable of being saved by
any part of his Merits. Which is as much as to fay, that he might have been
their Savior, not that he is. He might if he would, because his merits were
sufficient; but he would not, because he did not intend it; and he could not
intend it in the fullness of Time, because he willed the quite contrary before
all Time. Whereas the Texts which I alleged do not speak in the Potential, but
Indicative Mood. It is not said, he might have been, (for his ability or
sufficience) but expressly that he is the propitiation for the sins of all the
world. Not aptitudinally, but actually such. Every Smatterer in Logic will be
able to tell Mr. B. that from Ab actu ad potentiam been valet Argumentum. Vice
versa non item.
the act to the aptitude there may be very strong arguing, but there can be
none at all from the Aptitude to the Act. And therefore Secondly, if men may
say with any truth, That Christ is 2.
their Savior whom he neither does save, nor does intend to save, and did
eternally determine he would not have saveable, and leaves them without the
passive p^er or bare Possibility of being saved, yet might have saved them if
he had pleased; then by the very same reason in all respects, a man may say
with great Truth, That God is the Creator of a thousand worlds besides this,
(and add the distinction not intentionally but sufficiently) because he was
able, and might have done it if he had pleased. Or that he was the Destroyer of
this very world 5 or 6 years since, because he had been sufficient to have
destroyed it, if he had not decreed it a longer time of Duration. Or that every
rich man who is worth more then he owes, is truly a payer of all his Debts,
(though he neither does pay them, nor does intend it, but does intend the
contrary,) because he has wherewithal, abundantly sufficient, and might do it
if he pleased, and were so honestly minded. Suppose that Mr. B. were such a
man's Creditor, who should refuse to pay the greater part of the Debt, and yet
affirm he paid it all, [sufficienter, non Intentionaliter] explaining himself,
that he was sufficient, but never meant it, would not Mr. B. call this a lie,
or a Jeere? would he give him any thanks for such a payment? how many myriads
of Absurdities must inevitably follow, if that may truly be said to be, which
either may be, or might have been, but never was, nor ever will be? But
Thirdly, the vulgar 3.
use of the word [sufficiently] is more unreasonable then so amongst the men of
the absolute way. For they infer our Savior to have been utterly unable and
insufficient to have made himself a Ransom for all mankind, whilst they say,
as he was God, he had determined the contrary before the Foundations of the
Earth were laid. For he was not able to resist himself, or to reverse his
irreversible Decree And his Decree of Reprobation (say they) was such. Upon
which it follows by their Doctrine, that Christ was not sufficient to have
saved all the world, but only those that could be saved; he could not possibly
save them, to whom he had denied a possibility, and the very passive power of
being saved.

From all this together it is as clear as noonday, that they who deny him to
be the Savior of all the world intentionally, cannot say with any reason
(whilst they keep their old principles) that he is so much as sufficiently the
Savior of them whom he eternally decreed he would not save, but that he is
sufficient to have been their Savior, if from all eternity he had been
pleased. But (say they) he was not pleased to be their Savior; yea he was
pleased not to be so, and sure he could not be their Savior against his will
and good Note, that they call the Decree of Reprobation without respect unto
sin, The will of Gods Good pleasure or the will of likin^ (as Mr. B.
translateth voluntas beneplaciti in his p. 67.) though God himself swearcth, he
has no pleasure in the Death of the wicked. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
pleasure. And yet they say, he saved all sufficienter, who did nothing toward
it, nor ever had it in his Thoughts. That is to say, [he is their Savior,
because he was able; and he is not, because he would not do what he was able.]
So that as often as I meet with that distinction, the only true sense of it
seems to me to be this, [we know not well what to say, but are resolved to hold
our own. We find we are beaten, but will not yield. We want a good Cause, but
yet we have a good courage. We think Christ died not for all the world, but
we will say it with a reserve, because it is Scripture.] And therefore one of the
Mr. Hobbs of Liberty and Necessity. p. 72. 73.
ab^est of Mr. B. his Party was so far from affirming so absurd a Use of the
word sufficient, that he rather chose to fall into a contrary error, and would
have nothing sufficient which is not necessary, or (to speak his mind more
properly) which does not necessitate. Whatsoever (says he) is produced, has
had a sufficient cause to produce it. And therefore also voluntary Actions are
necessary. Into such contrary Absurdities even witty men must needs fall who
did at first set out from the very same Error. When men are brought to their
wits end, and know not which way to go, and are ashamed to go back, the
clearest Truths are sure to smart for it. Whatsoever they suffer in dispute,
they stomackfully resolve they will not be silenc't. 4. They would make by this
distinction, a stranger kind of Amphibologies in holy Scripture, then those
that were famous or infamous in the ancient Oracles of the Heathen. For in such
sayings as those [ibis red bis nunquam Roman peribis] two contrary things are
very equally signified. But in the words of the Apostle there is the greatest
simplicity that can be wished. [He is the propitiation, not for our sins only,
but also for the sins of the whole world 1 John 2. 2.] There can be no plainer
speaking then by [not only] in one clause, and [but also] in another. Yet that
distinction above mentioned would make an Amphibolia in those plain words, or a
fallacy which is worse. For it makes not only an affirmation of two contrary
things, [He is the propitiation for our sins only intentionaliter, and also for
the sins of the whole world sufficienter,] but an affirmation and negation of
the very same thing, [He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world
sufficienter, and he is not the propitiation for the sins of the whole world
intentionaliter.] And now 5. That 5.
what I have said may be useful to such very plain Readers who alone may be in
danger of being debauched by Mr. B. I will denudate that distinction by a
familiar Illustration. Suppose the King of Spain has a thousand Christian
subjects taken captive by the Turks. He gives as much for the Ransom of 2 or 3
hundred, as would have been required for all the whole Thousand. But he will
give the whole sum, because he will; and because he will too, he will have
released not all the Thousand, but only two or three hundred, intending all the
rest shall be Captives still. And this he will do, to show his power over the
greater number, and his partiality toward the lesser. Can that King say with
Truth or Modesty, that he is the Redeemer of all those Captives, because he
paid a sum of money which had been sufficient to redeem them all, but did not
intend that they should be taken into the Bargain? No. It only proves that he
is not their Redeemer, but might have been if he had pleased. And that the Turk
was lose merciless then He, who would have given all back if the King of Spain
would have had him. I intend nothing in this similitude, but to illustrate the
vanity of that Distinction [He is the Savior even of Reprobates sufficiently,
but not intentionally] That the lowest capacity may not fail to comprehend,
how vast a difference there is betwixt the being sufficient to do a Thing, and
the doing of a thing sufficiently. Which are fallaciously confounded (the later
used for the former) by the necessitous Inventors of that Distinction. And if
in the last place I shall observe, that Pelagius himself by 6.
denying Original sin denied universal Redemption too, and that no Ancient did
it so much as He, I suppose Mr. B. will be more Pelagian then I am, or confess
(in time) that I have made it appear a Pernicious Heresy. And I have for so
doing a very excellent Hist. Narrat. of the Judgment of the most learned and
godly English Bishops, holy Martyrs, and others. Whereof Arch Bishop Cranmer,
B. Latimer, and B. Hooper, suffered Martyrd^m in the days of Q. Mary for the
Protestant Religion. p. 11. N. B.
Precedent, in the second or third year of Q. Elizabeth, who flourished in the
time of King Edward the sixth and Q. Elizabeth, and in the time of Q. Mary for
his conscience sake endured voluntary exile. His words are these. But this
appears to be one of Pelagius his damnable Errors, that Christ was not a
general Savior; if Christ offered not up the Sacrifice of Redemption for all
the whole world. Contrary to the manifest Scripture. Which says, he it is that
obtained grace for our sins; and not for our sins only, but also for the sins
of the whole world, 1 John 2. the same also is manifestly declared in these
Scriptures following, and many other, 1 John 1. a. b. f. and 12. g. Romans 5. d.
1 Cor. 8. d. 2 Cor. 5. c. Heb. 2. c. and 2 Pet. 2. a. This Heresy of Pelagius
as well as of Mr. B. so directly contrary to the Scripture, he flatly call's
damnable, (which is more then I have ever done) and Pelagius himself was so
ashamed of it, that he was feign to make a Recantation in the Council of
Palestine, (as S. Austin himself declares Epist. 106. Tom. 2.) I wish Mr. B.
may do no worse. Farther yet. That most learned Divine and holy Confessor does
make an excellent Observation from St. Austins Recital of the fourth Error of
Pelagius, the worthier of all men to be observed (who shall peruse what I am
writing) because the Book (I suppose) is not commonly to be had. And further
(says he) there is to be noted, that the first part Apud Hist. Nar. p. 10.
of the fourth Error is manifestly the very same which is the second and third
Error, before rehearsed, and by the same Scriptures plainly condemned. But to
make the latter part of this Error more plain, it was necessary and thought
good of Et quod neque per mortem, vel praevaricationem Adae, omne genus humanu^
moriatur, neque per Resurrectionem Christi omne genus humanu^ Resurgat. Aug.
apud Hist. Nar. p. 6.
St. Augustine, to rehearse the first again. That, by the comparison of
condemnation in Adam, and Redemption in Christ, it might the more plainly be
perceived, that Christ was not inferior to Adam, nor grace inferior to sin,
and that as all the generation of man is condemned in Adam, so is all the
generation of man redeemed in Christ. And, as general a Savior is Christ by
Redemption, as Adam is a condemner by Transgression. Which comparison is taken
out of St. Paul his Epistle to the Romans; where he says, Romans 5. 18.
likewise then, as by the sin of one, Condemnation came upon all men; even so
by the justifying of one, comes the Righteousness, which brings life upon
all men. Yet shall not all men be condemned, by Adam, eternally; for there is
ordained of God again, a way to life; which way is Christ. Neither shall all be
eternally saved by Christ. For there is of God DECLARED a way again unto death;
which way is sin, and the wilful This should be considered by Mr. B. who asks
somewhere, [if Chapter died to save all, why are not all saved?] and (p. 174.) from
the fewness of the chosen he would make it a blasphemy to say, that all were
seriously called, or that Christ desired the salvation of all. Not having
learnt that Christ is a conditional Savior, saving none for whom he died, but
such as do what he requires to be done.
contempt of God's mercy in Christ. I have insisted the longer upon this Point,
because if this one Error be once disclaimed by the Adversary, all the rest
will tumble of their own accord.

24. His 24. [ That I neither do nor Correp p. 4. l. 13. 21. Of the grace of
Perseverance.
can maintain no special Grace, as by which any special habits of Grace, viz.
of Conversion, Regeneration, Sanctification, etc. are infused into my soul, as
any abiding seed of grace, or life of God. For in both my Papers I am highly
silent as to these matters, though ad phaler and ^m populum (p. 56.) I make
some slight mention of grace infused by God, etc. p. 41.] Yet 1. he confesses,
that in my p. 56.) I do maintain what he says I cannot. 2. So 1.
far are those mentions from being slight, that I could not have 2.
spoken more distinctly, if it had been for a wager, as any 3.
man will say who reads that page. 3. I there affirm most expressly, not only
preventing, and subsequent assisting Grace, but the perfecting grace of
Perseverance. And yet is he so strange a speaker as to say, that I neither do
nor can maintain any abiding seed of Grace, etc. and this he calls [light
Coruscations only,] as if any grace could go farther then the grace of
Perseverance unto the end. 4. If I had not mentioned what 4.
I did, he had sadly argued from a Negative. For many things might be in my
opinion which were not set down in those few Papers. By such Logic he may
conclude (as some have done against others) that I am a Socinian, because in my
Book I do not treat of the Trinity. 5. Being forced to 5.
confess that I did that, which (in the same period) he said I did not, he is
feign to say I did it ad phalerandum populum. Which is as pretty a jest as ere
was heard of. For if by that Latin phrase, he meant on purpose to speak
nonsense, that no man living might know what he meant, it seems he knew that
he was guilty of a falsification. And if by [ad phalerandum] he meant [to
deceive] it seems he spoke he knew not what; and thought that that word which
comes from phalerae Horsetrappings, had been derived from Fallere to deceive.
And so is almost as pitiful a Latinist as he appears to be a Grecian,
wheresoever he tampers in those matters; there being hardly a place (at least
not many) wherein his very little Greek is not very falsely set down. And
because he wishes that I had writ my Notes in Latin (in his p. 192.) to the
end our plain hearted Englishmen might not have understood me, (and adds, he
might have been well able to answer me) I cannot but avow I wish it too: for
sure he would not then have been so tedious in his Correptorie Correction. A
specimen of whose Latin we have, as here, so p. 90 [multasunt admodum How many
faults he has committed in his [multa rara] and what an English Latinist he
is, whose Latin makes him so gaye, let any man judge.
rara quae hic inserta fuissent, in marginis Angusti^ prohibuisse^.] But
especially, p. 197. where he takes [ Defectio arguit fuisse derelictos. Cujus
(supple derelictionis says Mr. B.) non potest alia adduci causa, quam
reprobatio, etc. p. 197.
derelictos] rather then [defectio] to have been the Substantive, at least the
Antecedent to [Cujus the Relative.] Or if it were not a pure want of skill in
Grammar, it was very much worse, even a wilful prevarication to excuse Mr.
Calvin's making Gods Reprobation the Cause of the Angels sin of defection. And
because that one place is most sufficient to ruin his whole undertaking
against that which he calls the pillar of my Book, I will speak of it more in
its proper place. 6. If he means by his 6.
strange Latin, that I only did what he said I did not, either to deceive or
to please the people, it is gratis dictum, like the rest. And he may say as
well, I am a speculative Atheist, because when I make any mentions of God, they
are but slight mentions ad phalerandum populum.

25. His 25th. [ That I am for a mere conditional consequent Of Preventing
Grace and Free will.
Grace, which find's my will so busy and active as to be not only pragmatical
in my temporal vocation, (but lo what an active thing T. P's will is) but
even in my very election, p. 42.] When the Reader is still treated with such
mere inventions, and perfectly groundless, it might be sufficient to answer
them all with a short denial, and with a desire to Mr. B. that he will
henceforward set down my words, and not his own in my name. But because this
Calumny (as the rest) is not only disagreeable, but even contrary to the Truth,
I shall vindicate my self by saying these few things. 1. That in my p. 56. I 1.
affirmed the quite contrary to what he inventeth. Particularly, [we cannot
take what God does offer, unless he give us the hand of Faith. Nor can we
possibly desire to take it, unless he gives us our very appetite and hunger.
There is no good thought arising in us unless suggested by his Preventing
grace; nor increased unless strengthened by his subsequent grace, etc. 2. In
the p. 69. of my published Notes which he cites, there 2.
is not any the least mention of what he charge that page withal; he might
as well have referred to any page as to that. 3. He is fain to refer his
Reader to p. 11. of a Manuscript 3.
which secretly lurketh in his Study, to which I am as great a stranger as any
other of his Readers. And he might have said as he did before, (with every whit
as much reason) that he was told it by a Reverend Minister. 4. I never spoke so
much toward it as St. Austin himself. For Mr. B. confesses there 4.
was a time, when Austin knew not that Faith was the gift of God, (p. 186.) and
Hilarie himself (a great Admirer of Austin) affirms Austin to have said upon
the Epistle to the Romans (which was after his conversion, when he was no bab,)
Quod enim credimus, nostrum est, quod autem operamur illius. August: apud
Hilar. Basil. Edit. p. 679. Of the Grace of Perseverance. I.
it is of our selves that we believe, but of God that we work. which is more
liable to the charge that Mr. B. lays against me, then any thing I ever said,
or thought. It having been always my belief, that Faith as well as works is
the gift of God, although the one before the other. And so I declared p. 56.

26. His 26. [ That I am for no special, abiding, lasting, continued grace,
etc, p, 42.] Yet (in my p. 56.) I expressly assert the grace of Perseverance.
Which I there do call a perfecting Grace, by which the rest are consummate. So
p. 69. I assert a perseverance in well doing unto the end. And would Mr. B.
have any thing beyond the end? or more lasting then everlasting? nothing that I
say can ever please him, unless I will do him the favor to say something which
he may rationally accuse without the help of his Invention. 2. He II.
adds my saying p. 67. that many Infants in Christendom who in their harmeless
Nonage were babes of Grace (for such were my words) have yet outlived their
Innocence. But First, 1.
do I infer that there is no abiding Grace, by saying that some do not abide?
might not John persevere, though Judas fell? I may infer as rationally that
Mr. B. demeth Christ died for any, from his denial of his dying intentionally
for all. 2. What I said in that place of many out-living their harmeless 2.
Nonage, first is evidently true by our every-dayes experience. 1.
For Judas was not a Traitor whilst he was hanging at his mothers Breast. He
did not then keep the Bagg. He was covetous only of milk, and not of money. It
was long enough after his Infancy when the Devil entered into his heart 2.
John 13. 2. Nor 2. does Mr. B. offer one word to prove 3.
the contrary. Nor 3. does he invalidate my proofs out of Scripture, or
Antiquity, (not Tertullian only, but Austin too) which gives Instances in men
of very -- credendum est, quosdam -- in ^ide quaeper dilectionem operatur
incipere vivere, and aliquandiu fideliter and just vivere, and postea cadere,
neque de hac vita priusquam hoc ijs contingat auferri. Aug. de correp and Gra.
c. 13. p. 1647.
ripe Ages, whereas I spoke in the most advantageous manner that was possible,
of harmeless Infants, who having been baptized into a membership of the Church,
have lived long enough to be very far from being harmeless. For nemo repent
fit p^ssimus. The Infants Father is not presently at his worst, much less the
Infant. 4. For want of an Argument, He adds a Jeere, which touches not me, but
the God of all Grace. So in his p. 217. he calls the very power of resisting
Gods Grace (which is not an act of resisting, and so not guilty, and which God
himself was willing we should have) a wretched, miserable, lying, ^inful power.
His words are these [A goodly special Grace sure, which has all these
mischievous qualifications. p. 42.] Hear o Heavens, and give ear o Earth! every
measure of God's Grace which is not irresistible is called [goodly] by a Gibe,
and is said by a blasphemy to have [mischievous qualifications.] -- o quis
Iniqui
Tam patiens oris! tam ferreus, ut teneat se!
Upon the first reading of the words I am tempted to some Of Grace Resistible.
Impatience. But I will resist it as a Temptation, and only calmely reprove my
Corrector, and set before him the things that he has done. There are that Ephesians.
4. 30.
grieve the spirit of God. There are that 1 These. 5. 19.
quench him. There are that always Act. 7. 51.
resist the holy Ghost.. And sure the Paraclete is not grieved before he comes
to comfort, or to convince. The spirit is not resisted before he strives. The
Fire is not quenched before it is kindled. Where lie the mischievous
qualifications, whereby Grace is resisted, the Holy Ghost grieved, the spirit
quenched? Sure not in the Grace of Gods spirit, nor in the spirit of Grace, but
in the wills of the wicked who love Joh. 3. 19.
darkness rather then light. We find that silver may become dross, because it
I^a. 1. 22.
did. And the faithful City may grow a Harlot. Verse 21.
Murder may, and has dwelt, where Righteousness and Judgment were wont to
lodge. The Dross and the Harlot were none of Gods Creatures. God made Jerusalem
a faithful City, and that by the gift of his special Gra^e; but 'twas her own
wicked will that made her a Harlot; which it could not have done, if that
special Grace had been irresistible. Saul had once the spirit of God, and with
1 Samuel 10. 22.
humility refused a Kingdom. But after his preferment, he grew chapter 15. 8, 9.
covetous, chapter 23. 14.
envious, chapter 14. 44.
cruel, chapter 28. 7.
profane, and in a desperate manner procured his own chapter 31. 4.
Death. Yet God forbid that we should say, that the Talent of Grace which he
abused was a goodly Grace by an Ironie, or that it had mischievous
qualifications. Exo. 32. 33.
Whosoever has sinned against me (said God to Moses) him will I blot out of my
book. Whosoever is blotted out is therein employed to have been written, and
that implies a special Grace. But the mischievous qualification is in him that
sins.

How shall I hope to be spoken well of by Mr. B. who speaks so bluntly ill of
the Grace of God, if it is not such as he would have it? but (if we will take
it upon his bare word) He is sure (in his following lines p. 42.) that all the
Orthodox in all Ages have maintained the contrary. Indeed the contrary to what
he holds. The Scholar and Ex regeneratis in Christo Jesu quosdam relict^ fide
and pijs moribus, apostatare a Deo, and impiam vitam in sua aversione ^i^ire
multis (quod dolendum est) probatur exemplis, sed horum l^psum Deo ascribere,
immodicae pravitatis est. Quast ideo ruinae ^psorum Impulsor a^que author sit,
quia illo^ ruituros propria ipsorum voluntate, praescivit and ob hoc a filijs
perditionis nulla predestinatione discrevit. Prosper. ad Gall. object. 7. vide
^tiam 3. and 3. ob.
Follower of S. Austin shall speak for all. Who in vindication of his, and
Austin's Doctrine from the Calumnies of the French men, said the very same
words which I shall say in the same case, [That many men who were regenerate in
Jesus Christ, fors^king their Faith, and godly manners, do apostatizo from God,
and finish their wicked lives in that Aversion, is proved by many examples,
(the more is the pity) but to ascribe their fall to God, were immoderately
wicked. As if he were therefore the Impulsor, or Au^hor of their ruin, because
he foresaw that they would fall away by their own mere wills, and even for
this reason did not sever them by predestin^im from the sons of perdition. etc.
If it be duly considered, who spoke those words, and to whom, and upon what
occasion, Mr. B. surely will call back his hasty words; or else by all the
Orthodox, he must confes^ he means none but such as are exactly of his opinion*
and then the upshot of his saying is only this, [that all agree with him in
judgment who do not differ.]

27. His 27th, [ That I frequently relinquish Scripture, Of Scripture,
Tradition, and right reason.
and Tradition, for the courting of right reason. Which some of my faction give
out to be, even since the Fall, incorrupt. and to be appealed unto against the
J^dgment of the whole Ancient and Modern Church. p. 43. 44.] Here again are as
many falsities as in so many words can be expressed. For 1. it is 1.
evidently the Method of my Notes to give Scripture the first place, universal
Tradition the second, and right Reason the third. Which is not to relinquish,
but to prefer the former. Scripture before Reason, and the public reason of
the whole Church before the private reason of my self, or of other particular
men. 2. As he names no place wherein I do what 2.
he affirms, so am I not able to conjecture what pretense he can have for
that suggestion; unless it be this one, that when I have done with Scripture,
and Antiquity, I proceed to Reason, and so he thinks it a witty thing to call
the finishing of a Subject, the relinquishing of it. He may say in this sense,
That S. John the Evangelist (chapter 1. v. 19) does relinquish the Divinity and
Office of Christ, for the courting the Testimony of John the Baptist, because
he leaves the former (having spoken of it sufficiently) and falls in hand
with the later. And so the Author to the Hebrews may be said by Mr. B. to
relinquish the principles of the Doctrine of Christ. 3. There are none of my
Religion (which he is every where so civil as to call my Faction) nor yet of my
Acquaintance, who give out Reason, 3.
since the Fall, to be incorrupt. I for my part did avow my being subject to
errors (p. 1. (...)) and my having once erred the same errors with those men
who now oppose me for my conversion (page 48.) Mr. B. himself is much more
liable to this accusation, because in all his Articles of his new Creed, he is
as peremptory as a Pope. Nor can I find him confessing that he ever erred, or
was mistaken in all his life, 4. Nor do any of my Principles appeal to Reason
against the 4.
Judgment of the whole ancient and modern Church. But on the contrary, would
have things decided by that Authority, which Mr. B. and his Teachers have set
at naught; and thence are worsted so frequently in their Disputes, not only by
the learned, but by the unlearned part of the Independents. They having said
such things against the Authority of Tradition and the universal Church, when
they contended with Bishop Hall and other Assertors of the Hierarchy, that
whilst those dictates stand unrevoked, they are utterly unqualified to prove
the baptism of Infants, the Sunday-sabbath, the very Canon of Scripture, the
Apostolicalness of the Creed, or their pretensions to the Ministry, more then
any other men* 5. Mr. B. unwarily confesses (p. 43.) that with me tria 5.
sunt omnia, these three things are all in all; Scripture, Tradition, and Right
Reason. Now since nothing is subtracted from the Authority of the Scripture by
the addition of suffrages both from public and private Reason, (Tradition
being use^ul to convey the Canon of Scripture to us, and reason as well useful
to explain it where it is hard, as to understand it where it is easy) I know
not how Mr. B. could have spoken more to his own disadvantage, or my
commendition. And that he may not say that I am Popishly affected for the
reverence I bear to universal Tradition, and the Mother Church, (as sometimes
he does) I will here put him in mind of Mr. Bal^'s own words. The Pulpit.
Patron. part. 2. c. 2. p. 197. Sect. 7.
best way to find out what the Scriptures have determined in Ecclesiastical
affairs, is to observe the practice of the Universal or Catholic Church of
Christ in all successions and Ages from that time unto this. For no doubt the
Apostles made known their minds to those that lived with them, would not
injoyne what they themselves had never practiced -- we should therefore in
matters Ecclesiastical be guided and directed very much by the Annalls and
Actions of the Church, and those believers that succeeded in the Apostles
Rooms [of which Ignatius was one] and bequeathed their practice unto
succeeding generations. This indeed seems to me one of the very best
arguments in all that Book. And I wish it were considered in all Cases, as well
as in hat wherein it is urged. For the Ecclesiastical Levellers were in all
probability the true Parents of all the Levellers in the Civil State. And if
this Argument is valid for the Patronage of the Pulpit (which is so different
now, in all kinds, from what it was in the Primitive Church,) how much more for
those things, which Mr. B. has resisted with so much v^hemence? 6. It is a
very great Ignorance, or a 6.
strange wilfulness of Deceit, by which Mr. B. does call a small number of men
who (I may say) are but of yesterday, not only the whole Church, but the whole
both Ancient and Modern Church. For the one thing that he referrs to is
Castellio's Preface. And there it is certain, that the vnlgus are they who
believe what is plain by common sense. And that the quidam literati are some of
his Time, (Mr. Calv^n, and the like,) who persecuted him for his opinions. For
it follows, [ Sed quia multum laborant liberati quidam, ut per suadeant
hominibus ^a non esse quae sentiuntur, hoc est ut hominibus ^culos effodiant,
nos laborabimus in hoc errore re^^llendo. Sebast. Castle. in Pref. ad Dia^.
because some learned men do much labor to persuade the people, that such
things are not as are evidently seen, that is, that that they may pull out the
peoples Eyes, we also will labor in the refelling of this error. And for the
ingenuous confession of Castellio's Prefacer, [that by those certain learned
men, is meant the Ancient and Modern Church since Austin] (as Mr. B.
prodigiously affirms) on the contrary, Felix Turpio, that Praefacer, speaks
only of a few, and even of those very times, and of them he speaks very Itaque
factum est, ut plerique eorum qui nostra memoria Christianae Religionis
notitiam funditus propemodum eversam instaurare sunt aggressi, ad hunc lapidem
offend^rint* and cae^eris Antiquioribus omnibus spretis, unum Augustinum aut
secuti, aut certe se sequi persuasi, tam absurdam, imo nefariam and detestandam
opinionem, (qua, velint nolint, Deus and peccati primus auctor, and egregius
simulator, atque proh scelus, turpiter mendax, and injustus, esse neces^ario
concluditur, ac pietas universa convellitur) imprudentes pro salutis nostrae
praecipuo quodam fundamento obtruserint. Viderunt hoc non pauci viri
praestantissimi qui in plerisque satanae imposturis detegendis cum illis ipsis
consenserunt. Nec tanto malo obviam ire neglexerumt. Atque ut eo^ qui adhuc
vivunt silentio praeteream, ex iis vero qui obdormierunt, quatuor tantummodo
praecipuos commemorem, etc. Felix Turp. in Praef. ad Castle.
sharply, as those that d^spised all the rest of the Ancients and only followed
one Austin, at least persuaded themselves that they followed him, and that
before they were aware, they obtruded so absurd, yea so impious, and
detestable an opinion, (as that by which they made God to be by necessary
consequence the first Author of sin, an egregious dissembler, a liar, and
un^ust, and by which all piety is plucked up by the root) for a special
Fundamental of our Salvation. That many of the first Reformers did endeavor
the prevention of so great a mischief, amongst whom then living he only reckons
the four chiefest. viz. Erasmus against Luther his servum Arbitrium, Theodorus
Bibliander against Peter Martyr, and Philip Melancthon (who at first followed
Luther, but after acknowledged his Error, and maintained the contrary with
perseverance unto the end) and Sebasti^nus Castellio. This is the sum of what
is said by that ingenious Prefacer in that place, so destructiuely contrary to
Mr. B his Party and opinions, and to the invention lying before us under
examination, that I cannot but make him this Dilemma. Either he understand's
the Latin Tongue, or he does not. If he does, he must confess he is a wilful
Impostor, and did put his trust in the Readers ignorance, or want of leisure to
examine the Truth of his Citations. And if he does not understand Latin (which
will be the best of his plea) I will leave it to be conjectured in how many
respects he is to be blamed. 7. If by the whole 7.
Ancient and Modern Church he means the 8. or 9. men whom he injoynes me to
study next to the holy Book of God (p. 194.) whom he groundlessely believes to
be exactly for his turn, (granting him his supposition) his profound meaning
will be this, [That they do make up the whole Church of God who are precisely
of his Opinion; and they are all of his opinion who think precisely as He does.

28. His 28th. [ That my concession in the beginning of Of the cause of
punishment eternal.
Chap. 3. that every Reprobate is praedetermin'd to eternal punishment, is
directly at daggars drawing with my almost whole Chap. 2. where I strenuously
dispute, that God determins none 1.
to punishment, p. 45.] 1. What Text is there in the Scripture which may not be
made by Mr. B. his arts to be at daggers drawing with some other Texts? had he
been so upright, as to have named the next words, [not by Gods irrespective,
but conditional Decree] he had had no place for this invention. Suppose a man
say that [God is a God of purity] in one place of his Discourse, and in
another, that [God is not the God of uncleannesse] would it not be thought a
dishonest part in an Opponent, to say he speaks contradictions, [God is a God,
and God is not a God,] concealing the two terms which alone did make the two
contrary Praedications? I have but put his Case into other colors that the
plainest Reader may see how odious it is. I never said in my life that God
determins none to punishment (there making a period, as Mr. B does;) but God
determins none to punishment without respect or consideration of their
Transgressions. He does determine respectively, but irrespectively he does not.
So that in case I had spoken any such words in my second Chap. Mr. B. had
committed a great trespass. But 2. In all that Chapter there are not any 2.
such words that I can find, nor in any part of my Book, (nor in any Book I
ever saw, as Mr. B. has set them down.) My Thesis there is no worse, then wat
is asserted by our Bishop Hall in his Select Thoughts Medit. 34. and 35. p.
102, 103, to p. 107.
Divines who were at Dort. viz. [That the Cause of Damnation is not on Gods
part, but that man himself is the Quicquid ad aeternam damnationem ducit
miseros mortales, and in gehennam praeeipi^at* id omne nob^s nostrisque
Demeritis imputemus, and a Deo long face^^ere jubeamus. Senten. Davenan. p.
20. this is just the Sense and meaning of my words, which I spoke as M. Hooker
did, when he said, [our selves we condemn as the only causes of our own
misery. l. 5. Sect. 72.
sole cause of his eternal punishment, p. 20.] and what is this to the denial
of Gods eternal determination, that he would punish this or that man according
to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings? Jer. 17. 10. it was
only used as a Topic whereby to prove, that God's eternal determination to
punish sinner's was not made without regard or respect unto their sins. But Mr.
B. does not understand how the meritorious cause of punishment can be also the
efficient, (p. 95.) I am not to be reviled for another man's want of
understanding; but I will endeavor to give it light.

And first, I will tell him, that his Definition of Causa efficiciens Of the
cause of punishment.
[cujus vi res fit] is not adaequate to the thing defined; and only shows he
will be tampering in matters, to which (in all likelihood and appearance) he
was never trained up. Before he adventured to deny what I affirmed concerning
the efficient cause of punishment, he should have looked round about him, and
have studied the Subject of which he spoke. He should have considered within
himself, that Causa efficiens in general is Biel in 2. d. 1. q. 5. act. 1.
Causa quae extrinsece producit aliud, cujus ipsa non est pars. And then have
inquired after the species by these Dichotomies. Causa alia per Soncinas 12.
Met. q. 3.
se agit, alia per Accidens. Causa efficiens per se est vel totalis, vel
partialis. Causa Totalis vel sufficiens, vel adaequata. Causae partiales (quae
and sociae dicuntur) sunt vel ejusdem, vel diversi ordinis. And again these
latter must be considered, secundum latitudinem, vel secundum vim agendi. Quoad
Latitudinem, alia est universalis, alia particularis. Secundum vim agendi, alia
est Principalis, alia instrumentalis. Again the Causa principalis (as it is
considered in Scot. in 4. d. 1. quaest. 1. and ibid. Gabriel.
4. manners, so) is either magis, or minus principalis. And the later is motiva
primae. And this being of two sorts, (...), or (...), sin will be found to be
exactly the later of these two. For the will of man (in strict speaking) is the
immediate efficient cause of his sin, (that is to say) of determining it self
to this or that thing, which is forbidden by God Almighty, and is so the
immediate efficient of that, which is the motive to, or meritorious efficient
Cause of punishment; (that is) the efficient of the efficient. But for fear Mr.
B. should not be able to understand what is Metaphysicall, (and I may very well
fear it, whilst I find him so unintelligent in these affairs, as to say that
a Cause is not efficient, because it is meritorious, which is as if he should
have said, it is not efficient, because it is efficient,) I will open my self
to him [(...)] in the grossest and most familiar and plainest manner that he
can wish. And I will do it so much the rather, because he complains in several
places of his book, that he has plumb^ous Cerebrosities (to use his own
Bumbast) to be indoctrinated.

He knows the Parent is the efficient Cause of the Child. And he knows the
relation betwixt the sinner and the sin, the sin and the punishment, is
expressed in Scripture by that of a Father to a Child (Joh. 8. 4.) the Devil
is a liar, and the Father of it. And by that of a Mother to a Child, (Jam. 1.
15.) lust conceaving [(...)] brings forth sin [(...)] and sin being finished
brings forth Death. From such Texts as those, [ O Israel thou have destroyed
thy self Hos. 13. 6. And they shall bring upon themselves swift destruction 2
Pet. 2. 1.] Man is concluded suppliciorum suorum Faber. He is the parent of his
sin, his sin of his punishment, which is not the less its offspring because it
is its wages too. Romans 6. 23. on the contrary, the sinner is therefore the
efficient, because the meritorions Cause; for he could not make to himself a
punishment, unless by sin he did deserve it. By one man (says the Apostle)
Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin. Romans 5. 12. Now the Cause of
the Cause is the Cause of the effect. The Father of the Father is (we know) the
Grandfather: but the sinner we find is more, in relation to his punishment;
not only its immediate, but only Parent. For sin being an accident cannot exist
without the subject of its Inherence. Its very being is in concreto. It is
impossible to fancy or imagine sin without the connotation of some kind of
sinner. Sin in the abstract cannot be, much less be active without the sinner,
nor by consequence effective of any thing whatsoever. And although we speak
catachrestically true when we say that sin is the Cause of Punishment; yet our
speaking is more exact, when instead of sin we say the sinner. Wilful man
effects his ^n (and so is causa efficiens) and being, by sin, become a sinner,
effects his punishment, because his sin. (and so is causa efficiens still.)
Which Mr. B. and his Masters not considering, or not conceiving, have ruined
themselves with the distinction of sins not having an efficient, but only a
Correp. Corr. p. 33. 135. 178. Of the Cause of sin, not deficient, but
efficient; which shall be spoken of again chapter 4. Sect. 21. 1.
deficient Cause, which will infer it not an efficient, but only a deficient
cause of punishment, since it cannot have more of Entity then the cause of its
production.

But the pitifulness of that distinction will soon appear. For 1. If man is the
cause of sin, and not efficient, he must then be either the material, or
Formal, or Final Cause; for if the deficient Cause be none of these, it is not a
cause. (Nor will any man pretend that it is either of those three.) And if it
is not a Cause, then has sin no real being, because no Cause. And so it cannot
be, in any sense, the Cause of punishment; and so God will be jnferred to
punish men without Cause. 2. Malum non habere Causam efficientem, (when said by
2.
any in the Metaphysics) is the same thing as to say, malum est non ens. For
as that must be something which is caused by something, so out of no-cause we
know that no-effect can be produced. Efficient, and effect, are reciprocally
converted both in the affirmative, and in the negative. So that where there is
no-efficient there is no-effect; that is to say, there is nothing. But Mr. B.
says expressly, that sin has no-efficient, (as in Correp. Cor. p. 55.
other places, so in his p. 79, and his reason is, because it wholly consists in
a deficiency,) and by consequence is nothing; and so according to him, men are
punished eternally for just nothing in the world. 3. If wicked man is no 3. How
God is inferred by Mr. B. to be more the Cause of sin then man is, or can be.
more then the deficient cause of sin, he is not so much the cause of it, as
God himself, in their account, who say he [absolutely] wills that sin shall
fall out (p. 78.) and that he does determine it shall be done. (p. 79.) that he
did voluntarily decree it should fall out (p. 73.) that his permissive will of
sin is efficacious (p. 196. and p. 54.) that he* creates, and* commands it, and
by no less then an* impulse excites men to it. That *** All this and more is
asserted by Mr. B. in his asserting the 10. citations which I produced at the
entrance of my Notes, from his 59. page as far as p. 68.
Gods will is as (a) efficacious in relation to sin, as in the production (...)
a Vtramque voluntatem agnoscimus esse efficacem, ut cui nemo possi^ resistere.
Twiss. Vin Gra. l. 1. part. 1. Sect. 12. p. 140. of which I shall speak chapter 4.
Sect. 42.
of good; and so efficacious, as to be (a) irresistible, and by consequence to
necessitate sin. So that their distinctions of a permissive and effective will,
or of efficient and efficacious, cannot stand them in any stead, and are made
appear to be but figleaves to cover the nakedness and the shame of those
frightful expressions (as Mr. B. himself calls them by a periphrasis p. 56.)
For Dr. Twisse says plainly, [ Voluntas divina non minus est efficax ad
praestandum quod peccatum sit, permittend^, quam ad praestandum quod bonum sit,
efficiendo. Id. ibid.
That the Divine will is no less efficacious to the doing of that which is sin
(permittendo) then to the doing of that which is good (efficien^ do.) To what
purpose does he distinguish those two members of his period by permittendo and
efficiendo, whilst he ascribes as great an efficacy to the will of God in the
production of sin, as in the production of virtue? for the word [praestandum]
is used in both, and so is the word [efficax.] And a [non minus] in the one,
implies a [non magis] in the other. Nor will it help him much to say, He meant
no more by efficac^ous permission, then Gods withdrawing his Grace and all
other hindrances, which he might interpose to keep from sin. For this will
have no place at all in all those sins which are committed against his Grace.
Grace being not withdrawn whilst it is receiving resistance, but after it is
resisted. When God calls, and enables and moves us to obedience, and only does
not force us to it, or disable us to disobedience, it is abominable to say, He
efficaciously permits it. Though God may be said to be efficacious, in making
man as he is, (in a peccable conditition) whom he might (if he had pleased)
have made impeccable; yet that being supposed, and the same God giving Grace to
enable this man at this time, to abstain from the commission of this or that
sin, (which needs must be granted in all that resist the grace of God) there
can be no new efficacy of God Almighty in thus permitting the sinner, (that is
to say) in not forcibly stopping him from that Commission. And to place it
without question, that Dr. Twisse intends an equality in the operation of Gods
will, as to wicked or good Events, he immediately adds not many lines after, [
Ex quo fit, ut per solam permissionem non minus efficax sit voluntas Dei, quam
ex effectione positiva. Idem. ib. And here Note, that Piscator does expound
[efficaciously] by [necessarily.] Saying that God does efficaciously destine
men to sin, so as by the force of his destination men must necessarily sin.
Piscat. Notis ad Am. Coll. Vorstij. p. 157.
That the will of God is no less efficacious through his sole permission, then
from his positive effection.] By which two last words, [positive, and
effection] we may discern what they mean by the abstruse point (as Mr. B. calls
it p. 54.) of Gods efficacious permission of sin. And the word [efficacious] ab
efficiendo, being used in Authors, and set down in Dictionaries, to signify
[prevalent, forcible, effectual, available, and the like,] how can that be only
a deficient Cause, which is efficacious, determining, ordaining, and
irresistible? but God (says Mr. B. and his Friends) is all that which I have
showed from their forecited pages, and man (say they) is but a deficient Cause;
therefore God by them, is concluded to be more the Cause of sin, then the very
sinner that commits it. 4. If this point is so abstruse, that Mr. B. does not
understand it, why does he 4.
talk That into the Universe of Readers, which is arrant gibbrish to himself?
but if it is not so abstruse, why does he talk off and on, affirming and
denying the very same thing? E. G. in his p. 79. he says the sinning Creature
is the sole efficient Cause of his sin. Yet in his p. 55. he said that sin has
no efficient
Cause. Again p. 79. he says that sins very Being is consisting in a
deficiency. And by the word [Being] he needs must mean its existence, and so
does confess it to be something real. For that must be something which God
ordains. And he says directly, that Correp. Cor. p. 178.
every thing is ordained by God, giving no other Instance then that of sin.
Which though he affirms to be ordained well enough by God, yet he says it is
not effected by him; giving this reason, that sin is only a privative, not a
positive Entity. Which is as much as to say, that God can and does ordain every
privative Entity, that is to say, every sin; but he effects nothing but
positive Entities. The meaning of which (if it is sense) must needs be this,
that he ordains the commission of sin by his Creatures, but he commits not
sin himself. That is, He is the Cause, but He is not the Instrument; or he is
the first Cause, but not the second. He does it per alios, but not per^se. For
if Mr. B. shall plead, that his meaning is only this, that sin is but a
privation and so is not effected by any thing, he will rather be in a worse
pickle. The conclusion being unavoidably to be this, that no creature can
effect sin, and by consequence no creature can commit it. These are some of his
vile absurdities, but these are not all. For he presently adds sin has only a
deficient, not an efficient cause. Which being compared with the first words of
that period. [every thing may well enough be absolutely ordained by God] does
most evidently infer; that Gods absolute ordination of sin (from whence it
receives the necessity of its being) is the deficient Cause of sin. For though
he should distinguish of Gods ordaining to permit, and not effect it, yet it
helps him not at all, if we remember duly, that he means an efficacious
permissive will, such as necessitates the thing determined, as much as a
positive effection. (as has been showed.) And he is for a necessity of
Infallibility, as well as of Coaction. And to excuse the ugliness of that
saying above mentioned, he adds the contradictory to it, God can ordain nothing
but good. By which he must mean (unless he retract his other sayings) That sin
is good, in as much as it is absolutely ordained by God; but evil in as much as
God forbids it, or as it is committed by man. For he says p. 73. 78. 79. that
God does [absolutely] will, that he does voluntarily decree, that he does
determine sin shall be done, that it shall fall out or come to pass. 5. It
being* granted by Mr. B. that 5.
sin has a p. 79.
Being, and an p. 178.
Entity, it must also be granted that it either exists of it self, or is
effected by something else. He cannot say the former, (that being the
privilege of God alone) he must therefore confess the later, that sin is
effected by some other thing. And what is effected does imply an efficient (for
they are relata secundum esse, being both founded in the Creature) and so the
cause of sin is not only deficient. 6. If the Cause of sin is only deficient,
not efficient, 6.
what will become of the difference betwixt sins of Omission, and sins of
Commission? betwixt not praying, and cursing? not giving Alms, and committing
Saoriledge? if the Cause of the first were only deficient (which yet is as
irrational) yet sure the Canse of the second must needs be efficient. For the
Cause must needs be more noble then the effect. And in genere causarum, the
deficient (if such there were) would be less noble then the efficient. Now
Cursing, and Sacrilege and other sins of Commission (and I may say of Omission
too) are effects with a witness. And then their causes cannot be less. 7.
Where was the Logic of Mr. B. when he concluded sin to have a cause 7.
only deficient from its having only a privative Entity? for (admit what he
swallow's, the merely privative Entity of sin, which yet is most false) can
there be any thing so illogicall as to argue the privativenesse or
negativenesse of the cause from the privativenesse of the Essect? How many
privations are there of which God himself is the first and chiefest cause? the
darkness of the night is a privatton of light, which yet was one of the famous
works of his Creation, (Genesis 1. 4, 5.) And will Mr. B. say that God is but
Causa deficiens, non efficiens tenebrarum? A man is often the efficent cause of
his own blindness, sickness, Death it self, which yet are privations of three
contrary habits. But 8. Note, that the 19. Article of the Augustan confession,
and so Melancthon, do set down the will of the wicked as the positive cause of
sin. [Avertitse a deo ad alias res.] And the Ratisbon proposition was
conceived in these words. Causam peccati constat esse malam voluntatem Diaboli
and hominis se a Deo avertentem. Quae malitia voluntatis, non a Deo, sed ex
Diabolo and nobis est. And is the judgment of Cassander In Art. 19. de Causa
peccati.
A thing may be privative in one respect, and yet positive in an another. As we
find by experience in our sicknesses, and sins. The stone and the Srangury, the
Fever, and the Pestilence, are not only privative of health and pleasure, but
they are constitutive of sickness, and torment, and destruction it self. So
adultery, and murder, and blasphemy and Witchcraft, are not only the absences
or mere privations of Grace and virtue, but they do [ponere multifariam]
constitute both the species, and degrees of vice. Murder has some thing of
positive in it, by which it differs in kind from all other sins; and in degree
from other murders. The disorder of Nature, the confusion of faculties, the
resistance made against Grace, the defacing of God's Image, the grieving his
Spirit, the dihonouring his Name, and the like, are such attendances of sin, as
do enforce it to be more then merely privative. If David's sin of not
protecting the life of Vriah, and the chastity of his wife had had no more then
a privative entity, yet his murder of the first, and his pollution of the
Second could have no less then a positive entity. If the sin of not
admonishing or reproving the guilty were merely privative, yet the sin of
seducing and perverting the innocent would have something in it to make it
positive. If the sin of not obeying the commandments of God did wholly consist
in a deficiency, yet would it have something of addition, to rebel with
violence against them. We know by experience that there are some of whom we
commonly say, they are not good; and rather not very vicious, then very
virtuous. Whereas others are not only positively, but superlatively evil. So
that according to M. B. one sin would be a privative o^ a negative privative,
and another Sin would be a Positive Privative. 9.
But 9. It cannot so much as be pretended, that every sin is only privative.
For every privation praesupposeth a Habit. Which every sin cannot do. Because a
man may be covetous, or cruel, who never was liberal, or compassionate. Which
rather implie's a Negation, then a privation of those virtues, which he has
not lost, but never had. So that if those vices have nothing in them of
positive, but do wholly consist in a Deficiency, they will not be privative,
but negative of Entity, 10.
that is to say, they will be nothing. 10. To conclude, If there is any Truth
in that Proposition, [That there is a deficient cause of sin] it is in a moral
signification, [quod qui peccat deficit a regula rectae rationis, etc.] that
the sinner is wanting or defective in the performance of his duty. But then
that will not be sufficient to verify the other part of Mr. B. his assertion,
[That sin has no efficient cause.] Because that Agent that is morally
deficient, and in that circumstance fails, and transgresses the Law, does
yet effect or prodvce the action which is so deficient and so irregular. For 1.
the Adulterer is without question the efficient cause of his filthy act. 2. The
Devil is called by our Savior the Father of lies; and sure a Father is an
efficient. 3. A man by Gods grace is the efficient of a good action, and as
such, rewardable. And I hope Mr. B. will not say (what is much worse then
Pelagian) that man is more the efficient of a good action, then of an evil
one. For which he is punishable with much more justice, then rewardable for the
other. To conclude. Mr. B. himself is of opinion (in his p. 111. where he
thinks it for his turn) that there may be something positive in a privation,
and that in death there is so, so far forth as under the notion of punishment,
and so is from God the Author of it. Let him now but remember; First, that sin
is sometimes under the notion of a punishment, next that death is a privation
as much as any sin can be, (and more then some sins can possibly be,) Thirdly,
that he alleges it as the reason (in his p. 55.) why they do not say that God
is the Author of sin, even because that sin has no efficient cause; And then
he is forced to conclude in one of these sad inferences, 1. Either that God is
not the Author of Death (consisting in a deficiency as well as sin at least) Or
2. that he is the author of sin, (which has something in it of positive, as
well as death at least,) Or 3. That he is the Author of both, (as far as both
have any thing of positive in them,) Or 4. That he is the Author of neither (as
being not efficient of what consists wholly in deficiency.) So miserably
entangled is this man in his own unwary, unskilful sayings. But I have not
showed him his whole unhappiness. For whilst he argues their denial of Gods
being the Author of sin from sins not having any efficient cause (p. 55.) he
perceives not that that Reason is as apt to evince, that the sinner himself is
not the Author of
sin, neither man, nor Devil. And then according to Mr. B. either sin has no
author at all, (as consisting wholly in a deficiency p. 55.) or God is the
Author of it, (as having something in it of positive p. 111.) or that God its
first Author, (as having decreed it from eternity says Mr. B. p. 73.) and man
only the second (as fulfilling in time what was decreed from Eternity, p. 79.
135.) From all which Absurdities, which do naturally grow from his Principles
and distinctions, we must conclude by way of Refuge, that it is not for a
Small-thing (a mere defect or privation) much less for No-thing (of which
there is not a cause efficient) that God does punish wicked men in a
bottomless lake of fire and Brimstone, where the Recompense or Deuteronomy. 32, 35
Revenge is not only not finite, but of eternal duration too.

3. And now M. B. I hope has learned how (by sin's having A return to the
point at first proposed. The cause of of punishment.
an efficient cause) the Sinner becomes the cause Efficient of his eternal
punishment. Not of Hell, (the place of his punishment) nor of the Devils or the
Fire (which are the Instruments of his punishment) for they are substances of
God's Creating, and in genere substantiarum are very good. And this was but the
grosnesse of Mr. B. his mistake, to deny that the Sinner is the Cause of his
Damnation, because he did not In his p. 97.
make Hell which is the place of Damnation. So he asks if the Judges do let
the Malefactors be the efficients of their Ibid.
Gibbets, Racks, Rodds etc. Forgetting that the Carpenter is the efficient of
such as these, which are the Instruments wherewith to punish, not punishment it
self. Now that which I said was plainly this, That (God having ordained that
such (l) Causa efficiens, positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis, necessari^
producit effectum.
Causes as Sin should be productive of such effects as punishment, and that Sin
being committed even to final Impenitence should become that Requisite to the
production of punishment, which being supposed must needs be followed with its
effect) man is the sole efficient Cause of his eternal punishment; that is to
say, he is the Cause of his being punished, of deriving upon himself a right
to punishment; not of the Torments of Hell in themselves (which others suffer
as well as he, and which would have been Torments to others, though he had not
felt them,) but of his suffering the Torments of Hell; or of the appertaining
of those Torments to himself; or of committing those sins of which those
Torments are unavoidable effects.

Thus though God is the Maker, and so the Father of Note, that these are meant
for illustrations and not as additionals to the arguing part.
mankind, yet he having ordained, (not to make every man, as he did Adam, out
of the Earth; nor every woman as he did Eve, out of the man's left side; but)
that by the union of man and woman, both men and women should be produced; we
truly say that the Parents are the efficient Causes of their Sons and
Daughters. It is not (as Mr. B. does inconsiderately suppose) either the
Lawgiver or the Law by whom and which a Felon is ordained to be hanged. It is
not the Plaintiff, the witness, the Counselor, or the Judge, the Jury, the
Jailer, the Sheriff, or the Gibbet, it is not the Carpenter who made the Gibbet
on which the Felon is to be hanged, nor the Hangman by whom, nor the Halter
with which; it is not any, nor all of these, to which the Death of the Felon or
Malefactor can be so imputable, as to himself. He is therefore the most
considerable efficient, who by the Malefaction of his Fellonie did Wisd. 1. 16.
call Death to him, and Verse 1^.
pulled destruction upon himself with the work of his hands, (as the Book of
Wisdom speaks of the greatest punishment of all.) his (o) conceiving of Jam. 1.
15.
his sin (o) brought forth his punishment. All the Catalogue of Requisites to
the condition of his punishment did no more then give a due connection of the
Cause to its effect. His ma^efaction was the Root from which his punishment did
grow, and so his sufferings are but the Jer. 17. 10. and chapter 6. v. 19.
fruit of his guilty doings. He Wisd. 1. 12.
sought out death in the error of his life; and is but Prove. 1. 31. chapter 14. v.
14.
filled with his Devices. He has Isa. 3. 9. 4.
rewarded evil unto himself. 4. One sin sometimes becomes the Punishment of
another, and the greater of the less. In which case (say I) the former sin is
the Cause and efficient Cause of the later. Which if Mr. B. shall deny, he must
(according to his reasonings against my second Chapter) affirm God the
efficient of the greater sin, and man only (the efficient, or rather) the
Deficient of the lesser; because the greater sin which follows is the
punishment of the lesser which goes before; and he denies that man is the
efficient Cause of his punishment. But if he shall not deny it, he grants the
whole Cause against which he has taken such exceeding great pains. Unless he
can give a solid reason, why a Man, who by Sin is the Cause of one punishment,
may not also by more sin become the Cause of another. 5.
From whence it follows, (5.) That the Scripture speaks very truly, and
properly, when it connecteth punishment with six by a conjunction Causal. Such
as [ Prove. 1. 29. 31. Man. 25. 4^. Psalm. 81. 11. 12. Romans 1. 21, 24, 25, 26.
Jer. 6. 19. 6.
For. And wherefore. and therefore, and because.] Nor was it nonsense or a lie
which was said by Solomon, that the wicked shall eat of the fruit of their own
way, and the turning away of the simple shall slay them. Prove. 1. 31, 32. And
therefore (6) It was judiciously spoken of Mr. Hooker (who hardly knew to speak
otherwise) Hooker Ec^. Polit. l. 5. Sect. 72. The Reverend Bp. Hall says the
same in effect in his 34th Select Thought p. 103. 104. comparing a Reprobate to
one that is a Felon of himself. Bishop Davenant also is express, that the
Original and Cause of all Evils is not founded in God Reprobating, but in the
Reprobates themselves. And that there is no such Decree of God by which
Reprobates should be forced to Sin and Perish, but alway^s they Perish by their
own voluntary Unbelief and Impiety, Free, and not Constrained. Which how
contrary it is to the common doctrine of Sub and Supralapsari^ns, I shall show
by my Citations, when I come to the 63 page of Mr. B.
our selves we condemn as the only Causes of our own miscry. Let the Reader
compare Mr. Hooker's saying and mine, and judge which is liable to most
exception. He says, the Causes of Misery, but I of Punishment. He says the
only Causes, I the only efficient. And where Mr. B. does pretend to wrest the
suffrage of so great an Author out of my hand (in his p. 86) he spoils his
very pretensions in these few words, (which confirm the saying of Mr. Hooker,
and much more mine;) [All that he says has been most readily consented
unto by men, -- less liked by you.] After this he adds something in pretense
of exposition to Hookers words, so perfectly impertinent either to Hookers
meaning, or his own purpose, as shows his necessity exceeding great. He will
only say something that his Reader may not see he has nothing to say. Mr. B.
there says, (p. 86.) that even those very things of which Gods absolute Will
is the Cause, yet as they stand in relation to each other they have many other
causes and laws besides Gods absolute will. (And this he says that Mr. Hooker
does say in effect.) But first it is as contrary to that saying of Hooker which
I produced as any thing can be spoken. Secondly I ask, are those words true of
Sin it self, (in Mr. B. his account) and are they less true of punishment? 7.
The 7.
repeated saying of Melancthon in that part of his works in which he used his
greatest Care and writ with greatest consideration, (as appears by his -- eo
majore con^ilio and Religione scribi deb^bant. -- quare majore cura ac studio
illa artis vestigia confector. -- religionem and fidem, quam debemus rebus
sacris prae^tare studui -- etc. Melancth. ad Hen. 8. ante loc. Com. Edit. 1536.
Epistle to our King Henry the eighth) will put this matter without all doubt.
And so much the rather, because Mr. B. commends him (p. 129.) for Depth of
learning, Calmeness, Prudence, and Moderation, yea, and as none of my party,
yet (says he) it is certain, Causam Reprob^tionis certum est hanc esse, viz.
peccatum in hominibus, and humanam voluntatem. -- and paul^ inferius -- Haec de
causa Rejectionis seu Reprobationis certa sunt. Phil. Melancth. in loco
Praedestin. p. 316. 317. Edit. Basil. 1562. Causa reprobationis in ipsis est.
p. 320. Correp. Cor. p. 129:
that the sin of men, and their will is the Cause of their Reprobation; and to
assure us of his meaning, he says a little after, [The Cause of Rejection and
Reprobation.] Which though the same in effect with the words of my Thesis in my
Second Chapter, yet are the words of Melancthon much more liable to exception
if any such as Mr. B. would quarrel with him; and since Mr. B. does charge me
as an Arminian with falsehood and impudence, as often as I make Melancthon on
my party, I will say a few things to show how little of Truth or of Modesty
there is in that expression. First, in general it is known by all that are
tolerably knowing in such things as these, that as Quam [Lutheri] s^ntentiam
postea Philippus Melancton tum in Confessione, tum in locis communibus
correxit. Cassand: Consult: de Praesci: ad Art: 19. page 134.
Melancthon grew older, and so more learned, and wiser too, he grew an enemy to
those opinions which he had formerly been of, and which Mr. B. does now assert.
Next it appears in particular to any man that shall read his common places, [de
Confer. Melanct: loc: Com. de Cau. Pec. p. 47. 48. cum Calvin. Inst. l. 3. c.
23. Sect. 4. p. 323.
Causa peccati, and de Praedestinatione] wherein he took as great care to speak
the Truth with moderation, as he ever did in any work, (if not much greater,)
that he speaks as precisely against the Doctrines of Mr. Calvin, as I have done
in my Notes. Nor is it likely that he could be a Calvinist, who is so much in
the favor of learned Grotius observes that the Followers of Calvin were fierce
and cruel, but the Followers of Melancthon mild and gentle. Vot. pro Pace. p.
18.
Grotius, and Erasmus. But he that was once against Nonne Melancthon damnavit
Scholas publicas? nune autem dicit, maneant scholae quae bonae sunt; vitia
corrigantur. Erasm. in Epist. l. 31. Ep. 59. p. 2127.
Public Schools, might also once have entertained other Errors, and yet
afterward retract as well the one, as the other. Lastly, who ever shall
consider how great a Harmony there is betwixt the Augustan Confession,
Cassander, and Grotius, in the points of Free Will and Praedestination, and
shall consider that Melancthon was the chief Composer of that Confession, he
will not fail to wonder at these two Confess: August: Artic: 18. 19. p. 22.
23, 24. Cassander p. 128. usque ad p. 135. Gr^t. ad Cass. p. 307. 308. 309.
things. First, that Mr. B. should represent Cassander as an utter Enemy to my
Opinions, and yet call me so often a Cassandro-Grotian; next that he should
call me both false and Impudent, for citing a passage out of Melancthon, which
very truly and precisely did make for my purpose. Especially since These
objective considerations are the proper Causes of his Temporal Transient acts,
and of the execution of those Decrees. Correp. Cor. p. 113. No man ever
suffered to the cutting of his finger, but for his Sin. Which is not the Cause
of Gods Decree, but only of the Execution of his Decree. page 116.
himself (whether as ignorant, or forgetful, I cannot say) has said the same
in effect in his p. 113. and since in his p. 129. he wonders what is become of
my Forehead, for having cited P. Moulin in my behalf, whom he affirms to be
against me and Arminius in all the 5. Articles; I will show him how in that
speech he even flies in the face of Dr. P. MolinaeiCausae Orthodoxae non tam
defensio, quam praevaricatio. Ut non modo hac ex part Causam Arminianorum plus
justo promoveret, sed and quicquid antea de election^ satis Orthodoxe
differuerat, prorsus convelleret. Twiss. in Vin. Gr. l. 1. par. 1. Digr. 1.
Sect. 4. p. 58.
Twisse, who says that Moulins defense of the Orthodox cause, ought rather to
be called his praevarication, (which implies a juggling on both sides) for that
he did not only promote the Arminian Cause (in his way of stating Reprobation,)
but plucked up by the Roots what before he had spoken very Orthodoxly concerning
the business of God's Election. So extremely unhappy is Mr. B. in every one of
his undertakings.

29. His 29th. [ That he is informed I made a promise to some of my best
Friends in the Ministry ABOUT US, that I would in Pulpit at Lectures, vent
nothing but what was agreeable to their known Tenants; and that I kept my
promises 1.
no better then Arminius, p. 47, 48.] 1. He pretends to no more then a private
information, of that with which he does so publicly accuse me. 2. The thing
whereof I am accused 2.
is set in direct opposition to the Truth of that story. For what I said to my
friends was plainly this, that as I knew my Tenants were very different from
the Tenants of many Ministers who were of that Lecture, (which as I never was
of, so by the Grace of God I never will be) so if I should hear any of them
Preaching up a false Doctrine, I would not fail of my endeavors to preach it
down. It being the duty of every Shepherd, not only to feed the Flock, but to
defend them from the Woolf too. 3. I never Preached upon a Lecture-day, when I
did not say that which I thought most useful to them 3.
that heard me* without the least regard to any man's favor or disaffection.
Nor did I yield to appear at those Lecture meetings (which Mr. B. calls
Combinations, p. 48.) but upon being misinformed of the greater part of the men
of whom those meetings did mostcommonly consist. And upon knowledge of my
Error, I did immediately reform it. 4. If this invention had 4.
been a Truth, it had been nothing to the business of God's Decrees, nor my
desire to be restored in the Spirit of meekness by any man that could prove me
to be erroneous. 5. All that I have delivered either at Daintry, or Northampton
(with which Mr. B. does so often importune the unconcerned Reader) was not in a
controversial, but practical way. Nor do I remember any passage concerning the
liberty of the will, or the respectivenesse of God's Decrees in any one of
those my Sermons, though Mr. B. in those Pulpits has declaimed against both.

30. His 30th. [ That the only question betwixt me and my Opposites, is,
whether it be possible for me to adhere to my second Principle, if I do but
resolve to stick to what I stickle for in my first and second mischievous
Papers, p. 50.] 1. There was never any question in any kind proposed betwixt me
and 1.
any Opposites that I know, much less this which here he speaks of. 2. By
mentioning opposites in the plural, he seems to intimate a Club of wits in
this Correptory Correction against 2.
my Notes; agreeable to that part of his third Epistle, wherein he professes
to proceed by the His words were in Latin, verbatim thus -- communi
Presbyterorum consilio. 3.
Common Council of the Presbytery. How much for his, or their credit, let
others judge. But I am verily persuaded, that very few of the Presbytery are
either glad, or thankful to him, for such a considerable disgrace as he has
put upon their Name. 3. The only Question betwixt us that I can guess at is
this. Whether I am abactor Gregis alieni, (to use his Phrase) for when I heard
of his (...), and friendly advised him by letter, that if he were writing
against any thing which either was, or was called mine, he would consider
whether his Copy were true, or false; he returned me this answer in the very
entrance of his Epistle [ -- you know me to be robbed, (I call not you the
Thief) of a considerable part of my very few Auditors when they be all together.

This was the first unkind word that ever past 'twixt him, and me. 'Till this I
could not discover why he should call me a Pelagian, or compose a large volume
against a very small Manuscript which was but reported to be mine. By that
aching Tooth, to which the Tongue (by a Proverb) does most naturally tend, I
foresaw the many Calumnies which are since fallen on me. He complained that his
Parishioner^ (...) come to my Church, and I professed sincerely I could not
(...) it. Other controversy then this I never knew any, until this little
sparkle was publicly blown into a fire. But 4. If the only Question 4.
now is, whether I can possibly adhere to my second Principle, whilst I stick
to what I stick for in my first and second Papers, (as he is pleased to clintch
it) he makes a lamentable confession, that the far greatest part of his Book
is not a syllable to the purpose.

31. His 31. [ That against these men's blessed works and of Dr. Twisse his
^^arging of h^ren t^ ^apsarians with their making God the author of sin. 1.
memories, I rage and rampe it, and make slaughters amongst them, Nimrod, or
Nero-lik, p. 50.] The men he speaks of are Mr. Calvin, and Dr. Twisse, of whom
he says (by a quibble he much delights in p. 51. and p. 60.) I mean to pierce
through and through their Works and Books, p. 51.] 1. Whether Mr. B. in this
place does not whip himself upon my back, I leave it to be determined by any
man that shall compare his Declamation with my Book. 2. All that he can pretend
2.
for this strange speech, is my saying that their Doctrines do make the God of
all Goodness to be the Author of Sin. And to that I have many things to say
which Mr. B. will not glory 1.
in the hearing of. First, I said no more of Dr. Twisse and Mr. Calvin in that
particular, then Dr. Twisse himself has said not only of Mr. Calvin, but of
all the rest of his own party, as he himself calls them the professed Enemies
of Arminius, who place the object of Praedestination in massa corrupt a, whom
he elaborately confuteth, and speaks of very hardly, as I shall faithfully
manifest in this following Account. (Which whether or no it be not faithful, I
will not be judged by Mr. B. but by every Learned and Impartial Reader, who
shall examine those Citations which I shall cast into the Margin.) First, Vis
liber^ pronun^iem quod vnice proficiatur ex hac nostrae de praedestinatione
sententiae temperatione? dicam quid sentiam. Hinc nimirum efficitur, ut a lapsu
primorum parentum decreto praedestinationis subjiciendo and subordinando
liberemur, etc. Twiss: Vin: Gra: l. 1. part. 1. p. 87. Digr. 4. Sect. 4. c. 4.
Edit. 2. Amster. 1632.
what the reason should be, why almost all the Anti-Remonstrants should place
the object of Predestination after Adams fall, rather then before it, the Dr.
sets down in these very ^s. [ Nesc. alias peccatum fieri statueretur decernente
^anquam medium ad fines a Deo in praedestinatione sibi praestitutos
accomneodatum; unde etiam quin Auctor peccati constituendus sit, nulla solida
ratione explicari posse videtur.] That is to say, that God might not be
inferred to be the Author of sin. Hence is my first Observation, (though only
in the way to what I principally intend) that all the Supralapsarians do infer
God Almighty to be the Author of Sin in the unanimous judgment of the
Sublapsarians; or Dr. Twisse has lost his aim. Sed quem altera via declinare
satis anxie cupivimus, ad eundem lapidem altera nihilo minus infeliciter
impe^^rim^s. (...)
But (as the Doctor goes on) their very refuge is as liable to that
inconvenience. They unhappily stumble at the very same stone. Flying from
Scylla, they fall upon Charybdis. Qui^ mum anxia hac nostra scopuli istius
declinatione profecerimus? Id. ib.
What have we profited (says the Dr. in the first person plural, thereby
owning the party, though confuting their opinion in that particular) by our
anxious endeavor to decline that Rock? and then he shows that they incur the
very same absurd Sequel which they would avoid, in the following parts of that
fourth Chapter, concluding sharply, Haec sunt monstra illa opinionum and
portenta quae nobis parturit and paritista sententia (Sublapsariorum sc.)
scholis Jesuiticis and Arminianis digniora quam nostris, Id. ib. p. 88. Col. 1.
These are the monsters of opinions which that opinion has brought forth,
worthier of the Jesuiticall and Arminian Schools, then of our own. And hence
is my second Observation, that Dr. Twisse as a Objectum praedestinationis
universae esse massam nondu^ conditam, nec tame^ cujusquam Reprobationem fieri
citra considerationem peccati, probatur per totum cap. 5. l. 1. par. 1. Sect.
4. Digr: 3. p. 77.
Supralapsarian (placing the Object of the Decree in Massa nondum condita)
however differing from the rest of the very Supralapsarians also (by denying
Reprobation to be without the consideration of sin) does argue against the
Sublapsarians (though Anti-Arminian, as well as He, and owned by him as his
party in other matters) as inferring God, by their way, to be of necessity the
Author of sin. And they whom he accuses of so intolerable an absurdity, are no
fewer and no less men (by his own Confer: l. 1. par. 1 Sect. 4. Digr: 2. c. 1.
p. 63. 64, 65. cum cap: 4. Digr. 4. ejusdem libri and Sectionis, p. 87, 88.
confession) then all the Brethren in the low Countries who subscribed the
contra-Remonstrantia; besides Tilenus in France, Sibrandus Lubbertus in
Frizland, Kimedontius in high Germany, Zanchy, Vrsin, Paraeus, Polanus,
Bucanus, Bucarius, Peter Martyr, Vermilius Florentinus, Bishop Hutton, Bishop
Abbot; yea, even Calvin, Beza, Piscator, Perkins, are brought by him into the
list of such as make God to be the Author of sin: Whom he does not confute
only, but he does it with bitterness; Seeming to love them for their common
hatr^d of a Common Enemy, but withal to despise them, because (many of them
before he was born) did not jumpe with him in judgment concerning the object of
universal Praedestination. Farther yet. That Doctor proves at large against
Quod posterior sententia Piscatoris sit deterior ea, quam retractat. Id. l. 1.
par. 1. Sect. 4. Digr. 3. cap. 2. p. 74, 75.
Piscator, what Mr. B. does merely affirm of me,) that his later opinion was
worse then that which he retracted. Then he disputes against Moulin himself
(one of the ablest of that Party) in no less then 8 large Chapters, affirming
him to have -- quod videam Theologum istum in articulo Reprobationis turpiter
hall^cinatum, adeoque purum putum Arminianismum Ecclesiis Reformatis
reposuisse; Idque proh dolor, nimium animose and splendide, sine omni
tergiversatione executum esse; Quo facto hac ex part non modo ex professo cum
Arminianis conspirat, sed --. Idem l. 1. part. 1. Sect. 4. Digr. 6. c. 1. p. 92.
filthily erred, and to have brought flat Arminianisme into the reformed
Churches, and professedly to conspire with the Arminians, even in that very
Book which he painfully composed against Arminius. (as Mr. B. calls me Pelagian
for what I writ against Pelagius, as well as against those of the other
extreme.) And all for no other crime, then his being so much quicker sighted
then the vulgar assertors of that cause, as to discern the necessity of
granting thus much, That the Decree of Reprobation was not made but upon a
Reprobatio non procedit (quemadmodum ille contendit) nist ex peccatis
actualibus praevisis, perseverantiaque finali in ijsdem. Id. ibid.
foresight of actual sins, and of Perseverance in the same unto the end. All
this is done by Dr. Twisse against others of his party, whilst every Reader is
my witness, that I used him better who is none of mine, having quoted his words
only without the least incivility to his person, Learning, or Integrity. Nor
(2.) did I rage and rampe it any more against Calvin, but without interessing
his person, I fairly represented 2. Of Mr. Calvin's style and Temper.
his naked words. So far was I from using him, as he used others; He not only
Qu^s nune quidam Augustini supra modum Admiratores Pelagio compares faciunt.
Grot: in Discuss: Riv: Apol: p. 98. conferantur illa verba cum Calvin. Instit.
l. 2. c. 2. Sect. 4. ^ol. 78.
branding the Ancient Fathers in general, and S. Chrysostom with S. Hierome in
particular, as Pelagianizing in their opinions; but calling Grot. vot. pro
Pace. page 17.
Castellio Knave and Devil, Cornhertius Dog, Cassander and Baldvinus, Serpent,
Hobgoblin, Pest, and Hangman, with many more foul things, which Grotius rips
up in his votum pro pace. In so much that Bucer Imo and ob atrocia dicta
Bucerus ei Nomen dedit Fratricidae. Hanc maledicendi libidinem Calvinus in
Epist. ad Bucerum (...) Impatientiam voca^. -- nondum ai^ consecutum ut Belluam
domuerit; Si quis post id ab eo scripta leget, inveniet eum profecisse, sed in
pejus. Id. ibid. p. 18. 3.
himself called Calvin Fratricide, a murderer of his Brethren. And Mr. Calvin
confessed in an Epistle to Bucer, that he did labor with Impatience his
untamed Beast; and yet so far was he from mending, that the mild Grotius
observes, he rather grew worse and worse. And that Calvin's Disciples and
Imitators are such themselves in disposition, as they make God to be in their
Imaginations, toward the greater part of mankind. [Contra, Calvini discipulos
asperos videas, and tales, qualem in maximam partem humani generis Deum esse
sibi imaginantur.] 3. I spoke more gently of those frightful sayings of those
men, then I needed to have done, or then many great men had done before me. I
only said they make God to be the Author of Sin; whereas I can prove, that they
do make him a great deal worse. For the Author he might be by mere Pe^swasion
(if that were possible) but they do boldly affirm him to be an Impulsor, or
driver on into sin, and that irresistibly, by giving a necessitation. And this
I shall prove in its proper place. Whereas the Notable Vide ^^iscopium in suo
Vedel. R^apsod. cap. 10. p. 186. 187, 188, 190. and seqq.
Vedelius (whom Mr. B. so much commends) did but crudely affirm that the
Remonstrants indeavourd the bringing of Atheism into the world, and could do
nothing toward the proof of it but what did ruin his undertaking, as
Episcopius made it appear to the e^ernal discomfiture not only of Vedelius, but
of Correp. Cor. p. 28.
Mr. B. also who owns and uses that Calumny of Vedelius in several parts of
his Declamation. And 4. Whereas Mr. B. tells me, Correp. Cor. p. 56. 4.
that I did Cham-like uncover my Fathers nakedness (for he so calls Mr.
Calvin and Dr. Twisse) into whose writings I should have dutifully gone back,
etc. To that I answer, first, that he confesses something shameful in their
writings, which was not openly to be discovered. Secondly, that I published
nothing of theirs, but what themselves had made public before I was borne. And
Thirdly, public means of infection must have public Antidotes and (...). If
their words were wholesome, why might not I use them? and if they were not, why
then did they? I see that to publish some errors is to confute them.

32. His 32d. [ That I draw up a malicious scattered Inventory or Catalogue of
broken expressions, gathered here and there out of their writings, without any
due regard to the scope of the words, or the Authors explained meanings. p.
52.] Mr. B. his Tongue is his own, and it is not my fault that he will use it
as he pleases. But 1. I cannot believe that 1.
he has examined the places, from whence I fetched those ten Expressions (p. 9.
10.) some of those places I am sure he has not, or else he does wilfully
prevari^ate in his p. 63. For Correp. cor. p 63. lin. 12. 13, 14. etc.
what I took out of Dr. Twisse, he ignorantly or deceitfully says I took out
of Calvin. And in the same manner he says I Ibid. line 3, 4. from the bottom.
fall fiercely upon Calvin in the passage taken out of Zuinglius. And again,
what I cite out of Dr. Twisse his vindiciae Gratiae (l. 2. part. 1. p. 36.) he
says I took out of Calvin Id. ibid. lin. 2. from the bottom.
l. 2. de Provid. when he cannot but confess, (now his confidence and Imposture
is thus discovered) either that Calvin has noe Had it been out of Calvin, it
must have been de occulta dei Providentia. Not in Sermon. de Prove. etc.
such work, or not divided into parts, as well as books, or has no such
passage in any such page. Was he ignorant, or was he not? if he was ignorant
out of what Authors those citations were made, he could not but speak against
his Conscience (p. 52. lines 3, 4.) in saying, I did as good as name them to
any attentive Reader, when I particularly quote them as to Book, Section, Page,
and almost line, whilst he himself mistakes their Names. And if he was not
ignorant, he cannot but speak against his conscience in ascribing those things
to Calvin which he knew belonged to Twisse and Zuinglius. He cannot possibly
escape the first, or second Horn of this Dilemma. Especially since he betrays
himself with a flat contradiction within the space of 6 or 7 lines. For he
concludes the 63 page by saying it is [ de Prove. c. 5. and 6. l. 2. de Prove.
part. 11. p. 36.] And he begins the 64 page with the Enemies of Calvin quoting
the place before me, and Calvin's Answer upon the place, which yet he quotes in
the
Margin from [Occult. Dei Prove. p. 736. inquinto articulo.] What a great
necessity there is, that some men should have good Memories! that Mr. Barlee's
should not stand to him whilst he could write 6 lines, was very unkindely and
strangely done. How can he hope that the Reader will ever trust him upon his
word, who thus makes it appear in a most palpable manner, that he cares not how
truly but how bitterly he may speak. But 2. I was not obliged 2.
to transcribe whole Chapters in my Citations, only so many words as might
declare a full and perfect sense. And so 'twas fowly done in Mr. B. to call
them broken expressions gathered here and there. The shortest of my Ten (p. 9,
10.) was this out of Calvin. [ Calvin. Inst. l. 1. c. 18. Sect. 4. p. 71.
That a wicked man by the just impulse of God does that which is not lawful
for him to do.] Which is as full and as round and as significant a Period, as
any Grammarian can imagine. He confesses that my Citations were almost to the
line. And that I had a due regard to the scope of the words, every man that
will examine me will be my witness; and I in probability shall largely
evidence hereafter. 3. If none of those sayings were blasphemies, he would not
3.
think himself concerned, nor call my Catalogue malicious; but because they are
such, he is angry with me for saying they are what they are.

33. His 33d. [ That I promised he should receive a Copy of my Creed in the
particulars which he did intimate. But it seems it consists rather of Negatives
then affirmatives, p. 53.] what I promised, I did speedily perform. And he E.
G. in his p. 134.
conconfesseth in many Pages, that my Printed Copy was little differing from
what I had before written. I only enlarged my Notes, and gave them Method. Nor
did I disown what I published, but only those false Copies, which were as
false, as the several Transcribers had pleased to make them. The later part of
this saying is gratis dictum, and so fare it well. What I did not believe, I
briefly set down in two single pages, (viz. 9, and 10.) but both before and
after I sufficiently affirm^ what I believe. Which if I did not, Mr. B. his
whole Book must be acknowledged by himself to have been nothing to the purpose.

34. [ That Calvin l. 1. c. 18. (of whom he speaks) does Of Gods permission of
sin. How understood by Mr. B. and his Masters, and how by me.
but oppose such an idle speculative permission, as I and the worst of my
Associates plead for (in my p. 14.) a permission which makes evil things to
fall out, etc. p. 63.] a large congeries of falsities in not many words. For 1.
It was not Calvin but Zuinglius, out of whom I cited that place, (as I lately
showed.) 2. In my p. 14. which he mistakes for p. 15, and 16. I said expressly
that God (besides his permitting of our sins) does dispose, and order them to
the best advantage. Which shows I am not for such an idle permission, (as he
forgeth) but for a permission designed for wise and just ends. Nor 3. Am I for
such a permission as makes evil things fall out, (as he does 3.
groundlesly affirm, not only besides but against the Truth of what I say) but
for such as signifies [not to hinder by main force.] 4. He alone and his
Associates are for such a Of this see more chapter 4. Sect. 28.
permission as makes sin to fall out, who accordingly call it God's (x)
efficacious permission of sin, and his (x) efficacious permissive x x Corrept.
Cor. p. 7^. 79. and p. 54. 196.
Will, and explain themselves by saying, that God did voluntarily Decree, and
(x) determine its being done, as I have largely showed upon his 28. invention.)
5. Since Mr. is discontented 5.
with what I said [of Gods permission, and of his wise disposal and ordering of
what is thus permitted without a decreeing or ord^ning of the evil,] he
discovers what he means by Gods Agency in sin (a few lines after;) viz. his
determining its being done; and his Decreeing it shall fall out, (as he spoke
before,) for if I say less, I am (says he) for an idle speculative permission,
yea, that I take away the very Correp. Cor. p. 54. and 69.
subjecte of the Deity. Yea he charge me with the greater and lesser
Atheism. Yea farther, [not only that my Opinions tend to it, but that I am Id:
p. 55. 117, 118.
absolutely for Atheism major and minor. (according to the method of my
proceedings) That I turn Id. p. 58. where he refers to my Section of Gods
permission. Qui tollit providentiam tollit Deum.
God into a mere speculator, and deny his sovereign and working providence.
And he that takes away Providence, takes away God.] Thus with Mr. B. ne sim
sceleritus facio scelus. Because I dare not be so wicked, as to say that God is
the Determiner, the Decreer, the Necessitator of Sin, (but only that he does
suffer, and permit, dispose, and order it to the best advantage, in the saying
of which I did sufficiently attest his Providence, as well as his Sovereignty
and Godhead) or of sins being done, or that he does (b) command men to sin, b b
b For all which and more see my Testimonies out of Calvin, Zuinglius, and Dr.
Twisse in my 9 and 10 pages.
or that they sin by his (b) Impulse, and that his (b) will does pass into the
sin it self which is permitted; I say, because I dare not be so wicked as to
say such things, but think it my duty to beat them down, Mr. B. declares me to
be so wicked, as to turn God into a mere speculator, to deny his Providence,
his Sovereignty, his very Being. Which is as much as to say, that if God is not
willing, and efficaciously willing, that all the wickedness in the world should
be committed, he cannot be God. But if he will concur to the commission of sin
in that Theodor. Bez^ in lib. Qu^st. and Resp. Christianarum. p. 695.
Almighty, Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 8. p. 325. and Sect. 7. fol. 325.
Irresistible, and Dr. Twiss: in vind. Gra. l. 1. part. 1. Sect. 12. p. 140.
See also Corr. Corr. p. 88. and what I have cited upon his 28 Invention.
ordaining manner, which they plead for, then they will be propitious to their
Creator, (as Apud Vos de Humano Arbitratu Divinitas pensitatur nisi homini deus
pla^uerit, Deus non erit. Homo jam De^ propitius esse debebit. Tertull. in Apol.
Tertullian speaks to the heathen persecutors of Christ and all true
Christians) then they allow him to be a God still. Is not this a hard tenure
for the spirit of Holiness to hold his Godhead by? who professes to hate sin,
and to have it with a sincere, not with a counterfeit Hatred, (as Non deus
volens Iniquitatem es Tu. Ps. 5. id est, Deus vere and non simulate, odit
peccatum* Et paulo post. -- omnia haec sunt quae odi. Zech. 8.] cumigitur non
sit simulatum odium peccati in voluntate divina, nequaquam sentiendum est, Deum
velle peccatum, Ph. Melancth. in Ioc. de Causa peccati. page 48.
Melancthon speaks in his detestation of that which I plead against?) whosoever
shall compare Zach. 18. 17. with what Melancthon says upon it more then once
in the same page, (who yet was not guilty of vain repetitions) he will conclude
two things. First that Melancthon (whom Mr. B. would have of his Party) is as
opposite to Mr. B. as the Nadir is to the Zenith; and next, that it is better
(that is, less ill) to make God a mere speculator of sin, then a Willer and
Decreer of what he hates. And whilst I have it under my Eye, I will observe it
to the Reader, That whereas Dr. Twisse and out of him Mr. B. do call Gods will
an Twisse in loc^ novissi^e citato Mr. B. p. 54. and p. 196.
efficacious permissive will in relation to Sin, Certum est, Hebraic^ phrasi
significare ^as permissionem, non voluntatem efficacem. Melanct. Ibid. p. 49.
Melancthon on the contrary, does set Gods permission in a direct opposition to
his efficacious will. 6. When Mr. Cnlvin says, that God did therefore foreknow
events, because by his Decree he had ordained them, and adds (a little after,)
that God Et ideo praescierit, qui^ Decreto suo sic ordinarat* Nec absurdum
videri debet, primi hominis casum praevidisse Deum, and suo arbitrio
dispensasse. Calvin. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. y. fol. 325.
foresaw the fall of the first man, and by his will ordained it, (as he could
say no less according to his Rule of putting Gods Decree before his prescience,
and inserring his prescience from his Decree, with an [ideo, quia,]) Mr. B.
professes, that Mr. Calvin does say no more in that place, then what must be
Correp. Cor. p. 117. 118.
granted if we have no mind to turn Atheists. Now because it is evident, that
God foresaw all the sins in the world, it needs must follow from their Doctrine
[of God's foreseeing things Cum non alia ratione quae futura sunt, praevideat,
ni^^ quia ita ut fierent, decrevit, frustra de pr^s^ientia lis movetur, ubi
constat, ordinatione potius, and nutu omnia evenire. Calvin. Instit. l. 3. e.
23. Sect. 6. fol. 324.
because he ordained them,] either that he did not foresee those sins which he
did foresee (which is an intolerable contradiction) or that he therefore
ordained, because he foresaw them. (which I still say is a blasphemy and the
worst kind of it.) upon which it follows (7) That however they do not say
those very words [God is the Author of sin] How Mr. B. and his Party, whilst
they deny their saying that God is the Author of sin in those express Terms,
do say the same Sense in more odious Words, as well as in words that are less
odious.
yet they say a great deal worse, and in much worse Terms. And they are not
those six letters [A. U. T. H. O. R.] which I stand upon, nor is it the
signification of the word [Author] which is made up of those letters, that I
esteem only-odious. There are other Aphorisms and affirmations of a more odious
Importance (if that is possible to be,) and because Mr. B. is so unthankful
for the lenity which I used in so short a Catalogue as I made (p. 9. 10.) I
will evince the Truth of what I say by adding more to their number. Which for
Brevities sake I will content my self to set down in the fewest words The
first Classis of Quotations, making God to Decree and necessitate sin.
that I am able, even those words especially wherein the blasphemy consists,
or from whence it follows, quoting the Authors and their places very exactly in
the Margin. And if Mr. B. shall pretend that they are not faithfully or fully
enough quoted, I will vindicate my self, and puni^h him by a purposed
enlargement, wherein I will lay down the original on one side, and my
translation on the other. I will begin with the milder sort.

Piscat: Disp: de Praedest: contra Andr: Schalm: Praefat: p. 6. called by Mr.
B. the Honest Piscator.
The Horrible Affirmations are these that follow. That by a necessity of Divine
Providence, though not of Nature, the Fall of Adam did necessarily happen: yea,
that God made the Protoplasts to this very purpose, that he might suffer them
to be tempted, and led into sin, and that by force of his Counsel or Decree, it
^la^ly contrary to Melancthon de Contingentia. p 51. sic erant conditae
voluntates, ut poslent non peccare.
could not otherwise be but that they Id. ibid.
must sin.

Idem These. 121. Hermann: Rennech: in aurea salutis Catena. c. 6. p. 28. and c.
That Judas could not but betray Christ, seeing that Gods decrees are
immutable. And whether a man bless, or curse, he always does it necessarily in
respect of God's Providence, and in so doing he does always according to the
will of God.

That Adams fall did only happen, because God eternally foresaw and decreed it
should be. And could not otherwise happen, than God had ordained. And in
respect of Gods Decree, there is no Note that this is flatly contrary to Me
ancthon in loc. com. de Causa Pecc. p. 50. 51. as well as all the rest to which
he there gives Antidote. Beza c^msequae. suis in Monpel: Coll: ad do: 8. de
Praedest. fol. 5. 9. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. (...) 9. f. 325
contingency in the world. And therefore Adam's change from good to evil was
absolutely necessary to the execution of Gods Decree.

That God foresees nothing but what he has decreed. And that his Decree does
precede his Knowledge. That Adam necessarily fell in respect of God. And that
it behooved him to sin, not by the naked and idle permission of God, separate
from his will and Decree.

That Reprobates would fain be thought excusable in sinning, because they
cannot escape the necessity of sinning, especially when that necessity is cast
upon them by Gods own ordina^ion. But we deny (says Calvin) that they are
thence excusable, because that ordination of God has its equity, though to us
unknown.

From these passages it is evident, what these men mean whenever they speak
of efficacious permission, and why they say we make God to be a mere
speculator. Even because we allow not that stoical Necessity (which they have
thus forged) of all events. And so the contingency they speak of from the
Teeth ^utward can signify nothing in the world, but either the frustraneous
endeavors of Nature, or else our ignorance in the management of things,
whereby being ignorant of God's Decrees, we labor sometimes in vain toward a
contrary event to what has been absolutely decreed, and of necessity must come
The second Classis of Quotations making God the Cause of Sin, and that
Irresistibly.
to pass. And whether God by these Doctrines is not evidently concluded to be
the Cause of all sins, I leave it to every man to judge by what has been
cited, and shall farther manifest by a second Classis of quotations.

That we cannot say of Esau being rejected by God, I Huldericus Zuinglius in
Elencho contra Catabaptist: strophas: p. 172.
would to God he had died an Infant. For he could not dye whom the divine
Providence created to this very end, that he might live, and that he might live
wickedly.

That man does fall. God's providence so ordaining it. Calv: Inst: l. 3. c. 23.
Sect. 8. p. 325.
And the first man fell, because the Lord thought it expedient; why he thought
it expedient, we cannot tell. (which words are spoken before the former.)

That God does holily drive or thrust men on unto wickedness, Joh: Piscator in
Praefat: Disput: de Praedest: p. 8.
that he may punish sins with sins. (though these last words are true so far as
that God by permitting, or suffering men to do, or not restraining them from
doing what he sees they will do if they be not restrained, is said very
properly to punish sins with sins, yet the former words are so blasphemous, as
not to be capable of any tolerable excuse.)

That God made men such as that they might be able to Idem These: 27. (which he
also repeats These: 33.
sin, yea, he made them to this end or purpose that they really might sin.

That God by a secret force as by a hidden Rope does drag wicked men to attain
those ends which they think not of. Herm: Rennecherus in Aur: Sal: Cat p. 32.
To which they are directed without their least purpose or endeavor, just as
arrows are shot out of a Bow, without being sensible whither they are going.
(which though true in one sense, is blasphemous in another.)

Piscator These. 115.
That God chose some, and reprobated the rest for this reason only, that he
might manifest the Glory of his power in handling those that were equal,
unequally.

D. Festus Thesauri Catech. fol. 216. Lutherus de serv^ Arbitr. citantibus
Tigu^i^is contra Phil. Nuo. p. 9. and Beza post Praelec. in ep^d Romans Calv.
Inst. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 1. p. 322. ^id. etiam Sect. 2. Z^^ch. de Not. Dei l.
(...). c. 2. ^e Prad. part. 4. Resp. ad Argument. ult. etiam de Reprob. c.
(...). These. 4. p. 571. ali^ edit. 743, 744. Zanch. de Not. dei l. de Pr^.
dest. S^nct. Qu^st. 5. page ^3^.
That the subduction of Grace, and of its means, even Excecation, and
Induration, and Perseverance in ^ins are the fruits of God Rejection, or the
things which follow from or out of his rejection.

That it is incomprehensible yet believed by us, how it is just to damn such as
do not deserve it.

That it is not agreeable or fitting to ascribe the preparation to destruction
to any other then the hidden counsel of God.

That Reprobates are compelled with a Necessity of sinning and so of perishing
by this Ordination of God, and so compelled, that they cannot choose but sin and
perish. This is ushered in with a [Damus we grant.]

That all who are predestined to the End, are predestined to the means without
which they cannot attain unto the end. -- Bucanus loco de Praed. quaest. 30.
etiam Macco^. Disp. de Praed. These. (...).
The common means are three. The Creation, and Fall, and Propagation of man.

That God made men to diverse ends, and some to the Macco^i^^ Disput: de
Praedest: These 8.
end that they might suffer eternal Torments. He appointed also or ordained,
that those men being entire should fall from their Integrity. And that for this
reason, that whom he had created for Destruction he might reprobate, to this
end that he might punish them out of Justice.

That the Denial of Grace and Sins are the consequents Zanch. de Not. dei c. 2.
de praedest: page 620.
of Reprobation. Sins are the Punishments of Sins, to all which God preordained
Reprobates from all Eternity.

That God's first constitution was, that some should be Zanch. ibid. p. 740.
col. 1.
destined to eternal Ruin. And to this end their Sins were ordained; and
desertion, and denial of Grace in order to their sins.

That the first man, as he was made upright in body and Mart. B^rrhaus Posit.
1. impress. A. D. 1551.
in soul by the divine Providence, so by the Counsel of the same God he
contr^cted that stain which by no humane means can be blotted out, his
Innocence being lost by his Disobedience. (he contracted that stain, is the
same as to say, he committed that sin.)

That all things Which shall be, shall be by the inevitable Idem in Deuteronomy. 47.
p. 924.
Counsels and Decrees of God. (without any distinction betwixt good and evil.)

That Satan is judged to be the Author of evil, (whether Idem in Isa. 28.
of sin, or of punishment,) one way, and God another way; ** Zuing. in Sermon. de
Prove. c. 5. and 6. Dr. Twiss. Vin. Gra. l. 2. part. 1. p. 36.
aliter Satan malorum quam Deus (sive de malo quod in culpa, sive de eo quod in
poena cernitur loquamur) Author judicatur esse. So Zuinglius speaks of Adultery
and Murder as the * work of God the * Author of it.

That God does stir up the Devil to lie. And is in some Petrus Vermilius in
Epist. ad Romans p. 403, 406. and 38.
manner the Cause of sin. And thrusts on the wills of the wicked to grievous
sins.

That God does will and necessitate sin; that men do ill to Mr. Hobbs of of
Liberty and Necessity. p. 22, 23, 24. compared with his p. 44, 45.
distinguish betwixt Gods Will and Permission; that no man can be free from
necessitation; that all men who do any thing for love or Revenge, or Lust,
though free from Compulsion, yet their Actions may be as necessary as those
that are done by Compulsion. (whether this is not the upshot of Mr. Hobs his
Doctrine in those pages, which for brevities sake I have thus expressed in this
Epitome of his sense, I leave it to be judged by such as have leisure to
consult him.

That God is the Author not of those Actions alone, in Comfort for Believers.
p. 36, 37.
and with which sin is, but of the very pravity, Ataxy, Anomie, Irregularity,
and sinfulness it self which is in them. Yea, that God has more hand in men's
sinfulness, then they themselves.

That Reprobates are therefore not converted, because Trigland. ex comment:
Calv in Ezekiel. 18. quam piam explicationem vocat. p. 138. Defens. 140. Dontelock
contra Anonymum Quatern. K. 3.
God will not have them to be converted. Yea,

That God calls men to Christ, but [will not have them come; for] it pleases
him not to draw them, which is absolutely necessary to their coming. And --
seeing they were dead in sins, and obnoxious to damnation, before that Christ
is preached to them, it must necessarily follow, that Christ is preached to
them, to aggravate their Damnation.

That God predestined whom he pleased not only to Beza contra Castle. Art. de
Not. very and falsi dei. p. 417.
Damnation, but the Causes also of Damnation. (of this Beza says, agnos^imus
esse verum, we acknowledge it too true.)

That both the Reprobates and the Elect were preordained Zanch. de Not. Dei l.
5. Thesi 4. de Reprob. p. 555. ali^ edit. p. 572.
to sin as sin. In as much as the goodness and Glory of God was to be declared
by it.

That as God did so deprive Reprobates of his Grace, Id. ibid. c. 2. de Reprob.
Q. 2. These. 4. p. 554. alia edit. p. 722.
as that they cannot sin, so he also ordained or destined them to this
condition, that they cannot but of their own Nature commit variety of sins.

That a Necessity of sinning and of sinning unto Death Id p. 571. alia edit.
743, 744.
without Repentance does lie upon Reprobates from Gods immutable Reprobation.
This is with a [non dubitamus con^iteri.]

That if God wrought or acted the wicked man to punishment, Piscatar contra
Hemming. p. 76.
it follows that he acted him or wrought him to sin also; because unless sin
preceded, he could not justly punish him.

That God made men with this intent, or to this purpose, Idem contra Schism. p.
29. Thesi 27.
that they might really fall. Because he could not attain his principal ends
any otherwise, then by this course.

That the word of God does dictate, that God does predestine Piscat. Notis ad
Am. Coll. Vorstij p. 157.
men to their very sins, and that by an absolute Decree. (note that this is by
way of Answer to Vorstius his Question.

That men were Idem in 1 Pet. 2. 8. Schol.
constituted and ordained to disobedience by Gods decree. Id. observat. ex v.
4. 6, 7, 8.
That he ordained* Reprobates to their very Incredulity. Idem in Eze. 24. 21.
That he took care to have his Temple profaned. Id. in 2 Samuel 16. 10. Schol.
-- and observat.
That he commanded by the secret Impulse of some evil spirit, and moved the
will of Shimei to curse David.

That men were predestined precisely to both evils. Both that they may
eternally be punished, and that they Id. Resp. ad Duplic. Vorst. part. 1. p.
220.
may Necessarily sin. Yea, that they may therefore sin, that they may be justly
punished.

That the Rebellion of the Reprobates does depend upon Idem p. 217.
the Antecedent will of God.

That God does necessitate man to sin, to the end that he may punish him for
sin. Idem p. 223.


That though Reprobates are Predestined to damnation, and to the Causes of
Damnation, and created to that end Idem contra Tau^^. p. 47.
that they may live wickedly, and be vessels full of the dregs of sins, yet it
follows not that God's absolute Decree of Reprobation is the Cause of all the
villainies and lewdnesses in the world, because besides the sins of the
Reprobates, there are also other villainies and lewdnesses committed, namely, by
the Elect. (let the Reader here imagine what Piscator will have to be the Cause
of the heinous crimes committed by the Elect, if not the very Decree of
Election? since he expressly affirms the Decree of Reprobation to be the Cause
of all the wickednesses committed by Reprobates. And whenever they say that
God's Decree is the Cause of wickedness, they mean that God himself is the
Cause of wickedenss for they cannot but confess, that God's Decree is God
himself, (as I can show if any deny it according to the School-maxime, Quicquid
dicitur de deo est Deus.)

That God does will and make us to sin. And that he Gratianus Civilis in
Semipelag. Grotij p. 16. and p. 17.
does us no injury in making us sin, because we are willing to be made sin. And
volenti non fit injuria. -- And (in the next page) that nothing is future but
by the will of God going before as the Cause of what is future.

That God works all things in all men, not only in the Z^n^h. miscel. p. 428.
in 4 to.
godly, but also in the ungodly.

That nothing is done without God's will, no nor without Trigland. Apolog. p.
172.
his operation. For God works all things in all men. Therefore he wills and
effects, that ungodly men do live in their concupiscences.

That the sin of Incredulity does depend upon God's Predestination, Piscat.
Resp. ad Dupl. Vorst. part. 1. p. 10, 11. Id. ibid. p. 27.
as the effect upon the Cause. (this says he, is his Opinion, or Tenent.) Yea
he adds p. 25. that God does effect in them an incredulity, in as much as he
blinds them whilst the Gospel is preached.

(Two things are here remarkable. 1. He does not say that God makes them only
incredulous, but effects or makes their Incredulity. As if it were his sin in
them, and not theirs but by donation. 2. He inferrs the only cause of their
Incredulity to be this, that God is their hinderance.)

That God does incite, seduce, draw, command, harden, M^rtyr in Jud. 3. ver. 9.
p. 49.
and inject deceptions, and [doth, or makes or] effects those things which
are heinous or grievous sins.

That it does, or at least, may appear from the word of Piscat. ad Amic. Dupl.
Vorstij. p. 176.
God, that we neither can do more good then we do, nor omit more Evil then we
omit. Because God from eternity has precisely decreed that both [the good and
the evil] should so be done. Id. ibid. p. 228. This is also expressly taught by
Beza, Sturmius, and Broeckerius, in those places which are quoted by Dominius
out of their Books. Witness Rippertus Si^i Pastor Hornanus in Necessaria
Defension^. p. 755. All applied to the Case in hand.


That it is fatally constituted, when, and how, and how much every one of us
ought to study and love piety, or not to love it. (we may Note, that he uses
the word [debe^t] as well as to [non colere] as to [colere pietatem.] As if it
were a man's Duty to be wicked when God has precisely appointed him to be so.
And indeed upon their principle of Gods particular decree, and precise
determination, and secret command that such a man shall be wicked, he ought to
be so indeed. Piscator's Inference is very logically good, however morally it
is vehemently evil.

Now whereas in my Notes (p. 15. 16.) I said that God does only permit sin,
that is to say, does not ^inder, or does patiently suffer it to be committed by
the unconstrained or free will of his Creatures, and when he has so permitted
it to be committed, does wisely order or dispose it to the best advantage, and
draws good out of the evil (not evil out of the good) we see the Absolute
Reprobatarians (whom Mr. B. defends and admires,) do oppose against this
reverent and safe stating of God's Permission, that He does absolutely decree
it, and effect it, and command it, and will it, and seduce, and stir up, and
compel men to it, and create men on purpose, that they may commit it. And much
more then this, as has been showed in the Citations, not from a few, but from
many of those Doctors, nor from those of the least, but of the greatest Note
amongst the Masters of Mr. Barlee.

35. His 35th. [ That I call in Poets, if not Devils, to Of my being called
Blasphemer for not daring to call God the Decreer of my Sin.
help me to blaspheme. p. 69.] if the Reader will examine my two pages which he
p. 13. and 24. I.
referrs to, he will admire the strangeness of this complicated Invention. 1.
That I blaspheme. 2. That I call in Poets. Yea, (3) Devils to help me. The
first place he fetches from the thirteenth page of my first Chapter. Where the
thing which I assert is merely this, [That I am the Author of my own sins,
that Adam and the Serpent may be allowed as sharers, but my God (blessed for
ever!) is none at all.] This I hope was no blasphemy. Having proved this by
Reason, I made it good by Scripture too. Let no man say when he is tempted, I
am tempted of God. Jam. 1. 13, 14. (this I hope was no blasphemy.) From that
reason and that Scripture I next concluded, that I durst not say with him in
the Comaedian who had been a great sinner, [what if some God has so decreed
it?] and to say I durst not say so blasphemously, I hope was no blasphemy. The
only Poet in that page was Terence, and him I cited to condemn that horrid
blasphemy. Why then said Mr. B. that I called in Poets to help me to blaspheme?
2. Mr. B. must say, against what it was that I blasphemed. 2.
Not against God, for whose hatred of sin I was an Advocate; nor against
Scripture which I pleaded in my behalf. But against the wicked Heathen brought
in by that Poet speaking just like those men, who say as expressly as that
Heathen did, (and my Quotations shall prove what I am speaking) That God Deus
Decrevit ut Adam peccaret. Piscat. Resp. ad Apolog. Bertii p. 136.
decreed that Adam should sin. Id. ib. p. 111. absurdum non est, peccatum fieri
de^ volente, decernente, ordinante. Item prae^olente, praedece^nente,
praeordinante. It^ ut non possit non evenire.
That sin is committed, God willing, decreeing, and ordaining it, yea
forewilling, foredecreeing, and foreordaining it. In so much that it could not
but come to pass. Yea farther, Quintum caput, Deum peccata quae prohibet, ad
eadem occulte impellere. ^dem advers. Schism. Praef. p. 7.
that God does secretly thrust men on to those same sins which he forbids. Yea
farther, Vult Arminius lapsum evenisse voluntate dei transeunte duntaxat in
suam permissionem, hoc est, Deum voluisse permittere lapsum. At sententia
Perkin^ii nostrorumque The^logorum haec est, lapsum illum evenisse Dei
voluntate transeunte in rem permissam. Hoc est, Deum voluisse ut Adamus
laberetur. Dr. Twiss: in vind: Great: l. 2. part. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 12. Digr. 3.
p. 142. Col. 2.
that God's will does pass, not only into the permission of the sin, but into
the sin it self which is permitted. That God did not only will the permission
of Adams Sin, but the sin it self which he permitted, or it was Gods will that
Adam should fall etc. Yea farther yet, Hic justo illius Impul^ agit quod sibi
non licet. Calv: Inst: l. 1. c. 18. Sect. 4. p. 71.
that a wicked man does sin by the Impulse of God. (as Mr. Calvin expressly
words it.) Which word Impulse (for which alone I cite the place) is Fatemur
^ita usurpari posse, ut designent actiones interdum morales, interdum vero
naturales. Twiss. ibid.
confessed by Dr. Twisse to note both a natural and moral action. Yea farther
yet, (if that is possible) Ad peccatum, quia peccatum, quatenus ex eo Dei
boni^atem and gloriam declar^ oportuit, praeordinati sunt tam Electi, qua n
Reprobi. Zanchius de Not. Dei l. 5. Thesi 4. de Reprob. p. 555. alia edit. p
572.
That as well the Elect as the Reprobates were praeordained to sin as sin,
(reduplicative; that is to say, in as much as it is sin, in that very notion
and respect,) in as much as it behooved the goodness and glory of God to be
declared by it. Now that these are the opinions and sayings, not only of those
Authors whom I have cited in the Margin, but of very many others, and of our
Correptory We may compare with these, that very strange speech of Mr. B. in his
page 72. where he says, (by way of Answer to the Former part of Grotiu's words
cited by me in my page 11.) That the Scripture and the Ancients say not much,
or often, that God does praedestinate men to sin. Thereby avowing, that both
the Scripture and the Ancients do say it a little, and sometimes. Indeed the
Marcionites and Manic^ees were Ancient Heretics, and the only Ancients that I
know, who favor that ungodly speech. But where in Scripture is there any such
thing? No 'twas He in the Comaedian who spoke just like it.
Corrector in many places of his Volume, I have prepared to demonstrate in my
next Account of the most material things in his Declamation. But Thirdly, I
have wronged the Heathen III.
Poet and the Actor in his Play, by ranking their Blasphemy with those last
mentioned; for 1. they said no more then 1.
[Quid si, What if some God has so decreed it?] by way of Scepticisme or
Doubt, as if it were but a faint suspicion, not a peremptory Belief. But Mr. B.
says Dogmatically in his very act of Commission, that God would have it at
this time to be so. p. 21, 22. Secondly, The Poet spoke of some one of the
Heathen Gods, which had deservedly an ill Reputation 2.
(as Mr. B. himself observes in his p. 80.) for one was the patron of
Adulterers, another of Drunkards, a third of Thieves. And from such God's as
those to expect such Decrees was not so strange for a Heathen man. Nay 3. That
Heathen did no more then [Personam agere] act a wicked 3.
man's part. But here on the contrary. 1. The Authors 1. 2.
forecited did speak in a positive Dogmatical way. 2. They spoke of the God of
Holiness, who professes he cannot endure the least stain of sin. 3. They spoke
very seriously, and were impatient of contradiction. E. G. I did but say, [I
durst 3.
not say what if God has decreed sin] and Mr. B. tells the wide world, I
called in Poets to help me to blaspheme. It. IV.
may therefore be wondered at in the fourth place, why Mr. B. should charge that
Heathen with Blasphemy, for speaking as he himself did in the Correp. Cor. p.
79. ^is words are, ^od does de^min that sin shall be done.
page going before, unless he is angry with the Heathen for seeming to make a
doubt of that which is one of his Theological Maxims. He confesses that God
does not will to do or Yet here he contradicts his honest Pisca^or (as he
calls him) who says flatly ^it in illis ^tem Deus. ^iscat. ^p ^d Dup^ V^r^^.
part. 1. (...)* 25.
effect sin; (that is, he does not sin himself,) but only determine that sin
shall be done; that is, he decrees its being done by his Creatures? and what
was it else spoken of in the Comaedian? and if I had blasphemed in denying Gods
decreeing of sin, yet of all the men in the world, how could that Poet be said
to help me? he was rather helpeful to Mr. B. as any Reader will say who shall
compare their speeches. And therefore (5.) It may be another wonder, why Mr. B.
should call him an Correp. cor. p. 80.
Atheistick Lad who spoke so much for the absolute Decree, which whosoever
denies must be an See his p. 54. 69. 117 118. and how freely he there bes^ows
Atheism on all Dissenters. VI.
Atheist in his Judgment. If he was Atheistick who spoke so like to Mr. B. and
I Atheistick who spoke so unlike to both, he breaths at once both Hot and Cold.
6. He adds my calling in Devils to help me, which as it is the ^st opposite to
Truth or Candor, that any man can imagine, (that which I spoke of (...) being
merely an Inference from that opinion which places the Destruction before the
sin of the Creature,) so I have spoken to it See the Forgery taken from his
10th page. Sect. 6.
already by 4 degrees. And therefore shall add no more to that strange part of
his Invention, then what Austin spoke to the Pelagians upon an occasion not so
bad, yet somewhat like it. Non miramur Vos de n^bis, id est, homines de
hominibus, falsae posse con^ingere: c^m videamus Vos ^ic (...) Diabolo esse
Fas^inatos. Augustine. Hypognost. lib. 6. Sub initium. mihi p. 880. Calvin:
Inst: l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 9. p. 325. Piscat: in Prae^at: Disput: de Praedest: p.
8. Herm: Rennech: in Aur: ^^lut: Cat: p. 32. Rippert. Six. Horn-Defens. Necess.
p. 755.
I do not wonder that one man should forge out Calumnies of another. Yet
Austin's Reason of such Calumnies, I am too civil to apply. Only I propose it
to consideration, whether of the two is most blameworthy; I, who called it a
blasphemy, to say that God does will sin, Decree sin, praedestin men to sin,
determine efficaciously that sin shall be committed, prostitute, impell, and
excite men to sin, and that irresistibly; or He who calls me Blasphemer,
because I assert and prove the contrary.

36. His 36. [ That I will rifle the well furnished Cabinet Of the Batavian
Remonstrants.
of the Batavian Remonstrant writings, or not, stick to be beholding to very
Thieves, viz. such roguish Pamphlets as Fur Praedestinatus, and others are,
rather then want materials for invectives against Calvin, Beza, Twisse etc. p.
69.] Here Mr. B. has spoiled himself for a public Writer, so long as the
memory of these Fictions shall stick in those few who accidentally may read
him. If he would bring his Figments somewhat nearer together, or make them
cunningly to border upon Truth, I might dispatch them with greater brevity; but
standing as they do, in a direct opposition and contrariety to Truth, they
will be wastful of Time and Paper by being exhibited in all their colors.
First in general I declare, that 1.
when I published my Papers on God's decrees, I had never so Of the Batavian
Remonstrants.
much as seen that well furnished Cabinet [the Acta Synodali^ Romonstrantium]
Though since that time, I have got it into my study, and shall not fail to
recommend it to every man's Reading of my Acquaint^ 2. If I had taken any 2.
thing out of those Remonstrants, I had professed as much, either by quoting
them in the Margin, (as I did other Authors,) or in the body of my Discourse
(as I did Ger. Note here the impotent ill will of Mr. B. p. 24. where he would
seem to discover to my disadvantage what I had told him in print p. 25. (as I
thought) to my advantage. 4.
Vossius, in my p. 25.) and for the future, I do avow, that though I want not
their help, yet I will use it as often as my leisure to read them will permit,
and as occasion shall be offered. But 3. Upon such a perusal as I have made, I
cannot find one passage which Mr. B. (with any color) can say I have from
them, (though such there may be for ought I know) much less did I borrow, much
less did I rifle one syllable from them. Nay 4. I am certain, (1) that Dr.
Twisse is not cited by those Remonstrants, and a great part of my Decachorde is
out of him. (2) My place out of Zuinglius is not in that Cabinet; or if it had
beeen, Mr. B. could not have known it, because of that Ignorance which he
discovers of the place in his p 63. where he grossly mistakes Mr. Calvin for Dr.
Twisse, and Zuinglius too. (3) Beza is not in my Decachorde (as Mr. B calls it)
nor in any part of my Notes where I speak severely of him, (as far as I can
remember) nor is there a syllable of Beza common to me with the Remonstrants.
And what a pickle is Mr. B. in, in case he find nothing of Mr. Calvin, which I
might have taken (by a possibility) from them? But 5. His guilt is little
lessened in case he do. For is not 5.
Calvin in Print? may I not read him as well as others? and observe the same
things without their help? and was it not strangely done of Mr. B. to lay Note
that in his p. 158. he flings upon me the Thievery of the Fox, and filtching
matters against Calvin. Though he cannot but know, that I cite him to the page,
(which others do not) and to the page of mine own Editions, and almost to the
very line, as himself confesses in his p. 52.
stolen waters to my charge, when my own Cisterns were full? if any two men
shall accidentally read, and cite the same passage of any book, what an
unmanlike act of hostility must it needs be, to say that the one does ris^e the
other? But 6. I can say it as a great Truth, that I went immediately to the
Fountain, and refused to draw out of unsincere streams. I suspected that Fur
praedestinatus might possibly err, at least in some of the Quotations, and
through the negligence of the Printer; and though for ought I knew, or yet
know, his many Testimonies are all exactly set down, (and I have since found
reason to think they are,) yet I did Of Fur Praedestinatus.
purposely resolve not to use him at all, both because I knew not the Author of
it of what Credit he might be, and because I would not have it possible for any
Correptory Corrector, to abuse himself by aspersing me. And I can never enough
admire Mr. B. his slanders in this particular; since upon examination whether
my Ten Quotations p. 9. 10. or any of them, were accidentally also in that
Dialogue, I find Mr. B. to have chosen his Fiction the worst that could be for
his turn, and because it is my business to give an account of his dealings,
(that the unwary Reader may know what kind of Author, he takes in hand) I will
detect him by these Degrees.

First, (in my Decachorde p. 9, 10.) I have four Citations 1.
out of Dr. Twisse, who is not at all mentioned in Fur praedestinatus. 2. That
Dialogue cites Zuing. de Prove. c. 6. But 2.
my Citation was thus, Zuing. in Sermon. de Prove. c. 5. and 6. which I also cited
from Dr. Twisse himself l. 2. part. 1. p. 36. where'tis verbatim to be found.
Nor did Mr. B. know that I had any thing of Zuinglius, as I have showed before.
3. Of 3.
the five places from Calvin four are wanting in that Dialogue. And 4. The one
place remaining, though by accident in the 4.
Dialogue, is only fetched from the Book Chap. and. whereas I fetched it from
the page 324. which shows I used mine own Calvin. Inst. Edit. Genev. A. D.
1637. and farther, I quoted these words in a different manner from Mr. Calvin,
then that Dialogue does, which shows I had them not thence, but from the
Fountain. But 5. Suppose I had agreed in each 5.
circumstance of that one Quotation with the Dialogue, would it have followed
that I had taken it out thence? (...) might not one Testimony of Ten be lighted
upon by me, and by another, from such an ordinary Book as Calvin's
Institutions? But 6. When on the contrary, I did abstain from the reading 6.
of that Fur Praedestinatus, and did studiously avoid the having any commerce
with him, or of taking from him any syllable; with what modesty or conscience,
or show of Charity, could Mr. B. say even in print (where every Readers light
might be able to manifest the exceeding blackness of such a Deed) that I was
beholding to Thieves and Roguish Pamphlets, nay, that I was my self a very
Thief p. 158? when he called me Thief by a Paralepsis in the first of his
letters which he so often alludeth to throughout his Book, he was somewhat the
less unpardonable, because he was robbed (as he worded it) of a considerable
part of his Auditors. But here his Calumny is absurd, as if he should say that
Dr. Twisse did filtch Quotations out of Arminius. He had not spoken a greater
falsehood, (though to some less credible,) if he had said that Mr. Barlee took
all his Sermons out of Ben Johnson. And hence it follows (7.) That if those
words of Mr. B. 7.
have either Truth or Sense in them, Calvin, Beza, and Dr. Twisse writ Roguish
Pamphlets, and were themselves Thieves, in the unworthy Character of their
Admirer; for theirs were the Books from which I cited those things to which I
fasten their Names. And this is such language bestowed upon his friends, as I
could never have given my bitterest Enemies. Nor can be possibly prove that he
has not thus defamed them, unless he will confess he injured me. But (8.) if
Mr. B. his Book 8.
is but a Rapsodie or Cento, Patch't up out of the writings of Dr. Twisse and
the rest of those Absolute Reprobatarians, (except the major part of it, which
is foul or false language,) he had less reason then any man to say that I
rifled a Cabinet I never sam; or was beholding to a Pamphlet, from which I
never received so much as the black of a Bean. 9. He speaks 9.
in the Plural of R^guish Pamphlets; as if in that number he would include the
great and good men, Bishop Andrew's, and Vossius, whom he so much reviles in
his p. 190. 206. and p. 121. and other places. In such a case he should have
signified what men he meant, if he cannot name any, he confesses the nature of
his Invention. 10. Let him show in what page I use 10.
Invectives against the three men he mentions. Had there been any such thing,
he would have given his Reader my very words, at least have showed him where to
find them. I suppose he must mean the Term of blasphemy, which I give to
those speeches, whereby God is affirmed in effect to be the Author of sin. But
whether I did amiss to call that blasphemy, which is contrary to the Nature,
and Glory, and word of God; and whether it is not contrary to each of them, to
say that God is expressly the Piscator contra Taufr. p. 47. Beza contra Castle.
Art. de Not. very and falsi Dei p. 417 Piscator Notis ad Am. Col. Vorst. p.
157. Nota. 6. and 8. Resp. ad Dupl. Vorst. part. 1. p. 220. Martyr in Jud. 3.
v. 9 p. 49. and viginti tales.
Cause of sin, the Necessitator of sin, that he commands men to sin, draws men
to sin, seduceth men to sin, incites men to sin, and even effects grievous
sins. (all which amounts to what is much more ugly, then if they only affirmed
him the Author of sin.) Whether this (I say) is not blasphemy, I intend to try
with the Reverend Author of the first Epistle prefixed to these Behaviors of
our Correptory Corrector, or at least in my next account of Mr. Barlee's
Dealings. And let it be marked in the conclusion, That I affirmed those writers
to blaspheme whom I conceived to have written to the Dishonor of God; whereas
Mr. B. calls me Blasphemer In his p. 114. he says I pour out damnable
Blasphemies. That I play the Lucian and Carpocratian in his p. 119.
whom he conceives to have written to the Dishonor of men only, and of such
men only as I have mentioned. Of which I doubt not but I shall publish a very
satisfactory account, if yet there are any who are not satisfied already.

37. These are some of those groundless, and uncharitable Inventions which I
have observed within the compass of his first nine sheets. Which we may easily
conclude the most tolerable part of his Book, as that on which he confesses he
bestowed most pains. Should I continue my account throughout the rest, I leave
the Reader to judge how great a Volume must be made on so slight a Subject. It
shall therefore suffice me to give my Reader but a Taste of Mr. Barlees
entertainment in the following sheets.

38. In his p. 125. He says, that I am much beholding Of Dr. Jackson.
to my Domestic Dr. Jackson for abusing the world with my two first principles
p. 6. which I took from him.] If this were true, 1.
it were a commendable thing. And I heartily wish it had been true, that I had
had the happiness (and the leisure from other studies and employments) to have
read any one of those inestimable books, which I have heard commended as such
by very learned and pious men. But 2. Though I have seen and am 2.
possessed of two little pieces of that Great Author, (intending long and often
to make a severe perusal of them) yet such have been my prae-engagements in
other methods, that I have not read six pages in either of them. And as I know
not of my self, so neither (3.) am I able as yet to learn, in which part of
that 3.
Doctors works my two principles are to be seen. And because Mr. B. has not
mentioned the place, (considering also his custom of saying any thing at a
venture which may express him to be spiteful in any kind) I do verily believe
he is not able. So

39. In his p. 178. he lays to my charge Atheistical Lucianizing, and
Castalionizing, unto whom (he says) Of Castellio.
I am beholding for my flowers of Rhetoric.] First he quotes 1.
no part of Castalio's works, from whence he can pretend I ever borrowed one
word, and therefore I suspect he speaks against his own Conscience. And I have
reason to suspect it; for (2.) until a month since, I was a perfect stranger
to that excellent 2.
man, I had never so much as seen what he has written on this subject. Much
less did I borrow any one flower out of his Garden; which if I had done, I
should ambitiously have named such an honorable Acquaintaince, rather then
have concealed what I had really esteemed a credit to me. For now I have
learnt, (since Mr. B. has reviled him in many places of 3.
his Book,) that he was a very learned and pious man; and in this the more
lovely to all who are not enemies to the cross of Christ, but delight in a
followship with his Death, and a conformity to his sufferings, that he was
persecuted by Monsieur Calvin to extreme great want. Yet was fain to provide
for eight motherless Children by making Trenchers, (as S. Paul did Tents) and
also by translating the Sacred Bible into Latin. So far was he from taking
other men's livings over their heads, or from snatching and tearing other men's
Bread out of their Mouths, (in pretense that he was the Godly man, and that the
meek were to inherit the earth, and that all Dominion was founded in Grace,)
that he rather took Heb. 10. 34.
joyfully the spoiling of his own Goods, (like those excellent Christians in
the Apostles Times, who were Christians indeed, but not in word,) and rather
Chapter 11. 23.
chose (with Moses) to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. This good man dying left his eight poor
children to the mere Providence of God, who provided for them all, as for so
many young Ravens when they call upon him. Eight Gentlemen of Poland having
been then in the City where he expired, bestowed upon him a handsome Funeral,
and to each of his 8 Orphans, each of those 8 Gentlemen became a Father. It was
so great an Impertinence in Mr. B. to defile the memory of such a person (who
durst to suffer for Conscience sake as much as Mr. Calvin, or any other, could
dare to enjoy,) that it cease to be impertinence in me, thus to vindicate a
Saint in Heaven, And I have done it the rather, because I am sure he cannot
thank me. Now though nothing that is Divelish could likely proceed from such a
man, and though I could not learn any thing from him, whom, (when I published
my Notes) I never read, or saw, yet Mr. B. tells the world, that I am much
beholding to him for my Correp. Cor. p. 179.
Diabolical Argument, and did translate his smooth Latin into smoother English.
I will not enlarge in the unnecessary vindications of the
prodigiously-Erastio-Arminio-Socino-Pontificio-politick Headpiece, (as Mr. B.
calls immortal Grotius. p. 126.) Who has such heaps of contumelies and ill
names cast on him, for this visible reason, because he has discovered the
Designs and Practices of the Presbyterian party so fully and distinctly in
several of his works, (in his Appendix especially de Antichristo) that no man
can with their safety be permitted to read him. But sure the more they rail at
him, the more are all true Lovers of Peace and Truth, Learning and Piety,
stirred up to the love and study of him. Nor need I make a Vindication of the
venerable Bishop Andrews (whom Mr. B. uses so profanely p. 190. 206.) nor of
those very many others, which it would be tedious even to name; but supposing
the youngest Scholars, having this hint given them, will greedily read and
admire those very choice Writers, who are extremely commended to their most
serious Use by the very stigma's and reproaches which this Correptory Corrector
is pleased to cast on them, I will only show him in one thing more.

40. In his p. 155. he makes me excellent good at Of a book entitled Artificial
Handsomeness.
laying on Paint upon rotten Posts. Witness the Praefacers paint in the
Dialogue betwixt the two Ladies mentioned before.] Without the least Ground and
directly against the Truth, He reported me the Author of that new Book, to
which is given the Title of Artificial handsomeness. Now he tells me even in
Print, that I am the Author of the Preface, if not of the whole Book. And
perhaps in the place where he has spoken of it before (as he professes to
have done, though in my perusal of his Book I did not find it) he has feined
me the Author of all the Book too. I may say as well, that he is the Author of
the Alcoran, if I were capable of so much folly. It is not the first printed
Book of which I have been reported to be the Penman, which yet to this hour I
never read. Nor am I able to learn (after my diligent Inquiry) who is the
Author of Artificial Handsomeness. But that I might know what it is, of which I
am said to be the Author, I have read a part of it. I find the Preface
subscribed by I. Johnson, and not by T. P. The Dialogue it self is said by the
Publisher (who could tell better then Mr. B.) to have been composed by a Lady.
And I admire the vast difference betwixt the language, the wit, the Temper, and
the Learning, of that Lady, and Mr. Barlee. I never pleaded for the lawfulness
of any painting; but I ever thought them to 2.
be most guilty of it, who having a 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Form only of Godliness deny the Power of it. They that go in Mat. 7. 15.
sheeps clothing whilst within they are no other then (e) ravening wolves;
they that seem to love God, and more then seem to hate their Neighbors; they
that persecute their Neighbor for whom Christ died, and paint it over with
zeal to Christ; they that devour Widows houses, and make long prayers for a
Mat. 23. 14.
pretense; they that wash the Ver. 25.
outside only of the Cup and Platter, and are outwardly Ver. 28.
righteous unto men; they (say I) are most guilty of Artificial Handsomeness;
and I wish the Learned Lady had writ against them, who are Ver. 27.
whited Sepulchers (in our Saviors Sermon) appearing beautiful outwardly, but
inwardly full of dead men's Bones and all uncleanness. But (3.) suppose I had
written in the behalf of White and Red, yet Mr. B. should not have 3.
said it upon a groundless supposition, much less have sent it to the Press;
Since it was wholly impertinent to God's Decrees, which he pretended to confute
as I expressed them in my Notes. And indeed to what end should he publish this
Invention, if not to represent me as one that administers to Vanity, and so
unfit for the ministry, and by consequence fit for a Sequestration. The
Reverend Author of his first Preface may be my witness, (for he was the Author
of what I say) that I suffered the loss of (what I thought) the pleasant'st
possession upon Earth, for being secretly suggested (he did not tell me by
whom) to be the Author of some books which to this very day I could never hear
named. And though I earnestly desired, that I might hear my self accused, and
know distinctly my Accusation, and be heard speak for my self, yet was he not
able (as he told me) to obtain that for me. Which I should not have said in
this place, unless it were to this end, that men may know how it concerns me to
publish the falsehood of such Reports. 4. It 4.
does sufficiently appear, that Mr. B. is the Author of Artificial Ugliness.
For to make me odious to his Readers, he has draw^ me out in the worst Colors
that he was able to fancy. Not only as an Arminian (which yet with him is no
small Crime) but as a Socinian, a Massilian, a Pelagian, a Jesuit, an Atheist,
a Ranter, a huge Independent, a pharisaical Battologist, and twenty other
things, which his Reader will meet with as I have done. He shows a willingness
somewhere to make me a Quaker. Where I vindicate God from being inferred by his
Doctrines to be (...), he tells me that in blaspheming I do exceed the Devil
himself. And salutes me in these words, Avaunt, Avaunt, depart from O thou
Satanical Blasphemer, Thou art an offense unto me. It Is in his p. 102. Where I
contended for nothing less then the glory of God's mercy, he says I blurrd my
Paper with Diabolical stuff. p. 178. and professes seriously in the presence
of God (and how frequently does he take that Great Name in vain!) he much
fears no man could write thus but one well nigh in the same condition with
Simon Magus. p. 174. But the most horrible thing of all is in his p. 22. where
notwithstanding such bitter language and such spightful Inventions as I have
quoted out of his Book, (which have as dismal a Character in the Scriptures, as
any sins whatsoever,) he says in his excuse, That God gave him the leisure to
say thus. And God would have it at this time to be so. And it may be of some
Use
to the Church of God. So said he in the Comedian after some great sin (I know
not whether so great as this) Quid si hoc quispiam voluit Deus? What if some
God would have it to be so?

Thus he dares do, who is secure he cannot fall (p. 35.) and who says (in his
165 page,) that God did play upon Adam presently after his Fall Genesis 3. 22. He
(forsooth) is one of them who are faithful, chosen and true (p. 10.) It Is
within his commission to be cutting (p. 12.) He tells us, he ought not to be a
dumb Dog, nor ought his tongue to be toothless (p. 12.) and that nothing
drops from his Pen which was not usual to Austin against Pelagius (p. 6, 7.)
Which by the way is as foul and as false an aspersion as was ever cast on that
Father by the Pelagians themselves.

CHAP. IV.
A Miscellaneous Discovery of Mr. Barlee's strange Failings in several kinds.

. 1. TO those words in my Title [concerning Gods Decrees] Of Gods Decrees.
Mr. B. opposes, that I might have said more truly, against God's Decrees, p
1.] In how very few words how many Falsities can he comprize? For 1. Decrees 1.
dependent and conditional are as truly called Decrees, as those that are
absolute and Independent. The Decree of damning impenitent Sinners is as much a
Decree as that other Decree of creating a World; and much more worthy of that
compassionate Father and righteous Judge, then the decree of reprobating the
greater part of mankind without the least respect or intuition of their
impenitence. Am I against God's Decrees, because I reconcile them as well with
his Justice as with his Power, in confutation of their opinion, who asscribe
them to his Power without his Justice? is not the Justice of the Omnipotent in
his Decrees as essential to him, as his Omnipotence? and can I be said to be
against them by being an Advocate in their behalf? and that by proving them
just, as well as mighty? and that they do not run counter to his compassion,
which is as natural to him as to be just? I ever contended for God's Decrees of
Reprobation, which I proved to have respect unto the sinfulness of the
Reprobates, and so indeed am against the Poetical Decrees of Mr. Barlee, which
consider only the punishment, but not the Note, that he professes himself a
good friend both to the Sub, and to the Supralapsarians, as has been showed. 2.
sin. By his unsound way of reasoning, a Man may say of Mr. B. that he leaves
God no Decrees, but what are absolute and irrespective, and what a horrible
thing is that? But 2. How can I be against the Decrees of God, who assert his
promises and his threats as the very Revelations or copyings-out of his
Decrees? Does not the promise of Jesus Christ infer a Decree in the Almighty
that he would give him to be the Savior of the World? Does not his Threat of
Perdition to all Impenitents, and his Psalm. 95. 11.
Oath against such, plainly prove his Decree that they should not Psalm. 95. 11.
enter into his rest? But 3. I ever acknowledged Decrees independent on, and
antecedent to the will of 3.
man, that is to say, to its very consideration. As 1. the Decree 1.
of creating a World, and in it Men, not as necessitated, but as voluntary
Agents; not to do good or evil as Stones tend downwards, but very freely and by
consent. 2: The Decree of giving life to the obedient, and death eternal to the
Rebellious. 2.
Which being considered in it self (and not in its effects) is not depending on
any act of man; but it is his absolute will, that he will thus deal with us,
that he will proceed by this Rule, of rewarding if we will obey, and of
punishing if we will not: that is to say, it is his absolute will, that his
Decrees of Man's End shall be conditional, having respect and consideration of a
Man's Faith or Infidelity, his Obedience or Rebellion, his Repentance or
Impenitence. 3. (The sin of Adam 3.
being supposed,) I assert the Decree of giving Christ for as many, as are
fallen and dead in Adam; the Decree of a (...), a propitiation for the sins
(not of us only, but) of the whole World, 1 John 2. 2. And also 4. The Decree
of sufficient Grace; sufficient, I say, for Evangelical obedience. And 5. the
4. 5. 6.
Decree of accepting it instead of perfect obdience. 6. The Decree of more
Grace to him that uses his Matthew. 25. 28, 29.
Talent, and of taking it away from him that uses it not. Both which are Acts
of his free Economy, his liberty to do what he will with his own, and no way
depending (unless it be in the execution) on any act of our will. But 4.
though I am thus an 4.
Assertor of Gods Decrees, and as well of those that are absolute, as of those
that are conditional, yet my Correptory Corrector will not be pleased, unless
I also will assert that God decreed the fall of Adam, (that Source and Fountain
of all our sins,) and that I will not thus far comply with his Masters and
himself, as to make the Spirit of Holiness to be the Decree and predeterminer
of all events whether holy, or unholy, clean or unclean, good or evil. I thank
him as much as if I did. God forbid that I should think any such Treasonable
thought against his Majesty and Goodness, as that he decreed what he hated,
the Apostasy of Adam or of the Angels: he gave them liberty, and only permitted
them to abuse it. Nor can I believe the irreversible damnation, or preterition,
of far more then half the whole World upon no other score then Adams sin, (the
Second Adam being given to raise up all them that had been fallen in the
first,) but also upon the score of their manifold personal and actual sins. It
being more agreeable to the nature of God, to reject Men for those sins which
they wilfully committed in their particular persons, then for the one sin of
one man committed many thousand years before these Reprobates were born. Which
is not to write against Decrees, but to define what they are which are owned by
God, and what they are which are not.

. 2. To that word in my Title, [Reprobation] Mr. B. Of Preterition and
Damnation or Reprobation Negative and Positive.
opposes, that I should rather have said Damnation, which he says I confound
with preterition, or Negative Reprobation, p. 1.] It Is very well that he
discovers so much knowledge of his opinions as to put these Figleaves upon
their shame. Shame may possibly make way for penitence; and it is easier many
times to confute the hardness of a Forehead, then the darkness of an
Understanding. This is one of the (...) which have been infamously invented to
disguise and palliate the frightful rigidnesse of their Doctrine, their
disclaiming the old words [Reprobation or Damnation] and flying for refuge to
the smoother Terms [Preterition, or Negative Reprobation.] But first, suppose
there were a very real difference, 1.
might not I have the liberty (in my Notes) to discourse of what I thought
good? or to be silent as I saw occasion? Might not I insist upon the Absolute
Reprobation spoken of by some, without extending to the negative spoken of by
others? If I pitched upon the Subject which M. B. was most ashamed of, was that
my fault, or his misfortune? I will not be responsible for other men's
infelicities; especially when I show them the way to prosper, (and by
prosperity I mean Amendment.) I did but mind Mr. B. in a friendly Letter, that
if he needs would be meddling, he should do very well To keep close to his Text
which lay before him from the Press, and neither call me by ill names, (which
would but tend to my Advantage and his Dishonor) nor affirm any thing to be
mine which I had already very heartily and very knowingly disowned; when he
returned me this Answer, That he wondered at my injustice and at my monstrous
uncharitableness, telling me that I prescribed him, Dictatoria nescio qua
potestate, some Rules for his future proceeding. And though my advice was the
same which he received from those Men, who even loved his very Cause a great
deal better then his Person, yet here in Print he upbraids me for pursuing the
very Subject which I had chosen for my Discourse. But 2. What if it appear that
there is no real difference betwixt preterition and reprobation? 2.
or betwixt a negative and positive reprobation,) as Mr. B. and others are fain
to Cant it?) Sure they that are passed by being not approved, and they that are
not approved being all rejected, and all they that are rejected being certainly
to be cast into fire unquenchable, proves the lamentable distinction to be no
more then a trick, insufficient to Buoy up a sinking Cause. For what is to
reprobate, but not to approve, or to reject? And what sense is it to say, there
is a negative not-approving (or reprobation) and a positive not-approving (or
reprobation?) or if reprobation is taken in a positive sense only (as it cannot
be both at once, positive and negative,) what sense is it to say, there is a
Negative positive, and a Positive Positive? I will therefore put my Demand a
little farther. When all that are passed by are damned, and all are damned that
are passed by, what real difference can be assigned betwixt Preterition and
Damnation, (as to the justifying unconditional Decrees of reprobation?) they
are Identical propositions which are converted or reciprocated Per simplicem
conversionem. The not-approved are rejected, because they are not approved; and
the rejected are not-approved because they are rejected; (supposing the
rejection to be made either in, or Ante Massam, as our Adversaries do, whether
of the upper, or lower way,) nor need it better be proved [ad hominem] then by
the saying of Mr. Calvin. [ Quos praeterit reprobat, nec alia causa, nist quod
ab baereditate qua^ filiis suis* praedestinat, illos vult excludere. Calvin.
Inst. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 1. fol. 322
Whom God passeih by (says he) he reprobates, and that for no other cause,
then his will to exclude them from the Inheritance which he predestins to be
his Sons.]. What a mockery then is this to the Justice, and Mercy, and
goodness of God, and what a bitter jeere to the far greater part of all
mankind, to say they are rejected without respect unto their sins? but yet not
damned without respect unto their Sins, when the same men do say, that all the
rejected are damned, and therefore damned because rejected? Mr. B. professes
(p. 135,) that I no where seem to understand Reprobation otherwise then as he
would have me, that is, to signify a decree to damn. How chances he then to
write against me? or rather why against himself? for he Corrept. Cor. p. 121.
confesses he knows not one (the more is his ignorance) who will not readily
yield, that God did not absolutely decree the Reprobation (positive) of any
Creature, but upon prescience and supposition of wilful Rebellion and
Impenitence.] which is as much as to say, that though my opinion must needs be
true, and he cannot choose but confess it, (when in a lucid Interval he can
discern its necessity) yet lest he seem to be worsted, or to have erred
heretofore, or to be the convert of one who is not a Presbyterian, he will put
my opinion into new words, and say he is not of my opinion because he speaks it
in other words; and he will do so, because he will differ, and differ he will,
because (forsooth) he will not yield. But it is too late to say he will not, for
he has done it distinctly in that confession, which in the Margin is pointed
out with a Finger. Let him not eat up that saying, and we shall be friends,
(although perhaps he may not know it, who understands not the difference
betwixt himself and himself,) he must be an Arminian, (I say not in mine, but)
in his own notion. But (alas!) in how many minds may one man be? for the
Author of the sentence pointed out with the last digit, is the Author of
another sentence, which must in my Margin be pointed out with another. [It must
needs be most evident (sath Master B. p. 115.) that punishment must needs be
decreed before the permission
of Sin.] I am in some Amazement, how one and the same man should be the
Asserror of these two sayings; that is so true, and this so false, that so
contrary to this, and this to that; for if the decree of damnation, or
reprobation positive, was not absolute, but conditional, made upon prescience
and supposition of sin (as he confessed p. 121.) how could punishment be
decreed before the very permission of sin? (as he affirms p. 115.) either he
must say, that positive Reprobation or damnation is not a punishment (which
will be strange) no not though it were decreed on supposition of sin (which
will be stranger,) or that the Being of sin is before the permission of it, or
that God foresaw it would be, before he foresaw he would permit it; or that
that is before which is after; or that the Correptoria Corrector has printed
unparalled Contradictions, and instead of biting has broke his Teeth. Again,
3. Master B. his preterition denotes, a leaving in massa 3.
corrupta. Upon which it follows, that what is said in my Notes against the
Postlapsarian way does equally hold against his preterition, as against
irrespective, or unconditional Damnation. For there the Question is in the
issue this, whether when all had sinned in Adam, the greater multitude were
left, or passed by in that Mass by him who hated nothing that he had made,
without his providing them any Remedy, or giving Christ to die for them. If
Christ tasted death for every one of these thus fallen, there could be no
preterition, or negative Reprobation of any one, And if there were multitudes
for whom he died not, nor was intended by God to be the [(...), or] Ransom for
them, then as these were passed by in Massa, so were they also in Gods Decree
condemned or Reprobated in Massa. For so they certainly must be, who being
fallen in Adam were never so much as intended to be raised by Christ. Again, 4.
If some of those that are passed 4.
by, shall die in Infancy or in the womb, before their commission of actual
sin, they cannot but perish (according to Mr. B.) And if so their preterition
and Damnation is on the very same account, merely upon the Sin of Adam. And so
not distinguishable either in the subject, or in the Foundation. Not in the
former, because the same persons that are passed by are also damned. Nor in the
later, because the same sin of Adam which provokes their preterition, does
also provoke their Condemnation.

Sect. 3. In the Margin of Mr. B. p. 4. he cites Jer. 9. 1. every whit as
impertinently to the subject matter for which it is cited, as the place in
Hilarie which he says is somewhere, but cannot tell. I will tell him Male vos
parietum Amor cepit, male Ecclesiam D^i in Tectis aedificijsque veneramini,
male sub his pacis Nomen ingeritis. -- Montes mihi and sylvae and lacus and
Carceres, and voragines sunt tutiores. In his enim Prophe^ae aut manentes (...)
detrusi Dei spiritu prophetabant. Hilarious contra Arianos and Auxentium in
fine. Basil. Edit. p. 216.
where it is, that he may learn Of Orthodox Assemblies.
to use his Readings better. For it is pitifully mistaken, or as pitifully
applied, it being in Hilarie, a preferring the Orthodox Assemblies, although in
solitary places, before the Assemblies of the Arians; who prevailing by
violence ^ver the Orthodox party, did by the favor of the Emperor fill all
the Churches* So much did they prosper who denied the Godhead of Jesus Christ,
as to sequester them that did assert it, and were ready not to be plundered
only, but even to die for the Lord Jesus. This is applied by Mr. B. to his
burying himself amongst his books. How much a better application he might have
made, I leave his Reader to be his Judge.

. 4. He calls it his happy misfortune, that no other dropped Of Aust. and King
James
from his pen then were usual to Austin against Pelagius, and to learned
Orthodox King James against Arminius. p. 6. 7.] 1. He abuses Austin and King
James, as much as 1.
before he abused himself. He does as good as call them Raylers, and false
Accusers. But where do they say, that Pelagius or Arminius were satanical a
Blasphemers, and in blaspheming a a Corrept. Cor. p. 102.
a exceed the Devil himself, and were Id. p. 55.
absolutely for Atheism, major, and minor, and such other language, as Mr. B.
gives me? 2. Though King James at first appeared 2.
in favor of the Anti-Romonstrants Doctrine, concerning man's will, and Gods
Decrees, yet years, experience, and meditation made him espy and retract his
former persuasions (as I foresee an occasion to show hereafter in my account of
Mr. B. first prefacer) 3. If King James were learned (as he was) 3.
he was the likelier to be Orthodox, and if he were Orthodox (as Mr. B.
confesses) then we to Mr. B. and to all of his Gang, for that King was a
perfect Hater of the Presbyterian way; to which he gave the blackest characters
that could be given to a Sect; and foretold what things should be expected from
that Tribe. (But more of this too hereafter, this being enough to make appear,
how very cruelly Mr. B. used himself.

. 5. He says an Erysipelas is a disease rather hot then hurtful, and sometimes
the indicium of a recovery from some great Of Erysipelas.
sickness, possibly from a dangerous fever, nay, phrensy. p. 7.] Here his
condition is most deplorable. For 1. I spoke in my Epistle 1.
of an Exulcerate Erysipelas (as a thousand Readers can witness) which Mr. B.
does here conceal, making a weeful flight, ab hypothesi ad Thesin. 2. Does he
mean that Erysipelas 2.
which he does not express, or does he not? if he does not, there is
Impertinence and fraud, but if he does, there is ignorance and hypocrisy. For
3, He names Fernelius 3.
in his Margin, (as if he had knowledge of what he says;) but neither mentions
his words, nor the place where they are written, (as if he feared the Reader
should find him false.) 4. He applies to himself what I said of Erysipelas, 4.
and though he says it is a sign of Recovery, yet every Recovery does
presuppose a disease. He names a fever and a phrensy. I will not contradict
him, for Ira furor brevis est, in the judgment of Horace, but is it a sign of
Recovery, when after all means of Cure used by me, and his other friends
(whereof his first prefacer professes to have been one) he uses all the
scurrility that could be thought on? if to say that I exceed the Devil in
blasphemy, and that I make God to be worse then the devil, and that I write
Diabolical stuff etc. is the sign of a Recovery, what would he have said if
his wholesome Erysipelas had been no index of his Amendment. But (5.) An
exulcerate Erysipelas is no such innocent 5.
thing, as he would make it, nor did Erysipelas est duplex: unum quod simplex
Eris: Celso appellatur, solo rubore and ardore, nulla exulceratione molestum;
alterum quod eidem sacer ignis nuncupatur, atque exulceratum Erysipelas.
Simplicis Erysipelatis origo est e fervente tenuique sanguine qui biliosus
appellatur; exulcerati vero ex eo cui bilis supervacaneae ejusque incalescentis
nonnihil sit admistum. Fernel. l. 7. c. 4.
Fernelius tell him any such thing, (as I have showed in my Margin.) Or if he
had, he had deceived him. For Quando suppuratur, apparet non fuisse verum and
legitimum, quia genitum est ab aliquo crasso humore cum bile mixto,
undesequitur corrosio partiu^ quae cuti proxime subsunt; quapropter tale
Erysipelas pejus etiam habetur eo, quod exquisitu^ appellatur. Frambes. in l.
7. Canonicu^ and Consultationu^. Med. p* 497.
Frambesarius, and Id autem quod Erysipelas v^cari dixi, non solum vulneri
supervenire, sed sine hoc quoque oriri consuevit, atque periculum majus affert,
utique si circa cervicem aut caput constitit. Celsus lib. 5. cap. 26.
Celsus, with (...). Hippocrates Aphor. 20. Sect. 7. (...). Id. Aph. 25. Sect.
6.
Hippocrates added to them, do speak so hardly of an exulc^rate Erysipelas,
that I had rather believe then feel it. And so all the contumelies of that Page
do fly back into the Face of him that vents them, and do admonish their Author
from this day forward, not to meddle with matters above his reach; and when he
shows himself in public, to use more skill, or more integrity. But both will
do best.

. 6. He confesses he is jealous over me, page 8. Because I Of sincere being
better then Orthodox.
say, with S. Paul, That God will render to every man according to his Romans 26.
1.
works, not his opinions. (Ibid.) Jealousy, even here too, is as cruel as the
Grave. Suppliciumque suum est. How sad a life does he lead who is afflicted and
troubled at all I say? Even Scripture will not please him if proceeding from my
Pen. Certainly none but a Solifidian can have unkindnesse to such Texts. Yet
perhaps he has not an ill opinion of the innocentest passages in my Book, but
only takes a round course to quarrel at all, that in case there should be
Pelagianisme in any one Period, he may not fail to meet with it: As Herod (in
another case) had not the least aversion to any one of those Matthew. 2. 16.
Infants who were of two years old and younger, but yet gave order to slay them
all, that he might be the surer to light on Christ. Secondly, I said, it is not
so good a task, to 2.
make Men Orthodox Christians, as to make them honest and sincere ones. Upon
which Mr. B. is very angry. (p. 8.) Is that my fault? if he thinks otherwise, I
am sorry for him, but cannot help it. And if he does not, why should he be
angry that we agree? If he thinks it is better to know much, then to do well,
and prefers a clear Head before a sound and upright Heart, what a case is he
in? and how ill has he done to * commend his preaching? And if on the
contrary, he Correp. Cor. p. 22.
thinks as I do, why should he be froward for want of power to dissent?

. 7. He adds a little after (p. 8.) That I and the pi^us To be practical
Christians (...) ill thing.
men of my way, are great Admirers and Followers of a Practical Catechism the
sixth time published.] What greater commendation could he have given us, then
that we follow the good which we admire? Would he have us know our Lesson, but
not observe and keep it? Orthodox Christians, but not Practically honest and
sincere ones too? If He and the Godly. men of his way (as he and they are wont
to word it) do neither admire nor follow that Practical Catechism, I wish they
did, and beseech God they may. If they neither do, nor will, I will rather be a
pious, then godly man: that is (as he has distinguished) I will rather be of
them, whom he calls the pious, then of them whom he calls the godly.

. 8. He calls his opinions in these matters, [The very fundamentals Of
Fundamentals in Religion.
of the Covennant of Grace, page 8. lin. 12.] but in which of the Three Creeds
shall we find either of them? What Poperty is this, to o^trude upon us new
Articles of Faith? I see King James was a wise, as well as a Learned and
Onthodox Man. And so was He of the Lower House, who told Mr. Speaker in his
Speech, (An. Dom. 1640.) That if they were listened to who would extirpate
Episcopacy (speaking of the Presbyterians) they would instead of every Bishop
put down in a Diocese, set up a Pope in every Parish: And if the Presbyterian
Assemblies should succeed, they would assume a Power to Excommunicate Kings, as
well as other Men: And if Kings were once Excommunicated, Men would not care
what became of them. And Mr. Hooker (as I take it) does say of such Men, that
they might do well enough to live in a Wilderness, but not in a Kingdom, or
Commonwealth. For all who differ from their opinions (that is, their
mistakes,) shall be said to err in the very fundamentals of the Covenant of
Grace, and so be looked upon as Heathens, and so be used as Vessels of Wrath.
And that their Censures do extend to the Supreme Civil Power, is apparent to
all who know the History of Scotland, or the Book of Paraeus upon the Epistle
to the Romans, which was burnt at Oxford by order of Conv^cation, An. Dom.
1622. It is here to be noted by Mr. B. and his Abettors, that the Reverend
Bishop Sentent. Davena^, p. 10. and 11.
Davenan^ in his famous Epistle to Duraeus, (which was one of the last, if not
the very last thing he writ, and that not long before his death) affirms,
That nothing is Fundamental which is not comprehended in the Apostles Creed.
Amongst these he reckons the Redemption of mankind in general, as really
different from Gods * peculiar people (which he therefore does distinguish into
two several Articles) And this is one of those Articles which he alleges as
an Expedient to reconcile the Protestant Churches. Which whosoever shall deny
is pronounced by the Bishop to deserve an Excommunication, and to be a
Christian only in Name. And this perhaps may be the reason why Mr. B. tells us
of a Damnatory Sentence to be pronounced upon that Bishop, (however he was one
of the Synod of Dort) were it not that he is pacified with some Orthodox
put-offs.

9. He says, That some Diseases do better when they 1.
break out then when they are kept in, p. 9.] Yet the Diseases of Railing and
Forgery had been better kept in, then be suffered to break out. For that which
comes out of the Mat. 15. 11.
mouth defiles the man. And our Savior does instance as well in Verse. 19.
False-witnesse and Blasphemies, as in Murders, Adulteries, Fornications and
Thefts. Now whether or no Mr. B. has not born false witness against me and
others, let every Man judge by the third Discovery. And whether he has or has
not blasphemously spoken concerning God, let it be judged by what I have
proved, and by what I shall prove before I leave him. 2. For the publication of
my Notes, which he expresses by 2.
the breaking out of a Disease, I have this to say; That though at first I was
unwilling to publish any thing which I thought might prove [(...)] an Apple of
Strife and Contention; yet when I saw that peace could not be had with the
quarrelsome, and was persuaded by Friends to prevent the Calumnies of a False
Copy, by the publication of a True one, I did in all singleness of heart make
my Appeal to common Readers, whether or no I was a Pelagian, etc? Or whether my
secret did belong to the Correp. Cor. p. 23.
Depths of Satan. In this I am sure I did very well. For he that does truth,
comes to the John 3. 21.
light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God. And
it is the joy of my Soul, for which I am bound to thank God, that my small
performance in those Papers has redounded to the benefit at least of some.

. 10. He professes not to put on the Spirit of meekness, Meekness professedly
put off by Mr. B.
p. 10.] (much indeed to his commendation) but to come against me with the Rod,
Ibid.] Yet he has made so many Rods for himself, that I am even weary to lay
them on. What I said and meant only of the Accusor of the Brethren, Rev. 12.
10. he takes unto himself, p. 10. and so is Felo de se: as if this were a mark
of his being faithful, chosen, and true, (Ibid.) that he hates his Neighbor
not as himself, though the Refuser of instruction Prove. 15. 32.
despises his own soul.

. 11. He is content to have his Cause tried by any ten noted senior
Sym-Presbyters, who since the times have been upon their Tropicks, have been
least of all Tropical, p. 11.] It Is well he acknowledges his Cause so ill, as
to submit it only to the 1.
judgment of his own Dear Brethren to whom he Dedicates his Book. But 2. how
came he to say, they have been least 2.
Tropical since the times have been upon their Tropicks? Are they the Men that
have stood their ground? Indeed S. Hierome has said, Bos vetulus fortiter
figit pedem. But did he not ^ell them in his Address, that they adhered yet to
one part of the 39 Articles, implying their Apos^acy from all the rest? What
was that which he called an unchristian thing, and four things more? How many
turns and removes have some of them made since they subscribed the three
Articles which were cont^ived by Bishop W^itgift? Since they owned the
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical agreed upon with the License of
Orthodox King James in the Synod held at London An. Dom. 1603. and commanded to
be observed under the Great Seal of England? Since they took their Degrees
either in Oxford or Cambridge? Since the Day of their Ordinations when they
were upon their Knees, and the Bishops hand upon their Heads? Since they Read
Common Prayer like other mortals? and preached some Sermons like other men? The
time would fail me to speak of what I will not here speak of. And will he never
leave jeering the very men of his way? But (3.) perhaps he had need to utter
his fine 3.
Clinch, which he therefore marked with Italick letters, and of which he is so
amorous as to repeat it verbatim p. 48. lin. 7. 8. 9. (where he calls them
grave Incumbents only, as if he distinguished betwixt right and possession.)
Had he not done better to have kept his ^est whole, then thus to have broken it
upon his friends? Tropicks and Tropical would sure have kept.

. 12. He concludes the necessity of railing in that he Railing not warranted by
Scripture.
ought not to be a dumb Dog, nor to be toothlesse at his tongues end, and pens
end, and that it is within his commission to be cutting. p. 12. lin. 45. 6. 8]
Thus he squeezes the Text till blood comes from it. Scripture was ever made a
Lesbian Rule, by which all sorts of men have undertaken to set their Errors
right. The very Gnostics and Nicholaitans pretended to it as much as any, but
hardly ever was it put to viler uses, then now by our Correptorie Corrector.
because Titus a Bishop had the sharpness of Rebuke committed to him as part of
his Episcopal Censures, (Tit. 1. 13.) Mr. B. a mere Presbyter defends his
railing and slandering against a person, over whom, he cannot pretend a
jurisdiction. Which abuse of this Text he seems to have borrowed from his first
Epist'ler, with what success, or Discretion, we shall see more hereafter.

. 13. He is much pleased that our Divines at the Synod of Of our Divines at the
Syof Dort, and of the Synod* it self.
Dort were the visible lawful Representers of our Mother the Church of England
there. p. 18.] I am very glad of this confession, because he adds another to
it, not many lines after, [That when a motion did but seem to be made somewhat
prejudicial to the Hier^rchick Flaunt of the English Church, they (our English
Divines in that Synod of Dort) did unanimously enter their joint attestation
against it.] 1. It seems they were not so much against the Remonstrant, as
against the Presbyterian party. For (2.) They were so far at agreement with the
former, that Bishop Davenant in his Pacificatory to Duraeus, is very Sentent.
D. Davenantij edit. Cantab. p. 10. 11. Bishop Davenant.
expressly for universal Redemption; and says that P. 27. Edit. Land. A. D.
1641. Edit. Latin: Cantab: p 20.
nothing belongs to the Catholic and Fundamental faith in these points of
Free Will and Predestination, but this one thing, [that all good is from Gods
Grace, and all evil from our selves.] Which as it is the total sum of what I
desired to be granted me in the two Grounds of my belief and Book* so it is
also of what the Bishop there mentions. He says too, that the word Calvinist
is rather a sign of Id. ibid. p. 46.
Faction then a badge of brotherly union, and sets down Exhortat: to broth:
Comm: c, 11. p. 150.
Theses of Gods Decrees, which are flatly contrary to many Anti-Romonstrants,
if not to all. So that whatever his opinions might once have been, he shows
evident marks of his change, as the Primate of Armagh, and other great ones
have done, (as well as my very inconsiderable self.) Its very well known that
in the Synod of Dort, the English were more moderate then the rest of that way,
nay, sometimes opposite. Bishop Hall of late has publicly showed his dislike
of all that party who ascribe eternal misery to the Select Thoughts one
Centurie. Med: 34. p. 102 103. 104. and seqq.
absolute will of an unrespective power; and rebukes them Bishop Hall
for their distinction of a positive and negative Reprobation. (Which Mr. B. so
much relies on p. 1.) he calls it blasphemy (as I did) to make God the Author
of Sin, and pleads in effect for my whole second Chapter, (which Mr. B. has so
much railed at) yet he and Bishop Davenant were both at Dort. Besides, it is
certified by a most learned and pious Argumenta omnia erant ferrea, and
syllogismi numellae ac compedes. Praetor majorem Propositionem, Lictor Minorem,
and conclusionem faciebat Carcer: Episcop: in Vedel: Rhap. c. 11. p. 216.
person of that Synod, that things were carried at Dort (somewhat worse then at
Trent it self) rather by violence, then Reason. Their Arguments were all iron;
their Syll^gismes no other then Stocks and Fetters, the Praetor made the Major
proposition, the Lictor was the Minor, and the prison was the conclusion. 3.
Besides, if those very few Dr. Hall. D. Davenant. D. Carleton. Doctor Ward.
of our men at the Synod of Dort were the visible lawful Representers of our
Mother the Church of England, how much more were all Those who composed the
Catechism, the Communion Book, the 39. Articles of our English Church, to some
of which some Confer Artic. 31. Eccl. Belg. in Act: Synod. part: 1. p. 362. cum
Artic: 36. Eccl. Anglic. Item These: 6, and 8, etc. Genev. in Synod: Dordr:
part. 2. p. 132. 133. cum Artic: 2. 7. 15. 31. Eccl. Anglic:
Articles of the Synod at Dort have a most evident Repugnance? what shall we
say of all those who composed our Canons and Constitutions A. D. 1603. which
were ratified by the learned and Orthodox King James (as Mr. B. calls him when
he thinks it is for his turn) to which notwithstanding Mr. B. and his Masters
do stand in perpetual opposition? if so few men at Dort who were purposely
called out by the same King James are to denominate the judgment of the whole
Church of England, how much more may be said for the Common prayer, which was
not only subscribed to by all our English Divines at Dort, but was establshed
by Law and Canon, since the times of our Reformation, by no less then five
Acts of Parliament in the days of Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth?
compiled by those Reformers who were not persecutors, but Martyrs? and held in
practice during the time of no less then 4. Princes? (and it is well known that
Pe^ry for publishing of libels against the Church Government, was indicted,
arraigned, and executed at Tiburn.) How much more for Epis^opacy, which is not
only as ancient as Christianity it self in this very Land, but was
particularly confirmed by M^gna Charta, and by no less then 32 Acts of
Parliament? and in 42 of King Edward the third, the first chapter enacteth,
that if any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be holden for none. And
in 25. Edvardi 1. Chap. 1. 2. Magna Charta is declared to be the Common Law of
the Land. And I hope an Ecclesiastical Constitution whether divine or humane,
is not the less valid for being corroborated by the whole Civil power. But 4.
Our English Divines at Dort, as they were all for Episcopacy (and their
Authority as valid in one point, as another,) so they were Confer These: 3.
sent. Theol: Mag: Brit: in Act. Synod: de Artic. 2. in part. 2. p. 100: 101:
cum These: 6. 8. sent. Genev. ibid: 132: 133:
opposite in that, and in other points, to other Representers of other
Churches, even in that very Synod. And Mr. B. is so angry for one part of their
Dissension as to jeere them very mannerly with their Hierarchick Flaunt, which
the most Reverend Bishop Hall did very learnedly assert against Smectymnuus,
whom Mr. B. has ill requited with this Correptorie Correction for his having
requested Mr. Kendal to write an Answer to my Notes. Which yet none are so
credulous as to believe, except the few who are not acquainted with such men's
Rumors. But 5. That a Presbyter should accuse those Bishops of so much
arrogance and Pride, as seems 5.
to be couched in that Nickname [Hierarchick Flaunt] is no more or less
strange, then for Corah, Dathan, or Abiram to accuse Moses and Aaron of having
taken too much upon them. What shall we think of the Aerian or Presbyterian
Flaunt, which denies a supremacy to all Civil power in all cases and over all
persons, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil? and for this very reason were never
known to be quiet, any longer then they were flattered, or kept inawe? The
power to excommunicate the Supreme Civil Magistrate was never arrogated by any,
except the Pope, and the Presbyterian, in direct opposition to the 39 Articles
of the Church of England, and to the Protestant Hierarchy by whom they were
composed; and who never were known to beard their Sovereigns; a thing as
natural to the Scottish Presbytery, as eating and drinking to other men. And
what affinity (or Identity rather) there is betwixt the Scottish and English
Followers of Aerius, their League and Covenant has made apparent. If Mr. B. or
his Assertors do think I cannot prove what I have spoken, let them say but the
word, and I will try. I have notcharged my Margin with Citations of proof, both
because I suppose it is not needful where there is so great a Noteriety of
Fact, and because my supellex is too plentiful to be but tolerably expressed
in so small a Room.

. 14. He says Vox populi Vox dei. p. 23.] if that is generally true, then is
he himself the unhappiest man that I have known. He has forgot what he told us
p. 6. that his parrhesia in speaking has procured him small favor in the
world. And yet he would needs publish his Correptorie Correction. When he calls
my person [satanical Blasphemer, and my writing [Diabolical stuff,] he
professes as near as he can, to call things by their proper names, p. 6. This
the people calls Railing. And he concludes against himself, that the voice of
the people is the voice of God.

. 15. He calls Vossius his Pelagian History my Warehouse to fetch Quotations
out of, p. 24.] Perhaps he had not known that there was any such Book, or that
I made the least use of it, if I had not publicly informed him in my 25 page.
What a cunning Man is this to find out the knowledge of some things, by no
other Circumstance then that of being told? but since he is so ungrateful as to
make an ugly use of the knowledge which I gave him, I may perhaps be less
liberal another time. I was desirous to use Vossius, (not as Mr. B. has used
Janseni^s and Dr. Twisse, and several others of that stamp, out of pure
necessity, but) that the Reader might discern what was the sense of Antiquity,
not only in my judgment (which is not considerable) but in the judgment of
learned Vossius. To whom I added many Testimonies, though not the Tithe of what
I could easily have done.

. 16. He says It was a Massilian Tenent, that they denied Of the Grace of
Perseverance. 1. 2. 3.
there was given unto any such a perseverance from which they were not
permitted to prevaricate, p. 24.] Though this is nothing to the purpose, and
has been spoken of before, yet that his Reader may not be abused by his bare
Intimation, I think it not amiss to say a little. 1. That all is not
erroneous, or Massilian, which was said to be so at the Synod of Dort. 2. That
I never denied the Grace of Perseverance; but said Corrected Copy of Notes. p.
66.
on the contrary, that that Grace in the Elect does bring them to a most
certain and infallible degree of bliss. But 3. I question whether every one
that has Sanctification has also that Grace of Perseverance. And to this S.
Austin has sure no quarrel, as appears by the Cum dicunt sancti, ne nos
inducas in tentationem, sed libera nos a malo, quid aliud quam ut in sanctitate
perseverent precantur? Aug. de bono Persev. c. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4.
beginning of his Sixth Chapter De bon^ perseverantiae. For 1. They are holy
(in some measure) before they have or pray for the Grace of Perseverance. 2. If
no holy man can fall, then no need of that prayer. 3. The Grace of
Sanctification is one Grace, that of Perseverance another. 4. God does not
always at the first grant holy men's prayers, but does exercise their
vigilance, and excite their importunity, and grants them perseverance in their
course of well-doing as a reward to their vigilance and importunity in prayer
for it. 5. Though in S. Austin's opinion, they that have the grace of
Perseverance cannot fall from that grace; 5.
yet they that have the grace of regeneration and justification may fall from
that grace, as appears by the place which I had cited out of S. Austin in my p.
67. Now before Mr. B. had writ against my Notes, he should have taken the pains
to understand them, especially what I had spoken, p. 65, 66, 67.

. 17. What he says of the Lambeth Articles, and the Of Lambeth Articles.
Explanatory Articles of the Church of Ireland, p. 24.] is every whit as
impertinent. For 1. They are not of the Church of England, which he professes
to be for, though I 1.
cannot guess for what reason. 2. The Articles of Lambeth were such an
Innovation, as Queen Elizabeth was angry at, 2.
and commanded them speedily to be suppressed. Nor would King James be entreated
to let them pass among the Articles of the Church of England, who rather
protected Mr. Mountague, their great opposer. And we may very well suspect the
Man is sinking irrecoverably, who catches so earnstly at every such straw, to
support or rescue his drowning cause.

. 18. He tells us That in fidelity, though with much weakness he has served
his Mother the Church of England now above these twenty years, in the work of
the Ministry; and if he cannot prove that the Doctrines which he has taught
all along, contrary to what I deliver in my Book, are most agreeable to her
faith, and that mine is as opposi^e to it as Heaven and Hell, he will be
contented to be cursed by his Mother even with Anathema Maranatha, p. 24, 25.]
1. Here is another Specimen of his peculiar Logic, which does commonly consist
1.
in such a stomackful affirmation, that he is in the right, and I in the wrong.
So the Scottish Preacher confuted Bellarmine *in the Pulpit: [ Bellarmine says
thus, but I say the contrary; Where is he now? 2. That he has served his
Mother with much weakness, is that which no body denies him the glory 2.
of: but 3. with what fidelity we cannot possibly imagine. And 3. 4.
how much the contrary, let others judge. But 4. how is the World concerned to
know, that Mr. B. has been a Minister above Twenty years? Must we be taught by
an example, in how long a time how little a Proficiency some Men can make? It
may here be demanded, whether in so many years he ever preached against Railing
or Bearing false witness? If he did, how much was his Correptory Correction
against his own Doctrine as well as Conscience? 5. How cruelly and Rashly 5.
he has proceeded against himself in his Invitation to an Anathema Maranatha,
amongst many Instances I shall give but one. He is an opposer (to his poor
utmost) of Universal Redemption, Universal Redemption asserted by the* Church
of England.
asserted by his Mother in her Liturgy, Articles and Catechism. Or if he
grant Universal Redemption, how can he doubt of what I say against the absolute
Reprobation of the Antelapsarians, or the Sublapsarians Preterition? For if
Christ died for us men, and for our salvation (as in the Nicene Creed it is
expressed by an indefinite equivalent to universal) or for me and all mankind,
(as the Catechism has it) or for all the sins of the whold World both actual
and original (as she has it in her Articles) how can the greatest part of Men
be absolutely reprobated, or but passed by in Massa, without respect unto their
actual sins? For if that can be true, Christ died not for them; the passing by
being contrary to the giving of Christ. Instead of which these Men do very
solemnly use God's offering of Christ (not for them, but) to them. And this
they would fain reconcile with the full intention of God Almighty, that they to
whom he is offered shall not possibly have him.

. 19. He says There is no question or difficulty, after Predestination
Respective confessed unwillingly by Mr. B.
what fashion, and upon whom that predestination is to be executed, p. 25. lin.
ult. p. 26. lin. 1.] This is as much as I desire. For if no question is to be
made how, and on whom Gods predestination is to be executed, it does instantly
follow, that his execution being agreeable to his Decree, it must be also
without question, that his Decree of Reprobation was to the final impenitent
and unbelieving; and that his decree of election was to the believing,
penitent, and persevering. Which is my Notion of Gods decrees.

. 20. He says That I and my party rob God of his Sovereign Of Gods Sovereignty
and justice. 1.
determinining power, etc. p. 27.] Unless he means my denial of God's being
the cause and predeterminer of sin, I cannot guess what he means. I plead for
his Sovereignty and determing power, as much as Scripture pleads for them. But
he does not exercise his Sovereignty in decreeing to punish without respect
unto sin; and as he determines all things that are good, so he determines
nothing that is evil. I appeal to the Reader where lies the Sacrilege. In me,
who deny the least causality of wickedness to the Spirit of Holiness? or in
the Correptory Corrector, who will have him the Determiner of all Events, just,
and unjust? But 2. our Controversy 2.
is not, what God may do if he will, but what he has decreed to do, and
therefore cannot but will because he has decreed it, and determined himself by
so decreeing; and by his word revealed to us those his determinations. Which
are mercifully and justly to judge every man (not according to his merits, as
Mr. B. words it, but) according to his Rev. 20. 12. Romans 2. 6.
works.

. 21. He says that his party will clear themselves to hold Of Gods being the
Author of sin, according to Mr B. his reason to the contrary.
more then my self, that God is no Author of sin, nor can be. For that the very
esse of sin is merely Priva^ivum and nullam habet causam efficientem, sed
deficientem tantum, p. 33.] Here our Correptory Corrector is fallen so deeply
into the mire, as it will not be possible to fetch him out. For 1. If there is
The distinction of Efficient and Deficient Cause was before considered. Chap.
3. Sect. 28. 1. 2. 3. 4.
found to be an efficient cause of sin (as I have proved there is) he
concludes God to be it, since he gives no other reason of his not being the
Author, then that sin has no efficient cause. 2. He implies that God is such a
cause, of which the being of sin is capable, though not such a cause as is
competent to that, whose very esse is merely privative. Else for what reason
should he render such a reason? 3. If the esse of sin is more then privative,
(as I have proved long since) Mr. Barlee's only Reason cease, in default of
which, he leaves God to be the Author of sin; he giving no other reason why he
is not the Author. 4. The Reason which he pretends to give, is not taken from
the purity and holiness of God and its repugnancy to the nature of sin, but
from the incapacity of sin it self; as if upon supposition of sins being
positive and so capable of an Author, nothing could hinder God Almighty from a
capability of being its Author. Or 5. If God is found to be the Author 5.
of that, whose very esse is merely privative, as of Darkness, Blindness, and
the like, (then which there is nothing more apparent) then, (notwithstanding
the Reason which M^. B. gives) God may be concluded the Author of sin too. Or
6. If his way of arguing were as strong as he can wish it [viz. that God is not
the Author of sin, because its esse is but privative, and has not an efficient
but deficient cause,] yet his condition is as lamentable as his very
Adversaries can wish it, (and I heartily wish it were better with him) for this
would prove God to be the Author of sin, as much as any thing else either is,
or can be. And if it has any force in it, it will prove that the Devil is not
the Father of lies, nor Cain the Author of that Murder for which he is
deservedly and justly damned. 7. Why may not that which is punishable with
Death eternal, be something? and that which is something, be effected? and that
which is effected have an efficient? but Mr. B. has confessed that sin is
something, when he made it the object of Gods Correp. Cor. p. 73.
decree, of Gods will, of Gods eternal Determination, and it cannot be nothing,
which God has absolutely willed to fall out: and Id. p. 78.
voluntarily decreed; and Id. p. 79.
determined to be done. Not only Charity, but good Nature forbids the farther
prosecution of so unfortunate a writer, whose great store of unskilfulnesse may
help excuse him. For no unskillulnesse is so bad, as to be knowingly erroneous
without Amendment.

. 22. His Cylindrical (...), or turn-pin Indifferency Of Free Will.
p. 33.] he does as little understand, as he does [his Euph^es of the pia matter
of my Brains p. 19.] or his plumbeous cerebrosities of the Church
indoctrinated, p. 70.] For what is nonsense is unintelligible, it signifies
nothing besides the depth of the speaker, and his very small Acquaintance with
Greek, or Latin. But that may otherwise be discerned by comparing the Errors of
his Book with those in his Catalogue of Errata, which to prosecute at large
would make a very long Chapter, and stir up more laughter then would be perhaps
for the Readers ease. It is pity that some men should rather use a ^ew Bumbast
and rumbling words at a venture, then stay so long as to enquire after their
proper signification. The passage which he quoteth p. 64. was fetched from Jesus
the son of Sirach, whom perhaps he believes to have been one of the profane
Correp. Cor. p. 28.
spawn of the Arminians, many hundred of years before Arminius himself was
born. And Si liberum arbitrium primi hominis consistebat in illo aequilibrio
affectus and inclinationis ad malum and bonum, tum sane homo ante lapsum non
tantum Dei Imaginem, sed, quod impium auditu est, etiam satanae Imaginem
retulit. D. Anton: Walae. cont. Corvin. c. 6.
Walaeus his Argument in the Margin p. 33 [that if the first man were placed in
aequilibrio to good and evil, he would not only have been Gods, but Satan's
Image,] is so incomparably shallow, that none but a Correptorie Corrector could
have thought it worth citing. For the image of Satan consists in the pressing
motion to evil, and not in an Indifferency to good or evil. If Mr. B thinks
otherwise, he has a better opinion of the Devil, then he seems to have of Adam
in his state of Innocence.

. 23. He confesses, that their Doctrine would sinck That Mr. B. his Doctrine
leads to despair by his own confession
men into the gulf of Despair, if they did teach, that though men did knock
never so hard, heaven Gates should never be opened unto them p. 34.] yet it is
part of their Doctrine, Nec plus boni facere possumus quam facimus, nec plus
mali omittere, quia Deus utrumque, ut fi^ f^^t ab aeterno praecise decrevit.
Piscat: ad Amic: Dupl: Vorstij: p. 176.
that that no man can possibly commit less sin then he commits, or do more
good then he does, because God has precisely decreed from eternity that both
be done as they are done. And that it is Fataliter constitutum est, quando, and
quomodo, and quantop^re, unusquisque nostrum pietatem vel colere vel non colere
debeat. Id: ibid: p. 228.
fatally constituted, both when, and how, and how much every one of us ought to
be pious, or not to be pious. It is another part of their Doctrine, that all
the care and diligence which men can use toward the attainment of Salvation is
vain and frustrate, and rather Dontelock advers: Castle: p. 171.
hurtful then helpful to them that are without faith. And Mr. Calvin refers
the irremediable misery of the sons of Adam [ad Calvin: In: sti^: l. 3. c. 23.
4. fol. 323 Nonne ad eam quae nunc pro damnationis causa obtenditur,
corruptionem, dei ordinatione praedestinati ante fuerant? quum ergo in sua
corruptione pereunt, nihil aliud quam poenas luunt ejus calamitatis, in quam
ip^ius praedestinatione lapsus est Adam, ac posteros suos secum praecipites
secum traxit. ^ateor sane, in hanc qua nunc illigati sunt, conditionis miseriam
dei voluntate decidisse universos filios Adam. Atque id est quod principio
dicebam, redeundum tandem semper esse ad solum divinae voluntatis Arbitrium,
cujus cause sit in i pse abscondita.
solum Arbitrium divinae voluntatis] to the sol^ or only or mere will of God,
as if he were afraid, that a ma^s own will should be any cause of that
corruption, which is alleged to be the cause of Damnation. For such is the
Question to to which he there answers, and makes a Grant. Q^ Were not men
predestined by the ordination of God to that * corruption which is alleged as
the cause of Damnation? when therefore they perish in their corruption, they
only suffer the punishment of that Calamity into which Adam fell and into
which he drew headlong his Posterity with himself, by Gods Predestination.
Truly (says Calvin) I do confess, that all the sons of Adam did fall into
the misery of this condition in which they are bound [and fettered] by the will
of God. And this is that which I said at the beginning, that we must always
have recourse to the sole Decree of Gods will, the cause of which lies hidden
within himself. I will here observe but two things. 1. That the Question was
not made of any other corruption then that of sin, viz. the cause of Damnation.
2. That such as are absolutely reprobated or passed by in Adams loins, and had
not Christ as a Ransom intended for them, cannot enter heaven Gates though they
should knock never so hard; that is, upon supposition, that they should knock,
which whether they can or cannot, they cannot enter, if they are absolutely
excluded by unconditional Reprobation. Which being the Doctrine of Mr. B. and
of his Teachers, he has confessed it to be bloody, as leading men into the
Gulf of Despair.

. 24. He has a strangely weak and false assertion of A. Of Rivets Argument.
Rivet in the Margin of his 38. page, which he says will prove most
unavoidably true, Qui affirmant Inclinationem ad peccandum etiam ante lapsum,
in Deum Naturae autorem omnem peccati culpam, conjicunt cum inclinatio talis
vitiosa non esse non potuerit, quae tamen fuerit a deo necesse est, si ante
lapsum detur. etc. Rivet: Disp: 2: These: 2.
viz. that they who affirm an inclination to sin before the fall, do lay all
the fault of the sin upon God the Author of nature, since such an inclination
cannot but be vicious, which yet must needs have been from God, if it were
before the fall p. 38.] But here I demand. Had not Eve an inclination to the
forbidden fruit, before she eat it? was it not fair to look on? and did not
this incline her eye? was it not tempting to the Taste? and did not that incline
her palate? had she not a body of flesh and blood, inclinable to its proper
material objects, as well as a soul, or spirit, inclined to obedience? if
before she sinned, she was not inclinable to sin, how then did she sin? was it
without or against her inclination? if her sin was voluntary, and not committed
of necessity, (or whether she would or no) she had an inclination to which she
yielded, and thereby sinned. And which if she had resisted, she had not fal^e,
but been victorious. 2. Her mere inclination to 2.
sin was not her sin; for if it were, she sinned before she sinned. And if her
inclination to her first sin were it self a sin, there would be something
[primo prius] before the first, and the first would be second, which would
imply a contradiction. There would also be an inclination to that inclination
(as there must needs be to every voluntary and wilful sin) which would infer
the absurdity of progressus in infinitum, if inclinatio ad peccandum were ipsum
peccatum, nor would there be any distance betwixt the way, and the journeys
end. 3. It is not a sin to be hungry, (for so was Christ) nor to be tempted,
(for so was Christ too.) But 3.
it is a sin to do what is forbidden, or not to do what is commanded. Adam and
Eve were forbidden to Gen: 2. 17.
eat and to Chap. 3. 3.
touch, not to be inclinable to either of them. 4. How God inferred to be the
Author of Sin by Rivet and Mr. B.
Whence was the sin, if there was no inclination? not from Eve her self, who if
she had no inclination, had no temptation from within; not from the Devil,
whose Temptations have no force, if contrary to all our inclinations. He
tempted our Savior, but could not possibly prevail, because he had not
inclination to any the least evil So that according to Rivet, and Mr. B. the
sin of Eve was from God alone. For they affirm two things; First that her very
inclination to sin was Cum talis Inclinatio vitiosa non esse non potuerit.
vicious, and Secondly, that of necessity it was from Quae tamen fuerit a Deo
necesse est. A. Rivet. apud Correp. Corr. p. 38.
God. So that unless they can prove that Eve had no inclination to sin before
she sinned, they must confess they make God to be the Qui affirmant
inclinationem ad peccandum ante lapsum, in Deum naturae Authorem conjiciunt
omnem peccati culpam. Id. Ib.
Author of sin, upon the ground on which they say, that others do it. And
besides this violentum which Mr. B. procures to himself, it must be remembered
5. That these Men who do not allow an inclination to Eves first sin, do yet
contend for a necessity of its being committed, and do ascribe that necessity
to Gods absolute Decree. And yet 6. Mr. B. Correp. Corr. page 217. his words
are, that I stand up for a miserable, lying, sinful power of resisting Gods
grace.
accuses me, for merely asserting the power of resisting the grace of God; and
farther calls it a sinsul power, although it is of Gods giving. The power to
sin is very innocent whilst not reduced into act. For Adam and the Angels were
very innocent before they sinned; and they had power to sin before they
sinned; how else could they sin? had they been able without the power? and
was not God the Author of all, with which they were endued before they sinned?
So that if the very power to sin is sinful (as Mr. B. says) Mr. B. makes God
to be the Author of sin. Unless he can prove (by way of subterfuge) that a Man
can sin without the power to sin, or that he has not the power to sin before
he sins. That Potentia is not Prior actu.

. 25. He accuses me of saying, That Infants are P. 39. lin. 29, 30.
harmless notwithstanding original sin, and that none in the world dying
Infants are P. 39. l. ult. 1. 2. 3. Of Infants being harmless and in a
saveable condition.
damned, in his p. 39. But First in my page 9. which he cites, there is not
any such thing. And Secondly if there were, it were not liable to Reproof. Nay,
Thirdly, how could Mr. B. defame himself more, then by denying Infants to be
harmless, or by affirming that those harmless things are damned? he had been
less cruel to himself if he had called himself Pelagian, Massilian, Arminian,
or the like. For if Mr. B. is one of those who are faithful, chosen and true,
(p. 10.) and who cannot possibly fall away, (p. 35.) why should Infants be
sentenced by him to Hell, who never were guilty of any railing, or of bearing
false witness against their Neighbors? And if Infants may not be termed
harmless, who never injured any Man living in thought, word, or deed, what
hope has Mr. B. that we should term him a harmless Man? Must the heinous
Malefactors be placed in Heaven, whilst thousands of Infants are ad^udged to
Hell, who did no evil actually, neither was guile found in their lips? If Job
is said to be Job 1. 1, 8.
perfect and upright, fearing God, and eschewing evil; if Zachary and Elizabeth
are said to be Luke 1. 6.
righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord blameless; if David said of him self that he was Psalm. 86. 2.
holy; if Christ commanded his Disciples to be Mat. 10. 16.
harmless as Doves; and S. Paul his Philippians, to be blameless and Phil. 2.
15.
harmless; why should I be reproached for saying that Infants were harmless
things, who are sure more harmless, then Job, or Zachary, David, or the
Philippians? If our Savior was so tender of little children, as to be much
Mar. 10. 14.
displeased with his Disciples for being less tender then they ought; if he
proposed a Mat. 18. 1, 2, 3.
little child as an emblem of the greatest in the kingdom of heaven, and told
his Disciples, that except they were converted and did become as little Verse. 3.
children, they should not enter into the kingdom of heaven; and bid them take
heed that they did not despise one of those little ones, because Verse. 10.
their Angels in heaven do always behold the face of God; if he said of little
children (as little children) that the kingdom of God is composed of Mar. 10. 14
such (of such in Age, or such in Innocence, that is to say, in simplicity and
inoffensivenesse of mind) and farther added, that whosoever should not receive
the kingdom of God as a little (e) child (that is with meekness, and
malleablenesse, self-distrust, and resignation, and sole dependence upon
Christ, like that of an Infant upon the Mother or the Nurse,) should in no (e)
wise enter therein; if he took them up into his Verse. 16.
arms, Verse. 15.
put his hands upon them, and blessed them, and that because they were little
children (whether their parents were believers, or unbelievers, or believers
only in part,) how is it honorable or safe for Mr. B. to give such Correptory
Correction to Millions of Millions of such Dove-like souls, as to be willing
to have them burning in a bottomless lake of Fire and Brimstone, and that for
ever, merely for being the posterity of Adam, (which yet they could not but be)
and so polluted with that sin which is called Original, because it never was
actually g So says our Mother the Church of England, Artic. 31.
committed by them, and for the expiation of which their Savior died? Let
every Man judge of Mr. B. his opinions touching the irrespectivenesse of Gods
Decrees, by the monstrous assertions to which they lead him. Amongst many of
which this sure is one, [That such great sinners as he cannot but confess
himself to be, (unless by a denial he will become the greater sinner) are
precious vessels of election, and cannot (by any means possible) fall finally
from grace, whilst the far greater part of Infants are vessels of wrath,
though incomparably better and more harmless, and so more lovely before God
and Man, then such as hate and persecute their Fellow Christians.

. 26. He says I have a care of pouring out a world of humane Rhetoric in the
very words which man's wisdom teaches. But none at all of any spiritual Logic;
which art I no where exercise unless in drawing up a cracked Syllogism of four
terms, p. 43.] If I have done so, as he speaks, it is 1.
more then I know; and how he should know it I cannot imagine, since I am sure
I never told him. It Is true indeed that in my Book I did not say, I wot, I wis,
and I trow. But that was no argument that I took any care of pouring out a
world of humane Rhetoric. What care he took I cannot tell, but he has poured
forth a world of most inhumane and cruel Rhetoric, in the very words which
man's wilfulness (I cannot say man's wisdom teaches: for to have called me
Dragon, Sorcerer, Satanical Blasphemer, the child of the Devil, and my Book a
Noonday Devil, was I think no part (no not so much as) of humane wisdom. But
2. If a great deal of Rhetoric were a 2.
fault, either as being Rhetoric, or as being a great deal, Mr. B. might
accuse the Epistles of S. Paul, and Psalms of David. And if the fault lies in
the humanity of the Rhetoric, as that is opposed to divine, Mr. B. is more
guilty then any Man I ever read. He is as rhetorical as he is able, as appears
by the pleasure he takes in clinches. Such as [Notes of no good Note. Courted
at Court. (...) and Face. Fulgent and Fulgentius. Prefaces, faces, and
outfaces. Classes and clashing. Tropicks, and Tropical. Polite and Politic.
Stick and stickle: Prosperous and prosper.] With other such elegancies and
rhet^rications, which some little children of six years old have not been able to
endure. But 3. It is worthier a Readers patience, to consider the cracked
Syllogism of four Terms, which he says I pin on the 3.
Apostle in my 19 Page. How far from truth and ingenuity, or but tolerable skill
in the Art of Reasoning, how much to the injuring of S. Paul, and to the
pitiful betraying of his own Cause, will be as worthy our observation, as any
one misdemeanour in all his Book. The whole case lies thus. I did in Of
universal Redemption, already spoken of. Chap. 3. Sect. 23.
the 19 Page of my Notes prove the universality of Christ's death from those
words of the Apostle [If one died for all, then were all dead, 2 Cor. 5. 14.]
Where [That all were dead] is the thing to be proved; and [that one died for
all] is the Argument or Medium, whereby to prove it. And that this later being
the Antecedent, as that former the sequel of the major proposition of a
Hypothetical Syllogism, the former could not but make the minor, and the later
the conclusion, (and both of necessity, without my help,) as every child must
needs know who has but dipped into any Logical System. And if Mr. B. will but
try to make such a Syllogism, he shall find by experience, that (let him do
what he can to the contrary) the Antecedent of the major will make the minor,
and the sequel of the major will become the conclusion. Therefore said I very
truly (what Mr. B. does not gainsay with any the least pretense of reason) that
the Apostle in that Text does argue thus,

If one dyed for all, then were all dead.
But one dyed for all (that must be the Assumption)
Therefore all were dead.
So that had there been the Fallacy of four Terms in that cracked syllogism
(as Mr. B. has been unskilful enough to call it) it must have been objected
against S. Paul, whose way of arguing that was, and not against me, who was but
his E^h^. Which because Mr. B. may be unwilling to understand, it may perhaps
be worth while 4. To make him 4.
understand it against his will. For although it does lie in any man's power to
dissemble, and to persist in a denial of what he inwardly does acknowledge, yet
there are very many cases wherein he cannot be ignorant although he would. E.
G. Mr. B. cannot be ignorant, what is commonly meant by [If, and Then,] when in
the same proposition the first is conditional, and the second illative. Next he
cannot be ignorant, that they are both used as such in our Apostles proposition
[If one dyed for all, then were all dead.] Again he cannot be ignorant, that in
case it were false [that one died for all,] it might also be false, [that all
were dead.] Because the later is inferred, by our Apostle, upon the strength
and presupposal of the former. And so unless Mr. B. will turn Pelagian, and
deny that all were dead, (without the exception of any one,) he must confess
that all were died for (in the same notion of the word all,) or if to escape
Pelagianisme he shall seek to creep out at another Crevice, by saying that
[all] in the sequel, is more universal then in the Antecedent, he will accuse
St. Paul of deceit, or ignorance, of a gross equivocation, or a want of skill
to speak good sense, which no Pelagian was ever so wicked as to attempt. For
the evidencing of which (to such as are of his size,) let us 5. Behold St.
Paul's words as they make an Enthymeme (which is as sound a form of
Argumentation as any disputant can use: One died for all,
Therefore all were dead.


If the word [all] in this Enthymeme is not univocal, as (Mr. B. says it is
not) the Apostles meaning must needs be one of these two. [One died for Note
that Mr. B: (in his p. 106.) does say that [all] in this as in other Texts,
does only signify [many.] that is, the Elect. Who in respect of all, are but
some; and in respect of the Reprobates, are but a few.
some only, therefore some only were dead] or [one died for some only,
therefore all were dead without exception.] If Mr. B. will have the former, he
makes St. Paul a Pelagian before that Heresy had a Being; And if the latter, he
makes that mighty spiritual Logician (as he has called him p. 43.) to infer an
universal from a particular. Which how illogical it is, I need not say. But 6.
Mr. B. has one shift more in his p. 106. whereby he hopes to evade or evacuat
the conquering force of that Text. The poor sum of it is this, that when the
Apostle says [all were dead] he means not dead in trespasses and sins, but (on
the contrary) dead unto sin. But this is to flownder and not escape; such an
endeavor of evasion, as does but entangle him so much the more. For 1. It
shows him (against his will) a notable Friend to the Pelagians, 1.
whilst he labors to rob me of the force of that Text, which, as I understand
it, is most expressly against them. Next, 2.
it shows him to be careless what becomes of the Context, if that Text by any
means may be but wrested to his uses. For the obligation lying upon us from the
constraining love of Christ (which the Apostle there speaks of) is seen in this
more especially, that Christ died for us even then, when we were all dead in
trespasses and sins, when we stood in perfect need of his vivification. 3. I
ask him, how Christ's Death can presuppose or conclude our being dead to sin,
when 3.
it is said in the same place to be in order to that end, that we should not
henceforth live unto our selves, that is to say, that we should die unto sin?
4. If Christ died for them only who are dead to sin, then the object of Gods
decree, and so of 4.
Gods giving Christ, is not man as man, nor lapsed man as lapsed, but the
mortified Regenerate man in as much as he is regenerate, which is directly
against the Doctrine of Mr. Barlees own Masters the Sublapsarians. 5. If the
word [all] 5.
in this place [then were all dead] does only signify a few (for the Elect
are very few, in respect of the Reprobates) what place of Scripture can Mr. B.
allege, affirming all to be dead in Adam, which may not thus be avoided? and
for how much a lesser reason then this (indeed for no reason at all) has the
stupendous Grotius been called Socinian? much more might be said to show the
absurdity of Mr. B's Answer, and the force of the Argument from that Text,
which is yet found to be capable of no other Answer. 7. I will now return to
his former shift of saying that all does only 7.
signify many, when Christ is said to die for all. The absurdity of which as I
have showed many ways, so may it be showed many more. As 1. From other places
of Scripture, where the Death of Christ is so universally expressed, 1.
as to exclude the least exception. He died for all, that is for the Joh: 4. 42
world, for the 1 John 2. 2.
whole world, for Heb. 2. 9.
every man, for them that are capable of Romans 14. 15. 1 Cor. 8. 11.
perishing, for them that 2 Pet. 21.
deny him and are damned. Texts so very much prevailing with Junius and
Tilenus, as to make them acknowledge the Ancient Fathers' distinction (which
Mr. B. derides so often) of Gods Antecedent or conditionate will. 1. That no
man should perish. 2. That 2 Pet. 3. 9. 1 Timothy: 2. 4.
all should come to repentance. Which does infer sufficient Grace to every man
in the world, as Prosper a hundred times confesses, and of ^are even Junius as
well as he. 2. From the nature 2.
of the word [(...) pro, For,] which needs must note either the end, or the
effect. In respect of this later, he died effectually for no^ ^ut the elect;
because they only do believe, and obey, and syncerely repent, and persevere
unto the end, which are the Conditions of the Covenant betwixt us and Christ,
and the respective Qualifications in the prescience of which we were Elected.
But in respect of the former, He died intentionally for all and every one, even
for them that forsake him, whom he never forsakes, Deus priusquam deseratur,
niminem deserit. and multos Desertores saepe conver^it. Prosper Respon. ad 7.
object. Vincent.
until he is forsaken by them. (As Prosper spoke in his answer to one of
Vincentius his Objections, who yet of all mankind is the least suspected to be
Pelagian by our Correptorie Corrector and all of his way). The goodness of God
would have continued even on them, Rom: 11. 22.
if they had continued in his goodness (as St. Paul expresses the condition
upon which the pr^mises of God are made) 2 Chro. 15. 2
The Lord is with us, whilst we are with him. If we seek him, he will be found
of us. But if we forsake him, he will forsake us (as Azariah spoke by the
spirit of God.) In the former notion of the word [for] as it notes the effect
of our Saviors death, he is said to lay down his life for the John. 10. 15.
sheep; and to have given himself for his Ephesians. 5. 25.
Church. But in the later notion of the word [for] as it notes the end, and by
consequence the intention of our Saviors Death, he is said to be the
propitiation for the sins of the whole 1 John 22.
world, and to have tasted Death for Heb. 2. 9.
every man. Thus the double notion of the particle [for] shows us an easy
reconcilement of several Texts which may outwardly seem to disagree. And if our
Correptorie Corrector can neither prove another use of the particle [pro, for,]
nor evade those absurdities which have risen from his Doctrine, and ways of
proof, I do conceive he is obliged to make a public Recantation.

. 27. He says, Fulgentius makes it his business to confute my Second Chapter,
where he largely proves, that though God do not predestinate men to sin, yet he
does to their punishment for sin. p. 43. Yet this is pleading for my second
Chapter, and not against it. For sure Praedestinatos affirmat Augustinus non ad
delictum, sed ad supplicium. etc. Fulgent. l. 1. ad Monim.
[supplicium] punishment supposes sin, and so Gods Predestination of sinful
men to punishment must needs be made in intuition of sin, which to prove, is
the business of my second and third Chapters; but Mr. B. takes his usual
liberty of calling things as he pleases. A respective Decree must be no Decree
a^, when he has need to beg the Question. He will not allow me to say (in my
second Chapter,) that the sin which God wills not is the Cause of the
punishment, (which God wills only for sin, not for it self.) And yet he
cites a * saying from Dr. Dr. Twisse against Mr. Hoard p. 49. cited by Mr. B.
p. 144. and 145.
Twisse, Respective Decrees proved from Dr. Twisse his own words.
That sin is acknowledged to be the cause of the will of God in reprobation,
quoad res volitas, in respect of the punishment willed thereby] If I had said
that sin had been the cause of Gods will in any respect whatsoever, (as D.
Twisse has done) Mr. B. would probably have called it blasphemy; because Gods
will is Quicquid dicitur de Deo est Deus.
himself, and the cause is ever before the effect; but nothing is before the
will of God, and therefore nothing can be the cause of it. But if the meaning
of that Doctor was only this, that sin was that thing in respect of which, or
for whose sake, the punishment of the sinner was willed by God in his eternal
Decree of Reprobation, there is sense and Truth in what he spoke. And so he
grants the whole Thesis against which he disputes, viz. [That Gods Decree of
reprobation is respective and conditional.] So our Correptorie Corrector is
^ain to do when he allows the distinction of Gods Antecedent and consequent
will, with this proviso, that it be quoad res volitas, and what Remonstrant did
ever think otherwise? for they that say that Gods decree of Reprobation is
respective, must understand something in the object, in respect of which it is
respective. And what can that be but Sin, which every punishment does
presuppose? so that if Mr. B. or Dr. Twisse himself would not gainsay sometimes
out of distaste and Animosity, what they sometimes say when driven to it by
necessity and pressing urgency of discourse, a great part of our difference
would be at an end; and Mr. B. hence-forward would write no more Volumes
against himself.

28. He says they deny God to be the Sea what has been said before. Chap. 3.
Sect. 28. and 34.
Author of sin, whilst they repeat it at every turn, that sin has no efficient
cause, p. 55.] How many very gross absurdities do arise from this poor Salvo,
I have showed before, and must not here make repetitions. I shall only add,
That Mr. B. and Dr. Twisse do ascribe to God Almighty an efficacious permission
of sin, and when they say he wills and decrees sin, they say that will is
efficacious. We know that permission, although active in sound, is passive in
signification. For to permit is to suffer, or not to hinder. So that when they
say, an efficacious permission, they say in effect, an active passive, a
positive negative, a forcible not-hindering; and why should non sense be
spoken, and studied, or the known sense of words be purposely abused and
perverted, if men were not conscious to themselves of some fowl Doctrine which
must thus be covered and disguized? but the disguise is so gross, that it
stands in need of a disguise. For Dr. Twisse affirms that his efficacious
permissive will does act as irresistibly, as when it is effective, (which I
have also showed before,) and how are they thank-worthy, who deny that
blasphemy in one mode of speaking, but assert it in another? efficacious and
efficient do differ no more then Potentia and actus. And it is as bad a thing to
say, God has the power to effect sin, as to say, that he effects it. But I
have showed that those men do use both ways of discovering themselves. And to
deny from the Press what from the Press they have affirmed, is but a new
aggravation of their impiety.

. 29. The many Texts of Scripture which he musters and affirms to go P. 56.
lin. 18. 19. Scripture vindicated from making God the Author of sin.
beyond the highest expressions of my bold or moderate blasphemers, page 56.
lin. 7, 8. etc.] are as unlike those of their Writers, as Mr. B. is unlike Job.
And since Mr. B. has not dared to make the parallel, by matching their
expressions with the expressions of Scripture, lest his Reader should discern
the very strange difference; I will not be so severe as to do it for him,
unless he shall provoke it from me by persevering in his offense. Let him only
consider (with fear and reverence) that if what he here says of those Texts
cannot be proved to be true, (as I am sure it cannot) the wit of Man cannot
excuse him from the greatest blasphemy that can be spoken. For some of his
Masters have said that God P. Martyr in Jud. 3. ver. 9. p. 49.
effects sin, and that (in plain terms) he is Mart. Borrhaus in Isa. 28. ver.
21.
the Author of sin, and (in some respect) that sin does Idem in Exodus cap. 4.
page 448.
please him, and some have said worse, if worse may be. And therefore (as Mr.
B. has confessed in his Margin) our English Divines at the Synod of Dort were
for the public rejection of such Addendam quoque existimabant nonnulli
rejectionem duriorum quarundam and incommodarum locutionum, quae in nonnullis
reformatorum scriptis reperirentur, quae infirmioribus offensionem praeberent,
etc. Synod. Dort. Se^^. 132.
scandalous expressions in the Calvinistical writings, whereat the weak might
stumble and fall down into sin. Nor was it their fault that they were outvoted
by the other part of that Synod, who refused to admit of any such Reformation,
(upon such like Reasons as were rendered by the Pope to Charles the Fifth, and
Maximilian, why he could not reform those things in prudence, which otherwise,
in conscience, he should not tolerate,) alleging their Visum fuit potioribus
suffragiis rejectionem incommodarum locutionum esse omittendam, ne calumniari
possent adversarii, etiam doctrinam orthodoxam quam professi sunt illi qui in
ejus explicatione ejusmodi phrasibus durius aut imprudentius usi videntur,
pariter damnari, etc. Ibid.
politic fears and jealousies, that if they rejected such expressions, their
Adversaries might say that they had also condemned the Doctrine of those
Calvinistwriters by whom the expressions had been used. Which if they called
Orthodox, it is no wonder; for so every Man living does think his own.

. 30. His several Quotations from the Pontificians, p. 57.] Calvinists agree
with Papists.
do only prove this great Truth, That those Papists and Mr. Calvin do agree in
those Doctrines which I resist; And so they are not all Papists who hold the
contrary. If Mr. B. had but considered, that there are Jansenians as well as
Molinists, Thomists as well as Scotists, as well Dominicans as Franciscans in
the Church of Rome, he would not have told me (for his own sake) that I am
nearly allied to the Jesuits.

. 31. In his Margin, p. 60. he says that Arminius is for Of Arminius his
absolute decrees. 1.
absolute Decrees.] First, if he is so indeed in Mr. B's. sense, it seems that
he is the Arminian, and I am none. (A^ Jo. Goodw. p. 59. is of his opinion, and
not of mine, if he really says what Mr. B. says of him, that nothing falls
out in time not decreed by God before all time, without distinction betwixt
good and evil.) 2. If Arminius spoke in quite a different sense from 2.
Mr. B. there is nothing remarkable in his mention of those absolute decrees,
besides a matchless Impertinence, or want of knowledge, of what it was that
Arminius spoke. But 3. that 3.
every Reader may here observe the extraordinary defect either of judgment or
integrity in Mr. B. (for it must be one, and I cannot tell exactly whether the
fault lies more in his heart or in his head) I have thrust the very words of
Arminius into my Primum and absolutum Dei Decretum de homine peccatore
servando, quo decrevit Filium ponere mediatore^, etc. Secundu^ praecisum and
absolutum Dei decretum, quo decrevit resipiscentes and credentes in gratiam
re^ipere, eosque perseverantes adfinem salvos fa^re in Christo, (...) Christum,
and per Christum, impoenitentes vero and infideles in peccato and sub
irarelinquere, and damnare tanquam alienos a Christo. Tertium, quo decrevit
media ad resipiscentiam and fidem necessaria sufficienter and efficaciter
administrare, etc. Hinc sequitur Quartum, quo decrevit singulares and certas
quasdam personas salvare and damnare. Atque hoc decretum praescientia Dei
innititur, qua ab aeterno scivit, quinam -- ex praeveniente ipsius gratia
credituri erant, and ex subsequenti perseveraturi, qui vero non. Armin. in
Declarat. Sent. p. 95, 96.
Margin, which Mr. B. either could not or durst not do. Either he could not, if
he found that quotation at second hand, and that in some one of his English
Authors; or else he durst not, for fear the Reader should discover the
misapplying of the place, and thence conclude his want of faithfulness, or
understanding. For when Arminius had spoken of three degrees of God's Decree
concerning the final state of Man, (as 1. To give his Son, 2. To receive the
penitent and believing into grace and favor, and 3. To administer the
necessary means of both,) he proceeded unto a fourth, which he affirmed to be
respective, and to depend upon his praescience, whereby he knew from all
eternity, who would believe and persevere, and who would not. And how little
this tends either to the hurting of my Doctrine, or to the helping of his
own, is so apparent of it self, as that I need not enlarge upon it. I will now
make haste to clear my self from that [Libel or Decachord of slanders] which he
lays to my charge in his p. 59

. 32. Before I enter on the Ten Places urged by me in Of those Ten places
whereby God is concluded to be the Author of sin. 1.
my Notes, p. 9. and 10. which Mr. B. calls slanders, I think it fit to promise
a few general Observations, before I consider them in their particulars. First,
Mr. B. should have tried to prove, that I had invented those speeches, and
falsely laid them to the charge of Calvin, Zuinglius, and Dr. Twisse, (from whom
I fetched them without the addition of their Names,) before he had ventured to
call them slanders; which as it was impossible for him to do, so he no where
pretends to set about it; but contents himself to call them slanders, as being
a word soon spoken, and very hardly kept in when he is angry with his
unhappiness. 2. I do publicly declare, and every 2.
man living is my witness, (who either has compared, or wid compare those ten
Quotations with the respective Fountains from which they are by me derived)
that the First five places are truly fetched from Mr. Calvin. The Sixth and
Seventh from Dr. Twisse. The Eighth from Zuinglius. The Ninth and Tenth from
Dr. Twisse. So that until Mr. B. can prove the Negative, he stands guilty of
that great slander, his having called my Ten Places a Decachord of slanders.
Nay, 3. He demonstrates himself to have been guilty of a most slanderous
accusation whilst he makes it appear no less then twice 3.
in one Correp. Cor. p. 63.
Page, that he either This I have showed Cha. 3. Sect. 32.
wilfully or ignorantly mistook my Authors; ascribing to Mr. Calvin what was
spoken by Zuinglius. And by consequence he has slandered the very Men whom he
admires. Nay he slanders himself in a most admirable manner. For he had said (p
52.) That I did as good as name those Authors (whom I did not name) to any
attentive Reader. And he renders this reason, because I particularly quoted
them as to Book, Section, Page, and almost Line.] From whence two things are
very observable. First, that he himself was no Attentive Reader of my Book,
which yet he pretends to confute, or that he wilfully mistook me in his p.
63. Or that he spoke against his knewledge, in saying I did as good as name
what I never did name, and what he with all his diligence was not able to find
out. The Second thing is, That he acknowledges the exactness of my Citations
which were almost to the line (p. 52.) and yet calls them slanders p. 63. which
two pages being compared do prove this great sin to have been committed upon
Design. And 4 to conceal 4.
it the better from vulgar Readers, he sought to wear out their patience with
58. pages before he had the courage to set about that Decachord. And 5. When at
last he comes 5.
thither, he seems to hope, that his Reader may be at some loss by forsaking
the order which I had used. For after my fifth instance he puts my ninth, thence
leaps back unto the eighth. Thence he goes backward, and skipping nimbly over
the seventh, he sets down the sixth, thence he goes forward to the seventh, and
jumping over the eighth and ninth he pitcheth his feet upon the tenth. Now upon
what Grounds of policy he should thus strangely pervert my order, unless to
trouble his Readers, and make it painful for them to compare his book with
mine, or in favor to Dr. Twisse whom he calls his friend and his Fathers
friend, and of whom he had the happiness to be beloved as an other Timothy, I
am not able to divine. But for the ease of my Reader, I will follow mine own
order in the ninth and tenth pages of my Notes, with which the Reader is well
acquainted, and quote the page of Mr. B. where each of those places is spoken
to.

. 33. The first of those horrible affirmations he seeks to Of the first place
in his p. 59.
justify, and not excuse, (confitentem habemus reum) viz. that all things
(without exception of any the least, or the greatest wickedness) do happen or
fall out by Gods Decree. And fain he would wrest some Texts to authorize the
guilt of this assertion, but they are easily vindicated from that unclean and
vile use to which he puts them. Ephesians. 6. 11. is sure misprinted (as I in charity
believe) and should have been Ephesians. 1. 11. God works all things according to
the purpose of his will, or after the counsel of his own will,] he does not say
all wicked things, but all things there spoken of, viz. the giving of Christ,
the preaching of the gospel, receiving the Gentiles into the Church; or all
things which he works, not the lewdness of men which he works not. This does
not so much as intimate, that God c^ncurs to the most devilish and impure acts
(as Dr. Twisse Twisse. Vind. Gra. l. 2. part: 1 p. 149.
Teaches.) Or that nothing falls out in time, (though never so filthy or
unjust) but what was decreed before all time (as Corrept. Cor. p. 59.
Mr. B.) 2. [Isa. 46. 10. my Counsel shall stand and I will do all my
pleasure.] He does not say, he has decreed all things whatsoever men or Devils
do, but that he effects all things which he decrees, which needs must be good
if he decrees it. But Mr. B. says plainly, Correp. Cor: p. 73. 78, 79.
that God wills, and decrees, and determines that sin shall be done, and by
consequence that he effects it, and that according to the Text. 3. [Rom. 9.
11.] is only spoken of Gods electing the Jews, the seed of Jacob, to be his
elect and peculiar people, whom (as to temporal Blessings, and the revealing
his will, and sending them Christ to be born of that seed) he was pleased to
prefer before the posterity of Esau, but not devoting Esaus person, or all the
persons of his posterity unto eternal condemnation, and that without
consideration of the least or greatest sin committed by them. 4. [Pro. 16. 4.]
does only speak of Gods making or decreeing the wicked to punishment, not the
Creature to wickedness. And so the Gnostics, or Nichol^itans, or modern
Ranters never made a more irrational or a more guilty use of any Text, then our
Correptorie Corrector has made of these. Which being thus cleared (in the
fewest words I can invent) there is no need that I affirm all decrees to be
temporal, (for some being absolute, and all those that are conditional being
founded in his eternal prescience, may I hope be allowed to be eternal,) and of
Arminius I have spoken already. 31. and the words of the Trent Catechism I am
not concerned in. They only show an agreement (in some things) betwixt the
Papists and Presbyterians; and much good do it him with that advantage.

. 34. The second saying out of Calvin he seeks to excuse Of the second place in
his p. 60.
by other Texts. And that for want of this knowledge, or consideration, that
those Texts are only spoken of the effect or event, of Gods either speaking,
or giving light, when they are followed by deafness or exc^cation. Whereas the
words of Mr. Calvin do speak of the end and intention, (as appears by his
following words,) as if the deafening and blinding, and infatnating of some,
were the final Cause of Gods dispensing both voice, and light, and good
instruction. And this Mr. B. does seem to acknowledge, when speaking a little
after of obstinate sinners, he says [the word is and will be a killing letter
unto them.] But that does only prove [killing] to be, through their obstinacy,
a sad effect, and not at all the design or intent of Gods preaching. Now if
Mr. B. is so thick of understanding as not to discern the wide difference
betwixt the end intended, and the effect accomplished b^t not intended, (and
often times accomplished by the Creature in a direct opposition to Gods desire
and intention, as when God is willing that 2 Pet. 39. Act. 7. 51.
all should come to Repentance, but many resist and reject the Luk: 7. 30.
Math: 23. 37, 38.
counsel of God against themselves;) I say if Mr. B. is not able to distinguish
any better of things that differ, he should not meddle with such edged Tools,
as the Ephesians. 6. 17.
sword of the spirit which is the 2 Pet: 3. 16:
word of God, with which how many have killed their own souls for want of (e)
knowledge t^ use it well, it will be easy to conjecture from this common
observation, that there never was yet any Abettor of sin, or Error, though
never so foolish or impure, who has not pretended to as much Scripture, and
with every whit as much confidence, as our Correptory Corrector is found to
do. How very hastily Mr. B. has urged the letter of those Ex: 4. 21. Ephesians. 2.
3. and 2, 12. Jer. 1. 10. Isai: 6. 9. Joh. 12, 39. Mat. 13 11.
Texts against the sense will farther appear from those words which here he
cites from Mr. Calvin as the sum and upshot of all that Section, viz. that God
cares not to be understood by wicked men. Upon which I ask; does not God Eze 7:
18. 3 and 33, 11.
desire they should repent and live? is there not joying in heaven at the
conversion of (g) such? and came not Christ into the world, to call such to
Repentance? and is not all this a g g Luke 15. 7.
^aring to be understood by them? had he spoken only of the obstinate who have
filled up their measure, such as Phara^h after the sixth Judgment, there might
have been Truth in it. But there is no Truth in it at all, when spoken of all
wicked men not arrived at that pitch, or even of Phara^^ himself from the time
of his Birth, or during the space of his former judgments. For God does
seriously desire the Repentance of a sinner so long as he offers him the means,
of which he never deprives him totally, until he finally gives him ever in his
state of Impenitence and obduration. For if any thing in God (whether absolute
Decree, or unwillingness to be understood when he commands and exhorts and
entreats men to repent) could be the Cause of man's Impenitence, he could then
be the cause (and so the Author) of the greatest sin that can be named or
thought on. 3. As for Gods punishing sin with sin [Rom. 1. 24. and 2. These. 2.
11.] that is only by 3.
giving them up to their scornful dispositions, (as Mr. B. himself does here
express it) by withdrawing his Grace which they abused, by forsaking them as
desertors, and depriving them of their Candlestick, and permitting them to be
cheated by mere 2 These. 2 11: see Dr. Ham: Paraphrase upon that place.
Magicians and Impostors; not by directing his voice to them, and by giving
them light, and by offering them instruction, and by using Remedies on purpose
to make his Patients incurable. Besides I would know how the punishing sin with
sin can have any place in the decreeing of Adams fall, who had one sin to begin
with, and did not fall before he fell. Or what place can it have in the sins of
such as are not arrived to those scornful Dispositions? which yet (by their
Doctrine) are decreed by God as well as others. As for [Hos. 4. 13. Act. 13.
41. Rev. 22. 11.] they only signify the just Desertions of God Almighty, and
the sins of the deserted which would be consequent thereunto. Those words of
God [Therefore your Daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall
commit adultery (Hos. 4. 13.) are only spoken by the way of prophecy or
prediction what would be the effect of their Idolatries (in the former part of
the same verse,) not by way of decree or purpose that he would almightily
necessitate those foul commissions; but by way of threat and menace, that he
would permit them to be committed; neither hindering them by violence, nor by
the assistances of Grace. But what is this to Gods giving light that men may be
the blinder for it? 4. The place of Austin and his [non potuerunt credere] is
very easily answered by 4.
having recourse unto the place from whence he fetched it, John 12. 39. Where
the (...) does not signify that it was impossible to believe, but according to
the Hebrew phrase, Genesis 19. 22. that they did not believe. So the phrase is
used Mark 6. 5. and Luke 16. 2. and John 5. 19. Where Isidore the Pelusiot
expounds (...) by (...). The Son can do nothing of himself, that is, he does
not. And that the word is so used John 12. 39 [they could not believe] is plain
from that which next foll^ws, [because that Esaias said again.] For that
Prophets prediction was not the cause of their unbelief (any more then the
Almanac is the cause of the Eclipse which it pres^geth) but only a sign, or
an argument, or an infallible token of its event. And until Mr. B. can learn
the difference betwixt a prediction, and a cause, or betwixt a consequence and
an effect, or betwixt the certainty of Gods foreknowledge, and the
necessitation of his Decree, I know not how I shall cure him of this Disease of
making God to be the Cause of all the wickedness in the world, by 2 Pet. 3. 16.
wresting the Scriptures to feed his sickness. I shall only tell him that the
word [(...) That] is not always (...), denoting the end or final cause of the
thing spoken of, but often refers to the mere consequent or event. As when
S. Paul says, [the law entered Romans 5. 20.
that the offense might abound Romans 5. 20.] he cannot possibly mean, that the
abounding of the offense or increase of wickedness was the very end or final
cause for which the Law was intended by God Almighty, (far be it from us to
speak or think so wickedly,) but that it was the event or consequent of Gods
giving the Law, as that by which it received its aggravation. For sin is not
Romans 5. 13
imputed where there is no Law. But I must hasten to other stages of my journey.

. 35. The third Assertion of Mr. Calvin [that men do sin Of the third place, in
his p. 60. and 61.
by Gods Impulse] which is least excusable, or rather most unexcusable, Mr. B.
huddles up in fewer lines then the rest, as if his stomach did not serve him to
stay long upon that, which the more he stirred, the more he saw it would stink.
His first way of defense is nothing else but a presumption, a sturdy begging of
the Question. He asks What truth was more protrite and more readily of old
received in the Church, then that God does justly stir up wicked men to acts as
acts, which yet to the Actors are and will be unjust. Where First he
calumniates the Ancient Church without any other pretense then merely 1.
to relieve himself in his present exigence and distress. 2. Of all ancient
Writers he only urges one Austin, who also fails 2.
him in his design, as I shall presently make it appear. 3. Of Mr. B's making
God to be the Author of sin.
He avows it to be a part of his particular Creed, [ That God 3.
does stir up wicked men to unjust Acts as Acts] which he explaines and
illustrates by [setting spurs to a dull Jade. (p. 61. lin. 2. 3.) which is as
much as to say, that as we put spurs to a dull Jade to make him go faster, so
God does stir up wicked men (or dull sinners, such as are but slow at sinning
of themselves) to wicked acts, that they may sin so much the faster, or with
more mettle, and become as it were Galloppers in the Carrier of sinning; as if
of themselves they were not infinitely too fleet, but rather needed stirring
up. It will avail him nothing, to say that this excitation is to wicked acts as
acts, because it is as impossible to separate the wickedness of the wicked act
from the act which is wicked, as the roundnesse of the Globe from the Globe
which is round. What would be thought of that Man, that should distinguish
David's lying with Bathshebah from his Adultery? or his Adultery from his Sin?
or that should stir up his Neighbor to some wicked act (as Iezabel did her
Husband Ahab) and then plead in his excuse, that he stirred him up only to the
wicked act as an act, but not as a wicked act? If a sin is the less sin by
being committed with a distinction, not Reduplicative, as sin, but under some
other notion, then the Adulterer will quickly plead, that David lay with
Bathshebah under the notion of a woman only, and not under the notion of
another man's wife; or only as a means of procreation, and not as an Injury to
poor Vriah. And Eve might have pleaded (by Mr. B's Logi^k) that she did eat of
the Apple as it was pleasant only to the taste, or only as it seemed good to
make one wise, but not as it was a Forbidden Fruit. Note here that Mr. B. does
ask in these words page 32. [Do we maintain that the only true God is at all
Proprii nominis Author of that which is sinfully evil as such? Wherein he
implies two things. First, that in substance and effect they do maintain him to
be the Author, or something tantamount to it, but not the Author Propri^
nominis, they do not give him that Name or Title. Secondly, That they maintain
him to be the Author of what is* sinfully evil, but not [reduplicative] as
such. But a sinner commonly loves sin, not as such, merely because it is sin,
but as profitable or pleasant (at least in show,) who cannot yet pretend that
he is the less an Author or a Lover of his sins, or the less liable to blame,
in that he commits them under some other notion then that of their being
sins. And he that makes God the Author of sin in equivalence, is not capable
of excuse for not making him the Author of sin as such, or for not saying he is
the Author very properly so called.
Now that no the weakest Reader of Mr. B. may be debaucht into wickedness, by
being made believe, that when he sins, God stirs him up unto the act, (a phrase
I should not dare use, but that it is published by Mr. B. and called the ^enent
of the Church, and I must repeat it so far as to give it an Antido^^ or
Confutation) it will not be amiss to let him know, that the sin of Murder or
of Adultery or any the like, is withal the sinful act, and the sinful act is
the sin, in the account of God, and in the style of his Penmen. For although
in propriety of Logick-speech a sin and a sinful act are as the abstract and
the concrete, yet they are so far differene'd from other Conjugates, as to
admit of different predications. For Cains killing of Abel was a sinful act,
and by consequence a murder, and by consequence a sin. For the truth is, sin is
a concrete in respect of sinfulness which is its abstract. And it is as
impossible to separate the sinfulness from the sin, as the sin from the sinful
act; Nay, we shall find an Identity betwixt the sin and the act which we are
not wont to call sinful. For the transgression of the Law must be confessed by
Mr. B. to be an Act; and he knows that sin (by definition) is the transgression
of the Law; and he cannot but grant, that the act of sinning is a sinful act.
For being a transgression it must needs be an act, and being such an act it
must needs be sinful. The first beginning of this transgression is the act of
consenting to any temptation whatsoever (I speak of Temptation to things
unlawful.) Now the act of consenting is Punctum indivisibile, and has not any
dimensions to render it. capable of division. The very act of consenting is sin
in its birth, and e converso. Upon which it follows, that when God is affirmed
to stir up wicked men to acts as acts which to the Actors are and will be
unjust, (that is to say, to unjust or sinful acts,) he is affirmed (eo ipso) to
stir them up to sins; Because sin is not sin any otherwise, then as it is an
act of sinning, nor an act of sinning any otherwise, then as it is a sinful
act. Nor can a Man be stirred up to the act of consenting without being stirred
up to the sin it self which is that act. So that if Mr. B. cannot distinguish
the act of consenting to a temptation (of the World, the Flesh, or the Devil,)
from the sin it self which is the act of consenting to such Temptation, he must
confess he makes God to be the Author of sin. And if he will not acknowledge
what he cannot but know, D. Twisse at least shall force him, unless our
Timothy will dare to bid defiance to his Paul. For the Doctor says plainly, [
Fornicatio notat peccatu^, non tantum secundum formale ejus qua peccatum est,
sed and secundu^ materiale ejus, qua actus est. Twisse vind. Gra. l. 2 part. 1.
Crim. 3 p. 155.
That Fornication denotes sin not only according to its formality, as it is
sin, but also according to its materiality, as it is an act.] And Mr. B. says
as plainly, (and calls it a very protrite truth) that God does justly stir up
wicked men to acts as acts which yet to the actors are and will be unjust. So
that according to Dr. Twisse, Mr. B. makes God to be the Author of sin. Yet
this is his Friend and his Fathers friend by whom he was loved (if we believe
him) as another Timothy. Nay, his Friend Mr. Of lib. and Necess: p. 23. 24
Hobbs (who is sure the Friend of his opinions) has publicly professed To
find no difference between an action that is against the Law, and the sin of
that action. As for example, between the killing of Vriah, and the sin of David
in killing Vriah. Thereby condemning Mr. B. the most that may be. Nor will it
help him to say, that he did not say [sinful] but [unjust] in conjunction with
those acts, nor that he said [acts which are and will be unjust] for what is
unjust is sinful, because it is unjust. And the acts that are and will be
unjust, are and will be unjust acts. And if they are un^ust acts to the actors
(as Mr. B. says) who are said (by Mr. B.) to be stird up to them by God
himself, what are they to him who is said to incite or stir up those wicked
Actors to those unjust or wicked acts? Nor will he become the more excusable
for his Quotation out of Austin. For 1. if it were so that Austin Austin
vindi(...)eted from Mr. B' s Ca(...)umnies.
had spoken any such thing, as that Men do sin by Gods Impulse (with Calvin) or
that they are stird up to it (with Mr. B.) yet would it not have been the less
false or impious for having been spoken by such an Author. For that Austin had
his Ego fateor me ex eorum numero esse eonari qui proficiendo scribunt, and
scribendo proficiunt. Unde si aliquid vel incautius vel indoctius a me positum
est quod non solum ab alijs qui videre id possunt merito reprehendatur, verum
etiam a me ipso, quia and ego saltem postea videre debeo si proficio, nec
mirandum est nec dolendum, sed potius ignoscendu^ and gratulandum, non quia
erratum est, sed quia improbatum. Augustine. in 7. ad Marcellin.
Errors, himself has implicitly yet liberally confessed, and on that
supposition has desired of his Readers not only pardon, but Reproof too. And
that he had his great Errors, Mr. B. cannot but confess, unless he will tell
us he is a Papist. But (2) Austin is not guilty of any such impious expressions
whereof Mr. B. does very guiltily accuse him. For [utitur cordibus malorum, usus
est Juda etc.] comes not home to Calvin's Impulse, or Mr. B's stirring up. God
may use whom he impels not. The other passage comes nearer (l. 2. de great. and
lib. arb. c. 21.) yet not home neither to wicked men's doing by Gods impulse
what is not lawful. for this implies Gods impulse to be the mover of his
unlawful Action, without taking notice of any previous inclination to evil in
the wicked man thus impelled. Whereas his will being bent to any evil of it
self indifferently, God may so wisely Ejus voluntatem proprio suo vitio malam
in hoc peccatum judicio suo justo and occulto inclinavit. August. l. 2. degra.
and lib. arb: c. 20. And after speaking of the Pbilistines and Arabians 2 Chro:
21. 16. ha has expressly these words (c. 21.) Hic ostendit Deum suscitare
hosts ijs Tertis vastandis quas tali paena judicat dignas, nunquid tamen
Philistijm and Arabes in Terram Judaeam dissipandam sine sua voluntate
venerunt? etc. Id: ibid: cap: 21.
limit and restrain him from one sort of evil, as that the wicked man will
certainly commit another, which God in his wisdom can best convert to good
uses. Thus the Jews were permitted to release Barabbas, rather then constraind
to release Christ, because the former evil, had the greatest good to be drawn
out of it, viz. the Redemption of all mankind. Besides, Austins word does
only note an inclination, and not an impulse; and that in relation to a
[quocunque voluerit] which seems to imply a limitation of the sinful man's will
already sinful, and as yet indifferently sinful, rather to one sin then to
another. Which whether or no St. Austin meant for his sense, the Reader may
Judge by his own words which I have thrown into the Margin, concerning Shimei,
the Philistines, and the Arabians. Which if in some parts inexcusable, that is
not my fault. I have so much a reverence of his Antiquity and learning, as to
give his words the most candid interpretation that I am able. If he had said
[permit,] instead, of [incline] there had been no Question of the Truth of it.
And even for the word [inclining] too in that particular Case wherein Austin
uses it, I have thus much to say. That whatsoever in it self is just for God
to command, he can justly limit and incline man's will to execute, and such is
the punishment of his people, by what rod he thinks fit. Whether by Egypt or
Assyria, the Philistims or Arabians, those Rods of his Anger and staffs of his
indignation, (as the Prophet phraseth it.) God did not only incline, but he
commanded Abraham to kill his son, and he commanded as well as inclined his
people Israel to deprive the Egyptians of their goods; for he might justly
dispose of Isaacs life, and of Egypts treasure, and take both from both by
whatsoever instrument it was his pleasure to employ. And therefore Abraham's
intention and preparation to kill his son was so far from his guilt, that it
was an argument of his Faith and impartial obedience to Gods command. But there
are things of an other nature which are not just (for God Almighty) to do or
command, and therefore he cannot command or do them, because he cannot do
unjustly, or command injustice to be done. For example, it is injust, and so
impossible for This is Seriously recommended to Mr. B. his consideration.
God to abjure, or blaspheme, or dishonor himself, and by consequence unjust,
and so impossible, that God should command or impel, or stir up wicked men to
the abjuring, or blaspheming, or dishonouring of himself. All sorts of sin are
a dishonouring of God and a rebellion against his sacred majesty, which he does
suffer, and permit and limit, and circumscribe (as he does the wild Ocean) and
draws good out of evil; but cannot decree, or command it, compel, or provoke,
or stir up men to it, because he cannot be so weak (that is, so contrary to
himself) as to be principal or Accessory in the dishonouring of himself. Yet
this is the Doctrine of Mr. B. and of his great Masters, as I have plentifully
showed in diverse Paragraphs. 4. But it is no wonder, that he seeks to draw
Austin into a share of that odium under which his own Doctrine will ever lie,
s^^ce the Scripture it self cannot escape him, p. 61. For he says that Calvin
does irrefragably prove by variety of Scripture and Scripture Cases, (what I
cited from him, viz.) that men do sin by Gods impulse, and farther gibes me for
saying, that such Scriptures are by Calvintoo literally expounded; therein
confessing it to be his opinion and belief, that such Texts of Scripture ought
to be literally expounded. Which is as black an Accusation as he could have
framed against himself; worse then which was never spoken by any Gnostick of
old, The sad effects of Mr. B. his literal interpretations.
or by any Ranter of later times. One of his Instances may serve for all, viz.
2 Samuel 16. 10, 11. Which if literally expounded must needs be an argument of
one of these two things. Either that Shimei did not sin in cursing David who
was Gods Anointed, but rather discharged his duty in doing just as God had Let
him curse for the Lord has bidden him. 2 Samuel 16. 11.
bid him; or else that he sinned by Gods Let him curse, because the Lord has
said unto him, curse David. ver. 10.
express precept and command. If Mr. B. shall assert the former, he will incur
two mischiefs. First, by contradicting those Texts of Scripture wherein the
cursing of Shimei is affirmed to be a sin; 2 Samuel 19. 21
confessed by himself, and 1 Kin. 2. 44.
punished by Solomon with Death it self; next by opening a Door to the secure
commission of such a damning sin as cursing is, and even the treasonable
cursing of Gods Anointed, whilst he shall teach his people that it is no sin,
but rather the yielding an obedience to the will of God. And if to slip out of
these mischiefs which follow upon the former assertion, he shall presume to
assert the later, he will translate the wickedness from Shimei to the Precept
of God, by which he did it (in his literal interpreting of the words of those
Texts) and so incur the most impious absurdities that can be thought on. First,
by contradicting those clearest passages of Scripture, which say [that God has
Psalm. 5. 4.
no pleasure in wickedness, that he is of Habak. 1. 13
purere eyes then to behold evil, and cannot look on Iniquity, that he hates
all abomination, and has not caused Eccles. 15. 13
any man to err. That he has verse. 12.
commanded no man to do wickedly, neither has given any man license to sin.]
Next by inferring, that a man may sin by doing that which God will have him,
and has ver. 20.
said to him that he shall do, and by consequence may do his duty by disobeying
Gods k 2 Samuel 16. (...)
precepts, and by consequence that God has a twofold precept, directly
contrary the one to the other; whereof the one is of things which ought to be
done, but cannot possibly, because it is decreed they shall not; the other of
things which ought not to be done, yet must be done of necessity, because it is
decreed, they shall. Whereas if David's words concerning [Gods biding Shimei] be
understood to be spoken by the common The right way of Interpretation (...).
Hebraisme, by which such verbs as are active in sound, are only permissive in
signification, all those horrible absurdities will be avoided, or if the Hebrew
particle [(...)] which we render [because] were rendered [if] as sometimes it
signifies, it will then be no more then a mere conjecture arising from David's
guilty conscience. As if he should have said thus. [if the Lord has said (as
for ought I know he has, and I am sure he justly may,) Curse David, who shall
then say, wherefore have thou done so?] for God might justly curse David, in
revenge of his sins, by whatsoever messenger he pleased to send, as well by
Shimei, as by Samuel; who, if God had said to him (...) [curse David] had but
discharged his message, (as Samuel himself had done before him) and not
committed 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8, 9, 19, 11, 12.
a sin in doing what God distinetly bid him. How much better were it to think,
that David erred in his conjecture Chap. 11.
(as easily he might, who found it no hard thing to commit Adultery and murder)
then to speak irreverently or indecently of God Almighty? it was an argument of
David's modesty, and of the severe reflection which he made upon his sins, to
look upon it as a wise and righteous Act of Gods Oeconomie, that God should
thus punish him for his sins, by permitting Shimei to reproach him openly; or
that by restraining the wickedness of Shimei's heart from all other acts at
this time, he should limit him to this, (when perhaps of it self it was
indifferent) thus to punish David's sins. But in this, and the like cases, God
forbid we should say, (with Mr, Calvin and Mr, Barlee) that the sin is done by
Gods impulse, or by Gods stirring up to unjust acts as acts; although in sundry
respects, the effect does seem to be ascribed unto God, (after the Hebrew
custom of speech) and the Phrases [exciting or bidding etc.] are used
figuratively or tropically of God himself, when yet he is so far from exciting
or commanding, that he does the contrary to them both. 5. As 5.
for Mr. B's. similitude (spoken of before) by which he resembles Gods stirring
up to unjust acts to a Man's setting of spurs to a dull Jade; it is very
strange, and far beyond the rate of Austins expressions, by whose Authority Mr.
B. does seek to mitigate his crime. For the will, which Austin says God does
incline, (in the sense above mentioned) is forward enough to evil, only God
puts the b^idle into his mouth (not the spur into his side) and restraining him
from one evil, does consequently limit him unto another (out of which in his
wisdom he knows more good is to be drawn.) Whereas he that spurs the dull ^ade,
does find the ^ade dull, and so infuseth speed into him, stirs him up and
excites him against his will or inclination: which it is impossible for God to
do. 6. As 6.
for Calvin's similitude [ of the Suns drawing up noisome Vapors out of a nasty
impure Dunghill, etc.] that is but Per Accidens in respect of his shining, and
is so far from coming home to the Impulse of God (which it is brought to
illustrate) that it is miserably defective in five respects. For First the 1.
Carcass or noisome Dunghill (which Mr. B. seems to have overlookt, or to have
taken at second hand) is presupposed to be before the shining of the Sun, and
is sure to stink, whether the Sun does shine, or not. Whereas Gods Impulse (of
which he speaks) is presupposed to be before the sin, and decreed so to be from
all eternity; (according to their Doctrine of which I spoke, Chap 3. Sect. 34.)
Secondly, the Sun is Causa universalis, 2.
and shines no more upon the Dunghill, then on the Diamond, and upon every thing
else within its Horizon. Whereas God is said by them to be Causa particularis,
impelling Shimei to curse (which is Mr. B's first instance) and ^eroboam to
rebel (which is his second) in their peculiar numerical persons more then all
other men, who had none of that Impulse, or not so much. Thirdly, the shining
of the Sun intends 3.
not the corruption so properly as the heat of the noisome carcass or Dunghill.
Whereas the Impulse spoken of is concluded to intend the sin it self, unless
Mr. B. will distinguish Shimei's cursing from his sin; and Iereboams rebellion
from his sin; and his own calumny from his sin, which he excuses by saying,
that God will have it to be so, p. 22. Again Fourthly, 4.
Although the Sun were granted to be Causa particularis, yet in corrupting
other things it would not it self be corrupted, because it is not a voluntary
Agent, but does all that it does by pure necessity or necessitation, which it
receives from Gods absolute Decree. Whereas the Impulse spoken of is ascribed
to God as a free Agent, and by consequ^nce to his choice (as if he preferred
the imp^lling of men to unjust acts before the restraining of them from unjust
acts) unless Mr. B. will say that God is necessitated, or does of necessity
impell men to do wickedly, which were such a Plaster as would make his Sore a
great deal worse. Fifthly, the Carcass or Dunghill is merely passive, as to
every thing that is done unto it. And sending 5.
forth ill vapors, sends them forth of necessity, without election, or
voluntary consent. Whereas the sinner does choose to send forth sins, and might
have forborne if he had not been wilful, who if he had not been a voluntary, had
as little been a sinning agent. Upon all which it follows, that Mr. Calvin was
conscious of something shameful in his use of the word [Impulse] (extorted from
him by his first error of irrespective reprobation,) when he endeavored to
conceal it by such similitudes, as he hoped might procure him a more favorable
construction when he talks of Gods impelling to wicked acts. And now having
spoken thus largely of the three first places, I shall not need say any thing,
and shall therefore say the less to those that follow.

. 36. The Fourth place of Mr. Calvin Mr. B. confesses Of the fourth place in
his p. 61, 62.
to make something a higher sound then the former, and that perhaps may be the
reason why he seeks to amuse his Reader with some very impertinent and very
false sayings. First, 1. 2. 3.
that in Calvin he cannot find it. Secondly, that he finds some such thing in
the predestined Thief. Thirdly, That I am more delighted in that Book then in
that which I commend of Bishop Wintons. To the First, I answer, that he might 1.
have found that saying in Mr. Calvin if he had turned to the Chapter, Section,
and Page set down expressly in my Notes. How else did he know that I took that
place from Mr. Calvin, when I only referred to the place but concealed its
Authors name? Nay, why said he himself (p. 52. lin. 2. 3, 4.) that I did as
good as name those Authors to any attentive Reader, by very particularly
quoting them, as to Book, Section, Page, and almost Line? This does put me in
mind of (...). Hierocl. (...). 28. 2.
Hierocles his Scholar; Who receiving a Letter from his Friend, wherein he was
requested to buy certain Books for him, which he neglected to perform, alleged
afterward in his excuse (meeting his friend by great chance) That the Letter
which he sent concerning the buying of certain Books never came to his hands.
So Mr. B. does confess, that he found my fourth Testimony to be from Mr.
Calvin, but says he cannot find it there. And yet he cannot render any
imaginable reason why he affirms it to be in Calvin, except this one, that he
found it to be there. To his Second saying I answer, that that speech of Calvin
which I produced cannot any where be found in the Book Entitled [The
predestined Thief] and so it was impossible that I should take it out thence.
Which if Mr. B. had not a willingness to make men believe, why did he urge
that Book so perfectly nothing to the purpose? when it signifies no more, then
that other men have read Calvin as well as I; and that as I have noted some
things in my Reading, so* other men have noted other things, though not the
same, yet somewhat like. To his third saying I answer, that I never delighted 3.
in that Book, which in all my life I never read, until Mr. B. had thus from
the Press accused me of it. Nay, I did purposely forbear the reading of it
(even whilst I had it in my possession) that Mr. B. might not be able to
upbraid me with it, as he has frequently done without the least appearance or
4.
show of reason. But Fourthly, neither is Impii occulta Dei manu, etc. tanquam
laqueo latente diriguntur ad scopum ipsis ignotum, etc. 5.
that saying so much as a [some such thing.] For although that sentence is
inexcusable as spoken in consequence of the doctrine, and in relation to other
sayings, and in the usual sense of the Stoicallyminded men, yet is it capable
of a good interpretation. And therefore Fifthly the former part of my fourth
Instance is not that for which it was alleged by me; there being nothing more
granted on all sides, then that God does restrain wicked men as with a bridle
from doing more mischief then he suffers them to do. But what is his
restraining from evil to his commanding or compelling or impelling men to evil?
Nay, how contrary are these to one another? It is plain therefore that I set
down the first words of that Instance, as merely leading to the rest, that the
Reader might see how the rest came in. For had I not rendered the full sense, Mr.
B. might have said (with more show of reason then now he has done,) that I
quoted nothing but Correp. Cor. p. 52. spoken to before, c. 3. Sect. 32.
broken expressions. The evil of that fourth place consists only in these two
assertions. 1. That God does not only permit, but also command [the doing that
which is not lawful for men to do:] 2. That he even compels them to perform
obedience to such commands.] Mr. B. strives to cover or excuse the first, by
saying, [that the rough phrase of a command is only seemingly rough to dainty
ears, and may be dexterously expounded (as it is by Calvin, Austin, and others)
not of a command given out by God, for any man to yield obedience to, which
would be contrary to Deuteronomy. 29. 29. But of that occult Law of Gods stupendous
workings, even whilse men sin, which God has appointed to be the Law of ^is
providence, and so of his outgoings, but not of our conversation, Isa. 8. 20.]
In which excuse there are diverse things unexcusable. For 1. he fancieth in God
a twofold command: the one given out, (and so truly a command) the other occult
or secret, or not given 1.
out, (and so not possibly a command; which may be in purpose, or intention, or
in the way to a command, but not a command before it is commanded, that is to
say, before it is. A Master may purpose, or design, or resolve, or intend, or
determine within himself to send his servant upon this or that message, but we
cannot say that he commands him, until by word of mouth, or by Epistle, or by
some dumb but significant sign, he gives out his will and pleasure, and bids
him go.) And so the meaning of Mr. B's. distinction comes all to this, that of
the two sorts of command, the one is a command, and the other is not a command.
Or, of two revealed wills (which the word command implies) the one is given
out, and the other is occult or not revealed. 2. He expounds the same word, not
only of two different, but of two contrary things. A command to be 2.
obeyed, and a command not to be obeyed. One the rule of Gods providence which
must be done of necessity, but ought not; another the rule of man's
conversation, which ought to be done by right, but cannot possibly when by the
other occult Law the quite contrary is determined. 3. Because [command] is a 3.
relative, whose Correlative is [obedience] when Mr. B speaks of a Command [not
given for any man to yield obedience unto,] it is as if he should say, that
there are two sorts of Parents among men, some who have children, and others
who never had any, nor ever can have. 4. Mr. B. wrongs Austin 4.
in making him an Abettor of this distinction, who no where says that God
commanded Shimei to curse David, but (the contrary to it in the very place
cited) that God did Non enim jubendo dixerit ubi obedienentia laudaretur.
not command him; and that if he had, the obedience of Shimei had been a
commendable thing; and interprets the [dixerat maledicere] by [cor ejus malum
miserit, sive dimiserit] God bid him curse, that is (says Austin) he did not
hinder him from cursing, he dismissed his heart from his Holy guidance and
restraining Grace, he suffered or permitted him, as his [dimiserit] must needs
import. And if Mr. B. shall plead, that he spoke not of a twofold command any
more then Austin did, he must either blame the words of Calvin, for calling
that the command of God which is not such, but contrary to it, and so renounce
his own book; or else he must say, that he expounds Gods commanding by his not
commanding, (an affirmative by a Negative;) and that that is one of his
Dexterities. But (6.) If Mr. B. had been able, why did he not labor to
justify the last and worst part of that fourth instance, as it relates unto
the former, that a man is compelled by God to perform obedience to such
commands? that the commands were in order to something not good, he intimated
by saying, that they were not for any man to yield obedience to, wherein he
contradicts both Austin and Calvin. For (1.) Austin says that obedience to
Gods command is to be Si jubenti obtemper asset Deo, laudandus potius, qua^
puniendus esset Austin lib. de gra: and lib: arbit: c. 20.
commended rather then punished. And (2.) Calvin says, that God compels men
to obedience, which he could not do, if he were not willing that such commands
should be obeyed, which yet Mr. B. affirms God to have given out, not for any
man to yield obedience to, as if the commission of such sins were merely the
effect of Gods occule will (nicknamed his Command) and committed by men by mere
compulsion, whether they will or no. But 7. Instead of meddling with this last
part, Mr. B. concludes with the first; and excuses that, which no man ever
thought ill. Instead of showing how God, when he commands men to do evil,
compels Obedience to such commands, (or confessing at least that they are
words inexcusable) he tells us a Tale of something else which no man either
denies, or doubts of; as that the Devil and his angels etc. are ruled, and
overruled, and held in a chain, and ordered as the wild Ocean, that they
shall not go beyond their Bounds. But Mr. B. must be held ad idem, and be bid
to prove, how God does set spurs to the dull Jaded sinner, or compel, or
impell, or stir up, or command any man to do evil.

. 37. The fifth place of Mr. Calvin Mr. B. tells me, may be served with the
same answer which was given unto the last* Of the 5. place in his p. 62. 63
and if so, it may be served with the same reply which was just now given to
that last answer. But because he tells us another story neither for himself,
nor against me, to supply the space of those two pages, which should by right
have been filled with something pertinent to the thing for which that saying
was produced, I will give him the reason for which I added no digit to it; even
because I found it capable (considered simply in it self, and in the former
part of it especially) of an innocent sense and exposition. For I knew that
Instruments of the Divine providence, may possibly signify no more, then those
whom God does by his providence so overruled, as to make instrumental to his
wise Economy, by permitting them to act those their voluntary evils (of which
the crucifying of Christ may be an instance) out of which he can draw the
greatest good. For the Judge may in Justice, and in punishment of the sinner,
decree to suffer or permit the commission of sin, which yet is committed by the
sinner through the mere wickedness of his heart, and not by any act of Gods
will or impulse. But yet considering that that speech fell from the pen of that
person, who was the Author of those sayings set down immediately before, and
that the men spoken of were [Theeves and Murderers] of whom it is added in the
conclusion, [that God works through them] I thought fit to set it down (not
in the first, second, third, or fourth, but) in the fifth place of that
Catalogue, as being capable of a very guilty sense, and so meant in all
likelihood (or rather of necessity) by him whose meaning was made apparent in
the four first Doctrines. For unless by [working through them] he means the
act, as well as the end, effect, or consequent of it, he beats down all that he
had built in his forecited words. Which if Mr. B. will deny, it is as much as I
can wish for to prove the blackness of his Assertions.

. 38. The sixth place, taken from Dr. Twiss (whom he calls his Of the sixth
place in his p. 65. 66.
old friend and his Fathers friend p 65.) he seems to be more gravelled at,
then at any of the former. For instead of showing that Gods Decree of Damnation
does not presuppose sin, or that the prescience of sin does not precede the
decree of Damning, or that the Decree of damning for sin, if granted to be an
act of Vindicative Justice, does not presuppose sin; he shuffles in somewhat of
Dr. Twisse, which being added to his own words, amounts to little else then the
mere begging of the Question. He says the Dr. speaks modestly by using the
word [seemes;] who yet in my instance, does pronounce without seeming; and even
in that very place of his supposed modesty, says [it may be demonstrated.] And
what is it which he tells us may be demonstrated? even the grossest falsehood
and most irrational position, that the wit or witlesnesse of any man can
invent, viz. [* That the will of condemning or the decree by which a man is
destinated to condemnation for sin Correp. Corr* p. 66. lin. 1. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7.
seems not to be an act of Justice, * and cannot presuppose sin.] This is the
thing of which he says, that without any obscurity it may be demonstrated
(line 6.) but neither does he, nor can he give us any thing like it; and he
seems to be conscious of its impossibility, whilst he says [it seems not to
be an act of Justice,] in agreement to which he should have said, [it seems
not to presuppose sin.] For if the former is not, it is plain the latter cannot
be; and if that is, it is plain this must. If he thought the former did only
seem, why did he say the latter cannot demonstratively. And if he thought this
cannot be, why did he say that did but seem? nay, why did he strongly, though
implicitly, affirm them both in the same breath that he denied them, by saying
expressly [a condemnation for sin?] sure Gods Decrees to punish sinners, and
to punish them for their sins too, may very well be acts of Justice (and if
they may be, it is enough for the refuting of Dr. Twisse) and certainly they
must be agreeable to justice, which decreeing to punish without consideration
of, sin cannot be (and this again is enough for the refuting of that Dr.) And
although such Decrees are Predestinatio non egreditur extra se^ibid.
imminent Acts (as Mr. B. and his Dr. do rightly speak) yet they must have an
object; for he does not reprobate no body, or a man in the clouds. And the
objects of such decrees are particular men, or Note that he speaks of a Decree
to condemn for sin.
sinners, to whom they relate, and so they are ad alterum (which Mr. B.
requires in acts of justice,) and those sinners are so objected, as having an
actual Being in Gods sight, to whom all things are and must be presentiated.
For they must be considered as being, before they can be destined to
condemnation for sin. Nothing can punish nothing. what is looked on as
punishable, must needs be looked on as something, and so as Being; because
punishment is something, and that must be something on which something is
inflicted; for the subject has rather more then less of Being then its
Adjunct which is so much acknowledged by the very Antilapsarians (of which Sect
Dr. Twisse, if he is any I say [if any thing,] because he disagrees even with
them with whom he more agrees then with any other of that party.
thing, is one,) that though they do not make man to be the object of Gods
Decrees, [qua peccatorem,] as a sinner, yet they do [qua creaturam as one of
Gods creatures.]

. 39. The seventh place (taken from Dr. Twisse) he seeks to rid himself of by 3
strange sayings. 1. That he will Of the seventh place in his p. 66. 67. 2. 3.
do great matters elsewhere (neither naming time, nor place) 2. that I had been
more valiant, in doing what I did not. 3. that Dr. Twisse teaches him, the two
wills are not contradictory, as being not ad idem, nor secundum idem, as
belonging to different objects and different ways of working, etc. This is
prettier then all the rest. For to the First answer, 1.
which is nothing, (but that he will elsewhere do what he would gladly have
done here, if it had been to be done,) I have nothing to reply but that there
is nothing to reply to; and that this is indeed his wittiest course. For to the
Second, I reply (to his greater discomfort) that I never denied 2.
God to have another will besides that of legislation; but only affirmed, that
the one of these is not contrary to the other. He does not by the one will
impel to do what by the other he forbids, etc. (which is the Doctrine of Dr.
Twisse to be defended by Mr. B.) He determines what shall be as to particular
events, but decrees not that men shall sinfully contribute to this or that
effect; or that he shall commit the every sin which he commits. (To which if
Mr. B. was ashamed to speak, he should have been not- ashamed to say it is a
shameful Doctrine; and if he was not ashamed, he should have spoken.) As for
the Instance of Gods willing or commanding, and yet not determining the
offering up of Isaac, the answer to it is very easy, viz. That God willed and
commanded, first that Abraham should be willing, and then that he actually
should do every thing which he did toward the offering up of Isaac. And as
Abraham did what God commanded, so God determined nothing contrary to that
which he commanded. But for the actual slaughter or offering up of that
Sacrifice, God did punctually forbid it [Lay not thy hand upon the child.] And
to that agrees also his predetermination that Abraham should not kill his Son.
So that in this example, which Mr. B. seems to be so glad of, both the will of
God as that signifies his command, and the will of God as that imports his
determination, are most perfectly agreeable. And condemns that Doctrine of Dr.
Twisse, in excuse of which it was unskilfully alleged. Nor can it be said with
any shadow or show of reason, (as it is by that Dr. and his second Timothy)
that Gods Voluntas signi, or revealed will, is improperly called his will; for
he did most properly will that Abraham should do every thing which he did, by
way of obedience to his command of sacrificing his Son; and so afterward, God
did properly will that he should spare his Son, by way of obedience to his
command too. Now if the Sun at noon is not more visible then this, what a mad
thing is it to tell the world, that what has hitherto been called the revealed
will of God, that is, the whole book of holy Scriptures, has been improperly
so called, and is not really a revelation of his will, but only a sign of what
men ought to do by right, if his secret or real will did not hinder the doing
of it? as if when God says, [thou shall not kill, or steal, or commit
adultery,] it were not properly his real will that we should abstain from those
sins, because it is written and revealed, not kept secret from our knowledge.
If this Doctrine has truth in it, then when the Spirit of God says, [he is
not * willing that any should perish, but * willing that all should come to
repentance] ** 2 Pet. 3. 9
his [not willing] would signify his real will (because many perish) and his
[willing] would signify his being really unwilling (because all repent not.)
And when the Spirit of God says, [This is the will of God] his meaning would
be, [this is not the will of God, but only improperly called his will,] because
it is revealed, and not kept secret. Where as the contrary is evident, that
when S. John says [He that does the will of God, abides for ever, 1 John 2.
17.] he cannot speak of his secret, but revealed will. And yet I hope S. John's
words were very properly and truly spoken. But I must hasten my reply to the
third (...) of Mr. B. wherein he quite betrays his cause, and contradicts his
Teacher Dr. Twisse, by 3.
speaking as contrary to his knowledge, and to the very testimony of his eyes,
as any thing can be imagined. For one of Dr. Twisse his Instances of Voluntas
signi and B^neplaciti he conf^sseth to be Abraham, who is but one man and the
very same with himself, and that in the relation to the same Isaac who was not
different from himself neither. So that the object was Idem, and the
consideration Secundum idem. Another Instance of both wills is one and the same
Pharaoh. And a third Instance of both wills is the one numerical individual
Adam, who is not sure two different objects. Nor says the Doctor any such
thing concerning the object of those two wills, but only says of the wills
themselves, that they are not contradictory, without rendering the least reason
of that his bare affirmation; only in lieu of a Reason, he says that one of
the two wills is very truly a will, and that the other is not a will, but only
a signification what ought to be done, not what God will have to be done, and
is but called a will, and that improperly. And how agreeable this is to the
distinction of several seekers, of which some do seek and find, others
neither seek nor find, let indifferent Readers now pass their judgment.

. 40. The eighth place, out of Zuinglius, Mr. B. seems Of the eighth place in
his p. 63, 64. 1.
to be sicker of, then of all the seven going before. For First, he offers not
a word either to justify, or excuse it, but leave, It to stand in full force
against him and his Doctrines, and tacitly confesses it to be a very
blasphemous speech [that Adultery or Murder is the work of God; that God is the
Author, mover, and compeller to it, and that therefore it is not a crime.]
Secondly, He falsely ascribes this wicked speech to 2.
his Dear Master Calvin, and so is guilty of that Forgery, of which Calvin
accuses his anonymous Foe in the passage translated by Mr. B. (intentionally
against me, but) really and effectually against himself. 3. He says that that
answer which 3.
he translates is made by Calvin upon the * place, when he ** Calvin de occult.
Dei Prove. p. 736. 4.
knows that in * that place there is no such matter. Which must be therefore
his wilful and deliberate sin. Fourthly, What he calls the zealous Answer of
Calvin, however zealous it may be, is not an Answer, no not so much as to the
bb Note. I did not accuse them of saying, that Ged sins himself, but that he
makes men to sin.
substance of that eighth Instance. For the words which I cited and charged
with blasphemy were plainly these [ That when God (b) makes an Angel or a Man a
tr^nsgressour, he himself does not (b) transgress. And again, the same sin,
viz. Aultery or murder, in as much as it is the (c) work of God the Author,
mover, and compeller, it is not a crime; but in as much as it is of man it is a
wickedness.] But that which c c Note God is here called the Author of
Adultery, and Adultery the work of God. And both in a full, round complete
period of speech, not broken or mutilated. Now whether Adultery is a sin, and
whether it is blasphemy to say that God is its Author, let Men, women, and
Children be heard to speak.
Mr. B calls an Answer, is nothing else but an angry and railling speech, [of
spitting in faces, Impudence, Fools, and execrable wickedness.] And how does
this prove, 1. That God makes a Transgressour? or 2. That Adultery is Gods
work? or 3. That God is the Author of Adultery? or 4. That he is a cempeller to
it? (which is worse,) or 5. That the Adultery can be separated from the sin? or
6. That God can be the Author of the Adultery, yet not the Author of the sin?
Mr. B. his Answer must be made to these six things; and till that is done, he
must confess he was non: plust at this astonishing saying of his great Master.
Fifthly, he cannot pretend that his Translation of ^r. Calvin's Invective is any
way applicable 5.
to me, but rather to Dr. Twisse. First, because Dr. Twisse has Vin. Gra. l.
2. par. 1 p. 36
quoted Zuinglius his words, as well as I; (and therefore if it were a
Forgerie, the guilt would lie upon that Doctor.) Next because he charge the
Id l. 1. part. 1 Sect. 4. c 4. Digr. 4. p. 88.
Postlapsarians in general, (and Id. l. 1. part. 1 Sect. 4. c. 1. p. 63, 64,
65. 6.
names Mr. Calvin amongst them) with the crime of making God to be the Author
of sin. 6. What I cited from Dr. Twisse his Vindiciae Gratiae against Arminius,
Mr. B. imputes injuriously to Mr. Calvin's Book De providentia, where he
knows, if he has tried, there is no such thing; and if he has not tried, he
cannot excuse his blind asseveration: but any Man will believe that he did
wilfully prevaricate, who shall compare the end of his 63 page, with the
beginning of the Margin of his 64.

. 41. The ninth place (from Dr. Twisse) Mr. B. again imputes, Of the ninth
place in his p. 63. 1.
with great injustice, to Mr. Calvin. Whether in kindness and partiality to
his old Friend (as he calls him) from whose shoulders he would devolve such
insupportable burdens, or whether in hope that Mr. Calvin has shoulders strong
enough to carry all, and that every thing is justifiable merely by dropping
from his Pen, I am not willing to determine. But so it is, that Mr. B. calls
him wicked Calvin (which in my life I never did) and Correp. Cor. p. 63. li. 15.
disgorgeth himself upon him (to use his own words) sticking so much in his
stomach indigestible, even by saying I did, what he knows I did not. 2. He
speaks not a word in the defense of that strange speech of Dr. Twisse, but bids
me turn to the Section of Mr. Calvin again, (where he knows there is no such
thing) as if Mr. Calvin in his Grave had expounded that saying of Dr. Twisse,
before Dr. Twisse was old enough to lie in's Cradle. 3. He says, [tis plain, 3.
though a man should run, yet he might read it, that he pleads not for Gods
Agency in sin as it is sin.] Upon which I offer him this Dilemma. Did he read
my eighth instance (from Dr. Twisse) in Mr. Calvin's works, or did he not? if he
did, let him name the page, and say that Dr. Twisse did only steal it out of
Calvin. If he did not (as I am sure he did not) let him publicly confess,
that he spoke against his clearest knowledge. 4. He professes that God as a
Judge was the 4.
Author of punishing a sinful Ahab by his i e. Ahabs sin. But how the Author of
such punishment? by permitting him to sin, or by withdrawing his grace only
and not restraining from the sin? no (says Mr. B. and his Dr.) not only by
the fiction of bare permission, but by (a) decreeing what he will have done,
and by (a) commanding its execution.] So a a See Correct. Copy of notes p. 10
Dr. Twiss vind: Great. l. 1. c. 18. Sect. 1. p. 68.
that the sin being avowed to be the punishment of sin, and God being avowed to
be the Author of such punishment, he is avowed the Author of sin too, when we
and others say, that God does punish sin with sin, we say it is by sufferance
and permission, by not hindering from sinning, by leaving men to their willful
selves, expressed in Scripture by giving them up to their own hearts lusts, or
by giving them over as desperate Patients, as Physicians do those men on whom
no good is to be done But when our Adversaries speak of Gods punishing sin with
sin, they say it is by decreeing it, and by commanding its execution. (As in
the place above cited from Dr. Twisse.) 5. He says, [that I and the worst of
my Associates do plead for such a permission which makes evil things to fall
out against Gods determination etc.] this is first as contrary to truth as any
thing could be spoken, in all respects, (I ever denying permission to be
efficient, effective, or efficacious of evil, nor is evil against, but besides
his Determination.) Next it is contradictory to his own words but a few lines
before, where he accuses me of holding an idle speculative permission. And how
can such a permission be so busy and practical as to make evil things to fall
out? Thirdly he confesses (by this very Calumny) that he is for such an active
permission of evil things, as is also effective, and * makes them fall out, and
that according to his will and Determination. Which were he to express in
Latin, he would have said [* facit or * efficit ut mala eveniant.] 6. How many
fearful miscarriages there are besides in this eighth exterprise, I have so
largely showed 6.
already Chap. 3.. 34. that I will choose to refer my Reader thither.

. 42. The tenth place (from Dr. Twisse) Mr. B. speaks Of the tenth place in his
p. 67. 68.
to in such a manner, as to bewray his acknowledgement that there is something
in the place past all Apology and excuse; for 1. He commends the whole
Discourse of Dr. Twisse. 2. He 1. 2.
calls my quotations scraps and bits of his words, but is blindfold in both.
For it appears by all Circumstances, that he did not read those long discourses
of the Dr. to find whether my quotations were true, or not, but wanting the
patience or the Courage to observe how faithfully and fully I had exhibited the
Dr's. sense (which I was not to do by transcribing whole pages) he finds it
easier for himself to give me a cast of his Contumely, and let me pass. 3.
When he pretends to justify the several parts of that last instance which 3.
does consist of four degrees) he only addresseth himself to that which he
thought most capable of Apology or excuse, but passes by in deep silence the
two prime things which I intended should be considered in that Quotation, viz.
That Gods will does pass not only into the permission of the sin, but into
the sin it self which is permitted.] now why should our Correptorie Corrector
(who is professedly such) choose to speak of the mildest and easiest parcels of
the Quotation, but purposely slip over the hardest and most affrighting, if he
were not conscious to himself of his perfect inability to make them good? The
second thing is, [that God does not only administer the occasions of sinning,
but does also so move and * urge them as that they smi^e the sinners mind and
really affect his imagination etc.] now that for which these words were uoted
was not [the administering of Occasions] but [the moving and urging them upon
the mind of the sinner]. The former of which Mr. B. speaks to, (which amounts
to no more then the telling a Tale of a Tub) but takes no notice of the latter,
wherein the blasphemy does lie. I say the blasphemy, in Justification of Saint
James, who says that God tempts Jam. 1. 13, 14
no man, and how can the (...) The tempter tempt any man, more then by moving
and urging, and thrusting home the occasions of sinning upon the will and fancy
of the sinner, so as to smite his mind with them, and really affect his
imagination? what is it to urge a thing, but to thrust it forward, or set it on
lustily to the utmost point? and when are the Occasions of sinning thrust on or
urged more homeward, then when they affect the Imagination, yea, even smite the
mind of him that sins by that means? the Devil can but tempt, not compel us
to do wickedly, how can he tempt more, then by the utmost degree of suggestion
or persuasion to evil? and what greater degree of that, then the urging the
occasions of sinning so far as to smite the mind with the allurements of
profit or pleasure? (as D. Twisse goes forward in that quotation) the very next
thing to the smiting of the mind, is the yielding up of the consent, but that
is an effect, and not a part of the Temptation, performed by the sinner, not by
the Tempter. Nor did the Devil tempt our Savior one jot the less, in that our
Savior did not assent. Nor in that Eve consented did he tempt her more then he
did our Savior. To neither could he do more, then first to administer
occasions, and then to urge them upon the senses, and persevere in that urgency
until they affect the imagination, and ^mite the mind too. All which that
Doctor does speak of God, and as if that were not enough, he adds another ugly
word, [that there is on Gods part] a farther prostitution to sins required,]
which being added to the urging of occasions and to the smiting of the mind
with those occasions of sinning, is more then can truly be ascribed to the
unclean spirit called Satan (...), that is to say, [The Tempter. 4. Having
showed the two things which Mr. B. was so prudent as not to mention (yet would
not confess that his old friend had erred, or spoken rashly) I will a little
consider the three particulars to which he speaks. First he tells us that the
Dr. does put a wide difference betwixt Gods efficient, and his efficacio^s will
To which I reply, 1. That the difference cannot be very wide betwixt two wills
which are both irresistible, and such are these two 1.
in the Vin Gra. l. 1. p. 1. Sect. 12. p. 140.
profession of Dr. Twisse. Besides, he will confess, that Gods will is
efficient in the production of good, and yet they both say, that Gods decree is
no less efficacious in the permission of evil, then in the production of Good,
which is to equal [efficient] with [efficacious.] But 2. Though there is indeed
a difference betwixt efficient and efficacious, yet Dr. Twisse and his Timothy
make none at all, whilst they say that Gods will does tran^ire in rem
permissam; for that transience of the will into the object is not separable
from efficiency, as Dr. Twisse himself acknowledges, when to make
Predestination not to be ad alterum, he affirms it to be an immanent Action,
and yet he is willing to deny any such efficiency, by only acknowledging an
efficacy in the permission of evil, the former of which if Mr. B. will deny, he
will ruin his Cause as much as I can desire him, and if he cannot understand
it, let him discover his infirmity before I endeavor to work his Cure. But
having spoken of this distinction Chap. 3.. 28. I refer my Reader thither, and
reply to his second Answer no more then this, that Dr. Twisse speaks not only
of some judiciary acts of God upon impenitent sinners, as Mr. B. pleads at a
venture, and discovers his adventure by the word doubtless, which implies
only a confidence, and not a knowledge) or if he did, it were no good plea,
whilst he is for a transience of Gods will into the sin permitted, and for the
urging of occasions to smite the mind etc. and therefore Hosea 3. 13, 14. and
2 These. 2. 3. do only stand in his paper, as the signal Monuments of his
Impertinence, or Abuse. To his third I reply, (what I enlarged on before) that
what he says no body can deny, was not the thing which I mislik't considered
simply in it self; but that I might not set down scraps and bits of the Doctors
words (as now Mr. B. has affirmed for want of Logic,) I transcribed those
words to show the full sense of that which followed. But the things themselves
which were precisely the objects of my dislike, and to which I expected Mr. B.
his Answer, or Ab^uration, were the two foul speeches which I have pointed out
with Digits at the beginning of this Section, which because Mr. B. was afraid
to meddle with, I conceive he mislikt them as well as I.

The Conclusion.
I Conclude with some Reasons why I will lose no more time in representing the
other weaknesses of my Incomparable Antagonist, but only leave them to be
judged of by that account, which I have hitherto given of his Abilities and
Designs.

1. I find him so obnoxious in every Page and Period of his Attempts, that
should I vindicate my self after the measure that he is guilty, I could not
answer to my Discretion so great a wastfulnesse of Time, nor to my Reader so
great a length.

2. It was the opinion of several persons, that the best way of clearing the
First Edition of my Notes, would be to set forth a Second without addition or
alteration. And if that again were calumniated, then to set forth a third. At
least not to be long in my Vindication of those Truths, which Mr. B. has
injured, but cannot hurt.

3. The very Taste of some things is able to breed a Satiety, if not a Surfeit.
When some wagers have (con-been laid cerning the Correptory Correction) that
let a Man dip where he will, he shall not find a clean Page, they that have
betted on this side have always won. Cut off the Nails and the Hair and other
excrescencies of the Thing (I mean the scoldings and inventions) [Et nusquam in
toto corpore corpus erit] the whole Body of his Book will be transparently thin
and slender. And I hold it not lawful, or decent, to combat with him at his
own weapons.

4. He commends his Answer to my two * Portals (as he is pleased to word it)
viz. my Title, Epistle Dedisatory, and Paraenesis to the Reader,) to the
serious perusal of such as are not at leisure to read him through. Therein he
professes to have been * purposely the longer for the gratifying of some, and
to have taken off the edge of my Ob^ections. From whence I gather, that he
thinks it the shrewdest part of his Book; And thence I concluded it the fittest
subject of my Reply.

5. Such as he takes to be the keenest and choicest passages of the following
part of his Volnme he has industriously premised in his Invective against my
Portals. And that he gives for the Reason why he will speak but briefly and by
strictctures to that which indeed is most material. So that taking for my Theme
his first nine Sheets, and fetching in his several strengths from other places
of his Book, (to avoid abundance of Repetition,) I have extracted the very
Quintessence of all his Correptory Correction.

6. He has happily confessed, that the Ten Speeches which I quoted in the
entrance of my first Chapter do make one great * Pillar upon which all my Book
does rest.] Upon which it follows, that if I have proved undeniably, that that
Pillar is not rotten, nor overturned by him, (as he pretends,) but established
rather and confirmed, (as I have evidently showed) I need not display him any
farther, until he shall endeavor to shake that Pillar, by invalidating the
proofs by which that Pillar is supported. For whilst it cannot but be granted,
that his Doctors and Doctrines, do tempt the people to believe, that God is the
Author or cause of sin, (some in those very words, and some to that very
purpose, and almost all in a language as bad or worse,) with what excuse or
patience can such a writer be considered in all his failings?

7. He has made his whole work so immethodieal, and confused, and taken so
many strange courses to make his Reader incapable of compa^ing his Declamation
with the Notes which I had written on Gods Decrees, (which he in part does
acknowledge by his Apology to the Reader just before his Errata,) that he
implicitly confe^seth he durst not stand to an easy trial. And when I consider
how many Men were employed in the correction of every Sheet, (besides the
ordinary Corrector,) and with how absolute a Liberty they were empowered, I
cannot but look on his Apology in the conclusion of his Book, as the deepest
Instance of his Invention.

8. Whereas the only right way to confute my Notes, had been either by proving
that my Principles were false, or that my Inferences from thence were not
legally deduced, he has tacitly acknowledged the indisputablenesse of both And
I need not be elaborate in the vindicating of That, which he implicitly
confesses to be without blame.

9. He has many Sad Methods of speaking nothing to the purpose, the very
discovering of which will be a competent Antidote against his whole Book.
First, it is ordinary with 1.
him, to mistake the Topics of my Proofs for the Proofs themselves, and then
to call them no Proofs, and wisely to send me for an Answer to Sir N. N. which
is in effect to tell his Reader, that he is a Rare Person in the Art of
Misunderstanding; or is not able to distinguish betwixt things that differ. 2.
He has another solemn custom, instead of confuting 2.
my way, to set down his own from one or other of his Masters; which can
signify no more, then that the judgments which differ, do not agree. 3. He is
excellently good 3.
at deceiving himself with Petitio Principii, and Ignoratio Elenchi, and
(either skilfully or for want of skill) makes frequent Transitions ab Hypothesi
ad Thesin. As, when I prove that Christ died intentionally for all, he
vehemently opposes that all are not saved. And when I say, Gods Reprobation of
the far greater number of Men was not without the consideration of their sins:
He demurely asks, If God content himself with a little Flock, why should you
grumble it is no bigger?] as if he hoped that some Readers would be so silly as
to believe, that I did grumble at God's Oeconomie. 4. When he is pintcht with
an Argument which he dares not meddle 4.
with at all, (lest in salving one ulcer, he should make many more of as
desperate a Nature,) he amuseth his Reader with some little story, concerning
his Father, or himself, or his Fathers Friends, or his own, or his wholesome way
of making Sermons, or his great pains taking with his little flock; and not to
be wanting to himself on these occasions, He tells the Reader how many years
he has been a Minister in England, that the world may have an Intimation how
old he was when he began to be an Author; otherwhile he diverts to his having
been in Holland, his having seen Gerhard Vossius, and heard him speak too; Now
he is very much beholding to Dr. Ames; anon he is beloved of Dr. Twisse, and
that no less then another Timothy; Nay rather then enter into a reasoning about
that part of an Argument wherein the force of it does lie against his
Doctrines, he tells the Reader as much of me, as he either knows, or suspects,
or else is able to invent; and as much of others as he thinks is needful to
stop a gap. 5. In diverse cases of Extremity, when he cannot devise which way
to turn, he says, he is not at leisure to do this, 5.
or that, and referrs his Reader to some other Author; or tells us he should
blush to spend time in confuting it; or that he is too short, because he has
been too long; or that it is time to string up his Pen. Or says, 'twas
answered long ago in his First Attempts against my Notes, which neither I nor
his other Readers could ever see. Yet he refers us to the pages of his
manuscript labors locked up in the privacy of his Cabinet, or Closset, and
hopes that that will pass with us for one of his Orthodox Put-offs. But to
cover these shifts with some variety, he often refers to some page of my
Printed Copy, where I either say nothing of what he pretends, or many times
the contrary to his pretentions. 6. It is one of his 6.
subtil^ies, not at all to quote my words, or the page where they are written,
hoping the Reader will not be able to bring him to due examination, but rather
swallow it as granted, that in a great deal of story there is at least a
little Truth. 7. When 7.
he cannot quarrel with my words, he interprets my heart to be as opposite to
my words as he can wish. As when I did not conclude the will of man to be free
from all divine Praescience, (nor was it possible that I should do so) he tells
his Reader I would have done it but for the shame of the world and speech of
People. By which inhumane course of proceeding, any man may say any thing
against any man living. In a word. When he has least to say against my
Argument, he railes the most against my Person, Crying out [that my ways of
reasoning are Blasphemous and Scurrilous or mysterious pieces of Iniquity. Or
that others have answered them already. Or that he will stride over all my
fifth Chapter, because it has been battered, mauled and broken by his Answers
to my Former, so as it moulders all to pieces. Or else he breaks out into Noise
and Clamor, as if he took me for a Fiend to be exerciz'd, AVAUNT, AVAUNT,
DEPART FROM ME O THOU SATANICAL BLASPHEMER, QVI DIABOLVM IPSVM BLASPHEMANDO
SVPERAS.]

These are the Admirable Methods of giving Correptory Correction to such as
differ in Judgment from Mr. Barlee. In the Discovery of which, I have revealed
no Secrets. It was without my Consent, and in Refusal of my Advise, that he
has unnaturally inflicted such an exemplary punishment upon himself, as first
to publish his Imperfections in a Remonstrance of Thirty sheets, and then, in
the ordinary News Book, to be at the cost of publishing his very Publication.
In both which Contrivances of his Disgrace, I can truly say I have not had the
least hand. But o^ the contrary, I was so careful of his Credit as to desire
him very early (by several Letters to that effect) that he would not div^lge
his Animosities, nor make himself known in the streets of 2 Samuel 1. 20.
Askelon; but if he could not abstain from behaving himself unseemly, that he
would suffer his Misbehaviours to pass in silence; and in Retu^n of my Charity
afford me his. All the Requital that I expected for the many Injuries which he
had done me, was that at length he would put an end to them, and cease from
doing me any more; and that he would not conceive me to be made incapable of
pardon by my having been so Inoffensive, as to have suffered so many wrongs
with so much patience. It was not therefore my fault, that he has scorned my
Counsel, and thrust himself upon the Theater, and Trumpetted out those things
which he was deeply concerned to have concealed. I have but showed him by that
light, by which he longed to be seen; and so have said in effect no more then
this, Behold the CHRISTIAN, the SCHOLAR, the GENTLEMAN, and the MAN.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. for Philanthophy r. Philanthropie. p. 7. in marg. 1. 1 John 2. 2. p.
8. in marg. 14. vera. l. 30. r. Austin. p. 14. l 29. r. nor p. 15. in marg.
Dal. Apolog. pro 2. Synod. ibid l. 22 Hilarie p. 40. l. 8. J. Goodw. p. 57. l.
15. Gadarene p. 59. l. 30. Nazarene p 63. penult. dele not. 69. ult. Erastian,
p. 72. l. 7. r. volumn. p. 99. l. 19. r. ni. 106 for the Title r. Of the cause
of punishment. p. 112. l. 15. r. unto p. 124. for the running Title, r. Dr.
Twisse against p. 125. l. 2. r. Peter Martyr Vermilius Fl. p. 129. l. 25. after
Mr. r. B. p. 130. l. for sceleritus r. sceleratus: p. 132. in Marg l 10.
Schasm. ibid in Marg. l. 45. 46 fol. 5. 19. p. 137. l. 2. after cannot r. not.
ibid in marg. l 12 r. Schasm. p. 139. in marg. l. 17. and 21. r. Broeckerus and
Dominicus. ibid l. 22. dele as after well. p. 141. in marg. l. 17. for quia r.
qua. p. 146. l. 11. after is r. as. ibid l. 24. r. Rhapsodie. p. 151. l. 28.
after from r. me.

CHAP. 4.
Page 6. line 9. read Correptorie. p. 9. in marg. l. 12. r. Cano^um. p. 20. l.
5. r. determining. ibid. l. 9. r. sacrilege. p. 23. in Marg. 41. r. cujus causa
sit in ipso. ibid in marg. 45. r. conjiciunt. p. 24. for the running title r.
the ugly consequence of -- p. 57. l. 6. dele for.

A Table of those things that are most material, wherein the Reader must needs
be referred as well to the Chapter as to the Page.
A.
A Braham in relation to the sacrificing of Isaac. Chapter 4. p. 57, 58. Absolute.
See Decrees. Arminianism what, and how little understood by the ^ulgar, and by
Mr. B. Chapter 1. p. 12. to p. 17. Arminius his Absolute Decrees. Chapter 4. p. 35.
Artificial Handsomness in the worst kind. Chapter 3. p. 150, 151. Antiquity how
misunderstood and abused by Mr. B. Chapter 1. p. 27. to p. 30. Augustine Chapter 1. p.
28. of his writings and the Fathers before him. Chapter 3. p. 74, 75, 76, 77.
vindicated from Mr. B's Calumnies. Chapter 4. p. 44, 45, 46. Author. See God.
B.
Blasphemies. A Catalogue of them, and from what Doctrine they arise. Chapter 3. p.
123. to p. 140. and p. 141. etc. it is no blasphemy to free God's Decree from
being any Cause of Sin. p. 140. rather the contrary is blasphemy. p. 147. as to
say he is the Author of Adultery with Zuinglius. Chapter 4. p. 59, 60.
C.
Calvin, his style and Temper. Chapter 3. p. 125, 126. the weakness of his simile
of the Sun and a Dunghill. Chapter 4. p. 49, 50. how calumniated by Mr. B. p. 60,
61. Calvinists agreeing with Papists. Chapter 4. p. 34. Castellio. How injured by
Mr. B. Chapter 3. p. 148, 149. Conditional. See Decrees. Church. The Church of
England Chapter 1. p. 17, 18, 19, 20. all the ancient and modern Church how meant
by Mr. B. Chapter 3. p. 105, 106. Correptory Correction, what it signifies chapter 1.
p. 1, 2. etc. Christ his dying only for the Elect a great and dangerous Error.
Chapter 3. p. 86. 87. etc. of his dying intentionally as well as fufficiently for
all. p. 93. 94. etc.
D.
Damnation. How disguised by Mr. B. and his masters. Chapter 4. p. 3. 4. etc.
Decrees Absolute. Chapter 3. p. 56. absolute and conditional. Chapter 4. p. 2.
irrespective Decrees if believed lead men into despair by their confession who
maintain them. p. 22. 23. respective Decrees proved from Dr. Twisse his own
words. p. 32. the absolute Decrees of Armineus. p. 25. Decrees though eternal
must have an object and so be ad alterum. p. 56. Despair the effect of Mr. B's
Doctrine Ch, 4. p. 22. 23. Dort. Our Divines at that Synod Chapter 4. p. 13. 14.
jeered by Mr. ^as not being for his turn. p. 16.
E.
Effect and End not distinguished by Mr. B. Chapter 4. p. 39. Efficient and
Efficacious how confounded by Dr. Twisse and Mr. B. Chapter 4. p. 64. See Sin.
Election eternal. The Cause and the Condition must be distinguished. Chapter 3. p.
62. 63. etc. Erysipelas Exulcerate hurtful malgre Mr. B. Chapter 4. p. 8.
F.
Freewill. How safely interpreted by me. Chapter 3. p. 64. 78. 79, 80. and p. 100.
Chapter 4. p. 21. 22. Fundamentals in Religion. Chapter 14. p. 10. 11. Fur
Praedestinatus how groundlesly imputed by Mr. B. Chapter 3. p. 145. 146. Chapter 4. p.
51.
G.
God. How and by whom he is forged to be the Fountain and Cause of Sin. Chapter 1.
p. 23. 24, 25. 26, 27. how inferred by Mr. B. to be more the Cause of Sin then
the sinner himself. Chapter 3. p. 110. 111. God's being made to be the Author of
Sin is charged by Dr. Twisse upon the Anti-Remonstrants his Brethren. p. 123.
to p. 125. how God's permission of sin is understood by Mr. B. and his Teachers
p. 129, to p. 143. How made to be more then the Author of sin p. 131. 133. etc.
of his Decrees. Chapter 4. p. 1, 2. His sovereignty is consistent with Justice, and
does not consist in the causality of sin, p. 20. how made Author of sin by Mr.
B's very way of Tergiversation, p. 20, 21. and by Rivets Argument, p, 23, 24,
25. and by Mr. B's way of denying it, p. 33, 34. how Mr. B. and his are
demonstrated to make God the Author of sin, in 10 whole Sections from p. 36. to
the end of Chapter 4. God cannot will his own dishonor, p. 46. etc. Grace special,
Chapter 3. p. 83, 84. etc. of perseverance. p. 98. 99. prevenient p. 100. of
perseverance not irresistible. p. 101. 102. 103. Chapter 4. p. 17. 18.
H.
Hell. For whom prepared. Chapter 3. p. 70. 71. Mr. Hobbs, against Mr. B. Chapter 4. p.
44. otherwise of the same principles, Chapter 3. p. 136. Hilarie, Chapter 1. p. 29.
I.
Dr. Jackson, Chapter 3. p. 147, 148. King James orthodox with Mr. B. Chapter 4. p. 7.
Infants are harmless, and in a saveable condition malgre Mr. B. Chapter 4. p. 25,
26.
L.
Lambeth Articles an Innovation which Q. Elizabeth was angry at. Nor would K.
James be entreated to admit them, Chapter 4. p. 18.
M.
Massilianism, Chapter 1. p. 7, 8. etc. Melancthonianism, Chapter 1. p. 14.
O.
Orthodox Assemblies, Chapter 4. p. 7 The Orthodoxie of K. James, Ibid. Orthodox
not so good as sincere, p. 9, 10.
P.
Pelagianism, Chapter 1. p. 7, 8, etc. Permission of sin, how misunderstood and
misapplyed to God by Mr. B. and his Masters, Chapter 3. p. 129. to p. 143. and
confounded with positive effection, Ib. and Chapter 4. p. 61, 62. Perseverance. See
Grace. Postdestination, Chapter 1. p. 4, 5, etc. Postlapsarians charged with
postdestination by the Antelapsarians, Ib. Practical Christians no ill things
Chapter 4. p. 10. Predestination respective confessed unwillingly by Mr. B. Chapter 4
p. 19. See Decrees. Prediction not distinguished from effection by Mr. B. Chapter
4. p. 41. Preterition, how it argues the shamefastness of the Sublapfarians,
Chapter 4. p. 3, 4. etc. See Reprobation. Prosper, Chapter 1. p. 29. Punishment
eternal, the cause of it, Chapter 3. p. 107, 108. etc. and p. 116, 117. to p. 121.
the punishment of sin with sin, how meant by us and by our Adversaries, Chapter 4.
p. 61.
R.
Railing leads to five conclusions, Chapter 2. p. 44. to p. 50. not warranted by
Scripture, Chapter 4. p. 13. Reason, of what Authority right reason is, Chapter 3. p.
103, 104, etc. Redemption universal, Chapter 1. p. 21, 22. Special, Chapter 3. p. 84,
85, etc. Universal clear from Scripture, p. 86. and flowing immediately from an
Article of the Creed in the judgment of Bishop Davenant, Chapter 4. p. 11. and is
vindicated from Mr. B's attempts, p. 29, 30, 31, 32. Remonstrants, Chapter 3. p.
144. Reprobation, its Cause and Condition, Chapter 3. p. 62, 63, etc. confessed to
be conditional by Mr. B. p. 64. etc. Positive and Negative, an ill distinction,
p. 65, 66, 67. Chapter 4. p. 3, 4, etc. Revealed. See Will. Rivet's strange
Argument inferr's God the Author of Sin, Chapter 4. p. 23, 24, 25.
S.
Scripture how used by Mr. B. and how by me, Chapter 1. p. 21, 22. to 27. and Chapter
3. p. 123, etc. Vindicated from being made to make God the Author of sin, Chapter
4. p. 33, 34, 38, 39, 40. the sad effects of its literal Interpretation where
it speaks figuratively, p. 47, 48. the right way of interpreting (...), p. 48.
Sin, no man above it, Chapter 3. p. 81, 82. Its cause efficient not deficient only,
p. 110. to 116. Sinfulness cannot be separated from sin, nor sin from the act
of sinning, Chapter 4. p. 42, 43, 44. See God. Sincerity better then Orthodoxie,
Chapter 4. p. 9. and 10.
T.
Temptation to sin is not sin. Chapter 4. p. 63. 64. Tradition. of what Authority.
Chapter 3. p. 103. etc. Dr. Twisse against his Brethren the Anti-Remonstrants,
Chap. 3. p. 123, 124, 125. His words infer respective degrees, Chap. 4. p. 32.
Of clashing with Mr. B as p. 44. how strangely mistaken, and how sadly defended
by Mr. B. p. 60, 61, 62, 63, etc.
V.
Vedelius, charge the Anti-Remonstrants with Atheism, Chapter 3. p. 126.
Universal. See Redemption.
W.
Will. What the Adversaries do mean by Gods Secret and Revealed will. And the
absurdities which follow, Chapter 4. p. 52, 53, 54, 57, 58.
The End.

