'AYTOKATAKPISIS, OR, Self-Condemnation, EXEMPLIFIED In Mr. Whitfield, Mr.
Barlee, and Mr. Hickman. WITH OCCASIONAL REFLECTIONS On Mr Calvin, Mr Beza, Mr
Zuinglius, Mr Piscator, Mr Rivet, and Mr Rollock: BUT MORE ESPECIALLY On DOCTOR
Twisse, and MASTER Hobbs; AGAINST WHOM, God's Purity and his Praescience, and
his Eternal Decrees according to Praescience, (commonly called Respective or
Conditional Decrees) with the sincere intention and the general extent of the
Death of Christ, are finally cleared and made good; And the Adversaries
Absurdities ( confessed by themselves to be unexcusable) are proved against
them undeniably, out of their own hand-writings.

WITH An ADDITIONAL ADVERTISEMENT Of Mr Baxter's late Book Entitled The
Grotian Religion discovered, etc.

By THOMAS PIERCE Rector of Brington in Northamptonshire.

London, Printed by J.G. for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane, 1658.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THAT I presume to entertain thee with this Additional Importunity in
vindication of those things so largely insisted upon already in several Tracts,
to wit the Truth and Goodness of God's Decrees, and the things that are
consequent thereunto, there is this (amongst other reasons) to be alleged for
an excuse, that it is intended to be the last. Or if I live to grow worthier of
bringing my thoughts into the light, as it is not likely to be in haste, so I
hope it will be in some other kind.

I wish that some had remembered whilst they were men of ripe years, what we
all have been taught in our several childhoods, that there are four sorts of
things which should not be drawn into dispute; but either be granted, or
rejected, as soon as named. And I had once a very pleasing, but (it seems) a
vain hope, that it could never become a Question, See the right Reverend Bishop
Bramhal his catching of the Leviathan, particularly from p. 467. to p. 473.
Whether or no there is a God? or, Whether God is a Spirit? or, Whether the
holy Spirit of God can be the sovereign Author of all uncleanness. To be barely
skeptical in such things as these, is sure a crime of greater moment then to be
cherished with impunity, or to be suffered to pass abroad without being put
unto a stand.

But it seems we are fallen into that Age of the World, wherein the worst of
Questions have not only been rudely started, but blasphemously stated in the
very worst sense too. The most unwholsom Doctrines that can be named, have not
only been brewed in the private fantasies and brains of unlearned men, but
have publicly been broached by men of parts; and running out at their Pens,
have been given for Drink to the giddy People.

Reader, thou will find, in the ensuing Treatise, strange contradictions of
diverse men, both against the Scriptures and themselves too. Thou will find them
saying that sins are the works of God, that God is pleased with them, that God
does will them with a perfect willingness, and that they make for God's glory.
All directly against themselves, who having said such things in many places of
their works, have also said sometimes they never said them. And all directly
against the Scriptures, which say that sins are the works of the Devil, that
they are grievous to God Almighty, that he wills them not, but abhorres them,
and that he is extremely dishonored by them. Thou shall find it acknowledged
and avowed to have been publicly taught by famous men, whom thou will find to
be justified in their very worst sayings, and not only so, but even owned for
orthodox and classical Authors; I say, by such men as these thou shall find it
confessed to have been taught, If in a multitude of examples the Reader desires
to be directed to one or two, he may satisfy himself, chapter 3. sect. 13 and
sect. 27. n. 2, 3, 4, 5.
that God in plain terms is the Author of sin, that he not only wills it, but
impells men to it, and makes them sin by coaction. And yet with a turn of the
tongue, thou will find a bold Artist trying to lick them all clean. For though
such things (says Look forward on c. 3. sect. 27.
he) have fallen from the pens of the Orthodox, yet they have not understood
them in any flagitious or unconscionable sense, nor have they used to do it
often, and the Jesuits have done it as well as they, and they have said the
contrary at other times: and so without any more ado, salvares est, saltat
senex. Thou will find men obtruding new Creeds upon the Church. One inserting
this Article, that God is no Spirit; Another this, that God is the maker of all
things real, and so (by a consequence unavoidable) of all the wickedness in the
world. In a word, thou will find, that we Isa. 6.5.
dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips, who Ezekiel. 22.26.
put no difference between the holy and profane. It is impossible (says Job
14.4.
Job) to bring a clean thing out of an unclean; much more impossible (say I) to
bring any thing unclean from the Spirit of purity. It is a lesser wickedness
of the two, to ascribe unto the Devil some good works of God, then to charge
God foolishly with the evil works of the Devil. It is a very great sin, for men
to bear false witness against their neighbors: it is yet a greater, to be
false witnesses 1 Cor. 15.15.
for God. It is a greater sin yet to be false witnesses against him: but sure
it is the greatest sin of all (by 2 Pet. 3.16.
wresting and corrupting his sacred word) to make him bear false witness
against himself.

Had such impieties as these been only practiced in private corners (as the
Feasts of Bacchus heretofore) I had contented my self to have mourned over them
in secret, like one of the Lam. 2.10.
Elders of the daughters of Zion, I had sat upon the ground and kept silence:
having the words of the Prophet Amos as it were sounding in mine ears, The Amos
5.13.
prudent shall keep silence in that time, for it is an evil time. I should then
have reasoned within my self, Mat. 7.6.
that no man living can be obliged to cast what is holy unto * Dogs, or to
give the * Pearl of reproof to Swine, (if yet my charity could have suffered me
to think mine Adversaries such.) For why should I draw upon my self the
implacable hatred of evil doers, in case I had reason to expect a very great
prejudice to my self, without any the least hope of being profitable to others?

But when I saw such things proclaimed in Gath, and as it were written with a
Sunbeam in the streets of Askelon; when I found it taught by Damus Deum esse
causam particularem uniuscu jusque actus. Vin. Gr. l. 2. p. 40. col. 2.
Doctor Twisse and his followers (Mr. W. and Mr. B.) that God is the cause in
particular of every act, nay the natural Cause, and the Mr. B. c. 3. p. 11.
sovereign Author of the act of sin; nay that he wills and works, not in the
act of sin only, but in the Mr. W. Ext. of D. Prove. p. 12.
sin of the Act too, whose very pravity and deformity does make way for God's
glory; and when I found it acknowledged by Doctor Twisse, Ex quibus quam facile
quae^o fuit viris istis indoctis, quales erant Libertini colligere D^um
Aucrorem faisse omnium scelerum quae ab hominibus perpetrantur. Vin. Gr. l. 2.
sect. 1. p. 52.
that such illiterate men as the Libertines then were (and as the Ranters now
are) might very easily collect even from this one Doctrine, [The Act of sin is
from God] that God himself is the Author of all the wickedness in the World;
when I found it granted by Of lib. and Nec. p. 26. and Q. p. 11.
Mr. Hobbs himself, that evil use may be made of such bold assertions, and that
though he thought them to be true, and so to be inwardly believed, yet he
thought them too dangerous to be spoken aloud, much less fit to be preached
and printed too, (forgetting that himself had even preached them in print, and
that in the very same books wherein he confesses the danger of them;) when I
considered how great an odium had been derived from these doctrines upon the
Protestant name, through the dexterities of the Jesuits, and other Emissaries
of Rome, who have charged the whole body of the Reformed Church with the
particular misbehaviours of some very unsound and unruly members; when I
considered that those Doctrines had stopped the way to reconcilement betwixt the
Lutheran Churches, and those that follow the way of Calvin, they See Doctor
Jacksons Exact Collect. l. 10 sect. 6. p. 3188.
not agreeing (say the Lutherans) in the worship of one God, because the God of
the Lutherans is only the Author of what is good, whereas the God of the
Calvinists is owned by them to be the Author of what is morally evil; last of
all, when I considered the tremendous dignity of my calling, which is not only
to be a shepherd, and a * Watchman in Israel, Ezekiel. 33.7, 8. and chapter 34. v. 2,
10.
(and as such to be accountable as well for Ibid.
other men's lapses as for mine own) but also a 1 Cor. 4.1.
steward of the mysteries of the living God, (however unworthy and 2 Cor. 2.16.
insufficient for so insuperable a work;) I say when I seriously considered
these several things, and compared them all with one another, I had not the
courage to be afraid of my fellow creatures, the fear of whom did seem to me to
be a desperate boldness: for what greater boldness can there be, then to stand
in so great a fear of them who can at the Mat. 10.28.
most but destroy the body, as not to stand in fear of him who can cast both
body and soul into Hell? It is not a true love of God, which is not able to
Joh. 4.18.
cast out the fear of men. I know what Ecclus. 2.12, 13.
woe is to them who have fearful hearts and faint hands, and what will be said
at the judgment seat, unto the sinner that goes two ways? I know the Rev.
21.8.
fearful and unbelieving shall have their portion in the lake of fire and
brimstone. I know it was one of those sins which the Prophet did not think he
could sufficiently bewail, (unless his Jer. 9.1.
head were all water, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that he might weep day
and night, Verse. 3. Isa. 58.1.
NOT TO BE VALIANT for the TRUTH. Isaiah was bid to cry aloud without sparing,
and to lift up his voice like a Trumpet in showing the people their
transgressions. Should I presume to be afraid of the wrath of men, and in an aw
of their persons forbear to tell them of their sins, (for some men's Doctrines
become their sins, if it is a sin to blnspheme and dishonor God) I might well
cry out, as the same Prophet did, Isa. 6.5. Vae mihi quia lacui, id est, quia
peccata non libere reprehendi. Grot. in locum.
WOE IS ME FOR I^AM UNDON. And that for the very s^^e reason which the Prophet
gives of his outcry in the following words, because I am a man of unclean
lips. That is, (as the learned Annotators have explained the place) I have
been guiltily afraid to tell the great ones of their iniquities. Many are
tickled with an opinion of their Policy and Prudence, when it is but cowardice
and coldness in the cause of God. Woe be to such, for they are undon.

But neither indeed can I pretend to have been valiant in my encounters, whom
even mine Adversaries themselves have made unable to be afraid. For I have
spoken no harder things of what I have found in their writings, then their
Masters have spoken of the same, when they have found them in the writings or
mouths of others. And this I doubt not but they will grant me, that Henbane is
not the wholsomer for being found to grow in a specious Garden, no more then a
Tul^p is the uglier for having grown out of a Dunghill. Nor is El^sphemy the
better for being found in he Works of a Christian Writer, any more then Pontius
Pilate for have ng been mentioned in the Creed. When I find men Jam. 2.7.
bl^spheming that worthy name, which (I hope) shall ever be dearer to me then
my life; and when I find them Psalm. 73.8.
corrupting others (as the Psalmist speaks) even by verse. 9.
stretching forth their mouth unto the h^avens, and that their verse. 8.
talking is against the most H^gh; and when many of the verse. 10.
people do fall unto them, whereout they suck no small advantage; I cannot but
be offen^ed at what is spoken, without partiality to them that speak. Whether I
find it in the Jesuits (as sometimes I do,) or in the rigid Pre^byterians, (as
I have many times don.) or in the d wnright Libertines, (as who does not?) I
desire to give it its proper name. When Mr. Calvin writ against Quintin and
Pocquet, and other persons of quality who were domestic servants to the Queen
of Navar, See Calvin's Epist. 62. compared with what follows.
he made no scruple to call them Libe^tines, Qui ^gnorab^nt quid sibi vel^et
Lib rt^norum nomen, id Quintini nomi^e cogn^turi sunt. Exp^dit Be^luas tam
p^^niciosas no a aliq a ^nsigni^i. Blash^ m ^s x cra^il^s s^a^gunt. -- Non
solum Ch^^s;t nam Relig onem, s d e^^am omnem human^tat^m quae hactenus inter
Tu^cas, etc Calv. adversus Libers. c. 4.
and (what is more) pernicious b^asts, charged them with ex^crable blasphemy,
then which no villainy was greater, no poison worse, as tending (says the) to
the subversion, not of the Christian Religion only, but even of that ingenuity
and civil nature, which has hitherto prevailed amongst Turks and Infidels. The
making of God to be an Author and Cause of sin, Voetius confesses to be [
Voetius in Method. Resp. Calum. p. 1136.
absurd, and sottish, and implying a contradiction, horrid, blasphemous,
scandalous, against all Theology and the consent of Christendom, against the
light of nature, and the dictates of reason.] If Voetius say thus, much more
may I. Again, to say that God has imposed a necessity of sinning upon his
creatures, is concluded by Hist. Gottesch. c. 11. p. 173. R g. 5.
Remigius, to be a charging God foolishly as the Author of sin, which Doctor
Whitaker affirms to be a very Dr. Whitaker contra D^raeum. l. 8. sect, 1. p.
524.
great blasphemy. Nay whether it is not the greatest to be imagined, let the
Reader conjecture by that which follows.

1. The greatest blasphemy is that, which ascribes to God (as the Principal
Cause and Contriver) the very worst of the worst that can be possibly imagined.
2. That is the worst of the worst which is the very worst thing in the Devil
himself. 3. The Devil has nothing worse in him then a necessity of sinning, or
an impossibility to abstain from sin. 4. Therefore to say that God Almighty did
eternally cause, or contrive, decree, or praedestin a necessity of sinning, in
a great part of the Angels, and in the greatest part of mankind, is the
greatest blasphemy to be imagined.

That this is frequently to be met with in a great variety of Writers, the
intelligent Reader needs not be told. And such a variety he will meet with in
the following Treatise. For though that rigid Ternary of Presbyterians, Mr. W.
Mr. B. and Mr. H. may seem to be the chief in my consideration, yet my Reader
will much misunderstand me, if he thinks that Writers of their Pitch could have
drawn so many sheets from me, upon the sole account of their own achievements.
Had I spent so great a share of my precious time upon but two or three
Aggressors of no greater fame and consideration, I had done much more then I
could have answered, if not to my conscience, yet at least to my discretion.
Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Barlee, in their several songs to the same Tune, (which
they both entitle their vindications,) were of themselves sufficient to be the
principal occasions of this my enterprise, but the impulsive causes were much
more worthy: For I look upon these two, as on a couple of Chemists, whose very
Quintessence and Elixir of strength and subtilty, I clearly discover to have
been fetched from the public Elaboratories of the greatest Artists, both of
the upper, and lower way; and in a more especial manner of Mr. Calvin and
Doctor Twisse, whose good Latin they have turned into no good English; and
what for many years together they had been gathering, they have at once
produced in the great, and in the profuseness of their humor have shed it
abroad amongst the people. It has been therefore my chiefest aim, to enfeeble
those Armories and Magazins, from whence these Combatants have borrowed their
choicest weapons, whether engaged in their offensive, or defensive quarrels.

I have allowed Mr. W. the first and chief place in my consideration, (I mean
in respect of Mr. B. and Mr. H.) first because he is a person of the greatest
gravity and the So says Mr. B. in his Neces. V.n.c. ^. p. 32. l penult.
grayest hair, and one who was versed in these Controversies (as Mr. Barlee
says often) Introduct. p. 3 and chapter 3. p. 18.
before I was born or brought forth into the l^ght; before I had a head or an
eye; one who subscribed the 39. Articles Ibid. p. 40.
before there was any such thing in the world as Mr. T. P. Lastly chapter 2. p. 34.
Old enough and wise enough to be my father. When I observed Mr. B. upbraiding
to me my want of years, Ibid. p. 49.
more then any other thing, not one y in these pages which I have cited, but in
many more which I conceal, (calling me one while, a c. 2. p. 41.
Demure Junior, and another while, a c. 2. p. 53.
Juvenal Divine) sometimes objecting his Chapter 2. p. 27.
own antiquity, and Mr. W's extremely often, as if he thought that old age were
the strongest The weakness of it is visible in the S^nner Impleaded, p. 300,
301.
argument in the world against what ever had been alleged by one who followed
them into the world at some years distance; I comforted my self with the
remembrance, that I did not choose my nativity, nor was I the Lord of my own
Horoscope, and in regard I was as old as I was able to be by any means, it
would no be reckoned as my fault, that I could not plead my longevity for the
advantaging of my cause. It a ^pears by the words of 1 Timothy 4.12.
S. Paul to Timothy, that a Priest is too apt to be despised for his youth. And
to remove that stumbling block out of the old man's way, he shall know that our
Lord and Savior did not quite attain to my years in his Peregrination upon the
earth. S. John and S. Timothy were both but young men, when yet the first was
an Apostle, and the second a Bishop. If Argumentation and Orthodoxy were to be
reckoned by a man's age, I am sure the old Serpent would go beyond them. And
though I my self am far from it, yet the truth which I assert has Age enough
to become an Argument. Quod primum verum est. Tertul.
So that from this day forwards, I hope the difference of years betwixt my
adversaries and me, (which they have hitherto more insisted on in all the^r
public and private chat, then upon any one thing which they have conceived to
be of use) shall be no longer an ingredient in our dispute. yet this is one
reason, why Job. 32.4, 6.7.
Mr. W. comes first into my consideration. Another reason is, because he
publicly made me a second challenge from the Press, when I had in modesty and
in mercy refused his first, as having been backward and unwilling to expose his
age to inconvenience, (for which reason also I have been sparing to Mr.
Cawdrey, notwithstanding his public and grand abuses) but finding he thought
himself unanswerable in that he saw he was not answer^d, I straight concluded
it a charity, to undeceive him. A third reason^s, because he professes in his
Preface to his first book (which he has boldly repeated in his second) that he
Ext. of Div. Prove. is Praef. p.
goes h^gh^r, then other Divines of his party, in making God have an active
hand in the actions of sinful men. How much higher then the most, the Reader
shortly will see and wonder. Add to this, my having heard, that upon some weak
Readers his book has made some strong impressions. So that men of no skill,
who are of narrow capacity, and very slow of apprehension, are not long to be
trusted with that temptation. Again, I find that Mr. B. does rely on Mr. W. as
upon one of his Corr. Corr. Ep. Ded. p. 8.
Majorites, to whose Protection and Patronage he chose to dedicate his former
Book, (to wit his firstborn, the excellency of his strength) and whose gracious
Ibid.
assistance he then implored. Mr. W. answers to the call, ownes himself for a
Majorite, comes in to the rescue of Mr. B. (as Milo ran to set his shoulders as
an equal prop to the falling house, which crushed him into Quiddini for his
presumption) and it is but fit he should first be heeded, whom common Fame has
set uppermost in the thoughts of men.

Next I proceed to Mr. B. his second part (as he calls it) because I was bound
to it by promise, which I was loath not to perform. Then I antidote Mr. Hickman
because he invenomed Mr. Barlee, and intermeddled in his affairs to such a
desperate degree, that if he preaches as he has printed, his Disciples (of
all others) have the greatest need of a preservative. I have often to do with
Dr. Twisse, because they often translate his words, and once most solemnly they
bring him to me with a defiance. Not to mention all particulars (with whom I
have to do as occasion serves) I have many reflections on Mr. Hobbs, because he
jumps so often with my Assailants, as if he had borrowed from their writings,
or they from his. What I have more to premise I will dispatch in few words.

If I seem too much enlarged in explaining some things, It is partly because I
have to deal with such disputants, as cannot be confuted but by being first
taught; and partly because it often happens, that their Master's confutatian
does stand in theirs.

I do many times refer to what I have published already, as well to avoid
prolixity, and vain repetitions, as to exempt my Reader from paying often for
the very same matter in several volumes.

I have reckoned with my Aggressers both separately and jointly. My two first
Chapters and Introduction are chiefly addressed to Mr. W. My third to Mr. B.
and Mr. H. My fourth to Dr. Twisse, Mr. W. and Mr. B.

I have so disposed of the whole, as that all their concernments may be seen
distinctly and apart. But yet so many were my occasions to show their
differences and agreements, and their mutual collisions more especially, (the
running of their heads against each other to the great indangering of their
brains, which I verily believe will hardly ever leave akeing, until they
accept my way of cure, chapter 3. sect. 9.) that Mr. B. is eminently concerned in
all I say to Mr. W. and Mr. W. equally concerned in all I say to Mr. B. and Mr.
Hickman commonly concerned in what I say to both the former, and their greatest
Masters are concerned in what I say to all three.

If I seem to have been pungent in laying open some sorer parts, I desire my
Reader to look well upon the Case, to consider the duty of a Surgeon, and
then to imagine (if he is able) how such Phagedaenous and eating sores can be
taken away without being touched, and that with either the Lance, or Caustic.
When an inveterate Ulcer has been long skinned over, there is no way to cure it
without searching it to the bottom: which though painful to the Patient, yet
being in order to his ease, and (which is more) his safety too, he ought to be
thankful to that diligent and impartial hand, which for some short time does
seem to hurt him. The ratio curandi cannot always be such, as I can always
desire, and w^sh it might be; It must be such, as the malady requires, and
calls for. But when my present Methods shall be found to have taken a good
effect, so as the obstinate Tumor shall relent and suppurate, and finally cast
forth its Core, together with the dreggs of the peccant hu^^or, I shall gladly
prepare another kind of composition, whose every line shall be a lentive.

May the persons the most concerned consider well what is said in the following
sheets, and The Lord give them understanding in all things. 2 Timothy 2.7.


The general Contents of the Introduction, showing the manifold Absurdities and
Contradictions, which issue out from the Denial of Gods eternal, respective or
conditional Decrees.
Sect. 1, 2. THe nearest way to end a Controversy, is to strike altogether at
the Root of error. Sect. 3. The grand error touching Gods Decrees, and its
numerous offspring, is rooted in the mistake of two things, The false conceits
of Praescience and Praedetermination. Sect. 4, and 5. The speedy way to
Conviction, made plain and open by a manifestation of three things. Sect. 6.
The three things undertaken solemnly to be proved. Sect. 7. The same men affirm
it to be both blasphemy, and truth, to say that God is the Author or Cause of
sin, that he wills and works sin, etc. Sect. 8. Nothing but their Principles of
Gods Decrees can lead them to blasphemies of such a Nature. Instances briefly
set down from Calvin, Zuinglius, Zanchy, Piscator, P. Martyr, Beza, Borrhaus,
Triglandius, Dr. Twisse, Mr. Hobbs, Mr. Whitfield, and Mr. Barlee, and Mr.
Hick. Sect. 9. How the violent streams of blasphemy may be quickly dried up in
their several channels. Sect. 10. Mr. Whitfields whole Fabric plucked up by
the Foundation. His explication of what he means by conditional Decrees. His
provision for a Flight from his whole undertaking. He is equally unfortunate
whether he intended sense or nonsense. He is equally unhappy, whatever he
means by the word Condition. Sect. 11. His first Argument compared with his
Exposition of Conditional Decrees as he professes to understand them. He is as
unhappy in his best as in his worst meaning. His way of arguing in his best
sense against Conditional Decrees, is as much against the Trinity of persons in
the Godhead. He argues against his own Masters and Brethren, Beza, Wollebius,
Dr. Reynolds. Directly against Saint Paul, and against the Eternity of Gods
foreknowledge. And in a flat contradiction to himself; also against Dr. Twisse,
and even against the Tenet for which he argues. He is fain to make Gods decrees
to be Actus D^i ad iutra, against his own party who teach them to be ad extra.
He makes Gods Actions to be God himself (and so infers many Gods) even against
his own Masters, Gomarus and Wollebius. Five blasphemous Absurdities which that
absurdity does infer. He makes God himself to be Reprobation it self. Sect. 12.
An easy way to Mr. W's Reformation concisely opened and pointed at. To his
pretended Arguments against Conditional Decrees are confronted two Arguments
for conditional Decrees. The first is grounded on the Confession of all the
contrary party, and according to the tenor of the seventeenth Article of the
Church of England exhibited to us in the last clause of the Article. The second
is grounded on another Confession of the contrary party in their definition of
Gods Decrees. Sect. 13. Mr. W's mistake of the thing in question represented in
clearer and fairer colors.

The general Contents of the several Chapters.
Chap. I.
Sect. 1. MAster W's fanciful Creation of three general Objections. The
distrust he puts in his cause. His studied aiming beside the mark. He
overthrows his own rampire. His second overthrow of himself and of his Absolute
Decrees.

Sect. 2. His third overthrow of himself by a most crimson contradiction. He
enters on that which Mr. Calvin judged the worst part of Libertinism. His new
contradiction about the manner of Gods working. His down right Libertinisme.
Libertines no Christians. A Dilemma as a touch stone to try his meaning. The
determination of man's will to wicked actions is not Gods work. He infers God
to be worse then the Author of sin. His meaning ferreted out of his words. His
abuse of Scripture to serve his turn. He speaks worse of God then can be truly
said of Satan. His ugly Doctrine of God spoken out by Mr. Barlee.

Sect. 3. His third general Answer a mere majestic mistake.

Sect. 4. He descends from Generals to Particulars, beginning with the charge
of making God the Author of sin, and with a Tergiversation, and Imposition on
the Scripture. He asperseth God with the decreeing of sin in the first attempt
of his excuse. His memorable Answer to his own Objection. His meaning caught in
a Dilemma. His foul use of the word Permission, and its odious impropriety
represented in other colors. The common Poultice for a sore Doctrine.

Sect. 5. He moulds a new Objection against himself, and grants what his
Doctrine is charged with. His Answer consists in shifting the duty of a
Respondent, and speaking quite another thing. He confounds the Permission of
sin with sin, and tries to blot his Doctrine fair. His abuse of Saint Austin.
He argues that God does will sin perfectly, because he wills the permission of
it. And fain would have Scripture to speak against God by speaking his activity
in the production of sin. 1. From the selling of Joseph. 2. Pharaoh's
obduration. 3. The Candanites hardening. 4. Absaloms defiling his Fathers
Concubines. 5. Shimei's cursing David. 6, 7, 8. Three other Texts. 9. The
Egyptians hatred of Israel. 10. Gods being said to deceive the Prophet. 11.
Giving up to vile affections. 12. Giving eyes not to see. 13. Sending delusion.
14. The Nations making league with the Romans. All which Scriptures are
explained and vindicated from the frightful misapprehensions of this Mistaker.

Sect. 6. Mr. W. most groundlesly infers God to sit still, and to be an idle
Beholder, if he is not busy in the efficiency of sin.

Chap. II.
Sect. 1. OF the common Hebraisme by which such verbs are active in sound are
only permissive in signification: by the admission of which Rule the foul
Absurdities aforesaid would be avoided, and Scripture expounded (...). Mr. W's.
manifold unhappiness in rejecting that Rule. He makes contradictions in
Scripture, and overthrows his own interest in other cases. He is convinced by
that which he cannot but confess. His woeful shifts in expounding Scripture, and
the mischiefs ensuing on it. His Masters contradict themselves by not observing
the Hebraisme. Mr. W. makes light to be a sin, and incest to be no sin, by
making a parity of Gods working in either case. He is beaten with his own
weapons by any Atheist Dialogue-wise, condemned out of his own mouth. Scripture
interprets Scripture against Mr. VV.

Sect. 2. His return to his first method of forging Objections to himself. He
is at odds with Doctor Twisse. To make men sin is a a sin of the worst size,
yet ascribed unto God by that sort of men.

Sect. 3. The ease and ordinary perversion of the Scriptures. Mr. W. mistakes
the errors for the persons of some Protestants, and confounds them with the
Papists. His party clamor against themselves, and affront God with an
Epitrope. Mr. W's. clamours against Protestant Divines. He jumps in so doing
with the Jesuited Papists.

Sect. 4. His foulest imputation cast upon the Scriptures. Saint Peter's caveat
touching Paul's Epistles. The literal plalnness of some Scriptures does make
them difficult to some. A short direction to the means of remedy, or
prevention, removing a stumbling block out of the peoples way.

Sect. 5. Mr. W. either means, that God has a hand in evil, because in good;
or that the act of sin is not the sin; or that God is the proper cause and
efficient of sin; and that he means the last is proved by a Dilemma. Humane
learning a good foundation for a Divine.

Sect. 6. Mr. W's. rare essays to separate the wickedness from the act of the
wicked act.

Sect. 7. His first essay is a bare Dictate, including eight gross absurdities:
Of actions Natural and Unnatural. Of nature Corrupted and Uncorrupted. Mr. VV.
denies Gods Omnipotence, and makes him the proper cause of sin.

Sect. 8. His second essay is an Impertinence beyond example; or what is so
much worse, as that it ought not to be named. He is forced to be pertinent, and
his answer challenged.

Sect. 9. His third essay is a continuance of his Tergiversation, and infers
God the efficient of sin. Mr. VV. vindicated from his abuses put upon himself.
The probable causes of his chiefest aberrations. Five Expedients proposed to
undeceive him.

Sect. 10. His fourth essay makes the wickedest actions to be good, and from
God.

Sect. 11. His fifth essay does betray him to a confession, that he makes God
the Author of sin. He mistakes a moral for a natural action, and is hampered in
some Dilemma's. The method by which he is led into all his blasphemies.

Sect. 12. Sin is inseparable from the sinful action, which Mr. VV. seems to
see by his Tergiversation. He makes an Accident the subject of Inhesion to an
Accident. Confounds the act of differing with the passive power of being
parted. Makes David's lying with Bathshebah no sin. And the sin of Adultery
separable from it self.

Sect. 13. He shows his cause is desperate, by speaking purposely beside the
purpose. He attempts the washing of wet from water, roundness from a Globe.

Sect. 14. Mr. VV. affirms that God does will and work sin, and has a hand in
effecting it, and that sin makes for Gods glory. Concludes sin to be good, or
Gods working it as evil. Feigns God to work evil to a good end. Q. Whether he
infers not God to be a sinner. His inconsistence with Mr. Hick. and Mr. B. and
with himself. He frames not his propositions to the nature of God, but the
nature of God to his propositions.

Sect. 15, and 16. Mr. W's. great forgery in that little which he cites. His
foul sense of Gods determination that sin shall be done. His impious expression
or Gods having a hand in sin, and the Importance of that phrase.

Sect. 17. His gross error in the notion of Gods permission. His tremendous
notion of Alworking providence without exception of wickedness.

Sect. 18. He puts himself afresh into his old streights betwixt gross
blasphemy, and extraordinary impertinence. He affirms that God has an active
hand in the sins of Oppression, Rebellion, Murders, Treachery, Violence, and
VVrong How the Great Turk proceeds on those maxims. He justifies the Ranters,
by ascribing all our English changes to the hand of God. God is cleared from
carelessness or weakness, with which he is charged by Mr. VV.

Sect. 19. God is cleared from willing and effecting what he hates. A case put
to show the danger of Mr. VV's. Doctrine in order to practice.

Sect. 20. Mr. VV's. dangerous misapprehension of that figurative sentence,
that God does punish sin with sin. His making God the proper cause of the
greatest sins: which he also extends to the very sin of the act, the pravity it
self. He treads a step beyond Calvin worst.

Sect. 21. The desperate nature of Mr. VV's. Salvo's. And the hardness of his
Emollients. His open profession that Gods secret will is quite contrary to his
revealed will in respect of the very same objects.

Chap. III.
Sect. 1. MAster B's. Confession of the Fact of which he pleads not guilty. His
making God the Author of sin, and worse then so, in his endeavors to speak as
warily as his principles will suffer him.

Sect. 2. He contradicts his own and his Readers eyes without the possibility
of gaining by it. His inconsistency with himself, with Mr. VV. and Mr. Hick. He
betrays himself many ways in his provision for an escape, making God (
verbatim) the sovereign Author of sins both of omission and commission. Grants
the whole charge, or understands not a moral act. His mixture of blasphemies
with contradictions on the right and left hand.

Sect. 3. He is ashamed to cite his own words truly. Proves himself conscious
to himself of being left without excuse, in charging God with being a Tempter
unto sin. Pretends a want of leisure to excuse or extenuate his blasphemy, yet
baulks it at his greatest leisure. He accuses God of that which is the worst
quality of Satan. Flatly contradicts the Scripture. Commits the worst of
contradictions as well as blasphemies.

Sect. 4. He is enraged that his meaning should be measured by his words.
Slanders ancient and modern, both Papists and Protestants. Saint Austin in
particular. And implies it a sin for corn to grow.

Sect. 5. His uncharitable reflection on his own Dr. Twisse. The Doctors words
cited.

Sect. 6. Mr. B's. severity to himself, proving his falsehoods by
self-contradictions. He unavoidably charge God with sin in himself;
irrefragably proved from Heb. 6.18. He implies his blasphemies common to him
with his party. He is convicted by Dr. Twisse of making God the Author of sin.

Sect. 7. He makes no difference betwixt the act of Adultery, and Marriage, but
equally makes God the Author of both: worse then the Encratitae.

Sect. 8. The undeniable blasphemies which ensue upon the Doctrine of
unconditional Praedestination. The great Disease of making God the Author of
sin. The original Cause of the Disease. The Patient proved extremely sick of
the Disease by his own acknowledgement of the Cause. Four short Arguments to
confirm it.

Sect. 9. The easy and infallible means of cure to all that are not resolved
to continue sick. The nature of Knowledge opened, and distinguished from
Decree. Gods absolute Decree does cause a necessity of event, but his
foreknowledge does not, nor possibly can it. The Absurdities which would follow
if it were so. An Argument taken from the knowledge of what is past. The wide
difference showed between a necessity of consequence, and a necessity of the
consequent. It Is vain for the Adversaries to quit the first error, unless they
quit the second also. D. Reynolds his concurrence with T. P. in this point,
Gods praescience does not praesuppose a praedetermination. But rather
praedetermination does connotate praescience, if not praesuppose it. The cause
of the error showed and removed. The Application to the present case, and a way
opened to reconcilement.

Sect. 10. Mr. B's. unavoidable consequential blasphemies, that God determined
all wickedness before be could foreknow it. His ignorant use of the words,
Futurition, Will, certain, Counsel. A threefold blasphemy, besides a
self-contradiction.

Sect. 11. His positive Doctrine of Gods ordaining sin both original and
actual. Nonsense added to Blasphemy.

Sect. 12. His self-contradiction in denying and also affirming that he makes
God the Author of sin. He is convicted by his own words, and the Assemblies,
and Mr. W's. and Dr. Twisse, and Mr. Hobbs, which last is justified by Mr. W.

Sect. 13. Mr. B's. 10000. curses upon himself and his Masters, with his
confession of the blasphemy of which he was accused. The like confession of his
owned Masters, together with their Commissions of the crime confessed.

Sect. 14. His confession of faith touching Gods commerce with sin. He
professes openly to believe, that God is the cause of sinfulness it self.

Sect. 15. Concerning the efficient cause of sin. The state of the case from
the beginning. Sin proved to have a true efficient cause, and by Mr. B's.
confession, who also denies it. How his railings in lieu of answers do strike
at S. James, but hit himself and his party, of Jam. 1.15.

Sect. 16. Of the positive entity of sin, clearly proved.

Sect. 17. Mr. B's. first Argument to prove the goodn'ss of sin, in which Mr.
Hick. is equally concerned. The noysomness of the Disease. The purging out of
the peccant humor. Of metaphysical and moral bonity. The dangerous effects in
Mr. B. and Mr. Hick. of being but Smatterers in Metaphysics. Dr. Twisse his
foundation of irrespective decrees a thin Sophisme. How a lie is verum, as much
as si^ bonum. Albertus Magnus his words explained, and Austin's vindicated from
the impertinence of the Citation.

Sect. 18. The most remarkable impiety of one Mr. Hick. and Mr. B. called by
the name of a second Argument. Inferring the Godhead of sin on one hand, or its
being Gods creature on the other. Mr. H. miserably tossed by the two horns of his
own Dilemma. A way opened to his rescue from his ineffable dangers. He is
showed a medium betwixt God, and Gods Creatures, where he could see none. How
Mr. H. and Mr. B. do infer Atheism it self to be the Creature of God, or God
himself. Sins positive things, because inward habits. Man the Author of some
positive things, and God of some privatives. Mr. H. confounds Negative and
privative, as well as privative and privation. To harden our own hearts, and
consent unto temptations are positive things. Our destruction from our selves a
positive thing. Sin spoken of in Scripture as a positive thing. Mr. Hick.
convinced by his own party. He will confess he has blasphemed in case that sin
is something positive, which is further proved many ways. The sad effects of
forging God to be the maker of all things real without exception.

Sect. 19. Mr. B's. first chip hewn out of Mr. H's. block. He foists into the
Creed the word Real, and makes it supply the place of good. Provides a Creed
for the Libertines, viz. that God is the maker of all sins, if sins are things
real, (and things not real, implies a contradiction.) The different methods of
our reasonings, and what comes of it. They ascribe the filthiest of positive
Entities unto God. A^c convinced by the Assemblies confession of Faith. Are
farther uncovered by being supposed to be catechized.

Sect. 20. His second chip of the same block. Inconsistency with himself, and
making all sinful actions to be wrought by God. His unsuccesful Relyance on the
Jesuits.

Sect. 21. His third chip more pitiful then the former.

Sect. 22. His fourth chip the most lamentable of all. His arguing concludes
him Pelagian, or Libertine. He is impertinent on purpose to make God the Author
of sin.

Sect. 23. By his fifth chip he denies Gods Praescience of all wickedness,
unless he also praedetermined it.

Sect. 24. His impositions upon the Scripture. The Schoolmen. Aust^n. His new
degree of Arminianism.

Sect. 25. Mr. Hick's. Heathenish expression of sins (...).

Sect. 26. Of Calvin's Doctrine, that God commands, yea compels the Devil and
all that are wicked to Conceive and execure their evil dving.

Sect. 27. Mr. B's. affected Tergiversation in his chiefest concernments. Of
Zuinglius his Doctrine, that God is (in plain terms) the Author of sin. How Mr.
B. holds the same, even in that which he confesses to be the proper notion of
the word Author. He accuses Calvin in excusing him for saying that God does
will sin. And Piscator as well as Calvin, for saying that God does thrust men
into wickedness. He confesses his Masters do some times teach a coaction from
God to sin. He forgeth new Texts upon the Scripture.

Sect. 28. He turns his back to the prime charge, and tacitly yields the whole
cause.

Sect. 29. Of Adams inclination to sin before he sinned. The birth and growth
of the very first sin, with the very wide difference betwixt the inclinations
of the sensitive appetite, and the will.

Sect. 30. The whole importance of the word Author. How the Adversaries say
worse, then if they had only said verbatim, God is the Author of sin. Mr.
Roll^cks strange Salvo.

Chap. IV.
Sect. 1. OF the signal fallacy swallowed first by Dr. Twisse, then by his
followers. Mr, W's essay to cover it. The Fallacy showed in its deformity. The
first cause of the whole mistake about the order of intentions and execution.
That cause removed, and the fallacy left naked. Mr. W's. indirect course to
excuse Dr. Twisse in contradiction to him. Dr. Twisse his error of Co^rdination
in things subordinate.

Sect. 2. Mr. W's. forgery of objections in other men's names.

Sect. 3. Mr. W's. second part displayed, and Universal Redemption vindicated,
as to the true intent and extent of Christ's death, from the feeble utmost of
his attempts, in a subdivision of eight Paragraphs.

Sect. 4. How the Presbyterians do nourish Socinianism in contracting Christ's
death, and perverting Scripture. Daille, Camero, Am^rald, why they forsook
their party abridging the benefit of Christ's death, Received rules for the
interpreting of words, and ending controversies. The extreme absurdity of
dutiful misbelief exploded hy the Lord Primate. Mr. W's. reproach cast upon
Christendom, and the Gospel of Christ. Europe, Asia, Africa, and America
inferred by Mr. W. to be the least part of the world.

Sect. 5. Universal Redemption proved from 2 Cor. 5.14. by S. Austin and
Prosper, to the stopping of Mr. W's. and Mr. B's. mouths.

Sect. 6. The conclusion, giving reasons why no more time is to be lost in this
employment.

AN INTRODUCTION To the three first Chapters Concerning the impious, and
unexcusable, because blasphemous, and unavoidable, both Contradictions, and
other Absurdities, which issue out from the Denial of Gods eternal respective
or conditional Decrees.
SECT. 1.
The nearest way to end a controversy is to strike altogether at the root of
error.
When once an Error is grown fruitful, and has run it self out into several
Branches, it is commonly found (by sad experience) to grow the thicker for
being lopp't. There is not an Error in all Theology, which does seem to have
taken so deep a Root, or to have spread so sturdy Branches, or to have born so
lewd a fruit, as that many-headed Error, whose extirpation out of the Church
ought so much the rather to be desired, because it has shed such a fatal and
deadly influence upon a multitude of Professors who have lately sat under its
shade. Of those that have exercised themselves in so good a work, I may call it
my Lot, and my Necessity, to have been one of the meanest. Faithfulness and
Affection have been my chiefest qualifications; and I esteem it a privilege,
as well as duty, to have done God service in any measure. But in every good
Labourer, there is a skill and prudence, as well as industry and faithfulness,
to be required. It is not enough to be doing and working, in a mere opposition
to sloth and idleness; but by contrivance and forecast, to do a great deal of
work in a little time.

Sect. 2.
I am not quite so sensible of that unquestionable Aphorism set down by
Solomon, Eccles. 12.12.
much study is a weariness to the flesh, as of the words going before it, in
making many books there is no end. This I knew a long time since, but it is now
that I consider it and lay it seriously to heart. And therefore now I determine
to make an end of the Task imposed on me, not contenting my self with a bare
Resistance, but proceeding to a Dispatch, of that Hydra-like Error of which I
spoke. I will no longer amuse my self with striking off now and then a Head,
which (besides that they are many) are very apt to be succeeded by many others
growing up out of the very same Trunk; but rather compendiously endeavor to
strike the Monster into the heart, which (besides that it is but one) is the
(...), the first part that lives, and the last that dies in every creature.

Sect. 3.
The grand Error about God's Decrees and its numerous offspring is rooted in
the mistake of two things.
The false conceit of God's prescience, and predetermination, makes up the error
of irrespective and unconditional Decrees (I do not say of the most natural,
but) of the most voluntary actions and effects; neither reward nor punishment,
nor sin it self being excepted. This I take to be the heart, imparting life and
activity to every member and limb of that body of error, whose most
affectionate friends and abettors have conspired to find me my late employment.
With this grand error, all the rest which grow from it must live and die. In
this Mr. Whitfield has put his chief trust. Upon this he has been poreing (as
his admirers have ^oasted) these thirty years. In his Apology for ^his, he
has publicly chosen to display his whole strength; as if by this he were
desirous that every part of the controversy should be decided. I ^ccept his
challenge, and heartily thank him for the ^ontrivance; He having given me an
occasion of taking much a nearer way to my journeys end then I first intended.

Sect. 4.
The speedy way to conviction.
For if I prove out of his mouth, and out of the mouths of his predecessors,
that what they publicly acknowledge to be blasphemously false, does
unavoidably follow from their espoused notion of God's Decrees; then can he not
choose but acknowledge, that such a notion of God's Decrees must needs be
dangerously false. He must confess that his book is an insufferable Libel
against his Maker; and such, as against which he must publicly enter his
protestation. Now that it is false and blasphemous, to say that God is the
Author or cause of sin, both in those very terms, and in others as bad, and in
many others much worse, is ever acknowledged by themselves in some parts of
their Writings, (wherein forgetful of their Doctrines they consider nothing but
duty) who yet in other parts of their own writings, (wherein forgetful of duty
they reason only from their Doctrines) do most dogmatically deliver it for
very great truth.

Sect. 5.
Made plain and open by a manifestation of three things.
In great affection to the most vulgar and less intelligent Readers (whose
deliverance and liberty from the worst kind of thraldom I do especially aim at
in what I publish) I will use the greatest plainness and perspicuity of speech,
which by study and meditation I am able to contrive. Our whole Dispute will be
concluded by a most cogent demonstration of these three things.

granted by the Adversaries themselves to be both false and blasphemous, to say
that God is the Author or Cause of Sin.

same Party to be neither false nor blasphemous, but a most necessary truth, to
say that God is the Author or Cause of Sin.

cannot be denied by the aforesaid Party, that what they sometimes confess to
be both false and blasphemous, they would not at other times affirm to be
neither false nor blasphemous, but that they find it to be the natural and
unavoidable issue flowing out from their Principles of Gods Decrees.

Sect. 6.
The three things
I do solemnly take upon me, after mature deliberation, undertaken solemnly to
be proved.
(and in a full comprehension of the several evidences and proofs) to make a
cogent demonstration of those three things. A demonstration so cogent, that the
most stomachful adversaries shall not be able to gainsay it, unless they will
say, that they never say what they say, and that they have not printed what
they have printed, or that the world lies in darkness, so as we cannot read
either their Latin, or their English, but only dream that we read what indeed
we do not. Either they will, or they will not, proceed to those later degrees
of madness. If they will, they will prove the liberty of their wills to speak
against their own light, and against their own speakings, and against their
testimonies of conscience, and against the witness of other men's eyes as well
as of their own; and what is this, but to sin as with a Cart-rope, to turn
Grace backward, to bid righteousness stand afar off, and to say, we will be
stubborn in spite of evidence and conviction? Thus it is if they will proceed
to the degrees of madness above specified. And if they will not (as sure they
will not,) then in spite of themselves, and their own perverseness, they must
fly by way of Refuge to these following confessions. First, That they have
published self-contradictions beyond compare, affirming what they deny, and
denying what they affirm, calling that by the name of blasphemy which they
profess to think Orthodox, and asserting that for true Divinity (with one
stroke of their pen) which (with another dash of the same pen) they call the
Doctrine of Devils. Their Second Confession must be this, that being proved to
have printed such contradictions in several parts of their Writings (as their
occasions did require, or their necessities enforce them) they are obliged
indispensably to declare their last thoughts, and to name that part of their
contradiction to which they will finally adhere, and in adherence to which they
will quit the contrary from this day forward; whether the affirmative, or the
negative part of the contradiction; whether that which is for God, or that
which is against him. If the later, they are declaredly Libertines and Ranters,
and I shall wish for nothing more then the publick'st trial in the World to
prove them such; there being nothing now wanting but a sufficient publication
and notification of the thing, to effect its solemn (...), or total Banishment
out of the World. Thus it is if they adhere to the later part of their
contradiction. And if they adhere unto the former, (which God of his mercy, and
by his grace, may be pleased to work in them both to will, and to do,) I know
not how they can escape an entire conversion unto the truth: or how obstinacy
it self can slip its neck out of the collar, which the Sovereignty of Light
has sitted for it, and in a willing submission unto which the ghostly freedom
of the obstinate does chiefly stand.

The same men affi^m it to be both blasphemy and truth, to say that God is the
Author or cause of sin.
Sect. 7.
To prove the three things of which I spoke (in my last Paragraph but one) and
to prove them so largely as I desire, is not the business of this place, but
of my following Chapters, (of the second and third more especially) to which I
now am but writing my Introduction. I will therefore say no more here, then
what may serve to stay the appetite of any possible impatient and longing
Reader.

First, That the Adversaries do grant it to be both false and blasphemous, to
say that God is the Author or cause of sin, Note the double concession of Mr.
B. First, that his Masters do call it an excerable blasphemy, p. 129, etc. and
yet they teach in other places, 1. That God is the Author of sin, 2. Wills Sin,
3. Impells to it, 4. Forces men to it, p. 132, 133. where he labors to make
it good.
I have abundantly proved in my Defense of God's purity chap. 4. Sect. 6. p.
30, 31. and shall farther do it in this following work, in particular chap. 3.
sect. 13. and 27. Nor can they possibly eat their words, but at the peril of
renouncing the whole stream of Church-Writers, both ancient and modern, of whom
I have given a large specimen in my Divine Purity Def. chapter 4. sect. 5. p. 22,
etc. to p. 29. And yet

Secondly, That the same party do affirm it to be neither false nor
blasphemous, but a most necessary truth, to say that God is the Author or cause
of sin, I have more abundantly made apparent in Three distinct Tracts, viz.
Correct Copy p. 9, 10, 50. especially Div. Philanthropy defended chapter 3. sect.
34. p. 132. etc. to p. 139. and sect. 35. p. 141. and again Div. Purity def.
chapter 4. sect. 3. p. 19, 20. And I shall do it yet more effectually in the second
and third Chapters of this following Work, in particular chapter 3. sect. 13. and
27. And therefore

Thirdly, That they would not so frequently and affectionately contend for that
very Doctrine, which sometimes (though very rarely) they confess to be false
and blasphemous, but that they find it must follow from their espoused
Principles of God's Decrees (so as they see they must relinquish either both,
or neither, I have abundantly evinced in the Div. Pur. def. chapter 4. sect. 7. p.
33, etc. to p. 39. especially from the citations out of Doctor Twisse, Du
Moulin, Remigius, and the other friends of Gotteschalc, Bishop Cuthert Tunstal,
and above all, out of Prosper, whom they many times dream to have been their
Patron, and therefore cannot gainsay him without Discomfort. And again I shall
evince it in several parts of the following work; and in particular chapter 3.
sect. 8. and 10. Besides that the thing is so conspicuous of it self, that I
may venture to make the Adversary the sole Judge of the Business. For

Nothing but their Principles of Gods Decrees can lead them to blasphemies of
such a nature.
Sect. 8.
I demand of any man living, what should move such learned men as Huldericus
Zuinglius, Doctor Twisse, Piscator, Zanchy, Triglandius, Beza, Calvin, Martyr,
Borrhaus, and many others, to teach posterity in their printed works, [ That
God does make men transgressors, For the several pages of their works, see the
Div. Philan. def. chapter 3. sect. 34. especially the Div. Purity def. chapter 4. sect.
3. p. 19, 20. and sect. 6. p. 31, 32.
and is the Author of adultery, and that murder is the work of God, and that
sinners do sin by the force of Gods will; that God predestines men to sin, and
to sin quatenus sin; that he is the Author of evil, not only of punishment,
but of sin too; that he is the cause not only of humane actions, but of the
very defects and privations; that he effects sins, that he exciteth, and
tempts, and All the excuse Mr. B. makes for the saying that God does compel
men to sin, is that they use it but seldom. See what shall be said chapter 3. sect.
27. number. 5.
compels men to sin, and a world the like stuff; I say, what moved them to
print such loathsome Doctrines? Was it that they esteemed them as flowers of
Rhetoric, or witty sentences, or pretty conceits, or well-sounding periods, or
soul-saving preachments, or Hosanna's to the most High? This cannot be, no not
so much as to be imagined.

What invited Mr. Hobbs to say [ That Mr. Hobbs of Liberty and Necessity, p.
23, 24.
sin may be necessarily caused in man by God's ordering all the world; that God
does will it and necessitate it, and Id. in Animadvers. p. 11. and 107. and 106.
cause men to err, and is the principal Agent in the causing of all actions?
(which he who says does also say, that he finds no difference betwixt the
action and the sin of that action, from which great truth he should have
inferred, that God cannot be the cause of sinful actions, not that he is the
cause of sins.) What made the p. 36, 37:
Comforter of believers to say, that God is the Author of sinfulness it self,
and has more hand in men's sinfulness then they themselves? Were these Writers
afraid lest men should think too reverently of God, too hardly of the Devil,
and too profanely of themselves? or were they moved with an itch to revive the
Doctrine of Carneades, and to make men believe that sin is nothing but a name
invented by Ecclesiastics, and that the thing (called sin) is just as good as
the thing called virtue, as being equally the work of God? it is very hard to
think this. Or if this was one of their reasons, yet it was not certainly the
first. But I have yet a harder Question.

What should move Mr. Whitfield and Mr. Barlee, in the very books which they
have printed on purpose to vindicate their Doctrine from all the horrible
absurdities wherewith they stood charged, and wherein they knew it concerned
them to speak as warily as they were able, as knowing that they were liable to
be publicly called to an account, what (I say) should move them, at such a
time* and in such a manner, to affirm that [ God For Mr. W's several pages
where these things are taught, see the first and second chapters of the
following work, especially the second; and in that for instance Sect. 14.
does will and work sin; that he has an efficiency in sin; that in all the
wickedness in the world God has a hand, a working hand, yea the chief hand;
that sin does make for Gods glory; and that it has a respect of good; and that
God has a hand in effecting it; yea that God does act in it as a natural
cause; that God decreed the sin of Adam, and so ordered the whole business that
he should certainly fall; that it was necessary the first man should sin; that
the Gospel does stir up evil affections in the hearts of wicked men, and
hardens men's hearts, and God intends it should do so, and sends it for this
very purpose; that of sinful actions God is the Author and proper Cause; yea
that he does both will and work in the Sin of the Act, because not only the
action simply considered, but the very Pravity and Deformity of it makes way
for Gods glory?] What moved Mr. Barlee to add his suffrage to Mr. Whitfield,
and to say in plain terms, [ That For Mr. B's several pages where these things
are taught, see the third whole chapter of the following work, and the Index of
the Divine Philanthropy Def. which will direct to the rest.
God is the Sovereign Author of the material part of sin, which is the doing or
leaving undone not only a natural, but moral act; such as David's lying with
Bathshebah, or Cain's killing Abel, (as Doctor Twisse himself interprets the
material part of sin) nay farther, that God is the cause of the very Obliquity
of the Act of Sin; that God exciteth men to the act of adultery; that he
stirs them up to unjust acts, as a man puts spurrs to a dull Jade; that he
tempts men to sin; and a world the like blasphemies? Nay what made him and Mr.
Hick. to tell the World, See what shall be said chapter 3. Sect. 18.
that if sin is a positive Entity, either God is the Creator of sin, or else
sin it self is God?] Did this prodigious pair of Writers think that these were
quaint Apophthegms which they were loath should die with them? or was it their
purpose to strengthen the hands of evildoers, and to tickle the ears of our
English Libertines, who wear the new name of Ranters? or was their project the
same with that of Mr. Hobbs? or did they mean by these things to administer
comfort to believers, whether Fiduciaries, or Solifidians? were they fearful
that Satan should be slandered, as the very first Fountain and source of sin?
or that sinners should think too meanly of their sins, as if they had not a
brave extraction? or are they inwardly haters of that very party which they are
outwardly of? and have they taken this course to make them hateful to all
besides? or do they really believe that these are the profitable and pithy
truths, in which the Godly of the land ought to be thoroughly grounded? or are
these the instances of their care and circumspection, in such a defense of
their Doctrines, as might not give any distaste to pious minds? or do they
think that these speeches concerning God are the most supple, and the most
popular, that their Principles will bear, and so exhibited as Abstersions and
Vindications of their Divinity? or do they count it a fine thing to contradict
themselves solemnly and in Print, by saying that God is This and That, and then
by saying they never say it? O me prope lassum juvate posteri! If none of these
were their inducements, (as my charity forbids me to think they were) what
other account can be rendered (even by such as would plead in favor of them)
but that they teach such things through the necessity of their affairs? they
are so naturally flowing from their conceit of God's praescience, and of his
praedetermination (before his praescience) of all events without exception, and
so of his absolute Decrees of reward and Note, that absolute Reprobation must
needs be confessed to be a very sore punishment, in whatsoever sense they
please to take it.
punishment, without the consideration of their being in Christ by Faith, or
out of Christ by infidelity, of their abiding in Christ by perseverance, or out
of Christ by impenitence unto the end; That whilst they hold these Premises,
they cannot possibly escape the black and terrible conclusion so lately
mentioned. They must either part with their first Principles, or else they find
(by many experiments) that the ugly inferences will follow, do what they can to
the contrary. Having swallowed it for a Maxim, that God's praescience of all
things does presuppose his praedetermination (as Mr. B. tells us) and that he
foreknew nothing but because he first had decreed it, (as Mr. Calvin) they find
it necessary to infer, that God absolutely decreed and praedetermined all the
wickedness in the World. Thus their Principles, rather then they, (or they by
serving their Principles) have brought those monsters into the light. And if
they sincerely do hate the sequels, they must bid farewell to the antecedent.
For when it is affirmed, that two and two make five, it must be inferred, that
five and but four, four being the product of two and two: which Downright
Maccovius was so sensible of (who was as learned and as Zealous as any one of
that Party) that he honestly confessed in the Synod at Dort, that if they did
not maintain God's willing of sin, and his ordaining men to sin as sin, they
must come over to the Remonstrants.

How the violent streams of blasphemy may be quickly dried up in their several
channels.
Sect. 9.
Now that all those black and noisome streams may no longer gush out of their
pens, I find the most effectual and speedy course will be to damm up the
Fountain, or Headspring of the effluxions. This is done on set purpose in the
eighth and ninth Sections of the third Chapter of this Book. And there my
Reader is to begin, if he will take my counsel; because he will there be
entertained, not with the nature only, and cause, and malignity of the
disease, but (if I am not much mistaken) with the proper method and means of
cure too. For thus I reckon within my self, if God's foreknowledge of all
events, and so (by consequence) of all the wickednesses in the world, be proved
not to praesuppose his praedetermination of them, then it is proved in the same
instant, that he did not absolutely decree the being of sin; but (on the
contrary) that he conditionally decreed the permission of its being, which he
foresaw would have a being by the sinner's determination of his own will to it,
if he did not forcibly hinder the sinner's Free Will, which he eternally
decreed he would not do. And in this is wrapp't up another proof as undeniable,
to wit, that all God's Decrees are not absolute or irrespective or
unconditional, (as my adversaries presume to limit the power of the Almighty)
but some of his deceees, namely those which respect the acts of voluntary
agents, with the rewards or punishments which do ensue, must needs be
respective and conditional, that is, secundum praescientiam, according to his
foreknowledge and eternal consideration, For whatsoever is found to be, in
time, either the cause of man's punishment, or the condition required to his
reward, that did God from eternity both foreknow and fore-consider; and
according to that eternal foreknowledge and consideration of the temporal cause
of the one, or condition requisite to the other, he did eternally decree both
to punish and to reward.

Mr. W's whole Fabric plucked up by the foundation.
Sect. 10.
Whether Mr. Whitfield did understand this, or not, or whether he found it so
clear a thing as not to be able to make a show of any colorable resistance,
but by dissembling his understanding, and putting all his confidence in his
affectation of a mistake, let his dearest friends judge by that which follows.
For he lays the foundation of all his structure in these most signal and
extraordinary lines:

Arguments against Conditional Decrees.
By Conditional Decrees we understand such as wherein the condition does not
only go before the execution, Mr. W's explication of what he understands by
conditional Decrees.
or effecting of the things decreed, but before the Decree it self, before the
eternal act of God's will, and that purpose within himself, whereby he has
determined that such or such things shall be, p. 2. lin. 21, 22, etc.

His provision for a flight from h^s whole undertaking.
Number. 1. Observe (Good Reader) how sublimely his building is designed to rise,
by him whose very basis is purposely laid within the clouds. He professes to
frame Arguments against conditional Decrees, not as I understand them, or any
man living of my way; but as He and his Peers are Poetically pleased to
understand them. And what is this but to make provision, that all his book may
be no better then a vainglorious Tergiversation? boasting his strength, in
running away from the general Title of his book? bravely threatening to dispute,
yet poorly declining the thing in question? Durst he have writ against my
Doctrine of Conditional Decrees (as it seems he dares against his own) he durst
have cited my words, wherein my meaning might have appeared. Which why durst he
not do, but because he found that my words were not liable to exception? He
knew he was destitute of Arguments against Conditional Decrees, as I have
always understood them; but as he understands them, he can order them at his
pleasure. A goodly (...); and much good do it him with all his conquests, in
that war which he wageth against himself.

He is equally unfortunate whether he intended sense or nonsense.
2. But what are Mr. W's conditional Decrees, against which Mr. W. prepares to
argue? he tells us [They are such, as wherein the condition does go before the
Decree it self.] Did he intend this for nonsense, or did he not? If he did,
how mean and abject an opinion must he have had of his enterprise, who thought
it not safe to speak sense for fear the people should understand him? if he did
not, it seems he thought it good sense, to say, that the condition in the
Decree was before the Decree it self wherein it was. Had he not imbarqued
himself in a most desperate Adventure (as very shortly he will find) he would
have told us that a Decree is therefore said to be conditional, because it is
made with a condition annexed to it, or concomitant with it, or in a foresight
of something, in respect of which it is decreed. For thence it is that the word
conditional is commonly explained by the word respective, as absolute is (on
the contrary) by irrespective. For example, God foreseeing or foreknowing that
Adam and Cain would determine their wills to sin, (the one in eating, as the
other in killing, what was forbidden) decreed to permit, and to punish both. In
which case his Decree is called respective or conditional, because it was made
in a praescience and praeconsideration, that they would both determine their
wills to sin: which praescience was concomitant because coaeternal with his
decree. Whereas according to Mr. W. God did absolutely decree that Adam should
eat against praecept, and that Cain should kill his brother. Which if he shall
venture to deny, and say he holds (as I do) that God did only decree to permit
them to sin, in a foreknowledge that they would freely and voluntarily do it,
if not forcibly hindered from using the freedom of their wills; he will then be
exactly of my opinion, and overthrow his whole fabric by subverting and even
nulling his whole foundation. For to decree one thing in intuition of another,
(and both from eternity, respecting their objects which shall be in time,) is
to make a respective or conditional decree. Now because when God is said to
decree and foreknow, he is implied eo ipso to decree something, and foreknow
something, it is plain, the things now in time which were decreed and foreknown
from all eternity, were some way present to the Almighty when he foreknew and
decreed them, because the act implies the object about which it is conversant.
And how can that which is merely temporal have been eternally present with the
Almighty, but by its Idea or Exemplar in mente Dei? as the work of every
rational and advised Agent is conceived by the Agent, before effected; the
intelligible platform or conception is present with the workman, whilst the
work it self or thing executed is yet but future. And here it is duly to be
considered, that as the temporal thing which God eternally decreed was every
whit as future when God decreed it, as any temporal thing which God foreknew
when he eternally foreknew it; so his eternal foreknowledge was as eternal, as
his eternal decree. Again it is duly to be considered, that as now in time, the
sin does go before the punishment, so from all eternity God foreknew this
priority of the sin, and posteriority of the punishment. Nor could he possibly
decree the second, until he had foreknown the first. Nay he must needs have
decreed to punish sinners, according to his foreknowledge that they would sin;
because whatsoever he did decree, he did knowingly, and wisely, and righteously
decree, neither cruelly, nor by chance, or at a venture. So that God's
foreknowledge was simultaneous with his decree, as having been coaeternal;
neither was before the other in order of time (for that would imply a
contradiction) although in order of nature his foreknowledge of sin did
praecede his Decree to punish sinners, and his foreknowledge that man would
determine his will to sin, did praecede his decree to permit that man's
determination. Now I proceed to show more of Mr. W's unhappiness, into which
he has freely cast himself, either by not comprehending, or by dissembling his
comprehension of these so plain and obvious things.

3. He is equally unhappy whatever he means by the word Condition.
3. Forsooth he means such Decrees, by Conditional Decrees, whose condition goes
before the Decree it self, as well as before the execution of the Decree.] Very
well. But what does he mean by the condition? As being in act a temporal thing,
or only in Idea, as being eternally in God's foreknowledge? If the first, then
his meaning is wonderful, and never enough to be celebrated with admiration.
For his project is but to prove, that temporal is not before eternal; and that
that which comes after God's Decree at an infinite distance, could not possibly
go before it. A very visible truth, but a most inexcusable Ignoratio Elenchi.
If he shall say he means the second, he must also tell us his meaning of the
word [before.] Does he mean a condition before in time, or before only in
order? If the former, he implies a contradiction, by implying in eternity a
priority of time: and when he says that the condition is (understood by him to
be) before the Decree it self, he implies another contradiction, by implying an
eternal conditional Decree to have been a Decree, before conditional; for such
it was, if the condition was in time before the Decree. But if he shall say he
means the later, then he first of all infers that God is the Author of all the
wickedness in the World, by his denying the possibility of such Decrees, (as
in part has been showed, and shall be showed in great plenty;) and secondly he
ruins the utmost force of his first Argument, which therefore now shall be
compared. For his next words are these;

Sect. 11.
Mr. W's first Argument to be compared with his exposition of conditional
Decrees, is he understands them.
That such a Decree as this cannot agree with the excellent nature of God, if
we consider him in regard either of his eternity, immutability, omnipotency,
simplicity, or other perfections belonging to his nature, may thus appear;

That which is absolutely eternal had nothing going before it, for it is
absolute primum: but all God's Decrees (being acts within himself, and
therefore not really differing from himself) are absolutely eternal: therefore
they can have no condition or consideration of any thing without himself going
before them, p. 2. and 3.]

Number. 1. Now his absurdities grow numerous, 1. He is as unfortunate in his
best, as in his worst meaning.
as well as gross: for either he here bewrays his former meaning to have
been, of a priority of time in eternity it self, and so he is enwrapped in all
the miseries so lately mentioned; or else he must say in his defense, that he
only here means a priority of order, as I and others are wont to do. I am
content to allow him the utmost favor that he can wish; I will suppose he
means sense, and the very best that can be meant: yet as things go with him, I
cannot choose but make him appear to be as unhappy in his best as in his worst
meaning. And when I have done, he shall take his choice. For let him stick to
what he will, and say he means what he can, or can be prompted by his Abettors
to say he means, yet he has so ordered the matter, that the measure of his
calamities will be on every side equal. For admitting he here means a priority
of order, from the impossibility of which in that which is absolutely eternal,
he argues the impossibility of Conditional Decrees, we find him fallen without
redress into these following absurdities.

2. His way of arguing in his best sense against Conditional Decrees is as much
against the Trinity of persons in the Godhead.
2. First his arguing is against the Trinity of the Godhead: for the Father is
the first Person, the Son the second, the Holy Ghost the third and by a
priority of order (though not of time) the first is before the second, as the
second before the third. So that according to Mr. Whitfield, the second and
third persons cannot be absolutely eternal; for whatsoever is so, is absolute
primum (says Mr. W.) but the second and third persons are not both the first
person; therefore (according to Mr. W.) they are not absolutely eternal. But by
his favor the three persons are coaeternal, yet they differ in order, as the
first from the second, and the second from the third; nay they differ also in
their proprieties, and in their manner of working. The Father existing and
working from himself, the Son from the Father, the Holy Ghost from both, as the
Adversaries agree. But that which is of it self only, is before that which is
of another, in some respect; therefore that which is eternal may have something
going before it by a priority of order. Again, God's Essence is in order of
nature before his attributes, and his attributes before his actions, yet God
did act, and had attributes from all eternity. There must be Ens before Tale,
and a subject before a praedicate, especially in Conjugates, where the
praedicate is by way of adjunct; as when we say God is just, we imply his Being
in the first word, and his attribute in the third. And as there must be men,
before they can be happy, so God's decree that there shall be men, is (by one
kind of priority) before his decree that they shall be happy. We intend the end
before the means, God both at once; yet so, as that the one is in order of
nature before the other. And this is confessed by Mr. W. p. 42. Arg. 3. viz.
[That Divines do usually place an order in God's decrees wherein one thing goes
before another.]

3. He argues against his own M^st rs and Brethren.
3. Next his way of arguing is against his own Masters as well as brethren:
Calv. Lost. l. 3 c. 23. sect. 7. fol. 325.
for Mr. Calvin places God's Decree before his praescience, and so does Beza
ad Romans 11 4.
Beza; and Mr. Barlee says, Gods praescience praesupposeth his
praedestination, c. 3. p. 13. Doctor Reynolds more truly thus, D. Reyn. of the
Passions, c. 42. p. 545.
The actions of our will were foreknown because our will would certainly
execute them, though not without freedom and election. Wolleb. in Theol.
compen. l. 1. c. 3. p. 29.
Wollebius (more plainly then any other) affirms God's will to be considered as
the efficient cause, and his Decree as the effect: and again he says, Id. ib.
c. 4. p. 35.
that God's praedestination does praesuppose his decree. So that according to
Mr. W. all these are enemies to the absolute aeternity of God's praescience, or
of his praedestination; some placing his praedestination before his
praescience, and some his decree before his praedestination, and some his will
before his decree, even as the cause before the effect.

4. He argues directly against S. Paul, as well as against the eternity of
God's foreknowledge.
4. Again, his way of arguing is not only directly bent against the eternity of
God's foreknowledge, as always supposed by himself to be after his decree, but
more unhappily against the words of S. Paul, who in the very same period does
imply God's purpose and counsel, (and so his knowledge) to be in order of
nature before his praedestination, Ephesians. 1.11. In whom (that is in Christ) we
also have obtained an inheritance, being praedestinated [(...)] according to
the purpose of him who works all things [(...)] according to the counsel of
his will. Where his counsel is as the Rule by which he acts, which is in order
of nature before his action, his action being according to the Rule of his
counsel: from whence it is evident, that God did not first Decree, and then
consult or consider, but both together, because both from eternity, yet so, as
that his counsel or consultation was in order of nature before his Decree; he
having wisely decreed, for this reason only, because he decreed according to
his counsel; not by hap hazard, but according to his knowledge and
consideration, that it would tend to his glory, without which it is evident he
would never have decreed it. And therefore says the same Apostle (2 Thessalonians.
2.13.) God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation (he does not say
absolutely, but) through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth:
which God foreknew when he chose them. And according to foreknowledge they were
chosen or elected, as S. Peter says expressly 1 Pet. 1.2. as 'twere defining
or explaining a conditional election. And S. Paul does put foreknowledge before
Praedestination, Romans 8.29. which may fitly be compared with Romans 11.2. and
Act. 2.23.

5. He argues in a fl^t contradiction to himself, and against Doctor Twisse.
5. His way of arguing is contradictory to himself, and to Doctor Twisse, with
whom he joins in a confession, [ That there is in God's Decrees prioritas
Rationis ( p. 6. Arg. 4.) and because (says he) in order of nature the end
goes before the means, and we can apprehend no other way, therefore that order
is usually attributed unto God in his Decrees, that first he decrees the end,
and then the means, p. 7. Does M. W. here mean by Prioritas Rationis, one of
the quinque modi priorum commonly known to all the World, or does he not? If he
does, he should have told us which, and have confessed that his Argument p. 3.
is against his own Doctrine p. 6. But if he does not, then either he asserteth
a sixth way of priority, which no man living can imagine, or else he speaks of
a verbal priority, as opposed to real; and then his fetch is no deeper then
this, that there is no priority in God's Decrees, except no priority: and
because it is ugly to say there is none, except none, he therefore expresses
his meaning of none, by prioritas Ration is. Just as Wollebius and others do
first affirm that God's Decretum revera est ipsissima Dei voluntas: docendi
tamen causa, voluntas ut causa efficiens, Decretum vero ut effectum
consideratur. Loco superius paulo cit. p. 29.
Decree is really his will, ipsissima voluntas, his very very very will; and
then docendi gratia, considers his will as the efficient cause of his Decree,
and his Decree as the effect of his will. This is still Mr. W's practice. To
bring about his little ends, and to effect impossibilities, he considers God's
Decrees as such in some places (as p. 6, 7, 42) which he professes in other
places to be impossible that they should be, (as p. 3, and 44.) And what is
this but to acknowledge that they cannot procure for their Doctrines any color
of truth, but by grounding their Discourse upon the most declared falsehoods?

6. He argues against the Tenent for which he argues.
6. His Argument is subversive of his own dear Tenent for which he argues:
Because if God Note, that Mr. W. proceeds to say (p. 3.) God could not foresee
Faith, or any other grace in man, before man had any being in the World, as if
he either denied all foresight in God, or understood not what foresight means.
Again he says, p. 42. that the foresight of sin cannot go before God's Decree.
foreknew nothing but because the first had foreordained it, (which is the
saying of the whole party) his praescience then would be conditional of his
Decree, and so there would be place for a cendition in eternity, which Mr. W.
whilst he inserrs, endeavors to prove to be impossible. This is rare:
impossible one way, and yet another way unavoidable. Again, when he says, that
God decreed to permit sin, he either means, that God decreed the permission
only, in praescience of the sin; or that he decreed as well the sin, as the
permission. If the later, he either means that the Decree was of the permission
before the sin, or of the sin before the permission, Let him avow which he
will, he must either avow a conditional Decree, or that his Doctrine is
blasphemous, and that it is but his Parties salve, when they say that God
decreed to permit men to sin, and mean his decreeing that men should sin.

7. He is fain to make God's Decrees to be actus Dei ad intra, against his own
party, who teach them to be ad extra.
7. His memorable Parenthesis [ that God's Decrees are acts within himself, and
therefore not really different from himself, p. 3. has quite undone him many
ways. For first, he means that God's Decrees are not only immanent, but also
actus ad intra, as he says in terminis p. 37. But this is lamentably false,
his own Teachers being witness: for those are actus Dei ad intra, which relate
to nothing without God; as his contemplation of himself, the generation of his
Son, the procession of the Holy Ghost. But those are actus Dei ad extra, which
are referred to any thing without the Godhead; such are God's Praedestination
and Creation, which respect his creatures, whereof the former is (...), and the
later (...), but both ad extra, for immanent and transient are the divisive
members of actus or opera Dei ad Extra; as every Novitius in these
controversies can well inform him. If he did not know the difference betwixt
immanent and ad intra, or is a self-contradicter betwixt his p. 3. and p. 37.
he alone is to answer for it. But this is the least of his absurdities; For

8. He makes Gods actions to be God himself against his own Masters and common
sense.
8. The very thing which he affirms to be actus Dei ad intra, p. 37. and here
an act within himself, he affirms to be no other then God himself. But that
God himself should be an act of God, within God, is a strange conception. Let
him consult his Master Wollebius, and he will say that God's Decree is an
internal Decretum Dei est interna voluniatis Divinae Actio p. 28.
action of the Divine will. Again let him ask his Master Gomar. T. 3. Disp. 9.
These. 29
Gomarus, and he will say that God's Decree is an action, and therefore not
God, and therefore different from God: so inconsistent he is with such as gave
him his Laws. But he is also inconsistent with common sense; For

9. Five blasphemons absurdities which that absurdity does inser.
9. If God's Decree is not really different from himself, and so really is
himself, then 1. He depends upon himself as upon a free Agent, which was at
liberty once to have decreed, or not decreed the redemption of the world, and
by consequence at liberty to have been, or not to have been. 2. It would also
follow, that God was the efficient cause of himself, because of his Decree, and
so in order of nature before himself. 3. It would follow, that God could not
choose but Decree, because he could not choose but be himself; and so that his
Decree is falsely defined by all Divines of all Parties, except Mr. Hobbs and
Mr. Whitfield. 4. It would follow, that the generation of God the Son would be
God himself, as being actus Dei ad intra, whereas Decretum is but ad extra. 5.
It would follow, that the Son might be said to have begot the Father, and the
Father to have proceeded from the Son and the Holy Ghost, because the essence
of God is equally common to each person in the Trinity. But these are things
which are blasphemously absurd; therefore God's actions are not his essence,
and therefore different from his essence, and by consequence from himself.

10. He makes God himself to be Reprobation.
10. Mr. W. forgetting what he here says, by that time he comes to p. 44. will
have it there to be [ Improper to say that God does decree to reprobate, as if
he should decree to decree; where as reprobation it self is the Decree, p. 44.]
Were I not striving to put an end to my Introduction, I would examine whether
he knew what is the English of decernere, and whether he pleads not for my
notion of God's Decrees against his will. But I will only observe, how he
first affirms God to be the same Being with his Decree, (p. 3.) and now his
Decree to be Reprobation it self (p. 44.) so that according to Mr. W. God is
Reprobation, and Reprobation is God.

Sect. 12.
An easy way to his Reformation concisely opened and pointed at.
That I may not seem to dwell in the very door, I will speak as concisely as I
am able. 1. Mr. W. seems to have a prejudice against the coaeternity of God's
consideration, according to which he did decree, because its object is temporal
and without himself. As if the object of his Decree were not the same. 2. Certe
omnis voluntas est respectiva, sicut and scientia.
Doctor Twisse confesses, ( l. 2. p. 24. col. 2.) that the will of God, as
well as knowledge, must needs be respective. And if of one object, why not of
another? if in one kind, why not in another? 3. If he could, and did, nay could
not but consider the sins of Angels, or of Men, whilst he decreed their
Reprobation, what should move men to say, that he decreed their Reprobation
without any consideration of their sins, which yet he could not but consider,
as being wise and omniscient? If he did not foresee the fall of Adam, before he
decreed to give his Son, yet this they will grant, that he did not decree to
give his Son before he foresaw the fall of Adam; which is as much as I desire,
if they will also grant that he had a respect to the fall of Adam, when he
decreed to give his Son. 4. Again, let them grant, that causa exemplaris is
before the efficient by any kind of priority, (such as is granted by themselves
at other times) and even that will suffice to undeceive them. Of twenty
Arguments which I could urge, and as it were build upon the ruins of Mr. W's
whole Fabric, I shall lay down but two from the general confessions of the
adverse Party.

1. They do unanimously confess, that God's promise is conditional; and that
his promise, though made in time, was decreed to be made from all Aeternity;
The first Argument for conditional Decrees grounded on the confession of all
the contrary party, and according to the Tenor of the seventeenth Article of
the Church of England, exhibited to us in the last clause of it.
and that it was decreed to be such as it is, a conditional promise. For, say
they, (Mr. W. p. 37. and Mr. B. Correp. Corr. p. 86, 87.) God does not only
determine the thing it self that shall be done, but the manner how it shall be
done.] Now if God's promise is conditional (as all acknowledge) God eternally
decreed that he would make it (what it is) a conditional promise: which yet he
could not do, but by considering the condition, as well as the promise to which
it cleaves; for else he had not considered it as a conditional promise, nor
could he be inconsiderate, in any thing, or circumstance, which he decreed: and
a Decree of any thing in consideration of a condition, is exactly the thing I
mean by a Conditional Decree. And what is thus argued from the promises of God
which are conditional, may equally be argued from his conditional threats for
his conditional Decree of Reprobation. Nor is there place for cavil in this
plain Argument; for as the promise was decreed, so also was the condition; and
as the condition was foreknown, so also was the promise. Again, as the promise
was eternally in Idea or conception, so also was the condition. And as the
condition is temporally in act or existence, so also is the promise. And hence
plain Readers may see the mind of the seventeenth Article of the thirty nine.

The second Argument for conditional Decrees from another confession of the
contrary party in their definition of God's Decrees.
2. It is unanimously confessed by the adverse Party, (as a prime ingredient in
its definition) that God 's Decree is an action of his Divine will depending on
God as a free Agent. And by a consequence unavoidable, that God was free (from
all eternity) to decree, or not to decree, to elect, or not to elect. For if he
was not once free, how can he be said to have elected? And how unlikely are
those men to thank God for their election, whose Principles do infer that he
could not possibly have done otherwise? But to elect of necessity, or to choose
without a freedom, implies a gross contradiction in adjecto. It will and must
be therefore granted, that if God did decree any thing, he was free to decree
it before he actually decreed; and if he chose or elected any one, he was free
to elect before he actually elected. I say [Before] for this reason; because
when he actually elected, he was not free to elect, and what he actually
decreed, he was no longer free to decree. And the reason of my reason is most
irrefragable, it being this, that what is done already cannot remain not yet
done. That which is past, or present, cannot be future: and he who has chosen,
cannot still be to choose the numerical thing which he has chosen. This
implying another Contradiction. It will be granted then on all sides, that when
God had determined his will ad hoc, it did not ad hoc remain undetermined. And
because it was once completely free, or undetermined, it is plain that his Being
and his Liberty were before his actual Decree: which being granted, there is
nothing to hinder (by the very confession of the Adversary) but that his
Decrees might be conditional.

Sect. 13.
Mr. W's mistake of the thing in Question represented in cleerer and fairer
colors.
But if Mr. W. and his Partisans will mean what they please by conditional
Decrees, and then confute their capricious meanings, and entitle others to
those overthrowes, which (with pains and charges) they give themselves, I will
leave them in their afflictions from this time forward. For what is to be done
with such a Disputant, who undertaking to demonstrate that a man cannot
possibly be an animal, shall begin his enterprise with this explication of his
meaning?

[ By the word Animal, we understand such as wherein the animality does bear
the chief sway. And because of animals there are two sorts, ( and vox (...)
must be distinguished into its different significata) I mean that sort which is
commonly called by Logicians Animal irrationale.

That such an Animal as this cannot agree with the excellent nature of man, if
we consider him in regard either of his risibility, or rationality, or other
perfections belonging to his nature, may thus appear.]

This is just the case of Mr. W. represented only in more visible, but fairer
colors. It is a more important truth, that God's Decrees of election and
reprobation are conditional, then that a man is an animal. And Mr. W. preparing
to write against them, has opened his meaning of the word conditional, as I
have largely showed. How irresitible is the truth of conditional Decrees, which
the Adversaries themselves cannot tell how to gainsay, until they have created
themselves a subject, and called it ours? How deplorable are the endeavors of
such opponents, whose chiefest refuge and strength is to mistake the very
ground on which the Defendant is known to stand? Upon fairer terms then such as
these, I will at any time undertake to make it appear to Mr. W. that two and
two amount to ten, or that five and five put together do make but four. I am
secure of the success whenever it shall please him to show his strength,
because I find the task is easier to prove that two and two are ten, then to
prove that God's Decrees are all irrespective or unconditional: which though
the chiefest of that Party have asserted as well as they have been able, yet
have they done it in such a manner, as if they were afraid to have it believed.
And this I hasten to make apparent in the following Chapters.

CHAP. I. Concerning his Fanciful Creation of Three General Objections; and his
Propoundings in General in way of Answer, p. 19, 20.
SECT. I.
AS Mr. Whitfield found it his safest way, to s^end no less then eighteen
^ages, 1. M. W 's distrust which he puts in his cause.
be^^des his E^istle to the Reader) upon a Subject of his own choice, before
his courage would serve him to split himself upon the Rocks, which he pretended
to attempt in his valiant Title; so when he is brought to his proper Task
(t^nquam Bos ad Ce^^ma) of answe^ing such Ob^ections as had been made against
his Doctrines in the Divine Philanthropie defended, he is fain to shrug three
times together, before he is able to fall on.

First he tells us, It is agreeable to right reason, that God being a most
free, absolute, and omnipotent Agent, he might design the creatures that were
of his own making to what ends himself ple^sed, without giving account to any,
etc. (p. 19. Number. 1.) And this he calls his first General Answer, or thing
propounded by way of Answer.

2. His studied aiming beside the mark.
Secondly, But to whom, or to what, or upon what occasion, no man living can
imagine, much less can he. Where dwells the man who ever dreamed of such an
Objection against the (...), or Sovereignty of God? not in any of their houses,
who ascribe thus much to the Sapreme Civil Magistrate, that he is [(...)]
unaccomptable upon earth, much more to the Omnipotent, that he is such even in
Heaven. This general Objection was framed at Bugbruck, by that creator of
Chimaera's who loves to fancy an Enemy, and then to fight him; when he cannot
answer what is objected, he objects such things as he can answer. It is the
cream of his strength, that he feels his own weakness, and therefore deals
with a proportionable Objection. That which comes out of his Forge, he thinks
is fit enough to pass between his Hammer and his Anvil. But then he ought to
consider, that he should feign no more Objections than he can dissipate with
his practice as well as with his Pen.

3. Yet overthrowes his own Rampire.
For Thirdly, If God was pleased that his Mercy should be over Ps. 145.9. Ps.
103.8. Ps 145.8. Ps. 86.15.
all his works, and might do what he pleased, (as Mr. W. confesses) why does
he daringly exclude the greatest part of mankind from any imaginable share of
that rich mercy? The least degree of Gods mercy has some of comfort: But is it
a comfort to the Reprobates, that by a peremptory Decree they are rendered
incapable of Heaven, and sure of Hell, without respect unto their sins, and yet
inevitably sinful without repentance, that so they may not be damned for
nothing? Why then do men, who are as worms, advance themselves against God,
denying his M. whitf. p. 2. l. ante-pen. penult. ult. and page seq.
1. Eternity. 2. Immutability, 3. Omnipotency, 4. Simplicity, and all his other
perfections, because he was pleased to decree the end of his rational
creatures, in an eternal consideration of the respective means? If God
determined from eternity that Cain and Judas should be Genesis 4.14, 16. Mat.
25.30. Act. 1.25.
cast out of his presence, in regard of their Murder and Impenitence, (and no
otherwise) what is that to Mr. Whitfield? Job 33.13.
Why do thou strive against him, for he does not give account of his matters?
as Elihu pleaded for God in another case. The Prove. 16.4^
Lord has made all things for himself, them that are good, for the day of good
things, them that are (a) wicked, for the day of evil; yea in an eternal
foreknowledge and consideration of their wickedness. If God was pleased to give
his Son to be a ransom for all the World (upon their several performances of no
impossible conditions) why should a Calvinist be offended, that all others are
savable as well as he, whose bodies are Job 33.6.
formed of as good a clay, and whose Eccl. 12.7.
souls can pretend to as high a pitch of extraction? why should the Mat. 20.15.
Creatures eye be evil, because his God is exceeding good, and it seems much
more, than Envy and Avarice can well endure? Let Mr. Wh. therefore cease from
contriving Objections against himself; or if his Invention must needs be busy,
let him conjure up no more than he is able to exorcize; nor Wisd. 1.12.
pull disgraces upon his Doctrine, with the work of his hands. But withal let
him be told, that as God was not bound to give account of his ways to any
creature, (and as little to those of the Kirk, as to those of the Synagogue,)
so when it pleased him (of his mercy and free love to Mankind) to reveal as
much of them, as lies open to our eyes in his written Word, who dares call him
to account for giving account of his Dispensations? if God is pleased in some
Cases (and that as an instance of his freedom) to become Isa. 5.3, 4, etc.
Ezekiel. 18.
accountable to his creatures, and to become like Heb. 4.15. Mat. 8.17.
one of us ( sin alone being excepted) he is not to give an account to any.

4. His second overthrow of himself, and of his absolute decrees.
Fourthly, What is added by Mr. W. That God might appoint his creatures to such
ends as should make most for his glory, is very true, and very impertiment, and
very much to the downfall of his Poetical Reprobation. For to decree men to
punishment without respect unto their sins, makes not so much for Gods glory,
as to decree them to punishment in consideration of their sins: Unless Mr. Wh.
is of opinion, that it is a more glorious thing to torment a creature as a
creature, then to punish a sinner as being sinful; of that eternal Decrees are
not every way answered by their Temporal executions. God created Mankind as he
was mighty, but decreed to reprobate and elect as he was in^^nitely just. For
Reprobation in all senses (negative, or positive) imports a very sore
punishment, as every punishment imports a sin, for which the punishment is
inflicted. That is most for Gods glory, which is most for his justice and Mercy
too: but to decree a man's misery, for the mere showing of a Sovereignty over
the work of his hands, (and therefore to decree it without respect unto sin)
has nothing in it of Justice, much less of Mercy; and so is incompetible to
^im, who could not choose but be always (from all eternity) at once a Just and
a Merciful Sovereign: it being destructive of his glory (and by consequence of
his Being) that any one of his Attributes should (for an Article of time)
exclude the other. From whence it follows that Mr. Wh. has confuted all his
own Doctrine in less than two lines. Nor can he be otherwise disintangled from
his own dear (...).
Lime-twiggs, unless he can prove that Gods dishonor does make most for his
glory: or unless he will add to his other miseries, that to be sinful by a
Decree, or to be punished without sin (which by the way is a contradiction)
tends nothing at all to Gods dishonor. But for such things as these Ishall
reckon with him hereafter: I hasten now to his Second General.

His third overthrow of himself by a most crimson contradiction.
Sect. 2.
His second Propounding (as he words it) in way of General Answer to
no-body-knowes-what (nor does he venture to tell us what) General Objection,
does very happily run thus; That which the Scripture plainly, clearly, and
positively asserteth that God does, we ought not to deny that he does it,
though we cannot discern the manner how he does it: and p. 19. bear witness
Reader, against anon; for when he comes to those Scriptures, which do plainly,
clearly, and positively assert, that Christ has died for all men, and tasted
death for every man, and is the pro^itiation for the sins of the whole world,
and the like, then the Case is altered with him; and in a flat opposition to
what he here tells us, It is (says he) a very weak way of arguing, to argue
from the signification of words; especially such words as have various
significations; as all men, every man, the world, the whole world, and the
rest, which are oft-times used, not to signify every particular man and woman,
but a part of them only, (p. 71, 72.) Well fare the Disputant indeed, who
will never lay down the Cudgels, so long as he is able to break his own shins
with them; let his cause be never so bad, he will not fall from his
principles, so long as self-contradiction can hold him up: rather then others
of his kind shall be as saveable as He, the whole world must signify the
smallest part of it; and we must not argue from the signification of words, we
are not bound to adhere unto the letter, (p. 72.) So abominable and impious is
Universal Redemption, that it cannot stand with Gods wisdom (says Mr.
Whitfield) not be consistent with other Scriptures, nor can it agree with the
Analogy of Faith, (p. 73.) Any way of exposition must be invented and
embraced, rather then Christ must be admitted to have died for mankind. But
here on the contrary side, when Mr. W. desires to prove, that God has a hand
in all sin, an efficiency in sin, that sin is Gods work, and that God is
actively the cause of sin, (and more such stuff, as shall be shevved and cited
in its proper place) this is such comfortable Doctrine to a man of his life and
conversation, that all Texts of Scripture must be taken according to the
Letter, whose outside and Letter does sound this way: any thing must be
svvallovved against the Analogy of Faith, and against the plain tenor of all
other Scriptures, rather then God must be exempted from the causality of sin.
Mr. W. then must needs argue from the signification of words, which to do in
other cases he calls a very great weakness, (p. 71.) This is the man of mettle,
who cannot possibly be conquered, he is under the protection of so much
frailty: or grant him conquered, he must not possibly be caught; for if he
cannot out at the door, he will escape at the window. Yet I will follovv him
so far, as to lay some hold on him; and will not willingly let him go, until
he shall promise a Recantation. For if in any one case, it may be pertinent in
this to use the (...).
Greek proverb, That for a wicked man to prosper in making God the fountain and
source of wickedness, will be apt to turn to Gods discredit. The name of God
will be Romans 2.24.
blasphemed among the Gentiles, if such Theology as this shall pass abroad
among^t Christians without control. Observe how he goes on, p. 19.

2. It rather becomes us humbly to acknowledge our Ignorance 0688 0136 V 2 in
the manner of Gods working, 2. Mr. W. enters upon the worst part of
Libertinism, as Mr. Calvin himself judged it. Contra Libert. c. 3.
then to deny any of his works, then to deny that he works all things, etc.
-- then to deny that he works most determinately, certainly, and infallibly,
in the various and mutable motions of man's will. And to show his meaning to be
no better then that of Beza, Piscator, and the rest of his Teachers, viz. that
sinful works are some of Zuingl. in Sermon. de Prove. c. 5 and 6.
Gods works, and that he Beza advers. Castle. Aphor. 1. and 6. See The Divine
Purity desended. p. 21. 30.
works all things, whether good or evil, without any the least exception, and
that God does determine the will of man to the most sinful Act which he
commits, he adds many things to make it evident that this indeed is the
scope at which he here drives. For he tells us a little after, that when God is
said in Scripture to harden men's hearts, to send them strong delusions, to bid
Shimei curse David, to bid the evil spirit go and deceive Ahab, to turn the
hearts of the Egyptians to hate his people, to have given up the Gentiles to
vile lusts, to put into the hearts of the ten Kings to give their power unto
the beast, and the like, (p. 22.) we must not expound such Texts by the common
Hebraism, but take them as literally as we do those other wherein God is said
to make the earth, to form the light, to create man, and the like, (p. 23.) He
also says that Gods permission of sin is not without action and operation, (p.
21.) that he must needs have some efficiency in it, (p. 24.) that he does both
will and work it, (p. 26.) that he has a hand in effecting of it, (p. ^6.) And
gaping so wide as he does, (nay wider then all this, as shall be showed in due
time,) how can we fail to know his meaning by his gaping? Let us then
contemplate the large Dimensions of his swallow, that at last we may demand
what it is will stick with him.

3. His now contradiction, about the manner of Gods working.
3. First, an huge Contradiction goes down very glibly; for as soon as his
ignorance is acknowledged as to the manner of Gods working, (p. 19.) he
describes the manner of it, and sets it down as dogmatically, as if he had been
an eyewitness, and of counsel to that secret and hidden will of God, which the
men of his way are wont to oppose to his revealed one. He says consentingly
out of Negari non potest, illum aliquo modo procurare negotium, cujus consilio
and decreto genotium geritur. Piscat. ad Am. Collat. Vorst. sect. 17.
Piscator, (but blushed to put it into English) that God does procure the
business of sin] by whose counsel and decree the business is managed or carried
on, (p. 21.) my more distinctly as to the manner, in another shred of Latin,
which he calls a true Rule, but puts it not into English. The true English of
it is this, That Deus agit in peccato, non tanquam causa moralis, sed tanquam
causa naturalis.
God does act in sin, not as a moral, but as a natural cause, (p. 25.) that is
to say, He does not so act as to persuade only (which yet is bad enough of it
self, and the worst that the Devil can arrive unto) but in such a natural way,
as to necessitate the sinner; (which is infinitely worse then to persuade him.)
Nor will it advantage him to say, that God decrees, and procures, and is the
natural cause of the positive act of every sin, but the accidental cause only
of the sin it self, (as He and Mr. Barlee shall be showed to say in plain
terms.) For David's lying with Bathsheba was the positive act of Adultery, and
sin it self, (but David's lying without Bathsheba was no sin at all, either in
whole or in part) which if Mr. Wh. cannot deny, as I am sure he cannot, (and do
challenge him to do if he thinks he may, or dares to do it) then must be
confess it to be his Doctrine, that God was the natural cause of David's lying
with Bathsheba, and that that positive act of Adultery was Gods work, and his
Creature; because of positive acts (he says) that God is the proper efficient
cause, (p. 24.) This lies on him unavoidably, unless he can separate the
positive act of David's lying with Bathsheba, from David's sin of Adultery, which
was his lying with Bathsheba, and nothing else: which I shall show he cannot do
(if so gross a visible needs showing) when I discover how Mr. Hicks betrayed
Mr. Barlee into a Blas^ hemy (no less then sins being God, if a pos^tive act)
and how Mr. B. was even with him, by sending his Treachery to the Press. So
much for Mr. W's. new self-contradiction.

4. His downright Libertinism.
4. Next Mr. W. must be observed to speak the language of the Libertines (...)
to a syllable, as I lately intimated, but now shall openly express. Saint Paul
having said, God works all things, (Ephesians. 1.10.) meaning all the Graces of the
Holy Ghost, of which alone he there speaks (as Calvin himself confesses,) the
Libertines concluded (as Efficit omnia, id est, omnia sine exception^. Beza in
locum. 1. Facinus, puta Adulterium aut homicidium, est Dei Auto. is, Motoris.
Impulsoris opus. Zuing. de Prove. c. 6. 2. Deus videri potest causa, non modo
humanarum actionum, verum etiam D^fectuum atque Privationum quae ipsis
inhaerent. Pet. Mart. in 1 Samuel c. 2. 3. Deus efficit ea quae peccata sunt.
Sturm. de Praedest. These. 16. 4. Idem facit Deus, scilicet, procurat
adulterium, maledicta, mendacia. Piscat. resp. ad Apolog. Birtii, p. 143. 5.
Omnes peccatores and flagitiosi, vi voluntatis Dei faciunt quicquid faciunt.
Id. Resp. ad Tauffr. p. 65. 6. Deus efficaciter agit seu efficit, and sua
efficacitate perag^t omnia, sine ulla prorsus quantulacunque exceptione. Beza
contra castle. Aphorism. 1, 6, 7.

Beza did, and as Mr. W. now does) that all their sins were Gods works. For
that was their rule, which is now Mr. Whitfields, that what the Scripture
both plainly and positively asserteth that God does, we ought not to deny that
he does it, (p. 19.) not admitting any Hebraisms, or other figures of speech,
or restrictions and limitations of universal terms, but taking all by the
Letter to serve their turn, as Mr. Wh. does to serve his, (p. 23.) Hence are
those ordinary Doctrines amongst the men of that batch: 1. That adultery or
murder is the work of God the Author. 2. That God may seem to be the cause, not
of humane actions only, but of the very defects and privations which cleave
unto them. 3. That God effects those things which are sins. 4. That God
procures adultery, cursings, lyings, etc. 5. That all wicked men do all that
they do by the force of Gods will. 6. That God efficaciously acts or
effects, and by his efficacity performs all things without any the least
exception. From which very saying, being pronounced by the Libertines, Mr.
Calvin discovers two horrible, but unavoidable sequels. 1. That there is not
any difference betwixt God and the Devil. 2. That God, by this Doctrine, is
transmuted into the Devil. Calv. ad e^s. Libert. cap. 13. and 14.) Now when
the Calvinists and the Libertines do teach the very same thing, why shall not
I hate it in the Calvinists, as Calvin hated it in the Libertines? nay, why
not more? since a Blasphemy is the worse (not one whit the better) for
proceeding out of a learned and a leading man's mouth.

-- Tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto melior qui peccat habetur.
Nor does it move me that some Calvinists will take it ill at my hands
(vvhilest others not rigid will take it well) for no doubt but the Libertines
took it as ill of Mr. Calvin. The Treasure that I covet is not their Favor,
but their Amendment. Let this precede, and that will follovv unavoidably. I
therefore ask Mr. Whitfield, A Dilemma as a touchstone to try his meaning.
Is his meaning the same with Beza's and Peter Martyr's, and the rest in my
margin, when he says, we must not deny that God works all things, or is is
not? If he say, Yes, he is a Libertine, and Mr. Calvin shall be my witness; and
then let him renounce the Christian name and Religion, that the Romans 2.24.
Name of Christ be not blasphemed among the Gentiles. For we who are Christians
do assert, that God works not all things without exception, good or bad, but
all things only which are good, (...), all things which become him. All the
rest are the 1 John 3.8.
works of the Devil, and of his genuine Children, who are resolved to do their
Job. 8.41, 44.
Fathers works. This was Christ's Doctrine, this was Saint John's, and Saint
John (believe me) was a Christian. All Gods works are done in Psalm. 33.4.
Truth, therefore lies are none of his: and so Piscat. loco paulo superius
citato.
Piscator was out. The Lord is Psalm. 145.17.
holy in all his works, Adultery and Murder are therefore none of Gods works:
Zuing. loc. jam citat.
Zuinglius therefore was deceived by his Doctrine of Decrees, and Mr. W. by
Zuinglius. The Lord shall Psalm. 104.31.
rejoice in his works, but has Psalm. 5.4.
no pleasure in wickedness: therefore Martin Borrhaus spoke very madly, when he
dared to say that Borrhaus in Exodus cap. 4. p. 448.
sins do please God; and Mr. Wh. more madly, when he says that God does will
sin with a perfect will. p. 22. We see what must follow if Mr. W. shall answer,
yes, to my Dilemma. But if his answer shall be, No, then he must burn his own
Books, and all those Books from whence he made up his Cento, and publicly
subscribe to the truth of mine. If he shall say his meaning is (p. 22.) that
Gods will, of which he speaks, is only objected on the wise permission or
patient suffering of all sins, and not upon the sins themselves, why then did
he entitle his book against me, and not against Mr. Barlee, or against his
unconverted self? He and I will shake hands, if he will say he meant thus, and
not as Doctor Twisse, who See the place cited Correct Copy, p. 10.
says, that the will of God does pass, not only into the permission of the
sin, but into the sin it self which is permitted. Utrum horum mavelit,
accipiat: Let him now take his choice, and speaking distinctly to my Dilemma,
let the world know what he is for, without any Tricks or Tergiversations. But I
will tell him for his security, that he were better be tried by the waters of
jealousy, if his meaning shall be found in the former part of the Dilemma; by
how much a lesser evil it is, for Number. 5.21.
the thigh to rot and the belly to swell, then for a man but to mean (or say in
his Psalm. 14.1.
heart) that adultery and murder are the works of God. And therefore timely let
me advise him to use the Number. 19.13.
waters of separation, that the uncleanness of such Doctrines may not be on him.

5. The Determination of man's will to wicked actions is not Gods work.
5. In the next place let us consider what he means by those words, God works
most determinately, certainly, and infallibly in the various and mutable
motions of man's will. I do but passingly take notice of his unscholar-like use
of the word Infallible, as if he knew not its meaning, or did not consider its
Derivation (the fault is too small to be observed in a Writer of his breadth and
thickness) I will rather try him by another Dilemma. Does he mean that God does
so work on the wills of men, as to determine them of necessity to all their
objects and actions, both good and evil? or does he not mean this, but rather
grant that man's will does determine it self? If the later, all is well; he has
no more to do next, but to abandon his Especially Mr. Barlee, and his brother
Hickman, who say, that whatsoever positive thing is not from God is God. c. 3.
p. 112. The apex of Blasphemy, as shall be showed hereafter.
party, and burn his books: whereas if the former is his meaning, (as hitherto
it has been) I know not what to do for him, to lighten the weight of his
calamities, which will press him down deeply, do what I can: For first he
implies a contradiction, as I demonstrated to a person of greater worth. And
therefore here I repeat it not, but refer him to the Sea The Divine Purity
defended. chapter 8. sect. 2. p. 80, 81, 82. and sect. 5. p. 86, 87.
place where he cannot fail of it. Next it infers unavoidably, that God is
the natural cause of all the wickedness in the world. For example, suppose a
wicked man has conceived Adultery in his mind, or committed it in his Heart
(as our Mat. 5.28.
Savior speaks.) If God did predetermin that wicked man to that physical Act
of Concupiscence, and the will of that man to a consent, as well as the
appetite to a complacency, he was not only the cause, but the sole cause of
the Adultery. Nay farther yet, if the inward intention of the end is the
determination of the will to the first act of sin (as the subtilest of them do
say,) and if that Inten^ion, or whatever else is the Determination of the will,
and the Determination it self, is a positive act (which none can deny,) and if
God is the Creator or Maker, or proper cause, of whatsoever thing is positive
(as these precious ones do affirm;) He is not only concluded the sole cause of
the Adultry in his Creature, [Verum etiam id ipsum quod dicere nolo] but also
that which is worse, and ineffably blasphemous. And here I ask Mr. Wh. was that
adulterous thought or intention so determined to its object, in that respect
evil, or was it not? If in that respect evil, he accuses God; if not evil in
that respect, he acquitteth the wicked man; and unavoidably infers, that
there was never any Adulterer, Murderer, or the like, but was carried to the
doing of all his wickedness with a good intention, a good desire, a very good
determination of his will. And reason good too; For the Determination of man's
will (they say) is Gods work, or Gods share in the procurement and
accomplishment of sins. And Gods part in the business they say is good. But
then they leave man no share at all in his impieties: if they do, let them name
it, which they never yet did. Indeed they talk in the general, [that God is the
Note this distinction which Mr. Barlee makes chapter 3. p. 55.
natural cause of the mere Act of sin, and a mere Accidental Cause of the
obliquity of the act of sin.] But bid them instance in some particular, then
they see that they are blind, and quickly speak themselves speechless. When a
man hates God, or Levi^. 24.15.
curses God, or any otherwise blasphemes against him, let Mr. Wh. or Mr. B. or
Mr. Hick. be asked, which is the act of that sin? and which is the obliquity of
the act of that sin? you shall have them as mute as three dead Fishes. If the
cursing of God is a whole sin, it is an act of sin, or an obliquity of an Act,
or both together, and that either separably or inseparably: If only an act,
where is the obliquity? if only an obliquity of an act, where is the act it
self? (for all the whole sin is the cursing of God, nor more, nor less) if both
together, and separably, let them make that separation in words, or dumb signs,
that we may hear, and conceive it. But if both are inseparably together, let
them confess the thousand blasphemies, and the six hundred contradictions,
which have and may be detected in all their Doctrines and Distinctions; and
after confession, let them amend too; I ask no more.

6. His meaning ferreted out of his words.
6. It may from hence be collected, what is meant by Mr. W. when he immediately
adds, [ that God works most holily in those very Actions wherein man works
unrighteously, p. 19.] Even the same with See Correct Copy, p. 10.
Zuinglius (abetted also by Twiss. Vind. Gra. l. 2. part. 1. p. 36, 37.
Dr. Twisse) that the very same sin, viz. Adultery or Murder, as it is the work
of God the Author, Mover, and Impeller, it is not a crime, but as it is of man,
it is a great one; which is only to say, that sin is Gods work, but God is no
sinner. He is the Author of sin in others, but sins not himself. He co-operates
with the sinner to the effecting of his sin, but being God he is not guilty.
That this must be the meaning of Mr. W. I can demonstrate by many Arguments. 1.
By his denying Scientia media (though I am not sure he understands it) and
holding with Mr. Calvin, that God foresaw nothing, but because he foreordained
it. 2. By his Note that in his Epistle to the Reader he argues the later from
the former with a [must.]
concession, that there is the same reason of the fore sight of sin and the
Decree of Reprobation, with the foresight of Faith, and the Decree of Election.
But it is the Doctrine of him, and all his party, that Faith is the proper
effect of Election, and not foreseen until decreed. Upon the very same ground
(to use his own words in my violentum) he does and must hold, that God did not
foresee sin, until he had decreed it too. Nor will it lessen the absurdity, to
say that God decreed to permit sin only, unless by permission he means a
sufferance, or a wise not hindering: if so, he is right, but then he must burn
Doctor Twisse his books, and retract his own: it being their constant doctrine,
That God's permission of sin is efficacious. Nay no Twiss. Vin. Gra. l. 2.
part. 1 p. 142, 143, etc.
less efficacious is God's decree in the permission of evil, than in the
production of good: so very sore are their very salvo's. Thirdly, His meaning
may be evinced, (as by all other passages of his book, which I have, and shall
cite, so) by comparing his present words with the nature of sin it self, which
is found to consist in such an indivisible point, that to say, God works in it,
is to say as much as that he works it. As for example, To hate God is a sin, or
a sinful action (two expressions for one thing). The very sinfulness of the sin
does entirely consist in the hating of God; not in God without hating, (for he
is purity it self) not in hating without God as the object of it (for hatred in
it self is a thing indifferent, and as apt to be good as evil, and even
communicable to God, who hates sin with a perfect hatred) but in the union and
application of that act to that object. As the nature of man consists not in a
body one^y, nor only in a soul, but in the union of the one with the other; so
that the sinfulness of that sin of hating God, is nothing else but the union of
that act with that object. And that is punctum indivisibile: for sin it self is
a Physical abstract at the Note that there is no such thing as pecceit^ in any
Profane, or Sacred Writer.
grossest, of which sinfulness at least is an abstract Metaphysical; which
admitting not any Composition, cannot farther be abstracted so much as in
imagination. How then can God work in the hating of God, and that no less than
as a natural cause, (for so he does, says Mr. W. p. 25.) without being the
cause of the sin it self, when in the hating of God there is nothing but sin?
Here I exact of Mr. W. to tell the World what he means, or to satisfy for his
words, of which he dares not tell the meaning. But again 4. He gives us notice
of his true meaning (if not of the meaning which he will own) by three Texts of
Scripture, which he applies to the purpose of which I spoke: for thus run his
words;

7. His abuse of Scripture to serve his turn.
7. How else can it be said when Joseph's brethren sold him into Egypt out of
envy, that God sent a man before? etc. And when David numbered the people, it is
said not only that Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number
the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. but that the Lord moved David against them, in that
he said, go number Israel, 2 Samuel 24.1. By these he seeks to make it credible,
that God does work in the wickedst actions as a natural cause, although these
Texts do prove the contrary. To the first and most impertinent of the two
allegations, I have f^oken so In the Divine purity defended, chapter 7. Sect. 6. p.
63, 64, 65.
largely to Doctor Reynolds, that Mr. W. must fetch his answer thence. To the
second, consisting of two contradictory Texts (as to the letter) I make an ease
return, by showing the literal inconsistence of the one with the other, unless
the first may be allowed to explain the second. For when the very same thing is
said to be done by God, and by Satan, either one of the two must needs be
figuratively spoken, or else there will be [(...)] irreconcileables in
Scripture, not only [(...)] the bare appearances of Discord: else farewell to
Torniellus, and all other Writers in that kind, who reconcile the Scriptures
which seem to differ and contradict. First I take it for granted, that the word
of God is not chargeable with any self-contradictions; That the very same
action cannot at once be good and evil, Divine and Devilish; That God and Satan
cannot do the same works. From whence it follows of necessity, that when God
is said to Activum pro Passivo, ut saepe, inquit Grotius in locum.
move David to number the people (2 Samuel 24.1.) the meaning must be, He *
permitted Satan to move David. For so the Scripture explains it self afterward
(1 Chronicles. 21.1.) by saying that Satan provoked David to that deed. Another
example will make it plainer. It is said of the Devil (the God of this world)
that he has blinded the minds of unbelievers, lest the light of the Gospel
should shine unto them (2 Cor. 4.4.) Again it is said of our God who cannot
endure the least sin, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts,
that they should not see with their eyes, etc. (Joh. 12.40.) where because the
two senses of those two Texts cannot possibly be the same, the former must
needs be active, and the later only permissive. It is to be seriously
considered, whether any such men can be fit for the Ministry, to be entrusted
with the Key of Knowledge, to be Stewards of the Mysteries of the living God,
who are not able to distinguish betwixt those Scriptures which differ most; but
help the people to confound the works of God, and of the Devil. I confess my
indignation is very great at this instant, whilst I observe M. W. (in a book
So he professes in his Epistle to the Reader, p. 2, and 3.
intended for the unlearned) to present the letter of such Texts without the
least explication, nay opposite Texts without the least offer of reconcilement,
nay teaching that God has an P. 24.
efficiency in sin, and P. 19.
works in the worst actions as a natural cause, and 25. He speaks worse of
God then can be truly said of Satan.
determines the wills of men to every event; whereas the Devil himself cannot
contribute so much to sin, by the utmost force of his Temptations: He can but
persuade, and incline, as a moral agent, which cannot necessitate to
wickedness, as the natural does. And if his parishioners, or others as void of
learning, shall ask him the manner of God's working and efficiency in sin (that
they may know how it differs from the Devils manner of working in the very same
sin, and from the manner of working in which the sinner himself works) behold
his answer is only this, [ It beseems us humbly to acknowledge our ignorance
in apprehending the manner of his working (p. 19.) and again, we be not able to
apprehend his secret and wonderful manner of working in evil actions, p. 23.
lin. ult.] How then, Good Sir, says the amazed Catechumenist? what shall we do
in this Case, when our light is darkness? where shall we seek knowledge, when
our Priests lips cannot preserve it? Mr. W's answer is at hand, P. 24. lin. 3,
4.
Though he does it miro and ineffabili modo, as Austin speaks, yet we are not
to deny the doing of it. But first the people are abused with Austins name, who
never said any such thing; His P. 20. lin. 1. Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 100.
words are quite contrary: id non fit, that is not done beside the will of God,
which is done against it. Mark Reader, He does not say, what God does, but what
is done against Gods will by Gods permission, which is not beside his will to
permit it. Next suppose Austin had said any such thing, had not that been one
of his many Errors? But thirdly, It Is well Mr. W. will yield any authority to
Austins Enchiridion, which is perfectly August. Enchir. c. 98.
destructive to Mr. W's Doctrine. Well, Mr. W. declares his ignorance to the
unlearned Quaerist, touching the manner of God's working and efficiency in sin,
as a natural cause (which being precisely his own expressions, do put us in
mind of his contradiction, whilst he confidently defines in some places, what
he professes not to know in others, as being wonderful and ineffable.) Make
but room for Mr. Barlee, and he will help his Fellow Laborer to make it out
with a wet finger. [ Mr. B's Neces. vin. chapter 3. p. 12.
He that cannot or will not tell how God may be said to excite men to the Act
of Adultery, which to the Adulterer so excited is sin, though not to God,
neither will he tell how God without sin does stir up men to the act of lying
with their lawful Wives; ad utrumque ejusdem generis excitatio and concursus.
Idabid.
for the excitation and concurrence to both is of the same kind.] Observe the
growth of this Student since his Correp. Correction. He there expressed his
Divinity of God stirring up men to sin, by his putting spurs to a dull Jade.
Now he tells us [(...)] in downright terms, that God has the same concurrence
to the most unlawful, and the most lawful actions. S. Paul no sooner said,
Marriage is honorable, but immediately added, and the bed undefiled, (...),
immaculate, pure, and spotless: but Adultery is Rebellion against the Monarch
of all the world. And yet he stirs up the wicked to the unclean Act of
Rebellion against Himself by the same incitation (says Mr. B.) whereby he
excites his loyallest subject to the most blameless thing that can be named;
not only not forbidden, but commanded by God for propagation; whereas Adultery
is an Act which God forbids by his law, and from which he restraines by his
Grace, disswades by his Spirit, and which his children cannot commit, but by
resisting his Grace, and by grieving his holy Spirit, by whom alone we are
sealed unto the day of Redemption. But M. B. may say, that I now torment him
before his time. I therefore return to his majorite, whose third general Answer
does now ensue.

Sect. 3.
Mr. Whitfield says, Mr. W's third General Answer a m^er Majestic mistake.
[ that the sum of what Mr. P. or any of his Predecessors in this
controversy about Gods absolute Decree has objected against it, is included
in that which the Apostle objects against himself, speaking of his subject,
Romans 9.14. Is God unjust? and, who has resisted his will? which he answers
with an Absit, and quis tu es? -- And if we should give no other answer but
this, it might suffice, p. 20.] What will not some be bold to say, rather then
want wherewith to gainsay? First he forgeth a certain Tale, and gives it the
Name of a Third general Answer. If he had called it a Whirligig, his
impropriety had been less; for the Question there is the contrary to what it
is here. There it was of God free mercy, which well might be without man's
merit: Here it is of his wrath, which cannot be without our demerit. No less
are the wanderings of Mr. W. But Secondly, Where was he told, that this is the
sum of whatsoever has been objected against his mythical Decree? He neither
names his Author, nor gives his Reason, nay speaks precisely against his
knowledge, and crudely dictates (stilo satis praetoriano) This is the sum. I
answer with more Truth, but much less Majesty, that this indeed is the sum
of all their subter-fuges and salvo's, Quis tu es? Who art thou, O man, who
objectest against God, that he has not an efficiency and hand in sin? This was
the very last plank which Mr. Hobbs was fain to betake himself unto, when he
found himself ship-wreckt by the most learned Bishop Bramhall, in his book of
Liberty and Necessity, p. 20. The shift is common to the Libertines and
Ranters, with Mr. Hobbs, and Mr. W. and Mr. B. etc. This is the ablest of their
Answers, when nothing else will do the work, to say that God would have it so
because he would, and however contrary to his word, yet it is a part of his
secret will, (revealed only to that Tribe) at which the rest of mankind must
content themselves with (...), and must hold themselves confuted with the
[Quis tu es] of the Presbyterians. Thirdly, It is his other absolute leisure,
to say that Saint Paul did speak of this subject, Romans 9.14. It is enough to
say No, and that it is senseless to imagine it. But I will tell him farther,
that Non fuit levis offensio, quod tam pauci Judaei credierunt. -- Nomen populi
Dei objiciebatur Apostolo. -- Haec est (meo judicio) occasio harum
disputationum. Melanchth. in Praef. ad cap 9. ad Romans
Saint Paul is there disputing against the male-contented Jews, who were
very much offended that the Gentiles should be received, and the Jews rejected
(the greatest part of them) who hitherto were well known to be Gods
peculiar and chosen people. This (says Melanchthon) was the occasion of that
which follows. And Non aliud vult Paulus, Romans 9.^0, 11. quam docere,
Gratiam universalem esse; contra Judaeos, qui culpa sua exciderunt Grat^a, etc.
H^mming. Praef. in Exposit. Epist. ad R^m. See Doctor Ham. Annot. upon that
Chapter.
Hemmingius thus, That S. Paul intented nothing else (v. 10, 11.) but to teach
that Grace was universal, and extended also to the Gentiles: This was
contrary to the Doctrine which was then espoused by the Jews, as now it is
by the Consistorians. Were this a place and a time to argue from the genuine
and demonstrable sense of that Chapter (which of it self would make a Volume)
there could nothing prove more destructive to Mr. W's Doctrines, then that one
Chapter; and that not only according to S. Paul's sense, but even according to
the senselesness which the 2 Pet. 3.16.
unlearned and the unstable are wont to wrest from that Scripture. Fourthly,
The Quis tu es may fit my mouth a great deal better then Mr. W's. If God was
pleased to punish none in his eternal Decree without respect unto their sins,
and to Tit. 2.14.
give himself a ransom for all mankind, Quis tu es, Who art thou O man that
reply against God? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, why
have thou made me thus? Why was I not decreed and necessitated to bliss from
all eternity? why have I not grace irresistible? why should thou leave it in
my power to be unhappy? why should any kind of wickedness be able to put me
into a state of damnation? or why should all men be capable of escaping Hell,
as well as I and my party? what have moral honest men to do with heaven?
why were they not rejected before they were? The Puritanical Jews were apt
to mutter to this effect, but let not Christians be so irrational. This were
answer sufficient to all the illnatur'd murmurings of carnal men. But for the
good of the vulgar (for some of whom Mr. Wh. may be too hard) I will apply my
(...) to the particular dangers now spread before them.

Sect. 4.
Mr. VV. says truly, He descends from Generals to Particulars, and begins with
the charge of making God the Author of sin.
[ that the first and princi^al objection against the Doctrine of absolute
Decrees, is, that it makes God to be the Author of sin, p. 20.] But does he say
how we prove it? No, he durst not do that; How then should he have
ansvver'd? He therefore proves it his own way, taking on him the person of T.
P. or the like; but does not so much as pretend to have read the objection
which he proposes to be ansvvered. And to one who speaks less then nothing
it is not fit to speak much, although it is hard to abstain from speaking. The
last part of his objection is somevvhat honestly framed, [if God decrees the
Being of sin, then he is the Author of it] Let us observe how he answers it,
for in that we shall shortly find a very great jest.

First he says what was never denied I think by any, I. He begins with a
Tergiversation, and imposition on the Scripture.
that God does permit sin, and has decreed to permit it. But then he adds
(what is most false, unless it be carefully explained) [ The Scripture is
plain, that God decrees those actions, which when men do, they do very
sinfully, (p. 20.)] 1. He here adds to the word of God: there is no such
Scripture. 2. He slides from what he said of God decreeing to permit, and
(without any transition, or pretense for the change,) pronounces quite
another thing, that God decrees the sinful actions, or sins themselves; for
that these are synonymous I shevved before. But let his own words shame him y
these degrees. David's lying with Bathshebah was an Action, which when he
did, he did very sinfully. Such Actions so done Mr. W. says that God decrees.
The Action specified was Adultery, and that was sin: and so according to M.
W. God decreed that sin, that Adultery, that actual lying with another man's
wife, that action which, when David did, he did sinfully. The instance which
he gives Act. 2.23. and chapter 4.27, 28. is cross to his purpose; for it was in a
foresight and consideration that Christ would be crucified by the Jews, if
not violently hindered, upon which God determined he would not hinder, and so
(by a consequence unavoidable) that the thing should be done by his permission.
And therefore the first Text Act. 2.23. affords an excellent exposition to the
second, Act. 4.27, 28. for it is said there expressly, he was delivered by the
Counsel and foreknowledge of God. The word (...) to determine does no way
exclude, but suppose (...), to foreknow. And this was the answer of Justin
Martyr to Tryphon, as I have elsewhere noted, and spoke so much by way of
answer to this very objection of Mr. W. that I must send him thither for a
fuller account, though what I have now said is somevvhat more then I ovv'd
him. [See Sinner Impl. part 2. chapter 2. p. 258. to p. 264.] And because the
words of that Father were not there given at large, I have here thought fit
to set them down in the Margin (...). Just. Mart. contra Tryph. p. 370. porro
illam objectionem, (...), ita solvit Justinus.
. I am very well pleased, that the same is objected against my Doctrine,
which was objected by wicked Tryphon against that learned Apostolical and
holy Father. What is added by Mr. W. of God permitting sin to be, is only for
me, and against himself, unless he will declare that he is just as I am, and
fairly publish his Retractations.

2. His memorable answer to his own objection.
2. But vvher's his Answer to this Objection, [That if God decrees the Being
of sin, then he is the Author of it?] Now comes the jest. His Answer to it is
fully and wholy thus:

Page 21.
But though God has decreed that sin shall be, and therefore has decreed to
permit it, without which it could not be, yet it does not follow that he is the
Author of it.

Does he mean by Gods decreeing that sin shall be, His meaning caught in a
Dilemma.
that he decreed it absolutely, and antecedently to his prescience that it
would be, if the sinners will were not hindered be some violent means? or that
he decreed not to hinder it upon his eternal foreknowledge that the sinner
would determine his will to sin, if not miraculously impeded? Which soever he
shall say, it will be equally pleasant (and he must say one, for there is not a
third.) If the former, he makes God to be the first and principal cause of
every sin, but denies the sequel of his being the Author: which is as if he
should say, Paul was a rational creature, but it does not follow he was a man.
Sophroniscus did beget Socrates, but yet was not his Father. The Jewish high
Priests were the first and principal contrivers and procurers of the murdering
of Christ (to which Judas and the Romans were instrumental) but it does not
follow they were the Authors of that murder. Thus Mr. W. with the same breath,
denies what he affirms, whilst he affirms it, if he owns the former meaning of
his words. And if the later, he yields the whole cause, by overthrowing the
foundation of all his Doctrines; which is the placing Gods Decree before his
Knowledge, his preordination before his prescience; which although the most
against Reason and Philosophy of any thing that can be named, has been
swallowed by the Calvinists from Mr. Calvin's own Ideo praesciverit quia sic
ordinavit. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 23. sect. 7. fol. 325. See Div. Pur. c. 7. p.
74.
mouth. Thus it fares with Mr. W. if he means either of those two senses. If he
can think upon a Third, I will speak to it when he shall name it. But be his
sense what it can be, it was faulteringly done, to baulk the words in the
Objection, and to substitute others in the Answer; and unskilfully resolved, to
obtrude a bare Denial, without pretending a dram of Reason to give it at least
a little weight: nay, he has not so much as an evasion to supply the room of
an Answer; never an Orthodox put-off. The total of his answer (to bate the
other flawes in it) is the syllable [No. It does not follow, For it does not.]

3. And because he mingles the word [permit] in this and many other places, 3.
His soul use of the word permission. Of which see Div. Philan. Def. chapter 3. p.
129, 130, to p. 139. and chapter 4. p. 53, 54.
as a necessary Emollient to assuage the hardness of his sayings, the Reader
must once more be put in mind what is meant by [permission] in the writings of
this and such like Authors. Their common accom^t of their meaning is by the
word efficacious: and if we ask how far forth Gods permission of sin is
efficacious, Doctor Twisse is Prolocutor, and tells the sense of the Party.
Gods Decree (says he) is no less efficacious in the permission of evil, then
in the production of good. But in the production of good, they all affirm with
one mouth that Gods Decree is absolute, irrespective, and irresistible; nor is
it less (says that Doctor) in the permission of sin. That Mr. W. thinks the
Doctor Orthodox, his Book forbids us to disbelieve; for he says that God has
a hand in sin, and a hand in the effecting of it, (p. 26.) that he has some
efficiency in it, (p. 24.) that he acts or works in sin (not as a moral
Agent by dissuading from it, but) as a natural cause promoting the Being and
Act of sin, (p. 25.) that Gods permission of sin is accompanied with Action and
Operation, (p. 21.) and all this in the ugly sense, as I shall show more and
more in the following Sections. And therefore his using the word permission
does but aggravate his guilt, until he shall declare, that he takes it in a
passive and negative sense, so as to signify the suffering, and not hindering
of sin. But then he must add a Recantation of those unsober expressions, with
which the word Permission is inconsistent. The odious impropriety represented
in other less odious colors.
For suppose a man shall command or excite his Son to steal a Horse, and that
so effectually, that the Horse is stolen by that Son upon his Fathers
excitation; can the Father be thought to speak truth or sense, if he shall
plead that he did only permit his Son to steal by an efficacious permission,
which could not be resisted because of its efficacy and force? Or will it avail
him to plead not guilty, by saying he had but a hand in that stealth, or an
efficiency in it, or that he only commanded and stirred up his Son to that
vile Action, but was not the Author of that sin which cleaved to the Action,
nor was it he, but his son who stole the Horse? Reader, this is the Case, but
represented in fairer colors then Mr. W's Doctrine does deserve. For he and
his Note that those Authors are defended by Mr. W. and Mr. B. as well as
imitated and followed.
Teachers have said of God, that he decrees, wills, commands, determines,
seduceth, exciteth, stirs up, impelleth, tempts, effects, and makes men
to sin, and that not only as a moral cause (as some) but as a natural cause
also (as others) as the Author of sin (say some) to sin quatenus sin (say
others.) All which, and much more, I have formerly showed in three distinct
Tracts, to which I must ever refer the Reader, though I am ever adding to my
Supellex. And let this serve for their Emollient, made up of contrary
ingredients (as Emplastra and Cataplasmes may sometimes be) for the discussing
the peccant Humor (at least for the concealing the ugly face of the Disease.)
The first Ingredient is Active, and they allay it with a Passive, which is the
second. The first they think has too much of Positive in its Nature, and so
they qualify it with that which has somewhat of Negation in it. They add
permission to efficacious, to save their credit; and efficacious to permission,
for the salving of their cause. Their Dictionaries can tell them (and they who
never read Tully, may easily look into Nizolius) that Note that to permit is
not the English of permitto; any more then to occide is the English of occido.
But permit is purely Latin, made use of in English; as occide is Latin, not
made use of in English. And as to occide is in English to kill; so to permit is
in English to suffer.
permitto and sino are words of one signification. Sino signifies to suffer, or
permit; Permitto signifies to permit or suffer. Judge how sore that part of
their Doctrine is, to which an efficacious permission (that is an active
sufferance, or an operative not-hindering) has been only applied by way of
Poultice. But some Patients are so unhappy, that either they tear off the
Poultice from the Oedematous Tumor, or else they add to the composition as
much as robs it of its anodynous and healing virtue. This will appear in the
next Objection which Mr. W. has raised against himself, as fittest (he
thought) to fall before him.

Sect. 5.
Object. [ But if he has willed and decreed it, 1. Mr. W. moulds, a new
objection against himself, wherein he grants what his Doctrine is charged with.
his Decree is an energetical, and operative Decree, therefore he has some
hand in working and effecting of it, as Calvin, Piscator, and others teach, who
are for the absolute Decree. Negari non potest illum aliquo modo procurare
negotium, cujus consilio and decreto negotium geritur, says Piscator: and if
his Decree be operative, so as he has any hand at all in the working of it,
then he must needs be the Author of it. p. 21.] Bear witness, Reader, that this
is also an Objection of his own making up against his own Doctrine; which no
doubt but he did with as much tenderness as he could, in special regard unto
the weakness both of the Answerer and the cause. Yet even thus it is such, as
we shall find by and by he is not able to elude. But first observe his
acknowledgement, that Calvin and Piscator, and the rest of his way, do in good
earnest maintain the ugly premises in the Objection, viz. that God has willed
and decreed sin, and has some hand in working and effecting of it; and negari
non potest, it cannot be denied (says Piscator) but that God procures the
business, and that it is transacted by his Counsel and Decree. These things, I
say, he does not offer to deny in any part of his Answer, but does his utmost
to make all good (as shall immediately be seen;) he only denies (and it is a
naked denial without the least reason) that they do hence infer God to be the
Author of sin. Mark well his Answer, or rather his shifting himself of it in
lieu of an Answer.

2. His Answer consists in shifting the duty of a Respondent, and speaking
quite another thing.
Answ. For Answer of this, two things are to be cleared. 1. That Gods permission
is not such a bare permission as is without all action and operation. 2. That
though his permission is accompanied with some kind of operation, yet he is no
Author of sin. p. 21.]

This is an (...), an achievement never to be forgotten. For in the Objection,
there was not a syllable of Gods Permission, which yet in his Answer is All in
All. The Objection was of Gods willing, decreeing, working, effecting,
procuring sin, and the like. The Answer stands in the clearing of Gods
permission, and showing it is not unac ompanied. Here then I must ask him (as
before I did) does he mean that Gods permission is efficacious, and accompanied
companied with those things which are ingredients in the Objection, viz.
decreeing sin by an operative energetical Decree, willing and working,
procuring and effecting it, (which is all the language of his Predecessors?) or
does he not mean any such things? If the first, I take hold of his confession,
and will demonstrate that he does worse then if he merely called God the Author
of sin. If the second, he does not answer, but sneak from giving any answer. He
lays down a Cushion, and sits beside it. And if when one thing is objected, he
shall answer to quite another, he is no sitter for a Disputant then a man
that is deaf, who if he is asked what is a clock? will answer, a Windmill, or a
Pump. But let him be granted to have a pertinent meaning (however his words are
nothing less) yet the state of his affairs will be but so much the worse: For
by that he discovers, how many dismal mysteries are closely couched in the word
Permission; enough to show the great usefulness of what I spoke on that subject
a few minutes since. Now then let us observe how he clears his two things,
which he calls in his margin by the name of two Arguments.

3. His first part of his escape, clearing his first thing with a very great
blot.
3. [ That Gods permission of sin is accompanied with some kind of operation,
appears, because when he permits sin he does volens permittere, he does
willingly permit it: then there is some act of his will about it. p. 21.]

Mark his notable passage a genere ad genus. The permission he speaks of, is in
relation to sin; but the will of God he here speaks of, is in relation to the
permission. Did he take permission to be a sin, or not? If he did, he charge
God with that sin, which (were it such) would denominate him a sinner. And this
would be blasphemy in its (...). For the avoiding of which, if he shall say he
did not, then he must say he is a shifter, not a Disputant or Respondent in any
sense; for the thing he is to clear (and it is a task he imposed upon himself,
without being bid,) is Gods permission of SIN attended with operation (not his
permission of his PERMISSION, which is perfect nonsense, and yet employed by Mr.
W. unless he professes to be impertinent) which in stead of clearing, he gives
the slip, by saying that God does willingly permit it. Where the willingness
relates to the permission of sin, (which permission is no sin) not at all unto
the sin which is permitted. Which if he did not discern, O the depth of his
Apprehension! if he did, and yet passed it, O the depth of his Dissimulation!
whether he did, or did not, he has done a strange thing; for thus he argues,
[God does willingly permit sin, therefore there is some act of his will about
it.] About what, good Sir, is the Act of Gods will? about the permission spoken
of, which is Gods? or about the sin permitted, which sin is the Devils and his
Instruments? The first is as impertinent, as the second is blasphemous. And
though it is plain that Mr. W. does mean the second, yet he offends against
Logic, as much as against Theology: for thus he argues; God does will to
permit sin, which to do is no sin; therefore he wills sin, which cannot be
divided or distinguished from sin: which is to say in effect, Gods will is
conversant about what is good (such is permission) therefore it is conversant
about what is evil (such is sin permitted.) Because he does not will sin (but
only to suffer or to permit it, or not to hinder the sinners will) therefore
he does will it. One part of a contradiction is his proof of the other. But
though he miscarries (to a prodigy) in his way of probation, yet he discovers
his affection to his opinion, that God does velle peccatum, immediately will
sin, and that with a perfect will, as he goes on p. 22.

4. His abuse of St. Austin.
4. Thus then he advances (if that can be in a Circle wherein he only runs
round.) He Deus permittit aut volens, aut nolens and invi^^s; non certe
invitus, quia id esset cum Tristitia, and potentia se majorem haberet: Si
volens permittit, est genus quoddam voluntatis. Enchir. aed Laur. p. 100.
cites a passage out of Austin, in which he confesses that that Father does
grant but this, [ that God has some kind of will in the permission of sin, p.
22.] So grants Arminius, and Pelagius, and all mankind. But what then (Mr. W?)
A will in the permission is not a will in sin; for Gods permission is of a
contrary nature. If Austin had said, that God has a will in the effecting of
sin (which is contrary to his holy will) he had then said something to bear you
out, or rather he had fallen into the same ditch with you. But Austin does not,
nay durst not say, that sin (permitted) is according to Gods will; for he says
that sin is Fit contra voluntatem. Id. Ibid.
against his will; and that at the very same time, when he says he has a will
in the PERMISSION of sin. Now be it remembered by the Reader, that Mr. W. does
mean an efficacious permission when he speaks of Gods permitting sin. And how
much he means by efficacious, I lately showed. Together with that, compare his
process.

5. His arguing that God does will sin perfectly, because be perfectly wills
the permission of it.
5. If any kind of will, this must needs be a perfect will; for no imperfect
will agrees to God, who is perfection it self: and how can he be said to will
any thing without any Act of his will? p. 22.] Now the Doctrine comes more into
the light. Gods efficacious permissive will (as Mr. Barlee and others are wont
to word it) is the same to sin, as to sinlessness, says Mr. Whitfield: for
more then perfect it cannot be when objected upon the best things; nor is it
less then perfect (says Mr. W.) when objected upon the worst: (for from Gods
will to permit sin, he argues Gods willing sin.) Which reasoning of his is so
excellently absurd, that it demonstrates the contrary to what he seeks to prove
by it. For because nothing in God is imperfect, and whatsoever he wills he
wills in perfection, therefore he wills not sin at all; it being of his
perfection, that he cannot will sin; and the greatest imperfection in the worst
of all Creatures, that they are able to will sin with a perfect willingness.
And what a Divine must he be, who shall say the same of God, which is the very
worst thing that can be said of the Devil, that he wills sin with a perfect
will? If to evade this whirlpoole, Mr. W. shall say, he meant the permission
only, nor the sin permitted, then it is the least of his misfortunes, that he
has only made Answers to the Man in the Moon, and then he will be splitted on
the less dangerous Rock. But to make good his meaning, he must abjure his whole
Book: for to say that Gods decree is energetical only (not permissive) and to
say that he decrees the being of sin (which is his and his Teachers Doctrine)
is in consistent with mere permission; which is not an exertion, but a
suspension of the will, from interposing any Impediment which might forcibly
hinder the Creatures choice. Nay one thing I must add for the vindication of
Gods holiness, and for the instruction of Mr. W.(whose mere want of instruction
I have the charity to hope is his greatest stumbling block) That though God
does not hinder a man from sinning by any such physical impediment, whereby the
man is rendered not able to sin wilfully, yet even then he does hinder by such
moral impediments, whereby the man is rendered able not to sin wilfully.

6. He strives to prove Gods Activity in the production of sin from Gods own
word.
Now let us see how he clears the second thing he proposed in stead of Answer to
the Objection. [ Scripture-Expressions do constantly hold forth Gods manner of
working in sin, by way of action. It does not say, God suffered Joseph's
Brethren to sell him into Egypt, but that God sent him, Genesis 45.8. It does not
say, God suffered Pharaoh to harden his own heart, but that God hardened it,
Exodus 9.12, etc. p. 22.] Here he tells us that the Scriptures hold forth, what
before (p. 19.) and after (p. 23.) he professes to be ineffable and
incomprehensible, viz. the manner of Gods working in sin. This is his first
degree of misery. Again, he takes those Texts merely according to the Letter,
which Mr. Barlee himself confesses to be figuratively spoken, giving Neces.
Vind. chapter 3. p. 55.
this reason for it, [ that God according to the Letter of many of those Texts,
seems to be made a moral cause of sin as sin.] So that now Mr. W. has played
such a prank, as his own fellow-laborer must needs condemn in him. This is his
second. Again he says, that this is constantly held forth in Scripture by way
of action, Constantly, good Sir? how can that be? Did not God tell Israel, that
because he had purged them, and they were not purged, they should Ezekiel. 24.13.
not be purged from their filthiness any more? that is to say, he would leave
them to themselves, he would permit or suffer them to be filthy, he would not
cleanse them against their wills? Which one Text is sufficient to have taught
Mr. W. the true importance of all those at which he stumbles. And from thence
it is evident what is meant by the Schoolmen, when they say that God punishes
sin with sin: which must thus be negatively expounded by Gods forsaking such
sinners, withdrawing his grace so long resisted and abused, not clensing them
any more from their beloved filthiness. Let M. W. answer to this Question; Does
the Scripture express or hold forth the real command of the holy Ghost, in
using that imperative, Rev. 22.11.
Let him that will be filthy, be filthy still? Or was our Savior accessory to
the Jewish murder, in saying, Joh. 2.19. which compare with Mar. 14.58.
destroy this temple, meaning the Temple of his body? To have commanded it in
the sense (as he did in the letter) had been a kind of (...), laying hands upon
himself; yet the Jews (like Mr. W.) were so intent upon the letter, that they
took an occasion from those words to bear false witness against our Savior. [
We heard him say, I will destroy this Temple made with hands, etc. Mar. 14.58.]
But enough of Mr. W 's degrees of misery in his position, come we now to his
examples.

1. From the selling of Joseph.
His first ( Genesis 45.8.) is most remarkably impertinent to that for which it was
produced: for in stead of saying God sold Joseph into Egypt (in which sale of
Joseph his brethren sinned) he confesses that Joseph did only say unto his
brethren, that God had sent him: nay he spoke it with an Antithesis to his
Brethrens action, and to a contrary scope to what Mr. W. directs the words.
Reader, consider, and stand amazed at his matchless inconsiderateness in this
particular. Joseph's speech runs thus, See the Divine Purity Def. c. 7. p. 63,
64, 65.
[ God has sent me before you, to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and
to save your lives by a great deliverance: so now, it was not you that sent me
hither, but God, and he has made me a Father to Pharaoh, and Lord of all his
house, etc. v. 7, 8] He speaks of nothing but the good which God had done for
him, upon occasion of that evil which they that sold him had done against him.
Yet this is urged by Mr. W. for Gods Activity and work in sin.

2. From Pharaohs obduration.
His second Instance is not quite so ridiculous. [ Exodus 9.12.] but it is
ridiculous enough. For though God is said to harden Pharaohs heart by doing
somewhat, yet was it not by working in sin, but by removing punishments, and
all other means of his recovery, which had so long been afforded him, and all
in vain. It was said before, Pharaohs heart was hardened, Ex. 7.22. which
implies the permission, not efficiency of God. Nay farther it was said, That
Pharaoh hardened his own heart, Ex. 8.15. Again after that, it was said that
Pharaoh sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants, Ex. 9.34.
(whom God is said to have endured with much long-sufferance, Romans 9.22.) as
'twere on purpose to deliver us from the very possibility of erring grossly,
when we afterward read, God hardened his heart. And how did God do it? sure
not as Pharaoh, nor as Satan, by any activity or efficiency of obduration, (for
Satan hardened Pharaohs heart, as well as Pharaoh himself) but by a total and
final withdrawing of his Grace, Indurabo cor Pharaonis, id est, sinam indurari,
non flectam genuinam impii cordis duriciem, Melan. in Praef. ad Comment. in c.
9. ad Romans
leaving him in a state of irremediable wickedness, by such a kind of
dereliction by which the damned are left in Hell. Nay even this very
dereliction and leaving Pharaoh to himself, (the certain consequence of which
was his final obduration) was awarded to him as a punishment for his having
hardened his heart so often, when God by his Messengers and their Miracles had
often called him to repentance. Compare Gods words to Israel, Ps. 95.8.

3. From the Canaanites hardening.
His third Instance is taken from Josh. 11.20. but more irrationally then the
former. For it is said there expressly, the Canaanites hardened their hearts;
which because they could not have done if God had not suffered them, it is
therefore said it was of the Lord: for had he given them a cogent and
irresistible Grace, or destroyed their human nature, their hardening their
heart could not have been. And for God Indurare quem si liberet, emollire
potuistes, est non emollire -- and paulo supetius, roli it Deus in perditis
salvificam vim explic^re. Dallaeus Apol. part. 2. p. 117. In eundem sensum
Augustine. in Epist. 105. ad Sirtum. Idque fatente Calvino Instill. l. 2. c. 4.
Sect. 3. sol. 95.
not to hinder, or not to soften their hearts, which the Text says expressly
they had hardened against Israel, was no more then to permit what they
committed by their option; and this for ends of his providence, that his people
Israel might destroy those wicked Canaanites for their sins, the measure
whereof they had filled up. But besides it must be noted (to show the
impertinence was the greater) that for the Canaanites thus to harden their
hearts against Israel, that is, to oppose and resist them coming to take away
their land, could not be censured as a sin in them, unless they had a
revelation that God had given their land to his People Israel; which as it
appears not in Story (for ought I can learn) so if it does, then Gods revealing
it to them was far from having any hand in the hardening of their hearts: all
he did was not softning what he found obdurate; and not to soften, is not to
have any hand; the negative to that which is affirmed by Mr. Whitfield.

4. From Absalom's defiling his Fathers Concubines.
His fourth Instance is taken from 2 Samuel 12.12. in which he seems to be
unhappier then in all the rest which went before: for observe how he applies
it. [ It is not said, God suffered Absalom to defile his Fathers Concubines,
but he tells David, what thou have done secret, I will do in the sight of this
sun, p. 22.] Now if it is literally meant (as Mr. W. contends) that God did do
the same in public which David had done in private, the blasphemy is such as
cannot modestly be named: for what was that which David did in secret, but his
adultery with Bathshebah? And can it be possibly imagined, that God could do
the same thing openly? yet so run the words, [ what thou have done I will do.]
which undeniably proves, that the words are spoken by an Hebraism (which M.
W. very shortly will be found in the Act of denying) and are permissive only
in sense, though active in sound. For God could not do actively in the sight of
the Sun, what David had done in secret. (That is such a gross and impious
thought as some Heathens conceived of their carnal Jupiter.) And if Mr. W. had
but read unto the end of the Story (which was at the most but the completion
of Gods Prophecy) 2 Samuel 16.22. He would there have found, that it was
Absalom who did what Mr. W. applies to God. A Tent was spread upon the top of
the house, and Absalom went in unto his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all
Israel. This (Reader) is the sin, which Mr. W. urges as an instance,
[vvherein the manner of Gods working is held forth to us by way of action, p.
22.] But not to speak more of the impiety, behold the unskilfulnesse of the
Respondent. I will do this thing (says God to David v. 12.) And what was this
thing? It is expressed (v. 11.) I will raise up evil against thee, that is, the
evil of punishment. I will take thy wives and give them, that is, permit
Absalom to enjoy them. There was not the least need of any more from God,
because Absalom of himself was ready enough to do it, his own Jam. 1.14.
flesh was sufficient to draw him on. And besides his own flesh, he had
Ahithophel at his ear to set him forward (chapter 16. v. 21.) nay both he and
Ahithophel had the Devil at their elbows to urge and tempt them. Frustra fit
per plures quod fieri potest per pauciores.
Was not all this enough to bring the wickedness to pass, but God himself
must be affirmed to have a hand in it, an efficiency in it, to work, to act, to
operate in it, and that as a natural (which is a necessitating) cause? yet by
all these expressions Mr. Wh. does teach us his thoughts of God. I commend one
thing to his consideration. It is acknowledged by him, and by all his party,
that if God withhold or withdraw his Grace from any one of his creatures endued
with reason, the creature is prone of himself to do abundantly evil. Let them
content themselves with that then, and go no farther, until they can imagine
some reason why.

5. From Shimei's cursing David.
His fifth Instance is taken from Gods being said by David to have bid Shimei
curse David, 2 Samuel 16.10, 11. of which I have spoken twice already in print,
and both times largely. First, to Mr. B. in my Defense of the Divine Philan.
chapter 4.. 35. p. 47, 48, 49. And afterward afresh to Dr. Reynolds in my Defense
of the Divine purity, chapter 7.. 8. p. 71, 72. To those two places I referr Mr. W.
and to that which I shall say chapter 2. Sect. 1. Answ. 5. that I may not do like
him, in printing the same book under two Titles, and letting it pass for two
books, when it is indeed but one repeated.

6, 7, 8. From three Texts already answered in equivalence.
So his sixth, seventh, and eighth Instances, from 1 King. 22.22. and Job 1. and
Isa. 63.13. are answered out of the Answers which I have given to the five
instances now immediately preceding, as also out of my Answers to D. Reyn.
chap. 7. Sect. 8. particularly page 69, 70.

9. From the Egyptians hatred of Israel.
His ninth Instance may be referred to the foresaid places, and so indeed may
the rest: but because in the ninth, at least a blind man may stumble, I will
therefore add, That Gods turning the hearts of the Egyptians to hate his
people (Psalm. 105.25.) was his doing that which provoked them to jealousy and
fear: that was first, and from that they Oderint quem metuunt.
naturally turned to hatred. But what was that which God did, which did provoke
them to that jealousy, fear, and hatred? even what was very good (v. 24.) for
he increased his people exceedingly, and made them stronger then their enemies.
He blessed and multiplied his people Israel, for which the envious Egyptians
did fear, and hate, and conspire against them, Exodus 1.9, 10.

10. From God's being said to deceive the Prophet.
His tenth Instance from ( Ezekiel. 14.9.) does ruin the drift for which he brings
it: for as he who loves, teaches, reads, or hears, (in the literal sense
without a figure) must needs be a lover, teacher, reader or hearer; so he who
does deceive without a figure, must without a figure be a deceiver. But because
it is blasphemy to say, that God is really a deceiver, it must needs be
figuratively spoken, and understood by the Hebraism so often mentioned by the
most learned and unquestionable Writers, when it is said in that Text [I the
Lord have deceived him:] what will be thought of Mr. W. who disclaimes the
Hebraism in that and in all the like cases? A word to the wise is here
sufficient; but let him know, that in the judgment of all the Fathers, and by
the granted meaning of other Scriptures, it is apparent that the meaning must
needs be one of these two. Either deceiving is nothing else but Gods permitting
the false Prophet, for his wickedness, to be deceived by the Deceiver, that is,
the Devil; or delivering him up to his own corrupt heart, which is willing of
it self to be deceived, and accordingly it follows in the very next words, [I
will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him.] Or else that of
Grotius may fitly take place. It should be rendered (says he) not, I have
deceived, but, I will deceive him, (viz.) by giving him such an end as he
expects not.

11. From giving up to vile affections.
His eleventh Instance Romans 1.26. is of the same importance with the former
Instances above. By giving up is meant forsaking, Tradere in desideria
significat desertionem. Malanchth. in cap. 9. ad Romans page 132, 133.
no longer calling them from vile affections. See The Sinner impleaded part 1.
chapter 1. p. 9. where Austins Exposition in the Margin is the same with mine.

12. From giving eyes not to see.
His twelfth Instance from Romans 11.8, 9. does only serve him to let us know
that he reads the English Translation only, and mistakes the meaning of the
Translators: for there is no such thing in S. Paul's own words as (...), though
our English Bibles read, [he gave them eyes that they should not see.] It is in
the Greek (...), eyes of not seeing, or not to see, or eyes which see not. The
sense is evidently this, that the major part of the people who made not use of
that grace which God had offered, and resisted Christ when he was preached in
their streets, did grow so obstinately blind (God withdrawing the means so long
resisted, and so much abused,) as to fulfill the prediction of the Prophet Esaias,
chapter 29. v. 10. or at least to parallel the case of which the Prophet there
speaks. And this does farther appear from S. Paul's Psalm. 69.23.
citation of the Psalmist v. 10. Let their eyes be darkened that they may not
see: words spoken by David, not as a Curse, but a Prophecy, that the things
intended for their Verse. 22.
welfare would become their trap. Their very Table (whose proper end was to
refresh and feed them) would by their wickedness be made their Ibid.
snare: And even the preaching of the Gospel (resisted by them) would
accidentally advance their induration. If Mr. W. read the note of Non accidit
haec induratio, nisi interveniente Dei Decreto. Beza in Romans 11.8.
Beza, and also took it by the worst handle, he alone must answer for it.

13. From sending delusion.
His thirteenth Instance from 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. makes me think that his
Concordance is his chief Commentator: for had he compared that Text with the
whole Context (which your Concordance-Preachers seldom do) he had found the
sense to have been this, That because they received not the love of the truth
Mark the Chasm or Ellipsis which must of necessity be thus filled up [Which
truth was offered to the end that they might be saved.]
that they might be saved, (p. 10.) (...), for this cause (or to punish this
wickedness) God will suffer the man of sin (v. 3.) whose coming is after the
working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders (v. 9.) to come
upon them with such advantages of strength and subtilty, as would gain credit
with them, being not wonderfully restrained. God is said to send, what he (
can, but) does not hinder from being sent. We are taught to pray, Lead us not
into temptation, when yet our meaning is, suffer us not to be led, or leave us
not helpless in our temptations, permit us not to be tempted above our
strength, let thy Grace be sufficient for us: and thence it follows, but
deliver us from evil. Thus our Savior may be said to have sent the Devils into
the herd of swine, because when they besought him, he gave way to their prayer;
when they said, Suffer us to go, he answered, Go. Of which the meaning must
needs be this, I suffer you to go; for he granted what they ask't, and they
ask't for sufferance.

14. From the Nations making league with the Romans.
His fourteenth and last Instance from Rev. 17.17. does only proclaim him to be
unqualified for such mysterious parts of Scripture. And I am heartily glad upon
this occasion, that Doctor Hammonds Annotations are writ in English, that the
lowest Reader may discern, how quite beside his own purpose Mr. W. has seized
on that Text also, which is only a prophecy of S. John, foretelling an
eminent and remarkable Act of Gods providence, in that all the nations should
first confederate with the Romans, and yet afterward breaking off should
execute vengeance upon those Romans, and that Alaricus the King of the Goths
and Vandals should so suddenly retire after his conquest and captivity of Rome,
as if he had purposely been sent by the special Providence of God, to destroy
the Idolaters, and preserve the Christians.

Sect. 6.
From all which it is evident, How Mr. W. most groundlesly infers God to fit
still, p. 23. and to be an idle Beholder, p. 26.
that none of those active expressions alleged by Mr. W. (in his 22. page) can
be pretended to denote Gods working in sin; more then his punishing of it does
(which yet is active) when he casts the sinner into hell. The consequent to
which is the sinners continuance to all eternity in his sins. Nor does it
follovv (what he says p. 23.) that if God has no manner of working in sin,
See more of this subject Sect. 17, 18, 19.
he sits still as a spectator. For he is working in diverse respects; as by the
motions of his Spirit dissuading from sin, and also by his word, both writ and
preached. Again he is working in overruling, ordering, and disposing sins
committed to many excellent advantages, to which he is able by his wisdom to
make them serve. But all this is nothing to his active working in sin, or his
having a hand in it, (as Mr. W. phraseth it) but on the contrary, it shows that
he has no hand in it: for overruling sins to good, suppo^eth them committed,
and when it is said (as it is commonly) that God draws good out of evil, the
meaning is, (not that he makes it to be good in one respect, which is evil in
another, as such men dream, but) that upon man's doing evil he takes an
occasion of doing good: such was the saving of the world upon occasion of that
murder which* the wicked ones committed in killing-Christ. And as good things
are made an occasion of evil, yet are not evil, (as I lately showed) so are
evil things made an occasion of good, yet are not good: which some men not
descerning, are betrayed into the worst and uncleannest speeches; as, that
adultery, or murder, as it is the work of God, its Author, mover, and impeller,
is no sin at all, but only as it is of man: which though the saying of
Zuinglius, a great Master of those men, yet it is abetted and approved by Doctor
Twisse in particular; and in particular by Mr. Barlee, and aequivalently by Mr.
Whitfield also. If any others of their way shall renounce the Doctrine, let
them do it in print, and then the World will forgive them. Having showed that
God is no idle spectator, (as the brethren do both speak) because he restrains
from sin, and (when he suffers it) does overrule it (as has been showed) and
does also note it in his book (as the Prophets speak) and does satisfy his
justice in the punishment of sin, as well as exercise his mercy in forgiving it
to the contrite and penitent sinner, and gives the continuance of a Being unto
his creature, by whose free will the sin is made; I will add this little, that
it were much a lesser evil in Mr. W. and his partners, to say that God sits
still as a spectator only; then to asperse him with a working and activity in
sin: for as to the commission of the sin it self, God is truly a mere
spectator. The Sinners sole will determines it self unto the Sin.

CHAP. II. Of Mr. W's Attempts to help Mr. B. by replying a few things to the
Divine Philanthropie defended, which now at last he does particularly consider,
and not till now.
Sect. 1.
TO such Texts of Scripture as are literally taken by that sort of men, Mr. W.
begins with the end of that book, to which his Title Page pretended a Reply.
who do not only take the boldness to bear false witness against God, by
charging his Majesty with having a high hand in sin, but most lewdly also do
endeavor to make him bear false witness against himself, I did amongst many
other things (which Mr. Whitfield studiously omitteth, that he may speak to
that only which he thinks is least above his strength,) afford my Correptory
Corrector this short note of Instruction,

Divine Philanth. defended, c. 4. p. 48.
That by a common Hebraism, such verbs as are active in sound, are only
permissive in signification: by the admission of which Rule, those horrible
absurdities would be avoided, and Scripture expounded (...).

To which part of my Answer, M. W 's wonderful reply in behalf of M. B.
Mr. Wh. adventures this sad Reply. This he dictates, but does not demonstrate,
nor bring the least patch of an Argument to prove it, neither will all his
skill in the Hebrew enable him to do it. And may he not by this shift evade the
cleerest and strongest Scriptures that are brought against him, by telling us
that they signify quite another thing then the nature of the words does
import, if we will believe him? 2. Why may he not then interpret other
Scriptures in the like manner, where the like expressions are used; as when the
Lord says, I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create
evil, Isa. 45.7. I have made the earth, and created man upon it, my hands
spread out the heavens, Psalm. 12? Why may we not by Mr. P. his Hebraismes,
interpret these verbs that are active in sound to be permissive only in
signification, and say that God has permitted light and darkness to be
created, and suffered the earth to be made, and the heavens to be spread out?
p. 23.]

How many ways Mr. Wh. has uncovered himself in these words before the face
of all people, I could never have showed, if himself had not made it thus
needful for me; which I beseech his best friends to carry always in their
minds, that they may not accuse me of severity in any one of the particulars
which now ensue.

His great unskilfulness in the things of a Divine.
First he uncovers his no-acquaintance, not only with the Hebrew, but with the
plain Quod autem in Scripturis legitur, Indurabo cor; item Tradidit eos in
capiditates, and similia; haec figura sermonis facile potest explicari, si quis
observet naturam Hebraici sermonis: certum est enim has figuras habere
significationem permittendi. Melanchth. in Comment. in c. 9. ad Romans fol. 132.
edit. Argentorati A. D. 1536. spanhemius and Dallaeus huc accedunt.
Latin Writers by whom the Idiotismes of Hebrew have been observed. How else
could he complain that I did not demonstrate the Sun at Noon? I expected that
Laymen should believe me as a Divine, in setting down that as a granted Rule;
and that Divines should receive it upon their knowledge that it was true. But
'twas my fault not to remember that of the Clergy, as well as Laity, there are
several sorts; and that many of the former are very ignorant, whereas many of
the later have perfect knowledge. Be it so, that Mr. P. has but a little skill
in Hebrew, (who yet has more then Mr. Wh. if he has none) yet if any man
living, sure Hugo Grotius had a great deal. And Grotius his Decepisti, i. e.
sivisti decipi. Saepe enim apud Hebraeos, verba sono activa, significatu
passiva sunt. Grot. in Jer. c. 4. v. 10.
Annotations are guided much by that Rule. Nec figurae illae verborum in
sermon Hebraico pugnant cum sententia quam dixi, Indurabo cor Pharaonis, and
sim^les: certum est enim, Hebraica phrasi significare eas permissionem, non
voluntatem efficacem: Mel. in loc. de causa pecc. p. 49.
Melanchthon (I am sure) was a great that Rule. It shall suffice me to say that
in my Answer to Doctor Reynolds (chapter 7. p. 67, 68, etc.) I have proved the use
of this Rule in the interpretation of such Texts, by the verdict of all the
Fathers, by that of S. Austin in particular, by the exact Bishop Andrews, nay
by the public acknowledgments of the most skilful Hebreicians of Mr. Wh's own
party, even Philippes de Morney, and Peter the Calvinist of Florence. I farther
proved it by Scriptures agreed upon by all the World to be only capable of
that construction. All which if Mr. W. did never see, nor what I said to Div.
Philan. c. 1. p. 23.24. chapter 4. a p. 37. ad finem usque.
Mr. Barlee, I am not guilty of his omissions. And if he really did see, but
made as if he did not, it is a commission he must repent of. Here lies the
wonderful (...) of this shrewd undertaker. Once I mentioned and only mentioned
the abovesaid Hebraism, but in diverse places I fully proved it; Mr. Wh. finding
the naked mention, cries out I dictate, but do not prove; but Note that my
proof was in the first chapter (p. 23, 24.) my naked mention in the fourth, (p.
48.) so as he passed by the first, before he fell upon the second.
finding also my ample proof, of that he wisely makes no mention. From whence
we may rationally infer, that all the fault was in his Will, and not ( this
bout) in his Understanding.

Secondly, He uncovers his months mind to the literal sense of those Texts,
His frightful adherence unto the letter:
which say (according to the letter) that God did 2 Samuel 16.10.
bid Shimei curse David, which was to do wickedly, and Ezekiel. 20.26.
polluted the people in their own gifts, and 2 Samuel 13.11, 12.
raised up evil, and Ezekiel. 14.9.
deceived, and Jer. 35.1, 2, 3, 4.
tempted, and Isa 63.6.
made men drunk; which (according to the letter) do seem to charge God with the
efficiency of sin. And yet (says Mr. Wh.) such verbs as those must be
actively, not permissively, understood; for this (he tells us) is a shift, by
which a man may evade the cleerest Scriptures, by telling us that they signify
quite another thing then the nature of the words does import. So unwilling is
the old Ephesians. 4.22.
man (as the Apostle speaks) that God should be cleared from all impurity, and
the word of God rescued from blasphemous contradictions, that he will rather
reproach the ancient Fathers of the Church, as well as the modern upholders of
it, with ridiculous shifts and evasions, then submit to the judgment of common
sense. For says not the Scripture in other places, that God is of Habak. 1.13.
purer eyes then to behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity; and will have Ps.
94.20.
nothing to do with the stool of wickedness; and who is not a God that has
Psalm. 5.4.
pleasure in wickedness; and that all his works are Genesis 1.31.
very good; and that sin by one Romans 5.12.
man entered into the world; and that all the wickedness in the world, the lust
of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, 1 John 2.16
is not of the Father, but of the world; and that Jam. 1.13.14.
God tempts no man: that he Isa. 1.14.
cannot endure sin, and hates it, and is ibid. and M^l. 2.17.
weary to bear it; and all things which may express, not only his perfect
unwillingness to be dishonored by sin, but his utmost Zechar. 8.17.
hatred and detestation? Now when two sorts of Scripture do contradict each
other (...), in respect of the surface and letter of them, there must be a way
to reconcile them, or they will not be thought to be every where true, nor by
consequence the 1 Timothy 3.15.
word of God. They cannot be otherwise reconciled, then by taking one of the
two in a Note, M. W. himself conf^sseth, ^. 48. that some Texts would
contradict each other if literally taken.
figurative sense, and so the reconcilement is very easy. Now whether the
figurative speaking is in the first sort of Texts, which do seemingly and
literally asperse the goodness of our God, or in the second fort of Texts,
which do really and plainly clear the goodness of God from all aspersions, let
the Reader judge betwixt me and Mr. Whitfield. Nay Mr. Barlee himself, although
he sometimes judges on Mr. W's side (as in his See Divine Philanthr. chapter 1. p.
24, 25.
Correptory Correction, p. 69.) yet at last he is forced to judge against it:
for he says in plain terms (as I lately observed) in this his last print, [
that God according to the letter of many Texts seems to be made a moral cause
of sin as sin, chapter 3. p. 55.] so that Mr. W. and Mr. B. are as much at odds in
their very conspiracy and conjunction against a third person, as Mr. B. is at
odds with his dearest self.

His overthrowing his own interest in other cases.
Thirdly, If M. W. admits of Hebraisms in any parts of Scripture, much more must
he do it in those we now speak of; where if they are not admitted, the
inconvenience will be greater then any where else. But no doubt in some parts
he will not dare not to admit them, for fear of being censured a direct enemy
to Christ, and to take part with the Socinians, nay (which is worse) with such
as Julian, and the profane Helvidius. For how many prophesies of Christ are
read by us in the Preterperfect Tense, the Hebrew Idiotism being retained in
the English by our Translators? Isa. 9.6. there are two Hebraisms at once,
which no creature can deny who does acknowledge that Text to have a prospect
upon Christ: [unto us a child is born] for [unto us a child shall be born.] And
when the Jews object (as they do often) that Christ's name was Jesus, not
wonderful, counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace; which yet (according to the letter) is affirmed to be the name by which
he should be called who is there spoken of ( Isa. 9.6.) what can Mr. W. allege
for himself, unless he mind them of the most vulgar Hebraism, by which the
Name is put to signify the Being? A man is said by the Hebrews to be called
thus and thus, to whom such titles and epithets do well agree. So Cited from
Isa. 7.14.
Mat. 1.23. [They shall call his name Emmanuel] would be literally truer of the
Isa. 8.3. compared with verse. 8.
child of the Prophetess given to Ahaz for a sign, then of Jesus Christ the son
of Mary, which yet according to the Hebraism is truer of Christ then of that
child. Again, if our Greek copies of S. Mark did read (...), Mar. 3.29. (as
well they may, because the ancient Manuscrip^s were found to do so, and out of
them the vulgar Latin) what other reason could be rendered for our translating
the words thus [in danger of eternal damnation] rather then [in danger of
eternal sin] but that sin, by an Hebraism, is set to signify the punishment of
sin? Nay, it is much more probable (in the judgment of Grotius) that S. Mark
himself writ (...) [of sin] and that (...) [ of judgment or condemnation] was
nothing else but Interpretamentum Hebraismi, the Exposition of that Hebraism
which was used by S. Mark, who is known by all to have been an Hellenistick
Writer; I say, by all, excepting such as Mr. W. who complains of hard words in
a most plain English Writer. Again, if Helvidius his three objections (from
Mat. 1. verse. 18. and verse. 25.) against the Virgin Mary's being (...), (as the
Greek Fathers are wont to call her,) a perpetual Virgin, should be urged by
some Helvidian against Mr. W. he would be thankful to that man who should help
him to answer unto the third, that there were three (...) among the Hebrews,
the Principality, the Priesthood, and the right of Inheritance, which were all
the privileges of the firstborn, and in respect of which our blessed Savior
was so called. How much gladder should he be, to understand such Texts by the
common Hebraism, whose literal acception is of so dangerous importance as has
been showed, if he did not [(...)] live in vassalage to an opinion, which
cannot otherwise be defended, then by making God to have a hand in sin?

He is convin^ed by that which he cannot but confess.
Fourthly, M. W. cannot but confess, that the verb sino is an active, that is
to say, of the active voice, and yet its signification is only passive, for it
only signifies to suffer. And when the Devils besought our Savior, [ Mat.
8.31.
suffer us to enter] they did not command him, but begged his leave, although
they spoke in the Imperative or commanding mood. Our Savior said to the
Haemorrhois ( Mat. 9.22.) Thy faith has made thee whole: which was not
literally, but figuratively true. S. Peter's words to Aeneas were not
figuratively, but literally true, [ Act. 9.34.
Jesus Christ makes thee whole:] and if Christ healed the later, much more
evidently the former. Thus when we are said to be justified by Gal. 3.24.
Faith (in S. Paul's phrase) and by Jam. 21. and 24.
works (in S. James) neither is literally true, without the help of a
distinction or explication; for in exact propriety of speech, we are justified
by Romans 8.33.
God, and by God alone. And Mr. W. might have known, that there is nothing more
common in the opening of Texts, then to distinguish the literal from the
rational importance.

The mischiefs which ensue upon his way of exposition.
Fifthly, Whereas Mr. W. alleges, [ that the c^earest Scriptures may be evaded
by this shift, etc.] I will show him by some instances what kind of mischiefs
have ensued by his way of apprehending those Texts of Scripture, whose Hebraism
he slanders with the name of shift. One of his own examples is (p. 22.) David's
saying of wicked Shimei, that the Lord had 2 Samuel 16.10, 11.
bid him to curse his Sovereign, quite contrary to that which the Lord had
commanded, [ Exodus 22.28. compared with Jer. 19.5.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people.] nay Shimei
being penitent 2 Samuel 19.20. Quomodo dixit Dominus Semei maledicere David* non
jubendo, etc. Austin. degra and lib. arbit. c ^0.
confessed his sin a little after. In this case, say I, either David was
mistaken, (as well he might be who could commit such scarlet sins) and thought
that Shimei might really be sent by God in that message (as Nathan before chapter
12.) to pronounce that curse which David confessedly had deserved; and in
particular cases, it is manifest that God can dispense with his precepts to the
sons of men, who yet must never pretend to any such dispensation, unless they
can prove it to us by miracles, and show that the counter-precept was revealed
to them from Heaven, which till then must be concluded to have been sent up
from Hell: else any man may say, that God has commanded him to kill, as well
as to curse the Rule of his people, or whatever else is forbidden. But Shimei
had nothing to show for it, nay he had afterward something to show against it.
And therefore if David was not mistaken, he must needs have spoken by an
Hebraism; it being impossible that David should be an absolute Reprobatarian,
and so imagine that God could bid a man sin. God could have sent a curse to
David for his sins, by what Messenger he had pleased, as well by Shimei as by
Nathan; but then that curse had been Gods, and not his Messengers. Shimei could
not have sinned in the delivering of his message, whilst he did as God bid
him: yet it is apparent by the Text, that Shimei sinned against Gods Precept,
Exodus 22.28. From whence it follows unvoidably, that the words of David are
only permissive in signification, though active in sound. Nay this (says
irrefragable Melanchthou) is the true Haec est ve^a Grammatica interpretatio,
and nihil habet absurdi: Tradere in desideria significat desertionem: Deus
deserit impins, and sinit^eo^ furere, and non cohibet eorum furorem. Indurabo,
id est, sinam indurari, non flectam impii cordis duritiem. Melanchth. in cap.
9. ad Romans sol. 133.
Grammatical interpretation of such Scriptures, and has nothing in it of
absurd; because the most active expressions imaginable do by an ordinary figure
only signify desertion, and sufferance, a not restraining of men's fury, and a
not turning of their hearts. But alas! Melanchthon was a poor shifter to Mr.
Whitfield. He was only admired for his learning and holiness, by the most
learned and the most holy of the Christian world; he was courted and consulted
by no greater persons then Kings and Princes: whereas Mr. W. is obliging the
greatest Emperor of the East, and in a zealous contention for the Mahumetan
Decree, confutes Melanchthon and his Hebraisme, and all the Pillars of the
Church, (both ancient and modern) with the least puff of his breath. [By this
shift the clearest Scriptures may be evaded.] Mr. W. and the Scottish brethren,
and James Naylors worshippers, and Andrew Smith, with Coppinger, Artington, and
the rest, are for a literal understanding of Gods bidding Shimei to curse King
David. God did not only permit, but was active and operative and efficacious
in the villainy, say these Expounders: nay, decreed it absolutely (say they)
from all etermity, antecedently to his praescience of Shimei's will. And in
conformity to these dreams, Coppinger said he was commanded by the Spirit of
God to murder the Privy Counselors of Queen Elizabeth: a second had a call to
slay the Ministers: and a third, who could not write or read, was to be the
executioner of the Lords most holy will. ( Dang. Posit. l. 4. c. 10. p. 164.)
The same command was alleged by them who adored James Naylor: and when Andrew
Smith, at prayer time, had stabbed the Quartermaster Farley in Farfar Church,
he very seriously protested, that Christ commanded him to do it. Mr. Egerton
was a Minister of no small note in the Presbytery, to whom when Coppinger had
revealed his extraordinary call to execute vengeance upon the Magistrates, Mr.
Egerton would not discourage him in his intentions: To use his own words, Dang.
Posit. l. 4. chapter 14. p. 174.
[ he would not hinder the zeal of Coppinger, and should be loath to quench the
Spirit of God in him.] Again, the Ministers of the Kirk, when they had caused
the people to take up arms against the Exodus 22.28.
Ruler of the People, said they were Spots. Hist. Scot. l. 2. p. 330, 331.
moved thereunto by the Spirit of God, (without the shift of an Hebraism, you
may be sure.) I know not whether Eldavid was brought up in the Doctrine of
irrespective Decrees; but of this I am sure, that when he gave himself out to
be the forerunner of the Messiah, he said he did it (without an Hebraism) by
the Sea The self-Revenger Exempl. chapter 1. p. 3, 4.
commandment of God. The time would fail me, if I should speak of all the
Impostors whom I have met with, from Numa Pompilius to Mahomed, and so
downwards, who did all pretend (without an Hebraism) to a secret revelation of
Gods command. I will conclude with one instance, which (in several pertinent
respects) will be as good as a thousand; and which having touched upon
elsewhere for another purpose, I shall exhibit more fully, and with a new
application. This Story is to be had either in Knox his Hist. of the Church of
Scotl. p. 143, 144, 145 or in Bish. B acrests: Dang. Pos. l. 4. chapter 15. p. 177,
178.
Norman Lesly (who was son to the Earl of Rothsey) had fallen out with the
Cardinal who was withal the Archbishop of S. Andrews, upon a private cause
(faith Buchanan) between them two. He, together with James Melvin, and Peter
Carmichael (zealous Reformers of Religion in the Kingdom of Scotland) forcibly
brake into the Castle, and into the chamber of the said Cardinal; where they
found him sitting in his chair, and crying out in these words, [I am a Priest,
ye will not slay me?] Lesly struck him once or twice, and so did Peter. But
Melvin (sweet man!) perceiving them both to be in choler, (and being himself in
cold blood) withdrew them from their temerity, which he reproved in these
words: [This work and judgment of God, although it be secret, ought to be done
with great gravity.] and then presenting to the Archbishop the point of his
sword, he preached thus; [ Repent thee of thy former wickedness, etc. -- Note
that the Historian is Mr. Knox, who calls this Murder, the work of God; and
writes in his margin, The Godly Fact and words of James Melvin.
we from God are sent to revenge it: for here before God I protest, that
neither the hatred of thy person, nor love of thy riches, moves me to strike
thee, but only thy being an enemy against Jesus Christ and his holy Gospel.]
Having so preached, he fell to practice; first running him through several
times with a Stog-sword (to show it was not any hatred of hi^ person) and then
seizing on all his Goods, Plate, and Jewels, (to show it was not any love to
his Riches.)

Let it now be but remembered, how the men of Mr. Knox and Mr. Melvin's way do
distinguish of Gods secret and revealed Will, what they acknowledge themselves
to mean by that distinction, and in what manner they do apply it, and how
without any Hebraism they understand such Texts of which I am speaking; let
this, I say, be remembered by the considering Reader, and then he has met with
the Application.

Sixthly, 6. Mr. W's. Masters commit contradictions by not observing the
Hebraism.
For want of using the said Hebraism in giving the sense of such Texts whose
letter seems to make God to be the Author of sin (as Mr. Barlee says, c. 3. p.
55.) it is wonderful to behold, into how many absurdities, and civil wars, the
Commanders in Chief of that party have unawares betrayed themselves. Piscator
in Resp. ad duplic. Vorst. par. i. p. 325. and in praefat. enuntiato 6.
Piscator flatly denies, that God does will whatsoever he commands; and yet he
flatly confesses, we ought to grant and believe, that God will have to be done
by us whatsoever he commands, and to be omitted by us what he forbids. Again,
Doctor Twisse, although he says in Twiss. Vin. Gr. l. 1. part. 1. Digr. 10. c.
1. sect. 12. p. 140.
some places, that Gods secret will may be contrary to his precept or revealed
will, which is improperly called his will; yet he says in other places, that
God must need; will whatsoever he commands: for thus he argues, [ Idem l. 2.
advers. Arm. C^im. 3. sect. 5. p. 150. Col. 2.
God cannot be denied to have willed that Shimei should cu^se David, because
the Scripture professes that God commanded Shimei to curse him.] But now
Spanhemius, of the same party (and as eminent as either) does wholly deny what
is granted (and also denied) by those two; saying positively, that Spanhemius
in Exercitat. de Great. univers. p. 147.
God does sometimes command what yet he wills not that it should be done:
adding this for an instance, that they who never shall repent, are yet
commanded by God to do what God intends they never shall do. Lastly, Dallaeus,
at least as learned as either of them, and a professed Anti-Arminian, confutes
all Three in a most excellent manner; and Non possum non admirati duos illos
summos viros propositionem hanc, Deus ea vult quae jubet, qua eae quae ipsis
probantur argumentationes totae nituntur, alibi fortiter negare. Dal. Apol. pro
duab. synod. part. 2.104.
admires at the two former, that men of their learning should abjure in some
places, what at other times and places they make the Basis of their reasonings,
viz. That God does will what he commands. What should be the reason of such
enormities? They could not think it a fine thing for Brethren to be at odds,
nor did they purposely study for self-contradictions. Why then did they run
such deadly Risques? It was sure because they could not help it. When they had
swallowed the great Camel, they could not strain at such Gnats. When a man
begins in irrespective unconditional Decrees, he cannot possibly foresee at
what absurdity he shall end. Dato hoc uno sequuntur mill. And Dallaeus his
ingenuity in leaving his brethren when they leave reason.
therefore Dallaeus was so ingenuous as to acknowledge, what a man of his
judgment could not but know, that all those Actives above mentioned must be
explained by Deus voluit indurare, id est, non-^mollire Pharaonem. Ibid. p.
118. In eundem senfum Polanus Partit. Theolog. l. 1. p 75, 76.
permission. He farther adds this observation, That the Hebrew (...) which is
the word expressing the Induration of Pharaoh's heart, (Deuteronomy. 29.4.) is of that
conjugation which is commonly called Hiphil; and verbs of that conjugation, by
the Sunt interdum (...), sive (...) potius quam (...), verba hujus generis.
Sp^n. Exerc. p. 214.
confession of Spanhemius (a prime Author with Mr. W.) are many times rather
privative then positive. So that when it is said, God hardened the heart of
Pharaoh, the meaning is, he did not soften it, but permitted it to it self. I
hope Mr. W. will not say, that the Orthodox Preacher at Charenton is a shifter,
much less his admired Professor at Leyden, whom the Preacher at Charenton has
well confuted.

Seventhly, Mr. W. makes Light to be sin, or Absalom 's filthiness to be none,
by making a parity of Gods working in either case.
Mr. W's greatest unhappiness i^ in the second part of his Answer before
recited. Mark his words, good Reader: [ Why may we not then interpret other
Scriptures in the like manner, where the like expressions are used? as when the
Lord says, I form the light, I create darkness, Isa. 45.7. I have made the
earth, and created man upon it, my hands spread out the heavens, Psalm. 12. Why
may we not by Mr. P. his Hebraisms, interpret these verbs which are active in
sound, to be permissive only in signification, and say that God permitted
light and darkness to be created, and suffered the earth to be made, etc? p.
23] I have thus recorded his words in the seventh part of my Answer, though I
had set them down in the beginning of the Section, because they are the most
memorable I ever met with, and are alone sufficient to make a penitent Author
of Mr. W. For, first, I demand of his dearest Friends and Partisans (who will
certainly condemn him for this adventure, in whatever else they may excuse him)
Is the case the same in those other Texts and these? Is Light a sin? Or is it
no sin to be hard-hearted, to defile the Concubines of a Father, to curse the
Ruler of the people, and the like? The Texts expounded by an Hebraism, were
such as I spoke to in the fifth Section of the former Chapter, which to take
according to the Letter, is adjudged by Mr. Balee to be an impious Fact, if it
is an impious Fact to asperse God with the causality of sin as sin. But when it
is said, God formed the light, and created darkness, it cannot be pretended
that the literal acception of the words does so much as seem to make God the
Author of sin. I therefore challenge Mr. Whitfield to publish his reasons for
his pretended parity of Reason, by which he has publicly affirmed, we may
interpret Gods creating of light and darkness, of his permission to create
them, as well as his hardening Pharaoh's heart, and his deceiving the false
Prophets, of his permission and not hindering, that the former should be
hardened, and the later deceived.] If he has no reason to give (and sure if he
had we should here have heard of it) I then require him, in the name of God, to
take off the scandal which he has given to many credulous souls for whom
Christ died. Let him either declare it to be his Doctrine, that God had as
really an hand in Shimei's cursing his King, in Absalom's polluting his Fathers
Concubines, in the Egyptians hatred of his Israel, in sending strong delusion,
in putting it into the hearts of the ten Kings to do wickedly, (as he
interprets the Text Rev. 17.17) and as really an hand in Pharaoh's obduration,
as in creating the light and the darkness, in making the earth, and in
spreading out the heavens; or if he dares not declare this, then let him print
his confession (to adequate the Plaster unto the wound) that he only spoke
out of his stomach, and not out of his reason, because he was resolved to
contradict my Answer to Mr. Barlee, and knew not how to do it better. He could
not be otherwise revenged on me, then by venting himself against the Scripture:
wherein he conjectured very truly, if he took that course to make me smart;
because there is nothing so grievous to me, as to find a professor of
Christianity to turn Gods word against the holiness of his will. But whilst I
pray for his amendment, I will necessitate his confession, or confusion of
Face, and that by this following violentum, by which in the person of a Jew, or
rather of an Atheist, I will turn his weapon upon himself. Secondly, therefore
let us imagine, that Mr. Whitfield is to defend the two Natures of Christ,
Divine and Humane, against the personated Atheist, who shall thus object
against them both.

Ath. That which is really a Tree cannot be really a Man, Mr. W. beaten with
his own weapons by any Atheist who shall oppose him.
much less really a God: But Christ is really a Tree. And thus I prove it. That
which is a true Vine (not a fictitious one) is very really a Tree* But the
Scripture says plainly, that Christ is a Vine (Joh. 5.5.) nay a True Vine (v.
1.) Therefore Christ is really a Tree.

Mr. Wh. Those words of Scripture are only spoken by a figure, and
parabolically, which amongst the Hebrews was an usual way of expression. Christ
did only represent his relation to his members by that which is seen betwixt
the Vine and its Branches.

Ath. This indeed you dictate, The Atheist replies in Mr. W's. own words, p. 23.
but not demonstrate; nor do you bring the least patch of an Argument to prove
it. And may you not by this shift evade the clearest and strongest Scriptures
when brought against you, by telling us they signify quite another thing then
the nature of the words do import, if we will believe you?

Mr. W. I tell you Christ was a Jew, amongst whom it was common to deliver
themselves in Parables, as you may see throughout the Old Testament as well as
New. And indeed all Nations have used Apologues and Tropes, not only to
signify, but to imprint their minds upon the hearers.

Ath. Why may we not then interpret other Scriptures in the like manner, The
Athest replies in Mr. W's own words, p. 23.
where the like expressions are used? as when the Lord says, I and my Father
are one, Joh. 10.30. Or when the Scripture says that Christ said, I am the
true Vine, why may we not say that the Scripture speaks by a Parable, and
brings in Christ speaking by a Prosopopoeia, as diverse Authors of Mythology do
make Dialogues and Discourses betwixt Trees and Rivers? For how can a True Vine
speak indeed, and say, I am a True Vine?

Mr. W. But it is granted by all story, as well secular as sacred, and by men of
all Religions, as well false as true, that Christ did truly speak and teach in
the Synagogues of the Jews, and in many other both public and private places.

Ath. That does only infer, that Christ was a speaking and didactical Tree,
not that he was not a Tree at all; for if he really spoke, this was one of his
real speeches, That he said he was a True Vine. Had he said only a Vine, you
might have said he only meant he was a Figurative Vine: But to anticipate that
evasion, he said, I am the True Vine. And as when it is said, [ God hardened
Pharaohs heart, The Atheist replies in Mr. W's own words, p. 22.
deceived the false Prophet, and the like, the Scripture does hold forth the
manner of Gods working in sin by way of Action;] so when it is said, that
Christ said, I am the true Vine, the Scripture does hold it forth by a verb
substantive, which denotes existence, and not Phraseology. As Again Mr. W's.
own words, p. 22.
it is not said, God suffered Pharaoh to harden his own heart, but that God
hardened it, Exodus 9.12. so it is not said, I am a metaphorical Vine, or I am
called, or accounted, or compared to a Vine, but I am the true Vine, Joh. 15.1.

Mr. Wh. But how can those words be literally meant, which infer such an
absurd and unintelligible thing, as that a Tree should be rational, and yet a
Tree still? This implies a contradiction, for Christ to go about doing good, by
preaching, healing, and exemplary life, and yet to be a True Vine in the
literal notion of the word.

Ath. But that which the Scripture plainly, clearly, The Atheist replies in Mr.
W's own words, p. 19.
and positively asserteth, you ought not to deny, though you cannot discern the
manner how it can be; It rather beseems you humbly to acknowledge your ignorance
in apprehending the manner, then to deny the thing.

Let the Reader now judge, whether the Atheist in this Dialogue has not
replied to Mr. W. as much like a Disputant, as Mr. W. has done to me. Nay,
whether there is not this difference betwixt the two cases, that it is much a
lesser evil, to say that Christ is a Vine without a Figure, then to say that
God without a Figure did harden Pharaoh's heart, and will that Absalom should
do filthily against his Father, and Maledicere Davidi actus est malus, a
pietate, and charitate, adeoque and a Dei voluntate alienus. Dallaeus Apol.
part. 2. p. 103.
bid Shimei curse David, and deceive the Prophet, and the like. Again, it was
said by our Savior, I am the true Vine; but it was never said in Scripture,
that God was a true hardener of Pharaoh's heart, or that he did truly deceive
the Prophet.

Eighthly, Since Mr. W. asks, 8. Mr. W. condemned out of his own mouth.
[why may we not interpret ^ther Scriptures in the like manner, etc.] to which
I have given at least a satisfactory Answer, and showed him the wofulness of
his Question by an Argument ad hominem, and since he jeers me with my Hebraisms
(which yet are his Masters as well as mine;) I will now proceed to justify my
self, and to condemn him out of his mouth. For when he comes to deny Universal
Redemption, and to resist the Scriptures which are point blank against him, he
is then so gracious as to use these words; Scripture must be interpre^ed by
Scripture: and though we are not to recede from the literal sense when it will
agree with other Scriptures, and with the Analogy of Faith; yet when it is
defective both these ways, we are not bound to adhere to the Letter, p. 72.
Very good: I thank Mr. W. for this justice, in the dispensing of which he does
not spare his own self. For if the words of Saint He is the propitiation for
our sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 2.2.
John were two ways defective as to the Letter, as neither agreeable with
other Scriptures, nor with the Analogy of Faith, (as Mr. W. liberally dictates)
how can all those Texts whose Letter seems to make God the cause of sin as sin
(says Mr. Barlee) be either agreeable to other Texts, or to the Analogy of
Faith? Are any Scriptures inconsistent with the words of Saint John in the
Letter? not one in any appearance; but all on the contrary do sound the same
way. Or with what Analogy of Faith are Saint John's words unagreeable? even the
Faith of Mr. W. and them of his Creed. But I have See the second thing replied
in this Section.
proved by examples, that the Letter of those Scriptures which are cited by Mr.
W. to prove that God has a hand in sin, are inconsistent with those others by
which God is affirmed to have no hand in sin; nor can it agree with the Analogy
of any Faith but Mr. Whitfields. If the Letter of the Scripture may be two ways
defective, (as Mr. W. tells us it may) where is it likely so to be, if not in
the places of which we speak, since nothing is dearer to God Almighty, then the
inviolable honor of his Purity and his Truth? And if we are not bound always
to adhere unto the Letter (as Mr. W. also grants, to serve his ends) why does
he hold himself to it where it is most to be forsaken? because it is more for
his turn, that God should be operative and active in all the wickedness in the
world, then that Christ should die for all mankind? If that is not his reason,
let him tell me what is. And if that is his reason, we know the length of his
foot. Judge (good Reader) of this man's Doctrines.

9. Again, 9. How Scripture interprets Scripture against Mr. W.
if Scripture must interpret Scripture (as Mr. W. also does acknowledge) I
desire no more to prove my Hebraism. For all those Scriptures of Gods hardening
Pharaoh, bidding Shimei curse David, delivering up to vile affections, sending
delusion, and the like, receive the same interpretation (which I have given)
from the words of S. Paul (which are also Scripture) who told the People of
Lycaonia, that [ God in times past Act. 14.16. which compare with Act. 17.30.
Romans 2.4. 1 Cor. 10.13. 1 Pet. 3.22. Exodus 34.6. Act. 13.18.
suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways.] Their wicked ways were
wholly their own, and they alone did walk in them without Gods help: he gave
them their being, life, and motion, which were very good things, but he had not
the least hand in the determination of their wills to wickedness, or their
consenting to their temptations; he only suffered them with patience to walk
in the ways which they had Isa. 66.3.
chosen, to wit, their own ways, which were called their own, because they
chose them. And here it is fit that I meet again with Mr. W. For as he said (p.
22.) that it was not said, God suffered Pharaoh to harden his own heart, but
that God hardened it; so here I say on the other side, it was not said by S.
Paul, God excited, or commanded, or decreed all nations to walk in their own
ways, but that he suffered them to do it. Come we then to a trial of Scripture
by Scripture, which to do for the benefit of common people (whom I am sure in
my writings I most consider) I will compare 2. Scriptures, by placing one on the
right hand, another on the left; that men may see so much the better, which of
the two must be the Rule, by which the other is to be guided; which the
Touchstone, by which the other is to be tried; which the Standard, with which
the other is to comply.

Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their
own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves, Romans 1.24. For
this cause, God gave them up to vile affections, v. 26. God in times past
suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16. He endured with
much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, Romans 9.2.
(that is, fitted by themselves, by those their sins, which God endured or
suffered.)

They are both the sayings of S. Paul, as well the Active on the left hand, as
the Passive on the right. By which of the two, which of the two must be
expounded? when God is said to have given up to uncleanness, is it not only
meant that he sufferd them to be unclean? or when he is said to have suffered
them to walk in their own ways, is it also meant that he had a Note that p.
26. Mr. W. says of sin, that God does both will and work it, and has a hand
in effecting it.
hand and efficiency (to use the phrases of Mr. W.) in such their doings? Res
ipsa loquitur, The Case it self speaks it self. For, first, the uncleanness,
and vile affections, were the uncleannest and vilest that can be thought on:
and how could God have a * working or * active hand in such villainies, more
vile then which the Devil himself cannot invent? Secondly, They were before
habituated in the practice of their uncleanness, and that is rendered for the
reason why God gave them up: These are also M. W's expressions.
as appears by the wherefore v. 24. and for this cause v. 26. But what sense is
it to say, that God did actively and operatively give them up to filthy habits,
to which they had given up themselves too long before? or admit they had not,
yet what madness is it to say, that because their tempter and their own hearts
had made them admirably wicked, God should therefore be active to make them
worse? Thirdly, There is Note, I mean the conf ssion of M. W's Teachers, who
know any thing of those matters; not of himself, who has printed either his
ignorance that there is any such thing, or at least the dissimulation of his
knowledge.
confessedly an Hebraism, by which actives in sound are permissives in
signification; but no such Hebraism, or other figure, by which passives in
sound are actives in sense. Fourthly, For God to suffer or endure the sins of
men is exactly agreeable to the Analogy of Faith; but to will and work sin, or
to have an hand in the effecting of it (as M. W's words are) is according to
the Analogy of what is worse then infidelity. From all which it is apparent,
that the Scripture in the left Column must be interpreted by that in the right.
And now I will add some more Examples.

1. If the Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have
That is, I have permitted him to be deceived: or (as Grotius) I will deceive
him by giving him such an end as he expects not.
deceived that Prophet, Ezekiel. 14.9. 1. Speak ye every man the truth to his
neighbor, and love no false oath; for all these are things that I hate, says
the Lord, Zech. 8.16, 17. 2. Behold I will That is, I will expose it to the
lusts of the Gentiles, and not restrain them from profaning it.
profane my Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 24.21. 2. He shall not profane the Sanctuary of
his God. He shall not come nigh unto the Altar, that he profane not my
Sanctuaries, for I the Lord do sanctify them, Lev. 21.12, 23. 3. I That is, I
suffered them to commit sacrileges, or to make sacrilegious sacrifices.
polluted them in their own gifts, Ezekiel. 20.26. 3. Thou art of purer eyes then
to behold evil; neither can thou look on iniquity, Hab. 1.13. 4. I That is, I
with drew my Grace from them, so that contemning my laws they made laws unto
themselves.
gave them statutes which were not good, Ezekiel. 20.25. 4. The Commandment of the
Lord is pure, and inlightening the eyes, Psalm. 19.8. The Law is holy, and the
Commandment holy, just, and good, Romans 7.12. 5. God shall That is, I will
suffer Magicians to deceive them: or will not hinder delusion from being sent.
send them strong delusion that they should believe a lie, that they all might
he damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2
These* 2.11, 12. 5. Thou art not a God ha^ has pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall any evil dwell with thee, Psalm. 5.4. Thou desire truth in the inward
parts, Psalm. 51.6. The fruit of the Spirit is in all truth, Ephesians. 5.9. As I
live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways,
why will ye die? Ezekiel. 33.14. 6. O Lord, why have thou That is, why would
thou suffer us, by our being oppressed with a long tyranny, to faint in our
duties, and to forsake thy law?
made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Isa.
63.17. 6. Ye have wearied the Lord with your words, Mal. 2.17. Will ye steal,
murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and come and stand before me in
this house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered to do all
these abominations? Jer. 7.9, 10.

Now what opinion they were of concerning Gods Decrees, who wearied him with
their words, and said they were delivered to commit all those abominations,
(and that in an active sense, without an Hebraism,) is very obvious to be
imagined. Again, whether it implies not a most blasphemous contradiction, for
God to will what he hates, and to decree what he forbids, and to set
forward what he hinders, (as far as promises, and threats, and persuasions
come to) and to have a willingness of the same thing of which he is perfectly
unwilling, every A B C darian may well inform us. And then (by a consequence
unavoidable) whether the Scriptures on the right hand are not the Note, that
what is spoken by an Hebraism, Is. 6.10. Shut their eyes, and so repeated by S.
John, he has blinded their eyes, Joh. 12.40. is cited thus by our Savior,
Their eyes they have closed, Mat. 13.15. and so it is explained by S. Paul, Act.
28.27.
Touchstone, and the Rule whereby to try and to interpret the other Scriptures
on the left; And whether those on the left hand are not spoken by the Hebraism
of which I spoke, and to be meant of Gods permission, not of his working or
efficiency (as Mr. W. tell us;) And whether my way of understanding the
Scriptures on the left hand is not perfectly agreeable to those Scriptures on
the right, to the Analogy of Faith, to the judgment of right reason, to the
constant assertion of Note, that I exclude from the universalily of the Fathers
all sorts of Libertines, by whatsoever Titles they are distinguished.
all the Fathers, nay to the dictate of common sense, I leave it to be
determined by the indifferent Reader.

Well therefore said S. Paul to the Heathens of Lycaonia, that God had suffered
all Nations to walk in their own ways: for had he said (with Mr. W. p. 26.)
that God did will and work sin, and had an hand in effecting of it, the
Lycaonians might rather have stoned him, then have been ready to do Act. 14.18.
sacrifice. S. Paul therefore added, (that they might not think ill of God for
suffering the wickedness of the Nations) that although God had suffered them
to walk in their own ways, yet he left not himself without a witness, in that
he did good (v. 17.) which had not easily been believed, had he said to those
heathens (as Mr. W. to us) that Note, that M.W, makes this his medium whereby
to prove Gods hand in effecting sin, p. 26. lin. 5, 6, 7.
sin does make for Gods glory, who in that respect does both will and work it,
and has an hand in effecting of it. It being hard to believe, that sin, which
is Gods dishonor can make for his glory, or that God, who is all purity, can
will and work sin. Hard (I say) for a Heathen to believe such stuff, but
impossible for a Christian, who believes his Savior affirming plainly, Mat.
7.18.
that a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit. There is an infinite difference betwixt sins making for
Gods glory, and Gods taking occasion from sin (which dishonors him one way) to
glorify himself some other way. The Jews murdering of Christ did not make for
Gods glory, (for 'twas the greatest dishonor could have been done him, that
they should commit such a wickedness whom God had owned for his people) but God
did glorify his Mercy, his Wisdom, and his Justice, in accepting the death of
Christ for the propitiation of all our sins. I say, in accepting the death, not
the murdering of Christ. As Christ did willingly lay down his life, and suffer
himself to be put to death, he was the sacrifice of the world, and that did
make for Gods glory: But as the Jews did violently take away his life, they
were murderers in the highest, and that did make for Gods dishonor. No sober
man did ever say, that God can make evil good; but some have said, that God can
draw good out of evil, which is quite another thing. Nor do they mean by so
saying, that God draws good out of evil, as we draw water out of a ditch, but
that from men's doing evil he takes an occasion of doing good.

Sect. 2.
Mr. W. proceeds to a new Objection, but of his own invention, His return to
his first method of serging objections to himself.
not taken out of my writings, or out of any man's else; for if it had, he would
have cited the place where it is legible. And yet he confidently says, [ He
further objects p. 23.] so that here I must as confidently accuse him of
Forgery, and charge him to make me satisfaction. But what superchery is this,
to entitle his book against mine, and to omit a hundred things which I did
really there object, and to forge a ridiculous objection, and (which is the top
of the Commission) to call it mine? I have already been too tedious in speaking
to his Chimaera's throughout my first Chapter, and will now be shorter to make
amends.

1. He is at odds with D. Twisse.
First, I observe it is his opinion, [ that though God works not in the same
manner in evil actions as he does in good, or as evil men themselves do, yet me
must not deny that he has any work at all in evil actions, since himself does
so often and so expressly affirm it: p. 23, 24.] Dr. Twisse and Mr. W. are at
odds, for the Doctor See Correct Copy, p. 10.
says undauntedly, that Gods decree is no less efficacious in the permission
of evil, then in the production of good.

2. To make men sin is a sin of the worst size.
2. To say that God does not work in sin as sinful men themselves do, is no more
then to say, that God does nor sin, or is not a sinner, but only makes men
sinners, as See Correct Copy, p. 10.
Zuinglius expressly speaks, whom Mr. W. defends p. 24. but to say that God
did decree sin, and praedestine men to sin, and work sin in men as a physical
cause, and compel men to sin, so as they cannot but commit it, is worse then
truly can be said of any sinner; neither Man nor Devil can compel any one to
sin. Tarquin could ravish Lucretia, but could not compel her to be lascivious.
The Devil could torment and plunder Job, but not compel him to be impatient.
Now that those men do teach, that men are compelled by God to sin, (besides my
Div. Philanth. chapter 3. Sect. 34. p. 132, etc.
Catalogue of examples) I can prove by the Quoties quenquam impelli a Deo aut
cogi dicunt, rhetorice potius loquuntur, etc. Twisse. Vin. Gra. l. 2. part. 1.
sect. 1. Crim. 3. c. 1. p. 29.
confession of Doctor Twisse, who does acknowledge, and excuse that very
expression in his own party. Besides, Jeroboam did not work in Isreal's sins in
the same manner that they did, (because he was not them) but 'twas the worst
part of his Character, that he made Israel to sin, (2 King. 15.18, 24, 28.) yet
he neither did, nor could compel them. It was the worst part of the unbelieving
Jews, that they stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected
against the brethren (Act. 14.2.) yet they proceeded not to compulsion. Nay, it
was reckoned by Nathan as the worst thing in David, that by the sins he had
committed, he had given occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme (2 Samuel 12.14.) which was far from coaction or compulsion, the very terms applied
by those men to God. And therefore Deodate himself, though the chief Minister
of Geneva, denies that God is so much as the Deodat. in Prove. 16.4.
occasion of sin; much less could he judge him to be the cause, or the coactor.

3. Yet ascribed unto God by that sort of men.
3. Though it is said by M. W. that the manner of Gods working in sin is secret,
and not to be apprehended, (p. 23.) yet he and his predecessors have described
the manner of it, in the most plentiful manner that any description can be made
in. They say [ he tempts, and prostitutes, and acts, and operates, and works,
and wills, and seduceth, and draws, and commands, and compells, and moves, and
drives, and stirrs up to sin, as a natural cause (say some;) as a moral cause
(sayothers;) as an efficient cause of the sinful act, as an accidental cause of
the obliquity of the act, as a man puts spurrs to a dull Jade, and as a man is
excited to enjoy his own wife, etc.] All these expressions I have met with in
Mr. W. partly, and partly in Mr. B. yet these are far from being All; they are
but All which I can remember in the present haste that I am in. But whosoever
shall examine my several Catalogues in other books, and compare them with what
they find in this which now I am upon, will say that all this is truth, yet not
the whole truth.

Sect. 3.
1. The easy and ordinary perversion of the Scriptures.
But Mr. W. proceeds thus. [ But all those Scriptures mentioned, it may
appear what little reason Mr. P. had to make such a clamor against those our
Protestant Divines, -- as if they made God to be the Author of sin, when he
knows that they positively professed, and some of them strongly proved the
contrary, p. 24.] So he says, and says only. But 1. I have proved in my
Sect. 1. of this Chapter, that the abuse of those Scriptures is a great portion
of the impiety. Suppose that some Lucian should make a Cento out of the letter
of the Scriptures, as Ausonius did out of Virgil; would the impiety of the
thing be any whit the more excusable, because he could show that his
expressions were all from Scripture? or would it not rather be so much the
worse? It Is known that Proba Falconia composed a history of the Life of Christ,
and a good part also of the Pentateuch of Moses, from out of the works of
Virgil a Heathen Poet. And out of the very same Virgil (however so chaste in his
expressions, that he has won the Title of the Parthenian Poet) Ausonius very
wittily, but yet most Ingeniosum, sed adeo foedum, ut neque Scriptore nec
Auditore dignum sir. Scaliger l. 6. p. 825
detestably, made up the filthiest Fescennine that has been read. Again, the
Empress Eudoxia writ the life of our Savior in the words of Homer, (a blinder
Heathen then Virgil was.) And were it not every whit as possible, to patch up
the life of Achilles in a Rhapsodie collected from the holy Penmen of our
Gospel? If Mr. Wh. will know what may be done in this kind, let him consult the
Capilupi, both Laelius, and Julius, set out by Henry Meibomius; and Otho
Gryphius of Ratisbon; or Lilius Greg. Gyraldus; or whom else he pleases. Let
me mind him also of this, that all the Heresies in Christendom have sucked out
a nourishment to themselves from the sincere milk of the word, although
immediately flowing from the breast of truth. So great a difference is to be
found amongst the several digestions of the very same meat.

Mr. W. mistakes the Errors for the Persons of some Protestants, and confounds
them with the Papists.
2. I did not clamor against Protestant Divines, but against the heathenish
asseverations which had been published in the writings of Presbyterians and
Papists, not only Dominicans, but Jesuits also, for which I S^e Div. Phil^n.
chapter 1. sect. 5. p. 27, 28.
produced the confessions of Doctor Twisse and Mr. Barlee. But being a
Protestant my self, I had by so much the greater reason to declare against the
blasphemies of any Protestant Divines, that I might not be accessory so much as
by my silence; and that some Papists might cease to say (what they commonly
have done) that those horrible Doctrines are indiscriminately the Protestants,
and that qua tales. Nor can I but think it well worth my labor, if I have made
it more known then it was before, that whatever dishonours have been done unto
the Protestant Name, by those of the Kirk, or the Consistory, or their
adherents here in England, yet the dutiful Sons of the Church of England have
ever been free from any part of that guilt. Besides, the chief exclaimers
against the Presbyterians (for Protestant Divines is an equivocal expression,
and comprehends those Protestans whom I assert, as well as those whom I oppose)
were the other sort of Presbyterians, I mean the Arminians and Remonstrants in
the Low Countries, who still remained Presbyterian in point of Discipline (for
ought I can learn) although they left their own party for the enormities of
their Doctrine. Farther yet; My clamours were no greater against the Dogmatical
sort of Calvinists, then were their own clamours against each other; nor indeed
so great, as I conceive I have evinced upon See The Div. Purity defended, chapter
4. sect. 6. p. 31, etc.
another occasion. And how Doctor Twisse in particular has made his clamours
against his Brethren, I have See the Div. Philan. Def. c 1. p. 12. and chapter 3.
p. 123, 124, 125.
acquainted Mr. Barlee when he wanted that knowledge.

3. His party clamor against themselves, and affront God with an Epitrope.
3. What Mr. W. plead for them, does make their case so much the worse: for if
they say in some places, that God is much more then the Author of sin (as the
word Author may be expounded;) and again in other places, that he is precisely
the Author of it (both which I have showed again and again;) and yet do say in
a third sort of places, that God is not the Author of sin; they are (...),
self-condemners, and contradictors, and have justified me in all my sayings, as
well when I accuse them of breathing hot and cold too, as when I accuse them of
breathing all Fire. Besides, to say that God decreed sin by an Absolute Decree,
that he wills and works it, that he is the cause of it, that he has a hand and
efficiency in it, tempts, excites, and compells men to it, but yet he is a good
God, and therefore not the Author of it, what is this but to affront him with a
dishonorable Epitrope? If my memory does not deceive me, it was in a speech
against Verres, where Cicero used such kind of Rhetoric: Sit fur, sit
sacrilegus, sit flagitiorum omnium vitiorumque Princeps; at est bonas Imperator
and felix. Cic. in Verr.
Be it so that he is a Thief, a sacrilegious person, the Patron in chief of all
villainies and vices, yet however he is a good and a happy General, etc. I
clearly find that Mr. W. and many others of that way, do not hitherto
understand the full importance of the word Author, its derivation, or use in
classick Authors. I shall therefore make that a peculiar business, when I shall
come to demonstrate, that I did use them with tenderness in saying no more of
their Doctrines then plainly this, That they did make the God of purity to be
the Author of sin. What can I think of that man, who shall tell me that I lie,
and yet affirm when he has done, I am a very true speaker? I cannot but think
him a very bitter Rhetorician, and that he mocks me by an Epitrope. Doctor
Twisse apologizeth (as I lately said) for the men of his way, by saying that
their speeches are but Rhetorical, when God is said by any of them to See the
D^v. Philan. chapter 1. p. 26.
compel men to sin. And when that Doctor does plainly say, [that there is on
Gods part a Twiss. Vin. Gr. l. 2. p. 1. sect. 2. Cr. 3. Digr. 2. c. 15. p. 156.
prostitution to sin required, which prostitution cannot be perfected without
temptations leading up to the act of sinning,] it is likely he would allege
that he did yet deny God to be the Author of sin. But then I should think it a
shrewd Epitrope, than which I cannot conceive a greater dishonor to the
Almighty.

4. Mr. W's. clamours against Protestant Divines.
4 Mr. W. must call to mind, what clamours he and his party have commonly made
against Protestant Divines, by calling them Enemies to the Grace of God, and
Introducers of Atheism, without a tolerable color of reason for it, nay quite
against it; since they are enemies to Grace, who sacrilegiously enclose it, and
seek to rob it of its extent; and they are rather the Introducers of Atheism,
who represent God to be such, as cannot modestly be owned: for when men have
been taught such Notions of God, which as soon as they believe, they cannot
conceive him to be good, they think it modesty to infer that there is (...).
no God at all, and that the notions which they were taught were but the
characters of a Chimaera.

5. And jumps in so doing with the Jesuited Papists.
5. What Mr. W. says in his parenthesis [ that some of his Authors were
instruments in advancing the work of Reformation, p. 24.] it most concerned him
to have concealed: for in that he joins hands with the most Jesuited Papists,
who did purposely infect some noted Protestants with their invention of
irrespective Decrees, that they might have some little color for which to
defame our Reformation; betraying some Protestants into the mire, upon a design
to accuse them of being dirty. But we know, as well as Aristotle (from whom we
learnt it) that the (...) may be faulty, and yet the (...) without all blame.
Again, we insist upon Melanchthon, and the other brave persons of the Augustan
Synod; upon the Orthodox Bishop Tunstal, who helped to begin our Reformation;
upon the Confessors and Martyrs (such as Cranmer, Cooper, Latimer, and the
like) who carried it on here in England. As we think not the worse of
Christianity, for what is spoken by Zosimus of Constantine the Great; so
neither do we conceive our Reformation to be concerned in the personal
Aberrations of Mr. Calvin, or Zuinglius, any more then in the vices of King
Henry the eighth. If there were any sound arguing from some particular
Reformers, unto the general work of the Reformation, or from the same man's
errors in one kind, to his being erroneous in all others, (then which sort of
arguing there is nothing more silly) Geneva and Helvetia must look to that.
But Luther in Saxony preceded both in that work; who though he fell into the
errors of other men at the first, yet he exchanged them for the truth in his
riper years, as well as Melanchthon and other Worthies.

Sect. 4.
1. His foulest Imputation cast upon the Scriptures.
Mr. W. says further, [ that what expressions they used in this subject, were
but the same in effect with Scripture-expressions, yea not altogether so high,
p. 24. 1. This is so admirably false, that I wonder how he durst say it. And
because it is the Word of God upon which he has cast this foul aspersion, In
the name of God I do require him, either to make good his words by a collation
of the particulars, or to take away this stumbling block in as public a manner
as here he sets it in the peoples way. 2. If he shall make a Parodia of Holy
Writ, which is a Rhapsody invers't, and so endeavor to palliate this ghastly
speech, the fraud will be the more visible, by having on it so thick a cloak.
And 3. If he is really of opinion, that the sense and mind of the Scriptures
(though not the words) does not only go as high, but higher too, then the
expressions of his party, and of himself, whilst they say, [ that God does
make men transgressors, and that adultery is his work, that he tempts men unto
sin, nay compells them to it, that he wills and works it, nay that he
preordained men to sin as sin, that not only the Action it self, but the very
pravity and deformity of it makes way to Gods glory, and a world the like
stuff;] If he thinks that this was meant by the Apostle Saint Paul in his
Epistles, God gave them up to uncleanness, Romans 1.24. and God shall send them
strong delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. (which yet is infinitely different from those
expressions I just now mentioned) I think it a duty incumbent on me, to
admonish the followers of Mr. W. that they take great heed to that important
Advertisement which is given them by Saint Peter; and that they accommodate it
at least to this occasion. It being likely, 2 Pet. 3.16. Saint Peter's Caveat
touching Paul's Epistles.
That there are diverse things in S. Paul's Epistles, which being hard to be
understood, they that are unlearned and unstable are apt to wrest to their
destruction. The matter we see is of no small moment. A man may wrest Gods word
(not to some little inconvenience only, but) to the greatest mischief to be
imagined, the eternal destruction of Body and Soul. Scripture is easily
mistaken; mistakes of Scripture are not easily rectified; and being not
rectified, they do pervert the word of God, which is the River of Life, not
only into a dead, but a killing Letter. Those two sayings of Saint Paul were
both cited by Mr. W. (p. 22.) in the behalf of his own and his Teachers
Doctrines. The ugly Nature of those Doctrines I have many times showed: what he
now says of them, and of the Scriptures compared with them, the Reader has
seen in the beginning of this Section. And whether or no he is a wrester, good
people judge.

I know it is said by Mr. W. (p. 19.) that in the places above mentioned the
Scripture does plainly, and clearly, and positively assert what God does; and
so by consequence he may ask, what can be easier then a short sentence wherein
there is never a hard word? Every man who has been cheated may know the
meaning of delusion, and every child who can but go on an errand can tell us
what it i^ to send. Saint Peter speaks of (...), difficult things to be
understood in the Epistles of Saint Paul. But what need we have a Key when the
Door is open?

2. The literal plainness of some Scriptures does make them difficult to some.
2. But here the unlearned and the unstable must be informed, that in the
plainness of some Texts the greatest difficulty consists. And dangers are
greatest, when least suspected: which no doubt is the reason why many stumble
in plain ground, because they there take no heed unto their footing. Nothing
seems to be plainer then those words of our Savior, My Father is greater then
I: And, This is my Body, This is my Blood; My Flesh is meat indeed, and my
Blood is drink indeed. Yet from the plainness of the former, how many have
stumbled into Arianism? and from the plainness of the later, how many have
fallen into the error of Transubstantiation? And from the literal plainness of
such words, God shall send them strong delusion that they should believe a lie,
how many have stumbled and fallen headlong into that worst of errors, that God
has an hand and efficiency in sin? Even by those and the like expressions, Mr.
W. has made us see (such has been his own blindness) that such plain
Scriptures are hard, because they are plain: hard as to the sense because so
plain, as to the Letter. But we know that Satan is the spirit of Delulusion;
that the Magicians there alluded to were the Emissaries of Satan, and not of
God; that God is the spirit both of holiness and Truth; that sin and Satan are
none of Gods Messengers; that Simon Magus ( that man of sin, v. 3, 9.) was
Satan's Apostle, and sent by Satan, but not by God, who did only not hinder him
from being sent; that Saint Paul's own words are (...), (not strong delusion,
but) the working of error, and (...), to the believing of a lie, which
signifies nothing but the event; it is not (...), that they may believe a lie,
which might seem to the illiterate to note the end of an intention. But suppose
it had been [(...), That,] yet Mr. W. must have looked into the whole importance
of the word; and I do earnestly beseech him (since he takes upon him to be a
Shepherd, nay a Note that He and Mr. B. did join in that prank of a
mock-ordination of Ministers.
sender out of Shepherds into Christ his Fold) that he will vouchsafe to know
the difference betwixt (...), and (...), the conjunction [That] as it is causal
(and so in most places) or merely consequential, (and so in many:) this one
distinction will preserve him from falling in many plain paths of Scripture (
plain I mean as to the Letter) and in the path where he is fallen (2 These.
2.11.) it will contribute to help him up: whereas for want either of knowing,
or at least of heeding this little thing, he has frequently fallen, and very
foully.

3. A short direction to the means of remedy or prevention.
3. I will finally reinforce my Admonition upon the vulgar, that they take
great heed in their perusal of many Scriptures; not that any Scriptures can be
unsound or dangerous in themselves, but because they are capable of being
wrested. Some are unlearned, and some. unstable, and the rather unstable,
because unlearned. These must not be entrusted (by us or by themselves) with
the less fordable passages of the waters of Life. I could give my instances in
many Scriptures, but Saint Peter gives his in the Epistles of Saint Paul, that
Learned Preacher of the Gentiles, whom none but such as are learned should dare
to read without a Clavis. The Tremendous mistakes of the Texts above mentioned
(Romans 1.24, 26. 2 These. 2.11.) and of the greatest part of the ninth Chapter to
the Romans, (to name no more) may serve for a warning to the ignorant and
seduced people of the Nation, not to presume on such places without an
Interpreter at their Elbow; I mean a qualified, authentic, uncontrollable
Interpreter, and such as may easily be had, and be as easily used by English
Readers, that is in a word, Doctor Hammond's Annotations upon the whole New
Testament.

Sect. 5.
1. Mr. W. either means that God has a hand in evil, because in the contrary.
Mr. W. incurs another danger, which he also calls an other Argument. Some will
laugh (I am sure) but others (I hope) will rather weep at it. His words are
these, That God has some hand in the Acts of sinful men, appears, because the
substratum or subject of sin, namely, the natural motion or action whereunto
the sin cleaves, is that whereof he is the proper cause and efficient:
therefore he must needs have some efficiency in it, p. 24.] If by the
Substratum he means the man who is the subject of sin, Look forward on c. 3.
sect. 14.
God indeed is the cause of man, but man is not a motion, much less a sin. If
by Motion, Act, and Action, he means that which is natural, as the act of
walking, eating, digesting, speaking, thinking, and the like; God again is the
cause of these, but not of any thing that is sinful; it being no more sinful to
walk, eat, speak, or think, then to be as God made us, not only movables, but
men. So that if Mr. W. does mean no more, he speaks not a syllable to the
purpose, but plainly deserts his undertaking. And to prove that God has a hand
in evil, because he has a hand in that which is good, is to say a thing is,
because it is not; or that it is thus, because it is quite otherwise. By such
Logic as this, he may say, that the Devil has a hand and efficiency in good,
(giving this for his reason) because he is the efficient and proper cause of
evil. And indeed it is much less impious, to ascribe something of Nature to
that perverter of nature, then the least perversion of nature to the God of all
grace.

2. Or that the Act of sin is not the sin;
But 2. It appears by the scope and tenor of his Book, that when he says, God
has a hand in the Acts of sinful men, he certainly means, the sinful Acts,
which sinful Acts are the Acts of sin, or (to speak it in other words) the sins
themselves; for that these are (...), three expressions of the same thing, will
be made undeniable by this example. The act of sinful David was the Act of
lying with Bathshebah. The Act of lying with Bathshebah was the sinful Act, to
wit, the Act of Adultery, and so the sin. For whether we say, that his lying
with Bathshebah was his Adultery, or his Act of Adultery, we say the same
thing, and we find them promiscuous in all men discourses of the thing. Now
that his Adultery, or his Act of lying with Bathshebah, was the sin it self
which he committed, (not the Substratum, or Subject of his sin, distinguishable
from it tanquam accidens a subjecto, aut res a re,) I am confident Mr. W. will
not dare to deny: It being granted by men of all sides, that to pollute another
man's Wife is Adultery it self, and that Adultery is the sin it self which is
called by that name, and by that distinguished from other sins.

3. Or that God is the proper cause and efficient of sin; and this proved by a
Dilemma.
3. From whence it follows unavoidably, that Mr. W. affirms God to be the
proper cause and efficient of sin it self. Nor can he escape it, let him go
which way he will, to the negative, or the affirmative of what I said just now.
For let him answer to my Dilemma. Was David's lying with Bathshebah (by which
she was impregned) the mere substratum or subject of his sin of adultery, or
the very sin of adultery it self? If Mr. W. shall say the first, then it is
clearly his Doctrine, that God was the proper cause and efficient of David's
lying with Bathshebah. (for it is his positive assertion, that of the motion or
action to which the sin cleaves, God is the proper cause or efficient.) And if
Mr. W. shall say the second, then he must run into the very same mischief, or
yield me up the whole cause, and bid particular defiance to Mr. Barlee and Mr.
Hick. which will soon appear by this other Dilemma. Was David's lying with
Bathshebah (which is granted to be the very sin of Adultery in the second
member of the first Dilemma) an Act, or an Action, or a Motion, or a positive
thing? or was it none of these four? If he shall say, it was an act, an action,
or a motion, then again he calls God the proper cause or efficient of the sin
it self, David's lying with Bathshebah: (for if the Reader will look back, he
shall find all three in the subject of this Section) and withal it implies a
gross contradiction, to say that that is the sin it self, which was said
before to be the subject only of sin to which the sin cleaves. If he shall
say, that David's lying with Bathshebah was a positive thing (which he cannot
but say, if he shall say it is the other three) then either he must acknowledge
that Mr. Barlee and Mr. Hick. are blasphemers in grain, for having said
expressly, that Mr. Hick's words in a letter to Mr. B. printed by Mr. B. chapter 3.
p. 112.
whatever positive thing is not from God is God, or else he must say it was the
creature of God, or else he must say it was God himself. For so it follows in
the two brethren, Ibid Look forward on, chapter 3. Sect. 18.
there is no medium betwixt Deus and Creatura: making no distinction betwixt
Gods creatures and the Devils, but concluding that David's lying with
Bathshebah, if a positive entity, was as much Gods creature as David himself
was. But if to avoid these rocks, Mr. W. shall throw himself on the later horn
of the Dilemma, and say that David's lying with Bathshebah was no act, action,
motion, or positive thing; that will toss him out of all reason; not only set
him at enmity with the (...), the common maxims of all mankind, and even the
judgment of common sense, but also infer that sin is nothing, and so that
sinners are either not damned at all, or damned for nothing, or damned for
something besides their sins.

4. Humane learning a good foundation for a Divine.
4. I will not here exagitate his wants of knowledge in Physiologie, (which
would administer occasion of much discourse) because his errors in Divinity are
too apt of themselves to make me tedious. I will only observe, how needful
it is for a Divine to lay his foundations of knowledge in humane learning, or at
least to preach only by way of exhortation to depart from evil, and to do the
thing that is good, but not to meddle in matters beyond their ken. The sad
effects of such meddling I have showed already, and am now to show further in
the ensuing Paragraph. For what I spoke as a Physician to show Mr. B. the
immediate cause of his disease, Mr. W. either could not, or would not
comprehend, and does his utmost to nourish the peccant Humors. Mark him well
as he goes on.

Sect. 6.
Mr. W's rare essays to separate the wickedness from the Act of the wicked
Act.
[Object. Against this Mr. P. objects, that it is as impossible to separate the
wickedness of the Act from the Act which is wicked, as to separate roundness
from the globe, and to separate sinfulness from the sin as from the sinful act,
p. 24.] 1. This is now the second morsel of my Philanthropy, which he has
ventured to fasten his Teeth upon: that the Reader may see, how much oftener I
have occasion to confute Mr. W's inventions, then to defend mine own Doctrine
delivered in that Book, which his boasting Title Page pretends to combat. 2. He
had not ^he courage to cite my words right, or to acknowledge in the Errata
that his citation was wrong: For 1. he cites them all from chapter 4. p. 48. where
I had said nothing like it: nor has it cost me a little trouble to find the
pages of my book where such words are to be found; which truly is matter of
just complaint: and now at last I have found them in two distinct pages at
great distance, whereas he has cited them as from the same, and as spoken in
the same period, p. 48. but the former part is p. 42. and the later p. 43. and
each in the midst of the several pages. 2. He has left out the word [wicked]
which he found in my sentence before the first mention of the word [Act;] which
is the less excusable, because he cites so few things from me. 3. He takes not
any notice of what Lurg'd for the proof of those few words, but barely sets
down the words themselves: which being a great Tergiversation in a pretender to
confute me, deserves no other reply then to be sent for satisfaction to my
three whole See the Div. Philan. defended, chapter 4. p. 42, 43, 44.
pages upon that subject. Yet that he may not be able to say I slight him, I
will show him his unhappiness in every part of his Answer, though not so much
of his unhappiness, as I could easily discover if I would lose so much time.

Sect. 7.
His first essay is a bare dictate including a manifold absurdity, no less then
8.
His 1. Answer is this [ God is little beholding to him for so denying him to
be the Author of the evil that cleaves to the actions of nature, as withal to
deny him to be the Author of nature; for maintaining his purity, by denying his
omnipotency, p. 24, 25.] First, It Is an ugly expression, to say that God is
little beholding to me for any thing, as if for something he might be possibly
beholding: when I have done my best for the honor of God, I have done but my
duty; which being my duty but in part, and infinitely far from what I ow him, I
must say (when all is done) I am an Luke 17.10.
unprofitable servant. 2. But yielding Mr. W. his naughty terms, how much less
can it be said that God is beholding to Mr. W. who would so maintain him to be
the Author of nature, as to make him also the Author of things against Nature?
How much rather is Satan beholding to him, for so asserting Gods omnipotence,
as to asperse his purity, and so by consequence to plead for Satan? 3. It goes
ill enough with Mr. W. that what he says, he says only, without an offer of
any proof; to which it were sufficient to say the contrary with the same
confidence, and to charge or challenge him to provide his proof against
hereafter: yet even thus he is worsted, by the mere opposition of dictate to
dictate; because it is less wicked to ascribe some work of God unto the Devil,
then to ascribe the proper work of the Devil unto God. Of actions natural and
unnatural. Nature corrupted and uncorrupted.
4. But I will more then dictate: though he does not; for I will mind him that
the word Nature, which of it self is good when God is called the God of Nature,
is often set in opposition to Grace, and is used to signify the corruption of
Nature, at least by way of connotation: which Mr. W. not considering, (as
something or other is still the cause of aberrations from the truth) confounds
the Actions of Nature with unnatural actions. To speak, indeed, is the work of
Nature, but sure it is not a sin to speak: To pray sincerely is the work of
Grace, and sure it is not a sin to pray sincerely: But to blaspheme against
God, is neither a work or an action of Grace or Nature; yet is it a work or
action as really as the former; that is, a work of the Devil, ungracious, and
unnatural, against the God of Grace and Nature. Now the difference is wide
betwixt speaking in general, and speaking in particular to the glory of God,
and particular speaking against Gods glory. For the last of these, I demand of
Mr. W. is that action of blaspheming or speaking against God, an action of
Nature, or is it not? If he says Yes, he does bewray it to be his doctrine,
that God is the Author of blaspheming against God; which blas^heming, as it is
an action, so it is a sin too: If he says No, then he confesses there are
actions which are not of Nature, unless he will say that to blaspheme is no
action: if the former, he pulls down with both hands what he erected only with
one; if the later, then according to his reasoning, either to speak is not an
action, or to blaspheme is not to speak: and so the farther he proceeds, the
wo^se it fares with him. 4. Where now was the ground of Mr. W's saying that I
deny Gods omnipotence? Even my dutiful denial that God is the Author of such
actions, as blaspheming, cursing, fighting against God, David 's lying with
Bathshebah, Cain 's killing Abel, and the like. He may by the same Logic
accuse the Apostle of denying God's omnipotence, and that in contradiction to
the word of God: for our Savior says, with God nothing shall be impossible,
Luke 1.37. but the Apostle says, It is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.18.
The reconcilement stands in this, that our Savior spoke of good things only:
for of evils it is true, that it is impossible for God to be either Principal or
accessory. Now because I maintain, that God cannot will, or work sin in his
creatures, Mr. W. proclaims that I deny Gods omnipotence. And this is just the
very calumny of Atheistical Orig. contra Cells. l. 4.
Celsus against Origin. But I have See Correct Copy, p. 22, 23.
elsewhere showed, that if God were- able to be the Author of such actions, he
were able not to be God, which were only a power of being impotent. There are
many things of which the Scripture says, God cannot do them. As he cannot deny
himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. He cannot lie, Tit. 1.2. What God has promised
absolutely he cannot but perform, Heb. 6.18. Ge. 18.^5. Genesis 19.22. Heb. 6.10.
And therefore I am the asserter of Gods omnipotence, because of his purity, and
Mr. W. is the man who disputes against both. 6. He again is the man that denies
Gods omnipotence, who denies him to be able to decree the end in consideration
of the means; or to make a rational creature with such a liberty of will, as to
be able to determine his will ad hoc, to this or that forbidden object, without
an efficiency from his creator. 7. What kind of Theist may he be thought, who
does not think that the creating and governing of a world, and the being the
Author of all good things, are proofs enough of an omnipotence, unless the
filthiest actions to be imagined may be admitted for Jewels in that rich Diadem?

Sect. 8.
1. His second essay is an impertinence beyond Example:
His second Answer runs thus: [ Does not the Scripture tell us expressly, that
in him we live, move, and have our being? Act. 17.25. As he is the Author of
our being, so also of those Natural motions that arise from our being, p. 25.]
Thus the same Fallacy continues his error which made him err. And here I might
repeat my former Section, if that were as seemly, as otherwise fit: but
referring my Reader thither, I here will add 1. My amazement at the
impertinence: for I had said, It is impossible to separate the wickedness of
the wicked act (to wit, of Blasphemy, Adultery, or the like) from the act which
is wicked. And Mr. W. (instead of instancing in any one wicked act, and showing
how the wickedness may be separated from the act of wickedness, or (which is
all one) the wicked act) does only tell us of things which are no wicked acts,
viz. our living, moving, and being in God, etc.

2. Or what is so much worse, as that it ought not to be named.
2. If he pretends that he is not impertinent, he is infinitely worse, as the
shallowest Reader can infer: for if the Apostle there spoke of wicked acts
(which to think is most unpardonable) let him perform his enterprise, by
showing which is the wickedness, and which the act, and by showing the
separation, which he denies to be impossible.

3. He is enforced to be pertinent, and his Answer challenged.
3. But let us enforce him to be pertinent, and challenge his Answer to this
Question, Does the Scripture any where say explicitly, or implicitly, that in
God we blaspheme, and murder, and commit adultery? such as these are
confessedly the wicked acts to which I alluded in my objection. Again, I ask
Mr. W. Can the wickedness of an actual blaspheming be possibly separated from
the act of blaspheming? Can the wickedness of David's congress with Bathshebah
be possibly separated from the act of his congress with Bathshebah? Since his
Answer of necessity must be Yes, or No, I am bound in duty both to God and my
neighbors, to exact thus much of Mr. W. That he will either show how this may
be done, or confess in print that he has undertaken impossibilities, and that
his first absurdity being swallowed, this is one of the thousand which follow
after. Had he been able to show it, or had he but thought he had been able, he
would sure have tried, and offered at it at least; he would have taken some one
wicked act for his instance, displaid his tools, and begun his dissection, and
made us perceive this separability, if not the separateness it self, at least
with the eyes of our Metaphysical understandings. But because he has merely
proposed an objection, and forsaken it, speaking as far from his Theme as he
could devise, I must needs believe, he understood his own weakness, and felt
the strength of the objection; yet I am checked in my belief, by finding his
answers grow worse and worse, as I think will appear by what now follows.

Sect. 9.
His third Essay is a continuance of his Tergiversation, and infers God the
efficient of sin.
His third Answer is this [ Was not Natures work the same in Adam when he ate
the forbidden fruit, as when he did his necessary food? and in David, when he
lay with Bathshebah, as when he lay with his lawful wife? -- It is a true Rule,
Deus agit in peccato, non tanquam causa moralis, sed tanquam causa naturalis,
p.25.] Now he makes us a discovery of his mind.

1. He had said a little before (Answ. 1.) that God is the Author of the
actions of nature: look forward on Sect. 12, 13.
and a little before that, that of natural motions and actions to which sin
cleaves, God is the efficient and proper cause (p. 24.) now he adds, that
natures work is the same in the most unlawful and lawful actions; and
exemplifies his meaning, not only after, but before the Fall also. From whence
his Tenent must be concluded unavoidably this, That God was the efficient and
proper cause of Adam's eating the forbidden fruit, as well as of his eating his
necessary food; and as much the efficient and proper cause of David's lying
with Bathshebah, as of his lying with lawful wife. He shall be greater then
great Apollo, if he can show the least flaw in this deduction. Now to separate
the act of Adam's eating forbidden fruit, from the wickedness of the act, which
consisted in eating forbidden fruit, Mr. W. does not so much as try. And if he
cannot do it hereafter neither, (as I am sure he cannot, because it cannot be
done) then it is clearly his opinion, (at least his Doctrine,) that God is the
efficient and proper cause of all sin.

2. Nature depraved and undepraved are opposite things.
2. It was the work of undepraved nature, for Adam to eat his necessary food,
before he eat the unnecessary forbidden food. But to eat the forbidden was the
ruin of nature, and not the work: I mean that nature wherewith God made him
(not simply a man, but) an innocent man. And by Adam's eating that prohibitum,
Mr. W. must not think to say, he meant the motion of Adam's jaws only,
without his consent to the temptation, or his determination of his will to a
forbidden object; for the eating the forbidden fruit was plainly the predicate
in Mr. W's proposition, as Adam was the subject of it: not, eating, without
forbidden fruit, nor eating fruit, without forbidden. And if twenty words are
in the predicate (as possibly they may) they all can make but one term, and are
equally coupled to the subject, by a never-failing verb substantive, either
expressed, or implied.

3. Adam sion'd before he eat in the determination of his will to eat.
3. Besides, Adam sinned before he eat, in the determination of his will to eat:
and if that was also the work of Nature, as well as his volition to eat of any
lawful fruit, (as Mr. W. must say, or eat up what he has said) then according
to Mr. W. God was the efficient and proper cause of that sin also, which lies
in puncto indivisibili, perhaps more intelligibly then others may.

4. Mr. W. vindicated from his abuses put upon himself.
4. Because Mr. W. has been abused by himself, in the misapprehension of his
own Rule, I think it my duty to disabuse him. And I shall do it by saying no
more then this: 1. That as God does give, and continue the being of his
creature, with the natural endowments of such a being, (such as Life,
Loco-motive, Reason, and Will, in his creature called Man) he does not work as
a moral, but as a natural cause. 2. But as he moves his creature by his grace
to choose a right use of all his Faculties, in applying his actions to their
proper objects, he only works as a moral cause. 3. And as he suffers or
permits his creature to determine his will to forbidden objects, and in
pursuance of that choice, to apply his faculties to execute what the will has
decreed, (be it to kill, to blaspheme, to hate God, or the like) in this third
case, he neither works as a natural, or moral cause, but suffers his creature
to pervert and abuse his Faculties of Nature into a contrary thing to that
which God made them. As for example, Adam's Faculty to will was the work of
God, and (under God) of Nature, a very excellent and noble Faculty: But Adam's
applying that faculty to the forbidden fruit (which was his choice, or act of
willing that numerical thing) was neither the work of God, nor of Nature, (Gods
handmaid) but the work of Adam against God, and against that Nature which God
had given him; and which Adam, with Satan's help, did deprave, or pervert into
another thing. Yet am I willing that Mr. W. should say that there was in it the
work of Nature, if he will say that he means that work of that Nature, which
could not be possibly the work of God, but of Adam only in one respect, and of
the Devil in another.

5. Five expedients proposed to undeceive M. W. by pointing at the causes of
his mistakes.
5. The not distinguishing rightly betwixt Nature and Nature, Gods Handmaid and
his Rebel, Nature created by the good will of God, and Nature corrupted by the
wicked will of the creature, does seem to me a prime cause of Mr. W's errors in
this affair. Another cause does seem to be his want of a steady consideration,
that Adam's sin did begin in the first aversion of his will (which was his
rational appetite) from God and his Precept, unto the creature which was
forbidden. His determining of his will (per actum imperatum) to the forbidden
object, was the same sin in its growth. His actual eating in obedience to that
Empire of his will, was the same sin in its perfection. In each of which three
acts God had no hand at all: which because Mr. W. did not discern, the third
cause of his errors does seem to be, his not continuing to meditate, or to
remember, that the Being of sin is (...), in the habitude and This confessed by
Dr. Twisse himself, in Vin. Gra. l. 2. par. 2. Crim. 3. Sect. 1. p. 155. Col. 2.
relation and indissoluble connection of a voluntary act to a forbidden object:
after a fancied separation of which two, we cannot so much as fancy the sin to
be. For consider Adam's eating as unapplied to forbidden fruit, and so it
cannot be conceived to be a sin, any more then the eating of a natural Agent,
it being as natural to eat, as to grow by eating. Which makes me guess a
fourth cause of Mr. W's error to be this, that either he did not exactly know,
or not incessantly bear in mind, that the same man (as to several actions) is
both a natural and a voluntary agent. We eat and drink as we are animals; but
we fast and pray, and do our duties, or eat and drink against Precept, as we
are men: the former as we are spiritual, and the later as carnal men. But Mr.
W. in his instances of Adam and David, did confound the brutish with the
rational property of the men. The fifth cause of his miscarriage does seem to
be, his not animadverting that sin is a concrete, in respect of sinfulness, and
notes the same thing in one word, which sinful act does note in two; which I
will make him apprehend (do what he can to the contrary, beside; not reading
what I am writing) by showing that a sin, and a sinful Note that what is said
of a sinful Act, is as true if applied to action or motion, which are also Mr.
W's Terms.
act, have the same enunciation in all propositions to be imagined. Ex Gr. It
is as true a praedication (and in sense the same) to say that David's lying
with Bathshebah was his sin, as to say it was his sinful act. Again, as true a
praedication, (and in sense the same) to say it was his adultery, as to say his
adultery was his sin. Mr. VV. shall find upon every turn of the tongue, that
these terms are convertible, and that in Recto: and finding that, he will
confess, that either he must separate the same thing from it self, or
acknowledge his making God to be efficient of sin. Thus far am I brought beyond
what I was bound to, or at first intended, by the mere strength of my desire to
convert my Aggressor, whilst I confute him.

And having done thus, I shall only put him in mind of his concurrence with
Mr. B. as well as of his discord with Doctor Twisse. 1. He concurres with that
of Mr. B. [ That Gods concurrence and excitation to the Act of adultery, and to
the husbands lying with his lawful wife, is the same, chapter 3. p. 12.] 2. He is
at discord with Doctor Twisse, who says that See Correct^ Copy, p. 10.
God does so administer the occasions of sin, and does so urge them, that they
smite the sinners mind, etc. which is to act in sin as a moral cause, whereas
Mr. W. affirms his acting to be as a natural cause only. I will not exagitate
the noisome instance by which he clears his meaning to us, nor will I show how
he has gratified his carnal Readers. I rather hasten to his ensuing words.

Sect. 10.
His fourth essay infers the wickedest Actions to be good, and from God.
His fourth Answer is, [ That every new action and motion is a new Entity; now
all entities and beings are from the first Being, and so far forth they are
good, p. 25.] Apply his generals to particulars, and he is ever undone. The
first Rebellion against God that ever was, was a new action or motion, and so a
new entity; and therefore (says Mr. W.) was from the first Being, and so far
forth was good. Thus every new filthiness or elaborate sensuality which
Petronius invented for Tiberius, has Mr. W's commendation for the goodness of
its being, and the Divinity of its extraction. It was descended (says Mr. W.)
from the first Being, which is God. 2. His sentence out of Ipsum
quantulumcunque esse bonum est, quia summum esse est summum bonum. De vera.
Relig. c. 4.
Austin is either quite beside the purpose (He speaking only of Gods
Creatures, and not of Satan's) or taken on purpose by the left handle, that
Austin (as well as Scripture) may be pretended as a Factioner against Himself:
For the sin against the Holy Ghost is a Being, as being really something,
because the cause of damnation without hope of reprieve. But Saint Austin could
not argue the least goodness in that sin, from the greatest goodness of that
God against whom it is committed. 3. But it is added by Mr. W. [ That if any
natural act (qua actus) proceeds not from the God of Nature, there must be a
Creature without a Creator, Ibid.] But 1. Blasphemy, or the sin against the
Holy Ghost, is not a natural act, but an act contra-natural, and yet it is a
real act. 2. When God is called the God of Nature, it is to be meant of good
Nature. 3. Blasphemy is an act of malicious Nature, against the Nature of God,
and against the God of good Nature; but blasphemy as blasphemy (or that act as
that act) proceeds not from God: and yet it is not a Creature without a
Creator; for men and Devils are the Creators of all sorts of blasphemy; which
Mr. W. and the Mr. Hickm. and Mr. B. spoken of before, and hereafter, c. 3
sect. 18.
two brethren will have to be created by God himself, or to be an Independent
Creature. This is therefore a sixth cause of his and their aberrations, that
they do not distinguish (with the Scriptures) betwixt the Joh. 3.8.
works of the Devil and the Psalm. 103.22.
works of God.

Sect. 11.
His fifth Answer is the most to his disadvantage, unless the confession of his
guilt may lead the way to his repentance: 1. His fifth essay does ensnare him
with an implicit confession that he makes God the Author of sin.
for believe me, Reader (though to believe it is very difficult) these words
which follow are all his own. [ Does not Mr. P. by this Doctrine make God the
Author of sin? for if God be the Author of all natural Actions, (as has been
proved,) and it be impossible (as he teaches) to separate the sin from the
action, then he that is the Author of the Action, must needs be the Author of
the sin also which is unseparable from it, p. 25.] Thus he thinks he has laid
a Net for Mr. P. whilst Himself is caught in it, Look forwards on chapter 3. sect.
12. Number. 4. and sect. 18.
and cannot possibly get out. For 1. He confesses most explicitly (though not
in any humble Form) that if it is proved to be impossible to separate the sin
from the sinful action (which I have often proved to be impossible) he cannot
choose but take God to be the Author of sin. Here then again he must be
summoned, to show us how David's sin, to wit, his Adultery, can be separated
from his sinful action, to wit, his lying with Bathshebah: which until he shall
perform, I must declare him (out of his Book, which is as much as from his own
mouth) to be an Assertor of that Blasphemy, which yet he does many times
disown, though not so often as he owns it. 2. He is fain to miscal things to
countenance his mistakes, or else he knows not a moral action.
2. To make a show of having ensnared me, he is fain to call those things by
the name of natural actions, which he knew at that instant I have ever called
sins, or sinful actions, or acts of sin, unnatural actions, or acts against
nature. But what he could not discern in the sins or sinful actions of Adam and
David, I will compel him to see clearly by these following Queries, to which I
shall earnestly expect his Answer. Mr. W. hampered in some Dil^mm's.
Is a man's lying with a beast a sin, or not? If not a sin, how then was it
Exodus 22.19.
forbidden upon pain of death? If a sin, is it an Action, or not an Action? If
not an action, what is an action? and how defined? But if it is an action, is
it a natural action, or an action unnatural and against Nature? If a natural
action, why says Mr. W. that God is the efficient and proper cause, and now
the Author of all natural actions? and so by consequence of a man's lying with a
beast? If, to avoid that blasphemy, he says it is not a natural, but an
unnatural action; why then did he say ( Ans. 3.) that Natures work was the
same, as well in wicked as lawful actions? If he flies from that too, (now he
is scared with the danger) then let him say he is converted, and abjure his own
Book, and join with me against Mr. Hick. and Mr. B. who say that sin is God, if
a positive thing. To make sure work, I will appeal to Saint Paul, whether it
has not of old been found very possible, to Romans 1.26.
change the natural use into that which is against Nature, yet that change
includes Action, but contra-natural. So again to worship Jer. 2.27.
stones, and to serve the Romans 1.25.
Creature more then the Creator, Witchcraft and Incest, are all against Nature:
But some of the Gentiles did by Romans 2.14.
Nature the things contained in the Law; whilst other men's actions were
unnatural, because as 2 Pet. 2.12.
natural brute Beasts, and not as men, they spoke evil of things they
understood not.

3. The method by which he is led into all his blasphemies.
3. It is most apparent at every turn, that the main thing to be discussed, is,
whether the sin can be sequestered from the sinful Action. If it can, I must
acknowledge my error, and make amends if I am able. But if it cannot, then Mr.
W. and his party must do the like. My Method is, first to lay it as my
Principle, That God cannot be possibly the Author of sin; and thence to infer,
that he cannot be the Author of a man's lying with a Beast, which is a real act,
and yet a sin: and my reason is, because I cannot conceive, much less describe,
how that sin (called Bestiality) which consists in lying with a Beast, can be
separated from that in which it perfectly consists. But Mr. W's. Method is,
first to lay it as his Principle, that God is the Author of every real act, and
so by consequence of a man's lying with a Beast; which because he knows to be a
sin, of which he would not say plainly that God is the Author, he is fain to
infer (as far as naked words come to) that the sin (which is the Devils part)
may be separated from the sinful act, which act is Gods part, says Mr. W. This
(I say) he often dictates, but gives no reason, nor offers to try how it can
be: nay clearly, though implicitly, does make it appear that it cannot be,
whilst he pretends to show it can be. For observe hi^next words, and hold from
smiling if you are able.

Sect. 12.
1. The sin is inseparable from the sinful action; which Mr. W. seems to see by
his Tergiversation. Compare this with c. 3. sect. 18.
[ But I suppose he is not so dull-sighted, but if he pleased he could easily
discern a difference between the action and the evil quality of it, p. 25.]
This is his new Tergiversation, which is intended by its Author to do the
office of a proof. In stead of trying to make me see what I affirm to be
invisible, he contents himself to say, that I can see it if I please. By the
same Logic I may prove, that he can stand in London, and hear the grass
growing in this part of the Country; the medium to prove it being this, [Sure
he is not so heavy-eared, but that he could hear it, if he pleased.] To discern
any Note, Reader, that I use the word Difference as an act of my bounty to Mr.
W. against whom it lies upon me to prove no more then that there is no
separability of David's sia called Adultery, from his lying with Bathshebah,
which was his Action as well as Sin.
difference betwixt David's lying with Bathshebah and his Adultery, or betwixt
his Adultery and his Sin, is at least as impossible as to hear the grass
growing at 60 miles distance. If Mr. W. can see a difference, where
dull-sighted mortals can see nothing but Identity, he must lend them his eyes
and his perspective, that they may see it as well as he; or supply them with
Faith, by which at least they may believe that he can see what they cannot. Had
he thought he spoke rightly, why did he not descend to some one pertinent
Instance, as that which I have given, or any other? It is a very ill sign when
a man hides himself in Dolus latet in generalibus.
generals, which are known to be nothing but second notions.

2. He speaks as if be thought an Accident could be the subject of Inhesion
unto an Accident.
2. He speaks of an action, and its quality, as if he considered not the
predicaments they both are in; and thought that action is the subject in which
quality is inherent, and from which it may be parted, as a separable accident
from a substance. So that before I go further, it may be needful to mind him of
these four things. 1. That action and quality are both accidents. 2. That an
Accident is not the subject of Inhesion unto an Accident. 3. That some
Accidents are separable from their subject of Inhesion, (as artificial colors
upon a wall) and some inseparable, (as Risibility in a man.) 4. That every
Action implies a Quality, according to which the Agent acts. Thus Calefactio
must needs imply Calor: Nor is it possible to imagine the act of heating
without Heat. Thus Hatred is a quality, and to hate God is an Action: Nor is it
possible to separate the hating of God (which is the action) from the hatred of
God (which is the quality, without which the action can have no Being.) Yet
betwixt these two there is a difference, though no possible separation; which
shows the gross Fallacy Mr. W. has put upon himself, in making no difference
between a Difference and a Separability. Many things are inseparable from many
things, betwixt which notwithstanding there is a difference: which I would make
to appear by uncontrolable examples, if I thought so meanly of Mr. W. as to
think he needs them. But if he will tell me his wants, I promise speedily to
supply them.

3. He confounds the act of differing with the passive power of being parted.
3. This does lead me to complain of a great injustice in Mr. W. who does imply
me to have said (what he knows I did not) that I cannot discern the difference
between the quality and the action; whereas my words were these only, (and so
cited by himself) That it is impossible to separate the wickedness of the wicked
act from the act which is wicked. As if, when I say, it is impossible to
separate the three persons in the Trinity (commonly called Individual) the one
from the other; Mr. W. should answer, I am not so dull-sighted as not to
discern there is a difference between the first Person and the second, the
second and the third: whereas it is he is dull-sighted, who discerns not the
difference between the act of differing in Individuals, and the passive power of
being parted.

4. He believes not (or dissembles) that David's action with Bathshtbah was his
sin.
4. But though I am bound to say no more, then that the wickedness of the wicked
action cannot be separated from the action which is wicked; and again, that the
sin cannot be separated from the action which i^ sinful (as Mr. W. p. 25. Ans.
5. l. 30, 31, 32.
says it can) yet I just now added, and still add, there is no difference.
For David's lying with Bathshebah was his action, which action was his sin,
which sin was his wickedness. The whole world lies in wickedness, that is, in
Sin. To prevent a (...), I give this notice to Mr. W. that if the word
Wickedness is not always synonymous with sin, yet it is so often; and so I now
use it.

5. He makes the sin of adultery to be separable from it self.
5. Because the words of Mr. W. are very homonymous and uncertain (of several
aspects, and to be taken or mistaken as many several ways) I will tell him
what I discern, and where I cease to be discerning. I discern a gross
difference between the sin and the sinner (though from some kinds of sinners
some kinds of sin cannot be parted.) I discern another difference between the
action, and the quality by which the action is good, or evil, or indifferent,
(neither morally good, nor morally evil.) Again, I discern a clear difference
between one evil action and another; as between David's Adultery, and his
Murder. But I discern no difference between the same evil action, and it self;
as between David's lying with Bathshebah, and his Adultery. Nor is it credible
that such difference should be, much less be discernable, when even the acutest
of Mr. W's own party (among whom Libert. and Necess. p. 23. where note, that
Mr. Hobbs seems to have borrowed his Argument, which proves his own doctrine
blasphemous, from Doctor Jackson, l. 10. c. 6. fol. 3013. Mr. W. specks
purposely beside the purpose, by which he tacitly confesses his cause is
desperate.
Mr. Hobs has no low place) have not only professed that they cannot discern
any difference betwixt the sin and the sinful action, but they have clearly
discerned there can be none. Nay Mr. VV. does here demonstrate that he cannot
discern the least difference, whilst he tells me, that if I please, I can
discern it. For mark how strangely he speaks to my similitude.

Sect. 13.
[ The roundness may be separa^ed from the Globe, and yet the matter of it
remain still, when it is put into another Form, p. 25, 26.] Hence he discovers,
that he knew his cause desperate, and did wilfully mistake his proper Task,
because he saw it impossible to be performed. For first he leaves out the later
end of my sentence, by which the sense is to be governed, and the scope of it
to be taken: which had he not wilfully omitted, he could not certainly have
said what here he says. My words were far from being thus, [A Globe may be
destroyed, and so its roundness be taken away; or, the roundness may be
separated from the Globe by the Globes ceasing to be a Globe, and its matter
cast into some other form] but on the contrary, thus, [ See the Div. Philanth.
def. chapter 4. p. 42.
The roundness cannot be se^arated from the Globe which is round.] Which last
words I did add on purpose, to note the continuance of the subject of the
roundness spoken of, and to preserve my simplest Reader from the very
possibility of that mistake, which Mr. W. out of subtilty has here most
resolutely committed. Having mentioned a Globe, I needed not have added round,
had it not been for such Readers as do not know or con^ider, that nothing not
round can be a Globe. Nor did I imagine that Mr. W. could have been of their
number, who not considering a Globe is round, or else not a Globe, (which is a
loathsome contradiction) can dream that roundness may be separated from the
Globe, because the Globe with the roundness may be separated from the matter in
which it was, to wit the brass or the wood, which may be cast or shaped into
several figures. To separate roundness from the Globe, is neither more nor less
impossible, then to separate roundness from roundness, which is so much more
then to square the Circle, that many have ventured upon the one, (as well as M.
Hobbs,) whereas none but M. Whitfield has ever thought of doing the other. And
yet his way of attempting it is at least as admirable as his attempt: For
instead of proving against my words, that the roundness may be separated from
the Globe which is round, (so as it still may remain a Globe) he says the
Globe may be cast, as to the matter of it, into another form; and what is this
but to say, the Globe is not immutable, but may cease to be a Globe, by being
turned into a conical, or a cubical Figure? But Mr. W. knew that this was
contrary to the subject of which I spoke, and inconsistent with the case of
which we are speaking: for it is not our Question, whether a sinner can be
converted and become a Saint, or whether his sin can be done away and
destroyed, and his actions which were wont to be very evil, be very much
altered unto the better: But whether the sin can be separated from the sinful
action, so as the action shall remain when the sin is gone from it. As whether
David^s sin can be parted from his adultery, or his adultery from his lying
with Bathshebah, it being supposed and granted, that he is lying with
Bathshebah, and that the doing so is adultery, and that adultery is a sin. This
being the Case, and Mr. VV. speaking not of it, but of quite another thing, I
therefore condemn him out of his own mouth, for having spoken against a truth,
even whilst he saw it was unresistible. For he who sits beside the Cushion, no
less the twenty yards wide, even after he took it into his hands as if he meant
to sit on it, cannot be thought to sit beside it because it is not conspicuous,
but because it is conspicuously so full of prickles, or any otherwise so
frightful, as that he dares not adventure on it.

2. His wonderful attempt to wash wet from water.
2. To show Mr. W. both his danger, and his dishonor in such his dealings, let
him name any one thing in any part of his doctrines wherein he will affirm an
inseparability, and I will presently enforce him to confute himself out of
himself. I will prove by an argument ad hominem (which he at least will not
resist) that Mr. W. may be separated from Mr. W. nay, I will prove with more
color, that the difference is wide betwixt twenty and twice ten, because that
is but one number, but this is two. I will prove the separability of his proper
passion from his formal reason, and again of his formal reason from that
essential whole to which it gives its specification. I will prove that a
disease, however incurable, may be cured; because it is possible to kill the
Patient. There is nothing so impossible, but may be proved to Mr. W. to be the
contrary, if he will but take his own coin for current, which here he puts off
to others without a blush. If his mavelous error has been through ignorance,
or inadvertency, (which yet I cannot conceive) he shall do well to study the
nature of conjugates, and denominatives, of adjuncts and subjects, of common
and proper accidents; and if he will try but to put his present sense into a
Syllogism, he shall find four terms in the Premises, or Ignoratio Elenchi in
the conclusion: he shall not escape one of the two, let him go which way he
will.

3. The three lines of his present Section, which shut it up, p. 26. are
cabbage (not only twice, but) twenty times boiled, and from the first to the
last is gratis dictum.

Sect. 14.
Mr. W. affirms God to will and work sin, and to have a hand in effecting of
it, upon his supposal that sin makes for Gods glory.
Mr. W's five Essays, instead of Answers to my Objection, being now at an end,
he proceeds to a fourth Argument as he calls it in the Margin) whereby to prove
his beloved Doctrine, of God's efficiency in sin. And thus it runs: So far as
sin makes for the glory of God, so far he may both will and work it; for if he
neither intends it, nor has any hand at all in effecting it, how shall it make
for his glory? p. 26.] First he lays for his foundation a most palpable
falsehood, That sin does make for God's glory. This is his postulatum he will
needs have granted, and therefore gives no reason, or color for it. Observe
the manner of his speech: he says not passively, sin is made an occasion upon
which God is glorified; but actively, sin does make for the glory of God. Nor
does he say, that sin makes for it per accidens, from whence he could not
infer, God wills and works it; but by making this inference, he implies that
sin does make per se for God's glory. Is not he likely to infer strange things,
whose very Principle implies a contradiction? To sin, is to rebel against the
Maker of that Law, of which it is a transgression: to rebel against him, is to
dishonor him: there is nothing but sin by which the God of all glory can be
dishonored: And to say that God's dishonor does make for his glory, is the
same as to say, that that is for his glory which is against it. Thus the
Ranters and Libertines are taught to plead for their sins, that they do not
commit them as God thereby is dishonored; but (in the contrary notion) as they
make for God's glory: they rebel not against him, but take up arms; or if it
must be called a rebellion, yet they rebel against him in his defense only, to
the end they may make him a glorious God; they fight against him in loyalty,
that his pardoning mercy may shine forth in its highest luster. They in the
times of the Apostles, who did evil that good might come of it, and sinned the
more, that grace might abound, were led to sin by their opinion, that sin did
make for Gods glory. The Carpocratians thought it their duty as well as
incerest, to fill up the measure of their sins, by which God was to be
glorified. And many have attempted to pull the Thou shall not revile the Gods,
nor curse the Ruler of thy people, Exodus 22.28.
Gods out of their Thrones, (that is, the Rulers of the people) professing to
do it for their good, and for the glory of God Almighty.

2. He concludes sin to be good, or God's willing and working it as evil. See
what I, shall say Sect. 19. of this Chapter.
2. When Mr. W. says, that sin does make for Gods glory, he does certainly mean
that sin is good, at least, so far as it makes for Gods glory, because he
presently adds, that God so far may will and work it. Which if he shall
venture to deny, he will then bewray it to be his doctrine, that God may will
and work sin as sin, and that sin as sin does make for Gods glory. For whatever
is the object of Gods will, or the effect of his working, or has a tendency to
his glory, must needs be taken in one notion of the two, as good, or as evil.
If as good, then Mr. B. and Mr. Hick. are quite undone by Mr. W. who will
either have God the Author of it, or else will conclude its (...). And again,
Mr. W. is undone by himself, because he would separate the sin from the sinful
act, for this very reason, that the act only is good, but not the sin. If he
shall say, by way of refuge, that God does will sin as evil, (not as good) how
then does he will it as it makes for his glory, unless Mr. W. will say, that it
makes for his glory as it is evil? and if this last, then sin as evil must
needs be good, because as such it does that in respect of which (says Mr. W.)
God wills and works it. And if God does will, my work sin as it is evil, then
it is not only good as w ll as evil, whilst it is evil, but good eatenus, so
far forth as it is evil; good, because evil; that is, good, and not good: nay
it therefore is good, because it is not. Into such kinds of mischief has Mr.
W. ingulft himself.

3. He feigns God to work evil to a good end.
3. Upon this foundation, that sin makes for God's glory, observe how he raises
his superstructure. He says that God may both will and work sin: not one, but
both; not will or work, but will and work it. Here behold a barefac't speaker.
The Sinner and his Satan can have no more said of them: God and they are said
to differ in their aims, not at all in their actions. All do will and work
sin: but God does both (says Mr. W.) as it makes for his glory; the Sinner and
Satan do both, but not for Gods glory; Let Satan pass; but how few sinners are
there, who will and work sin, to the end that God may be dishonored? I
believe, and hope there are no such sinners. Nay, how many sinners have sworn
(with hands lifted up to the most High God) that they have willed and workt
those very things, which they have afterward confessed to have been damnable
sins, without respect unto self, and merely as making for the glory of God? we
have our Saviors words for it, and Paul's example. Our Lord foretold his own
Disciples, that Joh. 16.2.
whosoever should kill them would think they did God service. And 'twas in
Philip. 3.6.
zeal to religion that Paul persecuted the Church before his conversion of name
and temper. He was cruel as he was godly, a rigid Verse. 5.
Pharisee, and in his way Verse. 6.
blameless. Of these it will not be denied then, that they did will and work
sin (not as sin, but) as it made for God's glory, as they conceived. The sad
consequences and uses which some have made of this Doctrine, I have showed
partly See the Div. Philanth. Def. chapter 4. p. 42.
elsewhere, and so forbear.

4. Q. Whether he inferrs not God to be a^ sinner.
4. He does not only make sin to be the object of Gods will, (which is
desperately bad) but the effect of his working, which sounds much worse. To
work sin does define and denominate a sinner, witness the words of our Savior
to the condemned Reprobates, Depart from me ye that (...). Mat. 7.23.
work sin, or Transgression. The Devils chief sinning is his making others to
become sinners, and thence he has purchased the name of Satan, and (...), the
Tempter. Nor does it excuse Mr. W. to have said that God does work sia as it
makes for his glory. For besides the absurdities which I showed in that shift,
he must remember that the end is but one circumstance of many, which are all
required to make a good action: Bonum est ex causa integra, malum ex quolibet
defectu:
the least defect is enough to deprave an action, and the greatest perfection
is but enough to make it every way blameless. Besides, the end is extrinsecal
to the essence of an action, in respect of the matter and the form, which make
it up. And if it is impossible for a good man to work sin to a good end,
(interim ut sit bonus secundum quod vult) much less can God work it in order to
his glory. Further yet it must be noted, that as some things are evil, because
forbidden by God; so others have been forbidden by him, because they were in
their nature antecedently evil. And how can God work sins which are so
naturally such, (as the blaspheming, cursing, and hating of God himself) that
the purity of his being is an eternal Law unto himself against such working?
Let Mr. W. make reflection upon his words.

5. He is inconsistent with M. H. and Mr. B.
5. If God does work sin, in as much as it makes for his glory, then sin is his
work in the same respect in which he works it. And if so, it is a positive
thing, which Mr. H. and Mr. B. will by no means endure; for then (say they) it
must be God, unless it be granted to be his Creature. Thus the Brethren betray
each other, and each himself, both into most frightful and inextricable
streights.

6. Inconsistent with them and with himself too.
6. That we may not be able to wrong the meaning of Mr. VV. he gives his reason
for his blasphemy: [ For if he neither intends it, nor has any hand at all in
effecting it, how shall it make for his glory? p. 26.] Elsewhere he says, God
has an efficiency in sin, and a hand in sin; but now he tells us in plainer
terms, God has a hand in effecting sin. Then sin (it seems) is the effect, of
which God is the efficient; and yet at other times they tell us, that sin has
no efficient, but only a deficient cause. So irreconcilable they are with one
another, and with themselves. As the wicked men effect sin, Mr. VV. grants it
dishonours God. And therefore to the end that it may make for his glory, M. VV.
tell us, he himself must have a hand in effecting of it; for so he
expostulates, if he does not do so, how shall it make for his glory? A
well-taught child would answer thus; If sin cannot make for Gods glory, unless
God has a hand in effecting it, then the first cannot be, because the second
is impossible. So common it is for those men to begin their reasonings at the
wrong end; witness this last violentum.

7. He frames not his Propositions to the nature of God, but the nature of God
to his Propositions:
7. What at first he says God may do, he now infers that he must do. And
what is that, but to will and work sin, and to have a hand in effecting it? how
else (says he) shall it make for his glory? that is, how else shall Mr. VV's
principle be true? Mr. VV's maxims must be true, though God must be blasphemed
to help make them out. The original of his error I showed long since, in his
not apprehending what is meant by Gods taking occasion to glorify himself,
partly by punishing, partly by pardoning, partly by ordering the sins of men.
In all which cases it is not sin, but Gods justice in punishing, his mercy in
pardoning, and his wisdom in ordering, which do make for his glory.

Sect. 15.
Mr. VV's next thing, which I know not what to call, but is called by him a
fifth Argument in his margin, is the same which was spoken by Mr. B. to whom I
gave See the Div. Philanth. chapter 3. p. 129. to. p. 140.
a large Answer; and the same which was spoken by the Superintendent Mr. Hobbs
in his egregious Number. 12. p. 107. lin. 1.
Animadversions (or rather Tergiversations) on the learned Bishops Reply; nay
the same which was spoken by Mr. VV. himself, no longer ago then p. 23. to
which I gave a whole Section in the close of my first Chapter. And it amounts
to no more then an expression of his fear, that God will be found an Idle
Spectator, and an Idle Beholder, (they are his own words) unless hebe granted
to will and work sin. Against which he proceeds to frame, and answer an
Objection; which that he may answer the less unhappily, he fashions it to
himself in these following words.

Sect. 16.
1. His great forgery in that little which he cites.
Sect. 16. [Mr. P. thinks to shift himself from this argument by telling us,
That God does wisely order and dispose of sin after the committing of it, but
does not determine that it shall be done, or has any hand in the doing, p. 26.]
1. These words he cites from my Div. Philan. Def. c. 3. p. 129. where I cannot
find them, nor in any other page of any thing which I have written: So that
here I must demand more reparations for more injury. My words were these; [That
God, besides his permitting of our sins, does dispose and order them to the
best Advantage.] What Mr. VV. has foisted in, and how he has forged the
whole period, I need not say; the Reader sees it.

2. His foul sense of Gods determining that sin shall be done.
2. God, according to his praescience that sin would be voluntarily done, if not
miraculously hindered, did determine not to hinder, and so consequentially or
conditionally, that sin should be done by his permission, that is, God
determined to permit it to be done. Where permission, not sin, is the object of
Gods determination. But Mr. B's Doctrine was, (and Mr. VV's is) that God did
absolutely and antecedently determine its being done, and determine the wills of
men to do it, and that he could not foresee it but because he decreed it, and
that his will of evil was as efficacious as his will of good. In a word, that
he does so determine its being done, as to have an efficiency and a hand in the
doing of it. Nay in plain terms, that he does work it. And working (we know) is
acting, doing, causing, at least designing, or contriving sin.

3. His impious expression of Gods having a hand in sin, and the importance of
that phrase.
3. What he means by Gods determining sin, he explains in the next words, by
his having a hand in it; which is a most formidable expression, and never
enough to be detested. For he who only permits sin cannot be said to have an
hand in it. Nor 2. he who suffers another to tempt for the exercise of the
constancy, or patience, of a Job, or a Joseph. Nor 3. he who withdraws grace
for sin committed, to punish former despights which had been done to grace
given. Nor 4. he who delivers up to Satan by way of Discipline, to bring unto
Repentance the Presumptuous, or the Secure. But to have a hand in sin, is to be
a partner in it, or an Accessory, whether by commanding, or counselling, or
contriving, or countenancing, or carrying on the business by secret impul^^ons
and excitations; all which are but a few of our Adversaries phrases. And
because Mr. W. is a frequent user of this expression, I will once for all
desire my Reader to note the horrible importance of it. It is the observation
of the most Learned who have commented upon Scripture, that Gods great efficacy
in working is expressed by Finger; his greater efficacy by Hand; his greatest
by Arm. When Moses turned the dust of Egypt into Lice by the power of God,
showing it self in his weakness, the Magicians told Pharaoh, It was the Exodus
8.19. which compare with Luke 11.20.
finger of God. When Job spoke of Gods power by which he created the world, and
by which he does sustain it, he said, Job 12.9. which compare with Act. 11.21.
The hand of the Lord had wrought it. And when the Mother of our Lord would
express the very greatest, that is, the most to be admired of all Gods works,
his own conception and Incarnation in the Body of Mary, she said that God had
showed strength with his Luke 1.51.
Arm. And so without more ado I leave my Reader to judge both of the phrase and
meaning of Mr. W. when he says that God has a hand in sin; which because I
denied and disproved also, Mr. W. tells me again, what he told me twice before,
that God is inferred to be a mere Spectator. Observe his words.

Sect. 17.
1. Mr. W's gross error in the notion of Gods permission.
[ But then still it follows, that he stands as a mere spectator in regard of
the greatest part of actions that are done in the world. -- But how can this
stand with the All-wise and All-working providence of God, (without which a
sparrow falls not to the ground) that he should stand looking on, etc. and
determine: nor do any thing while they be done and past, only afterward
employ his wisdom in ordering of them? p. 26, 27.] Though 'twere sufficient to
refer him to what I have said of Gods permission in diverse Tracts already
published, which if he has read, he is utterly inexcusable for what he here so
crudely, and yet so frequently, venteth: yet I will tell him once more, what I
told him so lately (Chap. 1. Sect. 6.) but only now I will do it in plainer
terms, that I may leave him no pretense of misapprehending or overseeing my
meaning in it. I do not mean that God permits sin with such a neglectfulness,
and unconcernedness, as the Epicureans are wont to dream of, who feign a God
sitting with his back toward the world; but I mean a most useful and a most
wise Permission, becoming the wisdom as well as goodness of that only wise
God, who will not hinder what he sees, and hates perfectly while he sees it,
because it is better that he should bring that good out of evil which he can
and does, then that he should not suffer any evil to be done. I never speak of
a bare permission, as that excludes every thing else, but only as it excludes
Gods working, or decreeing, or willing sin. God does not only permit, but
punish evil, and dispose of it to good, as the murdering of Christ to the
salvation of the world: yet God had no more a hand in that de villish murder,
(non impediendo efficaciter) then I have a hand in the falling down of any
house which I do not underprop.

2. His tremendous notion of all-working providence:
2. Mr. W. opposes to a mere looking on, the all-working Providence of God,
which is the language of the Libertines, without any distinction of good or
evil, and shows us what he means by Gods having a hand in all the wickedness of
the world. The instance he gives of a sparrow falling to the ground is most
impertinent to the subject of his ciscourse, unless he can prove it to be a
sin for a sparrow so to fall, which if he could do, he would also prove that
God does neither will nor work it. His following words are most insipid,
because he knows it is granted, that God did foresee sin before it was; and
sustains the Being of his creature whilst it is committing; and being
committed, overruleth it also to some advantage. But what is this to his This
has been spoken of chapter 1. sect. 2.
determining the will of the sinner to the sin, which is the boldly-irreligious
Tenet, of which its Patrons cannot give us any excusable account?

Sect. 18.
1. M. W. newly puts himself into his old streights, betwixt gross Blasphemies
and extraordinary Impereinence.
Mr. W. professes to give instances in some of his former examples, and so
with a bare repetition fills up the [ page 27. and part of p. 28.] That I may
not repeat, as he has done, I send back my Reader to the fifth Section of my
first Chapter. Only here I observe, he says that God had the chief hand in
Joseph's being sent into Egypt. If he means his brethrens sin in selling Joseph
to strangers, (not knowing or caring to what place they would carry him) then
the blasphemy is apparent: if he means not that, but another thing, Gods doing
good unto Joseph in his affliction, then the impertinence is as signal. As if
when the question is, whether the Physician has any hand in the Patients
Disease, the Respondent should say, Yes, he has the chief hand, because he is
not only a spectator, or looker on, but administers such things as cure his
malady, and perhaps restores him to better health then before he fell sick. I
have reason to be as weary of disputing with such Respondents, as any workman
could be at the Tower of Babel; where when he called for stone, he was supplied
with mortar, and when for mortar, they brought him stone.

2. Affirms God to have a hand in oppression;
2. Mr. W. goes on to Pharaohs oppression of the Israelites, which he affirms
God to have had a Note that in his Preface to his Extent of Gods Providence, he
professes to understand it of Gods active hand.
hand in, because he had determined it, and foretold it many years before. What
[it] does he mean that God determined? If Pharaohs will to his oppression,
behold the blasphemy; if the permission of the oppression, mark well the
impertinence. To foretell is far from having a hand in the event. The Physician
foretells when his Patient shall have a paroxysme in a Chronical disease, even
whilst he is prescribing the usual means of prevention. Mr. W. must study the
difference betwixt the end of an intention, the event of a Prophecy, and the
effect of a cause; and not imagine that Isaiah had any hand in the birth of
Cyrus, because he foretold it an hundred years before Cyrus was born.

3. And in rebellion.
3. Mr. W. says, that God had a hand in that, which is called rebellion, 1
Kings 12.19. And to say that he says this, is a word enough for the wise.
Again, that God hand a hand in the destruction of Samaria, Is. 10.3. But what
then? was it a sin for God to destroy such sinners, who were the people of his
wrath, because hypocritical, v. 6? And might he not do it by what instrument he
pleased, by giving a right, as he did to Israel over the Canaanites, or by
permitting the violence, as he did to Assyria over Israel? But what has Mr.
VV. got by this? was Assyria the happier for being the Rod of Gods anger, v. 5?
No; the Rod, when it is used, is commonly cast into the Fire; and to be burnt
is worse then to be beaten.

4. In murders, treacheries, violence and wrong.
4. Mr. W. says farther p. 28. That when dominion has been devolved from one
hand to another, it has seldom been done without much violence and wrong, yea,
without murders, treacheries, and bloodshed. To which he presently adds, that
God had a hand in such things. If he means in those unjust things, he speaks
according to his Principles as well as Mr. Hobbs; if otherwise, he is but
impertinent. I wish that that were the worst. But because it is said, that God
does give Kingdoms to whom he will (Dan. 4.14.) he must be brought to a
remembrance, that God is sometimes said to give Kingdoms in the Letter, as
when he gave Israel the land of Canaan: but sometimes only by an Hebraism, as
when he permitted the Assyrians to hold his people in captivity for seventy
years; though I do not remember that God was ever said in Scripture to have
given the Kingdom of Israel unto Assyria. Besides, God gives riches to whom he
will, yet gives it not literally to them that steal, to them that seize on
their neighbors goods by fraud, or violence. For then whosoever has the
strongest arm, and has added to that the longest sword, might live among^^ his
neighbors like a great Pike in a Pond, and say he does but take what God has
given him. The King of Spain and the Great Turk would probably love to hear
such Preachers, as would thus promote the universality of their Empire. And the
later proceeds upon the very same Maxim with Mr. W.

5. He justifies all our English Ranters by ascribing all our changes to the
hand of God.
5. Wh^t is added touching the changes which have happened here at home, I need
not speak unto at all. It being cle^r already, that as all actions are wicked
which are against the will of God, revealed to us in his commandments,
(affirmative and negative,) so God abhorrs all such, and is so far from having
a hand in them, that he will certainly lift up his hand against them, if not
remarkably in this world, yet infallibly in the next: for the longer he is in
lifting up his hand, he lifts it up so much the higher, and by so much more
heavily he lets it fall. How quickly do men's opinions run out of their heads
into their hearts, and thence into their hands too, I mean, their actions? I am
persuaded that Mr. W. had hardly taken a sequestration, if he had not believed
that God had had a hand in it.

6. God cleared from carelessness or weakness.
6. But mark how he goes on: To deny that God has a hand (in the proper subject
of our debate) were (says he) to make God a very weak and impotent, or a very
remiss and careless Governor of the world, etc. p. 28. Bona verba quaeso. Ne
saevi, magne Sacerdos. Must it be weakness in God not to have a hand in
wickedness? No, it is an argument of his power, as well as purity. See the
prodigious groundlesness of speaking thus concerning God, exhibited at large in
the sixth Section of my first Chapter, and in the seventeenth of this. God
indeed gives man his power to will, and to do: but man being left [in manu
consilii sui] in the hand of his own counsel, does determine his will to such
and such actions as God forbids, rather then to such as God commands, to wit,
Adulteries, Murders, Extortions, and the like. As God forbids these actions
which are sins, so he gives Grace to abstain from the doing of them, and all
things else, except an irresistible impeding of us. He farther disposes and
orders the things done to good, and that in many respects, as I have See the
Sinner impleaded, part. 2. chapter 2. p. 262.
elsewhere showed. This in all, but more in some, of whom we have Pharaoh for
an example, whom he did not only withdraw his Grace from, but condemned also
to live, (when he might have sent him as quick into hell, as he did Corah and
his company) being delivered up finally unto an utter obduration, I will shut
up this Paragraph with that of Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 9.4.
Speak not thou in thine heart, For my righteousness the Lord has brought me
in to possess this land -- Verse. 5.
Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thine heart, do thou
possess it, but for the wickedness of these Nations the Lord does drive them
out from before thee. Ves. 6.
Not for thy righteous^ess, for thou art a stiff-necked people.

Sect. 19.
God has no hand in w lling or effecting what he hates.
M. W. now proceeds to undertake a new Objection which he does not cite from
any part of my writings, or any man's else; but it seems it is such as he
thought he could answer, and it is briefly this: God hates all sin, and
therefore can have no hand at all either in willing or effecting of i^; for no
man will have any hand in doing what he hates, p. 28.] First, I observe he does
not deny what is objected, in so much as he owns it to be his Doctrine, that
God has a hand in willing and effecting what he hates. Secondly, I observe
that he does not answer the Objection, but only puts [Answ.] before his words,
which are partly an Evasion or Tergiversation, and partly a Grant of the thing
objected. The Evasion is thus, [Though he hates it, yet he permits it.] And why
is he said to permit sin, which he hates, rather then to permit righteousness,
which he loves, but because he has not any hand in the former, as he has in
the later? And what an Argumentator must he be thought, who goes to prove that
God does will and work s^n, by saying, he permits it? that is in effect,
because he neither wills, nor works it? His reason is worse, which is taken
from Gods getting glory by sin, ibid. for God gets nothing by any man's
righteousness (if we speak exactly) much less by his sins. Or if we may say by
a Figure, that God gets glory by our thanksgivings, yet sure by our blasphemies
he gets nothing but dishonor. Because God takes occasion of doing good, upon
our doing evil, (which good conduces to his glory) it seems Mr. W. is of
opinion, that God gets glory by the evil: then which I cannot imagine a more
intolerable mistake. A case put to show the danger of Mr. W's Doctrine.
He who concludes he is a vessel of absolute election, and that he cannot fall
totally or finally from Grace, may corrupt himself strangely by such a maxim,
as that sin makes for. Gods glory, or that God may get himself glory by it; and
be apt to plead, upon his committing of adultery or incest, that he did not do
it as 'twas forbidden by the word (which is This is the Doctrine of Dr. Twisse
and others, particularly owned by Mr. W. p. 47.
improperly called the will of God, say they,) but as God did secretly will it,
as it made for Gods glory, or to the end that God might get himself some glory
by it. He did it not out of lust, or as a sin, but to procreate a Saint, and
increase the number of the godly, and withal to glorify that discriminating
mercy, which could not be exercised in the pardoning of such sins, if they were
not committed by them in whom they are capable of being pardoned, that is to
say, by the Elect. I put this Case, to fright men out of those premises, from
which (if God restrain them not) they have been known by experience to draw
such horrible conclusions. And had I not been able to give examples, I should
not have thought this method needful. Mr. W. tells us plain enough, (both p.
26. and here too) that so far as sin makes for Gods glory, God may both Note
that all are his own expressions, ^.26, and 28. which must be compared: to
which purpose, look on what I h^ve said sect. 14. of this Chapter.
will, and * work it, and have a hand in (...) effecting, or * working of it.
And though sin be in it self evil, yet it may have some respect of * good. As
for that which he calls a true Rule, and what he has out of Austin against
himself, I will not exagitate his unhappiness therein, (as I must also forbear
to do it in many other particulars,) merely for fear I should be endless.

Sect. 20.
Mr. W. proceeds to a sixth Argument, whereby he proves his great willingness to
prove that God has efficiency and hand in sin; Mr. W's dangerous
mis-apprehension of that figurative Sentence, That God does punish sin with sia.
but more then his willingness to prove it, he proves not. For his Argument is
but this, [ That God punishes one sin with another; and punishment is more
then a bare permission. It were ridiculous to say, that a Judge only
permits a malefactor to be arraigned, condemned, and executed, p. 28. lin.
ult. p. 29. lin. 1, 2, 3, 4.] First, it is not any where said in Scripture,
that God does punish one sin with another; but it is a sentence of the
Schoolmen, as commonly known to be catachrestical as any beggar knows his own
dish, and has neither truth nor sense in it, unless it be figuratively meant.
For God punishes the sinner and not the sin. Nor does he imprint sin on him as
the Lictor does stripes, but withdraws his grace, and leaves the sinner to
himself, whereupon he sins without restraint. But I have spoken of this in
See the Sinner Impleaded, c. 1. p. 9.
another place, where I have also recorded S. Austins suffrage for the truth.

2. His making God the proper cause of the greatest sins.
2. But Mr. W. has so prodigiously misunderstood that sentence, or else so
guiltily dissembled his understanding, as to express Gods punishing of sin with
sin by the positive actions of a Judge, in his arraigning, condemning, and
execution of malefactors: which is to make God the Author and proper cause of
the greatest sins in the world, such as are the later sins which are called the
punishments of the former. It being frequently the Doctrine of Mr. W. that of
all positive actions God is the Author and Ext. of Gods Prove. c. 4. p. 11.
proper cause. But Idolatries, and Adulteries, Blasphemies, and Murders, and
the sins not to be named ( Romans 1.26.) are positive actions, and punishments,
in the Schoolmens sense; and so according to Mr. W. God is blasphemously
inferred to be their Author and proper cause.

3. Which he also extends to the very sin of the act.
3. Now we see what moved him to say in print, [ That God must Ibid. p. 12. Iin.
1, 2.
needs some way both will and work in the sin of the Act.] Mark well, good
Reader: He does not say (as at other times) the act of sin, or the sinful act,
but the sin of the act, meaning the pravity, and deformity and obliquity it
self, as he explains himself in the next two lines, wherein he says that God
gets glory to himself by that very pravity and deformity.

4. He treads a step beyond Calvin's worst.
4. Mr. W. in this does tread a step beyond Calvin, not only "" Calv. Instit.
l. 1. c. 18. sect. 1. fol. 68.
follows him through thick and thin. For though Mr. Calvin speaks broadly, [
that the wicked man, whilst he acts, is Id. ib. sect. 2. fol. 69. Apparet
cer a destinatione Dei fuisse impulsos. Fateor quidem interposita Satanae opera
saepe Deum agere in Reprebis; sed ut e jus impulsu Satan ipse suas parts agat.
-- unde hoc, nisi quod a Deo manat efficacia erroris, ut mendacium credant?
etc. Ibid. Summa haec sit, quum Dei voluntas dicitur rerum omnium esse cause,
-- ut non tantum vim suam exerat in electis, sed etiam reprobos in obsequium
cogat. Ibid. Et jam satis aperte ostendi, Deum vocari eorum omnium Authorem,
quae isti censores volunt otioso tantum ejus permissu contingere. Id. ib. sect.
3. p. 7.
acted by God; and that the Assyrians were thrust on [to rob and plunder by the
sure destination of God; and that God does act in the reprobates by the
interposition of Satan's help; that Satan by God's impulse may act his own part
also; and that the efficacy of error proceeds from God; and that when he casts
men into filthy desires, he is the chief Author of his just vengeance, (that
is, of sin in Mr. W's sense) and Satan only the Minister; and that the will of
God is the cause of all things; and that his providence does not only exert
its force in the elect who are ruled by his holy Spirit, but does also compel
the reprobates to be obsequious; and that God is called the Author of all those
things which the censorious will have to happen by his idle permission only:
though these are frightful expressions, and applied in such a manner as not to
be capable of excuse, yet Mr. VV. (as I showed) has stepped beyond him.

5. The Veteres religiosiu interdum simplicem veritatis confessionem in hac
part reformidant. -- Ne Augustinus quidem illa superst^tione interdum solutus
est, quemadmodum ubi dicit, indurationem and excaecationem non ad operationem
Dei, sed ad praescientiam spectare. Calv. Inst. l. 2. c. 4. Sect. 3. fol. 95.
Ancient Fathers were afraid to ascribe that to God's working which they saw
could only be the object of his praescience, and his permission; and this by
the confession of Mr. Calvin himself, who as he calls it their superstition, so
he confesses that S. Austin was not always free from it. But Mr. Calvin in
despite of the Fathers piety, which he brands with the Title of Superstition,
does very dogmatically pronounce of those later sins of men which are called
the punishments of the former, that as they are punishments, God is Idem. l. 1.
c. 18. Sect. 2.
Author praecipuus, the prime or chief Author, and that the Devil is only
subservient to him, Satan vero tantu Minister. And though he says that the
Ancients were somewhat too religious in their fear of speaking the simple
truth, (as he calls it) yet he confesses their fear was very sober, because
the thing which they feared was the Idem ib. l. 2. c. 4. Sect. 3. fol. 95.
opening a passage unto impiety, of irreverently defaming the works of God. Now
what it was which misled Mr. VV. and Mr. B. from that holy fear of those
Fathers, to speak of God in such a fearless and frightful manner, (as I have
partly already showed, and am partly to show in my following Chapter) I believe
most Readers do judge as I do.

Sect. 21.
1. The desperate nature of Mr. u's Salvo's, and the hardness of his very
emollients.
Mr. W. having now done with the prime part of his enterprise, wherein he has
often made God to be the Author of sin, and often very much worse, goes on
talking to himself, from p. 29. to p. 35. in an endeavored excuse of what he
has hitherto delivered. And in the very entrance on that attempt, he makes
himselef unexcusable, by dropping out such excuses as stand in need of an
excuse, but cannot find one. 1. Though Gods permission of sin is an operative
permission (says Mr. W.) yet he is not the Author of the evil permitted. His
reason is, because what the wicked do wickedly, God does holily, p. 29. Which
is only to say, that God is not the Author of sin in Himself, not that he is
not the Author of sin in others. The Question is not whether God is a
Transgressor, but whether he makes men Transgressors, as Zuinglius publicly
affirms. Not whether David's lying with Bathshebah was a good Adultery, and
so no sin, in as much as it was the work of God, and in as much as God did
impel him to it (as Zuinglius also speaks.) This is not the Question, but the
sordid begging of the Question, and a taking that for granted, which we deny
and abominate with all our might, as most blasphemous and irrational. The
Question is, whether God impelled David to that Adultery, or did work in the
sin of that act, (as Mr. W. speaks) which whilst I deny as a most impious and
a most senseless proposition, he must first of all prove and make apparent,
before he comes to infer upon it, that the very same thing which man does
wickedly God does holily and justly: For God does it not at all, nor can he do
it, because he is God.

2. What he says of the Physicians occasioning the sickness, yea the death of
the Patient, 2.
by giving Physic which meets wi ha malignant Humor, who yet cannot be said
to be the Author of those effects, p. 29, 30. is as impertinent a similitude as
he could easily have chosen, and shows he considers not of what he speaks, or
understands not any thing of the word Author, or seeks to amuse his illiterate
Reader.

3. He hopes to excuse himself by uttering these following Aphorisms, 3.
which pass with him for fan and soft and suppling speeches. 1. God may be said
to administer occasions of sinning, and so to have some kind of hand in it, The
mollifying expressions of the harsh speaker.
by his word, and by his works, p. 30. 2. The Law has an efficacy in stirring
up sinful motions, p. 30. 3. The good word of God does accidentally stir up the
corruption that is in men's wicked hearts, p. 31. 4. Christ's preaching, and
Stephens preaching had an EFFICIENCY in stirring up the wrath of their Hearers,
p. 31. 5. The good word of God does stir up evil affections in the hearts of
wicked men, p. 31. Thus he puts upon himself that thick and palpable Fallacy,
non causae pro causa. Because when the word of God is preached, the evil
affections of the wicked are stirred up, he concludes that Gods word does stir
them up. As if my writing were the cause of those things which come to pass
when I am writing. Again, he does not distinguish betwixt the giving of
occasions, and taking occasions when none are given. God has spoken and done
those exceeding good things, from which men have snatched an occasion of evil;
but to administer or give occasions of doing wickedly, is so ill a phrase, that
it is very unskilfully applied to God (to say no worse.) And I had hoped that
these times had taught the unlearnedst to distinguish betwixt Scandalum datum,
and acceptum; Acceptum, sed non datum. Though David was pardoned his sin of
Adultery, yet because by that deed he had given great occasion to the enemies
of the Lord to blaspheme, his Infant Child did surely dye, 2 Samuel 12.13, 14. If
Mr. W. did not consider that there is such a thing as the sin of scandal, or
did not know what scandal is, and wherein it stands, he may both know and
consider it another time. He, who in doing what is lawful, intends to make
another man sin, as well as he who does it by doing what is unlawful, without
out intending any such thing, is properly said to give occasion, to scandalize,
to lay a snare in his Brothers way.

4. His open profession that Gods secret will is contrary to his revealed will,
in respect of the very same objects.
4. I am urged to enlarge upon another passage in Mr. W. where he says, that
the wicked in their evil actions do that which is contrary to the revealed
will of God, though the same things which he wills, viz. by his secret will
which they know not, p. 34. But I count the number of my pages, and am exhorted
to spend but little time against a man of no greater strength, and have already
acquainted him with enough of his unhappiness; and whatsoever I shall omit of
his other misadventures, I shall abundantly meet with in my Account of Mr.
Barlee and Mr. Hick. whom I intend for the Subjects of the following Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of Mr. Barlee's forging God to be the Author of Sin, and very much
worse then so too, in his very endeavors to speak as warily as his Principles
will suffer him.
Sect. 1.
BEing now to consider the Doctrinal part of Mr. Barlee's Book, which he
Intitles, A Necessary Vindication, or full Abstersion, I must begin with his
Third Chapter: where omitting his Buffonery, (as that which serves to no end,
but to proclaim him to the world for the most lantentable Zanie that ever
pretended to stir up laughter) I will immediately address my self to the
uncovering of his Doctrines; and of those in the first place, which have most
endeared him to Mr. Whitfield, by forging God to have a hand in all the
wickedness in the World without exception; and not only to be the Author, but
(which is much more frightful) the Necessitator of sin.

His first Abstersion in this kind (for so he was resolved to word it, His
acknowledgment of the crime for which be Apologizeth.
and the Printer it seems did let him have his own will) is a plain
acknowledgment of the Crime with which he stands charged. For of Div. Philan.
c. 3. from p. 1^3. to p. 139.
all those Authors and Assertions which I objected to Mr. B. as to a Follower
and a Disciple, he professes to disown no more then two. His words are these,
[ I will only except against monstrous Leviathan Hobbs, and the Book which he
calls Comfort for Believers. These I disown from ever having been my Masters,
c. 3. p. 7.] Away with these two then; they are excepted against. But for
Zanchie, Borrhaus, Piscator, Beza, Zuinglius, and Martyr, and all the other
ingredients in that long Catalogue, Mr. B. avows them to be his Masters.
Ingenuum est agnoscere per quos profeceris. But it is taught by those Authors,
(in the very Ibid.
pages by him cited) That both the Reprobates and the Elect were preordained to
sin as sin; That God is the Author of sin in general, of Murder and Adultery in
particular; That he is the cause of sin; and in particular the cause of
Incredulity; That God does thrust men on unto wickedness, and the like.
Therefore these and the rest (from p. 133. to p. 139.) are avowedly the
Doctrines of Mr. Barlee. And why Mr. Hobbs is out of favor, who has not
spoken so noisomly as these have done (for ought I have hitherto observed) I
cannot guess at the reason, unless he has offended by his comparative
reservedness.

Sect. 2.
1. He contradicts his own and his Readers eyes, without the least possibility
of gaining by it.
His next Abstersion (c. 3. p. 11.) has the unhappiness to begin with a very
bold falsehood, in contradiction to his own and his Readers eyes. For he
professes [ every where (in his Correp. Correction) to have carefully
distinguished these three things; least possibility of gaining by it.
1. The material part of sin, 2. The formal part of sin, 3. The ruling and
overruling the sin and sinner. This he professes to have done in all the
places which I directed unto, and fears not to say, that his heedful Readers
may easily see it. Either he is confident of no such Readers, or else he has a
worse confidence to affirm point blank he cares not what: For when he spoke of
Gods tempting men to sin, p. 79. he said, he was not at leisure to tell in what
sense: nay, he did peremptorily pronounce, that God does not only determine
all things and actions (without exception) but their several modalities too:
and that of all such modalities God is the supreme cause, p. 86, 87. So that
according to Mr. B. God was not only the Determiner and sovereign Cause of
David's lying with Bathshebah, which was a Thing or Action, but of every
Circumstance or Modality, and so of the sinfulness it self, the application of
David's will to the forbidden object, and of every point of Aggravation with
which the Adultery was loaded. Now though the broad-est-mouth'd. Libertine must
study hard to speak worse, yet this was one of Mr. B's. most careful speeches.

2. He professes his care for the clearing of God from having any efficiency
in sin, 2. His inconsistency with himself, with Mr. W. and Mr. Hick.
as such (p. 11.) yet it was flatly his language, as well as Mr. VV's. (p. 24.)
that God must needs have some efficiency in sin. And his Masters say, in sin as
sin, as has been showed. If by the word [as such] he means another modality,
then he either contradicts what was so lately cited from him, or else it is his
Divinity, that God is the cause of sin as such. But this again is a
contradiction to his clearing God from it. If he means (as Mr. VV.) that God
does will and work sin, not as it is sin, but as it makes for Gods glory; then
he is liable to all those miseries into which Mr. VV. has plunged himself, and
condemns himself out of his own mouth, as well as out of Mr. VV's. and Mr.
Hick. out of both. In a word, he is ruined seven several ways; for an
Acquaintance with which I send him back to my second Chapter Sect. 14.

But. 3. Let us come to the utmost of his Acumen and his Care. He says, [ that
the material part of sin, 3. He betrays himself many ways in his very
provision for an escape. Look forward on Sect. 7. and 12. of this Chapter.
is the doing or leaving undone some positive natural or moral act, and of that
he calls God the sovereign Author, p. 11.] So that if David's Adultery or lying
with Bathshebah was a positive act either natural or moral (which he cannot
deny) he is declaredly of opinion, that God was the sovereign Author of it.
Again, he calls it a part of sin, whilst he calls it the material part of sin;
and adds, that God is the Author of it: but every part of the whole must needs
participate the nature of the whole, (especially in Accidents:) and even so he
makes God to be the Author of sin, not only in equivalence, but even in those
very terms. Nor will it help him to say, materiale* substratum; for by that he
must mean either the substance or the action, either David himself, or his
lying with Bathshebah. If the former, he is undone; for it is to say, that a
substance is a part of an accident, and that David himself was a part of his
Adultery. If he flies unto the later, he is worse undone then in the former;
for it is to say, that the Action which is confessedly positive, is a part of
that which (according to him and Mr. Hick.) is merely privative; and that
David's lying with Bathshebah was but part of his Adultery, or at least that his
Adultery was but part of his sin. If to avoid these Absurdities, he shall say
the very truth, that the Action it self, to wit, David's lying with Bathshebah,
was indeed his whole Adultery, and so his whole sin; then his miseries are as
pressing as when he spoke the greatest falsehood, unless he cry peccavi, and
yield the whole cause: For either he must deny that David's lying with
Bathshebah was a positive thing, or say that God was the Author of it (as here
he does) or else he must say that Sin is God (which is his own Inference, c. 3.
p. 112.) or he must spit in the face of his pious friend Mr. Hick. who betrayed
him to that senseless blasphemous Inference. Now let him go which way he
pleases, he will find in conclusion (perhaps before I have done with him)
that the last of the four is much the safest.

4. He says that God is but a permissor of the (...), wherein he speaks as I
would have him. 4. He knows not how to dissent from my Doctrine, but by
charging God as the author of sin.
Again, he speaks my sense in the third particular, of Gods governing, ruling,
and overruling both the sin and the sinner. So that our difference must lie in
the first particular of the three, or there is no difference at all, but he is
exactly of my opinion. If this later, why then was I the subject of his
Correptory Correction? if the former, he is the subject of his own. For he
knows I ever granted, that the Being of the Creature depends on God, and so the
power to act, as well as liberty to choose. It must therefore be in somewhat
else that Mr. B. thinks fit to differ from me. And what can that be but this,
that God does determine the will of the sinner to the sin, and is the Author
either of doing, or omitting, those things which are not to be done, or left
undon? the very blasphemy with which I charged him.

5. He does profess to make God the sovereign Author of doing, 5. He grants
the whole charge, or understands not a moral act.
or leaving undon, not only natural, but moral acts. So that in case he knows
the difference betwixt a natural and moral act, he must acknowledge it for his
Doctrine, that God is the sovereign Author of all sins, both of omission and
commission.

6. Yet no sooner has this Abstersor divided sin into two parts, 6. He ingulfs
himself in contradictions on the right hand, and on the left.
(material and formal) but straight he adds, that the second alone is properly
sin, (p. 11.) and so in one short breath he implies a couple of contradictions.
For if he means, the second part is alone the whole sin, how then is it a part?
if he means that that alone is part of the sin, how then is it a second? He
must either prove, that two parts are but one part, or that one only is both
together, or that one half is the whole, or that the whole is no more then the
formal part; or else he must confess, that it is impossible to separate the act
from the sin (as David's lying with Bathshebah from his (...) for breach of
precept) and that Mr. Hick. has abused him more then any man living, by making
him lean upon a weapon which is often running through his elbow.

Sect. 3.
He is ashamed to cite his own words truly.
His third Abstersion defiles him all over, and proves him conscious to himself
of such a guilt, as admits of nothing in its excuse. He pretends only to
have said, [ He was not at leisure in reference to Jam. 1.13, 14. fully to open
in what sense God may seem, and yet not be the Author of sin, p. 11.] But his
words were quite otherwise, how God may be said to Correp. Corr. p. 79.
tempt men unto sin. Which here he durst not repeat, but puts the word seem to
supply the place of that Blasphemy.

And here six things are very observable. 1. That he thought it a blasphemy
beyond his power even to palliate, 1. He proves himself conscious to himself of
being left without excuse.
to have charged God with being a Tempter, and a Tempter unto sin too. For why
should he falsify his own words, if he thought them innocent? why had he not
the courage to be honest in the citation, if he thought his words had been
excusable. He could not think it a gallant thing to be caught condemning
himself in print without a confession that he had erred: and therefore he
anchored upon this, as his lesser misery of the two, hoping perhaps that I
might probably overlook it; and of all other Readers he was secure, that they
would not compare his second book with his first.

2. It was strange that he had the leisure to write a book of thirty sheets,
the leisure to rail, and to raise reports, 2. He pretends a want of leisure to
excuse or extenuate his blasphemy.
the leisure to charge God impiously with the tempting of men to sin, but not
the leisure to show how, so as not to infer him the Author of sin: at leisure
to lay a stumbling-blook before the people, but not at leisure to remove it out
of the way. It was highly for his interest, to have indevoured the clearing of
those words from blasphemy; why then was he wanting in any the least of such
endeavors? even because he found it a most unfaisible attempt. But instead of
confessing it was impossible to be done, he thought it handsomer to say, he had
not leisure to do it in.

3. Be it so that he was not at leisure in his first book, 3. Yet be baulks it
in his second book, wherein he pretends a vindication, and cannot pretend a
want of leisure.
yet how comes it to pass he was not at leisure in his second? Does he think
it a vindication, to let us know that he is capable of no excuse? or will he
say that nothing ails him, because he is desperately sick? Either let him
repent, and make some public satisfaction for calumniating God as a Tempter
unto sin, or let him try to reconcile it with the analogy of faith, or let him
declare himself a Libertine without delay. And if he writes another book, I do
early bespeak him to be at leisure, and to repeat his own words without further
fraud, or Tergiversation.

4. Had he only said that God does tempt men, 4. He forgeth God to be a Satan,
and shows the bottom of his doctrine of Gods decrees.
he might have opened in what sense, by saying not unto sin. But having
specified the object, as well as the act, by saying he tempts men to sin, he
has left nothing to be opened; having opened his whole heart, and showed us
the inside, the kernel, the very marrow of his Divinity, as to the subject of
our debate. For to tempt men unto sin, is the definition of Satan, and the
worst that we can say of the Devil himself. The word tentare of it self is very
innocent, and signifies to prove, or to try, or to bring as 'twere unto the
Touchstone. But when applied unto sin, it only signifies to seduce, or
debauch the person that is tempted. Vincentius Lirinensis, out of the Latin
Translation Deuteronomy. 13.3. does read the Text thus, Sed objici potest, cur a Deo
non prohibetur doceri, quod a Deo prohibetur audiri? Quia (inquit) Tentat vos
Deus. Vin. Lir. cap. 15.
quia tentat vos Deus, and that is all; he does not add, ad peccandum: and our
English Translators have fitly rendered the passage thus, The Lord your God
proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart,
and with all your soul, Deuteronomy. 13.3. And in this sense it is that God is said to
tempt Abraham, Genesis 22.1. that is, by way of proof and trial, as the Apostle
himself explains it, Heb. 11.17. By Faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered
up Isaac.

5. But to tempt men unto sin, 5. He sets himself against the Scripture, and
flatly contradicts S. James in particular.
is so far from being spoken of God in Scripture, that it says the quite
contrary in the very place by him cited, Let no man say when he is tempred, I
am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
man, Jam. 1.13. At such enmity Mr. B. does stand with S. James, that what the
Apostle says we may not say of God Almighty, Mr. B. says we may say of him.
Let the Reader believe which of the two he thinks good. I for my part believe
S. James.

For 6. To say that God does tempt men to sin, 6. He implies the worst of
contradictions, as well as blasphemies.
implies a dull contradiction, as well as Blasphemy. It ceasing eo ipso to be a
sin, when God is said to tempt to it. Admit that God had bid Abraham to kill
his Son (whereas he bad him only offer him, Genesis 22.2. and distinctly forbad
the killing of him, v. 12.) it had then been a sacrifice, and not a sin. Or had
it then been a sin, Abraham must not have done it; or if he must, he must have
been sinful by Gods command; it had been his duty to do wickedly, as some of
our modern men teach. But as it is said to be impossible for God to lie, (Heb.
6.18.) because to lie is simply evil; and for God to do evil, implies the worst
contradiction: so is it also as impossible for God to tempt us unto sin,
because to tempt unto sin is as simply evil, as to lie; and for God so to do,
implies the worst contradiction. Nay, the tempting men to sin, is one of the
very worst sins which men or Devils can commit: which when Mr. B. ascribed to
God, he was necessitated to say, he was not at leisure to tell in what sense.
It being as much as to say, he was not at leisure to facilitate things
impossible, to verify falsehood in its extremity, to reconcile both parts of a
contradiction, and to make a blasphemy a very good business. To do these
things, Mr. B. has not been at leisure any time these three years, and yet as
little at leisure to confess, and repent, and amend his life.

Sect. 4.
Since he is destitute of Excuses, 1. He is enraged that his meaning should be
measured by his words. Look forwards on Sect. 27. where he is showed
confessing, what is properly the Author of sin.
I will take some notice of his complaints. His first is, [ that I was
uncharitable and irrational in insinuating, that he would have done it in a way
which would have aspersed God with man's sin, p. 11.] First, he knows I did not
expound his meaning, but allege his words only, his saying God may be said to
tempt men unto sin; leaving every Reader to judge of his meaning by his words:
for by his looks or dumb signs, I knew not how it was possible to guess his
meaning. Was I irrational (...) this, that I recited his words, and meddled not
with his meaning, yet supposed his meaning to be according to his words? I know
but one meaning or signification of his words; nor does he yet so much as try
to set down a second. Suppose a man shall affirm that four and four do make
twelve, and I shall tell him he is mistaken, they make but eight; will he tell
me I am irrational in insinuating his meaning to be as bad as his words? yet
this is our case in other colors. Or when the Libertines said, God works all
things without exception (which Mr. Beza said as well as they) was Mr. Calvin
uncharitable, when he concluded their Look back to chap. 1. Sect. 2. Number. 4.
meaning to be blasphemous in three respects? I direct this Question to Mr.
Barlee.

2. He slanders Ancient and Modern both Papists and Protestants.
2. He says his words might be explained, as ancient and modern Interpreters,
both Pontifician and Protestant, have done, p. 12. But yet he names not any
one, either ancient or modern, in the writings of whom any such words are to be
found, much less their Interpretings of any such words. And I require him to
tell me of any one or more of them, who have said that God does tempt men to
sin, or who have showed that such words may have a tolerable meaning: or if he
cannot do this, let him publicly satisfy for the slander which he has cast
upon ancient and modern writers. There is not a Libertine, or a Ranter, but may
say the same thing for the greatest blasphemy to be thought on: calling all men
irrational and uncharitable creatures, who shall think their meaning to be
amiss; and referring in general to Ancients and Moderns, who being taken in
their particulars did never dream of any such thing.

3. He slanders S. Austin in particular: and implies it a sin for corn to grow.
3. Nay Mr. B. is more unhappy in his generality; for he proves irresistibly, he
never read any such thing, because in his marginal citation there is not one
word of it, though pretendedly brought even for that very purpose. What other
reason can be imagined, why Mr. B. should refer to the words of Austin, and set
them down in his margin, but because he either did not understand them himself,
or hoped that such of his Readers as know no Latin might suppose that Saint
Austin had been as blasphemous as himself? mark the dealing of the Disputant.
Saint Austin says, that Nature is good in as much as it is Nature, and that
Nature is evil in as much as it is vicious; Ergo, God may be said in some way
to tempt men unto sin, according to Austin. Is not this a rare Logician? But
mark him farther; Austin instanceth in making stolen corn to grow (p. 12.) what
then? why then according to Austine (says Mr. W.) God may be said to tempt men
unto sin. Auditum admissi Fletum teneatis amici? either he thinks it a sin for
corn to grow when it is stolen, and that it grows upon being tempted, or else
he speaks as impertinently as the art of man can devise; and has nothing to
excuse it but (what is very much worse) his opinion that the Thief was tempted
by God to steal that corn, which being stolen, God makes to grow. As if the
growing of such corn were the peculiar blessing of the Almighty upon the Thief,
in reward of that stealth to which he yielded, when so divinely tempted as Mr.
B. supposes him to have been. This is not ridiculous, for it is deplorably sad,
and should stir up the pity as well as indignation of all that read it.

Sect. 5.
1. His uncharitable reflection on his own Dr. Twisse.
His next complaint is, [ that I was supercilious in overlooking that which he
directed me to out of Doctor Twisse, p. 12.] First, in the page which he
referres to, he cites not a syllable from Doctor Twisse, (as in other places he
does, and as no doubt he would have done, if he had thought it for his
Interest) but magisterially Correp. cor. p. 79.
says, [ Let him consult with Doctor Twisse against Mr. Hoard, from p. 17. to
p. 28.] a Book I never yet saw, nor know where to bo^row, and why I should buy
it at his pleasure, I know no reason. If Dr. Twisse in those pages accuses God
of tempting men to sin, and then excuses him by saying, that it is not a sin to
be a Tempter unto sin (which yet we know is a sin in grain, and so, as
incompetible to God as any thing else that can be named) I shall be as sorry
for the Doctor as now I am for his Timothy, and think the Blasphemy but so much
the worse. But if the Doctor says no such thing, Mr. B. is guilty of having
persecuted the dead with his invention.

2. Doctor Twisse his own words cited.
2. If Mr. B. will needs know what was delivered in good earnest by Doctor
Twisse, concerning the sense and the manner of Gods temp^ing men to sin (as Mr.
B. words it) I will tell him out of my memory of the Doctors own words, not (as
he) from my invention; that in case I shall by accident do the Author some
hurt, it may be impossible for me to do him wrong. The Doctor taking upon him
to show G ds concurrence to the commission of sin, does affirm in plain terms,
[ That Cum tamen manifestum sit, ulteriorem aliquam, per occasiones agendi
suppeditatas, ad peccata (ut it a dicam) prostitutionem requiri, quae sine
tentationibus ad peccandum inducentibus absolvi non potest. Vin. Gra. l. 2.
part. 1. Crim. 3. sect. 2. Digr. 2. c. 15. p. 156.
besides his denial of efficacious Grace, there is, by occasions of acting
offered, a farther prostitution to sins required, which prostitution cannot be
perfected without temptations inducing to sin, ad peccandum (the word is) to
the Action of sinning.] Would you have him explain his meaning? he does it
thus; Licet Deo, and occasiones quidvis agendi subministrare, easque ita
movere, and agere, ut animum hominis pulsent, and imaginationem afficiant vere,
juxta quoscunque gradus aut utilitatis, aut etc. Id. Ibid. p. 156. Col. 2.
[ God does so move and put on the occasions which he subministers, that they
smite the mind, and truly affect the imagination, according to all those
degrees, either of profit, or pleasure, or opportunity of acting, represented
to the sinner in those occasions.] I have showed my knowledge of Doctor Twisse
his opinion, in the most accurate of his writings against Arminius. But his
medlings with Mr. Hoard I never read. Had Mr. B. produced his words as I have
done, they had perhaps been as little to his advantage: yet still they come
short of Mr. B's. in point of broadness at least, if not of sense.

Sect. 6.
6. Mr. W's. proof of his falsehoods by his self-contradictions.
It is another of his complaints, [ That I did barely repeat his several
sayings, without any the least show of confutation, when they were wary enough,
and commonly enough received, p. 12.] Here his falsities are loaded with his
self-contradictions. 1. A little before he had accused me of irrational and
uncharitable insinuations, and often told me of wresting his words; yet now he
signally confesses, that I did barely repeat his words. And could I possibly
have used him with greater equity and compassion, then to show his Doctrines by
their own light only, without those Gloses, Inferences, and Aggravations, with
which I might easily have exposed them to greater shame? What does he now but
proclaim me the fairest Adversary, and the most tender, that he could possibly
have provoked?

2. He unavoidably charge God with sin in himself, as may irrefragably be
proved from Heb. 6.18.
2. Admit it were true (what is most false) that I did barely set down his
words, but never added a confutation; this had but tended unto his greater
disadvantage. For how grossly blasphemous must those words be, which were
sufficiently punished by being showed? And how apparently false must that have
been, the very discovering of which I could think enough for a Confutation? If
I accuse a man of saying, that God does tempt men to sin, I need no other
proof, then the page of the Book wherein the words lie printed; it being taken
for granted, that the words are Blasphemy in the highest; it being no less then
to say, that God is Satan, or a sinner. For to tempt men unto sin is a greater
sin then to lie, and has a blacker mark put upon it throughout the Scriptures:
but it is a great blasphemy to say, that God does lie; and a greater, by
consequence, to say he tempts men to sin. Why says the Scripture, It is
impossible for God to lie, but because it is impossible for God to do evil? And
for the very same reason, it is impossible for God to tempt men to sin. And
though the making this appear in its native colors, must needs be pungent to
Mr. B. yet how can I help it, when he complains of me to the world, that I
repeatd his words, but did not confute them?

3. He little needed a confutation.
3. How little reason he had to complain of that, the Reader may see in many
places of my Div. Philanthropie defended. And the Index will help him to make
quick work of his experiment. But some of his words were so conspicuously
blasphemous, that I thought it sufficient to h^ng them out upon a Gibbet; they
having a natural propens^on to scare the Reader with their appearance. If a
Schoolboy should say, that God did tempt him to be a Truant, (citing the words
of Mr. B. for his security) his Master would certainly think it fittest to
confute him only with a Ferular.

4. When he is most unwary he is wary enough, and implies his blasphemies
common to him with his party.
4. In that he says his words were wary enough to be uttered even in print, he
leaves us to imagine how much more he may say in his private Pulpit, and how
much more in his private Parlour, where he is less kept in awe, then when he
appears upon the Theater. And when he adds, that such words are commonly
enough received, he needs must mean his own Party; for which the most rigid
will hardly thank him, and the moderater sort will cast it off as a slander.
When Mr. B. had said, that God does stir up men to unjust acts, he opened his
mind by this simile, even as a man puts spurs to a dull Jade. And though he
confesses that the expressions of Mr. Calvin, Zuinglius, and Dr. Twisse, may
be possibly too high, (p. 8.) nay that they spoke with some Corrept. Corr. p.
56.
fearfulness of what they spoke, nay though the Fathers of the Church were
religiously afraid to speak the like (by the confession of Mr. Calv. Instit. l.
2. c. 4. sect. 3. sol. 95.
Calvin) and though Mr. B. does approve, yea defend their expressions, as well
as add to their number as black as any, yet now he boasts that they were wary
enough, and he has nothing (happy Creature!) for which to crave mercy.

5. He is convicted by Dr. Twisse of making God the Author of sin.
5. What he presently adds of his words and meaning at other times, when he
denies that God is the Author of sin, does but add to his impiety a
self-contradiction. My proof of which shall be taken partly from himself, and
partly from Dr. Twisse. It is said expressly by himself, (p. 11.) That God is
the sovereign Author of the material part of sin; Fornicatio notat peccatum,
non tantum secundum formale ejus, qua peccatum est; sed and secundum materiale
ejus, qua actus est. Twiss. Vin. Gr. l. 2. par. 1. Digr. 2. c. 14. p. 155.
and as expressly by Doctor Twisse, that Fornication denotes sin, not only
according to its formal part, but also according to its material part. Or if he
had not said it (as he has) in those very words, yet he approved of those
words in Borrhaus and Zuinglius, and said it often himself in words equivalent,
yea diverse times in very much worse; which however I have already made plain
enough, yet in the Tract of my account I shall make it much plainer.

Sect. 7.
He makes no difference b^twixt the act of adultery, and of marriage, but
equally makes God the Author of both. Look forward on c. 3. sect. 12.
Now (Reader) observe how our intimate acquaintance begins to unbosome himself
to us. His words and syllables are these; He that cannot or will not tell, how
God may be said to excite men to the act of adultery, which to the adulterer so
excited is sin, though not to God, neither will he tell how God without sin
does stir up men to the act of lying with their lawful wives (for it is ad
utrumque but ejusdem generis excitatio and concursus) unless he makes himself
guilty of something of sinful concupiscence, which always more or less since
the fall cleaves to the act, p. 12.] Here is matter for a whole Volume, if I
could think it fit to give the reins to my pen upon such a large subject; but
many things do admonish me to study brevity and dispatch. I will therefore
first send back my Reader to what I Look back to chapter 1. sect. 2. number. 7. and
chapter 2. sect. 9.
spoke (upon occasion offered to me by Mr. W.) to these very words. Next I will
set down the Branches of Mr. B's Doctrine herein cont^ined. As 1. That God may
be said to excite (that is in English, to stir up) men to the act of adultery.
2. That that to which the adulterer is so excited is a sin. 3. That (by a
consequence immediate and unavoidable) God may be said to excite or stir up men
to sin. 4. That Gods concurrence and excitation is of the very same kind, both
to the lawful and unlawful act; to the matrimonial, which he commanded, and to
the adulterous, which he forbad. Now that he who exciteth any agent to any act,
is properly said to be the Author of that to which he exciteth, is evident to
as many as understand the word Author, and the uses of it in Cla^sick Writers;
of which that none may be ignorant, I do intend very shortly to make provision.
And having said but thus much, I shall only ask of Mr. B. what sinful
concupiscence is that he speaks of (as unavoidable and inseparable) in a man's
lying with his wife, according to Gods most holy and most wise Institution, for
the procreation of children, that he may train them to the service and glory of
God? Is it lawful, commanded, pronounced honorable in Scripture, and
undefiled, and (after all this) is it sinful too? This was the horrible
doctrine of the Encratitae, from whom the Fathers were wont to vindicate the
Catholic Doctrine of Original sin. But Mr. B. is worse then the Encratitae,
because he holds this Doctrine, and is yet the husband of two wives. He may
perhaps have spoken truth in the noisome instance of his own secrets, (which
yet I wonder he would thus publicly reveal,) but from his particular
experience of himself, he was most shamefully advised to draw a gneral
conclusion.

Sect. 8.
He treads not many steps farther, 1. The undeniable blasphemies which ensue
upon Mr. B's. doctrine of praedestination.
but he stumbles and falls down, and bruiseth himself, in a most deplorable and
piteous manner. And I desire to make it the more illustrious, that Lookers on
may take warning by his mishap; yea that himself (if it is possible) may no
longer be able to endure his Doctrines. The Case stands thus: I had said in my
Correct Cop. p. 49.
Notes, [ God foresees I will write, not of necessity, but choice; so that his
foresight does not make an absolute and peremptory necessity, but inferrs a
necessity on supposition.] Mr. Barlee says, that this is senseless; and as if
he thought that necessity had been the English of Praedestination, he changes
my words in this manner: [ It is senseless to say that Praescience does infer a
Praedestination, p. 13.] In opposition to which he sets down this as a maxim,
[ That Note, that he affirms (in It Is p. 61.) that the will in respect of
Gods decree is necessarily determ^ned to will.
Praescience of a thing future must needs praesuppose a Praedestination, or a
Praedetermination of it, page 13. lin. 26.] Here it is that I desire the
seduced Reader will give attention. This is one of the first stones at which
the men of that way are wont to stumble: if this is happily removed, both they
that are staggering will stand upright, and they that are down (if they are not
stomachful and childish) will surely rise. Since Mr. B. has been my Patient, I
have often told him what he ails, but he thought that the malady was somewhat
too loathsome to be acknowledged. I will therefore now perform two things:
First, I will manifest his disease, together with the great cause, and then I
will plainly demonstrate the means of cure.

2. The great discease of making God the Author of sin.
2. The Disease (as I have frequently observed) is this; That he and his Masters
do most openly, clearly, and unexcusably make God to be the Fountain, Author,
or Cause of sin, of all sin, of every sin, without exception; as much the
Author of it as the sinner himself, and as much as Satan who tempts him to sin,
and in some respects much more then both. Which before I come to demonstrate,
I will name the Cause of this Disease; which being premised, must needs be
followed by its effects.

3. The original cause of the disease.
3. The Cause of it is this; That they believe Gods praescience or
foreknowledge of all things and events, to be neither praevious to, nor
simultaneous with, but directly after his praedetermination of them. Mr. Calvin
expressed it thus; See the Divine purity defended, chapter 7. sect. 8. p. 74.
that God did therefore foreknow all things, because he foreordained all
things: of which I have spoken on another occasion. And now Mr. Barlee
expresses it thus, [Gods praescience of a thing future must needs praesuppose
a praedestination, or a praedetermination of it.]

4. The Patient proved extrembly sick of the disease by his own acknowledgment
of the cause. Look sorward on the tenth Section of this Chapter.
4. That Mr. B. is sick of the disease I mentioned, I now prove out of his
words, which declare the Cause to be reigning in him. And to make the shorter
work of it, I shall proceed to conviction by this Dilemma. Does he believe Gods
praescience of sin, or not? If he does not, then all his own party will send
him packing to the Anticyrae, every mouth will be opened full wide against him:
he will not therefore dare to say No to my Dilemma. And if he says Yes, his
calamity will be greater; for adhering to his Maxim, he must confess his
Doctrine to be this, That God did praedetermine sin, antecedently to his
praescience or foreknowledge of sin. To make it plain by Syllogism;

1. He who holds that Gods praescience of what is future must needs p esuppose
his praedetermination of it, holds that the praedetermination praecedes the
praescience.

2. But Mr. B. does declaredly hold the former.

3. Therefore he also does hold the later.

This being made thus evident to the most ignorant of his Favorers, and
undeniable to the most obstinate, I will now go on to prove my Necessary
Assertion, That Mr. B. is sick of the most loathsome and the most dangerous
Disease, of making God to be the Author and Cause of sin.

5. Four short arguments to confirm it, left for every Reader to enlarge upon
in his thoughts.
1. If God foresaw nothing, but as being first fore-appointed or predetermined
by himself, then he foresaw not any man's determination of his will to sin,
until himself had predetermined that man's determination of his will to sin. Now
if the Devil is the cause of another man's sinning, by merely inclining his will
to sin, and if the sinner himself is another cause of his sin by merely
determining his will to sin, (though not as sin, but under the notion and
appearance at least of good;) how can God be thought less, if from all Eternity
(before the Man or the Devil had any existence) he had predetermined does the
temptation of the one, (which is the sin of the Devil) and the sin of the other
(who yields himself captive to that temptation) yea, the determination of both
their wills to both their sins? Yet thus he did (says Mr. B.) at least in
signo rationis, before he could be able to foresee the one or the other.

2. If he who shall command or advise a man to do a thing which he knows to be
forbidden, and so a sin, cannot possibly be conceived to be less then a
concause, and coadjutor; what then must he be concluded, who does absolutely
and irresistibly predetermine and tie up the will to sin?

3. God in his Law does forbid the whole moral act, (to wit, Adultery or
Murder) and the liberty of the Agent to commit it; ( Thou shall not do this or
that:) he does not only forbid the obliquity of the Act abstracted from the
Act, (as the repugnance of killing an innocent with the Law, which says, Thou
shall not kill, abstracted from killing;) for this last is impossible to be so
much as conceived, much less to be ex part rei, and implies a gross
contradiction. God forbids us to blaspheme, he does not forbid us to blaspheme
amiss, implying it possible to blaspheme aright. So that if he predetermines
the will of man, (or man as a voluntary Agent) to the positive Act of
blaspheming, he predetermines to that which he forbids, that is, to sin. And if
the union of the pravity with the Act does move God to forbid that the Act it
self be freely done, how can he then predetermine that it shall be done freely?
or admitting that he can, who is then the Author of sin? It is hard to say,
whether the impossibility on one hand, or the absurdity on the other, is more
observable in the Case.

Impossibilium nulla est obligatio.
4. If God is not, by his predetermination of sin, the Author of sin, who is
then the Author of it? Man cannot be, for in that case he cannot sin. For can
he possibly hinder the for bidden Act from having a pravity or filth, on
supposition that it be free, and known to be forbidden? Or can he so order the
matter, that there shall not be an Entity of the Act, a wilfulness of the
Agent, nor a testimony of conscience against the thing done? No, this is
impossible, the predetermination being supposed: or else it is a being too
strong for God; which is blasphemous, as well as impossible. How then can God
be conceived to exact any thing of his Creature, who does the thing that is
forbid, being predetermined to the Act which is forbidden, and to every
circumstance of the Act? What is said of man, may be repeated of the Devil; and
if neither of them can be the Author of sin, according to Mr. B's. Maxims, the
Reader knows what to think of Him and Them.

Sect. 9.
To remove the cause of this Noysom and Inveterate Disease, and to keep it from
being Desperate, 1. The easy and infallible means of cure to all who are not
resolved to contine sick.
at least from being Epidemical, I must clear the point of Gods Praescience to
my less instructed and common Readers, such as Mr. W. and Mr. B. appear to be.
And because they are reckoned as chief men of their party, there must needs be
great numbers who partake with them in their greatest wants. First, they seem
not to consider that Praescience is nothing else but the Latin word for
foreknowledge, or else not to know what knowledge naturally imports; and so
discern not precisely wherein Gods Knowledge does differ from his Decree. How
else could they imagine (with Mr. W. discovers his opinion, that whatever God
foreknowes must necessarily come to pass ( and so all sins) as well as whatever
he decrees, does the like.
Mr. W.) that Gods foreknowledge does necessitate as well as his decree? or how
could they dream (with Mr. B.) that Gods foreknowledge of what is future (and
so of all sins) is after his praedetermination? two gross absurdities, not
repugnant only to reason and common sense, but inconsistent with one another,
yet both affirmed by the same sort of men. By Mr. Hobbs, amongst others, in his
Animadversions on Bishop Bramhal. In his Answ. to an Object. p. 40. of his
Extent of Div. Prove. Mr. B. c. 3. p. 26. and Mr. Hobbs, p. 108.

2. They will soon quit the first, if they have but the patience to conside^,
2. The nature of knowledge opened, and distinguished from decree.
that scientia est habitus conclusionis, as simplex intelligentia is
principiorum. When the mind is in possession of any conclusion immediately
flowing from the premises, and united to them by an essential tie, then the
rational Agent is said properly to know. Scire est per causam scire. To know is
not to make either the cause or the effect; but to find out the effect by the
cause (as in Demonstration a priori,) or to track the cause by the footsteps of
the effect (as in Demonstration a posteriori.) This is great plainness to such
as know but a little Latin; but I labor for them who understand none at all:
to them I speak thus. To know is properly an Act of the Intellect; but to
decree or determine is an Act of the Will. The Act of knowing presupposes the
object, which needs must be knowable by a priority of nature, before it is
possible to be actually known. There may be scibile, or a thing knowable, where
there is Note that scibile and scientia are only Kelata secundum a ci, and are
not capable of being both ways converted per conversionem simplicem, in respect
of us who are not omniscient. In which respect only this thing is spoken.
not yet scientia or an actual knowledge of it, (such as a very great part of
the habitable world, until Christopher Columbus and Americus Vespusius had
begun their Discoveries.) But an actual knowledge cannot possibly be imagined
before an object knowable, nay must imply its being actually known. And though
the object is future (as in all foreknowledge) yet even then it must be actual
in its Idea, and made present unto the mind by its intelligible species. In
which respect it was rightly affirmed by the Plotin. Enn. 5. l. 9. c. 13. and
Enn. 6. l. 3. c. 1.
Platonicks, that before the Creation of this visible world, there was in Gods
mind a World Intelligible, that is, an Exemplary Cause, an idea or Platform,
according to which the world was made. But now to Decree is another thing, as
being an act of the will, and being supposed to be absolute, is (for that very
reason) effective also. For though Gods Decree alone (abstractively considered)
will not cause a necessity; yet his decreeing to do, being always followed
with his doing what he decreeeth, must needs ( in sensu isto composito)
necessitate the object which is decreed.

3. Gods foreknowledge does not make things simply to be, and therefore makes
them not to be of necessity. 3. Though Gods absolute decree of doing any thing
does cause a necessity of the event, yet his foreknowledge does not, nor
possibly can it.
But his Decree (I speak of) must needs do both. This may be illustrated by a
Physicians foreknowledge of alteration in the Patient upon a critical day,
which yet has nothing of efficiency in its coming to pass. But if the
Physician does decree to work a change in the Patient, by such or such means as
he resolves on, he is then the Author of such a change; and if it be with a
purpose to dispatch the Patient, it is not his prophecy, but his murder.

4. If Gods foreknowledge did imprint a real necessity on the things foreknown,
4. The absurdity which would follow if it were so.
this portentous absurdity would unavoidably follow, that he must act in
nothing freely, but in every thing as a necessitated and limited Agent. A
blasphemy not to be escaped but by the denial of his omniscience from all
Eternity, which is every whit as great a blasphemy. And to the same
inconvenience the irrespective predestination must needs be subject.

5. If Gods foreknowledge did necessitate the things foreknown, it was either
simply as foreknowledge, 5. Other absurdities which would follow.
or as Gods foreknowledge in particular. Not as the first, because then the
foreknowledge of every man that can prophecy would be the cause of things
future which he foretells. Cyrus then had been beholding to the Prophet Isaiah
for his birth, because the Prophet foreknew it a hundred years beforehand. Not
as the first therefore; nor yet as the Note, that God foreknew what himself
would choose to do; yet did not necessitate himself. He eternally foreknew that
he would in time let Adam fall; and not only let him, but help him to rise
unto repentance: yet who dares say he was necessitated to either?
second, because the act is not the cause of the object, but by a priority of
order (as I showed before) the object of knowledge is before the act, how long
soever it may be after by a posteriority of Time. It must first have been true,
that there should be such a man as Cyrus, or else it had not been possible for
the holy Prophet to have foreknown it. God foreknew all things that are good,
as being certain that he would do them; and he also foreknew all things that
are evil, as being certain that wicked Agents would freely do them, if they
were not hindered; and as certain that he would not hinder, but permit, or
suffer them to be done. Both were present to his omniscience from all eternity.

6. There is no quicker way to make this point most plain and easy, 6. An
Argument taken from the knowledge of what is past.
then by bidding the obstinate to consider, that knowledge is as properly of
things past, as future. But it implies a contradiction, for a present act of
knowledge to necessitate or cause a thing quite past. The Almighty knows at
this instant that Adam fell, as well as he knew from eternity that Adam would
fall. Now all acts of true knowledge must needs imply infallibility; else it
cannot be perfect knowledge, but some other thing; as confidence, belief,
opinion, suspicion, or shrewd conjecture. From whence it follows, that all acts
of true knowledge do infer a necessity, although they cannot make any, to wit,
a necessity of consequence arising from the truth of a proposition. But such a
necessity is inferred from every true knowledge of what is past as well as from
a foreknowledge of what is coming: which my hasty Adversaries having not
hitherto considered, they have incessantly confounded it with the antecedent
and absolute necessity of the consequent, even such as is conferred by every
cause on its effect. And therefore next I must enforce them (do what they can
to the contrary) to discern a palpable difference betwixt these two; and to
discern it so clearly, as not to be able to dissent, however able to conceal it
by a dissimulation.

7. Before I show the Case in God, I will provide some light for the
weaker-eyed Reader to see it by. 7. A manifestation of the wide difference
between a necessity of consequence from the antecedent to the sequel, and a
necessity of the consequent imposed by the cause upon the effect.
This is conspicuous to All, that if I hear a man blaspheme against his Maker,
it does necessarily follow that he blasphemeth; for if he does not, I do not
hear him, it being impossible to hear what is not to be heard: but this being
granted that I do really hear the man blaspheme, his blasphemy is inferred by a
most necessary sequel. Yet this is only a Necessity of Consequence, arising
from the Truth of a Proposition; wherein the reality of my hearing his
blasphemy being supposed, the reality of the blasphemy does unavoidably follow.
But my hearing him blaspheme does not necessitate his blaspheming; for it would
be what it is, if I did not hear it. And though I hear him blaspheming whilst
he blasphemes, yet in order of nature his blaspheming has the priority; for he
must be to be heard, before I can hear him. From whence it is manifest, that
here is not any absolute or antecedent necessity, or a necessity of the thing,
as of the consequent or effect. But his blasphemy is a voluntary and contingent
Action. Now by this it will be easy for the thickest capacity to discern, that
if God foreknew from eternity this blasphemy of the man, then by a necessary
consequence the man does really blaspheme: For if he does not, God could not
possibly foreknow he does. But this is only a necessity arising from the truth
of that Proposition, That God's foreknowledge is infallible, or not capable of
erring, and that what he foreknows is very really foreknown. It is not a
necessity of the existence of the thing, imprinted in the blasphemer by Gods
foreknowledge; but still the blasphemy is a voluntary and contingent action:
which it could not be, if the man did commit it by an antecedent Necessitation.
And if he did, such antecedent Necessitation must have flown from God's
Omnipotence, and not at all from his foreknowledge. It being the nature of
knowledge, not to produce its object, but to suppose it. God does contemplate
by his knowledge what he effects by his power. But it is not in his power to
be effective of sin, much less in his foreknowledge to be necessitative of
blasphemy, which whosoever shall affirm, will be a very unskilful and dull
blasphemer. For

8. As Gods Decree is Actio ad extra, so is his foreknowledge also; 8.
Foreknowledge therefore does not necessitate.
yet (by the Mr. Wh. p. 37. Where note that M. W. does call Gods decree, Actus
Dei ad Intra, which in another man had been a strange mistake. Note also, that
Gods knowledge of himself is actio ad intra, though his foreknowledge of us is
actio ad extra.
confession of the Adversary) it does not ponere quicquam in ob^ecto: being an
action within himself (says Mr. W.) it works not any thing upon the Creature,
and therefore does not necessitate; for whosoever necessitates, does make
necessary, not infer it only. He makes a necessity in the thing which he
necessitates, not only infers it in a proposition which another makes of
things contingent. If the Adversaries expound the word Necessitative, not by
effective, but illative, then first they speak nonsense before they expound
it, and after the Exposition they give up their Cause. First they speak
nonsense, in saying that Gods foreknowledge does antecedently necessitate the
being of sin, when it infers only that it will be; and next they give up their
Cause, in confessing that there is not an antecedent necessity of all events,
but a suppositive necessity of some, or a necessity of consequence, arising
only from the truth of a proposition, whose Antecedent does of necessity infer
the Sequel.

9. Having snewed the difference betwixt an absolute causal and a conditional
consequential Necessity, and freed the praescience of God from the vulgar and
senseless imputation; 9. It is vain for the Adversaries to quit the first
error, unless they quit the second also.
how will the men of that way be ever able to free themselves? For admit they
quit the first great error of making Gods praescience to necessitate sin, yet
still they live in the misery of the second, which is their absolute decree and
praedetermination of all events. For this can never be freed from laying
absolute necessity, having that influence on the effect which praescience
cannot be thought to have. As if I decree that my servant shall rob my
Neighbor, I do contribute more toward it, then if I only foresee that he
will voluntarily do it: and supposing my decree to be irresistible (as it is
supposed to be in God) it must produce a Causal Necessity. The common Note
here, that Mr. W. holding the doctrine of Free Will, which he try's to
reconcile with his absolute decree of all things, was betrayed (poor man!) into
this sad speech; [God having decreed the Fall of Adam, it was necessary that
this should come to pass; but it was also necessary that it should come to
pass freely] Ext. of Div. Prove. c. 9. p. 42. and again he says [It was
necessary that the first man should sin, upon supposition of Gods Decree, and
that he should sin freely. Ibid. p. 40. See the Divine Purity Defended, c. 8.
p. 80, 81, 82.
shift is too shameful to serve in stead of an excuse. For if God did
absolutely decree that man should voluntarily sin, (which they are often
Treatise of the Passions, etc. chapter 42. p. 544, 545.
fain to say, though it implies a Contradiction) then he might possibly have
forborne the commission of it (because he did voluntarily commit it) which yet
was absolutely impossible, if God had absolutely decreed it.

I think it fit in this place to insert a passage of Doctor Reynolds, Dr. Reyn.
his concurrence with T. P. in this point.
both because he does condemn and severely censure the very same error which I
at this instant do write against, and also because he is a person whom Mr. W.
and Mr. B. conclude to be of their party. Note, that he means an Hypothetical
Necessity, or of the consequence, as appears by his last words.
His words are these, Others there have been yet more impious, which seek to
fasten all the corruptions of their wills on something above the Heavens, even
the eternal foreknowledge and the providence of God. As if my foreknowledge
that on the morrow the Sun will rise, or that such men as these shall one day
be brought to a most severe doom, were the cause working a necessity of the
next day, or the last Judgment. It is true indeed, Gods praescience implies a
necessity after that manner as he foreknows; but this is Necessitas only
Infallibilitatis, in regard of his undoceivable knowledge, which ever foresees
things as they will certainly come to pass, by the free or natural working of
the Agents whence they proceed. It is not necessitas coactionis, or
DETERMINATIONIS, whereby the will of man is, without any other disposition or
propension in it self, enforced or unspontaneously determined to the producing
of such effects. The actions of our will are not therefore necessarily
executed, because they were foreknown; but therefore they were foreknown,
because our will would certainly execute them, though not without freedom and
election.] Now how contrary this is to Beza, Wollebius, and Mr. W. in
particular, all do know who have read these four: And how contrary in general
to all the enemies of Arminius, all can tell who have any acquaintance with
them all. It is evident by the last period, that Dr. Reynolds pleads for
free will as much as I have ever done.

I shall conclude this Subject by putting the Adversary in mind, that the
English of Infallible is undeceivable, whereas the men of that way do use it to
signify irresistible: which is as gross a mistake, as if they should hearken
with their eyes, or try to see with their ears. Were it not for the assistance
of such obstinate mistakes, they would want wherewith to mutter against the
Cogency of Truth. Two short propositions will subdue their error, if it lies
not protected by an invincible perverseness.

1. What God decreed to effect, will come to pass unavoidably, and by a
necessitation, because his absolute will and his power cannot possibly be
resisted. 2. But what he only decreed to permit, will contingently come to
pass; yet (in case he has foreseen it will come to pass) with a certainty of
event, because his foreknowledge is infallible, and cannot possibly be
deceived.
What he decreed to effect is every way good, but what is morally evil he
decreed only to permit, and patiently, but wisely, to suffer Men and Devils to
effect, (that is, not to hinder forcibly from being effected,) and being
effected by the wilfulness of Men or Devils, to overruled and order to the best
advantages and ends to which they are capable of being made to serve.

10. Now I come to show the senselesness of the next great error, 10. Gods
praescience does not of necessity praesuppose a pradetermination.
which Mr. B. expresses in these words, [ That praescience of a thing future
must needs praesuppose a praedestination, or a praedetermination of it, p. 13.]
It seems the man did not know, and even his Masters did not consider, that
causa exemplaris is in order of nature before the efficient, and thought that
God could decree to do something, before he knew what he would decree to do. If
God did praedetermine before he foreknew, he praedetermined at a venture he
knew not what. For he knew it not, until he had praedetermined it, if it was
needful for his praescience to praesuppose his praedetermination. But it is
blasphemy to say what unavoidably does infer, That God decreed he knew not
what, until he had actually decreed it. God knew all things, which yet he
cannot be conceived to have done, if any thing can be conceived before his
knowledge. From the first moment of Eternity (with pardon to the word Moment,
which I only use to reveal my meaning, as Unum in Metaphysics is said to be
momento primo, verum, secundo, bonum, tertio,) God knew himself, his own
essence, attributes and actions, his actions ad intra as well as ad extra;
therefore he knew he would decree, as well as what he would decree, and how he
would decree it. He knew he would decree a world; and in that, all voluntarily,
as well as natural Agents. So that though this visible world was temporal, yet
the platform of it (the intelligible world) was eternal: it being, before it
was created, in mente Dei conceived. For he did not know nothing, when he knew
he would create it, at an infinite distance from its creation. He knew it
eternally, but created it in time; betwixt which two there is an infinite
distance. As he knew what, so also how things would be, and how himself would
decree them. Somethings absolutely, as the being of man; other things
conditionally, as the punishment of man: which could not possibly be
considered, much less decreed, without respect unto sin, which the very word
Punishment must praesuppose. Besides, if Gods praescience preceded not his
Decrees of Election and Reprobation, there was not a^ moment in Eternity in
which he was free to elect or reprobate: For the freedom to choose must needs
precede the act of choice; and to deny God his freedom in his elections, is as
impious as irrational.

11. But rather praedetermination does connotate praescience, if not (in some
sense) praesuppose it also.
11. Well then, It being blasphemously irrational, to say that God did
praedetermine he knew not what, or before he knew what, (in any sense) it is
plain his praedetermination praeceded not his praescience, and by consequence
his praescience praesupposed not his praedetermination; but rather his
praedetermination (of what he did praedetermine) did connotate his praescience,
if not praesuppose it. Let this one thing be well considered, that though we
cannot say with truth or modesty, God decreed or praedetermined any one the
least thing which he did not know; yet we may say with great truth, that he
knew what he would This is confessed by Mr. B. l. 3. p. 22.
not decree, as well as what he would. And again, Verum, the object of the
Intellect, is in order of nature before Bonum, the object of the Will. So as
his praescience in some sense praeceded his decree (by a priority of order) but
his decree in no sense praeceded his praescience. Nay in a perfectly wise
Agent, who does nothing but according to the (...). Ephesians. 1.11.
counsel of his will, according to knowledge and consultation, it is not
conceivable by the most precise and metaphysical abstraction, how a
praedetermination can be before praescience. As in order of Dignity, Wisdom
goes before Power, so in order of Naeture, Advice does go before Action, and
the act of the Understanding before that of the Will. A wise resolution does
praesuppose Knowledge. To determine before advice and consideration, is counted
rashness and folly in mortal men, and so is impiously imputed to the All-wise
God.

12. The cause of the error showed, and removed.
12. The cause of the error in Mr. B. and his Masters, does seem to me to be
this, that even whilst they use the word Future, they do consider it as past.
And though their speech is of a praescience or foreknowledge in God, yet their
reasoning is clearly of a post science or after knowledge. Because they know
the wisest Agent cannot tell what he has done, until he has done it; they
therefore conclude of the wisest Agent, (even God himself) that he cannot tell
what he will do, until he actually does it. God works always from eternity
hitherto, (...), even till now, Joh. 5.17.
says our Savior: and what he now works, he knew he would work from all
eternity, even whilst he determined that he would work it. He did not first
determine, and then know, but determined according to his knowledge. Thus far
indeed the men of that way may safely speak; that Gods Decree of Creation was
before his knowledge of a world actually created: for before a thing can be
known as actually done, (as the actual creation of the world, or the world
created) God must needs have decreed that he would do it. But withal let them
consider, that we are speaking of Gods knowledge of what is future, not yet in
act; and therefore call it his foreknowledge, which contemplates what will be,
in the presence only of its Idea. And his Decree of Creation could not possibly
be before that Idea of a world to be created. Man in some things has a
similitude with his maker. And as a man cannot decree to make a Watch (or any
other piece of work) before the image of that Watch is in his mind; so God
himself could not decree to create a world, before he knew it in its exemplar,
and conceived how it should be: and that for the reason before specified,
because he could not decree [vagum quid and indefinitum] he knew not what.

13. The Application to the present case, and away opened to reconcilement.
13. I will apply my discourse to the case in hand. God must needs have decreed
that he would permit sin, before he could know or consider it as actually
permitted. But it is one thing to know it in Idea, or in exemplari, as a thing
which may be, if God will, and so may not be, if he will not; and quite another
thing, to behold it as actually being: for this is after his decreeing that it
shall be, if it be such on which his decree can pass, as the creating of a
world, and the permitting of sin; but upon sinning it self the decree of God
could never pass: and therefore for that, I must resume what I lately said,
that God eternally foreknew what he did not decree the being of, as well as all
which he did decree. As he knew he would create one world, so he knew he would
not create a hundred. As he knew he would suffer or permit us to sin, so he
knew he would not tempt, not incite us, not necessitate us to sin. As he knew,
whilst he decreed, that he would give us free-wills; so he knew, whilst he
decreed, that he would not take that freedom from them; and he knew what he did
not, yea what he could not decree, our many impious abuses which we voluntarily
make of this our freedom.

Now let my Adversaries recount, as well how far I go their way, as where I
leave them, and for what Reasons. 1. Let them consider that I say (as well as
themselves) that (in order of nature, though not of time) God did first decree
to make or do things before he knew them as actually made or done. 2. Let them
consider that I leave them by adding this, that God decreed nothing future
before he foreknew it in Idea; and foreknew, but decreed not, the Acts of sin,
such as Adultery, Murder, Blasphemy, and the like. 3. Let them consider my
Reasons (to name no more) are these two: first, it is impiously irrational, to
make God to have decreed he knew not what; and next, it is worse, to make him
the Author or Cause of Sin. Let them admit of so much as may consist with the
wisdom and goodness of God. And for any thing else, I will not strive with
them. But till that shall be done, I must proceed to discover their grievous
failings.

Sect. 10.
I can pass no further then the two and twentieth page of Mr. B. without
observing him teaching, Mr. B's. unavoidable consequential blasphemy, that God
determined all wickedness before he could foreknow it.
[ That the things which God foreknows will have a certain futurition; he
foreknows them all by virtue of his own will and counsel, whereby from all
eternity he determines their futurition, and without which he could not know
that they should certainly be, p. 22.] First he speaks of Futurition, 1. His
ignorant use of the word Futurition.
as if he thought it signified Existence; for he talks of Gods knowing what
will be future; whereas that which will be, is future now, whilst yet it is
not, but hereafter it will be present. Had he said waterish water, he had
committed a less absurdity.

2. Of the word Will.
2. He talks of Gods knowing by virtue of his Will, as if he knew not the
difference betwixt the Understanding, whose proper object is truth or falsehood;
and the Will, whose proper object is good or evil, ( good only of Gods will,
and evil also of ours.) He might as well have said, that God did will by virtue
of his knowledge, and indeed much better; because it is natural for the Will to
follow the judgment of the Intellect. The sight of the object is before the
pursuit, or else the pursuit is in the dark. If Mr. B. had said, that he sees
by virtue of his hands or feet, he had been less to be blamed, because he had
but made himself a Monster; and with himself he may be bold, but not with God.

3. Of the word Certain.
3. He talks of Certain, as if he thought it had been all one with Necessary; or
if he knew what he spoke, (as probably he did) he has blasphemed unexcusably.
For God foreknew that all the wickedness in the world would very certainly be
(it had not else been foreknowledge, but false conjecture, if what he seemed to
foreknow had been uncertain:) and so it is the Doctrine of Mr. B. That God could
not foreknow all the wickedness in the world, unless by his will he had first
determined its futurition.

4. Of the word Counsel.
4. He talks of Gods Counsel, as if he knew nothing of the word; For he says
that God foreknew by virtue of his Counsel, as well as Will: whereas Counsel
cannot be Counsel, but by virtue of Knowledge. In the absence of Knowledge
there must be Error and Unadvisedness, but consultation or Counsel there cannot
be. Thus his Doctrine of Decrees has made plain English a stranger to him.

5. His threefold Blasphemy, besides his self-contradiction.
5. But the most notorious thing in his present speech, is his making God to
will sin, and his not allowing that God could otherwise foresee it, then by
decreeing its coming to pass. Which first, is blasphemously contradicting to
the word of God, who says he wills not the wickedness of a sinner, ( Psalm.
5.4.) Next, Look back on the eighth and ninth sect: of this Chapter.
it is blasphemously contradicting to the Oath of God, who swears he wills not
the death of a sinner, ( Ezekiel. 33.11.) Thirdly, it is no less then blasphemously
to infer, that the narrow knowledge of man is more extensive then the knowledge
of God: For man does know many things which he does not will or determine;
whereas God (says Mr. B. with his Condisciples, and Predecessors) never knew
any thing in the world but what he willed and determined; nay (which is yet a
greater madness) that he never knew, or could know any thing, but because he
willed and determined its future being. Fourthly, it is repugnant to the common
Rule by which his own dear party are wont to be guided at other times, to wit,
that the Will does necessarily follow (not go before) the practical Judgment
of the Intellect or Understanding.

Sect. 11.
Not many lines farther, 1. Mr. B's. positive Doctrine of Gods ordaining all
sins, both original and actual.
he forgets himself thus, [ As for future moral evil things, whether original
or actual sins, God foreknew them all in the same moment of Eternity, because
even then he did by his permissive and ordinative will determine that they
should fall out, p. 22.] Here let him distinguish, that his just meaning may
appear. Does he mean Gods ordering only of all sins, or his ordaining them
also? If so, then it is blasphemy; if not so, it is contrary to the Assemblies
Catechism, and Confession of Faith too, and as contrary to himself. For it is
said by that Assembly, that God by the counsel of his own Will, did freely and
unchangeably Assem. Confess. of Faith, c. 3. Artic. 1.
ordain whatsoever comes to pass. And again, say they, He has Assem. short
Catech. p. 158. Edit. Land. 1656.
foreordained whatsoever comes to pass. Thus the Assembly of Divines. And Mr.
B. himself affirms Gods Praescience to be subordinate to his Decree both in the
moments of Time and Nature, p. 23. l. 5. Agreeable to which is the
Pulpit-Doctrine of Mr. Case: [ This is the M. Case his Sermon, Entitled, The
vanity of glorying in the flesh. p. 58.
plot of Divine Providence, which he has been * contriving from the days of
Eternity; the miscarriage of the first Covenant was not of improvidence, but of
* ordination.] But Doctor Twisse and Mr. Whitfield will have it thus; Non
tantum voluiss^ Deum ab aeterno dicimus, sed conformiter ita operatum esse in
tempore, and totum negotium ita administrasse, ut reve^ra peccaret Adamus. Vin.
l. 2. p. 27. cited by Mr. W. in Ext. of D. Prove. p. 10.
God did not only will [the sin of Adam] from Eternity, but conformably to it
did so work in time, and so administer the whole business, as that Adam might
[or should] really [or effectually] sin. Mr. W. approves of this extremely, and
translates it so, as to leave out the word whole, (which is in the Latin of
great Importance) and renders revera by certainly, by which he meant
unavoidably, if he meant at that as at other times. Thus we see it is the
Doctrine of Mr. B. his Brethren, and his Masters also, that God ordained all
sins both original and actual, and that he foreknew them, because he
foreordained them.

2. By this the Reader may judge, 2. Mr. B's. Nonsense added to Blasphemy.
what sense he puts on the word Permissive, when he adds Ordinative to it for
explication. If the man should have said, that the world was created by Gods
permissive and ordinative will, he had only spoke nonsense, and had but moved
his Readers laughter. Whereas in saying that original and actual sins were
determined to fall out by Gods permissive and ordinative will, he adds
blasphemy to nonsense, and cannot but stir up his Readers wrath.

Sect. 12.
In his c. 3. p. 55. he has done a stranger thing then when he denied his own
hand, 1. Mr. B's. self-contradiction in denying, and yet affirming that he
makes God to be the Author of sin.
because he denies what he has printed, to wit, that he pleaded for a literal
sense of those Texts, of which he now at last says, [That God according to the
letter of many of those Texts, seems to be made a moral cause of sin as sin, p.
55.] Yet in his Corrept. Corr. p. 69, 70. he did heartily plead against me (for
my charging those men with too literal Expositions of such Texts) that the
sense of Scripture was but one, Look back on Sect. 7. of this Chap. and on
Sect. 2. Number. 3.
and that the Grammatical; and withal jeered me for teaching him to recede from
the words, and to approach nearer unto the genuine sense; ending his jeer too,
with credat Judaens apella, non ego: all which he now denies, to my great
amazement. It Is true indeed, he added these words, Where the Letter is not
plainly metaphorical, typical, or contrary to some other plain places, and the
clear Analogy of Faith: all which condemns him so much the more, because he
said this of other Scriptures (like Mr. W.) which say that Christ did taste
death for every man, and the like; but not of those Texts whose Grammatical
sense he there defended. For he referred to the Texts reckoned up by himself,
p. 103. and what should they be, but Mat. 20.28. and 26.28. Heb. 9.28. Romans
5.18. concerning Gods mercy and love to mankind? not those, whose naked Letter
does seem (to such as he is) to make God the Author or Cause of sin. So that
now more then ever, I admire his Conscience, which would suffer him to speak so
very plainly against his knowledge.

2. He is convict-by his own words, by the Assemblies, and by Mr. W's.
2. I will convince him out of his mouth: for when he mentioned the Analogy of
Faith, did he not mean that Faith which is owned by him and his party? And is
it not one of the Articles of their public Confession of Faith (which I lately
cited, sect. 11.) That God did foreord in whatsoever comes to pass? Does not
Mr. W. (his Majorite) contend most stiffly for a literal sense of those Texts
which he would have to make God to will and work sin? (p. 19. 20.) and does not
that Majorite Mr. W's. Ext. of D. Prove. p. 12.
elsewhere teach the people in Print, [ that God must needs some way both will
and work in the Ibid.
sin of the Act, because not only the action it self, but the very pravity and
deformity of it makes way for Gods glory? Ibid. p. 11.
That as sin makes for his glory, he has a hand in effecting it? and that Ib.
p. 44.
sin by accident makes much for his glory? That God did Ib. p. 40, 42.
decree the sin of Adam, and that his sin was therefore necessary? * That God
intends his Gospel should harden men's hearts, and close their eyes, and shut
their ears, and that he sends it for this very purpose? Lastly, does he not
say, Ib. 45.
that in all the sins which are committed by men, God has a secret working
hand? and in this his last Book, he chief hand too? (p. 27.) Thus I convince
him out of his own mouth, and Mr. W's.

3. He is convicted out of his own and Dr. Twiffe his words also.
3. I will next convince him out of his own and Dr. Twisse his mouth also.
First, for his own part he professes, that he makes God the sovereign Author
of the material part of sin, p. 11. Now because from Dr. Twisse he learned his
distinction betwixt the material and formal part of sin, and because I well
remember what the Doctor says of it, let us next consider that Doctors words.
Futtum omne duo netat, viz. actum contrect^ndi sive surripiendi ^es alienas,
and actus hujus deformitatem, quatenus sc. lege divina nobis interdi^itur rebu^
alienis sur ipiendis. Sic and Homicidium duo consignifica^, and actum
interficiendi hominem, and illicitam ejus conditionem, sive cum lege Dei
repugnantiam. Similiter Adulterium duo connotat, nimirum actum c ncumbendi cum
aliena, atque hujus actus turpitudinem. Twiss. Vin. Gra. l. 2. par. 1. D^gr. 2.
cap. 14. p. 155.
[ Theft does note two things, the act of snatching away another man's goods
(the material part of the sin,) and the deformity of this act, in as much as we
are forbid by the law of God to snatch away another man's goods, (the formal
part of the sin.) So also Murder does signify two things at once, the act of
killing a man, and the illegal condition of that act, which is its repugnance
with the law of God. Likewise also Adultery does connotate two things, to wit,
the act of lying with another man's wife, and the flagitious turpitude of this
act.] These three are the examples which the Doctor gives us of his distinction
betwixt the material and formal part of sin. Compare these words with Mr. B's.
above cited, (and with the Doctors in diverse places of his Books.) and Mr. B.
must confess his printed Profession to be this, That God is the sovereign
Author of any man's robbing his Neighbors goods, of any man's destroying his
Neighbors person, and of any man's lying with his Neighbors wife. Or to
instance in particulars, it is the public profession of Mr. B's. Faith (a
special Article of his novel Creed) That God was the sovereign Author of
Achan's stealing the golden wedge, of David's lying with Bathshebah, and of
Cain's killing Abel. Now since it is granted by all the world, that the first
was Theft, the second Adultery, the third Murder, God is affirmed by Mr. B. to
be the sovereign Author of Theft, of Adultery, and of Murder. And because it is
also granted by men of all sides, That Theft is a sin, Adultery a sin, and
Murder a sin, God is affirmed by Mr. B. to be the sovereign Author of the first
sin, of the second sin, of the third sin, and so (by a parity of reason) of all
the sins in the world.

4. He is convicted out of his own, and Mr. Hobbs his mouth; Mr. Hobbs his
words being justified by Mr. W.
4. In the last place I will condemn him, not only out of his own mouth, but
out of Mr. Hobbs his also. First Mr. B. (as I showed before) does make his
Confession of Faith in the first person singular, and speaks dogmatically thus;
[I make God] and what is it that he makes him? he tells us in the next words,
[I make God to be the sovereign Author.] But of what does he make him the
sovereign Author? He tells us that in these words, [of the material part of
sin.]. And what does he mean by the material part of sin? he tells us
distinctly in the same breath, [ either the doing, or the leaving undone some
positive Natural or MORAL Act, p. 11.] What moral Act for example? he tells p.
12. the Act of Adultery. And how makes he God the Author of that Act? he tells
us in the same breath, by exciting men to it. What kind of excitation (or
stirring up) does he mean? he told us that in his first appearance upon the
stage, even as a man pu^s spurs to a dull Jade, Correp. Corr. p. 61. Now let us
compare Mr. Hobbs his words, who is as able a Calvinist (as to these points) as
their party has lately had. He, after all his meditation [ Mr. Hobbs of
Liberty and Necessity, p. 23, 24.
cannot find any difference between an Action, and the sin of that Action; as
for example, between the killing of Uriah, and the sin of David in killing
Uriah; nor when one is the cause both of the Action and of the Law, how another
can be the cause of the disagreement between them, no more then how one man
making a longer and a shorter garment, another can make the inequality that is
between them.] Whether Mr. Hobbs does argue thus from his heart, as being
really seduced by Mr. Barlee's principles which he defends, or does only talk
it from his Teeth outward, as playing the Drole with Religion upon the grounds
which are given him by rigid Presbyterians, I leave each Reader to pass his own
judgment. But sure his deduction is duly made from the error of absolute
praedestination, of praedetermination antecedent to praescience, and so the
necessitation of all events. And I wonder if any of that patry who have granted
and given him his premises, will adventure publicly to deny his conclusion.
Well, we have the Confession of Mr. Hobbs, what that Doctrine does unavoidably
infer, which is common to him with Mr. W. and Mr. B. But because Mr. B. has
given him an Epithet, and a Praenomen, and expressed his detestation by calling
him c. 3. p. 7.
Monstrous Leviathan Hobbs, I will add to his the like confession of Mr. W. [
That if it is impossible to separate the sin from the action, Look back onth. 2.
sect. 10.
then he that is the Author of the Action must needs be the Author of the sin
also which is inseparable from it, p. 25.]

Sect. 13.
Notwithstanding all which has been proved, 1. Mr. B's. 10000 curses upon
himself and his masters. And his implicit confession, that that is blasphemy
which I have called by that name. Look forwards on Sect. 27. Number. 2, 3, 4, 5.
of this Chap. where Mr. B. confesses and tryes to justify what here he
pours his curses on.
and will be proved yet farther, from the printed words of Mr. B. that God is
made by him to be the Fountain and Cause of sin, yet like a desperate
Malefactor, he falls a cursing in these words, [ I wish miriads of
Anathematismes to light upon him who holds it, be he who he will be, if he
repent not the sooner, p. 54, 55.] One Miriad had been enough (if he who writ
Myriad and did not mend it in the Errata, understood what it meant) it being no
less then 10000. yet more then so many curses, the man who said he never
cursed, does pour at once upon himself, and upon the chief men of his way, on
supposition that they still do what I have proved them to have done. If their
opinion is contrary to their words, (which is the only excuse he can pretend
to) it does but aggravate their guilt, and speak them wilful. He who shall deny
his having aspersed his neighbor with the ignominy of Theft, because he did
but charge him with having invaded another man's goods, will only make himself
capable of so much a greater condemnation. I am sorry that Mr. B. has put
himself under a curse; but am heartily glad he dares not own what he has
written, because I hope he will find it needful, to hate those principles,
which led him to write such Poenitenda.

2. The like confession of his owned Masters, together with their Commissions
of the crime confessed.
2. The like Confession has been made by Mr. Calvin, and Dr. Whitaker, and many
more; whose words do rise up in judgment against themselves and their party,
as they do justify my charge in the severest part of it throughout my Books:
which that the stomachfullest Adversary may not be able to deny, I will
confront their own words to their own words, and to the words of their friends,
in two parallel Columns; setting down on the left hand the Adversaries
Confession, that it is indeed a horrid Blasphemy, to say that God is the
Author, or Cause, or Necessitator of sin; and linking with it on the right hand
the Adversaries Commission of the very same crime confessed by them.

Mr. Calvin's Confession.
De maleficiis Deo Authore perpetratis, locutus, Certe (inquit) ut quidvis
contra tam prodigiosam Blasphemiam dicatur, libenter patiar, modo ne immerito
immisceatur nomen meum. Calv. de occult. Dei Providentia p. 736.

Idem Calvinus in Libertinos cap. 13. ait, ex hoc Articulo, Deum scilicet omnia
operari, Tria admodum horrenda consequi; quorum primum hoc est, Nullum inter
Deum and Diabolum discrimen fore. Et porro cap. 14. in eosdem, Ipsum a se
abnegari oportet, and in Diabolum transmut ari. -- Et cap. 4. Execrabilis
Blasphemia dicitur.

Remigius, although a Patron of Gotteschalc's Cause, concludes against the
whole party in these following words.

-- Nulli necessitatem imposuerit ut malus esset. Hoc enim si fecisset, ipse
utique esset Auctor malorum, etc. Hist. Gottesch. cap. 11. p. 173.

Mr. Calvin's Commission of the Crime confessed.
Et jam satis aperte ostendi, Deum vocari eorum OMNIUM AUTHOREM, quae isti
Censores volunt otioso tantum ejus Permissu contingere. Calv. Inst. l. 1. c.
18. sect. 3. p. 70.

De Assyriis praedatoribus iniquissimis locutus, apparet (inquit) certa
destinatione Dei fuisse impulsos: fateor Satanae opera interposita saepe Deum
agere in reprobis; sed ut ejus IMPULSU Satan suas parts agat. -- A Deo ipso
manat efficacia erroris ut mendaciis credant, etc. Vindictae suae
(projectionis, scilicet, in foedas cupiditates) praecipuus est AUTHOR, Satan
tantum minister. -- voluntas Dei rerum omnium causa. -- Reprobos in obsequium
cogit. Id. ib. sect. 2. fol. 69. Idem facinus Deo, Satanae, homini assignari,
absurdum non est. Ibid. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 2. p. 95. Obstinatio cordis Divina
fuit ad ruinam praeparatio. Ib. sect. 3. p. 96.

Frustra de praescientia lis movetur, ubi constat ordinatione potius and nutu
omnia evenire. Ib. l. 3. c. 23. sect. 6. fol. 324.

Hic (scilicet peccator) justo illius (scilicet Dei) IMPULSU agit quod sibi non
licet. Id. l. 1. c. 18. sect. 4. fol. 71. Idem consulatur contra Pighium, de
aeter. Dei Praedest. p. 118. ubi Deum peccati Authorem facit.

Doctor Whitaker 's confession in reference to the whole party, without
exception.
Si Calvinus, aut Martyr, aut Quisquam nostrum affirmet, Deum esse Authorem and
causam peccati, non repugno quin simus OMNES HORRENDAE BLASPHEMIAE scelerisque
Rei. Whitak. l. 8. contra Duraeum, sect. 1. p. 524. Doctor Fulk confesses the
same in his Defense of the English Translation, p. 500.

Mr. Whitfield himself does now confess it to be a Crime, and a great Crime, to
make God the Author of sin, p. 2. l. 2. And Mr. Barlee multiplies his Curses on
all that do it, (as has been showed) and calls it a sottish unholy opinion, c.
3. p. 132. although they both are deeply guilty, not only by approving it, and
defending it in others; but by doing it also themselves in the most open
expressions, in which an Author of sin can be described.

The Parties Commismission of the Crime confessed.
Unum atque idem facinus, puta Adulterium, aut Homicidium, Dei AUTHORIS,
motoris, Impulsoris opus est. Zu^ng. in Sermon. de Prove. c. 6. Deus Angelum vel
Hominem Transgressorem facit. Id. ib. cap. 5. Dictis hisce Zuinglianis D.
Twissus patrocinium suum commodat. Vin. Gr. l. 2. par. 2. p. 37.

Aliter Satan malorum quam Deus, five de malo quod in culpa, sive de eo quod in
poena cernitur, loquamur, AUTHOR judicatur esse. Borrhaus ad Isa. cap. 28.

Fatemur Deum non modo ipsius operis peccaminosi, sed and intentionis malae
AUTHOREM esse, etc. D. Twiss. Vin. Gr. l. 2. par. 1. p. 36.

Deus homines ad suas pravas actiones incitat, seducit, jubet, indurat, trahit,
deceptiones immittit, and quae peccata gravia sunt efficit. Martyr in Jud. 3.
verse. 9. p. 45.

Ad peccatum qua peccatum praeordinati sunt tam electi, quam reprobi. Trigland.
Defens. fol. 87.

Mr. W. and Mr. B. have equaled all the rest, if not outdone them; as my
Reader has partly seen, and will see yet farther in the several Sections of my
second and third Chapters, where I have faithfully exhibited, and shall
exhibit, their words and pages.

It were a task too easy to write a just volume, in confronting the
Confessions to the Commissions of that party. But of things so nauseous, I
think it enough to let every Passenger have a taste. And I am called away by
Mr. Barlee's next words, affirming God to be the cause of the very obliquity of
the act of sin, in his very attempt of an Abstersion. That I may not possibly
do him wrong, I will transcribe his own words, and make them the top of another
Section.

Sect. 14.
His confession of Faith touching Gods commerce with sin.
His Apology for himself, and for his Creed, is verbatim thus; I do every where
make it evident, that I do only believe God to be a Natural Cause of the mere
Act of sin (without which it is impossible that any sin can be committed,) but
that he is only a mere accidental ^ause of the obliquity of the act of sin,
wherein alone the formality of sin is consisting, and from whence alone sins
Denomination ought to be taken, p. 55.] This is his wary way of speaking, and
this (he tells us) is his Belief, 1. That God is the cause of sin; both of that
which he calls the material p. 11.
part of sin, or the positive act, and of that which he calls the formal Ibid.
part of sin, or the obliquity of the act. God (says Mr. B.) is the cause of
both parts, and so of the whole sin, of which they both are components. But 2.
he tells us, that God is not the natural cause of both, but the accidental
cause of the one, and the natural cause of the other. A fair confession of his
Faith. For Cain's killing Abel, and David's lying with Bathshebah were positive
acts, and each of them (says Doctor Twisse) materiale peccati; so that of them
Mr. B. believes God to be the natural cause. And supposing it possible to
separate their obliquities, he believes God to be the cause of them also. For
although he calls it accidental, he cannot mean that it is none; for then he
would have said, that God is no cause at all of the obliquity of the act:
whereas he now says the contrary, that God is a cause of the obliquity,
because an accidental cause; nor will the known Po^sito uno Conjugatorum
ponitur alterum. Et si Conjugatorum unum uniconveniat, alterum etiam conveniet
alterit
Rule of Conjugates allow him any the least evasion. The Question is not what
kind of cause of the obliquity they affirm God to be, natural or moral, per se
or per accidens, but whether or no he is a cause. And to this Mr. B. makes
answer in the affirmative. Nor can he be imagined to argue thus, God is not a
natural, but an accidental cause; therefore no cause at all. For that were to
argue that a thing is not, because it is; and that a proposition is false,
because it is true: We may argue by such Logic, that Mr. B. is not a man,
because he is not a patient, but an angry man. And to deny that God is the
Author of that obliquity, of which he affirms him to be the cause, is the same
thing as to say, he is indeed the Author of the obliquity, but the Author of
the obliquity he is not; for whatsoever is the cause of any thing in any kind
of causality, is so far forth the Author of it as it is the cause, according to
the use of the word Author in all Classick Writers, as I shall show in due time.

How Mr. B. makes God the natural cause of sin it self.
And if that which he calls the Act of sin, (as the act of cursing or hating
God, of David's lying with Bathshebah, and the like,) is nothing else but the
sin it self in its whole essence, (as indeed it is, and I have demonstrated
before,) then his belief must needs be this, that God is the natural cause of
sin; which is worse then to believe him the moral cause only, by how much it
is worse to necessitate any man to wickedness, then only to tempt and persuade
him to it. He who necessitates, being the sole cause of it; and he who
persuades, the concause only. I will say no more here, because I have enlarged
so much Look back on chapter 2. sect. 5.
already on an occasion offered by Mr. W. I will only add a word to Mr. B's.
citation in his Margin; If he is to be judged a moral cause of any sin, who
moves any one to it, by help or counsel, favor or persuasion, (as Dominicus a
Soto does truly speak, In moralibus prorsus est judicaturque causa, qui lege,
open, consilio, favore vel persuasu movet quempiam sive ad bonum sive ad malum.
Domin. a Soto de Not. and Gra. l. 1. c. 12.
how falsely soever in some other things) then God is also accused of being the
moral cause of sin, by Mr. B. and his party, who have publicly taught, that
God does tempt men to sin, and so far favor the regenerate in the very worst
sins they can commit, as that they cannot fall totally, much less finally from
grace. I have showed the former in the third Section of this Chapter; and the
later long ago in the Div. Purity defended chapter 14. sect. 2. p. 128, 129, etc.

Sect. 15.
Mr. B's. most signal and most desperate attempt, from p. 111. to p. 121
Now I proceed to that part of Mr. B. which will save me the labor of saying
more, and make him wish (ere it be long) that he had said nothing at all, but
that he had rather been born dumb. For it is that wherein he engages, not his
own credit only, (if he can possibly imagine that he has any yet left him)
but the credit of his friends too, amongst whom Mr. Hick. of Mag. Coll. is
branded by him for a chief. Nor only so, but he engages very deeply his soul
and conscience, which ought (I am sure) to be dearest to him. Now that himself
and his Abettors may not fail of comprehending the breadth and depth of the
Calamity into which he has ingulphed and plunged himself; and to the end that
he may find it much the most for his Interest, to make a public Recantation,
and to act 2 Cor. 7.11.
revenge upon himself, I will (as briefly as I am able) premise the state of
the affair betwixt him and me, that so the life of his unhappiness may at last
appear in the greater luster.

2. The state of the case from its Original.
2. I had proved, in my Chapter 3. p. 110. to p. 116.
Defense of the Divine Philanthropie, that the sinner is the efficient cause of
sin, in confutation of Mr. B. who denied that sin had any efficient cause at
all, but only (forsooth) a deficient cause. I say, I had proved the efficient
of sin by a great number of Arguments, whereof each was so cogent, that neither
Mr. B. nor M. W. nor Mr. Hick. had the courage to venture on a solution. I do
heartily wish that my Reader will here peruse those seven pages in my D.
Philan. Defended, from p. 110. to p. 116. where he will find my Thesis proved
by so many convincing Demonstrations, as have not left the Adversary the least
color for a Reply. And because some Readers may not have that Book in their
possession, whilst others are unwilling to neglect the work they are upon, I
will here recapitulate (but very briefly) what there is proved in ample manner.

3. Proof^ that sin has an efficient cause.
3. 1. If man is the cause of sin, and not efficient, he is the material formal,
or final cause; if the Deficient is none of these, (as none will say it is) it
is no cause at all. If sin has no cause, it has no real being, much less can
it be the cause of punishment: and so God is inferred to punish men without
cause. 2. Where there is no efficient, there is no effect, that is, there is
nothing: and so (according to Mr. B.) men are either not damned, or damned for
nothing. 3. If the sinner is but deficient as to the being of sin, he is less
the cause of it then God is inferred to be by them, who say that Gods will of
sin is efficacious, and irresistible, as that which predetermines, decrees, and
necessitates sin; and efficacious, ab efficiendo, is prevalent, forcible, etc.
4. Mr. B. confesses (in a sober fit) that the sinning creature is the Corrept.
p. 79.
efficient cause of sin, although he says (in a fit of passion) that sin has
Ib d. p. 55.
no efficient cause. 5. He often mentions the Ibid. p. 79.
Being of sin, as when he says that God p. 178.
ordained it. Whereby he infers it to be effected, and so to have an efficient.
6. If he says (as at other times he does) that sin consists wholly in a
deficiency, he infers (what is worse) that no creature can effect sin, nor by
consequence commit it. 7. Whilst he affirms Gods absolute ordination of sin in
one breath, and that sin has only a deficient cause in another breath, he
charge on God all the causality of sin, of which he allows it to be capable.
8. As when he breaths hot, he says that God ordained and determined sin; so
when he breaths cold, he says that God can ordain nothing but good; which is
to infer that sin is good: And to what is good he allows an efficient cause. 9.
If sins of omission (as not praying, and not giving alms, etc.) had but a
deficient cause, yet sins of commission (as cursing and sacrilege, etc.) have a
cause efficient with a witness. 10. Admitting that sin were a privative Entity,
it would not follow that it has not any efficient cause. For he who deprives a
man of life, or sight, is the efficient cause of death, or blindness. And
darkness (the privative of light) was one of the works of Gods Creation, Genesis
1.4, 5. of all which he was the efficient cause. 11. What is privative in one
respect may be positive in another; as our sicknesses and sins do daily teach
us. Murder is not only privative of virtue, but also constitutive of vice; and
must have something in it of positive, to make it differ in specie from all
other sins, and in degree from all other murders. Of some we say, they are not
good; whilst others are not only positively, but superlatively evil. 12.
Every privation presupposes an habit to which it stands in opposition: but a
man may be covetous who never was liberal. 13. An Agent morally deficient in
the performance of a Duty does effect that evil action which is so morally
deficient. For 1. The Adulterer is the efficient of his filthy Act, which is
his sin. 2. The Devil is the Father of lies, and a Father is an efficient. 3. A
man (through grace) is the efficient cause of a good Action. And Mr. B. is
worse then a Pelagian, if he will say that man is more efficient of good then
of evil. 14. Mr. B. Corrpt. 111.
confesses (in a lucid interval) that there may be something positive in a
privation. 15. Punishment is a positive Entity, and owned to have an efficient
cause. But Mr. B. says often that sin is a punishment. 16. Whilst he denies
his making God the Author of sin, because sin (forsooth) has no efficient, he
unavoidably infers, 1. Either that God is not the Author of death; or 2. that
he is the Author of sin, if of death; or 3. of both; or 4. of neither. 17. If
when they say that God is the cause of sin, they do not infer he is the Author,
because the cause is but deficient, they plead no more for God then for the
Devil; for if nothing is an Author which is not efficient, and if sin has no
efficient, then neither Men nor Devils can be the Authors of sin.

4. In stead of answering these things, 4. Mr. B's impertinencies, and railings
in lieu of Answers, do stricke obliquely at S. James.
Mr. B. talks thus, p. 111. sect. 3. First, that my opinion of sins having a
positive Entity, and an efficient cause is a dreadful opinion. Secondly, that
there is no question between us about any thing else: (which if true, then my
evincing this concludes the Controversy between us.) Thirdly, that he trembles
more at the thought of commiting sin, then many of my party, if not my self, at
the open acting of it. Fourthly, that Gods judicial hand appears against me.
Fifthly, that my conclusion (out of S. James, chapter 1. v. 15.) is 1000. times
more for Gods being the Author of sin, then the words of his party which I have
cited. Sixthly, that Gods just hand is upon me. Seventhly, Quem perdere vult
Deus hunc dementat, p. 112. These are his general Answers thrust up together
into one Paragra^h. Before I come to his particular Answers (which are
infinitely worse) I will entreat my Reader to com^are my seventeen particulars
with Mr. B's. seven, and with what I shall now say from the express words of S.
James, who says, that Jam. 1.15.
lust having conceived brings forth sin. The conception of lust is before
expressed by a man's being drawn away, and enticed by his lust ( v. 14.) The
Spirit solicit^ the Will on one side, lust on the other. If lust prevails and
carries away the wills consent, then lust conceives; or (which is all one in
effect) the Will is (...).
drawn away, and (...).
deceived, or overreached by Lust: not only invited, but ensnared and wrought
upon by the invitation, so as to give up its consent. Lust by this does
conceive, and then brings forth sin, as the Parent the Child. What is sin
therefore, but the production of the will consenting to Lust, or drawn away by
it? The production (I mean) of the evil will, which by thus consenting becomes
evil. Now this being the upshot of what I mean by the efficient cause, and
positive entity of sin; against whom has Mr. B. spent the expressions of his
Pet? against we only, who spoke from S. James, or against S. James also, from
whom I spoke? Note how the bitterest of his censures do hit himself and his
party.
Nay, has he not spent them upon himself, who has confessed, even in Print,
the very same things which here he railes at? He has openly affirmed, both
that the sinning Creature is the efficient cause of his sin, (Corrept. p. 79.)
and that there may be something of positive in a privation, (Ibid. p. 111.) Nay
are not all his railings against all his own party, who say that God does Look
back on chapter 2. p. 90.
efficere peccata, and not only will, but M.W's. own words p. 26. of which I
have spoken chapter 2. sect. 14. and also sect. 20, 21.
work sin, and that he has a hand in * effecting sin? Sure these are very
frequently the expressions of his Masters, as well as Brethren: and therefore
judge (good Reader) whether S. James and Mr. P. or Mr. B. and his party, are
the pertinent objects of Mr. B's. Invectives, especially his last expressed in
Quem perdere vult Deus hunc dementat. Of the positive Entity of sin.
Latin, [1. Dementation sent from God; and 2. as a token of Reprobation.]

Sect. 16.
To the Preface which he makes to his more particular Discussion, wherein he
only takes occasion to call it a horrible opinion, that sin as sin in respect
of its obliquity, has a positive entity and efficient cause, p. 112. lin. 9,
10. I have but three things to say. 1. That if it were so indeed, he would be
utterly unexcusable for having embraced that opinion in that part of his Prints
so lately cited; or for railing at an opinion which himself confessed to be
true: or if he has since seen his error, why was not his second volume a
Recantation of his first? And what will he do to Mr. W. for saying that God had
a hand in effecting sin, whereby he inferred, that sin had an effective or
efficient cause? 2. He cannot say he speaks of the formal part of sin as sin,
and not of the whole sin, because he speaks of sin in respect of its obliquity,
which he is wont to call the formal part of sin. And it is nonsense to say,
that sin as sin in respect of its sin, or that obliquity as obliquity in
respect of its obliquity, has not a positive entity, or efficient cause. So as
he dares not deny, but that sin does signify the integrum peccati, or whole
filthy act (such as Cains killing Abel, or David's lying with Bathshebah) whose
repugnance with Gods Law is called obliquity. And because that sin is an
oblique, or crooked, or irregular action, Mr. B. concludes it no positive
Entity. 3. But to rest on him to sobriety and common sense, I shall need only
to ask him, whether Rectitude is not a positive Entity. If he says yes (as I
am sure he needs must) what show of reason can he pretend, why obliquity is not
as much so as Rectitude? how much more that whole sin, of which obliquity is
accounted the formal part? Is not a Circle, qua talis, as positively a figure,
or a round figure, as a right line is a right line? Is not crookedness or
gibbosity in any man's shape as positively such, as streightness or clean
making? When a crooked parent begets a child which is also as crooked, is he
less a positive and efficient cause, then if he and his child were both well
shaped? When Adam begat Cain in a state of sin, (with Satan's image in stead of
Gods, as some of the Fathers have expressed it) was not the cause and the
effect too, as truly positive, as if they both had been sinless? An action
flowing from an Agent has as positive an Entity, as the Agent himself from
whom it flows. The sin of Murder is an Action; as Cain's killing Abel: So is
the sin of Adultery; as David's lying with Bathshebah. Nor any whit the less
such, in respect of their being irregular actions; any more then a wicked man
is the less a man for being wicked. David's lying with Bathshebah before she
was his wife, was as positive an Entity, and had a cause as efficient, as
David's lying with Bathshebah after she was his wife; which alone is sufficient
to fill Mr. B. and Mr. Hick. with confusion of Face, and to compel them to
Recantations, unless they will shelter themselves under Rantism and
Libertinism, by saying that David's lying with Bathshebah was no adultery, or
such an adultery as was no sin, or that it was a very good sin, because a
positive Entity, and that which had an efficient cause. For Mr. B's. first
Argument does follow thus:

Sect. 17.
If sin as sin be a positive Entity, 1. Mr. B's first Argument to prove the
goodness of sin, in which Mr. Hick. is equally concerned.
then it is a thing in it self good. For every positive thing is good. It is to
all Scholars well known, that unum, verum, bonum convertuntur, p. 112.] First,
he cannot but confess, that if sin is a thing positive, he seeks to prove (by
this Argument) that sin is good. But that it is a thing positive, I have
abundantly proved in my two last Sections, and himself has confessed in his
Correptory p. 79. and p. 111. both before cited and compared with one another.
Correction; therefore he cannot but confess, that all the force of this
Argument is only to prove that sin is good.

2. A thing that is privative in one respect, is also positive in another, 2.
The noysomeness of the Disease.
as every Sciolist knows and Mr. B. has virtually confessed. Every Sciolist
can tell, that the corruption of one thing is the generation of another; that
what is privative of life or sight, must needs be positive of death or
blindness. The Darkness which God created was not more privative of the Day,
then it was positive of the Night. Nay, does not Mr. B. confess as much? for in
saying that the sinner is the Correp. p. 79.
efficient cause of his sin, he does grant it to be a thing. And in saying,
there may be something of Ib. p. 111.
positive in a privation, he does more then grant it to be a positive thing. I
therefore say, more, because a privation is but the abstract of privative. And
the Transgression of the Law, which is sin, is not a mere privation of virtue,
but a positive thing, which is privative of virtue, and positive of vice. Sin
is so perfectly a concrete, that unless it is a concrete, it cannot be
conceived to be a sin: No, no more then a concrete can be conceived to be a
concrete when it cease to be a concrete. The most Poetical brain cannot
fancy the least ^^^ial difference betwixt David's lying with Bathshebah, and
his adultery with Bathshebah, at the time of her being Uriah's wife. So that
now Mr. B. must confess, that the least part of his blasphemy is no less then
this, that sin is good as it is positive of evil, although it is evil as it is
privative of good. This being the Printed Article of his unchristian Creed,
[THAT EVERY POSITIVE THING IS GOOD.]

3. The purging out of the peccant Humor.
3. Having showed him the noysomness of his Disease, I will now remove the
peccant Humor by which it appears to have been fed, to wit, his Ignorance, or
Inadvercency, that bonum metaphysicum, which is converted with ens, has quite
another signification then bonum morale. And being Aristotle's phrase (who was
neither a Prophet of the old Testament, nor an Evangelist of the new) should
rather have been rejected as unsound and unsafe, then have been used by a
Priest to prove the goodness of sin. For the Libertines and Ranters (who are as
little versed in Metaphysics, and in Aristotle's meanings, as Mr. B. or Mr.
Hick. or Mr. Hobbs) are not only very ignorant of the Bonitas moralis,
naturalis, transcendentalis, passim leguntur apud id genus Scriptores.
difference betwixt good and good, but they cannot easily be taught it. And a
Carneadist will be glad to introduce an opinion that sin is good, by calling it
Bonum Metaphysicum, or Transcendentale. Mr. B. must now be taught (that he may
not debauch his Disciples) that the adaequate subject of Metaphysical Science
is ens quatenus ens, reale illud; not omnimodo positivum quatenus positivum.
And so, in one sense it comprehends Vide Scot. Quodl. 3. Art. 1
Res, and Vide Monlorium de Univers. cap. 7.
Aliquid. And Mr. B's. very obliquity (he knows) is really some thing: but then
again he must be taught, that Bonum in Metaphysics, which is converted with
Ens, does not signify Good in English, any more then Canis (the Star) does
signify the Dog which walks about with four feet in our English streets and
apprehensions, though that (in Latin) is Canis too. The difference is not the
less betwixt malum (an Apple) and malum (an Evil) and In accusativo.
malum (an mast) because they are expressed in the very same letters. Bonum, in
English, does signify good, as opposed to evil. But in Metaphysics no more
then ens in ordine ad appetitum. And that sin is such, Mr. B. knows by sad and
minutely experience; and so before he is aware, he has proved the thing which
he endeavored to disprove, by his very endeavors to disprove it, viz. that
sin is a positive thing.

4. Dr. Twisse his Foundation a thin Sophisme.
4. Upon this lamentable Sophism, as lame and as naked as it appears, Dr. Twisse
has founded his Doctrine of irrespective Reprobation. Because, forsooth, there
is aliqua bonitas (nimirum entis) in damnato, but none in annihilato, therefore
God (says the Doctor) who may annihilate for nothing, may damn his Creatures
also for nothing; this being (says he) the lesser evil. Choose now (good
Reader) whether thy Savior, or Doctor Twisse, does best deserve to be
believed. Doctor Twisse tells us that it is better to be tormented in Hell for
ever, then to be turned again to nothing. Our Savior tells us the contrary,
Mat. 18.6. and Mat. 26.24. Mar. 14.21. where he says in effect, that it is
better to be annihilated, then to be damned. By the Logic of that Doctor, it
should be better also to do wickedly, then not to do any thing at all, and sin
would be good by being something.

5. How a lie is verum as much as sin bonum.
5. If nonsense is to be spoken in the style of Metaphysics (as misunderstood
by a Hobbist or a Presbyterian) then indeed we must say, that sin is bonum
metaphysicum, and that a lie by consequence is metaphysicum verum. Then which
if Mr. B. does mean no more, the Reader sees what he has gained. But if by
Good he means bonum morale, let him prove that Parricide, Incest, Witchcraft,
or Blasphemy, must either be naked privations, or moral good things; for
according to his dreamings, they must either be nothing, or no sins, or moral
virtues, or sins and moral virtues too. And so the Devil, who is not a bare
privation, must be with Mr. B. a moral good.

6. Now I must show him the sense of his Latin Citations in the Margin. 1.
Albertus Magnus his speech has thus far truth in it, 6. Albertus Magnus his
words explained. Perfectius est agere, quam esse. Id quod non est a se nec
potest a se manner in esse, multo minus potest agere a seipso. Et cum actus
malus secundum conversionem ad materiam sit simpliciter actus egrediens a
potentia activa perfecta secundum naturam, ideo non egreditur ab eo, nisi
secundum quod movetur a causa prima, alioqui sequeretur duo principia esse.
Alb. Mag. in Pet. Lomb. Senten. 2. Disp. 37.


that actus malus is not so from the man, as if he could simply agere a seipso,
if God did not give him the power of being and acting as a very free Agent. But
this being supposed, it is meetly the work of man's own will (which God has
left thus free, that is, determinable by it self) to determine his Will to this
or that which is evil. So again it is true, quod non egreditur abeo, nisi
secundum quod movetur a causa prima, if he means by movetur, his having the
power of being and acting as a man, both given and continued by God unto him:
which is abundantly sufficient to avoid the duo principia, if he means
coaeterna: otherwise it is certain, that God is the principle of good only, and
Lucifer only of evil. Thus the Citation makes not for Mr. B. but in two
respects it makes against him: for actus malus is actus, and egredient from
that power which is enabled to act (as that is more perfect then barely to be)
and so as to need a dependence from the first cause, which must infer the Agent
to be more then deficient; for to a mere deficiency there needed not his moveri
a causa prima. 2. Mr. B. does here assert, that man had his power to sin from
God, Mr. B. (taught by Mr. Rivet) does most avowedly make God the Author of sin.
nor will he deny that that power has a positive entity; but he had argued
before ( c. 2. p. 54.) That if the power to sin was from God, God must
unavoidably be the Author of sin, which besides the great impiety, bewrayes a
sottishness in the blasphemer: for the power to sin being (in order of time, as
well as of nature) before the being of sin, it follows that such a power is
not only no sin, but it is impossible that it should be; else Adam must have
been sinful whilst he was innocent, and sinned before he sinned, because he
had the power to sin, before it was possible for him to sin, or for that power
to be reduced into act. Mark now the arguing of Mr. B. from his See the Div.
Philan. chapter 4. sect. 24. p. 24.
friend Mr. Rivet. If that power or capability which neither was nor could be
sin, was from God, then God was unavoidably the Author of s^n, that is, he was,
because he was not; it was necessary, because impossible. This it is to be a
rigid Consistorian. He and Rivet must either say, Look forward on sect. 29.
that Adam actually sinned before he had the power to sin, or that it is part
of their belief, that God is unavoidably the Author of sin.

7. S. Austins words most impertinently cited.
7. Saint Austin's speech of Natura vitiosa in sensu diviso, in which are
separated those two things, natura and vitium, is nothing at all to the purpose
of sin, whose very being is evil, and has not the least moral bonity in it; of
which alone we here speak. There is no doubt, but Nature is good when it is not
evil, and evil when it is vicious: but what is this to the posiciveness or
privativeness of sin? This is but one of Mr. Bis. (...).

Sect. 18.
I now proceed to the second Argument, which is the most horrible of all: The
most remarkable blasphemy of one Mr. Hick. and Mr. B. called by the name of a
second Argument.
it is hard to say, whether more impious, or more unscholarly. And as if one
Presbyterian had not sufficed to make it sufficiently absurd, Mr. B. and Mr.
Hick. have joined their forces. But Mr. Hick. is the Chieftain in this exploit,
(if Mr. B. has not done him wrong) because it came out of his Forge, and was
sent from Oxford to Brockhole to be hammered on by Mr. Barlee. Observe (good
Reader) the words and syllables of the men.

If sin is a positive Entity, IT IS GOD; for as a very Note that Mr. B. in his
margin, explained whom he meant in these large Characters. Mr. H. HICK. of his
own College, p. 112.
learned pious friend of mine wrote to me not long since very well, Whatever
positive thing is not from God, is God; there being no medium betwixt Deus and
Creatura. In truth every positive thing must be Creator, or Creature; and who
now is the Manichee, maintaining an independent evil principle? p. 112.

Before I show how many ways this brace of Presbyterians have been unhappy in
this conjunction of their abilities expressed in five or six lines, I will take
a short notice of the Authority and Repute which is acquired to Mr. Hick. by
his being noted (in the margin) to be a man of mine own College. For ought I
know, he may be also in possession of mine own Fellowship, and mine own
Chamber, and mine own meat and drink, and those yearly Revenues which are mine
own too: and for which I may the rather expect to have some satisfaction,
because it seems the Visitors made him one of my Receivers and Usufructuaries
(for my legitimate Heir or Successor they could not make him.) And I have
reason to be glad that he is thought such a pious and learned man: because if
he is pious, he will the sooner pay me my Arrears; and if he is learned, he
will not object against my known and indisputable right. But of his Learning
and Piety both at once, I am now to make some easy trials.

1. First he concludes the Devils Pride (not only to be good, but) to be God;
1. How Mr. Hick, inferrs the Godhead of sin, which I durst not repete, but that
I cannot confute it otherwise.
for the Devils pride is a positive thing (as I have lately made apparent,
Sect. 15, 16. and shall farther demonstrate by and by.) And being the very
filthiness of the filthiest spirit, it cannot possibly be from God, or one of
Gods Creatures. And if not so, then (say the Brethren) it must needs be God.
For so run their words, [ whatever positive thing is not from God, is God,
there being no medium betwixt Deus and Creatura, God and his Creature.] The
Devils pride is as positive a thing as his lies are, and as much from the
Devil, and as really a sin, and so as infinitely far from being one of Gods
Creatures. But Gods word tells us, that Joh. 8.44.
lies are from the Devil, and not from God. The Devil alone is the Ibid.
father of lies, whereas God on the contrary is the spirit of Joh. 16.13.
truth. And as a lie in particular is the child of the Devil, (for relata
dicuntur ad convertentiam) so sins in general are the 1 John 3.8.
works of the Devil: and so they are called in many places of Scripture by the
name of Mic. 6.16. Gal. 5.19. Ephesians. 5.11. Col. 1.21. Heb. 9.14. Rev. 9 20.
works; as 'twere on purpose to show us that they are positive things. The
works of darkness, the works of the flesh, the works of men's hands, dead works,
the works of the Devil. Nay farther yet, so far are those works from being Gods
Creatures, that the Son of God was manifested in the flesh, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. And yet those works must needs be
positive things, even for this very reason, that they are capable of
destruction: privatio est habitus privatio, and vacuum vacui implicat locatum.
Every privation is of something positive; and not to be so implies a palpable
contradiction. He who shall prove there is a vacuum in nature, because there is
vacuum vacui, will say no more in effect, then that there is a vacuum, because
there is not a vacuum. And so a privation of a privation is nothing else but a
position, that is, not a privation. So that unless Mr. Hick. will embrace the
suds of a contradiction, he must confess that to be positive, which God came to
destroy; and that he came to destroy, not his own works, but the Devils; and
that the works of the Devil are nothing else but sins: upon which he must
recant his most deplorable way of arguing, and make some kind of satisfaction
for his so scandalous an attempt; or else he must own his proposition in one
part of it, or in another; either by saying that the Devils works are Gods
Creatures, (and so from God) or that he thinks they are God himself.

2. I do so pity the Malefactor, 2. It way opened to the undeceiving of M.
Hick. by showing him a Medium where he could see none. Look back on chapter 2.
sect. 7.
even at this very instant whilst I am persecuting his crime, that though in
conscience and duty I am bound to show it in every part of its deformity, (that
the weaker sort may be warned against the killing Doctrines of such
Instructers) yet am I unwilling to go farther in showing the dangers (nay real
mischiefs) into which he is fallen, and fallen headlong, by his own wilful
precipitation of himself and others, (for I hear he is a person who has many
more followers then Mr. B.) until I have showed him a way whereby he may
scrabble out of the misery wherein he lies. He must know there is a medium
betwixt God and his creatures, (and I wonder what ayl'd him that he should say
there is none) even the works of the Devil, which the Son of God himself came
to (...).
dissolve and dissipate, 1 John 3.8. Men and Devils have their creatures, which
are not God's: such are all their Psalm. 106.3.
inventions, with which they are said to go a * whoreing, and with which they
Verse. 29.
provoke God to anger, and on which God is said to have taken Psalm. 99.8.
vengeance. God made men upright, but they have sought out many inventions
(Eccles. 7.29.) Man and his natural faculties are the creatures of God, but the
abuses and pollutions of those natural faculties are man's own creatures. Res
in Metaphysics has three acceptions; in the first of which it comprehends
entia rationis, as opposed to Nihil: so that when a man has chimaera's in his
head, as golden Mountains, Eutopia's, Hirco-Cervi, Centaures, Models of houses
to be built hereafter, or perhaps never, false apprehensions of God,
Atheistical conceits and imaginations, and all manner of lies; Man (in that
case) is the creator of those entia rationis, whether merely groundless, or
wicked notions. We know that to lie, is a positive thing; yet Saint Paul
affirms it to be impossible to be the Creature of God, Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18. It
was one instance of Gods Almightiness, that he created Men and Angels with such
a liberty of will in conjunction with Ratiocination, as to be able to have
their Creatures too; although those Creatures must needs be vain, whose
Creators are finite, and Creatures too. Nay so evident it is; that men are
really Creators, that they seem to be such in the proper notion of the word, as
Creation signifies the Production of something out of nothing; for there are
entia rationis ratiocinantis, which have not so much as fundamentum in re. But
why do I talk Metaphysically to such a Scholar as lies before me, who seems so
great a stranger to it, that I may very well take up the proverbial verse,
(...);

My design is to convert, and not confound him, and therefore I will use a
greater plainness. When a witty Psalm. 14.1. and Psalm. 53.1.
Fool strives to prove there is no God, and when a sil^y Fool does believe it,
(as wrought upon by the witty ones proof) Atheism then becomes his Creature. My
will and my power to will this, or that, or another thing, is the Creature of
God: but the determination of my will to that which God forbids, and my
aversion from God, and my dislike of Gods will, and my loving or willing what
God abhors, these are my Creatures, and I alone must answer for them, if I
shall ever be so wretched as to abuse my liberty by such a looseness.
Concerning the many most real and positive things which were the Creatures of
Nero, Tiberius, Petronius, and Domitian, and which to derive from Gods Will, or
Creative Power, were a blasphemy great enough to make a man's hair stand upright
at the very thought of it, I have spoken The sinner Impl. part 2. chapter 2. sect.
12. p. 264, 265.
elsewhere, and therefore now do but give a hint of them. Concerning the Bishop
Andrews Sermon of the worshipping of Imaginations, p. 33, 37.
vain imaginations created and worshipped by Presbyterians, under the specious
name of the Apostles Doctrine, Government, Sacraments, and Prayers, Bishop
Andrews of blessed memory has wisely treated. God indeed made Gold and Silver;
but for the Idols which were made of Gold and Silver (the mere invention of the
Heathens by the help of Satan,) the Scripture tells us they were the work of
men's hands, Psalm. 115.4. They that make them are like unto them, (v. 8.) It was
God, who said in the second Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image. He did not say, Thou shall not worship the graven Images which I
the Lord thy God have made. God created the Earth out of nothing, and made
metals out of the Earth: But the Idolaters themselves did make their Idols out
of those metals. God made them men, but (by the help of the Devil) they made
themselves Idolizers of graven Images. God continued their being, life, motion,
and every faculty or power to act as free Agents; but to apply their faculties
to the making of Idols, to reduce their power into the act of worshipping what
they had made, to urite their wills with the accursed thing, and to choose their
own Gods, these were the instances of their freedom, and humane creatures. When
S. Paul says plainly, there be Gods many, meaning false and fanciful Gods,
(which were become the true God's Rivals in the greatest part of the world,) he
cannot mean that the true God had made so many false God^, but that they were
creatures of the creature. And if mechanical works, (as Watches, Windmills,
Fire-shovells, and Bellows) are properly called the works 1 Cor. 8.5.
of men, as to the shape and fashion by which they are specified (although the
materials of wood and iron, and the men themselves, are the works of God
only,) how much more are those spiritual and cannal works, Pride, Envy,
Malice, Idolatry, Murder, Drunkenness, and the like, the works and creatures of
Men and Devils? It was the saying of S. Austin (as I have read him cited by a
most eminent Prelate of our own) Peccator non est inter opera Dei, a sinner is
no work of God: As a man, he is God's work; but as a sinful man, he is his own;
or if not his own, I am sure the Devils, says that great man. And when Austin
says (upon Luke 15.7, 10.) that the joy of heaven extends no farther then the
works of God, he does imply that there are works which are not of God. Mr.
Hick. therefore should have made his division thus, by a Trichotomy: All
positive things are either 1. God, or 2. his creatures, or 3. things wrought by
his creatures through the power which the Creator has communicated unto them.
And that the brethrens way of arguing the very Deity of sin (from its being
something positive, yet none of God's creatures,) was the fantastic creature
of the brethren, I farther proceed to make apparent and undeniable.

3. The sin called Atheism is a positive thing, 3. How Mr. H. and Mr. B. do
infer atheism it self to be the creature of God, or God himself.
ns being a positive belief that there is no God, not a belief of nothing, nor
a belief of any thing else, nor a privation of Godhead without belief, but (in
sensu composito) a belief of no God; that is Atheism. Now I ask Mr. Hick. Is it
from God as his creature, or is it not? If he says that it is not, he must
avow it to be God, or recant his argument: if he says that it is, he must
confess he holds God to be the Author of sin. He cannot deny it to be a
positive thing, because every belief is a species of quality, to wit an habit,
or disposition of mind, and every (...) credere, or act of believing, is in the
praedicament of action, and so a positive entity or thing. Nor can he say that
all Atheism does consist in not believing there is a God, as that is opposed to
the being of belief; for stones and trees would then be Atheists, as not
believing there is a God: whereas Atheism on the contrary (however the word is
compounded with (...)) is the positive belief that there is no God, and is
competent to nothing below a man. That I may not here be mistaken by such as
are not only willing, but glad to fall into mistakes (when nothing else is
left to help them) I will explain my true meaning in what I speak concerning
Atheism, when I call it a belief that there is no God, and not a mere absence
of belief that there is a God. I take it for granted that there are none but
have heard at least there is a God, and that the being of a God is at least
believed by other men; from whence it follows unavoidably, that the supposed
Atheists of whom I speak, (who have heard of a God, and of believers that Heb.
11.6.
God is, and yet for their own parts do not believe any such thing) must needs
have a positive belief that they have heard a false report, and that the
Theists are erroneous, and that their fellow-Atheists are orthodox in that
particular. Nevertheless I discern so wide a difference, betwixt irrational
creatures which neither do, nor can, nor can be obliged to believe there is a
God, and men who can, and ought also to believe it; that if it is possible for
a man not to believe there is a God, without believing that there is no God, I
pronounce him guilty of negative Atheism. But this I take to be impossible in
any capable subject, which is able, and obliged to have an actual belief. And
because an infant of two days old has not the exercise of reason, and is not
capable of any positive belief, it follows that that infant is not guilty of
Atheism in any sense, (any more then the trees of which I spoke) although he
does not believe there is a God. But admit the possibility of merely negative
Atheism in a subject capable of actual Faith, yet all will grant that positive
Atheism is a sin, and a greater sin then the negative; which evinceth the thing
that I am proving. Mr. Hobbs himself, though he Mr. Hobbs his Leviath. p. 214.
denies that there are spirits, which is the heart of Atheism, (for God is a
Spirit, Joh. 4.24.) yet he says that Id de Civ. c. 14. scot. 19.
Atheism is an erroneous opinion, and so infers it to be a positive thing.
Again, he says that sins are Lib. and Neces. p. 23.
actions; and that actions are things positive, his nearest Confederates will
not deny.

The like may be said of all other sins, especially sins of commission; which
being riveted in a man by long custom and continuance, are commonly called Sins
are positive things, because inward habits.
HABITUAL SINS. So then, Mr. Hick. cannot but confess, that vices are habits as
well as virtues, (there is a habit of Drunkenness, as well as of Sobriety;) and
that Habits are Qualities he cannot be ignorant, if he is but able to tell his
fingers; and that a habit is a thing positive, his postpraedicaments have
taught him, where a habit and a privation are set as opposite terms, such as do
mutually necessitate each others absence: which being granted by all the world,
Mr. H's. Dilemma has caught him in this inextricable snare, that he must
either do a public penance, or confess his Belief to be one of these two
things; [So many Sins, so many Gods; or so many Sins, so many Creatures derived
from God.] He sees his sin in his punishment, and what a vain thing it is for
(...).
Beetles to fly in the face of Eagles; for such a thing as Mr. Hick. to strike
at God, and his Purity, by giving sin an (...), and laying his Child (when he
has done) at another man's door: For so I find by Mr. B. p. 114.

4. Man the Author of some positive things, and God of some privatives. Romans
22.11.
4. The positive Entity of sin may farther be evinced thus: There must be
something positive to make a man positively foul; which foulness suffers a
privation when the man is cleansed of his filth. Sin does make a man filthy;
God by his grace does make him clean. The filth of sin is many times so
ingrained, that after Gods own cleansings the habitual sinner remains unclean.
I have Ezekiel. 23.13.
purged thee (says God) and thou wast not purged; therefore shall thou not be
purged from thy filthiness any more. Yet in a flat contradiction to Mr. Hick's
Divinity, the filth which is positive is man's own Creature, whereas the
cleansing which is privative is Gods own work.

5. Mr. Hick. confounds Negative and Privative, as well as Privative and
Privation.
5. Whilst Mr. Hick. denies sin to be something positive, he seems to make no
difference betwixt a simple negative, and a privative properly so called. And
again, confounds a privation properly so called, with a thing called privative
secundum quid. He makes no difference betwixt not blessing, and cursing God;
betwixt ceasing to give alms, (which is one kind of sin) and grinding the faces
of the poor, (by rapine, oppression, and extortion) which is another. He makes
no difference betwixt not saving, and killing another man. And yet the men of
his party do interpret Gods sufferance or permission of sin, by efficacious and
operative; from whence I thus argue: If to permit sin only (which is only not
to hinder) can be any way positive, because efficacious; how much more is that
positive which is called persuasion, or temptation unto sin? yet temptation
unto sin is a horrible sin in the tempter, though none at all in the person
tempted.

6. To harden our own hearts and consent unto temptations are positive things.
6. Mr. H's. party are wont to say, that God does harden a man's heart by way of
action. So says Mr. W. p. 22. How much more by way of action does a man harden
his own heart? and every action is a positive entity; Ipsum privare, as much as
any. To consent to a temptation, he knows is sin; and he will not deny it to be
a thing positive. But to consent to a temptation is none of Gods offspring,
much less is it a God; by which Mr. H. may discern, that in the Net which he
had laid he is Psalm. 9.15. and 35.8.
caught himself. And his traitorous Child (I mean his Argument) has done
exactly unto him, as he Deuteronomy. 19.19.
thought to have done unto his brother.

7. Our destruction from our selves a positive thing.
7. Though it is God that made us, and not we our selves, ( Psalm. 95.) yet our
spiritual destruction is from our selves, and not from God, ( Hos. 13.6. Wisd.
1.13, 14.) And believe me, to destroy is a positive thing, as the woeful effect
can well inform us. And if the determination of the will to blaspheme, or curse
God, (which will be granted by all Sects to be a positive thing) is not man's
own work, but his Creators, who then is made by Mr. Hick. to be the Author of
such impieties?

8. Sin is so spoken of in Scripture, as to be every where concluded a very
positive thing. 8. Sin spoken of Scripture as a positive thing.
There are that sin as with a Is. 5.18.
Cart-rope, and Is. 30.1.
add sin unto sin. Christ Is. 53.10, 12
bare our sins, and made his soul an offering for them. All sin shall be
forgiven, Mat. 12.31.
except that against the Holy Ghost. We read of Genesis 20.9. Joh. 15.22. and
19.11. 1 John 5.16.17
great and little sins in comparison. We also read (in proportion) of Mat.
23.14. Luke 12.48.
greater and lesser damnation. Sin is the 1 Cor. 15.56.
sting of Death, and death the Romans 6.23.
wages of sin. And the cause cannot have a lesser Being then the effect. Sin
Romans 7.8.
wrought in me (says the Apostle) all manner of concupiscence. And perfectius
est agere, quam esse, says Albertus Magnus. Sin has its Romans 7.8, 9.
life, and death, and resurrection. There is a Heb. 3.13.
deceitfulness of sin. And sin is said to have its Heb. 11.25.
pleasures. Sin is a thing to be Heb. 12.1.
laid aside, either totally, or for a time. There are that are Romans 7.14.
sold under sin, and are servants to it, and cannot 2 Pet. 2.14.
cease from it. Insomuch that sin does rule and Romans 5.21. and 6.12.
reign over them. In a word, it is evident from the Scriptures, that from the
time in which sin did make its Romans 5.12.
entrance into the world, it was able to change the course of Nature. And could
a simple privation, which is but the absence of an Entity (supposed to have
been present) have been the cause of all this?

9. Mr. Hick. convinced by his own party.
9. Mr. Hick's own party acknowledge sin to be a compound, made up of a material
and formal part. The material part of it Mr. W. calls a natural act (p. 25.)
Mr. B. both a natural and moral act, (p. 11.) Doctor Twisse gives his instance
in the act of lying with another man's wife; All positive things. Nay, the
formal part of sin is a positive Entity, as themselves have defined it; it
being the result of two positive things, to wit, the repugnance of any Action
with the Law of God. Nay, Mr. W. says broadly, that God must needs both will
and work in the sin of the act, the very pravity it self, p. 12. implying it to
have an efficient cause.

10. He argues with the Libertines.
10. Mr. Hick. argues like the Libertines, and as it were out of their mouths,
whilst he contends that all things positive are either Gods Creatures, or God
himself. And so he comes to be concerned in what I said to Mr. W. chapter 1. sect.
2. p. 8, 9, etc. I leave the Reader to collect how Mr. Hick. would frame his
Answers to any man that should Catechize him in the very first Article of the
Nicene Creed, he having discovered to all the world in what a latitude he
understands it.

11. Mr. Hick. will confess he has blasphemed, in case that sin is something
positive; which is many ways proved.
11. This Mr. Hick. will unavoidably confess, that if it is impossible to
separate the sinful act from the sin, as David's lying with Bathshebah from his
sin of Adultery; nay that we cannot imagine or conceive how they can possibly
be distinguished; then sin must needs be something positive, and so is inferred
by him, to be either Gods Creature, or God himself. But that there is not the
least difference betwixt the sinful act and the sin, (as betwixt the act of
hating God, and the sin of hating God, which is that act of hating God) I have
manifested Look back on chapter 2. sect. 12, and 13. and also on sect. 9, and 11.
of the same chapter 2.
before to Mr. W. In all which Mr. Hick. comes to be equally concerned; and I
refer him to four Sections pointed out in the * margin. To all which I add
these following proofs. 1. Sin being complexum quid (in the acknowledgement of
all) cannot admit of an abstraction, and yet remain the complexum which it was
before abstracted. God can separate the soul of man from the body, but not the
man from the man, who is the upshot of their union. This would imply a
contradiction; as, that the parts are united when they are separated or not
united. To make it plain and naked for the thickest heads, I shall use this
example; David's sin of Adultery was not possible to be merely his repugnance
with the Law, abstracted from his lying with Uriah's wife; nor merely his lying
with Uriah's wife, abstracted from its repugnance with the Law of God: But
'twas the product or result of both united. As a man is not his body only
without his soul, nor only his soul without his body, but a compound
consisting of soul and body. 2. The sinful act being a Relative, whose very
being (as such) is in relation to the law which it transgresses, it is as
impossible to separa^e the one from the other, as to separate a Father from his
very relation unto a Son. 3. Mr. Hobbs has Liberty and Necess. p. 23.
confessed (what his brethren of the Kirk will never be able to claw off,
either by owning or disowning,) that if God is the Author of the action, which
is a breach of the law, as well as of the law of which it is a breach, he must
be the Author of the breach, that is, the sin, and of the very repugnance
betwixt the law and the action by which it is broken; which shows the
inseparability of which I speak. And because the Author of all things requisite
to the being of any thing, must needs be the Author of the being; therefore,
say I, God is so far from being, that it is impossible he should be, the Author
of any one action which is a transgression of the law, that is, a sin, but
only the Author of the man's free will, and of his power to use his freedom,
which power is innocent, as has been S^ct. 18. Number. 7.
showed. The sin begins not but with the abuse of that power in the determining
of the will to the forbidden and wrong object: which wrong determining of the
will is the sinners own action, and his alone, since he did freely choose it,
whilst yet the contrary was in his power to choose. The power to act being
before the act, is therefore separable from it, though the act being done
against the law, is not separable from the obliquity, which is, its being done
against the law. 4. If it is said that man has a pravity in his nature, Who
they are who make God the Author as well of original as actual sin. Look
forwards on the 27. sect. number. 4. of this chapter
which accompanies the action of which God is the Author, and so
distinguishable from it, and that God does but make the lame horse go, which
was lame before he made him go, and so is the cause of his going, but not of
his lamenesse; that will be found to be a Reed, which will run into the elbow
of such as shall dare to lean upon it: for when Adam was yet innocent, he was
not as a lame horse, and yet he ceased to be innocent; or (if you please) he
grew lame by eating that which was forbidden. So that if God was the cause of
his eating that forbidden fruit, he was also the cause of the sin, which was
nothing else but his eating the fruit forbidden, if he made him eat, he made
him lame. Besides, if a horse which goes not, and has only an aptitude to go
lamely, will of necessity go lamely if he be made to go at all; he who shall
cause that horse to go, will also cause him to go lamely: so will God be
concluded the cause of sin, if having first given us the power to act against
his law, he shall also reduce that power into that act, so as that positive act
shall be his creature; yet so it must be, (says Mr. Hick.) if a positive act.
And Doctor Twisse does say as bluntly, [ Damus Deum esse causam uniuscujusque
actus. Vin. Gr. l. 2. par. 1. p. 40.
we grant that God is the particular cause of every act.] Wherein this differs
from that of the Libertines, let him tell us who can. 5. God has forbidden in
his law the positive acts of Stealing, Adultery, Murder, and the like, for
which positive acts he will also cast into Hell. It will be ill pleading for
Cain that God alone was the Author of the positive act of his stabbing Abel,
and of the law which forbad it, from which two the obliquity was an unavoidable
resultance. And if the sin of blasphemy is distinguishable from the act of
speaking against God, then did God forbid something besides the sin, (which
implies a horrible contradiction) and there may be a good act of speaking
against God, as well as an evil one; which again implies another contradiction.
6. When Mr. Hick.'s Masters are wont to say, that God praedestin'd men to sin,
as the means of damnation, they do and must mean, to sin as sin, because sin is
no otherwise the means of damnation; and diverse of them do use that very
reduplication. Now because they teach also that God decreed the means as well
as the end, they infer sin as sin to be a positive act, and therefore not
distinguishable from it.

I have now done with Mr. Hick. as to this particular, which Mr. B. calls his
second Argument, upon which I have the more enlarged, because I perceive it to
be the great block at which those men are wont to stumble, and at which the
Libertines have fallen down headlong. Again, I find it to be the block, out of
which Mr. B. has hewed so many chipps, and little splinters; which having
flown into his eyes, have made him rageful as well as blind. This will very
much appear by the following Sections, which for that very reason shall be so
much the shorter.

Sect. 19.
Mr. B's. first chip hewn out of Mr. Hick.'s Block.
Mr. B. thus debauched by his leading friend as has been showed, sticks not to
say in plain terms, He must either maintain God to be the Author of sin, or
else he must speedily renounce the very first Article of his Christian Creed,
and say that God did not make heaven and earth, and all real things visible and
invisible therein. That in him we do not live, move, and have our being, Act.
17.28. That every good and perfect gift in its kind is not from God, Jam. 1.17.
p. 113.] Though this is a chip of the old block, and might be sent for its
reception to the former Section, yet in order to his cure, I will make him feel
his infirmity.

1. He foists the word real into the Creed, and makes it to stand in the place
of good, and infers God the maker of all sins.
1. The word real is in neither Creed but foisted in by M. B. and if he intends
it as exegetical of all things visible and invisible, in the Nicaene Creed, he
makes a Creed for the Ranters, who finding by experience that blasphemies and
adulteries are real things, and having been taught (by whom think you?) to
believe that God is the maker of all things real without exception, conclude
those things to be very good. Such domestic Libertines must be taught that
when God is said to be the maker of all things, it is only meant of all things
that are good, which alone are possible to be made by God; not of all things
that are real, whereof many are evil, and only made by Men and Devils.

2. The different methods of our reasonings, and what comes of it.
2. Mark (Good Reader) before thou go any farther, the different methods of
our reasoning, and the different effects. I lay it down as my Principle, that
God is not the maker of sin, therefore not of David's adultery; therefore not
of that action called his lying with Bathshebah; therefore not of every
positive and real thing. But Mr. Hick. and Mr. B. and the Libertines do build
backwards thus: They lay it down as their Principle, That God is the maker of
all things that are real without exception, therefore of David's lying with
Bathshebah, (acknowledged by all to be a real and positive thing) therefore of
his Adultery, (unless his Adultery can be differenced from his lying with
Bathshebah) therefore of his sin, (unless his sin can be differenced from his
Adultery.) Again, the Libertines argue thus; God does decree sin, therefore it
is good. But I argue thus; Sin cannot be good, therefore God cannot decree it.
Of so great concernment it is, that they be beaten out of their methods and
ways of reasoning, and taught to begin at the right end.

3. They ascribe all positive entities, however filthy, unto God.
3. I who prove sin to be a positive entity, do also prove it to be the work of
men and Devils only; whereas it is he and Mr. Hick. who do impute it unto God,
on supposition of its positive entity. What he says from Act. 17.28. is wholly
impertinent, unless he thinks it to be a sin to live, and to move, and to have
a being. For that innocent liberty and power which we have from God, we alone
do determine to the doing of evil. Much less pertinent is that from S. James
(c. 1. v. 17.) unless he thinks that sin can be a good and a perfect gift, or
that every positive entity is such.

4. They are convinced by the Assemblies confession of faith, chapter 9. Artic. 1.
4. It is part of the Assemblies confession of faith, [God has endued the will
of man with that natural liberty, that is neither forced, nor by any absolute
necessity of nature determined to do good or evil. From whence it follows,
that Adam's determination of his free will to the eating of forbidden fruit,
(which was a positive entity) was merely from Adam, and not from God. Unless
they will say, he had a necessity supernatural, though not from nature; which
if they say, it will be at their peril. Again, it is granted by all, that man
since the fall has a liberty of will in things not moral, and in many things
which are merely moral; which inferres them to be the Authors of many positive
Acts.

5. They are farther uncovered, by being supposed to be catcchized.
5. If Mr. B. and Mr. Hick. were to be publicly Catechized, and first asked who
made them men, 2. who made them sinners, 3. who made them Priests, 4. who made
their Dublets either long or short-wasted, 5. who is wont to wash their
clothes, to cleanse their hands, and their feet, and to do some other much
viler offices; they would not say (for shame) that God did make or do those
things, which they know to be positive and real Entities; but to each of those
Questions they would certainly return a severe Answer. Again, if they are asked,
who made the short-wastedness of the Dublet aforesaid, they will say, the same
Tailor who made it a short-wasted Dublet. Ask them then, who made the
sinfulness of the sinful Action (to wit David's lying with Bathshebah) they will
say, the same Agent who made the sinful Action, that positive Entity, David's
lying with Bathshebah against the Law. Who made that positive Entity, or sinful
action? Even God, say Mr. W. says that of every positive act God is the proper
efficient cause, p. 24. Mr. B. and Mr. H. the same and wors, as has been
showed.
they; but (say I) the Adulterer, against the precept and will of God, and
against that measure of his grace, which had been sufficient to prevent it, if
David had not been a resolute and wilful sinner. I conclude this Section with
the confession of Mr. W. [ That he who is the Author of the Action, must needs
be the Author of the sin also which is unseparable from it, p. 25.] But both
himself and Mr. Hick. and Mr. B. do say, that God is the Author and maker of
the action (as being a positive and real thing,) therefore according to their
concessions they do all make God the Author of sin.

Sect. 20.
Mr. B's. second chip of the old block.
Mr. B. hews out his second chip thus, [ He must hold, that there be myriads of
myriads of actions in the world which are not wrought by God, etc. p. 113. This
second chip is wonderful, if compared with the first; 1. His inconsistency with
himself, and his inferring all sinful actions to be wrought by God.
for there he would have me bound up by my Thesis, to maintain that God is the
Author of sin, though here he makes me to hold, that there are 100000. of
Actions not wrought by God: if the first were swallowed, there is no place for
the second; and if the second, then no place for the first. For if I hold (as I
do) that there are myriads of sins, or sinful actions, whereof not one can by
any possibility be wrought by God, then by no possibility can I make God the
Author of sin. But now Mr. B. declares his Tenet, that all the actions in the
world (however filthy and noisome) are wrought by God. I say the contrary, that
there is a world of wickedness which is none of Gods making, but of the Devils,
and his party, whether in Hell or in Earth.

2. His unsuccesful reliance on the Jesuits.
2. Whilst I deny that any sinful actions are wrought by God, I do not deny
that he permits them; and I have often showed, how the sinner depends on God,
both for his power to live and move. What he says of the sesuites may well be
true; for they are kinsmen in these affairs. The Jesuits, in waggery, did
purposely propagate many blasphemies, arising from the Tenet of unconditional
Reprobation, in many Protestant parts of the Christian world, that by making
them odious, they might fright men from thence into the Church of Rome. I find
the observation in the Renowned and Judicious Exact. Coll. l. 10. chapter 39. sect.
6. p. 3189.
Dr. Jackson, whom Mr. B. put me upon reading, by his saying that I had read
him, when indeed I had not. And since the Jesuit Suarez is of so much
Authority with his Cousin of the Kirk, I will observe out of Proprio and reali
influxu concurrit Deus ad actus liberi Arbitrii ut reales actus sunt, etiamsi
saepissime and intrinsece mali sint: nam cum hi actus sint vere res and
effectus reales, necesse est ut saltem illam dopendentiam a Deo habeant, quae
omnibus causarum secundarum effect bus generalis and omnino necessaria est.
Suarez de concursu, motione, and auxiliis Dei, lib. 2.
Suarez, that the acts of Free Will are real acts, though evil, and the real
effects of second causes; which Mr. Hick. and Mr. B. are both entreated to chew
upon. And again, I will observe, that Suarez gives those acts but a general
dependence upon God; whereas Doctor Twisse (as I lately cited him) makes God to
be causa particularis uniuscujusque actus: which is worse then the Jesuit,
though the Jesuits and Dominicans are too too bad in their Assertions.

Sect. 21.
Mr. B's. 3d. chip more pitiful then the former.
Mr. B. says farther [ It will follow, that the more sinful acts any commits,
the more he is a Creator, and a kind of an (...), a God of himself, p. 13.]
Still a chip of the same block. But 1. what pretense has he for this, when I
have said so often, that though the sinner in some sort may be called the
Creator of his sins, yet the evil which he does, he does by that power and
freedom of will which he had from God? How then (...) in any sense? 2. To be a
God of evil, is a very sad privilege. And the word [God] is so far from
signifying Him only who is the (...), that Exodus 22.28.
men and 1 Cor. 8.5.
Idols are called Gods in Scripture; and Satan himself, the 2 Cor. 4.4.
God of this world. And so the sum of Mr. B's. acumen is but this, That the
more sins a man commits, of the more sins he is the Author. The more evil the
Devil invents, the works of the Devil are so much the more. Very pretty. Look
back on Sect. 18. and 19. Number. 5.

Sect. 22.
Mr. B's. fourth chip, the most lamentable of all.
Mr. B. begins to be more extravagant then himself, (not only more then other
men) by arguing from the supposal of sins being a thing positive, [ That God
did never concur to any the best action that ever the holiest Saint did act, p.
113.] As wild a saying as this is, his reason for it is little less; it being
no other then this, [That sinful infirmity does cleave to their holiest
performances. Ibid.]

1. Mr. B's. arguing concludes him either Pelagian, or Libertine.
1. If this were reduced into a Syllogism, it would overthrow his whole
Fabric, and that two ways: for either it would argue him a Pelagian, in
denying that our best actions are from the grace of God; or else a flat
Libertine, in affirming our evil and good actions to proceed from God in equal
manner. The sum of his arguing is this, That if sin is not from God, the
holiest action of man is not from God. But first he must be minded of his least
unhappiness, which is his great impertinence: for this is not the thing which
here it lay upon him to prove, That sin is from God, but that it is not a thing
positive; whereas by striving to prove it is from God, he proves it also a
thing positive, against himself and his friend Mr. H. Hick. For in that they
both say, whatsoever positive thing is not from God is God, they unavoidably
imply, that whatsoever is from God is a positive thing.

2. His great impertinence is to no end, but to make God the Author of sin.
2. From hence it is evident and undeniable, that though Mr. B. in some places
does deny his derivation of sin from God, yet his heart is so full, so brim-ful
of it, that here he goes out of his way to shed some of it upon his paper; or
if unknowingly it falls from him, it is still a sign he overflowes. If he
thinks that the best actions of the holiest men are the very sins of infirmity
which he says do cleave to them, he knows his dangers above recited, and
many more I need not name; but Isa. 5.20.
woe to him that calls good evil, and evil good. If he means that the sin is a
distinct thing from it; why could he not distinguish betwixt the Sun and a
Coal-pit? betwixt the pious action, which is from God, and the sin annexed,
which is from man? Gods concurrence is an equivocal word, and must be carefully
distinguished. If it relates only to good, God concurs to the very act; if to
evil, God concurs not any otherwise, then by continuing to us the liberty and
power to act with which he endued us as we are men. But to abuse that liberty,
and to reduce that power into any forbidden or evil act, is the unhappy and
sole privilege of the depraved Creature.

Sect. 23.
Mr. B. says farther, that if sin is something positive, Mr. B's. fifth chip
denies Gods praescience of all wickedness, unless he also praedetermined it.
and none of Gods Creatures, [ It will overturn all Divine praescience of sins;
and how can that be foreknown by God, which is in no sense praedetermined by
him; in which he has at all no hand? p. 113.] This is the same sad beggary of
the thing in Question, without the least offer of proof, which his cogent
necessities have so often squeezed from him, and which I have See the eighth,
ninth and tenth Sections of this third chapter.
spoken to so largely in diverse Sections. Though he has several times
confessed, that Deity it self is overturned if praescience, yet here he
professedly overturns Gods praescience of any thing in the world, but what he
first does praedetermine, and has a hand in. If God did not praedetermine (nor
had any hand at all in) all the villainies in the world, (which none can imagine
but Mr. B. and his party) then he could not foreknow them, says the unclean
Dictator. And so he casts himself into his wonted straight, of aspersing Gods
holiness on the one hand, and his praescience on the other. To what he asks,
and asks only, I will fully (but briefly) answer, that God can foresee what we
will do, as well as what he will do himself. He may determine to give us power,
and foresee how we will use it. He gives us a power to act freely, and to
determine our own wills; which would not be wills, much less our own wills, if
determined by any thing except our selves. So much am I for Gods praescience,
that I extend it to all things without exce^tion; as well to the evil, which he
did not praedetermine, as to the good, which he did. But it is a great
derogation to Gods infinite knowledge, to say it reaches no farther then to
his own decrees and executions: The very thing which the Socinians do so
improve, as to deny Gods praescience of future contingencies. And whether Mr.
B. with his party are not Socinians in this point (according to that method
which they do constantly use in judging others) let them be their own Judges in
cooler blood. If they deny it, it is at their peril; it being much a lesser
error, to think that God foresaw no wickedness, then that he foreordained any.

Sect. 24.
Mr. B. concludes with an affirmation, 1. Mr. B's. Impositions upon the
Scripture,
(which he hopes may pass with the easy multitude for a kind of sixth
Argument) that my opinion is contrary 1. to Scripture, which speaks of sin as
of a privative, when it speaks most properly; 2. to Austin, who pleads that sin
has no cause efficient, but only deficient; 3. to Schoolmen of all sides and
parties; 4. to his honored and beloved Father Arminius, p. 114. The first is
contrary to truth in the very judgment of common sense, as I have largely made
appear (and partly out of his own mouth) in the 15, 16, 17, and 18. Sections of
this Chapter. But yet I will ask him this little thing, Does the Scripture
speak properly when it says that God hardened the heart of Pharaoh? and does
it not speak properly when it says that sin is a work of the Devil, that the
Devil is the Father of it, that Lust conceives and brings forth sin? True
indeed, it is called Vanity; but so is Psalm. 39 11.
Man too, who yet (I hope) is a positive entity nevertheless. Nay Man at his
Verse. 5.
best estate is altogether vanity: nay altogether Psalm. 62.9.
lighter then vanity it self. Sin indeed is called darkness, but by a figure,
and so are Ephesians. 5.8.
men too. A man is no where called emptiness, no more is sin. But sin has
negative attributes (as every thing in the world has) in respect of its having
no moral goodness. How many things are there, which God himself in Scripture
is affirmed not to be? yet Mr. B. will not deny him to be a positive entity.

2. The Schoolmer.
2. As for the Schoolmen, if either they talk erroneously (as Mr. B. will
confess they often do) or are mistaken by Mr. Barlee, (who is as good at that
faculty as any man of his paste) or were never read by him, (who does not cite
so much as one in this place,) who can help it?

3. S. Austin might err as well in this as in many other things wherein Mr. B.
will say he erred, 3. S. Austin. August. lib. 12. De Civit. Dei cap. 7. ubi de
causa malae voluntatis agit, conferat^r um ejusdem lib. 21. de Civitate Dei,
cap. 24. ubi pa^um (inquit) veraciter dicitur quod dicitur (Mat. 12.32.) nisi
essent, quibus etsi non in isto, tamen rem^tteretur in futuro saeculo. His new
degree of Arminianism
and in the very same book which here he cites. I say he might, not that he
does. For Mr. B. understood not his own citation, which being seemingly for
him, does make against him in reality. For Austin's speech belongs only to the
cause of the evil will, not of every evil act of which the will is the cause.
Again, it only belongs to the causes that are without the man: and this is
that which I would have, that God is far from being the efficient cause of an
evil will; he is not so much as the deficient, because he is not wanting in
those things that are necessary to make an evil will good: so far is Austin
from pleading that sin has no efficient cause. Notwithstanding all that he
has spoken, the impious man's own will is the efficient cause of his impiety.

4. Whereas he says that my opinion is most contrary to Arminius, he
contradicts a good part of both his books, wherein he says that my opinions
are c. 3. p. 25.
all derived from Arminius. I had formerly proved by many Div Phi. def. c. 1.
p. 12, 13, etc.
instances, how far himself was an Arminian, and how impossible it was that I
should be so. Now he lends me another instance, wherein Himself and Mr. Hick,
are at agreement with Arminius, and I am contrary to all three. But I am of
opinion he wrongs Arminius, and makes him more Presbyterian then indeed he was;
had he read any such thing: he would in all probability have set down the
^lace. His case is sad, whether he pretends to Truth or Falsehood. If to the
first, he hurts himself and Mr. Hick. If to the second, he slanders Arminius,
and stabbs himself.

Sect. 25.
Having made this way for his own unhappiness, Mr. Hick's heathenish
expression of sins, (...), commended by Mr. B. for 1. learned, 2. witty, and 3.
well written.
by that variety of attempts to which Mr. Hick. (it seems) betrayed him; he
acts the well-natur'd man, and even blesses the Author of his unhappiness. He
declares that Mr. Hick. is his cordial friend, who wrote well to him, told him
learnedly and wittily, that Mr. T. P. is the first who gave sin this (...), an
extraordinary invention, p. 114.] Here is his tragical Exit for many reasons.
1. Mr. Hick.'s saying that my invention is extraordinary, is no proof that
Arminius does say the contrary, or that Mr. Hick. did write well, or that his
saying was both learned and witty. Each of these I deny, and have sufficiently
disproved in my eighteenth Section. 2. He knows that I had never mentioned any
such Heathenish expression, as sins (...); nor was it ever to be found in any
Author but Mr. Hick. And he knows that it was clearly his own invention;
either arising from his opinion that (...) was derived from (...) pono, and
signified the posicive entity of sin, (which though a sad miscarriage of the
Scholar, is yet the very best that his friends can make of it) or from his
sadder apprehension that sin must needs have a Godhead, if it is none of God's
creatures, and yet a positive thing. To believe the former were a huge act of
charity; but there is no place for it with Mr. Hick. who has forced me to the
severity of believing the later. 3. All Mr. Hick. has displayed is his being
overflown with (...), which (could its banks have contained it, would not thus
have gushed over on no occasion, when it is plain that the effect could be
nothing else but to drown his credit with a yellow, as well as his cause with a
blacker Jaundise. But evenit malo male, and (...).
Erynnis (as they say) still p^oves a virgin: for poor Perillus is the first
who is likely to be tortured with his invention; and believe me, the brazen
Bull was a lesser misery, then to be found in the im^iety of making the
foulest actions to be the Rivulets issuing out by a necessity from God the
Source. What Spirit but an unclean one, can be the cause of uacleannesse* that
is, of sin? Who are they whom I have proved to have printed in plain terms,
that God is the cause of that uncleanness? When the Pharisees heretofore, who
were the Jewish Puritans, or Preci^ans, and rec^oned themselves the godly party
of the land, had slandered our Savior with having an unclean Spirit, (who,
although he was God, did appear to them as he was man too) our Savior told
them (on that occa^^on) the danger of blaspheming against the holy Ghost. Let
them who love the Lord Jesus in s^ncerity, and tender the safety of their own
as well as of other men's souls, not only read, but consider, and then apply
what is spoken, Mar. 3.28, 29, 30.

I now dismiss the signal Paragraph which Mr. Hick. suggested to Mr. Barlee,
and Mr. Barlee has vented to all the People; which yet I should not have
dismissed so soon, but that my Reader may be referred to several Sections for
an enlargement, as chapter 1. sect. 2. from p. 7. to p. 13. chapter 2. sect. 5. p. 69,
70. sect. 10. p. 79, 80, 81. sect. 14. p. 88, 90. All which being considered,
Mr. B. does fitly dislike the style of Unfortunate Writer, for if it ever
belonged to any, it does to him and Mr. Hick.

Sect. 26.
Mr. B. having thus far miscarried (by the help of Mr. Hick.) proceeds to plead
for himself, A short speci^^^ of M. B's. rem^^nt of Abst rsions in ord r to the
Readers and P^inrs ^ase.
and his guilty M^sters, in such a treacherous manner both to them and himself,
that to give my Readers an account of such numerous failings, were to draw out
the man's unhappiness to an intolerable length. And because a Pigmy as well as
Hercules may be judged of by a foot, I will leave the Reader, by that which
follows, to guess at the body of his abstersions.

1. What I had cited out of Calvin's Institutions, he affirmed to have been
fetched from Calvin's Book De Providentia; and said I did as good as name it. I
Div. Phila^. def. chapter 3. p. 127 etc.
showed him the grosseness of his mistake, and proved the wilfulness of it,
which raised the error into a sin. Now by way of abstersion, he confesses the
fact, p. 126. and complains he was misled by his edition of Calvin, which he
says was different from mine. And (which shows the wilfulness of his last
crime also) he is silent of the book De Providentia, and talks of nothing but
Institutions: which had he really consulted, he must needs have met with the
citation, as since he confesses to have done. But this does only introduce
his more incomparable Commission. For

Of Calvin's Doctrine, that God commands, yea compels the D vil, and all that
are w cked to conceive and perpetrate their evil doing.
2. I had cited other words from Calvin's Institutions, and that from the page
where now I see them, to wit p. 66. c. 17. l. 1. Edit. Genev. A. D. 1637. But
it seems M. B. conceived the passage so unexcusable, that instead of laboring
to salve the matter, he daringly brake out in this equally ridiculous and
desperate manner; [ I will give all my books for a halfpenny, which I should
be loath to part with for 150 l. if the fourth testimony be to be found in
Calvin's book of Institution in the place quoted by him, p. 126* To ^unish the
Malefactor for such a ^old dishonesty, I will not challenge all his books,
(which yet are due to me for one halfpenny) but record the words of Mr.
Calvin, with the page and the lines wherein they lie. [Verum ubi in memo iam
revocant, Diabolum totamque improborum cohortem sic omnibus partibus manu Dei,
tanquam fr no cohiberi, ut nec concipere ullum adversus nos maleficium, nec
conceptum moliri, nec ad perpetrandum, si maxi^e moliantur, digitum movere
queant, nisi quantum ille permiserit, imo nisi quantum mandarit; nec compedibus
tantum ejus teneri ligatos, sed etiam ad obsequia praestanda fraeno cogi;
habent unde se prolixe consolentur. Calv. Inst. l. 1. c. 17. sect. 11. p. (seu
potius fol.) 66. col. 2. lin. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Edit. Genev.
1637. And this was the fourth blasphemous Instance which I produced in English,
Correct Copy, p. 9. Thus the Malefactor is proved most guilty; and not only
so, but he stands condemned out of his mouth too. For when it is for his turn
to skin over an ulcer, which he sees cannot be cured, he p. 126. lin. 1, etc.
says, It appears by the pages which I quote out of Calvin, that he follows
one Edition of the Institutions, and I another; his having been printed 1585.
and mine no longer ago then 1637. Is this a man to manage a controversy with
any longer, who never regards what he utters, either to sully another, or to
absterse himself, so that he may but say something, and become the Author of a
book? 1. It seems my Edition is much later then his, and therefore probably
more emendate. 2. Had it been true that my citation did not appear in his
Edition, he should not yet have concluded that it appeared not in mine own. 3.
Had he not been resolute in making a refuge of a mistake, he might have
borrowed my Calvin, or at least have ask't when it was printed. 4. Though the
Printer erred in a punctilio, by putting sect. 12. for sect. 11. yet he made it
no error by expressing the very page exactly right, which made the Section
become needless; besides that sect. 11. and sect. 12. are the very next
neighbors to one another, and being both extremely short, they cannot but both
be seen at once, with one and the same cast of the Readers eye: so utterly
destitute of excuses is the Merchant become in this adventure, which I have
prosecuted thus at large for these three reasons. First in order to brevity,
that other things may be compendiously and yet sufficiently replied to, by the
Readers being entreated to guess at the Disputant by this one instance; and
how unworthy he is of my farther consideration. 2. It appears by this instance,
that whatsoever blasphemous Doctrines I have publicly cited from that Tribe of
Writers, I am proved to have truly and justly cited, by that man of all the
world, who is most concerned to have them thought false; for in case he had
found one real flaw, how would the Victor have triumphed, who is so full of
ovations in being beaten? 3. It appears by this one instance, how ashamed they
are of those Doctrines in their modest intervals, which in their Fits of
courage they use to boast of. Mr. B. was unwilling either to praise or
dispraise what he found cited out of Calvin, viz. That the Devil and all other
wicked ones, are not only permitted, but commanded also; nor only commanded,
but compelled also [ad concipiendum, moliendum, perpetrandum maleficium] to
conceive, to attempt, and to accomplish their evil doing. I will not dissect
the words, much less read a Lecture on them, unless I shall possibly be invited
by some worthier person then Mr. B.

Sect. 27.
Mr. B's. affected Tergiversations in his chiefest con^ cernments.
That which next follows in Mr. B. from p. 127. to 137. is never enough to be
admired. For pretending to answer that large Catalogue of Blasphemies which I
had collected out of his Masters in my Defense of the Divine Philanth. c. 3. p.
132. to p. 140. he does not so much as meddle with any one of the particulars
of which the Catalogue is composed: but in stead of that, he performs these
pranks. 1. He p. 127.
sends the Reader to his first book, where there is not a syllable touching any
one of them. 2. Ibid.
He asks what it would conduce to the main Question, though some out of diverse
owned classical Authors should not prove to be exactly defensible. 3. He says,
Ibid.
if I will hold what they do, I shall explicate such matters by as soft phrases
as I please. 4. p. 128.
He complains that my Design was hateful in the making of that Collection. 5.
He tells us that the p. 130, 131.
Jesuits, to wit, Bellarmin, Suarez, Pererius, Vega, have writ as boldly of
God, as the Presbyterians so often cited; and that Arminius (who was also a
Presbyterian) did something like it. 6. Ibid.
He complains that my Indictment does serve for nothing, but to make his
Classical Authors odious (for so he commonly describes the party) and to make
room for such as Grotius and Castalio. 7. Ibid. Ibid.
He protests against Hobbs, and the Comforter of Believers, as no Protestants.
8. He calls the objection which is made against his Masters, their making God
the Author of sin, an old musty stale objection. 9. p. 132.
He pleads (against matter of Fact, demonstrated to the eyes and ears of all)
that men so eminent for piety and learning were never like to be the Authors of
so foul and sottish an opinion. (Mark that, Reader. It is as if one should
prove that Peter did not deny Christ, because of the unlikelihood that so great
and good an Apostle should do so wickedly. Or that Pelagius was no Heretic,
nor writ against by Austin, because Austin commended him so very much, which
'twas not likely he would have done, if he had thought him a Heretic.) 10.
Ibid.
He says his Masters are not like to need an Apology, like that of the Poet,
Lasciva est nostra pagina, vita proba est. 11. He grants that his Masters
have taught in Print, 1. p. 132, 133.
That God is the Author of sin, 2. God wills sin, 3. He impells to it, 4. He
forces men to it. These things Mr. B. takes upon him to excuse; and the manner
of it is wonderful.

2. To the first of the four he answers thus; 1 p. 133. Of Zuinglius his
Doctrine, that God is the Author of sin.
That he does at no hand like it, that God should be the Author of any culpable
evil. Reader, observe his partiality, and selfcontradiction. When the
Libertines pronounce the words, then he calls it, with Mr. Calvin, an execrable
blasphemy, (p. 129.) and curses them that are so blasphemous, (54, 55.) but now
he finds the same blasphemy in his own Masters writings, the case is altered;
and the worst he says is, [He does not like it for his own part.] Like
indulgent old Eli reproving his Sons for their sacrilege and rapine, Nay, my
Sons, it is no good report which I hear; why do ye such things? 1 Samuel 2.23,
24. There Is his partiality. And here he professes to dislike what he
frequently approves (as has been showed) commending the Authors for very
Classical, and owning them for his Masters. There Is his self-contradiction. But
now he has said he likes not the blasphemy for his own part (that is the word)
he shows us how vehemently he likes it for those other men's parts who are his
Classical Authors. First for Ibid. Note, that of all who call God the Author of
sin, he names only Zuinglius, omitting Borrhaus, who calls him the Author of
the evil of sin, as well as of punishment.
Zuinglius he alleges, that a little Candor would interpret him to have meant
that God is the Author of the evil of punishment, rather then of sin. But
Zuinglius his word is peccatum, which signifies sin only. And he does instance
in the sins called Adultery and Murder, naming them Gods works, and calling God
their Author. (See Corr. Copy, p. 10. and Philan. c. 4. p. 59, 60.) So that the
best of Mr. B's. excuse is this, that though Zuinglius calls God the Author of
sin (not speaking a word of punishment in the place which I cited) and so must
be confessed to have meant the evil of sin, yet charity should interpret, that
he meant the evil of punishment also; and rather that then the other. Or 2. if
Zuinglius did mean as he spoke, he did not mean that God was a moral Author of
sin, Ibid. How Mr. B. makes God the Author of sin in that which he confesses
to be the proper notion of the word Author. Look back on sect. 3, and 4. of
this Chap.
so as the Devil is, by way of persuasion, but (it seems then) a natural Author
of sin, which is infinitely worse, as acting by way of necessitation. But when
Mr. B. said that God does tempt men to sin, he spoke of a persuasion; and now
he says, that to persuade unto sin does infer the proper Author of it. So he
is judged and condemned out of his own mouth again, to have properly made God
the Author of sin. 3. He says Ibid.
it is not credible that Zuinglius should mean any other Author or Cause of
sin, then non removens prohibens, or causa per accidens. But 1. I cited his
words, and not his meanings (either beside or against his words.) 2. His words
will not signify such a meaning as this: Else, when the world is called Gods
work, Mr. B. may say, God was but causa per accidens, and that the world was
not properly his work. 4. Causa per accidens, if causa, is extremely bad; and
God is in no sense the cause of sin. 5. Removens prohibens he understands not,
if I may guess by the Use he makes of it: For Zuinglius says that God does
make men Transgressors, as well as that sin is the work of God.

Last of all, he produces some Popish Writers, Ibid.
who write as grossly as Zuinglius the Presbyterian. And who did ever doubt of
it? Sure none that knows their consanguinity. Ocham and Gabriel do affirm,
Ocham and Gabriel affirmant, quod Deus in rigore and proprietate Sermonis est
causa peccati. Medin. in 1.2. q. 79. a.
that God in a rigor and propriety of speech is the cause of sin. What then?
Therefore the rigider sort of Papists are like the rigider sort of
Presbyterians.

3. To the second thing which he confesses as his Masters Doctrine, 3. Mr. B.
accuses Calvin, in excusing him, for saying, God does will sin.
viz. that God does will sin, he says these things, p. 134.1. That the meaning
of the Orthodox has been often explained. 2. That Calvin explains himself.
And how should that be, but that though God does will sin, yet he wills it not
as sin? The horrid nature of which shift I have Look back on chapter 2. sect. 19.
And see Div. Philanth. c. 4. p. 42.
elsewhere displayed. This is the fountain of those unclean sayings, That
Adultery is good in as much as it is the work of God the Author; And that all
sins are good in as much as they make for Gods glory. That is from Zuinglius,
and this from Mr. W. 3. He tells us that Mr. Calvin's meaning is no worse then
the Schoolmens, naming a Papist in the margin, Look back on chapter 2. sect. 3. p.
61.
according to his wont. To show a very great affinity betwixt the worst sort of
Papists and Presbyterians, does universally pass with Mr. B. for an Abstersion.
Yet this is the man who rayles so frequently at others for having any good
thing common to them with the Papists.

4. To the third thing granted to be the Doctrine of his Masters, 4. Mr. B.
accuses Piscator and Calvin, in his way of excusing them for saying that God
does thrust men into wickedness.
viz. That God does drive, or thrust men on into wickedness, and that men do
sin by Gods impulse, he has returned four things, p. 134, 135.1. That neither
Calvin nor Piscator do understand it in a flagitious or unconscionable manner.
(And may it not be pleaded as well for the Pharisees, that although indeed they
said of Christ, He has an unclean spirit ( Mark 3.30.) yet they did not
understand it in a flagitious sense?) 2. That when himself had affirmed Gods
stirring up the wicked to their wicked deeds, as a man puts spurs to a dull
Jade, he brought the Simile to show, that the man is the Author of the going of
the horse, but not of the halting. (The sad estate of which shift I showed very
Look back on sect. 18. number. 11. of this Chap.
lately, and therefore I forbear to repeat it here.) 3. That whatever Calvin
and Piscator do say in some places, yet they say the contrary in other places.
(This does justify what I said in my Look back on Introduct. sect. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Introduction: and the Logic here used is just the same, as if the Barbarians
of Melita should plead for themselves, that though they called S. Paul a
Murderer in one place, yet they did not wrong him, because in another place
they called him a God, Act. 28.4, 6. And so though Judas at one time betrayed
his Master, yet he did not mean it in a flagitious sense, because at another
time he did not betray him; yea and kissed him too when he did betray him. If
Mr. B. speaks Treason, such Abstersions as these will not avail him. 4. That
whatever they say, they understand no more then Arminius. (What is this, but to
acknowledge, that as Arminius was a Presbyterian, so the Presbyterians are for
Arminius, wheresoever Arminius does chance to err, or speak unhappily?)

5. To the fourth thing granted to be the Doctrine of his Masters, viz. That
men do sin by Gods coaction, 5. Mr. B. grants that his Masters do sometimes
teach a coaction from God to sin. Look back on chapter 2. sect. 2. p. 59, 60. and.
sect. 3. p. 62.
(which by the way he does distinguish from forcing and thrusting into sin) he
would seem to give a salvo by floundring again in this following manner, p.
135, 136. First he says, That Orthodox Writers do use it very seldom. Hold,
good Reader, and bear me witness, that the man pleads guilty to the very worst
part of the Indictment. He confesses that they do use to blaspheme in this
manner, by saying that God does compel men to sin, but only alleges that
they use it not often. And though I can prove they use it often, yet I am
willing to pass it by, if they will but recant, and promise never to do the
like. The Question was not, whether a few times, or many times they vent this
blasphemy; but whether or no they do it not sometimes. Mr. B. says, Yes,
sometimes, but seldom; not often, though now and then. Judas did not often
betray his Master; but it was too much that he did it once. By such a soft
phrase he slandered the Scriptures in his former Volume, He forgeth new things
upon the Scripture.
[ The Scriptures say not much, or often, that God does pradestine men to sin,
Corrept. Corr. p. 72. at the bottom.] which is a desperate forgery imposed on
the word of God, for the Scriptures say not any such thing, no not once, no not
any thing like it; no nor the Fathers of the Church, who are slandered together
with the Scriptures. (ibid.) 'Twas but a bold invention to lessen the odium
which lay upon his Divinity. Next he tells us, that whenever Orthodox Wriers
douse the word Coaction (in saying that God does compel men to sin) they mostly
at the same time acknowledge they speak improperly, p. 135. (Which by the way
is very false, and if it were true, 'twere too too bad, as I have See Div.
Philan. chapter 1. p. 26. Look back also on chapter 2. of this book.
elsewhere showed) But what impropriety is that he speaks of? even such as
implies a contradiction, and a condemnation of his own Party: for his words are
these (and he takes them out of Paraeus) They understand it not of a coaction
which destroys the will of man, but of such an one which proceeds from the
fierce impetus and inclination of the sinners will, p. 136. l. 1, 2. Here he
miscarries several ways at once; for first he fights with Doctor Twisse and
Doctor Reynolds, and with all the rest of his Party, and with all mankind
(except Paraeus) who confers it incompetent to the will to suffer any coaction.
2. If they meant by coaction, the sinners own inclination and impe^us of will,
they must have said that the sinner compells himself; which had been much
better nonsense, then to have said (as they are wont) that God compells him to
sin. To say, the will does suffer coaction by its own inclination, is innocent
nonsense in comparison: but to say that God compells men to sin, is a horrid
blasphemy. Besides, 3. He again confesses the whole fact, by saying whenever
they use to do so! as before he said, [they use it seldom.] 4. He confesses
they do not always acknowledge any impropriety, because he says, they do it
mostly: so that in some of his Masters, and in some places of their works, he
does acknowledge as much guilt as I have ever cha ged their Doctrines with. 5.
He does not rightly translate Paraeus, nay he is not so much as consistent with
him; for Qui cogit invitos, is est causa p^ccati Qui vero cogit volentes, is
perse causa est boni, etc. Paraeus in C^stig. ad lib B^ll. de Am^ss. Great. and
stat. peccati. Note, that D^^ Twiss does consess it to be their custom, to say
that men are compelled by God to sin. Vin. Gra. l. 2. p. 1. c. 1. p. 29.
Paraeus talks nonsense in this following sort: [He who compells men against
their consents, is the cause of sin; but not he who compells men with their
consents.] To exagitate this as it deserves would require a whole Volume. 6. As
sad as these salvoes appear to be, they are the best that he could borrow from
the ablest Abstersors who went before him. And he concludes with this excuse,
that Bellarmine the Jesuit and other Papists, are near of kin in this case to
the Presbyterians. As for the bold and groundless forgery concerning Bellarmine
and my self, I pass it by, as being personal, of which I am sure there is
enough in the Self-Revenger.

Sect. 28.
Mr. B. turns his back to the chief part of the charge, and tacitly yields the
whole cause.
I now expected with great longing, what he would say to my fourth Chapter of
the Divine Philanthropy defended, where he and his Masters are most concerned,
even from p. 36. to p. 65. But in stead of speaking one syllable to those
twenty nine whole pages, he only tells us he needs not do it, sect. 3. p. 137.
and pretends to render some reasons why. As, 1. for fear of needless
repetitions: and 2. no body needs be solicitous what becomes of Doctor Twisse
or Mr. B' s particular expressions: 3. And this task has been performed by
other men (against his own knowledge, as his partiallest friends will confess)
4. And what is omitted by himself, he hopes before long will be done by
another, p. 138. And thus he thinks he has done like a brave Abstersor, in
refusing to plead to the indictment.

Sect. 29.
1. Of Adam's inclination to sin before he sinned.
Mr. B. being desirous to show his good will to Mr. Rivet, whom I had proved to
be guilty of making God the Author of sin, by saying the very inclination which
Adam had to sin, before he sinned, could not choose but be vicious, and yet of
God's making; is fain to commit a world of faults for the making a salve to
that one sore, from p. 139. to p. 144. The chief ingredients in his salve are
those that follow: 1. Rivet was a strong Disputant before Mr. T.P. was brought
forth into the world: the same which he had pleaded for Mr. W. (as if the
oldest men must needs be-most orthodox, and of quicker sight then their
juniors.) 2. Other eminent men have used that argument as well as he: (as if to
err in company, were either to be orthodox, or very near it.) 3. He speaks of
concupiscence, and lust, which are a couple of sins; whereas the question is
only of Adam's inclination before his very first sin. 4. He speaks of lust
after the fall, Romans 7.7. and which was in the will too; whereas the subject of
the dispute was before the fall, nor in the will, but in the appetite. And so
he either understands not, or wilfully flies from the thing in question. 5. He
calls an inclination to sin a weighty plummet inclining; at once an abstract
and concrete in one and the same respect. 6. He says that Adam, even before
the fall, had the Devils image upon him, as well as God's, if his inclination
to sin was before his first sin; as if he thought that potentia could not be
before actus. 7. He confounds temptation to sin with sin. 8. He asks why I
should be shie of granting, that Christ had any inclination to sin? (which why
should he ask, if he did not think that impious thing which he imputes to
Castellio, without the least citation from him?) 9. He confesses he cannot
tell how to salve those absurdities which I had showed his opinion must needs
betray him into, as progressus in infinitum, and prius primo. 10. He says (out
of Nulla peccati Adami in Adamo reddi eausa potest, quae non sit ipsa peccatum.
Camero contra Epist. viri docti. p. 163.
Camero) that there could be no cause of Adam 's sin which was not also it self
a sin. And so his party, by consequence, must needs be charged by him and
Camero, with the crime of making God to be sin it self, as often as they call
him the cause of sin.

2. Concerning the birth and growth of the very first sin; with the very wide
difference betwixt the inclinations of the sensitive appetite, and the will.
2. Though I need not say more then what remains unassaulted in my Defense of
the Divine Philanthropy ( chapter 4. p. 23, 24, 25.) or more then what I have added
in the eighteenth Section of this Chapter (Number. 6.) yet because his
understanding may be as dark in this Point, as his will crooked, I will
endeavor to afford him sufficient light. The inclination of the will to evil,
differs much from that of the sensitive appetite, to which the Apple even in
Paradise was very grateful. The will (we know) is the middle faculty betwixt
the sensitive appetite on one side, and the reasoning faculty on the other. The
propension of the will to the sensitive appetite's proposal of what forbidden,
was the very beginning of Adam's sin, it having been his first degree of
aversion from God unto the creature: thus it was in Eve also, before it was in
Adam, and was a sin in her will some insensible time before her eating; but her
fullness of consent, and actual eating, and giving her husband to eat also, were
all additions to that first sin: which I call the first for this reason,
because nothing of sin can be so much as imagined, before the propending of the
will to the forbidden object; and because it was in the will before it could be
in the hand or mouth. The very next degree of sin to the propending of the
will, was Delectation; next, Morosa Cogitatio; next, a plenitude of Consent;
next, the actual eating what was forbidden. But now the gratefulness of the
sweet to one sense, and of fair to another, is less then the least of those
degrees; and the inclination of the sensitive appetite could be no sin at all,
remaining only in the sense, and winning nothing from the will, which
continued as yet in its (...). But when the will of Eve was debauched by her
appetite into an (...) (that is, a bending of her will the wrong way,) so as
her mind did hang or hanker after the apple, that was clearly the beginning of
her transgression.

Sect. 30.
The importance of the word Author.
To conclude the whole Chapter, and so to quit the whole subject, I must
satisfy a complaint which Mr. B. has made ( c. 3. p. 129.) That I charged him
and his Masters with the crime of having said a great deal worse, and in much
worse terms, then that God is (verbatim) the Author of sin. Now that he may not
complain afresh of his having complained to no purpose, and to the end he may
beware of rash complainings for the future, I will prove my charge in such a
manner, as not to leave his very abettors the possibility to dissent. The most
succinct way to do it, will be to lay down the whole importance of the
aequivocal word Author, and then to compare it with those expressions which are
confessed by Mr. B. to have been used by his Masters, as well as Brethren.

1. Author quando que (...) significat, quandoque (...). Priscian. lib. 5. Idem
valet quod (...). Coel. Sec. Cur. Author est ut sic dicam Factor, Laur. Val. l.
4. Hortator and Author, Cic. in partit, Orat. 52. Consiliario and Authore
aliquid inire, legitur apud Cic. ad Alt. l. 14.305.4. Suasor and Author
deditionis. Cic. 3. Offic. p. 147. Author est in quo est vis, potestas, and
dignitas. Live. l. 1. ab urbe cond. 72. Impero, Authorque sumut me cuivis
castrandum loces, Plaut. Aul. 7.73. suspende, vinci, verbera, Author sum, sino,
Idem Poenal. 3.17. Author^est a quo quis jus comparavit. Cic. 7. Verr. Authors
pupillorum vocantur, in quorum administratione infirma aetas, resque eorum
sunt, Paulus Juriscon. Authors sunt qui Authoritatem suam and decretum
interponunt, Live. l. 1. ab urb. cond. Viae Author qui viam monstrat, aut qui
ire jubet. Ovid. 3. Metam. Etiam Duces militum Authors vocabantur, Valla. l. 4.
1. Author sometimes does signify the first beginner of a work, sometimes him
who does help advance it; sometimes a factor, sometimes only a perswader;
sometimes a sole cause, sometimes a concause; sometimes a person of power and
dignity, by whose advice or command a thing is done; sometimes him who confers
a right; sometimes the guardian of a child under age; sometimes him who does
abet or assert, or uphold another in any action: sometimes he that shows the
way is said to be the Author of it: sometimes he who appoints or decrees any
thing, is called the Author of the thing decreed.

2. How the enemies of truth say what is worse then that God is (verbatim) the
Author of sin.
2. Now from hence it is apparent, how many ways Mr. B. and his Praedecessors
have not only made God the Author of sin, but something worse too. Had they
only said in plain terms (as I have showed they have) God is the Author of
sin, they might have sought for some excuse or mitigation of the crime from the
softest importance of the word Author. They might have said they meant no more,
then that God does persuade or tempt men to sin, (as Mr. B's word was.) But
notwithstanding even that had been sufficiently blasphemous, Mr. B. His
confession is to be seen from his p. 133. to his p. 136.
confesses (as I have Look back on Sect. 27. number. 5.
showed) that they assirm God's impelling and forcing men to sin, his making
men sin by coaction, which Prosper professes to be Prosper ad object. Vincen.
11. p. 341, 342.
worse then can be truly spoken of the Devil himself. Now though he who
compells a man to sin, is properly called the Author of it; yet because the
word Author has other softer significations, this must needs be much worse
then only to say he is the Author.

3. Mr. Rolloc's strange Salvo.
3. Nay in not many lines (p. 128.) before Mr. B. is so unhappy as to put me on
this task, be cites a passage from Mr. Rolloc, thus excusing and mollifying
that Parties Doctrine; [ Non est Decretum malitiae qua malitia est, sed qua
bonitatis rationem habet. R. Rolloc. in Romans 8.29.
God's decree of sinfulness in the abstract, is not of sinfulness as such, but
as it has the nature of goodness in it.] His word is malitia, as the abstract
of malum, and himself explains it by Anomia, in the two lines going before. To
show how Mr. W. and Mr. B. have stretched the blasphemy to its extremity, by
teaching that God does work sin, as well as will it, and has a hand in
effecting. of it, that he makes it necessary, Dr. Twisse affirms, that Gods
Incitation and Excitation to the act of sin does not only influere in ipsum
actum Creaturae, but also in ipsam voluntatem etc. Vin. Gra. l. 2. par. 1. c.
12. sect. 2. p. 142.
excites men to it, is the maker of all real things without exception, and the
cause of the obliquity it self in abstracto; I say, to show this afresh on this
occasion, were [actum agere] to make a needless repetition of what has been
the subject of many Sections.

CHAP. IV. A notorious fallacy of Doctor Twisse and his Followers; with
several failings discovered in Mr. Wh.
Sect. 1.
Of the signal Fallacy swallowed first by D. Twisse, then by his Followers.
MY chief enterprise being performed in so large a manner, and the whole Tree
of Error plucked up by the root, it may seem a superfluity to spend more time
upon little twiggs, whose whole subsistence is from the root, and must
therefore perish together with it. Yet because Doctor Twisse is a leading man,
and has built the highest Castle, on the most Airy Foundation, of any
artificer in the kind; and because Mr. W. was not contented, that the Doctors
unhappiness should go alone, but was desirous to join his own too; I will
regard him so much as to take him in.

1. Dr. Twisse his important fallacy which runs through his book.
I had showed the sad fallacy which Dr. Twisse had put upon himself and his
followers, through his misusage or mistake of that Logic Maxim, [What is
first intended is last executed.] For either not understanding, or wilfully
dissembling his understanding (I cannot say which, though I am sure of one of
the two) what is the scope of that Maxim, and within what limits its truth is
bound; he most unreasonably concluded, that because punishment is executed
after sin, therefore sin was intended after God decreed punishment. The cause
of his fallacy I shall show anon, and how inconsistent he is with Mr. W. or
with himself. I showed that if the Maxim had universal truth in it, a thousand
such absurdities as this would follow; that if I first intend to take ship at
Dover, and afterward intend to sail into France, I must (according to that
Maxim, as it is mistaken by Doctor Twisse) first sail into France, and after
that take ship at Dover.

2. Mr. W's essay to cover the fallacy in his p. 17, and 18.
2. To slubber over the business, Mr. Wh. thus talks to admiration; [ Is not
the journey into France the first thing here intended, and in order to that to
take ship at Dover?] Reader, observe to what a prodigy some men are able to
tread awry. I had plainly put my case thus, that my first intention is for
Dover (not resolving yet to what Country I will sail, much less to what
Port,) and my second intention for France, particularly for Callis; in answer
to which Mr. W. asks, Is not France first intended, and Dover next? and what is
this but to say, that my first intention is my last, and my second is my first?
If he shall say, that France is the first thing intended by him, and Dover the
second, he will confess the absurdity with which I charge him: for I had
spoken of my intentions, in putting the case at that time; not at all of any
man's else, much less of Mr. W's, a year or two after the time that my case
was put.

3. The Fallacy showed in its deformity.
3. That he may plead no more for Doctor Twisse his mishaps, nor escape a right
apprehension of his own miscarriage, (and that the party may yield their
Palladium lost) I will illustrate the Case with the greatest perspicuity I can
imagine. Suppose a man here in England taking his life to be in danger, intends
to go out of the Kingdom, he cares not whither, for preservation from present
peril: the first thing that he intends, is to take ship at Dover; then it being
free to him to go whither he will, as to Flanders, or Holland, or any place
else, he at last decrees to go to France: this then is last in his intention,
and must therefore (by the Doctrine of Dr. T.) be the first in execution; then
which there is nothing more impossible, and so nothing more absurd. Again, a
man intends to build a house, not to let it out to others, but to dwell in it
himself, and after that intends to make it sumptuous; in doing that he turns
Bankru^t, and therefore determines to let it out: this is the last in
execution, the sumptuous furnishing of it was next before that, building before
that; will it now follow (as Dr. T. his Logic would have it) that he lets it
out before he furnishes it? and that he does furnish it before he builds it?
Once more, A man determines to take a servant; after he has taken him, he
finds him a knave, and so resolves to put him away: must he therefore put him
away before he takes him, because his intention to take him was before his
intention to put him away? yet such is the arguing of Doctor Twisse, who Si
peccati permissio prius intenderetur quam damnatio, sequeretur in executione ut
damnatio prius sieret quam peccati permisso. Twiss. in Praesat. ad Vin. Gr. p.
3.
says, that if God did decree to permit sin, before he decreed to damn men for
sin, it would follow they must be damned, before they can so much as be
permitted to sin.

4. The first cause of the whole mistake.
4. As the cause of this Error was his taking that Maxim by the left handle,
Quod primum in intention, est ultimum in executione; so the cause of that also
was his overhasty imagination, that Neque enim ullus intentionis ordo est,
nisi ratione mediorum and Finis. Id. ibid.
there is no order of intention, unless in respect of the end and the means;
which he dictates tanquam ex Tripode, as an unquestionable truth, though there
is nothing more visibly and even palpably false. For there being many means to
one end, (to wit God's glory) one of these means may be subordinate to another,
and so, in mente Dei, before the other. God did not decree to create man to the
end that he should sin; nor did he decree that man should sin, to the end he
might be damned: but he decreed to create man, and to permit him to sin, and to
damn him for sinning, to the end his glory might be advanced. And this is Neque
enim damnotio potest esse finis a Deo intentus, quandoquidem D^us fac^^ omnia
propter se. Necesse est ergo ut gloria Dei ejusque patefactio sit finis
actionum Divinarum. Idem ibid.
acknowledged by the Doctor even in that very page.

5. That first cause removed, and the fallacy les^ naked.
5. To remove the Origin of the whole evil, I shall not need to say more then
this: God foreseeing that man would voluntarily sin if he were not forcibly
hindered, and decreeing not to use any forcible hinderance (which would not
suit with the nature of a free and voluntary Agent) he also saw that Adam would
make a wrong choice, and thereby fall from his state of Innocence. This state
of Adam is to be looked on as a Disease, which stands in need of a Sovereign
Remedy. The death of Christ is that Remedy which God decreed. And it cannot be
imagined, that the Remedy should be first in intention, before the Disease was
foreseen, or the very permission of it decreed; though still the Remedy is to
be last in execution, as it was also in the intention. Therefore the Axiom must
be so limited, as to be only appliable to those things, whereof the later is
the absolute end, and the former decreed as a means to attain it by. But thus
it is not in mente Dei; for the permission of sin is not designed by God as a
means of bringing in any former decree of giving Christ; but as that which is
suitable to Adam's nature, created with a free elective faculty, commonly known
by the name of Will. Now God foreseeing that man will do what will be permitted
to be done, does also foresee an opportunity of magnifying his mercy in giving
Christ, and accordingly decrees to give him. And that before Adam falls, though
not before he decrees to permit his fall, and actually foresees that fall of
Adam. From whence it is clear, that Quod primum in intention, est ultimum in
executione.
that Maxim is very absurdly applied unto the business of Gods decrees; as by
numberless instances might be evinced. For what man will say, that the Creation
of the world, which was the first thing in execution, was therefore the last in
Gods intention? It was certainly praecedaneous, in mente Dei, to the fall of
Adam. For how could Adam be considered as an actual sinner, without being
considered as something capable of sin? Indeed Mr. Perkins was so unhappy as to
teach it for Divinity, Etiam ipso Decreto creandi prius esse judicavi decretum
praedestinandi tum ad salutem tum ad damnationem. Id. Ib. p. 2. col. 1.
That Gods decree of damning was before his decree of creating man. And Doctor
Twisse Ibid.
confesses that he was once of that mind. But Arminius clearly confuted
Perkins; and Doctor Twisse does seem to confess as much, calling Perkins his
opinion Ibid.
rigidiorem sententiam. Let it now be remembered, that there is a priority of
order amongst those things whereof neither can be said to be the end of the
other, and the original cause of the error is quite removed.

6. Mr. W's indirect course to excuse Doctor Twisse in contradiction to him.
6. But Mr. W. alleges, that Doctor Twisse understands the old maxim de
finibus ultimis, non intermediis, p. 18.] If he did not look into the Doctors
words, why would he speak thus without any knowledge of the Fact? And if he
did, why would he speak against his knowledge? The Doctor applies the maxim
only to sin and damnation, and things on this side damnation, but not to any
thing beyond it. And that damnation is not finis ultimus, the Doctor stiffly
maintains in the place before cited. If Mr. W. think^ it is, he contradicts the
Doctor, whilst he asserts him. It is agreed on all sides, that the Glory of
God is finis ultimus, to which the damnation of the impenitent is but a means.
And therefore Mr. W. might have omitted his ill language which there he gives
me, unless he had found some color for it. If he did not fear his undertaking,
why did he not cite the page or chapter, where I had spoken of the subject,
that I and others might easily have found it out? I leave his best friends to
judge of such dealings.

7. Doctor Twisse his error of coordination, etc.
7. But Doctor Twisse says farther, that the decrees of permitting sin, and of
giving Christ, are coordinate, Ibid. p. 3.] In saying that, he did well to
oppose Mr. Perkins, although not well to miss the truth: It does not follow
that they are not subordinate, because not so as Mr. Perkins feigned them: they
are one after another in order of nature (though not of time) as the Disease is
before the Cure, as well in nature as time; and though both are means to Gods
glory, yet still the Remedy must suppose the Disease, and one is naturally
conceivable before the other. And so for the punishment of sin, which is
another means of Gods glory, it praesupposeth sin by such a necessity of
illation, that God cannot be imagined to decree a man's punishment, without
regard to some offense, which the nature of punishment does imply: which being
the main thing that I objected to Mr. B. (speaking of See D. Phil. ch 1. p. 5,
6.
Post-destination) to which he durst not re^^ly, nor Mr. W. in his behalf, I
leave with the rest of this Section, as a full Rejoinder to what he has in his
running Titles, concerning Post-destination, or Negative Reprobation, since the
body of his Book is filled with Tergiversations.

Sect. 2.
There being nothing now left of any moment in Mr. W. Mr. M's. forgery of
objections in other men's names.
I will discover his other failings in the fewest words that I am able. In his
p. 43. he makes a syllogism after an ugly manner in the third figure, and
tells his Reader it is mine, nay he pretends to cite it from Philan. c. 4. p.
5. and calls it pitiful Sophistry: yet his own heart and the world shall be my
witnesses, that there is no such thing in any part of any book which I have
published; much less there where he pretends it. All my redress of such wrongs,
is to protest against them, and to require reparations from the person
offending, and to direct my Readers to Philanth. c. 4. p. 5. where they will
see what it was which made the enemy to sly into such lewd dealings for his
defense. He and Mr. B. must either prove that Reprobation is no punishment, or
else confess their cause is ruined.

Sect. 3.
In Mr. W's. second part, which is all against conditional and universal
Redemption, p. 53. Mr. W. of Christ's death, p. 53.
I observe these things with a running eye. 1. He denies that Christ died for
all mankind. Not only in contradiction to Scripture, and the Church of
England, but to Bishop Sent. Daven. p. 10, 11.
Davenant in particular, and even to Dr. Twifs, as Mr. Baxter shows in his
Praef. to his Disp. p. 11, 13, 14. Next, he says, that there is no conditional
Election of all. Who says there is any election of all? an election of
persevering believers is not of all. 3. Election and Redemption are not
commensurate, as he affirms. Redemption is not the fruit of Election, witness
the poverty of his proofs, p. 54. His first is nothing to Redemption, no nor
the second. But on the contrary, Electing in Christ praesupposeth Redemption,
in Gods eternal foresight, and our being considered as believers in Christ. No
nor the third, for Redemption according to rich grace, (Ephesians. 1.7.) is not of a
few; to the more it is extended, the richer it is. His fourth from Joh. 3.16. is
yet more grossly against himself. God so loved the world, as to give his Son for
the world, not the smallest part of it. Had that been the meaning, Saint John
had said, God so hated the world, that he denied his Son to the far greater
part of it, that not believing in him they might perish, etc. Mr. W's. proofs
p. 55. from the word [(...), so] are most ridiculous of all; for so is
expressive of the degree of the love, not exclusive of it, or of any man from
it, but inclusive of all, etc. It seems the Presbyterian love must be enclosed,
or good for nothing; whereas sincere love, the more extensive it is, it is ever
the greater, not the more restrained. What would he think if one should say, he
is so loving a Neighbor, that he hardly loves one in twenty? a man so kind,
that he hates more then he loves? Redeeming love tends to eternal life, even to
them that never come thither: and this is sure the greatest love, as being
extended also to enemies, whereas the other is only to supposed friends. But
indeed betwixt infinites there is no comparison. The comparison made Joh.
15.13. is of finite men's loves; and yet even there the greatest is that of
laying down a life. Does Mr. W. think there are two greatest?

2. His Answers to that Objection, p. 55. [The world is here the object of this
love, therefore it cannot be meant of an electing love] are strangely gross.
For (1) special love, with him, is nothing else but electing love: nor is there
need in that notion, to say that all are the objects of it. It is but his
begging of the Question, to confound Electing with Redeeming love. Gods hating
Esau is comparatively meant, and is but loving him less then his brother Jacob:
in which sense we are obliged to Luke 14.26.
hate our Parents, our Wives and Children. Even Luth. in Genesis 33.
Luther and Mollerus in Mal. cap. 1.
Mollerus did not doubt of Esau's et eternal bliss. Nor durst Oecolampadius to
account him a Reprobate, because he knew those words ( Romans 9.) were only
spoken by a Oecolam. Edit. Crisp. 1158. Genesis
figure. 2. He confessed the world does either signify in Scripture the whole
universe of men, or the greatest part, which is the worst, (p. 55, 56.) and
this most usually he grants. But he ask, why may it not also signify the
fewest and the best too? as if he knew not the Rule, Analogum per se positum
stat pro famosiori. He says a heap that has more chaff then wheat in it, is
usually called a heap of wheat, (p. 56.) By deceitful Jobbers no doubt it may
be, who cheat the Buyer. But would Mr. W. buy his Corn so? or think the man
honest who should so sell a bag of Corrans, where 29. parts of 30. are very
trash? Joh. 6.33. there is bread spoken of, giving life to the world, that is
to say, to all that eat it. And Romans 11.15. the world is all except the Jews,
therefore by far the greater part. Then 2 Cor. 5.19. Reconciling the world, is
meant of the whole world, but conditionally. The other Texts 2 Pet. 2.5. and 1 John 5.19. which speak of the world, and the whole world, are clearly meant of
the greatest part, not of the least. So all flesh, Joel 2.28. is meant of all
Nations, all the earth, as well the Gentiles as the Jews. Mundus Redemptionis,
in Austin, is not mundus simply, but restrained to those that are finally
saved; which is not the notion of Redemption of which we are speaking from Joh.
3.16. where God so loved the world (without restraint) that [quicunque vellet
credere] whosoever would believe, might have life everlasting.

3. His Answer to that Objection, p. 56. [The world is distributed into
believers and unbelievers, etc.] is very woeful. For 1. Is not the word
Believing a restraint of the World? If so, then there are some who are not
believing, and then there is a distribution: which Mr. W. denies. 2. If those
who are uncalled, our Savior calls by the name of the world, then the world
signifies not only the Elect: for Mr. W. cannot say that all the uncalled are
the Elect.

4. What he calls his second Argument, p. 57. is gratis dictum, he crudely
affirming, without the least proof, that Christ died for none but whom he
approved. Point Blank against Scripture, 2 Pet. 2.1. where Christ is said to
have bought them that deny him, and broach damnable heresies, and bring upon
themselves swift destruction. Did he approve of such men? or did he not dye for
them whom he bought? Alas Mr. W!

5. His third Argument, p. 57. is thus easily retorted; That if it is as he
would have it, Christ died for many who were already in Heaven. And his Answer
to the Objection, p. 58. is somewhat worse: For as he holds that they in Hell
were decreed absolutely to be damned; so he holds that they in Heaven were as
absolutely decreed to be saved. In both he is but a beggar of the thing in
question: for I affirm those decrees not to be absolute, but respective.

6. As for his His Argument is this, If Christ died to purchase Faith, and all
other things needful, etc. then he did not die to purchase salvatton upon
condition of believing, etc.
fourth ( p. 58) I deny the sequel; but he takes leave to prove his Antecedent
only, which no man denies. In his Answer to the Objection, p. 59. he
misunderstands the word Condition; which is not resisting, but using and
improving Gods gifts and graces: and so God will give them the grace of faith,
if they will humbly beg, or thankfully receive it. None can come except the
Father draws; but when he draws, all may that will. And though no condition is
required to Gods first grace, (p. 60.) yet the receiving of that is required to
his giving of more.

7. His fifth Argument, (p. 60, 61.) if granted, proves my conclusion, that
Christ died not only sufficiently, but intentionally for all; for that he died
for all, the Scripture says. But (2.) Christ has not actually taken away
impenit^^cy by his death, any farther then by purchasing sufficient grace to
repent. It Is true, the blood of Jesus cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.
but how? actually? or only meritoriously? not so, but thus, Locis in^ra
citandis. Number. 8.
says the late great Primate. He has redeemed us from iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
but by giving us grace to forsake iniquity. (Let Mr. W. mark that.) He saves
his people from their sins, (Mat. 1.) but we must be his then by our
faithfulness to him, as well as faith, before he will save us from the
punishment which our sins will otherwise entail upon us. He has so far
delivered us, (Luke 1.74.) as to give us grace or power whereby to serve him.
And though it is the pro^erty of the flesh to resist the spirit (as Mr. W. says
truly, p. 61.) yet it is the work of Christ's spirit to mortify the flesh: which
when we have done, even to that very Spirit we im^ute our conquest. Whereas he
says, to the great reproach of his Doctrine, A confession to be recorded, as
dropping from the p^n of the guilty party.
[ That Christ cannot be said seriously to desire the salvation of those, from
whom he will not remove those things which he knows will hinder their
salvation, p. 61.] I answer, that he could not seriously desire it, if he did
not give them sufficient means: but this lights heavily upon them who deny such
a sufficiency to the most of mankind, and so infer Gods offers to be serious
only to a few. I always teach, that Christ is wanting to none in what is
requisite to their safety, if they are not wanting to themselves. But though
his desire is serious, it is not passionate, or unreasonable, so as to save men
by force, either against, or without their wills. He does not violently remove
whatsoever hinders them from salvation by any acts of mere power, but deals
with men as free Agents, who could not otherwise be fit for reward or
punishment. He takes away the heart of stone where it is really taken away, and
none but he can do that work: but he does it not irresistibly, and therefore in
many the stone remains not taken away, where yet he mercifully attempts it by
such kind of means, as are wise and congruous, and in themselves sufficient;
only the wilfulness of men does keep them from being effectual also.

8. His sixth Argument from Tit. 2.14. (in his p. 62.) deserves not any
Indignation, but very much Pity. For those Believers whom Christ receives, he
does purge and purify with Jam. 4.6.
more grace. That all are not purged, is their Ezekiel. 24.13. See the Primates
judgment of Christ's death, p. 6. and 21.
own fault only. Christ satisfied for all upon the Cross, but did not actually
save them; as his Grace of Armagh does often say. Application is not a
necessary effect of Redemption; and that Mr. W. may also learn from the same
Id. ibid. 22, and 16, and 38.
writing of the said Primate. Christ does not leave it unto man only to make
the Application, yet gives him grace whereby to make it. And for what is said
p. 63. from 1 John 2.1, 2. I answer thus, There is a twofold Advocation or
Intercession of Christ, one on the Cross, and one in Heaven. Again, one for
sinners, that they may repent; another for penitents, that they may finally
persevere. He had this prayer for his Crucifiers, Father, forgive them. But
another for his Disciples; Father, keep those whom thou have given me, (Joh.
17.11.) That kind of prayer was was not for the world, but for those who came
in from among the worldlings, (Joh. 17.9.) That former prayer was for Rebels
who stood out; this later for obedient and loyal Subjects, who were already in
his possession.

9. His seventh Argument (p. 63.) from that promise of God, The seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head, (Genesis 3.) is a very strong Argument of the
Disputers weakness; and serves for nothing in the world, but to proclaim the
grosness of his mistake. For the seed of the woman is Jesus Christ, the object
of true belief; not true believers. So that all falls at once, which he has
built on this bottom. Yet I will note one rarity for being a rarity indeed. Mr.
W. says that the Serpent does not properly exercise his enmity against all
men, but against the Elect only, (p. 63.) And what moves him to say it, but
his being resolved to conclude this from it, Ergo, Christ died not for all, but
only for the Elect? But stay, good Sir, is not Satan their enemy, whom he
tempts to sin, and possesses, and makes to cut themselves with stones? or does
he not exercise his enmity against them whom he betrays to the pains of Hell?
Besides, has he a knowledge of the Elect (before the last audit) or has he
not? If he has, from whence? or why will he tempt them at all, when he knows
it is lost labor? If he has not a knowledge of them, how can he single them
out from all the Reprobates, to practice his enmity upon them?

10. His eighth Argument, (p. 64, 65.) is the worst of all, as well as the
last, it being nothing but a presumption, that all the infants of the Heathen
are unavoidably damned. Yet ask him what he thinks of himself and his party
(who are exceedingly more sinful then Heathen Infants) he will tell you they
are Elect, and must be saved as unavoidably. Mr. B. is on this pin too, from
his p. 144. to p. 147. But having cut them out work in See Div. Philanth. chapter
4. p. 25, 26. The self-Revenger, chapter 1. p. 22, etc. and p. 32, 33.
other places, I only pity them in this, beseeching God to endue them with
grace and reason. I will but briefly forewarn others against the presumption of
passing judgment upon other men's souls, and rudely pressing into Gods secrets.
God acquaints us indeed with his manner of proceeding in certain cases, as with
those to whom his word is preached; but of his dealing with others we are not
qualified to judge, un less as far as we are led by general rules out of
Scripture. As for example, [ He has no pleasure in the death of the wicked. He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. He is a God ready
to pardon, swift to show mercy, and slow to wrath. His mercy is over all his
works. His Commandments are not grievous. The soul that sins it shall dye.
The son shall not dye for the iniquity of the Parents. God requires according
to what men have, not according to what they have not.] He condemns not any man
for not seeing, to whom he never gave eyes, or who never had light whereby to
see. He condems not the deaf, for not hearing the Gospel; nor the tender
Infant, for not comprehending it, whilst it is near. And how he will be
pleased to deal with others, who are under the same Impossibility for want of
preaching, he has no otherwise told us then by parity of reason, that many are
saved by Christ's name, who never heard it; and by his merits, who never heard
of them. I say not these things, as if the interest of my cause were concerned
in it; I am sure it is not: For if all the Heathen are damned for their
unbelief, then am I still in the right; it is not because Christ is not
offered, but because they will not accept. And if they that are redeemed, are
so conditionally, then what can hinder us from believing (especially since God
has so often said it) that the Heathens also were redeemed, as well as
Christians? And may it for ever be kept in mind (for many great and weighty
reasons) that it is not knowledge, but practice, to which the promises are made.

Sect. 4.
How they strengthen Socinianism, who contract the benefit of Christ's death.
Mr. W. spends his remaining papes in a pretended Answer to Objections, in two
of which I am concerned. The first (beginning p. 71.) I have already showed to
be destructive to what he had positively delivered, p. 19. Or if his p. 19. is
owned by him, it is just as destructive to his p. 71, 72. and so I refer him to
what I have said, c. 1. sect. 2. p. 4, and 5. But because Mr. B. on the same
chapter 3. p 84, 85, 86.
subject does also speak the same sense, (if it is sense to say, that all and
every man does signify very few in respect of all, and that the whole world
notes the lesser part only,) I will add a few things, to deliver them both at
once from the present thraldom they are in.

1. Socinians and Presbyterians compared.
1. If the world, and the whole world, shall be permitted to signify the little
flock only, and not the Universe of men, a way is opened to the Socinians, to
persist in their course of robbing the Church of those Texts which we allege
for the proof of Christ's Divinity. One of the clearest Texts we have is Joh.
1.10. The world was made by him: Here by the world, say the Volkel. lib. 5.
cap. 10. p. 446.
Socinians, is not meant this Fabric of Heaven and Earth, not yet the Universe
of men throughout the world, but the state of Bliss in the life to come, which
the Man Christ Jesus has purchased for us. And they have more to say for it,
then the Presbyterians for their Whimsey, because the Apostle does call that
future state, (...), the world to come, Heb. 2.5. but he never uses the word
World to signify only the Elect. Nay, as the Learned Daille does acknowledge,
(who is far from being an Arminian) whenever the World in Holy Writ does
not signify Mankind, it clearly signifies the greater and Non solet Scriptura
mundi nomen in figurato sensu absolute positum in bonam, sed in deteriorem
partem usurpare. Dallaeus in Apol. pro Duab. syn. part. 1. p. 16.
worser part. Nay Mr. Daille Id. ib. p. 17.
gives this for the first and chief reason why Camero and Amyrald, and other
eminent Protestants, did depart from their brethren the Calvinists in this
particular, and chose rather to submit to the plain Tenor of the Scripture as
it was ever understood by the Primitive Church. Besides, he gives notice to
Spanhemius, Aperitur audacibus ingeniis licentia quoslibet sensus divinis
verbis affingendi, quae omnia pro libitu invertent, and ad peregrinas
significationes detorquebunt, si nobis hoc ipsi permiserimus, ut mundi nomen
simpliciter positum pro solis electis sumamus, sensu, ut quivis videt, plane
allegorico, and apud hominum, sive Judaeorum, sive Gentilium, Scriptores nove
atque inaudito. Id. ib. p. 16.
, that if we suffer our own selves to understand the world of the Elect only,
(a trick never heard of, says Daille, from any Writer in the World, whether
Jew or Gentile) we shall encourage the bold and licentious people to make God's
word a Nose of Wax, and forge up on it what sense they please.

2. Received Rules for the interpreting of words, and ending controversies.
2. Mr. W. does confess p. 72. and Mr. B. p. 84, 85. 1. That we must not recede
from the literal sense of Scripture when it will agree with other Scriptures.
And 2. That Scripture-Phrases must be interpreted according to the nature of
the matter expressed by them.] The former of these two I showed See D. Phil.
chapter 4. sect. 26. p. 31.
so plainly, that neither of these brethren have offered any thing against it;
and so they confess, in equivalence, that in the literal sense of those
expressions [ all, every, the whole, etc.] the Texts I cited are to be taken.
Then for the later, it is evident that the matter of Christ's procuring a
salvability for all without exception, is of a See the Sinner Impl. part. 2. c.
2. p. 272. to p. 279.
favorable nature, both in respect of God and Man. Whereas the matter of God's
leaving the far greatest part of mankind under a desperate impossibility of
being saved, is of an See the Sinner Impl. part 2. c. 2. p. 280. to p. 284
odious nature in all respects. Now we have general 1. In non odiosis, sumenda
verba secundum totam proprietatem usus popularis, etc. 2. In favorabilioribus,
verba laxius sumenda. 3. In odiosis, sermo figuratus admittitur, quo onus
vitatur, etc. Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis, l. 1. cap. 16.
Rules for the interpreting of any matters in dispute, by reason of any
ambiguity which may be pretended to lie in words; and such unquestionable
Rules, as the law of all Nations (of what Religion whatsoever) is wont to go by
in all Debates, that so Controversies and Jarres may not certainly be endless;
which yet they certainly will be, if there are not some standing Rules, by
which the words of all compacts are to be measured and made certain, as to
their sense and signification. Such Rules are these in the Civil law, (which is
founded upon the Law of Nature.) 1. In things not odious, words are to be taken
according to the whole propriety of popular use, The first Rule.
so as the Masculine may include the Foeminine, and the Indefinite the
Universal. 2. In matters more favorable, words are to be taken in the most lax
and wide signification that they will bear. The second Rule.
3. In things of an odious nature, a figurative sense must be admitted, The
third Rule.
to avoid rigor or absurdity. And a greater restriction is to be used then for
the rigid propriety of the wo^d.


Hence it is that as when God is said in Scripture to harden the heart, to
pollute his Temple, to profane his Sanctuary, and the like, I say it is
figuratively spoken, and must be only understood by the common Hebraism; so
when Christ is said to be the Savior of the world, the Propitiation for the
sins of the whole world, the Savior of all men, and to have tasted death for
every man, and the like, I say it is meant in the propriety of those universals;
and if [whole] in one Text had not been added to [the world] as we know it is 1 John 2.2. yet that Indefinite [the world] must have included the universal: my
reasons of both are taken a diversa ratione materiae odiosae, and favorabilis.
But now my Adversaries (on the contrary) do take the words in their propriety
where the matter is odious; and they contend for a Synechdoche (such as never
was heard of before the broaching of their Heresy) where the matter is the
most favorable to be imagined: unless they think it no odious thing for God
to be concluded the Author of sin; and a thing very odious for the mercy of God
to be over all his works, and for other men to be saveable as well as
themselves.

3. The extreme absurdity of dutiful misbelief.
3. Mr. B. confesses (p. 87.) that in the general proposal of the Gospel to
every creature Mar. 16.15. there cannot possibly lurk any mental reservation,
or insincerity.] And that an untruth is to be believed by the commandment of
him who is the God of truth, the Lord Primate calls the The Primates Judgment
of the true intent and extent of Christ's death, p. 24, 25.
extreme absurdity into which the Arminians did drive the Calvinists. Nor did
he doubt but Mr. Culverwel was driven to the extremity on the right hand, by
the Ib. p. 25.
absurdities which he discerned in this extremity on the left. For (says the
Primate) what would not a man fly unto rather then yield that Christ died in
no ways for the Reprobates, and that none but the Elect had any kind of title
to him, p. 26. p. 27.
and yet many thousand Reprobates should be bound in conscience to believe that
he died for them, and tied to accept him for their Redeemer and Savior, yea,
and should be condemned to everlasting torments for want of such a faith, (if
we may call that Faith which is not grounded on the word of Truth) whereby they
should have believed that, which in it self was most untrue, and laid hold of
that in which they had no kind of interest? Mr. W's Tenet, that only the least
part of the world ought to believe the Gospel.
Yet Mr. W. says plainly that all men are not commanded to believe, but only
the least part of the world, p. 75. thereby inferring, 1. That the greatest
part of the World do not sin in not believing, as being not commanded to it; 2.
That none of that greatest part are damned for not believing; 3. Or if they
are, they are damned for not doing that, which not to do is no sin; 4. Or that
they actually do sin without offending against Praecept; 5. And so, by a
consequence unavoidable, that S. John has falsely defined sin to be [(...)]
the transgression of the law. He farther says, His reproach cast upon all
Christendom and the Gospel of Christ. See Prosper de vocatione Gentium l. 2. c.
1, and 2, and 16. etc proving that God did never leave himself without a
witness in any part of the world. Compare Act. 14.17. Psalm. 76. and Psalm. 118.
Isa. 60.
that the Gospel is only preached to the least part of the world, ibid. as if
he knew nothing either of Church History, or Cosmography; nor did believe any
truth to be in the Prophesies of the Old Testament, or in the economy of the
New. It seems the 1. Protestants, and 2. Papists, and 3. Greeks, and 4.
Muscovites, 5. the Asiaticks under the Patriarch of Jerusalem, 6. the Melchites
under that of Antioch, 7. the Armenians under 100. Bishops, 8. the Jacobites
(who are mingled with the Mahumetans through a great part of Asia under their
Patriarch at Caramite) 9. the Christians under the Patriarch of Mozul about
Assyria, Mesopotamia, Parthia, and Media, (accounted more then all the Papists)
10. the Georgians in Iberia, 11. the Circassians, 12. the Mengrellians, 13. the
Christians of all Natolia under the Patriarch of Constantinople, 14. those in
the Kingdoms of Cazan and Astracan under the Patriarch of Mosco, 15. the
Maronites, 16. the Indians of S. Thome, 17. those under the Patriarch of
Alexandria, whose jurisdiction has reached from the Gaditan streights to the
River Nile, 18. The Abassin Christians in Aethiopia under their Abunna, 19.
those in Congo and Angola, 20. besides all the Americans through New Spain,
Castella nova, Peru, and Brasile, 21. besides all the English, Dutch, and
French Plantations in Mexicana, and the Islands on either side, (that is to say
in fewer words) Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, do pass with Mr. W. for the
least part of the World. It were easy to teach this bold affirmer (were there
time, or necessity for such a work) how much the greatest part of the world was
preached to by the Apostles, and Deacons, and other Disciples of Christ, both
in the first and succeeding ages of the Church. I have heard of one who thought
the Sun never shined out of Spain and Italy. And now I meet with his peer, who
thinks the Sunshine of the Gospel does reach no further then his stunted
knowledge of what is done under the Sun. But grant him his dictate, he is still
undone in his doctrine: for the Gospel is preached here in England and France,
as well to the Reprobates as the Elect; which Reprobates are in duty to believe
a lie, or else they are not commanded to believe, and so shall never be
punished for want of faith, or shall be punished for that which cannot possibly
be a sin. One or more of these things must be admitted by Mr. W. if Christ died
only for the elect, as he positively affirms. Now considering the Tenent of
that Tribe, that the Papists are Reprobates, and the Episcopal Protestants a
kind of Papists ( Cassandrian Papists their word is) and Independents of all
sorts as bad as either, it may well become a Quaere, whether it is not his
opinion, that Christ died only for Presbyterians, and that none besides are
sincerely commanded to believe. But I am not at lei^ure to sift him so, as well
I might.

Sect. 5.
Universal Redemption proved from 2 Cor. 5.14. by Saint Austin and Prosper.
The last thing I am concerned to consider in Mr. W. and Mr. B. is their
nibling at that Rock of demonstration, which I opposed against their error, in
my Notes first p. 19. and next more largely in my Defense of God's
Philanthropy, c. 4. p. 28, 29, 30. I mean that Rock of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
5.14. making it good against all opposers, that as sure as all were dead in
sin, so sure it is that Christ died for all. This is nibled at tenderly by Mr.
W. p. 77. and yet more tenderly by Mr. B. p. 93. by both so tenderly, as if
they discerned it to be a Rock, as firm and hard as the Marpesian, and were
fearful to venture their teeth upon it; especially the man with the noysom
teeth, as knowing that such would break the soonest. To make short work, I
allow Mr. B. his Tergiversation, and am content to be tried by the best
Interpreters, 1. Omnes itaque mortui sunt in peccatis, nemine prorsus excepto;
five in originalibus, sive etiam voluntate additis, vel ignorando, vel sciendo,
nec faciendo quod justum est; and pro omnibus mortuis vivus mortuus est unus,
i.e. nullu^ habens omnino peccatum. Ex hoc probavit omnes mortuos esse, quia
pro omnibus mortuus est unus. -- In illo uno (sc. Adamo) mortui sunt omnes, ut
moreretur alius unus pro omnibus. Et rursus -- A morte justissimae damnationis
per unum mediatorem liberatur Genus Humanum. -- Unus pro omnibus mortuus est,
ergo omnes mortui sunt. Conclusio haec Apostoli invicta est; ac per hoc, quia
and parvulis mortuus est, profecto etiam parvuli mortui sunt, etc.
(as he pretends to be desirous, p. 92.) even by those whom he and Mr. W. shall
grant to be the best Interpreters, as to this particular, to wit, S. Austin and
Prosper. 1. S. Austin argues from that Text in the very same manner that I did,
[viz. That Christ died for all without exception, because all without exception
were dead in sin] no less then six distinct times. Once, lib. 20. de Civ. Dei
cap. 6. init. Tom. 5. p. 1340. again, lib. 6. contra Julian. cap. 4. Tom. 7. p.
432. and again, ibid. c. p. 434. and again, ibid. c. 5.9. p. 436. once more,
ibid. c. 17. p. 442. col. 2. And in another book against Julian, although
imperfect, l. 1. c. 62. Tom. 7. p. 24. and yet again, lib. de Corrept. and
Gratia, cap. 16. Tom. 7. p. 541. And to this is consonant what he taught in his
Retractations, c. 3. lib. 1. Judaeos and Gentiles, Christi contemptores,
vocatos fuisse ea vocatione qua vocati sunt qui noluerunt venire ad Nuptias.
And again in his very Retractations, Verum est omnino omnes hoc posse si
velint, lib. 1. cap. 9. And to the same purpose in his Confessions there is a
notable passage, lib. 8. c. 5. Tom. 1.

2. Prosper also does prove that Christ died for all that were dead in sin, 2.
Nulla ratio dubitandi est, Christum pro impiis mortuum, a quorum numero si quis
liber inventus est, non est pro omnibus mortuus Christus. Sed prorsus pro
omnibus est Christus mortuus, etc Prosper de voc. Genesis l. 2. c. 16. p. 144, 145.
and so for every son of Adam, unless there is any one of the number free from
all sin; for Christ (says he) died not for such: but he proves there cannot be
any such, and therefore none for whom Christ died not; and his chiefest proof
is from 2 Cor. 5.14. which he expounds exactly, as I have done from the
beginning; and he indeed was the first in whom I met with it, at least three
years before I saw it in S. Austin.

3. To save me the labor of saying more, Mr. B. has dropped a confession,
which he says is the confession of all my adversaries, That an offer of Christ
is made to all unto whom the Gospel is, and by commission ought to be,
preached, p. 87. he also confesses that the offer is sincerely made, ibid.
This I lay hold on, though he says the contrary shortly after, viz. That God
in the means of Grace, does not so much as make an offer of salvation to all,
p. 90. Again, though he says at one fit, that there was in Christ's death a
sufficiency for all, even of a Note, that he had railed at me in his first
book, for saying this very thing; and after blotted out his railing, in the
North-hampton Copies of that Print, as resolving to assert, in his second book,
what he condemned in his first.
thousand worlds, if there were so many, p. 91. yet at another fit he tells us,
that God had not an intention to save all, p. 90. and yet in a third fit, he
says, the proposal of the Gospel to every creature is without reservation or
insincerity, p. 87. and further yet, that it is pessible, by virtue of Christ's
merits, for all men to be saved, p. 87. and how so? he says very truly, in
case of true faith and repentance: there he is also for conditional redemption
to all the world, as exactly as I am. As for his flat contradictions to the
Lord Primate, with whom he professed to concur, and many other misfortunes upon
this subject, I refer him to all his concernments in The Self-Revenger
exemplified.

Sect. 6.
The Conclusion.
I now conclude with some reasons, why I lose no more time in exposing these
Authors to more pity, and their Doctrines to more contempt. 1. I am told by men
of knowledge, that their books are already become waste paper, bought by a few
only of the many, and read contentedly by none at all. 2. I am importuned by
diverse not to consider them overmuch, who have not a dangerous plausibility
amongst the vulgar, but to reserve my spare hours for the most popular man of
that party, who (as I am credibly informed) is doing his utmost to find me
work. 3. They have adventured to nibble, (and but to nibble) at so few things
in my Answer, that they do tacitly grant the greatest part to have left no
color for a Reply. 4. A great part of their performances are visible shifts,
rather then serious oppositions; even mean transitions a genere ad genus, easy
sneakings ab Hypothesi ad Thesin, at every pinch Ignorationes Elenchi, purposed
sittings beside the Cushion, and many times betwixt two stools too, gratis
dicta are their very least frailties, as studied forgeries are the greatest;
and I confess it is painful, to spend much time (with Domitian) in killing
Flies. 5. When they are brought to such straits, that they find not a crevice
or a keyhole whereat to attempt a creeping out, they yield themselves up, and
all for which they have contended, without so much as making any terms of
mercy. As for example, Certissimum est nobis, Decrevisse, ut non nisi nolentes
atque impii perderentur, Twiss. Vin. Gr. l. 1. p. 100.
Mr. B. professes He does readily yield, that God did not absolutely decree
the Reprobation positive of any creature, but upon praescience and supposition
of wilful rebellion and impenitence, p. 70, 71. nay he professes this to be
the Doctrine of all Orthodox Writers, ancient and modern, p. 70. And why should
He be much talked with, who confesses all in one breath, which he denies in
another? See the Div. Philanth. chapter 4. p. 4. especially p. 5. yet no sooner
gets he loose, but he denies the very thing which the necessity of his affairs
had made him confess, and pleads (for want of a better excuse) Lapsus linguae
non est error mentis, p. 77. what cares he how he miscarries, who can so easily
make amends? 6. When this evader is so stomachful that he will not yield, and
yet so despairing of success that he will not resist a cogent Argument, he
makes no scruple to profess a Tergiversation. As for example, when I had
pressed him with a See the Div. Phi. chapter 3. p. 65.
Dilemma of huge importance, even evincing out of his mouth, that his
Distinction of Positive and Negative Reprobation was but a shift, he contents
himself with this return, [Mr. Barlee needs not answer that Dilemma, p. 81.]
And so when he knows not what to say to the convincing points of my reasonings
about the general extent and sincere intent of Christ's death, he gives me the
slip in these words, [ It would be superfluous labor to spend more time and
paper in giving more particular answers to his luxuriant discourses, p. 93.] 7.
Mr. W. and he and Mr. Hobbs are so frequently condemned out of their own
mouths, that they would need no Confuters besides themselves, if all their
Readers were but attentive. To give a few instances of many, Mr. W. says p.
29. God is not the Author of evil, because not causa per se, but per accidens.
Yet in his extent of Div. Prove. p. 40. he says that causa per accidens never
works till causa per se sets it on work.] Now because it is not man who sets
God on work, it is plainly his meaning, that God is causa per se of sin, and
sets man on work who is causa per accidens; which others call a deficient
cause. Again, he confesses in his last Work, p. 25. that if it is impossible
to separate the sin from the action, then he who is the Author of the one, is
also of the other. Yet he also confesses p. 37. that the modi rerum are not
really distinguished from the things themselves, but so nearly conjoined as
they cannot be separated. Nor can any reason be rendered why Doctor Twisse
should say, Mr. Hobbs his prodigious self-contradictions.
that Fornication denotes sin even secundum materiale, except this one, that
the sin is inseparable from the Act. In like manner Mr. Hobbs, though he says
in Of Lib. and Necess. p. 23.
one place, that sins are actions, and in Quaest. Number? 12. p. 105.
another place, that God is the cause of all actions, and in a Ibid. p. 107.
third place, that he is a principal Agent in the causing of all actions, yet
he Ibid. p. 105, 106.
denies him to be the Author of the actions which he causes. And his reason
for it is more prodigious then all the rest; for God (says he) cannot be said
to be the Author of sin, because he does but necessitate it, not command or
warrant it, p. 105, 106. yet even this last he contradicts too, by saying that
Of Lib. and Necess. p. 22.
power irresistible does justify all actions. Now that which necessitates is
power irresistible, and that which justifies does warrant, and he says that
that which warrants is the Author of sin. (Qu. p. 106.) and that sin must needs
derive a necessity from God (p. 105.) and the greatest men of his Principle do
say that God commands men to sin, which he confesses is to call him the Author
of sin. (p. 106.) Nay he Q. p. 11. l. 7, 8, 9, 10. from the bottom*
elsewhere professes, that a man must not SAY, God has caused him to err,
and it is through the Lord that he fell away, but he may THINK so very well.
And woe had been to Ecclesiasticus, had he denied it. Nor is there any thing
more common with these men, then to say that sin is necessary as decreed by
God, although contingent as freely willed by man. Now necessary being that,
which cannot choose but be, and contingent that, which either may or may not be;
what is this but to say, it is necessary as decreed, but not necessary as not
decreed? It cannot but be, and yet it might possibly not have been: it is
contingent, and not contingent: which is as if they should say, we cannot deny
our Adversaries Premises, and therefore we must hold the one part of the
contradiction; but we will not quit our own conclusion, and therefore we must
hold the other part of the contradiction. Thus by their own way of arguing,
they are men, and they are not: they are men, as being endued with Reason; and
they are not, as being endued with none. Sure that sort of men is no longer to
be disputed with, who have drank so deeply, and digested, and reduced also to
practice, the Quamcunque duarum viarum primo diversarum homines inicrint, recta
tendunt ad superos. Escobar. Theol. Moral. Tom. 1. in prael. cap. 3. See the
Mystery of Jesuitisme, Letter 5. p. 59, 60. and Additionals second Edit. p.
70, etc. p. 90, etc.
Jesuits doctrine of Probability. 8. Last of all, for Mr. B. who has spent so
many whole sheets in calling me Papist, Arminian, Socinian, Massilian,
Pelagian, and what else he listed, though I could make it undeniable, (even to
him, and his Congerrones,) that he has spoken of each, as if he knew nothing
of any one, and could prove him irresistibly (by an Argument ad hominem) to be
a Hobbist, a Mahumetan, and of every other Sect of men, with whom he partakes
in any kind; yet I shall imitate S. Austin, and take a shorter course with him:
When that Father was accused by Secundinus for a Manichee, he purged himself in
this manner; Secundinus says I am a Manichee, and I say I am not. Let the
Reader judge, which of us is herein to be believed. My case is the same, and I
will take the same course. Mr. Barlee says I am a Papist, Pelagian, Socinian,
Sorcerer, etc. But I say No to all his sayings: I leave it now to the Reader,
to believe whom he pleases, Mr. Barlee, or Mr. Pierce.

Extend manum, and tange, etc.

(Job. 1.11.) Id est, permit ut extendam manum, and tangam cuncta quae
possidet; ut saepius in sacris Scripturis tribuuntur Deo Actiones, cu solum eas
fieri permiserit.

August. ad Simplician. l. 2. q. 2. Either make the Tree good and his Fruit
good, or else make the Tree corrupt and his Fruit corrupt,

Matt. 12.33. For the Tree is known by his Fruit. Ibid.

An Additional Advertisement To the Reader, July 26.1658.
MY present Tract being finished and wrought off at the Press, the Stationer
sends me (at this instant) a little book of Mr. Baxter's which addresseth it
self in the Title Page to no more then three men, to wit, Grotius, the new
Tilenus, and Mr. Pierce; but in several passages of the thing his objections
reach to many more; though, having only run it over with a transient eye, I
can remember no more particulars then Bishop Bramhall, Doctor Sanderson, Doctor
Heylin, and Doctor Tailor. Had it not come a little too late, and were it not
more in my humor, then it seems to be in Mr. Baxter's, (...), to prefer a good
speed before a great deal of haste, an hour or two had sufficed to have made a
Winding Sheet for himself, at least as suitable as that which he made for
Popery. But as it is, I must declare to all those persons concerned in it with
my self, and to Tilenus the second more especially, (whom after all my
inquiries I have not the happiness to know in the least degree) that till the
end of this Summer I shall not bestow the least though upon any part of Mr.
Baxter; and that for these ensuing reasons.

First, because I am praeengaged in diverse matters of greater moment, which
will take me up wholly the next three months. And if I return to any Dispute
in any kind whatsoever, as it will fall out cross to my inclinations, so I
resolve to do it only at times of leisure and diversion. For whilst my time
may be spent in some good employment, why should I lose it in my least
necessary Defenses?

Next, I desire to understand what entertainment the thing will find with
considering Readers: for if it seems to others what it does to me, it will tend
to nothing but the disparagement of its Author. Nor need I vindicate Mr. Baxter
from his severities done unto himself. Besides, that I resolve, never to
controvert a subject, until the most sober unbyass't persons shall think it
publicly useful, as well as I.

Thirdly, I think it will be best to expect the final resolutions of the other
persons concerned, especially of the excellent Tilenus junior, whom Mr. Baxter
has blurred with his blackest ink: and if he possibly is alive to undertake
his own cause, the world will find 'twill be but impar^ congressus.

Again, I am told that Doctor Reynolds is at last resolved to find me work: and
in case it proves true, I shall remember the speech of the King of Syria at
Ramoth-Gilead, Fight ye not with small or great, save only with the King of
Israel, 2 Chronicles. 18.30. He is so worthily reputed the Coryphaeus of that party
(if yet he is not too worthy to be in earnest one of them) that Mr. Baxter will
follow him very contentedly at a very great and humble distance.

Fifthly I ought to think twice, before I meddle with Mr. Baxter, because I
find him so very liable, (I had almost said in every line,) for as much as I
can judge by my short and cursory perusal of him. And where advantages are too
many, some consideration is to be had how much of all that abundance is to be
taken and left: for it is a thanklesse office to acquaint a man with his
unhappiness; and in the doing of that, I would not willingly be endless.

Sixthly, I am to meditate, in what manner of terms I ought to deal with Mr.
Baxter. The desires of my soul are to use him gently; but considering his
guilt, I know not whether my indulgence may not be hurtful to his admirers, who
may be apt to think well of his greatest crimes, if they find me (like Eli to
his sons) too mild a Censor. Nor am I sure that my softness will not be
mischievous to himself; who may mistake my longanimity for carnal fear, and so
by sinning yet more, may make a worse thing happen unto him. I say not this
without ground, because I find him abusing my former lenity, as if he imagined
his being terrible had made me courteous. Christian Reader, observe my reason:
He does now acknowledge to all the world, and withal professes [he Praef.
sect. 4. p. 3.
must acknowledge, both my gentleness, and charity, and brotherly moderation in
dealing with him.] But as if gentleness, and charity, and brotherly moderation
were only fit for a moral man, and were the glittering sins of an Episcopal
Divine, he behaves himself so unexpectedly in diverse passages of his Book, as
if he durst not imitate the best things in me, and (in the point of charity)
had thought it his duty to come behind.

I had done no worse, then the clearing of God from those slanders which the
tongue of the wicked had raised against him, and the freeing my self from those
other slanders which were raised against me for clearing God, (things confessed
to be matchless and groundless slanders by the dearest friends of Mr. Barlee,
and now at last not denied by himself;) when yet Mr. Baxter thinks fit to say
in the depth of his passion and partiality, [ Mr. Baxter in his Praef.
addressed to Mr. T.P. Sect. 20. toward the end of it.
That he had rather die in the state of David before Nathan spoke to him, or of
Peter after he had denied his Lord, (that is, in the state of an Adulterer,
Murderer, and one who projected the drunkenness of Uriah, and continued thus
about a year in an impenitent state,) then of Mr. Pierce that has committed no
such sin.] Nor does he give the least reason, besides my writing that Book, and
the rest of my failings which are known to God only. He does not pretend to
know the least sin in me, excepting my public Writings against those sins of
which I knew not that he was guilty, until (in this his late Book) he revealed
it to me from the Press. And that I have failings known to God (I will add, to
my self also) is no more then he might have said even of David and Peter after
the times of their repentance. Yet goes he not 5. pages farther, before his
eruption into these strange words. [ I Ibid. sect. 24.
had rather my right hand were used as Cranmers then I should have written
against Puritans what you have done:] Yet it is known that I writ against no
other Puritans, then such as were defined at Hampton Court to be Protestants
frighted out of their wits: Such Puritans as are known to be painted
sepulchers, having a form only of godliness without the power of it. Such as
were thought by judicious Hooker to be fit inhabitants for a wilderness, not
for a well-ordered City: Such as have ever despised dominion, and spoken evil
of dignities, have been commonly Boutefeus and men of blood, the Proverbial
Autors and Fautors of Sedition and violence in Church and State. If Mr. Baxter
does know enough of the ancient Gnostics and Catharists, the Pharisees of
Judaea, and rigid Jesuits at Rome, (besides what I have not now time to name,)
he knows the Puritans against whom I have written.

Lastly, I find him so frequently unmasking himself to all his Readers, by
pretending that the difference between me and my Antagonists is merely verbal,
and so acknowledging himself to be really of my opinions, yet calling me as
well as others by the very same names, ( Arminian and Pelagian,) which with
equal reason are often fastened upon himself, by not a few of his own Tribe;
sometimes showing himself an Advocate for the crimson sins of other men, and
not only an Advocate, but an Encomiast of his own; concluding Grotius to be a
Papist, for the very same reasons for which himself (if he is just) must needs
conclude him to be a Protestant, (unless he thinks as hardly of the Augustan
Confession, as of the Articles of the Council of Trent) mistaking at once the
whole drift of Grotius his excellent Discussio Apologetici Rivetiani, and
parcelling his mistake into a great many Sections toward the making of a book;
citing Grotius his Latin, and not translating it into English, or translating
it so lamely (to say no worse) as to conceal his true meaning from English
Readers; I say so frequently do I discern Mr. Baxters uncoverings of himself,
in these and many more respects, that for ought I yet know, these very hints
which I have given for the intelligent Reader to enlarge upon unto himself, may
be a sufficient (...) against the Contagion of all his Volume. My perusal of
his book has been so hasty (it having been brought me by the same Carrier by
whom I am hastily sending this short account unto the Press) that although I
can say I have run it over, yet I cannot say I have read it all. And therefore
my Reader will be satisfied with this one instance of my experience. In his
Sect. 21. p. 34, 35. Grotius is brought by Mr. Baxter speaking thus in his
Discussio: * Quare nunc plane it a sentit Grotius, and multi cum ipso, non
posse Protestants inter se jungi, nisi simul jungantur cum iis qui Sedi
Romanae cohaerent; sine qua nullum sperari potest in Ecclesia Commune Regimen.
Ideo optat (mark this good Reader) ut ea divulsio quae evenit, and causae
divulsionis tollantur. Inter eas non est Primatus Episcopi Romani secundum
Canones, fatente Melancthone. --

The later part of these words (which are the chief) Mr. Baxter takes no notice
of in the English account which he renders of them, only contents himself to
say Here you see that Grotius judged that the only way for union was for all
Protestants to join with them that adhere to the Sea of Rome.] He is deeply
silent as to the causes of the breach, which Grotius did wish might be taken
away; and which he charged the Papists with. Vot. pro Pace p. 7, 8.

I have not a minute wherein to say more, then that for all his medlings and
misdemeanors about my last reckoning with Mr. Barlee, (in my (...), or
Self-revenger exemplified) I sincerely commiserate his passion, I truly pardon
his partiality, and I heartily pray for his amendment.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. lin 9. in marg. r. libert. c. 13. p. 7. l. 5. from the bottom. r. Mr.
Hickman. p. 31. l. 15. after done r. in. p. 40. l. 8. in marg. r. 2 Samuel 12.11,
12. p. 50. l. 1. r. Joh. 15.5. p. 95. l. 3. from the bottom. r. had. p. 102. l.
9. r. himself. p. 113. l. 8. for Mr. W. r. Mr. B. p. 114. l. 28. in marg. for
Mr. W. r. Mr. B. p. 149. l. 16. for rest on, r. restore. 163. l. 1. in marg.
after of r. in. p. 169. l. 10. for severe r. several. p. 171. l. 1. for. p. 13.
r. p. 113. p. 176, l. 5. r. Erinays. p. 187. l. 5. after what, r. was. p. 197.
l. 7. in marg. r. in Genesis p 203. 39. in marg. r. vitetur. p. 208. l 13. in
marg. r. p. 844, 845.

THE END.

