THE PRINCIPLES OF LAW Reduced to PRACTICE.

By W. PHILLIPPS.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Twyford, Thomas Dring, John Place, and are to be sold
at their Shops, 1660.

To the Reader.
AMidst the many Complaints that have been taken up against the Law, there is
not any that seems of Weight, unless it be that of it is want of Method. And in
truth that is not a real, but only a seeming Objection: for the Learned know
that the Law of England (excepting Statutes) is a customary, and no written
Law: and therefore it is no wonder, that the Professors thereof have not been
curious in the methodizing of that Art, which has it is force only from
Custom, and was never committed to writing. But, although it be not capable of
Exquisite Method; it cannot be denied, but of late times, fair Essays have
been made for the better retaining of the same in memory: which has bin by
putting particular Cases under general Rules; which, as to the younger
Students it must needs be very helpful; so, to Atturneys (whose practice will
not permit them to peruse the greater Volumes of the Law,) it cannot be less
useful. Having therefore at spare hours Collected the Ensuing Principles of
Law, and communicated the same to some most eminent in that Profession; their
approbation has been such, that it has deemed them worthy the Public view.
Whereupon being secured of the skill of those Gentlemen I confidently commit
them to the World, not doubting but they will have as good reception abroad, as
they have met with in private. For, if I mistake not much, you will find them
to come home to your Business and Occasions. Farewell.

A TABLE Of the MAXIMS, Displayed in this TRACTATE.
A
ACcessorium non ducit sed sequitur suum Principale. The Accessory follows
the Principal: fol. 1. A communi observantia non est recedendum. Common
opinion, a rule in Law. fol. 2. Actio personalis moritur cum persona. A
personal action ends with the person. Ibid. Actus Dei nemini facit injuriam. An
act of God injureth no man. ib. Actus legis nulli facit injuriam. An act of Law
is injurious to none. fol. 3 Actus non facit reum nisi men's sit rea. The mind,
not the act, makes a man guilty. ib. Actus repugnans non potest produci in
esse. Contradictions cannot be brought into being ib. Actus me in vito factus
non est meus actus. An act done against my will, is not my act: fol. 4 Actori
incumbit onus probandi: The Plaintiff must prove. ib. Additio probat
minoritatem. Addition argues the less extent. fol. 5. Ad proximum antecedens
fiat relatio. The Relative has respect to the next Antecedent. ib. Ad
quaestionem Facti non respendent Judices. Judges do not decide matters of fact.
fol. 6 Aestimatio praeteriti delicti post factum munquam crescit. No subsequent
matter adds degrees of guilt to a past fault. ib. Affectio no men imponit
operi. The intention denominates the action. ib. Affectus punitur, licet non
sequatur effectus. The affection is punishable, though the effect do not
follow. fol. 7 Affirmativum negativum implicat. An affirmative implies a
negative. ib. Agentes and Consentientes pari poena plectuntur. The actor and
the consentor are equally culpable. fol. 8. Aliquis non potest esse Iudex in
propria causa. None must be judge in his own cause. ib. Apices juris non sunt
jura. Niceties of Law are no Law. fol. 9 Ambiguum placitum interpretari debet
contra proferentem. A doubtful plea shall be taken strongest against the
pleader. ib.
B
Benignae faciendae sunt interpretationes chartarum, propter simplicitatem
laicorum; ut res magis valeat quam pereat. Charters admit of a favorable
construction, by reason of the Lay man's ignorance; that the thing may be in
force rather then perish. fol. 10. Benignior sensus in verbis dubiis est
praeferendus. In doubtful things, the most favorable construction is to be
preferred. 11.
C
Causa and origo est materia negotii. The cause of the business is the offense
of it. 11. Caveat emptor. Let the buyer beware. ib. Certa debet esse intentio
and narratio. Counts and Declarations ought to be certain. 12 Cessante causa,
cessat effectus. The cause being gone, the effect cease. ib. Charta non est
nisi vestimentum donationis. Charter is, as it were, the garment of the gift.
ib. Communis error facit jus. Common error constituteth a right. 13. Consensus,
non concubitus, facit matrimonium. Consent, not the sheets compleats the
marriage. ib. Conditio been ficialis quae statum construit, benign secundum
vrborum intentionem est interpretanaa-Beneficial conditions are to be taken
according to the intention of the words. 14 Consensus tollit errorem. Consent
takes away error. ib. Consuetudo debet esse certa. A custom ought to be
certain. 15 Constructio juris nemini facit injuriam. Favorable construction of
Law injures no man. ib. Consuetudo semel reprobata non potest amplius
introduci. A custom once rejected cannot be used again. 16 Consuetudo tollit
legem. Custom takes away the Law. 17 Contraria aellegans non est audiendus. He
that alleges contradictions is not to be heard. ib. Cui licet quod majus est,
non debet quod minus est non licere. He that may do more, can do less. ib.
Cuique natural est, illud quod procreavit tueri. The Law of Nature commands
every one to defend his issue. 18 Cuilibet in arta sua perito est credendum.
The Artist must be believed in his own Art. ib. Cujus est dare, ejus est
disponere. The Giver may dispose of his gift. ib.
D
Debile fundamentum tollit opus. A weak foundation defeats the superstructure.
19 Derivativa potestas non potest esse major primitiva A derivative power
cannot be greater then the primitive. 20 Destinata tantum, pro factis non
habentur. Things intended shall not be taken for things done, ib. De fide and
offieio Iudicis, non recipitur quaestio. A Judge's honesty ought not to be
questioned. ib. Dies Dominicus non est juridieus. The Sabbath Day is no day in
Law. 21 Divinatio, non interpretatio est, quae omnino recedit a litera. It is a
guessing, not an interpretion, which wholly leaves the Letter. ib. Dilationes
in lege sunt odiosae. Dilatory pleas are odious. 22 Dispositio de interesse
futuro, est inutilis. A disposition of a future interest is null. ib. Dominus
non maritabit minorem in custodia sua, nisi semel. A Ward shall be forced to
marriage but once. 23 Dormit aliquando jus, moritur nunquam. A right is
suspended sometimes, never extinguished. ib. Doti mulieris parcatur, quia
praemium pudoris est. A woman's dower shall be spared, because it is the reward
of chastity. 24 Dona clandestina semper sunt suspitiosa. Under board gifts are
suspicious. ib. Dos de dote peti non debet. One Dower cannot be made out of
another.
E
Ecclesia fungitur vice minoris; meliorem potest facere conditionem, deteriorem
nequaquam. The Church exercising the office of a minor, it may make his
condition better, not worse: 25 Executio juris nulli facit injuram. Execution
of the Law injures none. 26 Expressio eorum quae tacit insunt, nihil operatur.
Expression of those things which are understood works nothing: ib. Ex nudo
pacto non oritur actio. Of a bare agreement there arises no action. ib.
Expressum facit cessare tacitum. An express drowneth an implication. 27 Extra
jurisdictionem jus dicenti, non paretur impune. He that obeys a Judge beyond his
commission, shall not go Scot-free. ib. Exteriora acta indicant interiora animi
secreta: The outward actions show the inward intentions of the mind: ib. Ex
verbo gencrali aliquid excipitur. Every general rule has an exception. 28.
F
Facinus quos inquinat aequat. An offense equalleth those that are guilty of
it. 28 Festinatio Justitiae noveroe infortunii. More haste then good speed. ib.
Finis rei attendendus, Mark the end. 29 Filiatio non potest probari.
Legitimation cannot be proved. 30 Firmior est operatio legis quam dispositio
hominis. The disposition of the Law is stronger than any proviso of man: ib.
Frustra fit per plura, quod potest fieri per pauciora. Much is needless, where
less will serve the turn. ib. Furiosus furore suo punitur. A madman is
punished by his own madness. 31.
G
Generale nihil oerti implicat. Generals determine nothing. 32. Generalibus
semper specialia insunt Special things are always contained in generals. 32.
Generalis clausula non refertur ad expressa. A general clause is not referred
to those things which are expressed. 33. Generalis clausula non porrigitur ad
ea, quae antea sunt specialiter comprehensa. A general clause is not extended
to those things, which were before specially comprehended. 34. Generalia sunt
praeponenda singularibus. Generals are to be preferred before particulars. ib.
H
Haeres est pars antecessoris. The son is part of the father. 35. Haeres
legitimus, est, quem nuptiae demonstrant. He is a lawful heir, whom marriage
connteth so: ib. Haeres non tenetur ad debita antecessoris reddenda, nisi per
antecessorem ad hoc suerit obligatus; praeterquam debita Regis tantum. An heir
is not bound to pay his ancestor's debts, unless to the King, if he be not
bound by the deed of his ancestor. ib: Hermaphrodita tam masculo quam foeminae
comparatur, secundum praevalescentiam sexus incalescentis. An Hermaphrodite
inherits, according to the prevalency of the sex. 36.
I
Id certum est, quod certum reddi potest. That is certain, that may be made
certain. ib. Ignoratio Iuris non excusat. Ignorance of the Law is no excuse. 37
Ignorantia facti execusat. Ignorance of the fact does excuse. 38 Ignoratis
terminis, ignoratur and ars. The terms not known, the art is not understood. 38
Impotentia ex usat legem. That which cannot be helped, cannot hurt. 39 Idem non
potest esse agent and patiens. The same cannot be agent and patient. ib:
Impersonalitas nec concludit, nec ligat. Impersonality does not conclude nor
bind. 40 Imperitia maximae est mechanicorum poena. Ignorance is the artists
greatest punishment. ib. Inclusio uninus est exclusio alterius. The including
of one thing is the excluding of another. ib. Infinitum in jure reprobatur.
Infinity is rejected in Law: 41 In fictione legis semper est aequitas. In the
fiction of Law is quity. ib. In aequali jure melior est possessio possidentis.
In an equal cause possession is best. 42 Injuria illata in corpus non potest
remitti. Injuries made upon the body cannot be remitted, ib. In ambiguis
casibus, semper praesumitur pro Rege. In ambiguous cases, it is always presumed
for the King. 43 In disjunctivis, sufficit alterum esse verum: In disjunctives,
it is sufficient if one of them be true: ib. In jure, non remota sed proxima
causa spectatur. The Law respects the most immediate cause. 44. Impossible est
unum corpus in duobus locis esse simul. The same body cannot be at two places
at the same time. 46. In praesentia majoris, cessat potentia minoris. A greater
power drowns a less. ib. In quo quis deliquit, in eo de jure puniendus est. In
what one offends, in the same he rightly suffers. 47 In omnibus
obligationibus, quibus dies non ponitur, praesenti die debetur. Where no time
is set, the debt is presently due. ib. Judic is est judicare secundum allegata
and probata. The Judge ought to determine according to proof. 48. Judicium pro
veritate accipitur. Judgment and truth equivalent: ib. Judicium a non suo
judice datum, nullius est momenti. If Judgment be not given by the proper
Judge, it is of no force. 49 Junior non potest dotem promereri. A woman under
nine years cannot have dower. 50 Jura naturalia sunt immutabilia. The Laws of
nature are immutable. ib. Ipsae etenim leges eupiunt ut jure regantur. Laws are
ruled by equity: 51 Jura publica anteferenda privatis. Public rights are to be
preferred before private. ib. Jus accrescendi praefertur oneribus. Right of
increase is preferred before charge. 52. Ius accrescendi praefertur ultimae
voluntati. The right of Increase is preferred before the last Testament. ib.
Ius descendit and non terra. Right, not the Land descends. 53. Justum non
est, aliquem ante matrimonium natum, mortuum, facere bastardum, qui toto
tempore suo pro legitimo habebatur. It is unjust to m^ke him a bastard, when
dead; who was accounted legitimate while alive. ib.
L
Lex est summa ratio. The Law is the perfection of Reason. 54 Licet Tenenti
vetus opus reficere, non novum facere. The Tenant may repair, cannot build. 55
Lex non praecipit inutilia. The Law prescribes not in vain. 56 Lex semper
intendit quod convenit rationi. The Intendment of the Law is always consonant
to reason. 57 Lex spectat naturae ordinem. The Law regards the order of
nature. ib. Lex non cogit ad impossibilia. The Law forces not to things
impossible 58. Lex libertati das favorem: The Law favors liberty. 58 Lex
citius tolerare vult privatum damnum, quam publicum malum. The Law will sooner
tolerate a private injury, than a public inconvenience. 59 Liberata pecunia
non liberat efferentem. Money tendered does not discharge the Obligor. 60 Linea
recta semper praefertur transversali. A right line is always preferred before
a collateral. 61
M
Mala Grammatica non vitiat chartam. False Latin does not destroy a Deed. 61
Maritus and uxor, animae duae sunt in una carne: Man and wife are two souls in
one flesh: 62. Malus usus abolendus. An evil usage is to be abolished: 63
Maxim paci contraria sunt vis and injuria. Violence is contradictory to Peace.
ib. Meliorem conditionem facere potest minor, deteriorem nequaquam. An Infant
may better his condition, cannot make it worse. 64 Minor jurare non potest. An
Infant cannot be upon his oath. 65 Modus and conventio vincunt legem. An
agreement does alter the Law. ib. Mulieres ad probationem status bominis
admitti non debent. Women are not admitted to prove the condition of a man. 66
Multa transeunt cum universalitate, quae per se non transeunt. Many things pass
in a crowd, which do not pass in themselves. ib.
N
Negatio nihil implicat. A negative implies nothing. 67 Nemo debet bis puniri
pro uno delicte. None ought to be punished twice for the same fault. ib. Nemo
potest plus juris in alium transfer quam ipse habet: None can transfer a
greater right, then he himself has. 68 Neminem oportet esse sapientiorem
legibus. None ought to aspire to be wiser then the Laws. ib. Nemo tenetur
exponere se inf^rtuniis and periculis. None is bound to expose himself to
peril. 69 Nemo punitur pro aliens delicto. None suffers for another fault. ib.
Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum. No man is bound to betray himself. 70 Nihil quod
est inconveniens val contra rationem, est licitum. Inconveniences are unlawful.
ib. Non refert an quis assensum praebeat verbis aut factis. It matters not,
whether an assent be by words or deeds. 72 Non afficit con^tus, nisi sequatur
effectus. The endeavor signifies nothing, unless the effect follows. 73. Non
est haeres viventis: There is no actual heir of the living predecessor. 74 Non
valet pactum de re mea non alienanda. A contract, that I should not alien what
is my own, is of no validity. 75 Nullum iniquum in jure est praesumendum: No
injustice is presumed in the Law. ib. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. No time
prevails against the King. Nullum simile est idem. No like is the same. 76
Nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria. None can take advantage
of his own wrong. 77
O
Omnis privatio praesupponit habitum. Every privation presupposes an habit. 78
Omnia quae movent ad mortem sunt Deodanda. All things which cause death are
Deodands. 79 Omne testamentum morte consummatum est. The death of the Devisor
compleats the Will. ib. Omne majus continet in se miuns: Every more contains
in it self a less. ib. Omnia quae sunt uxoris, sunt ipsius viri. That which is
the Wive's, is the Husband's. 80 Omnis ratihabitio aequiparatur mandato. Every
approve is equivalent to a command. 81 Oportes ut res certa deducatur in
judicium. It behooves, that a thing certain should be brought into judgment.
ib.
P
Pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant Marriage proves the father. 82 Pendente
lite nihil innovetur. Writ hanging, nothing must be innovated. ib. Perspicue
vera non sunt probanda. Clear truths are not to be proved. 83 Plus peccat
author, quam actor. The author is more guilty then the instrument. 84 Possesio
fratris de foedo simplici, facit sororein else haeredem. The possession of the
brother of a fee simple, m keth the sister to be heir. ib. Propinquior excludit
propinquum. The nearer akin excludes the more remote. 85 Proximus sum egomet
miki. I love my self best. ib.
Q
Quando lex aliquid concedit, concedere videtur and id, sine quo res esse non
potest. When the Law grants any thing, (...) grants that, without which the
matter could not be. 86 Quando aliquid fieri prohibetur ex directo, prohibetur
and per obliquum. A direct prohibition includes an oblique one. ib. Quando jus
Domini Regis and subditi concurrunt, jus Regis praeferri debet. When the right
of the King and Subject stands in competition, the Kings is preferred. 87
Quaelibet haereditas naturaliter descendit: Every inheritance does naturally
descend. ib. Quae in parts dividi nequeunt solida a singulis praestentur.
Things entire must be entirely paid of several. 88 Quaelibet concessio
fortissime contra donatorem interpretanda est. Every Grant is to be taken most
strongly against the Grantor. ib. Qui non babet in are, luat in corpore. Either
the purse paies, or the body suffers. 89. Qui ex damnato ccitu oriuntur, inter
liberos non compusentur. Bastards are not accounted amongst sons. ib. Qui
haeret in litera, haeret in cortice. He that sticks in the letter, sticks in
the outside. ib. Qui adimit medium, dirimit sinem. He that takes away the
means, takes away the end. 90 Qui peccat ebrius, luat sobrius. He that offends
when he is drunk, shall suffer when he is sober. 91 Qui per alium facit, per
seipsum facere videtur. He that does by another, does by himself. 91 Qui semel
actionem renuntiavit, amplius repetere non potest. A retraxit burs all actions.
ib. Qui sentit commodum, sentire debet and onus. He that bears the burden,
ought to receive the profit. 92 Quod ab initio non valet, traccu temporis non
convalescet. That which is invalid in the beginning, tract of time will not
make good. ib. Quod prius est tempore, potius est jure. Prioritie in time
prevails in Law. 93 Quod semel meum est, amplius meum esse non potest. That
which is once mine, cannot be twice mine. 94 Quod semel placuit in
electionibus, umplius displicere non potest: That which is preferred by
election, cannot be altered. 95 Quoties in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi
nulla expositio contra verba expressa fienda est. Where there is no ambiguity
in the words, there express meaning shall be taken. 69 Quod constat clare, non
debet verificari. Of that which is clear, no need of any averment. 97
R
Refert, a quo fiat perquisitum. It matters from whom the purchase comes. 98
Remote impedimento, emergit actio. The impediment being removed, the action
does arise. ib. Repellitur a Sacramento infamis. A scandalous person is barred
of his oath. 99 Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet. A thing acted
amongst some, ought not to prejudice others. ib.
S
Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi accipiendus est. The sense of the words is to
be taken from the occasion of the speech. 100 Semper praesumitur pro
legitimatione puerorum. Legitimation is always presumed. 101 Si mulier nobilis
nupserit ignobili, desinit esse nobilis. If a Noblewoman by marriage, marries
under the degrees of Nobility, she loses her Nobility. ib. Solus Deus facere
potest her aedem. God alone can make an heir. ib. Stabitur presumptioni donee
probetur in contrarium: The presumption is good, till the contrary be proved.
102
T
Testamento cum duo inter se pugnantia reperiuntur, ultimum ratum est: The last
takes place. ib. Traditio loqui facis chartum. Delivery makes the Deed valid.
103
U
Vana est potentia, quae nunquam venit in actum: That power is frustraneous,
which is never produced into act. ib. Vbi non est principalis, ibi non patest
esse accessarius. Where there is no principal, there can be no accessory: 104
Vbi endem ratio, ibi idem jus. The same reason, the same Law. 105 Vbi nullum
matrimonium, ibi nulla dos. No marriage, no dower. 106 Verba accipienda sunt in
mitiori sensu. Words are to be taken in a favorable sense. 107 Verba sunt
accipienda cum effectu. Words are to be taken with the effect. ib. Verba
aquivoca intelliguntur digniere sensu. Doubtful words are to be taken in the
more worthy sense. 108 Verba rolat a hoe maxim operantur, per referentiam, ut
in esse videantur. Relative words do especially work this by reference as they
may seem in being. 109 Verba chartarum fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem.
The words of a Deed are most strongly taken against the Grantor. ib.
Vnumquodque dissolvitur eo ligamine quo ligatur: Every thing is dissolved by
the same it obliges. ib. Vltima voluntas testatoris perimplendae est, secundum
veram intentionem: The Will of the Testator is exactly to be performed. 110
Voluntas testatoris ambulatoria est usque ad mortem: The last Will only stands.
111 Volenti non fit injuria. To him that is willing, there is no injury done.
ib. Vtile per inutile non vitiatur. That which is profitable is not destroyed
by that which is frustrane ous. 112. Vxor non est sui juris, sed sub potestate
viri. The Wife has not her own swing, but is under the power of her husband:
Law-Principles Reduced to Practice.
A.
ACcessorium non ducit sed sequitur suum Principale.

As if a man lets Lands for life rendering certain rent, if he grant in
Reversion to another, and the Tenant attorn, all the Rent and Service pass by
this word Reversion; because the Rent in such case, is incident to the
Reversion. But albeit he grants the Rent to another, 10 H. 7.10. Coke l.
5.21. Ployd. 235. a.
the Reversion does not pass by such grant, Litt. 152. a. 33. H. 6.33.

A communi observantia non est recedendum. A common opinion is good authority
in Law. Lit. 186. a.
Coke:

Actio personalis moritur cum persona. If a Lessee for years does waste, and
dies; Litt 53. b. Die. 114.
a Writ of waste lies not against his Executor or Administrator, for waste
done in his lifetime.

Actus Deinemini facit injuriam. As, Cokel. 1.98. a. Coke l. 148. Coke l.
8.72.63. a. l. 5.86.
If a Lessee covenant to leave the wood in as good a plight as it was at the
time of the Lease; and after, the trees are subverted by tempests, he is
discharged of the Covenant.

Actus Legis nulli facit injuriam. If Land, out of which Rentcharge is
granted, be recovered by an older Title, and thereby the Rentcharge is
avoided; yet the Grantee shall have a Writ of Annuity, for that the Rentcharge
is avoided by the course of Law. Coke Lit. 148. a. 178. a Coke l. 5.87. Die, 60.

Actus non facit reum, nisi men's sit rea. And therefore, in criminal Causes, as
Felony, the Act and Wrong of a madman shall not be imputed to him. Lit. Com.
247. b. Doct. and Stud. 148.

Actus repugnans non Coke l. 1.
potest in esse produci. Corbet's Case. Die. 153.21. E. 436.4. E. 4.29.
Ployd. 255. a. As if a Gift in Tail, upon condition, that if the Donee aliene,
that then it shall remain to another, it is repugnant; for, after alienation,
it cannot remain. An Obligation, solvendum nunquam, the Solvendum is void for
the contrariety, and the thing presently due.

Actus me invito factus, Lit. Com. 253. b. 14. Ass. pl. 20.21: E. 4.28. Coke l.
2.9. Ployd. 18. a. Coke l. 4.70. Lit. Com. 233. b.
non est meus. As, when one is compelled for fear of Imprisonment, to make a
Bond, or other Deed; such fear suffices to avoid the same.

Actori incumbit onus probandi. Bargainee and Bargainee; if the Bargainer
intend to avoid the Bargain, by reason of non-inrollment within six months; he
must make manifest proof thereof, or else it will be presumed, that it was
enrolled.

Additio probat minoritatem. When it is said any where, Lit. Com. 139. a.
that a man is seized in Fee, it shall be intended Fee-simple, and not
Fee-tail; unless there be added to it this addition, Fee-tail.

Ad proximum antecedens fiat relatio. Litt. Com. 20. b. Die. 14. b. 46. b. Coke.
l. 2.71. Cromwell's Case.
If a man let Land to A. for life, the remainder to B. in Tail, the remainder
to C in forma praedicta; this remainder is void, for the uncertainty. But if
the remainder had been to C. in eadem forma, this had been a good Estate Tail;
for, Idem semper proximo antecedenti refertur.

Ad quaestionem facti, non respondent Indiecs. Lit. Com. 155. b.
Ad quaestionem Iuris, non respondent Iuratores. The most usual trial of
matters of fact is, by twelve men. And matters in 'Law, the Judges ought to
decide.

Aestimatio praeteriti delicti post factum nunquam crescit. 11 H. 4.12
If the Jailer let the Parcussor voluntarily to go at liberty; and, after, the
party wounded, dies; yet it is no feloninus escape.

Affectio nomen imponit operi. Lit. Com. 49. b.
If it be agreed between the Disseisor and Disseised, Ployd. 86. 141.21. H.
6.55. 1 E. 4.11. 4 E. 4.23.
that the Disseised shall release all his right to the Disseisor upon the Land;
and accordingly the Disseised enters into the Land, and delivers the Release
to the Disseisor upon the Land, This is a good Release; and the Entry of the
Disseizee being to this purpose, shall not avoid the Disseizin; for his intent
in this case did guide his Entry to a special purpose.

Affectus punitur licet non sequatur effectus. 34 H. 6.26.27. Ass. pl. 44.19.
R. 2. Breife 726.
To give money to one returned on the Jury, though he be not sworn, is
Maintenance.

Affirmativum negativum implicat. Coke l. 9.56.
As W. 2. 2.6.11. Westminster. c. 3. 4. Ployd. 206. b.
That upon account before Auditors, and Arre-ages, they have power to send
their Bodies to the next Gool of the Lord their King, in those parts. Hence it
is, that it is herd, 27: H. 6.8. That the Auditor ought to commit him to the
next Gaol, though another County.

Agentes and consentientes pari poena plectuntur. 22. Ass. pl. 82. Coke l.
5.80. a.
A. maimeth B. by the consent of C. An Appeal lies against A. and C. and
damages equally against both.

Aliquis non potest esse Judex in propria causa. Litt. Com. 141. a. Coke l.
8.118. Die. 65.12 H. 8.11
If one will prescribe, that if any Cattle were upon the Demeans of the Manor,
doing Damage; that the Lord of the Manor, for the time being, has used to
Distrein them, and the Distress to retain, till Fine made to him for the
Damages, at his will; This prescription is void: for so he should be his own
Judge:

Apices Juris non sunt Jura. Litt. Com. 283. b. 304. b.
The Law of England respects the effect and substance of the Matter, Coke l.
4.45. b.
and not every Nicety of form or Circumstance.

Ambiguum placitum interpretari debet contra proferentem. Litt. Com. 3^3. b.
The Plea of every man shall be construed strongly against him that pleads
it; for every man is presumed to make the best of his own case.

B
Benignae sunt faciendae interpretationes Chartarum, Lit. Com. 183. b. 112. b.
propter ignorantiam laicorum, Coke l. 3.25.
ut res magis valeat quam pereat. Ployd. 197. b. 213. a.
pereat. As, if Lands be given to two men, and to the Heirs of their two bodies
begotten; the Donors have a joynt-estate for term of their lives, and yet they
have several inheritances, insomuch as they cannot by any possibility, have an
heir between them engendered. The Law will, that their Estate and Inheritance be
such, as is reasonable, according to the form and effect of the words of the
Gift; and this is to the heirs which the one shall beget of his body, by any of
his wives; and so of the other.

Benignior sensus in verbis ganeralibus sen dubiis est praeferendus. Coke l. 4.
fol. 15. ^
As, if one charge another, that he has forsworn himself, it is not
Actionable, because it shall be intended, to be forsworn in usual
communication. Coke l. 4.15.

C.
Causa and origo est mate. Coke l. 1. Shelley's case. Die. 266. b.
ria negotii. If a Servant have an intent to kill his Master; and, before
execution of his intent, departs out of his service, and afterward kills
him: it is petty Treason.

Caveat emptor. If I sell another man's Horse, Litt. 102. a.
and he take him out of the Vndee's possession; yet I shall have an action of
debt for the money.

Certa debet esse intentio and narratio. Ployd. 84: a. 3. E. 4.21.
Debt, by one retained in Husbandry, against a Prioresse, for his Salary; and
declares, that he was retained with her Predecessor, and does not show by what
person; it shall abate.

Cessante causa cessat effect us. Coke l. 6.13. Bur^on's case.
If the Lord marry the Heir female within the two years, which he has to
tender her Marriage, her Husband and she shall presently Enter. Litt. 78. b.

Charta non est nisi vestimentum donationis. Ployd. 291.22. H. 6.10.
And therefore if the intent be performed, though not the words of the Deed, it
suffices:

Communis error facit jus. Doct. and Stud. 46. Ployd. 2. Manxel's case.
As, an Acquittance by the Mayor alone, where there are many presidents for it,
is good.

Consensus, non concubitus, facit Matrimonium. Coke l. 5 fol. 22. Litt. 33. a.
As, in Ambrosia Gorges's case: she married Francis Gorge, which Francis died
when Ambrosia was often years of age. It was resolved, that the Queen,
notwithstanding the said marriage, should have the Wardship of the said
Ambrosia: For, it was not a complete Marriage, because to every Marriage there
ought to be a Consent; and, Consentire non possunt, ante annos nubiles.

Conditio Beneficialis quae statum construit, Cokel. 8.90. b.
benigue, secundum verborum intentionem, Die. 45. p. 1. 7. E. 4.13.
est interpretanda; Odiosa tamen, quae statum destruit, stricte secundum
verborum proprietatem, est accipienda. A Lease to one upon condition, that the
Lessee shall not alien to A. B. and he alien to R. B. the condition is not
broken; for every Condition must be taken strictly.

Consensus tollit errorem. If a Venire facias be awarded to the Coroners, Litt.
37. a. 126. a.
where it ought to be to the Sheriff; Coke l. 5. fol. 40.
or the Visno come out of a wrong place; yet, if it be per assensum partium,
and so entered of Record, it shall stand.

Consuetudo debet esse certa. 13. E. 2. Fit a. Dum fuit infra aetatem, 3.
In Trespass for Trees carried away, the Defendant pleaded a Custom, that
that Tenant of the Manor, that first came to the place where, etc. shall have
the Windfalls there: Void, for the uncertainty.

Constructio Iuris nemini facit injuriam. Litt. 18.3. a. b.
It is a Rule, that whenever the words of a Deed, Coke l. 3.74.
or of the Parties without Deed* Ployd. 77. a.
shall have a double intendment, and the one stands with Law, and Right, and
the other not; that that stands with Law shall be taken.

Consuetudo semel reprobata, non potest amplius introduci. Litt. 114. b
As, if a Copyhold be Leased of the Lord of the Manor, for Life, or Years,
according to the course of the Common Law, it shall never be after demised by
custom, as a Copyhold. For, as continuance makes a custom, so
discontinuance destroys it. But a Title gained by prescription cannot be lost
by interruption of Possession, but by interruption in the Right.

Consuetudo tollit communem legem. Litt. 33. b. 158. b. Coke. l. 4.21. Ployd.
36. b. vid. Stat. de consuetud. Kanciae.
By the custom of Gavelkind, the Wife shall be endowed of the Moiety, so long
as she keeps her self sole, and without child; which she cannot wave, and take
her Thirds for her life.

Contraria allegans non est Audiendus. 21. H. 7.21.
As, in pleading Guilty to the breaking of the House, and Not-guilty to the
Walls, in Trespass, de domo fracta and muris ejusdem domi; It is not good.

Cui licet quod majus, Coke l. 9.23. a. l. 9.48. b.
non debet quod minus est non licere. Where Copyhold Lands may, by custom of
the Manor, be granted to any one in Fee-simple; there, a Grant to one, and the
heirs of his body, is within the Custom.

Cuique natural est, id quod procreavit tueri. Ployd. 304. a. 11. H. 4.23.33.
H.6.55.12. H. 4.16.
And therefore is given to the Father, the education and custody of his Son;
and, if any take him from him, he shall have a Writ, Quare filium and haeredem
suum rapuit.

Cuilibet, in art sua perito, esi credendum. Lit. 125. a. Coke l. 4.29. a. l.
7.19. a.
In Sentence given in Causes in the Spiritual Court, the Judges of the Common
Law, though it be against the Reason of the Law, shall give faith and credence
to their Proceedings.

Cujus est dare, ejus est disponere. Coke l. 2* fol. 70.
That a Proviso make a Condition, Cromwell's case.
three thing are required; First, That the Proviso do not depend upon another
Sentence, nor participate thereof; but stand originally of it self. Secondly,
That the Proviso be the word of the Bargainor, Foeffor, Donor, etc. Thirdly,
That it be compulsory to enforce the Bargainee, Foeffee, Donee, Lessee, etc. to
do an Act, and where these concur, it is a Condition, in what place soever it
be placed. For, Cujus est dare, ejus est disponere:

D.
Debile fundamentum fallit Coke l. 6.14. a.
opus. 20. Ass. pl. 7.49. E. 3.8.3. E. 3.74.
When an Estate, to which a Warranty is annexed, is defeated; the Warranty also
is defeated.

Derivativa potestas non potest esse major primitiva. 28 Ass. pl. 4.
The Bailiff of a Disseisor shall not say, that the Plaintiff ever had any
thing in the Land; for the Master himself shall not have that plea, because he
is not Tenant of the Free-shold:

Destinata tantum pro factis non habentur. As if I square a Tree to make a Beam
of a House, and die before it be laid in the building; it shall go to the
Executors.

De fide and officio Judicis non recipitur quaestio, F. N. B. f. 21.
sed de scientia, 3 H. 6.3.8 H. 6.23.5. E. 4.3. F.N.B. 23.
sive error sit Juris, sive Facti. As, If I assign for Error, that whereas the
Verdict passed for me, the Court received it contrary, and so gave Judgment
against me; This shall not be received.

Dies Dominicus non est Juridicus. Die: 168.
A Scire Facias out of the Common-Bench, Error assigned, because the Test of it
was upon a Sunday; and adjudged Error, because no Law-day.

Divinatio non interpretatio est, Litt.
quae omnino recedit a litera. As, If I have a Fee farm Rent of 10 s. issuing
out of White-Acre; and, reciting the same Reservation, grant to J. S. a Rent of
5 s. to be received out of the aforesaid Rent, and out of all my Lands and
Tenements in Dale, with clause of Distress; it is void, because it is against
the words; and the copulation of the words show, the taking of them in an other
sense.

Dilationes sunt in lege odiosae. Ployd. 75. b.
Though Warranties are favored in Law, F.N.B. 178 W. 2. c. 25. Ployd. 98. a.
90.8.8 H. 7.8.
yet none shall vouch any one in Assize, if he be not present. And Dilatory
Pleas must be good to every common intent.

Ployd. Ryder's case.
Dispositio de interesse futuro, est inutilis. 19 H. 6.62. Die. 221. pl. 18.90.
pl. 8.
If I devise the Manor of D. by special name, of which, at that time, I am not
seized; and, after, I purchase it; if I make not some new publication of my
Will, my Devise is void.

Dominus non maritabit minorem in custodia sua, Lit. Com. 79. b.
nisi semel. If the Guardian, in Chivaky, marry the Ward within the age of 14
years; and if afterward, at the age of 14 years, he disagree to the marriage,
the Guardian shall not make tender of a second marriage.

Dormit aliquando jus, Lit. Com. 279. b.
moritur nunquam. For, of such an high estimation is Right, in the eye of the
Law, as the Law preserves it from death and destruction: When it is said, that
a Release of Right does in some cases, inure by way of extinguishment; it is to
be understood, in respect of him that makes the Release.

Doti mulieris pareatur quia proemium pudoris est. Lit. Com. 31. a.
Tenant in Dower shall not be distreined for the debt due to the King, F. N. B.
150.
by the Husband in his lifetime, in the Lands which she had in Dower.

Dos de dote peti non debet. Lit. Com. 31. a.
The Father dies, and the Wife of the Grandfather is endowed of one Acre, and
dies, The Wife of the Father shall be endowed only of the two Acres residue.

Dona clandestina semper sunt suspiciosa. Coke: l. 3.81. l. b. 72. Burrel's
case.
The Assignment of the Lease was taken to be fraudulent; because delivered in a
secret manner to a person of mean quality.

E
Ecclesia fungitur vice minoris; Litt. Com. 141. a. 103. a.
meliorem potest facere conditionem, deteriorem nequaquam. A person may have an
action of waste, and it shall be said, Ad exhaere dationem ecclesiae. So if he
make a lease for Life, he shall have a Consimili caesu, during the life of the
Lessee; but a person cannot make a discontinuance; but if he do and dye, his
successor may enter, notwithstanding the discontinuance.

Executio juris nulli facit injuriam. Litt. Com. 161. a.
Therefore a man shall not be punished for suing of Writs in the Kings Court,
Hob. 266. 1. Die. 285. Pl. 37.
be it of right or wrong.

Expressio eorum quae tacit insunt nihil operatur. Litt. Com. 299. a. 30 Ass.
pl. 8.1.7. E. 3.7. Coke l. 4.73.
As if a man seized of Land, lets the same by Deed indented for years,
rendering a certain rent, with clause of distress; this clause is vain, for the
Lessor may distrain of Common right for the rent behind.

Ex nudo pacto non oritur actio. Litt. Com. 47. b.
And therefore, in an action of debt for rent, it is a good plea for the Lessee
to say, that the Lessor had nothing in the Tenement at the time of the Lease.

Expressum facit cessare tacitum. Litt. Com. 210 a.
As if the Condition upon a mortgage be to pay to the Mortgagee or his heirs,
Coke Rep. Altham's case.
the money, etc. and before the day of payment, Bedel's case.
the Mortgagee dies, the Feoffor cannot pay the money to the Executors of the
Mortgagee.

Extra jurisdictionem jus dicenti, 22 E. 4.33 Die. 60. Pl. 26.14. H. 8.16.
non paretur impune. When the proceedings are coram non judice, an action lies
against them that execute the process.

Exteriora acta indicant interiora animi secreta. Litt. Com. 100. a.
When License is given to any one by the Law, Coke l. 8.146. l. 9.59.
and he does amiss, be shall be a trespasser from the beginning.

Ex verbo generali aliquid excipitur. Litt. Com. 47. a. Ployd. 361. a.
An exception is part of the thing granted, and in esse, (as exceptis, salvo,
praeter,) and out of a general a part may be excepted.

F
Facinus quos inquinat, aequat. 40. Ass. Pl. 25.
A servant procures another to kill his Master; this is not petty Treason in
the servant, because but felony in the other.

Festina^io Iustitiae noverca infortunii. Nov. Int. 285. b.
And therefore, Heb. 133. Litt. 304.
the Judges always in cases of Demurrers, have a time to consider of the
matter in doubt, by a Curia advisare vult. And when judgment is given, it is,
Et super hoc visis praemissis, and per Justiciarios hic before intellectis,
(and then, Ideo consideratum est.) As in the judgment between the King and the
Prior of Worcester, concerning an Appropriation. Et examinatis, and
intellectis, recordo et processu coram toto Concilio, etc.

Finis rei attendendus. Coke l. 5. 87.
The end and fruit of a Suit, is satisfaction: 14 H. 7.8.33. H. 6.47.
but execution of the body is no satisfaction, but a gage for the debt. And
therefore, after his death he shall resort to another execution.

Filiatio non potest probari. Litt. Com. 126. a.
A man leaves his wise enseint with a child: issue shall not be taken that she
was not enseint by her Husband on the day of his death; for, Filiatio non
potest probari.

Firmior est operatio legis quam dispositio hominis. Litt. Com. 224. a.
A Lease upon condition, Coke l. 10.67. b.
that if the Lessee make any waste, 37 H. 6.16.
a re-entry; if a stranger does waste, Die. 281. Doct. and stud. l. 2. c. 4.
he may re-enter: Yet if the Tenant had been bound in an obligation that he
shall do no waste, he shall not forfeit his Bond by the waste of a stranger.

Frustra sit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. Coke l. 6.167. a.
Ployd. 191. b. 9 H. 7.24.
If the King by his Patent, reciting the estate tail, grant the reversion, and
further grant the Lands in possession, those several Grants in one Patent are
as strong in Law, as if the King by one Patent had recited the estate tail, and
granted the reversion, and by another patent the Lands in possession.

Furiosus furore suo punitur. Litt. Com 247. b. Ployd. 19. a. Litt. 124. b.
And therefore if a Mad man commit Felony, he shall not dye for it: for though
he has broken the words of the Law, yet he has not broken the Law.

G
Generale nil certum implicat. Coke l. 2. fol. 33. Doddington. lib. 8.98. a.
Baspoles case.
If a man be bound to be Non suited in all actions that he has against another
in the common Bench, he may say that he has no action therein: otherwise, if
the condition be particular, viz. that he shall be nonsuited in a Formedon. So
in arbitrament when the subm^ssion is general, an award of one cause, though
there were more between them, is good.

Generalibus semper specialia insunt. Ployd. 467. b. 68. a.
As the Stat. of Gloucester gives an action of wast against him which holds
for years, which is in the plural number, yet it may be taken for him that
holds for a year, or half a year.

Generalis clausula ad expressa non refertur. Coke l. 4. fol. 80. Noke's Case.
An Assignee of a lease, shall have a Writ of Covenant upon the words, Demise
and Grant: yet if there be an express Covenant that the Lessee shall enjoy it
without eviction of the lessor, or any claiming under him, this express
covenant qualifieth the generality of the covenant in Law, and restrains it
by mutual consent of both parties, that it shall not extend to the Assignee.

Generalis clausula non porrig itur ad ea, Coke l. 4.131. Die. 56.6.
quae antea sunt spicialiter comprehensa. When a deed at first contains special
words, and then concludes in words general, both shall stand: As Lands given
to one and the heirs of his body, habendum to him and his heirs, he has an
estate tail, and a fee simple expectant.

Generalia sunt praeponenda sin gularibus. F^^z Not. B ev. 2. a.
As in a Writ or Plaint, the general shall be put in demand before the special,
as Mess^age before lands, Lands before Meadow, Mendow before Pasture, Pasture
before Wood, Wood before Jancary, etc.

H.
Haeres est pars antecessoris. Lit. Com. 22. b. Coke l. 7.12.10 H. 7.8. Die.
868. Kep. 151.
And therefore if Lands be given to a man and his heirs, all his heirs are so
totally in him as he may give the Lands to whom he will.

Haeres legitimus, Coke l. 7.44. a. Litt. 7.6.
est quem nuptiae demonstrant. One who is engendered in a vowtry during the
coverture, is a Mulier by the temporal and common Law.

Haeres non tenetur ad debita antecessoris reddenda, Britton fol. 65. b. Litt.
Com. 209. a. 383. b.
nisi per antecessorem ad hoc fuerit obligatus; praeterquam debita regis
tantum. If the heir be not named in the obligation, he shall not be bound by
the deed of his Ancestor, except to the King.

Hermaphrodita tam masculo quam faeminae, Litt. Com. 8. a. g. b.
comparatur secundum praevalescentiam sexus incalescentis. An Hermaphrodite
shall be heir either as male or female, according to that kind of the sex which
does prevail; and accordingly it ought to be baptized.

I
Id certum est, Litt. Com. 45. b. 43. b. 96. a. Ployd. 273. b. Die. 91. b. 44. a.
quod certum reddi potest. Albeit, there appear no certainty of years in a
lease, yet if by reference to a certainty it may be made certain, it suffices.
As a lease to A. 11 H. 11. 7.17.
for so many years as B. shall name: when B. has named the years, it is a good
lease for so many.

Idem semper proximo antecedenti refertur. Litt. Com. 20. b.
As if a man let Lands to A. for life, the remainder to B. in tail, the
remainder to C. in forma praedicta, this remainder is void for the incertainty:
But if it had been the remainder to C. in eadem forma, this had been a good
estatetail.

Ignorantia juris non excusat. Doct. and St. 2. c. 46. Coke l. 1. fol. 177.
Mildmay's Case.
If a statute penal be made, and it is enacted that the statute shall be
proclaimed by such a day in every Shire, and it is not proclaimed before the
day: yet if any offend against this statute, he shall not be excused for the
not proclaiming of it; for he is bound to take notice of the Law at his peril.

Ignorantia facti excusat. Coke l. 2. fol. 3. b. Mauser. Doct. and Stud. l. 2.
c. 47. 31 E. 3.3.
As if an illiterate man be bound to seal a Deed, he is not tied to do it, if
there be not some present to read it, if required; or, if it be read amiss, he
may plead non est factum.

Ignoratis terminis, Coke Lit. 177. a. 2. a. 68. a.
ignoratur and ars. Every art has its vocabula artis, which being not
conceived, that art cannot be comprehended. Therefore the significations of
words in all arts and sciences are necessary, which Master Littleton and Coke
upon him ordinarily observe.

Impotentia excusat legem. Coke Litt. 29. a. 258. b. 263. b. Coke Rep. Laughter
case. Coke l. 98.
A man seized of an advowson, or rent in fee, has issue a daughter who is
married, and has issue, and dies seized; the wife before the rent became due,
or the Church became void, dies; she had but a seizin in Law, and yet he shall
be tenant by the courtesy, because he could by no industry attain to any other
seizin.

Idem non potest esse agens and patiens. 14 H. 8.31. 13 H. 8 32. 8 H. 6.29. 9
L. 4.32. Dye. 188.
And therefore a man cannot present himself to a Benefice. No man can summon
himself. And therefore if a Sheriff suffer a common recovery, it is error,
because he cannot summon himself.

Impersonalitas non concludit nec ligat. Coke Lit. 352. b.
And therefore every Estoppell ought to be a precise affirmation.

Imperitia maxima est maechanicorum poena. 7 E. 3.65. b. Coke l. 11.57. a.
Therefore if he that takes upon him to work be unskilful and ignorant, it is
sufficient punishment for him: for if any take upon him to work and does it
amiss, an action of the case lies against him:

Inclusio unius est exclusio alterius. Lit. Com. 210. a Coke l. 11.50.
A morgage with the money to be paid to the Morgagee and his heirs, Ployden.
106.
it shall not be paid to his Executors.

Infinitum in jure repro batur. Coke l. 6.45. l. 7.456. l. 8.16. b. 3 H.
4.17.11. H. 4.9.9 E. 4.50, 51.
As if a man have a debt by a simple contract, and takes an obligation for the
same debt, or any part of it, the contract is determined: So of a Judgment
upon an obligation.

In fictione legis semper est aequitas. Litt. Com: 150. a. Coke l. 11.46.
Liford's case.
As if one seized in Fee, take Wife, and make a Feoffment in Fee, the Feoffee
grants a Rentcharge of 10 l. to the Feoffer and his Wife, and the heirs of the
Husband; the Husband dies, the Wife recovereth the moity for her Dower by the
Custom; the Rent shall be apportioned, and she may distrain for five pound,
which is the moity: for albeit the Dower by fiction of Law be above the Rent,
yet when she recovereth Dower, she shall not have the entire Rent but of the
residue: for fiction of Law shall never work a wrong to a third person.

In aequali jure, melior est conditio possidentis. 9 H. 5.15. Coke l. 4.90. a.
l. 2.68. Perk. fol. 6.
If a man purchase several Lands at one time, which are holden of several
Lords by Knights service, and dies, the Lord who first seizes the Ward shall
have him.

Injuria illata in corpus non potest remitti. I itt. Com. 1 27. a. 1 61. b.
Vita and membra sunt in manu regis. 19 Ed. 1. rotul. 36: And therefore if a
Lord Mayheme his villain, the King shall punish him for mayming his Subjects,
by Fine, Ransom, and imprisonment.

In ambiguis casibus semper praesumitur pro rege. 22. Ass. pl. 19. Stamf. fol
10.
And the reason that Treasure Trove belongs to the King, is, Quia dominus rei
non apparet; and ideo cujus sit incertum est, and therefore presumed it is the
Kings.

In disjuctivis sufficit alterum esse verum. Coke l. 10.59. a.
Bishop of Sarum's case: Whereas the Avowant did avow that the Office
supravisoris omnium maneriorum suorum, to such Person or Persons as it pleased
the Bishop, and the Defendant pleaded in the negative, that the Office had not
been but for the life of one; that exception was not allowed, because he did
not say, that the said Office had been granted to diverse, but only to such
person or persons; and in disjunctives, it is sufficient that one of them be
true.

In jure, non remota sed proxima causa spectatur. 2 H. 4.3. 26 H. 8.2.
If a person make a Lease and be deprived, or resigneth, the Successors shall
avoid the Lease, for the Law regards not the cause of Deprivation or
Resignation, which is the Act of the party, but the act of the Ordinary in the
admission of the new Incumbent.

In maleficiis plerumque spectatur exitus, 1 H. 3.144. Coke. l. 2.84.
non voluntas. If I hurt another only with an intention to beat him, and he
dies, it is Felony. So the ancient Law is altered, wherein it was a Rule of
Law, In maleficiis spectatur voluntas, and non exitus, as Bracton has it, vid.
1. E. 3.

In omnibus fere, minori aetati succurritur. In a cessavit against an infant,
who has the Tenancy by descent, he shall have his age, though it be upon his
own Cesser, because he cannot tell what arrearages to tender before the
Judgment.

Impossible est unum corpus in duobus locis esse simul. Pop. Rep. 58.
As if a man make a lease of two Barns, rendering Rent, and for default of
payment a re-entry. If the Tenant be at one of the Barns to pay the Rent, and
the Lessor at the other to demand the Rent, and there is no body there to pay
it, yet the Lessor cannot enter for the condition broken; because there was no
default of the Tenant, he being at one Barn; for it is not possible for him to
be in two places together.

In praesentia majoris, Ployd. 498. a.
cessat potentia minoris. Appropriations made by the Pope, Patron, and King,
were good before Stat. 25. H. 8. without the Bishop; because in the power of
the greater, the lesser cease, the Pope being supreme Ordinary.

In quo quis deliquit, Coke Litt. 233. b. Groke Rep. fol. 183. Litt. 233. b.
in eo de jure puniendus est. If the Keeper of the Park pull down the Lodge or
any House within the Park, for putting of Hay into it, for feeding of the Deer,
or such like; it is a Forfeiture, and the reason why the Office is forfeited,
is, that he may be punished in that wherein he offended.

In omnibus obligationibus quibns dies non ponitur, 20 E. 4.8. 21 E. 4.8.
praesenti die debetur. Et nulla temporis d signatio praesens denotat. When one
is bound in Twenty Pounds, to pay Ten Pound, and no day of payment is limited,
the lesser sum is due presently to be rendered.

Judicis est judicare secundum allegata and probata. Die. fol. 12. pl. 50.
Ployd. 83.6, 7. H. 4.31.
In a Formedon, if the demandant count upon a Foeffment in Fee; and not in
Tail, if the Tenant demurre upon it, the Court cannot maintain the Declaration
to be true, because the Judge is to judge according to what is alleged.

Judicium pro veritate accipitur. And therefore, common recoveries suffered by
the Tenant in Fee of the Lands of his Lessee for Life, could not be avoided or
satisfied till the Stat. 14. Eliz. c. 8. And in Attaint, the first Judgment is
so favored, that the Plaintiff shall have no other evidence but what he had
at the first Trial; but the Juty, as many as they will, to confirm the first
Verdict.

Judicium a non suo judice datum, Coke l. 10.76. b.
nullius est momenti. As if the Sheriff, who is prohibited by the Law to hold
his Turn within a Month after Michaelmas, holds his Turn after the Month,
and take an Indictment of Robbery at that Turn, and the Indictment is removed
by Certiorari into the Kings Bench; by advice of all the Justices, the party
was discharged, because not within the time limited.

Junior non potest dotem promereri, Coke Litt. 33. a.
nec obstavit mulieri, minor atas viri. If the Woman be not of the age of nine
years, she shall not have Dower: but if she be of that age, it matters not what
age the husband be of, though but four or five.

Jura naturalia sunt immutabilia. Coke l. 7.15. b. Bracton, l. 9. c. 23.33 H.
6.55.
As if a man have a Ward by reason of a Seigniory, and is outlawed, he
forfeiteth his Wardship to the King: but if he have the Wardship of his Son or
Daughter which is heir apparent, and is outlawed, he does not forfeit this
Wardship; for Nature has annexed it to the person of the Father.

Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt ut jure regantur. Lit. Com. 10. a. 271. a. Coke l.
5.100.
If partition be made beween partners of Land in Fee simple, and for owelty of
partition, one grants a Rent to the other generally, the grantee shall have a
Fee simple without the word [heirs] because the grantor has a Fee simple, in
consideration whereof he grants the Rent.

Jura publica anteferenda privatis; and, Litt. Com. 130. a.
jura publica ex privatis promiscue decidi non debent And therefore in
protection either for being in the Kings service, Mirror. c. 3. Sect. Britton.
281.
as the Kings Soldier, or of his Council as the Kings Ambassador, pro
negotiis regni, both these things for the public good of the realm private
men's actions, and suit must be suspended for a convenient time.

Jus accrescendi praefertur oneribus. Litt. com. 185. a. 453.3.13.
As if one joynt-tenant grant a common pasture, or of Turbary, Estovers, or
Corody etc. out of his part; or a way over the Land; this shall not bind the
survivour.

Jas accrescendi praefertur ultimae voluntati If Litt. Com. 185. b.
two joyn-tenants be of Land in fee simple, and one of them devises that which
to him belongs by his testament, and dies, this devise is void, because the
Survivour claims by the first Feoffor.

Jus descendit and non terra. Litt. com. 345. a. b.
As when an estate is turned to a right by disseizin, discontinuance, etc. but
in case of a title, the Land descends.

Justum non est aliquem ante matrimonium natum, Coke. l. 8.101.14 E. 2.
bastard. 26.
mortuum, facere bastardum qui toto tempore suo pro legitimo habebatur. Doc.
and Stud.
If bastard Eigne after the fathers death enter into the land and occupy it
during his life without interruption of the mulier puisne, and dye seized, the
mulier is barred for ever.

L.
Lex est summa ratio. Litt. Com. 97. b.
The common Law is nothing else but Reason; which is to be understood of an
artificial perfection of reason gotten by long study, observation, and
experience, and not of every man's natural reason, for nemo nascitur artifex.
This legal reason is ratio summa. And therefore if all the reason that is
dispersed into so many several heads were united into one, yet could he not
make such a law as the Law of England is; because, by succession of many ages,
it has been refined by an infinite number of grave and learned men.

Licet Tenenti vetus opus reficere, 44 E. 3.21 44.11. H. 4.32.
non novum facere. A Tenant may cut down Trees for the amend meant of houses, or
reparation of them. But if the necessity of a new house comes in Question, as
to build a Stable; or, if no house be built upon the Land at the time of the
lease, the Lessee may not cut down Trees; to make a house.

Loquendum ut vulgus, Coke l. 4.46. a. Ployd. 169. Coke l. 4.64. b. l. 7.11.
Words shall be taken according to the vulgar and ordinary construction as
though a person attainted be a person convict and more. And therefore it is the
office of Judges to take and expound the words, which the common people use to
express their intent by, according to their intent, and not according to the
true definition.

Lex non praecipit inutilia. Litt. Com. 126.127.79, a. 197. a.
A villain shall not by the Law have any appeal against his Lord, for in appeal
of Mayhem a man shall recover but his damages; and if the Villain in that case
recover damages against his Lord, and from the villain, and so the recovery
void.

Lex semper intend't quod convenit rationi. Litt. com. 78. b. 182. a.
The Guardian in Chivalry shall have the custody of the heir, and his land
until become to his full age of one and twenty years: because, by intendment
of Law the heir is not able to do Knights service before that age, which is
grounded upon apparent reason.

Lex spectat natura ordinem. Litt. com. 92 a 97. Ployd. 540.
If tenant in socage hold of the Lord by Fealty, and a rose, the Lord shall
have for his relief a Rose, etc. or other flowers: the tenant dies in winter,
the Lord cannot distrain for his relief, until the time that roses by course
of the year may have their growth.

Lex non cogit ad impossibilia. Litt. Com. 231. b.
If a deed remain in one Court, it may be pleaded in another Court without
sueing forth.

Lex libertati dat favorem. Litt. Com. 124. b. 139. a.
If a villain sue an action of trespass or any other action against his Lord,
in one County; and the Lord says, that he shall not be answered: because, he
is his villain regardant to his Manor in another County; and the Plantiff
says, that he is free, and of a free estate, and not a villain, this shall be
tried in the County where the Plantiff has conceived his action; and not in
the County where the Manor is, and this is in favor of Liberty.

Lex citius tolerare vult privatum damnum, Litt. Com. 152. b.
quam publicum malum. If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant; and the Tenant
holds of the Mesne by service of five shillings; and the Mesne holds over
by service of twelve pence: If the Lord Paramont purchase the Tenancie, in see,
then the service of the mesnalty is extinct, because when the Lord Paramont
has the Tenancy, he holds of his Lord next Paramont to him; and if he should
hold this of him which was Mesne, then he should hold the same tenancy
immediately of diverse Lords, by diverse services, which should be inconvenient;
and the Law will sooner suffer a mischief, then an inconvenience, and therefore
the Signiory of the mesualty is extinct.

Liberata pecunia non liberat offerentem. Litt. com. 207. a.
If an obligation of one hundred pounds be made with condition for the payment
of fifty pounds at a day, the Obligor tenders the money, and the obligee
refuses the same: yet in action of debt upon the Obligation, if the Defendant
plead the tender and refusal, he must also plead that he is yet ready to pay
the money, tender the same in Court.

Line a recta semper praefertur transversali. Litt. com. 10. b.
For descents, it is a Maxim in Law, Lineal descent which is conveyed downward
in a right line, (as from the Grandfather to the Father, from the Father to the
Son,) shall inherit before the heir by collateral descent, which is derived
from the side of the lineall as Grandfathers brother, etc.

M.
Mala Grammatica non vitiat chartam. Litt. 146. b. Coke. l. 9. 48.4 H. 6.16
As Nec aliquid in eo specificatum non aliter se extendat, etc. Here is a
double negative, Nec and non, which in Grammatical construction amounts to an
affirmative; for Negatio destruit negationem and ambo faciunt affirmativum; yet
the Law that principally respects substance, does judge the proviso to be a
negative, according to the intent of the parties, and not according to the
Grammatical construction, to the end the proviso may take effect.

Maritus and uxor animae duae sunt, Litt. Com. 6. b. 41. a. 112. a.
in una carne. Therefore a Wife cannot be produced either against or for her
husband; for it might be a cause of implacable discord, and dissension, betwixt
the Husband and Wife, and a mean of great inconvenience.

Malus usus abolendus. Litt. Com. 141. a.
If a man will presume that if any Cattle were upon the demeans of the Manor
there doing damage, that the Lord of the Manor for the time being has used to
distrain them, and the distress to retain till fine were made to him for the
damages at his will; this prescription is void, because it is against reason.
And the rule is, In consuetudinibus non diuturnitas temporis, sed soliditas
rationis est consideranda.

Maxim paeci contraria sunt vis and injuria. Litt. Com. 161. b.
And therefore Britton says well, speaking in the person of the King. Nous
volous quae touts gents pluis useant judgment quae force. And therefore is it,
Ib. 254. a.
that in Rent-service, Charge and Seck; Forestallment, (which is an incountring
or menacing the Lord in the way, that he dare not come on the Land to
distraine, or demand the rent,) is a disseizin. And in such case claim of the
Land shall avoid a descent.

Meliorem conditionem facere potest minor, Ib. 337. b.
deteriorom nequaquem. If the infant make a feoffment; he may enter either
within age, or at full age: likewise after his death his heir may enter:

Minor jurare non potest. Litt. Com. 172. b. Bracton. 5. l. fol. 340. b. 46 E.
3.10.9.3.424.
And therefore he cannot be of an Inquest. An Infant cannot make his Law of Non
summons; therefore the default shall not prejudice him. An Infant cannot upon
his oath, make his Law in action of debt. 26. E. 3.63. Die. 7.104. 11 H. 6.40.
1. H. 7.15.

Modus and Conventio vinciunt legem. Litt. com. 41. b. (...) 166. a. Bracton.
l. 4. fol. 222. 21 H. 6.46: 10 B. 4.13.
To every Tenant for life, the Law, as incident to his Estate, without
provision of the party, gives him three kinds of Estovers; that is, Housebote,
which is twofold, viz. Estoverium aedificandi, and ardendi. Ploughbote, that
is, Estoverium arandi. And lastly, Haybote, which is, Estoverium claudendi. And
these Estovers must be reasonable. And these the Lessee may take upon the Land
demised, without any assignment; unless he be restrained by special Govenant:
for an Agreement does alter the Law.

Mulieres ad probationem status hominis, Lit. Com. 6. b. Fleta. l. 2. c. 44.23.
E. 1. Villain 36, 37. 29 E. 1. Ib. 32. Lit. Com. 142. a.
admitti non debent. And therefore are women, by Law, wholly excluded, to prove
a man to be a villain.

Multa transeunt cum universalitate, quae per se non transeunt. If a man has a
Rent-seck of the part of his mother, and the Tenant of the Land grant a
Distress to him and his Heirs, and the Grantee dies; the Distress shall go
with the Rent to the heir of the part of the mother, as incident and
appurtenant to the Rent; for now is the Rent-seck become a Rentcharge.

N
Negationi nihil implicat. 11 H. 7.23. 21 H. 6.41. 10. E. 3.10.
If a Tenant wage his Law of non sum; this does not imply that he was Tenant.

Nemo debet bis puniri pro uno delicto. Coke l. 4. fol. 43. Hudson's case.
In Appeal of Mayhem, the Defendant pleaded that before, etc. and the Plaintiff
recovered in Trespass, for the same Ba ery and Wounding, 200 l. and
satissaction acknowledged; and the Bar was adjudged good.

Litt. Com. 309. b. Coke. l. 5. fol. III. Mallarids case. Peck. 15. Ployd. 432.
b.
Nemo potest plus juris in alium transserre quam ipse habet. If the Conusee of
a Fine, before any Attournment by Deed Indented and Enrolled, bargaineth and
sells the Signiory to another; the Bargainee shall not distrain, because the
Bargainor could not distrain.

Neminem oportet esse sapientiorem legibus. Litt. Com. 97. b.
The Law is the perfection of Reason. And if all the Reason that is dispersed
into so many several Heads, were united into one, yet could he not make such
a Law as the Law of England is; because by so many succession of Ages, it has
been refined by an infinite number of grave and learned men; so that it is
ratio summa.

Litt. Com. 162. a. 49 E. 3.14.49. Ass. 5.29. Ass. 49.
Neme tenetur exponere se infortuniis and periculis: And therefore
forestalment, with a menace of life and members, is a ^isseizin of
rent-service, ^arge, and seck.

Liet: com. 145. b.
Nemo punitur pro alie^^ delicto. A man cannot claim propriety by his Bailiff
or Sarjeant, in Replevin; and the reason is, for that if the claim fall out to
be false, he shall be fined for his contempt; which the Lord cannot be,
[unlesse he make claim himself; for he shall not be punished for his Bailiff's
offense.

Ployd. 32. b. 39 H. 6.22.
Nem^ tenetup prodere seipsum. As if a man grant to one an Annuity, pro
consilie impendende, the Grantee shall have a Writ of Annuity, without showing,
that he has given him counsel; for the showing of it is not for his benefit;
and denial of counsel goes in defeizance of the Annuity: which ought to be
shown by the Defendant, because for his benefit.

Nihil quod est inconueniens vel contra rationem, Lit. Com. 97. b.
est licitum. Tenant in Frank marriage, shall do fealty to his Lord, before the
fourth degree, be past; for it should be inconvenient, and against reason, that
a man shall be Tenant of an estate of inheritance to another, and the Lord
should not have any manner of service; for, if he does not fealty, he shall
not do any manner of services to his Lord:

Litt. Com. 188. a Ployd. 419. Bracebridge's case
Nihil de re accrescit ei, qui nihil in re quando jus accresceret habet. If two
joint Tenants be of a Rent, and one of them disseize the Tenant of the Land;
this is a severance of the Jointure for a time, for the moity of the Rent is
suspended by unity of possession, and therefore cannot stand in Jointure with
the other moiety in possession. And here, if one of them die, there shall be no
survi, vour. For there shall never be any survivour, unless the thing be in
jointure at the instant of the death of him that first dies.

Non refert an quis assensum praebeat verbis au rebus and factis. 44 E. 3.
fines. 37.37 H. 6.17. 7. E. 3.50.
If the Baron accept the grant of a Reversion, that amounts to an Attornment.
44. E. 3.37. He which has interesse termini, cannot, by express words,
surrender it, but the acceptance of a new Lease shall drown it.

Non valet impedimentum quod de jure non sortitur effectum; Coke l. 4.31.
Frenches ease. Litt. 361. h.
and, Quod contralegem sit, pro infecto habotur. If Copyhold Lands be
forfeited, or escheat, and the Lord Lease them for years or life, or any other
estate by Deed, or without Deed; this Land can never again be granted by Copy,
for the Custom is destroyed. For, during these Estates, the Land was not
demisable by Copy. But if the interruption be tortious, as by Disseizin and
Descent, false Verdict, or erroneous Judgment; there it may be granted again
by Copy.

Non afficit conatus, nisi Coke l. 6.4 Mildmay's case.
sequatur effectus. A gift in tail upon condition, that his Estate shall cease,
if he go about to alien, etc. This condition is void; for endeavor of a breach
is not a breach.

Non est baeres viventis. Litt. Com. 22. b. 217. a.
If a man, by Deed, make a Lease for years, the remainder to the right heirs of
J. S. and the Lessor make livery to the Lessee, secundum formam Chartae; this
Livery is void, because during the life of J. S. his right heir cannot take;
and in that case the Freehold shall not remain in the Lessor, and expect the
death of J. S. during the term. For, albeit J. S. dye during the term, yet the
remainder is void, because a Livery of seizin cannot expect.

Non valet pactum de re meanon alienanda. Litt. Com. 223. a.
As a Feofment upon condition, that the Feoffee shall not alien, the condition
is void.

Nullum iniquum in jure praesumendum. Coke l. 4. fol. 70. Hynde's case.
Records are so high and sacred, that they import in themselves inviolable
verity, which if any gainsay, they shall be tried only by themselves, and not
by the Country. And if averment against a Record should be permitted, then the
effect and validity of the Record should be tried by the Country, which is
against the Rule of Law, Nullum iniquum est in jure praesumendum.

Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. Litt. Com. 118. a. 90. b. 119. a. Ployd. 156.159.
9 H. 6.21.12 H. 7.12
For, if the villain of the King purchase any lands, and alien, before the King
(upon and office found for him) does enter; yet the King, after Office found,
shall have the Land.

Nullum semile est idem. Litt. Com. 43. b.
Tenant by Statute Merchant, Staple, or Elegit; are said to hold land, ut
liberum tenementum, until their debt be paid: Yet in truth they have not
Freehold, but a Chattle, which shall go to the Executors; and the Executors, if
ousted, shall have an Assize. But is similitudinaric; because they shall by the
Statutes, have an Assize, as a Tenant of the Freehold shall have; and in that
respect has similitude of a Freehold; but, no like is the same thing.

Nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria. Litt. Com. 148. b.
If B. make a Lease of one Acre for life to A. and A. is seized of another Acre
in Fee; and A. grants a rentcharge to B. out of both Acres, and does waste
in that Acre which he holds for life, B. recovereth in waste. The whole Rent
is not extinct, but shall be apportioned; and yet B. claims one Acre under A:
So if A. had aliened in Fee, and B. had entered for the forfeiture.

O.
Oninis privatio praesupponit habitum. A person makes the Lease for years,
reserving a Rent, and dies; the Lease is determined by his death. Also in a
real action, a Parson, Vicar, Archdeacon, Prebend, shall have did of the
Patron and Ordinary, as Tenant for life shall have. So that to many purposes, a
person has in effect but an estate for life, and to many a qualified Fee
simple. But the entire Fee and Right is not in him, and therefore he cannot
discontinue the Fee simple that he has not, nor ever had; for, Omnis privatio
praesupponit habitum.

Omnia quae movent ad mortem, sunt deodanda. Coke l. 5.190. Foxley's case.
Stamf. l. 1. c. 12. fol. 20
If a man ride in a Chariot, and the Chariot fall upon him and kill him, the
Horses, as well as the Chariot, shall be a Deodand.

Omne testamentum morte consummatum est. Coke l. 4. fol. 60. Forse and
Hemblings case. Lit. 112. b.
The making of a Will is but an inception thereof, and it does not take any
effect till the death of the Devisor.

Omne majus continet in se minus. Coke l. 5. 114. Wade's case.
If a man be bound in a Bond for a sum of money, to be paid at a certain day;
and at the day, the Obligee tender more than the sum; yet it is a good
tender, for the reason abovesaid.

Litt. Com. 43. b.
Omne majus trahit ad se minus. The King cannot be said to be a Minor; for when
the Royal Body Politic of the King does meet with the natural capacity in
one person, the whole Body shall have the quality of the Body politic, which
is the greater, and more worthy, and wherein is no minority.

Omnia quae sunt uxoris, sunt ipsius viri. Litt. Com. 112. a. b.
And therefore she is disabled to contract with any; without the consent of the
husband; neither has she power to dispose of any personal estate in her own
right.

Omnis ratihabitio retrotrahitur, Litt. Com. 180. b.
and mandato aequiparatur. As if A. disseize one to the use of B. who knows
not of it, and B. assent to it; in this case, till the agreement, A. was Tenant
to the Land; and after agreement, B. is Tenant of the Land; but both be
disseizors.

Coke l. 5. fol. 321. Playters case.
Oportet ut res ceria deducatur in judicium. Playter brought an action of
Trespass against one W. Wuare clausum suum fregit, and pisces suos cepit;
without showing the number or nature of the fishes; and it was resolved, that
the Count should have comprehended the fishes in certain, that the Defendant
might have a certain answer; and upon which, a certain Judgment might be given.

P.
Pater est quem nuprie demonstrant. Litt. Com. 123. a.
And therefore if a Villain have a Bastard by a woman, and marries her, the
Bistard is no Villain, because the Villain cannot be said to be his father, he
being a Bastard.

Pendente lite nihil innovetur. At the Common Law, Litt. Com. 344. b.
if hanging the Quare impedit against the Ordinary, for refusing of his Clerk,
and before the Church were full, the Patron brought a Quareimpedis against the
Bishop, and hanging the Suit, the Bishop admit and institute a Clerk, at the
presentation of another: In this case, if Judgment be given for the Patron
against the Bishop, the Patron shall have a Writ to the Bishop, to remove the
Incumbent, that came in, pendente lite, by usurpation. But since Westminster. 2.
among other things, it is enquired, Ex officie, if the Church be full, and of
whose presentation.

Perspicue vera non sunt probanda. The Lord Cook, Litt. Com. ^ 16. b.
in his Commentary upon Littleton, observes, that Mr. Littleton never cites
any Authority through his whole Book, but when the case is rare, or may seem
doubtful; which appears in this, that he puts no case, but has warrant
of good authority in Law. The like of Justice Fitzherbert in his Natura
Brevium, that he never cites authority, but when the case is rare or doubtful.

Plus precat author, 13 H. 7.10. Stamf. l. 1. c. 45.21 E. 4.71.
quam actor. If one be present at the death of a man, and incite another to
strike and kill him, by this he is principal, as well as he that killed him.

Litt. Com. 14.6.
Possessio fratris de foede simplici, facit sororem esse haeredem. A man seized
of lands in Fee-simple, has issue a son and a daughter by one venture, and a
son by another venture, and dies; and the eldest son enters, and dies without
issue; the daughter shall have the land, and not the youngestion. The like of
an Use.

Ib. 10. b.
Propinquior exeludit propinquum, and propinquus remotum, and remotus
remotiorem. And therefore the Fathers brother, and his posterity, shall inherit
before the grandfathers brother, and his posterity.

Proximus sum egomet mihi. And therefore in Legacies, it is reason, that the
Executors shall have preferment of satisfaction before others; and the Law
makes allowance to them before any others.

Q.
Quando lex aliquid concedit, concedere videtur and id, Litt. Com. 55. a. 153.
a. Coke Rep. Lyford's case.
sine quo res esse non potest. If Lessee at will sows the land, and the
Lessor, after it is sown, and before the corn is ripe, put him out; yet the
Lessee shall have the corn, and shall have free entry, egresse and regresse, to
cut and carry away the corn.

Quando aliquid fieri prohibetur ex directo, Litt. Com. p. 23. b.
prehibetur and per obliquum. A Feosment upon condition, that the Feoffee shall
not alien to such a one, naming his name, is good. And in this case, if the
Feoffee infeoff J. N. of intent and purpose, that he shall infeoffe J. S. some
hold this a breach of the condition.

Quando jus Domini Regis and subditi concurrunt, Litt. Com. 77. a.
jus Regis praeferri debet. If a man hold lands of the King by Knight Service,
in Capite; and other lands of other Lords, and dies, his Heir within age; the
King shall have the Wardship of all the lands, by his prerogative.

Quaelibet haereditas naturaliter ad haeredes haereditabiliter descendit; Litt.
Com. 11. a.
nunquam naturaliter ascendit, nisi a latere. If there be father, uncle, and
son; and the son purchase land in fee-simple, and die without issue, living
his father; his uncle shall have the Land, as heir to the son.

Quae in parts dividi nequeunt, 14 E. 3. Fitz. 1. Kitchen. fol. 134. a.
solida a singulis praestentur. If my Tenant that holds of me by a Harriot,
alien part of the land to another; every one of them shall pay Harriot, because
it is an entire thing.

Quaelibet concessio fortissime contra donatorem interpretauda. Litt. Com. 42.
a.
If Tenant in Fee make a lease for life, without mentioning for whose life, it
shall be taken for the life of the Lessee, and shall be taken more strongly
against the Lessor.

Qui non habet in aere, Hobart's Rep. fol. 133.
luat in corpore. And therefore the Law has provided several executions for
the executing of the Law; and he that has not to pay of his goods, etc. must
suffer in his body by imprisonment:

Qui ex damnato etitu nascuntur, Litt. Com. 3. b. 78. a. 123. a.
inter liberos non computentur. A man makes a lease to B. the remainder to the
eldest issue male of B. and the heirs males of his body: B. has issue a
bastard son; he shall not take the remainder, because in Law he is not his
issue.

Qui haeret in litera, haeret in cortice. The statute of Glouc. c. 5. which
gives the action of waste against the Lessee for life, or years (which lay not
against them at Common Law) speaks of one that holds for term of years in
the plural number; and yet though it be a penal Law, whereby treble damages,
and the place wasted shall be recovered, yet tenant for half a year being
within the same mischief, shall be within the same remedy, though out of the
letter of the Law.

Qui ad mit medium, dirimit finem. Litt. Com. 161. a. 26 Ass. 17.3 E. 4.2.
And, Qui obstruit aditum, destruit commodum: And therefore, if a man be
disturbed to enter and manute his land, this is a disseizin of the land it self.

Qui peccat ebrius, Litt. Com. 247. a.
luat sobrius. A drunkard who is voluntarius demon, has no privilege
thereby, but what hurt or ill soever he does, his drunkenness does aggravate
it.

Qui per alium facit, Litt. Com. 258. a.
per seipsum facere videtur. If the master command the servant to go to the
Land, and make claim there to avoid the descent; if the servant does all that
which is commanded, and which his Master ought to do, there it is as
sufficient, as if his Master did it himself.

Qui semel Actionem renuntiavit, Litt. Com. Coke l. 8. f. 58. Beecher's case.
amplius repetere non potest. A retraxit is a bar of all actions of like or
inferior nature.

Qui sentit commodum, Coke l. 5.99. Rook's case. c. l. 5.24. Dean and Chapter
of Windsors case. Hob. 4. f.
sentire debet and onus. The Commissioners in the Commission of Sewers, ought
to tax all which are in damage, or in danger of damage, and not only him
which has the lands next adjoining to the river: for it may be that the rage
and force of the water might be such, that the value of the land adjoining
would not serve to amend it, therefore the statute would have all in peril, 6
H. 6. c. 5.
and which take commodity by the making of the Banks to be contributary to the
amendment thereof.

Quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis non convaelescet. Tenant for life of
a carve of Land, the reversion to the father in fee, the Son and Heir apparent
of the Father indoweth his Wife of this carve by the assent of the Father, the
Tenant for life dies, the Husband dies, the reversion was a Tenement in the
father, and yet this is no good indowment, ex assensu patris because the father
at the time of the assent had but a reversion expectant upon a freehold,
(whereof he could not have endowed his own Wise) though the Tenant for life
dyed, living the Husband.

Quod prius est tempore, Litt. Com: 14. ae.
potius est jure; and, quod prius dignius. And therefore among the males, the
eldest brother and his posterity shall inherit lands in fee simple, before any
younger brother, or any descending from him.

Quod semel meum est, Litt. Com. 49. b.
amplius meum esse non potest. And therefore, if a man let land for a term of
years, the remainder over to another for life, or in tail, or in fee; in this
case it behooves the Lessor to make livery of seizin to the Lessee for years,
otherwise nothing passes to them in the remainder, although the Lessee enters
into the tenements. And if the termor in this case enter before any livery of
seizin made to him, then is the freehold, and also the reversion, in the
lessor. And if the Lessor afterward make livery to the Lessee, it is void, for
by the entry of the Lessee he is in actual possession, and livery cannot be
made to him that is in possession.

Quod semel placuit in electionibus, Litt. Com. 146. a.
amplius displicere non potest. If a man grant by his deed a rent charge to
another, and the rent is behind, the grantee may bring a writ of Annuity, or
distrain at his election, but he cannot have both together. For if he recover
by a writ of annuity, the land is discharged of the distress. And if he
distrain for the arrearages, and the Tenant sue a Replevin, and the grantee
avow the taking of the distress in the land, in a Court of Record; then is the
land charged, and the person of the Grantor discharged of the Action of Annuity.

Quoties in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, Litt. Com. 14.7. a.
ibi nulla expositio contra verba expressae fienda est. If a rent be granted
out of the Manor of D. and the Grantor grant over, that if the rent be
behind, the Grantee shall distrain for the same rent in the Manor of S. this
is but a penalty in the manor of S. For the Law needs not to make
construction, that this shall amount to the grant of a rent, for here a rent is
expressly granted to be issuing out of the Manor of D. and the parties have
expressly limited out of what land the Rent shall issue, and upon what land the
distress shall be taken, and the Law will not make an exposition against the
express words and intention of the parties.

Quod constat clare, Coke l. 9. fol. 33. Batens case.
non debet verificari. In a Quod permittat, if it appear to the Court that the
Nuisance is to the damage of the Plantiff, he need not show it specially; as if
the house of the Defendant hangs over the House of the Plaintiff's.

Refert a quo fiat perquisitum. Litt. Com. 12. a. Ployd. 47. Sir Edw. Clere's
case. Coke l. 5. f. 76. Paget's case.
None shall inherit any lands as heir, but only the blood of the first
purchasor.

Remoto impedimento, emergit actio. If tenant for life, remainder for life, the
remainder in fee, make waste in Trees, and after he in remainder for life dye,
an action of waste is maintainable by him in the remainder in fee, for the
waste done in the life of him in remainder for life, because to the
disinheritance of him in remainder in fee; and now the impediment, which was
the mean estate for life, is taken away.

Repellitur a Sacramento infamis. Litt. Com. 158, a.
If a Juror be attainted or convicted of Treason, or Felony, or of any offense
to life, or member; or in attaint for a false verdict, or for perjury, be
adjudged to the Pillory, or the like; or to be branded, or stigmatized, or to
have any other corporal punishment, whereby he becomes infamous; these and
the like are principal causes of challenge.

Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet. Litt. Com. 152. b.
And therefore if a Lessor by Covin suffer a common recovery, the Lessee may
falsify it by the Stat. of 14 E. c. 1.

S.
Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi accipiendus est; Coke l. 4. 105. Birchlye's
case.
and sermones secundum subjectam materiam: and sermo relatus ad personam
intelligi debet de condition personae. The Defendant said to B. Clerk of the
Kings Bench, (and sworn to deal duly without corruption,) You are well known to
be a corrupt man, and to deal corruptly, adjudged that the action lies, because
the words ex causa dicendi imply, that he has dealt corruptly in his
profession.

Semper praesumitur, Lit. 126. a.
pro legitimatione puerorum And therefore if the Husband be within the four
Seas, that is within the Jurisdiction of the King of England, if the Wife has
issue, no proof is admitted to prove the child a bastard.

Si mul^er nebilis nupserit ignobili, Litt. 16. b. Coke. l. 6 53. l. 4.18. b.
desinit esse nobilis. If a woman gain Nobility by Marriage, if she marry under
the degrees of Nobility, she loses it; otherwise, if Noble by descent.

Solus Deus facere potest haeredem. Litt. com. 7. b, 22. b.
And therefore during the life of the Father he cannot be heir, but heir
apparent? And therefore a Lease for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of
J. S. if Tenant for life die, living J. S. the remainder cannot rest, there
being no heirs of J. S. but only apparent.

Stabitur praesumptioni, donec probetur in contrarium. Lit. Com. 310. b. 393. b.
If a man plead the Feoffment of a Manor; he need not plead an Atturnment of
the Tenants, for that shall be presumed, till it be shown to the contrary.

T.
Testamento cum duo inter se pugnantia reperiuntur, Litt. Com. 112. b.
ultimum ratum est. In one Will where there be diverse devises of one thing,
the last devise takes place.

Traditio loqui facit chartam. A Lease dated 26. May. 25, Coke l. 5. f. 1.
Claylon's case.
Eliz. to hold from three years henceforth, it was delivered at three of the
Clock in the afternnon of the 20th of Junt after, from henceforth shall be
taken the day of the delivery inclusive, for the day of the delivery is parcel
of the term; but a die confectionis, or a die datus, the term begins the day
after the date.

V.
Vana est potentia quae nunquam venit in actum. Coke l. 2. fol. 50.
Tenant in Tail, Cholmley's case.
the remainder in Tail, the remainder bargains and sells the land, and all his
estate, to I. S. for the life of Tenant in Tail, the remainder to the Queen;
the remainder to the Queen is void, because the Grantee, for life of Tenant in
Tail, took nothing; for it is a void Grant. And a remainder, dicitur, quasi
terra remauens, which cannot be here. And the remainder must take effect when
the particular estate ends; and here it never begins. Et vana est illa
potentia, quae nunquam venit in actum.

Vbi factum nullum ibi fortia nulla, Coke l. 4. fol. 43. Syers case.
and ubi non est principalis non potest esse accessarius. If the principal be
pardoned, or has his Clergy, the Accessory cannot be arraigned, for none can
be principal before it be so adjudged by Law; viz. by Judgment upon the
Verdict or Confession, or by Outlary. And it suffices not, that in truth he be
principal, and the acceptance of pardon, or prayer of Clergy is an argument,
but no judgment in Law, that he is guilty.

Vbi eadem ratio ibi idom jus. Litt. Com. 232. a. 191. a.
If two men do a trespass to another, who releases to one of them, by his Deed,
all actions personal; and notwithstanding, sueth an action of Trespass
against the, other the Defendant may show, that the Trespass was done by him,
and by another his fellow; and that the Plantiff, by his Deed, which he shows
forth, release to his fellow all actions personal, and demand the Judgment. And
yet such Deed belongs to his fellow, and not to him. But because he may have
advantage by the Deed, if he will show the Deed to the Court, he may plead
this. By the same reason may the Feoffer, if he is come by the Deed Poll, when
he ought to have advantage by the Condition, comprised within the Deed Poll.
Lit. Com. 32. c.


Vbi nullum matrimenium, ibi nulla dos. To the having of Dower it is necessary,
that the Marriage do continue; for, if that be dissolved, the Dower cease.

Verba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu As, Coke l. 4.13.
Thou art a Thief, and have stolen a Tree, (spoken of another) it shall be
intended a Tree standing.

Verba accipienda sunt cum effectu. Cok. Rep. l. 4. f. 48. Ognel's case. Litt.
Com. 183. b. 112. b. Coke l. 3.23. Ployd, 197. b. 213. c. ^*
If Lands be given to two men, and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten;
the Donees have a joint Estate for the term of their lives, and yet they have
several inheritances, inasmuch as they cannot have an heir between them
engendered; the Law will, that their estate be such as is reasonable, according
to the form and effect of the words of the Gift, viz. the Heirs which the one
shall beget of his body by any of his wives; and, so of the other.

Verba aequivoca and in dubie posita intelliguntur digniori and potentiori
sensu, Coke l. 6. fol. 20. Gregorie's case.
secundum excellentiam. As if the speech or writing be of I. S. generally, it
shall be intended of the father, where the father and son are both of a name.
So, if of two brothers of one name it shall be intended of the eldest; for
these are more worthy. So, where the Statute of 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar.
speaks in any Court of Record, it shall be intended of the four Courts at
Westminster, because the King's Attorney it Attendant there.

Verba relata hoc maxim operantur per referentiam ut in esse videantur. Litt.
Com. 9. b.
As if the father infeoff the son, to have and to hold, to him and his heirs;
And the son infeoffeth the father as fully, as the father infeoffed him: By
this the father has a fee-simple.

Verba chartarum fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem. As, If two
joynt-Tenants grant a Rent of 10 s. the Grantee shall have a Rent of 20 s. out
of the land.

Vnumquodque dissolvitur eo ligamine quo ligatur. Litt. 5 H. 7.33. 4 H. 7.7. b.
In an Annuity, growing by prescription, rien arrear, is a good plea; for this
prescription is matter in fact: But in an Annuity by Deed, it is no good plea,
without showing an Acquittance.

Vltima voluntas Testatoris perimplenda est secundum veram intentionem. Litt.
Com. 322. a. b.
If a man let lands devisable to another for life, or for years, and devises
the Reversion, by his Testament, to another, in Fee or in Tail, and dies; and
after, the Tenant commits waste: He, to whom the Devise was made, shall have
writ of waste, although the Tenant never Atturn. And the reason is, for that
the Will of the Devisor may be performed, according to his intent. And if the
effect of this should lie upon the Attournment of the Tenant, then, perchance,
the Tenant would never Attorn; and then the Will of the Devisor should never be
performed. And for this, the Devisee may distrain, etc. or bring an action of
Waste without Attournment.

Voluntas testatoris ambulatoria est usque ad mortem. Litt. 112. a. b. Coke l.
4. f. 60. Forse and Hemling's case.
And therefore* if a man, at diverse times, make diverse Devises and Testaments,
yet the last Devise and Will made by him, shall stand, and the other are void:
for the latter Will does countermand the first.

Volenti non fit injuria. Pop. 9.
As if Lessee for twenty years accept another Lease for ten years; the first
Lease is void and gone, being the acceptance of the second, is, in Law, the
surrender of the first: and no wrong in the Lessor.

Vtile per inutile non vitiatur. Litt. com. 227. a.
If the Jury give a Verdict of the whole issue, and of more* etc. that which is
more is surplusage, and shall not stay Judgment.

Vxor non est sui-juris, sed sub potestate viri. Litt. com. 112. a.
And therefore during the Coverture, she is disabled to contract with any,
without the consent of the husband.

Rules and Principles of Law.
LAW is an Art of well ordering a civil Society.

Laws, are Native or Positive.

Native, are those Laws, which are in us of themselves, and therefore
unchangeable and perpetual.

These are twofold, like those two great Lights, Bracton. l. 9.23. 3 H. 6.55.
which God has set in the Firmament of our Heart, Nature and Reason.

Lex naturae est ratio summa, insita in hominis natura, quae jubet ea quae faci
enda sunt. prohibetque contraria. Cic. l. 1. de legibus.
The Law of Nature is Sovereign Reason, fixed in man's nature, which ministers
common Principles of good and Evil.

The Law of Reason is, that which deduceth Principles by the discourse of sound
reason.

The rules of Reason are of two sorts; some taken from Foreign Learnings, both
divine and humane; the rest proper to Law it self.

Of the first sort are the principles and sound conclusions, from foreign
Learnings.

First from Divinity the Doctrine of Religion.

To such Laws of the Church as have warrant in holy Scripture, 34. H. 6.40.
our Law gives credence.

1. The Sabbath day is no day for Law-dayes: 1 Eliz. Die. 168. F.N.B. 17. f. 12
E. 4.8.
Dies Dominicus non est juridicus. If a Scire facias out of the Common Pl as,
bears Test upon a Sunday, it is error.

Of Grammar.

2. Words in construction, must be referred to the next Antecedent, when the
matter it self does not hinder it.

An Indictment against I. S. serviens I. D: de D. im com. Mid. Butcher. 9 E. 4.
4^. 32 H. 8. Die. 46. b*
This is not good; for Serviens is no addition, and Butcher refers to the
Master, which is the next Antecedent.

From Logic.

In the Maxim of Causes and Effects.

The Cause ceasing, 5 E. 4.8. b. 7 El. D. 293. b. 13 El. 401. 13 E. 4.10. b.
the Effect does likewise cease. The King grants an Office to one at will,
and ten pound-fee for life, 14 H. 7.2.
pro officio illo. Now if the King put him from his Office, the Fee shall cease.

4. Things are construed according to that which was the cause of it. 21 E. 4.
68 b. 14 E. 3.14. b. 14 Ass. pl. 20. 3 E. 3.84.
One imprisoned, till he be content to make an obligation at an other place,
and afterward he does so, being at large; yet he shall avoid it by duress of
imprisonment.

5. Things are construed according to that which is the beginning thereof. 33
Ass. pl. 7. 10 Eliz. Die. 266. b.
If a servant (departed out of his M^ster's service) kill his Master, upon
malice that he bare him whilst he was his servant; it is petty Treason.

And therefore a derived power cannot be greater, Litt. 6. 28 Ass. pl. 4. 2 E.
4.1^
than that from which it is derived. The Attorney of one that is disseized,
cannot make claim of from the land, if the Disseizee himself durst have gone to
the land

Things are dissolved as they be contracted. 19. E. 4.1. 5 H. 7.33. b. 5 H.
7.7. b.
An Obligation, or other matter in writing, cannot be discharged by lan
Agreement by word.

Things grounded upon an ill and void beginning, cannot have a good perfection.
10 El. Die. 344*
An Infant or Feme covert, make their Will, and publish it, and after dying of
full age or sole; yet the Will is nothing worth.

He that claims paramount a thing, 2 and 3. El. Die. 187.
shall never take benefit nor hurt by it. An Executor recovereth and dies
intestate. Administration of the first Testator is committed to J. S. J. S.
shall not sue execution upon this Recovery; for he is Administrator to the
Testator Paramount the intestate.

Things are construed according to the end. 19 E. 4.3. 13. E. 3. Joynder in
aid. 10. 50. Ass. pl. 2.
Vouchee, upon a Grand cape ad valentiam, shall not lose the land, though he
cannot save his default: For the Process is only to this end, to have him to
appear.

In the Maxim of Subjects and Adjuncts.

Where the foundation fails, 3. E. 3.74. b. 49 E. 3.8.
all goes to the ground. A Church appropriated to a spiritual Corporation
becomes disappropriate, if the Corporation be dissolved.

Things incident cannot be severed. 7 E. 4.11. 12 El. 12. 381. Die. 12 El.
12.379. 19. H. 8. Br. Incidents. 34. 3. E. 3* Ass. 441.
Lord and Tenant, by fealty and homage, the Lord releaseth his fealty; this is
void: for fealty is incident to homage.

Things, by reason of another, are of the same plight. Two Copereeners make
partition, and one covenants with the other to acquit the land. 42 E. 3. 6 E 6.
Die. 72. b. F. N. B. 21. b.
Now if the Covenantee abett his part, the Alienee shall have a Writ of
Covenant.

Personal things.

Cannot be done by another. 7 H. 4.19. 21. E. 4.34.
Suit of Court cannot be done by another.

They cannot be granted over, as matters of pleasure ease, 12 H. 7.25. 19 H.
8.10. 7 H. 4.36.11.3.4.1. 12 El. 179. Br. Licenses. 25.
trust, and aeuthority. A license to hunt in my Park, to go to Church over my
ground, etc. cannot be granted over. So a warrant of Attorney made to one to
deliver seizin, he cannot grant this his authority over.

They dye with the person. When a corporal hurt or damage is done to a man, 2
H. 8.21.1.2. and P. and M. 114.
as to beat him, etc. if he or the party beaten dye, the Action is gone.

Among the disagreeable arguments.

First, from these that differ only is a certain respect and reason, not indred
and in nature.

Things do inure diversty according to the diversity of

Time. Lands given in Frank marriage reserving a rent, 26 Ass. pl. 66.
the reservation is void^ till the fourth degree past, and afterward good.

Person, viz.

Of the same person. One that has a rentcharge going out of the wive's lands,
14. H. 8.6.
releaseth it to the Husband and his. Heirs, the Husband yet shall not have it,
but it shall inure to him by way of extinguishment only, as seized in the
right of his wife.

Several persons A man makes a lease of a Manor except an acre, 1 and 2 P.
and M. 104. 11 E. 4.2.
this acre is no part of the manor as to the Lessor, but as to him that has
right to demand the Manor by an eign title, it remains parcel, and
therefore he shall make no foreprise in his writ.

Then from Relatives.

No man can do an act to himself. 3 El. Die. 188. 13 H. 8.22 Lit. 147. b.
And therefore if the Sheriff suffer a common recovery, it is error, because he
cannot summon himself.

Of Comparisons from the equals.

Things are to be construed, secundum equalitatem rationis. If two, four, 26
Ass. pl. 37. Coke 136. Sir Will. Herbert's case. Bract. l. 1. c. 23. H. 8. Fitz.
or more men being severally seized of land, join in a recognizance, all their
lands must equally be extended.

From the greater and the less.

The greater does contain the less. 3 and 4 P. and M. Die. 150. b.
By a pardon of Murder, manslaughter is pardoned.

A matter of higher nature determines a matter of lower nature. 21 H. 7.5.33
H. 8. Die. 50.
A man has liberty by prescription, and after takes a grant of those
liberties by Letters Patents from the King, this determneth the prescriptions
for a matter in writing determines a matter in fair.

The more worthy draws to it things of less worthiness. 11 H. 4.31 10 El. 321
b. 3. Eliz. 238.
An adulterer, if he takes away another man's wife, and puts her in New clothes,
the Husband may take the wife with her clothes.

And therefore.

Things accessory are of the nature of the Principal. 40 Ass. pl. 25. 7 H.
6.19. b. 26 H. 8. Die. 7. b.
A Servant procures another to kill his Master: This is not petty Treason in
the Servant, because it is but felony in the other, which is the principal.

A Man's own words are void when the Law speaks as much. 30 Ass. pl. S.
Lands given to two, and uni little diutius viventi, they make partition, and
one dies, yet the lessor shall have again the moiety of him that dies, for
uni little diu^ius viventi are but idle words, because (without them) the
joyntenant by course of Law is to have all if he do survive.

From the Rule of Method.

In things of Formality.

The Generals must go before, The Rule of the Register.
and the Specialls follow after. In a writ the general shall be put in demand,
and in plaint, before the special: as land before prede, pasture, wood, etc.
wood before Alders, Willows, etc.

The more worthy is to be set before the less worthy. The entire thing shall be
demanded before the moiety, ibid.
part, ibid.
or parts. The thing of greater dignity before that which is of less: as a
Mease before Land, a Castle before a message or manor.

Next are the precepts of Natural Philosophy. Law respects the bonds of
nature.As the Son may maintain his father, and one brother another.

The Law judges and esteems of all according to their nature; both persons
and their ages, things, actions, and the time of the doing them.

In persons. It looks to the excellency of some, and gives them singular
privileges, and preheminencies above the rest. As to the King, the Queen his
Wife, Noblemen and Peers of the Realm: Also unto them of the Church.

It tendreth the weakness and debilities of others, As, of men out of the
Realm, or in prison, femes Covert, (and therefore favors them for their
Dowers,) infants, men unlettered, Idiots, etc. If a disseizor die seized, the
disseizee being all the while within age, Covert-Baron, in prison, or out of
the Realm, it shall be no descent to toll the entry of the disseizee. And an
Idiot, or man of nonsane memory may enter, or have an action to avoid their own
Peoffments.

It favoreth strangers, not parties nor privies.

Lessee for years grants a rentcharge, 1 El. 198.
and surrenders* yet the rent shall be paid during the years.

And therefore things done in another right.

A person Outlawed, or Excommunicated, may have an Action, as Executor of
another man.

It dis-favoureth othersome.

Aliens, neither borne within the Realm, nor free Denizons, that they shall
not participate of the Privileges of natural-born subjects.

Especially Alient that are enemies.

Alien enemies shall not have so much as a personal action, which other Aliens
may.

Touching their Ages.

It holds 21 their full age, to make good any act they do: 14 their age of
discretion:

And therefore,

That a competent age to bind a man in matter of marriage; 12 to bind the
woman; 9 to deserve her Dower.

In things.

It respects every one according to worthiness: As.

Life and liberty most; the person above his Possessions; Freehold and
Inheritance more than it does Chattels; Real Chattels more then Personal.

A Villain infranchised for an hour, is free for ever. So, if infranchised upon
condition, the condition is void, and the infranchisment absolute.

A matter in right, more then a matter in Possession. 3 E. 3.88.
In Avowrie or Annuity, aid shall not be of a person, if the Plaintiff be
seized by the hands of the same person, because it is of the person's own wrong
to deny it. Otherwise, in a Cessavit, for that is in the right for the land.

Yet it favors Possession, where the right is equal. A man purchases at
one time several lands, 8 El. 296.
holden of several Lords by Knights-service, and dies: the Lord that first
can hap the Wardship of his heir, shall have it.

It favors.

Matters of Profit and Interest largely; of Pleasure, 13 H. 7.13 12 H. 7.25.11.
H. 7.12.35. H. 6.58. 4 E. 6.68. b.
Ease, Trust, and Anthority, or limitation strictly. Way granted to Church over
my Land, extends not to to any other but himself; for it is but an Easement. If
the Sheriff behead one that should be hanged, it is felon y. A Lease to A and
B, etc. for their lives. A dies, B shall have all during his life, for it is
an interest. But if a Lease be made to J. S. during the life of A. and B.
there, if one of them die, the estate is determined; for that is a limitation.

Therefore, These may be countermanded, 9 E. 4.4. b. 1 E. 5.2. 28 H. 8. Die. 22.
14 E. 4.2. Perk. 19. b.
so cannot those. A license to come to my house to speak with me. Goods bailed
over, to deliver to J. S. or to bestow in alms. A Letter of Attorney to
deliver seizin. All these may be countermanded, before they be dones. But if I
present J. S. to a Church, I cannot after vary, and present a new; for, a kind
of interest passes out of me.

It favovreth matters of Substance, more then matters of Circumstance. Pleas in
Bar, and Replications, though the Plaintiff be afterward Non-suite, make an
Estoppell, for they are express allegations, and material. As, 21 H. 7.24 b.
in Debt upon Obligacion, if the. 33 H. 6.10. b.
Defendant plead in Bar an Acquittance made at D. Or, if the Defendant plead
an Acquittance, and the Plaintiff reply, That it was made by duress of
Imprisonment at. D. Now in another action, neither the Defendant shall plead,
that the Acquittance; nor the Plaintiff, that the duress was at another place.
But a matter. in the Writ or Count, makes no Estoppel; for they are but
supposals.

20 H. 7.11.32. H. 8. Br. Darrein Pre^^ments.
Things executed and done, more then things executory and to do. A Feofment to
the use of ones Will, if this Will be declared before, or at the time of hit
Feoffment; it cannot be altered, because it is executed.

It favors possibility of things. And therefore.

1 H. 4.1.15. H. 7.10.41 E. 3.11.
Nothing to be void, that by possibility may be good. A messualtie is given in
Tail, reserving a Rent: this is good: for, the Tenancie may Escheat to the
Doriee, and then the Donor shall distrain for all his arrerager.

It favors a mutual recompense. An assumption or promise does then only
bind, when it is made upon good consideration.

In Actions.

It yieldoth favor, when for the doing of it there is necessity. Br. Executor.
172.


A man, in his own defense, for the necessity of the saving of his life; and a
Champion, in a Writ of Right, for the necessity of Trial; may kill another.

Whither refer,

Conformity, which is a kind of necessity. Rent must be demanded, though no man
be upon the land to pay it.

Of Color. If the heir indow the Ancestors wife, 41 H. 3.28 22 Ass. pl. 64.
though she were not dowable, yet she shall hold in Dower.

It priseth acts in Law higher, then those that are done by the party.

2. and 3. P. M. 134. b. 29 Ass. pl. 23. 49. E. 3.15 2 H. 7.5.
For equality of partition among Coperceners, a Rent granted shall be a
Fee-simple, without the word [heirs] and issuing out of the land, without so
expressing it in the Grant.

It reputeth, that men will always deal for their own best advantage.

And therefore,

Believes against the party, whatsoever is to his own prejudice.

For the time of doing things.

It countenanceth more,

Things done in time of peace, Litt. 97. 7 E. 3. Darren presentment. 2. F. N.
B. 31. b.
than in time of war. A Diffeizin and Descent, in time of war, shall not toll
the Entry of the Dasseized.

Things done in the day, more than in the night.

A man must not distrain in the night time for Rent behind.

Where things are fit to be straightened to a time, is esteems according to the
nature of the things.

Sometimes a whole day sufficient. Where goods are lost in War, and recovered
from the enemy by another of the Kings subjects, the owner shall have them
again, if be make fresh suit, before the Sun set, else, not.

Sometimes a whole year. The Lord loses his Villain for ever, if a Villain
fly into ancient Demeasn, and there continue a year and a day, without claim
of the Lord.

The third offense it estremeth more heinous. The third Writ, not returned by
the Steriff, is a contempt, whereupon an Attachment lies.

Political Precepts follow.

The Law savoureth.

Things for the Commonweal. 8 E. 4 18 b. 14 H. 8. 25.29. H. 8 Die. 36. b.
Fishermen may justfie their coming upon the land adjoining to the Sea, to dry
their Nets; for, Fishing is for the Commonwealth, and fustenance of all the
Realm.

Public quiet. And therefore,

Common Error goes for Law. Ploy. Manxel's case. f. 2. 2 R. 3.7.
Whether a common Recovery be a Bar unto an Estate Tail, or no, is not to be
disputed; because a great part of the Inheritance of the Realm does depend upon
it.

Of this kind are those Occonomicks.

The Husband and the Wife are one person.

And therefore,

F. N. B. 78 Abridgement. Ass. pl. Brook. Denisn. 2.
The Wife is of the same condition with her Husband; Franck, if he be free;
Denizen, if he be an Englishman, though she were a neise before, or an alien
born.

They cannot sue one anoth^r, 21 H. 7.29 b. Perk. 40.
or make any grant unto the other, or such like. If a woman marry with her
Obligor, the Debt is extirect and she shall never have an action against the co
obliger, if another were bound with him; because the suit against her husband,
by enter-marriage, was suspended; and therefore being a personal action, and
suspended against one, it is discharged against both.

Upon a joynt-purchase, during the coverture, either of them takes the whole.
Litt. 65.39 H. 6.45.21 H. 2. Judgment. 63.
If the husband alien land, etc. so given, she shall recover the whole in a Cui
in vita, alter his death, and the Warranty of one of them, or his Ancestors, is
a bar of the whole against them both.

The Husband is the woman's head.

And therefore,

All she has is her hurbands. If goods be given to a Feme Covert, 21 H. 7.29.
Litt. 148.14 El. Pl. 418. and 191 16 E 4.8.7 H. 6.1.39 H. 6.27.
and another; the Jointure is strait-way severed, and the husband and the other
are Tenants in common: and the Executors of the husband shall have all the
goods that were his wives.

Her will is become his will, and subject unto it.

If an action of Trespass be brought against Husband and Wife, and the wife
come in by Cepi corpus, and the Husband does not appear, she must be let at
large without any Mainprise, till her husband does appear; but he appearing may
answer without her, therefore a protection cast by the Husband serves for the
wise also, because she cannot answer without him.

Last, come the Moral Rules.

The Law favors right. Litt. 158.
When two are in a house, or other Tenements, and one lays claim by one Title,
the other by another Title, the Law adjudgeth him in possession that has the
right to have the tenements.

And therefore,

Suffers things against the principles of Law, F.N.B. 69 b. 4 H. 7.40.11 H.
7.10.
rather then a man to be without his remedy. The Tenant shall have a replevin
against the Lord that did wrongfully distraine, though the beasts be come back
to himsell, because he can have no action of Trespass against him.

Hateh wrong.

So that

So man shall take benefit of his own wrong. 13 H. 7.1.31. H. 6.60.27. H. 8.11.
One in execution escapes, and the Jailer gets him again, the party if he will
may have him to remain in execution for him still, for the escape is his own
wrong.

And therefore,

Of it self projudiceth no man. 12. E. 4.8.48. E. 3.27.
He that misdemeaneth authority that Law gives (as if one come into a Tavern,
and will not go out in seasonable time; or distrein for rent and kill the
distress) shall be a wrong doer ab initio.

Especially for things that cannot be imputed to his own folly. 35 H. 6.3.38 H.
8. Br.
The Lord Chancedor's Servant impleaded at the common Law, clameth privilege
of the Chancery, and before it be discussed, whether he shall have it or no,
the Lord Chancellor dies: yet his privilege is allowable still, for the act
of the Court to advise of it, shall not prejudice him.

And therefore,

Drives not a man to show that, which by intendment he knows not. 10. E.
4.15. 2 Mar. 128 4 E. 6.46.
One bound in an Obligation to serve J. S. for seven years, in omnibus mandatis
ejus licitis, shall plead that he did serve him lawfully, without showing what
service or in what Commandment; for no servant can remember all.

Truth.

And therefore It disfavoureth Fraud and Covin.

If a woman has good title of Dower, 18 H. S. 5.
and cause I. S. to disseize the Tenant of the Land, and recovereth her Dower
against I. S. yet this is no good estate of Dower in her, for she is privy to
an unlawful act, which should be the means of her estate.

Uncertainty, whereby truth is inveigled. A man grants all his Trees and Wood
upon black acre, 1 Mar. Die. 91. Manxel's case. 10. b.
that may reasonably be spared; this is a void Grant, unless it be referred to
a third person's judgment, what may be spared.

Variance.

11 E. 4.2. 4 Ass. pl. 2. 32 H. 6.3. 7 H. 6.22.
or other speciality, in name, surname, or such like in an action of debt and
annuity brought upon it, or the Count vary from the Writ; As in an action of
debt of 20 l. 8 E. 4.2.
and declare but a debt of 10 l. both shall abate.

Contrariety. In trespass de domo fracta and muris ejusdem domus fractis. 21 E.
4.36 4 E. 4.29. 21 H. 7.21 2 and 3 P. and M. 153.
The defendant cannot plead not-guilty to the breaking of the house, and
justify the breaking of the walls, for house and walls are all one; and he
cannot of the same thing both justify and plead Notguilty, for by the
justification he acknowledges himself guilty; so they are contrary.

And therefore, It will not drive a man to justify that he goes about to
defeat: ^0 H. 7.9.
He that brings an Assize of the Mastership of a Chapel against J. S: shall
not need to name J. S. the Master of the Chapel, because the Plaintisse is to
disprove his interest.

Diligence.

And therefore

It hates folly and negligence: Litt. 95. 5 E. 3.222.
A descent cast during the Coverture, where the wife is disseized, barreth her
not of her entry after her husbands death; But if a Feme-sole be disseized, and
then takes a Husband, there a descent during the Coverture takes away her
Entry; for it was her folly to take such a Husband that entered not in time.

Speeding of men's causes. And therefore,

It hates delays. He that pleads a record in delay, 3 H. 6.15. 12 H. 7.3. 8
H. 7.9. 2 H. 6.1.
as to prove the Plaintiff excommunicate, must have it ready to show; otherwise
it is, if he plead it in bar.

Unnecessary circumstances. One that is in Court ready to join with the
Defendant, 8 H. 6.1. 1 H. 6.4.
may do it without process. As the Vouchee the Plaintiffs lessor being praid in
aid of, when the defendant in a replevin avoweth upon him, or the Mesne when
the Lord Paramont avoweth upon him. But joynder in aid cannot be by Attorney
without process.

Circuit of action. Upon the grant of a ward with warranty, Manxel's case ^7. b.
the Defendant in a writ of right of ward may rebutt the Plaintiss by that
warranty, and shall not be driven to bring an action of covenant for avoiding
circuit of action.

The Law construeth things with equity and moderation.

And therefore,

Restrains a general act if there be any mischief or inconvenience in it.
Litt. 110.
Tenant for life lets to another for life without expressing whose lives, it
shall be taken for the lessors own life, for else it were a forfeiture of his
Estate.

Moderateth the strictness of the Law it self. By abridging, diminishing, and
taking away the severity of it, and mollifying the hardness of it, A moral
virtue, as Plowden calls it, and may appear by Aristotle, who treating of it
defines it, A certain correction of the Law, wherein it is any way wanting,
because of the generality of it. It is no trespass to carry away a man's wife
against his will to a lawful end. As to sue a divorce against her Husband, or
to have the peace of him before a Justice of Peace:

To the best. And therefore,

Every act to be lawful when it stands indifferent to be lawful or not. 6 11
H. 7.5.
In an action of trespass, two issues are joined triable in two Counties, One
in London, another in Middlesex only, without saying which of the issues it
should try, this shall be taken to try the issue in Middlesex only: for so the
venire facias is lawful, and not in both Counties, which is against Law. And
therefore it is a discontinuance of the Issue in London, and not a
mis-continuance.

Thus far of Rules drawn from their Sciences. There follow those that are
proper to our selves, which we call Law-constructions. And these are natural,
or fained.

Of the first sort we have two notable grounds.

Law construeth things reasonably.

And therefore, With a reasonable intent* A bargain and fale of Land, and a
reversion, by deed not enrolled, the Reversion passes not, no more then the
Land, 21 H. 7.5.
though the Deed, without Inrolment, may pass the Reversion; but it was meant
they should passtogether.

According to the effect. A Deed delivered by an Infant, 1 H. 6.4.
cannot be delivered again at his full age; for, it took some effect before,
and was but voydable. Otherwise, of a Feme Covert, or a Resease of one that
has nothing in the land; for here the first delivery was merely void.

So that he that cannot have the effect of a thing, shall not have the thing it
self. The King shall not be received upon default of Tenant for life, 4 Eliz.
241.
because the Demandant cannot have the effect of the Receipt; viz. to count
against him, which none can do against the King, but sue to him by Petition.

To the most validity. Tenant in tail, Lit. 140. b.
makes a Lease for life; this shall be intended the Lessee's life.

And therefore,

When any join in an act, it makes it his act that may do it. Lit. 2 and 7 El.
Die. 191.
The Disseizee, and the heir of the Disseizor, in by descent, make a Feoffment
by one Deed and Livery; this is the Feoffment of the Heir only, and
confirmation of the Disseizee.

When two Titles concur, the best is preferred. One is disseized, Litt.
and the disseizor lets the land to the Disseizee for term of years, or at
will: Now, if he enter, the Law shall say, he is in of his ancient and best
title.

Things to be done by him that has most skill to do them. 9 E. 4.4. 4 E. 6.15.
4 El. 230. Litt. 22.11 E. 4.36.
An Obligation upon Conditiou, that the Obligee shall bring to the Obligor's
shop (being a Tailor) three yards of Cloth, which shall be shapen, and the
Obligor to make the Obligee a Gown of it; the Obligor must shape it. So, a
Merchant agrees with the King's Collectors, that his Merchandise shall be
weighed at the Kings Beam, and the King shall have his Subsidy as it rises;
the Collector must weigh it.

Void things, good to some purpose. 10 H. 7.12 1: and 2. P. and M* 107.
A Feoffment upon Condition to be void, as if it had never been, yet the
Feoffee shall have an Action of Trespass, after the Feoffor's entry, for the
Condition broken, for a Trespass done by the Feoffor before.

One thing to inure as another. 21 H. 7.3. 15 H. 7.7. 37 H. 6.4.
The King grants to a Town, easdem libertates quas London habet; it shall be
intended the like, The Lessor infeoffeth his Lessee for life, by Dedi, and
Concessi; this shall inure as a confimation.

In one thing, all things pursuant to be included. 2 R. 2. Bar. 309.
Upon a Grant of Trees, the Grantee may come upon the Land to cut them down,
and with his carriage carry them through the Land. 14 H. 8.1. 10 E. 3.17.
And the Vendee of all ones fishes in his pond, may justify the coming upon
the banks to fish, but not the digging of a trench to let out the water, to
take the fish; for he might take them by Nets, and other devices. But if there
were no other means to take them, he might dig a trench.

Strongest against him that does them. 2 and 3. P. and M. 140. b. 161. b.
Two Tenants in common grant a Rent of 20 s. the Grantee shall have forty
shillings. But if they reserve twenty shillings upon a Lease, they shall have
only one twenty shillings.

And therefore,

A man shall not qualify his own act. As, 21 H. 7.23. b.
if the Obligee releaseth his debt till Michaelmas, the debt is gone for ever.
So, a reversion of three acres of land is granted, 18 E. 3.53 17 Eliz. Die. 339.
the tenant atturns for one; it is a good atturnment for all.

The construction which otherwise Law would make, is altered by the parties.

Special agreement. Lessee for years is excused for waste, 40 E. 3.5. Peck.
55.56.
if the houses be blown down by sudden storm or tempests. But in that case, if
he covenant to keep reparations, an action of covenant lies against him.

Special words. As, a Lease reserving a Rent, 27 H. 8.19 30 H. 8. Die. 42. b.
the heir of the Lessor, after his death, shall have the Rent: otherwise, if
the Lease be reserving to the Lessor.

Surplusage of words: An information upon a Statute, made such a day, 6 E.
6.84. 9 E. 4.28. h.
and the day is mistaken, is naught, though he needed not to have recited the
day. 9 El. Die. 255. b.


A fained construction, which we call a fiction in Law, is, when in a
similitudinary sort the Law construeth a thing otherwise, than it is in truth;
and is of the person, thing, action, and the circumstances thereof, time, and
place.

Of the person.

Things done by another, are as if they were done by one's self. 27. H. 8.24.
A promise to one's wife, in consideration of a thing to be performed by the
husband; if the husband, upon his coming home, agree and perform the
consideration, he may plead this promise as made to himself. So, if my servant
sell my goods, and I agree; I shall have an action of debt, supposing be bought
of me.

Of the thing, we have these two Rules.

A thing that comes in lieu of another, 18 E. 3. rec. in val. 26.48 E. 3 11.6
H. 4.1.
to be as if it were the same. One shall recover in value against the heir,
(upon the Ancestors Warranty) lands, which the heir took in exchange for lands
descended.

A thing to be all one with that, whereunto it does amount. The Maxim of a
Bastard eigne, is, that the mulier puisne must make an entry upon him, or else
he gains the right; yet, a continual claim, made by the mulier puisue, 14 H.
4.9. 14 H. 8.13 5 H. 7.1.
destroys his right, for it amounts to an Entry. So, a Lease for years, and
a Release, amount to a Feoffment.

And therefore,

A thing that should not be done; to be as if it were not done. 20 El. Dyer.
362.18 El. Dyer. 362.
A man makes a Lease for years of a house, with certain implements, reserving a
Rent. The Executors, after the Testators death, receive the Rent, yet it is no
assetts in their hands; for the whole Rent belongs to the Heir.

So, of a thing done in a time that it should not. A man seized in fee, lets
for ten years, 1 E. b. Br. 18.
and after sells the land, and takes it back to him and his wife; and then
the husband and wife let it for 20 years, reserving a Rent. The husband dies,
the wife accepts this rent, during the first ten years. By this, the second
Lease is not affirmed, 21 El. 563.
for the acceptance of a Rent before the Lease begins, and so before any
Rent be due, is no acceptance at all.

To the circumstance of Time, these two Rules pertain.

Priority of time is imagined in things.

Done together. One devises a term for years to his son, 21 El. 540.
and that the wife shall have it during the son's minority. This is first a
Devise to his wife, and after to the son when he comes of full age.

Happening in an instant. A Mesualty descends to the Tenant of the Land: 11 H.
7.12 7 H. 46. 9 E. 4.21.
Though the Mesualty be at the same time and instant extinct; yet the Tenant
shall pay relief, if he be of full age; or be in Ward, if he be within age;
viz. where it is holden by Knights service.

Things relating to a time long before, be, Litt. 92.36 H. 6.7.
as if they were done immediately from that time. Where the wife is endowed by
the heir of the husband's lands, she shall be said to be in, immediately from
the husband. And therefore if the husband were a Disseizor, and the heir in by
descent; yet the Disseizee may enter upon the wife.

These Rules of common reason do many times cross and encounter one aenother,
which is the greatest difficulty that is found in the arguing of Cases. But, to
help this, the general ground is, according to the former Rule, that,

Those prevail, Litt. 110. b. 140. b. 32 H. 8.
that carry the more excellent and perfect reason with them. Tenant for life
makes a Lease for life, Br. gar. 18.28. E. 3.20 b. Br. gar. 17.35 H. 6.3. 9 El.
Die. 264. b. 11 H. 7.9. Perk. 41.13 H. 8.15.7. H. ^.9.
without naming whose life; this shall be intended for his own life, ( Rule
74.) for else it were a wrong. But if Tenant in tail make such a Lease for
life, this is a discontinuance, and for life of the Grantee, ( Rule 86.) for it
is strongest against the Grantor, and most beneficial for the Grantee.

FINIS.

