AYTONTIOPOENOS, OR, THE SELF-REVENGER Exemplified in Mr. William Barlee.

By way of Rejoinder to the first Part of his Reply, viz. the unparalled
variety of Discourse in the two first Chapters of his pretended Vindication.

(The second Part of the Rejoinder to the second Part of his Reply being
purposely designed to follow after by it self, for Reasons shortly to be
alleged.)

Wherein are briefly exhibited, amongst many other things, The
Rigidly-Presbyterian both Principles and Practice.

A Vindication of Grotius from Mr. Baxter. of Mr. Baxter from Mr. Barlee. of
Episcopal Divines from Both together.

To which is added an Appendage Touching the judgment of the right Honorable
and right Reverend Father in God, James Lord Primate of Armagh, and
Metropolitan of Ireland, irrefragably attested by the Certificates of Dr.
Walton, Mr. Thorndike, and Mr. Gunning, sent in a Letter to Doctor Bernard.

By THOMAS PIERCE Rector of Brington.

(...).
Isocrat. Out of thine own Mouth will I condemn thee.

Luke 19. 22. LONDON, Printed by R. DANIEL, for Richard Royston, at the Angel
in Ivie-lane, M DC LVIII.

A Praemonition to the Reader.
HAd we such eyes and other instruments, as (by the help of a Macroscope) might
suffice for the Dissection of an emmet, or a Fly, we are told by a (...). Et
pueri nasum Rhinocerotis habent. Habet and musca splenem.
Greek and a Latin Proverb, that we should find a Gall in the one, and a Spleen
in the other. Even a gnat, or a puneze, may break the sleep and Repose of the
strongest man living. And Brasidas, though a stout and a valiant Captain, did
yet acknowledge this Truth, when he was bitten by a Mouse. I am not making any
Comparisons, as being too odious to serve for my use. I desire only to signify,
that it is so far from being manlike, to contrive mischief unto a neighbor,
that it is a sordid Privilege to be hurtful, and common to men with the meanest
Creatures. How manifold a mischief has been designed upon my Person, by one
who utterly despaired of disadvantaging my cause, I foresee an occasion to show
anon. In the mean time I will desire this common favor, from all indifferent,
unbyass't Readers, that they will take some acquaintance, in case they have
none, or that in case they have any, they will send back their memoryes upon
the All that has passed betwixt my Neighbor and my self.

I had, by way of prevention, set out a Copy of some Notes, which I had written
for a Friend, upon God's Decrees. How well I kept to the Subject, has been as
clear as that light, by the help of which it has been cleared. How much beside
the whole Subject my Neighbor pretended to frame an Answer, I have discovered
in my account of that his Correptorie Correction. And now how much his second
Book is more exorbitant then his first, I am again obliged to make apparent. I
say, obliged in Conscience, as well as in ordinary Discretion, and that for
diverse good reasons hereafter mentioned. Had he disputed against my Notes,
though not as a Christian, yet at least like a Man, I had received and treated
him as a generous enemy; and by how much the stronger I had found him, I should
have loved and honored him so much the more. But if the venerable Grotius might
say of Mr. Rivet, much more may I of Mr. Barlee, that in stead of a
Confutation, he only presented me with a Qui a me nunquam nominatus de illis se
defendit, and in me velut de Plaustro convitia exspuit, etc. Grot. Vot. pro
pace p. 63.
Dung-Cart, fully laden and running over with all sorts of muck, wherein his
Doctrins (belike) were to lie and batten. For besides the worst names, and the
uncleanest Epithets, which could have dropped from the Pen of a Consistorian,
(of which Tribe we have a They rail against all they dislike with more then
heathenish scurrility. Survey of Ho. Discip. p. 123.
Character from the Wise and Provident Bishop Bancroft) whatsoever ill things
he was able to fancy, or to hear, or but to say that he had heard, concerning
my Person, and my Opinions, all that was my Portion, heaped up, and fastened on
me, with the profusest liberality I ever heard of. I knew that vengeance was
none of mine; for, by a peculiar right, God had challenged it to Romans 12. 19.
Heb. 10. 30.
Himself; nor durst I venture to break in upon Gods (...).
Enclosure. I was contented to make my self some little part of amends, by
giving my Reader no other taste of his style and temper, then what I had met
with in his first nine sheets, and by exhibiting the weakness of all his
pertinent Argumentations, wheresoever I could find them throughout his Book. I
did not give him ill language, unless it were an ill language to say what
language he had given; nor did I do him the least wrong, unless it could
possibly be a wrong to show the wrongs which I had suffered: but even Luke 21.
19.
possessed my soul in patience, and 1 Pet. 2. 23.
committed my cause to Him who judges righteously. (...), Hom. Iliad. (...).

(...).


I confess it had been more for my secular interest, to have pai'd my
Neighbor in his In proverbium abiit, Malis viris ne Draconem quidem audere
dentes admoliri, Bonos vel a m^re morderi solitos.
own coin, or rather to have made him pay soundly for it. For had I impleaded
Him at Law upon an Action of Slander, (as some, who were learned in the Law,
thought most convenient,) I had probably sat down in Peace and safety. But see
how well I am requited, for having but showed, and so pardoned, his
misdemeanors. My Neighbor observing my Resolutions neither to rail, nor to
raise Reports, nor to take Advantages of Law, but only to show that I am Psalm.
19. 13.
Innocent from the great offenses imputed to me, (in the doing of which I was
constrained, by unavoidable necessity, to demonstrate the injustice of my
Accuser) he took the boldness thereupon to persevere in the course which he
had begun; as being well assured by my Principles, that when he had done his
very worst, (both as a bitter speaker, and as a Bearer of False witness,) he
could not fail of my forgiveness, and that upon no dearer Terms, then his own
willingness to accept it. It seems he did esteem it so great a Punishment to
be showed, (though in no other colors then he had put upon himself, and such
wherein he had chosen to make his appearance upon the stage) that nothing now
would content him, unless he might show himself worse. After many Epist. Ded.
p. 1.
Travails, and much painstaking, Ibid.
laboring in the work, and p. 5.
thrashing hard, a second Volume was squeezed out; which, for the better
sound's sake, he adorned with this Title, A Necessary Vindication. For,
whatever the Contents of the thing required, he thought it could not be seemly
to call it A Necessary Revenge. To that he added in the Title Page, A full
Abstersion of all (...).
Calumnyes: because it was grievous to Flesh and Blood, to Declare A Confession
of former Faults. When men have drank too deeply of the Waters of Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
strife, hardly any thing but vengeance will quench their thirst. They will
never leave dabling in Printer's Ink, till they have made themselves blacker
then any Negroes. [(...).] But yet their lives are bitter to them, when they
come to the (...).
Dreggs of the guilty potion; and they do commonly rake up those putrid things
out of the Grave, to which they wish they had given the deepest Burial. There
were many grand fictions in my neighbors first Book, which having proved to be
such, I meant should dye, and be buried in perfect silence. But being raised
again to life by him who gave them their Being, and that by a new kind of
Clyster, to which is given the Name of a Full Abstersion, I shall be forced (do
what I can) to make their life very miserable, and (for ought I know) to give
them a woeful Immortality.

Yet very far shall I be from doing this upon design, but only by such a mere
Accident, as will inseparably follow my Vindication. For had he confessed his
perpetrations, and thereby taken off the Scandals, which have been given to as
many as have read his writings, I had readily embraced him with both mine
Arms. Nor shall I fail to forgive him (by the help of God's Grace) though he
shall still offend against me more then Mat. 18. 22.
seventy times seven. Or had he only bitten me with a neat piece of Drollerie,
I had been pleased with his wit, and taken all in good part: For that which I
have complained of, has not at all been the sharpness, but only the
noysomnesse of his Teeth. So far have they been from being sharp, that (to
speak the very Truth) I have thought them the obtusest I ever felt. And in
biting at any thing of mine, they have but broken themselves in pieces; perhaps
much more then if they had chewed upon a flint. Or had he charged me in his
second Book (as he had done in his first) with now and then a volley of
Railing, by calling me Dragon, or Devil, or Atheistical Lucianizer, or a
Belcher forth of damnable Blasphemies, and the like; and having given that Vent
to the exuberances of his Passions, (as Epist. Ded. p. 2.
himself is pleased to make it out) had not proceeded any farther to things
incomparably worse, I had either not answered, or only answered with the Angel,
Jude 9.
the Lord rebuke thee. Nay farther yet: Had he raised such idle Rumors, as had
reached no farther then the outward man, as that I had 17 or 18 fingers, and
about some 13 or 14 toes, I had confuted him no otherwise, then merely by
showing my Hands and Feet. Nothing then but his Doctrins should have fallen
under my Pen. But when I am publicly charged with things of that Nature, that
if I really am guilty, I must not live; and of which if I am silent, I may by
some unkind people be reported to consent; I do conceive it to be a duty, to
the performance of which I am in reason and conscience indispensably obliged,
to show the groundlesnesse and falsehood of such suggestions, lest I appear (by
my omission) to bear false witness against my self. It Is true, that some of my
Neighbors stories are so incredible in themselves, and so bewrayed to be
Inventions by his very endeavors to prove them none, that many may think it
had been better to tread them only under foot by passive silence, then by a
solemn confutation to cast them back in their Author's Face. But when I see,
and consider, that the Things are twice printed, and with much more boldness
in the second indictment then in the first, nay with confident affirmations
that they shall be justified to my Face, if need require; I do conceive that my
silence might help to lend them some credibility, though without my silence
they can have none. And this may serve for the first reason of my following
enlargements; especially of those in my two first Chapters. Which being
premised and supposed, there are others so cogent, as I know not how they can
be resisted. For

First, how shall I hope to serve God in my calling, with any considerable
Success, by any Doctrine I shall deliver from Press or Pulpit, if I am judged
beforehand to be a piece of an Atheist, Hin-Quarter of an Anabaptist, the
bigger half of a Papist, 3 quarters of a Ranter, a whole Socinian, an Angel of
Darkness every Inch, as highly a Pelagian as Pelagius himself when at his
worst, and not only guilty of much Heretical pravity, but an Helvidian
anti-Scripturist, and whose Design in highly Jesuitical? Nay if besides all
this, I am a frontlesse, absurd, and graceless Person, dementate by God for
perdition, a kind of a Sorcerer, the Quakers Darling,
and worthy to be reckoned among the witches, and a hundred things more, (of
which See chapter 4.. 1. Note that this is but a specimen of a world the like
stuff, which Mr. B. calls the boiling up of his Piety, (c. 1. p. 6. in marg.)
the doing like Christ and his Apostles, (Ibid.) doing the part of an orthodox
cordial zelot, (p. 8.) his godly jealousy, (p. 12.) the playfulnesse of his
style to tole-on Gallants to read his Book, who if they be not toled on with
somewhat of mirth and cheerfulness, are ready to swear they be weary of over
much reading, (chapter 2. p. 45.)
hereafter,) what sort of men will take part with me? Sure not the Papists,
because I am a Protestant, and (upon all occasions offered) dispute against
them: nor yet the Protestants, because I am (forsooth) a Cassandrian Papist.
Not the Quakers, because I am a Black-coat: nor yet the Anabaptists, because a
Socinian: nor the Socinians, because a Sorcerer. nor the Sorcerers, because a
Pelagian. Much less the Pelagians, because an Atheist: no nor the Atheists,
because an Arminian: nor the Arminians by any means, because a witch: nor the
rest of mankind, because I am not a Presbyterian. Neither the Town in Barbary
which was all turned into stone both man and beast, nor yet the Monster brought
forth at Weerted on the Elder-Sconce near Ardemburg, were any way comparable to
the Monster which Mr. B. has described (I may say) in his News-book. I will
propose no more (in an Epistle) then two particulars to consideration. First,
if I am not only thought, but said in print to be the Monster, who did not only
think, but boast aloud, [ See the first Chapt. of this Book,. 9. p. 15, 16,
etc.
That there was no sin in me, that I was above sin, and that by my own power I
could abstain from all sin,] how can I rationally hope to fare better then
Servetus, who never spoke any thing like it that I can learn, unless I prove
it to be a groundless and witless Slander? for what were this but to make my
self God, who alone by his own power is above all sin? Our blessed Savior did
but say, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee, when straight the Scribes accused him
of Mar. 2. 5, 7.
Blasphemies; alleging this reason, that to forgive sins was for God only.
With how much a greater force of Reason should he have stones cast at him, who
should affirm himself sinlesse, nay above sin, nay above all sin, nay suopte
Mart, by his own power above it all? To clear my self from so foul a charge,
and to show the impertinence, the unskilfulnesse, nay the demonstrable
falsenesse of that Aspersion, I See Divine Philanth. defended, chapter 3. p. 81,
82, 83.
answered in a Section of 10. Particulars. All which Mr. Barlee does tacitly
confess to be irresistible, by his wilful omission of a reply; and yet he
asks no pardon, makes no confession, but (on the contrary) denies it flatly to
be a fault, and (without the least color or show of proof) professes to stand
to his Accusation, and (twice in a Breath) calls me impudent for denying what
he is pleased to affirm, and talks of proving it by a Minister without a Name,
and seeks to cover it with new Slanders, so unluckily chosen, that they become
their own Traitors, as I shall shortly demonstrate in the following papers.
Secondly, if I am not only a Papist, but Iesuitical; nor only such, but also a
Seminary Priest; nor only one of them who creep privately into houses, but one
in possession of a Parsonage; if I am one of the Mr. Baxter's Christian
concord, p. 45, 46, etc. cited and applied by Mr. Barlee in his Necess. Vindic.
c. 2. p. 73, 74, 75.
Conspirators against the Protestant Religion, who having more wit then Dr.
Vane, Dr. Goff, and Dr. Baily, do only stay here in England under the Names of
Episcopal Divines, because we think we may do our party more service then by
declaring our selves Papists; and if our Design for the Introduction of Popery
is so strongly laid, that it gives a strong probability of prevailing, if God
do not wonderfully blast it; I say, if I am one of these Popish complotters (as
Mr. Barlee now publishes) against whom Mr. Baxter In the page above cited.
professed to take himself bound to proclaim a public warning to the
inhabitants of the Nation; then by the Law of this Land must my Quarters be
hung up on the high places of the great City, for the striking a Terror into
those who are partakers of the plot. And the great plot (says Mr. Baxter) is
designed to be carried on with no less then p. 46, 47.
5 subservient plots, of which the least is a swinger; and of which I am
publicly Mat. 15. 19.
charged by Mr. Barlee, as well with the greatest, as with the least.

By these two instances it is evident, that I am now to deal with an other
thing, then the most who are engaged in any controverted Doctrins: Not only
with a weak and unskilful Disputant, but also with an outrageous and false
Accuser; who lays things to my charge, which (if he is able also to prove)
will make my Native Country too hot to hold me. So that now Mr. Barlee has
brought affairs to this pass, that I must either be suspected for the worst
Creature in the world, or else I must manifest to the world that I am
slandered. Had he kept to the Questions of God's Decrees, the Death of Christ,
the Grace of Conversion, and the like, and in prosecuting them had showed but a
shortness of Discourse, bewraying nothing but his Cause and his understanding,
I had had no more to do then to 2 Timothy 2. 25.
instruct him in meekness opposing himself, if God per adventure would give
him Repentance to the acknowledgement of the Truth. For as he should not have
been offended that I saw not with his eyes, but with mine own; so could I never
have been displeased so far forth as to be angry, that he saw no farther then
he was able. But when a man is accused of committing a murder, or of stealing a
horse, or any other matter of Fact of very dangerous importance, he must prove
the negative by such mediums, by which negatives are to be proved. As by
catching the Accuser in diverse contradicting Tales; by proving him [virum non
fide dignum] a Customary Raiser of false Reports; by showing the vast
improbability of the thing; by evincing the inconsistence of circumstantials;
by making it evident and clear, that the life and Temper of the Defendant is
known by thousands of worth and credit to have ever been Wisd. 2. 15.
quite of another Fashion; last of all by the exerting of a Hand from Heaven to
compurge him. How much of this is my case, the intelligent Reader will see
anon. And if my Neighbor did pretend he was to publish his Reply, to secure
[the Introduct. p. 4.
credit of his ministerial office, his Name, and Fame,] it may well be one
reason of my Rejoinder, that besides those things I must also provide for
Truth, and safety.

Secondly, as I must not hate my Brother in my Heart, Levit. 19. 17.
so in any wise I must rebuke him, and must not suffer sin upon him. If I
should not resist a growing evil, I know not to what it may aspire, or whither
at last it may arrive. It is so dangerous a thing to go along with impunity in
any lewd Course, that Faelix and prosperum scelus virtu^ vocatur,
the greatest mercy to malefactors is to arrest them in their Carriere. Why did
Diagoras turn Atheist, but because he saw a Plagiarie not struck with Thunder?
When Bancr. Dang. Pos. practiced under pretense of Reformation, and for the
Presbyterial Diseipline. chapter 15. p. 176.
Mr. Hacket and his Adherents were apprehended and examined, they did then
confess before witness, [ that their extraordinary purposes were nothing
else, but illusions of Satan, cruel, bloody, and Traitorous Designments, which
yet before they were detected, they protested even with tears, fastings,
groans, and imprecations, to have proceeded from the Dictates of God's good
Spirit. So much wholsomer it is for evil Doers to be caught, then to be
cruelly permitted to grow successful.

Thirdly, there is some such thing in Plato's Gorgias, as that offenders are to
be punished for three gooduses. (...) or (...), for the revenging of Pateat
quod noxium est, ut possit conteri cum patuerit. Hieron. advers. Iovin. l. 2.
the offense, and paying satisfaction to injured Justice; (...), for the
admonishment of the offender, that he never again commit the like; and (...),
for the giving a timely warning to Lookers-on, that they amend their lives by
that example. It was one of the menaces of God to Israel, Ezekiel. 5. 7. 8.
That he would execute his judgments in the midst of them in the sight of the
Nations round about them. Which was no doubt for this reason (as I collect from
the Context) that as their exemplary sins had been apt to hurt many, so by
their exemplary punishments many also might be healed. And this is openly
expressed to be one end of punishment, that Deuteronomy. 17. 13. which compare with
Ezekiel. 39. 7, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27.
all the people may hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. These are
the things at which I aim, and (I hope) very sincerely. First, the clearing of
mine innocence, as to that whereof I am accused; next, the good of my Quae per
insuavitatem medentur, emolumento curationis offensam sui excusant. Tertull. de
poenit. cap. 10.
Accuser, whom I would fain be isntrumental to promote unto Repentance and
change of life; lastly, the benefit and instruction of both our Readers, whom
another man's harms may render circumspect and wary: but the Glory of God more
especially, both first, and last, is the end and scope of my undertaking.

I have not been ignorant, or unmindfull, that I am put by my Neighbor in
slippery places, and that in the doing of my duty I am not freed from all
danger: it being possible for the injured to seek Revenge against the
injurious, under the righteous pretense of a vindication. And truly the fear
of the former has sometimes put me to the Question, whether it were not my
safest course to omit the later. It being absolutely impossible to clear my
self, but by extenuating the credit of my Accuser. To this I answered within my
self, that should I be so very impotent, as to requite his Railing with
Railing, and his false Accusations with false Accusations, I might conclude my
self guilty of a defensive vengeance. And yet what might I not say, (would I
make use of my invention) with greater credibility then He has done? Nay
should I but faithfully repeat what I have heard from persons whom I can name,
Iam more then confident I could make his Ears Tingle. But whilst I keep to this
Rule, of divulging no more of his misdemeanors, then I find divulged by
Himself, (which yet will so vehemently tend to his disadvantage, that his
Abettors will be apt to think me cruel, unless they consider all along that I
am no more then a Defendant, and that the follyes of my Neighbor were wilfully
printed in both his Books, before it was in my power to reprint them in mine
own) I say, whilst I keep to this special Rule, I am hitherto persuaded I do
not deviate from my duty. To prove that I am slandered, is but to do my self
right; and to do my self right, is no man's wrong. To punish an evil Doer, is
no injustice. It is rather a great Mercy, to punish him less then he deserves;
because in the doing of corrective or vindicative justice, an Arithmetical
proportion is still allowed. Yet should I think my self cruel, for having
showed how out of measure I have been wronged and injured by my provoker, but
that I find within my self a perfect. willingness to forgive him; and upon
competent satisfaction (though but half so much as I may require) I shall
readily offer him a solid Friendship.

But now in order to this end, I must convince him of his guilt; and let him
see his necessity of coming in, by showing the dangers of holding out. I must
make it undeniable, that he has charged me with things, which (because I am
not able to express their nature any otherwise) I must discover and express
by the name of Slanders. Diverse of them being such, that the Cabbidge whose
Diameter was half a mile, and the Furnace erected to boil it in, were but puny
Fictions in Comparison. I am very well aware, that whilst I am using the means
for the attainment of the end, (that undeniable conviction of which I spoke) he
may say in a third Book, as now he does in a second, that I am much more
pungent in my Defense, then he has been in his Accusations. Concedo Torum, I
am exactly of that opinion: It being not the pungency, but the Rancidity of a
writer, which men of clean nostrills are wont to nauseat. Very far were the
Pharisees from being pungent, unless by moving our Savior's pity, when they
called him Glutton, Wine-bibber, a Friend to sinners, and one who wrought by
the power of Beelzebub: But sure our Savior was very pungent, when he proved
them malicious and senseless slanders. To show that another is abusive, is
much more smarting, then to abuse. And therefore (with pardon to the
comparison) I think it more my Neighbor's Torment, that he is evinced to be
injurious, then it can possibly be mine, that I am injured. It is not a little
for my comfort, that my greatest severity does consist in a manifestation that
he is cruel; and that no other miseryes do fall upon him as from me, but what
he has pulled upon himself with all his might. It is not so little as
seventeen Times that he has called me an impudent and a brazen-fac't Person,
which I never could endure to call him once. Without a circumlocution, he has
often given me the Lie, for having spoken the greatest Truths; much more then I
had given Him, for having printed the greatest falsehoods. Times without number
he calls me proud and insolent. much good do it him with all his meekness. To
sum up all in a word; The more injustices and wrongs he has industriously done
me, I shall be still the more resolute to do him none. I confess that slander
is a very hard word; but unavoidable to those, who are obliged to distinguish
it from other species of untrue speaking. Whatsoever is not true comes under
the notion of a lie, but one sort only is called a slander. And to call a thing
slander whilst it is proved to be such, (and in part confessed, as well as
denied, by its Author,) cannot possibly be a slander, unless (which implies a
contradiction) it be also proved to be none. In so much as for the usage of
this one word, it will be needless to ask my neighbor's pardon.

There are now remaining but 3 things more, of which my Reader may be pleased
to be premonish't.

1. Mr. Barlee seeming to me to be Note, that after he had proposed a Method,
p. 5. he profesfeth to quit it, and to speak immethodically, p. 11.
professedly immethodicall, and to have made a kind of Thicket wherein to hide
his Argumentations, which he has also so fenced with Thorns and Briars and
hollow Teeth, as to forbid the Reader an Access unto the nakedness of his
Doctrins; I determined so to order my account of the whole, as that his
Doctrins and his manners may no longer afford an umbrage to one another. This
is therefore no more then the first part of my Rejoinder. It is indeed but the
prolusion to those approaching Calamityes, wherein Mr. Barlee and Mr. Whitfeild
will be made appear to have involved their dearest Doctrins. For I reserve the
second Part for a peculiar work, to follow this at some Distance, with a strict
injunction upon my Stationer, that he shall never permit the one to be bound up
with the other. And I contrive it thus to this End, that what concerns Gods
Decrees, and the subjects depending thereupon, may be put far asunder from
those exorbitant subjects, which (however very useful in several kinds) are
wholly foreign and impertinent to the professed subjects of our Debate. My
Aim being now to set out personals by themselves, that I may shortly with
greater comfort fetch all his Doctrinals out of their Dens, and expose them
stark naked, (divested of those Capparisons wherein they are labored to be
disguised) that the abused people of the land may behold them clearly as they
are, and start back at their Appearance, and keep aloof from the Danger of
being ever again led captive by them.

2. As I have now d^scharged but half my Debt to Mr. Barlee, so he may probably
stay the longer for what remains, because of grave Mr. Whitfeild, his
Fellow Laborer in the work who, it seems, conceiving (and very wisely) that
one at once was insufficient for the maintaining of many errors against one
single man, (who has never a Second but the Truth to take part with him in
this Contention) took advantage of the time to join his forces to Mr. Barlee's;
as being very well assured, that my Actions are successive, not instantaneous;
that I must first do one thing, and then another, before it is possible to do a
third. Now because his whole Book is at least Entitled against mine, (though
the greatest part of it is against no-body-know'swho) and because he is
superior to Mr. Barlee (in point of manners at least, though not at all in
point of learning,) and in regard of some other things of which I shall shortly
give account, I do intend in the next place to make him acquainted with
himself, to whom I find he has been hitherto a very great stranger; and all
for want of such friends, as I shall show my self to him, if God permit. I
shall not reflect on those indignityes most uningenuously put upon me in his
Poetic and b^tter Prose before the Correptorie Correction, (wherein he
instructed Mr. Barlee how to rail, and calumniate, by the tacit exhortative of
his Example;) but immediately falling upon the matter of his last printed Book,
and that in conjunction with his Collegue's, I shall charitably endeavor to
make him see that his greatest Isa. 30. 7.
strength had been to sit still.

3. Whatsoever is found spoken, in the ensuing sheets of this Book, concerning
the Principles and Practice of Presbyterians, I have only spoken as an
Historian upon matters of Fact. Nor have I done it from my self, but from the
credit of the most questionless and authentical Records. Nor have I sought
out occasions of such discourse, but patiently received occasions offered. All
is to satisfy Mr. Barlee, who (if we may judge by his writings) would not
otherwise be content. Nor are my words to be extended unto all Presbyterians
indiscriminately, but to such, and such only, of whom the Authors by me cited
are found to speak. For I know there are many, who at least are esteemed to be
of that judgment (how truly or falsely I cannot tell) whom for their peaceable
Dispositions, their Christian Temper and moderation, I do very unfeignedly both
love and honor. In Rem, non in Personam, scripta est mea Actio. I intend those
zelots, to whom my character does agree, let their Names or Qualityes be what
they will. What I say from the History of Mr. Knox, I mean of those men whom
Mr. Knox himself meant, who was a chieftain of the party. When I name Paraeus,
Buchanan, Hacket, and the like, it is plain I mean Them. If, when no body is
named, any one or more persons shall name themselves, and apply my words to
their particulars, which I had left only in common, (to be seized on by none
but the proper owners) they will be, in that case, their own Accusers.

There is nothing else in my thoughts, which seems needful to be premised.
And this at least is enough for the no-greatlength of the following Treatise;
whose great variety of matter (whereof the third Chapter will afford the best
choice) is represented to the Reader in the General Contents which now ensue.

The General Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAP. I.
AN Introduction containing the great dishonesty of the Tongue: Its several
Species, and Degrees. Mr. B. arrived at the utmost Round of the climax. How a
man may be brought to believe his own lie: made apparent by 4 examples. Mr. B's
concernment in the premises.

His wise and caetera. His confession sealed with an Oath, that he gave no
credit to the far greatest part of his inventions. yet will not make a
Recantation. but seeks to secure an old Falsity with a new one. Proved by an
Induction. His 2 Oaths opposite to each other. His impossibility of escaping at
any crevice, either from perjury, or contradiction. The best that can be said
for him is vehemently bad. What he gets by his denial of vain credulity. His
Oath at best inconsiderate as from a common swearer. His pretended necessity
for swearing. His Argumentative Oath like Mr. Hackets. His necessityes and
streights betwixt his first and second Book. He gives the slip to a passage
which would convince him of a double perjury. The first of his 3 excepted
slanders: proved no more now then when it was crudely affirmed: pretended to be
a Hearsay contrary to his Oath. He is provoked to name his Informer, if he
has any. Motives used to that purpose, from parallel slanders which might be
raised upon him, and that with more probability, and greater hopes of escape.
Reasons for the motives to the producing of his Informer. Of Adams sin, and
ours, Original and Actual, in him, and us. How Mr. B's notion tends to
Pelagianism, and to other absurdityes. T. (...)'s account of Original sin in
himself. What it is to be born in sin: What it is not. Of that Text Romans 5. 12.
The Absurdityes which follow from Mr. B's exposition. The ridiculous force of
his Argument. Its Absurdity shown in a parallel case. He betrayeth his crime
with his excuse: and blasteth his Informer. His second Informer evinced by
himself to have been a Forger. How his Tempter betrayed him to the choice of
his invention. How the Trick of his Confidence is an Argument of his Distrust.
Again he runs on the Sympl^gades either of perjury or causeless Railing. The
shameful modesty of the Informer. He is challenged to appear. Mr. B. makes
more way to the Discovery of his slanders. His signal Tergiversation. His new
Calumny in defense of an old one. His Revenge upon a Gentleman of 3 years old.
His woeful Drollery. His malice against Castalio. Of Christian perfection in
Scripture. A Catalogue of his gettings by maligning Castalio. He slanders
Arminius, or charge Mr. Baxters Doctrine with Arminianism. His personating a
Bp. His being by confession 400 wide of the Truth. His conscionable Divine
confessedly a cheat. Of Artificial Handsomness. His perjury thereupon. In sum,
His confessions without Repentance: His Repentance without Amendment: His
liberal promises to amend, with Resolutions of growing worse.

CHAP. II.
Mr. B. cites private Letters to his own disadvantage. His competent judges
none but those of his party. His tacit confession of scurrility. His go^
^bullitions. His 15 Falsityes in 8 lines. His passing judgment before
Doomsday. His adjudging men to Hell imply's the falsenesse of all his Doctrins.
His fear of Danger, without being of opinion that there is any. He wo^nds
himself with a Sal^o. Sneaks from his charge of Socinianism, yet lays it on
Mr. P. and inferres Calvin a S^c^man. His cruel kindness. Servetus his Books
burnt before his Body. Mr. (...)'s monstrous Dilemma his own snare. His
ordination into the Priesthood; when, and by whom and on what Terms. His
Promises of Conformity. subscription to the 39 Articl^s. several Oaths. Deny's
his own Hand, wherein he professed to proceed by the common Counsel of the
Presbytery. His Accusation of Dispatch. His Recriminations the saddest part of
his Adventure. His love of falsehood quatenus ipsum. The first Ground of his
Malignity ripped up by Himself. What he gets by his complaint that his
Parishoners were filched from him. Their Vindication. His charge recoils upon
Himself. His cursing, and swearing, and Pulpit-scuffles. The Continuation of
his Inventions. His Dream of the Printers Boy. His sin against Conscience and
common sense. His sad Defense of his Scholarship. He bu^^ets Mr. Calvin and
Himself, in hope to make his Latin whole. An important Digression to a new way
of convincing Mr. B. of False witness. Of Praying for the Dead, and unto
Saints. A bashful Calumny betraying its own Guilt. A short Catalogue of 34
other Falsehoods, to save the labor of 34 whole Sections.

CHAP. III.
Mr. B's charge of Ingratitude the greatest jest in the world. He defiles his
own Nest: Is disobliging to Sequestrators, and unthankful to Mr. Hobbs. King
James concerning the Presbyterians. The Imprisonment of Mr. Cartwright,
Travers, etc. King James his Antipathy to Presbyterianism and Pigg. The Bishops
lenity compared with the Presbyterian Rigor. The Presbyterian Doctrins of
excommunicating and killing the supreme Civil Magistrate. Knox, and Buchanan.
The Presbyterian Principles agreeable to their Practice. That of the Kirk in
particular. Quares touching the Covenant. Touching a Book subscribed by the
Ministers within the Province of London against Toleration, and for the
Covenant. Paraeus his Book most seditious: dissembled, and defended by Mr. B.
^ondemned to be burned by the whole University of Oxford: and by orthodox King
James with the hands of the common Hangman. Grotius his judgment of the Book.
Paraeus an Oracle to the party. Of Lambeth Articles: King James and Bishop
Mountague: Universal Grace and Redemption. The late Reverend Primate against
Mr. B. Mr. B's Quaestion never enough to be admired. His remarkable Calumny,
and Impertinence. The irresistible Truth of Universal Redemption. Of Testard,
Camero, Amyrald, Spanheim, Daille. Blondel for universal Redemption in his
approbation of Daille's Book. Of Mr. Baxter's warning to the Nation against
Cassandrian Papists under the names of Episcopal Divines. How applied by Mr.
Barlee. A vindication of Grotius: His Temper and Design. The Peace of
Christendom attempted by Melanchthon, Maximilian, Ferdinand, and others, before
Grotius. Accusations must not be too general. Episcopal Divines no Papists.
Melanchthon, Bucer, nay Calvin and Beza for Episcopacy, set Forms of Prayer,
Rites and Ceremonies. Popery shut out by Episcopal Divines: but advanced by
Presbyterians. How Jesuits and Presbyt. (...) have been assisting to one
another. Mr. B's Contradictions about Bishop Davenant: His third edition before
his second: and his being alive at least a year after he was dead. His
pretended correspondence with that Bishop. His exceptions and sauciness to the
same. That Bishop reckons universal Redemption among Fundamentals, and declares
against all who shall deny it. How severely that Bishops judgment reflects on
Mr. B. His foul inventions of the late Primate of Armagh.

CHAP. IV.
HIs Breeding, and way of Complement, to the admiration of all the world. XI.
pages full of Railing, of which a Taste only is exhibited. A Copy of Mr. B's
Reformation. His notable justification of himself. His Asperity against all
others: obliquely against Dr. Bernard and Dr. Reynolds; expressly against
Grotius, Castalio, Episcopius, Dr. Tailor, Mr. Thomson, etc. against Mr.
Calvin. Mr. Thomson vindicated in particular. Of Mr. Baxters Godly Man: And why
Mr. Barlee so much extolled him. The sad effect of that opinion, that the
Regenerate man cannot cease to be so. Mr. B's self-contradictions. His
excessive commendations and condemnations of himself. His Digression to the sum
of 150l. at which he values his study of Books. His Dexterityes in speaking
beside the purpose. How great an Artificer of escapes. The two Instances of his
Wit.

The Contents of the Appendage.
A Manifestation by several Instances, that Dr. Bernard never pretended to
prove the Negative to that which was Affirmed by T. P. concerning the judgment
of the late Primate as to the controverted points. That matter is ventilated in
several Letters to Dr. Bernard. In the first it is evinced, that T. P. spoke
safely of the said Primate, on which side soever the Truth might lie; and that
the case of Mr. Barlee is very sad on all hands. The same things with more
advantage are evinced in the second. The third Letter shows, that the
Primates Honor was advanced in the publication of his change. The Aspersions
cast upon the Primate by Mr. B. as well as on Bishop Overall, with whom the
Primate at last concurred. The great Harmony and Agreement between the
judgment of the Primate as it is lately set forth by Dr. Bernard, and the
Doctrine delivered in the Books of T. P. The fourth Letter does make a parallel
of the Primates judgment with the writings of T. P. in 13 particulars. Then
shows the inconsistence of the Primates judgment with M. B's in 15
particulars. wherein is also included Bp. Andrews his vindication. The fifth
Letter exhibiteth the three Certificates, by which T. P. was induced to believe
and publish the Primates change: the first from Dr. Walton; the second from Mr.
Gunning; the third from Mr. Thorndike. Upon which, satisfaction is required of
such Calvinists, as have adorned their Doctrins by unjustly usurping the
Primates Name. His Grace of Armagh is farther proved to have changed his former
judgment, by the Irish Articles concluded A. D. 1615. and by the late account
which Dr. Bernard gave of it. To which is added the Primates care, that Dr.
Iackson's writings might be preserved. And Mr. Baxters Censure of St. Austin,
as unsound, and against Scripture, in that particular, wherein it is collected
from Dr. Bernard, that the Primates judgment agreed with Austin's.

An Introduction to the First Chapter, concerning Slanders and other Falsehoods.
. 1. IN the whole Catalogue of Impostures by The great Dishonesty of the Tongue.
which the God of all Glory has been dishonored, Religion perverted, and the
World abused, there is certainly none greater then the Dishonesty of the
Tongue. For in a direct contrariety to the principal Ends of its Creation, to
wit, the Honor of God, and the mutual benefit of man, it is frequently
employed (by some sorts of Factors more especially) in the blaspheming of the
one, and in the ruining of the other. Since the Jesuits, and their Apes, (who
at the first did but imitate, yet at last were able to instruct them) have made
use of their Tongues to conceal their meanings (although intended by God to lay
them open) there have been whole volumes written concerning the Mystery, or
Science, or Art of Lying; and a sadder confusion has been made of the distinct
est Languages and Tongues, then that which was given for a Defeat at the T^wer
of Babel. God himself in much mercy was the Author of the Genesis 11. 7.
one; but the Devil in great malice was the first Father of the Joh. 8. 44.
other.

. 2. Now the Dishonesty of the Tongue, though of diverse Its several species and
degrees.
species and degrees, by a generical word is called Falsehood; which being
singly taken is breach of Truth, and joined to witness, is breach of Iust^ce,
and joined to Neighbor, is breach of Charity: all expressly forbidden in that
short Praecept, Exodus 2^. 16.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. In the former
respects, it is no more than a Lie; whereas in the later, it is that, and
somewhat more, Improperium, a Slander. But there are three sorts of speaking
which are not literally True, betwixt which notwithstanding there is a very
vast Difference: to wit, a Rhetorical, a Logical, and an Ethical Falsehood. Of
which the first, and the second, may in many cases be very innocent; but there
is hardly any case, in which the third will not be guilty. And yet of this last
sort there are degrees too. For a Lie that is perfectly officious, is not so
filthy as a malicious one. That is nakedly a Lie, but this a Slander. And this
is capable of Degrees, whether the slander be contumelious, or only by way of
obtrectation.

3. For that I may not suffer a possibility of doing mine Mr. B. arrived at the
utmost Round of the climax; as will be showed Chapter 1.. 9. and 10. and 11. and 12.
enemy any wrong, by laying more to his charge then I can certainly
demonstrate, whilst I say he has arrived to the very top of this ladder on
which so many have climbed to ruin, I will inform my self and my Reader with
so much more of this subject, as may help to preserve us from all mistakes, and
enable us to pass a righteous Judgment on Mr Barlee, as to that which is the
subject of this first chapter.

4. There are three or four ways, by which a man may be How a man may be
brought to believe his own lie.
brought to believe his own Lie, as well as to credit the Lies of others. For
first, a man may be sick of a Frenzy, through some distemper in the brain; or
be transported by the strength of a windy spleen, which may feed the fancy with
strong and 1.
strange dreams. Or secondly, in revenge of his former 2.
wickedness, and continued enmity to the Truth, he may by God's just judgment
be wholly left unto himself, and to the suggestions of the Tempter; according
to that of the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Because they received not the love
of 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1o, 11.
the Truth that they might be saved, even for this very cause God shall send
them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie. Or thirdly, he may
stumble into the steadfast belief of an arrant falsehood, through the scandal of
[felix and prosperum scelus] his temporal prosperity in any lewd practice: and
this is likely to be meant by that of Solomon, Because sentence against an evil
is not executed Eccles. 8. 11.
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil. Or fourthly, his case may be just the same, which I have read in the
works of that excellent Patriot, 4.
the most wise Bishop Bancroft; A Pretended Holy Discipline Chap. 4. p. 61.
man (says he) may tell a lie so often, that forgetting himself to be the Author
of it, he may think he heard it from some person of credit, and so believe it
to be true. And of this he the^e gives us two remarkable examples, in the two
Origins of Popery and Presbyterian^sme.

5. How this is pertinent to the Indictment of the grievous Made apparent by
four Examples.
Malefactor, who stands before us in this Arra^gnment, I shall demonstrate so
much the better, if I give some Examples of this Assertion, That a man many
ways may believe his own lie. The first occurring to my memory is that which I
1.
find in learned Buxtorf, and by him it is Maimonides apud Buxtorf. in Thesaur.
^ing. sanct. p. 683. usque ad 689.
recorded out of Rabbi Mosche Ben Majemon, who in an Epistle to the Rabbis of
the City Marseilles, makes this relation of one Eldavid. That about 520. years
ago, he gave himself out to be the Prodromus of the Messiah, and that he came
to prepare the way before him. Upon this his pretension many Jews flocked to
him, as their Ancestors had done to John the Baptist. But after the space of
twelve months, this confident Impostor was apprehended: and being asked by a
King of Arabia (before whom he was brought to be examined) what it was that
moved him to do such things, his answer was (like that of the Scottish Spotswood
Hist. Scot. l. 6. p. 330. 331.
Presbyterians) that he was moved to what he did by the Commandment of God.
And when the King again asked him, what sign will thou give us whereby to
induce us to a belief? Eldavid presently replied, Cut my head from off my
shoulders, and a little after I will revive. The King, as he desired, cut off
his head; but far was Eldavid from making good what he had promised, by
either recovering his old head, or by getting a new one. And so he proved
himself to have been a false Prophet. But it is likely the man was serious, and
deceived not others, until his heart or his fancy deceived him, because he was
willing to be tried by a decollation, and dyed a Martyr to his Delusion. I find
Bp. Bancroft of Dangerous positions practiced in pretense of Reformation, and
for the presbyterial Discipline. l 4. c. 10. p. 161. 162.
another Example in the seditious Presbyterians of Queen Elizabeth's days, I
mean Copinger, and Wigg^nton, and the rest of 2.
that Gang; who having fasted and prayed, both much and often, to try what
method God would put into their Hearts, for the releasing of the Mr.
Cartwright, Vdall, Traver, and the like, who were then imprisoned.
Brotherhood, as well as for the Reforming of Church and State, at last they.
found in themselves an impetuous motion (called by them and their brethren, A
Call from God) to murder the Lords of the privy Council, and so to make an
Insurrection against the Queen. And to prepare the peoples minds for the
readyer acceptance of their purposes, they printed a pamphlet of
pradestination, as though by the Abuse of that Doctrine they meant to have laid
their Intended wickedness upon God (they are the Authors own words) as if he
should have moved them to such ^ewd Attempts. These things stand upon Record,
transcribed from the mouths of several witnesses upon Oath, such as were
sharers in the conspiracy, when openly examined in the Starr-chamber. We have a
third example in 3.
the Cicero de Natura Deorum l. 3.
Tyrant Dionysius: who having spoiled the three Temples of Proserpina, Jupiter,
and Aesculapius, conceived his Sacrilege not only lawful, but godly too;
because the first did not drown him as he sailed to Syracuse, nor the second
strike him with a Thunderbolt, nor the third infest him with some great
sickness. And if with these great Instances of Selfdeceit we call to mind, and
compare, what we cannot but 4.
have heard of the James Nayler.
man at Bristoll, who thought himself to be the Christ, and was worshipped as
such (by not a few both men and women) and was so stiffly wedded to this
unreasonable Fancy, that for all the whipping in London, he would not admit of
a Divorce, but carried it with him into the prison, and (for ought I hear)
continues to embrace it until this Instant, and defends this whoredom of his
Invention, by pleading Testimony of Conscience, and the inward witness of the
Spirit; if, I say, we compare this fourth example with the former, I think I
need not here add a fifth.

. 6. From what has been said in the last two paragraphs, Mr. B.'s Concernment
in the praemisses.
it appears to be a thing possible, that Mr. Barlee really might believe (at
least some part of) his Inventions; by which of the four ways (. 4) it does
not concern me to pass a Judgment. But that in some of his Falsehoods, he
has been a most deliberate and wilful sinner, beyond the worst that I have
met with, in all my Reading, or Converse, I shall shortly manifest and evince,
not by persuasive Probabilities, but by cogent Demonstrations; such as shall
wring out an Assent from the most incredulous of all his Friends, I mean his
Accomplices and Abettors. Concerning some of his Falsehoods I will be bold to
say, that had he endeavored for a wager, or been bribed by me with a Reward,
to frame his Calumnies so unproportionable to all the Rules and Arts of lying,
as not to leave a possibility of his being believed by any Creature, he could
not have given us a lustier experiment of his Faculty, by all the Pangs and
Tortures of his Invention.

7. Now then, good Reader, give me the steadyest of thy Attention, and prepare
thy self for an Astonishment. He begins He betrayeth himself by his endeavored
vindication.
to quit himself of the Forgeries which I had laid to his charge, in these
following words.

W. B.
Chapter 2. page 17. line 18. and so downwards.
About what he has of my (1) Fictions against him, of taking up things upon
(2) bare report, or simple hearsay, about what I charge him with Corrept, Cor.
39. concerning his being above sin, and concerning the denial of the
lawfulness of second Marriages, p. 73. of Ministers, etc.

Answ. That I may at once quit my self from the Aspersion of having indulged to
any vain Credulity against him, I must once for all protest before God and men,
that I know but three things in all my book, which I did so much as seem to
give Note, that what he did not give credit to, he did no: believe, for if he
had, he must needs have given some credit to it. For not to believe is to give
no credit; to which the giving of some credit is a direct Contradiction.
credit to against him, and which yet I did not take up upon bare hearsay,
etc.

T. P.
1. Had not the man been so distinct in the later part of these 1. His wise and
caetera.
lines, which he marks for an Answer unto the manifold charge, I should have
thought his two and caeteras (but especially the first) had been the wisest
performance in all his Book. For I had charged him in one See the beginnings of
the 40. sections of the third chipt. of the Div. Philanth. D^f. b
chapter with 40. palpable Inventions, which were the Subjects of so many
Sections, all conspicuous in the Front of the several Sections, and thereby
thrusting themselves into the Eye of the Reader, and expressed all in his own
words, and all referred to the pages from whence I took them. Mr. B. observing
but two of the 40. in my epistle (set down only as a specimen of what the
Reader was to expect,) sets them down with an and caetera, (but imperfectly
too) and pretends to acquit himself from all at once. This is the bottom of his
deep project, and my first observation. But secondly, He spoils himself for a
projector 2. His confession sealed with an Oath.
in the very next words. For he rapps out an Oath, that in all his book
(without exception of a page) there are but three things that he knows, which
he did so much as seem to give credit to against me. Reader, observe the man's
Confession. Of those 40. great Falsehoods which he delivered in his book with
the greatest confidence in the world, he does acknowledge 37. to have been
wilfully committed, there being but 3. of all the number to which he gave any
Credit. How great a wickedness was that, to accuse a Neighbor, even in print,
of so many foul things, when he makes Oath (even in print too) that he
believed so very few? But this is the (...), the mere beginning of all his
sorrows. For thirdly, there was a multitude of Slanders (besides those 40.
thrust up together) 3. That he gave no credit to the far greatest part of his
Aspersions.
which I observed out of his Pasquil both in the first, second, and fourth
chapters of my book. Of all which, when I expected that he would offer at a
proof, or publish at least a Recantation, he puts me off with a Solemn Oath,
that (excepting three things) he gave no credit to a syllable of whatsoever he
spoke against me throughout his book. How then shall I, or the world give
credit to him, if he can hardly believe a word of what himself speaks?
Fourthly, since he confesses with an Oath, that all his slanders, except
three, were 4. Yet will not make a Reparation.
so transcendently incredible, that he himself could not believe them; why do
we not find him upon his Knees, at an open penance, as he Dedic. Ep^st. p. 3.
line 1. 2.
promised no longer since then whilst he was dedicating his Labors? Here is
his * fateor with a witness, but where is his * peccavi, which he is wont to
be at in a poenitent mood? Does he think that his making a lusty confession **
Epist. Ded. lib. pr. p. 9.
of his sins, can entitle him to a privilege of doing as wickedly as before? If
so, we understand what is his Doctrine of Repentance, which does consist of a
Confession without satisfaction or amendment; (a goodly ornament of the Party,
of which he would be reckoned a Leading man.) Or does he think that slanders
are peccadillos in the elect, of whose small Number (small I mean in
comparison) he often gloryes that he is one? If so, what need such large
Confessions, and so many offers to cry peccavi, when the omission of that also
can be no more then a peccadillo? But I will follow him no farther in this his
misery, as being diverted by a greater. For fifthly, he does not only swear
that he gave no credit to all the things which he spoke against me (excepting
three) but 5. But seeks to secure an old falsity with a new one.
that he did not so much as seem to give credit to them. Was ever Man so
unhappy in the laying down so few words? that whilst he is saying a very great
Truth [his giving no credit to what he spoke against me] he should spoil it in
the same Instant with as great a Falsehood [his not so much as seeming to do it
neither?] Does he never so much as seem to give any credit to the Articles of
his Creed, when he pronounces them in the most positive and dogmaticall manner
to be imagined? And was he not every whit as positive, every whit as
dogmaticall, in pronouncing things against me, to which he here swears that he
did not so much as seem to give any credence or belief? I will put it home by
an Proved such by an Induction.
Induction of some particulars. When he said, that I gave out Faith to be the
Correp. Corr. p. 15.
cause of election, in my public papers; and that I did not so much as deny
that when two men are equally called, whereof the one converts himself, the
other miscarrieth, it is not p. 15.
God, but Man that puts the difference; and that at Daintry in my Sermon I
affirmed God to have prepared Hell, for the Devil and his Angels, but p. 20.
not for any wickedmen; that I affected to be an p. 36.
elector and Determiner of Grace; that I called in Poets, if not p. 69.
Devils, to help me to blaspheme; that I was a Satanicall blasphemer, and p.
102.
exceeded the Devil himself in blasphemy; (with a multitude the like) did he
not so much as seem to believe what he said? or will he say that these things
were rather for me, then against me? Or when he Correp. Corr. p. 174.
professed in the presence of God, that he did much fear, that no man could
write thus, but one wel-nigh in the same condition with Simon Magus, adding,
that I did openly blaspheme against Scripture, did he not seem to give credit
to it? Either he did, or he did not. If he did not, why then did he profess it
in the presence of God? and if he did seem to give credit to it, why then does
he protest before God and men, that he did not? Poor man! what has he done? or
what will he do? Can he escape doing penance upon his knees (as before he E*
is it. Ded. the first p. 9.
promised, and has now Epist. Ded. the second p. 3.
reprom^s'd) when he has not a mousehole through which to run from it? The
many falsehoods which he affirmed in the word of a Priest only (for he is a
Priest, or a Lay-preacher) he did lustily seem at least to credit: and did he
not so much as seem to believe what he said upon his Oath? Behold His two Oaths
opposite to each other.
two Oaths as perfectly opposite to each other, as the Scottish Covenant was
opposite to any Oath which can be named. And will be do no penance for being
perjured? At what Crevice will he creep out?

He cannot say, either in reason, or in charity to himself, His impossibility
of escaping at any Crevic^, either from perjury, or contradictions.
that by his phrase of giving credit, he only meant taking up upon Report from
other men. For 1. if that had been his meaning, he would certainly have
expressed it in a significant Phrase; whereas habere fidem, to give credit, and
credere, to believe, are [(...)] two expressions of one thing. A man may give
credit to the false suggestions of his own heart; and again his own Fancy may
create such Fictions, to which himself can give no credit. 2. In that very
objection which he proposes unto himself, as that to which he must shape his
Answer, there are two sorts of falsities with which he stands charged; viz. the
Fictions of his Brain, and Things taken upon report: to the first of which he
is to give his first answer, or at least his second, or to give a reason for
the omission. 3. As a man is said to be vainly credulous, who believes his own
Iealousyes without just ground, so had Mr. B. meant otherwise by that
expression in that place, it had been more to his misery, then now it is. For
4. no sooner had he sworn that he knew but three things to which he gave
credit, but he immediately lets fall a fourth, concerning second marriages,
which he confesses to have taken upon the report of a Reverend Divine: which
plainly proves him to be perjured, if he meant there were but 3 things which he
took upon Trust. Nay 5. there were many amazing portentous falsehoods, with
which he was charged in my book, and clearly proved to be guilty of; which he
must either now say he had but taken upon Trust from other men, (and then he is
perjured, as before,) or that at least they were the Issues of his Invention.
Such was that of rifling the Batavian Cabinet, and of being * beholding ** See
Div. P^il^nt: Def. chapter 3. p. 143, 144, etc.
to such Roguish Pamphlets as Fur Praedestinatus, and to Ibid. p. 147, 148, etc.
my Domestic Doctor Iackson, and to p. 149.
Castalio for flowers of Rhetoric, etc. neither of which is in the number of
those 3. fictions, to which alone he swears his having seemed to give credit.
And be it known to all his Readers, that he neither endeavors to prove the
truth of those things, nor declares his sorrow for their falsehood, but
passes them over in a very deep silence, hoping that I would forget them, as
well as our lesse-concerned Readers. In a word: if he will say his meaning is,
That of the Numerous Calumnies and Forgeries which I demonstrated to be such,
(and himself also confesses, partly implicitly, and partly explicitly) there
were three, and three only, which he received upon Trust from some other man;
he is not only perjured, as has been showed, but also ownes the greatest
wickedness that any man (in this kind) can be guilty of. It being much a
greater fault, to be the Coyner of adulterate money, than only to take it with
the one hand, and put it off with the other. That is such a betraying
subterfuge, that I conceive he dares not use it. I have taken his words, not
only in the most rational, but the most favorable construction: and therefore
knowingly he will not cast Anchor upon Quicksands. But whither then will he
fly for Refuge? He cannot say that the place is false-printed, for the sense
is entire, the words exact, they are not altered in the Errata, nor yet with
his pen, and he jogged up to London immediately before his book came forth,
('it is said) on purpose to set all right as he would have it. He cannot say that
he excepted but three things only of some one sort, or in some one part of his
Correptorie Correction; for the words of his Oath are these expressly, [ I
must protest once for all before God and men, that I know but three things in
all my Book, which I did so much as seem to give credit to against him, and
which yet I did not take upon bare hearsay, etc.] Observe good Reader. All his
book, is the widest expression he could have used, whereby to justify me, and
defame himself. Nor will his last words afford him any the smallest chink. For
what he took Note, that in his p. 19. lin, 35. 36. he confesses those to be
bare hear-says, which here he swear's were not.
not up upon bare hearsay, he either saw, or felt, or smelt at least afarr
off: and then why gave he no credit to them? or if he did, why did he not so
much as seem to do it? or if he did, and did seem too, why does he swear that
he did neither, when in the very same Oath, he swears that he had reason and
ground for both? Here he swears that which implies a contradiction, and that
within the compass of not many words, of which his Oath is composed. For if he
allege (as a Salvo for Name, and Conscience) that the last words do not relate
to any thing else, then the three particulars excepted, his Calamityes will
increase by all the things that he has spoken in their defense, as I shall
clearly demonstrate, when I come to consider them apart. and yet (the sadder is
his condition) they cannot regularly belong to any other then those three; nor
truly should I have guess't it to be his meaning, but that I know it his lesser
Evil, and find him often at false construction, and so in charity would hope,
that some degree of his guilt may be imputed unto his Ignorance, rather then
all should be laid on the back of Conscience. Yet that he may not be
ungrateful for so much favor as I afford him, (as he formerly has been) I
will show him very shortly how ill he chooses for himself, in case he chooses
to be thought a good Grammarian. But I may not yet pass from the present
passage lying before us. For sixthly, I must not omit any means whereby to
lessen the unhappiness of this unfortunate Creature, if any 6. The best that
can be said for him is vehemently bad.
means may be found for so good a purpose. The best excuse that I am able to
prompt him to, is to put a special Emphasis upon the words [I know.] for so
run's his Oath, [ I must first once for all protest before God and men, that I
know but three things in all my book, which I did so much as seem to give
credit to against him, etc.] But alas! this best of excuses is so vehemently
bad, that I know not how he will be able to take it kindly. For if he did not
see the greatest part of my book, nor of his own, whilst he was Epist. Ded. p.
1. l. 3.
laboring in the work of vindicating the later from the many high charges of
the former, where were his Eyes? If he did see, but not perceive, whether went
his understanding? If he did see, and perceive, but would not be known to do
either, whereabouts lay his Honesty? If I rightly remember, Busbequius, in one
of his Embassyes, tellsus a story of some Turks (the great Assertors of Mr.
Barlee's Doctrine of Decrees) who having a very great mind to be drunk with wine
(which Mahomet's Law had forbid them) did first break forth into such a showt,
as they thought was sufficient to fright their Consciences into their feet,
that so they might revell it without all scruple. Some such expedient our
Correptory Corrector had need devise, if after his having published so many
things against me, he will have an ability not to know them; or to know but
three of them, and to unknow the rest; or not to know them to have been
credited by himself, no not so much as in appearance. If by saying, he does not
know, he means, he does not consider or respect them, it has some Resemblance
to his Doctrine of God's Decrees, viz. That God did decree the Reprobation of
his Creatures, not without a foreknowledge of their Actual sins, but yet
without the least respect or consideration of them.
Seventhly, it is to be noted, that Mr. Barlee does imply it to 7. What he gets
by his denial of vain credulity.
be a very ill thing, for a man to have indulged to any vain credulity against
a Neighbor; because he calls it an Aspersion from which at once he would fain
be quit. And to effect his purpose, he must protest before God, that he gave no
credit to any one thing which he spoke against me in all hi^ book; excepting
those three, which shall be by and by mentioned. As if he thought it a lesser
crime to slander a man against his knowledge, then to speak what he thinks
through vain credulity of disposition. For that they really were slanders
(every one, except three) he does more then confess whilst he protests before
God, that he himself did not give any credit to them; whereby he proves them,
by an Oath, to have been maliciously intended, and not embraced through mere
credulity. Nay he is yet more unlucky: For in that he protests against his
having been vainly credulous, and against his having taken those things upon
hearsay, does he not intimate unto us, that they were only the children of
his invention? As if he thought it a finer thing, to spin a Forgerie out of
himself, and not to give it any credit, then to be so credulous as to believe
it from another. Eighthly, neither he, nor his Friends, can comfortably say in
his excuse, that the 8
words of his Oath were not carefully put together, and tha^ through some
inadvertency he hardly knew what he said, be yet his meaning was good enough.
for this will render his gilt as great as any thing else, that he should swear
he cares not, or considers not what. I can expect it from none but a common
swearer, to protest before God even before he is aware. But neither is it
credible, that that sin should serve for his excuse. because it was written,
and read, (in probability very often) before 'twas printed. Were it available
to say, that his intention and meaning was good enough, though infinitely
different from the signification of his words, there would not be any
difference betwixt the truest and the most slanderous speaker, as to an human
Tribunal. But if Mr. Barlee should speak Treason against the Commander of 30.
Legions, and then appeal to good meaning, I doubt such Logic would not
preserve him. Nay ninthly, His invoking of God was clearly used as a Design, to
wipe off the aspersion of 9.
being credulous. for so run his words, That I may at once quit my self from
the aspersion of having indulged to any vain credulity against him, I must once
for all protest before God, etc. where the particle [That] in the beginning, is
(...), that is, it notes the final Cause of his protesting before God; [That I
may] is all one with [To the end that I may.] Nay tenthly, he ushers in his
Transgression of the third Commandment, with a positive [I must,] which needs
10. His pretended Necessity for swearing.
must signify either his Duty, or his Necessity. Not his Duty, because it was
lawful to have omitted the attestation of God in such a case. but his
Necessity (as he thought) for one of these two reasons: either because he was
reduced to that extremity and exigence, that he had no other shift whereby to
amuse one sort of Readers, (and then the necessity was but moral, created to
himself by himself;) or else because he was predetermin'd to that abuse of
God's Name, by such a Fatal Decree as he is wont to dream of, such as gives a
necessity to all men's Actions, (and then 'twas a physical necessity, not at 11.
all to be avoided, if we believe Mr. B. upon his word, or his Oath.) Mr. B.'s
Argumentative Oath. Not unl ke to Mr. Ha^ket, who inste^d of miracles, or
reasons, whereby to prove that his Doctrine and T aiterous Design did
immediately proceed from the spirit of God, fell into swearing, and groaning,
and calling curses upon himself, if it were not so. Bp. Bancr. Dang. Posit. chapter
15. p. 170.
But then, in the eleventh place, what a subtle Disputant is Mr. Barlee, who
urges an Oath for an Argument? and no other Argument, except an Oath? I had
accused him of many falsehoods which he reported upon hearsay in several
kinds, and other falsehoods which he invented, (which sure are worse;) and he,
to vindicate himself, has not any thing to say, but that he protests before
God and men, etc. and to give us Assurance that this is all he has to say, he
tells us, He must once for all protest, etc. for though he inserts the word
[first] yet there follows no [secondly] to which that first can have a regular
relation. What falsehood is there, or can there be, which may not be proved to
Mr. Barlee (by an argument ad Hominem) if wicked Protestations may pass for
proofs? But what is the thing which he protests? not the negative to that which
was laid to his charge, but a thing impertinent and senseless. For I accused
him of his slanders and other falsehoods, (as things wicked in themselves, and
injurious to his Neighbor) partly invented by himself, and partly taken up
upon bare report; (and in that very method he sets them down in the objection:)
I did never accuse him of giving credit to those falsehoods, but rather of
raising such falsehoods as were incredible, and pretending nothing for his
ground, but a simple hearsay. Now Reader, attend to his astonishing Answer. I
must once (says he) for all, protest before God and men, that I know but three
things in all my book, which I did so much as seem to give credit to against
him, etc. Would he have justified himself, or answered the Objections, he
should have protested, or proved, one of these two things: that either he never
said the things whereof he was accused; or if he did, he said true, and that
for such or such reasons. Whereas he only protests, that of all the
particulars in his book he believed but three, nay that he did but seem to
believe those three too. And therefore twelfthly, Mr. Barlee subscribeth 12.
His necessityes and streights betwixt his first and second book.
implicitly to my whole volume of Accusations, and stigmatizeth his second
book, for pretending to vindicate his first. The reason is evident, because in
this most signal and remarkable place, (wherein he protests before God and
men) he does not offer so much as to say, that they were not Fictions with
which I charged him, but he swears that they were Fictions, by swearing that
he gave no credit to them. For, what other reason can be imagined, why he gave
no credit to them, but because he believed them or knew them to be but
Fictions? Behold now the streights into which this writer has cast himself
(for I am only an Index to show him how.) He must confess himself guilty, for
fear he confess himself guilty. It must be his refuge to say, that he was
slanderous before, that he may not seem perjured in having sworn that he was
slanderous. I have his public Protestation to clear my self, nay to clear the
very charge which I brought against him. At least the utmost that he can say,
is, that he excepted three things; which what they are, his next words tell us,
by way of reference.

W. B.
chapter 2. p. 17. line 29. and deinceps.
The first is that which here he has, and which again he makes a great stir
about, Philanthrop. chap. 3. p. 81, 82, 83. The second is that about the 600.
Copyes mentioned by him chap. 3. p. 54, 55. The third is about the Dialogue of
two Ladies about Artificial Beauty, mentioned from p. 150. to 552. of chap. 3.

T. P.
. 8. Now he names the three things, to which alone (he He gives the slip to a
passage which would convince him of a double perjurie.
protested) he seemed at least to have given credit. But he slily passes over
that, of which in particular he swore, that he did not so much as seem to give
credit to it, and yet that he did not take it up upon bare hearsay, etc. which
must therefore be examined, before I go forward to the three particulars
expressed. Whilst he was speaking of Gods Decree in relation to sin, he brake
out most impertinently into these very words, Corr. Corr. p. 73.
Look you to that formidable Ergo, who are said to be against all second
Marriages of Ministers. This passage he was willing to give the slip, because
he knew it would convince him of a twofold perjury. For first, if he did not
believe, or give credit to it, at least he seemed so to do, and yet he swore
he did not, as has been showed. and if he did but seem to believe the fiction
(by having printed it in his pamphlet of Predestination) but did not believe it
in good earnest, what a wicked Impertinence must it needs have been, to publish
a fiction quatenus ipsum, without connection to any syllable before or after? as
if in the midst of his thoughts concerning eternal Predestination, it had
occurred to his memory, that (the day before) he swallowed the Ace of Trumps,
and so forgot where he lef^: and then he remembered, what he thought a fine
thing, (a sh^ed of Latin) Baculus stat in angulo, etc. which suggested a
slander from a pretended hearsay. And this inferres his second perjury. For
his protestation before God referres to all that period (as has been showed)
and so to his pretention of not having taken upon bare hearsay. Yet he had
printed, [that I was said to be against the lawfulness of all second Marriages
of Mini^^ers:] which how could he tell, if he never heard it? If he heard it,
he did but hear it, and then we know he is forsworn; if he did not, 'twas his
invention. Thus having showed his miscarriage, which he so cunningly huddled
up; I will hasten to that which is more amazing, his three excepted particulars
which are of most weight with him, and for which he thinks he has most to say,
[as being the only three things in all his book against me, to which he
protested his having giving some credit.] Stand forth, Malefactor, and name the
first of your offenses.

W. B.
Chapter 2. p. 17. lin. 35. and thence to the bottom of the page.
First, if my Reader will be pleased once more to turn to my Correptory
Correction, p. 39. he will find that I used my utmost care and diligence to
inform my self of the Truth of it, and I farther back it there, with a probable
Argument from what he has in his uncorrect Copy.

T. P.
. 9. Now he enters upon that, which will paradigmatize The first of his three
excepted slanders.
him to all posterity: the greatest slander, and the most groundless; that I
believe has been brewed in the brain of man. And because by that which I shall
say, his utter undoing in point of Credit (if at least he has any) must needs
ensue; I desire his well-willers to carry this in their minds, That should I
abstain from doing that which may seem a siverity to Mr. Barlee, I cannot fail
of being guilty of perfect cruelty to my self, besides a double injustice both
to the Truth, and to the world. I have turned to the page where the great
slander is recorded, where I find a bare narrative of a pretended report from a
reverend Minister, who is said at first to have told him alone, and afterward
many more The slander, as it lies in its original.
Ministers in his hearing, and as heard by him from my own mouth, viz. that I
believe no sin to be in me, that I was above sin, that by my own power I could
abstain from all sin; and that he wrote this Testimony as the Testator of it
did dictate it to him.]

First observe, that here is nothing of care and diligence expressed in finding
out the truth of it, but only a hearing 1 Proved no more now then it was at
first, when it was crudely affirmed.
the words at one time, and transcribing them at another. Here is not a
syllable concerning the care which he took, to try the truth, or the falsehood
of that report: for the finding out of which, he professes that in that place
(p. 39.) he used his utmost of care and diligence. To find out the truth or the
falsehood of such a strange Tale, he should have examined the Relator, about
the time when, and the place wherein, and the occasion upon which such words
were spoken: he should have asked who heard them besides himself, and have told
him (out of St. Paul) that against a man of my calling (which is their own
also) an accusation is not to be admitted but before two or three witnesses: he
should 1 Timothy 5. 19.
have consulted with me about it, to try if I did remember, or would
acknowledge any such words, or any other words like them, or if I never said
something which might occasion such a mistake in him who heard me; or if that
would not prevail, he should have tried to catch me in several stories: he
should have moved every stone to have found out the truth, had he used his
utmost of care and diligence. But what did he in stead of all this? he bids us
look. but whither? to his p. 39. for what? even his utmost care and diligence.
wherein employed? in finding out the truth of what was told him by a Reverend
Divine. wherein did his utmost both care and diligence consist? in giving ear
to the words, and in writing them down. Here then is one falsification in the
beginning of his Defense.

Secondly, He pretends to no more than a naked hearsay forth t Invention (for
so I shall prove it in the end;) whereas 2. No more then a hearsay, contrary
to his oath.
he swore a little before, that he did not take it up upon a bare hearsay. Nor
does he pretend, that any more than one man did ever say that he had heard me
to speak such words, and he a Sympresbyter of the Gang too, who cannot
therefore pretend to so much as one witness; but the Apostle says expressly,
An accusation must not be received against a Priest, without two or three
witnesses: and (...), to admit, or receive, a Complaint or Accusation, was but
the first part of the three, which were to go before the sentence in the
judicial proceedings among the Jews, by which that Text must be explained: See
Doctor Hammond's Annot. on the place.
next the complaint must be confirmed by the oaths of those witnesses: and
because the witnesses may be perjured, (whether bribed with money, or suborned
by their own malice) the cause is thirdly to be searched, and considered by the
Judge. for if the witnesses are two, but made appear to be sons of Bel^al, if
they are proved to be greedy of filthy lucre, or if the Plaintiff is known to
be a Iezebel, and apt to be a suborner with either money or moneys worth, if
Naboth is known to be both honest and religious, and yet accused at once of
blaspheming God and the King, if Ahab is known to have been in love with
Naboth's vineyard, and that he could not obtain it by fairer means, a
considering Judge will be suspicious of such men's oaths. But Mr. Barlee's
Informer is the original accuser, and cannot be his own witness; for where two
single men say yea, and no, to one sentence, the result is nothing but (...),
an endless a Heb. 6. 16.
strife of contradiction.

Nay thirdly, that one Informer is but pretended; neither 3. Mr. Barlee
provoked to name his Informer, if he has any.
named in the first book, nor now in the second; and I really believe he is not
yet christened. If there is any such creature, let him not hide his head and
his name together; nor any longer expose his brother Zelot to shame and
censure. If his Name be Simeon, let him not suffer little Levi to bear the
whole odium of such a slander. At least let Mr. Barlee have so much mercy upon
himself, as to lighten his load of guilt and hatred, by laying part of it upon
a new pair of shoulders. When I reported that I had heard of the Primates
change, I thought my self obliged to name my Authors, first in private, and now
in print. And if there is any other case wherein this Justice shall be
required, I will not fail to perform it, or make satisfaction for the wrong. I
require no more of my Accuser, then what I offer at his Demand. If he had an
Informer on this side his bosom, or his Brain, let him be brought into the
light, that the deed of darkness may be made manifest, and Mr. Barlee be freed
at least a Tanto. But until he do this, he must remain on that Gibbet on
which he has trussed himself up. His upper lip must be thought the reverend*
Divine unto his lower; or his tongue did dictate, whilst his ear and his hand
did both receive the information; and so at once he is Simeon and Levi too.

But fourthly, that I may force him by cogent Reason to take this course, which
is more for his interest, then he can 4. Mo^ives used to that purpose.
think it to be for mine, (for whilst he names not his Informer, he is
concluded to have none) I shall entreat him to remember, that he may make it a
leading case to as many sons of Belial, as either for malice, or for money,
shall ruin themselves, or their dearest friends, in point of fame, or fortune,
or life it self, by raising a false Report, upon pretense of an Author without
a name, if it were fit that such a report should pass so easily for its own
proof. As for example, If I my self had any malice to Mr. Barlee's person, or
any love to his parsonage, or any envy of his parts, or had been publicly
non-plust in some dispute, and thereupon had a design to contrive his mischief,
I could easily publish a Declaration, That September the eight 1649. he was
found under a hedge in the act of Adultery, and that this I was told by from
parallel slanders which might be raised upon him.
three godly Ministers, who riding that way, were all three witnesses of the
thing. And many years before, when Mr. Barlee was in Holland, he was commonly
drunk every week, as three Dutch Merchants told me, first when I was alone with
them, and afterward upon the Exchange, when many more heard it as well as I,
and this they protested to have been eyewitnesses of; and they were most These
are Mr. Barlees words chapter 2. p. 19. li. 9, 10, 11.
conscronable men, who I think made as much conscience of not telling or
believing lies, as any men in Holland. Such slanders, I say, I could invent, or
cause others to invent, if I had his Conscience (which God of his mercy, and by
his grace, defend me rom) or if I could endure to repay him in kind. Nay let
Mr. Barlee lay to heart, that these two fictions are more commendable, or (to
speak more exactly) l^sse intolerable then his. First, because in the former I
name the year, and the day, and the place of commission; secondly, because I
pretend to three witnesses, all as reverend as his one; thirdly, because the
subject matter is much more probable (as I conceive) then that which is the
subject of his invention. Or I could say, that Mr. Barlee had killed a man in
his wrath, when he was at Leyden, for worsting him in dispute And that with
more probability,
about the point of Praedestination, and thereupon fled into England, etc. and
for this I could give a more probable Reason, then he can give for my saying, I
am without sin, etc. for is it not true, that he was at Leyden? and that he
came into England? and that he is strangely choleric, (as himself confesses)
and that he is vehement in dispute? impatient of opposition? much more
impatient of being worsted? And since wilful murders are sometimes committed,
manslaughter often, in fits of passion; is it not infinitely more probable,
that fire should burn down a house, or a choleric man kill in a fit of rage,
then that a man should say, he believes he is without sin, and above sin, and
by his own power can keep himself from sin, who has breathed nothing so much
as confessions of sin, ever since his very boyage? The former case has so much
color of probability in it, and Mr. Barlee has discovered so much virulence
of spirit, that many men have considered how great a happiness it is, that
neither he, nor his kinsmen, have got the power of the sword.

Nay fifthly, should I invent such a slander as one of those above mentioned, I
could have such an advantage as he is not 5. And greater hopes of escape
able to pretend to: for I could say, that my three Dutchmen, or my three
Reverend Divines (from whom I had my Intelligence) are all six dead, and so
escape the necessity of bringing them forth to the Tribunal; whereas Mr.
Barlee's one man is employed by him to be still alive (as we shall happily
observe anon.) And truly (Reader) the chiefest Reason The Reasons of these
motives ^or the finding of the Informer.
why I use these Impellents, to force my confident Accuser unto the naming of
his Informer without delay, is my rational jealousy and fear, that if he stay
a long time before he does it, he will impute it to any Minister within the
compass of his Acquaintance, who betwixt this and that shall chance to die; or
else, for want of a better way, he may take an occasion to die himself; at
least he may hope to be my Surviver, and then may use me as well as Mr. Rivet
and others have used Grotius. And because I find at the later * end of his
book, he has provided a pretense for his saying nothing to ** chapter 4. p. 149.
li. 3, 4, 5.
this charge, by professing to be * resolved to cut off all the advantages,
which in this kind I may take against him, and to cut them off by an obstinate
kind of silence for the future; I am afraid he will pretend he must not answer
to my charge, because he dares not break his promise; and that the clearing of
himself (by aspersing the Minister who did inform him) will not any way consist
with his obstinate kind of silence, nor with his steadfast Resolutions of
cutting off all my advantages from this day forward. But this is just as if a
Felon should take an oath before his trial, that he will cut off all advantages
by an obstinate silence, and refuse an answer to his Indictment, under pretense
of his duty to keep his oath. Indeed I have heard of a cunning Schoolboy, who
when the Master was brand^shing (over his back) the terrible. Instrument of his
anger, besought him only this favor, that he might not be whipped until he first
had said his prayers. The Master pleased with the petition, thought good to
grant it. Why then (said the Boy) I w^ll never say my prayers until I am grown
too big for such correction. But Mr. Barlee must consider, that if he shall
refuse to name his Reverend Informer, because he resolved to write no more, and
confirmed it with his promise in the conclusion of his book, the Slander will
be ascribed to his invention. Or if he will not write, he may read at least
before the Magistrate, and take the advantage of being Plaintiff: for if he
has not slandered me, nor his Informer neither, then they may worthily implead
me for all this wrong. And therefore let me persuade him, either to crave my
forgiveness, and to make me a little satisfaction, (for I will not rigidly
require my due) or else let him speedily produce his man, who was the Author of
his Report. I know that most Soldiers do love to make a golden bridge to a
flying enemy, because even cowards, and conquered men, will do strange things
when they are desperate. But so sure am I of being innocent, as to that
wherewith I have been slandered, and so very desirous to know the bottom of the
report, that I will not willingly accept of Mr. Barlee's Tergiversation, nor so
much as afford him a wooden bridge. For suppose the worst that can arrive, to
wit, that he and his Congerro should both conspire to be perjured at a dead
lift, or suborne false witnesses (as Iezebel did;) yet so much do I rely upon
the Integrity of my cause, (and upon the good providence of God upon it) that
if I could not evince them to be suborned and perjured, by either the
multitude, or strength of reasons, I should not despair of a miracle, for the
making a D^scovery of Truth and Falsehood. But I find I am so far from having
spoken the Total of what I have to say, for the proving this slander to be
demonstratively a slander (however demonstratively proved already) that I do
think it fit for another Section.

. 10. Because a namelesse Informer (he knew) was worth nothing, he tells us
that he backed it with a probable Argument from what he found in my uncorrect
Copy; that is, from How Mr. Barlee spoils himself by his pretensions to a
probable Argument.
a manuscript, which he transcribed, I know not when, nor from whence, nor with
how many Interpolations; such as I never yet saw, nor would he suffer me to see
it when I desired that favor by way of Epistle. Yet he confessed in his
Epistle, that there was non sense in two places, and that if he should send it,
I could not possibly read it; and other Transcripts which I saw, were strangely
altered from my Original: and yet he calls this my uncorrect Copy
(uncorrected indeed of all his Interpolations) and to the world of Readers who
never were in his desk, nor had ever a sight of his Manuscripts, he cites no
body knows what, to prove his Slander. How much better might I accuse him, of
having written whatsoever I please to fancy, who have so much of his own hand
whereon to father it? But secondly, admit in his Manuscript there 2.
are such words from whence he can draw a probable Argument (as by and by I
shall show the contrary) yet is that sufficient to back a story, which if not
true, is an incomparable slander? Probable is that, which as it may possibly be
true, so it may possibly be false too. Behold the manifold unluckinesse of this
D^sputer. The very Topic from which he argues he confesses to be Apocryphal,
a jen-scay-quoy, an uncorrect Copy in the dark, a Manuscript lying in his Desk,
or at least in his closet; and yet from this unknown thing he pretends to no
more then a probable Argument, which he hopes will persuade, but cannot hope it
will prove, unless he understands not what [probable] signifyes, and so has
printed he knew not what. But thirdly, his greatest unluckinesse is yet to
come. For that which he calls a probable Argument of my having said, [ I am
without sin, and above it, and by my own power can abstain from all sin,] is
rather a probable Argument that I never said it. Because the words which he
cites from the manuscript Copy (which he calls mine) are expressly these;
Correp. Corr. p. 39. lin. 22, 23.
[ You say that Adam's Concerning Adams sin, and ours and original sin, and
actual, both in him, and in us.
sin was none of our own, contrary to the Apostle Romans 5. 12.] In which few
words, how many ways has he miscarried, and even ruined his own interest, for
which he spoke them? For 1. suppose I had said, that Adam's sin is none of our
own, had I thereby inferred that we are without sin and above sin? had I not
rather infer^'d the contrary, that though another man's sins are not ours, yet
ours are our own? Is there no difference betwixt another man, and our selves?
the things of another, and the things of our selves? and was not Adam an other
man? was not Adam's whole person, (body, soul, and spirit, and the qualityes of
each) a different thing from our persons, bodies, souls, and spirits, and all
personal qualityes whatsoever? Every child could have taught Mr. B. that
though Adam and we do agree in specie, yet we are (with a witness) numerically
different. 2. It seems Mr. B. is so unsufficient for the Ministry, that he
knows not what is meant by our original sin amongst the men of his own way. He
thought that Adam's actual sin of eating the Apple had been that which we call
original sin in our selves: which none of his party (if they have more wit then
he) will ever say: and How Mr. B's notion of it tends to Pel^gian^sme and to
other absurdityes.
if they should, they would imply unavoidably, that our original sin is not
inherent in our souls, but only in Adam; who being forgiven, dead, and happy,
has that sin done away from his imparadised soul, and so there is no such
thing remaining as original sin, by that doctrine. And by the same it would
follow, that original sin is actual sin, that actual sin is no sin, that Mr.
Barlee's Daughter is guilty of his books, (as having been in ipsius Lumbis)
though she never had a hand in them, and I verily believe was never willing
they should be written. 3. But if I had said, that Adam's sin was none of our
own, and had employed thereby what he supposes, yet having spoken in the
plural number, including all the posterity of Adam, of which Mr. Barlee is a
part, I had by consequence employed that every man in the world (Mr. Barlee too)
is without sin, and above sin, and by his own power can abstain from all sin.
And thus we see that Mr. B. was an unpolitick projector: for he should have
fancyed my words were these, Adams sin was none of mine own; but he would needs
have it thus, Adams sin was none of our own. 4. My own Account of original sin
in my self.
That which I call original sin in my self, is the pravity of my nature, my
corruptnesse of Disposition, by which I love darkness better then light,
unless God by his Grace does make me able to choose better, to have better
loves, desires, and inclinations, then I can possibly have without it. And
through this pravity of Nature there is not any mere man who can possibly be
without sin. And the spirit of this Doctrine does run through all that I have
published from press or pulpit. But I Why I say that Adams Actual sin is not
numerically mine own.
must not lie, and speak nonsense, and abuse the Scriptures, and imply a
thousand contradictions, for fear of displeasing an angry Neighbor. I say, I
must not commit these Crimes, by saying that Adams sin was very really mine
own. Indeed if Adam had never sinned, I hope I should ever have been Innocent.
But Death having entered into the world by sin, and sin by Adam, I have too many
sins which are peculiarly mine own, (both Original and Actual) to need another
man's sin for the completing of my Number Perhaps a few country people, who
have been taught by such Pastors as were put besides the right use, when they
were dedicated to learning, may think it sense to say, that Adam's sin was our
own before we were, or that his sin which began above 5600. years since, did
also not begin till yesterday when we were borne, or did begin a thousand
times, and was ten thousand times begun before its beginning. Such men as these
must be taught to say, that all our own sins did enter by Adam; not that our
sins were Adam's, much less that Adam's sins were ours. And before I show this
from Mr. B's own Text, (which he thought had been pertinent, but is nothing
less) I will thus reason him into his wits. If Adam's sin was none of Mr.
Barlee's own, it was none of mine or thine, Reader: but it was none of Mr.
Barlees own. For did he eat of the fruit in the midst of Eden, many thousands
of years before he had a mouth? no more did I, or the other man. What the Jews
said to Christ (and very rationally in respect of his Manhood) Ioh. 8 57.
Thou art not yet 50. years old, and have thou seen Abraham? that may I say
more rationally of my self, I am not yet 40. years old, and have I ever seen
Adam, whom Abraham was too young to see? and could his sin be mine without my
commission? and could I commit it without existence? Nothing is mine in any
sense, (right, or wrong,) unless I find, or conquer, or purchase, or inherit,
or claim by prescription, or receive it by deed of gift. Now it cannot be
pretended that Adam's sin is mine own, unless by right of inheritance, and
that is but weakly pretended too. For when I say in my Concerning a man's being
born in sin. What is not meant.
confessions and prayers, that I was born in sin, and in sin my mother
conceived me, and the like, I do not mean that I was born in the act of eating
forbidden fruit growing in the midst of the Garden of Eden; nor that I did eat
it with Adam's mouth before I was born; nor that my mother Eve conceived me in
sin as she once conceived Cain or Abel; nor that I was born, in the guilt of
those actual sins, which my mother committed, who brought me forth into the
world: but I What is meant by it.
mean that I was born in original sin, that is, a pravity of nature, a
corruptnesse of disposition, which makes me naturally prone to obey the law
that is in my Romans 7. 23.
members, and to rebel against the Law which God has imprinted in my mind. So
that that which I inherit, is a depraved nature, common to me with all mankind,
considered in specie; but numerically considered, it is peculiarly mine own,
and no man's else. Whereas if I inherited (in a proper sense) as well the sin,
as the substance of my progenitors, then the sins of my particular immediate
parents would be mine own, rather then Adams. And therefore (fifthly.) let us
consider, how perfectly 5.
contrary to common sense Mr. B. opposes that Text, Concerning that Text, By
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin.
Romans 5. 12. where the Apostle says, that by one man [Adam] sin entered into
the world, and death by sin. He does not say, that one man's sin is the peculiar
sin of all men, or all men's own, (as the word was:) nor can he mean it in such
a sense, as if the numericall sin of Adam's eating the Apple, were successively
propagated (as mankind was) throughout the universe of men. The Absurdityes
which follow from Mr. B's exposition.
for then, as all the sons who descended from Adam, were the same kind of
Creatures that Adam was, to wit men; so all the sinners, as sinners, descending
from Adam, should be the same kind of sinners that Adam was, to wit
Apple-Eaters, and eaters of that Apple which was forbidden. A second absurdity.
And if every thing of man which entered into the world by Adam were Adam's
own, and our own too, then as Adam's sin should be our sin, so his personal
qualityes and members should be our own too. And Mr. Barlee must say, that
Adam's Nose was Mr. Barlee's own Nose, or deny himself to be Adam's Son; or say
that he was born without a Nose, and that this which he now wears, is not an
original, but an actual Nose. he must say that Adam's Death was our own, if
his sin was our own, by force of that Text Romans 5. 12. which says, that Death,
as well as sin, did by one man enter into the world. Now then let us observe
the utmost force of his probable Argument. The utmost force of Mr. B's
Argument.
[ Mr. Pierce said in his uncorrect copy, that Adam's sin was not our own: and
St. Paul says, that by one Man sin entered into the world: therefore it is
probable Mr. Pierce said, That he was without sin, and above sin, and by his
own power could abstain from all sin.] By the very same Logic, (but with a
greater force in some respects) I will prove that Mr. Barlee does probably
think he shall never dye; (but either be translated, or live immortal upon
Earth.) For he does probably believe Its absurdity shown in a parallel case.
that Adam's Death was none of Mr. Barlee's own: and St. Paul says, that by
one man Death entered into the world, Romans 5. 12. therefore it is probable, Mr.
B. believes, that he is without death, and above death, and by his own power
can abstain from dying. Besides; the same Apostle that says, By one man sin
entered into the world (v. 12.) does also say at the same time, that by the
righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of
life, v. 18. from whence how many inconveniences will arise to Mr. Barlee, and
to his Doctrins, as well as his ways of arguing, I leave to be observed by the
considering Reader. Having showed how little he understood that saying, that by
one man sin entered into the world, etc. I will but add that the meaning is
only this: It was by Adam's eating the forbidden fruit, that we are all of us
obnoxious both to sin and mortality, as being born after the image and
likeness of Adam. (...), by one, as by an instrument, which Satan used; or
(...), by one, as by a door, at which sin entered, and Death by sin. not that
Adam's sin and Death were both our own.

But notwithstanding the less then nothing which Mr. B. has alleged for his
report, that I said such things as must needs imply me to be a Ranter (a Sect
which follows his principles, for want of mine) yet he adventures to proceed
(not foreseeing what I have showed him) in that desperate manner which now
ensues.

W. B.
Chap. 2. p. 18. lin. 1, 2, etc.
The Minister from whose mouth I took up both the Reports, about his
maintaining himself to be above sin, and about his Denial of the Observe
Reader, that both those Tales had one Author: and that in the first he
conceales the worst part; which was, that I said there was no sin in me, and
that by mine owa power I could abstain from all sin.
lawfulness of second marriages of Ministers, is not a man of mean Note in the
Ministry, nor far off, with whom, since this last book of his came forth, I
have diverse times conferred about these reports; and he professes, that upon
any just occasion he will justify them to his Face; and stands amazed at his
impudent Denial of what he then said to him. Methinks therefore his marginal
Finger p. 81. is but like that of the naughty one who be speaks his own
impudence with his fingers, Prove. 6. 13.

T. P.
. 11. First it ought to be observed, that what he barely reported in his first
book, he barely repeateth in his second, He betrayeth his crime with his
excuse, and blasteth his first Informer.
without replying to those See Div. Philan. Def. chapter 3. p. 81, 82, 83.
ten things, which I had returned in my Answer to that incomparable report. and
yet he said in his Title Page, that he had made a full Abstersion of all
calumnyes, etc. thereby implying this confession, that those were far from
being Calumnyes, from which he has not endeavored to clear himself. This is a
special point of his necessary Vindication, to acknowledge the enormityes
which were laid to his charge, even whilst he labors to deny them. To sing the
same song, in the very same notes, with this ridiculous difference, that he who
before was a Reverend Minister without a Name, is now a namelesse Minister of
no small Note, what is this but to be stomach full in the midst of a
confession? 2.
and to betray his Crime with his excuse? Secondly, he confesses a little
after, that that Minister who told him, I was the Author of Artificial
Handsomnesse, although a p. 19. lin. 9.
conscionable Divine, was yet a Deceiver in that point. And if he was cheated
by his conscionable Informer, why did he not suspect his man of note too? since
I was much more likely to have penned that book, then to have given occasion for
such a slander. Nay thirdly, he confesses, (in the passage lying above) that
his man of no mean note in the Ministry had foulely wronged 3. His second
Informer is evinced by himself to have been a Forg^r.
me in one thing which he related, [viz. my denying the lawfulness of second
marriages of ministers,] and why might he not have thought, that he as foulely
wronged me in the other, [viz. my saying, that I was without sin, etc?] That he
wronged me in the former, by Mr. B.'s confession and Oath too, I prove from
those words which were the subject of my seventh section, where he protested
before God and men, that there was nothing in all his book to which he gave
credit so much as seemingly, except those three things, of which this,
concerning second marriages, he knows, was none. And by this we may see, that
Mr. B. wants a good memory the most of any man living, unless I may except his
Reverend Minister. For as if Satan had betrayed him, since he slunk from the
mention of second marriages, when it concerned him nearly to crave my mercy, or
at least to prove he did not need it, (which yet he could not prove without a
confession of being perjured, as has been shown. 7.) he here confesses the
same man (that is, probably, himself) to have been the Author of both reports;
as well of that which is acknowledged to be false, as of the other which is
still pretended to be true. Thus he uses his Brother presbyter, (as the men of
his Leven do use the Catholic Church) whilst he relyes upon him in one thing,
as an infallible informer, and yet esteems him in another 4. How his Tempter
betrayed him in the choice of his invention.
an arrant cheat. But fourthly, the greatest jest is, that he should leave his
informer in his more tolerable invention, and stick fast to him in that which
is more impossible to be true. For I did really dissuade a neighbor Minister
from a plurality of wives, though the Arguments which I used were taken only ab
incommodo; which might give a slander some kind of color, or pretense. But so
infinitely distant has my tongue ever been from that impious boast of being
without, and above all sin, that I never spoke any thing like it, never any
thing that look'c that way, or that might give an Eve-dropper and an enemy the
least occasion of mistake, but as much the contrary as any man has ever
spoken. He might have said with more skill, that Christ and St. Paul were
against all marrying, because they both preferred the single life. Or being
resolved to say an ugly thing of me, he might rather have given it out, that I
pretended to be a Prophet, sent in the Spirit of Elias as a forerunner of
Christ at his second coming; or that I used to say Mass in a Cope and
Surplice; or that I was Canon of Saint Croix; or any other strange thing,
rather then that I said, I was without sin, etc. And yet to gain some credit to
this wonder, he says [he has diverse times conferred ** Observe him speaking
in the plural.
with his man of note about these * reports, who stands amazed at my impudent
denial, and upon any just occasion will justify * them to my Face.]

. 12. The more desperate the pranck is, the greater confidence is needful to
make it prosperous. When the besieged How the Trick of his confidence is an
Argument of Distrust.
Romans were almost famish't in the Capitol, and had no provisions now left
besides a few loaves of Bread, they cunningly threw out those loaves at their
besiegers, that so the enemy might swallow a strong belief of their plenty. And
still the guiltiest malefactor is the readyest to wish the earth would swallow
him alive, if he was ever suborned to bear falsewitnesse. Some men's sins are so
great, that to protect them from a discovery, they think it needful to make
them greater. If Laban's Teraphims are stolen, and searched after very narrowly,
they must either be restored, or else Genesis 31. 19, 35.
concealed with a lie. Dioxippus was innocent, and yet did Saepe minus est
constantiae in rubore, quam in culpa. Qu. Curt. l. 9. p. 294.
blush at his indictment: But the Prove. 30. 20.
whore in the Proverbs did wipe her mouth, and say that she had done no
wickedness. Mr. Barlee finds it concerns him to be as confident as the best;
and I wonder how he miss't of rapping out the other Oath. But it happens to
Him, as to most malefactors, that he reveals his guilt in his endeavors to
conceal it; and may say of the tongue, what Diana did of the countenance,

Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere! -- For not remembering that he
protested before God and men, that, except three things, he knew nothing in all
his book How he runs on the Symplegades of being guilty either of perjury, or
causeless railing.
which he had spoken against me to which he gave the least credit; and again
not remembering, that the report about second marriages was none of those three;
and again not remembering, that he was now only to speak about the first of
those three, (viz. my saying, that I was without sin, etc.) he links that of
marriages together with this (quite out of its place) and says that the same
man of Note will justify both. Insomuch that Mr. Barlee should have excepted
four things, from the multitude of those, to which he swore he gave no credit.
For that now he gives credit to that which he swore he gave no credit to,
appears by his charging me with impudence, both in the person of his Informer,
and from himself, and both within the space of 3. or 4. lines. or else he
charge me with impudence against his own conscience, and in violation of his
Oath, because he swore he did not credit, what now I must be impudent for not
crediting my self. Which of his sentences will he adhere to? if to the later,
he is perjured; 2. The shameful modesty of the informer.
and if to the former, a causeless Rayler. Secondly, I do not wonder that his
informer admires my impudence, since himself is so bashful, as not to show us
his head, and even to hide his very name. Good modest creature! He runs behind
Mr. Barlee, before he railes. He goes on the other side his stalking Horse,
that I may not discover by whom it is that I am shot. This is now the second
time that we have heard of him in print, sine nomine, sine Tribu. And turning
his own back to me, (as being ashamed of my impudence) he tells me (by his
Vicar) what he will do before my Face. Once more therefore I send a challenge
to this Anonymous man of Note, He is challenged to appear.
(unless his name is Mr. Outis) to show himself above-board, and either
publicly to confess that he has abused Mr. Barlee, or to declare that Mr.
Barlee has slandered him, or to prove that I have injured both, or to
acknowledge that both have injured me. Mr. B. implies his being yet extant;
and therefore let him not say with the man in the Comedy, Non 3. Mr. B. makes
more way to the discovery of his slandor.
possum audire, quia dormio. Nay thirdly, he is not only alive, and mettlesome,
and wonders I am so impudent as not to own being a Ranter, when it pleases his
black Majesty to have me thought such, but he is of Note in the ministry, and
not far off. This is better then all the rest, at least as good for my purpose.
For now I shall prove by an induction (I thank Mr. Barlee for this assistance)
that the slander is an unlucky one in several respects. For I can easily
number all the Ministers of note in this part of the County. With one part of
them I have never had any discourse; with another part of them I have
discoursed only in public, when many persons upon their Oaths, will and must
be my witnesses, that I never uttered any such thing, as that I was without
sin, above sin, and by my own power could abstain from all sin. nor does Mr. B.
so much as pretend, that I was heard speaking thus by more then one. And the
ministers of note are very few, in this County, with whom I have ever
discoursed singly. And those few have been such, who have not only still
treated me in friendly manner, and censured Mr. Barlee in a high degree, but
they have given me such characters behind my back, as have much exceeded my
small deservings. I am tempted to name them, but that I think I ought not
without their leaves, least they should be in some pain, and look with
suspicion on one another, as the They looked one on another, doubting of whom
he spoke. Ioh. 13. 22.
Disciples did when Christ said, that one of them should betray him. To one of
those Ministers I once affirmed in a letter, that I was, and would continue,
(by the grace of God assisting me) free from the great abomination of the
Presbyterian Directory; but that was far enough from saying, I was without sin,
because there are many other sins besides complying with the Directory. I said
to another by word of mouth, that we did many times resist the grace of God. He
said, he could not, being one of the Regenerate. And whether did he or I imply,
that we were above sin? This is the utmost I can remember I ever spoke, whereby
to give him any occasion of so impertinent a slander. Fourthly, if Mr. B. has
4.
diverse times discoursed with his Informer, and his Informer has answered as
he reports, he is perhaps of their number (spoken of by Bp. Bancroft) who come
to Pretended Holy Discip. chapter 4. p. 61.
believe their own lies merely by telling them too often. Fifthly, he says his
Minister will justify his two Reports upon any just occasion. A likely matter,
when upon two such occasions already 5. His signal Tergive sation.
offered, he has so valiantly hid his head, and taken the courage to be
namelesse. When that time comes, that he can think it a just occasion, I shall
prove him Brother to those two, who took their Oaths against Naboth. But
betwixt this and that, bear witness Reader, that Mr. B. has accused me a
second time in print, of saying that which is said by none but Ranters, and yet
he thinks he has not hitherto a just occasion to name his Author. But he has
not yet done with it; nor I with Him, I do assure him. And therefore let us
observe him confuting himself in his own defense, as it were casting himself
backward by trying to stand upon his guard.

W. B.
Chapter 2. p. 18. lin. 13, etc.
Secondly, I cannot but believe, had he not publicly brought in a large plea
for the innocence of Infants, chap. 4. p. 25, 26, 27. but that the same front
of his would bear him out in the denial of what a person of true honor and
integrity told me, as having heard it too from his own mouth; that he called a
waggish lad of about four years old an innocent, free from sin, who yet, I
trow, has by this time committed some kind of actual sins.

T. P.
. 13. In these few lines, there are many things most grossly false, which, in
case they were true, would be impertinent and absurd. Before I show the gross
falsehoods, I will relate the whole story which gave occasion to this calumny,
The occasion of this new calumny, in defense of the old.
though nothing but Rancor could be the cause. There was a child in his Parish
of 3. years old, who being sickly and consumptive (as his Physicians were of
opinion) and yet at that time the only Son of his parents, (whose plentiful
Fortune might make them the gladder of a Son) gave some occasion to his parents
of very mournful apprehensions. I thought it my part, (as in many respects I
was obliged) to administer comfort in such a case. In the tract of my Discourse
I was led to say, that if God should be pleased to take their child unto
himself, in the harmless Nonage that he was in, they might raise themselves
comfort even from this consideration, that God had taken him from the evil to
come, and set him in Wisd. 4. 17.
safety, as the book of Wisdom expresses it. God might verse. 11.
speedily take him away (for ought they knew) to this end, that ibid.
wickedness should not alter his understanding, nor deceit begu^le his soul,
in case he outlived his harmless years. That this was the utmost, I have more
witnesses then one, and I defy his Informer to prove it more if he is able.
Now observe Mr. B's prevarications of the truth. 1. The child was then but 3
years old; Mr. B. has mounted it to 4. 2. The child was then very weak; Mr. B.
feigns him to have been waggish. 3. I said he was harmless; Mr. B. adds
innocent, and free from sin. Vi^ probus, and pius, non tantum in^ocens. Cl.
Salm. in Def. R^g. c. 11. The Earl of Bristoll's Apology was (in his constant
phrase) to clear his Innocence, not freedom from (...).
Innocent I might say, though I do not remember that I did: but [free from sin]
I am sure I did not^: and they that heard me will bear me witness. But
innocent and harmless are both of one signification. When David said he would
Ps. 26. 6. 2.
wash his hands in innocence, and that in innocence Ps. 73. 13. 3.
he had washed them, when Daniel said that God had saved him from the Lions,
for as much as before him Dan. 6. 22.
innocence was found in him, when Abimelech said, In the Genesis 20. 5.
innocence of my hands have I done this, when God himself said of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, that they had filled that place with the blood Ier.
19. 4. His revenge upon an Infant of 3 years old.
of Innocents, will Mr. Barlee complain against those expressions, and say they
were denyers of original sin? If his person of honor will say I said any more
then the penmen of Scripture have said before me, I will prove him a person of
no integrity. But secondly, how should a person of honor have any thing to do
with Mr. Barlee? He that can, let him believe it. Or thirdly, how unfit is Mr.
B. to give his verdict of that child, to whom he was concluded to have owed a
shrewd turn, ever since that child was known to have cut him with a Sarcasme?
but my words were spoken long before M. B. had found him waggish. Nor does he
pretend, that the child was then guilty of actual sins when I pronounced him
to be harmless, but [he Trow's that by this time he has committed some such;]
and why he Trow's it, he is too bashful to give the reason. Fourthly, be it so
that the 4.
little Gentleman of four years old (he should have said of 4. years young) was
somewhat playfull with Mr. B. (as Mr. B. Chapter 2. p. 45.
professes to be with me) did he think the Babe was of his match, and fit to
be writ against from the press, and in the presence of all the world to
receive his Correptory Correction? I have read the saying of Will Withers, (in
Q. Elizabeth's time) that if any man pinch't him, he would strike him that
stood next, whosoever he were. I should have quite forgot my reading, but that
I am thus put in mind. If Mr. Barlee is once confuted, or pinch't with a
discovery of his inventions, woe be to all the little children that stand in 's
way. But now fifthly, let us grant him as much as may be, concerning 5.
the Age, or the ladderie, or the waggishnesse of the child, or my pronouncing
that he was innocent; yet what was this to the purpose, for which alone with a
[secondly] it was pretended to be brought? Thus runs his Argument. Mr. T. P.
did say a child was innocent of four years old; therefore The admirable force
of Mr. B's arguing.
probably he said, that Himself was without sin, and above sin, and by his own
power could abstain from all sin, who is somewhat more then four years old. How
much better might he argue against Daniel and David, who spoke of Innocence in
themselves, then here he does against me, who only spoke of another, who was
also more innocent then either Daniel or David? Does he not strike, through me,
at the Church of England? I am sure in the collect upon Innocents day (which
must now be called the waggish lads day) we are appointed to use these very
words, [Almighty God, whose praise this day the young Innocents, thy witnesses,
have confessed, and showed forth, not in speaking, but in dying, mortify and
kill all vices in us, etc.] If Mr. B. did not know what Innocent signifyes,
because it is a Latin word, why must my Front be therefore brought upon the
stage? I told him sufficiently what was meant by Innocence applied to Infants,
even in that very Div. Philanth. c^. 4. p. 26. li^. 2^.
page which he just now cited, viz. a simplicity and inoffensivenesse of mind.
He does not reply either to that, or to any other part of my plea for Infants:
but only shows that he is angry, both with me, and with a Gentleman of 4. years
old, and leaves posterity to determine, whether the Infant or his Accuser was
the waggish lad.

W. B.
Chapter 2. p. 18. lin. 21. etc.
Thirdly, if his public and domestic Confessions, of which he speaks, do all
sound a contradiction to, or a cordial retractation of what he formerly said
to my Reverend Brother, I am heartily glad of it, for the good of his Soul, and
long I wish he may, with St. John, continue in that sound and humble
acknowledgement of his sins: but I fear me he may quickly revert to his former
presumptuous sayings, if he embrace too fast the tenants of his new friend S.
Castalio, who has written a whole book about the perfection of Christians, and
their immunity from sin here upon the face of the earth. S. Castalio de
obedientia Deo praestanda. p. 295. edit. in 12. A. D. 1578. His woeful
Drollerie can not help him.
Totus orbis exercet Histrioniam.

T. P.
. 14. Here he adventures to allude to one particular of the ten, which I
returned to his slander in my former Defensative. My words were these, [ He
Div. Philan. chapter 3. p. 81.
cannot but confess, that when he has heard me out of a Pulpit, (which has
been 5 or 6 times) he has heard from my mouth a full confession of my sins.]
Or perhaps he alludes to my other words, Ibid.
[ I have as many witnesses, as weekly Auditors in my church, and as daily
Auditors in my family, that I affirm the quite contrary to that invention.]
Notwithstanding which, and all other things by me alleged in that place,
(which he durst not here take notice of) he perseveres in his impiety, and
supposes all I there said to signify no more then a Retractation. But that his
Drollerie may not excuse him, I can prove by many witnesses (whereof each is
equal to a thousand of his Informers) that since I came into this County,
within which time the matchless slander did take its Date, there has not been
any one day, wherein I have not been liberal in the confession of my sins.
Which when my Reader has considered, and compared with all which I have
published, especially with my preface to The sinner impleaded, and the two
grounds of my belief, (Correct Copy p. 6.) when he has weighed the
wretchedness of Mr. B's Reply, with what I have spoken in this Rejoinder, he
will infallibly conclude, that the ancient Tit. 1. 12.
Cretians did not come near him, but were as much behind him in faculty, as
before him in time. Secondly, what he says of Castalio, gives us a measure 2.
Mr. B's malice against Castalio most imp^rtinently vented.
of his Logic, and his integrity. That holy and learned man, (it seems,) has
published a book concerning obedience to be performed from man to God, wherein
he shows to what pitch of that perfection, to which our Savior does exhort us
Mat. 5. 48. a man by Grace may attain to upon the earth: and of that immunity
from sin of which St. John speaks 1 Ioh. 3. 6, 9. where he says of the
Regenerate man, not only that he does not, but that he cannot sin: which is a
higher expression then Castalio ever used. I am not concerned in this
unseasonable-impertinent-incoherent effusion of Mr. B's malice against
Castalio, save that I honor the memory, and admire the goodness of that great
Christian. In which respect I will say, it was Castalio's design in all he
writ, to advance Christian Perfection exhibited in Scripture.
the purity and strictness of Christian practice, that the name of Christ
might be no longer blasphemed Romans 2 24. 1 Timothy 6. (...). Tit. 2. 5.
among the Heathen through the wickedness of such as are called Christians. It
was said to Abraham, walk before me and be thou Genesis 17. 1.
perfect; and of Noah, he was a just and G^n. 6. 9.
perfect man; and of Job, he was a Job. 1. 1, 8.
perfect and upright man; fearing God and eschewing evil. (God will not cast
away chapter 8. 20.
a perfect man.) David said, God makes my way Ps. 18. 32.
perfect. And our Savior, Be ye Mat. 5. 48.
perfect as your Father in Heaven is perfect. If thou will be M^t. 19. 21.
perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor. Thou shall be Deuteronomy.
18. 13.
perfect with the Lord thy God. We speak wisdom among them that are 1 Cor. 2.
6.
perfect. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Teachers, for the Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
perfecting of the Saints. Verse. 13.
-- till we come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the nature of the
fullness of Christ. Now the God of peace make you Heb. 13. 20, 21.
perfect in every good work to do his will. Let patience have her perfect work,
that ye may be l^m. 1. 4.
perfect, and entire, wanting nothing. Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthynesse of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. St. Paul could do Phil. 4. 13.
all things through Christ who strengthened him. Zachary and Elizabeth walked
in Luke 1. 6.
all the commandments, (...), blameless, without reproof, none (but a
Correptorie Corrector) could say black to their eye. And had not Castalio good
reason to write a book of Obedience, when he saw he lived in a rebellious
world? Had he not reason (in that book) to speak of Christian Perfection, when
he found men pleading for a fat all necessity of their sins, and an
impossibility to be obedient? He spoke of that perfection which signifyes
integrity, and is required of us in Scripture, as has been showed. (if he went
any farther, I defend him not.) He spoke of immunity from sin by the help of
Gods Grace, not by the mere strength of nature* nor did he speak of an immunity
from original sin, or sins of ignorance and frailty, but from wilful,
deliberate, and damning sins. But this is Doctrine which Solifidians cannot
endure; because if they grant it to be true, they must rail no longer, and
slander no more; they must no more be perjured, or schismatical, or
sacrilegious, or covetous, or cruel in persecuting their Neighbors; they must
repent in another notion then they are willing to hear of; for restitution, and
satisfaction, mortification, and self-denial, and a newness of the whole life,
must be ingredients in their repentance. Thirdly then, let us observe what our
Pamphleter has gotten by being impertinent 3. A Catalogue of Mr. Barl^es g^gs
^y his m^lig^ing Castalio.
against Castalio. He has showed himself an enemy to the Grace of God, of
whose effectual working in his children Castalio writes. (as if God were not
able to work wonders on Earth as well as in Heaven.) He has showed himself an
enemy to all those Scriptures above mentioned, which do affirm a perfection of
men on earth, to wit, in the sense before given. He has showed himself an
enemy to the Darling of all honest and pious Christians, merely for following
the Scriptures, and pressing hard for a conformity to the example and precepts
of Jesus Christ. He has showed himself an enemy to his best beloved and
dearest self, who (when it is for his turn) is not only for effectual, but
irresistible Grace: as if he thought he could sin, without resisting the Grace
of God, or could resist that Grace which is irresistible. He has showed
himself an enemy to all his own Gang; but above them all, to his Chapter 2. p. 73.
admired Mr. Baxter, who differs as much from him and his, as Note that Mr.
Barlee does either slander Arminius, or charge Mr. Baxters Doctrine with
Arminianism. Cor. Cor. p. 109.
Arminius, or Castalio, or whosoever he is, whom the Presbyterians exclaim
against: whether he differs from himself too, let him determine. But what says
Mr. Baxter? He says very truly, that the Aphor. of Iustif. These. 24. p. 129.
personal Gospell-righteousnesse is in its kind a perfect righteousness, and
so far we may admit the Doctrine of personal perfection. -- Ib. p. 133.
our righteousness is perfect, as in its being, so likewise in order to its
end. -- Object. Is our personal righteousness Ib. These. 22. p. 122, 123.
perfect, as it is measured by the new Rule? Ans. Yes, says Mr. Baxter. -- Ib.
These. 27. p. 141.
As it was possible for Adam to have fulfilled the law of works by that power
which he received by nature, so is it possible for us to perform the
conditions of the new Covenant by the power which we receive from the grace of
Christ. Nay farther yet, the same Mr. Baxter who says, That the Tenor of the
new Covenant is not, believe in the highest degree, but believe Ib. These. 24.
p. 133.
sincerely, and you shall be justified, (so that our righteousness formally
considered, in relation to the condition of the new Covenant, is perfect or
none) does also say, that a man's sincerity does especially lie in his own
Saints Everl. Rest. part 4. p. 296.
will. And that it is, under God, in a man's own choice, whether he will live a
blessed life, or not. Thus Mr. Barlee has showed his enmity against all he
hates, and against all he loves too: And (which is his opus naturalissimum) he
has revealed to all the world, whereabouts his shoe wrings him. Yet fourthly,
I commend him for his confession, [Totum orbem exercere Histrioniam;] though he
knew it was not for 4. Mr. P. personating a Bishop.
his credit to translate it. But I will do that for him. All the world is
employed in the art of stageplayers or Hypocrites. Totus orbis (says Mr.
Barlee) All the world is pharisaicall, given to counterfeiting, and cheating,
and holy co^senages, (the Ad quartum Actum and ultra in Dramate hoc desultando
frigulti^tes Presbyteriani spectati sunt. Salmasius in Defen. Reg. cap. 10.
Godly party not excepted.) Totus Orbis is a capacious phrase; (as a Circle is
the most comprehensive of figures, and the world of Circles) it includes Mr.
Barlee, when he played his part in that notorious ^omoe-Tragoedie (equally sad
and ridiculous) which he and others lately acted in Daintry Church, intil'd by
the Actors, An Ordination of Ministers, but by many of the Spectators, An
Ordination of Lay-Preachers to be Lay-Preachers still, and (without repentance)
for ever Ne quispiam bis ordinetur* and ne qui piam bis baptiz^^ur. Nam
ordinatio est perpetuae functionis consecratio, ut Bapti^mus perpetui ^oe de^is
testificatio Bannosi^s d^ Po^i^. ^ivit. Dei, etc. 7 (...).
incapable of the Priesthood, by being ordained by such Priests as were
incapable of ordaining. Ier. 5. 30, 31.
Such horrible things are committed in the land, and some of the people (a)
love to have it so, and what will they do in the end thereof? Ordinationes
eorum ^^m^rariae, leves, inconstantes, etc. Tertull. de praescript^ adversus
Haereticos.

. 15. It The Reason of Brevity in all that follows.
now becomes me to be sensible, how many sections I have bestowed upon those
manifold absurdityes, thrust up together by Mr. B. in his pretended vindication
of himself from the first slander of the three, to which alone he protested to
have given some credit. A running pen, in conjunction with a most obnoxious and
faulty adversary, have betrayed me to this length, even whilst I still hoped I
should be brief. Should I proceed as I have begun, two inconveniencyes would
follow. I should first reprint his voluminous Libel; and I should write such
Volumes of Animadversions thereupon, as would speak me too prodigal of time and
paper: nor would my Stationers whole estate suffice for half the impression. I
will therefore take up, before I go any farther; and setting down his pages, if
not his very lines too, (as hitherto I have done) I will mark out his follyes
in the narrowest compass that I am able.

. 16. In his chapter 2. p. 18. lin. 32, etc. he confesses that he Of the 600
Copies of my Correct Copy which Mr. B. said were sold in this County within 2.
months. of which see Div. Philan. Def. chapter 3. p. 54.
lied about the second thing excepted, although he excepted it from his lies.
His 600. copies are now dwindled into 200. Good news for the Brethren. Things
are better then they expected. For in the reckoning of 200 Mr. B. did overlash
no more then 400 beyond the Truth. Besides that he excuses it, by saying that
his memory was intolerable false to him, or W. C. was swayed by frowns, or
favors, to a denial of his words. But W. C. is amazed at the incongruity of
the falsehood, because it is most for his secular interest to please that
party. And yet he professes not to have spoken of 200 neither: so that now Mr.
B. must prepare a new Salvo, and lay the fault on his invention, which was
terrible false to him, no longer on his memory, unless he forgets that 'twas
the babe of his invention. Nor was it I, but Mr. B. who told the world my book^
^old well: I rather labored to refute him, and to fleece his 600. And
therefore this was his waggery to lay his ordures in my Dish.

. 17. In his chapter 2. p. 19. lin. 8. etc. he confesses also that Of my being the
Author of Artificial Handsomnesse. of which see Div. Philan. Def. chapter 3. p. 150.
he lied, or (if you please) that he slandered, when he reported me the Author
of the book intitl'd Artificial Handsomnesse. But he excuses it by saying,
that he was told this lie by a most conscionable Divine, (is not he more
conscionable who tells no lies at all?) He farther commends the conscionable
Father of that lie, for a man that makes as much conscience of not telling, or
believing lies, as any man in England. He should sure have said Crete; because
he gives no instance of his Conscience, besides his having (by his confession)
foulely slandered his Neighbor. But he gave three Arguments to back his lie:
Which first were weak ones, because they did He says he did but almost
believe, what he thought fit to publish, as if he believed it altogether: and
which he lately excepted from the number of those things, to which he swore he
gave no credit.
almost persuade Mr. B. to a belief; and because he is ashamed to name one of
them; (which he could not have failed of, if it had been for his advantage:)
And secondly, likely to be none at all; because his conscience, or his fear, or
something like conscience, flew fiercely into his face, and made him draw over
it an invisible deleatur; so as the Printer might admit it into his book, and
then be chid for that admission, if the worst came to the worst. The phrase,
mentioned before, does show that the man had been at it long ago, but (it
seems) had considered, that he needed not in the same book tell the same
untruth twice. Though that was also another untruth, to say that a thing was
before mentioned, which now he says was never mentioned before. And this,
besides, is a contradiction. What he tells us of his letter sent up to the
Stationer, does but aggravate his crime: for it proves that he knew it to be a
slander and when it was printed for the use of the world, he blotted it out of
a few copyes to be sold in this County (which were indeed very few;) and this
he thought an expiation of such a general slander. But his book slew abroad as
far as the Mercury could carry it. And I was taken to be the Author of that
book, by men who lived in other Countyes, by whom I was also severely censured.
And therefore to make me amends, he should have stood in a white sheet upon the
stool of Repentance, with a Noverint Vniversi (upon his Forehead) that what he
said was a Slander, for the forgiveness of which he entreated the prayers of
all his Readers. But now he shows us what a Repentance he recommends to his
Parishoners by his example. The foul Nature of his Repentance.
He confesses that he had wronged me, but does not show that he is sorry: he
rather labors to prove it a very good injury, which it was fit he should do
me, for three strong reasons which he resolves shall be namelesse; and in lieu
of reparation, he proceeds to wrong me (if it is possible) ten times more then
before.

. 18. Having thus discovered the three remarkable Fictions in excuse of which
Mr. B. had most to say, and therefore excepted from all the rest, as the only
three things to which he gave the least credit, I will now begin a new Chapter.
And looking back a few pages, I will observe the man's manners as far as p. 77.
and try if his custom of speaking falsely is become his artificial and second
nature. I will not pretend to pen them all down, (that would be a vast
enterprise, neither suitable to mine, nor my Readers patience) but only as many
as may suffice for a little specimen of the Man.

CHAP. II.
Mr. B's new falsehoods superadded to his old ones as a Token of his Repentance
and proficiency; with his Absurdityes of several kinds in the management
thereof.

. 1. IN his chapter 1. p. 7. lin. 12. he complains of my private, Of cruel and
causeless provocations in private letters.
cruel, causeless, epistolary provocations.] It Is well for him that they are
private: for should I make them as public as diverse persons would have had
me, the world would wonder at this complaint. When Travelers have a mind to
tell incredible stories, they commonly calculate their tales to fit Meridians,
and place the strangest the farthest off. and Mr. B. thinks that he has nick't
it, when he cites my Manuscripts and private letters, as knowing that his
Reader has not a Key to his Cabinet. But he does not consider, that I have
Copyes of my letters as well as he; and can give his Readers this short
account: That when I heard he had been writing against I know-not-what
Manuscript, which he reported to be mine, I told him friendly (in a letter)
what I had heard, and that I would not rashly believe a rumor, but desired to
know the bottom of it from himself, that if indeed it were so, he might be
sure to have a true Copy, which I alone could infallibly supply him with. This
I hope was no cruel or causeless provocation. But yet he returned in part of
Answer, [ that I knew him to be robbed (he called not me the Thief) of a
considerable part of his very few Auditors when they be altogether. As for my
Question, he did say and write in a way that he would dare to own, and as just
occasion should be given, he would not be afraid, nor ashamed, to give me and
the Church of God an account of what he had been doing against a trifling
Pamphlet savouring of my Genius, and said and believed to be mine.] And at last
concluded with the words of Austin to Pelagius, having told me a little before,
of my Pelagian and Semipelagian Doctrins or Tenants.

. 2. Ibid. lin. 9, 10, 11. He says, that to mine and his Of his competent
Judges of his scurrility and calumny.
competent judges, he offered to do open penance for his passions, if they
prove against him either scurrility or calumny. The Note, that he excuses only
the later, confessing the former in an implicit way.
later of which Mr. T. P. vehemently asserts and supposes, but never proves.]
(1.) Let the Reader determine whether his Lecturing-sympresbyters, to whom he
dedicates that work, and to whom alone he submitted in Before his Correp. Corr.
P. 9.
that Epistle, are competent judges betwixt him and me. What Malefactor in the
world can be ever found guilty, if he may choose his own Jury, and Judges too?
Nay what condemned prisoner can be discouraged from his sin, or any whit
troubled at his Sentence, if he may have the privilege to choose his own
Gallows? Twice besides in this new Pasquil, he offers to be tried for his
Doctrine and manners, by any C. 2. p. 55. and p. 52.
ten of his senior Sympresbyters of any worth or Note. But withal he provides
for a double escape, if I should be so intoxicate as to stand to their
judgment. For they must not only say, but prove him guilty, so as he may be
fain to confess the proof, which he resolves never to do. Next they must be of
worth and Note; which he will not grant them, unless they say that he is
Innocent. Here is a tacit confession, that his Doctrine and manners are both
obnoxious, because he will not be tried but by his Peers, that is his Patrons,
or Congerrones, or Fellow Laborers in the work. Is there a Quaker in the
world, who will not offer to be tried by any ten sym-Quakers of any worth or
note? Or if his sym-Presbyterians are his competent Judges, can he think that
they are mine too? Well fare the Gallantry of the man, who has found out the
only way of being concluded William the Conqueror. But (2) I appeal to the
unconcerned Reader, and to late posterity, and withal to our legal
Ecclesiastical superiors, whither I have not evinced his twofold Guilt. Nay I
appeal to his own C. 2. p. 19.
confession, whether it was not a calumny which his (a) conscionable Divine did
help him forge against me, touching Artificial Handsomnesse, and his Reverend
Minister, touching second marriages: which if it were not a calumny, Mr. B. is
Ib. p. 17.
perjured, by not putting it down for one of his 3. things excepted from all
his book. But (3) if we quit him of calumny, (which we must not do) yet for the
sin of scurrility he must do open penance, as himself has tacitly
acknowledged. For having named both the Crimes, he says I never prove the
later, implying the former beyond all question: else he certainly must have
said, that I never prove either. In such language as this, Avaunt, Avaunt, thou
Satanical Mr. B's godly ^bul^itions.
blasphemer, thou exceedest the Devil himself in blasphemy, ragest against
Heaven, belchest out blasphemies and Diabolical stuff, playest the Lucian, and
Carpocratian, make a new Diabolical Paternoster, openly blasphemest against
Scripture, Dragon, Sorcerer, noonday Devil, worse then Diabolical, and the
like, Mr. B. will not deny but that he is guilty of scurrility. Yet (4) so
insearchable is the man, that notwithstanding his He had it first in one of his
letters to me; then in the Epistle before his Corr. Corr. now again in his
Reply.
repetition of [peccavi fateor, and, peto veniam, si unquam post hac] yet here
he writes a whole chapter to justify all he had committed: (...), he was but
somewhat p. 6.
overheated; it was the Ibid. in marg. si quid intumuit pietas, ignoscat.
godly intumescency and ebullition of his zeal; he had great Ibid.
cause for it, even epistolary provocations which were cruel and causeless;
he is but one of the orthodox p. 8.
cordial Zelots; these are only his (g) Ludicralls and the (g) play fullness
of his style; was not our Savior p. 6.
sufficiently zealous? His frailtyes (he confesses) are p. 55.
great and many; he has exuberancyes Ep: Ded. p. 2. and 3.
of passion, and will promise to make (if need be) an open confession upon his
knees for all the wrongs it shall appear he has done me: Chapter 1. p. 8.
but his cordial friends have no great Reason to blame him, because he is for
a useful and necessary moderation; whereas some men's hairbrain'd g g p. 9.
fury, falsely called zeal, is destitute of all prudence, and other men's soft,
milky, faint-hearted coldness is disguised under the Terms of prudence,
fairness, peace, moderation; but he has showed himself against both
extremes. Thus his conscience and his tongue are accusing, and excusing,
confessing, and denying, washing, and wallowing in the mire, sinning, and
repenting, and speaking well of his sins: and so by turns he does them both
over and over, and thinks he may do it very safely; for he is one of the few
whom God has Postscript. p. 6.
called to be faithful, is acted by Grace irresistible, from which he cannot
so much as totally for a time, much less finally fall away, let his
scurrilityes and calumnyes be what they can be. And whilst he is such a white
Boy of Fate (like Homer's Paris) what need he care to put an end to any thing
that is evil? Such are his opinions, and such his practice: and both have been
published in Print, first by himself, and then by me.

. 3. In his c. 2. p. 10. lin. 13, 14, etc. he complains, that I made assaults
upon his 3 aged Prefacers, the neighboring Of Assaults made upon all the
Protestant Name and Glory, upon Mr. B's bare word.
Lecturers of Northampton and Daintry, upon Calvin, Rivet, Vedelius, Walaeus,
Amyraldus, Bp. Usher, Hall, Davenant, King James, upon the whole Synods of them
at Dort, or Westminster; in a word, upon almost all the Protestant Name and
Glory.] Now he begins to be pretty hopeful, because in these few lines we have
not much more then 15 Falsehoods. For to the first of his Prefacers I gave a
greater Div. Philan. Advertis. to the Reader.
commendation then perhaps in modesty he will own. The second I Ibid.
passed over in silence, though he had publicly gaped upon me with his Teeth.
The third I Ibid.
dismissed with less castigation then he deserved. Nay. I Chapter 3 p. 61.
rebuked Mr. B. for passing so terrible a sentence upon the public Practices
of those his three Patrons, their growing rich upon 3 sequestrations, which M.
Barlee had said was an unchristian, ungentlemanly, unscholarly, unneighbourly,
unecclesiasticall thing. And it was he who assaulted his Neighbour-Lecturers,
not only by speaking to them in public (which they could not but take for a
disgrace) but by Chapter 1 p. 17, 18.
registring their receding from a part of those Articles which they had
formerly subscribed. from which Aspersions I did endeavor to clear as many as
I was able. I spoke not of the person, but words and Doctrins of Mr. Calvin. I
repeated what others had spoken of him, (which I did not do neither till Mr. B.
had urged me to it) and what he spoke of himself. I touched Rivet but once, and
that by accident, Mr. B. having used him to stave off a Blow; nor was it his
person, but his Chapter 4. p. 23, 24.
Argument whereby he sought to prove that vicious, which he said must needs
have been from God. Of Vedelius, however peccant, I spoke but little more then
nothing. of Walaeus, nothing at all that I can now think on. Amyrald, and the
three Chapter 4. p. 14.
Bishops, I spoke reverently of, as I had reason. The Synod of Dort was
composed of differing parties, and not a little misliked by our English Divines
who were Assessors; whom Mr. B. having Ibid. p. 15, 16.
abused with their Hierarchick Flaunt, I did vindicate and rescue from that
unclean Member. Of the Westminster Divines I said no worse, then that I had not
Chapter 3. p. 37.
seen their Confessions of Faith, and that they could not make a better Creed
then the Apostles, or teach their mother a better Catechism then she had
taught them. But Mr. B. by applying that to them, which was not spoken or meant
of them by me, calls them by craft Manichees, Helvidians, Carpocratians, Turks
and Stoics, c. 1. p. 7. King James I vindicated exceedingly, when Mr. B. had
Chapter 4. p. 7.
said in effect, that his Majesty and S. Austin were as great Railers as
himself. As I Ib. p. 11.
did also Bp. Davenant, when Mr. B. jeered him with his Orthodox put-offs. Last
of all for the Protestant Name and Glory, so far was I from assaulting them,
that when his sauciness had called them the
lazie-Hierarchick-non-preaching-lubbers, I did assert them as the Chapter 3. p. 73.
Ornaments, the Glories, and the venerable supports of our English-church, the
very latchets of whose shoes we weekly Preachers are not worthy to untie. And
was this to make an assault against them? Believe me, for Correptorie
Correction, and saying much in a little (I speak of Falsehood) Mr. Barlee is He
who shall wear the Garland.

. 4. In his c. 2. p. 11. lin. ult. p. 12. lin. 1, 2, etc. he takes Mr. B.
passes sentence before Doomsday.
it ill that I said, he represented me to the world as in a state of Damnation,
because he did not express it in those very words. yet he confesses, whilst
he denies, that my charge was true. For he confesses that he told me (Corr.
Corr. p. 43.) that I was like to be looked on as some of the Planets spoken of
Jude 13. (for whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever) if I
repent not the sooner, (that is, if I turn not Presbyterian.) Where he takes it
for granted, that I have not yet repented, and therefore hitherto am in a state
of Damnation. Besides, it is one of his tenets, that the Saints can never be in
such a state, no not in the (g) Act of Adultery or Corrept. Corr. p. 221, 222.
Murder, and that they cannot dye until they have repented. So that unless
his meaning was, that I am one of those Reprobates Jude 13. he either knew not
his own opinions, or saw not whether they would lead him, or else spoke
nonsense when he added, [if you do not repent the sooner:] it being certainly
his opinion, that if I am not already of the elect, I never can be; and if I am
of the elect, I must Note, that he prays in these words, The Lord he grant
Mr. T. P. Repentance, that he may avoid all divine censures. c. 2. p. 42. and
says, I want his prayers. p. 23. as being averse from the true Faith by way of
masculine opposition. p. 4.
inevitably repent, or must not dye. Here then Mr. B. is put to his choice,
whether he will renounce his whole conceit of election, and irresistible Grace
of Repentance, or confess (what he denies) that he thought me at that present
in a state of Damnation, or that he wilfully spoke against his conscience. By
the way observe at once his charity, and his discretion. If Mr. B. commits the
sin of Murder, he thinks he cannot be in a state of Damnation, and that he
cannot dye till he repents; but if I am found in the Act of being
Antipresbyterian, I am certainly damned if I repent not the sooner. Both are
taken from a presumption, (without any the least ground, save in his fancy)
that he is called to be Postscr. p. 5.
faithful, and I was absolutely ordained to be a Reprobate. Secondly, he
alleges for himself, that in his second passage which I cited, (Corr. Corr.
p. 174) He did not express his opinion, but his fears, that none could write
as I did, unless well-nigh in the same Mr. B. fears Danger, without being of
opinion that there is any.
condition with Simon Magus. As if he could fear my being a Reprobate, without
being of that opinion. It is so impossible for the one to subsist without the
other, that Philosophers do reckon fear as the Formido est de intrinseca
ratione opinionis.
formal reason of opinion. In saying, he did fear my sad condition, he employed
indeed, he was not sure of it. (and what a great virtue was this, that he did
not speak himself God, who alone can be sure what shall become of us
hereafter?) But the more he feared it, by so much the stronger was his opinion,
which set his fear at that pitch. So that if he speaks sense, his meaning
certainly must be this, (which will be worse then if it were nonsense) that he
did think me well-nigh in the same condition with Simon Magus, but yet he was
not of that opinion: or else he was of that opinion, but he did not say it in
those words. Let him choose which he pleases, his falsehood in saying, he did
fear what he did not, or his falsehood in saying, he did not think what he did.
And let him study some little Logic, (though it be but a System) that he may
trouble the world with not-so-many contradictions. Above all, let him not call
it his godly jealousy (as here he does p. 12.) to pluck the M^t. 13. 30. let
both grow together until the Harvest.
Tares from the wheat before the Harvest, until he is able to distinguish
betwixt the one and the other. But let him leave it to him, who shall come in
the cloud at the last Day to Mat. 3. 12.
gather the wheat into his Garner, and to burn up the chaff with unquenchable
Fire. When Mr. B. was pleased to charge me with Correp. Corr. p. 178.
Atheistical Lucianizing, and with the pouring out Ibid. p. 114.
of damnable blasphemies, for vindicating God from the aspersion of being the
Author or cause of sin, I would ask him if he thought me a precious vessel of
election. When he will answer that Question, I shall show him what follows.

. 5. In his c. 2. p. 12. lin. 24, 25. etc. He says he only Of Socinianisme
falsely charged.
charged me with Note, that [consequential] is here added as a Fig-leaf. And in
this his second Book, c. 2. p. 38. he lays Socinianisme to my charge without
the least Reservation.
consequential Socinianisme, to his best remembrance, in all his book.] Is not
this a rare Christian, who for so great an injury to his Neighbor, will make
no other satisfaction then to deny or to extenuate the crimson Fact? and to
justify this too with want of memory? It can as little be expected by any
Reader, that I should remember so many pages, wherein the Socinian is put upon
me. Yet by but dipping into his book, I find him speaking of my Correp. Corr.
p. 69.
Socinio-Grotian-Persian glosses; my desires not to be accounted a Ib. p. 157.
Socinian, in such a fleering way as does imply, that I shall be so accounted
do what I can; my (d) Atheistical Lucianizing and (d) Castalionizing, which
(with him who brands Castalio with no less then viperous Socinian books p.
13.) was to call me Socinian, and very much worse, unless he thought that the
Atheist Lucian was a Socinian only (many hundreds of years before Socinus was
borne) or that Socinians are all Atheists. Again, he told me, I was nearly
allied to the Ib. p. 15.
Jesuits and Socinians: though now dd Ib. p. 178.
he virtually confesses, I was no more like a Jesuit, then himself like a
Dominican. and so by his logic he is nearly allied unto the Papists, and
(which is worse) unto the Libertines, who only built upon the Calvinists
Foundations. In how many more places he did asperse me as a Socinian, I must
needs be forgetful, as well as he. He hints my erring about the very See with
how much more Reason he might have called Calvin a Socinian, who called the
three persons, the three proprietyes of God, and disapproved of Christ's being
God of God. Grot. in voto pro Pace, p. 15. Hunnius apud Grot. Discuss. Rivet.
Apol 185, 186.
Trinity, but holds forth nothing; only dreams of a Manuscript, and talks as
impertinently out of it, nay a great deal more, then Mr. Haddock did in his
sleep. At last he concludes, how he may show me, another time, justly
suspected of Socinianisme, because I read the books of Episcopius and Castalio,
who are no more Socinians then Mr. Barlee, (for ought I know,) and I read them
as little (I believe,) as He. Or if I read Socinian books never so much, (as I
know few men have read them less) does it follow I am a Socinian, more then I
am a Presbyterian, because I read Dr. Twisse, and Mr. Barlee? By this way of
reasoning, Mr. Barlee may justly be thought a Heathen, because it appears by
his Latin shreds, that he has taken some few of the Heathen Poets into his
Bosom. His signal ignorance of Antiquity, as to the Canon of Scripture, and
the three subsistences in one substance, I leave as I find it, merely for fear
of being tedious.

. 6. In his c. 2. p. 13. lin. 19, 20, etc. he talks of his Of his tenderness
to me, and to Servetus. Compare this with. 19.
witnesses in the Country, how tender he has been of my life, and of my
livelihood; giving this instance of his tenderness, that he thought me fit to
be punished, but not to be burnt, as was Servetus at Geneva.] Yet 1. he defends
the burning of Servetus, who was not so bad as Mr. B. has labored to fancy
me. For let them say what they please to lessen the guilt of that cruelty, yet
they are parties, and must not so easily be heeded, as other men who are none.
If Servetus his book was so blasphemous, why was Calvin so Serveti libri, non
Genevae tantum, sed and aliis in locis, per Calvini diligentiam exusti sunt;
fat^or tamen unum me exemplum vidisse libri Servetiani, in quo certe ^anon
reperi quae ^i objicit Calvinus, etc. Vot. pro Pace, p. 16.
diligent in burning up the Impression, which he should rather have preserved,
that posterity might see some competent cause for such a terrible execution?
Yet by the Providence of God, one or two of the Copies escaped the fire: and we
are assured by peerlesse Grotius, that in the Copy which he saw, he could not
find those things which were objected by Mr. Calvin. What Melanchthon spoke of
it was merely on supposition that Calvin's narrative was true. And
Oecolampadius was offended at the Barbarity of the Sentence. Nor find I any
thing pretended against Servetus, which was so highly blasphemous, as the
making God to be the Author or cause of sin. How well Mr. Calvin could tell his
own Tale, and how diligent he was in being the first Informer of his Affairs,
we may guess by his Calvini Epist. 164, 165, etc.
Epistles which he writ to the 4 Helvetian Cities, for the gaining of authority
to his new Devise. Secondly, Mr. B. c. p. 15.
complains of the severity which was used to Penry, which shows how much kinder
he is to Treason, then to that which either is, or is called Heresy. And with
how many sorts of heresy he has been pleased to load me in both his books, I
need not here reckon either to his, or my Readers. Thirdly, though he professed
in his Ep. Ded. p. 2.
Epistle to be so sollicitous of my Fame, and outward safety, as no man more;
yet he will have me to be a Sorcerer, and to be ranked with the witches spoken
of by the Apostle 2 Timothy 3. 13. (chapter 2. p. 42.) again, he charge me at once
with Socimanisme and dimidiate Pontificianism, p. 38. with my good friends the
Anabaptists, and Quakers, p. 42. (two sorts of persons to whom I am equally a
stranger, and more a stranger then Mr. Barlee) with Words, which he plainly
applies to me, if he is not guilty of somewhat worse. c. 2. p. 45. lin. 6. 7.
etc.
vehement pleading for the lawfulness of praying for the dead, and unto
Saints, p. 44. Nay in the very next page to the place I am upon, he seeks my
sequestration by this Dilemma.

. 7. P. 16. lin. 1. 2. etc.
Either he practices in his public Ministry those many liturgical knacks
which he does so zealously plead for, or he does not: if the first, he knows at
what peril he does it; if the later, he proclaims himself a timorous
unconscionable Coward to all the world. The Lord show Mr. T. P. a way how to
leap out of this snare; and this the Lord knows is all the harm I wish him.]
Observe the charity of this Saint, who prays by the Directory. He wishes me
no worse then perfect beggerie on one side, or to be published on the other for
an unconscionable Knave. If one of these must be my Lot (as Mr. B. seems to be
resolved) give me the former, let him take the later. Should I not speak to his
Dilemma, he would exclaim against my Cowardice, and want of conscience, for
doing as ill as a Presbyterian. Yet if I speak distinctly to it, he will admire
my folly, and want of prudence, for not doing so ill as a Presbyterian. I am
not amorous of suffering; I have had too much of it already from that
implacable and bloody Sect. But so much do I prefer the greatest secular
inconvenience before the sin of compliance with such a Gang, that I will
readily cast my self on the shorter Horn of his Dilemma, as being most sure
that it will do me least hurt. I would not be bribed with both the Indies, to
do any thing so ill, as might make me be mistaken for a Presbyterian, or a
Complyer with that Faction by any show or appearance either of flattery, or of
fear. Be it therefore known to this Contriver of mischief, (and to as many of
his Abettors as hope to have me in their Lurch,) that I do duly perform my
Oaths and promises; I live in humble obedience both to the Laws of the Land,
and to the Canons of the Church; I have no commerce with the Directorie, or
with any thing else that is Presbyterian; nor yet do I practice any more of my
liturgical knacks (as this Zelot of the Kirk profanely calls them) then I think
I am, in conscience, indispensably obliged and bound unto. I use that prudence
and moderation, to which I am advised by the severest of my Superiors. And
they who had power to do me hurt in consideration of my Practice, have been so
thoroughly satisfied with the grounds and reasons of what I do, as to think me
the worthyer of preservation. Had the I mean, the Correptorie Correctors only,
that is, the men of Mr. B's spirit.
Fiery sort of the Presbyterians (which I have reason to distinguish from the
more charitable and candid) swallowed down that power of doing mischief which
they gaped after so long, with so much appetite and hunger, (and when they had
swallowed for a time, were happily made to cast it up,) I had not expected so
great a Miracle, as that a man could have been honest, and have enjoyed his own
too. Who can take the vast distances, or number the manifold degrees, by which
the Body of Independents must be preferred? But now it is fit that Mr. Barlee
should know his part in the D^lemma, who to avoid the peril on the right hand,
has made choice, on the left, to be recorded as a most timorous and
unconscionable Coward. When he entered into the Priesthood, he took the Oath of
supremacy, and the other Oath of Alleg^ance, subscribed the nine and thirty
Articles (without which, Bp. By Him M. B. was ordained, c. 2. p. 40, 61. and
however Mr. B. may wrong that Bp. I can prove his practice in ordinations to
have been strict and wary against the least appearance of Presbyterianism, or
noncon-formity.
Davenant admitted none into the Priesthood, as I can show;) nay if he were
ordained in the year 1640. (when that Bp. celebrated a general ordination in
the Cathedral Church) he was made to take that other De praecavendis
Novitatibus in Doctrina and Regimine secundum Canonem nupertime editum, etc.
Note that the Bp. rejected those who refused the taking of that Oath, and would
not give them Holy Orders. this I can prove.
Oath against admitting or complying with any manner of Innovations in point of
Doctrine or Discipline, according to the Canon in that case provided by the
then-Convocation, which was legitimately called, and authorized. Nay this is
not all; for before Mr. Barlee was admitted into the office of the Priesthood
(which was the very expression then used by the Bp.) he did solemnly promise in
See the Book of Ordination of Bishops, Pri^sts, and Deacons, p. 18.
the presence of God, and the Congregation, (amongst many other things) that
the Lord being his Helper, he would reverently obey his Ordinary, and other
chief Ministers, unto whom the Government and charge was committed over him,
following with a glad mind and will their godly Admonitions, and submitting
himself to their godly judgments. There he solemnly and demurely did make
profession, [that he thought in his heart, he was truly called to the Ministry
of the Priesthood, according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
order of this Church of England.] Ibid. p. 17.
Clearly granting, (by that copulative,) that the order of our Church, as then
it stood, by his confession, was according to the will of our Lord Jesus
Christ. In Note that he confesses he subscribed the 39. Articles, when
ordained, c. 2. p. 61.
subscribing the 39. Articles, he acknowledged the Artic 20.
power of the Church to decree rites and ceremonies, and auctority in
controversyes of Faith. Artic. 2, 3.
That none are lawfully called and sent to minister in the Congregation, but
such as are chosen and called to it by men who have public authority given
unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lords
Vineyard. Artic. 34.
That whosoever through his private judgment willingly and purposely does
openly break the traditions and ceremonies of the church, etc. ought to be
rebuked openly, (that others may fear to do the like) as he that offends
against the common order of the Church, and hurts the authority of the
Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak brethren, etc. That the
books of Artic. 35.
Homilies, (concerning the Common Prayer, etc.) ought to be read in churches by
the Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be understood of the
people. Artic. 36.
That the book of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering of
Priests and Deacons, etc. does contain all things necessary to such
consecration and ordering, neither has it any thing, that of it self is
superstitious or ungodly, etc. Artic. 37.
That the Kings M. has the chief power in this Realm of England and other his
Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether
they be Ecclesiastical or civil, in all causes does appertain. All which, with
the rest, being subscribed by Mr. B. and the Priesthood received, (as has been
showed) he When this is done, they shall go to the Communion, which all they
that receive Orders shall take together, and remain in the same place where the
^ands were said upon them, etc. see the Book for Consec. and ord. p. 19.
sealed to all he had subscribed, promised, and professed, by the tremendous
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. All which notwithstanding, he has covenanted
with the Scots to mould us all after the Kirk; polluted his Church with the
Directorie, and many other abominations I spare to name; has taken upon him to
ordain Priests, to which office he knows he never received a consecration, and
had no other power imparted to him by Bp. D. venant, then to Ibid. p. 19.
preach, to dispense Sacraments, to bind and loose; and that not any how, or as
he lists, but Ibid. p. 17.
as this realm has received the same. He jeered our Divines at the Synod of
Dort, (and Bp. Davenant as one of them) with their Hierarchick Flaunt, the
Mass of Ceremonies, the ceremonious Litter, the many pretty Liturgicall
Knacks, with other the like effects of his spirit and breeding. He denies that
any civil power can have a supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical (so long as he
cleaves to his Kirkirsh Principles,) and now he publicly Ph. 2. p. 67, 68.
avows that his Presbytery has an Authority to excommunicate the Magistrate,
the supreme civil Magistrate under which they live, and to which they have
Note, he confesses it was no rash Oath (c. 2. p. 22.) and therefore ought to
have been kept.
sworn to live in subjection and obedience. the foul and horrid consequences of
which most Popish and Jesuitical Tenent, I could easily tell him out of story,
were this a place for such inlargements. I shall omit many things, until I am
farther provoked, and find it needful, I will only observe this once for all,
that when he labors to excuse his senior sym-Presbyters and Patrons whom he
had tacitly accused See that manifested in D^v. Philan. c. 1. p. 17, 18.
of temporizing, and inconstancy, and receding from their subscriptions, etc.
he says; they only receded from the Rituall c. 2. p. 40, 41.
part, and in an age unceremonial. What a rare Animal is this? and with how
healing a Tongue can he lick himself whole, although his ulcers are never so
grievous? There is but one Article, of 39, commanding a dutiful observance of
rites and ceremonies; the rest are only of substantials: from which when the
party Note, the Judgment of the late Primate, set ou^ by Dr. Bernard, (p. 126)
was this, That the ordination made by such Presbyters, as have severed
themselves from those Bishops unto whom they had sworn Canonical obedience,
cannot possibly be excused from being Schismatic.
apostatizeth, then all was but rituall (you may be sure) and they grew out of
fashion; that is, the times did alter, and (like their ordinary Emblem, upon
the pinnacle of the Temple) the men altered with them. There is nothing more
easy, then to put soft names upon the ruggedst Actions in the world.
Drunkenness is good Fellowship, Euphoniae gratia; fornication a Trick of
youth, (...). and so, (...), every thing may be any thing. I make no doubt but
if Popery should reign amongst us in these days, and should be as rigidly
imposed as in the days of Queen Mary, Mr. Rabbi Buisy would be the first at
his Crucifix and his Beads, and would say in his Defense, to any man that
should accuse him of serving the Times, that he only That is, Tempora mutantur,
and nos mutamur ab illis.
conformed to the rituall part, and in an Age ceremonial. They are very
unlikely to take up the Cross, who have laid it so heavily upon other men's
shoulders. But now that I and Mr. B. have taken our Turns in his Dilemma, I
must consider of a way how to shorten my work; lest if I punish the Malefactor
after the measure that he is guilty, I loose as much time as my greatest
adversaries can wish.

. 8. In his c. 2. p. 16. lin. 18, 19, 31, etc. he denies Of his denying his own
hand.
that he intended a publication of his papers against a Manuscript called mine;
and explains what he meant by communi Presbyterorum consilio in one of his
letters directed to me long since.] If I had not experience of his hardiness,
I should admire how he durst to contradict his own eyes, when he could not but
know that mine are open, and that it is in my power to send his letters into
the light. I have them now under mine eye, and do find my self threatened in the
second, as I find him boasting in the first, what public use he would make of
an Answer to my Pamphlet, and what account he would give to the Church of God
of what he had been doing against that Trifle. I am also looking upon his third
Letter (as he directs me) wherein his words are precisely these [ being a
Presbyterian I affect much to proceed communi Presbyterorum consilio:] that is,
in plain English, by the common Counsel of the Presbyters, not by the common
consent only, as here he falsely translates his own Latin. Did he think that
consilium had been the Latin word for consent? or did he wilfully mistake it?
or had he forgot his own words when he challenged me to look under his Hand and
Seal? Other men may judge as they think convenient: but I believe his
forgetfullnesse is the best expression of his Remembrance.

. 9. In his c. 2. p. 17. lin. 16. he says, I make more have Mr. B's Accusation
of my Dispatch. of which he might have accused St Austin, and Origin, and the
greatest Luminaries of the Church, with much more reason.
with my good works, then good speed, (giving this reason in the margin,)
because my Correct Copy, Sinner impleaded, and Philanthropie, were all put
forth in less then a twelvemonth.] He cannot endure to speak Truth, though
nothing is gotten by his falsehood. Nineteen Months were expired betwixt the
first and the last of those three books. And what had he to do with that? why
must he publish to the world, that I am industrious in my calling, and that
himself (if he is able,) is not willing to tell twenty, without loosing 7
before he comes to 19? But be it so that my books had come forth all in a day,
can that either better them, or make them worse? then indeed is Mr. B. an
excellent Author, who after some years Ep. Ded. p. 1.
travail (to use his Phrase) was able to squeeze out a couple of Monsters. And
however he tells me that I am not quick-sighted, yet in the very same line I
can see his Latin, [acutum cernere and mordere] and, few lines before, I can
see his Greek, [(...):] and whilst I see, I pity both; advising him
henceforward to content himself with Dutch and Hebrew.

. 10. Whilst I am thus going forwards in showing his His Recriminations the
saddest part of his Adventure.
Falsehoods, I am arrived at that c. 2. p. 19. lin. 36, 37, etc.
page, where he is pleased to accuse me of the very same crime, palpable
untruths which I published against him, and of them not a few, but many threes,
says our Accuser. But here he stumbles at his own threshold, and no sooner
tryes to get up, then he falls quite down. First he confesses, that his three
Exceptions were bare hearsares, which he had sworn were no bare hearsayes p.
17. Next he fears, that I had scarce so much as hearsayes to bear me out in
what I said: though part of what I spoke was from his own handwriting; part
from his mouth, delivered to me from his own messenger on purpose sent unto my
House, who did not whisper it neither, but spoke it audibly to others; and part
from such persons, who for number are more, and for credit more weighty then
this unhappy Recriminator can pretend to be. Thirdly, he tells us he will but
touch upon a p. 20. lin. 2, 3.
few of my supposed calumnyes, without so much as mentioning a world more; when
yet he had told us in his Title Page, that he had made a full Abstersion of all
calumnyes; hoping the Reader would forget what he had said in his Title, or not
read on till p. 20. or not observe the contradiction betwixt the one and the
other, or at least conceive a world more beyond the collective All. How
impossible it is, that M. B. should knowingly have omitted to accuse me of any
failing, which he conceived to be such, I will briefly demonstrate by 2
examples of his willingness to make me guilty. 1. In the conclusion of my
Philanth. I had written these words, -- when some wagers have been laid
concerning the Correptorie Correction -- The Printers officer (by setting his
letters so loosely as to fall out of the frame) expressed it thus -- when some
wagers have con been laid cerning the Correptorie Correction. -- which
misplacing of the syllable [con] which should have been added to [cerning] was
demonstrably no other then the misfortune of the Press; and yet Mr. B. in his
c. 2. p. 9.
Prints thought fit to trouble his Readers with it. 2. Whereas my Printer, in
the Div. Phila^th. c. 3. p. 99. lin. 19.
same book, had made it [in] in stead of [ni] which I had therefore very
carefully took care to have mended in the Catalogue of Errata, and that in this
printed form [p. 99. l. 19. r. ni] Mr. B. taking no notice that it was altered
in the Errata, lays it roundly to my charge in his c. 2. p. 28. which however,
in it self, most unworthy to be mentioned; yet considering the use which may be
easily made of it, I think it more worthy then greater matters. For from hence
I thus argue: If Mr. B. was so diligent in observing those oversights, which he
could not but know were none of mine, but merely Typographicall, and as venial
faults in the Printer as any Printer can let fall, in any the most weighty or
sacred volume; how would the man have triumphed, had he found any errors of
greater moment? and how innocent does he declare my papers to have been,
wherein he is fain to quarrel such motes? and how incredible must he be
thought, whilst he pretends an omission of other faults? Nay, fourthly, he
protested before God, that he knew but three things which I accused of being
fictions, to which he gave the least credit, p. 17. yet here he talks of many
threes; at the very expense of being perjured in his former affirmation, or of
speaking in the later against his knowledge. Fifthly, how incredible must it
needs be, that he who invented so many Tales, and took up so many upon Report
(either in deed, or in pretense) should omit to publish any ill thing of me, if
he had really met with it in any part of my writings? But let us come to the
particulars of which his unhappiness is composed.

. 11. His first complaint is, (p. 20. lin. 7, 8, 9, etc.) that Of the ground of
his malignity.
his chief Parishoners being of my Congregation, I said, was the ground of all
his Correptorie Correction.] My own words were, that this Philanth. c. 2. p.
46. in marg. and c. 3. p. 122.
appears to be the reason. And so it does very sufficiently. For 1. he was
civil and courteous to me, as civil, and as courteous, as most men in the
Country, until the time that his Parishoners betook themselves to my church,
(as much without my knowledge, as against his pleasure:) and from that time
forward my Neighbors enmity to me did take its Date. He got a Copy of a
Manuscript which was conceived to be mine, (and whispered such among the
Brethren) against which he boasted what confutations he was preparing. I
advised him by letter, that if it was true what I had heard, he would consider
whether his Copy were mine or not, and whether (if mine) it were a true Copy
or a false one. To this, (before he would give me one pertinent word) he
returned me an Answer ushered in with this Preface -- You know me to be Robbed
(I call not you the Thief) of a considerable part of my very fevv Auditors
when they be all together. In his second letter he told me, that those chief
Parishoners were the His words were in Latin, susceptor gregis alieni, non
certe abacti, sed sponte fugientis.
fugitives of his Flock, and that I was the Receiver of another man's sheep;
that they were not so good as he would have them, else I needed not to turn
His word was (...).
medler in another man's dioecese out of any over-fond love of abolished
Episcopacy. Nay he flew so high as to wish, that matters might be judicially
decided in an Ecclesiastical Court. (which what it imports in a Presbyterian
sense, so many have felt, that all have heard it.) 2. This aching Tooth did so
torment him, that he abruptly cried out in his first printed Pamphlet (as he
was trying to speak of Gods decrees) that I had fulfilled my insolency against
his See Philanth. c. 3. p. 56.
ministry, and his Flock. and in another place, (upon a sudden twitch of the
vexed part) he Of which there is a section Philan. c. 3. p. 72.
blurted out a bold world, that he took more pains with those fevv under him,
then I with my more numerous flock. Upon another sharp pang of the aching Tooth,
he brake out into a confidence, that his Correp. Corr. p. 22.
Sermons were more wholesome, though not so handsome as mine. Nay so far is he
from leaving this anodynous outcrie, until his pain has left him, that he
reproacheth me (even here too) with my Note, Reader, that this is as contrary
to Truth, as any thing that is false. See what I said Philan. c. 2. p. 46. lin.
4, 5.
Filching of his Parishoners (lin. 17.) and with schismatic practices
against his Parish (lin. 24.) and this ground of his Distempers he calls the
ground of his godly jealousy (lin. 20.) Nay (as the acid humor does increase,)
he lays about him like two or three It is his Thrase of himself, p. 5. lin. 7.
thrashers; strikes at the high commendations which he says I gave to his
Parishoners qualityes and conversations, when I said that they were persons of
a most imitable converse, fearing God and hating covetousness, etc. Then he
talks of his advantage to do me a mischief; and forgeth me to have said, My
words were these* Perhaps my neighbor does consider, that it lies in his
power, etc. and thinks that I am of his opinion, etc. Philan. p. 3.
that it is in his power to do me many a shrewd turn; talks of Patriarch sibbs
in another dioecese, and of no body-knows-who, who cheerfully complied with
his Ministry; calls me fawning Tertullus; speaks of his preaching by the
hour-glasse (in 2 words of true Latin) and of others coaching it to church (in
one word of false French;) observes that [far fetched is good for Ladies;] tells
them how well they might have fared by hearing him speak; and so concludes with
another old Say, [their mind to them their Kingdom is.] Thus he puts things
together to the very end of his 21 page: and this must go for a proof (if we
are as willing as himself) that his Parishoners going from him was not at all
the ground of his Correptory Correction. But because he denies that he did
preach them out of their patience, and spoke against them, as well as to them,
out of the very same Pulpit, I will oppose to his denial (which is but single,
and his own too) their unanimous affirmation, that what I said they will
justify on all occasions. It was from them who were affronted that I had
knowledge of the affronts: and they are persons of so much honor, as well as
of conscience and integrity, that one of their words will weigh more, then all
the Oaths and Protestations which can be put by Mr. B. into the contrary scale.
Nor is it a little to his prejudice, that he has spent two pages in an
impertinent invective against those persons, who are so generally beloved,
because so generally obliging, that they stood in some need of his evil
Tongue, to deliver them from the woe of being spoken well of by Luke 6. 26.
all men. For now it happily falls out, (to their unspeakable comfort and
advantage) that they are only spoken well of by all except one; and He a
Correptorie Corrector.

. 12. It is his second complaint, (p. 21. lin. ult. p. 22. lin. 1. Of hiring
his book to be printed.
etc.) that I did publish his confession, that it must cost him around sum of
money to get his book printed.] Was not 20^. such a sum? would not that have
done well in a Daughters portion? And did he not send it me in a message by a
neighbor Minister, that He could get his book printed for no greater sum then
20^. which if himself could not spare, he had friends who were able to do it
for him? I had been told it before by many grave Persons; but I should hardly
have made it public, had he not told me of it himself. And did I do ill to
believe his own message, when delivered by a person much more credible then
himself? If the bargain was altered from after that time, he should have sent
me word of that too, as he had done of the former. But how does he blast his
own credit, in setting this down as a palpable untruth, of which himself was
the Author, and I but his Echo? nay he confesses even here, whilst he does
offer at a Denial, 1. that he suspected some such matter, and spoke of it to
his friends; 2. that one acquainted with the ways of printers did a little
scare him about a sum of money; 3. that after the money matter was talked of, he
did, out of pure respect to his Budget, forbear committing his Book to the
Press; (Truth will out one way or other.) 4. that at last it cost him a small
matter to the Printer, and what he did gratify his choice friends with. But let
him speak again in print; was he not obliged, at the Stationers price, to take
off 200 of his Correp. Corrections? and does he not drop a I find it since in
his chapter 2. p. 28.
confession that diverse Dozens of his Book came down to him bound up? and did
he not leave some dozens to be sold for him by the ^tioners? Come away then,
Reader, to his next Recrimination.

. 13. His third complaint is, (p. 22. lin. 24, 25. etc.) that I Of his swearing
and cursing, and railing, and Pulpit-scuffles.
said, he rayled at me to all sorts of people, and cursed me to some, and
preached me down in his 2 lecture Sermons.] He preached and rayl'd, for he
rayled in preaching, to all sorts of people. Once at Northampton in mine own
hearing, under the title of (...): which when I charged him with, he did not
deny it. another time in Daventry Pulpit, which (being upon a market day) was
talked of in the market, and brought to my ears by a cloud of ear- witnesses.
And whether he railed at me or no behind the Curtains, his Readers may judge by
what he has done upon the Stage. A Correptorie Corrector begins to grow into a
Proverb, and gives a special denomination to one that railes. p. 22. lin. ult.
p. 23. lin. 1, 2, 3.
But Mr. B. will lay down his life upon it, that, for above this 30 years,
never did rash Oaths or cursing come out of the doors of his lips; nor in his
greatest have and heats did he ever protest so high, as by his Faith, by his
Troth, or his Truly. Yet in the 17th page of this his last book, he protested
before God, not only rashly, but very much worse, as has been showed. Is not
that more then by his Faith? Again he Correp. corr. p. 174.
professed in the presence of God, that he thought me well-nigh in the same
condition with Simon Magus. Is not that more then by his Troth? Nay farther
yet, he pulls a curse upon himself, and the greatest curse too, even Ibid. p.
25. lin. 1, 2.
Anathema Maranatha, if he prove not the Doctrins which he has taught these 20
years most agreeable to the Faith of the Church of England. And when we
consider how impossible it will be to prove that, how much worse has he done,
then if he had spoken it by his Truly? Nay in this his second Book he bestows
this curse upon his Friends, C. 2. p. 38. lin. 19, 20.
Beshrew them, who were at any time so credulous, etc. But in excuse of this
last he may chance to say, that he was somevvhat older at his p. 38. where he
cursed, then at his p. 22. where he laid his life upon it, that he had not
cursed or sworn these 30. years. and therefore I press it not much upon him:
I love to allow him all the scope that I am able.

. 14. His fourth complaint is (p. 3. lin. 20, 21. etc.) Of his Correctors,
Apology, and being in the Diurnall.
concerning what I said of the Correctors of his Press, and that his Apology
was to be looked on as the deepest instance of his invention: and p. 24. that
he was at the cost to have his Book in the Diurnall.] To the first I answer,
that I was told it by diverse persons whose eyes were still upon the place,
and could tell more of those matters then Mr. B. himself. which I cannot
prove, I Will beg his pardon, although the matter is not of moment. For a most
satisfactory Answer to the second, I refer my Reader to the Philanth.
conclus^^um. 7. p. 66.
place, where my words may be seen in conjunction with the reasons which there
I give for them. I say to the third, that what he did by a proxy, he truly did.
(...). That I can show my information under the hand and seal of a most worthy
person. That if he did, he did well, (for who prints books to keep them
secret?) and therefore if he did not, I did not ill to think he did. Yet
because I did take it upon report, I shall as soon as he proves I did mistake
it, make him amends in such a manner as he will have me.

And thus having seen the very utmost of what he has been able to charge me
with, (from the very beginning to the conclusion of my book,) I will pursue my
method of charging Him.

. 15. In his p. 24. lin. 8, 9. he is not afraid to divulge his Mr. B's Dream of
the Printers Boy.
Dream, that by my silver hook I hooked in very Printers boys to be my
Historians, and that I bribed them to let me have a hansell of his papers,
etc.] A thing not only extremely false, but so very impossible to be true, that
I was never able to find out whereabout his Printer lived, whether at London,
Oxford, or Cambridge. Upon my diligent inquiry, I heard that London was the
place, but I heard it only, and read it in the Title Page of his Book. For
ought I know, there is no such matter. But admit him to be in London, I cannot
tell (to this hour) either where he lives, or what his name is. All I find in
his Title Page, is, Mr. Sawbridge his Stationer, and W. H. which what it
signifyes, I cannot tell. Indeed Mr. Sawbridge was ask't the question by a
Friend, but he was as wary as the ancient Persians, and would not let fall a
syllable toward the opening of the secret. The mysteryes of Bacchus and of
Cybele were never locked up with greater care. The like was observed in the
printing of his last; which I was never able to get a sight of (notwithstanding
my endeavors, which might administer an occasion to Mr. B's confident
invention) until after there were Copyes in the public shops at Northampton.
So very unhappy is Mr. B. in printing all that lies uppermost. His sin against
conscience and common sense.


. 16. In his p. 25. lin. 18, 19. he says, I omitted to touch upon the 20th
part of all that was substantial in him, and argumentative.] If he had said,
[of all that was scurrilous and invective,] he had hit the Truth a little
nearer. I was chid by wise persons for considering him at all, and again I was
chid for taking him so much into consideration. But for this I have been
thanked by the very same persons, that I showed him the shadows of all his
substance. What subject is there in all his Satyr touching the questions in
debate, and relating to my notes, upon which I have not fully spoken in my
defense of Gods Philanthropie? My Alphabeticall Index is a thousand witnesses,
to such as list to look no farther. But I have many more witnesses then Mr. B.
can pretend to, because the whole Impression was dispersed long ago. How I
spoke to all things which were substantial and pertinent, and why I spoke to
no more, I cannot demonstrate by an induction, unless I transcribe the many
sections, both of his book, and mine. But I can do it a shorter way, even by
sending my equal Reader to the conclusion of my Philanthropie, and by desiring
him, with that to compare the Index.

. 17. In his 27, 28, 29. pages, he proclaims his ignorance Of his false Greek
and Latin.
in Greek and Latin, by his pitiful endeavors to make them venial. I did
occasionally name a few of his infirmityes, and in mercy to him I named no
more. I did seriously intend not to rub up that sore, and meant that Time
should either heal it, or skin it over. But since the Delinquent is so
ungrateful, as not to accept of my pity, and even flings dirt at me for
concealing so much of his uncleanness, I will compel him to be sorry, though
I cannot be sure he will repent. First, for his general excuses, that the
Printer did him much wrong, and that I would not admit of a corrected Copy
which he sent me, I have this to Answer for his discomfort. 1. That the
grossest of his commissions (such as multa rara, ad phalerandum populum,
derelictoscujus, and the like) are not pretended by himself to have been errors
typographicall. For of the three I now named he seeks to justify two, and very
wisely conceales the third: ad phalerandum populum he dares not mention. 2.
Though I would not accept of a book from his hands, (having bought one before
out of the shop, and suspecting many dishonestyes to lie in ambush by such a
project;) yet I detein'd it so long, as to examine his monstrosityes of Greek
and Latin, (which by the Index I had made was very easy to be done.) And except
Demon meridianum (which he had mended with his pen) I found the book to be as
faulty (in point of Latin and Greek) as that which I had from the common stall.
Nay I have now in my custody one of those very Copyes, which Mr. B. corrected
after it came to Northampton; and even there I have discovered above twenty
gross errors (as a neighbor Minister can bear witness) neither amended with
the pen, nor yet in the Catalogue of Errata. But let us come to the particulars
in which I See Philanthr. c. 3. p. 99.
instanc't. The first, and chiefest, was his deplorable use of phalerandum,
which in stead of confessing, or excusing, he very carefully passes over, and
breaks out into railing, as the natural His ad phalerandum populum.
language of his misfortunes. And having showed by convina, (as heretofore by
Monsieurs) that he would fain be mistaken to have at least a little skill in
Italian and French, even whilst he demonstrates his perfect ignorance in both,
he tryes to hide his real frailty, by starting a frailty where there is none.
For the fault that I found was multa rara, which His multa rara.
was as bad as to have said, multa pauca: And to that I pointed with an
asterisk both in the margin, and in the Text. But our Gamester provides a
backdoor for his escape, and makes as if I had blamed him for the particle
[ni] whereas he knows I never did, and was so far from laying it in his dish,
that I laid it wholly in the Printers, as Mr. B. might have read in the
Catalogue of Errata. In so much as that refuge has quite undone him. Nor fares
he the better for his many rare Gemms, because his words were multa lectu
dignissima and admodum rara; which if he thinks not worse then many
grammatical incongruities, I know what the Reader will be apt to say of his
learning. Is not this bad enough? not, it seems, for Mr. Barlee: for that which
follows is much worse. Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 23.. 4. His cujus derelictos.
Defectio arguit fuisse derelictos, cujus (supple Derelictionis, says Mr.
Barlee) non potest alia adduci causa, quam Reprobatio. Calvin's word was
derelictos, not derelictio: or if it had been so, as Mr. B's ignorance would
have had it, yet could it not have been Mr. Calvin's meaning. For 1. it appears
by the context, that he was speaking of the Defection of the Reprobate Angels,
and inquiring after its cause: and 2. it could not otherwise be sense, then by
making cujus to refer unto the word defectio. Could Mr. Calvin be so silly, as
to say that Gods Reprobation was the only cause of his dereliction? Not his
positive Reprobation, for then it would be before the negative, (in
contradiction to his Tenent;) not the negative Reprobation, for that is nothing
but dereliction, which cannot possibly be the cause of it self. No, 'twas only
Mr. B. who could arrive to that pitch of Dementation. What satisfaction will he
now make me for giving me the lie with a notorious epithet, and for his
wonderful impertinence of St. Paul's ignorance in Grammar? He tells us it is
venial to break Priscian's Head. But these are such faults as would break his
Heart too. The time would fail me if I should mention the great variety of the
like, which are very conspicuous in his Correp. Correction. But I will show my
Catalogue to any man that shall desire it for satisfaction; and from the
Press, if required by M. B. Nor is he happyer in his second book then he was
in his first. For not to speak of such trifles as Coriphaeus, and acutum
cernere, (not mended in the Errata) I will only mention two or three Rarityes.
What I had written Philanth. in A^vertis. to the Reader.
(...), he thought he must repeat This was worse then his manifold mistake of
(...), which it seems he thought could not agree with Helena, because its
termination did happen to be in [(...)] therefore he murdered it into (...),
and the like; and after all, marred all in the mending.
(...) p. 17. no doubt because he found (...) in his Lexicon, and could not
find (...). wherein how many absurdityes might be observed (to the filling up
of both pages) I leave to the guess of a sufficient Reader. Again (in his chapter
2. p. 54, 55.) he snibs me for an oversight in translating this Latin,
Desinebat esse vir, sed non malus Grammaticus: either not knowing, or not
considering, that the words are Amphibological (like Ibis redibis nunquam
Roman peribis;) and when the sentence was capable of both constructions, I
had reason to take that which was most for my purpose, and for the credit of
Origin, to whom the Amphibolie was applied. Now whether the Logic, or the
Grammar of Mr. B. is to be shent, I leave himself to be the judge. But above
all, I admire him for his vvaving of my In his c. 3. p. 52. lin. 27, 28. where
he referrs to my Philanth. c. 3. p. 106.
Dilemma, whereby he was forced to confess, that he was either a wilful
Impostor, or else understood not the Latin tongue, when he translated Felix
Turpio, not only besides, but against the meaning of the words. Whosoever
shall read chap. 3. p. 105, and 106. of Divine Philan. Def. and compare it
with Mr. B's affected Dumbness (c. 2. p. 52.) and with what he says of
opinion astree (c. 2. p. 36.) and how he mends it in his Errata, by making it
worse, he will sure be tempted to laugh as loudly, as Val. Max. l. 9.
Philemon once did upon another occasion.

. 18. Whilst I am in this place of my vindication, I am a little interrupted by
a kind neighbor of the Ministry, who An occasional Digression for the clearing
of what is past, and for the abridging of what is future.
was very much suspected to be the Man, whom Mr. Barlee pretended to be the
sole Author of his Reports: I mean those two, of which I have spoken so lately,
and so much at large, chap. 1.. 9, 10, 11, 12. Nay he himself was very
confident, that Mr. B. would lay those ugly children at his innocent Door, if
he were not prevented by timely caution. He has therefore very worthily, like
an affectionate neighbor (less then which I never found him) not only cleared
himself from Mr. Barlee, but cleared me from himself too; that I may be
justified by them both, upon whomsoever the blame and the guilt may lie. So far
was I from having said to this reverend Minister, that I was without sin, above
sin, and by mine own power could abstain from all sin, and again so far from
denying the lawfulness of the second marriage of Ministers; that he has three
times attested I said the contrary: first, to a clergyman of this County; the
next day after, to a Gentleman of greater quality; and two days after that, to
me in person. nor this by an orall or fugitive profession, but he voluntarily
offered to at test it under his Hand, and accordingly has done it at the very
same time December. 14. 1657. Nor has he done it in one, but in three distinct
written Forms, to which he has added a threefold subscription of his Name;
that Mr. Barlee may be known not only the Raiser of those two slanders, but
withal to have invented his way of management, and defense. Which to describe
unto the life, in its complication of falsityes, with which Mr. B. does lie
entangled, will be the subject of a Treatise to be published by it self, if Mr.
B. shall make it needful, by any obstinate perseverance in so manifold a sin.
But I suppose he will think it his easiest way, to make a confession of his
faults, and to accept of my pardon, which I am Mat. 18. 22.
bound to afford him upon the account of Christianity, though he shall yet sin
against me no less then seventy times seven. In the mean time it concerns me,
as the injured party, to make good use of my Advantage. And since I find my
self unabled, by no less then an induction of all particulars, to make a most
cogent Demonstration of my having been calumniated in several kinds, and that
without the least shadow or show of Reason; I shall take a shorter course then
I have hitherto done, for the clearing my self of all other calumnyes, as soon
as ever I shall have spoken to this following insinuation.

. 19. He says by head and shoulders (c. 2. p. 44. lin. 25, Of praying for the
dead and unto Saints, pleaded for by no-bodyknows-whom.
26, etc.) That it will much concern me to inquire who that Minister was, who
vehemently pleaded, four or five years ago, for the lawfulness of praying for
the Dead, and unto Saints, at a Gentleman's table, who contended against it, and
complained heavily to Mr. Barlee of it.] (1.) If another Minister did this, how
can Ibe much concerned to inquire who he was? or why did he not say, he meant
another, and not my self? For as the words are here placed, he plainly seems to
mean me by them? which why should his Readers be left to think, in case he did
really intend some other? (2.) Again, if I am the Man he means, (which is the
opinion of all I meet with) why durst he not say it in downright terms, as he
was wont to say things of worse importance? His very mode of delivery bewrayes
his guilt. And well it might. For (3.) how could I eat at any Gentleman's table,
who could possibly complain to Mr. Barlee? Or (4.) how can he be a Gentleman,
who did not only complain of what was spoken at his Table, but of what he
feigned to have been spoken? Off goes his Gentility, if that is part of his
Evocatos tanquam ad epulas nuptiales Protestantium primores, Carolus nonus
opprimi jussit. Thuanus l. 55. 56, 57. Cluver. ad A. D. 1572. p. 734.
entertainments. None but (...). Herodot l. (...). c. 119. p. 51.
Astyages, and Atreus, have ever made a more cruel and inhospitable Feast.
None but Harpagus and Thyestes have found a sorryer Treatment at another man's
Table. For (5.) so far have I been from pleading vehemently in behalf of those
errors of the Roman Church, that I have vehemently pleaded against them both,
when it has not been for my interest, but much to the hazarding of my safety.
Nor am I able to believe, that this is any other story, then what was newly
coined in the old mint, and only antedated from 4 or 5 years ago, that the
Gentleman (when accused) may fitly say he has forgot it. But I omit to say
more, (how much soever I am provoked) until I am refused some satisfaction. It
was no longer ago then in his p. 38. lin. 21, 22, 23. when Mr. B. wished [with
an O] that I would purge my self from dimidiate Pontificianisme. And p. 73, 74,
75. he reckons me to be one of those Cassandrian-Papists, against whom Mr.
Baxter does warn the Nation. And because he is assured that he has no ground
for it, he is fain to glance at me in a most oblique and squinting story, which
is as far from Truth, as Malice is from Charity, and Truth from Falsehood. It
is as if a man should say, that it nearly concerns Mr. B. to inquite, who that
Minister was, who upon the perusal of the Divine Philanthropie defended, did
so exceedingly swell with Anxiety and Anger, that the Cooper presently was sent
for, to Hoop his Belly and his Ribs, for fear of bursting: But I declare
against this, as a most unchristian and unmanlike course: and only propose it
as a glass wherein Mr. B. may behold the ugly face of his inventions. And
because by these courses, and many more of this nature, he strikes directly at
my Living, and at many others through my sides, I think he cannot but owe me
some very public satisfaction: And by these presents I do require it.

. 20. Now I come to my shorter course, which I promised A short Catal^gue of
37. more Falseho^ds.
at the end of the 18th section: and which if Mr. Barlee shall not take in good
part, I will speak at large to those things, in another Tract, which now I
shall only think fit to mention. 1. What he says of an imaginary Chapter 2. p. 31.
parallel betwixt my opinions and the Pelagians (which he pretends to have
made in his Correp. Corr.) 2. what he says of Ibid.
D. Reynolds in his Epistle to himself, showing my Arguments to have issued
from the Pelagian School. 3. what he says of my Ibid. and p. 32.
abusing D. Reyn. and Mr. Whitfeld, etc. 4. of my Ib. p. 33.
repeating the Barbers Basin a second time. 5. of its being no p. 34.
fiction, into the partnership of which he took in his reverend Divine. 6. of
what passed at p. 34.
Daintry touching Socrates and Job, (who were both spoken of, but not as Mr. B.
does make relation.) 7. of my p. 36.
ending my Notes with a harsh (...). 8. of my p. 37.
accusing him for being like Pausanias, (which indeed I mentioned of an
indefinite (...), but he alone applies to himself.) 9. of p. 38.
frequent repetitions, (which is more his own fault then any man's whatsoever in
all my reading.) 10. of my p. 42.
ranking the best of men with the worst of Quakers, (whereas I only said, what
things I was unlike, and how far from being a Quaker.) 11. of my being not able
not to know, that p. 42.
Bishops were no other then primi Presbyterorum. 12. of my p. 42.
justifying one of the worst of his expressions. 13. of his p. 43.
not making promise to crave pardon for his faults. 14. p 45.
of my spending above 22 sheets in pure invective. 15. of his not p. 47.
saying that he had need to cast about for Topical Arguments. 16. Ibid.
of his 5 Arguments to prove that matter of fact, pretended not to be spoken
to. 17. Ibid.
of my confessing a Copy to be mine (which I never saw, nor knew any thing of
but from Him.) 18. p. 48.
of confessing by faultring denyals. 19. Ibid.
of leaving out a passage against special discriminating Grace. 20. p. 50.
of his never having heard that his three friends had their finger in the pie
of sequestring others, though some of them lived upon sequestrations. 21. p. 52.
of its being plain by the Text and context, that he spoke not of me, but of
himself. 22. Ibid.
of my granting those Westmonasterial Authors to make for him (when yet he
declares for the upper way, etc.) 23. p. 53.
of his alluding to my words when he calumniates them. 24. Ibid.
of his opposing my Idol Fancy of Grace, when he gibed at Gods Grace by me
alleged. 25. p. 56.
of his not charging me with Atheism, etc. 26. p. 56.
of my not threatening him with a thing pass'^, but He me. 27. p. 57.
of his not allotting me a portion in the bottomless Lake, etc. (which I have
largely proved Chapter 2.. 4.) 28. p. 59.
of Aerius his not being condemned generally for heresy. 29. p. 60.
of his party's maintaining communion with us in doctrine and worship. 30. p. 61.
of Bp. Davenant's exacting nothing, but the Oath of supremacy, and
subscription to the 39 Articles. 31. p. 64.
of Episcopius his being an Antitrinitarian, etc. 32. Ibid.
of my knowing that Episcopius was fully confuted by Vedelius, (when I know the
contrary.) 33. p. 65.
of the Bishops severity to Non-conformists, etc. 34. p. 66.
of King James his promise, that he would labor to conform the
Church Government of England to that of Scotland, rather then vice versa. 35.
p. 71.
of special Grace being inconsistent with universal. 36. p. 71, 72, 73, etc.
of my charging Testard, Amyrald, Bp. of Armagh, etc. with Arminianisme (who
never owned it in my self.) 37. p. 76.
of Bp. Davenants Pacificatorie to Duraeus not being one of the last things he
writ (by which we must mean, his public works, not private letters, etc.) What
Mr. Barlee says, or insinuates, (by such inevitable consequences, as do make
it equal to what he says in dogmatical positions) is neither more nor less
true, in the 34 places directed to in the margin of this last section, then if
a man should say that Mr. Barlee was passionatly in love with the Queen of
France, and pretends a just Title to the Crown of Spain.

And thus (good Reader) I have preserved thee at once from so much labor, and
loss of time, as 34 long sections must needs have cost thee. I wish I had
thought of this method sooner; since his prevarications with the Truth are
(most of them) so palpable, that to Sententias vest^as prodidisse, superasse
est. Hieron. ad C^esiph. adv. Pelag. c 4.
name them only, is to discover them; and to discover them only, is to confute
them.

CHAP. III.
Mr. B's Abuses of other men, (as well as of me, and of himself,) especially of
his own Party; and his incomparable mistakes in those of the Prelacy, the late
Primate, Bp. Davenant, etc.

. 1. Mr. B. taking it for granted, upon the representation of his Fancy, that
he had done me some special savor, concludes from no-premisses, that I
discover my self to be a Monster of ingratitude for having Of my being a
Monster of Ingratitude to Mr. B. because he abused his best friends without my
consent, and was reproved by me for it.
written a tedious letter to him, and made that use of his Answer which he
expresses chapter 2. p. 50. lin. 14, 15. etc.] Where the ingratitude does lie, I
shall leave it to be considered by this impartial account of that whole
matter. When I had published a true Copy of my Notes to prevent the publishing
of a false one, I was told, (which since I find was true) that Mr. Barlee had a
design to print as much of that false one as he thought might be useful to do
his work. Against this I thought fit to preadmonish him in a letter. Advising
him first, to live in silence, and not to trouble the Press with breach of
charity or peace. Or if that might not be, that he would then keep close to the
proper subject of debate; and neither call me by ill names, nor affirm any
thing to be mine, which I had already so very heartily and so knowingly
disowned. For having voted me already to be a Papist, and a Pelagian, (and a
Socinian into the bargain) should he proceed to aspersions from I knew not what
Manuscripts copied out with his Ink, why might he not accuse me of having said
Mass, or of any thing else which might be matter of sequestration? With how
much reason I did this, both his books have made appear. For what I suspected
only as possible, he has abundantly performed, notwithstanding all those
premonitions, with which my self and others did very affectionately oblige him.
But the word sequestration did so sting him (as he pretended) that he wondered
(in his next letter) at my monstrous uncharitableness, for representing him to
my misgiving fancy, as if he had nothing of an Ecclesiastic, of a Christian,
of a Gentleman, of a Scholar, of a Neighbor left in him. So great a sin did he
reckon a sequestration. He farther added, that even then when his principles
did seem most to lead him to the liking of the sequestration of unworthy
Ecclesiastics, yet even then he was so much for Ecclesiastica Ecclesiastice,
and justa just, as that, he blessed God for it, he never had, nor ever would
have, nor ever in that way hoped to have, any hand or finger in that pie. Now
comes the jest. For having Noted sequestrations with such a black Coal, and
startled at the mention of such a Bugg, as if he thought it a Scarlet sin; and
being afterward put in mind, who they were that grew lusty upon that very Dish
which he thought Poison, (and blessed God that his finger was never in it;) he
tells the world even in Print, that some of his friends (his dearest Friends
and Patrons too) have even lived upon sequestrations, but he did not think of
them when he wrote what he did. Who says he did? or who can think it? Had he
remembered at that instant what now he tells us, he would not certainly have
used them as accidentally he did. He would rather have lessened and excused
that Fact, then have loaded it (as he did) with so many heavy aggravations.
What he says, he never heard of his three special Friends, and the
distinction which he makes betwixt having a finger in the pie of sequestring,
and living upon Still he says it is a way he is not satisfi^d with, however
practiced by the long Parliament, which he did most Idolize. p. 52. I hope that
others may be unsatisfied as well as He, and as safely.
sequestrations, etc. does but amount to such a salvo, as stands in most need
of being covered; and kept close: for the more Air gets in, the more the u'cer
will be endangered, as I could show more ways then one. Mr. B. should have
known, (I mean, he ought to have considered) that this is one of those things
which, the more he stirrs, will smell the more unbeseemingly. But let it lie
quietly for me, as before it did, until Mr. B. shall rake it up, as now he
has done. So much for Monster of ingratitude, which Himself was much rather to
be charged with, for calling Him [ Chapter 3. p. 7.
monstrous Leviathan Hobbs,] who has assisted his party (at least to the
utmost of his Ability) in asserting their Doctrins of Gods Decrees. And though
Mr. B. does but write like one of the lowest of his Disciples, yet he tells us,
he will as soon own the Ibid.
Devil for his Master, as Mr. Hobbs.

. 2. In his c. 2. p. 65. lin. 28, 29, etc. He says, it had been well for King
James, and all his posterity, if he had Of King James and the Presbyterians.
continued to follow the counsel of Robert Rollock; who did advise him, as he
would not fall into inextricable streights first or last, to continue a fast
friend unto the Godly.] So he calls the Presbyterians of the Kirk; with whom
if King James had complied, as he did not, they had not done as they did, but
had preserved him from falling into inextricable streights. And then (says Mr.
B.) it had been better for his Posterity. So dangerous and fatal a thing it
is, for any Magistrate whatsoever, in any Kingdom or Commonwealth, not to
comply with the Presbytery, when they have power to do mischief. He has spoken
very much to the credit of his party; and given notice to all in power, that
the way to be secure from the attempts of that Sect, is either to set them up,
or to keep them under. But which of the two is most eligible, I hope the world
will make no more Trialls. Well, we have heard Mr. B. of King James and the
Godly: Now it comes to my turn to produce King James concerning both. In the
conference at Hampton Court, upon occasion of Dr. Reynolds obtruding twice the
Kings supremacy, his Majesty took him up in these following words.

King James his speech of the Presbyt. Confer. at Hampt. Court, p. 82, 83, 84,
85.
Dr. Reynolds, I will tell you a Tale. After that the Religion restored by King
Edw: the sixth was soon overthrown, etc. we in Scotland felt the effect of it.
Whereupon Mr. Knox writes to the Queen Regent, that she was supreme head of the
Church; and charged her, as she would answer it before Gods Tribunal, to take
care of Christ his Evangill, and of suppressing the Popish Prelates, who
withstood the same. But how long, trow you, did this continue? Even so long,
till by her Authority, the Popish Bishops were repressed, Himself and his
Adherents were brought in and well settled, and by these means made strong
enough to undertake the matters of Reformation themselves. Then lo, they began
to make small account of her supremacy, nor would longer rest on her Authority;
but took the cause into their own hand, and according to that more light
wherewith they were illuminated, made a further Reformation of Religion. How
they used that poor Lady my Mother, is not unknown, and with grief I may
remember it. Who, because she had not been otherwise instructed, did desire
only a private Chapel, wherein to serve God after her manner, with some few
selected persons: but her supremacy was not sufficient to obtain it at their
hands. And how they dealt with me in my minority, you all know. It was not done
secretly, and though I would, I cannot conceal it. I will apply it thus. And
then putting his Hand to his Hat, his Majesty said; My Lords the Bishops, I may
thank you that these men do thus plead for my supremacy. They think they cannot
make their party good against you, but by appealing unto it: as if you, or some
that adhere unto you, were not vvell-affected toward it. but if once you
were out, and they in place, I know what would become of my supremacy. No
Bishop, no King, as before I said. Neither do I speak at random, without
ground: for I have observed since my coming into England, that some preachers
before me, can be content to pray for James King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; but as for supreme Governor, in all causes,
and over all persons (as well Ecclesiastical as Civil) they pass that over
with silence; and what Cut they have been of, I have afterward learned.
Thus far King James. With whose words if we compare what has been written
by Claud. Salm. D^fen. Reg. c. 10, and 11.
Salmasius, who was in every part of his life, except the last, the greatest
enemy to Bishops, and the greatest Patron to the Presbytery, and yet has
fastened the blackest Character upon the English Presbyterians that has ever
been given to any Sect, I suppose some Readers will take the words of Mr.
Barlee, and use them thus. It had been well for King James, and all his
posterity, if he had follovved the counsel (not of Robert Rollock, but) of one
who was infinitely vviser, I mean, his orthodox and learned self; who advised
his son Basi^. D^. l 2. p. 42.
Henry, whilst yet in Scotland, not to suffer such Ministers to be in his
Kingdom, if he liked to sit at rest.

. 3. But Mr. B^addes further (ibid. lin. ult.) that Mr. Cartwright, Of the
imprisonment of Mr. Cartwright, and Mr. Travers, etc.
and Mr. Travers, and others, were imprisoned for ceremonial inconformity
toward the later end of Q. Elizabeth her Reign. (And he tells us a little
before, that) King James interceded for their releasement. He would have it
thought, I suppose, that Q. Elizabeth was cruel to those good men, when they
were guilty of nothing but Peccadillos. But was Mr. Hacket hanged for
nonconformity to things indifferent? Or was it nothing but ceremonial, which
Copinger, Lancaster, and Artington, and others, designed against the lives of
the whole privy Council, and against the person of the Queen? Or were not
Cartwright, and Travers, and Wentworth, and Charke, and Egerton, and others of
the Presbyterian Ministry, Dang. Posit. c. 13. and 14. p. 171. to 176.
made privy to the plot, to which they were accessory by their concealment?
Perhaps Mr. B. is not acquainted with those affairs. And therefore to requite
him for his care to have me very well informed, about the Faction which played
Rex in King James his Court, (p. 69. lin. 32, 33. etc.) for which he advises
me to a book writ in elegant verse by Thomas Hepey, if I am able to procure it
for love, or money; I will direct him for information to a most admirable
volume, printed in the year 1593. and entitled thus -- [ Dangerous Positions
and proceedings published and practiced within this Island of Britain, under
pretense of Reformation, and for the Presbyterial discipline.] If King James
did intercede for those men's release, perhaps being then but King of Scotland,
he did not know the whole cause of their imprisonment here in England: or he
was not out of his wardship to those fiery spirits (as he called them) and so
might intercede in complaisance to his Guardians, (however unfit for that
office to a King of his Age:) or he was not yet perfect in his mystery of
King-Craft: or let the cause of his intercession be what it will, he did many
things of which he afterward repented that they were done. King James his
Antipat^y to Presbyterianisme.


. 4. What Mr. B. is pleased to add, (p. 66. lin. 19, 20.) of K. James his
writing into Scotland, that he would labor to reduce the Church Government of
England to that of Scotland, rather then conform that to England's, is for many
reasons very incredible. First, because Mr. Barlee tells it; and cites no
other Author then the unwritten words of a Scottish Minister. (At every dead
lift he tells us something that he was told, be it of me, or any man else.)
Secondly, K. James was so far from such a preference, that his a version to
Presbyterianisme was as great as to Pigg, or to Tobacco. Witness his words at
Conference second day, p. 85.
Hampton Court, where speaking of Dr. Reynolds and other chieftaines of the
party, If this, (quoth he) be all that they have to say, I will make them
conform themselves, or I will harry them out of this Land, or else do worse.
Witness his letter from Spotswood Hist. Scot. l. 7. p. 530.
White Hall A. D. 1617. to the Presbyterians of the Kirk, wherein he upbraided
to them their ignorance and profaneness, and resembling them to the Heathenish
Constable of Castile, told them, [ they would endure both Lions, Dragons, and
Devils to be figured in their Churches, but would not allow the like place to
the Patriarchs and Apostles.] Id. ibid. p. 533. A. D. 1617.
Witness his chiding speech in the Diet held at St. Andres, when he pressed
upon them to keep a yearly commemoration of our Saviors greatest blessings
bestowed upon mankind, as his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Descent of the Holy Ghost; the private use of both Sacraments in urgent cases;
the Reverent administration of his holy Supper; the catechizing and confirming
of children by Bishops; much too long to be here inserted. Witness his very
angry Id. ib. p. 535.
letter directed to the Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glascow, representing
the wrongs he had received from that sort of men, and saying, [ He was of that
age, that he would not be content to be fed with Broth, as one of their Coat
was wont to speak.] Witness his other angry letter directed singly to the Id.
ib. p. 536.
Archbishop of St. Andrews, wherein he complained of their ridiculous and
scornful dealings with their Sovereign, and their greater irreverence toward
God himself, saying [The Ministers ease and commodious sitting on his Tail
(they are the Kings own words) has been more looked to then that kneeling,
which for reverence he had required to be enjoined to the receivers of so
divine a Sacrament. Neither can we conceive (as he there goes on) what should
be meant by that Table (which they required even in their private
administrations to people upon their Deathbeds) unless they meant to make a
round Table (as did the Jews) to sit and receive it. In conclusion, seeing we
and this Church here must be held Idolatrous in this point of kneeling, or they
reputed rebellious knaves in refusing the same (they are the Kings own words)
it is our pleasure, etc.] Witness his third severe Ibid.
letter, sent with this unto the Council, for inhibiting the payment of
stipends to any of the rebellious Ministers, (they are the King own words) in
Burg, or Landwart. Witness his first letter of indignation, to the general
Assembly indicted at Perth, wherein he charged all the rebellious dispositions
of the people (who of their * Id. ib. p. 537, 538.
own dispositions were most Loyal) upon them, and their Doctrins: minding them
of his patience under their manifold provocations, their slandering the truth
of God (they are the Kings own words) by walking disorderly under the cloak of
seeming holiness, shaking hands, as it were, in this their disobedience to
Magistracy, with the upholders of Popery (still the Kings own words.) Witness
his fourth sharp Id. ib. p. 542.
letter directed to the Bishops at the An. D. 1621.
last Parliament which was held by that King in Scotland, telling them [ they
had to deal with two sorts of enemies, Papists, and Puritans; that they should
go forward in action against the one and the other. That Papistry was a disease
of the mind, and Puritanisme of the Brain, (they are the Kings own words) and
that the Antidote of both must be a grave, settled, and wellorder'd Church in
the obedience of God and their King. Whereof he willed them to be careful, and
to use all means for the reducing those that either of simplicity or
willfulness did err. Witness his speeches at Hampton Court, when he trounced
Mr. Confer. at Hamp. Court second day. p. 67, 68.
Knewstubs for taking exception to the Cross in Baptism: ib. p. 74.
when he said of him and his Brethren, [I have lived among this sort of men
ever since I was ten years old: but I may say of my self as Christ did of
himself, that though I lived among them, I was never of them since I was able
to Note, that when King James liked Presbyterianisme, it was before he was able
to judge, but not one minute after. And the very same do I profess of my self.
judge; neither did any thing make me more to condemn and detest their courses,
then that they did so peremptorily disallow of all things, which at all had
been used in Popery. Witness his words upon the third day of that Conference,
when he pleaded for subscription to the three famous Articles, which the
Churchmen of England were to approve by subscribing; namely, the Kings
supremacy, the Articles of Religion, and the Book of Common Prayer. The
necessity of which he did press so home, and evinced by three such excellent
Reasons, as he thought it fit to conclude in these words, Ib. third day p. 93,
94.
[ That if any, after things were well ordered, would not be quiet, and show
his obedience, the Church were better without him, he were worthy to be hanged.
Praestat ut pereat unus, quam unitas. The Lenity of the Bishops compared with
the rigor of the Presbyt.
Yet how favorably he used them, notwithstanding his Threats, and how much
mercy the Bishops showed them, in spite of all their guilts and provocations,
many thousands can witness, and have found too soon by sad experience. So
little reason had Mr. B. to accuse them of cruelty (as just now he did p. 65.
lin. 16, 17. etc.) whose only fault has been thought (by the prudentest
persons) to have been this, that they quenched not the fire whilst it was yet
in the Bramble, whereby it was suffered to grow boistrous, even able to devour
the lofty Cedars; and had not an Army of Buckets opportunely encountered the
threatening flame, had burned up every green Rev. 8. 7. and 9. 4.
thing upon the face of the Earth. Of this I am sure, that the severest of the
Bishops did exact no more of non-Conformists, then Mr. Calvin Expedit ut extet
summa quaedam Doctrinae ab omnibus recepta, quam inter praedicandum sequantur
omnes; ad quam etiam observandam omnes Episcopi and Parochi jurejurando a
^stringantur; ut nemo ad munus Ecclesiasticum admittatur, nisi spondeat illum
Doctrinae consens^m sibi inviolatum futu^um. Calvin. in Epist. 87. ad Protect.
Angliae, p. 165. and paulo infe^ius. -- A certa precum formula, and ritibus
Ecclesiasticis, nequaquam Pastoribus in functione sua discedere liceat.
advised the Duke of Somerset, (the then- Protector to King Edward the sixth)
to exact very severely of all that were candidates for the Ministry, before
their admission to Ecclesiastical functions. From which he would have them to
be rejected, if they would not stipulate for their conformity; which the
Bishops by Oath should be obliged to see performed. And it is known that Ab ea
discedere non magis liceat, quam ab ipsis Religionis placitis. Beza in Epist.
83.
Beza was so rigid an exactor of universal conformity to the devise of the
Presbytery, that he would have it as unallowable to swerve from that, as from
the very Maxims of Religion it self. What matchless crueltyes have been
committed, as well by the Scottish, as by the English Consistorians, I will not
relate, until I think it more needful. I will but hint to Mr. B. what was
once presaged in the Painted Chamber (Sept. 12. 1654.) how sad a Tyranny over
men's consciences would have been exercised in Britain, as well by the English
as the Scottish Presbytery, if it had made such steps, or been as sharp and
rigid, as it threatened when it was first set up. And so I pass to his other
plea for that party.

. 5. Mr. B. confesses (c. 2. p. 67. lin. 30, 31. etc.) that if Of
excommunicating Kings, and killing them, the Doctrines of Presbyt.
with the traitorous seditious Jesuits, they should hold, that in ordine ad
spiritualia, it were lavvfull by Ecclesiastical censures, to depose or kill
wicked Kings, (a thing which all Presbyterians with the late Assembly at
Westminster plead against,) dangerous matters with a witness I might be able
to prove against them.] Here he happily confesses the heinous nature of the
Fact, for which he brands the Jesuits (very vvorthily) with two shrewd
Epithets. And therefore as many Presbyterians as shall be found to have been
guilty of the very same crime, Mr. B. also confesses to have been both
traitorous and seditious Presbyterians. And since he has given me my Theme, I
will speak upon it as I am able, at least as I am bound upon this occasion.
First, I know it will be granted by men of all judgments, that Renowned Mr.
Knox was Presbyterian with a witness; as great a Ringleader in Scotland, as
Luther in Saxony, or Calvin at Geneva, or Zvvinglius in Helvetia. Nor was
Buchanan inferior in point of parts or reputation. But Buchanan and Knox have
taught the people these Doctrins: That if Princes are Tyrants, their subjects
are Knox to England and Scotland, fol. 78.
freed from their Oaths of obedience; (and whether or no they are Tyrants,
who but they must be the judges?) Buch. de jur^ Regni, p. 40.
It were good if Rewards were appointed by the people for such as should
kill Tyrants, as commonly there is for those who have killed Wolves or Bears,
or have caught their vvhelps. Nay nearer yet to Mr. Barlee's purpose, they say,
that Ministers may Id. ibid. p. 70.
excommunicate Kings: and that He who by excommunication is cast into Hell,
Ibid.
is not worthy to enjoy any life upon Earth. Nay Knox sets it home, Knox
Appel. fol. 35.
[The people are bound, as much as lies in their power, to revenge the injury
that is done by the civil Magistrate to God.] Would you know the force of the
obligation? He teaches that in these words. Id. ib. p. 26.
It is blasphemy to say, (what yet was said by St. Paul, and the primitive
Fathers of the Church) that we must obey Kings, be they good or bad. If it is
objected, that God places Tyrants sometimes for the punishment of the people;
the answer is, so does he Buchanan. de Iu. R g. p. 57.
private men sometimes to kill them. Obj. show an example in the Scriptures
that subjects may use their Governors so. Answ. It does not Id. ibid.
follow that it is unlawful, because it cannot be showed in Scriptures. Yet
that they urge for the unlawfulness of many ceremonies in the Church. If it is
farther objected, that St. Paul commands us to pray for the civil
Magistrate; it is presently Id. ib. p. 50.
answered, we may punish thieves, and yet we ought to pray for them. Obj. St.
Paul commands us to be subject and obedient to them. Id. ib. p. 55.
Answ. St. Paul writ this in the infancy of the Church. There were but few
Christians then, and not many of them rich, or of ability, so as they were not
ripe for such a purpose. Before I show the great Harmony betwixt their
Principles and their Practice, I will first observe, that what is thus taught
by these persons, was embraced also by the party. (I mean the violent, and
rigid, prevailing sort.) Not only Mr. Knox, but multitudes of Ministers
adhering to him (in the times of Queen Mary, and Q. Elizabeth) were bold to
innovate in Religion by a very violent and forcible course. They took an Oath
of Knox in his Hist. of the Church of Scotland p. 217.
confederacy of their own private heads; prescribed Id. ib. p. 218.
orders for Reformation, to be observed throughout the Realm; Ibid. p. 234. A.
D. 1558.
commanded the Religieux to leave their houses by a Day, upon pain of ejection
by open force; protested even to the Ibid. p. 256.
Parliament, (shortly after assembled by the summons of the Q. Regent) that
unless they had their desires, they would go on in their course: and if
violence happened, they should thank themselves. What they promised (or rather
threatened) they soon performed. Being summoned to appear at Striveling, they
humbly Ibid. 258.
refused to obey. In stead of that, Hollinshed p. 366.
they fell to the razing of Religious houses; sent Knox ib. p. 265.
menaces to the Queen, that unless they might have their own wills, and in
their own way too, they would not be subject to any mortal upon Earth. They
Ib. p. 272.
summoned the Nobility, upon pain of excommunication, to join with them;
preaching to them this lesson, Ib. p. 269.
that it was their duty to bridle the fury and rage of wicked men, whether
Princes, or Emperors. Ib. p. 276.
They sent the like threats unto the Bishops, and other Clergy, who were not
just of their Cut; Ib. p. 283.
entered by Oath into a league, that if one of their number should suffer
justice, all together should revenge it; Ib. p. 306.
kept the field 2 months; Ib. p. 308.
plundered the Coyning-Irons (however alleged by the Queen to be a special
po^tion of the patrimony of the Crown) Ib. p. 308.
endeavored also to make it good; entered again into a Ib. p. 317.
league to be disobedient. Ib. p. 330.
The Queen sought peace, and having wonderfully suffered, entreated too. But
they would have Ib. p. 333.
none, gave her insolent language, many times the Ib. p. 362.
flat lie. At last they called the Queens party a Ib. p. 364.
Faction, and threatened to punish them as Ibid. p. 364.
Traitors when God should put the sword into their hands. They consulted with
the Ib. p. 372.
Ministers, (with Knox and Wilcock more especially) for the deposing of the
Queen: And having pronounced it to be lawful, they Ib. p. 378.
actually did it in a most formal way. All which I have inserted so much the
rather, both because Mr. Knox is his own Historian (who cannot be thought to
have done himself, and his party, wrong,) and because his History is not every
where at hand; much less the works of Archbishop Bancroft, who is able to
furnish the best account of those men, from the very best Records that can be
wished.

As Geneva was the place where Mr. Knox had been Whence Mr. Knox received his
Doctrine.
Bancr. Dang^r. Po. chapter 3. p. 10.
trained up, and thoroughly instructed for such a work; so he professed in a
letter, (written by him from Diepe A. D. 1557.) that his opinion and motion of
that matter was not barely grounded on his own conceit, but upon the grave
counsels and judgments of the most godly, and the most learned, who lived in
Europe. Now that the Bishop of Geneva was vvithall the free Bodinus de Repub.
p. 353. Etiam Bonivardus in Descrip. Genesis
Prince, having the right of the sword, and the other parts of civil
Jurisdiction, Mr. Calvin himself did very liberally acknowledge, when he abode
at Id. Ho. Disc. c. 8. p. 113.
Strasburgh, where his acquaintance with Melanchthon had infused into him
some moderation. Witness his plentiful Calv. Epist. ad Card. Sadol. p. 172.
A. D. 1539.
Epistle to Cardinal Sadolet, and his agreement in the Conferences at Worms and
Ratisbone, that in the Reforming of the Church, the ordination of Priests and
Deacons should be left unto the Bishops. Yet what was done to that Prince, and
how the Syndicks after him (although the then chief Magistrates) were provoked
by Mr. Calvin to banish him out of the City, and how again (after that) he made
a very strange use of his Restoration, in so much that they complained of a
new kind of Tyranni esse voluistis in liberam Ecclesiam, voluistis nov^m
Pontificatum revocare. Calv. ad Farell. Ep. 6. p. 11.
Popedom in a Protestant Commonwealth, the intelligent Reader may easily call
to his Remembrance.

I will not speak of those pranks which they played here in England during the
Reign of Q. Elizabeth, (that would make a whole volume.) But having mentioned
the maxims of Mr. Knox, I will briefly give an instance how well he walked by
their directions. For when he had given us a Narrative of that studied murder,
which was committed by his Brethren upon the Archbishop of St. Andrews, he
Knox Hist. of the Chapter of Scott. p. 143, 144, 145.
commended it in his margin, not only as an innocent, but (to use his own word)
a Godly Fact.

In a word; 1. That the Scottish Presbyterian Discipline does utterly overthrow
the rights of Magistrates, to convocate synods, to confirm their Acts, to order
Ecclesiastical affairs, and to reform the Church in their Dominions; 2. That
it robs the Magistrate of the last appeal of his subjects; 3. That it exempts
the Ministers from due punishment; 4. That it subjects the supreme Magistrate
to their extremest censures, and the saddest effects of them; 5. That it robs
the Magistrate of his dispensative power; 6. That it takes from the Magistrate
his civil power about Religion; 7. That it challenges this exorbitant power
to it self by no less then the pretense of Divine Right; 8. That it makes a
monster of any Commonwealth wherein it is suffered to prevail; 9. That it is
most prejudicial to Parlaments, and indeed destructive to them; 10. That it is
cruel and oppressive to particular persons, whose tender consciences will not
suffer them to comply; 11. That it is hurtful to all orders and ranks of men;
the Reader may easily collect out of their own Relations of it in their Books
of Discipline. Or if the Reader shall think those Books too big, and not very
easily to be met with, he may help himself a nearer way, by consulting that
little extract (cheaply bought and soon read) entitled, A fair warning to take
heed of the Scottish Discipline, etc. Now, 1. whether the English
Presbyterians did not jointly, and solemnly, swear and Covenant, Testim. to the
Truth of I. Chr. subscribed by the Minist. within the Province of London, p.
26. lin. 16, 17.
with hands lifted upto the most high God, that with their utmost endeavors,
they would Solemn League and Covenant, Ar^ic. 1, and 2, etc.
conform this Church to the Kirk of Scotland, in point of Doctrine, worship,
Discipline, and Government; 2. whether they did not Testim. to the Tr. of I.
Chr. p. 28. in. 17, 18, etc.
publicly declare (A. D. 1647.) that they did then still stand as firmly
engaged to the real performance of that Oath and Covenant with their utmost
endeavors, as at the first taking of it, and that it was not in the power of
any person or persons on earth to dispense with it, or absolve from it; 3.
whether they did not Ibid. p. 26. lin. 11, 12, etc. also p. 27. lin. 24.
then, and there, affirm the Discipline of the Kirk to have been found
experimentally successful in preserving the Church of Scotland from errors,
schisms, and Heresies, from their first Reformation hitherto; 4. whether they
did not Ibid. p. 30. lin. pe^ult. and ult. which is to be compared with
confess to all the world, that in stead of true piety and power of
godliness, they had opened the very floodgates to all impiety and
profaneness; and that from after the time of their having Page 29. lin. 14,
15. which again compare with
removed the prelatical yoke from their shoulders by their Covenanted
endeavors, there was a Page 30. lin. 12, 13. etc.
ruefull, deplorable and deformed face of the affairs of Religion; -- Ibid.
lin. 26, 27, 28. and seq.
swarming with noisome errors, heresies, and blasphemies, in stead of Faith and
Truth; torn in pieces with destructive schisms, separations, divisions, and
subdivisions, in stead of unity and uniformity; Page 31. lin. 3, 4, etc.
that in stead of a Reformation, they might say with sighs what their enemies
said in scorn, that they had a Deformation in Religion; and in stead of
extirpation of heresy, schism, profaneness, etc. they had an impudent and
general inundation of all those evils; 5. whether they did not Page 34. lin.
16, 17. etc.
declare, that they had sworn to God, to disavow that toleration (which was
then made, and since has been Ian. 22. A. D. 1654. p. 17, 18.
re-made, for giving Liberty of Conscience to such as could not comply with
Them;) 6. whether they did not, according to the Stat. 13. Eliz. 12.
Law of this Land, before they were admitted to any Benefice, attest their
hearty Note that Mr. B. now says (c. 3. p. 49.) Those Ritualls of our Mother
Church were justly thrown overboard, when a storm was up; notwithstanding his
Oath of approbation.
consent (in the open face of the congregation in time of Divine service) to
that very Doctrine, Discipline, worship, and Government, which they swore, in
their Covenant, they would reform, and alter, as unlawful, and (in diverse
points) abolish also; 7. whether the House of Commons (in that Parliament, by
whose commission the Assembly of Divines did sit) did not Exact. collect. p. 19.
declare in their Remonstrance, (Dec. 15. A. D. 1641.) that they did not
purpose or desire to abolish the Church Government; nay 8. whether both the
Houses of that long Parliament did not declare the next year after, Declar. 9.
A. D. 1642. Exact. Collect. p. 135.
that they intended to take away nothing from either the Liturgy or Government
of the Church but what should be evil, and justly offensive, etc. 9. whether
the Ministers did not persuade the Houses to the utter abolishment and razing
out (as much as in men lay) of those very things, which at first they thus
intended merely to regulate and Reform; 10. whether there is not a contrariety
in the Theoremata III. Imp. Eden. 1647. decr^to Synodi Theor. 4. and 62. and
88, 82, 98, 96, 97. also Assem. Edinb. 1570. and 2 Book* Discip. c. 1, 7, 12.
Presbyterian principle (both Scottish, and English, and Allobrogicall) to the
remarkable Declaration of the foresaid Parliament, wherein they Exact. Collect.
in Rem. December. 1641. p. 19.
disclaimed all intentions of absolving men from that obedience which they owed
to God under his Majesty, whom they professed they knew to be entrusted with
the Ecclesiastical Law, as well as with the Temporal; whether all the
premises above mentioned have not been thus and thus, (as in the queres has
been expressed) I leave to be determined by all unpassionate and sober men.

I will conclude this section with the Confer. at Hampt. Court second day, p.
47, 48.
observation of King James: That in the margin of a Bible of the Geneva
Translation, (presented to him by an English Lady) he met with some Notes very
partial, untrue, seditious, and savouring too much of dangerous and traitorous
conceits. As for example, Exodus 1. v. 19. the marginal Note allows
disobedience unto Kings; and 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. the Note taxes Asa for deposing
his mother only, and not killing her. And how the Book against the supreme
civil Magistrate, was supposed by Dr. Reynolds to have been writby Ficlerus an
arrant Papist, which yet was proved to have been writby a great Disciplinarian
(whether Jesuit, or Puritan, it was not specified) and confessed by Dr.
Reynolds to have been applied against the Queens Majesty that last was for the
Pope, the Reader may see in the two Ibid. p. 49, 50.
next pages. Of what concernment this is to Mr. Barlee in particular, may be
partly judged by the subject of this section, and partly by that which now
ensues.

. 6. Mr. B. confidently affirms (c. 2. p. 68. lin. penult. Of Paraeus his
Book burnt by the whole University of Oxford.
antepenult. ult.) that Paraeus his Book upon the 13th to the Romans does not
at all treat of mere Ecclesiastical censures, such as suspension,
excommunication, etc. but only of the lawfulness in some cases of coordinate
states putting down of elect and limited Princes, such as most of the German
Princes are.] 1. If Mr. B. was ignorant of what was said by Paraeus, in that
his Comment, he cannot easily be excused for being so bold, whilst he is blind,
as to say, that what he says All those can tell who have seen Paraeus, etc. 2.
If he was ashamed to own his knowledge of the Truth in that affair, he should
not have outwardly excused what he inwardly condemned; nor have denied
explicitly, what he implicitly grants by so gross a falsification. For
first, it is as visible as the Sun at noon, that it was not only the Comment
upon the 13th chapter, (which alone is mentioned by Mr. B.) but the whole book
of Commentaryes upon the Epistle to the Romans, which was condemned and
executed (as women murdering their husbands are wont to be) by the wise Decree
of the most learned, Protestant, orthodox University, assembled together in
Convocation A. D. 1622. And secondly, it was burnt, for containing such
Propositiones erroneae, periculosae, insidiosae, impiae, seditiosae, sanae
politiae subversivae; non solum Canoni divino, Decretis Conciliorum, scriptis
Patrum, primitivae Ecclesiae Fidei and professioni, sed Monarchico Culmini
subdole ruinam minitantes. Decret. Vniv. Oxon. quinto Iunii 1622.
propositions, as were unanimously judged and pronounced by that vast body of
learned men, 1. false, 2. impious, 3. seditious, 4. subversive of found polity,
5. insidious, and 6. craftily threatening utter ruin, 1. to all Monarchy, 2. to
the Faith and Profession of the primitive Church, 3. to the writings of the
ancient and holy Fathers, 4. to the decrees of Christian Counsels, 5. to the
Canon of Holy Scripture. Nay thirdly, the most wise King James (as Grotius
calls him) who was acknowledged by Mr. Barlee at once an Orthodox and learned
Prince, was so far provoked by the abovesaid book of Paraeus, that he
commanded it should be burnt by the hand of the common Hangman. Fourthly, to
show the wonderful falsehood and unhappiness of Mr. B' s suggestions, be it
known that Paraeus did deliver these Doctrins in the book above mentioned. 1.
That 1. Episcopi and Pastores Magistratus suos imp^os aut injustos, si
contumaces sint, possunt and debent, de consensu Ecclesiae, Satanae tradere,
donec resipiscant. 2 Subditi in Magistratu inferiori constituti adversus
superiorem Magistratum se, etc. etiam Armis defendere jure possunt. 3. Subditis
mere privatis -- arma capescere licet, ab ordinaria potestate defendi non
possint. (this is regularly inferred by the rule of contraryes.) 4. Subditis
mere privatis -- se and suos contra tyrannum, sicut contra privatum
grassatorem, defendere lice^. Has and ^imiles propositiones condemnat
Vniversitas Oxoniensis, etc.
the Bishops and Pastors, by the consent of the Church, may, and ought to
deliver up to Satan their wicked and unjust Magistrates, if they are stubborn,
until they repent. 2. That the inferior Magistrates being subjects have a
right to defend themselves, even by Arms, against the superior Magistrate. 3.
That private subjects (who are not so much as inferior Magistrates) may take
up Arms, if they cannot be defended by an ordinary power. 4. That subjects
merely private may defend themselves and their Relations against a Tyrant, as
well as against a private Assassin, if they cannot implore the ordinary power,
nor by any other means escape the danger which they are in. This may serve for
a Taste of that renowned Presbyterian. Now it is to be observed, that when the
question is to be put, whether the chief Magistrate is a Tyrant, ungodly,
unjust, or whatsoever else it is which makes him liable to Satan, and to the
sword, the chief Magistrate himself must not be suffered to be the judge, (for
he will never condemn himself;) but they, forsooth, will be the judges, who
have a mind to make him away, both by excommunication, and force of Arms.
Fifthly, it is apparent, from the premises, that Paraeus did treat of
Ecclesiastic censures (which Mr. B. denied) and not of coordinate States, much
less of them only, (which Mr. B. affirmed:) and unless M. B. did believe,
that subditi was the Latin word for Princes or States, and that inferior did
signify coordinate, and that by tradere Satanae could not be meant an
Ecclesiastical censure, what excuse can he invent to lessen the guilt of his
excuses? And if he anchors upon this, he does declare himself a stranger to the
Latin tongue. Sixthly, Mr. B. discoyers his affection to Paraeus his Book, by
c. 2. p. 69. lin. 1, 2, 3, etc.
censuring the censure of that Famous University, and by censuring me for
approving of such a just censure. As if the Book were more pardonable for
endeavoring the ruin of Church and State, then King James and All Oxford for
sending that Book into the fire. Seventhly, that the burning of that book was
ill resented by the Note here the saying of most judicious Archbishop
Bancrost, that if Coppinger, Hacket and Ar^hing on, had murdered 2 or 3 of the
Lords in Starcha^ber the last day in Trinity Term, the Consistorian Doctrine
would easily have defended it; especially if the further intents of the
Discipline had thereby succeeded. Dang. Posi. chapter 15. p. 176.
party (as M. B. happily confesses) does help us well to demonstrate, that
though Paraeus was but one of the Presbyterians, yet his partners and Abettors
in the pernicious doctrins by him espoused, were too many by too many. Nor is
that any wonder, for (eighthly) Paraeus was an Oracle to that sort of men, much
consulted, and observed; an aged Professor of Divinity at Heidelberg, invited
to sit in the Synod at Dort, whether (because he could not go by reason of his
Antiquity) he sent his large Descants upon the 5 known Articles, which had not
only the honor to be read in the Synod, but to be printed even at Act. Synod.
Dord. sess. 99. p. 239.
large in the History of the Thing. Ninthly, the University of Oxford did
solemnly decree, Celebris ille coetus decrevit, quod singuli ad gradus in
qu^cunque facultate promovendi, ante admissionem, primo subscribant, and deinde
eodem tempore suscipiant juramentum c^rporale, se ex animo praedictas
propositiones condemnaturos, and detestaturos in perpetuum.
that all who were candidates of degrees in any faculty, should, before their
admission, subscribe to those Censures of Paraeus his Book, and at the very
same time should take a corporal Oath, that they would ever damn and detest,
from their very souls, those Paraean propositions before rehearsed. Tenthly,
Grotius the Great was of this judgment, that if Si istae Pareanae exceptiones,
id est, regulae Paulinae eversiones, admittantur, dico, nullum Imperium diutius
in ^uto fore, quam donec talia sentien^bus vi^es defuerint. Grot. Vot. pro Pa.
p. 53.
Paraeus his eversions of St. Paul's Divinity are once admitted for expositions,
no Government can be safe one minute longer, then the Abettors of such Doctrine
shall want Ability to Rebel. Eleventhly, Mr. B. pleads for Paraeus, that he
speaks against elected and limited Princes; as if he tacitly granted, that he
ought not to have spoken against any other. In which case I will advise him, to
compare the Discipline of the Kirk, and the National Covenant, with the Oath of
Supremacy, which he professes also to have sworn, and all three with the
statutes 24. H. 8. 12. 1 Eliz. 1. and 3. and then let him tell me who is meant
by Speciatim addo, Calvinistas in hac re deteriores esse quam Lutheranos. Nam
nullam fidem servant. Iura, perjura, etc. Becan. 5. Manual. Controv. 14. n. 4.
Becanus, when he says that the Heretics do neither keep Faith with God, nor
man. The words were not fit for a Jesuits mouth, because the Pope, as well as
the Presbyterian, does pretend a Gospell-right to The words of Padre Paul are
very agreeable, to show the absurdityes of both.
excommunicate his superiors. But I appeal to all the world, whether we may
not say the same of David Paraeus, which Ronsardus said of Mr. Beza, quod
Armatum Evangelium praedicavit, That the Gospel which he preached was clad in
Armor.

. 7 To all his Nothings which follow (p. 69, 70. etc.) because Of Lambeth
Artic. King James and Bp. Mountag. universal Grace and Redemption.
it is not lawful to say more then a little, I will say the least that I am
able, till I meet with something of some importance. First, it is sufficient,
that the Articles of Lambeth were never admitted into the Church of England, as
any part of her public Creed, however asserted by private men in their
Parlours, and perhaps by some in their Pulpits too. Their worthyest Patron made
some Amends, by contriving the 3 Articles of which Mr. B. has been so sick.
They were Confer. Hamp. Court second day, p. 24, 29, 30, 41, 42, 43.
offered by Dr. Reynolds at Hampton Court, but immediately cast out, and not so
much as vouchsafed a consideration. But the King in those matters was of the
mind of Dr. Overall, and the Bishop of London. Secondly, that King James
encouraged the Doctrine which was taught and printed by Bishop Mountague, Mr. B.
does not deny; but in stead of that, he gives the wise King some of his
Correptorie Correction, because the Presbyterian Faction could not then play
Rex at Court. Thirdly, when I used those words, The chief Head of Arminianisme
(as Mr. B. will call it do what I can) is universal Grace and Redemption, I
did clearly put off the Nickname of Arminianisme, which Mr. B. and his Mrs are
wont to fasten upon the Doctrine of Holy writ. But of that which they express
by such a silly Catachresis, I did profess to esteem universal Grace and
Redemption the chiefest Head: And with that I am willing to stand See Div.
Philan. Def. chapter 3. p. 19.
or fall. Nay M. B. does confess, he can easily justify my saying, because
that all the 5 points have a necessary dependence on one another. Fair fall for
once a good confession, that when he is beaten out of one error, he may no
longer admire the rest. He confesses that Mr. Perkins, and the most eminent of
the party, are for the universality of Grace and Redemption sensu aliquo. Very
good: let it be sensu sano, and we are friends. Fourthly, in his p. 72. lin. 3.
and 5. He adds [only] to universal, which no man (I think) did ever do before
Him: and then he asks, Mr. B's Question never enough to be admired.
with what forehead I can write against him, for charging me with the denial
of all special and peculiar Grace? I will patiently tell him (without admiring
his question, though sure the most senseless that ever was) even because his
charge was without all ground, nay without all color of Truth or reason, nay
against his own knowledge, nay in a flat contradiction to both his eyes. For he
read what I writ of special Grace, Divin. Philan. Def. c. 3. p. 84, 85. etc.
which I asserted as plainly as ever man did. But I said that all Grace was not
only special, there was general Grace also. And did I deny either, by affirming
both? whose forehead now must be desired? Nay in the section going before (p.
43.) I did instance in the particulars of special Grace, till I came to that of
perseverance unto the end, which there I called a special Grace. Which being
so, (as his eyes shall witness for me it is) with what discretion, or
conscience, could he ask such a Question? But Mr. B. cannot conceive how
Redemption can be universal, when Grace is special. Poor man! what he cannot
conceive he thinks not conceivable. I told him that Christ is a conditional
Savior, who will not give a second Talent to him that squanders a way the
first, or wraps it up in a napkin. The learned Bishop Usher of the true intent
and extent of Christ's Death, p. 6.
Primate has lately told him, by Dr. Bernards publication, that by virtue of
Christ's Death, God is made placable unto our Nature, but not actually appeased
with any, until he has received his Son. All men may be said truly to have an
interest in Christ, as in a Common, though all do not enjoy the benefit
thereof. Does M. Barlee ask why? the Bishop Answers, Because they have no will
to take it. they Ibid. p. 8.
refuse to accept the gracious offer that is made unto them. Now that every man
in the world is made saveable by Christ, until he wilfully forfeiteth his
interest, the Bishop proves invincibly from these two grounds which cannot
fail: 1. Ibid. p. 7.
That it is every man's duty to accept of Christ thankfully, and to apply him
with comfort unto his own soul; 2. Ib. p. 24, 25. especially p. 27.
that no man is bound by the command of God to believe an untruth. From whence
he infers his opinion (in opposition to two extremes, which I have ever
opposed as well as He) that Ibid. p. 7.
Christ has prepared for thee [O man whosoever thou art] and the Gospel has
offered unto thee, a sufficient Remedy for the taking away of all thy sins.
This I have chosen to express in the Bishops words, in exact conformity to
which I had delivered my opinion upon the very Correct Copy of Notes, p. 19.
lin. 1.
same grounds, before I had the possibility of reading that work, which came so
lately into the light by the happy care of Dr. Bernard.

. 8. As if Mr. B. were of opinion, that Apostasy signifyes conversion, or
reformation of judgment, he blunders on (c. 2. M. B's remarkable ealumny, and
excellent impertinence.
p. 71. lin. 13, 14. p. 72. etc.) that I framed a charge of Apostasy (so he
writes it, with a c) upon learned Testard, Amyrald, Daille, the Bishop of
Armagh, Bishop Davenant, and Mr. Baxter.] First, it is a foul calumny, to say I
charged Apostasy upon any man within the Church, much more to say it of those
persons, of whom I spoke not a syllable of disrespect. Nor do I think the word
Apostasy is any where in my writings, unless where I speak of the wicked
Angels. Secondly, the Reader will find in that Div. Philan. Def. c. 1. p. 15.
page, that I speak of a conversion or change of judgment in Philip
Melanchthon and my self, whom yet I meant not to call Apostates. Nay, thirdly,
I did not express a change of judgment in any one of the six who are expressly
named by Mr. B. Nay, fourthly, though I might seem to imply such an honorable
change in 2 of the 6; yet in the 4 remaining I did not so much as imply it
neither. Fifthly, or if I had said any such thing, I had said no worse of them,
then of Melanchthon, King James, Bishop Andrews, Dr. Potter, Dr. Godwin, (the
Author of the Jewish Antiquityes) Tilenus, Mr. Hoard, and diverse others, who
are known to have improved their younger judgments into that which Mr. B. does
call Arminian. And sixthly, by the same way of erring which Mr. B. here uses,
we may say that St. Austin was defamed by himself for an Apostate, by having
writ his Retractations. Seventhly, my design in that place was to show that I
ought not to be called an Arminian, for professing the Doctrine of universal
Grace and Redemption, because the anti-Arminians (so many of them as were the
most learned) did hold that Doctrine as well as I. Nay I showed it to be the
Doctrine of St. Hilarie and Prosper (I might have added, of all the Fathers)
many hundreds of years before Arminius was born. Of which two Fathers Mr. B.
durst not take any notice. Eighthly, in stead of speaking to the purpose, by
proving that point to be Arminian, or by proving that those persons were not
assertors of that point, he runs away with this impertinence, that those six
men were no Arminians, with which he fills up several pages in confutation of
his own Fancy. For I had told him in one word, (what he therefore needed not to
have told me back in many pages) that those six persons were So I call them in
that page which Mr. B. himself cites. viz. Philan. c. 1. p. 15.
anti-Arminians: which does not signify for Arminius, though (...) signifyes
pro, or for, (which perhaps was the reason of M. B's mistake) but against
Arminius, which is the force of (...) in composition, as Mr. B. will find when
he is got as far as his Greek Grammar. I am not sure that his mistake lay in
this; but if it did not, it needs must argue his greater guilt. For he would
instill into the Reader, that I called them Arminians, whom he knows very well
I called the contrary; that so he might compare me, with some pretense, to
malicious persons guilty of the plague. But now let us come to his particulars.

. 9. 1. His account of Testard (p. 71.) is only this, that he has nothing of
him in his study, but that the learneder he Of Testard, and Camero for
universal Redemption.
was, he was the likelyer not to differ from the Gallican Church. of which he
appeals to a National Synod held by the Protestants at Charenton 1623.] But
first he cites not the words, either in French or Latin. And secondly, his
words are the less likely to be true, because in that very Synod, learned
Camero was approved, both by Durant the Praesident, and all the rest of that
Body, after his conference with Tilenus, wherein he declared his opinion of
universal Redemption, and that in such a full sense, as gave occasion to
Spanhem. exercit. p. 59.
Spanhemins to call it Arminian, and Pelagian, and finally rejected by the
Synod at Dort. Thirdly, if Testard did differ from other Protestants of France,
does it follow from thence that he did not differ? yet this was that which I
employed. And others did differ as well as He, and were accused before Synods of
those very things which Mr. B. does forge in me. Fourthly, it was demonstrated
by Camero, and since by Daille, that the In precibus publicis. In Confess.
Fidei Art. 1, 2. In majore Ca^^che^i, Dom. 1, 4, 47, 49. In Catech. minori,. 4.
In Praesat. ad S. S. de quibus fuse Dallaeus in Apologia pro 2 Synodis, a p.
949. ad usque 968.
public monuments of their Church do teach that Christ is the Savior of every
man in the world without exception, not only sufficienter, but also
intentionaliter: That Christ has purchased, for every man, a possibility of
being saved; and that the reason why so many are damned is, because they do
Bona pars hominum non servabitur, quia Salutem su^m repudiat. Id. ibid. part.
4. p. 960.
repudiate their own salvation. All which is proved against Spanhemius by such
a multitude of Arguments, as will not be answered in any great have. Now if Mr.
B. will say, that that Church was divided against it self, or that her Pastors
taught they knew not what, or that Spanhemius, a Dutchman, was better
acquainted with the French Church, then the learned Ministers in France, or
that these were Arminians whom it concerns him to clear from all suspicion of
Arminianism, in what a Labyrinth of Absurdityes is he involved?

. 10. What he talks of Amyrald (p. 72.) is just as much at a venture: who,
however no Arminian, (no more then I Of Amyrald, and Daille, for universal
Redemption. So also was ^lo^dell in his approbation of Daillo's Book.
ever was) was yet so opposite to the Puritans in the points of Grace and
Redemption, that Spanhemius writ against him no less then three volumes, and
gave him Correptorie Correction for being Arminian, Massilian, Pelagian, and
what not? Now Mr. B. must confess, that Spanhemius had either reasons for what
he said, or else was guilty of more then heathenish scurrility. Which of the
two will Mr. B. now side with? if with Spanhemius, he pleads against Amyrald,
for whom he pleads; and if with Amyrald, he is bound to do penance for both his
Books. What I said of Gods Philan. c. 1. p. 22.
sincerity in desiring the welfare of all mankind, (and by consequence the
things in which his welfare does consist) is said by Amyrald and Daille
throughout their Books. Nay even that very thing which Mr. B. charge upon me
and the Arminians, is said by Camero, Amyrald, In Apolog. pro duabus Synodis,
part. 1. and 2.
Daille, my The judgment of the late Primate touching the intent and extent of
Chr. Death, p. 35, 36, 37, 39. Compare also p. 31. with p. 38. and both with p.
6. and 21.
Lord his Grace of Armagh, and (if my memory fail me not) by Mr. Baxter also,
viz. that Christ did procure upon the Cross a salvable condition for all
mankind, or possibility of being saved, rather then any actual salvation. In
which few words, Mr. B. calls them all Arminians, (before he is aware) for
whom he pretends the greatest measure of veneration. And thus it will be with
such confident Smatterers, who have not a tolerable knowledge concerning the
subjects of their discourse. Of Monsieur Daille he says nothing, but that
little that I told him, which was, that he writ in defense of Amyrald. And I
will tell him this also, that he has done the Remonstrants a very high piece
of service. Monsieur Moulin in this said very well of learned Daille, that he
had rather be numbered with the Arminians, then opine in this matter with the
Contra-Remonstrants.

. 11. Mr. B's next pages (73, 74.) are filled up with a Digression into a Book
of Mr. Baxter; out of which he Of Mr. Baxter's warning to the Nation against
Cassandrian Papists under the names of Episcopal Divines.
transcribes as much as serves for his Rancor, though not his purpose, and yet
(in one sense) his purpose too. First, he imagines to himself, that it would
be for his ease, if (as Mr. Whitfield has been his second, so) Mr. Baxter
might be his third. And because he finds no ground of quarrel, he makes use of
his invention for the supplying of that defect. Mr. Baxter is invited, by a
preface of good words, to clear himself from the suspicion of Arminianism in
these points, which I am pretended to charge him with. But because he knows
that this is false, and has not any thing to allege against the use which I
made, of his words in one place, and of his Name in another, he flies for
sanctuary to his old trade of impertinence, and uncharitable suggestions, and
proclaims me to be one of the Cassandrian Papists, who have a strong design
laid for introduction of Popery, a design so strong, that it is likely to
prevail, if God do not Mr. Baxter's words are, if God do not wonderfully blast
it.
blast it. Dr. Vane, These expressions are Mr. Baxter's in his Christian
Concord, p. 45, 46. but cited, and applied by Mr. Barlee against me.
Dr. Bailey and Dr. Goff, are already gone beyond the Seas, but I and others
have more wit then these, and think we may do our party more service by
staying in England, under the names of Episcopal Divines, a great deal more
then we can do by declaring our selves Papists. And against such as I am
(says Mr. Barlee) Mr. Baxter published his warning to the Inhabitants of the
Nation. Observe, good Reader, the Christian temper of the man. What Mr. Baxter
spoke in general against Episcopal Divines, Mr. Barlee takes care that no
Episcopal Divine may be excluded from in the Application: for he will have it
to extend even to such as I am, who am known (by all of my acquaintance) to
be as far from being a Papist, as Mr. Barlee is from being a Pope, and I
suppose my desires are very much farther. If he does but say this, and not
believe his own story, why would he sin against God, by sinning against his
own conscience? but if he really believes that I am one of those Papists
against whom Mr. Baxter does warn the Nation, to what extremityes would he
proceed for the prevention of such a design, had he the power of the sword in
such an arbitrary and unlimited manner, as now he has of his other sharp
weapon? Yet this is the man who would not have me sequestered,
notvvithstanding my close endeavors for the bringing in of Cassandrian Popery.
-- credat Iudaeus Apella.


To the words of Mr. Baxter, as produced and used by Mr. Barlee, I think it may
be useful to say a few things. Of Grotius his temper and design.
1. That if Grotius had a design for the making us all Cassandrian Papists, I
am very sorry I have not hitherto understood him. By what I have read of his
learned and pious labors, I am induced to believe, that his piety and his
learning were very equally matched. I do admire the charity and
publickmindednesse of the man, who espoused the miseries of all mankind, and
was not sollicitous how much he suffered, for his endeavors to promote the
Peace of Christendom, so that his enemies, in time, might enjoy the fruits of
his affliction. If Mr. Baxter might say of his own method and design, that,
were the principles which he has discerned betwixt the Lutheran and the
Calvinist received according to their evidence, they would quiet the
now-contending Christian world; how much more may I say the same thing of
Grotius (as to the case in hand) with whom Mr. Baxter will confess himself not
worthy to be named? As for Grotius, how sensible he was of the several
corruptions in the Church of Rome, and how he laid himself out upon a design of
Reformation, as well as peace, it is not uneasy to collect from the 10 In
particular the seventh and the eighth.
first pages of his Votum pro pace. How illegally he was dealt with, for having
been faithful to his trust, in his native Country, he has Grot. Vot. pro pace
p. 55. to p. 63.
sufficiently made appear. With how much meekness and aequanimity he did
support his injuryes, has been observed with admiration both from his writings
and his converse. And had he accomplished his wishes (which were not empty
wishes neither) there had not been in all the world, either a Papist, or a
Puritan; either superstition, or profaneness. Theology then had been a
practical science. They who now are but Talkers, had then been Followers of
Christ. As Schismatic, and Heretic, so Tyrant, and Rebel, had been but
Names. To sum up all in a word: Melanchthons and Grotiuses had filled the
Church; and men had found out a way of Loving God, without believing it
needful to hate their neighbor. I know that Grotius, as a Peacemaker betwixt
the Papists and the Protestants, has labored to show his moderation, as well
to them, as to these; and to excuse many things, at least a Tanto, to which he
must not be thought to have afforded his Approbation. Melanchthon did the very
same, and was hated for his pains, as himself complained to Camerarius and
Luther. Nay his moderation provoked some, to give him out a slye friend to
Popery. But Grotius went farther in his charitable design. And he who attempted
a Reconcilement of two great enemies, was not in prudence to declare a
personal enmity to either, but to mitigate the exceptions and animosityes of
both; and to insist on those things, whether faulty, or indifferent, which he
desired might meet with (in either party) an interchangeable pardon, and an
interchangeable compliance.

2. How M. Baxter was betrayed to speak so severely of so The Peace of
Christendom attempted by others, as well as by Grotius, and before him.
excellent a person, (unless it were by taking things upon trust, from some
unfavourable Censors of his intention) I am not able to divine, nor willing to
venture on large conjectures. But I my self was prepared for the reading of
Grotius, and for the judging of his design, by having read Thuanus before I
read Him. I had observed out of Thuanus, (who, however a Papist, was yet a
vehement Desirer of Reformation) that many endeavors had been used to make a
general Reformation, and that some little Dawnings gave hopes to Christendom
of such a fair Day. In a famous meeting at Ad Fontem Blaudi celebratus solennis
conventus est, in quo Gaspar Colinius pro liberate Religionis supplicem
libellum obtulit, etc. Thuan. lib. 25. p. 760.
Fountain Blau (before the world was so rich as to enjoy that Treasure, which
since was offered it in a Grotius) there was a Bill of Petition put up to
Francis the second then King of France, in conjunction with two Orations made
by the Bishop of Valentia, and the Archbishop of Vienna, exhorting all the
Bishops to endeavors of Reformation, and of a general Council in order to
it. Quod ^i Pontifex reeuset, ut Rex fine eo pronuntiet, utque foedae
nundinationes ex Ecclesia tollantur. Id. ibid. usque ad extrem. l. 25.
To which if the Pope should refuse his consent, the King should do it of
himself. De controversis Augustanae Confessionis Articulis componendis seri^
animum adjecit. Id. l. 36. p. 286.
There I met with the Foundation, laid by Ferdinand the first; upon which his
son, Maximilian the second, did very heartily endeavor to build a general
Reformation. Papam urget, ut Calicis gratia Laicis, and conjugii libertas
Sacerdotibus fieret, etc. ibid. p. 304.
He, together with his Brother, the Archduke Charles, and Albert his son in
law, did urge the Pope to (...) retrenching of several corruptions within the
Church, wherein he had also the assistances of two great Cardinals, and seven
Archbishops. When the Pope was reluctant, he pressed on with Caesar una cum
literis suis Argumenta Papae exhibuit, cum mandato ut Cardinalibus
communicaren^ur. ibid. p. 305, 306.
Argumentations, which he also commanded should be made known unto the
Cardinals. Nay the truly-pious Emperor was farther Maximil. iterum Pontific^m
urgebat ut promissa sua impleret. Nec abnu^bat tune Pontifex: sed postea
Cardinalium inst igatu pesitionem Caesaris elusit. Id. l. 37. p. 328.
instant with the Pope, for the making good what he had promised; which the
Pope at that instance did again re-promise, however the College of Cardinals
prevailed with him to break his word. The learned and wise Chancellor was
hugely pleased, in his History, with this so charitable design, expressing his
kindness to the Protestants on all occasions, and condemning those
encroachments which had polluted that very Church, of which he lived and dyed
a member. Grotius, among the Protestants, was of the same kind of temper with
Thuanus and Cassander among the Papists. But neither did their moderation give
them the name of Protestants, nor is there any the least reason, that his
should procure him the name of Papist. But they were men of moderation in
different churches, who were zealous of advancing the common interest of
Religion, as it is exhibited in the Gospel, and in the purest Ages of the
Church. Nor was their zeal for Reformation any whit the less religious,
because they desired it might be regular, and bloodlesse, after the tenor of
the Gospel, and according to the temper of Jesus Christ, without the miseries
of Rebellion against the Deputyes of God, which is worse then the Disease, of
which it is intended a means of cure.

3. It had been well, if Mr. Baxter had named those Papists, Accusations must
not be too general.
who stay in England under the notion of Episcopal Divines; and having named
them, it had been well, if he had publicly declared he meant no more; for
fear his suggestion might reach so far, as to asperse the whole Body of the
Episcopal clergy, in whom the Protestant interest does chiefly stand. If I
except Bishop Goodman, I have not heard of any Papist who has vvorn the
Protestant for a disguise: which should no more be imputed to the rest of that
order, then it was to St. Peter, or St. John, that one of their order was a
Ioh. (...). 7.
Devil. one in 12. is as much as two in 24. The other two, whom he mentions,
I know nothing of, and am obliged by my charity to think 1 Cor. 13. 5.
none evil. Nay, I have heard of Bishop Wren, that he is equally a learned and
pious Prelate, as far from being a Papist, as Mr. Barlee from being an
Episcopal Divine. And until I have reason for the contrary, I will believe him
to be as excellent, as excellent persons do represent him. What is added of Dr.
Vane, and two Dr. Goff, and Dr. Baily.
besides, who are indeed turned Papists, may be objected to that Rigor of the
Presbyterians, and the havoc which they made whilst yet it lay in their power,
whereby they did not discover, but make men Papists. Some may possibly wonder
they frighted so many out of our Church, but I am still wondering the frighted
wretches were no more. For when they saw their Mother 2 Cor. 4. 9.
persecuted, they esteemed her forsaken; when they saw her (a) cast down, they
sillily thought her to be destroyed. Which defection of a few, is no more to
the disparagement of those that are faithful in the Land, then it was to St.
Paul, that 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Demas had forsaken him, and had embraced this present world. There are a
multitude (God be thanked) who being (c) troubled on every side, are
notwithstanding c c 2 Cor. 4. 8.
not distressed; and however (c) perplexed, are far enough from despair.

4. It may be proposed to consideration, what may possibly Episcopal Divines no
Papists.
be the reasons, why Episcopal Divines, professing an enmity to the Pope, and
to all that can truly be called Popish, and writing whole volumes in opposition
to all his interests, should yet so easily be charged with being Papists, and
(which is yet of sadder moment) with a strong design to bring in Popery into
the Land, as the public and general Profession of it. 1. It is not Popish to
approve the Government of Bishops: for so did orthodox Melan. ad Camer. in
Hist. Con. August. per Chytr. p. 389.
Melanchthon, and moderate Bucer de vita and usu Minist. p. 565.
Bucer; so did all the great Hist. Conf. Aug. per Chytr. p. 109. and per Pap.
p. 137.
Protestants in the conference at Augusta, and Concion. Georg. Princ. Anh. fol.
61.
George Prince of Anhalt, Earl of Ascaina, whom no man living will call a
Papist; nay so did Mr. Calvin, as himself declared to Calvin. ad Sadolet. p.
172. Nullo non Anathemate dignos fatear, si qui erunt qui non eam Hierarchiam
reverenter summaque obedientia observent.
Cardinal Sadolet in excuse of what was done to the Bishop of Geneva. Talem
nobis Hierarchiam si exhibeant, etc. If they will give us such an Hierarchy,
wherein the Bishops may be so eminent, as that, withal they may not think
themselves above obedience unto Christ, then I confess they deserve to be
delivered up to Satan who do not reverently observe them with all obedience. So
did the same Mr. Calvin at Worms, and Ratisbone, and when he subscribed the
Augustan Confession. Nay so did Theod. Beza in Confess. cap. 5.
Beza himself; which we should never have believed, if he himself had not put
it into the number of his confessions. It is not therefore a Popish thing to
approve of the Episcopal or Hierarchical Order. Nor 2. is it Popery to adhere
unto a Liturgy, and Rites established in the church by Law, and Canon. For
that was done by Quod ad formulam precum and ri^uum Ecclesiasticorum, v^ld^
probo, ut certa illa exte^, a qua Pastoribus discedere in functione sua non
liceat; tam ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati and imperitiae, quam ut
certius ita constet omnium inter se Ecclesiarum consensus. Calvin. Epist. ad
Prot. Angl. 87. p. 165.
Mr. Calvin, who did humbly advise the supreme Magistrate here in England, even
Edward the sixth, that we might have in our Churches a set Form of Prayer, from
which it should not be lawful for any Minister to swerve in his Ecclesiastical
function: (and that for these two reasons) 1. for the help of the more ignorant
unskilful people, and 2. that a Harmony or agreement of all our Churches
between themselves might appear the more plainly to all the world. He farther
declared his opinion, that as the Rites and Ceremonies were to be set, as well
as the Prayers of the Church Fateor quidem, moderationi locum esse oportere --
adeoque ceremonias ipsas ad usum and captum populi esse accommodandas. Id. ib.
p. 166, 167.
so they were also to be adapted to the use and capacity of common people. He
added, that it was Neque enim me latet, proferri posse antiquum ritum mentionis
defunctorum faciendae, ut eo modo communio fidelium omnium in unum corpus
conjunctorum declaretur. Ib. p. 167.
lawful to make mention of the dead in public Prayer, after the ancient
custom of the Church, that the Communion of all the faithful joined together
in one body might be declared by that means. From all which it is evident, that
Mr. Barlee's jear does reach as far as Mr. Calvin, who had some kind of hand in
liturgicall knacks, and did many times approve of the Hierarchick Flaunt too.
And so did Zanch. de Relig. p. 217, 218.
Zanchy in such a measure, that he was censured severely for it. The Protestant
Churches in France have a public Liturgy, and yet are no Papists. The
Primitive Fathers had Liturgyes, before Popery was borne. Nay Mr. Cartwright,
and others of the Geneva cut, did make a Dang. po^it. l. 3. chapter 10.
new Common Prayer in Queen Elizabeth's days, and agreed to put it in public
practice without consent of Queen or Parliament. They were not grieved at set
Forms, but that they were not of their forging. The Common Prayer had no
fault, but that it was established by the Law of the Land. Nor 3. is it Popery,
to reject the Presbyterian Discipline. For besides that it is a thing, about
which its chief Architects could hardly Survey of p aed. Holy Discip. c. 5. p.
72, 73, 74. to p. 87.
ever agree among themselves, (the learned Discourser saying one thing, Mr.
Travers a second, Mr. Cartwright a third against both, and a fourth against
himself, and a fifth against his fourth,) the first disturber of the Episcopal
was the malcontent Aerius, who was a Heretic for his pains in the esteem of
Epiphanius, and of St. Austin, and so affirmed to have been censured, for the
very fact of opposing Bishops, by the unanimous consent of the In the Reasons
of their judgment, etc. p. 9.
University of Oxford. 4. It is not Popery, to yield a just Authority to
universal Tradition, the consentient judgment and practice of the universal
Church. For (besides that the Socinians are enemies to that,) it is declared by
the Protestant Ibid.
University of Oxford, to be the best Interpreter of Scripture in things not
clearly expressed, and that without it we should be at a loss in sundry points
both of Faith and manners, at this day firmly believed, and securely practiced
by us, when by the Socinians, Anabaptists, and other Sectaryes, we should be
called upon for our proofs: as namely, sundry orthodoxall explications
concerning the Trinity, and coequality of the Persons in the Godhead, against
the Arrians and other Heretics; the number and use and efficacy of Sacraments;
the Baptizing of Infants; National Churches; the observation of the Lords Day;
and even the Canon of Scripture it self. And in the penning of these Reasons,
the most excellent Dr. Sanderson is known to have had the chief hand, whom no
man sure will call a Papist, but an Episcopal Divine.

5. Nay farther yet: The Episcopal Protestants here in Episcopal Divines the
greatest enemies to Popery.
England, (if we reckon as far backwards as from the days of Edward the sixth,
unto the Age we live in) are very well known to have been the Heroes, who by
their Martyrdoms, Confessions, and conquering pens, have both defended, and
enlarged the reformed Borders of the Church. Nay, by their Decency and Order in
the way of their public worship, they have showed to all the world so much
discretion and knowledge, as well as zeal, and such unpassionate resolutions of
Reformation, that the Conclave at Rome has even trembled at the thought of an
utter Ruin, if such unblamable Reformers should live and prosper. Most
remarkable are the speeches, which the French Ambassador (Monsieur Rogne) gave
out concerning our Church of England, both at the Court, and at Canterbury,
upon the view which he had of our solemn Ceremonies and service in the days of
King James. It was one of his sayings, Confer. at Han^pt. Court second Day p.
38.
that if the Reformed Churches in France had kept the same Orders amongst them
which we observed, he was assured, that there would have been many thousands of
Protestants more there, then now there are* and yet our men (said an eminent
Person on that occasion) do stumble and strain at some petty quillets, thereby
to disturb, and to disgrace the whole Church. But for the preventing of so much
happiness as was in likelihood to ensue, the Popes themselves took care to sow
the seeds of Dissension, even fears and jealousyes among the people, that a
plot was laid by the Prelates for the introduction of Popery into the
Protestant Churches. The Carmelites, and Jesuits, and other Emissaryes of Rome,
were sent over into England, transforming themselves into precisians and
zelots, and declaiming (in that shape) against Episcopal Divines, a Mass of
Ceremonies, liturgicall knacks, a ceremonious litter, Hierarchical flaunts, in
the expressions and sense of Mr. Barlee. By such means as these, the people
were led into Presbytery, and by the crueltyes of that, many were driven back
to Rome. And so we see who they are, who (quite be side their intentions) have
been used as instruments and tools for the carrying on of the Popish interest.

6. For men of fiery, revengefull, and implacable dispositions, Po^^ry
beholding to Presbyterians.
did proceed to such rigors, and extremityes of dissension, from whatsoever
they saw in the Church of Rome, that they imbittered and Note, that among the
many Reasons of the University of Oxsord, why they could not join with the
Covenant against Episcopal Government, this was one of remark, that they should
by so doing give advantage to the Papists, who usually object against us, and
our Religion, the contempt of Antiquity, and the love of Novelty. p. 9.
hardened the Papists hearts, which they should rather have sought to mollify,
by Christian Temper, and moderation. If the Papists do excced us in point of
number, and of strength, (as without controversy they do) we should endeavor
to reform them by the convincingnesse of our reasonings, and the exactness of
our lives, by our evident charity, and visible marks of our sobriety. We must
not hope to convert them either by bitterness of railing, or dint of sword.
Should all dissenters in Christendom proceed to that, it would be soon
overwhelmed with Blood and Rapin. The empty word Christendom might still
remain, but the Mahumetans, and the Jews, would make a better Ioh. 13. 35.
appearance of being the imitators and followers of Jesus Christ. The Books of
Jesuits and Presbyterians against the civil Magistrate, above which they
would set up their Ecclesiastical jurisdictions, have had such a likeness to
one another, that sometimes the Authors of the one side have been mistaken for
the other. And hence it was observed in the Royal Synod, Co^^er. at Hamp.
Court second Day p. 50.
what advantage was given by that sort of men unto the Papists; who, mutatis
personis, could apply their own Arguments against the Princes of the Religion,
which they had framed against the Princes of the Church of Rome. So that the
Bellows of sedition, as well in that Church as in this, have helped to furnish
each others Treasures with naughty maxims, and stores of mischief. When King
James had observed Ibid. third Day p. 101.
at Hampton Court, that by the factious behavior of the Puritans, many were
driven to be Papists, and that the way to judge them was by their fruits,
humility and obedience being certainly the marks of honest and good men; the
Presbyterian chieftains, then present, forbore to make any more exceptions
against the ceremonies and orders so well established in the Church, and Ibid.
and p. 105.
promised to perform all duty to the Bishops, as their Reverend Fathers,
joining heartily with them against the common Adversaryes, and for the quiet of
the Church.

Hereupon it will be pertinent to make this profitable Dilemma. Either they
thought those things, to which they first refused, and after yielded a
conformity, to have been lawful, or unlawful. If lawful, why submitted they
no sooner? if unlawful, why submitted they at last? what made seditions, and
insurrections, and disobedience to Authority, in opposition to those things
which are confessedly lawful? or if confessedly lawful, but inwardly
conceived to be unlawful, why should the fear of that power which can destory
the Body only, make them fearlesse of Him who can cast both body and soul into
Hell? As to persecute, and to suffer, cannot both be for Christ's and
conscience sake; so we can never find one, in whom they both meet. Some men's
principles do render them liable to punishment no less then capital, but put
them out of all danger of being Martyrs, unless it can be a Martyrdom to
miscarry in a conspiracy, and to be overmatch't by the sword of Justice. Happy
and Blessed is that Nation, where such men's loyalty consists in their want
of power or opportunity to make Resistance. But (to conclude this tedious
section)

From all that has hitherto been spoken, some will be apt A Counterwarning to
the Nation.
to proclaim a Counterwarning to the Nation, that special heed may be taken of
that sort of men, who for the wreaking of their malice against Episcopal
Divines, whom they would have to be exposed to all manner of hardships (even to
famine, and sword, as far as in them lies) would poison the people with a
belief, that they are underhand-dealers for the bringing in of a Popish yoke.
All which I say of Mr. Barlee, and of such as he is; not at all of Mr. Baxter,
whose words are wickedly wrested beyond his meaning, and made entirely Mr.
Barlee's own, by being expounded and applied in so vile a manner. It is not
hard to make appear, in how many respects Mr. Baxter (though not in his person,
yet at least in his Doctrins, which are perhaps as dear to him) has been
affronted by Mr. Barlee; who, if he has any Truth in him, does overthrow the
very passage which here he cites with great applause. But where my advantages
are so many, I must (even for brevity) dispense with some.

. 12. In his two next pages (75, 76.) he obtrudes upon His false suggestion of
Bp Davenant, and his fumbling about that Bishops works, implying 2
contradictions within a few lines.
his Reader this constant falsehood, that I pretended Bishop Davenant to have
been also an Arminian, although he knows that I did rank him amongst Arminius
his Antagonists. I only pleaded his opinion of universal Redemption; which as
Mr. Barlee could not disprove, so he durst not (it seems) so much as try. I
referred my Reader to his Pacificatory Epistle, into which Mr. Barlee either
would not peep, or thought not safe for his interest to take any notice of what
he saw. He cites other words, which were not referred to by me, and which, as
they are not to the purpose in any kind, so if they were, they would serve
exactly for my Advantage, by showing that that Bishop had changed his judgment
from what it once was. I did not speak of every part of his life, but merely of
that wherein he writ to Duraeus: which, with his Adhortation to Ecclesiastical
Peace, was printed at Cambridge 1640. no more then two years before his Death.
Yet Mr. B. (to serve his turn) affirms this to be the second edition, and
that a Chaplain of the Bishops did set out a third 1638. two years before the
second in Mr. B's account. Would not he make an omnipotent Lawyer, who to salve
a cracked Title in his clients Tenure, can prove that Harry the eighth was
before Harry the seventh? This is his first contradiction about the works of
Bishop Davenant. His second contradiction is more ridiculous, because attended
with a pompous parenthesis of commendation. For whereas he says [it is much
more considerable, that the Bishops Animadversions against Mr. Hoard, was,
under the Bishops own hand, published three years after the last printed
Edition of his Pacificatory to Duraeus,] and whereas he says also but few
lines before, [that the Bishop dyed in the year 1642.] and whereas it is
Cantabrig. ex O^ficina Rogeri Danielis Alm^ Academiae Typographi M DC XL.
evident to all the world, who will but look, that the Cambridge edition of
that Epistle was in the year 1640. all the reasoning of Mr. B. amounts to this,
that the Bishop lived at least a year after his Death; which is somevvhat
longer then St. Dlonysius is said to do in the Golden Legend. Or at least he
must say, to avoid that absurdity, that there were then three years betwixt
40. and 42. nay betwixt 40. and 41. for he says in his margin, that the
Animadversions against Mr. Hoard were printed A. D. 1641. If he shall now
pretend ignorance in the Bishops works, and their Editions, why would he
speak at a venture of what he knew not? but if he shall say, he well knew
what he said, why would he wilfully defile his conscience? The reason of it
is very plain. For having resolved to accuse me of a notorious mistake, if not
somewhat worse, (they are his words) he knevv not how to make it out, but by
saying such things, as unavoidably employed those contradictions; which either
he did not perceive himself, or hoped that I should not be able to perceive, or
that at least I would keep his counsel, without his having told me it was a
secret.

2. Now we are taught what to think of his other stories, that he was more then
ordinarily acquainted with that His pretended Correspo^dence with Bishop
Dav^nant.
Bishop, almost to the very last moment of his life, and that the Bishop did
once in private sadly bewail to Mr. Barlee the great growth of Popery and
Arminianism. p. 75. and that the Bishop did write a letter to him in folio
about the ceremony of the Cross in Baptism. p. 76. All this is possible,
though unlikely, and not at all to the purpose. And had another man said it, or
Mr. B. himself before he made us all to know the strength and plenty of his
invention, I should have readily believed, that so charitable a Prelate might
write a letter of instruction to one who stood in need of it, and might show
him his bounden duty to use the sign of the Cross in baptizing Infants. But
he has brought his conceptions to so fair a market, that he must now affirm
nothing, if he intends to be believed, unless he is as ready to bring his
proof. Numa pretended to hold intelligence with Egeria, and Minos with Jupiter,
and Scipio with the same, and Sertorius with his inspired Do, and Eumenes with
the Ghost of Alexander the Great, and Mahomet with Gabriel one of the seven
Archangels, and Mr. Barlee with learned Davenant one of the Angels of the
Church of England.

3. Though Mr. B. pretends some kind of Reverence to the Bishop, yet he
declaredly dissents from his Doctrine of His exceptions and saw^inesse to the
same Bp.
Christ's Death, as he professed to do from that of Amyrald p. 72. He Correp.
Corr. p. 169.
confessed that Bishop Davenant and Dr. Ward did extend the phrase of Christ's
Dying for all, not only [generibus singulorum] to all sorts of men, but also
[singulis generum] to P. p Carleton, Bishop Hall, Dr. Ward, Dr. Goad, Mr.
Balcanquall, (all Divines of the Synod of Do^) and besides, Dr. Preston, Dr.
S^oughton, Mr. VVhately, Mr. Fenner, Mr. John Ball, Mr. Cu^verw^l^, Mr. Vin^s,
Mr VVoo^bridge, Mr. Baxter, are all avowed by Mr. Baxter himself to have been,
and to be, of Bishop Dav^nant's and the late Primates judgment in this point.
But what the Primates judgment was, has appeared partly already, and shall
more fully appear hereafter. With all these therefore M^. B. confessedly is at
odds. So is he also with the Duke of ^^andenbu^ghs Divines, and with those of
Breme, with Lud. Crocius, Martinius, Iselbu^g^; nay with Dr. Twisse, and the
Synod of Dort, if Mr. Baxter may be believed. In ^raefa^. ^d Disput.
every man of all sorts. But he will sue out a writ of melius inquirendum,
before he passes any damnatory sentence upon them, because they have so many
handsome orthodox put-off^. This is Rare! That Bishop must be reprieved though
he speaks as I do, and I must be condemned (as the enemy of God) although I
spoke as the Bishop did. What is the reason? The Bishop has his put-offs, and
I have none. What is this but to say in effect and substance, that the
venerable Bishop did tack about; he stood out in such a manner from Mr. Barlee,
as that in a manner he came in; he had handsome subterfuges, and orthodox
shifts; whilst Mr. Pierce does assert the same Doctrine with the Bishop, and all
that follows thereupon by unavoidable consequence, without the least fear of
displeasing the implacable, and so without making use of any orthodox Tricks,
or syncretizing Terg^versations, for the keeping of their favors, and acts of
Grace? Thus he abuses that excellent Prelate, to whose favor he owes his
admission into the Priesthood; though he does not abuse the orthodox^a of his
party (to which that Prelate was so averse) whilst he ingeniously places it in
handsome evasions and put-offs.

4. But sure the Bishop will incur a great deal more of his The Bishop reckons
universal Redemption among fundamentals, and declares against all who shall
deny it.
displeasure, by that time I have showed him one famous Ad hos fundamentales
Articulos puto respexisse Apostolum Tit. 1. 3. Communis haec fides, symbolo
Apostolico comprehensa, omnibus Christianis credend^ proponit, admirandum
Creaturarum ex nihilo opificium, Trinitatis myst^rium, Christi Incarn^ti,
passi, Resurgentis, glorificati, miseris peccatoribus impensum Beneficium;
quaeque ind^ dimanant, Redemptionem humani generis, Sanctificationem pec^aris
populi, -- Resurrectionem Corporum, Glorificationem fidelium, etc. Qui ullum ex
his Articulis furcillat aut sugillat, licet nomen Christiani si^i vendicet, ab
orthodoxorum communione arcendus est, and procul amandandus. Sentent. D. Daven.
praedict. p. 10. and 11.
passage. The Bishop thought that St. Paul in his words to Titus (chapter 1. v. 3.)
had a particular respect to the Apostles Creed; in which are comprehended the
fundamentalls of Christianity, to be believed by all Christians: to wit, the
creation of all creatures out of nothing, the mystery of the Trinity, the
benefit of Christ Incarnate, Crucified, rising from the dead, and Glorified,
bestowed upon miserable and wretched sinners; and (as fundamentals derived
thence,) the Redemption of Mankind, the Sanctification of a peculiar people,
the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of bodies,
and the Glorification of the Faithful. -- All these things (says the Bishop)
are comprehended in this short Creed. -- He that detracteth or defameth any one
of these, although he may take unto himself the name of Christian, he is yet to
be banished from the Communion of the orthodox. From which words of that pious
and learned Prelate, Mr. B. may be pleased to observe 4 things. 1. That he
makes such a distinction between the Redemption of mankind, and the
sanctification of a peculiar people, as to include every man to be within the
pale of that Redemption. All mankind was bought, and paid for. (which is just
the thing for which I contend, and more then which I need not care to have
granted, upon condition it be not murdered with any fancifull Put-offs.) 2.
That he reckons this among the Articles of our Christian Faith, placing the
Death and Resurrection of Christ before it, and placing after it the
Resurrection of our bodies. 3. That the Truth of this is derived from the Truth
of the Articles going before. 4. That he who denies the Truth of it, or does
but pare away from it in any kind, is to be sent to the Anticyrae, banished (I
mean) from all orthodox Society. And so Farewell to Mr. Barlee.

5. Bishop Davenant, (in a work bound up with the former) has laid down 8 such
propositions, as he supposes to be agreed How severely the Bishops judgment
reflects on Mr. B.
by Corcedunt o^nes and consentiu^, h^s propositiones ^ss^ verissimas, etc.
Adhort. ad pac. Ecclesiast. ^ap. 11. p. 148, 149.
all Protestant Churches. And yet our Correptorie Corrector, in both his
prints, has revealed his disagreement from diverse of them. From whence it is
inferred by the judgment of Bishop Davenant, that Mr. Barlee is not a member
of any Protestant Church, unless we mean an unruly and peevish member. What I
say I can justify, if he shall adventure to make it needful. What Mr. B. Si
Eccl^siae Rectoribus idem non persuaserit, aut in aliam Ecclesiam divertere
opor^et, aut, pro bono Animarum, Ecclesiae cui subest censuram patienter
tolerate. Sent. Dav. p. 39.
should have done, upon his several dissatisfactions in the prescriptions and
practices of the Church of England; and what the Church might have done in
castigation of such a member, Bishop Davenant has truly and justly showed him.
For the first, he should have gone into some other Church to which he might
have been pleased to yield obedience, or have patiently suffered under the
censures of that very Church in which he lived. For the second, Possunt ab
externa Communione tantisper removere, dum suis erreribus alios infic^re, and
ipsas Ecclesias perturbare desinant. Id. in Adho^t. ad Pac. Eccl. c. 4. p. 72.
the Church might have proscribed him from her external Communion, until he
had ceased from infecting others with his errors, and from disturbing the
Churches with his attempts. Nay rather then have troubled the Peace and quiet
of the Church, under which he lived in subjection, and of which he professed
himself a member, he should have pack't away (says the Bishop) into some other
Church, or have remained in this without disturbance, though he had thought
that his opinion, which he maintained against the Church, had been of such
moment, and the knowledge of it so necessary, as that Quod si quis eam qu^m
cont^a Ecclesiae senten^iam tu^tur opinionem tant^m omen^i ^sse sibi
persuadeat, ut ex ejus cognit^one salus hominum d^pendeat, aut in aliam
Ecclesiam divertere, etc. ut supra. Sent. Dav. ad Dur. p. 39. How he misbehaves
himself about the Primate.
Salvation it self depended on it. How little then can he excuse himself (or
others of his spirit and combination) for having caused those troubles which
have made us a hissing to our enemies, upon the pett they took at those things
which in themselves were indifferent (by their confession) and which the stamp
of Authority had made obliging? What they thought to be unlawful, they should
not have complied with (as they did) for a time; and what they thought very
lawful, they should still have submitted to in all obedience.

. 13. What Mr. B. thinks fit to add as a conclusion to his second Chapter, (p.
76, 77.) concerning the Primate of Armagh, I shall consider in my Postscript,
to which my Reader is now referred. I shall only here observe his perseverance
in that evil of laying things to my charge, from which he knows I am as
innocent as any man living. The Primate's Popery and Arminianisme are Mr. B's
insinuations; invented purposely, that he may have something to confute.
Nothing is like it in all my writings. But there is something in Mr. B's much
more then like it, as I shall discover in my-Post-script. What he says of the
History of Gotteschalc, shows a very great want of heed, or Conscience. For
that it was penned by the Primate, he does not deny: that the Primate was an
ancient Author, he dares not affirm. That the subjects of the History are 800.
years old, is true, but impertinent, and not of use to Mr. B. any more then to
Arminius. For the Primate there tells us, what was held by Hincmarus, and
Rabanus Maurus, two great Archbishops, as well as by Gotteschalc the private
Monk: and how Gotteschalc was condemned by the learned Moguntine Council, as
well as favored by them at Lions. And if the Primate's judgment was then for
Gotteschalc (who was pronounced an Trithemius apud Hist. Gottesc^. c. 4. p. 41.
A. D. 848.
Heretic in the famous Synod at Moguntia convened by the authority of the
Emperor Lotharius) I shall easily prove that he did afterward change it. The
Synod of Valentia which Mr. B. cites from the fourth Chapter, is not there,
but in the twelfth. And the History of that is the rather to be reckoned as
uncertain, because Hist. Got. c. 12. p. 186.
Baronius and the primate do give us opposite narrations, though I shall more
readily believe the later. But whilst Mr. B. takes upon him to show his
Lordships opinion, from what was delivered by the Valentian Synod, not in his
Lordships own expressions (as Mr. B. in his deep ignorance does take the
boldness to affirm) but in the expressions of the Synod; he does a very ill
office to Dr. Bernard, a courtesy to them who affirm his change, and a double
mischief unto himself, as shall be showed in its proper place.

CHAP. IV.
A Taste of some notable Qualifications in Mr. B. which give him an eminent
unfitness to be either a Disputant, or an Historian.

. 1. THe most obvious accomplishment in this gifted Brother, and that wherein
his greatest excellence Mr. B's Breeding and way of Complement.
does lie, (especially since he promised to mend his manners, and to do Ep.
De^. p. 3. l. 1.
penance for his passions, upon his knees,) is to win me over to his opinions,
(or else to fright me out of mine own) by all the caresses and indearments,
which can possibly be expected from a man of his It is the character which he
gives his own Temper, chapter 1. p. 7. and 8. In his first Book he called it his
pleasantness and playfulnesse (Ep. Ded. p. 9.) now he calls it his mirth and
cheerfulness to tole-on Gallants to the reading of him (chapter 2. p. 45.) So
Mountebancks have a Zanie commonly called Jack Pudding to tole-on Customers for
the buying of their wares. And when Dom^n invented a new Game, he called i^
(...).
orthodox and godly Temper. I hope I shall not be proud of his large
expressions, because I am able to distinguish betwixt his judgment, and his
civilityes. The age we live in is very courtly, and men will give fair
language, because it is fashonable, and handsome, and humane too; if not to
signify their opinion of the person to whom they speak, at least to testify the
breeding and civil deportment of the speakers. It must not therefore be
imagined, that Mr. Barlee's meaning is as obliging as his words, but that his
words are the marks of his education.

. 2. For as this liberal Encomiast is pleased to complement, The language of
the B.
I am an English Heretic, a back friend to true Religion, an underminer of
necessary Reformation, a second Predestined Thief, sedulously impudent, and a
Bespatterer, a very Erra Pater in Divinity, an insulting Thraso, an insolent
Note, Reader, that be profested (in his Ded. E^st. p. 2.) that no man valued me
more then He, no man should be more solli^it^us of my Soul, Fame, and outward
s^se^y, then Himself. If therefore th^se are the over flowings of his Love, ho^
terrible is his hatred to those who are not in his favor, as I (it seems) am?
Boaster, a verse from the true Faith, yea adverse to it, a sophistical
Wrangler, a dangerous Enemy to the Church, to be compared with the
hypocritical Pharisees, a maintainer of the same opinions with low-spirited,
plebeian, mechanic Sectaryes, an Angel of Darkness, an Apostate, and a Wolf,
mischievous to God and his Church, superciliously scornful, a great
Delinquent, and as an Herring-man, the composer of a Play-book for my Jovial
proselytes against the merry Time, an able Jester, playing upon him before
Lords and Ladies, Inhuman, Barbarous, like him in whom the evil spirit was,
and like the Spanish Bulls falling upon their Drivers, a facetious and most
dexterous Roscius, one of the three great wasps of the Nation, one by whose
Abilityes the Devil is adorned, guilty of Socinianism, true to the cruel
Grotian design of extirpating the Protestants Calvinisticall, of the Grotian
Caball, a filcher of his Parishoners, of Schismatic Practices against his
Parish, as infecting it with Arminianism, Soci^anism, Pontificianism in part, a
carryer on of vile designs, a fawning Tertullus, an insolent Provoker, a Tom
Tell-troth, of a malevolent design, a breaker of St. Paul's Hand, disingenuous,
and unconscionable, of a frontlesse Front, and scornful Spirit, a notorious
Liar, virulent, proud, slanderous, and of furious indignation, one whose very
light is darkness, and who takes the Presbyterians to be more It is his own
expression (Reader) as all the rest: 'twas never m^ne.
Knaves then Fools, a great wanton, full of malice and poysenous mischief, a
circumstantial rituallson of the Church, a demure Junior, justly called a
Sorcerer, one to whom the Anabaptists and Quakers are great Friends, one who
bewitcheth the people, and deserves to be ranked among the (...) or witches, a
clamorous Brazen-fac't person, of insufferable insolence, one that has lost
his conscience with his eyes, prodigiously Satirical to a Miracle beyond
imitation, one who intended to gull the world, and delude the Church, This he
^^hers in with this u^troden Preface, [as I am an Ecclesiastic, a Christian,
and a Gentleman, etc.]
a Monster of ingratitude, of a stony and brazen fore^ead, a Iuvenal Divine, a
wilful Impostor, setting up an Idol Fancy of Grace, a Pope above all Counsels
except the Papal, guilty of minor Atheism at least, devoid of all Christian
ingenuity as well as Grotius, a graceless Person, Grotius his Imitator, a
monstrous uncharitable Censurer as well as Grotius, a Prevaricator, without
regard of conscience, a master Railer, one who recedes from Arminius to the
worse, toward rank Pelagianism and Socinianism, whose Correct Copy begins and
ends in Pelagianism and Semi-Pelagianism, guilty of much Heretical pravity,
irrational, a Submortuarian, an Apostolarian, a Neophyte, Antiscripturall, a
downright Pelagian in the very chief point, deeply drencht with Massilianism,
of ridiculous shifts, crafty insinuations, supercilious Arrogance, putting
gulls and cheats upon his Mother the Church, wretchedly and unconscionably
abusive, a great Practiser of Hypocrisy, one whose Proselytes are but too great
Approvers of Hobbs his Leviathan, a maker of saplesse, senseless, subitane
Comments of Scripture, a woeful Calumniator, a Thrasonicall Boaster, stubborn,
wormish Fancy, intolerable, extravagant, an Helvidian, Antiscripturist, like
the old Heretics making their brains their Bible, wanting honesty, loud lying,
horribly wicked, absurd, foolish, childish, malicious, frantic, slanderous,
insolent, scornful, ridiculous, against whom the dreadful judicial hand of
God is highly lift up; and again, one who has the just hand of God upon him,
and likely to be dementated by God for perdition, a Manichee, holding that
which the boldest Jesuit would tremble to admit into his Creed, one who flurts
and flounceth at his Neighbor for want of Logic, a graceless Traducer,
odious, hateful, Note that the 4 complements next following are cited from
Crackenthorp against the Bishop of Spalato upon his return to Rome, and applied
only to me by Mr. B.
without shame or modesty, or any the least love of the Truth, one who has
drawn a Brawn upon his forehead and his conscience, one who proclaims his sin
as Sodom, and worse then Sodom, with a stubborn mind, which Sodom never did,
having a design highly Jesuitical, rendering the soundest Protestants odious, to
make room for the Pontificians taken into his bosom, basely abusive contrary
to conscience, blowing hot and cold like a Satyr, of a lavish Tongue, a broad
conscience, a crafty pate, one whose Religion grows upon the stock of Policy,
far in the way to Rome, like malicious persons guilty of the Plague; and (to
show that he goes out at the same Door which he came in at) The vast quantity
besides of Mr. B's Courtship.
I am finally an Heretic to be rejected.

That these are all his own complements, is so well known to as many as have
had the patience to read his second book, and so almost-impossible to be denied
by himself, that I think it not needful to mark the pages where they are
written; which would prove a greater trouble to the Printer, and to the
Corrector of the Press, then matter of satisfaction to any Readers. But as I
have them all in readiness, and given a view of them to many who have desired
to be Spectators of so strange a SIGHT; so if Mr. B shall murmur at my omission
of the pages, he shall not fail of them, as soon as I know what he would have.
So far are these from being more then what his book has afforded, that they
are only a sprinkling of his behavior. For a Gentleman in the Country having a
great curiosity, to know how much of the Volume might have been spent in mere
railing, (if it were thrust up together) took the courage, for once, to make a
Trial; And the total of his collection did amount to no less, then eleven
whole Pages in a spacious Quarto all as full as they could hold, and
overflowing the very margins. Now had I the leisure to take account of all the
like courtesies bestowed on others (for the 11. pages-full I spoke of were all
on me) I leave the Reader to imagine how fine and slender his book would be, if
such large Collops were pared away. In the little account which I have given,
there is a greater affluence then he could meet with in his Textor's Epithets,
or in his Sylva Synonymorum.

It may be wondered at by some, how a man of his diligence in the way he goes,
should forget (this bout) to call me Devil, A Copy of Mr. B's Re^ormation.
but (in stead of that) should choose to call me an Angel of darkness, (p. 7.)
The reason of it is very evident. For he confesses, that before, he was
somewhat (...). (...). p. 45.
playsome, and had Epist. Ded. p. 2.
ex^berances of passions; but now he is reformed, upon the admonitions of his
Friends, who did give him a c. 1. p. 6.
Hint that he was somewhat overheated, and therefore he gives them Ibid.
most solemn thanks. He now mislikes p. 8.
the hare-brain'd fury of some men, falsely called zeal; He is for Ibid.
prudence and necessary moderation. And therefore having, before, called my
Copy of Notes a Noonday Devil, he is now contented to call my Person an Angel
of Darkness, which amounts to no more then a Midnight Devil, which is not so
bad, as being a modester Devil, then that which walks about at Noon. In his
first Book indeed I was a Satanicall and Diabolical blasphemer, nay an exceeder
of the Devil himself in blasphemy, and worse then Diabolically wittily wicked.
But that was one of his Ibid. p. 6.
extravagances, for which he will not defend himself. And therefore now the
world is mended (to my unspeakable comfort) and I am only a Midnight Devil,
not one whit worse, or more wicked, (as then I was.) So that now he is assured,
Ib. p. 8.
that none of Christ's cordial Friends have any great reason to blame him,
because he is against both extremes. Before, I was for major Atheism, now I am
only for minor Atheism, because now he has hit the golden mean. p. 4. It Is
true indeed, that in this his opus emendatum, he does also seem to be
overheated, as before; some Ibid.
excesses of passion, style, and Temper, do remain (like Canaanites) in the
Holy Land: Though God, p. 4.
accounting him faithful, has put him into the ministry; yet he is hitherto
in via, on this side heaven, not fully arrived unto his state of perfection:
Sorcerer, and Witch, Apostatarian, and Wolf, and eleven pages-full of zeal have
not been heartily expressed; and there is something of mortality still cleaving
to him, whilst he admires at my impudence for not believing I was a Ranter. Mr.
B's Justification of himself.
But let us be so just as to hear him speaking for himself. p. 6.
What have I done? (says Mr. B.) Is there not a cause? was not our Savior
sufficiently zealous? And did not All Correptorie Correctors with Mr. B.
all the Apostles, especially St. Paul, imitate our Savior in this? He that
shall meet with the like, and behave himself more modestly, let him throw the
first stone at me. Calvin was liable to errors and passions as my self. p. 62.
-- p. 7.
Have I not offered to do open penance for my passions, if they prove against
me either scurrility or calumny? Is this Laodicean lukewarm age so full of
heats and zeal against seducers, as that he who thinks it his duty earnestly to
oppose opinions, practices and designs, must be unreasonably blamed for so
doing? Take heed (good Reader) that you fall not into the danger of thinking
hardly of this Ib. p. (...).
orthodox and cordial Zelot. He tells us plainly (c. 3. p. 70.) that whosoever
they are who will not yield to what he says, is worse then distracted. But
that he tells us on another occasion. Keep we close to the purpose, and we
shall find good reason for the worst of his words. He did wisely consider, That
Ibid. Dr. Bern. and Dr. Reyn. implicitly accused by Mr. Barlee of foul matters.
other men's soft milky faint-hearted coldness, disguised under the pleasing
term of prudence, fairness, peace, moderation, etc. has been one of the two
things which have brought us to that woeful pass that we are at in all
Ecclesiastical matters. (There he mumps the Reverend Dr. Reynolds, who timely
advised him to soft words, to omit my Person, and fall wholly to the Argument.
Again) what a milky faint-hearted person does the Reverend Dr. Bernard appear
to be in his sight, who told him At the end of his first letter to Mr. B.
that the fruits of the spirit are meekness, gentleness, etc. and advised him
to lay aside all verbal Animosityes, and personal Reflections, and calmly to
fall upon the matter? What? would they have Mr. Barlee not to be valiant, and
call men sorcerers, witches, wolfes, Devils? Ib. p. 8.
The age is not so full of orthodox cordial zelots, as that they need to be
Ib. p. 7. lin. ant^penu^^.
discouraged. Mr. B. Ib. p. 2.
blesses God for his Grace, who for well-^igh these 14. years has not
suffered him to behave himself unchristianly, ignorantly, or rudely. For what
though he let fall so many slanders, perjuryes, contradictions, and railings,
as have been written with a Sunbeam? yet having had Grace irresistible, he was
not suffered to do amiss, was not able to sin, he was so mightily withheld. p.
6. in marg.
Si quid intumuit pietas, if his godliness did swell, and boil up (as has
been showed) igno^cat lector, we must pardon him in conscience; and so Dr.
Twisse had said before him. If I, or other moral men shall wipe off his
calumnyes, we are presently Master Raylers, for we are Angels of Darkness; and
reason good, for we resist Mr. Barlee in his inventions. But when He shall
rail, and invent slanders, who has that privilege indulged to him, the case
is then altered, for he makes it known to the world, that God has So he says
in his Postscript, etc.
called him to be Faithful; and all is no more then a godly Tumor, as he is
pleased to express it to us. In his Introduction to this his second volume, he
solemnly p. 4.
prays to the God of all Grace, that he may be mightily assisted and wisely
directed in the management of so great a work, that if through his exceeding
great weakness, as is the Note, his several promises to do penance, i^ good
men should judge him guilty. Here he confesses, that diverse good men did so
judge: Yet p. 9. he cannot say he has done evil; and p. 8. has no reason to
accept of my pardon. For again (p. 8.) they must not only say, but clear it to
Him, that he is guilty. Which he does not intend shall be in have.
judgment of diverse good men, he did give too much way to his passions at
first, by not hitting the golden mean, he may be more successful in his second
attempt, lest the Church and the world complain of him. Judge now, Reader,
whether his Prayer has been heard, or whether when he prayed, he spoke as he
thought. Before, he gave too much way to his passions, and did not quite hit
the Golden Mean; but now he thinks he has nick't it. Salva res est, saltat
senex. Postscript.
He even skips for joy (pretty Lamb!) and does not repent him of his crueltyes,
because he designs to kill a Heretic; and Ep. Ded. p. 2.
English Heretics (he thinks) are not to be killed with kindness, as some
have vainly imagined. But it is time that I come to another Section.

. 3. It is no small part of my vindication, that Names and His like eruptions
against others.
Epithets are given to me by that incomparable Syringe, (for such I may call
our Author's Quill,) which has squirted ink into the Faces of the most
excellent persons in several kinds. For if Mr. B. may be believed, c. 2. p.
46. Against Grotius.
Grotius was an unparalled Prevaricator in Religion, and cruelly spiteful
against Protestants. To admire his writings is a dreadful sign of dementations
of many great wits, and of their inclinations to Popery, Socinianism, wicked
carnal policy. There is no Christian clergyman under the cope of Heaven, be
he Pontifician, Episcopal, Presbyterian, or congregational, but they have
reason to be an enemy to him and his writings, for betraying all Ecclesiastical
power into the hands of mere laics. p. 63.
He was a prodigious enemy to Calvin, a betrayer of his own native Country,
from which he was justly and perpetually exiled. He made it his business to be
a Judas against the Protestants, p. 62.
and showed himself devoid of all Christian ingenuity. p. 13.
Castalio's Books are viperous and Socinian. p. 64. Against Castalio and
Episcopius.
S. Episcopius was a lying-Socinian-Antitrinitarian-Cretian; spoke against the
Dictate of his conscience; most wantonly and sawcily trifled with the Synod. c.
3. p. 29. Against Dr. Tailor.
Dr. Tailor may at last swallow the later sequel of Jansenius, that Christ dyed
not, ergo he is not incarnated. The Lord be merciful unto him. c. 2. p. 60.
Against Mr. Thomson.
A man desperately unadvised, and for his affection to the Protestants, such
another as my self (a Cassandrian Papist c. 2. p. 73.) c. 2. p. 26. Against all
the orthodox together.
Drunken Dick Thomson was bewitched with the conceit of his own parts, as much
as any Babylonian, intoxicated by the cup of the whore. In a word, all the
great and good men, who for above 1200. years, in all Countries, have opposed
Int^oduct. p. 2. lin. 3, 4, 8, 9.
those opinions which Mr. B. is now of, were so many [Dragons and Leviathans,
sharpning their tongues and pens and wits against the omnipotent Sovereignty
and Grace of God.]

Reader, you must not be offended: For Mr. B. tells you, that Mr. Calvin was
liable to errors and passions as himself. Against Mr. Calvin.
And if he means, as liable as himself, he uses Mr. Calvin a great deal worse
then his Arminians. What would you have a man do, when he is tortured with so
many twitches of the aching tooth? even men of mild tempers will be apt to cry
out, after the measure that they have smarted: how much more may an p. 8.
orthodox and cordial zelot? pangs and torments make some men Rave. It being
natural to the Creature, to ease it self by any means; and to lessen its
Agonyes, by giving them the quickest and largest vent that he is able. Many men
have blasphemed in fits of have and vexation; not for want of right principles,
but of strength and patience to make use of them. It has been matter of
satisfaction to some stomach full soldiers, whilst they have grovelled upon
the earth in blood and slaughter, at least to brow beat their enemies, and (for
want of other weapons) to look blows at them, and call them Dogs. I will not
vindicate those persons, whom Mr. B. has thus reviled; because I think it
their vindication, that none but a Correptorie Corrector would have dared in
public to have reviled them.

I will only put him in mind, that this is now the second time wherein he has
printed his own disgraces, by giving the Of Mr. Thomson in particular.
name of Drunken Dick to that renowned Scholar Mr. Thomson: a person admired
for his Abilityes by the most pious and the most learned of the Belgic
Protestants; and highly commended by Bishop Abbot, who writ against him.
Pascitur in vivis livor. Had that Great Man been alive, M. B's superiors might
have malign'd him. Or had I cited any one passage out of his learned Book, Mr.
B. then might have pretended some small occasion for this asperity. But that
upon no occasion offered he should have Drunken Dick Thomson in both his
Prints, bewrayes a mavelous Cacoethes in the inward old man. If Mr. Thomson
were ever drunk, it is more then I know; I am sure his writings are very sober:
Nor came I soon enough into the world to know him by any thing but his
writings. In the judgment of Mr. Baxter, I do not speak mine own judgment)
Mr. Baxt. Disput. 3. p. 329, etc.
He that has oftentimes been drunk may yet have true grace, and be in the
number of the Godly. Nay there are worse things then that, which a man may
commit, and yet be Godly, says Mr. Baxter. Id. ib. p. 33^. Note the probable
Reason, why Mr. Barlee does so highly ex^oll Mr. Baxter, c. 2. p. 73.
How many Professors will rashly rail, and lie in their passions? how few will
take well a reproof, but rather defend their sin? How many in these times that
we doubt not to ^e godly, have been guilty of disobedience to their guides, and
of schism, and doing much to the hurt of the Church? a very great sin. Peter,
Lot, and its like David, did often commit greater sins. And yet a Ib. p. 326, 327.
man must be guilty of more sin then Peter was in denying and forswearing
Christ, that is notoriously ungodly; yea then Lot was, who was drunk two nights
together, and committed incest twice with his own Daughters, and that after the
miraculous destruction of Sodom, of his own wife, and his own miraculous
deliverance. The sad effect of that o^inion, that the Regenerate man cannot
cease to be regenerate, let his sins be never so great. and this is said by Mr.
Baxt. to be the opinion of most of our Divines, meaning (I suppose) the
Calvinistical: for I know none else of this opinion.
Nay a man that is notoriously ungodly (in the sense in hand) or unsanctified,
must be a greater sinner then Solomon was with his 700. Wives, and his 300.
Concubines, and gross Idolatryes, when his heart was turned away from the Lord
God of Israel, which appeared unto him twice, and commanded him not to go after
other Gods; but he kept not that which the Lord commanded. Thus far Mr. Baxter:
from whom, in conscience, I am bound to declare my dissent, and to warn my
weaker Readers not to believe a word of it. I will only say for Mr. Thomson,
that he was not dry drunk, nor added Drunkenness to thirst, as many Precisians
were known to do. What was said by the Prophet, (Isa. 51, 21.) I may also
say in another sense, that many have been drunken, though not with wine, but
with somevvhat worse. I will not imitate Mr. B. by raking inhumanely in dead
men's Graves. But I have heard of a great one of Mr. B's party, who, as often
as he was vvilling to exhilarate himself with the dew of Bacchus, would
make a short exhortation to his Bons Compagnions, holding forth to this
purpose, if not in these very words: [ Come, Beloved in the Lord, let us be
refreshed with the othr bottle of Sack: we have an interest in the Creature
through Jesus Christ: let not the wicked drink all.] I name not the man, and
so have revealed no secrets. But I am willing that Mr. Barlee should see the
ugliness of his arguings against a Doctrine, from the personal corruption of
some one man who did assert it. How easily might any man requite suchusage (as
God forbid that any man should) by saying impatient Note, that this is only the
putting of a case, whereby M. B. may learn to hate his own practice, by having
seen it in other colors.
Jack Calvin, or Calvin was a proud Jack? Is not that the same with Drunken
Dick Thomson? for was not Richard the name of the later, as well as John of the
former? nay did not Mr. Calvin confess he was impatient? and that the Beast
was grown masterfull, he could not tame it? Was not Bucer a moderate man? and
did not he call Calvin Fratricide? and is not that much worse then Drunken? and
is not all this printed by their very best Note, that Bezaunsealed that
consession of Calvin: whom Mr. B. unawares does affrm devoid of all Christian
inge^uity, c. 2. p. 62. His s^lf-contradictions.
Friends? But never did Mr. Thomson accuse himself of being Drunken, much less
from the Print-house. And therefore Mr. B. was ill advised.

. 4. He was also ill advised in being no kinder to himself, then to pull down
commonly with his right hand, what he had raised with his left. Had his memory
lain in his fingers ends, he would either not have written the former parcells
of his Book, or at least he would not have contradicted them in the later. To
show this at large, were to compile a whole volume of self-contradictions. But
yet my Reader shall have a taste of what has been the greatest part of my
entertainment. One while he tells he has abstersed Ti le-page.
all calumnyes; and yet another while he pretends to have c. 2 p. 20.
omitted many; nay briefly to touch upon a few, and not to mention a world
more. Had he followed the advice of his Father Pliny, saepius respiciendo
Titulum, he would not have swallowed so great a Camel without having felt it
in going down. He said in his Title [A Full Abstersion of All Calumnyes;] and
yet he raped out an c. 2. p. 17.
Oath, that of all those Forgeries and Fictions which I had charged him
withal, there were but 3 in all his Book to which he seemed to give credit.
Nor had he sooner said so, but he named a fourth, to which he avowed his giving
credit. As if he thought that Abstersion had signified Recantation, and that he
meant only to say, A Confession of all calumnyes except those three, He
pretended a Stationer for the one, and a conscionable Divine for the other.
two of which he also p. 18, 19.
confessed to have been calumnyes indeed. First he made himself smutty, and now
with a char-coal he strives to make himself clean. But never was any man fowler
in the full Abstersion of a chimney. At first he c. 1. p. 5.
promised his Reader, that he would write in a certain method; but solemnly
brake it a little after, by p. 11.
declaring his purpose to quit that method, and for brevityes sake to be
immethodicall. For above 30 years space, he durst to lay down his life, he c.
2. p. 22, 23.
never swore a rash Oath; yet he Ib. p. 17.
swore most rashly not above 3 leafs before, and no less rashly in his
Correptorie Correction p. 174. besides that he swore the Scottish Covenant, and
another Oath besides that, which if he did not swear rashly, was rashly broken.
He p. 22.
never cursed (if you believe him) in 30 years; but yet believe me, he cursed
himself (Correp. Corr. p. 25.) and here curses others (c. 2. p. 38.) and
together with himself, the I have proved from their printed works, that they
hold God to be the cause of sin, in those very words.
chief men of his party, upon whom he c. 3. p. 54, 55.
wishes that myriads of Anathematisms may light, if they hold that God is the
fountain or cause of sin. Yet he holds it himself in the very next page; where
he says that God is the natural cause of the mere act of sin, and the
accidental cause of the very obliquity of the act of sin, (p. 55. c. 3.) He c.
2. p. 12.
denies that he accused me of assertive Socinianism, and yet p. 38.
accuses me often in the Great, and adds c. 3. p. 4.
rank to the Socinian.

He frequently called me Arminian, and Arminius my c. 3. p. 25.
Father; yet he reckons up c. 3. p. 4, 5, 14, 15.
many things, wherein he confesses I do recede from Arminius, and that
irreconcilably; and yet he fears not to say, that I have Ib. p. 25.
all my Principles from Arminius. I am but c. 2. p. 46.
inclined to Popery; Ib. p. 38.
yet am half a Pontifician or Papist; nay a p. 73, 74, 75.
whole one. He says he c. 3. p. 11.
never called me Heretic; yet Ib. and p. 149.
often does it. He pleads for the c. 2. p. 6. etc.
lawfulness of his railing; and yet c. 3. p. 3.
denies his pleading for it. He says his Manuscript Copy of my Notes does not
differ from mine, in c. 2. p. 47, 48.
any material thing; and yet (in the very next page) he says they are Ib. p.
48.
two distinct things, and that it is false to say, that they are one and the
same for substance. He would not press me to things which I was most likely to
p. 52.
refuse to have my Doctrins tried by; and yet would be p. 55. and 52.
tried by no other then his Senior Sympresbyters. Grotius is often a p. 46.
Socinian; and yet a p. 73, 74.
Papist, which no Socinian can be. The same p. 46.
Grotius is an enemy to all Popish and Episcopal Clergy; which no Papist can
be, and be a Papist. He says his Senior Sympresbyters have p. 40, 41.
receded from their subscriptions; and yet for all that, that they have been p.
52.
least upon their Tropicks in these Tropical times. God (says he) is the
natural c 3. p. 55.
cause of the Act of sin; and yet that sin has no efficient cause. (Corr.
Corr. p. 55.) Throughout his first Book he was much and often for the way of
the Sublapsarians; yet (being beaten out of that) he Ib. p. 15.
declares himself now to be a Supralapsarian. He sometimes Epist. Ded. p. 2.
commends me for extremely gallant parts, and diverse rare excellencyes, and
Postscript.
fine Abilityes, and of a c. 3. p. 108.
superlative wit; yet at other times I am a c. 3. p. 148.
wordy and windy man, of a blunt judgment, and fitter then any of my
neighbors to supply the place of an c. 2. p. 33.
Idiot. It is frequent with him to slight my Arguments, as if they had nothing
of force in them; and yet he confesses that he is brought to an extremity, to
his very last Reserve of forces, which if they fail, the Cause is lost. This I
say he confesses, if he understands the meaning of his Proverb, c. 2. p. 11.
Deventum est Triarios. If he does not, I cannot help it. He confesses that
his Epist. Ded. p. 2.
passions against me. are exuberant here and there, and talks of giving me
satisfaction; but yet he boasts of his c. 1. p. 8.
moderation, and will not so much Ibid.
as accept of my pardon. His fictions and railings he calls his Frailtyes, and
does c. 2. p. 55.
confess they are great and many, and that he began his first Book with a
Confession of them; and yet his whole first Chapter is not only to excuse, but
(in some places) to commend them. He snatcheth several occasions to tell the
c. 2. p. 27. Mr. B. a Trumpet to his own praises.
world, [ that he learned Hebrew many years since, and has attained to some
little something; and from the 18th year of his Age to this very hour, men of
the greatest Note for learning and piety have given large Attestations to his
scholarship (which he ever writes with ll) when they have not been solicited
to it by any thing but their own forwardness.] And again, that the most
illustrious Luminaryes of the Church did grace his labors with their
unexpected Encomiums. p. 2. And p. 35.
that some of the greatest eminency for learning and piety, did in letters
express their good Resentment of his labors, and thankfulness for his pains.
But yet in a gross contradiction to the first of these passages, he has
published two Books; Note, he professes to have reviewed his sheets with his
own eyes, and to have drawn up the Errata, etc. In Epist. ante Catal. Err.
whereby he has showed it to be impossible, that the most learned and the most
pious should commend his learning. For if they were learned, how could they be
so much mistaken? and if they were pious, how could they speak what they knew
not to be true? Since Mr. B. has so partial an opinion of himself, and had
such need to let it fly, as that he could not forbear to say in Print, that he
is p. 27.
not hardly opinionated against himself, and also shows what it is that has
done him hurt; it will be a charitable attempt, to lay that spirit thus
conjured up, and to mind him of something for his Humiliation. He tells his
Patron (he says, not as a spaniel) that he knows not any mere Epist. Ded. p. 1.
individual alive, to whom, under God, he would more desire to approve all his
Travails. As if he thought that individual had signified a Man, which every
child could have told him is a generical word, and as aptly spoken of a Beast,
a Tree, a Stone, or a Devil, as of any man whatsoever. I had said that sin was
quid positivum: he says I put an c. 2. p. 56.
Apotheosis upon sin; as if he thought it derived from (...), pono; unless he
means that I made a God of it, and then it is infinitely worse, as I shall show
in my second part. He calls me c. 3. p. 18.
(...) in such a way, as if he thought it had signified a young man only. For
he could not intend to say, that I am newly converted to the Christian Religion
(as the word imports) because he calls me Apostate, and Apostatarian, and
twenty things to that purpose. So he uses the word c. 2. p. 71.
Apostasy (and writes it with a [c]) as if he thought it had signified
who-know's-what. Nor can he excuse it any way possible, unless by confessing
he bore falsewitnesse. I did but dip by accident into his Correp. Corr. when I
chanced to light upon this rare Corr. Corr. p. 27.
passage. Heartily I can wish, that you would not steer the ship you are one of
the guiders of per Archipelagum, through the main Ocean unto Rome it self. It
seems he thought that Archipelago (which I mentioned in my Notes) had been the
oblique case of a Latin word, because he knew Pelagus was Latin for a Sea. And
such was his knowledge in Geographie, that he thought the Archipelago had been
the Ocean, through which we sail from hence to Rome: or if he knew it to have
been the Aegean Sea, his mistake was more ridiculous, in thinking that that Sea
was on this side Italy. As great a jest as that Preacher's, who told his
Hearers, they must pass through the dangers of the Red Sea, before they could
arrive at the Cape of good Hope. I need not speak of his citing Aristotle and
Chrysostom in Epist. Ded. p. 3, and 4.
Latin, because I know not what it may signify; whether that he thought they
were Latin Authors, or met with a Translation at second hand. It were well if
he were able to write true English on all occasions, as well as upon some.
Examples of the contrary are extremely Introduct. p. 4.
rife in his public works. Whosoever shall consider, how he Epist. Ded. p. 4.
lin. 2. ad lin. 0.
prays perfect nonsense in his Dedicatory Epistle, and how in the end of his
Postscript, he is skipping for joy out of sense and syntax; and shall compare
what I have showed chapter 2.. 17. he will say that Mr. B. was somewhat too lavish
of his praises, upon such an obnoxious and faulty self: his faults being
greater then Moneo ne semet ipse t^aducat, ^e qui Latin ^on didicit, Latin
scrib^t; talis sc. ut: b Amico monitus primam syllabam in voce legendum esse
brevem, id ita mutaverit, ut gerundium nobis substituerit foemininum: qui vocem
elixerit nescio unde nobis elicuit. Grot. Vot. pro pace, p. 63.
those of Rivet, of which the grave and wise Grotius took public notice. And
in this I have followed that great example.

. 5. What he alleges to show his learning (for no other reason can I imagine)
concerning the Books in his study, of which he proclaims unto the world, that
Mr. B' s Rhetorical digression to the sum of 150l. at which he prizeth his
study of Books.
he should be loath to part with them for 150l. (chapter 3. p. 126. lin. 7, 8.) is
as far from being argumentative, as any thing which he has spoken for his
Doctrine of decrees, or of God's being the Chapter 3. p. 55.
cause of sin. And though it merits not an Answer or confutation, yet because I
cannot imagine why he should put it into his Book, unless he thought it to be
of force to serve for a part of his Vindication; I will respect him so far, as
to make him a return by these degrees. 1. I never did accuse him of having a
cheap study of Books, nor did I ever conceive it could be any man's crime. Nil
refert, si legeris quantum habeas; sat est, si habueris quantum legas. Seneca.
Grotius was the Owner of very few Books: he lived most upon borrowing the
Books of others, and that from the chiefest parts of Christendom; which having
contracted into his paper, and thence digested into himself, he became an *
animated Library, or an * Ambulatory Pandect, of all the best learning in all
the world. 2. What he says of his Books is gratis dictum; neither proved by
witness, nor by an Inventary of the particulars. and we who are Englishmen,
do not like your Dutch reckonings, nor is it the likelyer to be so, because he
says it, who has been found so often to give us the issues of his Invention.
The Boy in Horace was so known to speak falsely, that when at last he spoke
an important Truth, none of the neighborhood would believe him. 3. He does
not tell us how much his study of Books is worth, but for how ** (...).
much he will not leave them; which is only to tell us his great affection to
those Authors, whom he has indeared unto himself by many late obligations.
But another man perhaps may be as glad of their room, as he can be of their
company. 4. Admit 150l. would buy a great study of books, (which yet I cannot
apprehend) if he meant to infer himself a man of great learning, I deny his
sequel. For then the richest man living would have it in his power to be the
learned. Many Stationers are masters of much more learning, then the best
Scholars can pretend to: but there is commonly this difference, that the
Stationers learning is without him, the Scholars within him. Yet the Stationer
has a mighty command of his learning, (as well as Mr. W. B.) For as he bought
it at his pleasure, so he may sell it at his need; and till then, may hang it
upon a Tack. We see it is very ill arguing from the Quantity of the Study to the
Quality of the Student; whose greater commendation were, to have no more Books
then he can put into his Brain. Whosoever shall impose a Treasure of money upon
a Mule, will not certainly enrich, but load the creature. But if he prized his
Books to save his Executors a labor, he should not here have put it in his
Book of Abstersions; he should rather have reserved it for a Codicill of
Instructions, to be annexed (when time serves) unto his last Will and Testament.

. 6. I must not thus insist upon the other like parts of his His Dexterityes in
speaking beside the purpose.
vindication, and yet I may usefully represent them (for many reasons) by
drawing up a short Catalogue of his escapes from the Question of Gods Decrees;
wherein will be seen his Dexterityes in finding work for the Printer, and
providing materials for a Book, without indangering his Cause upon all
occasions, the very mention of which he had found by experience to be unsafe.
Hereupon he takes occasion (because no good body would be so courteous as to
offer it) to acquaint his Readers with many particulars of his life, which the
publickminded man would not have to dye with him. Ex. Gr. 1. He 1. Introd. p. 2.
has been in this very Country well-nigh these fourteen years; never behaving
himself unchristianly, ignorantly, or rudely, amongst many discerning gracious
Christians, amongst diverse most venerable and eminent Scholars. 2. He is averse
from the very Act of writing fairly and slowly. 2. p. 5.
3. He would not for 500l. that other men should be put to it with Printers,
Correctors and Transcribers, as he has 3. Postscript.
been. 4. Of diverse late years he has preached by the hour-glasse. 5. He
catechizeth in his Parish, as well as 4. Chapter 2. p. 21. 5. p. 24. 6. p. 23, and
24.
preaches. 6. His Carrier (he tells us) comes to him on Saturdayes in the
afternoon, and goes by ten a clock on Monday morning next after. 7. A Bishop of
my name (to whom I never had any relation) was wont to make clinches 7. p. 29.
as well as He. 8. We must know, at what glad T^dings his 8. p. 38. 9. p. 41,
42.
Sympresbyters would have jumped. 9. He lays up an Article against me, against
the time that ever we may be so blessed, as to enjoy Presbyterian Censures. 10.
He tells us a 10. p. 47.
Tale which he was told by an Oxford Stationer, to commend his Book for
Orthodox, because it was so little bought. 11. A 11. p. 66.
certain man whose name was Forbes, a Scottish Divine, was for above 30 years
Preacher at Delph. 12. And he did 12. Ibid.
speak to Mr. Barlee in the presence of Dr. Ames. 13. He was more then
ordinarily acquainted with Bishop Davenant (if 13. p. 75.
you believe him.) 14. Bishop Davenant did once in private sadly bewail to Mr.
Barlee (as Mr. Barlee tells us) the 14. Ibid.
great growth of Popery and Arminianism. 15. We must not dye in Ignorance, that
the Bishop writ a large letter to him 15. p. 76.
about the Cross in baptism. 16. And (which is most worthy to be communicated
to late posterity by the indelible Characters 16. Ibid.
of the Press) the Bishops letter was in folio. To conclude in a word, (that I
may not violate my promise of giving in a short Catalogue) one while he strokes
Mr. Whitfields Gray hairs; another while he cajoles a Worcestershire Minister:
now he tells us (but unsincerely) some Table-Talk at Daintry concerning
Socrates and Job; anon he gives us to understand the several parts of his Age.
Somewhere he tells us what the brethren intended, in case Presbytery had
prosper'd; and that he writes but a scrawling hand at the best. Into such kind
of subjects has he been pleased to step aside, from his pretended confirmation
of irrespective Decrees.

. 7. There are but two things more in the making up of my How great an
Artificer of escapes.
Accounts, with which I shall at present detain my Reader; viz. the odnesse of
his excuses, and the prettiness of his Wit. A Taste or two of each will be an
opiparous entertainment. As for the former, his facility is such, that though
his Tetters are never so spreading, the least drop of his sovereign Ink will
cure them all in an instant: If angry blisters have been discovered upon the
two-edged member, he gives us to know he is of a very small Stature, and little
men are still fretfull (p. 5.) If any thing ailes him in point of literature,
or manners, it is no more but that his memory was terrible false to him (p.
18.) or the Printer did him a shrewd turn (p. 19.) or he had motives to it
which shall be namelesse (ibid.) or he was told it by a Reverend Minister (p.
18.) or by a person of true honor (p. 18.) or by a conscionable Divine (p.
19.) or by W. C. (p. 18.) or by a Gentleman-entertainer (p. 44.) or else it
crept at the, Press out of his Margin into his Text (p. 19.) and so all is
well. If he is told of his clinches, he shows Scripture for it where there are
none (p. 29.) If he is caught in the Act of doing violence to my Words, he
says, he did but allude to them, not quote them directly (p. 53.) When he is
brought to such a pinch, he knows not which way to answer, or any other ways
to evade, then he says of his opponent, that he has words and wit at will (p.
53.) or else he tells us a story of Dr. Twisse (p. 54.) and that he has heard
the Doctor spoke it a The repeated jest was but this, that as the Jews did set
a Crown of Tho^ns upon Christ's head, so the Arminians put a Crown of Scorns
upon his Grace.
hundred times over (ibid.) the whole virtue of which story does consist in the
tinkling of Thorns and Scorns* (ibid.) Thus let the Difficultyes and streights
of our great Artificer be never so many for number, or never so monstrous for
shape, with a dash or two of his pen he winds himself out of all, he makes all
fair and unreprovable. There is not a fault in his manners, nor (I warrant you)
a flaw in any one part of his undertakings. So much for his artifice in drawing
good over evil.

. 8. And because in the course of his studyes he has attained to a pair of
jests, which in a volume of that bulk may run the hazard of being lost, I will
add my mite to their conservation. It seems he had learned (by one means or
other) that his Sympresbyter with the long breath (which admonish't Mr. Baxter
to keep his distance) had in a Latin Epistle, (upon such an occasion as he
could get,) showed the Dimensions of his wit in the mistaking of my Name. No
less then four whole times, without the fourtieth part of a reason, he was
resolved to call me Persius: and a little after took care to say (what he
thought would be pretty,) Difficile est Satyram non scribere. Thus lay the
Hint, upon which Mr. Barlee held forth as shrewdly in his Abstersion, that I am
Chapter 2. p. 53.
a Iuvenal Divine. He thought it was pleasant for Iuvenal and Persius to be
both predicated of Me; and so has left unto posterity this Memorandum, that
when two Sympresbyters join wit to wit, they are able (betwixt them) to break a
jest.

As his first jest is on my name, so is his second upon his own: in allusion to
which, he is again (says he) called out to Introduct. p. 5.
thrashing. For Mr. Barlee to be a Thrasher, it seems he thought to be as
lepid, as for the highways of Egypt to become all Travelers, when the Dust
of the Land was wholly turned into Lice. But he should have known whilst it was
time Genesis 8. 17.
(what is now too late) that he who is not skilled in thrashing, must take
great heed how he fights with a Flaile; lest in fetching back his weapon to lay
it on so much the harder, he prove so unfortunate as to break his own head. Had
I been in his case, and he in mine, this Book, without Question, had been
Intitl'd,

Mr. Barlee thrashed with his (...).
own Flaile, and found in the winnowing to be but Chaff.

AN APPENDAGE
Touching the judgment of the late most learned and pious Primate of Armagh,
as to the matters in controversy betwixt the Two Parties.

THat it concerns me very nearly to perform my promises to my Reader, and so to
communicate the Grounds of what I have publicly a^firmed, concerning the
judgment of the right honorable and learned Primate of Armagh, as to the
Doctrines which I controvert with the unjust Usurpers of his Authority, and
bold Invaders of his Name, my Reverend Friend In his two letters to Mr. Barlee.
Especially p. 61. lin. 14, 15, etc.
Doctor Bernard has made apparent; for if I have wronged so great a Person, it
is by so much the greater wrong, and exacteth from my conscience by so much the
greater reparation. Nor can I but take it very kindly from so Reverend a Person
as Dr. Bernard, that by opposing what I reported in that particular, he has
given me an Occasion to show the Truth in its Luster, (which till now was
exhibited in somewhat a thick vail) by laying upon me a Necessity to clear my
self. To clear my self (I say) not from any aspersions which Dr. Bernard has
cast upon me, (for there are none in his letters, if rightly taken, and
applied, he has rather opened a way to my vindication) but from the sinister
and irrational uses, which Mr. Barlee and his peers (if yet he is not a
peerless person) have had the skill or the unskilfulness to make of those
letters, against the intention of Him that writ them. It is not therefore my
purpose to clear my self, or my Informers, or the precious memory of the L.
Primate, by a p^ofessed work of Hostility against those letters of Dr. Bernard;
but rather by showing that those letters were so warily written, as to have
nothing in them of hostile against me, or mine: not pretending to prove my
Affirmation to have been false, but alleging some Circumstances by which it
might seem to be unlikely, and obliging me thereby to prove it eminently true.

First, he ingenuously professes, that as it is hard to prove a Negative, (p.
47.) so, according to my Caveat, he does not take upon him to do it, (p. 56.)
but immediately adds, He understands not the Ground of my definitive sentence,
etc. (ibid.) And therefore the utmost I have to do, is to make my Ground
visible, that an obscure Truth may not suffer for want of a right understanding.

Secondly, As Dr. Bernard has heartily professed, that he took not upon him to
prove the Negative of what I said, (p. 56.) so he professes to be content that
I enjoy my opinion, if I censure not him for not forsaking his own. (p. 57.)
And sure he cannot but be inclinable to agree with me in the end, who differs
from me in the way upon such amicable Terms of Reconcilement.

Thirdly, Though Dr. Bernard was willing (as well he might) to put the Belief
of my Affirmative to some kind of Stand, (at that time of the day, whilst yet
he knew not the Ground upon which I marched) yet he pretended not to do it by
any other then probabilities (p. 58.) And we know that probabilities do^ly in
the middle twixt Truth and Falsehood; it is not in their Nature, and so belongs
not to their Office, to make a proof, but to engender a persuasion; They are
proper to Rhetoricians speaking in genere Deliberativo, not to those who intend
a Scientifical Demonstration. And such was the modesty of that reverend Person,
that he professed only to stick to his persuasion (not to his knowledge or
assurance, which in that case was impossible) confirmed (as he goes on) by
probable Testimonies, that there was no such change in the Primate near his
Death, (p. 61.) where he confesses that his Testimonies were no more then
probable, and such as only begot a persuasion in him; nor does he seem to be
persuaded, that the Primates judgment was never changed, but that it was not
near his Death. And if it was longer before his Death, then I supposed it to
have been, I am extremely glad of it, because abundantly happy in that mistake.

Fourthly, As Dr. Bernard affirms (the third time also) a naked Improbability
of what I said, (p. 69.) so he seemed to believe, that I had no other witnesses
of what I said, then p. 64. compared with p. 70, 71.
such as were present at his Sermon, wherein he taught, that by the death of
Christ all receive this benefit, that they are saveable, or put into a Capacity
of salvation, that terms of peace are procured for all mankind, that all men's
sins are become pardonable, mercy attainable, and the like. From whence I
easily gather, that had he been timely enough acquainted with the other
evidences which I received, he had not opposed his probabilities against such
pregnant and cogent proofs.

Fifthly, whereas it is said by Dr. Bernard, He was perpetually with the
Primate when last in London, (p. 48.) he must not be thought to mean, that he
was never absent, but that he was present very often: for it appears that he
was absent, when his Grace and Dr. Walton discoursed together of these affairs.
Nor am I moved in the least measure at what he seems at least to intimate, p.
52. because he seems only to do it, but does it not. A person of his prudence
could not be so extravagant, as to put speeches into my mouth, which never
proceeded out of my thoughts. I did not only never say, (no not so much as in a
Dream) that the L. Primates Opinion was wholly for Arminius, but expressly said
he was an Anti-Arminian (as Dr. Bernard does acknowledge by his recital of my
words p. 50.) I only said that he asserted universal Grace and Redemption, as
well as Arminius; meaning a salvability, procured for all without exception:
more then which I look not after, nor do I care to have granted: And I am sure
my L. Primate affirms no less, even in that which Dr. Bernard has published of
him. All which does not hinder, but that in several other things his Grace did
differ from Arminius, as I and my Brethren have always done. It is sufficient
for the honor of that exceedingly learned and pious man, (I mean Arminius)
that though he wanted not his Errors, (as what man living can be without them?)
yet he was Orthodox in the main; and more exact in his Judgment, as well as
life, then your other Presbyterians are wont to be.

Sixthly, what is spoken by Dr. Bernard (indiscriminately) of universal Grace
and universal Redemption p. 64, 65. (betwixt which two there is a very wide
Difference, although the one does evince the other) I am not at all concerned
in: It having never been my opinion, (nor compatible with it) that the same
measure of Grace was equally and alike conferred and applied to Judas, which
was to Peter: But on the contrary, that though All have a sufficient, yet some
have a more abundant measure; one has five Talents, another has two, a third
but one; everyone according to his several exigence or ability (Mat. 25. 15.)
and according as the Master is pleased to deliver out his goods (v. 14.) but he
that has least has sufficient, if he hide it not in the earth (v. 18.) but
rather trade with it (v. 16.) according to the purpose of him that lent it, (v.
15. 19. 21. 27.) As he who had five Talents did gain five more, (v. 15.) and as
he who had but two did also gain his other two (v. 17.) so he who had one, and
only one, might have gained one more, if he had not been a wicked and slothful
servant, (v. 26. 30.) As he who improved his two Talents into four, received
the very same Euge (v. 23.) with him who improved his five to ten, (v. 21.) so
had the third servant improved his one Talent into two, he had also received
that blessed saying of his Lord Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou
verse. 21. 23.
have been faithful over a little, I will make thee Ruler over much enter thou
also into the Joy of thy Lord. A little money is sufficient to d^ive a little
Trade, and is capable of yielding a porportionable increase. But although one
Talent is less then two, verse. 27. 30.
yet considered in its self, it is not a little, and compared with other sums,
it is a very great deal; for a single Talent is no less then a hundred eighty
seven pounds and Ten shillings, which is a vast sum of money in some men's
purses and esteems. A Talent of Grace is infinitely more precious then one of
Money: And whilst I thankfully acknowledge, that my Talent of Grace is
sufficient for me, (though a far less Mat 20. 15.
measure then God has given to some of my Brethren) mine eye is not evil
because I see that my Masters is very good. I do not envy my Brother for having
five to my one; but am heartily thankful for his Abundance. So far am I from
believing, that Gods Grace is dispensed to all alike, that I fear those
professors have less then others, who have proudly adventured on its Enclosure.
I say therefore again, that I am not concerned in those words of Dr. Bernard,
concerning the same measure of Grace common to Judas with S. Peter: and by so
much the less, because he heartily professes, (p. 65.) that he would not be
understood to interpose himself in the controversy, or to affix thus much upon
Mr. Pierces judgment; of which, if his Readers will but take a due notice, as
well as mine, I shall be freed from the danger of being injured by their
mistakes.

Seventhly, Dr. Bernard concludes his second Letter to Mr. Barlee with a great
Civility to my self, and with a very course Complement to my Delator,
professing to have appeared in this affair, neither in patronage of Mr. Barlee,
nor out of any opposition to Mr. Pierce, (p. 71.) Which as it was more then I
expected from a perfect stranger (whose Favor too had been courted by the
renowned Raiser of false Reports) so from a person of that Temper which since I
find him to be of, I could in reason expect no less. And how many advantages
soever other men may have over me in other kinds, yet in offices of Humanity
and mutual Forbearance, I am very unwilling to come Ephesians. 4. 2. Col. 3. 13
behind them; but will say of Dr. Bernard, a reverend person, (as Abraham to
Lot in another case) why should strife Genesis 13. (...).
be between us, when it appears that we are Brethren?

These are sincerely the very Reasons why I take no other course to clear my
self, and my Informers, and the Honor also of the L. Primate, then by
publishing what I have spoken in several letters to Dr. Bernard, which lying by
me already written, and comprehending the main (though not the All) I have to
say of that particular, have fitly saved me the labor of writing all over
again in another Form. I should otherwise have chosen to extract the substance
of my letters, and (out of that) to have made a close Narrative of all my
Meaning, if both my time and my patience would have sufficed for such a work, I
have forborne to publish Dr. Bernards letters with mine own, not that I thought
I might not lawfully do it, (as Mr. Barlee had done before) but because I was
not sure that he would take it in good part, and because I knew it was not
needful; there being nothing of Concernment in any one of his letters, but what
may easily be gathered from one of mine.

For the Reverend Dr. Bernard at his lodging in Grayes Inn.
SIR,
THere are three things especially by which I am urged The first Letter.
to give you the trouble of this address. First, a Report which came to me from
several hands, that you have said something to me by way of letter; which,
although it came not to my hands, I am to thank you for as heartily as if it
had. But a second Report has made me guess at the Contents; For I have heard
that you were angry with Mr. Barlee, and with me, for doing wrong to the
memory of the late most learned and Reverend Primate of Armagh. And again I am
to thank you for being angry in such a Case, wherein my Anger concurrs with
yours, and that against mine own self, on supposition that I have injured that
excellent Person, whom I labored only to vindicate from Him who did. But as I
heartily intended the Primates Honor in what I publicly spoke of him, so I
cannot yet think that my intentions were misguided, or have missed of the mark
at which they aimed. For Mr. Barlee had printed such things of the Primate, as
did imply him a patron of those sad Doctrines which he asserted. And because I
was informed by several persons (for learning and Piety beyond exception) That
though his Grace in former times was universally thought to be the prop of
those Doctrines which Mr. Barlee asserted, and I opposed, yet in the latter
part of his life he declared his aversion to those opinions, and his perfect
Concurrence with Bishop Overal; I thought it my duty to make this known, that
so Mr. Barlee might be defeated, His Grace righted, the common people
disabused, and many learned men profited by that example. And supposing (as I
did) that my Lord Primate his Grace had once in times past been extremely
different in his judgment from Bishop Overal, as having embraced the way of
the Anti-Remonstrants, how could I possibly do less then conclude from thence
his change of judgment? But I have thirdly been informed, that the cause of the
displeasure conceived against me, is not my saying that the Primate was at last
of the opinions which I am of (in these points) but my implying his having been
otherwise, by my affirming his change of judgment. And again, for this cause I
am to give you great thanks; it being most suitable to my wishes, that his
Grace may be proved to have been always of the judgment which I am of, and
that by consequence he never changed it, and that I (by consequence) was much
mistaken on the right hand, as Mr. Barlee and his Abetters were more mistaken
on the left. In the mean time it is evident, that what I spoke of him in my
books, was safely spoken in all respects. For what I said that I was told, I
was told indeed, and that by excellent persons, whom I shall name when time
serves; how truly or falsely, viderint illi. And this must be granted me by all
the world, That my Lord Primates opinions in the declining part of his life
were either changed, or not changed, from what they formerly had been. If they
were, it is happy for me that I did not err in what I published; and if they
were not, it is much more happy I was mistaken, and misinformed: for as it is
much for my purpose, that so eminent a Prelate was perfectly orthodox at the
last, so it is more for my purpose, that so eminent a prelate was always
orthodox. On which side soever the Truth does lie, it will reflect very
severely upon the pretentions of Mr Barlee. For if my L. Primate forsook those
Doctrines which he and his party are wont to plead for, it is some discredit to
their Cause, that so great a person thought fit to leave it: but if he was
never of those opinions which they report him to have been of I know not how
they can excuse so bold a Fiction. And now Sir, that you see how truly zealous
I am, and ever have been, in vindicating the Honor of that Great person from
such Aspersions as the Adversary has cast upon him, I shall make no doubt of
having a fair opinion from you, concerning the Ground on which I go, and the
end at which I drive.

And to give you a right understanding of me, as well as to assure you that I
had answered your Letter, had I received it, was the principal inducement to
this present importunity from

Your Humble servant Tho. Pierce.
Brington, October. 5. 1657.
For my Reverend friend Dr. Bernard at Grayes Inn.
SIR,
IT had (it seems) been happy, if your first Letter to me The first Letter.
had not finally miscarried; for then I should have given you such a
satisfactory Account, as would (I think) have prevented, (at least have
altered) your resolutions of sending Letters to Mr. Barlee concerning me and my
writings.

To the next part of your Letter I have these things to say. First that I did
the very thing which you are sorry I did not. For before I durst publish what I
had heard of the Primate, I did consult with such persons, who (I did verily
believe) could best inform me, (as having been conversant with him to that very
purpose) and were most worthy to be believed, (as being persons of great fame
for Life and Learning.) Next, I desire you to consider, how unjustly diffident
I must have been, if I had not believed what I was told by several grave
persons, at several times, as from the Primates own Mouth, in private partly,
and partly also in public, and all attested to me under hand and seal, which
upon fit occasion they will be ready to make good too. How impossible will it
be thought, that three or four distinct persons, all of the Priesthood, and of
unquestionable Integrity, should either by chance or by conspiracy, write the
very same fiction (if it were such) to the very same party, who is not intimate
with either, and to one of the number a perfect stranger? Nay, what if my
witnesses are (some of them) strangers to one another, and of so exemplary
veracity, that each is instar multorum? will any man blame me for my belief,
and not rather believe them as I have done? When the thing by me asserted is
matter of Fact, it cannot possibly be proved with more advantage to me, or
satisfaction to such as judge, then by ear-witnesses upon Oath: whereas the
Negative to that is so impossible to be proved by any mortal, that I suppose no
oath can be admitted. What the Primate has said to you, you may very well
remember, but you cannot remember what he has not said. Nor can you know many
things which he said to others, much less can you know he never said them. All
which I recommend unto your timely consideration, because I am kinder to your
credit then to be willing that you deny what can dilucidly be proved; which I
therefore suppose you will not do. And if in stead of a denial of what shall be
proved by my informers, you affirm something else in derogation to it, it will
be expected that your proofs be as good as mine. If they are not, it will
redound to your prejudice; and if they are, it will not at all redound to mine:
but all the dishonor will be the Primates (which God forbid) if he shall be
found to have breathed both hot and cold, by declaring himself at once for two
opinions, whereof the one is not consistent with the other. I have said (and
shall prove) that he declared for that opinion which I am of; and if afterward
you shall say (what you will also prove) that he declared for another
inconsistent with mine, you alone in that case will cast a cloud over his name.
And if we differ about the time of his Declaration, (you placing it in his
former years, as I in his last,) that indeed will salve his Honor, but withal
it will make as much for mine as I can wish, because it will help me to prove
his change. In the mean time I am glad that you affirm the Primate not to have
been of Mr. Barlees judgment; which is as much to the ruin of his Correptory
Correction, (where he uses that Reverend and learned Prelate as one of the
heads of his party in these Affairs) as I need wish it in that particular. I am
as sorry for that heat which you say you find betwixt me and Mr. Barlee, as I
am glad that I do not find any in my self. It Is true indeed, I was forced to
clear my self from his Inventions, and to disown his ugly Names, as well as to
vindicate the Truth from his adventures. But in the repelling of his Fire, I do
not remember that I was ever once heated. And if you have seen what stuff I had
to deal with, I suppose you will think I could not have used him with greater
mildness. But I find my self tedious; and therefore my thanks to you for your
promise to send me that which you have published, shall put an end to this large
trouble from

Your assured friend and servant Tho. Pierce.
Brington, October. 31. 1657.
For my Reverend friend Dr. Bernard at his lodging in Grayes Inn.
SIR,
YOur last, which was dated Novem. 19. together with your book (which it seems
you sent with it, if not before The third letter.
it) did not come to my hands until the fifth of this Instant, and then
through the hands of Mr. Barlee, I was unwilling to send you my Thanks for your
book, until I also might send you some small account of my perusal; which by
the first opportunity shall now be done. But first let me acknowledge (by way
of answer to your letter) that you have indeed afforded me so much respect,
(above what you have given to Mr. Barlee, (in your second Letter directed to
him) as I cannot be offended with any want in that kind. Nay you farther load
me, in one passage, with such a weight of commendation, that I know not how I
can support it, but by his credit who laid it on. You have obliged me besides
with a righteous construction of my Intentions, which have aimed at the
promotion of peace and Truth. In which respect I am desirous, that even whilst
we differ in some few things, we may be as they who agree in all. I shall not
snatch at occasions of having controversies with you, though there is nothing
more pleasant then to dispute with persons of so much Temper. And had my
Neighbor of Brockhole either embraced your Advice, or taken his Copy from your
Example, by how much more strongly he had opposed me, I should have loved and
valued him so much the more. But so ill is the use which he has made of your
Letters and of your Name, and some expressions in your book do reflect so
sternly upon my Credit, and (which is more) upon my cause, that I think it
concerns me either to clear what I have done from being any way injurious to
the memory of the Primate, or (if I cannot do that,) to make some ample
satisfaction for having wronged it. That I intended no more then his greatest
Honor, all the world is my witness, for as much as I asserted him to be of
that judgment, which all men are of who have the highest of my esteem: And to
grow out of that which I think is error, to the possession of that which I
think is Truth, is not inconstancy, but improvement, as I interpret. When I
left those Doctrines into which my Teachers at first betrayed me, I cannot say
I revolted, but I was rather set free. To be fickle, is one thing; but to grow
and increase, is quite another. Whatsoever I could intend as an honor to my
cause, I could not choose but intend to their honor also, by whom I could
think my cause was honored. When I say that King James, Bishop Andrews, Philip
Melanchthon, Tilenus, Dr. Potter, Dr. Godwin, and many others whom I could name
of eminent learning and integrity, did turn away from those Tenants which are
called Calvinistical, in exchange for those other which unconsidering persons
do call Arminian, I make account I commend them for bowing to the scepter of
sovereign truth: And this does justify my Intentions in all I said of our
Reverend Primate. But the question still remains concerning matter of Fact,
whether his Grace did change his judgment from what it formerly had been. I
began in the affirmative, but you say No: And both perhaps with good reason,
because we are diversely informed, unless we can show by some Inquiry where
lies the Error. I grounded my affirmative upon the Difference which I found
betwixt the judgment of the Primate when he writ the History of Gotteschalc,
and that account of his judgment which I had from those Persons who are of
vast Importance in my esteem. To transcribe their Certificates, which they have
severally given me under Hand and seal, of what they severally heard from his
Grace his mouth, is too large a task in the present have that I am in; nor am I
sure that you desire it. And therefore deferring for a time the special part of
my Advantage, I will offer to your Equity and Christian candor, what I have
just now observed from several passages in your Book. First, you thank p. 43.
Mr. Barlee for the large expressions of his affection to the late Archbishop
of Armagh, and the readiness to clear him from some injury done him by Mr.
Thomas Pierce: whereas it seems very evident, by that account which you give of
the Primates judgment about the true intent and extent of Christ's Death, that
Mr. Barlee is less qualified for the Bishops vindication in that affair, then
any man in the world in all respects. I beseech you bear with me whilst I give
you my reasons. 1. Mr. Barlee, in his last book, declares chapter 3. p. 15. lin.
19. Cor. Cor. p. 130. 131, 133. and particularly 194.
himself a Supralapsarian. Yet 2. in Correptory Correction, he had again and
again usurpt the name of the Primate for the patronizing of his opinions. He
does in one place oppose him to Bishop Overal, as a more moderate Bishop,
affirming Bishop Overal to have played upon Calvin, and to have traduced the
Puritans, whom the Reverend Primate p. 130.
(he says) did clear. He cites the History of Gotteschalc against p. 133.
that notion of Christ's death and satisfaction, which you have now printed from
the Primates own Hand. He directs me to him as to a choice orthodox writer (in
the Barlean conceit of the word Orthodox,) besides what he p. 194.
does in other places, which I have not leisure to search after. 3. But now you
tell him in your Letter, that the Primates judgment was in a middle way,
different as well from Mr. Barlees, as from mine. Whether from mine, we shall
p. 52.
see anon. But if at all, I am sure much less then from my neighbors. In the
mean time it is demonstrable, that if Mr. Barlee was in the right, when he
vouched the Primate for his opinions, I was also in the right, when I said that
the Primate had changed his judgment. And for this your book shall be my
warrant, as well as the Primates own words, That he concurred with Bishop
Overal. Next I pray Sir consider; whether any one Paragraph in all my books
(touching the true intent and extent of Christ's Death) is any way dissonant
from what now you publish, and that (say you, very truly, without all Question)
from the Primates Letter of Resolution to the request of a Friend. First, I
have nothing in behalf of the two extremes (p. 2, 3.) in any part of my
writings. Next, I have jumped with the Primate in what I published, (before I
had the possibility of seeing that which you have sent me) not only much to my
comfort, but truly almost to my Admiration. For his Grace writes thus: That the
satisfaction of Christ was once p. 4.
done for all, the application is still in doing. The satisfaction of Christ
only makes the sins of mankind fit for pardon. All the sins of mankind are
become venial, in respect of the price paid by Christ to his Father, -- but all
do not obtain actual Remission, because most offenders do not take p. 4. and 5.
out or plead their pardon as they ought to do. -- By this way being made (that
is, by assuming our nature) God holds out unto us the Golden scepter of his
word, and thereby not only signifies his pleasure of admitting us unto his
presence, etc. but also sends an embassage unto us, and entreats us that we
would be reconciled unto him. 2 Cor. 5. 20. -- By p. 6.
the virtue of this blessed oblation, God is made placable unto our nature, but
not actually appeased with any, until he has put on the Lord Jesus. All men
may be said to have interest in the merits of Christ, as in a Common, though
all do not enjoy the benefit of it, because they have no Will to take it. The
wellspring of life is set open to all, Rev. 22. 17. Faith is the vessel
whereby we draw all virtue from Christ. The means of getting this Faith is the
hearing the word, etc. (Ephesians. 1. 13.) which ministers this general ground for
p. 7.
every one to build his faith upon. -- This Gospel of salvation many do not
hear at all, being destitute of the ministry, etc. Many hearing do not believe
or lightly regard it; and many that believe the truth thereof are so wedded to
their p. 8.
sins, etc. that they refuse to accept the gracious offer that is made unto
them. -- Yet we may truly say, that good things were provided for them on
Christ's part, and a rich price was put into the hand of a fool, however he had
no heart to use it, (Prove. 17. 16.) Our Savior -- has procured a Iubile for
the Sons of Adam, his Gospel is a Trumpet to proclaim liberty, etc. Luke 4. 18.
but that some desire no deliverance, derogates nothing from the generality of
freedom p. 9.
annexed to that year, (Luke 4. 18.) The slavish disposition of him who will not
be free, (Exodus 2. 5.) makes the extent of the privilege of that year not a
whit the straiter, because he was included in the general Grant as well as
others, however he was not disposed to take the benefit of it. The neglect of
the men invited (v. 5.) does not falsify the word of the King (v. 4.) -- See
Romans 3. 4. -- Ezekiel. 18. p. 10.
29. 30. -- The proclamation was general (2 Chro. 36. 23. p. 12.
and 1 Ezra. 2.) They alone did follow, etc. whose spirit God had raised to go
up, (Ezra. 1. 5.) But they that remained still in Babylon could not justly
plead that the Kings Grant was not large enough, or that they were excluded
from going up by any clause contained therein. The matter of our Redemption
purchased by Christ lies open to all, all are invited to it, none that has a
mind to accept of it is excluded from it. The beautiful feet of those that
preach the Gospel of peace do bring glad Tidings of good things to every house
where they tread. All are not apt to entertain this Message p. 13.
of peace, though Gods Ambassadors make a true tender of it to all unto whom
they are sent; but if it meet with such as will not listen to the motion of it,
their peace returns, etc. (Luke 10. 6.) The proclamation runs (Rev. 22. 17.)
with a Quicunque vult, lest we should think the largeness p. 14.
of the offer abridged. -- Yet none can come except the Father draw him, (Joh.
6. 46.) The universality of satisfaction, and especially of Grace, do not
derogate from one another. -- It does not follow from Ioh. 17. 6. He prayed
not, therefore he paid not for the world. His satisfaction does p. 15.
properly give contentment to Gods justice. -- contains the preparation of the
remedy necessary for man's salvation. -- We may safely conclude, that the Lamb
of God offering himself a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, intended
p. 15, 16.
by giving sufficient satisfaction to Gods justice, to make the nature of man
which he assumed, a fit object for mercy, and to prepare a medicine for the
sins of the whole world, which should be denied to none that intended to take
the benefit of it. -- In respect of his mercy, he may be counted a kind of
universal Cause of the restoring of our nature, as Adam was of the depraving of
it.

Now Sir, if your leisure will serve you to compare with this what I have
printed, Correct Copy p. 55, 56. then p. 18, 19. then Philanthr. c. 1. p. 22.
especially chapter 3. Sec. 23. particularly p. 96. and then chapter 4. Sec. 26.
especial p. 31. where I distinguish of (...), For) which needs must note
either the end, or the effect; and then say expressly, that in respect of the
later, Christ died effectually for none but the elect, but in respect of the
former, he dyed intentionally for all and for every one, and give examples of
each notion out of several Scriptures toward the end of that page; I believe
you will say (when you have done) that you concluded me in the first extremity
you mention p. 2. as Mr. Barlee in the second, p. 3. with as great a mistake of
my opinion, as with a just account of Mr. Barlees. If you mean any thing else,
by saying the Primate was in the middle betwixt us two, I shall be glad to know
the meaning of it. But if you find upon search that I have public wrong done
me, and that Mr. Barlee grows insolent upon occasion of your Letters (though
quite besides your fair intentions) I make no doubt but you will right me after
the measure that I am wronged. But I am weary of being wearisome, and therefore
shall hasten to subscribe,

SIR, Your assured friend and servant Tho. Pierce.
Brington, Dec. 11. 1657.
For my Reverend friend Dr. Bernard at his lodging in Grayes Inn.
SIR,
IAm heartily glad to find in your last (what I expected) so much Candor and
equity as there you show; both in The fourth Letter.
comparing the Primates judgment with the several passages of my books to
which I pointed, and in granting the near approches of the one to the other.
And although your words are, that you have found me much inclining to the
judgment of the Primate; yet I suppose your meaning is, that you have not
found wherein we differ. Differ we may in explications, or inferences, or
endeavors of Reconcilement (where it is more to be wished, then possible to be
had.) And so the Primate and you may differ; nay so great Authors may often
differ from themselves, by their charitable essays to make agreement between
their brethren. But as to the true intent and extent of Christ's Death, compared
with the end and the effect, there is a very pleasant Harmony betwixt us both.
I will first demonstrate wherein we agree, and then I pray (Sir,) tell me
wherein we differ. 1. I agree with his Lordship in an utter dislike of the two
extremes (p. 4.) both Mr Culverwells on the right hand, and Mr. Barlees on the
left. 2. I do perfectly agree to the middle Doctrine (p. 6.) not so much as
desiring that it should be expressed in other words, then those his Lordship
there uses, to wit, That by virtue of this oblation God is made placable unto
our nature, but not actually appeased with any, until he has received his
son. And that all men may be truly said to have an Interest in Christ, as in a
Common, though all do not enjoy the benefit thereof, because they have no will
to take it. 3. I do fully agree to what he says of Gods Intention, to make the
nature of man a fit subject for mercy, and to prepare a medicine for the sins
of the whole world, which should be denied to none that intended to take the
benefit of it, p. 16. lin. 2. and 8. where Gods intention is sincere, as well
as universal, but it is conditional of man's intention. 4. I agree to what he
says p. 35, 36. That the general satisfaction of Christ prepares the way for
Gods mercy, by making the sins of all mankind pardonable, the interposition of
any bar from Gods justice notwithstanding, and so puts the sons of men only in
a possibility of being justified. Now, Sir, that by the death of Christ all men
have the benefit to become salvabiles, or are put into a Capacity of salvation,
or that Terms of peace are procured for all mankind, or that for all men's sins
mercy is attainable, (as your self have expressed it in your second Letter to
Mr. Barlee, p. 64.) is as much as I have ever contended for in my writings.
Salvability for all without exception, as it is the main thing in the Primates
Tenet, so it is also the main in mine. For 5. Actual pardon is quite another
thing; and readily granted by me to be an effect of Christ's Resurrection (Romans
4. 25.) and of the consequents thereof, as his intercession (To. 8. 34.) so
that this is a fifth thing wherein I agree with that Reverend Primate. 6. I
agree to what he says, p. 21. That Christ obtained Remission of sins, not for
the Reprobate, but elect only; and not for them neither, before they be truly
regenerated and implanted into him. For election being nothing else but the
purpose of God resting in his own mind, makes no kind of alteration in the
party elected. And you have read in my writings, that though in respect of the
end, Christ dyed intentionally for all, yet in respect of the event, he dyed
effectually for the elect only. 7. I agree to the reason which the Primate
gives, why so many are damned forwhom Christ dyed with such a merciful and pure
intention; even because they refused what was sincerely prepared for them, p. 8.
sincerely offered to them, sincerely intended to do them good, and not harm:
but they had no will to take it; they would p. 16. p. 6. p. 10. p. 16. p. 8. p.
9.
not come, when invited; they intended not to take the benefit offered; Arich
price was put into the hands of a fool, howsoever he had no heart to use it,
Prove. 17. 16. He was not disposed to take the benefit of it. 8. I agree also in
this (p. 12. and 13.) That they who miss of the Redemption which was purchased
by Christ, which lay open to them, and to which they were invited, had not been
excluded from it, had they had a mind to accept of it, and would they have
listened to the motion of it, when a true tender of it was made by Gods
Ambassadors. And for the reason of this I give the old maxim, Nemo tenetur ad
impossible, or (to express it with Bishop Davenant) Impossibilium nulla est
obligatio. The Tender is not true, nor the intention sincere in him that
offers, Sentent. Dav. p. 3.
if he who must be damned for not accepting is not allowed so much as a
possibility to accept. And therefore (9.) I agree with the Primate in what he
says p. 16. That in respect of Christ's mercy, he may be counted a kind of
universal Cause of the restoring of our nature, as Adam was of the depraving of
it. Now that the Cause does not take its particular effects in the impenitent,
is not because it is no cause, nor because it is not universal, but because of
the impenitency in them that perish. Its universality is very perfect; it being
in the second Adam, as in the first: the Virgin Mary is not excluded from her
share in the first; no more then Judas (the son of perdition) from his share in
the second. 10. I agree to that part of the Primates Doctrine, p. 22. that
forgiveness of sins is not by our Savior impetrated for any unto whom the
merit of his death is not applied in particular. 11. I agree with the Primate,
that Mr. Amesinclined too much unto the other extremity, p. 23. that the
Arminians drove the Calvinists or Anti-Arminians unto this extreme Absurdity,
to say that the greatest part of mankind were bound in Duty to believe a lie,
p. 24, 25, 26, 27. and that, as Mr. Culverwell, so any man else, would fly
rather into any error, then yield that Christ in no manner of ways dyed for
any Reprobate, and that none but the elect had any kind of Title to him. p. 26.
Nor do I mean only a bare sufficiency for the Reprobate in the Death of Christ;
For (12.) I agree with the Primate, that to preach a bare sufficiency cannot
yield sufficient comfort to a distressed soul, without giving a further way to
it, p. 31. And let the distressed soul be what he will, he is not bound to
believe a lie, any more then Barnabas is bound to preach one. And to
demonstrate that the Primate does mean exactly in his writing, as I did in
mine, he does illustrate his meaning by the very same case; and that in a way
as extraordinary, as if he, or I, or both together, had been purposely
overruled by the providence of God to stop the mouth of our Correptory
Corrector. I pray, Sir, compare the 32. page of the Primates judgment, with
chapter 3. p. 96. of my Div. Philan, defended, and you will find the King of Spain
(in both those places) showing the folly of those men, who say that Christ did
dye sufficiently for all, but not intentionally unless for the elect. You
cannot easily imagine, how much contentment I have taken in this concurrence of
our minds, either by miracle, or by chance, or I know not how else. Nay (13.) I
agree with the Primate in the point of Application p. 11. if it is so
understood, as that it may be reconcilable with p. 6. and 8. and 10. and so it
will be very happily, by being understood of Gods giving grace to believe and
perform the condition, (which is Gods proper way of applying the Remedy unto
us) and our making good use of that Talent of grace, (which is our way, through
grace, of applying the remedy unto our selves) that as in the offer it is
general, so it may be particular in the acceptance. And that this is his
Lordships meaning as well as mine, I find demonstrated by himself, p. 39, 40.
No man's state is so desperate, but by this means it is recoverable* (and this
is the first comfortable news that the Gospel brings to the distressed soul:)
but here it rests not, nor feeds a man with a [bare] possibility, but it
brings the word of comfort nigh unto him, even to his mouth and heart, and
presents him with the medicine at hand, and desires him to take it; which
being done accordingly, the cure is actually performed; but otherwise not, if
he will not take it at Gods entreaty. The medicine then remains in its bare
aptitudinality, and does not actually cure him. What is the reason? because
there is not a concurrence of the man's desire unto his Makers; because he
submits not his will to the merciful will of his Redeemer, according to that
of our blessed Lord, [How often would I, and ye would not?]

Thus have I given you a parallel of our concurrences in opinion as to the
matter in hand. And I have done it so much the rather, because you say very
piously, that if you were mistaken in me, you will be ready to acknowledge it
to my advantage. You did not probably judge of me by what you found in my
writings, but by what you heard from byast men. Be pleased therefore to reflect
upon some passages in your Letters to M. Barlee: as p. 52. l. 2. where you
seemingly imply me to have said, that the Bishop was wholly for Arminius;
whereas I did not only not say it, but I said he was not so: and lin. 8. where
you place his judgment in this point in a middle way different both from mine
and Mr. Bs. without showing what it is in which the Primate and I do differ;
but leaving the Reader to imagine, that I do differ from him as much as Mr.
Barlee: next p. 58. where you imply me to have intimated the Primates penitency
of his sins; which as I never meant in the place you allude to, so my words
have quite another sound with them, and import the contrary. Again p. 65. you
clearly imply me to make no difference betwixt the grace given to Judas and
that to Peter, although you say a little after, you do not affix thus much upon
my judgment. The Primate might be changed, yet not to that pitch. Again, p.
61, 69, 70. you reflect upon me very severely; and I am sure you will say so,
when I shall prove by your Testimony, and by his Lordships own, (as well as by
others) that he did indeed admit of a change in judgment. I would do it now
presently, but that my letter is grown so long; and I must hasten to the next
part of yours.

Mr. Barlee tells you in a Letter, that in the main he does also perfectly
agree with the most venerable Primate. Which I can prove to be impossible,
unless he will sing a Recantation of both his books. But ^or the doing of that,
it is not enough that he sees his errors, unless he has also a single heart to
take off the scandals which he has given: which he cannot do in a private
Letter, because the scandals were given in print. It would be a good jest, to
hear him name the main things, wherein his perfect agreement with the Primate
does consist. If he speaks knowingly, and in earnest, he does also, for the
main, agree perfectly with me: And if so, for what reasons has he rayled
against me so voluminously, as against an Arminian, Massilian* Pelagian,
Papist, Carpocratian, Socinian, Atheistical Lucianizer, and sexcenta hujusmodi?
It appears by my Notes (the first thing I printed) how inoffensively I provided
both for my credit and my cause; I mean my credit in the righteousness of my
cause, and in the candid management thereof; no other credit do I pretend to.
And how Mr. Barlee fell foulely from my opinions to my person, Thousands have
seen, and stood amazed. It it were not a needless (perhaps an unexcusable)
expense of time, I believe I could show you, that Mr. Barlee differs from the
Primate in the 13 particulars, wherein I showed my agreement with his Lordships
Doctrine. How Mr. Barlee did differ from your account of the Primate, in his
Correptory Correction, I gave you some touches in my last. And as my Time or
memory will permit me, I will present you with some examples of Mr. Barlees
Hostility against our renowned and Reverend Primate. 1. In the second chap. of
his second Volume, p. 72. (lin. 4, 5, 6, 7. from the Bottom) he says, that I
and the Arminians do maintain the end of Christ's Death to have been the
procuring for men a salvable condition only or a possibility of being saved,
rather then any actual salvation. Now though I said no such thing in the place
by him cited (Philan. c. 3. p. 63.) or any where else, as I remember, yet I
have said in effect what the Primate says in plain Terms, (p. 4, 21, 34, 35,
36.) That by virtue of Christ's Death God is made placable to our nature, but
not actually appeased with any, no not with the elect, before they be truly p.
4. p. 21.
regenerated (which St. Paul was not, until it was late; nor the Thief on the
Cross, until it was later) but by Christ's satisfaction, he made the nature of
man a fit subject for mercy, p. 34. the sins of all mankind pardonable, p. 35.
and so put the sons of men only in a possibility of being justified, p. 36. Or,
as his Grace does elsewhere speak, Christ provided good things for all (even
for the worst) p. 8. so as the Reprobates in refusing what was truly tendered
to them, can blame none but themselves, p. 34. So that you see Mr. Barlee has
concluded the Primate an Arminian, as well as me, nay more then me; because it
was He that said what I consent to, but never said. I only said (in the place
This Mr. Barlee does confess to be a Truth undeniable. Corrept. Cor. p. 170.
before cited) That Christ is the means, the meritorious cause, and the head of
our election; and that upon the condition of believing in his Son, God gave the
promise of eternal life, John 3. 26. which being after the Tenor of the
Primates whole judgment, does again conclude him an Arminian with. Mr. Barlee.
Nor will it avail him to say, that he spoke of the end of Christ's Death, not of
the effect peculiar to it; for (besides that even so he is opposite to the
Primate, p. 35. lin. 10.) he interprets himself by actual salvation, as that is
opposed unto a salvable condition. And if he meant any otherwise, he does not
only speak ignorantly, but in the depth of that ignorance he wrongs the
Arminians in a most horrible degree. And though I dissent from Arminius in many
things (as Mr. Barlee confesses, and makes to appear) yet I agree with him in
some, as does also our Rev. Primate. Nor do I strive to differ from him, as if
I thought him an ill man, for I find him a most grave and learned writer, and I
read he lived a very strict life; and as he forsook the Presbyterians in point
of Doctrine, so at last he saw the mischiefs of their Discipline also, and did
endeavor a Reformation. But however I honor his great learning, and good
life, as without all doubt the Primate did; yet neither He, nor I, can
therefore be said to be Arminians. 2. Mr. Barlee tells us (c. 2. p. 76. lin. 4,
5. from the bottom) that he has set down the Primates opinion in his Historia
Gottes^halci in his own very full Expressions out of the Valentine Council. And
he referrs us for that his fact unto his Corrept. Cor. p. 133. in marg. But 1.
it is evident, that the opinion asserted by that Synod (Can. 4.) was quite at
enmity with the Primates (as you have lately set it out) in several respects.
Nay they brand it with the Title of Comm^ntum Diaboli. So that either Mr.
Barlee has much injured the Primate, or else your self must acknowledge his
change of judgment. Nay 2. Mr. Barlee does unworthily abuse the Primate, in
calling those his own full expressions, which were no more his, then they were
mine, but the numerical words of that Synod, which the Primare relates as an
Historian only, not at all expressing his own opinion, nor adding so much as
his Approbation; and I verily believe, that even then he disapproved that 4.
Canon of that Synod, which does not only deny that Christ dyed for all, but
does imply (what is worse) that he was not the Lamb slain from the Foundation
of the world. You may quickly consult the place Hist. Gottesch. c. 12. p. 181.
Mr. Barlee might have said (by a parity of reason) that the Primate was a
Pelagian, because (as an Historian) he sets down some of the Pelagian
Doctrines, and because by denying Original Sin, they did also evacuate the
universality of Christ's Death, as St. Austin makes appear, lib. 6. contra
Julian. c. 4. T. 7. p. 432. 3. Mr. Barlee declares his dissent from Monsieur
Amyrald (c. 2. p. 72.) as before he did from Bishop Davenant and Dr. Ward
(Correp. Cor. p. 169.) and then how far must he be from coming up to the
Primate, who goes as high, and (I think) higher then either of those three,
even as high as Bishop Overal, of whom hereafter? 4. Mr. Barlee follows Dr.
Ames, (whose Disciple (I think) he somewhere professes himself to be) from
whom the Primate has declared his great Dissent p. 23. Nay (5.) Mr Barlee is
clearly for actual salvation, where the Primate is only for salvability (as
has been showed;) and so his opinion is slit asunder, part of it lying in the
first extremity, part of it in the second, betwixt which two my Lord and I are
in the midst. 6. Mr. Barlee will have St. Paul's words, 1 Timothy 4. 10. where he
called Christ The Savior of all, to be only meant of a Temporal salvation
common both to men and beasts; which is as opposite to Corrept. Cor. p. 105. p.
6. 8, etc. Correp. Corr. p. 106.
the Primate, as light is to darkness. 7. He says with Dr. Twiss, that every
sinner to whom the Gospel is preached is not bound to believe that Christ dyed
for him in particular, but that there is salvation in no other; and this is
contrary to the Primate, p. 24, 25, 26, 27. 8. He says that the word All 2
Cor. 5. 14. must be understood of all a certain kind, and that Ibid. p. 107.
the word Dead is meant of their dying to sin, not in it; pointblank against
the p. 4.
Primate, as well as against De Civ. Dei. l. 20. c. 6. p. 1340. Tom. 5.
Austin, who confuteth the Pelagians by understanding that Text as I have
Correct Corr. p. 19.
done, and (which is more) by making the same use of it. 9. Correp. Cor. p. 108.
He says that none but the elect and Believers were concluded in unbelief,
with that intention as to obtain mercy; in contradiction to the Primate, p. 16.
and to St Paul, Romans 11. 32. 10. He ib. p. 108.
says, that those false Prophets, 2 Pet. 2. 1. were only said to be bought by
the Lord, sacramento tenus; in opposition to the Primate, p. 35, 39. 11. He ib.
p. 108.
says, we should wonder that Christ would dye so much as for any, rather then
grumble that he did not dye for all; in abuse and derision of the Primate, p.
24, 26. Nay (12.) he says more ib. p. 109. lin. 1. 2, etc. p. 108. l. ult.
penult.
plainly then in the place before cited, that this is an uncomfortable Arminian
proposition, That Christ by his Death has not purchased actual salvation for
any, but a possibility of salvation for all. And yet it is the Primates own
Doctrine, p. 6. and p. 35. and p. 36. and p. 38. where he also adds, that
that Disease is curable, for which a sovereign Remedy may be found; but cured
it is not, until the medicine be applied to the patient: and if it so fall
out, that the medicine being not applied the patient miscarries, we say, He was
lost; not because his sickness was incurable, but because there wanted a care
to apply that to him that might have helped him. 13. Mr. Barlee Note that man
has his part in the application.
says that of Bishop Andrews, and St. Bernard, which strikes home at the
Primate through each of their sides. (And I pray Sir observe this thing
especially) I had Correct Copy p. 20. in marg.
cited from Bishop Andrews no worse words then these, That saving Grace is not
conferred, but yet offered unto all, and God is ready to confer it also: and
the like words from St. Bernard, ibid.
That Gods mercy is offered unto all men, and none are without it, but such as
reject it, or accept not of it. To which Citations Mr. Barlee returns this
answer; Correp. Cor. p 109, 110.
As for what you quote out of your Saint like Dr. Andrews, when you shall have
proved him to have been as very a Saint, as every body knows he was a learned
Doctor, I shall then be more troubled that I find him so much an Arminian. I am
not scared at what he dictates rather then proves; for that he says nothing
but what Faustus the Father of the Semipelagians did, and what has been
answered a thousand times, or been warily expounded. And if any such expression
did unwarily fall from Bernard, in a Sermon; knowing what a declining age he
lived in, we may well say, Bernardus non omnia vidit, but wonder he spoke so
well elsewhere, by which he has made amends, etc. Here it is plain Mr. Barlee
esteems that to be false Doctrine, which our Reverend Primate and the
Scriptures have taught for true, as well as Prosper, and St. Austin. Next, he
pronounces Bishop Andrews an Arminian, and by consequence the Primate, who
does (in that) agree with him. After, he implies that Bishop Andrews was a
Semipelagian, by having said nothing but what was said by Faustus, which yet in
the Instance there brought appears to be admirably false: Or else he knew not
the difference betwixt ingeri, or impendi, and offerri; the 2. former were the
words of Faustus, the third only of Bishop Andrews. Nay such is the spirit of
the man, that he implies his disbelief of that Bishops sanctity, or bliss,
whilst he gives it for his reason why he is no more troubled at his finding
that Bishop so much Arminian. Yet you know that Bishop Andrews was never yet
excelled by any mere mortal, (I do not mean the Apostles or Virgin Mary) either
in Orthodoxy, or learning, or holy life. 14. I had said in my Notes (p. 56.)
that no good thought arises in us, unless suggested by Gods preventing Grace;
nor increases, unless strengthened by his subsequent Grace; nor is consummate,
unless perfected by his grace of perseverance; and that by this, it was God who
made men to differ, when one is better then another; and so again p. 70. yet
because I afterward denied the irrestibility of Grace, and affirmed that the
regenerate might fall away (who yet could not be regenerate without special
Grace) Mr. Barlee calls this in a jeer, A goodly special Grace, which has
Corrept. Cor. p. 42.
mischievous qualifications. And how this touches the Primates Doctrine, I
need not say in words at length, 15. Mr. Barlee says in his 2. Volume (c. 3.
p. 5.) That my Correct Copy begins and ends in Pelagianism and Semipelagianism:
Which yet begins and ends with the Primates Doctrine, as I conceive, and as I
think you will say, if you look on the beginning and ending of it. But this is
more then I intended, concerning the manifold disagreement betwixt the
venerable Primate, and the irreverent Mr. Barlee.

To the rest of your Letter I shall speak as a Laconick. Your willingness to
bear an equal share of a blame is very honorable and lovely; so is the end
which you propose in our Reconciliation. In order to which, there is no honest
thing which I will not be ready to do, or suffer. My charity to his soul is so
sincere, that as he is frequently in my prayers, that God will reform and
forgive him, and for ever keep him from the Danger of the Roaring Lion, so my
prayers, for him are no less cheerful, then those others which I pour out for
my greatest Friends and benefactors: yet being wonderfully slandered, and that
in print, and the cause of God (as I esteem it) being also slandered with my
self, (I being slandered as a Ranter, a Sorcerer, a popish Complotter, and a
witch, nay my God being slandered as the Author of sin,) I shall not dare for
all the world to omit a public vindication. Most sure I am, that there is no
breach of charity in doing justice; nor is it an injury to my Neighbor, that I
clear my self from his Aspersions. But I am too long for a Laconick. I take it
not amiss, that you sent me your book by Mr Barlee. I have not time to
transcribe the Certificates, nor am I sure that the Certifiers will be willing
to be named in private Letters: yet if you much desire them, they shall be
sent; and sooner or later, I shall tell you their names too. Their forwardness
in the business is just like mine, neither more, nor less. Our ends are equally
noble, the manifestation of Truth and Innocence. I shall not vindicate my self
by publishing answers to your two Letters to Mr. Barlee, because written by
you, with whom I desire nothing but amity. Had they been written by another, I
should have done it before this time. But you have more then an ordinary
Civility and respect from

Your assured friend and servant Tho. Pierce.
Brington, Jan. 4. 1657.
For my Reverend friend Dr. Bernard at his lodgings in Grayes Inn.
SIR,
THough your leisure did not serve you (in your very short return to my last
long Letter) to send me such The fifth Letter.
an answer as I did flatter my self you would, (upon the notification of those
Degrees, not of distance only, but enmity, which show a great Gulf fixed
between the judgment of the L. Primate, and the casual opinings of Mr.
Barlee;) yet will I not run into the error of misinterpreting your mind, to
which you make it your request that I give a right interpretation. What I did
hope for by the last Carrier, I make no question but I shall have by the next;
to wit, your full approbation of what I declared touching the Primate, and your
acknowledgement of a mistake in publicly saying I was mistaken. To make this
honorable, and eligible, and (to a person of your Candor) altogether
unavoidable, I am resolved to seize on the present Time, whatever shift I make
for it; whether I borrow it from my sleep, or from any thing else which is as
needful, (for through some special Emergencies both in my Parish, and in my
Family, I do not know that (at once) I was ever oppressed with more
impediments.) And first I will give you the Certificates of three most pious,
most learned, and (I had almost said) most irrefragable persons, whom (as you
say very well) you may possibly honor as much as I. And that as for many other
reasons, so in particular for this also, that they were ever, and are still,
most serious Honourers of the Primate of happy memory, whose judgment could
not but direct him to have them also in special Honor. The first and chief of
these Certificates is from the Reverend Dr. Walton, even before I had the
happiness to have seen his Face. Of which I transcribe you this following Copy.

This I can testify, that having often Discourse with the late most Reverend
Father in God, James L. Primate Part of a Letter from Dr. Walton to Mr. Pierce.
of Armagh, concerning diverse controversies in Divinity, and in particular, the
last time that he was in London, which was not long before his Death,
concerning the controversies of Grace, and Free Will, Election, and
Reprobation, and the Dependents thereupon; He did declare his utter dislike of
the Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation, and that he held the universality of
Christ's Death; and that not only in respect of sufficiency, but also in regard
of efficacy, so that all men were thereby savable; and that the reason why all
were not thereby saved, was because they did not accept of salvation offered.
And that the Grace of conversion was not irresistible, but that men might and
often did resist and reject the same. And that in these points he did not
approve the Doctrine of Geneva, but was wholly of Bishop Overalls opinion. All
which I took the more notice of, because he was generally conceived to be of
another judgment. And all this will be attested by

Brian Walton.

The second which I received (for I do observe the order of Time) was this
which follows.
BEcause you desire me to speak my knowledge of my Part of a Letter from Mr.
Gunning to Mr, Pierce.
Lord Primates judgment concerning your Question, as in justice to the Truth,
and to the honor of his Grace, and for that you are threatened (as I hear) by
some, that they will in print testify, that the contrary to your Thesis was my
Lord Primates judgment, in the last years also of his life; I shall truly
therefore give you his Discourse with me (as much as tends to this purpose) and
my memory of his Sermon.

At a Sermon which my L. Primate preached at St. Peter's Pauls-Wharfe, the last
that he intended to preach there (as it was said) I was an Auditor; having
heard that he had preached that Sermon in more places then one, before, and did
himself profess to think it a Sermon (as indeed it was) containing such
Necessary Truths, as without which all preachings and Sermons would be
unfruitful. It was on Romans 8. 30. (part of the verse) In which Sermon he very
earnestly pressed the sincerity of Gods universal call to every one of all
sinners to whom the Gospel was preached; alleging and pressing almost
throughout his Sermon, the universal free invitations of all, by God,
throughout the Scriptures: as that of Ap. 22. 17. whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely: and so that of Esa. 55. 1, 7. and added with much
godly zeal, that without this being made good, all preaching to convert sinners
(as yet in their sins) from the evil of their ways, would want a firm
foundation. This was his main scope in that Sermon. I went to him in one of the
week days following that Lords day, and gave him my thanks. And in the process
of our discourse, which was wholly spent upon the subject (much too long to be
told at large) his Grace expressed his judgment in these following Results.
That God together with his word preached, does give internal Grace to all that
are called by it, that they may repent and be converted, if they will. Yea they
all can will. And that so many will not, it is because they resist Gods Grace,
according to that of Acts 7. 51. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart
and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost. He fa^ther said, That God gives
to all who are called, posse non resistere. And distinctly concluded in these
words; Bishop Overal was in the right, and I am of his mind. This will be
attested by

Peter Gunning.

The third Certificate I receievd was at first by word of mouth, and afterward
by writing, in these following words.
CAlling to mind that you questioned me, whether my Lord Primate said to me,
that Christ dyed for all Intentionally, I have thought fit to say further, that
I did answer you affirmatively; not because I do remember that he used that
word, but because I am satisfied he could mean no otherwise. The sufficience of
his Death not signifying that which either of us understood to be in question.
And that sufficience of Grace which Dr. Ward maintained (with my Lord Primates
Approbation) that the Gospel brings to all that hear it preached, argues the
Intent of his Death, (and not only the value of it) being given in
consideration of it. Thus much as by a witness will be deposed by

H. Thorndike.

THere were two persons more who did contribute to my Belief of what I
published of the Primate. But the one will not be named (nor can I honestly do
it without his leave) and the other spoke what; he had heard only, but not
immediately from the Bishops own mouth. Nor indeed do I care for their
Attestations, (though if I did, I could produce them,) because the Three which
I have given you are from persons very eminent for exactness of judgment, and
of integrity, acute Discerners, and careful searchers, and faithful Relaters of
the Truth. Now Sir, if you shall possibly deny that His Grace was ever of
Calvin's judgment, as to the matters above mentioned, I shall not be concerned
to prove the contrary, but rather taking you at your word, I shall require all
those who have endeavored to gain credit to their Calvinist-Opinions by their
unjust usurpation of that venerable Name, that they make him satisfaction for
having done him so great a wrong. Amongst whom, I am sure, Mr. Barlee is one:
who either injured the Primate in a very high measure by urging Him as a patron
of what he held against me, or else I righted him very highly by making known
his change of judgment. And certainly you will say, that you were very much
mistaken, when you acknowledged your self much Mr. Barlees Debtor, for his
(I-know-not-what) Readiness to clear the Primate from some injury done him by
Mr. Pierce; because, you know, he neither did clear the Primate, nor was
capable of clearing him; nay (farther yet) that he had injured the Primate, and
that he had injured you also, by having injured that Account which you have
publicly given of the Primates judgment, (it being irreconcilable with that,
for which he vouched him in his Book extremely often.) Nay farther yet, you
know my own great Readiness to clear the Primate, and that I am qualified for
the work, and that in all my Letters put together I have actually cleared him.
And though it seems very sufficient to serve my turn, that if ever the
Primate had been exactly of the opinions which Mr. Barlee affirmed him to have
been of, he went off and departed from those opinions; and if he was never of
those opinions, he was grievously injured by Mr. Barlee: yet I have more to
allege in mine own behalf, then what is abundantly sufficient for the
defeating of Mr. Barlee. For let the Terminus a quo be what it will, from which
the Primate departed, unto the Terminus ad quem of which I speak, it is clear
that he admitted a change in judgment, on supposition if he removed from one
opinion unto another; and even that change in judgment of which I spoke, on
supposition that he departed from that which is called Mr. Calvin's, in
adherence unto that which I declaredly am of. That so he did in good earnest,
appears to me by a Certificate which I received from your self: For in your
second printed letter to Mr. Barlee, p. 67. you say the Primate was appointed
by the Synod at Dublin A. D. 1615. as a principal Person to draw up the
Articles of Religion agreed upon, which fully determine the points we speak of.
But the 32. Article agreed upon by that Synod is in effect the very same with
the 7. Article of Lambeth; and says in plain terms, That there is not such a
sufficient measure of Grace vouchsafed unto every man whereby he is enabled to
come unto everlasting life. It is not said in that Article, that every man is
not actually saved, or not effectually brought unto life everlasting; but that
every man is not enabled to come: which is as much as to say (if I am able to
understand it) that every man is not put into a savable condition, or does not
receive a possibility of coming to life everlasting. For if the former had been
the sense, it had amounted only to this, that every man in the world is not one
of the elect, but some are Reprobates; all are not saved, but some are damned:
which is so jejune a saying, and so unnecessary a Truth to have a place in that
succinct Body of credenda, that I cannot imagine it to have been the thing
meant. And we know, to be enabled, is just the same as to be rendered able; and
to be rendered able, is to receive a capability; which is clearly also imported
by a sufficient measure of Grace, as the word sufficient is distinguished from
effectual. And if this is the meaning (as I conceive it needs must) then the
contrary to * p. 4, 6, 8, 10, 16, 31, 35, 36, 38, 39. and p. 64.
this is often asserted by the Primate in your account of his judgment of the
true intent and extent of Christ's Death. Again you say in your first printed
letter, (p. 45.) That there is one Doctrine of Calvin's, which must be exempted
from my universality, and which will not be found to have been rejected by the
Primate, viz. that Massa corrupta was the object of predestination. Which how
it can consist with the Primates words to my three informers (mentioned before
in their Certificates) as I cannot possibly discern my self, so I conceive
that no man living will ever be able to demonstrate. Nor indeed can it consist
with that Account which you have given in the ibid.
above cited pages. For if Christ did dye for all mankind, to procure for all a
salvability, to make the sins of all venial, to put them all without exception
into a possibility of being justified, and so by consequence of being saved, of
which they that fail to reap the benefit do only fail for this reason, because
they have no will to take it; (which are the Primates expressions) if, I say,
Christ dyed for all the sins of the whole world both actual and original (as
says the Article of our Church, to which the Primate has subscribed) how can
the greatest part of mankind be absolutely reprobated, or but passed by in
massa, without respect unto their Actual sins? For if that can be true, Christ
dyed not for them; the passing by being contrary to the giving of Christ for
their Redemption. In stead of which, the Calvinistical writers do solemnly use
Gods offering of Christ, not for them, but to them, who were passed by in that
mass. And this they labor to reconcile with the full intention of God
Almighty, that they to whom he is offered shall not possibly enjoy him. Of
which what reason can they imagine but only this, that they think he was not
offered for them, so as to make their sins pardonable, and their persons
capable of Mercy?

I will not here take a view of what Infusions have been received by such
Mistakers as Mr. Barlee, from his Lordships History of Gotteschalc, and from
his celebrated Catechism, whether printed with, or without his leave, (nor was
it, you know, till very lately, that you proclaimed the difference between his
reputed and real works.) And as I will not do that, so will I not make any
comparisons betwixt the Doctrines of Bishop Overal, and those of Gotteschalc: I
having already made it apparent, that as my Certificates were helpful to me for
the making good what I had published of that great name, so you and I (thus put
together) have also been helpful to those Certificates, for the making good of
those things, whereof they have certified a Threefold knowledge; which as a
threefold Cord being not easily to be broken, I shall hope will be so happy, as
to draw your suffrage to make it stronger. I know not what should scare you
from a concurrence, except a show of dishonor which a change of judgment may
seem to carry along with it. But that I am sure has no place here; for to
change ones judgment upon just Grounds (as well from good to better, as from
evil to good) is the most honorable mark of a man's mortality, and I think
peculiar to the True lovers of Truth.

Before I am able to let you alone, Sir, (how much Business soever is at my
elbow to pluck my pen from my paper) I will tell you what I read lately in the
life and Death of Dr. Iackson, composed by the strict and impartial hand of Mr.
Vaughan, then whom I do not believe there lives a more conscientious and
punctual speaker, as being one who might have written Dr. Iacksons life from
his own, had it been possible for a man of his singular modesty to have
understood his own merits: which I say to this end, that you may certainly
believe what he relates, concerning the Care which the Primate took (being a
Mourner at the Funeral of that Rare Man) to have the writings of Dr. Iackson
very religiously preserved; that such inestimable (...) might not be wanting to
posterity, but might perform their proper work of bringing Religion into its
wits: whereas had his Lordship been Calvinistical (as Mr. Barlee would fain
have made him by his notorious creative Faculty) he would rather have taken
care that such books might have been buried with their Authors Body, and in a
Grave ten thousand times deeper. For Mr. Barlee does somewhere tell us, that
Doctor Iackson was the Father of English Arminians, (my Lord his Grace of
Armagh it seems was one of his children) and miserable is England, if such men's
writings as c. 2, p. 46, 47.
Dr. Iacksons and Castalio's are become as pleasing to the dainty wits amongst
us, as ever Titus Vespasian was, who was styled Deliciae humani generis. So
zealous was the good Primate (if Mr. Barlee has any Truth in him) to
contribute his care to our undoing.

And now as soon as I have told you, that I meant Dr. Godwin, the Author of the
Roman and Jewish Antiquities, (whose Christian name I think was Joseph) who was
converted by reading the Remonstrant writings, as Dr. Christopher Potter of
pious memory had been a little before him; that I am not the Author of Tilenus
examined before the Triers; that if ever I go to London (which I have hardly
ever done willingly) I shall gladly make an acquaintance with you; and that if
I punish Mr. Barlee, it shall be merely in my defense, and very much less then
he deserves; I think there is nothing in your Letter, to which any more can be
expected from

Your most assured Friend and servant Tho. Pierce.
Brington, Jan. 28. 1657.
A Postscript.
A Postscript to this last Letter sent to Dr. Bernard together with it.

ONe thing comes into my mind since the subscription of my Letter. You say in
your first printed letter to Mr. Barlee, That P. 45.
the Doctrine of S. Austin was it which was confirmed by the Primate, and so
elsewhere (I think) to that purpose. But Mr. Baxter Account of the Controv.
about perseverance, etc. in setting down the fourth opinion p. 4, 5.
has publicly avowed, that S. Austin's opinion was for the final falling away
of some effectually called, regenerated, justified, and sanctified. And because
some are so immodest as to deny it, he says, he asked the Reverend Bp. Usher,
in the hearing of Dr. Kendal, whether this were not plainly the judgment of
Austin: who answered, that without doubt it was. Then he adds many places out
of Austin by which this appears. And whereas he judges this opinion of Austin
to be P. 15.
unsound, nay contrary to many Texts of Scripture, he does obliquely in so
doing defame the judgment of my Lord Primate, in case he concurred therein
with Austin; as I cannot but think he did, both by what was spoken by his Grace
to Dr. Walton, and by what you have affirmed in the place above cited.

Thus, Good Reader, I have accounted for what I spoke in my former writings,
touching the judgment of that Venerable and Learned Prelate. Not out of any
the least design* of breaking Peace or Friendship with Dr. Bernard, (whose
public Letters notwithstanding had made it necessary for me to do some justice
unto my self, in a way as public:) but partly to perform what I had publicly
promised to make appear; partly to gratify the importunities of some, who
would needs have me publish what I could say of this Business, that they who
had met with my Report only, might be acquainted with my Grounds too; and
partly to demonstrate to the most contrary-minded, that I durst not be thought
a Raiser of false Reports. If now our Readers will be pleased, to put the
Reasons of my affirmative into one scale of the Balance, and Dr. Bernards
probabilities for his Negative into the other, (allowing either none, or equal
Grains) I hope that He, and I too, shall be well content with the Decision.

The End.
The ERRATA.
PAge 4. in marg. line 3. read Travers. p. 15. l. 20. for giving, r. given. p.
34. l. 5. from bottom, r. That. p. 35. l. 12. after at^ain dele to. p. 35. l.
31. for shalir. shall. p. 56. l. 2. from the bottom r. word. p. 82. in marg. l.
3. after Dedar 9. r. April. p. 67. in marg. l. 2. for praed. r. praet. p. 98.
l. 19. for Carmelites, r. Carme^. p. 99. l. 5. from the bottom, for made r.
need. p. 103. l. 20. r. (chapter 1. v. 4.) p. 103. in marg. l. 14. 5. r. Tit. 1. 4.

Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce Rector of Brington.
THe Sinner impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great
discouragements from sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self. 2.
Correct Copy of some notes concerning Gods Decrees, especially of Reprobation.
The 3 Edition with some Additionals, in 4. 3. The Divine Philanthropie
defended, in answer to Mr. Barlee, in 4. 2 Edition. 4. The Self revenger, to
which is added an Appendage touching the judgment of the late L. Primate of
Armagh. in 4. new. 5. The Divine Purity, defended in answer to Dr. Reynolds, in
4. new.
Books written by D. Hammond.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by H.
Hammond, D. D. in fol. the second Edition now in the Press. 2. The Practical
Catechism, with all other English Treatises i^ two volumes' in 4. 3.
Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopa^us Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva
Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum, in 4. 4. A
Letter of Resolution of six Qu^^ies, in 12. 5. Of Schism. A defense of the
Church of England against the exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of
Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, in 12. 7. Paraen^sis, or a
seasonable exhortatory to all true sons of the Church of England, in 12. 8. A
Collection of several Replies and Vindications Published of late, most of them
in defense of the Church of England, now put together in three Volumes. Newly
published, in 4. 9. A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on all the Books
of the New Testament, with some additions and alterations, in 8.
A Catalogue.
Books and Sermons written by Ier. Tailor, D. D.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the Year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. The History of the Life and Death of the
Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, third Edition, in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises of
holy living, in 12. 4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12. 5. The
Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of the week,
together with a shot Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12. 6. The Doctrine and
Practice of Repentance rescued from popular Errors, in a large 8. Newly
published. A Collection of Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol. 8. A
Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. New. A
Collection of Offices or forms of prayer fitted to the needs of all Christians,
together with the Psalter or Psalms, of David after the Kings Translations in a
large octavo newly published. The mystery of Jesuitisme, discovered in certain
Letters, written upon occasion of the present differences at Sorbo^ne, between
the Jansenists and the Molinists. Displaying the Corrupt Maxims and Politics
of that Society. 2 Edition The Law of Laws, or, the excellen^ of the Civil Law,
above all other human^ Laws whatsoever: showing of how great use and necessity
the Civil Law is to this Nation. By Robert Wiseman, Dr. of the Civil Law. Sold
by R. Royston at the Angel i^ Ivy-lane. The Grand conspiracy by Mr. John
Challington, in 12. The History of the Church of Scotland by Dr. Spotishwood
Archbishop of S. Andrews, in fol. Etymologicum parvum, in 8. by Mr. Gregory
Schoolmaster of Westminster. The Contemplation of heaven with a descant on the
prayer in the garden, in 12. The Magistrates Authority, a Sermon by Mr. Lyford,
in 4. The Quakers wild questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel
by Mr. Richard Sherlock, in 4. The Communicants guide by Mr. Gove, in 8. The
plain man's sense exercised, by Mr. William Lyford, in 4. Anglicisms Sattinized,
by Mr. Willis, 8. The persecuted Minister written by Mr. Langly, in 4. Lyfords
Legacy, in 12. The Cateschism of the Church of England paraphrased, by Richard
Sherlock. 2 Edition. An Apology for the Ministry by William Lyford. The
Examination of Tilen^s before the Triers in Utopia in 12. newly published.
The end of the Catalogue.

