THE LOYAL Nonconformist: OR, THE Religious Subject. Yielding to God his Due,
and to Caesar his Right: BEING A Discourse from the Pulpit, touching True
GOSPEL WORSHIP, AND Due SUBJECTION to MAGISTRATES. Now PRINTED, as it was
Preached (for the most part) in the month of August, 1662.

By T. P. P. -- N. C.

Mat. 22.21. Render to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's; and unto God, the
things that are God's.

1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God; honor the King.

(...).

Arist Domiti, ut pareant, non ut serviant.

Lips. London, Printed in the Year, 1664.

READER,
THe Design of this Treatise is honest, being the same which is held forth in
the Frontispiece; and the matter not only in offensive, but very useful,
(especially in these times) there being nothing contained in this little
Manual, which is liable to just exception, or can distaste any Sober,
Religious, Loyal, unprejudiced Person; and the Contents hereof, serving to set
people right in their judgment and practice, in point of duty toward God and
Man, that Piety and Loyalty, may go hand in hand; and that the mistakes about
each, which are the great matter of difference at this day, may be corrected.

Some have no Religion at all toward God, decrying Ordinances, and despising
all Worship. Others are altogether for a Religion of their own moddelling, or
for a Worship framed by men, and for human. Institutions and devices; for
Canonical, but not Spiritual Conformity and Obedience.

Some are of an Antimagistratical (as well as Antiministerial) spirit disowning
and despising Magistracy, and Majesty; Dignities, and Dominion; doctrinally and
practically denying to give to Caesar, hi^ due, to yield subjection to the
higher Powers. Others go about to advance man too high, making the chief
Magistrate Super-Supream^ setting him above God; preferring the commands of
Men, and human^ constitutions, before the Command of Christ, and Divine
Institutions Incidit in Scillam, qui vult vitar^ Charybdim.

Now, here is endeavored, to evince the necessity of Religious Worship, and to
show what Worship is and how God is to be Worshipped as also, to vindicate
Magistracy, and the Ruler's Authority, pleading for subjection to the higher
Powers; and withal, duly to bound this Subjection, setting just limits to the
Subjects obedience; that it be with a tantum usque ad aras.

I might here take occasion to insert something in patrocinium, showing my self
willing, (howsoever weak) to be an Advocate for the Religious Subject, who is
conscientious in Worshipping God, and in honoring and obeying the Powers
Supreme and Subordinate; a little to plead the Cause of such, against the
Obloquies, Criminations, and Calumnies of Detractours, and Calumniatours: But,
if the substance of this small Book, answer the scope and Title, (as I hope it
does) the intelligent observant Reader will find that work to be done there.

But before I dismiss thee [Reader] let me advertise thee, that what is written
in the following sheets, was Preached from the Pulpit in a Country Village, and
so fitted for, and suited to the Capacities and Concernments of the hearers;
and what it was, the same it is, for matter and form, as presented now to
public view, in confidence that it may probably meet with many Readers, whom
it may alike fit, and equally concern, and with whom it may find no less
acceptance; (though I doubt not, but it will likewise meet with many Carping
Momusses, and Censuring Aristarchusses).

The Reader may be pleased, further to take notice, That the first part of the
latter Text, [viz. the Proposition or Assertion of the Divine Right and
Authority of Magistracy] was opened and managed (Pro Authoris Modulo) on a day
of Thanksgiving for the peaceable and happy Restoration of our Royal
Sovereign, CHARLES the II. to his Throne and Royal Dignity: Not long after his
before desired; much longed for, and then joyful, congratulated Return, the
Nonconformist was and is Loyal; could, while he had liberty, Preach for the
Royal Interest; and can, and does still, pray for the higher Powers: Reversus
ad Dominum, revertatur magis ac magis usque ad Dominum.

Well; read the ensuing Treatise without prejudice; peruse it with diligence;
be not uncharitable, or malevolently censorious; yield to Truth; take direction
from the Word, and do thy Duty; yielding to God, his Right; and to Caesar, his
Due; and so enjoy the labor of the Author, and the benefit of his Prayers; and
pray for him, who desires to be found God's Friend, the King's Friend, and thy
Friend; and so Writes himself,

Theophilus, Philanax, Philadelphus.
DEVON. Aug. 1664
VErus Dei cultus hisce conditionibus circumscribitur; Ut colatur, non creatura
aliqua, sed Deus; non adulterimus, sed verus; non adjunctis aliis, sed solus;
non quovis modo, sed pro expressa ipsius voluntate; unde and Socrates dicebat
unumquemque Deum sic colo oportere, quomodo se ipse colendum esse praeceperit.
Szegid. in loc. commun. Tit de vero Dei cultu, page 263.


Delectatur Deus cultu mentis and spiritus, propterea quod spiritus est, etc.
ac quoniam purissimus sanctissimusque est spiritus, consequitur Deum delectari,
non simplicitur cultu mentis and spiritus, sed spiritus puri, innocui, and
sancti.

Cultus Dei spiritualis, est opus mandatum a Deo, factum ex fide, Idem vel.
in celebrationem Gloriae Dei Principaliter. Ess Dei Sacrum, in Verbo Dei
expressum ad colendum Deum institutum, quod a nobis in spiritu and veritate
praestatur.

True GOSPEL WORSHIP, From John 4.23, 24.
But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. God
is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.
THere are two famous Histories in this Chapter: The first gives us an account
of our Savior his Conference or Discourse with the woman of Samaria.

The second is a narration of the coming of Christ into Galilee, and his
miraculous healing of the Centurion's son.

My Text lies in the first general part of the Chapter, being part of the
Conference betwixt Christ and the Samaritan woman: indeed the very apex, or
utmost pitch of the discourse, the head or top of the Hill; to which I shall
ascend by degrees, making my entrance at the beginning of the Chapter,
beginning my journey at the foot of the Hill. Well then, as concerning the
Conference, notice may be taken, 1. Of the Occasions of it. 2. Of the Substance
and several parts of it. 3. Of the Consequents, or what followed upon it.


I. Occasions of the conference. Remote.
The Occasions of the Discourse were either more remote, or nearer.

Of the remote Occasions, I shall note but one; which was Christ his removing
from Judea. v. 3. and that was occasioned (a^ the first Verse does intimate) by
his knowledge of the offense, which the Pharisees took at the success of his
Ministry: whereupon he could expect no other but that, as they envied and
malic'd him in their hearts, so their hands would have been soon against him,
if he had remained any longer in Judea. Those Pharisees were a Sect among the
Jews, that pretended to much Piety and Devotion; but their Religion stood
altogether, or mostly, in Ceremony: for besides that they observed the
Levitical Rites more exactly than others, they had also many outward
Observations that were traditional, in which they placed righteousness and
merit: and these great Doctors and Religious men, (forsooth) these Devout
Ceremony-Masters, as they had corrupted most part of the Law with their absurd
mis-interpretations, and false glosses; so they were very Hypocritical in their
Worship and Practice; and the Evangelical History speaks them to be most
ambitious of Honor and Preferment, and most Covetous, and the greatest Enemies
and Persecutors of Christ, and of the sincere Preachers and Professors of the
Gospel; and Christ calls them Serpents, and a Generation of Vipers.

The Evangelist here mentions these Pharisees only as enemies to Christ, (not
that the Scribes were his friends, but) because these were the most eminent and
predominant Sect, and they who under a pretense of religious Zeal, were most
carried against the Way. Doctrine, and Religion of Christ. Now Christ knowing
what an offense he was to them, and what malice they had against him, removes
a little out of their way, departs out of Judea into Galilee, where the
Pharisees had not so much power as they had in Judea; (though Herod, who had
bound John, and cast him into prison, did now bear Rule in Galilee.)

I shall here take up two or three Occasional Notes. Notes.


to his friends and followers. Christ will rather trust Herod in Galilee, than
the Pharisees in Judea. Jeremiah found more courtesy at the hands of
Babylonians, than at the hands of Priests and Prophets. We find that the
greatest Persecutors of Christ and his Apostles were the Priests. It was said
by one lamentingly; Alas, Lord! Heu, Domine qui in Ecclesia sunt primi, sunt in
persecutione primi.
they that are the chief men in the Church, are the greatest Persecutors: And
has it never been so amongst us? We need not to wonder at it; it is no new
thing: Was not Christ despised and rejected by the Builders? (as if the Church
of God could be built up, where Christ is laid aside.) Well, though Christ
chose rather to go into Galilee, than to stay in Judea; yet he knew that there
was danger enough, (though not so much as among the Pharisees) and we read
afterward, that Herod sought to slay him.

may they flee for safety? where can they be in security? Only with God, who
is their refuge.

The Pharisees are troubled at the success of Christ his Ministry; they thought
that all was well when John was rid out of the way: but see! here comes another
who is a greater grievance to them, as making more Disciples than John made. So
they thought themselves sure when Christ was crucified; but Christ before his
death raised up twelve more, sending them to preach the Gospel; of whom he
says, that they should do greater things than himself.

Note here matter of comfort in two points: Elijah upon Elisha. - Ministers: I
am with you (says Christ) to the end of the world. Mat. 28.20.



But now, there are two Questions about Christ his withdrawing and departure
from Judea; the Answer to which may yield some profitable Doctrine.

Why does Christ now flee persecution and death, seeing he came into the world
for this purpose, to suffer and to die?

Answ. There are three Texts in this Gospel wherein our Savior gives a full
Answer to this Question.

One Scripture is this: Joh. 14.3
As my Father has given me Commandment, so I do.

Another is this: Joh. 6.38
I came not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me.

A third, is that which alone gives a satisfactory Answer to the Question: My
hour is not yet come. Joh. 7.30


Christ might not, would not, draw upon himself, nor cast himself upon,
persecution, suffering, or death, before the time appointed by his Father; but
following his calling, used lawful means to preserve his life and liberty, by
his own example, backing that Precept of his to his Disciples; If they shall
persecute you in one City, Mat. 10.23.
fly into another; and concerning this, Augustine says well; Our great and
good Master did this, Fecit hoc Magister bonus, etc.
not out of fear, but to teach us that every one ought to walk in his calling,
so as not to tempt God: As we ought not to fear men in such sort, as to baulk
our duty, so we must see that we do not rashly run our selves into danger, and
unadvisedly draw, or take, trouble upon our selves.

Why did not Christ, by his Divine Power, bind up or crush his Enemies, and
restrain the malice of these Pharisees: If he had done this, then he needed not
to have fled from them?

Answ. Christ was not sent to exercise his Power against his enemies, but to be
abased, and abused, and trampled upon by his Enemies; and he emptied himself,
Phil. 2.7. emptied himself of his Glory and Equality to his Father. He who was
all things, Ex omni ad nihilum seipsum redegit. (Beza.)
became nothing: He must be in all points tempted like as we are, that we might
be encouraged in trouble and persecutions, eying his Example; looking to Jesus,
the Author and finisher of our Faith; who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the Throne of the
Right Hand of God: The Disciple is not above his Ma-Master, says Christ; and
if they have persecuted me, they will persecute you; you must look for it, and
must not think much of it; the Members must be conformed to the Head, first in
bearing the Cross, and afterward in wearing the Crown: If we suffer with him,
Romans 8.17.
we shall be glorified together with him: The Apostle Peter bids us to rejoice,
in as much as we are made partakers of Christ his Sufferings, 1 Pet. 4.13.
that when his Glory shall be revealed, we may be glad also with exceeding joy.

So much how touching the remote occasion of Christ his discourse with the
Samaritan Woman. In his passage from Juded into Galilee through Samaria, (which
was his nearest way) he meeting with this woman, falls into such conserence
with her.

Well, Nearer.
The nearer occasions were, 1. Christ his coming to Jacob's Well, and sitting
there. 2. The Woman's coming to draw water. 3. Christ his asking of water,
together with her untoward Answer, and refusal to give it.


These I shall pass by.

II. The Conference it self.
Now as to the Discourse or Conference it self, herein we may observe, 1. How
Christ labors to set this Woman on thirsting after himself and his Grace. 2.
How successful his endeavors are, 3. How, having provoked her thirst, he
satisfies it.


First, First.
He sets her on thirsting, by showing her 1. Excellency of Christ and his Grace.
The Excellency of Christ, and his Grace. 2. The facility of obtaining it. 3.
The need that she had of it.


First, Set forth by
The Excellency of Christ and his Grace is set forth,

By the names that are given to it, and by the effects of it.

1. 1. Its Names.
By the names that are given to it, it is termed, The gift of God, and That
living Water.

Christ with his Merit for Justification, and his Spirit for Sanctification,
are thus called by our Savior, The Gift of God, and that living Water. I shall
note something very briefly from each of these Titles.

Gift, the Gift of Gifts, an incomparable Gift; and there are wonderful rich
Treasures of Grace laid up in Christ, and offered with him.

What childish folly is it then, that when God holds forth in his Right Hand
the Richest Jewel, Christ, and in his left Hand (an Apple or Nut) the
Belly-blessings of this life; we should choose the Apple, before the Jewel;
these Earthly things, before Christ: O that we may rather be like unto Paul,
than like the Gadarens! let us account all things as loss for Christ, that we
may win him; and let such as have laid hold on Christ, hold him fast, and let
go all, rather than let go this Gift of God. Alas! poor creatures do not
understand what that Gift of God is, and therefore they do not desire it, and
seek it, nor accept of it, when it is offered.



2. 2 It Is Effects.
The Excellency of this living Water, Christ and his Grace, is set forth by the
effect of it; one effect there is of the apprehension and knowledge of it,
another effect of the enjoyment of it.

1. The effect of the knowledge of this Gift is this, that it excites desire,
verse. 10. If thou knew, thou would have asked.

till he has some knowledge of him; till the eyes of his understanding be
opened, to see the worth of Christ, and the preciousness of his Grace: The want
of affection in the soul toward Christ, is from the blindness of the mind.

2. There is a notable effect of Christ and his Grace enjoyed, which is this,

but it shall be in him, a Well (or Fountain) of water, springing up to
Eternal Life: Christ will never leave him, the life of Grace shall never fail;
but the spiritual life begun here, shall be perfected in Glory: The ascent of
water, is answerable to it is descent, so that in the passage through
Conduit-pipes, or any ways of conveyance, it will rise as high as the
Springhead: This water (which we are speaking of) as it comes from Heaven, so
it rises again to Heaven.

Now the perfection that is in Christ his water, the excellency of this living
water in point of satisfactoriness, is illustrated by the defectiveness of the
water in Jacob's Well, (the unsatisfactoriness of all things besides Christ,
and without him) Whosoever drinks of this water, shall third again.

Austine expresses this hand somely by way of speech to God: Domine fecisti
nos propter te, etc.
Thou Lord have made us for thy self, therefore our heart finds no rest, till
it rest in thy self: Nothing can fill the heart, but the fullness that is in
Christ.

Isa. 55.2.
Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor
for that which satisfies not: Quo plus sunt petae, plus sitiuntur aquae.
He that drinks of the waters of pleasure, or profit, or preferment,
thirsts more afterward than he did before: Wherefore should we so eagerly
pursue these earthly things, from which we can have no satisfaction?

2. Looking to the former note, whereof this latter is an illustration; we may
see matter of great comfort to Believers and Saints, who have received Christ
by Faith, and have true Grace in their hearts; they have that which is
satisfactory, and that which will stay with them to minister comfort and
delight to them for ever: They can never fall away wholly, and return to their
former estate, to be without Christ, to be destitute of Grace and Spiritual
life; but the Fountain is still theirs, and that which flows from the Fountain
to them, into them, does prove a Fountain in them; and we know that a Fountain
cannot be exhausted or dried up: However the great water brooks of hypocrites
fail in Summer's drought, yet the little Fountain water of God his Children
holds out; and though true Christians may have their thirstings, and may be as
the parched ground (as David complains, Psalm. 32.4. that his moisture was
turned into the drought of Summer) yet the godly shall not thirst so, but that
this living water, Christ and his Grace, shall be a Fountain springing up, and
yielding water to relieve their thirst, so that it shall not be a killing
thirst: Excellently says Chrys-stome; Sicut is non potest sirire, etc.
As he cannot thirst who has a Fountain springing in the very bowels of him,
so they who have Christ dwelling in their hearts by Faith, and by his Spirit,
for as much as they have a Fountain of living water in themselves, shall not
thirst for ever.

Thus you have seen how Christ in the first place seeks to stir up this Woman's
thirst after Grace, by showing her it is excellency, which is discovered by the
names and effects of it.

Secondly, Christ provokes her thirst, by showing her the easiness of obtaining
Grace, if she have a desire to it, verse. 10. as in the beginning of the verse,
he told her, That if she had known; she would have asked; so in the end of the
verse he tells her, That if she had asked, God would have given her this living
water; she may have it for the asking: and here is intimated, that she must ask
it, if she would have it.

Ps. 81.10. Isa. 443.
God will fill it; God will pour water upon him that is thirsty; yea, the
thirsty lands shall become springs of water: If we open our hearts, God will
open his hands; but we must ask, that we may have; must thirst, that we may be
watered; and when God intends to bestow his Grace upon us, he stirs up in us
desires of Grace; and he will answer those desires which are excited by him.

Thirdly, Christ takes another course to provoke this woman's thirst after his
grace; and that is by convincing her of the need she has of it, awakening her
to a sense of her present condition, as being a filthy Harlot, living in
uncleanness. Call thy husband, says our Savior. I have no husband, says she.
Thou say truly, says Christ: For thou have had five husbands, and he whom
thou now have, i. e. with whom thou accompaniest, as if he were thy husband, is
not indeed thy husband. This woman (as it is like) had lived long in this filthy
course, keeping her filthiness close from men, and without any smitings of her
conscience for it; but now Christ comes home unto her, charging her with
uncleanness.

or flatter our selves in the secrecy of our sins; for though (with this woman)
we may hide our sins from man, yet Christ takes notice of them, and will at
one time or other charge them upon us.

Thus we have seen what course Christ takes to provoke this woman's thirst;
which is, 1. By showing her the worth and excellency of his grace. 2. By
intimating to her the easiness of obtaining it. 3. By convincing her of the
need she had of it.


Secondly.
Secondly, We are to look upon the success of Christ his endeavors: they have
that effect which Christ aimed at, etc. her thirsting after that living water.
This thirst of hers discovers its self in her next speech to Christ, Ver. 19,
20. Sir, I perceive that thou art a Prophet, etc. where we have, 1. Her
acknowledgement of Christ as a Prophet, and of all that he had said as true. 2.
Her desire to be resolved in a great point or case of conscience, about the
Worship of God: She would be informed where God was to be worshipped with
Sacrifice-worship, (which was the then solemn public profession of Religion)
and whether as to this matter the Jews or the Samaritans were in the right: She
would know which was the place where God was thus to be worshipped; whether in
Mount Gerizim, where the Samaritans Temple stood; or in Mount Sion, where the
Jewish Temple was built. Yea, and by our Savior his full answer, there seems
to be more in her Question than is expressed; and that she was desirous to be
informed not only which was the right place for solemn worship, but also which
was the best Worship and Religion, that of the Samaritans, or that of the Jews:
Sir, thou art a Prophet, that know the mind of God; thou can show me both
where and how God is to be worshipped; I desire now to learn of thee where and
how I may seek that living water which thou have spoken of, and may have it to
be in me a Well of water springing up unto eternal life.


There might be diverse Observations from this passage in Ver. 19, 20. I shall
touch upon a few things.

First, something from the success of this last course which our Savior took
with this woman for her conversion, after other methods used, he works upon her
by convincing her of her sin.

A through conviction of sin, is the way to the conversion of a sinner: so that
it is a mistake at least (and no small mistake) of those who would have Gospel
only preached, to bring sinners to Christ. As long as Christ preached pure
Gospel to this woman, she did but scorn him, and scoff at him; but when he does
(oleum aceto miscere) mingle his Oylwith Vinegar, Calv. in locum.
showing to her her filthiness; now she is changed, now she is sick, and seeks
to the Physician, whom before she despised and flouted; now she thirsts after
that living water, which before she regarded not.

Well; this woman's Question, which did argue her to be touched in conscience,
and awakened, is about the true worship of God: Quest. But what is the meaning
of the Question? or what moved her to the putting it forth?

Answ. It seems that she being convinced of sin, and touched in conscience for
it, begins to be sollicitous about reconciliation to God, whom she had so
highly offended; and now would fain know in what Religion, in what way of
worship, by what means, she should seek peace with God. Therefore acknowledging
Christ to be more than an ordinary man, she puts this question to him:

Forasmuch as I perceive thee to have the Spirit of God, and that thou art a
Prophet, whose Office it is to show unto men the mind of God; I pray thee to
resolve me in the main thing that is controverted betwixt us and the Jews. Our
fathers worshipped in this mountain: here they sought God, in that same way of
worship which is now in use with us. The Jews say, That if any man will seek
the face of God, to have him propitious, he must worship in the Temple at
Jerusalem, with that worship which they now practice: I pray thee show me,
which is the Religion that pleases God, and how he is to be worshipped to
acceptance.

Now this Question propounded with such a meaning, and to such a purpose,
intimates to us, what was this Woman's judgment in such a case, wherein she was
right: for this is a truth.

a few Prayers, wherein there is (vox and praeterea nihil) nothing done to
purpose: and some think that all Religions do well, and that God may be
pacified with any Worship; but this Woman, as soon as God had opened her eyes,
is of another judgment, and teaches us another lesson.

2. This Woman being convinced of, and touched in Conscience for, her Adultery,
makes question of her Worship, whether it were right or no; begins to scruple
about Idolatry and Superstition: As she will no longer be an Adulteress, so
she would not be an Idolatrous or Superstitious Worshipper; therefore she
desires to be well informed concerning the true Worship of God.



3. See how this Woman expresses her self about the matter of Worship, wherein
she seeks further resolution from Christ: Our Fathers Worshipped in this
Mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place wherein men ought to
Worship. Though she is at some uncertainty in this point, and makes it a
question, whether the Samaritan or Jewish Worship were the best, yet she is
iuclined to give her Vote for the Samaritan Religion; pleading prescription of
time, and urging the authority of Forefathers.

viz. The Authority and Example of Forefathers: If this or that has been
practiced in former times, why should it be otherwise now? there must be no
change, no, by no means, though the Word of God and state of the times do
require an Alteration: Our Fathers were Wise, and Devout, and Pious, and they
established this, and that pleased them; why should not we be pleased as well
as they? why should we make new Constitutions? without doubt, it is well enough
as it is, or else our Fathers would have reformed it: Oh, what a block is this
in the way of Religion? This is that which the Samaritans pleaded for their
mungril Religion, and very corrupt worship; Our Fathers Worshipped in this
Mountain; Sed patrum mores, and longa tempora nihil probant in Religione.
and this is the plea of Papists for their Religion, and this is the plea of
Formal, Ceremonious, Superstition Worshippers: Oh, how are people in love with
that Religion, in which their Parents and Ancestors lived and died? But now
against this conceit it is good to consider, Noli errantium majorum tuorum
sequi vestigia. Aug.


1. Who are the Fathers, whose Example is pleaded, as so fit (yea, almost
necessary) to be followed: Surely wise and serious Christians, or learned and
godly Doctors, Sana ratio and veritas exemplis patrum anteponenda. (idem.)
will not look upon the Major part of those that lived in the age or ages
before them, as their forefathers, by whose judgment and practice they must be
bound up, to follow their example, Nec parentum, nec seniorum error sequendus
est, sed autoritas Scripturarum, and Dei docentis imperium. Hier.
without looking into the law-lawfulnesse and expediency of things.

2. If those Fathers, whose Example is alleged, were of the better sort, yet
surely it is not so safe judging of these matters by Examples, as by Laws,
Scripturae sacrae Angelis etiam, nedum patribus praeponendae.
by the Law of God, the Rule of his Word, which should be clearer and better
known to succeeding Generations of the Church, than to former Ages: The best
men that have been, or are, are but men, and may err; but now to make their
Example a standing Law to the Church, or to our selves, is to lift them up
above the rank of men, setting them in the place of God: and surely God does
not like such gross Idolatry or Man-worship.

3. Tempora distinguenda, and diversa agendi lex a Domino praescripta; est
serio cogitanda.
It is wisdom to discern the difference of times, and the state of the Church,
and to enquire, whether that which our Fathers did (though well) in foregoing
ages, be now lawful and commendable for us.

Now, Statimab exordio Ecclesiae, in caeremoniaru^ congerie peccari caeptum
est, quia nimis valuit stulta judaismi imitatio.
in the case here before us, which has been the occasion and ground of this
discourse, that was lawful in former times, which in after times was unlawful:
The Fathers before the Law might lawfully Worship in this Mountain which the
Woman speaks of, having no command concerning a Temple at Jerusalem, and
Levitical Ceremonies; but the case was altered now, when this Woman alleged
their example, God had given a command concerning a certain place for his
Solemn Worship and Service by Sacrifice, and had tied all his people to that;
and in the New Testament, that command concerning Levitical Worship was
abrogated: Could this be good pleading of the example of the Fathers before the
Law, now when the Law was given? or could it be congruous to allege the
example of the Fathers under the Law, now in the time of the Gospel, Olim
suffitus, lumina^ia, vestes sacrae and similes ritus Deo placebant: nunc a
Christi adventu mutata est ratio: nam quae tunc fuit piasacrorum observatio,
hodie sceleratum fit sacrilegium. Szeg.
when that Law was abrogated by Christ? Besides, as in this case, that which
was lawful in one age of the Church was unlawful in another; So there may be
some things in the aeconomy of the Church, and the Worship of God, more
suitable at one time, which in other after times may be altogether incongruous;
so that if we confound times, we may be easily miscarried with a blind,
misguided, dangerous zeal of imitating our Forefathers.

4. It is good for us, especially, to heed, not so much what any men before us
have done, as what God, who is before all, Veritati nulla praejudicat
consuerudo, nulla vetustas.
The Ancient of days, in comparison of whom, the greatest and most Ancient
Father, (as one says well) has not one gray hair of Antiquity; to heed, I
say, what God would have to be done, To the Law, and to the Testimony: Our
Fathers worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem men [ought]
to Worship. This woman alleges Custom and the example of Ancestors but she
is put to a stand by the Jews Allegation of Duty; and surely the resolution is
easy, whether men's Example, or God Command, should carry it: Who dare to deny
this, Consuetudo sine veritate vetustas erroris est. Cyprian.
that we mu^^ consider what ought to be done according to the revealed Wor^ of
God, rather than what has been, or is, done according to the opinions and
humors of men?



1. He resolves her touching the true worship. 2. He makes himself known to
her, that he is the Christ, that gift of God, and that living Water.
The latter of these lies beyon^ my Text, and so is not within the Verge of my
discourse: I am but leading you to the Text, upon which I shall fasten.

Well then, as to his resolution concerning the true worship: It is an answer
to the question propounded, verse. 20.

Whether the Samaritan or Jewish worship was the true worship.

Now the Answer is not direct, as to a decision of the controversy, betwixt
the Jews and Samaritans, which of these two Religions or Worships was the best:
But the Answer is in effect, to this purpose; That she needed not so much to
trouble her self about this, seeing the best of the two was not to continue
long, as the other ought not to have been at all; for Christ sought not to
bring her over from the Samaritan Religion to the Jewish, but rather to make a
Christian of her: Jesus said unto her, Verse. 27
Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain,
nor at Jerusalem, worship the Father.

Woman, believe me; Thou acknowledgest me to be a Prophet, and if I be a
Prophet, I am to be believed, as being guided by an infallible Spirit,
therefore believe what I say: I tell thee, The hour comes, etc.

Here may be three Questions, Questions
fit to be answered by the way.

Did the Samaritans Worship the Father? Christ his words seem to imply, that
they did.

Answ. They pretended to worship the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; (this
was the Father) but indeed they did not worship him; therefore Christ in the
next verse plainly revokes what he seemed in this verse to grant; there he
says, Ye worship ye know not what: when I come to those words, I shall show
you what the Samaritan Worship and Religion was.

Why does Christ say; Ye shall worship [the Father,] rather than thus, Ye shall
worship [God?]

Answ. Calvin thinks that Christ here calls God Father, Videtur eum oblique
oppone^e patribus, etc. Calv. in loc.
in opposition to the fathers which the woman spoke of, Jacob and his twelve
sons, the Patriarchs, according to whose example the Samaritans worshipped in
this mountain, pretending to them as their fathers, (though indeed those
Patriarchs were not their fathers: for the Samaritans were people of other
Nations of the Heathens, whom the King of Assyria placed in the Cities of
Samaria, in stead of the people of Israel, who were carried away Captives into
Assyria. 2 King. 17.24.
Christ tells this woman, that whereas now the Samaritans pretended to worship
God in this mountain, (for which they had no warrant, but the example of
pretended fathers) and the Jews did indeed worship God in the Temple at
Jerusalem, (as God had given command) the time was coming when they and the
Jews should have one common Father, Ac si diceret Deum communem sore patrem
omnibus. Ibid.
even God, (the Gentiles also being taken into Covenant) so that God should
hereafter be worshipped without difference or distinction of places or people,
according to that prophecy. Mal. 1.11
But there may be a further Answer given to the question, Why Christ says, Ye
shall worship the Father, rather than ye shall worship God?

This may be to show how God is to be worshipped, God worshipped as in relation.
under what notion or consideration, viz. not as absolute, but as in relation.

1. Considered as in the relation of the persons in the Divine Essence, between
themselves.

A Divine person is, Modus Divinae Essentiae, the Divine Essence modified. The
three persons in the Divine Essence, are the Divine Essence considered three
manner of ways, (...).
distinguished from the Essence; not by a real distinction, (as if the Essence
were one thing, and the Person another) but as the manner of the thing.

We are to observe the order of the subsistence of these Divine Persons. In
order of subsisting, the Father is before the Son, and the Son before the Holy
Ghost; but we must know that they are equal in regard of Time, Majesty, Glory
and Essence. The Father is the first person, existing from himself, not from
any other, in respect both of Essence and Person. Joh. 1.14
The Son is the second person, who, in the consideration of his person, does
exist from the Father by eternal generation; (...).
but as to his absolute Essence is of and from himself. The Holy Ghost, or the
Spirit, is the third person, in respect of his person, proceeding and flowing
from the Father and the Son; but in respect of Essence, Joh. 15.26.
being God of himself, with the Father and the Son.

And we must know, that Deus sunt inconfuse trinus in unitate; indivise unus in
trinitate. 1 Jo. 57.
the Trinity of persons does not take away, or destroy, the Unity of the Divine
Essence, (as the Unity of Essence denies not the Trinity of persons) these
three are one.

Now this God is to be worshipped, as in such a relation of Father, Son, and
Spirit, 1 As Father, Son, and Spirit
as considered in such a modification of the Divine Essence: we must worship
the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, otherwise we worship not. God
aright, nor worship the true God. As God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost, are the object of Divine Faith; so they are the object of Divine
Worship. Prayer is to be directed to God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; but
we must not pray to either of the persons, but as united to the other. The
Apostle tells the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.12. (...)
that they were without God in the world, they were Atheists in the world; and
how does he make this good, that they were Atheists? why thus; they were
without Christ, (...).
without the knowledge of Christ. Though a man acknowledges, That there is a
God, and but one true God; yet if he knows not this God in Christ, he is
without God in the world, he is an Atheist, and an Atheist cannot worship God.
Now here in the Text, when the Father is named, the other two persons are
included. We are to call upon God the Father, in the name of his Son, by the
help of his Spirit. So that Turks and Jews, who acknowledge not Christ, worship
not God; nor many of our common people, who understand little or nothing of the
Doctrine of the Trinity.

2. God the Father is to be worshipped as in relation to Us, 2. As our Father.
as Our Father, loving Us as sons; and so we are to come to him with an humble
boldness, as his children, crying, Abba, Father. If we cannot say, Our Father,
we cannot worship God.

Thus have I answered a second Question arising from the 21th Verse.

How does Christ say, that they should no longer worship the Father [in
Jerusalem,] when God says of Jerusalem, Psalm. 132.14.
that it is his Rest for ever?

Answ. That spoken in the Psalm is true, especially of the Church signified by
Jerusalem: it is true likewise of Jerusalem the type, in a limited sense:
Jerusalem, Circumcision, Legal Worship, were to be for ever; i. e. until
Christ, and the beginning of the new world in him; till the coming of the
Messiah. Genesis 17.13.
Thus the Covenant of Circumcision is called an everlasting Covenant; and so it
is said that the feast of the Passover should be kept by an Ordinance [ for
ever, Exodus 12 14, 17, 24 Exodus 40 15.
] and so the Levitical Priesthood should be [for ever.]

Well, this is that which our Savior teaches in this one and twentieth Verse;
That in the new Testament distinction of place, for the worship of God, is
taken away, and that the Temporary Priesthood, and External Rites are abolished
by Christ his coming. In the Old Testament God revealed himself in the Temple,
over the Mercy-seat; but now Christ is the true Temple, and the true
Propitiatory. The Body being come, the Shadows are vanished.

I pass on to the two and twentieth Verse: Verse. 22. (...).
Ye worship ye know not what; or, that which ye know not.

This is spoken by way of anticipation, Per praeoccupationem.
(a Figure in Rhetorique very common:) Christ is here aforehand with the woman,
giving an Answer to a Question which she might be ready to propound, having
occasion given her by his former Answer. She might say, Though neither of these
Worships must long continue; yet at present one only of them is right, or one
is better than the other; I would know which that is? Not yours, says Christ;
for ye worship ye know not what: but ours, for we worship that we know. Though
Christ had told the woman, that both these Worshippers (both of the Samaritans
and the Jews) should cease, so that neither of them was that which shortly he
would have to be; yet he does not equal them in his censure of them, accounting
one as good as the other: but he condemns the Samaritan worship, and approves
of the Jewish worship; viz. that which the godly among them performed. As for
you Samaritans, ye worship ye know not what, nor how: though you will say, you
have a good meaning, and direct your worship unto God, and pretend the example
of your fathers; yet forasmuch as your worship is not directed or warranted by
the Word of God, Custus Dei astimandus est, qui verbo Dei nobis praescribitur
but taken up by you without this Rule and Foundation, it is indeed an
ignorant, foolish worship, which cannot please God: but now as to the Jews,
while they have God his Word for their Rule and Warrant, their worship is with
knowledge and judgment, and that which God approves of. But in as much as the
time is at hand, when the Levitical Priesthood and Worship shall be abolished;
if any Jew after such abrogation shall worship with observance of Levitical
Rites, his worship will then be as bad as yours is now.

Now, let us see what Christ here teaches: Ye worship ye know not what.

The Samaritans in their meaning did worship a Deity, yea the God of the Jews,
and their Worship was somewhat refined from that gross state in which it was at
first; yet because they did not conceive aright of God, nor worship him in the
appointed place, and appointed mode; but had another Temple, and another
Priesthood, and Ceremonies of their own devising; for this reason they are said
to worship they know not what; i. e. a fancy of their own brain, an Idol, not
the true God. Hence we may conclude,

That it is but an idle and Idolworship, which is not directed to the true God
rightly conceived of, as he has revealed himself in Scripture; and which has
not Gods Word for its Foundation and Rule.

God himself is turned into an Idol, when people have false gross apprehensions
of him, and worship him with any other than Scripture-worship, (such as is
ordered or allowed by the Word of God; I say) when people have carnal, gross,
unsuitable apprehensions of God, or do not conceive of him aright in his
Attributes, Properties, and Relations, as he has revealed himself in his
Christ, they worship an Idol in stead of God; and it is vain idle worship when
people follow their own or other men's inventions in stead of God his
prescriptions. Who but God himself can tell what worship that is with which he
will be pleased? Therefore has he in the Old Testament declared his mind from
time to time concerning this, with many strait prohitions of adding or altering
any thing. In nothing substantial or circumstantial must we make our own
fancies, or men's inventions or prescriptions the Rule of our worship; but we
are tied strictly to the Word of God for the kinds and parts of Worship, to
have them determined by God; and we are also tied in circumstanstances of
worship, not to act in particulars contrary to the general Rule of Scripture.

The matter of God's worship, whatsoever is acted as a part of worship, must be
something commanded by God; (...).
and in the modifying of worship, we must see that nothing be done contrary to
the Word, or unworthy of God. The Heathens grossly fancied a plurality, a
multitude of ridiculous gods; and they tell us, that each god is to be
worshipped and served according to his own directions: So Socrates can teach
us, that God is to be worshipped as he himself will. And what does the
Scripture teach us? why this, That the Lord our God is one God, and that him we
must fear, and keep his statutes and his commandments, which he commands us.
God often calls upon men to take heed that they follow not their own hearts,
that they go not in the way which themselves shall choose, that they do not what
seems stood in their own eyes.

The scope and sum of the Second Commandment, is to order us in the solemn
Worship of God, in Religious exercises, and therein, under an express
prohibition of Image-making, and Image Worship; (which was the chief invention
of men, for corrupting of Divine worship) I say, under that one instance God
flatly forbids all men's devices and inventions about his Worship: For this is a
Rule to be observed for the understanding of the Commandments, that where any
sin is expressly forbidden, under that general expressed, all the species, and
individuals, and degrees of that finne, together with all the causes, and
means, and occasions, and appearances of that sin, are likewise forbidden; Mat.
5.21, 22, 27, 28.
Thus our Savior interprets Commandments: So that I say, the second
Commandment forbids, not only the making and worshipping of Images, (the
grossest Idolatry,) but also, all Superstitious devices of men in the worship
of God: And does not God charge his people, not to turn aside from his
Commandments, Deuteronomy. 5.32.
either to the right hand, or to the left?

When men, out of profaneness, or Atheism, worship not God at all, this is to
turn aside to the left hand; and for men, under pretense of Religious zeal, and
good intentions, to set up, in the worship of God, that which he has not
commanded; this is to turn aside to the right hand, and this is forbidden: When
we have not the light of God's Word to direct us in our worship, we offer to
him a Sacrifice without eyes.

Now let us see what the Scripture speaks of such devised Willworship, that we
may see how God likes it, and what good it is like to do us.

See our Savior his censure of such worship, Mat. 159 Isa. 29.13
quoting the Prophet Isaiah; Deo non probantur, quaecunque extra verbum de
consilio hominum in sacris constituuntur. Chemn. in locum.
In vain do they worship me, teaching, for Doctrines, the commandments of men;
and surely this is the worst of all vanities, when our Religion and Worship
shall procure a vain thing.

Yea, such Will Worship of humane invention, is so far from being profitable to
us, or pleasing to God, that God accounts it done to Devils, not to him: This
is no rash assertion of mine, or gratis dictum. Ye may read it in Scripture,
Levit. 17.7. Deuteronomy. 32.17.
They shall bring their Sacrifices to the Lord, to the door of the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, (they shall do herein, according to my appointment) and
shall no more offer their Sacrifices unto Devils. And in the latter of those
Texts, viz. in Deuteronomy. 32. forasmuch as they worshipped Idols, they are charged
with sacrifising unto Devils. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. Rev. 9.20.
And Jeroboam his Idols are called Devils, and so are Antichrist his Idols.

This is God his estimation and censure of Idolatrous worship, and all devised
fictitious worship, which is not according to God's own appointment, wherein men
worship an Idol of their own brain: whatever they intend or pretend, not God,
but the Devil, is served by such forbidden uninstituted worship. Jeroboam did
not plainly renounce the true God, but pretended and intended still the worship
of God, when upon a politic account he set up the Calves in Bethel and Dan:
nor did the people that went up thither, intend the worship of Devils; yet God
in his Word tells us, that Jeroboam set up this worship to Devils.

O how cautelous should men be, and fearful, lest they worship Devils instead
of God? how careful to keep close to God his Institutions?

Now you have seen, that our Savior his answer here to the Samaritan woman,
teaches us, how vain, and idle, and how distastful to God, that worship is,
which is devised and oppointed by men, contrary to the Word, or without
Scripture warrant.

Well then, it follows hence,

1. That the worship of Turks, and Jews, is an idle Idol-worship, because they
worship God out of Christ; conceiving far amiss of that God whom they pretend
to worship; and making an Idol of him, (there being no such God made known in
the Word, to be the Object of worship.

2. That the worship In scripturis Idololatrae vocantur qui Divinum, cultum,
Idolo sive proprie dicto, sive figurate, tribuunt. Rainoldus Quis tam amens ut
Dei formam and imaginem statua referri perhibeat? Eusebius. Quam imaginem ponetis
ei qui spiritus est, etc. Hier. in Esai. cap. 40.
of Papists is an idle Idol-worship; for they conceive amiss of God, and of his
worship: as if his presence were tied in a special manner to Images, or as if
he were to be worshipped in Images, or could be represented by Images; there is
no such God. They conceive amiss of Christ, as if he could be held in the hands
of the Priest, after the consecration of the bread (or host, as they call it,)
there is no such Christ; so that they worship a God and a Christ of their own
devising; and they have monstrously corrupted the whole worship of God, by a
multitude of inventions, and superstitions, and devised rites of their own;
they have many new forms of worship which God has not commanded; they have
introduced a multitude of Ceremonies, which they make the worship of God; in
which their Religion mainely consists. They worship they know not what.

3. The worship of a number o^ Protestants is an idle Idol-worship Oh, how many
are they whose worship justly falls under thi^ censure! As,

1. They that have no understanding of the Doctrine of the Trinity, no
knowledge of the personal relations of Father, Son an^ Spirit, to be considered
in the Godhead, and yet pretend t^ worship God. These worship the^ know not
what.

2. They that worship God o^ therwise than he has appointed and in such ways,
and by such means, of worship as he does not approve of; that follow their own
fancies, or other men's inventions, with a neglect of, or in opposition to, Gods
prescriptions. These do, in the point of worship, they know not what, and that
of which they can give no account to God.

3. They that seek not to be resolved in their own Judgment and Conscience,
that what they do in the business of Religion, suits with the mind of God, and
so is his Worship; but cast themselves upon the streams, to be carried which
way that runs.

4. They that have no other apprehensions about Religion, or the Worship of
God, but the Laws of the Land, or the Constitutions of the Church in which they
live; that trouble not themselves to enquire whether it be right or wrong;
whether it be acceptable to God, and consonant to his Word; but this is
commanded by Superiors; and this they do, and therefore they do it, and will do
it; (as if Superiors were infallible, and could not possibly command that
which ought not to be done. Thus Seneca the heathen said of himself; Non
tanquam Diis gratum, led legibus jussum.
That he observed the worship of their Gods, not as acceptable to the gods,
whom he thus worshipped, but as commande^ by the Laws: But Christian^ should
know and do better, and the Word of God teaches otherwise; viz. to look to
God's Law^ and attend to his mind, and see^ to please him in our worship.

viz. upon the Word of God: Men are very prone to invent worship, have
naturally a delight to make a worship of their own; and man is naturally apt to
regard and adher^ to humane inventions, rather than Divine prescriptions: The
several ages of the Church have given sad experience of this; we have therefore
need to look to our selves, and, from what has been already said, and made
good from Scripture, we may judge how careful people should be, to see that
they go upon right grounds in the worship of God: Do we not in worship seek
God? if we do not, then there is no reason in our worship; we are no better
than bruits: Well, if we would find God, or have any benefit by our worship, we
must be able to say, We worship that we know: We must have the knowledge of
God, and a knowledge of his Will; must understand how he is to be worshipped;
must therefore look into his Word; must see what he has appointed there, and
must take directions from thence. I have been long enough in the Context,
therefore I will stay no longer from the Text; An approach to the Text.
wherein we have the very pith, and highest pitch of our Savior his discourse
with the Samaritan woman. The immediate connection of the words.
But before I fasten upon the Text, it will be convenient to show you the more
immediate Connection of the words.

The Dialogue or Colloqui between Christ and this woman, is from the nineteenth
verse, plainly about the Worship of God; concerning which, the Woman puts forth
a Question to Christ, and desires to be resolved by him, in the twentieth
verse; Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say, that in Jerusalem
men ought to worship: Whether are we or you in the right?

Our Savior's first Answer, was (as I have already hinted) to this effect:
That she needed not to be be solicitous about this, because neither of these
two worships was long to continue. Believe me woman, The hour comes, when ye
shall neither in this Mountain, nor in Jerusalem, worship the Father. Here he
teaches her, that there shall be an abrogation of Moses his Ceremonies, and of
the whole Levitical Service; for under the name or title of the place of
worship, Jerusalem, he comprehends the whole Jewish worship, which, for the
most part of the Ceremonies, was by God's appointment to be performed there,
and not elsewhere.

Well; but though neither of these worships must long continue, yet for the
present, one is right, or one is better than the other. Which is that?

Not yours (says Christ,) but ours; Yours is stark naught, for ye worship ye
know not what: your worship has no word of God instituting or warranting it:
but we worship that we know; our worship is grounded upon the Word of God: Romans
3.2
[For Salvation is of the Jews] i. e. to them are committed the Oracles of God;
The saving Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace, is among the Jews. Diod. in loc.
with them, is that word wherein they have a saving manifestation of God in
Christ (though not yet so clear as shall be) and a discovery of the right way
of worshipping God unto Salvation: and surely this is the right worship, which
is taught and warranted by the Word of God.

Object. But if the Jewish worship be grounded upon the Word of God, how shall
it be abolished?

Sol. To this Christ answers, that God had prescribed and appointed that way of
Mosaical worship, not for perpetuity, but only to continue till the fullness of
time should come; Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 9.10
till the time of Reformation; i. e. till the time of the New Testament, when
(all that was signified by those Ceremonies and outward Services, being
fulfilled in Christ) that temporary Ceremonious worship shall be changed into a
spiritual and more excellent worship, which shall neven be abrogated: And
Christ tells the Woman, that now the term of that Levetical worship is expired,
(the Messiah being come to put an end to it.

Here is the sum of Christ his Answer. There is a double Word of God
respecting his worship; One Word concerning the Levitical worship, delivered by
Moses, which was to be in force till the coming of the Messiah; that word
belongs not to the New Testament worshippers. There is another word concerning
the Spiritual Worship of God, that is perpetual; which word also the Patriarchs
before the Law, and the godly under the Law, did observe; (though both before
and under the Law, it was hooded and clothed (as it were) with certain
Ceremonies appointed by God; but now in the New Testament, this is the voice
and plain open expression of the Gospelword, [The true Worshippers, shall
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth.]

This is the Connection of the words, which I have made out as plainly and as
briefly as I might.

The Text is an assertion of the true nature and state of right Gospel Worship,
Text divided and
with a double reason to confirm it.

Gospel Worship is asserted to be a worship in Spirit and in Truth.

Now of this there are two Demonstrations.

1. The first Demonstration is drawn from the Will of God: The Father requires
such to worship him: God stands upon it, to have such Worshippers, and this is
the worship which he commands, which will please him.

2. The second Demonstration is taken from the Nature of God; he is a Spirit, a
pure spiritual Essence; therefore the worship done to him must be Spiritual,
answerable to his Nature.

The true Nature and state of Gospel Worship is asserted in the former part of
the Text: The true Worshippers shall [now] worship in Spirit and in Truth.

I shall a little open these words, and then conclude something from them:
opened.
The hour comes, i. e. the time is at hand: Here he teaches, that the
Mosaical Ordinances were not perpetual, but imposed only for a time, and that
they were at this time even out of date.

Yea, the hour [now] is, viz. in part, Christ being come, has already obscured
the grace of the legal-worship: and Now is the time of reformation: Now the
time is come, that the true worshippers shall worship after another manner: The
Temple and Priesthood, and ritual worship, which hitherto have been used with
approbation, must henceforth be laid aside, and now the Father must be
worshipped [in Spirit, and in Truth.]

To let pass these various acceptions of the terms, Spirit and Truth; I shall
only show you what is the import of these terms here; what it is to worship
in Spirit, and in Truth.

That we may understand this, we must note the Antithesis, here intended by our
Savior; he opposes Gospel Worship to both the former worships spoken of in
the Context; that of the Samaritans, and that of the Jews; the Samaritan
worship was hypocritical and counterfeit, not that which God had appointed, for
the internals or externals of it; it was heartless devotion, and uninstituted
worship; and the Jewish worship, as to the external part of it (as instituted
by God) stood in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and Carnal Rites, and
Ordinances, so called by the Apostles; Heb. 9.10
and the institution of that worship is said to be The Law of a Carnal
Commandment; Heb. 7.19
and the generality of the Jews were so grossly carnal in their apprehensions
of the business of Religion, that they stuck in the outward Ceremonies, having
no respect at all to internal and spiritual worship, nor minding that which was
signified by those carnal rites and shadows: but if the Ceremonial Law were
observed in offering Sacrifices, and in the point of Meats, and Drinks, and
Washings, etc. they reckoned that all was well enough: This is that which God
upbraideth them with, and for which he sharply reproves and threateneth them.

Now according to the Antithesis here intended; [Spirit] signifies the heart,
and its renewed spiritual motions and affections, together with the expressions
of those affections, in such outward actions as necessarily flow from them:
[Truth] signifies sincerity, as opposed to hypocrisy; and it signifies the
very substance and kernel of Religion, that worship which is rea^ and
substantial, which stands in the Truth of those figures and shadows, that
which was figured by those legal Sacrifices, and other ceremonial Ordinances,
that which is indeed the thing that God looks after; and [Truth] likewise
imports a consonancy to the Word of God.

True worship is that which is ordered and commanded by God, that which is
according to the Rule.

So then, worship in Spirit and in Truth is opposed to the Carnal Ceremonious
worship of the Jews, and to the heartless and devised worship of the
Samaritans, which was a false worship, wanting the Rule of God's Word,
appointing and warranting the matter of it, as well as the truth of a good
heart, for the manner of performing it.

Worship in Spirit and in Truth is sincere, spiritual, instituted worship,
Scripture-worship, which has the Word of God, for its foundation and rule.
This is true right Worship.

Obj. Did not the true worshippers in the Old Testament, worship God in Spirit
and in Truth?

Answ. God is always the same, so that from the beginning of the world he was
never pleased with a worship not spiritual and true; and undoubtedly, the godly
worshippers among the Jews, worshipped spiritually, in Spirit, and truly, in
Truth; but yet in the worldly Sanctuary at Jerusalem, and in shadows and
figures; and with the observation of many outward Ceremonies: so that in show,
and as to the external part, their worship was Carnal; we may say that the
Worship under the Law, was in it is substance, and soul (as I may call it)
spiritual; but in respect of the outward shape and body of it, it was in some
sort carnal and earthly: Whereas the New Testament worship is in Spirit,
without such a carnal body and covering of Ceremonies, and in Truth without
figures and shadows.

Obj. 1 With outward Ceremonies.
But do not we now under the Gospel worship God, as bowing the Knee, lifting up
the Hands and Eyes in Prayer? etc. And are not our Sacraments, as to the
visible matter of them, carnal Elements?

Answ. The former sort of these Ceremonies are natural, such as flow from the
Nature of the thing, and serve to a lively expression of the inward motions and
affections of the Soul, and so appertain to the worship, which is in Spirit;
for spiritural worship is not only the inward affection, but also meet outward
declarations and expressions thereof in action.

As for the latter sort of Ceremonies, viz. the Sacramental Rites, they are
instituted by God himself; but they are so sew, and so plain and significant,
that they do not at all diminish or obscure the spirituality of the Worship.

Now to fetch some Doctrine out of the Text.



The Doctrine employed is this:

That true Gospel-professours are true Gospel-worshippers: Doct. 1. implied.
All true Christians do indeed worship God: Our Savior here speaks of
Christians in contra-distinction to Jews and Samaritans; and this is the
description and Character of them; They are true worshippers.

The Doctrine expressed, is this.

expressed.
That true Gospel Worship is that which is performed in Spirit and in Truth.

Doct. 1. True Gospel-professours are true Gospel-worshippers.

I shall in a word open the Subject, Explication of,
and insist a little on the explication of the Attribute.

The Subject of the proposition, 1 the subject.
Gospel-professours; These are such as own the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
profess the Name of Christ, profess themselves to be of that Religion which the
Gospel teaches; and they who hold forth such a profession, are called
Christians.

Now profession is either feigned or unfeigned, either in hypocrisy, or in
sincerity, either a profession in word only and in show, or that which is a
profession indeed and in truth.

Now our Doctrine does not speak of all profession, (as to say, that all who
profess themselves to be Christians, are Gospel-worshippers) but of true
professors, such as are Christians indeed; all that do with judgment own, and
with affection embrace, the Doctrine of Christ, and sincerely profess the
Christian Religion. These are Gospel-worshippers, and do truly worship God:
This is the Attribute of the proposition, 2 of the Attribute
which comes now to be explained.

Quest. What is it to worship God? What is carried in this notion of worship,
when it is related to God as it is Object?

Answ. Religious adoration, or the Worship of God, is either natural, or
instituted.

1. Natural-worship I call that which does arise from the consideration of a
Deity, that which Nature it self will tell us is due unto God. Whoever
acknowledges that there is a God, will easily acknowledge that he is to be
worshipped, i. e. believed, feared, loved, invocated, trusted in, etc.

2. Instituted-worship is that which depends on, and answers to, the Revelation
of Gods will, any way or means appointed by God for the exercising of Natural
worship, which is due to God, as God; any work or service of divine
institution, to be performed unto God: This Notion of worship, in such a strict
sense of the word, is especially to be considered of in the prosecution of the
second Doctrine; but now in the first point, I shall take it in the largest
sense of the term; and you may take this description of it.

True Worship, Worship described
is a Religious holy observance of, and obedience to, the only true God, as our
God, in all things commanded by him; performing all duty in Faith, through
Jesus Christ the Mediator, unto the glory of God.

I shall give you the sense of this Description in five conclusions.
Description explained.




This first Conclusion has three Branches, Trimembris.


1. God is the Object of Worship: Religious worship is to be exhibited only to
God the Father, Son, and Spirit; to him, and to him only, must our worship be
directed; for worship is a Solemn acknowledgement of a Deity: Therefore the
Scripture holds out to us this Object of worship, excluding all others; 1 Samuel
7.3.
Prepare your hearts to the Lord, and serve him only: Mat. 4.10
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

2. We must worship the True God, or worship God [as God]; therefore we must
have true apprehensions of God, right conceptions of him in his Nature,
Attributes, and Properties, and a true knowledge of God in Christ, and as he
has revealed himself in the Covenant of Grace.

3. God must be worshipped and served [as our God] with an appropriation of him
to our selves, apprehending our Covenant Relation to him, and Interest in him:
Thou shall worship the Lord [thy God] God, the true God, our God, is the sole
Object of Religious worship.



First, Inward worship.
there must be the worship of the inward man; heart-worship, soul-worship,
which consists in

1. A right knowledge and acknowledgment of God, as he has revealed himself in
his Word and Works. And

2. A Religious holy affection toward God, thus known and acknowledged; for we
must know, that the Law of God, which is the rule of his worship, is Spiritual,
reaching the understanding and affections, and all the powers of the Soul. We
have both this knowledge and acknowledgement of God, and this affection toward
God, called for by Moses; Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5.
Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord; (know this) and thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and withal thy
might.

Now Religious holy affection toward God has in it, and notes out to us,
Internal duties.
all the internal duties of worship, which are the Souls more immediate
actings, wherein we glorify God: It cannot be expected, that I should name
them all; I shall but touch upon some few specialties.

1. 1 Faith.
Faith is one part of the Internal worship of God: I say, Faith to believe God,
and Faith to believe in God; for there is a great difference between these two.

And the first of these, viz. to believe God, is to be taken in a double sense;

1. 1 To believe God.
Credere Deum, to believe the Being of the true God; that there is a God, and
that he is such a God as the Scripture speaks him to be.

2. Credere Deo, to assent unto, and be thoroughly persuaded of, all that God
has spoken in his Word; so submitting our judgment, and stooping our reason
to Gods revelations, resting satisfied with them: This surely is part of that
worship and honor which every soul owes to God; To believe God his Being, and
to believe his Sayings.

Then, 2 To believe in God.
to believe in or on God, is, to have the Soul carried by Faith unto God in
Christ, as my God and Father; and to apply to my self the promises of Grace,
which in Christ, are yea and amen. So casting my self upon God, and depending
on his Fatherly goodness, for all good things for Soul and body.

This Faith is to be looked upon, as a virtue or work of the Soul, which
appertains to, and is part of, the inward worship of God.

2. 2 Love.
Another ingredient of Divine internal worship, is Love; when knowing God to be
the chief good, and apprehending our own interest in him, we love him truly,
and above all other things; desiting nothing so much as communion with him, and
to be conformed to him: This worship is called for in Scripture; Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God withal thy heart, and withal thy soul, and
with all thy mind.

3. 3. Fear.
The fear of God, is the internal worship of God, when reverencing the Word of
God, and the Majesty, and Holiness, and Justice of God, we fly sin, as being
fearful to offend God, and careful to please him in all things: This holy fear
is called for in many places of Scripture; Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God; Fear the Lord ye his Saints: Psalm. 34.^
In thy fear will I worship, says David: This fear of God is such a special
part of inward worship, that is is (not rarely) put for the whole worship of
God, for all Religion and godliness: The Prophet Esaias says: Isa. 29.13
Their fear toward me, is taught by the Precepts of men. Our Savior quoting
this Text, gives us the sense of it thus; Mat. 15.9.
In vain do they worship me, teaching, for Doctrine, the commandments of men.

4. 4. Repentance.
True Gospel-Repentance, which comprehends Faith in it, and is the turning of
the whole Soul unto God, looked upon as an effect of Sanctification, is the
internal worship of God. When we acknowledge our sins, and, acknowledging
them, bewail them, and cast our selves by Faith upon the Mercies of God,
through the Merits of Jesus Christ, firmly purposing, by the help of Grace, to
abstain from sin, and to obey God in all things; herein we give God the glory
of his Omniscience, and Holiness, and Justice, and Mercy; and this is surely to
worship God, when in our hearts we reverence him, and give him the glory of his
Attributes. This is that worship which Paul taught; Repentance toward God, Act.
20.21.
and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.

5. The inward worship of God, is, with a thankful heart, to acknowledge the
goodness and beneficence of God toward us; looking upon our selves as utterly
unworthy of any of his gifts; seriously purposing to glorify our good God.

I might multiply particulars, wherein the internal worship of God consists:
But these few hints shall suffice.

Secondly, Outward worship.
As concerning External worship, I shall only hint what it is in general: To
worship God Externally, is sincerely and regularly to profess and practice
true Religion; carefully and conscionably endeavoring to perform all outward
duties incumbent on us by the command of God: I say, sincerely to profess and
practice true Religion in performing such duties.



Though Internal worship may be where there is at present no acting of that
which is External, yet there is no External worship (which is indeed worship)
without Internal: that which is only an action of the outward man, (merely
bodily exercise) and not an act likewise of the inward man, the act of the
heart and Soul moving toward God, that is not the worship of God: However the
Soul may and does often act toward God in holy Worship, in Faith, and Love, and
godly Fear, etc. when no visible, external act of worship is put forth; when
there is nothing done in point of worship, that may fall under the notice of
man. But this I pray observe, That worship which is merely External, is not (to
speak properly) any worship at all, but mere hypocrisy, and formality, and
carnal compliance, and conformity to custom; so that you are not true
worshippers before God, and in his account, and so are not right Gospel
Professors, and real Christians, if your worship be only External; if you
satisfy your selves in performing the outward acts of duties, not drawing near
to God with the heart; this is to bring flesh to God for an Offering, and this
is not reasonable service; (...)
for God is a Spirit, and it is reasonable to offer to him, that which is
suitable to him, spiritual service.

And as they are not Gospel-professors, or true Christians, in the account of
God, who worship not him with an internal spirit-worship, though they be never
so frequent and constant in external acts of Religion; so they that will not
afford God the service of the outward man in public and private actions of
Religion and Worship, do declare themselves to men, not to be real Christians,
or Gospel-professors, because they are not Worshippers of God; For as God
observes the heart, and judges according to what he finds there, so man
judges according to the outward appearance. They who have no care or desire to
worship God outwardly in the way of his own Ordinances; it is sure that they do
not worship him inwardly; do not acknowledge him, nor believe in him, nor love
him, nor fear him in their hearts.

Thus you see, that true Worship takes up the inward and the outward man.

whole Worship: Our Worship must extend to all duty: God must be observed and
obeyed in [all] things commanded by him; in point of Worship, we must do that
which God has commanded; only that, and all that, and as commanded by God.

1. Only that which God has commanded: Seeing all Worship is to be directed
to God, we must for the matter and substance of Worship be directed and ordered
by God, that we may know it pleases him; and that what we do, may not be
excepted against, with a Quis injunxit? Who required this at your hands? The
Word of God is the Christian's Rule for his whole practice; nothing ought to be
done, but what the Scripture commands or allows.

2. In worshipping and serving God, we must have respect to the whole revealed
Will of God; to do all that he has commanded: Ye shall observe [all] my
Statutes, Lev. 19.37.
and [all] my Judgments, and do them: Mat. 28.20.
Ye shall teach them to observe and do [all] things whatsoever I have commanded
you: We must not half it with God in the business of Religion.

3. That which we do in the Worship of God, the matter whereof is God his
Command, must be done [as commanded] with conscience of Gods Command, and in
Obedience to it, with respect to God's Will, that in doing it, we may please
him; I will praise the Name of God, says David; Psa. 69.30.31.
This shall please the Lord: Paul prays for the Colossians, that they may
Walk worthy of the Lord unto all well pleasing. Col. 1.10


This is that which a Christian should look to in all his services: This is my
duty, God has commanded it, and in doing this I shall please God; therefore I
will do it.

Thus I have briefly showed you the extent of worship, respecting the matter of
it, all duty, omne praeceptum, all that God has commanded, with a limitation,
tantum praeceptum, only that which is commanded, and a regulation, qua
praeceptum, as commanded.



There are diverse significations of the Word [Faith] in Scripture, which I
shall not now trouble you with, but shall plainly show the meaning of this
fourth Conclusion; for the opening of our description of Worship.

1. We must worship God [i^ Faith] i. e. with knowledge, being well resolved in
our ow^ judgment and conscience, that what we do, suits with the mind of God,
and so that it is his worship, that which he requires and approves of; as the
Apostle in the case of indifferent things, in point of eating or not eating
such and such Meats, and touching the observation of days, says, Romans 14.5.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: This is the Apostle his
meaning there. Though to eat, or not to eat be indifferent in it self; yet let
every man take heed in eating, or forbearing to eat, and see that he does it
with knowledge; being well persuaded that what he does, is pleasing unto God.
Let him that eats be sure, that he does not sin in eating; and let him that
forbeareth be sure, that he offends not God or his brother in forbearing.

Now, whereas the Apostle requires such a full persuasion about things
indifferent; much more is it required about necessary things, which God has
commanded or forbidden, that in these matters we be well resolved of what we
take up in practice. A man may do that which God commands, and forbear that
which he prohibits; and yet sin in such an action or omission, because what he
does, he does not with knowledge, his action proceeds not from a judgment well
informed, and so he does it not upon good grounds: It greatly concerns us, that
our worship be according to knowledge. Whatsoever is not of Faith (in this
sense) is sin; It is sin for us to do any thing in the worship of God,
ignorantly and doubtingly: we must be well persuaded that the action pleases
God, as knowing that he has commanded it, or allows it.

2. There must be [Faith] in our worship, i. e. Faith to eye God, and to deal
with him, in every religious duty or exercise. Faith to believe in Prayer, that
God can and will hear and help, and give us that which we ask in his Son's
Name. Faith in reading and hearing the Word of God, to believe that it is true
in its predictions, and promises, and threatenings, and to apply it to our
selves. Faith in the use of all Ordinances, to believe that God will accept us
in them, and bless them to us for good. There must be Faith to see assistance
in the power of God, and to fetch strength from the promise, T. M.
and to see acceptance in the Grace of God, and a Reward in the Bounty of God.
This Faith must be in our Worship, that it may be pleasing to God, and
profitable to us.

3. God must be worshipped and obeyed in Faith [through Jesus Christ the
Mediator] i. e. There must be an application of the promise of Grace, and an
affiance on Jesus Christ, for the acceptance of our persons and services.
Without a Mediator we cannot come near unto God; our best services are so
faulty and so filthy, that in themselves they are rather a dishonouring of God
than otherwise, and therefore cannot be pleasing to God, but only through
Jesus Christ, in whom the Father is well pleased. Therefore when we worship
God, we must gather into Jesus Christ, and lay hold upon his Righteousness; and
present our services to God through Christ; and leave our duties with Christ to
be offered by him to his Father, and our Father, that they may be accepted
through him, as from him, and for his sake.

I shall insist a little longer upon this forth Position, that we are in hand
with, further to evince the necessity of Faith in the Mediator, unto a right
worshipping of God.

First, I shall show it respecting Prayer in particular, and then respecting
all Worship in general.

First, respecting Prayer, Faith is necessary, To set Prayer on foot, and To
carry on the work and duty of Prayer, and To the concluding of Prayer with an
Amen, and To keep the heart in a right frame after Prayer.

1. It is necessary to set Prayer on foot, or to bring the Soul to Prayer: Can
a man have any stomach to go and crave, and make request, where he has no hope
to speed? Now where effectual Faith is not, there can be no hope to speed in
any suit to God; and that upon this twofold account.

1. It is upon account of the relation, in which any soul stands unto God,
that it can have any hope of obtaining that which it seeks from God: It is
the consideration of God his Father-Hood and our Sonship, that must bring us
to Prayer, giving us encouragement to go to God with our petitions. The
Prodigal, says, I will arise, Luke 15.18.
and go to my Father. A Child has reason to hope that his Father will hear
him, and do for him, when he cannot expect it from a stranger. Now, how come we
into the Religion of God, to have him to be our Father? How come we to have the
Sonship of Christ upon us, by virtue of which we may be admitted into the
presence of God, and be received by him? See that Scripture; John 1.12.
As many as received him, to them gave he this Power, (...).
(this Privilege) to become the Sons of God; even to them that believe on his
Name. Ye are all the children of God, Gal. 3.26.
says the Apostle, by Faith in Christ Jesus.

2. We cannot stand before God without Righteousness, and this the Soul has
not of its own, in it self. We cannot look upon our selves, but as sinful
guilty persons, nor upon our duties, but as very defective. The Righteousness
which we must have, that we may be accepted of God, must be a Righteousness out
of our selves, another's Righteousness, viz. the Righteousness of Christ, which
yet must be ours, that it may do us good: Now it becomes ours by Faith; the
Righteousness which gives us access to God by Jesus Christ, is the Righteousness
of Faith, (...). Romans 3.22.
the Righteousness of God which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and
upon all that believe: Now for as much as without this Righteousness we can
have no hope Godward; How can we with any confidence draw near to God, till
such time as by Faith we close with Jesus Christ, and apply his Righteousness
to our selves? Upon this account Faith is necessary to set Prayer on foot, to
set the Spirit of Prayer on work.

2. Faith is necessary to carry on the work of Prayer, and for the discharging
of the duty.

1. That we may with humble, holy boldness, with a Child-like confidence, pray
unto God: Ephesians. 3.12
In whom we have boldness and access with confidence, by the Faith of him.

2. That we may lift up holy hands in Prayer. I will, says the Apostle, that
men pray every where, 1 Timothy 2.8.
lifting up pure hands, without wrath or doubting: It is Faith that purifies
the heart; 2 Cor. 7.1
Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves form all filthyness of the
flesh and spirit. Revelations concerning the Love and good Will of God,
concerning Christ, and Grace, do purge the Soul that takes them in.

3. Faith is necessary for the enlarging of the heart in Prayer: and to make us
lively and earnest in praying: I believed, therefore have I spoken. The
believing Soul will utter it self, and even pour it self forth before the Lord:
being persuaded, it shall through Christ obtain, at the hands of God, that
Grace which it sues for: but the Unbelieving heart is straightened; and where
Faith is not, fervency cannot be; and where fervency is not, the success of
prayer is doubtful, at least. The effectual fervent Prayer of the Righteous man
avails much

3. Faith is necessary to the concluding of our prayers with an Amen;
testifying, as our desires to have our petitions granted, so our reliance on
God, and a penswasion that he will, for Christ his sake, grant our requests:
For it is by Faith that we leave our prayers with Christ, in whom all the
promises of God are Yea and Amen.

4. Faith sets and keeps the Soul in a right frame after Prayer.

1. It sets the heart at rest, and keeps it quiet. When I consider that Christ
has the offering up of my prayers, and that God will not throw aside any of
the petitions which his dear Son brings to him, this quiets my heart: 1 Samuel
1.18.
When Hanna had prayed, she did eat and her countenance was no more sad: If she
had not Faith, her stomach would have been no better, nor her heart quieter
after Prayer, than it was before: but now believing that God had looked on the
affliction of his Handmaid, and that he would give her that blessing which she
prayed for; now, I say, she goes away rejoicing in the goodness of God,
apprehended by Faith, and eats her bread with a merry heart.

David being among many enemies, and in the midst of dangers, Psa. 3.5.
having prayed, could lie down and take his rest; believing that the Lord would
preserve and deliver him, as he had prayed.

2. Faith sets the Soul, and keeps it, in a patient, waiting frame; and this is
that which God requires, and that which he loves; psa. 27.13, 14.
I had fainted, says David, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living; wait on the Lord, etc. David's Faith resting on
the promise of God, upheld him to wait on the Lord for the accomplishment of
his promise. The Apostle tells us, Hebr. 10.36.
We have need of patience, that after we have done the Will of God, (viz. in
praying, and using such means as God has appointed) we may receive the
Promises: There is a Promise of God to waiting Souls; Isai. 30 18
Blessed are they that wait for him: Now it is only the believing Soul, that
is a waiting Soul; Isai. 28.16
He that believes, will not make have. The godly are spoken of Psalm. 123.2. as
having confidence in God, and waiting for his goodness.

3. Faith keeps the heart in a praying disposition and frame, sets the Soul on
work, to pray again and again, often to ask the same things, till we have a
clear and full Answer from God: And Faith makes the Soul importunate with God,
still rising higher and higher in holy importunity: I believe that this Mercy
will come, in answer to Prayer; therefore I will pray instantly that it may
come, and constantly till it does come.

Thus Faith is necessary with respect to prayer-worship, which is indeed a
principal part of the Worship of God.

Secondly, Faith is necessary to the Worship of God in general, or to all
Worship: and that upon this account, or for these reasons:

1. Because, to the worship of God, there is required a knowledge of his Will,
and of the Rule of Worship; and an assent unto, and approbation of, the Truth,
and Holiness and goodness of his Revelations, and an Interest in him: Can a man
worship he knows not whom? or when he understands not how, he is to worship? or
when he is not persuaded in his own conscience, that what he does is right? or
when the Soul has no recumbency on the Object of Worship? Now this knowledge,
and this assent, and this persuasion, and this recumbency, is Faith.

2. Without Faith the Soul has no way to God, and so cannot draw nigh to him
in Worship: Jesus Christ is our only way to God, in him we have access with
boldness and confidence to the Throne of Grace: Now it is Faith in Jesus
Christ, which gives us the benefit of this way; no Faith, no Christ; no Christ,
no way to God; no possibility of any approach unto him without a Mediator; for
God out of Christ is a consuming Fire, and poor Christless Souls have cause to
fall into trembling, when they think of God. Now faithless souls, are
Christless; and without Faith the Soul has no access unto God, or communion
with him; therefore Faith is necessary to the Worship of God: It is only in
this way of recumbencie by Faith on Jesus Christ, that the Soul has any peace
toward God, and hope and comfort in it is approaching unto him. While we look
unto weak, corrupt, sinful Self, and upon our own imperfect, faulty, sinful
performances, there must needs be doubts and fears, and unquietness of spirit;
Being justified by Faith, Romans 5.1
we have Peace toward God: [Peace] i. e. that tranquillity of Conscience, or
that comfort and joy, which a Believer has in a Conscience sprinkled with the
blood of Christ, and that boldness which he has toward God, as being his
Father in Christ Jesus.

3. Faith is necessary, to the worship of God, because where Faith is not,
there can be neither will nor ability for any hold action, for any duty of
worship: What desire can the Soul have to draw near to God, till it has some
hope through Christ of it is acceptance with God? till it has some hold-fast on
the Covenant of God his Love? so long as the Soul is estranged from Christ, it
is a stranger to God, and God is a stranger to it: Till there be an Union
between Christ and the Soul, (even a Marriage Union) there will be no desire of
Communion or Spiritual Intercourse; Christ his Spouse is delighted to see him,
even thorough the lattices, to hear his voice at the door, but she rejoices
greatly to be with him in the Galleries, to have his company in the Chamber;
delights to enjoy him in Ordinances, and converse with him in worship: Where
there is such an Union to Christ, there is pleasure in seeing him, and hearing
him, joy to be with him. The Soul having tasted the sweets of his Love, desires
to be led up to a more full enjoyment of him; and so is making toward him in
the use of means, in attending on Ordinances, and performing Duties. Now this
Union, between Christ and the Soul, is by the means of Faith; it is by
believing, that the Soul comes to be one with Christ, and so to be desirous of
conversing with him, to delight in his Ordinances and Worship. Again, It is by
Faith, that the Soul, being made one with Christ, does fetch strength and
abilities from Christ, without whom we can do nothing that good is: Of Christ
his fullness, the believer receives grace for grace: Christ dwelling in the
heart by Faith, makes a holy heart, is the worker of Grace in the heart, and
furnishes the Soul with abilities for Duty; that the Soul being justified, and
so sanctified by him, may serve God, and worship him acceptably.

Lastly, There is one thing more, which is considerable in the description of
Worship, viz. the End of it; concerning which, our Conclusion is this.

God may be glorified by us.

This is God his great end of all his Works, of all his appointments and
Commands, even his own Glory. God has made all things for himself, and he will
have all to be done to him: 1 Cor. 10.31.
Do all to the glory of God; we are called upon to glorify God in our souls, 1
Cor. 6.20.
and in our bodies. Then may we be said to glorify God, when apprehending him
to be such a God, as he in his Word and Works has discovered himself to be, we
make a suitable profession in Word and Deed, really acknowledging his Power, and
Wisdom, and Holiness, and Goodness, and Faithfulness, and the rest of his
Attributes and Properties, reverently and humbly worshipping and serving the
only true God, to whom all Worship and Service is due from us; referring all
our actions to the right end, terminating all in him: Paul would have the
Philippians to be filled with the Fruits of Righteousess, Phil. 1.11.
which are by Christ Jesus, to the praise and glory of God.

Thus I have finished the Explication of the Point, explaining the Subject
briefly, and the Attribute more largely.

God, and you shall find it verified in all true Professors, that the Scripture
makes mention of; they were all worshippers of God.

I shall give you two words for the demonstration of the Point, viz. That true
Professors of the Christian Religion, are worshippers of God, according to the
Principles and Rules of the Religion which they profess; that real Christians
do indeed worship the Father.

The first Demonstration shall be

1. From the true state of Religion, 1. Demonstration.
and of a profession of Religion.

Religion properly notes a right acknowledgment, and holy pure worship of God,
according to the rule laid down in his Word. And Profession, is a plain, open,
declaration of our owning, embracing, and adhering to, the true Religion. Now,
Profession may be either that which is verbal only, or that which is real, as
well as verbal; and the profession real may be either regular or irregular.

A Verbal profession, practically contradicted, is invalidated by such a
contradiction, so that it is to be accounted as no profession: He that in word
professes himself to be of the Christian Religion, i. e. a Worshipper of God
in Christ, and yet in practice, is [(...)] one that does not worship God;
surely he is no true Professor: Nor is he a true professor of Religion, who,
though he does act something in the worship of God, yet acts not according to
the rule of true Religion and worship.

Religion and Christianity is not a mere Notion, but it is something Practical;
it notes not only the Minds reception of, and the Wills subscription to, the
principles and rules of Christianity; but also the framing of the heart, and of
the whole man, to be acting and working in those Principles and Rules.

Thus stands the Argument.

A true profession of Christianity, is real; there is practical Religion, and
Christianity in the life; and it is Regular, so that the business of Religion,
the true Professor acts according to Rule; therefore they who truly profess
the Christian Religion, and are true real Christians, are real and regular
Worshippers of God the Father.

2. It must needs be, 2. Demonstration.
that true Christians are real worshippers of God, because they are possessed
and acted by the Spirit of God and Christ; which Spirit is the efficient of
holy Worship, leading Souls to it, and acting them in it: Every thing acts
according to it is Principles; Principiatum respondet suis principiis.
Christians are principled by the Spirit of Christ, which does efficaciously
incline and govern them to do that which is pleasing to Christ. The Spirit's
in-Being, is argued by the Spirit his working in the Soul: The Spirit of Christ
is a sanctifying Spirit, that sets the heart right toward God, and orders the
conversation aright, in all points of holy Obedience; so that they who have
this Spirit, must needs be worshippers of God.

Now I have dispatched the Doctrinal part of my Discourse; Application.
I come to Application: I shall make but two Uses of the Point; The first for
Conviction; the other a Use of Exhortation.

Conviction.
I shall propound this clear Inference from the Doctrine.

If all true Gospel-professors, be true Worshippers; then they who are not true
Worshippers, are no^ true Professors. Now, if we come to try the hearts and
practices of people, by the description of true worship, what a multitude of
nominal Christians shall we find, that are by our Doctrine shut out of the
number of true Professors, and real Christians?

How few Souls that are religiously observant of God, and obedient to him?
Where there i^ no observance of God, and obedience to him, there is no true
profession of Religion; where there is no care to conform to the mind of
Christ, there is no rea^ Christianity: What a number o^ Souls are there, that
do not believe, do not love God, do no^ turn to him, do not thankfully
acknowledge his goodness toward them, do not set themselves to glorify him for
his Mercies?

Ah Souls! Do you choose God for your portion and chief good? Do you
affectionately accept of Jesus Christ to be your Savior and Lord, not only
acknowledging his Sufferings, and accepting of Pardon and Salvation through
him, but also acknowledging his Sovereignty, and submitting to his Government
and way of saving? Where there is not such a choice of God, and such an
acceptance of Christ, there is not that Faith which is a part of Internal
Worship. Do you love God above all inferior earthly things, loving these
things but with a love subordinate to the love of God? Where God is not thus
loved, the Soul does not worship him. Now, alas! how does Self-love,
Creature-love, love of the World, yea, and the love of Lusts, shut God out of
the affections of very many of us?

Where is that fear of God to be found, which, in all addresses to God,
composeth the Spirit by an awful apprehension of that infinite distance which
is betwixt God and Us? Where is that fear of God, which fenceth the Soul
against temptation unto sin, and is operative and instrumental unto holy
walking? How few true Penitents are there, that disallow and detest fin, and
carefully abstain from it; and do actually resist it, and turn from all sin
unto God, unto Piety and acts of Religion?

Now Friends, If you do not believe, do not love God, and fear him, and turn to
him, what Religion is in you? what is your Profession? where is your
Christianity?

And now, for external Worship, to try men upon that account.

Some are not worshippers so much as in appearance, practice no worship in
their Families, and seldom appear in the place of public Worship.

And some there are (alas! how many) that are worshippers only in appearance;
their Worship is merely External, they draw not near to God with their Spirits
in any act of Worship; nor is that which they do in point of Worship, done with
Conscience of God's Command, or with any respect to his Glory, or with Faith in
the Mediator.

And how much vain Worship is taken up, which is not ordered by God, but by
men; which is not according to pure, holy, divine Institutions, but according
to corrupt, rotten, human inventions?

Now gather up all this, and hence take conviction home to your selves.

You that do not acknowledge God in your hearts and lives: You that do not
believe his Revelations, and believe in his Son; You that love the world, and
love sin, but love not God; You that do not reverence the Holiness and the
Majesty of God, that stand not in awe of his Word, that are not afraid to sin
against him; You that will not turn from your sins unto God; You that regard
not to worship God in public and in private; and you whose Worship is merely
External: Take Conviction to your selves, that you are not right
Gospel-professors, or real Christians, forasmuch as you are not true
Worshippers.

God, Exhortation.
and become true Worshippers: Labor to know the Lord, and acknowledge the true
God; and believe in God, and love God, and fear God, and worship him regularly,
according to the Scripture-rule, as ever you desire, that God should look upon
you as Christians, and own you as true Professors of Religion.

Now that you may be a little quickened; Motives.
If you look into the Word of God, you may thence take up Arguments fit for you
to press upon your selves, that you may be persuaded to give your selves up
unto this Counsel.

The Apostle tells us, Heb. 11.6.
that God is a plentiful rewarder of them that diligently seek him: that call
upon his Name, and worship him, and trust in him; so that it is not in vain to
serve the Lord: There is profit in keeping his Ordinances: Though our Worship
must not be mercenary, we must not look only or chiefly at the reward, serving
God for our selves, for our own advantage; yet having looked at God his Glory,
and aimed at a conformity to his Will, we must go on in God's way, looking to
the reward, for our support and encouragement. The Apostle presses this
Argument upon himself and others; Heb. 12.28.
Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have Grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear; and this he
illustrateth by insinuating the danger of not worshipping and serving God; for
our God is a consuming Fire.

And with this Argument Moses presses the people of Israel, to a care of true
Worship, and due Obedience; Take heed unto your selves, lest ye forget the
Covenant of the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 4.23, 24.
etc. for the Lord thy God is a consuming Fire, even a jealous God. God has
power to destroy those that despise his Worship; and he will not spare in the
day of Vengeance, but will pour out his Wrath upon the Families that call not
upon his Name, upon the people that will not worship him: They that will not
worship God, but slight and despise all Counsels and Exhortations thereunto,
shall perish as the Enemies of Christ, that will not have him to Reign over
them. In Isa. 65. we may read severe threats against those that would not
worship God according to his Will, and sweet Promises to his faithful Servants
and true Worshippers: Ye are they that forsake the Lord, Isa. 65.11, 12, 13
and forget my holy Mountain, etc. Therefore will I number you to the Sword.
etc. Behold, my Servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry, behold, my Servants
shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed, etc. God, Mal 3.16 17, 18.
by the Prophet Malachy, tells us, that he will own true Worshippers, those
that fear him, and serve him, they are dear and precious to him; his Jewels,
and he will deal Fatherly and lovingly with them; Then shall ye return, and
discern between the Righteous and the Wicked, etc. It shall one day clearly
appear, what difference there is between the godly and the wicked; what
difference God puts between the one and the other; when he shall deal with the
one as a tender Father, and in great Mercy save him; and with the other as a
severe Judge, and in great fury destroy him.

I will add but one word more, to excite you to a care of worshipping God
aright: Look again into the Scripture, and you shall find that God has engaged
his Name, and his Truth, to save the people that call upon his Name, that
worship him in Truth: See for this, Romans 10.13. Romans 10.13.
The former verse ends thus, The same Lord over all, is Rich unto all that
call upon him. Now he does by Scripture confirm this, [that God is rich in
Mercy to all true Believers, and holy Worshippers] he calls in the Prophet Joel
to attest this; For whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be
saved. Here is a promise of Temporal and Eternal Salvation, to such as in
Faith, worship God with a holy Worship: They shall be saved with a temporal
Salvation; saved in trouble, i. e. supported under it, and saved from trouble,
in due time delivered out of it: and they shall be Eternally saved, delivered
from the Wrath to come, and received up to Glory, to live with God for ever.

Now, let this be the great Argument to persuade you to become Worshippers of
God, to acquaint your selves with God, and give your selves up to him, to
search out, and to study his Will, and to give him the Worship and Service of
the inward and outward man; performing all outward Worship regularly, according
to the Scripture-Rule.

The Text last mentioned, tells you who shall be saved; viz. They that call
upon the Name of the Lord. i. e. such as know and acknowledge God, and believe
his Word, and believe in his Son; and love, and fear God, and strive to please
him, and worship him in Spirit and in Truth: You can have no hopes to be Saved,
as long as you are ignorant, and unbelieving, and fearless, and graceless, and
dutyless; while you continue to be of such a gainsaying spirit, that you will
not be called off from sin, and the world, unto God; so long as you continue
despisers of God his Ordinances, and Worship; or while your Worship is carnal
and superstitious; as long as it is thus with you, you are far from Salvation:
Therefore my beloved, let us call upon the Name of the Lord, let us become true
Worshippers of God, that we may lay hold upon this Gospel-promise, and may have
some well-grounded hope of Salvation through Christ Jesus.

Thus I have dispatched the first Point which is implied in the Text; viz.

That all right Gospel-professers, (true professors of the Christian Religion)
are true Gospel-worshippers; (worshippers of the true God, according to the
Principles and Rules of the Religion which they profess) Real Christians do
indeed Worship the Father.

Now I come to handle the second Doctrine, which is the substance, and express
matter of the Text.

True Gospel Worship, is a Worship in Spirit and in Truth.

This Proposition requires Explication; I shall therefore explain both the
Subject and the Predicate.

First, Explication.
Here is the Subject, Gospel Worship.

What is Gospel Worship.

1. I take the term Worship here in a stricter sense, than in the former point;
understanding it of Instituted Worship, that which depends on, and is consonant
to, the Revelation of God his Will, any way or means appointed by God, for the
excercising of natural Worship, which is due to God, as God; any Religious
work, or duty of Divine appointment, to be performed unto God, directed more
immediately to him.

2. Gospel Worship is a Worship suitable to Gospel Times, and agreeable to the
Gospel-rule.

Secondly, Now to open the Predicate, that you may see what it is to Worship
God in Spirit and in Truth.

I shall not trouble you with the various significations of these terms Spirit
and Truth, but only show you what is the proper notion of them, in our Text and
Doctrine.

I have already told you, that our Savior here opposes Gospel Worship, to
both the former Worships spoken of in the Context; that of the Samaritans, and
that of the Jews. The Samaritan Worship was Hypocritical, and Counterfeit,
invented worship; not that which God had appointed either for the internals or
externals of it: It was heartless Devotion, and uninstituted Worship.

The Jewish Worship, as to the External part of it, (as Instituted by God)
stood in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and legal purifications, and in
offering sacrifices of Beasts, and fruits, and such like things; carnal Rites
and Ordinances, Heb. 9.10
as the Apostle calls them: And the generality of the Jews were so grossly
carnal in their apprehensions of the business of Religion, that they stuck in
the outward Ceremonies, having no respect at all to Internal and Spiritual
Worship; norminding that which was signified by those carnal Rites and
Shaddows, (though the understanding, godly, true Worshippers that were among
the Jews, worshipped Spiritually, with their Spirits; and truly, in Truth) so
that the Worship under the Law, which God approved of, was, in its Soul, and
substance, Spiritual; yet the Worship then was clothed with such a dress of
Ceremonies, that as to the Show and External part of it, in respect of the
outward Form and Body, it was but carnal Worship. Whereas the New Testament
Worship, is ordered to be in Spirit, i. e. without such a carnal body, or
covering of Ceremonies; and in Truth, i. e. without Figures and Shadows.

Well, it is clear, that Gospel Worship is here put in opposition to the Carnal
Ceremonious Worship of the Jews, and to the heartless devised Worship of the
Samaritans, which was a false Worship, wanting the truth of God's Word
appointing and warranting the matter of it, as well as the truth of a good
heart, and holy Devotion in the manner of performing it.

Now we may easily see, what is the import of this expression, [in Spirit, and
in Truth.]

First, as for the term Spirit, it notes

1. A renewed mind, and a renewed heart and affections, together with due
expressions of those affections, in suitable actions of Religious Worship.

2. A Spiritual kind of Worship, in opposition to that which is carnal and
Ceremonious, a Worship stripped of that clothing and dress of Ceremonies, to
which the people of God were tied under the Law, which are abolished by the
coming of Christ.

Moses in his stead; and that they who affect and plead for, and delight in a
Ceremonious Worship, seem to forget, that these are Gospel Times; and do in
effect deny that Christ is come; for, it is most evident, that our Savior here
points out the difference between Jews and Christians, in point of Worship; and
it is clear that the difference is not in the inward Substance and Soul of
Religion, but in the outward Form and Body.

Well, you see how the term (...).
Spirit, is here to be understood.

Secondly, The term (...)
Truth signifies

1. Sincerity, as opposed to hypocrisy.

2. It signifies the very kernel and substance of Religion; that Worship which
is real and substantial, which stands in the truth of those ancient Figures
and Shaddows; that which was figured by the offering of legal Sacrifices, and
by Ceremonious observances.

3. Truth signifies a Consonancy to the Word of God; that which is according to
Truth written: True Gospel Worship, is that which is commanded, and ordered, by
Christ; that which is exercised according to the simplicity of
Gospel-Institution.

True Gospel Worship, is a Worship performed in Spirit and in Truth; i. e. it
is Cordial, Holy, Sincere, Spiritual, Substantial, Instituted,
Scripture-worship, that which has the Word of God for it is Foundation and Rule.

Mat. 15.9
that In vain do they worship God, teaching, for Doctrine, the Commandments of
men. That is a vain idle Worship, an unprofitable Worship, which is ordered
otherwise than God has appointed, which is not directed to the true God
rightly conceived of; and performed in a right manner, suitable to his Will and
Nature, and which has not God's Word for its foundation and Rule. This was an
observation which you had from the 22 verse, which Christ says, Ye worship ye
know not what.

Now for demonstration of the point: We have two demonstrations in the Text.
This assertion [That true Gospel Worship, is a Worship in Spirit, and in Truth]
is proved.

1. 1. Demonstration.
From the Will of God, The Father seeks such to worship him: This is the
argument here used: They that worship God, must see that their Worship be such
as will please God. Now only such spiritual, sincere, instituted-worship
pleases him: Therefore only such Worship is to be performed.

2. A second reason is drawn from the Nature of God; God is a Spirit: he is a
pure, spiritual Essence, and he must be worshipped with a Worship, suitable to
his Nature: Thus to worship God is reasonable service.

God is a Spirit, in a kind of singularity, and excellency, and eminency, above
all Spirits.

God is a most Intelligent Spirit; his understandig is infinite. They who
satisfy themselves with a carnal external Worship, such as is but a Carcaise,
without any Soul of Heart-devotion in it, without holy, spiritual motions, and
affections, of the inward man; these apprehend not God to be a Spirit, the God
and Father of spirits, and the searcher of hearts, but deny his Spiritual
Nature, and make him a God of flesh, while they bring stesh to him for an
Offering: If God be a Spirit, he must be worshipped with our Spirit; and truly,
he calls for this, My Son give me thy heart: Prove. 23.26.
he rerequires a preparation of the heart for Worship, and the activity of the
inward man in the performance of Worship; and the Soul's intentness upon the
work in hand. God loves spiritual performances.

Again, God is a Spirit, most simple, void of all Composition, and incapable of
division: Such must our Worship be, suitable to the most simple Nature and
Being of God: It must be uncompounded, undivided Worship.

1. There must be no Composition in it, no mixture of our own conceits, and
devices, or any humane inventions; a patched, sophisticated,
linsey-woolsey-worship fuits not with the simplicity of God, the Object of
Worship.

2. There must be no division in our Worship, it must be whole entire Worship,
head and heart; understanding and affections; Soul and Body; all must join
unanimously in the Worship of God.

I will add one Demonstration more.

performed in Spirit and in Truth, (according to the import of those terms, as
they have been opened to you) is corrupt Worship: For Worship is corrupted
these three ways.

1. In respect of the Object; as, Worship corrupted 3 ways.
when something else is worshipped in stead of God; or when other Objects of
Worship are taken up besides God, and together with him; so also, when people
have carnal, gross, unsuitable apprehensions of God; and so worship not the
true God with a Worship suitable to his Nature (a spiritual, simple, pure
Worship.)

2. There is a corruption in the manner of Worship, when it is performed in
formality, without any care of preparation for it: without attention and
affection in it; when there is no Soul-labour, no Spirit-work in all our
Worship, but a resting in the bare outward act; and when that which people do
in point of Worship is merely out of custom, or for fashions-sake, without any
true respect toward God, or tendency of the Soul unto him: And when people
behave themselves carelessly, irreverently and rudely in the place and time of
Worship; and while they themselves pretend to be worshippers: This is corrupt,
rotten Worship.

3. Worship is horribly corrupted, in respect of the kinds and parts of it, by
taking away from, or adding to, Gods Institutions, or making an exchange with
God, following our own fancies, or other men's inventions, instead of God his
prescriptions.

Now, Worship that is thus corrupted, any of these ways, is not true
Gospel Worship, or that which is approved of God. True Gospel Worship is pure
Worship: Now that is pure Worship, for the Object of it, which is exhibited
to the true God alone, conceived of according to the Revelation of him in
Scripture: And that is pure Worship, as to the manner of it, which is performed
reverently, conscionably, spiritually, and affectionately. And that is pure
Worship for the matter, in respect of the kinds and parts of Worship, which
holds strictly to God his appointments, when nothing is done in the Worship of
God (Contra vel praeter) against or besides the Word of God.

Thus you have the Demonstration of the point: True Gospel Worship is a Worship
in Spirit and in Truth. For

This only will please God, and

This only is a Worship suitable to God, and

This is pure Worship.

Now I come to application. Applicat.


And I shall in the first place draw up three Inferences for Information. 1 Use
for Information.


in Spirit, performed with a renewed mind, and a renewed heart and affections;
then the Worship of the profane person, and of the Formalist, and Hypocrite,
is not Gospel Worship, for it is not Spirit-worship.

These men are not renewed in the Spirit of their mind, by the Holy Ghost
transforming them into the Image of God, which stands in Righteousness and
holiness of Truth; nor do they worship God with their Spirit. Men that are
notoriously ungodly, who devote themselves to carnal pleasures, and to the
service of base lusts, may sometimes act the part of those that seem to be
Religious: And many there are, that put on a made face of Religion, and that
walk in a disguise, seeming to men, to be Worshippers of God, but there is no
truth in their inward parts: There is some Religion before men, who judge
according to outward appearance; but there is no Religion in the sight of God,
who searches the heart, and tries the reins. Oh! how vain is the Religion of
Formal hypocrites, that pretend many times to exceeding great Reverence, in
managing the outward part of Worship; and are very Zealous about
Circumstantials and Ceremonies, placing all, or most part of, their Religion,
in gestures and forms, and other accidents of Worship; and in External
observances of humane Constitutions, in a pack of Complements; but have no
regard to the inward Substance and life of Worship; are so far from prizing,
and honoring this, that they can reproach, revile, and rail upon the true,
tender conscienced, sincere, spiritual Worshippers; (and this in Pulpits) with
blood in their faces, and fire in their eyes, and the poison of Aspes under
their lips. What sentence does the Spirit of God pass upon such Worship and
Worshippers: Mat. 15.7, 8, 9.
Ye hypocrites, well, did Esaias Prophecy of you, saying, etc. Christ here
condemns the Worship of the Scribes and Pharisees, because they placed Religion
in Ceremonies, and made up a worship of humane Traditions, and preferred these
Traditions before God's Commands; and he tells them, that this is vain worship;
that which has no approbation with God, is of no advantage to them, and is
frivolous in it self. It is but an idle Mock-worship, in which there is not
Spirit-work; the labor of the heart and affections toward God, and wherein men
satisfy themselves with a few Superficial Hypocritical, Complemental Services:
This is to offer to God^ Sacrifice of husks and shells, and lifeless carcasses;
and will God be pleased with this?

Let me here insert a word o^ Caution, to prevent mistakes.

I have not pitched upon this Text, as aiming it, or the Doctrine from it, or
any inference from the Doctrine, against al Forms of Worship: My Judgment
stands not against the u^ of a well composed Litugy, o^ Form of public
Worship: I doubt not but there may be Spiritual Worship, and heart Devotion,
and fervency of affection i^ the use of a Form; though experience may teach us,
that we a^ apt to loose much of our affection by a constant use of the same
words or Forms, without any interposition of such matter or expressions, as may
serve to ca^ home, and quicken affection and attention.

But alas! how many are there, that are merely for Forms, without any
heart-Devotion, that not only are regardless of, but even defy, and deride,
Spirit-worship, and are zealous for such or such a Form of worship, merely out
of humor, or happily out of design, and in opposition to Gospel Worship, and
Gospel Worshippers? And how many are there that worship God according to their
own humors, and in such a formal way, of purpose to shift off God's Worship,
that which is Spiritual and Cordial? who offer him the lips, in repeating
Prayers after the Reader, that the heart may be excused; who, if they had not
some customary Service to perform, and some bodily Worship to be employed in,
would find little or nothing to do in our Assemblies: And how many are they who
I dolize the Liturgy, and place all their Religion in it? Now our Text and
Doctrine lies against such Worship and Worshippers, as naught, as being far
from Gospel Worship, and Gospel-worshippers.

Gospel Worship, (that which suits with Gospel Times, and accords with the
Gospel-rule) be a Worship in Spirit; i. e. a Spiritual Worship, in opposition
to that which is Carnal and Ceremonious; if it be a Worship stripped of the
clothing and dress of Ceremonies; then hence may be inferred a just
condemnation of a body of Ceremonies, introduced into the Church, of mystical
signification, by Institution humane, appropriated to Divine Worship, and made
necessary thereunto, and parts thereof. Spiritual Gospel Worship stands in
opposition to a pompous train of Ceremonies, and to that Worship, which
confisteth so much of body.

What then shall we think of the Popish Worship, which is as Ceremonious, as
ever was the Jewish; which is indeed a very Mass of Ceremonies. The Apostle
Paul tells the Jews, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3.
that they were but children, when their Ceremonies were in use, and indulged
to them; so that it seems the Popish Religion is a childish Religion. The
Church is now no babe: Augustine in his time, complained of the unreasonable
burden of Ceremonies, saying, That the condition of the Jews was more
tolerable in this respect, than of Christians: But alas! how much is the
burden increased beyond that it was in his time? so that the little finger now,
is heavier than the whole body was then. Jer. 3.16.
Jeremiah has a Prophecy of Gospel Times, that then the Jews should forget
the Ark, i. e. all those external Symbols and Ceremonies, which were in use
before the Ark was laid aside; and they should now be Spiritual worshippers.
The Antichristian Faction (as if these were not Gospel Times) have received
many Jewish and Paganish rites; and with those hypocrites which the Prophet
Esaias speaks of, Isa. 66.5.
insult over the true Spiritual worshippers, despising them, and their plain,
simple Gospel Worship, saying, Let the Lord be glorified; let him be honored
with a more decent, splendid Worship, such as we give him: But men shall one
day find, that God will give them no thanks, for going about to honor him with
their gaudy Ceremonies. Well, beloved; If this be a note of the true
Gospel Worship, that it shall not be Ceremony, but Spirit; then surely the
Popish Ceremonious Worship, and all Worship that is modeled in imitation
thereof, cannot be true worship: And I pray let this be considered, (which I
have formerly hinted to you) that they who burden the Church with a multitude
of Ceremonies, go about to destroy Gospel Worship, which must not be
Ceremonious; and do what in them lies to cast Christ out of the Church, and to
bring in Moses again; and they who affect, and plead for, and delight in, and
practice, a Ceremonious Worship, seem to forget that these are Gospel Times.

And if men shall allege, that many of the vulgar sort have as much need of
such helps, as the Jews had; surely this is a vain plea: for we must always
consider, how God will have his Worship to be managed; surely, he knows what is
best, and what is necessary and expedient.

Gospel Worship, be a Worship in Truth, i. e. that which is consonant to the
Word of God, according to the true revelations of his Will; that which is
commanded and ordered by Christ, and exercised according to the simplicity of
Gospel-Intitution, then all devised Will Worship, wherein there is an adding to
the Word of God, or a mingling of man's inventions with God's Institutions, must
needs be excepted against, as no true Gospel Worship.

All Gospel Worship is built upon the sure, pure foundation of Divine
Gospel-institutions. The Word of God does appoint and order the Worship which
he will have, in every Essential part of it; and it is a general Rule for
Circumstantials: It does not indeed particularly command and order every
circumstance, but the Church must take heed that under the name of
Circumstances, and under pretense of Church Power herein, she do not bring in
Worship. Mere Circumstances belonging to religious Actions, are left to Humane
determination; but it is not left unto men to appoint any kinds, parts or means
of Worship: Now Ceremonies properly sacred, and significant by Humane
Institution, are judged to be more than Circumstances, to be indeed parts of
Worship, to be Ceremonial Worship; and that Worship which is not commanded by
God, is not warrantable, approved Worship. We have in the Scripture strict
prohibitions of adding to the Word of God: Deuteronomy. 4.2
Ye shall not add to the word which I command you. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Whatsoever thing I command you, observe to do it: Thou shall not add
thereunto.

These Texts forbid all Humane Ordinances, and establish God's Word, as the
only Rule we must attend unto in his Worship. Every word of God is pure, Prove.
30.5, 6.
says Agur. Add thou not to his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar. Here is a prohibition, to keep men from corrupting or
adulterating the Name of God in his Word, by an addition of men's inventions and
traditions, when they are imposed as if they were the express Will of God.

Then, there are two great Considerations, to enforce this Prohibition.

1. God will reprove such Adders to his Word.

2. God, who is Almighty, and infinitely wise, and holy, and just, will take in
hand such Corrupters of his Name and Word, so that he will demonstrate to them,
and convince them of, their horrible wickedness in adding to his Word, by
foysting in men's inventions; and he will make them to bear their iniquity with
terror: And they shall be convinced, that they have lied against God, and
shall be made to bear the guilt of such lying, and shall suffer the punishment,
shall receive the doom of liars.

These are weighty Considerations, to deter men from corrupting the Word of God.

There is another terrible Text to this purpose in the close of all the
Scripture: Rev. 22.18.
If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this Book.

Thus you see how the Word of God witnesses against all devised Will Worship,
which is not Worship in truth.

Now surely, if men did look at God as God, and look upon the Scriptures as his
Word, owning the Sovereign Authority of Scripture, they would then be fearful
to corrupt the Worship of God, seeing God in his Word does so strictly
prohibit, and so earnestly testify against such Corruption. But here is the
mischief, that however men may say that they believe the Scriptures to be the
Word of God; yet they are indeed no better than Infidels concerning the
Scripture, and the Name of God in it. Jer. 6.10
The word of God is to them a reproach, they have no delight in it. Men think
that they have as good words as the Word of God is, and that they have
Traditions which are of as great Authority as God's Revelations: Now when
Scripture is slighted, so that it lays no awe upon men's spirits, no marvel that
men follow their own inventions.

Well, Beloved; Gospel Worship is a Worship in truth, Regular worship, which
has its foundation in the Word, and is ordered according to the Word of God.
We read in Scripture of pure Religion: certainly, Jam. 1.21
that Religion is most pure which has its foundation and dependence upon the
Word of God; and this Religion stands for ever, will stand in the
Judgement-day, when all other Religions will be condemned to Hell. The Word of
God endures for ever, and so do they that conform themselves to it.

Now, for such as slight Divine Institutions, and cast off the only sure
Foundation, they make other Rules to themselves, and ground their Worship upon
other rotten Foundations. As,

1. The imagination of their own hearts: Me thinks, says one and another, this
is very good Worship, this is decent, and this is good order. But God often
forbids the setting up of such a Rule, telling us, that we must not follow our
own hearts, we must not go in the way which we our selves shall choose, we must
not do what seems good in our own eyes.

2. Men desire to satisfy the flesh, and therefore delight in a sense-pleasing
worship. Thus the Papists have a Worship pompous, and outwardly glorious,
merely sensual, pleasing their eyes with their goodly Images, (as the Prophet
calls them) and with their costly Furniture; and pleasing the ear with their
Music, and the smelling, with incense and persumes. All Worship of God is the
exercise of Faith, and to draw out spiritual Meditations, not to please the
senses: That Worship which is most pleasing to the flesh, is to be suspected as
most displeasing to God.

3. Antiquity is a great prop of false Worship, and traditions of Fathers are
much pleaded by the Superstitious: but what says Christ? Call no man Father on
earth; i. e. so as to rely on his Authority: and what said Cyprian? Christ is
Antiquity to me, Antiquitas mihi Jesus, etc.
and not Custom; but Christ is the Truth.

4. The Name of a Church goes very far with many. Thus the Papists will be
bound up wholly by the Determinations and Constitutions of the Church, whatever
they be; and they cry out, What, will you go against the Church? and if you
enquire what is the Church, it will be found to be nothing else but the will
and resolution of a proud Pope, or the Antichristian Prelacy. Mr. A. B.
Indeed the Authority of a true Church, shining with Scripture Light must not
be a Cipher, but it must not be all things.

Well, Beloved; If we profess our selves Christians, it greatly behooves us to
be well settled in the right foundation of religious Worship, that as touching
what we do herein, we may be able to answer this Question, Who has required
it? otherwise God and Christ will reject our Religion and Worship, as not being
in Truth, not being Gospel Worship; and it will be found an empty vain thing,
by which we are no way advantaged, and for which there is no reward laid up.

Instruction.


Having inserted some clear consequences from the Doctrine, I come now in the
second place, to a Use of Instruction.

1. We are here taught, wherein the Worship and Service of God does principally
consist, viz. in the inward motions and affections of the heart; This is
Spirit-worship; this is to worship God in Spirit; and Christ tells us here,
that this is true Worship: He that does not thus serve God with his Spirit,
worshipping him with the inward motions and affections of the heart, does but
mock God, in saying his Prayers, (as ignorants phrase it) and in coming to
Church and hearing a Sermon, etc. Such a one deals with God, as the Poets
fable, that Prometheus dealt with Jupiter, in giving him bones covered with
skin, when all the meat was taken off.

2. Learn here, That as in God's Worship, we must feel inward motions
stirring, and the affections must be up; so these motions and affections must
be spiritual, excited in us by the Spirit of God, or else we cannot truly be
said to worship God in Spirit. Now

1. This does make against all unregenerate persons or hypocrites that are not
rerenewed by the Spirit of God; however they may feel sometimes, some flashings
of affection in their Devotion, yet these motions are not from the santifying
Spirit of God, and so they are not true Worshippers.

2. It makes against all Idolatrous and Superstitious Worshippers: commonly
such men's Devotions are very dead; usually false worship is grossly
hypocritical: This people (says God) draw near me with their mouth, Isa 29.13
and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me:
and why? Their fear toward me ( i e. their Worship) is taught by the Precepts
of men: Or if such Worshippers be not grossly hypocritical, yet there is a
secret hypocrifie and want of spirituality in their Worship: The inward motions
and affections of the heart, which they may feel stirring, are not Spiritual,
but Carnal; arising from their own deceitful hearts. This is a sure Rule, Mr.
D. D.
said an emiuent Divine; The Author of any Worship, is, in a manner, the
performer of it: Now God his Spirit is not the Author of an Idolatrous or
Superstitious Worship, but Satan and Man's brain are the Authors of it; and
surely the Spirit of God owes their inventions no such Service, as to attend
upon them, and help them in the performance of such Worship. Let them talk what
they please, of the usefulness of their Inventions, and Additaments, and
devised Ceremonies, for working upon the affections, and to excite Devotion;
The truth is, that only the Spirit of God excites true Devotion, and in doing
this, he blows with his own bellows; there is good ground therefore to supect
that Devotion, which is stirred up by such means as men talk of.

3. Learn here, that in performing any solemn Service to God, there must be a
Conjunction of Spirit and Truth: There must be a true matter of Worship
grounded upon the Word of God; it must be no devised Worship: and there must be
a true manner of Worship; it must be done with the very Spirit, and come from
the heart; it must be no formal, complemental Worship; As one speaks wittily,
and also solidly, Though it must not be Will Worship, as opposed to prescribed
Worship, (it must not be a Worship according to our own imaginations, or
humors, or wills) yet in regard of performance, it must be Will Worship; i. e.
it must be performed with the Will and Affections.

These are the two common Errors in men's Worship: If there be Truth, so that
it be a true Worship, for the matter of it, yet they worship not in Spirit;
with a true heart and fervent affections: Again, if there be Spirit, some blind
kind of Zeal, some affections in the service performed, yet there is no Truth;
the Worship is like that of the Samaritans in Mount Gerizim, it wants the Truth
of God's Word to warrant it: Thus some are Samaritans, some Jews; either a
false Worship, or a true Worship with a false heart; there are few true
worshippers: You see here, that true Gospel Worship, is a Worship in Spirit and
in Truth.

Exhortation.
from the Text and Doctrine, suggest to you, and press upon you: Is true
Gospel Worship, a Worship in Spirit and in Truth, and is there much Worship in
the world, among those that pretend to Christianity, which is no right
Gospel Worship. Then

God his appointment, is better than the ways that are of man's invention, and
that God is to be obeyed, rather than man; therefore let us consider.

in spirit and in truth. Let us prefer in our judgments, and adhere in
affection and practice to, that which appears really to be the best. Consulting
with flesh and blood, and advising with carnal reason, and attending to carnal
policy, is that which does strangely blind men's eyes, and bias their
judgments, carrying them the wrong way: if this be best, why should I enter
into a consultation, Whether it be better for me to fix here, or elsewhere?

true Gospel Worship. David having chosen the way of truth, hated every false
way.



in our Worship. Let us manage holy work with a holy heavenly mind, giving God
the kernel of spiritual Devotion, as well as the shell of Adoration: and let us
be pleased with the simplicity of Gospel Ordinances, and delight in the simple,
pure, plain institutions of Christ: and let us in our practice keep as close as
may be to Gods Commands, not turning aside to the right hand, or to the left.
Let us be Scripture-men in this point, making the Scripture both the Foundation
and Rule of our Worship, and adhering thereunto.

Then we shall be sure and constant in our way: For as the truth is the same,
yesterday, and to day, and for ever; so will the Scripture-man be of the same
mind, and the same frame, and the same practice in Religion; whereas they who
build not upon this foundation, will be like that Bishop of Alexandria, who was
called Euripus, because of his ebbing and flowing, his going this way and that
way in matters of Religion: For a Bishopric he would swear to the Nicene
Council; and then, to keep his place, (when the Tide turned) he would again
forswear it. But he that fixes upon God's Word, will be constant; and this
constant man shall have peace, shall have peace in Christ, (as our Savior
says to his Disciples) though in the world he may have tribulations. Gal. 6.16
As many as walk according to this Rule, peace be unto them.

And, that you may enter into, and persevere in, a right course of true
Gospel Worship, such as is pleasing to God;

1. There must be a sincere desire to be true worshippers, and so a seeking
unto God by prayer, to have your judgment rightly informed, and well settled
in this matter, and to have your hearts carried to true and spiritual Worship,
and to be guided and managed by the Spirit of God in your Worship. Beg of God
that you may understand, and affect, and act that which is right.

2. We must captivate our own fleshly wisdom, and carnal reason, which may
judge this or that Worship to be lawful, and convenient, and prudential, and
approvable, though not the very best. Corrupt reason must not be set up in the
place of a Judge, to give sentence in the matters of God; nor must it be
suffered to dispute Christ his Commands: but this must be brought into
captivity to the obedience of Christ. Where we have a clear Word, we must learn
to obey without reasoning, not examining the matter by the judgment of corrupt
reason. Our corrupt minds will reason against duty, and reason us off from it;
therefore reason must be subjugated to the Word of God, to the Law of Christ.

3. We must labor to work out of our hearts all inordinate love of earthly
things. Hag. 1.2, 4.
We shall find, Haggai 1. that the peoples care and love to build their own
houses, made them to neglect the building of God's house. Thus Covetousness put
the Pharisees upon corrupt interpretations o^ the Scripture. When men's hearts
are set upon the world, they will part from their Religion rather than their
Riches, and they will take up any Worship for their wordly advantage. When men
delight more in the glory of their own houses, than in the spiritual beauty of
Ordinances, no wonder if they stand little upon Christ his order.

Diogenes his Tub, Mr. A. B.
to be turned every way, from the Sun, and to the Sun, and according as the
wind blows. Carnal respect is a Loadstone to a number of men: Fac me Episcopum
Romanum, and ero Christianus.
Make me Bishop of Rome, (said he once) and I will be a Christian. The carnal
Politician, so that he may be great, and in favor with the Times, will be for
any Worship, of any profession or party. Carnal policy will make men to alter
for their own carnal ends; therefore we must take heed of this.



Mr. R. B.
Faith looking at the things unseen, would excite such a serious frame of
spirit, as would not suffer Religion to evaporate into Formality, or to dwindle
into Complement and Ceremony.

Consol.
for a close of all, shall be by way of Consolation, in two words.

1. Who has not experience of a wandering mind, and of a dull, lazy heart in
prayer, and in other parts of Worship? Who is not conscious to himself of much
weakness, and of many failings in duty? But here is our comfort, it is not
said, The true worshippers shall worship God in spirit and perfection, but in
spirit and in truth, with a true and honest spirit. Sincerity is the
Characteristical difference between an Hypocrite and a true Christian: this is
usually called by Divines, Gospel perfection; this makes Worship to be real.
Oh! what rejoicing has the Christian from the testimony of his Conscience
concerning his Sincerity? Where this Sincerity is, God will cover many
imperfections.

2. Here is further comfort to those that worship in spirit and in truth: The
Father seeks such to worship him; this is the Worship which God regards:
Though men cast out such Worshippers with scorn and spite, yet God approves of
them, and smells a sweet savor from them. Pro. 15.8
The Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of
the upright is his delight. The poor naked prayer of a spiritual Worshipper is
better accepted of God, than all the bravery of the most pompous services of
the formal Worshipper. Men may require and act this and that in the Worship of
God, but God regards Spirit and truth; bring that, and you please him.

To the true Israelite, the spiritual Worshipper, the Preacher says: Go thy
way, eat thy bread with joy, drink thy wine with a merry heart: for God
accepts thy Worship.

Little Children, keep your selves from Idols. Amen.

Farewell, My Beloved.

CAESAR's Right: OR, The Subject's Duty, Due Subjection. From Romans 13.1.
IN the beginning of this Chapter, (in the first seven verses) the Apostle
asserteth the Divine Right and Authority of Magistracy; and thereupon
infers, and thence presses, the Duty of Subjection and Obedience to
Magistrates.

It may not be amiss to touch a little upon the Apostle's scope here, and the
occasion and ground of this Assertion and Vindication of the rightful Authority
of Rulers; and of such earnestness in pressing Christians to Subjection and
Obedience, not only here, but elsewhere also more plainly. Tit. 3.1.


The Apostle had told these Romans, that Believers are not under the Law; and
he afterward tells Christians, that they must not be the servants of men, 1
Cor. 7.23. Gal. 5.1.
and calls upon them to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
them free.

Now the Apostle foreseeing, that some might abuse the Doctrine of Christian
liberty, to a denial of all Superiority, and to the casting off the Yoke of
Subjection and Obedience to such as God has set over them; (as now Libertines
cry out, Liberty, liberty; Christ (say they) has made us free, and we are not
under the power of any, but Christ, He is our King.) The Apostle, I say,
foreseeing, that among such as profess themselves Christians, there might and
would be unruly, Anti-Magistratical Spirits, that would despise Dominions, and
cast off the Yoke of Subjection, does therefore clean up this point, teaching
that Christianity does not consume, but confirm civil polity. He urges
Subjection upon Christians, all Christians, every soul, showing the equity and
necessity of it; and indeed the better Christian any man is, the better Subject
will he be: He that has no Religion, may obey in some things for fear, or for
some other respects, and from some sorry principles; but if a man be Religious,
a Christian indeed, he will be subject and obedient for Conscience sake, in all
things that may be done by him with a good Conscience. The Gospel does not
destroy, but establish Civil Government.

Well, now to look into the Text.

There are two general parts of it.

1. A Precept or Injunction of Duty, Text divided.
Let every soul be subject, etc.

2. A Reason of the Command, or Ground of the Duty, For there is no power, etc.
Or thus I choose rather to divide the Text. See here, 1. A Proposition of a
Truth. 2. An Inference of Duty.


The Truth affirmed, is the Divine Right and Authority of Magistracy; There is
no power but of God; the powers that be, are ordained of God.

The Duty inferred, is Subjection and Obedience to Magistrates; Let every soul
therefore be subject to the higher powers.

In the Proposition we have, 1. The subject of the Right or Authority proposed
and asserted. 2. The rise and ground of it, which is expressed Affirmatively
and Negatively.


1. The Subject of the Superiority, Authority here granted, which is thus
expressed, (...).
Powers, higher powers: under which expressions the Apostle, by a Metonymie,
points out Civil Magistrates, who are invested with power and Authority over
others: All Magistrates, especially the chief Magistrate; and he entitles them
Powers, intimating (as is probably conjectured) that he speaks not so much of
particular persons in power, as of the Order and Office it self.

2. Here is the rise and ground of this Supereminency and Authority, which is
expressed two ways:

1. Negatively, There is no power but of God. Here now is a Negation of power
in any Creature to make Higher Powers, to give Power and Authority to one over
others: a denial, I say, of any other rise or original of Civil Government, but
only from God.

Governors and Government are not from men, as some affirm: Though Magistracy
be called, 1 Pet. 2, 13. (...).
An Ordinance of Man, a humane Creation or Creature; yet this is not to be
understood originaliter, as if Magistracy and Government were invented by man,
or had its original from man: but it is said to be an Ordinance of Man, either

1. Subjective; because this Power and Authority is subjected in man, and
managed by man, and the choice of the kinds of Magistrates, or such and such a
form of Government; yea, and of the persons, to exercise the power
Magistratical, is for the most part lest to men, and acted by men, under the
ordering, disposing Providence of God. Or,

2. Objective; because it is employed about Humane Affairs, is conversant about
the ordering and governing of man. Or,

3. (...), Finaliter; Man is the end of Magistracy: it was ordained for the
good of Man, and for the preserving of Humane Society. In this sense, in such
respects Magistracy is an Ordinance of Man, but the substance of the Power is
of God; There is no power but of God.

2. The Apostle turns this Exclusive into an Universal Affirmative, The powers
that be, are ordained of God. Here St. Paul positively asserts the rise of
Kingly Authority, and all Magistratical Power, to be from God; and he intimates
how it is of God: not only permissive, and directive, by his permitting and
directing Providence; but by his approbation, ordination and command: such an
intimation we have in the Original word, (...).
which is very emphatical: for, 1. It signifies, that Civil Powers are
appointed by God, and by him advanced above others. 2. That this is an orderly
disposition for the good of men, and very necessary. 3. The word signifies,
that these Powers are brought in order by God; have bounds set to them, Rules
and Laws given them, which they must not transgress.


Now as to the second part of the Text, viz. the Duty inferred from his
assertion of the Divine Ordination of these Powers, i.e. Subjection to them:
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers.

Note here, 1. The subject of the Duty. 2. The Duty it self.


1. The subject of the Duty, who must be subject; Every soul: (...).
[Soul] is here by a Synech doche put for Man; and this is ordinary with the
Hebrews and Greeks to call Man sometimes Soul, sometimes Flesh; Every Soul, all
Flesh, i.e. all men of whatsoever age, rank, quality or condition; all are by
the Apostle his Precept subjected to Magistracy, to the Civil Powers, supreme
and subordinate.

2. The Duty it self, Subjection; Let every soul [ (...). Subordinata sit.
be subject:] The word in the Original notes a willing and orderly Subjection,
and it implies Reverence and Obedience: but I shall speak more largely to these
particulars anon, in opening the Doctrine of the Text, to which I now come.

Two points here offer themselves: Doctrines two.
1. That Magistracy is of Divine Authority, instituted by God; His Ordinance.
2. That every Christian must be subject to Magistrates.


I shall be very brief in handling the first of these Doctrines, and shall
insist a little longer upon the other.

Magistracy is of Divine Authority, instituted by God.

I shall a little explain both the Subject and the Attribute of this
Proposition.

First, as touching the Subject; Powers, Higher Powers, Magistracy. You have
already had something of Explication in opening that term (...), Powers; and
the adjunct (...), Higher or Supereminent.

1. I told you, that here are pointed out Kings, or chief Rulers, and
subordinate Governors and Magistrates: and we have both sorts of Powers
indigitated more plainly and openly in other Scriptures. Exhort (says the
Apostle) that prayers be made for Kings, 1 Timothy 2.2. (...)
and for all that are in authority; that are in Eminency; i. e. Governors and
Magistrates, whatever Titles they have. Deuteronomy. 33.5.
Moses is said to be King in Jesurun, i. e. Governor or Ruler of the People;
and whereas it is said in the Book of Judges, In those days there was no [King]
in Israel; Judge. 19.1.
it is not to be understood of a Monarch specifically, but of a chief Governor
or Magistrate in Israel: for neither before that time, nor afterward, till the
days of Samuel, was there any Monarchical Government in Israel: Saul was
Isreal's first Monarch.

Then, besides (...), Kings, there are others (...), that are set in Eminency,
placed in Authority above others: The Apostle Paul, speaks of Principalities
and Powers, (...); The former word notes those that have a Primary, more
immediate, and more full, Supreme power under God, for administrations in their
Dominions, by their proper Power and Command, as Kings and chief Governors:
The latter word or expression, signifies such as exercise Authority under
Kings, deriving Power from them, to act as Governors, by Deputation; there are
Kings, 1 Pet. 2.12.
as Supreme, and Governors sent by them.

Now, in our Proposition, The Subject is Magistracy, concerning which

2. I have told you, that we are not only to look at the persons that bear
rule, but also, and more especially, at the Order, and Office, and Calling it
self.

Secondly, As to the Attribute in the Proposition, is of Divine Authority,
Instituted by God, is God's Ordinance. I have already opened the term Ordained
in the Text, whence the word Ordinance, in our Proposition.

Briefly now, thus take the meaning of the Attribute: God is the Author of
Magistracy; it is the Will and Appointment of God, that there should be
Government and Governors; Principalities and Powers; so that all Rulers and
Governors are either Missi, or Permissi, by Commission, or Permission from God.
Usurpers are by God his Providence and Permission; and rightful Governors are
by his Commission: The Power is his, however attained or used by men; and what
ever Magistrates be, good or bad; the Office, Magistracy, is of God Approbative
and Mandative, by way of Approbation and Command: The Power of Nero, was of
God, for he was chief Magistrate, when the Apostle laid down this Axiom or
Principle; The Powers that be, are ordained of God.



The Text is full of this Doctrine; it is here a plain Proposition, and it is
strongly implied in the Inference of the Duty here urged, as you shall see
further by and by; but other Scriptures prove this fully: 1 Pet. 2.14. Dan 2.21
Dan. 4.32
Governors are said to be sent of God: God sets up Kings: The most high
rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. Christ, the
Eternal Wisdom of his Father, tells us, Pro. 8.15
That by him Kings Reign: God in one Psalm speaking to Princes, and
Magistrates, Ps. 82.6.
says, I have said ye are Gods. I who have power to appoint whom I will to be
my Vicegerents, do call you, and constitute you, to be my Deputies upon Earth:
Magistrates are called Gods, Non participatione Divinae Essentiae, sed
similitudine Divinae potentiae
not that they are so Essentially, and by Nature, but by Similitude, and in
respect of their Power, because they represent God his Majesty in regard of
their Office, and do in a sort participate of the Power and Authority of God,
being deputed and authorized by him, to exercise power among men; I have said,
ye are Gods: I have given you a Command, Commission, and Power to bear Rule;
and my Word is a sufficient warrant for any Office or Ordinance: Thus the point
is proved; it shall now be very briefly Demonstrated.

1. The Divine Authority of Magistracy, Demonst.
(that it is God's Ordinance) may be argued from the antiquity of it: We read
in the Book of God, of Magistrates, even from the beginning; and why may we not
use the same argument, to prove the Divine Ordination of Magistracy, which is
wont to be used (and that not unaptly) to prove the Divinity of Scripture, viz.
the strange preservation of it through so many Ages, in so many Changes and
Revolutions, amidst all Wars and Confusions, against the rage of men and
Devils: God has owned it as a Plant of his own setting, which he planted
early, and would never suffer to be rooted up.

2. The Divine Ordination of Magistracy, may be argued from the injunctions
laid by God upon Magistrates, with his prescriptions of Rules of Government:
Deuteronomy. 1.17. Jer. 22.3. Psalm. 2.10
If they had no Authority to Rule, why should God command them to Rule
according to his Laws? and prescrite to them Rules of Government? herein God
owns Magistracy and Government among men.

3. We are commanded to pray for Magistrates; Tit. 3.1.
therefore Magistracy is ordained by God, and approved of God; otherwise, if
the Office were evil, and without Divine allowance, we should pray against it.

4. God his commanding of Subjects to obey Magistrates, evinceth Magistracy to
be of God: The enjoining of duty to the Subjects, establishes the Authority of
Rulers.

I might add several other particulars, to demonstrate the truth of this
Assertion, [That Magistracy is of Divine authority, is God's Ordinance] but
enough has been said to this purpose.

I shall not stay to consider and Answer the many objections, that are urged
against this Truth: but I shall only take notice of two, and hint a very short
Answer.

Object. Vindication of the point. Hos. 8.4.
If God be the Author of Magistracy; if there be no Powers but of God; how then
is it said, They set up Kings, but not by me; they made Princes, and I knew it
not?

Answ. Many things may be said not to be of God, as commanding and approving
them, which are not without God permitting them; They made Princes, and I knew
it not; viz. so as to approve of their choice; I left them to themselves,
suffering them to go on in their own way; but they had not my approbation of
what they did, nor are they like to have my blessing in it: God does not here
disown Magistracy, as if it were not his Ordinance; but he testifies against
such a choice, and such a manner of choosing a Magistrate, in a mutinous,
headstrong, tumultuous way, without any respect to God's Will, and without
asking Counsel of him.

Obj. God was angry with the Israelites for asking a King; 1 Samuel 10. and 12.
therefore Kingly Government is not God's Ordinance, but it is unlawful and
displeasing to God.

Samuel, who had deserved so well at their hands.

2. God himself chose Saul to be King, and qualified him for the Office, and
commanded Samuel to anoint him; which he would not have done, if the Kingly
Office had been displeasing to God.

Well, having explained, proved, demonstrated, and vindicated the point; I
proceed now to Application.

I shall wholly silence the Use of Information. Application.


My first Use shall be for Conviction and Reproof.

Conviction.
our Doctrine strikes very many people of several sorts. As

1. Papists, who exalt the Pope above the civil Magistrate, and give him power
over Princes, to excommunicate them, and depose them, and loose their Subjects
from their Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity; and who do maintain and avow that
cursed Doctrine of King-killing: Do these own God his Ordinance? but to let
them pass.

2. There are other Heretics, as Socinians, Millenaries, and Fifth-monarchy
men, and Quakers, and some Anabaptists, that look for the abolishing of all
Magistracy, and affirm, that Magistracy is an office displeasing to God, and
unlawful for a Christian to undertake; and load Magistrates with most vile
reproachful Titles, calling them Though Righteous Rulers.
Tyrants, When they execute Justice.
Persecutors, the Powers of darkness, the Antichristian Beast, etc. Lawless
Libertines, that cannot endure that any should be Lord over them: these are
Enemies to God's Ordinance, and resist it.

Well, all that contemn, and disesteem Magistracy, are guilty of great impiety,
in vilifying those that God does Dignifie; and seeking to pull down that Order,
and that Ordinance, which God has set up.

There are two sorts of men in the General, that are chargeable with
ungodliness and iniquity, against the Truth which has been demonstrated.

1. They who do Doctrinally, and in their Principles, deny Magistracy to be
from God, and affirm Government to be a work of darkness.

2. They who in their practice contemn Magistracy, do likewise sin against a
clear Ordinance of God: Some sin in disgraceful scurvy language, reviling the
gods, and speaking evil of the Rulers of the people: Others sin, by unseemly,
uncivil, rude carriage and behavior toward the Magistrate; by shameful
irreverence, impudence, and insolency; as that Generation of Quakers, who
pretend to extraordinary Sanctity, when they have not ordinary civility: But
let such men know, that in contemning Magistrates, as Magistrates, they contemn
God, whose Ordinance Magistracy is, and whose Officers and Deputies,
Magistrates are; They have not rejected thee, (says God to Samuel) but they
have rejected me, who rule them by thee my Deputy.

Consolation.
seeing Magistracy is God's Ordinance. God will defend the Office, will
maintain his own Ordinance, against the spite and fury of men and Devils; and
he will protect the Persons, and maintain the dignity, of those that are
Magistrates and Rulers for him, as well as by him: God will keep the Crown
where he has placed it, upon the head of any Servant of his, as long as he
has any work for him to do; he will uphold the Throne of that King, that seeks
and strives to uphold his Kingdom; and will keep those Rulers, that are careful
to keep his Way.

Exhortation.
I should Counsel and Exhort you, to yield subjection and obedience to
Magistrates: which is the duty of all Christians, inferred here by the Apostle,
from this consideration, That Magistracy is God's Ordinance: But that duty of
Subjection, is to be handled distinctly, in a Doctrinal way, I having laid it
down as part of the Doctrine of the Text, which I intend to open, and handle
more largely. Now

Powers amongst us Ordained by him. The Scripture speaks of Magistrates, and
Magistracy, as a great blessing; It calls Kings and Rulers, Nursing-Fathers,
Sheilds, Shepherds, Corner-stones, Pillars, Foundations, Saviors, etc. The
loss of them is reckoned to be a great Judgment, Isa. 3.
and the restoring of them is a great Mercy: It is promised as a great blessing
to an obedient people, that they shall have Kings and Princes, Jer. 17.25.
Governors to Rule them; and it is reckoned as a choice Mercy indeed, that our
Nobles shall be of our selves, Jer. 30.31.
and our Goaernours shall proceed from the midst of us: Oh! if we could be
sensible of the necessity, and the utility, and benefit of Government, so as to
see what mischief and misery it prevents, which Anarchy would bring upon us,
and what good it brings, how much it conduces to the happiness of a people:
I say if we did see this, how should we bless God for Government, especially
for a rightful Government a proper Government, a religious Government? Where
there is no Magistracy, all runs into confusion, and people come to ruin. But
oh, what a mercy is it, when the great Shepherd of his Flock^ raises up
Shepherds under him to govern, feed, and defend his Flock? Such Magistrates,
such Rulers, as are the Ministers of Go^ for our good; what a blessing ar^
they? It were easy to explicate here; the Subject is large; There is very much
carried in the name of a King; (...) quasi (...).
I say, in the Gree^ word, which signifies a King; a a Critic in that Tongue,
gives u^ the Etimology, or derivation, o^ rather the signification of it. The
Commonwealth is a building, and a chief Magistrate or King, i^ the Foundation.
Oh! how should we be every day pray sing God for this Ordinance of his, that we
can lie down in peace, and rest in peace, travail in peace, and go to God's
House in peace, and with comfort? (yet it is so) Oh! how great are our
enjoyments, by means of Magistracy? Good Magistrates, Supreme and Subordinate,
are the means under God, to preserve our Lives, and Goods, and Sabboths, and
Ordinances, and all that is, or should be, dear to us: O then, let us bless the
God of Heaven for this Ordinance of his; and let us bless God for the peaceable
Restoration of his Majesty, our gracious Sovereign, to the actual possession
and exercise of his regal Authority among us, offering our hearty thanksgiving
to our God, for all those public benefits, which upon that account we have
received, and which we hope further, that we shall, and pray that we may,
enjoy; and the Lord grant, that we may have more and more cause to rejoice in
this great providence of his.

Magistrates, all that are in Authority under him, pray that God would enrich
both the Supreme and inseriour Magistrates, with Gifts and Graces fit for their
places; that they may Rule for God, and act as his Deputies and Vicegerents,
that they may be a Terror to evil doers, and an encouragement to those that
desire truly to fear God; that they may be Ministers of God, for the good of
God's people; and let us pray, that God will maintain this Ordinance of his
amongst us, and protect, and govern, and bless our Government, that the King's
Throne may be established by Righteousness, and the Crown may flourish upon his
head.

Magistracy, or the Powers which God has ordained: This is the Apostle his
inference from the Doctrine of the Text; The Powers that be, are ordained of
God, therefore resist not the Powers, but be subject to them.

The word here translated, (...).
to resist, is properly, to be counter-ordered, or ordered against; it notes
such a resisting, as when a man is contrary to the order established, to the
Power which God has ordained; and here is intended all manner of Actu, aut
affectu.
opposition; there must be neither opposite action, nor adverse affection: Let
there be no attempts or endeavors, either by open force, or close conspiracy
and secret plottings, against the Powers which God has ordained, against the
Government which he has set up; neither let the will withstand it, or the
heart be opposite to it; all attempts against Government, We speak of civil
Government, that which is of God.
and all disaffection and contrariety in heart and will unto Government, is a
resisting of the Powers: Where God has placed Sovereignty, let us take heed of
resisting Sovereign Power.

I shall not muster up Arguments to enforce this Counsel, but only hint a word
or two, which the Context affords.

He that resists, resists the Ordinance of God, and so rises up against
God himself; Shall we seek to violate God's Order, or desire the violation of
it? what is this but to rebel against God? and is not this horrible wickedness?

Magistracy: They that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation: The word
is [(...),] Beza renders it condemnation, others judgment, revenge,
punishment; indeed the word signifies all these; and here may be understood
both temporal and eternal punishment, to which we shall render our selves
liable, by resisting the Powers; but of whom shall resisters receive
punishment? why, either from the Powers resisted, or certainly from God, who
will not endure that men should rise up against him, by resisting his Ordinance
but he will resist them, and rise up against them: Never any Rebelled against
God, and prospered God is the Vindicator of his own Ordinance, and he will not
suffer the violators of Government, o^ the opposers of a lawful Magistracy, to
go unpunished. What befell Miriam, for speaking against Moses? and what did
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, get by their opposition and resistance? What became
of rebellious Absalom, and perfidious Achitophel? the one was hanged in an Oak,
and the other was his own wilful Executioner, hanged himself. What was the end
of Shimei and Sheba, was it not miserable? had Zimripeace that slew his Master?
And have we not seen, how they who sought to overthrough Magistracy amongst us,
have overthrown themselves? Therefore let us take heed of resisting the Powers
ordained of God.

Magistracy, and Government among us, (forasmuch as it is the good Ordinance of
God) and for the support of the Power which God has ordained: I shall only
touch upon two ways of endeavor, wherein we may, and must contribute
thereunto, viz. Praying, and paying.

1. We must pray for Magistracy and Magistrates; pray to God, to maintain and
uphold the Office, his own Ordinance, and to inspire, and guide, and preserve,
and bless the Officers both Supreme and Subordinate, to whom he has committed
the Sword, to be born by them; whom he has invested with Power and Authority
over us, that are the Powers ordained of God: We must pray for the continuance
and support of Magistracy, with respect to the honor of God, whose Ordinance
it is for his own Glory, in opposition to unruly Libertines, and
antimagistratical spirits, that defy this Ordinance of God.

And we are to pray for the upholding of Magistracy, with respect to our
selves, in regard of the necessity and utility of this Ordinance, in as much as
it is ordained for our good.

And we must pray for Magistates, for those whom God has set over us, to
govern us, that under them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, 1 Timothy 2.3,
2.
in all godliness and honesty.

2. We must contribute toward the support of the Powers which God has
ordained, by a cheerful payment of such Tribute or Customs, as are legally and
reasonably required of us, for necessary supplies: Render to all their dues,
Romans 13.7.
Tribute, to whom Tribute; Custom, to whom Custom belongs.

Magistracy, having a high esteem of the higher Powers, acknowledging their
Office to be God's Ordinance, and a jurisdiction delegated from God himself,
who invests Government with Majesty; I have said, ye are Gods: Magistrates are
God his Lieutenants (as it were) his Deputies; and so bear his Title; therefore
their Calling is honorable, and they must be honored.

But this will fall in under the notion of Subjection, to which the Apostle
here exhorts, from the consideration of the Authority of Magistracy; and that
is it, which I shall hereafter speak of.

The second Doctrinal conclusion from the Text, is this.

That every Christian must be subject to the powers ordained of God.

In handling this point, I shall by way of Explication, show 1. What is the
import of this term Subjection. 2. To whom Subjection must be yielded. 3. Who
must be subject. 4. I shall open the duty Subjection, endeavoring to give you
the true state of it.


What does this term Subjection import, or what is it to subject?

Ans. Subjicere, is to lay or put under; as it is said. David brought forth the
people that were in Rabba, [and subjecit serres, etc.] and put them under Sawes
and harrows of Iron; subjected them to such grievous punishments: but the (...)
Greek word here in the Text, signifies something further, than to be under, or
to be put under; it signifies an orderly subjection, to be put in order under
another: Let every soul be subordinate to the higher Powers; i. e. Subject in
his place and order: The word being of a middle voice, may be translated either
passively or actively; but here it must be of an active signification, for it
is an exhortation to the performance of a duty; Let every soul be subject,
according to God his Ordinance, who has by his Ordination and Command,
subjected every Soul to the higher powers; so that here is noted, a willing
orderly subjection: And the word is a general word, comprehending all other
duties and services; it notes the whole duty of an inferior estate;
particularly, it implies due reverence, and a ready, full obedience, without
resistance or reluctance.

To whom must this subjection be yielded?

Ans. To the higher Powers, and to all the powers that are ordained of God; to
Magistrates supreme and subordinate: Supreme powers are intended principally,
but not only; we read elsewhere, of Principalities and Powers: Tit. 3 1 (...).
The former word notes, those that have a primary, more immediate, and more
plenary, power under God, for administrations in their Dominions, as Kings and
chief Governors: The other word signifies, such as exercise Authority under
them, deriving power from them, to act as Governors, by delegation: There are
Kings, 1 Pet. 2.12.
as supreme, and Governors sent by them: These are the object of this duty of
subjection, or subjectum cui, the subject to whom subjection must be yielded:
and we are to look, not only at the persons that bear Rule, have Power, and are
in Authority, but also, and more especially at the Order, Office, and Calling
it self.

Who must be subject?

Answ. The Text says, Every Soul; (...).
in our proposition, it is every Christian: All persons under Government, of
whatsoever age, rank, capacity, calling, quality, or condition, all must be
subject to Magistrates, to the powers supreme and subordinate.

What is the duty here called for in the expression of the Text?

Answ. A willing and orderly subjection, Subjection implies
which implies Reverence and Obedience.

1. Reverence; 1 Reverence.
which is a kind of honor and observance, joined with some awe and special
humility, and submission of the mind and body, exhibited by an inferior, to a
Superior; having a regard to his person, and place, and worth, and words, and
actions.

This Reverence must be inward and outward.

1. 1. Inward.
Inward Reverence of the heart: The Apostle says, that the Law is spiritual;
it is so in every Commandment; it reaches the inward man: Thus in this point
of honoring Superiors, there is a Law laid upon the heart. This inward
reverence is, to have a due estimation of their Superiority and Authority; and
in acknowledgement thereof, to have due respect to them in our hearts, to have
them in high account, and to stand in awe of them: Contrary to this inward
reverence, is, a sleighting and despising of Superiors; as those children of
Belial despised Saul; 1 Samuel 10.27.
and those impure Heretics which the Apostle speaks of, Jude 8.
are said to despise Dominions: Now we are to honor Magistrates in our hearts
(as they are in God's place) esteeming them to be higher and worthier than
others, and standing in awe of them: Prove. 24.21.
Fear God and the King. The Lord magnified Joshua in the fight of all Israel,
and they feared him; Josh. 4.14.
i. e. reverenced him, as they feared Moses, etc. The people said unto David,
Thou art worth ten thousand of us; 2 Samuel 18.3.
they had a reverend, high esteem of him. The Church accounted King Josiah the
breath of their Nostrils; Sam. 4.20.
he was precious in their account.

2. There must be outward reverence, 2 Outward.
which is an expression of the mind in reverend and lowly speeches and gestures.

1. We must speak reverently and respectively of, In speech
and especially to, Magistrates. Aaron, though the Elder Brother, and
High Priest, honors Moses with the Title of Lord; he being by Gods
appointment the Captain General and Chief Magistrate, Governor of the people.
The woman of Tekoah calls David an Angel; 2 Samuel 14.17. cap. 19.27.
and so does Mephibosheth. If I have found favor in the sight of the King, and
if it please the King to grant my petition, etc. says the Queen Esther to King
Ahasuerosh. God his Command is express; Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the gods, nor speak evil of the rulers of thy people:
and the Spirit of God notes them to be audacious sinners, who are guilty of
this evil; 2 Pet. 2.10.
They are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities: as if he had said, Did they
fear God or Man, they would not dare to do this.

2. We must show reverence to the Magistrate by reverend cartiage and gestures;
In behavior.
as, uncovering the head, bowing the knee, and making obeisance; as Araunah,
when he saw the King coming toward him, 2 Samuel 24.20.
bowed himself toward the King on his face, upon the ground. So, when Joseph
was made Viceroy and Governor of Egypt, they cried before him, Genesis 41.43.
Bow the knee. Our deportment before the Powers must savor of humility, and a
sense of our Duty: therefore it is horrible ignorance, or notorious malice and
wickedness, in some men, to urge the Scripture against reverend respectful
behavior toward Magistrates, and to abuse it for the patronage of their
incivility and rudeness, telling us, that God teaches and commands
Christians to have no respect of persons. Certainly, Civility and Humanity, as
well as Christianity, requires respect and reverence to those that are eminent
in parts, and place, and authority; the Scripture does not condemn civil, but
sinful respect of persons: the Servant must reverence his Master, the Child
must reverence his Father, the Subject must reverence his Sovereign, and
inferior Magistrates: We must not scruple to give unto Magistrates those
Titles which the Scripture gives them, or the like; or to show them that
respect and reverence which the Word allows and commands, but we are bound to
give it. The Quakers therefore are absurd and sottish, who are afraid of being
too respectful to God his Deputies, nay, show no respect at all to them in
speech or gesture: the Holy Ghost has taught us better manners, to give Titles
of Honor to men in Authority, and to demean our selves toward them reverently
and lowlily.

Christians must be subject to Magistrates, i. e. they must reverence them:
this is one main branch or part of subjection.

2. This Subjection implies Obedience: 2. Obedience.
Christians must readily subject themselves to the lawful commands of
Magistrates, obeying them in all things according to the mind of God.

Now here I shall show, 1. What it is to obey. 2. Wherein we must obey Rulers.
3. How, in what manner we must obey.


1. What it is (...).
What it is to obey: The word in the Original signifies to hearken under, as
being in subjection, as becomes an inferior, one that is in place and order
under another: so that the word notes a hearkening with all humble submission,
and it implies both Reverence and Obedience. The simple Verb (...), notes
Obedience, and the Preposition (...), notes Reverence; so that the compound
word imports an humble readiness to receive commands, and a cheerful
obedience in performing them.

2. Wherein it is.
Wherein, and how far are we to obey Magistrates?

We must observe and perform their commands in all things possible and lawful
to be done by us; the only limitation of our obedience is this, In the Lord:
whatsoever the higher Powers command, so that we do not apprehend their
Commands as crossing Gods Commands, all Subjects must obey: for as soon as
Sovereign Authority has commanded any thing that is lawful, warranted or
allowed by the Word of God, God his stamp is set upon that Command. We must not
look upon the things commanded, (further than to enquire into the lawfulness of
them) but upon God's Ordination, setting Magistrates in place to command, and
Subjects in place for obedience: So far as the Magistrate has power to
command, that is, in the Lord, and according to God; so far there is a
necessity of obedience, not only for fear, but for Conscience sake; [because
God commands every soul to be subject to the Higher Powers, so far, as that
we cast not off our subjection to him, who is the highest Potentate, and
supreme Lawgiver. But when the Laws of men cross the Laws of God, and Humane
Injunctions are contrary to Divine Prescriptions; here now we must obey God
rather then man; we must so give to Caesar that which is due to Caesar, as that
we rob not God of his due. A Magistrate cannot be enriched with the spoils of
God; nor is it any dishonor to an earthly King, to see the KING of Kings
served before him. Nor is the Subject bound to obey in all things, but only so
far as may stand with his Allegiance and Duty to God, and so far as he may go,
and not dishonor God, or wrong his Conscience. It is good for us to observe
both the Connection and order of those two Commands, 1 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, and, Honor the King: We must so honor the King, as that withal we
fear God; and must be sure, that in obeying Man, we do not disobey God: and
this [Fear God.] goes before that [Honour the King.] We may and must obey the
hard Commands of Superiors, but we must not obey their sinful Commands, (if
any such at any time be.) The Israelites smarted sorely for worshipping the
Golden Calves, in obedience to the command of Jeroboam their King; and we find
that the Hebrew Midwives are commended and rewarded for disobeying the wicked
command of Pharaoh; they could not do what he did enjoin them, because they
feared God. They are ill friends to the Magistrate, and to themselves, to their
own souls, who persuade the Magistrate to enjoin any thing to his Subjects
which the Word of God does not allow; or that are ready for their own base ends
to obey his finful Commands. Indeed God is to be obeyed without any dispute,
debate, or helitancie, Solo intuitu voluntatis Divinae.
upon a bare sight of his will, as the Schoolmen speak: but I must compare men's
Commands with God's Laws, and if I find a dissonancie to the Laws of God, I
must be disobedient, (or I should rather say, non-obedient; for it is not
properly disobedience, not to obey men against God.) I have met with a pretty
Exposition of, and Comment upon, that of the Preacher; Eccl. 8.2.
I counsel thee to keep the King's Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath
of God.

First, These latter words may be looked upon as a reason or enforcement of the
Exhortation: It is necessary to give obedience to Magistrates, not only out of
fear toward them, because they bear the sword; but especially out of Conscience
toward God, because his Vows are upon us. Here seems to be a reference to some
Covenant and Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity, taken by the people, binding them
to their Prince. (Indeed Oaths to Magistrates are to be kept, and surely Oaths
to God are not to be broken, but religiously observed.) But now

Secondly, These words, In regard of the Oath of God, may be looked upon as a
limitation to the precedent Exhortation. Keep the King's Command, but with
regard had to the Oath of God, so that there be no violation of that, so that
your Obedience to the King be consistent with your Fidelity to God. Our
Obedience to man must be regulated by a good Conscience toward God.

This is Orthodox Doctrine, owned by all sound honest Divines, though there may
be (as there have been) some Court-Claw-backs that may put forth other stuff.

It was a notable resolution, and a noble speech of those Worthies, who were
commanded by the King to worship the Image which he had set up: they said unto
the King, O Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.16, 17.
we are not careful to answer thee in this, etc. They submitted to the fire
when they could not act as he commanded; so we must yield passive obedience,
when we cannot with a good Conscience yield active; we must choose rather to
suffer than to sin: and when a Christian submits himself to the penalty of not
doing that which is against his Conscience, this is no Rebellion or resistance
of the Powers, but here is still a subjection to them; though this is the loud
Outcry of many ignorant and malicious persons, against conscientious Ministers,
and private Christians, that cannot readily consent to do all that men command
them; O Rebellion, Rebellion! O Rebels, Rebels! The Martyrs of famous and
blessed memory, in those sad Marian Days, did not resist, nor rebel, they
willingly and cheerfully yielded their bodies to the flames, but still they
professed and protested against the Idolatrous Doctrine and Worship then
established by Law.

And now, for a further opening and a clearer stating of this matter in
question, viz. [Wherein, and how far we are bound to obey Magistrates,] I
propound to be considered, Whether the Magistrate command us to do that which
is unlawful, or deal hardly with us, by laying upon us unjustly some heavy
burden, (for these are different cases.) Well then,

1. In case of commanding any unlawful action; to such a Command we must deny
our obedience; the supreme Power of all is to be obeyed: no power on earth can
secure the Conscience in doing that which is unlawful, and cross to the Rule of
God's Word. But

Secondly: If the higher Powers shall, Multum est discriminis inter eos, qui
vim injustam patienter rolerant, and eos, qui quod injustum est saciunt. Szeged.
contrary to the Laws by which they are to Rule, lay heavy burdens upon us,
whereby we shall suffer in our persons or Estates, in such a case we must
labor with patience to endure, and be content to act to our own prejudice that
which cannot honestly be avoided or put off.

Now to clear both these Positions, I shall speak a little to a
Scripture-instance or two, about which there maybe some enquiry, not without
ground.

The Instances are of Subjects their obedience and disobedience to the Willand
Command of their Sovereign.

Ahab and Naboth: the Question is, Whether Naboth did well or ill in refusing
to part from his Vineyard to Ahab, upon the terms propounded by the King?

Nabot^ did justly and warrantably refus^^ to gratify the King's desire,
because God had forbidden the alienation of the Inheritance: there was an
express Law concerning this, Lev. 25.
that no Israelite might se^ his Field, but upon condition o^ redeeming it, and
returning it is the year of Jubilee. But Aha^ would have had Naboth his Vine
yard upon other terms, which i^ was not lawful for him to hearken to;
therefore he says, God for bid that I should give the inheritand of my fathers
unto thee.

But here, by the way, I humbl^ conceive that the Reverend learned Author, who
gives this Answer, was mistaken in that which he intimates as the ground of
this Question; for he forms the Question thus: Whether Naboth could justly
deny his Vineyard to Ahab, seeing the King has power to take Fields and
Vineyards, and give them to his servants, according to 1 Samuel 8.14. Now, says
he, in outward things, we must obey, though to detriment and loss. But as to
that Text in Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.14.
I conceive there was an unwitting mistake of the honest pious Auhor, though it
has been (I doubt not) the wilful mistake of some Court-parasites, who from
hence save suggested unto Princes, That Kings may do what they please, That
they have an absolute power of the persons and estates of their subjects.

Doubtless, they do better understand that Text, who interpret it to be the
threatening of a judgment to the people, and not a Concession of such a right
and power to the Ruler: It is as if he had said, This people shall pay dear
enough for casting off that form of Government which I had appointed to them;
they would needs have a-King, and I will give them a King that shall deal
Tyrannically with them, ruling Arbitrarily; that shall take away their Cattle
and their Goods by violence, that shall enslave then and their Children: This
will b^ the manner of your King. Here i^ not signified what-Kings ought to do,
but what some Kings would do, to satisfy their own lusts: s^ that we must not
understand thi^ as spoken de jure, but de facto. I^ Rulers might lawfully do
that which is here spoken of, then Ahab had not sinned in taking away Naboth
his Vineyard from him by violence; but this was Ahab his sin, for which God
punished him and we have an express word of God against this: Ezekiel. 46.18.
The Prince shall not take of the peoples inheritance by oppression, to thrust
them out of their possessions: (not but that Rule^ have a Legal right over the
persons and estates of their Subjects so that they make use of it to due ends.)
Well, it is resolved, that Naboth justly denied his Vineyard unto Ahab
illegally demanding it, requiring it from him against the Law of God, which
Ahab might not violate.

Secondly, There is another instance in Joab, who disobeyed one Command of King
David, and obeyed another: the Question is, Whether he did well in either? Joab
well in slaying Absalom, when the King had given a command to deal gently with
him?

Joab did evil in slaying him, (though he had deserved to die) because David
his Sovereign had given command to the contrary.

Joab do well to obey David in numbering the people? Was it a sin or no for him
to do this thing at the command of the King?

Joab his sin, (as well as his betraying of Vrijah to death upon the King's
Letter) for he did this against his Conscience, as appears by his speech to
David about it: 1 Chronicles. 21.3.
Why does my Lord require this thing? why he will be a cause of trespass unto
Israel?

Thus we have seen, wherein, and how far we are to obey the Higher powers: Soli
Deo sine exceptione parendum, humanae obedientiae pietas and justitia metae
sint.
Not in all things without exception (so God only is to be obeyed) but so far
forth as the matter of the Command has not impiety or injustice in it.

3. How, in what manner must we obey the Higher Powers?

I shall speak to this Negatively and Affirmatively.

One word in the Negative.

It must not be constrained, or grudged Obedience; properly and truly,
Obedience is a willing, free service, a readiness to receive and do Commands.

Affirmatively,

1. We must obey with that reverence and respect already spoken of.

2. There must be submissive, humble Obedience, 1 Pet 2, 13.
in an acknowledgement of subjection: Submit your selves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, etc. The word rendered
Submit, is (...), it signifies a submitting of the neck to the yoke.

3. We must obey in singleness of heart, in the fear of the Lord, for
Conscience sake, and not being led by our own interests and hopes of
advantaging our selves in the world. Where Self is the motive and end of
obedience to superiors, so that a man obeys the higher powers with respect
mainly to his own temporal emolument or advancement, there will be a readiness
to obey men against God, violating his Laws, and violencing the Conscience: but
when we submit our selves to every Ordinance of man, For the Lord's sake, with
respect to his Command, as serving and honoring him in our submission and
obedience to men, then we shall make God's Word the Rule, and his Will the
ground, of our Obedience; and so shall have a conscientious respect to the due
extent, and the just limitation of our obedience; obeying, in all things; in
the Lord; so far as men have God's warrant to command, and we have the
allowance of God his Word to act.

This is Christian Obedience, to perform civil duties upon grounds of Religion,
and within the bounds of Religion and Conscience; and this is a main thing to
be looked to, in our obedience to men, to have a Conscience therein toward God,
and to serve the Lord Christ, to whom we must give account, and by whom we
shall be rewarded for our obedience and service to men, which is done as unto
him.

Now here I shall take occasion briefly to discuss this Question.

Whether Humane Laws, or the Commands of men, do bind the Conscience, so that
the Command of lawful Authority lays upon the Subject an Obligation to, and
necessity of, Obedience?

about this; some denying, others asserting an Obligation laid upon the
Conscience, by the Laws of men.

Now for the reconciling of these seeming differences in judgment among the
Orthodox, I shall show, 1. What Conscience is. 2. What it is to bind the
Conscience, or to be binding in Conscience. 3. How many ways this Obligation
in Conscience is made or induced.


Then I shall conclude something positively concerning this matter.

1. What is Conscience?

The Greek word (...) is compounded of (...) and (...), as the Latin word
Consciencia, of Con and Scire: now Conscire is, to know together; so that
Conscientia sounds as much as Scientia cum alio. Well then, Conscience is a
knowledge, and inward sense of our own judgment, and of the judgment of
another, viz. of God, either approving our actions as good, or condemning them
as evil.

Now Conscience is either good or evil.

A good Conscience is a knowledge and persuasion of the Legality and Regularity
of our actions, and of the approbation of God and of men that judge right.

An evil Conscience is a knowledge and apprehension of the Illegality and
Irregularity of our actions, for which our own hearts condemn us, so that we
fear the judgment of God or Man for our evil deeds.

Whether Humane Laws do bind in Conscience, so, that the violation of them
makes an evil Conscience?



Strictly, Conscience is referred only to God: so that an evil Conscience is a
sense of sin committed against God, and a fear of God's judgment for it.

More largely, Conscience bears respect also to men: thus the Apostle says,
that herein he did exercise himself, Act. 24, 16.
to have a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men; being careful
to avoid offenses against either Table of the Law, both in general and
particular: so that an evil Conscience is a sense of sin, as against God, so
against men; and a fear, as of being judged for it by God, so of being censured
by men, or of falling under disgrace.

So much as to the first special enquiry, in order to the Solution of the main
Question: I have showed you, what Conscience is; a good Conscience, and an evil
Conscience.

2. What is it to bind the Conscience, or to be bound in Conscience?

This is to be understood, either strictly, or more largely.

Strictly and properly, There is an Obligation to Obedience, under a fear of
offending God, or under the danger of a moral sault.

More largely and improperly; there is an obligation upon the Conscience, under
a fear of offending men, or under the danger only of a civil offense, which is
a matter of ill report among men.

The Question is properly concerning the obligation of the Conscience, as
Conscience respects God: So that the doing, or not doing, of a thing, brings
on a moral culpableness, with which a man's heart may charge him, a sin against
God. Well then

3. How many ways is this obligation in Conscience, induced, with respect to
the Laws of man?

1. The Conscience is bound, either only in general; i. e. by virtue of God's
general Command, to honor Superiors; or also in special; i. e. with respect
to singular, or positive Laws of Superiors.

2. A special Law or Constitution of the civil Powers, may be said to bind the
Conscience, either per se, or per accidens.

A civil Constitution or Injunction, is obligatory per se, when it so binds the
Conscience, that it must necessarily be observed, and cannot be crossed or
neglected, without offending God; and that by reason of the special command of
the Powers.

Again, Sometimes such a Law or Sanction is obligatory, binding the Conscience
only by accident, as when any thing is commanded with respect to good order,
and the keeping of a due decorum, and the avoiding of scandal: The Conscience
is bound by this Command, so far as the violation of it, is the destruction of
good order, and a breach of the public peace, and matter of scandal, or an
occasion of sinning unto others.

A very learned and Orthodox Writer, has these distinctions, among others, in
the discussion of this great question, which we are now in hand with.

Well, Determ.
now to conclude something in Answer to this Inquiry; Whether humane Laws, or
the Commands of men, do bind the Conscience?

Concerning which, I lay down this in General.

Humane Laws do, and do not, bind the Conscience: For the understanding of
this, we must, with Aquinas, distinguish of Laws; he tells us, That Laws of
humane Position, or Sanction, are either Righteous or Unrighteous; and thus he
concludes, Justae leges humanae obligant, in soro Conscientiae, ratione legis
aternae, etc.
The righteous Laws of men, have a binding power in the Conscience, as they are
grounded upon, derived from, and agreeabe to the Eternal Law, the Law of God,
and no further; for only God's Laws do simply and per se; bind the Conscience;
But unrighteous Laws (says he) bind not in the Court of Conscience, Leges
auteminjustae, non obligant, etc.
unless in some cases; as for the avoiding of scandal, and with respect to the
public peace, etc. Yea, says he, f those Laws of men be unrighteous; per
contrarietatem ad bonum Divinum, as contrary to Divine good, or the Law of God,
(as if Rulers should make Laws binding to an Idolatrous Profession or Worship,
or to any thing contrary to the Law of God,) We are bound in Conscience not to
obey such Laws; it is meet that we should obey God rather than men: And in
another place he has this conclusion; 2da 2dae; qu. 104. Art. 5.
Subditi in iis tantummodo Superioribus suis obedire tenentur, in quibus ipsi
Superioribus subjiciuntur, and in quibus ipsi Superiores sublimioris potestatis
praecepto non adversantur. This in General.

Particularly; for a full determination of the Question, there might be many
distinct conclusions laid down, according to the diverse distinctions of
Persons or Powers that make Laws, or give Commands, with respect to the
diversity of the Subject, about which they are, as relating to the matters
Civil or Ecclesiastical: but I shall add only a few words, 1. Negatively, 2.
Affirmatively.


Negatively, I lay down these three Positions.

1. Men's commands oblige not the Conscience directly and immediately, as God's
Commands do, but by the intervention of God's Command. It is the command of God
that binds my Conscience to observe any command of man: Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.1^. Eccles. 8.10.
for the Lord's sake, says the Apostle Peter: Keep the Kings Commandment, and
that in regard of the Oath of God: i. e. not only for fear of man, but also
and chiefly, for fear of wronging thy Conseience toward God.

2. Humane Laws bind not the Conscience universally and unlimitedly, as the
Laws of God do: I must examine the constitutions of men, by the Laws of God,
and see whether they be righteous or no, whether they be not contrary to God's
Law; and if I find them so, I am bound in Conscience, to deny active obedience.

3. The Commands of men do not bind absolutely, as the Laws of God do: There
may be a due subjection in some cases unto man, by suffering the penalty,
though obedience be withholden.

The result of all, is this, That no voice, but the Voice of God, must be heard
in the Conscience, as commanding there, and binding indispensibly to obedience:
and let me add this, That it is antichristian for men to set up their own Will
as a rule of sin and duty, to take it upon them to give Laws to the Conscience.
This is St. Paul his Character of Antichrist, that he as God, 2 These. 2.4.
sits in the Temple of God; i. e. in the Church: he sits as God; i. e.
(says Diodate) making himself absolute Lord of Consciences, bringing them to
his obedience. The setting up of another Lawgiver then Christ, is properly
Antichristianism. What says Calvin? As long as the Pope exercises Tyranny
over the Conscience, we shall not cease to call him Antichrist: nay, we shall
go further, says he, and call them members of Antichrist, who take such snares
upon their Consciences.

Now Affirmatively, and positively, concerning this question of the binding
power of humane Laws in the Conscience, I conclude thus:

That all Laws and Commands of men in Power, to which the order of the Power
does rightfully and duly extend it self, are to be obeyed for Conscience sake;
and all such constitutions of men, as are fundamentally, or reductively, and
interpretatively the Commands of God, or which enjoin that which has allowance
from the Word of God; all such have a binding power in the Court of Conscience;
not directly and immediately indeed upon account of man's ordination, as they
are humane Ordinances, but as they are God his Laws, propounded and enforced by
a civil sanction; and as they fall in duty, under that general Command of
obeying those that are over us in the Lord.

That every soul must be subject to the higher powers; i. e. every person must
reverence and obey Rulers and Magistrates.

My Son, fear thou God, Prove. 24.2^. Tit. 3.1.
and the King: Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers; to
reverence and obey Magistrates: 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; whether it
be to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors, as to them that are sent by
him? and to this subjection God boweth the hearts of Subjects: God, says
David, Psalm. 144.
subdueth my people under me: Thus the people of Israel were subject to Joshua
their chief Magistrate; Josh. 4.14.
They reverenced him; They were obedient to him; All that thou command us,
Josh. 7.16, 17.
we will do; and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go, as we bearkned to
Moses in all things, so we will hearken unto thee; only the Lord thy God be
with thee as he was with Moses.

This last clause, [ only the Lord, etc.] seems to be a restriction, and wary
honest interpretation of their promise and engagement to Joshua; Junius reads
it thus, Tantum videto, Videto, ut Deus tibi adsit, sicut Moschi, and tu ab eo
non recedas, etc.
etc. only see that God be with thee, as he was with Moses, (guiding thee, and
dictating commands to thee) and that thou depart not from God, but keep close
to his Commands, as Moses did. They would have Joshua to know, that they were
not so rash, as to engage themselves unlimitedly, to obey him in all things, in
case he should command any thing according to his own will and lust: but so
far forth, as he should give Commands from God, and according to those
Statutes and Ordinances, which God has appointed to them, they would be ready
to yield obedience: This is not an absolute promise, but a restipulation, a
Covenant upon considerations to perform Articles.

Now for demonstration of the point:

I shall bring no other reasons or arguments, for the confirmation of this
Truth, That all men must be subject, for the enforcing of this duty of
Subjection to Magistrates, but only such as I find in the Context.

1. 1 Arg. ab honesto.
The first reason is taken ab honesto: It is meet that all men should be
subject to God, and to the Divine Ordination: Now Magistracy is from God, it is
his Ordinance, and the powers that be, are ordained of God; therefore out of
respect, and reverence toward God, the Author of Powers, it is meet that we
should be subject to them. It is God that gives to Man, power and authority
over others; Genesis 3.
he first gave a Marital power, a power to the Husband over the Wise; in the
next place, from this followed a Parental power, the power of Parents over
Children; and hence sprang other powers, as a Despotical power, the power of
Masters over Servants; and a Regal power, the power of Rulers over Subjects.
The Apostle here properly speaks of this last, of Civil, public Powers; Now,
these powers are ordained of God: First, appointed by him, raised above, and
set over other men: God challenges this, as proper and peculiar to himself, to
raise up, and appoint Rulers over people: By me Kings Reign; Prove. 8.15, 16.
by me Princes Rule: The most high has power over the Kingdoms of men, Dan.
4.14
and gives it to whomsoever he will: and God has put his own Name upon
Rulers, upon the powers which he has set up; Psalm. 82.6
I have said, ye are Gods: therefore let us reverence this Ordinance of God,
and be subject to the powers ordained by him: God will have us to honor them,
whom he thus honors; and will have us to know, that in our subjection and
obedience to them, we have to deal with him.

2. 2 Arg. ab inhonesto.
A second argument from subjection, is taken ab inhonesto, from the dishonesty
and shamefulness of the contrary; as an humble conscientious subjection to
Magistrate, is an acknowledgment of God's Ordinance, so a contempt or slighting
of the powers ordained by God, and disobedience to them, as Powers, is
Rebellion against God, and his Ordination: He that resists, resists the
Ordinance of God; and how great is this sin? It is a practical denial of God
his Sovereignty; a refusing to be under his Government. It is God's Will, to
set such Order among men, that some shall Rule, others shall be Subject; some
shall give Commands, others shall yield Obedience: Now to despise, and wilfully
to violate this Order of God, is great iniquity; therefore it is made a brand
of Libertines, 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 8.
and profane persons, to despise Government.

3. 3 Arg. a periculo.
A third Argument to enforce obedience to Magistrates, is a taken a periculo,
from the danger of disobedience, the pernicious effect of it, respecting
disobedient persons: They that resist, sha^^ receive to themselves (...),
judgment: From whom? why, from the Magistrate, who has Power in his hand, and
Commission from God, to punish contumacious Offenders; or they shall certainly
be punished by God, wh^^ will vindicate his own Ordinance and will plead
against the Violators of his Order; so that the levelling humor, and levellin^
practices, are dangerous to the Authors. Corah and his accomplices, rose up
against Moses and Aaron; but they fell in such rising, that they perished in
the attempt; the earth opened, and swallowed up those Rebels. Number. 16.
And the Apostle Jude, speaking of th^^ Factious and Seditious practice of
unruly and Antimagistratica^ spirits in the latter times, says They perished
in the gainsaying of Corah. They that make head against Moses and Aaron,
against Magistrates and Ministers, shall be punished, as sure, as if the
judgment were already Executed upon them: But here is mainly intended
punishment from the civil Magistrate; that which is to be inflicted by the
Powers disobeyed, resisted: They that disobey, and resist, shall receive
condign punishment from them; (...)
shall receive judgment to themselves: And this expression, is by the way, a
little to be noted, as hinting to us three things.

1. The folly of those that are opposite to God's Order, in his Constitution of
humane powers, refractory, and disobedient to the good Laws, and just Commands,
of Magistrates; they run themselves upon mischief; they are enemies to
themselves: when they suffer the penalty of disobedience, they have but their
own seeking; they do (as it were) reach out the hand for it, to receive it.
Now, will any wise man wilfully hurt himself?

2. Here is hinted the Justice of the Laws, in inflicting the penalty of
Transgression upon wilful Offenders; whatever the breakers of good Laws do
suffer according to Law, is to be imputed to their own wickedness; they have
nothing to lay to the charge o^ Magistrates: They that resist the powers,
receive judgment to themselves: their due is paid them; their punishment is but
a just retribution, the reward of their offense.

3. Here is a hint of the vanity, and bootlessness of such attempt of
Rebellious people, against God's Ordinance; when they rise up against
Authority, against the Powers which God has se^ up, They receive judgment to
themselves: They have the worst of it; like a man that runs his head against a
wall, to beat down the wall; he breaks his own head, it may be beats out his
own brains, but cannot overthrow the wall, nor do it any harm: They that
resist, shall receive judgment: And this pernicious effect, or fruit of
disobedience, (which is a denial of subjection to Magistrates) is confirmed by
one great end of the Institution of Magistracy, of God his committing the power
of the Sword to the Magistrate: namely, That he might be Ver.3.
a terror to evil doers; for Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
the evil: Here is the effect, put for the cause; evil works, Metalepsis.
for evil workers: And the Apostle expresses himself in this manner; because,
according to the course of Justice, men are not to be punished but for evil
works; for something that is contrary to the Law of God, and to the Laws of man
consonant thereunto, and grounded thereupon. Note this, Subjects are not to be
threatened, nor flattered into obedience to those Commands of the Powers, which
are sinful, and repugnant to the Law of God, and a good Conscience; or to those
that are arbitrary, and illegal, contrary to, or beside the laudable
constitution of the Government, which is to be managed according to known Laws;
nor ought men to be punished for not obeying in such cases. The Magistrate in
all his Commands, as well as his Executions, should act as the Minister of God,
urging only what God would have urged, and punishing accordingly: Prevaricatio
legati, nulla est potestas.
So that none of these arguments for subjection to Magistrates are pressed; nor
is any thing in this discourse held forth, to abet or countenance such an
antichristian, and disingenuous maxim; That Subjects are bound to yield
absolute obedience to their Supericurs; (as some atheistically and absurdly
conceit, or do dissemblingly and dishonestly, for their own ends, profess
themselves to be of this Judgment, or at least, are of such practice, as if
they did judge themselves obliged, to obey all the commands of their Superiors,
though against Conscience) nor can any thing that has been said, (for ought I
can see) be honestly or rationally interpreted, as reflecting at all upon
those, who do not, (because they dare not) in some cases yield active
obedience; viz. in that which seems to them, to be contrary to the mind of
God, and so is against the light of their own Consciences: [To justify the
wicked, and condemn the just, are alike abomination to the Lord.]

Well, This is a third ground of the point, or a third Argument to enforce the
duty of Subjection to Magistrates; because they that will not be subject, but
resist the Powers, shall receive to themselves judgment, punishment; the
Magistrate being appointed by God, to be a terror to evil works.

4. Here is a fourth Argument, 4 Arg. ab utili.
taken ab utili, from the profitable effect and fruit of due obedience to the
Magistrate: It is good for us to do that which will turn to our praise. But
now, to obey the powers ordained of God, will turn to our praise: It is
therefore good for us to obey the powers: Do that which is good: i. e. hold
fast Innocence, and do virtuously, in conformity to good Laws, and thou shall
have praise of the power: This (...), praise, signifies here approbation, and
remuneration; if thou be an obedient subject, thou shall be approved of, and
rewarded by, the Magistrate. Thus Governors are said to be sent for the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well: 1 Pet. 2.14.
and so this word is to be interpreted in that saying of the Apostle, Then
shall every man, 1 Cor. 4.5.
( i. e. every godly man, every faithful man) have praise of God. The Lord
Christ, the Judge, shall in that day give public Testimony to his innocence,
and give him the reward promised. Note this by the way, This should bear up,
and quiet the Spirits of Christ his faithful Servants, when they are reproached
by men, and reviled as Heretics, and Seditious persons, or Phanatiques, or
Rebels, and cast out, and injuriously dealt with. Let them commit their cause
to Christ their Judge, of whom they shall have praise and glory.

Well; honest, virtuous, conscientious, obedient Subjects, shall lose nothing
by it, but shall reap the benefit of innocence, and virtue, and due obedience
in the Lord; they shall be commended and rewarded for it by the good Magistrate.

And this Argument for subjection and obedience, is fortified with an
intimation of this special end of Magistracy, and duty of the Magistrate; For
he is the Minister of God to thee for good: If thou do that which is good,
behaving thy self orderly, in a conformity to good Laws, then he is the
Minister or servant of God, appointed and empowered to countenance and reward
thee.

5. 5 Arg. a devito.
Now there is in these very words, an Argument for subjection; i. e. reverence
and obedience to Magistrates. The Magistrate is in his place God's servant for
the Subject's profit, for the advantage of God's people: This is the end of God
his Ordinance, Magistracy; and this is the duty of God his Officer, the
Magistrate: and this is the care and employment of good Magistrates, to make
good this end of their Office and Power, improving it for the good of their
Subjects: Rulers and Magistrates, are the Ministers of God to us for good; for
good natural, and moral, and civil, and spiritual, to presere our lives, and
liberties, and to secure to us that which we do rightfully possess and enjoy,
to repress vilence, and defend us from the malice, and oppression, and rapine,
and cruely of unreasonabe, and vicious, and licentious men; to restrain vice
and wickedness, and to encourage and promote Virtue and Piety, and to maintain
true Religion, and the purity of Doctrine and Worship, etc. Christian Rulers
are set over us by God, to care for us in every respect, that under them we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Oh, what a
blessing is a Virtuous and Religious King, from whom, under God, Nutrix
Ecclesiae, Pater Patriae.
his Subjects receive the benefit of Religion and Justice, who is the Church's
Nurse, and the Commonwealth's Father? O what a benefit is it, to live under a
Pious, Righteous, settled Government? such a Government is, (as one says) like
Nebuchadnezzar's Tree, whose leaves are fair, and fruit much; affording meat,
and shadow, and sweet rest.

Now, is there not upon account of all this, a just challenge of subjection, i.
e. reverence and obedience to Magistrates? Our comforts from them, and
enjoyments by means of them, call upon us, to be subject to them. The Rivers
acknowledge their receipt of waters from the Sea, by emptying themselves again
into it; and the Trees receiving nourishment from the earth, give back their
leaves again, to dress and feed the Earth. Let us think how we are bound to a
retribution to the higher Powers; and let our Subjection be answerable to our
obligation.

6. 6 Arg. a necessario.
The Apostle argues a necessario: This is another reason why a we should be
subject, because it is necessary that we be so, not only for the avoiding of
punishment, but also for the keeping of a good Conscience: Ver. 5.
Ye must be subject, not only for wrath, but for Consciencesake: So that here
is a double reason or demonstration of the necessity of subjection to the
Powers.

1. (...).
It is necessary for wrath, because of wrath, for the avoiding of wrath; not
only the wrath of the civil Magistrate, (which we should be fearful to provoke
against our selves;) but especially, for fear of the wrath of God, that we
incur not his displeasure.

2. (...).
Subjection to the powers, is necessary for Conscience sake, that we may have a
good and quiet Conscience: for to obey the powers, is to obey God, and observe
his Command; so that obedience procures or begets a good Conscience, which is
the approbation of our own mind, judging rightly, and witnessing to us, that we
have done well, approving our selves to God and men: Whereupon follows a
gladness of the heart, resisting in this approbation and testimony. Contrarily;
to oppose the powers, is to resist the Ordinance of God, and so to resist God
himself; and this wounds the Conscience, and lays us under a fear of God his
revenging Justice. A Christian is bound to perform civil duties upon grounds of
Religion; God's Command binds the Conscience to keep men's righteous Laws.

Here is another Argument from the rule of Justice, which is, 7 Arg. ab aequo.
to render to every one his due: and here he reckons up four particulars of
civil ob^dience, according to the degrees of civil powers, or the several
Orders and Offices of men in power: Render tribute, to whom tribute is due:
viz. to the Prince his Treasurers; Custom, to whom custom is due: To the
Prince his Farmers and Collectours: Fear, to whom fear is due; viz. to the
Prince his Deputies, to Governors, Judges, Justices, Officers sent by him,
while they act in their places under him, according to the Prince his declared
will, and the power derived to them, and vested in them by the Laws, as they
are Ministers of Justice. Lastly, render honor, to whom honor is due; viz. to
the Person and Authority of the Prince or chief Ruler: as Saint Peter commands;
honor the King.

Now, Tribute is that which is charged upon, and paid out of a man's possession
and estate.

Custom, is properly that which is paid out of Merchandise or Traffic,
exported or imported.

Fear, is an acknowledgment of the power ordained by God, and a care not to
offend it, lest we incur blame and punishment.

Honor, is a due inward affection toward him, whom we judge worthy of reverence
and respect, either for his virtue, or for the eminency of his place; or for
his beneficence toward us, or upon some other just consideration; and an
outward, due signification, and testification of our inward reverence and
respect toward him: honor is due to the powers, especially the higher powers,
because of their Office and Place, as to our civil Parents, by virtue of God's
command; Honor thy Father: Honor comprehends reverence, fear, subjection,
obedience, love, and thankfulness.

Thus I have dispatched the Doctrinal part of this my discourse.

I have stated the duty of subjection to Magistrates, telling you, that it
imports mainly reverence and obedience; and showing you, what reverence is, and
what it is to obey.

Now, whereas I assigned this limitation of our universal obedience; viz. it
must be in the Lord; in all things according to the mind of God, only so far as
God his Word gives us command or allowance to act. This is the limitation which
the Scripture suggesteth, and in many place; holds forth, and therefore
cannot be justly offensive to any; nor will it offend any good Magistrate, who
acknowledges God to be his Superior, and the Supreme Lawgiver, and desires
that God should be honored above all.

And whereas, touching the binding power of humane Laws in the Conscience, I
determined, That the Laws of men bind not the Conscience, directly and
immediately, nor universally and unlimitedly, nor absolutely, as the Laws of
God do; but only by the intervention of God's Command, and as they are grounded
upon, and derived from, and agreeable to, the Eternal Law, the Law of God: and
I concluded, That no voice but God's Voice, is to be heard in the Conscience,
as commanding there, and binding indispensibly to obedience: This determination
is warranted by Scripture, and therefore not to be quarrelled with.

Concerning the whole; I shall show you what was the sense and Conscience of
our late King Charles the First, as he expresses himself in that Book of his,
Entitled (...): or the Portraiture of his Sacred Majesty: his words are these;
I have often declared, how little I desire, that my Laws and Scepter should
entrench on God his Sovereignty, who is the only King of men's Consciences; and
yet he has laid such restraint upon men, as commands them to be subject for
Conscience sake; giving no men liberty to break the Law established, further
then with meekness and patience they are contented to suffer the penalty
annexed, rather than perturb the public peace. And again; Next to fear God,
is, honor the King: (next to it, not before it) Thus our late Sovereign.

I now come to a word or two of Application. Application.


The first Use shall be for Confutation. 1 Confutation.


First of Papists, and Popish Doctrine. Of Papists


1. Of that horrible and hellish Doctrine, [That it is lawful, and meritorious,
to murder Princes in the quarrel of Religion] justifying, abetting, and
applauding the heinousest Treasons, against the highest Powers upon earth. Does
God say, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; and shall the Pope
teach Subjects to murder their Princes, and to blow up Parliaments, etc. for
the advantage of the Catholic Cause? (as they call it) Doubtless (says a
learned Divine) The Romish Religion is the most horrid Rebel in the world.

2. There is another false, absurd, idle, Doctrine of theirs, hereby confuted;
viz. this, That the Pope, and his Bishops and Clergy (who call themselves
Spiritual) are exempted from subjection to civil Magistrates, both as to their
persons in the trial of Ecclesiastical, Civil, and Criminal Causes; and as to
their purses and possessions, in paying Tributes. Whereas the Apostle here
charge every Soul to be subject to the higher powers, to the powers ordained
of God; and Christ (we read) paid tribute for himself and Peter; Act. 25.11.
and Paul pleaded before the civil Magistrate: and we know that Aaron the high
Priest, was subject to Moses the chief Magistrate: yet these men, (as if they
were higher than high Priests, and before Peter, and better than Apostles)
must, forsooth, be exempted from subjection to any civil Powers.

Secondly, Our Text and Doctrine serves for Confutation of Donatists, and
Millenaries, and Quakers, and some Anabaptists, who look for the abolishing of
all Magistracy; that Christ alone may reign among the Saints, who cry down
Magistrates, and deny that they have any coercive punitive Power; that cry up
an equality and parity among Christians; holding that Christians need no
Magistrates, and that they need not be subject to any.

And why so? What do they plead for this opinion of theirs, and for their
denial of subjection; i. e. reverence and obedience to Magistrates?

Object. They say that they are the Lord his Freemen, and that it is against
Christian liberty, for Christians to be under the power of any, but Christ, who
is their only King, who has made them free; and that they must not be the
servants of men.

Answ. The Liberty unto which Christ does free his people in this life, is
inward and spiritual: Gospel liberty is a liberty from sin, a liberty unto
duty; a liberty to serve God in our order, place and station; a liberty from
the yoke of Ceremonies, etc. and surely civil subjection to Superiors, is not
inconsistent with such spiritual liberty. Indeed the Apostle Paul discourses
largely of Christian liberty, and yet he does more than once enjoin, and
earnestly press subjection to Magistrates. There is a wide difference betwixt
that liberty which Christ has purchased for us, and that libertinism which
Fanatical spirits plead for.

And as to that other Text which they urge; 1 Cor. 7.23.
Ye are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of men.

To this I Answer; that the Apostle, there speaking of the subjection of
Servants to their Masters, forbids sinful subjection, and not civil
subjection.

By [Servants of men] he means not those that do civil service to their
Superiors; (he forbids not Christians thus to be servants) but he speaks of an
inclination to gratify their finful desires, and a readiness to obey their
wicked Commands; for servants were then forced by threatenings and strips, and
by the terrors of death, to obey all the Commands of their unbelieving
Masters, were they never so dishonest and wicked: therefore the Apostle gives
this admonition to believing Servants, that were under the power of such
Masters, to take heed, that they be not terrified into wickedness; that they so
serve men, as not to offend God, and wrong their own Consciences: Thus Pareus
interprets the place; and so Chrysostom, Noli^e eis parere, si impia
praecipiant.
Obey not their ungodly Commands: And this admonition is very suitable, with
respect to the subjection and obedience of Subjects to their Rulers and
Magistrates. I may, and must serve and obey the Magistrate, but I must not sin
at his Command. Major erga Deum obligatio, quam erga homines; illa absoluta,
haec conditionalis. Supremae majestati debetur major reverentia, Domino quam
servo major obedientia.
When men command what God forbids, in such a case God must be obeyed rather
than men.

Walk ye not in the Statutes of your Fathers, Ezekiel. 20.18, 19.
etc. Walk in my Statutes. I wish, says Calvin, that these things were deeply
printed in the minds of all men; then would not so many serve the lusts of men,
as if they themselves were to be bought and sold.

Well, here is the point; They whom Christ makes free, are free indeed; but it
is from bondage to their own and other men's lusts, not from obedience to the
honest Commands, and righteous Laws, of their Superiors.

Diverse other frivolous objections, and absurd pleas there are, which have been
fully answered, over and over again, and the Answers are in Print.

Obj. In Christ (say they) all are equal; there is no distinction of Superiors
and Inferiors; Gal. 3 28.
all are one in Christ.

Sol. To this it is Answered; That politic inequality is not against Spiritual
equality.

Obj. And whereas it is alleged; That Christ is the Christians only King,
therefore Christians must be subject only to Christ.

Sol. The Answer is, That though Christ be the sole King of the Church, yet he
is not the only King in the Church; nor is his Kingdom contradictory to, or
destructive of, civil Powers and Government: Subordinata non pugnant; There is
no repugnancy, where there is a subordination: Kings in the Church, serve
Christ the great King of the Church; and Christ keeps up Order, and
maintains Government in the Commonwealth for his Church's sake; for his own
Kingdom's sake.

I shall go no further in this Use of Confutation; nor shall I stay much longer
in the Application of the point, only I shall add one word for Information, and
another of Exhortation.

Information.
that Piety is not opposite to civil Authority; that true Christianity opposes
not Magistracy; that Religion makes not Rebels, but Subjects: for subjection
and obedience to Magistrates, is one of the Principles of true Religion.

Indeed this is the common slander raised by the Devil and his Instruments,
against Christ and his Kingdom, and Servants; as if the true Religion, and
Professors of it, were most dangerous to civil States; as if the best men, were
the worst Subjects; as if those that are most Religious, were worst to be
trusted; as if there were most need to watch them, and keep them under. See
what an Oration Haman made against God his people, stuffing it with malignant
Criminations: Est. 3.8.
See what a pestilent Letter Rehum and Shimshai, wrote against the Jews,
sending it to the King Artaxerxes. Ezra. 4.11.
Was not Christ himself accused and condemned as an Enemy to Caesar, and a
mover of Sedition? was it not laid to Paul his charge, once and again, that he
was a pestilent fellow, and a mover of Sedition, and a Sect-master? And thus
Popish, and profane, and Atheistical, malignant Spirits, have been always
ready to cast such aspersions upon sincere Professors of the Gospel; upon the
most Religious, and Conscientious, and faithful Ministers and people. Oh! they
are Factious, and Fanatical; they are troublers of the Church and State, they
have a Spirit of Rebellion in them, it is not fit they should live. Thus the
Devil would scare men from embracing the Truth, and the Ordinances of Christ,
and from all forwardness in professing Religion: But doubtless the godly
Preachers, and sincere professors of the Gospel, are so far from denying the
right of Princes, and from a Spirit of Rebellion, as that the Doctrine which
they bring, and which they entertain, and desire to hold fast, establishes
the power of Rulers in their hands: They are, as one says, like Solomon his
Workmen that built the Temple, and built the Kings's Throne too. And surely,
the more that any man takes in the Principles of the Gospel, and of a
Christian, and the more power Religion has upon his heart, the better Subject
will he be. The Gospel commands all lawful obedience, even to Infidel
Magistrates; such as were when Paul wrote this Epistle to the Romans; and the
more that the Doctrine of the Gospel comes in power upon the heart, the more
and better obedience there will be.

Rulers have no better friends, than such as make Conscience of their ways:
they are the best subjects to Princes on earth, that do truly fear the God of
Heaven. These pray for Rulers, while others do Curse and Swear, and drink
Healths (as they call them) thus constantly breaking the Kings Laws, and, by
their wickedness, provoking God to bring Judgment upon King and people. These
that fear God, obey for Conscience sake, and so as to keep a good Conscience,
when others obey only for fear, or according to their humor, and without
Conscience; and however such talk of Loyalty, and boast themselves the only
Loyalists; it would, I think, be no hard matter to demonstrate, that none can
be truly and certainly Loyal, but such as are truly religious. They that do not
truly fear God, do not truly Honor the King: Though they may flatter Rulers
for their own ends, and be ready to serve them in many things, so far as they
may serve themselves upon them, and carry on their own designs, and in those
matters that may suit with their own humors; yet to serve their lusts or
interests, they will break the King's Laws, as well as God's; but show me a
good Christian, and I will show you a good Subject, that obeys for Conscience
sake: he that truly fears God, will be afraid to break the Laws of God and Man.

And now there is an inference of the Magistrate's concernment, depending
hereupon, and issuing from hence: If true Religion make good Subjects, and true
Piety be the surest ground and bond of Loyalty; then it greatly concerns
Christian Rulers to maintain and keep up the true Religion among their
Subjects, and to promote Piety, and to protect, countenance, and encourage
those that are truly religious and pious: This will prove to be a true point of
State Policy; for it is matter of life or death political to any Kingdom, as it
does well or ill understand it is own Interest: Now I say, This is the great
concernment and interest of Sovereignty, Qui vere civilis est vult cives bonos
efficere, and legibus obtemperantes Arist. l. 1. Eth. c. 13
and ruling Authority, to take the most effectual course for the making of good
Subjects; and that is undoubtedly this, to take order, that principles of
Religion may be instilled into men, and fixed in them, and that the power of
godliness may be promoted; and to this end, that the exercises of Religion
both public and private, may be encouraged; and that care be taken, that the
Lord's day be sequestered and applied to holy exercises; and that an able,
godly, faithful, practical Ministry, be planted throughout the Prince his
dominions; and that insufficient, negligent, and scandalous Ministers, be not
promoted or suffered in the Church: This would be the way, to make good men,
and good Christians, and consequently good Subjects, tied fast to the Ruling
Powers, by the bond of Conscience; without this, other politic courses will
prove ineffectual; for till obedience be willingly yielded unto God, it will
not be conscionably, and so not constantly yielded to his Deputies: but
Christians well informed from the Word of God, and seasoned with Scripture
Principles, know, that they must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but for
Conscience sake.

Again; one word more with respect to Magistrates.

If Subjects be limited by the Word of God, in point of their obedience; so
that though they be bound to subjection, yet they are bound not to obey in any
thing contrary to the Word. Conceditur libertas utendi legibus, etc. itatamen
ut substantia legum Divinarum non calcetur, abjiciatur, aut negligatur. Szeged.
Bp. Babington.
Then Magistrates are likewise thus limited in their Commands and Injunctions;
so that though they have Power and Authority to make Laws, and give Commands,
yet they are bound not to make any Law cross to God's Law; not to command any
thing contrary to the Word of God: but all the Laws and orders of Superiors,
should be subservient to the Laws of God, or consistent with them. Piety and
Charity, are the limits of the Magistrates command, and our obedience. It is
the Magistrate': sin, to command that to be done: in doing whereof, the Subject
finneth directly against God; and in such a case of contrariety to the Divine
Law, the Maker (as well as the observer) of Laws abaseth the Eternal God,
setting him below the creature. As Christ comandeth his Kingdom to be subject
to Princes and Potentates, so he commands all Princes and Potentates, to be
subject to his Kingdom: Ps. 2.12.
Kiss the Son --

Every Calling and Profession, has some rule to go by; and men's excellency in
any calling, stands in their conformity to the Rule. Now, the Word of God in a
special manner propounded and enjoined to Magistrates, as their directory and
Rule: Josh. 1.8. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. 2 Chronicles. 23.11.
See the Texts in the Margin, When Joash was Crowned King, the Testimony, the
Book of God's Law, was given into his hand. It was a Wise, and a Religious
saying of that famous Queen Elizabeth, when a Bible was presented to Her, as
She passed through Cheap Side in London; This has been my delight, and this
shall be the Rule whereby I will frame my Government. And doubtless, if it must
be the Subject his Rule for obeying, it must be the Ruler his Rule for
Commanding.

Exhortation.
yielding due subjection to the higher powers, obeying for Conscience sake;
with a good Conscience, in and for the Lord: Give unto Caesar, the things that
are Caesar's, and unto God, the things that are God's: Fear God, and honor the
King. Let not these two Precepts be divided; let not this Scripture order be
inverted.

Obligatio erga Deum absoluta, erga homines, conditionalis; si nihil vel impium
vel injustum praecipiant.

Obediendum est Magistratui quatenus ea praecipit, quae praecipi possunt a
Ministro Dei, et ei convenient, qui gladium gestat malorum vindicem, and
bonorum defensorem.

FINIS.

