The VOICE of the SPIRIT.

OR An Essay toward a Discovery of the witnessings of the Spirit by opening
and answering these following weighty Queries.

Q. 1. What is the witnessing work of the Spirit? 2 How does the Spirit
witness to a soul its Adaption? 3 Who are capable of attaining the
witnessings of the Spirit? 4. How may a soul know its enjoyment of them? 5. By
what means may a soul attain them?


To which is added.

Roses from Sharon or sweet Experiences reached out by Christ to some of his
beloved ones in this Wilderness.

By SAMUEL PETTO Preacher of the Gospel at Sandcroft in Suffolk.

Isaiah 59, 19. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the
Lord shall lift up a Standard against him.

LONDON: Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1654.

To the Saints and people of God in and about Sandcroft, Grace and peace be
multiplied.
Dearly beloved in the Lord.
AS Jesus Christ (by the appointment of the Father) has purchased Redemption,
brought in an everlasting righteousness, and obtained eternal Salvation, for a
certain number of the race of fallen Adam; so, the blessed Spirit is designed
by the Father and the Son, not only to make application of Christ, and to
bring souls into the relation of Sons and Daughters thereby; but also, to
bear testimony of their standing in that blessed Relation. To encourage unto a
waiting for, and to give a knowledge of, the witnessings of the Spirit, is the
design of this Treatise.

And now (Dear friends) I beseech you rest not satisfied without a persuasion
[from the Spirit of Adoption] that God is your Father. Give over carnal
reasonings, and give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.
Though you be under the hidings of Gods face at present, Isa. 8.17.
yet wait for the light of his Countenance, and the issues will be glorious.
When Joseph's brethren were in their greatest distress, then Joseph makes
known himself to them. Genesis 45. v. 1.3, 4. So, when many charges and
accusations are brought in against you, and many seemingly hard passages are
met withal, and that from Christ himself, and your hearts are ready to sink
down lowest, and your fears to rise highest, yet then may your Assurance be
nearest.

Christ, your spiritual Joseph (as with Reverence we may speak it) will be
able to refrain no longer, he cannot but cry out [I am Joseph your Brother].
And if you enjoy a testimony of Divine love at last, you will not repent you
of all your waiting: It will be as a cluster of grapes from the Celestial
Canaan, that will give you a foreknowledge, how good the Land is.

This, will sweeten your bitterest cups, and your worst conditions to you: this
will be enough, that God is your Father.

Your hearts are now fearful of meddling with promises, and this is the
language of your souls, it is true here are precious promises, but what is
this to us? we know not whither we have any right to them or not: such a
testimony will assure you, that all the promises are yours, because Christ is
yours in whom all the promises are Yea, and Amen. Indeed when you want
Assurance yet it is your duty by faith to take hold of promises suitable to your
conditions, but Satan hinders oftentimes therein, when you cannot see your
interest in Christ. Hereby also you will see your liberty for near
approachings unto God, and that with a holy boldness, because he is your Father,
and may hope of being succesfull in all your drawings near to him.

Hereby you will have freedom from, or establishment against many temptations,
which a doubting condition exposes you to: you will not be so ready to have
hard thoughts of God, or murmuring, discontented thoughts at his dispensations
etc. as you have been. Hereby you will be rendered thankful for your mercies,
whereas now you are apt to Call the most special mercies Common.

And that such an abundant entrance may be administered to you, into the
everlasting kingdom, and that you may be filled with peace and joy in
believing, even joy unspeakable and full of glory, shall be the prayer of him,
who is,

Sandcroft 4th Mo: 20th day. 1654. Yours in Gospel Engagements, SAMUEL PETTO.

To the Christian Reader.
THe eternal decree of the great God about the everlasting state of souls in
which they shall for ever abide (after the number of our Months are determined,
and that this body is seized upon by the king of torrors) is registered in the
books of God, and to be opened at the great day; but at the present so hidden
that by all that is before us, as that we cannot either know love or hatted, or
what will be the sentence of the Judge of all the world upon a particular soul
when he comes to speak those irreversible words, Go ye Cursed, Come ye
Blessed.

Yet he that was worthy to open the books, and unto whom the Father has
committed all Judgment, even Jesus our Lord, be it is that has sent for that
blessed Spirit which curiously, and exactly surveighs the very bottom
Counsels of God, to make report of, and to witness unto souls the precious
assurance of their Adoption, that so, such as do believe might have
consolation, and hope.

And now a search after the knowledge of the language of that Spirit (and the
whisperings thereof) whereby the soul is made acquainted with the secret of
God, must needs be a work worthy the utmost of our care and diligence; and
every beam of light tending to that end should be answerably esteemed of by us
according to its issue, which is so great, even of eternal moment. Besides,
multitudes there are bound up in darkness, some on the one part laying claim to
acquaintance with the Spirits testimonies, whose walkings yet savor so rank
of the flesh, as they declare them sensual, and deluded. Others there are who
not only have tasted the Spirits sweetness, but by him have been made to
drink into Christ, yet through over-elated thoughts, and expectancies of the
Spirits witnessings, (much like the Jews in their too much raised account of
some pompous, and extraordinary appearing of the Messiah) regardlesse of those
precious whispers of love which the Spirit in the promise hints to the soul,
makes them still froward, and dissatisfied with God; as not counting their
prayers heard, or their persons regarded, because not extraordinarily visited
by the Spirit.

The design and aim therefore of the Author in this piece is to promote our
understanding of the voice of that Spirit. And according to the Grace given
him, to relieve, and edify the weak, and doubting, and undeceive such as are
deluded. We are persuaded he has dealt faithfully both with Christ and you,
in laying aside all (...), and endeavoring in the plainness, and
demonstration of that Spirit (which he is here treating of) to speak home to
either sort.

Upon that short view we had of this work we have added our testimony to it,
not because we think our names are any way worthy, or can back the Truth, or
that we intended the Authors Commendation thereby, we know he needs it not where
himself is known, and his work (we trust) will approove him faithful with
Jesus Christ. Only we aim at bearing testimony to the Truth. And (if it may
be) the encouragement of some poor souls further to ponder and consult what
is here wrott.

Reader, Consider, and view it over, and see if thou can find the book in
thy heart, and thy heart in that. We believe when thou have perused it thorough
(though thou miss spangles of Eloquence) yet thou will not account thy expense
of time as to be thy loss. Greive not that Spirit, by slighting any piece that
may familiarize his voice, and language to thee. Here are Questions of moment,
flated, opened; and in some measure cleared up. If thou meetest with thy
satisfaction, give glory to the God of heaven; if the blessing of the Gospel
drop but from one leaf, or line, upon thy Spirit in thy consulting it, thy
pains are recompensed.

Now that the Spirit of the Lord may be redoubled upon the Author, who has
waged in this work, and that thy profit (who perusest it) may be answerable to
the desires and travail of his soul, shall be the prayers of us who are
meanest among the Saints, who yet desire to approve our selves faithful to
Christ, his truths, his interests and his people; so we bid thee farewell.
Grace be with thy Spirit. Amen.

SAM. HABERGHAM. EDW. BARKER.

1. day. 4. Mo: 1654.
To the Reader.
Dear friend;
THe plentiful pouring out of the Spirit, is the great privilege which is
promised unto the latter days; and therefore it must needs be a duty of high
concernment, to seek for inward acquaintance with that blessed Spirit, in all
those ways it is promised in; amongst which its witnessing of Adoption is none
of the least. According to that measure of light which the Lord has lent me, I
have endeavored the clearing up of that great mystery in the ensuing Treatise.

And some of the reasons which have biased my Spirit to appearing in it, in so
public a way, are these which follow.

1. Because of the many encouragements which I have had hereunto, from diverse
friends, both Ministers and others.

2. Because so few have written distinctly on this Subject. The more Immediate
testimony of the Spirit is very little insisted upon, by any that I could ever
yet see. Assurance (I confess) is the Subject of diverse books; but there are
many marks and signs laid down by some, which I fear will not hold weight
in the balance of the Sanctuary.

3. Because of the many Delusions which multitudes of souls are under in these
days, who yet are pretenders to the Spirit therein.

Here are many things that (if the Lord will) may be conducible to the
undeceiving of such as are taken in the snares of the Devil, and to the
establishing others against them.

4. Beause of those great perplexities and inward distresses which my self and
many heavenborne souls have been in, for want of light into that Question, How
shall I know the testimony of the Spirit, from the Delusions of Satan?

I have been like Noah^ Dove, have not known where to set the foot of my soul
(as to the Doctrinall part) so as to be safe for eternity. I knew that faith,
and other graces (when of the right stamp) were evid ncing: but how to know
true faith from false, and so for other graces, and that my heart did not
deceive me in passing judgment on my condition, seeing Satan transformeth
himself into an Angel of light, and counterfeiteth every grace; this has put
me to a stand.

And now, the Lord having given me much satisfaction in this search, more then
ever I had formerly, about the Doctrinall part, and delivered me from many
perplexities and fears, which heretofore I labored under, least I should take
that for an evidence, which was none: I am hereby encouraged to hope, that
these Directions may be useful unto others, in the same ways that they have
been to me. Yet the special Concurrences of the Spirit only, can make them
effectual to a soul for their proper end.

And those experiences of that more Immediate testimony of the Spirit (which
thou find in the latter end of the book) coming to my hand (by an especial
providence) when I had well nigh finished the Treatise, and carrying with them
such a harmony unto what the Lord had convinced me of before, from his Word,
(yet was almost discouraged for publishing, because I had found so little
thereof in my own experience) these have not only added much Confirmation to
me in the truth it self, but also have given me much encouragement to a
proceeding in the work.

The Treatise (by a blessing from heaven) may be useful.

1. To those which are in a state of nature: to take them off those sandy
foundations which they have built upon for eternity. Here they may see how
far they may go and yet be in a perishing condition still.

Though they may attain unto Convictions of sin, and to a kind of believing
on Christ, and have some good motions and desires etc. yet, unless there be
such a through-worke as brings in [a heart turn from sin and to Christ] they
will miscarry everlastingly for all this. The swaying, prevailing part of the
heart must be Christ-ward, else their faith is vain, they are yet in their
sins. And hence we read so often of Conversion, and turning to the Lord --
and that as a distinguishing thing of Saints from others. Jam. 5.20. Math.
18.3, 4. Act. 3.19. Psalm. 51.13. Ezekiel. 18.30.32. Act. 14.15. Act. 26.18.20.

It is not enough that the heart is touched or wrought upon by the Word,
unless it be [turned].

2. To those which are in a state of grace: it may be of advantage to them,
toward peace, joy, Comfort, establishment -- and let them beware of disowning
any testimony from the Spirit, whither in that Immediate way or otherwise. It
is an ordinary saying, that wicked men would have Christ for their Savior, but
not for their Lord. And I grant, that none do rightly take Christ for
Salvation, but also do take him for Sanctification: but if hereby they intend
to make receiving of Christ [as Lord] the only Evidence of interest in him; I
conceive they are much mistaken; for, [Blood] is made a witness of Adoption, as
well as [Water]. And I am confident there is no hearty willingness in any
unrenewed soul to have Christ for a Savior. Joh. 5.40. Hebr. 2.3. Receiving
Christ as a Savior is as distinguishing, as receiving him as a Lord. But,
there may be some kind of willingness to receive him either way, yet if it be
not an effectual, hearty willingness, it is not evidencing; of which see more
in the Treatise it self.

And now Reader, search the Scriptures, whither the things be so or not. And,
if this poor Treatise may but be a provocation unto others, to a more through
handling of this great point, or may draw our any thing to the further
distinguishing the speakings of the Spirit, from Satanicall Illusions, it will
be a matter of rejoicing to me.

And if thou reap^st any spiritual advantage by what thou read, give the
glory of all to the Lord; and send up some groans and cries unto the Father of
mercies for me, that I might have a practical, experimental acquaintance with
the Witnessings of the Spirit, which I have endeavored in a Doctrinall way to
clear up to thee. And that thou may be filled with the same Spirit, shall
be the prayer of him, who is,

A poor, unworthy, labourer in the work of the Gospel, S. P.

Courteous Reader, By reason of the Authors far distance from the Press, many
faults have escaped, some of the chiefest are here noted out, which thou art
desired to take notice of.
ERRATA'S.
PAge 3. line 11. for rathen, read rather. p. 9. l. 18. for no, r. to. to yield
attention -- p. 11. l. 14. for or Conscience, 1. our Conscience. p. 27. l. 17.
for times, r. things. p. 30. l. 24. for Antedent, r. Antecedent. p. 34. l. 17.
for understood, r. understands. p. 37. l. 18. for promises, r. premises. p.
38. for Spiritual grounds, r. Scripturall grounds. p. 40. l. 9. for
Conjunction, r. Conjunctim or in Canjunction. p. 44. l. 12. for is, r. was. p.
54. l. 13. for curruption, r. corruption. p. 58. l. 16. for appleate, r.
appeal. p. 67. l. 9. blott out of. p. 104. l. 14. for himseife, r. himself.
p. 113. l. 8. read thus [And hence they are said] p. 119. l. 20. for are, r.
as. p. 138. l. 19. for bolines, r. holiness. p. 140. l. 12. for Consequences, r.
Consequence. p. 140. l. 16. for be as, r. bias. p. 148. l. 26. r. [they that
are after the Spirit -- p. 150. l. 5. for having, r. have. p. 160. l. 8. for
carnal confidences are, read thus, a carnal Confidence is. p. 160. l. 10. for
are, r. is. p. 81. l. 8. for lean, r. leave. p. 166. l. 11. for cannot, r.
could not. p. 168. l. 18. for Spirits, r. Spirit. p. 173. l. 25. for the, r.
they. p. 175. on the Margin for distincti, r. distinct. p. 176. l. 3. for
hair r. heir. p. 181. l. 30. for its r. his. p. 188. l. 5. blott out it. p.
191. l. 6. read thus, be hinted in.

A BRIEF DISCOVERY of the witnessings of the Spirit to the Souls of the Saints.
ROMANS 8. VERSE. 16. The Spirit it self witnesses with our Spirit, that we are
the Children of God.


CHAP. I. Opening the Text, and showing the meaning of the words.
THis Apostle Paul, having made it his great design (in the foregoing
Chapters) to clear up the doctrine of Justification by faith without the
works of the Law; he draws up a comfortable Conclusion, Chap 8.1. That there
is no condemnation to those which are in Christ. And, as well to prevent a
presumptuous claiming of interest in Christ, as to deliver from, ungrounded
doubtings thereof; (...) Characterizeth those which are in Christ, in the
following verses: and the inhabitation of the Divine Spirit. ver. 9. with its
concurrences in the mortification of sin. ver. 13. and as a Conductor or
Leader. ver. 14. These are made the great discriminating differencing things,
which those that are in Christ, are set out and distinguished from others by.

But, because men are apt to be deceived, and dream of an enjoyment of
leadings from the Divine Spirit, when they are without them; therefore he
adds this, ver. 16. The Spirit it self witnesses, etc. So that, the words
express the way, whereby a soul attaineth a knowledge of its union with
Christ, and consequently of its freedom from condemnation, and it is this [
The Spirit it self witnesses etc.] Where you may take notice.

1. Who witnesses, [The Spirit it self with our Spirit]. 2. What is witnessed
[that we are the children of God].
[The Spirit]. i.e. not only gifts and graces, but the Spirit, who is the
worker or bestower of these. That Spirit which has enabled us to believe, and
does enable us to cry, Abba Father, and which shall quicken our mortal bodies,
in the day of Christ, ver. 11 [The Spirit]. i.e. who searches the deep things
of God, who undoubtedly knows whither we be adopted or not, and whose
testimony is infallible, he being truth it self: this Divine Spirit, not by a
proxy, but it self.

[Witnesseth] (...), contestatur, testimonium reddit, und testatur. i.e.
co-witnesseth, or renders a testimony, or witnesses together: says Leigh,
Crit. Sac.
the word is composed with the Preposition [ together or with] and so it
denotes a double or Twin-testimony. 1. The Spirit of God. 2. Our Spirit. It
bears witness (says he) together with, rathen then [to] our Spirit. Yet, the
word is sometimes used to express a single Testimony. Wicked men are confident
of their Adoption, upon the false deceitful and deluding testimony of their
own Spirits: but the Sons of God have the Divine Spirit (who cannot lie, or
bear false witness) to testify, Si unus esset testis, dubitatio non
tolleretur: sed duo sunt testes, itaque nullus restat dubitationi locus.
Spiritus noster fallere posset nos: sed Spiritus Sanctus non sinit nos falli.
Fayus.
[to or with] their Spirits their Adoption. Here are two witnesses, the Spirit
of Adoption, and [our Spirit]. i.e. Either 1. Our soul, Luke 23.46. Into thy
hands I commend [my Spirit]. i.e. my soul, Act. 7.59. And so, it is contra
distinguished from the body. 1 Corin. 6.20. Glorify God in [your body] and in
[your Spirit]. i.e. in your soul. So 1 Cor. 7.34. And if you take it in this
sense, it holds out thus much; That the witnessings of the Spirit, are not to
the outward ear, but to the heart; the Spirit makes report of Divine mercy to
the inner man: the way of its witnessing, is not external, by an audible
voice, but internal, by secret whisperings to the soul. Not by outward
expressions, but by inward, unspeakeable inspirations. Or 2. Our Spirit. i. e
Our Uunderstanding, Judgment and Conscience: which being renewed are called
also by the name of Spirit. 1 Cor 2.11. What man knows the things of a man,
save the Spirit of a man, etc. Here, our Spirit denotes the knowing faculty.
And ver. 15, 16. He that is Spiritual judges all things etc. Here the Judging
power is given unto this Spirit of a man. And in this sense I take [our Spirit]
in the Text: and that because it is the proper office or work of our
understandings, judgments, and Consciences, to receive, embrace, or refuse
such testimonies as are offered. Romans 2.15. Their Conscience also bearing
witness etc. 2 Cor. 1.12. The testimony of our Conscience.

The meaning then of the words is this, That the Divine Spirit witnesses to
our understandings and judgments, and with our consciences, [That we are the
Sons of God]. i. e. that we have acceptance into favor with God, and now
(through Christ) may lay claim unto whatsoever that relation can entitle to:
this testimony tells us, that we may have an expectation of such provisions,
protections, and portions as it becomes such a Father to give out. And hence,
Romans 8.17. And if Children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heires with
Christ.

CHAP. II. The Observation from the Text.
The Observation I shall speak to, is this:

Doctr: That the Divine Spirit does witness, unto those which are in Christ
(with their Spirit) their Adoption.

This is the secret language of many a Son of Sion; Though I be adopted, yet, O
it is impossible that I should ever attain assurance of it: alas, I cannot
climb up to heaven, to see my name written there. How should I dive into such
a secret as that is? Methinke I find the Lord answering such a soul, and so
as it might for ever silence it in such reasonings, [ The Spirit it self
bears witness etc.] As if he had said, What testimony would thou desire?
what would thou reckon a sufficient evidence of thy Sonship? who might be a
witness that thou could confide in? If the Divine Spirit might ascertaine
thee of thy Adoption. Behold, that is nigh thee! thou need not ascend up to
heaven to setch that thence; that is descended to thee; for, every one that
believes has the witness within himself, 1 John 5.10. The Spirit knows the
mind of God, and how his heart stands toward thee, and that is sent from
the bosom of the Father into thy bosom, even on purpose to bring good news
from heaven of thy Fathers love: and though with men it be impossible, yet with
the Spirit all things are possible. That, is able to give infallible and
convincing demonstrations of thy Adoption, and this Spirit it self witnesses
etc.

In the carrying on of this, I shall show.

1. What this witnessing work of the Spirit is. 2. How the Spirit does witness
to a soul its Adoption: 3. Who are capable of attaining the witnessings of the
Spirit? 4. How a soul may know its enjoyment of them? 5. By what means a
soul may attain them.
CHAP. III. Of the witnessing work of the Spirit: or what it is for the Spirit
to witness unto a soul its Adoption.
Qu: 1. What is this witnessing work of the Spirit? Or what is it for the
Spirit to witness unto a soul its Adoption?

Answ. It is a work whereby the Spirit does that toward the clearing up unto
a soul of its Adoption, that a witness does amongst men for the decision and
determination of a matter dubious and uncertain.

Now, the use of a witness is, to give in evidence upon knowledge, how the
matter in question stands, purposely to ascertaine others thereof. Deuteronomy.
19.15. Matthew. 18.16. The end of witnessing is expressed to be, that a matter
may be established or confirmed and made to stand as firm and true, by that
record which is given in. And hence, Joh. 8.17. The testimony of two men is
true. i. e. is to be received as a sufficient evidence, and may free from
doubting. It was certain in it self before, and by the testimony it is
rendered certain unto those that questioned it. And, when the Spirit by some
operations, does what is equivalent unto this, then is witnesses. The
speakings of the Spirit are in a way suitable to it self who is the speaker,
and to the soul which is spoken to, and therefore by operations, not by voice.

And the Spirit witnesses 1. Objectively. 2. Efficiently.

1. Objectively: when it affords such special operations, as have an
aptitude to ascertaine the soul of its Adoption. There are some special and
remarkable Concurrences of the Spirit, which by a due observation, might
manifest adoption, and carry with them the force of affirmations and assertions
thereof. But many overlooke these evidences, and will not hear what the Spirit
says unto them. A soul may remain without a knowledge of its Sonship, after
the Spirit has thus witnessed, if its record be not received. So Rev. 22.18. I
testify unto every man that hears the words -- and yet every man to whom he
speaks this, do not believe what is asserted. Joh. 3.11. We testify -- and
ye receive not our witness. It is but a testimony proposed or offered, and is
not effectual unless received.

And, if nothing further were intended in the Text, yet it were a Mine with
much spiritual treasure laid up in it. Several things of great importance
arise from this. As, 1. Hence, a knowledge of Adoption is attaineable: it is
the very end of the Spirits witnessing to assure thereof. It is not to render
God more assured who are his Children, he knows who are his. Nor to make
Adoption certain in it self; that must be, before it can be witnessed. But,
its scope, drift and design is, to leave us assured or persuaded of it. And
that it should never attain its end in this, when it is so successull in other
works, how unconceivable a thing is it? 2. Hence, it is a duty of great
concernment to receive that testimony which the Spirit offers: may not the
Spirit complain unto many Christians, as Christ did? Joh. 3.11. So, I have
testified that you were the Children of God, and you have not received my
witness. Doubtless, it is a sinful neglect in those that are spoken to, not no
yield attention unto the voice of the Spirit which speaks. It is urged as a
choice duty, and enforced by a powerful argument, 1 John 5 9. If ye receive the
witness of men, how much more is a divine testimony to be received, which is
far greater? and it is the witness of the Spirit he intends, ver. 6.8.10.


Christians reckon it a small matter to deny the appearances of Gospel grace,
and to call the special operations of the Spirit, delusions of Satan: O but
hereby, you not only hinder your own peace, comfort and establishment, which
might come in at that door; but, which is far worse, you grieve the Spirit
of God also, Ephesians. 4.30. I may say to such as Isai. 7.13. Is it a small thing
for you to weary, grieve, and disquiet your own Spirits, but will you grieve
the Spirit of my God also? Its sad enough that carnal men deny attention to the
voice of the Spirit, O let not Christians make it speak in vain also, or
miss of its end in speaking to them.

But, I suppose this is not all which the Text aymeth at, or intends.
Therefore.

2. The Spirit witnesses efficiently: it causes the soul to conclude of its
Adoption, by its speakings to it. As Calling, does often express not only an
Inviting to a participation of Gospel grace, but the souls answering those
Invitations, which is effectual Calling, Romans 8.28.30. 2 These. 2.14. So,
witnessing expresses an effectual, efficacious witnessing. And, that this is
intended in the Text may appear.

1. From the Context: the scope of the Apostle is, to give a knowledge of this,
who are in Christ, and so have freedom from condemnation, ver. 1. And this he
clears, v. 5.9.13, 14. But least they should doubt or question, whither they
found a mortification of sin by the Spirit; or enjoyed the leadings of the
Spirit or not. In the last place he adds this as the highest, surest, and
most infallible means to help a soul unto a sight of its interest in Christ.
ver. 16. The Spirit it self witnesses with our Spirit etc. The other works
are of a witnessing nature, but this is beyond all other helps; this makes
the other evidencing, and gives sights of freedom from condemnation, and of
our Sonship. So that the Context favors this interpretation.

2. From the words of the Text: the Spirit is said to witness with our Spirit.
Its testimony, irresistibly overcomes our Spirit. i.e. or Conscience, it
causes them to conclude the same thing; and so there is a joynt-testimony. Some
times the Spirit utters its voice, and our Spirits hold off: but our Spirits
are fetched in and made use of in this way of witnessing, which is intended in
the Text; both agree in this numericall Conclusion [That we are the Children of
God] and so it is an efficacious witnessing.

I might clear it from what follows, ver. 33.38. and from other Scriptures,
which call the persuasion, or Conclusion of the thing which is witnessed, a
witnessing, as Luke 4.22. All bear him witness. i.e. Concluded the same thing
with approbation and allowance. But I shall proceed to a description, which
will further discover what it is for the Spirit to witness.

It is for the Spirit by some manifest, What it is for the Spirit to Witness.
and special acts and operations of its own, to ascertaine a soul by the word
or Gospel of its Adoption. Or, it is for the Spirit by clear irradiations,
and other effectual operations with the word, to work a particular soul (by
direct or reflexive acts) into a knowledge, persuasion, or Conclusion of its
acceptance into favor with God.

CHAP. IV. Of the Witness [the Spirit] and the thing witnessed, and wherein the
witnessing work does consist.
HEre are many things considerable; as, 1. Who is the Witness [The Spirit] This
is clear in the Text, Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self -- The truth of a
testimony has a dependence on the fidelity of the witness: and so the Spirit
who cannot lie, is appointed by Office unto this work, that a soul might be
infallibly assured of what is testified: were it any other, it might remain
under doubtings, and think it too good news to be true, that it should have
God for its Father; and so be a joynt-heire with Christ in that exceeding,
eternal Weight of glory. O but if the Spirit witnesses this, who is faithful
in all he says, this may give a full Assurance of Son ship, or free it from
those fears, doubtings, jealousies and suspicions, which it has labored under
about this question. This proclaims the infinite condescension of the Spirit,
that it self who is very God, should stoop so low as to be a witness in our
matters, who are dust and ashes. That the Creator should be a witness to the
creature, this is a high favor indeed.

And hereby this testimony is differenced.

1. From the Delusions of Satan: he is ready to bear false witness to the
soul, purposely to lead it into mistaking Conclusions about its condition: and
hearkening to his voice is extremely dangerous.

2. From the single testimony of our Spirits: I do not say that the Spirit
does witness effectually without our Spirits: but the Text plainly makes two
[the Spirit] with [our Spirit]. So that if the Spirit of Adoption, by some acts
peculiar to it self, be not in consociation with cur Spirits, the testimony is
most unsafe, dangerous, and deluding. O take heed of trusting the single
testimony of your own treacherous Spirits in the bu synes of your souls for
eternity: but if the Holy-Spirits has fetched in your Spirits, and overcome
them into a Conclusion of your Adoption, you may safely own it, at the mouth
of these two witnesses.

2. What is the thing witnessed, viz. the Sonship of particular souls: the
Spirit does not only witness the truth of some Doctrine of the Gospel; it does
not only give a persuasion that all which receive Christ, or believe on his
name, have authority to become the Sons of God, as Joh. 1.12. Not barely that
some, that believers, but (says the Text) that [we] even we are the children
of God.

3. Wherein the witnessing work does consist, viz. In the Spirits giving
manifestations, and working the heart into persuasions and conclusions of
Adoption.

1. It does not consist only in affording such operations as being measured by
Gospel rules do give assertions or affirmations of Adoption: but an effectual
witnessing is here intended, such as indeed causes the matter to be
established, which is, to accomplish the end of that witnessing, as Matthew.
18.16.

The Spirit establishes the soul in a persuasion of God's Fatherly love
through Christ. Romans 8.38. I am persuaded etc. and Job 19.25. I know my
redeemer lives. And hence it is made one end of our receiving the Spirit, 1
Coriu. 2.12.
that we might know the things that are given us of God, 1 John 3.24. Hereby
we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit, 2 Corin. 5. ver. 1.6. We know --
that we have a building of God -- and ver. 5, 6. Because he has given us the
earnest of his Spirit, therefore we are always confident -- So that, the
Spirit witnesses, by giving a knowledge and persuasion of Adoption.

2. It does not confist in its filling the soul with consolation: many if they
find comfort by a word, then they think the Spirit has witnessed Adoption,
else not: whereas, this witnessing work may be enjoyed in a very disconsolate
condition. Job 19. v. 6, 7.8, etc. Here was but little comfort, and yet much
assurance, ver. 25. and Matthew. 27.46. There is a want of comfort [Why have thou
forsaken me] and yet not a want of assurance; for, with the same breath he
challenges propriety in God twice over [My God, my God].

Indeed this blessed news does often fill the heart with joy unspeakeable and
full of glory; but, this consolation is rather consequential to the witnessing
of the Spirit, then that which gives being to it. It is an effect of it, not
an ingredient into it, more then other works of the Spirit.

Testification is a different work of the Spirit from consolation.

CHAP. V. Of the ways and means how the Spirit does accomplish this
witnessing work, in many particulars.
4. IN what ways or how the Spirit does accomplish this witnessing work. In
the Description, the Spirit is said, to witness. 1. By its Operations within.
2. By its Word without.

1. The Spirit performs the Office of a witness by operations within the
soul: we are not to expect any apparitions of the Spirit in any visible shape,
to the eyes of our bodies: or any audible voice from heaven to our outward
ear's, for the assuring us of our Adoption. I find no Rule for these. The
Spirit gives a certainty of Adoption by its actings within the soul, as well
as if a hundred witnesses had affirmed it. As,

1. It makes an effectual application of witnessing words, when it testifies
by direct acts: the hinting or giving in of a word is not enough, as I shall
show in another place. But then a word is applied, when it is powerfully set
upon the heart by the Spirit, and is so fixed, settled, and engraven there, that
it becomes an ingrafted word, James 1.21. and works effectually toward its
proper end. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Coloss. 1.29. And that it bears down all
temptations, objections, and unbeleeving reasonings that were in the soul
before, against what it is called up to, by the word, and so is written upon
the heart. Jerem. 31. v. 33. It is only the finger of the Spirit that can do
this. 2 Corin. 3.3.

And when there is such an application of a witnessing word, as the heart is
irresistibly overpowered into a pers wasion of Adoption by it, then it it
indeed witnessing.

And some of the Saints have found such a supernatural power coming along
with a word, that th ugh afflictions and temptations came; yet, they durst not,
could not but say to the Lord, Doubtless thou art our Father. Or as, 2 Corin.
5.1. We know --

And at such a time the promise is as it were holden to the heart; they are
knitt and glued together, that until the Spirit suspendeth its operations; it
is as easy to make the soul leave the body, as to make this persuasion of
Adoption leave the soul: as I shall show more fully else where.

2. The Spirit exciteth and draws out some manifest, special, gracious acts,
when the way of testifying is by reflex acts: the Gospel declares and
determines says and other graces to be infallible evidences of Adoption. Now,
the Spirit enableth to act these. Romans 5.5. Gal. 5.22. And from these by reflex
acts, to draw Concsusions of Adoption. I call them [speciall gracious acts] to
difference them from those works of the Spirit unbeleevers may have. Hebr. 6.
v. 4, 5.6. that have not power to assert Adoption, which is a special
relation: for, nothing common can evidence that which is special.

And they must be [manifest] acts of grace: for, Witnesses are purposely to
clear up a matter which is dark and dubious, and therefore witnessing must
ever be by what is more conspicuous and apparent: and hence Christ refers
the Jews to his works and the Scriptures. Joh. 5.36.39. Because they were
more visible to them. And (I conceive) there are many secret concurrences of
the Spirit, which (though they be special works) yet are not intended for
this, but some other end; and with the utmost diligence a soul can use, are
not capable of being improved unto witnessing, being themselves so hardly
discerneable. Yet, I dare not confine assurance unto eminent Saints, I think,
few or no Christians are so weak, that they are destitute of all such acts of
grace, as may witness to them Adoption, as I shall prove afterward. But there
is a vast difference between the operations, and the witnessing operations of
the Spirit: these must have light as well as peculiarnesse in them.

3. The Spirit causes the soul to apply it self unto the use of due means
for the attaining assurance. Sometimes, his proceedings are graduall, or by
degrees; the soul goes on step by step toward it, and it may be a great
while before it arriveth at it. As, the Spirit may first Convince by the word,
that a Christian ought to seek after, and may attain unto, more quietness and
establishment then yet it self has found. 2 Pet. 1. ver. 10. This part of the
will of Christ it little minded before. And then (it may be) the Lord removes
out of the way those impediments which formerly hindered Assurance: subdueth
some corruptions, answers some doubts, causes it to see the groundlesnesse
of some fears, it has labored under; helps it to look into Satan's
designs that have hindered the work of Christ within it, and to take notice of
some glorious advantages in the attaining of Assurance, which it thought not of
before: it sees how it may glorify God more in such a condition, then it can
do under doubtings, fears, disquietings -- And thus the Spirit capacitateth
the soul for such a mercy; So Exodus 33. v. 9.11.14.17. Moses upon every new
grant or return of prayer, takes advantage to rise higher and higher in his
requests, and at last cries out. ver. 18. I beseech thee show me thy glory.
And ver. 19. compared with Exodus 34.6. All his goodness passed before him. So,
the Lord causes a soul to seek for some mercits, and upon the Lords
answering some desires, it has encouragement to go with a holy boldness for
greater mercies, and at last it is enabled to act faith in an eminent way for
sights of Divine glory, and in the face of Christ has these also. It obtains
some mercies conducing to assurance at first, and afterward injoyeth that also.

I have mentioned this the rather;

1. Because Christians think to have assurance all at once, upon a sudden, and
are apt to be very much troubled if it comes not in by the lump: whereas,
the will of God is, to let it in sometimes by little and little; and the soul
may be a long time in attaining it: this is no matter of discouragement that
thou have it not presently, if thou be'st in the way to it.

2. Because many are very suspicious of a testimony, if it be not by some
violent, powerful heart-astonishing alterations: whereas, though sometimes it
be by such invincible operations as do not leave the soul to freedom whether
it will own them or not, but overcomes the heart immediately to a reception
of the testimony: yet, at other times the Spirit acts in a more mild,
gentle, and secret indiscernable way; and does more leave the soul to its
choice for owning it or not, and by quenching the motions of the Spirit it may
miss of that Assurance which they lead to. Yet these operations when they doc
effectually witness, are so powerful, that ever they carry the heart along
with them, toward Christ. When Assurance comes in, as the result of
selfe-examination, it may not cause such eminent alterations as a soul may
expect, and yet it may be good. But there are sweet gracious effects that will
follow real witnessings of the Spirit, which way soever they come in. And that
bowing of the heart to the use of means, as selfe-examination etc. is another
work of the Spirit as a witness.

4. The Spirit affords Irradiations: as a witness opens a Case and shows
how it stands; so the Spirit by shining forth with its bright, glorious, and
heavenly beams into the dark, dungeon-like soul, does cause it to discern
enough in the application of promises, and in the exercise of graces, to
satisfy it about its adoption.

And, though it seemed to be under a midnight of spiritual darkness before;
yet, when the Spirit has shined upon its own works in the soul, and put new
life into former experiences, then it can conclude that the Sun of
righteousness is arisen upon or in the heart, who was hidden or unseene till
then in a great measure. And hence the Apostle prays, Ephesians. 1. v. 17, 18, 19.
That they might have the Spirit of revelation -- And for what end? v. 18. That
ye may know what is the hope of his calling. i. e. that you may know upon what
certain grounds, Vt sciatis qualis and quam certa sit spes, qua nos sperare
jussit Dominus: atque ita ne ulla subeat animos vestros and mentes vestras
dubitatio de rebus non dum praestitis. Zanch.
and foundatio^s your hopes are built, and so may be freed from doubtings about
the things hoped for. And how is this attained? The eyes of your understanding
being enlightened, v. 18. It is by the Spirits clearing and brightning of the
understanding, and enduing that with supernatural light to know those things
which naturally it could not know: the Spirit raises, heighneth, and
strengthens the souls apprehensions of Divine things, by darting in spiritual
light, and thus it attaineth a revelation, knowledge, and persuasion of
Calling. So Psalm. 36.9. Not in the light of our own understandings, but in [thy
light]. i. e. in Divine light, we shall see light. If thy Spirit gives us the
light of knowledge, then we shall be able to see what comes from the Father of
lights, or has a Divine stamp or impresse upon it, and to put a difference
between light and darkness, we shall see light. And often the Prophet beggeth
for irradiations. Psalm. 31.16. and 67. 1. and 80.3.7.19. and 119. v. 135. Cause
thy face to shine. And hence 2 Corin. 4. v. 4.6. The light of the Gospel is
said to shine in our hearts, to give us a knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ. By these ir^^diations a soul is enabled to see the mind
of Christ in the Gospel, and to compare its condition with, and rightly to
judge thereof by, that perfect rule of righteousness.

2. The Spirit witnesses as by operations within, so also, by a written word
without: this does contribute much to assurance. The Word declares.

1. That such a Testimony is attaineable, and that the Spirit is the Witness.
Romans 8.16. 1 John 5. v. 8.10.

2. What those works of the Spirit are, which do evidence Adoption; as faith.
Joh. 1.12. it gives descriptions of faith and other graces, and opens the
nature, properties, and effects of these: or discovers what operations a
witnessing work has upon the hearts of those that are real injoyers of it;
whereby a man may discern whither those works he has found, be of the right
stamp; real and not counterfeit; special and not common.

3. What the ways and means are whereby these works may become witnessing.

4. What application of a word does make it witnessing.

Yet, not the word alone, but that in Conjunction with the Irradiations and
other operations of the Spirit, does witness Adoption.

If the Spirit witnesses by a reflection upon acts of faith; the word affords
this proposition toward it.

[ He that believes shall be saved, Mark. 16.16].

The second proposition is [But I beleeve].

Now, toward this, the Word tells us what Faith is, and the Spirit works
and acts faith in us, and by its Irradiations, helps us to see it in our
selves, and to say [but I beleeve] and then the Conclusion follows from the
Word, Therefore I shall be saved.

And thus I have discovered, what this witnessing work of the Spirit is.

CHAP. VI. Of the Spirits Witnessing to the soul its Adoption; and that first
immediately by it self: proved by four Arguments.
Qu. 2. HOw does the Spirit Witness to a soul its Adoption?

Ans: 1. More Immediately by it self.

2. By Water.

3. By Blood. 1 John 5 8.

Ans. 1. The Spirit witnesses more Immediately by it self: I say [by it
selfe] not in opposition to the written word; but to distinguish this way of
witnessing, from those by water and blood, 1 John 5.8. It is the Concurrence of
the Spirit with these, that makes them witnessing to us efficiently: but
besides, the Spirit has a more Immediate Testimony of its own, which it
affords to some believers, whereby they are filled with satisfaction about
their Adoption.

Sometimes, when they are gasping after Communion with Christ, the Spirit
gives them such sweet, unexpressible, heart-enamouring, soule-ravishing
manifestations of it self, and of Divine love, as effectually overcomes them
into an undoubted persuasion thereof.

Ordinarily, the Spirit makes use of the written word in this way of
witnessing: he makes the word without a voice within; by the effectual
application of it unto a particular soul.

Or, if it be not by an express word; yet, it is by some Scriptural
consideration, or in or presently after waiting upon the Lord in ways of his
own appointment by the Word: as prayer, it may be for the very mercy of
Assurance, etc. and so it is not properly an Immediate Revelation, because in
the use of means.

It may seem very improper to call it Immediate, and yet assert it to be by
the Word. But, the expression may be borne withal.

1. Because the Spirit has such an eminent stroke here, and does more
eminently manifest its own presence in this, then in the other ways of
witnessing. Here it witnesses not in a Discursive way, by deducing Conclusions
from premises; but the Spirit ^^^^^eth the soul, and thereby works it into
the persuasion by a Direct act, without any necessary reflection upon works
formerly wrought within. It effectually causes the soul to believe its
Adoption.

2. Because, the Scriptures are called the Word of the Lord, and are the very
breath, of the Spirit. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is (...) of Divine breathing
or inspiration. Men are said Immediately to speak unto one another, when they
use words to each other face to face; Now the Scriptures are but the voice of
the Spirit.

3. Because I use the word Immediate to distinguish this, from the other ways
of witnessing. Now, that besides the Spirits witnessing by Water. i. e.
Sanctification, and by Blood. i. e. Justification, there is such a distinct way
of witnessing, it may appear upon these grounds.

Arg. 1. From the Apostles ascribing it to the Spirit himself. Romans 8.16.
(...). It is proper to say that a man does that, which his substitute or
servant does by his appointment: Not the Spirit, but the Spirit himself: the
Graces of the Spirit are witnesses, as every effect is a witness of its Cause --
but the Spirit himself does it says the Text. Symonds deserted soul, Case
and Cure. page 453.
a Lord does many times by his Steward; but, if it be said that [such a man
himselfe] has performed any work, that argues his doing it in his own
person, and not by another. So, if it were only (...), The Spirit witnesses
-- then it might be by a proxy, gifts and graces; but, seeing it is (...) the
Spirit himself, this argues it to be a peculiar work of the Spirit,
requiring its own more Immediate presence.

Faith which is a grace may receive the testimony, but the Spirit gives it,
and not graces in his stead: else, it should not be himself properly, but
graces for him. As Water. i. e. Sanctification is called a witness, 1 John
5.8. when graces testisie: although it is the Spirit that causes them to do
it, yet the graces have the denomination for the witness. So here, the Spirit
himself is the witness rather then graces, though graces may be used about
this, as the Spirit is about the other. And hence after the Apostle had told
them of the usefulness of mortification and Conduct, v. 13, 14. for the
clearing up of Justification and Adoption; yet he foreseing that they might
question their enjoyment of these, as well as their Justification; therefore he
adds this as the highest means for knowledge, which may hold when all others
fail [ The Spirit himself -- ].

Argu. 2. From the aptitude of many written words or promises (by application)
to witness: I account it very unsafe to draw up such Conclusions from a
Scripture cast in, as it has no natural tendency to enforce; neither in its
scope or sense, directly nor by consequence, neither in the letter of it, nor
by application. This mistake too many labor under in these days. When they be
dubious about what is their duty, if a word comes into their minds, although
it tends not to resolve the doubt, looks not the least that way; yet that
word is made a rule for action, and the decider of the Controversy. Whereas if
it be applied by the Spirit, it is intended for some other use or end, and not
for the determination of a matter which is no ways concerned in that
Scripture: For, the Spirit does not speak barely in letters, syllables, or
words of Scripture, but as these express things which are agreeable to the
mind of Christ.

A man may be profane, and yet use the words of Scripture, and Satan often
comes with an, It is written, Matthew. 4.6. But, there are many Scriptures of a
witnessing nature, which cannot be denied this use.

Here are two things to be confirmed.

1. That there is an aptitude in some Scriptures to witness.

2. That the Spirit does make application of these, and that for such ends.

1. That there is an aptitude in some Scriptures to witness: or, that they
miss only application from the Divine Spirit to make them witnessing to a
particular soul: I shall give a few instances, amongst many, for the clearing
this truth. Isai. 41.10. Fear not, for I am with [thee] -- I am [thy] God --
Isai. 43. v. 25. I even I am be that blotteth out [thy] transgressions, for
mine own sake, I will not remember thy sins. Matthew. 9.2. Son, be of good
cheer, [thy] sins be for given thee: neither is this meant as to the present
disease only; for Christ intended to give others a knowledge hereby, of his
power to forgive sins, as v. 6. So Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you -- ver. 26. A new heart will I give you -- ver. 27. I will put my
Spirit within you -- ver. 28. I will be your God.

Surely the Lord would not speak in such a particular way to men [thy] God,
and [thy] sins, if he intended not their particular Assurance (by the
application of such words) of the things spoken: and that either of these have
an aptitude to witness Adoption is undeniable. What can satisfy a soul, if
this will not? for the Lord to say, I am thy God. Is. 41.10.
If the Spirit does but speak this over again, to our Spirit, it is enough.

And to clear it further.

1. There are many assuring promises, of special mercies which are
consequential to Adoption: Now, these must needs have an aptitude by
application to give Assurance of our interest in that which it a necessary
Antedent: as Isai. 41.10. I will strengthen thee, I will uphold thee. 2 Cor.
12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee. Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee.

2. There are many Scriptures that directly tend to remove the grounds of a
souls doubting of its Adoption: as, if it questioneth its interest in Christ,
because it is exercised with such heavy afflictions; these Scriptures tend to
remove that doubt. Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves be chasteneth. Rev. 3.19. As
many as I love I rebuke and chasten.

If the variety or violence of temptations which it has met withal be the
ground of its doubting; it may find releife from Heb. 2.18. and Hebr. 4.15.
Christ was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin: he was free
from sin, yet was not free from temptation; and so Christians may not look
for exemption from temptation who abound with sin: Yea, it is expressly said [
we are] tempted. If the feeling strong workings of corruption puts the soul
upon questioning its condition: that may minister help, that Paul, an eminent
Saint, groaned under the same burden. Romans 7.15. yea, he cries out with bitter
lamentation, ver. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? And thus, many Scriptures have an aptitude to witness: for
it is their proper effect (when applied by the Spirit) to remove such doubtings
of Divine love, as arise from such Causes, which oftentimes are the only
obstacles in the way to Assurance.

2. That the Spirit does make application of such Scriptures unto particular
souls, and that for such Ends, may appear.

1. From their aptitude to Witness: that word, Isui. 41.10. I am thy God --
brings in God as speaking to a particular soul, and telling it of its
interest in himself: it has a witnessing voice in the very letter of it, and
so carries evidence with it, that this is its proper design. And, that the
Spirit does apply words for the proper ends they so clearly point at, is
undeniable, especially when the thing pointed at, is undoubtedly a work of the
Divine Spirit, as witnessing is.

2. From a parity of reason: the Spirit applies other words, for those ends
which they aptly serve to. None will deny but that it may and does reprove
declineing Christians for leaving their first love, by such a word as that
Revel. 2. v. 3.4.11. Or threaten lukewarm souls, by Revel. 3.16. Or convince
carnally confident souls, of the sadness of their condition, by Revel. 3. v
17.22.

And, by the same reason, it should apply the aforementioned Scriptures in a
witnessing way, unto doubting souls: and hence when David was besieged, and
surrounded on every side with troubles, and the Lord seemed to keep silence,
he even puts words into the mouth of God. Psalm 35.3 [say thou] i. e. by thy
Spirit in some word or promise; for, this is the Lords way of speaking to the
souls of his people; and hence it is called often, the Word of God. And, it
was the Word that David hoped in for his salvations, Psalm. 119.81, 82.

He had the letter of a promise before, v. 28. but this would not satisfy him,
unless the Lord would speak it over again, he must have it applied to his
inner man, Say [^o my soule] they were internal speakings he prayed for: as if
he had said, Lord outward salvations would be nothing to me, without inward
feelings of thy favor in them; O say [to my soule] i. e. raise thou an inward
persuasion in my heart, of my interest in thee; say [I am thy salvation] i. e.
not only that he which believes shall be saved, but let me be particularized,
[thy] salvation: and not only that thou wise deliver me out of my distresses,
but say [I] not only will be, but [am] thy salvation. He beggeth here the
witnessings of the Spirit, in the Word, by an effectual application of it, to
his soul.

3. From a believers right and title to such words or promises: Christ is his,
and all the promises of the new Covenant his, in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. Yea,
promises directed to particular persons in Scripture, when they are about
things of general concernement, do admit of a general application, and every
believer may lay claim to them, as his: that promise [I will not fail thee or
for sake thee] is directed to Joshua, Josh. 1. v. 5. yet is applied generally.
Heb. 13.5. And so, general promises are capable of a particular application,
unto every individual believer. Now, if the Spirit did not apply them,
Christians should miss of that prosit and advantage which according to the
intent of the promiser is to be reaped by them.

A believer is adopted, Isa. 41.10. Ezekiel 36.25
has God for his God, has clean water sprinkled on him, etc. and the Word
does say thus much to him, though in a more secret way, in a language which he
understood not. The witnessing of the Spirit, is but the uttering these things
to the soul with a more audible voice. It is but like a Fathers telling his
Child of an estate which was really his own before. So, Christians have a
propriety in such words or promises before, and it is the office of the Spirit
to give a knowledge unto believers of the things that are freely given them of
God. 1 Corin. 2.12. And so, it will apply these as well as other words; for,
the Gospel owneth no restriction or limitation, as if some promises were to be
applied, others not. The whole Gospel is the voice of the Spirit, and so, any
word may be applied for its proper end, and therefore witnessing words as well
as other.

4. From the appointment of Divine promises for this very end to witness;
which must be by application from the Spirit: the whole word is often called
God's testimony. Psalm. 19.7. and 119. v. 2.22.24. etc. and Heb. 6.18. There
are two Immutable things ordained on purpose to help us unto strong
consolation, and they are. 1. Gods promise. 2. His Oath. v. 13.17. But how do
they bring in this Consolation? it is by witnessing, for, ver. 16. An Oath is
said to be for confirmation, and so the two Immutable things bring in this
strong consolation as they serve for the ratification and confirmation to a
soul of its interest in the blessings of the Gospel. And they are of the same
use to all the heirs of promise that they were of to Abraham, ver. 17, 18. To
give them the same certainty of what they are heirs to, that he had. And both
the promise and the Oath must needs give testimony, by direct rather then
reflex acts, as the nature of them do intimate. By all which it appears that
Gods promise and Oath (both which are without us) do as properly conduce to
the affording Assurance of our propriety in Christ, and in the everlasting
inheritance by him, as any inherent graces or qualifications can do.

Now, as it was the application to Abraham of these two, that made them
witnessing to him. Gen 22. v. 12.16, 17. So there must be a superadded work of
the Divine Spirit, making an application of them to particular souls, as there
was to Abraham; else, they cannot add a confirmation, or bring in consolation,
to any heirs of promise, which are the ends they are intended for.

Argu. 3. From the number of Witnesses which the Gospel owneth: 1 John 5.8
There are three that bear witness on Earth. Now, if [the Spirit] should not
give a distinct testimony from water and blood, there were not three
witnesses. Indeed, neither water nor blood are sufficient alone to witness:
but, the Spirit with water make but one witness; and hence the water has the
denomination for the witness, and not the Spirit. And, the Spirit with blood
make but one witness; and thence the blood is called the witness, and not the
Spirit: and therefore if the Spirit had not a distinct way of witnessing, from
its Concurrence with these, there were but two, not three witnesses. And that
water should be so distinct from blood in the way of its testifying, and that
the Spirit should not be as distinct from them both, is unconceivable, and
sounds very harsh, I conclude therefore, that the same use which water or
blood are of, The Spirit witnesses with blood and with water, but besides the
Spirit has a distinct witnessing, by way of enlarging the soul with joy in
the souls apprehension of Gods Fatherly love. The Spirit does not always
witness unto us our condition by force of argument from sanctification; but
sometimes immediately by way of presence; as the sight of a friend comforting
without help of discourse. Dr. Sibbs. Saints Sealing.
when they witness; the same the Spirit is of, when that witnesses. And, as
they have something distinct from each other, from whence (when discerned) a
conclusion is drawn of interest in Christ: so, the Spirit has some peculiar
acts or operations of its own, distinct from both; which effectually beget the
same persuasion which they do, though in a more Immediate way, then if it were
by Inferences from such promises as they attain it by.

Object. But by [Spirit] is not meant here, the Holy Ghost, but [our Spirits]
they are the third witness.

Answ. It must needs be understood of the Divine Spirit.

1. Because the Divine Spirit is a witness on earth. Romans 8.16. and so the
enumeration of Witnesses on earth, were not full, if that were not intended.

2. Because the scope of the Apostle in this Chapter is, not to advance our
Spirits, but, the Divine Spirit as the witness on earth. 1 John 5.6. It is the
Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is truth, and hereupon he
numbreth the witnesses, ver. 7 8. and ver. 10 He that believes has the
witness [ in himselfe] which argues that his design is, to assert the
Holy-Spirit to be a witness on Earth: for, he does not say, he has the witness
[in heaven] but [within himselfe]. i. e. on Earth.

3. Because if our Spirits were intended, they must be our sanctified and
renewed Spirits; and these belong to, and are included in the witness of water,
which denotes sanctification: and so, unless by Spirit be meant the
Holy Ghost, there will yet be, but two, not three witnesses on Earth, for our
Spirits and water make but one.

Arg. 4. From the experience of the Saints: I could name many that have had
their Adoption ascertained to them by the Spirits applying a written word.
Although experience alone is not argument enough to prove, yet with the former
spiritual grounds, it may confirm the thing to us.

But of this, more in the second part.

I have insisted more largely upon the proose of this, because some stumble at
it, and suppose that Assurance is attaineable only by reflection upon marks,
and signs, or Qualifications within.

I shall answer a doubt or two further, before I leave this point.

Object. 1. Have not some poor souls languished in doubtings almost all their
days, in expectation of such a kind of witness, and and do not others
dangerously err, by taking the strong conceit of their own fantasy, for the
witness of the Spirit?

Answ. 1. I grant that the Spirit does witness by faith and other graces, and
any one of these testimonies may keep him that has it, from languishing.

2. Possibly, a limiting or tying up the Spirit unto one way of witnessing, may
be the occasion of the soul distress: though asking asigne was lawful in it
self, yet when the Pharisees desired it in a carnal way, and limited Christ to
this way, when they had Miracles and the Scriptures to testify of him besides,
this occasioned a denial of their desires. Matthew. 12. v. 38, 39. Let Christians
beware of prescribing the Lord, and tying him up to one way that they have met
with him in, when other means are Instituted for the same end, besides that.

3. Many that make inherent Qualifications the only evidences, yet take their
own fantasies for these. Though distracted men say that all the houses and
lands they travail by are theirs, yet men in their right minds may know what
is their own: so (as I once heard a servant of Christ say) though bedlam
professors may say that Christ, and eternal life are theirs, when only their
own fantasies tell them so; yet, it no way follows thence, that such a
testimony of the Spirit is not to be expected.

Object 2. But the three witnesses. 1 John 5.8. do testify Conjunction,
together, not severally, or one alone; and so the Spirit may witness with water
and blood; or may put forth some distinct acts about these, and not have a
distinct way of witnessing.

Answ. 1. If sanctification be discerned, I ask whether it will not be granted
that this witness is sufficient? if so, then they may witness severally, and
it is not necessary that the three be always together in witnessing. And why
may not the Spirit also be alone in witnessing, who is the highest witness?

2. This was answered before: Water and blood are different in their ways of
witnessing; and therefore also the Spirit different from them both; because a
third and chief witness.

Yet, I deny not but that Graces may witness at the same time, when this more
Immediate testimony is afforded. That light which is darted in, may discover
graces, and former experiences; yet, the Immediate presence of the Spirit so
gloriously accomplisheth the work, that the soul does not, or not primarily,
Conclude from these graces, for the present: yet, afterward when the Spirit
has suspended its operations, then the remembrance of these may confirm, and
evidence that it was really the Spirit, which did bow it into that persuasion,
and may difference it to others from all delusions. And, it is necessary to
understand that these belong unto the other ways of witnessing; least the want
of a distinct knowledge of one from the other, should hinder a reception or
owning of real testimonies, when water or blood lie dark.

And this is the first way of the Spirits witnessing.

CHAP. VII. Of the Spirits witnessing by water.
Ans. 2. THe Spirit witnesses by Water: 1 John 5.8. There are three that bear
witness on Earth, the Spirit, and [the Water] i. e. Sanctification. And that
this is intended by water is evident. For it is something.

1. Derived from Christ, ver. 6. He came by Water. 2. That has an aptitude to
witness. v. 8. 3. That witnesses in Earth, v. 8. i. e. to or in us. 4. That is
distinguished from blood, ver. 6.8.
Now, Sanctification is the privilege enjoyed, or derived from Christ, which
the Scripture sets out by Water in way of distinction from blood: and
therefore that must needs be intended here.

This work of Sanctification was typified under the Law by washing; Exodus
19.10 Hebr. 9.10.
because water has a cleansing property, and so the Communication of grace by
the Spirit, is expressed by [powring out] Zech. 12.10. And we read of the
washing of regeneratio, Tit. 3.5. and are exhorted to cleanse our selves, 2
Cor. 7.1. Which are Metaphors taken from water, and are used to set out
sanctification. But most clearly, Ephesians. 5.26. That he might [ sanctifie] and
cleanse it, i. e. his Church, with the washing of water: which fully evidenceth
that sanctification is set forth by water; and I know nothing else that those
requisites aforementioned, will agree to, besides that.

And, that the Spirit does witness unto souls their interest in Christ, by
sanctification, is evident.

1. Because it is expressly called a Witness: 1 John 5.8. and there could not
be three, if that were not one.

2. Because it is reckoned up amongst the peculiar privileges and special
favors which the Saints receive from Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 Cor. 6.11. Such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified -- Where it
differenceth their state of Conversion to Christ, from their state of nature
wherein they were without Christ. And it is attributed to the Spirit, which is
therefore frequently called the [holy] Spirit; because it works holiness in
the hearts of men.

3. Because there is a necessary Connection between sanctification and
salvation, 2 These. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2. Act. 20.32. and 26.18. An inheritance
among them that are sanctified. And what ever has salvation coupled with it,
being discovered, must needs have a witnessing force in it. Yet, always
remember.

1. That Water. i. e. Sanctification cannot witness Adoption without the
Irradiations of the Spirit: when a Christian has had some sweet, lively,
experience of God, some sensible enjoyment of him, and a feeling of the Spirits
operations, exciting, quickening, and acting its own graces; yet by and by,
when this light from the Spirit is wanting, it is ready to throw away all
again, and say, O I thought I had seen God in such a way, and heard his voice,
and felt his love; but now I fear I was mistaken: and yet afterward when the
Spirit shines upon its own works again, then it can own God in the same
dispensations that it cast away; Psalm. 77. The Prophet was in great affliction
and distress; ver. 2. My snare ran in the night and ceased not, my soul
refused to be comforted.

And as a Remedy. 1. He remembered God, v. 3. i.e. called to mind how gracious
and merciful the Lord is; and this in stead of easing did aggravate his
sorrows. 2. He recollected former experiences, ver. 5. I considered the days
of old. i.e. what the dealings of God had been with me, how gracious he had
been to me formerly; and he thought to have mitigated his grief this way; but
the light of the Spirit was wanting; and so in stead of asswaging, this
heightneth his trouble, that he is rushed almost upon a brinke of desperation.
ver. 7.8, 9. Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more?
has he forgotten to be gracious? But, he has a second remembrance of Gods
dealings of old, v. 10, 11. and is cheered up by them, and could admire God in
them again, v. 13. There was a great darkness upon his old experiences, ver. 5.
and then they were wounding to him; but the Spirit shines upon the same, ver.
11. and then they tend to healing. So that, when the beams of that Sun are
afforded, then a soul may trace the footsteps of the Almighty, from one
particular to another, and say, God was here, to succor me under this
temptation, to support me in this condition, to sanctify to me this
dispensation, though I was not aware of it, and then Graces within may be
witnessing, else not.

2. That Sanctification is a darker evidence, then the other: this water is
many times muddy. There is so much imperfection in it; such stirrings of
corruption, yea prevailings, even in the best of the Saints, as Romans 7. that
this evidence is often darkened, and blotted, and has but a moonlight in it.
There is a perfection in the other witnesses, though there may be imperfection
in their witnessing: but, here is much weakness in the witness it self of water,
which affords more cause of questioning it.

Object. But may or can a soul enjoy any other testimony, by the Spirit or
blood, when water. i.e. Sanctification lies dark?

Ans: 1. A certainty that Sanctification is wanting speaks an incapability of
having Adoption witnessed any way to a man: for, the want of that does
infallibly evidence a want of Adoption. 1 John 2. v. 3, 4. 1 John 3. v. 8, 9.
He that commits sin. i.e. lives and walks in sin, and is addicted and
given up to the service of it [he is of the Devil] ver. 4. for he that is borne
of God cannot sin -- Such are expressly excluded from the inheritance of Sons.
1 Cor. 6. v. 9, 10. Neither fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, -- nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall
inherit the kingdom of God: nor no unrighteous ones. ver. 9. Whereas, all that
are adopted are heirs of that Kingdom. Romans 8.17. Luke 12.32. And this may
cast the carnal confidences of multitudes in these days, who are without
restraining grace, and yet pretend to assurance; who live in prophanenes and
those very sins aforementioned, and yet are confident of their interest in the
kingdom of God, which is expressly to give the Holy Ghost the lie, 1 Cor 6.10.
which says, they shall not enter.

If it can on Scripture grounds be concluded that a man is destitute of faith
or repentance etc. then it is certain that he has no testimony from the
Spirit of Adoption.

2. But Sanctification may be inevident, or lie dark, and yet the Spirit or
blood may witness Adoption: A man may not be able clearly or distinctly to
discern his Sanctification, it may be clouded, and be very obscure to him, and
yet the Spirit or blood may testify his interest in Christ. 1 Samuel 12. ver.
20.22. Jer. 3.4. He may be able by the light of the Spirit to see acts of faith
put forth upon the blood of Christ, and these are witnessing. Romans 3.25. Romans
5. v. 1.9. and 10.10.

And the Spirit and blood are the highest witnesses, and so afford the clearest
evidences of Adoption.

3. Yet a man may and ought by Consequence Conclude of his Sanctification when
ever the other witnesses are afforded: as in a dark day a man may conclude
that the Sun is up, though he cannot see it: so, a man, seeing acts of faith on
the blood of Christ, may conclude he is sanctified, though he cannot see his
own sanctification: and the not drawing this Conclusion is the occasion of
many fears, dejections, disquietings, and discomforts in the souls of many
Saint.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Spirits witnessing by blood.
Ans. 3. THe Spirit witnesses by blood: 1 John 5.8. i.e. the blood of Christ,
by which we have Redemption, Remission, Justification, -- Heb. 9.22. Ephesians. 1.5.
Matthew. 26.28. Revel. 5.9.

The righteousness of Christ and his blood are all one: and hence, Romans 5.9.
We are justified by his blood; and ver. 18. Justified by his righteousness.

Now, that this blood does perform the office of a Witness is evident.

1. Because it is called a Witness, and that in way of distinction from water, 1 John 5 8. 2. Because blood is useful to such special ends as are peculiar to
those in Christ: as Justification -- Romans 5.9. Ephesians. 1.5. and 2.13. Coloss.
1.20. Hebr. 10.19. 1 Cor. 11.25. 3. Because the application of this blood is by
faith, which has an aptitude to make it witnessing: we are not to imagine that
this blood can witness unto any particular soul its Adoption without it be
appropriated and applied by some special acts which many in the world want,
because many obtain not Adoption or salvation by it. Romans 2. v. 5, 6, 7, 8,
12. 2 Thessalonians. 1. v. 7, 8. And without such acts it would witness it to all the
world as well as to any one in it.
Now it is the office of faith, to make that general, of Christ's shedding his
blood for the redemption and reconciliation of sinners, to be of particular
advantage to a soul. Romans 3.25. It is the blood that Justifies, Romans 5.9. And
therefore blood is called the witness and not faith. But, seeing it is received
by faith, that may discover when it is applied, and so may make it witnessing:
and hence he that believes is said to have the witness within himself, 1 John
5.10. And we are said to be Justified by faith, Romans 3. v. 28.30. and 4. v. 2,
3.16. and 5.1. Gal. 2.16. And there is an inseparable connection made between
faith and salvation, Joh. 3.16.36. Mark. 16.16. Romans 10. ver. 9, 10. All which
prove, that blood (which brings in those privileges) has a power granted to
it to witness.

Much therefore are they mistaken, that take Sanctification and inherent
Qualifications, to be the only witnessing things: you see the blood of Christ,
which is without us, given, imputed, or applied to us, is also a witness, as
well as graces within us. I take blood, to be a clearer evidence then Water,
which is often muddy and full of imperfection: and hence such an Emphasis, is
put upon blood. 1 John 5.6. He came not hy water only, but by water and blood.
His saying [not by water onely] argues that it is the blood, he would have
especially taken notice of, and that it was for the sake of blood, that this is
iterated. Men are apt to slight blood, as if that deserved not the name of a
witness; whereas, although water is not to be neglected, yet blood is most to
be minded, or more then water in this witnessing work, for he striveth most to
advance that witness [not by Water only -- ].

CHAP. IX. Showing who are capable of attaining the Witnessings of the Spirit.
Qu: 3. Who are capable of attaining the witnessings of the Spirit? Answ. 1.
Only believers are in a capacity to enjoy such a testimony from the Spirit:
for, only they are adopted, Joh. 1.12. 1 John 3.1. Gal. 4.26. Ye are the
children of God by faith. There must be adoption, before it can be witnessed to
a soul that it is Adopted; else there is a bearing false witness, which
cannot (without blasphemy) be charged upon the Spirit of truth, who is the
witness, 1 John 5.6.

That some eminent believers may and do attain the witnessings of the Spirit
is evident, Romans 8.16. Job 19.25. 2 Timothy 1.12. And often we read of Confidence
and Assurance.

2. Weak believers are capable of attaining the witnessings of the Spirit
about their Adoption: this position is questioned by some, yet because the
denial of it does directly tend to raise discouragement in their way to seeking
after it (because it is in vain to attempt things impossible) and seeing the
very knowledge of a possibility of attaining it, is very comfortable, and the
thing it self much more: hence I thought good to offer some reasons, which for
the present, satisfy me, that it is not a privilege intended by Christ, only
for the tallest Cedars in Christianity, or those that are strong ones, but also
such as are weak in the faith, have this Legacy bequeathed to them by the will
of Christ.

Yet before I lay down my grounds, I shall premise some things, which will
make way for them.

Prem: 1. The witnessings of the Spirit may be attaineable, and yet not be
attained: Christians are without much of that sweet Communion which they might
enjoy with the Lord Christ; he knocked, called, and cried to the Spouse, Open
to me my sister, my love -- Cant. 5.2. But spiritual sloth, and carnal
security shut the door against him, and he withdrew himself, ver. 3.6. Here
fellowship with Christ was not attained, and yet was attaineable. I do not
undertake to prove that every weak believer does enjoy effectual witnessings
(though much might be said for that) but I am only to prove that they are
attaineable, even by babes in Christ. If they choke, smother, and quench the
motions of the Spirit, that (if followed up and cherished) might have been
witnessing; and through negligence about the use of means, or temptations etc.
may go without them, yet this speaks not their incapacity for the enjoyment
of them.

2. I shall endeavor to prove that those which are really weak; not only, in
gifts and natural abilities, but even in graces also; yet, are in a capacity
to attain the witnessings of the Spirit: and therefore, it is very dangerous
for men to despair of them, because they are weak in their own
apprehensions; seeing, they may mis-judge about their measure, and may be strong
in the grace of Christ; and however, real weakness affords not matter of
discouragement.

3. The witnessings of the Spirit may admit of degrees: as its operations are
at one time more potent, conspicuous and manifest then at another, so may the
souls persuasion of its Adoption be, which are raised by these.

The appearances of the Spirit at one time may be so glorious, and its actings
so powerful; as, all doubtings, fears, or questionings about its state may be
crushed, suppressed, and banished, that if men and Angels should labor to
bring under a contrary persuasion, yet it durst not, it could not subscribe to
them. Romans 8.38, 39. Yet, at other times they may not be so clear, or
irresistible, but liable to quenchings by smaller means. I shall not at
present assert that witnessings in those high degrees are attaineable by weak
believers: these may seem to be too strong meats for them to bear. But, that
they are capable of freedom in some measure from their doubtings, and of
attaining some degree of persuasion that Christ is theirs, this I am to prove.

The rich man's window may be wider then the poor man's, and so the Sun may make
his house more lightsome, that the things within it, may be more clearly
discerned there: but the poor man may really enjoy the beams of the Sun, and
know that they come from it, and may see what is in his house, as well as he.
So, the poorest Saint may know that the Spirit has shined in his heart, as
well as others, that are beholden to it, for brighter beams then he has been
acquainted with.

4. An eminent measure of grace is of great advantage toward Assurance: 2 Pet.
1. v. 5, 6.8.10. Therefore this affords no encouragement unto any to content
themselves with that measure, which they are come up to. Nay, the witnessings
of the Spirit will be furtherances, and provocations unto grow'th in grace, if
really enjoyed, Romans 13. v. 11, 12. But yet, a high measure of grace is not so
necessary to Assurance, but that a weak believer (in the use of means) may
actaine it, as well as other mercies, that concern him in his well-being.

5. I deny not, that a weak Christian at some particular times may hinder
himself of such a mercy: but this is common to him with eminent Saints: for,
they may (by nourishing some curruption) weaken, if not loose, these
witnessings of the Spirit, when they have enjoyed them. Psalm. 51.8.12. These
are extraordinary hindrances, I am to prove an ordinary capacity. Neither do
these, so incapacitate, as to forbid seeking after witnessings: for, David when
upon such an occasion, he had lost the joy of his salvation; yet, with that
intermediate duty of Repentance and pleading for cleansing. Psalm. 51. v. 2.7.
he beggeth also that his joy might be restored, v. 12.

6. I am not about to prove the duration of these witnessings, but the
capability of weak believers to attain them, how little while soever they
last: I do not assert their having such a constant certainty of salvation, as
should perpetually put them beyond doubtings: the multiplicity, and variety of
temptations which they are subject to, and their weakness, and unskilfulnes to
resist the tempter, may occasion a speedy loss of it again: their want of
experience in those ways which tend to the strengthening and cherishing of
this persuasion; together with that great suspicion which they have over their
own hearts, and those heart-amazing workings of corruption, which (by after
reflections upon themselves) they take notice of; these, may quickly deprive of
these witnessings again.

And, indeed with many eminent Saints, they are not long-lasting. They are but
the passings by of the Lord before their souls. They have a soule-ravishing
view of God and Christ, by the light of the Spirit; but, they are soon out of
sight again. They must not think of building Tabernacles when they are upon
this high mountain beholding the glory of Christ on it. A large measure of
grace, is of great advantage toward the continuance and preservation of these:
but, though they last but for a little moment, yet it is an unspeakable favor
that they are afforded.

CHAP. X. Four Arguments to prove that weak beleivers are capable of
attaining these witnessings of the Spirit.
ANd, that weak believers are capable of attaining these witnessings of the
Spirit, I shall prove these ways.

Argu. 1. From the Spirits being given to all believers as a witness. 1 John
5.10. It is not said, he that is an eminent believer, but he that believes;
not hereafter shall have, but [hath] the witness within himself. This
proposition were not universally true, if the weakest believer were at any time
destitute of it. Neither is it said he has the Spirit, but he has [the
witnes] i.e. the Spirit as a witness; or for this end to be a witness to him. And
how harsh does it sound that weak believers, should be incapable of attaining
the end of its being present with them as a witness, without which it should
neither perform its office, nor answer its name.

Object. It may perform the office of a witness, or be a witnes-bearer to all
believers objectively, by graces and operations, though they see or know it
not: as a Landmarke, or sheep-mark, witness whose the land or sheep are:
though not efficiently; as a Landmarke or Sheep-mark is not always discerned.
Or, the thing witnessed here, is, only [that Christ is the Son of God] 1 John
5. v. 5, 6.10. Not, that this or that particular soul is interested in Christ.

Answ. That witnessing to particular souls, their Adoption, and that
efficiently. i.e. so as to give them a knowledge of it, is intended; as well
as, that Christ is the Son of God, may appear these ways.

1. In this whole Epistle the manifestation of men's interest in Christ is
driven at, as a great end in the Apostles eye. 1 John 1. v. 4. These things
write we unto you, that your joy may be full. Chap. 2. v. 3.12.20. Chap. 3. v.
1.10.19.24. Hereby we know that he abides in us by his Spirit -- Chap. 4.13.
Chap. 5. v. 2.4. etc.

2. Water and blood do witness efficiently, that Christ is the Son of God: 1 John 5. v. 5, 6.8, 9, 10. Many in those days denied Christ to be the Son of
God, and therein denied that record which God gave of him, viz. That he has
given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. v. 11.

In opposition to these Faith is described in this Chapter to be, a believing
that Christ is the Son of God. Not, as if assenting to that, did express the
whole nature of faith, but as it includes a cordial receiving of Christ,
according to that record, v. 11. And hence, such are said to be borne of God,
v. 1. and to overcome the world by their faith. ver. 4, 5. which argues the
whole of Justifying faith to be intended. Now, to establish these believers in
these things. 1. That Christ is the Son of God, and therefore has life to
give, v. 1.11. 2. That they were borne of God, v. 1. had overcome the world, v.
5. and had eternal life in him, v. 11, 12, 13. Which latter falls with the
denial of the former; no life to be had in Christ, if he be not the Son of God.
To evidence and confirm the whole faith spoken of v. 1.5. he sends them to
six witness, v 7, 8. whereof water and blood are two. v. 6.8. As if he had said,
I appleale to your own experiences; have you not felt virtue and efficacy in
the blood of Christ for the pacification of your accusing Consciences? and has
not Christ been as water. i.e. for the purification of your polluted souls?
These (says the Apostle) are witnesses that you are borne of God, and that
Christ is the Son of God; for, none else has power to do these things. But
neither water nor blood can witness so much as, that Christ is the Son of God,
to any souls, if themselves be inevident, unseen, undiscerned. I must know, I
am Justified and sanctified, in order before I can know Christ to be the Son of
God thereby.

And the witnessing of this efficiently is intended by the Apostle. For 1. It
is his design to strengthen the believers (by these witnesses) against that
grand error of denying Christ to be descended from God (which prevailed in
those times) and that cannot be accomplished by water and blood without a
discerning their testimony. 2. Water and blood witnessed objectively before.
3. It is such a witnessing as is proper to believers, 1 John 5.10. Whereas,
Christ is objectively witnessed to be the Son of God, unto unbeleevere. Joh.
3.11. Joh. 5.32, 33.36, 37, 38. Joh. 19 v. 34, 35.

And if I know that I have the water. i.e. Sanctification; and the blood. i.e.
Justification, then my Adoption is witnessed efficiently to me also.

3. It is expressly declared to be the end aimed at. 1 John 5.13. These things
have I written to you that believe -- for what end? That [ye] may [know] that
ye have eternal life -- This was his scope or drift to manifest unto them
their title to eternal life. Ergo a witnessing to particular souls their
Adoption efficiently is intended, and that to all, even weak believers. 1 John
5.10.

Argu. 2. From the extensivenes of the promise. Joh. 14.21. Christ engages to
afford manifestations of himself unto all that love him, and the weakest
believer is a lover of Christ. Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with
those that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. Not eminent believers
only, but weak ones shall see his Covenant, for they fear him.

Arg. 3. Many that were weak in the faith, yet are concluded under a capacity
to attain the witnessings of the Spirit, if not under an actual enjoyment of
them. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that the Spirit of God dwells in you. i.e. Can
you be ignorant of it? if it be a doubting speech whither they did know or not,
yet it cannot but speak a possibility of their knowing it. Nay, such
Interrogations frequently have the force of vehement Affirmations. i.e. ye do
know that the Spirit dwells in you. And yet they were weak Christians; for,
says the Apostle, ver. 1, 2. I could not speak unto you, as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal, as unto [babes in Christ]. There is then, a possibility,
even for babes in Christ, not only to have a probable opinion, but a certain
knowledge, that the Spirit dwells in them; which is to know their Adoption.
Romans 8. v. 9. And, 1 John 3.24. Hereby [we] know he abides in us, by the
Spirit -- And those he writes to, are little Children, v. 18. and 1 John 2.12.
He tells them, that their sins are forgiven them: which may assure us, that
it does not make to the hurt of weak believers, to know they are forgiven.

Arg. 4. Weak Christians ought to exercise themselves unto selfe-examination.
Ergo, They are in a capacity to attain a knowledge of their state thereby. 2
Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves -- Prove your selves -- The ingemination of the
exhortation, argues it to be a duty of high Concernment, else he would not use
so much earnestnes in exciting to it. And it is their station they are to
enquire about. 1. Whither they be in the faith. 2. Whither Christ be in them or
not.

And, that weak believers are not exempted from this duty is undeniable.

For 1. It extends or reaches to unbeleevers: those that have not Christ in
them, are to find it out hereby: they are to try whither they be in the faith
or no --

2. It has no limitation unto strong believers: let them prove it, that will
assert it.

3. These were weak in the faith, which are here twice over required to come
up to it. 2 Corin. 12. v. 20, 21. Prone to envyings, strifes, backbitings,
whisperings, swellings etc. which are made the symptoms of but babes in
Christ. 1 Cor. 3. v. 1, 2, 3. Yet, these are enjoined to examine, 2 Cor. 13.5.

There are some seasons then, which all Christians, even the weakest, ought to
take for self-examination about their union with Christ. Ergo they are capable
of doing it with good success.

Either weak Christians must always give in this verdict, that they are
without Christ: and this is false, and the Lord does not command them to a
false Conclusion. Or else, they must give in no verdict, and then the duty is
fruitless as to its proper end. Or else, they must conclude that they are in
the faith. And the Text calls for one of these Conclusions; Either 1. That
they are in the faith. Or 2. Reprobates. i.e. unsound, hypocrites, without the
Spirit. Unto all which I may add, that these Romans, were many of them weak
in the faith, Romans 14. v. 1, 2. etc. And yet in the Text he excepteth and
excludes none, but seems to conclude all, under the witnessings of the
Spirit. By all which I cannot but apprehend, Assurance to be ordinarily
attaineable, even by weak believers.

CHAP. XI. Showing how a soul may know whether it enjoys the witnessings of
the Spirit or not: and first the Immediate witnessings of the Spirit.
Qu: 4. HOw may a soul know whither it injoyeth the witnessings of the Spirit
or not?

Before I give a direct answer to this Question, I shall premise, that the
answers to it, will be useful, to such ends as these.

1. To give satisfaction unto doubting souls: many precious sons of Sion are
full of fears about their Adoption: could they but know that God were their
Father, they should account it a favor of great value. Whereas, the Spirit
has witnessed this to them, but they know not its voice, or understand not,
that these operations which they have found, do amount to a testimony of
Divine love. They question, whither they be from the Spirit or not; or else,
whither they be witnessing, and intended by the Lord for that end. By a due
observation of what I shall here lay down, and the shinings of the Spirit on
its own works, (without which nothing will be witnessing) those, that never
had Assurance, way attain it, and those that have lost it, may recover it
again; if by reflection they can find that such works have passed upon their
hearts, as I shall speak of.

2. To difference the testimony of the Spirit from Delusions of Satan, and the
single testimony of our own Spirit: that so the voice of the Spirit may be
owned, and Satanicall delusions rejected.

3. To confirm and establish those that do enjoy witnessings, in the
persuasion of their Adoption.

And, the better to attain these ends, I shall, 1 Speak particularly unto the
feverall ways of witnessing. How a soul may know that. 1. The Spirit. 2.
Water. 3. Blood have witnessed. 2. Add some General discoveries, or secondary
evidences which will respect all those ways of witnessing.


According unto the threefold way of the Spirits witnessing, so must I divide
the Question into three.

Qu: 1. How may a soul know whither the Spirit has witnessed its Adoption to
it, in that more Immediate way, or not?

Before I reply to this Question, I shall give these pre-considerations.

Preconsid. 1. That there must be some great and remarkable impression and
alteration made upon the heart, working it into some strong persuasion of
Adoption; else there is not the least ground for a pretending to an Immediate
testimony. Those that never found any thing of this nature, are not concerned
in this Question; for, there must be something like the testimony, to make
capable of trial. The Nature of an Immediate presence of the Spirit, and the
application of a word, require, that there be some great impression when ever
they be enjoyed. Jam. 1.21. 1 These. 2.13. 2 Corin 3.3. So that, if a man should
read over witnessing words never so often, and his thoughts should run this
way, that God is his God, and Christ and eternal life his; yet, if no power
comes along with the word, to fix, fasten, and set it upon the heart; there
is not any color for an Immediate testimony. The word must take deep rooting
in the heart. Matthew. 13. v. 21.23. else, no gracious effects at all, are
accomplished by it; much less can it be witnessing. But if a man has found
some great alteration made upon his Spirit, that has wrought toward a
persuasion of Adoption. Our enquiry is, How he may know whither it be merely a
strong flashy opinion and fancy of his own Spirit, a delusion of Satan, or
indeed a testimony from the Divine Spirit.

Precons. 2. That my design in answering this Question, is not to discover,
who is interested in Christ and who not (that will be the thing driven at, when
I come to speak of the Spirits witnessing by water and blood) But, if a man
has a testimony of interest in Christ by some eminent impression made upon
his Spirit; our enquiry is, whither it be from the Divine Spirit, or be a
Delusion. I suppose, that many real believers, may (through their own
default) want this Immediate testimony of the Spirit, and may be under false
confidences, through the Delusions of Satan, i. e. Confidences taken up, from
such grounds as are not evidencing. Revel. 3.17. Psalm. 30.6. when by a due
search, they might find infallible grounds, for the same Conclusions. This
Question is not for the trial of Christianity, but of some Confidences thereof.

Precons. 3. That the primary evidence of this Immediate testimony, is not to
be limited or restrained, unto this Immediate way of witnessing only: For, as
graces do sometimes discover their own proceeding to be from the Spirit: so,
at other times the Spirit evidenceth its own presence in the exercise of
graces. Indeed, it is the very business of the Spirit, and the maine errand it
is sent upon, to put the soul into a persuasion of Adoption, when it
witnesses in this Immediate way, and so the souls assurance of the truth of
the thing testified, has a great dependence here, on its knowledge that the
Spirit is the witness, and therefore usually, it gives the most transparent,
and remarkable tokens of of its own presence here. Yet, it is not to be
confined to that way of witnessing: but sometimes, the Spirit draws out
graces to act at such a height, more then ordinary, and does so efficaciously
witness adoption, by reflex acts upon these; as, it gives sufficient evidence
to its own presence therein.

CHAP. XII. Of what does primarily evidence the truth of this Immediate
Testimony.
I Shall now answer the Question by showing.

1. What does primarily.

2. What does secondarily evidence the truth of such a testimony.

Ans: 1. The Spirit it self does primarily evidence, the proceeding of its
own witnessing acts from it self, whilst a soul is in an actual enjoyment
of them: those irradiations and other Concurrences of the Spirit, do carry
with them such clear and convincing demonstrations to the soul, of their
coming from the Spirit, as render it in some measure persuaded thereof. There
are such sparklings of Divinity in them, and the glorious name of the blessed
Spirit, is in such a lively way engraven, or enstamped upon them, as, they do
aloude proclaim themselves to have their original from that holy Spirit.
According to that degree of clearnes which the Spirit manifests its own
presence in; so, is the degree of persuasion in the soul stronger or weaker.
And when there is a Plerophorie, or full Assurance, all other things would be
but as a candle lighted up to see the Sun by, which is best seen by its own
light: and so is the Spirit best seen in the soul by its own light, and all
other things are but additional confirmations, and secondary evidences hereof.
If the Spirit has indeed witnessed to a soul its Adoption heretofore, and now
its testimony be clouded or eclipsed; by a serious reviewing the forgoing
testimony, and judicious reflections upon that; usually, it will more easily
recover it again, then by any extrinsecall demonstrations or consequential
effects whatever: for, the appearances of the Spirit are most conspicuous in
its witnessing acts, which are intended purposely to assure; yet, effects are
very useful for confirmation.

Now, that the Spirit does afford manifestations of it self, in its own
testimony: or, that it does operate so efficaciously as is does evidence its
own presence in its witnessing acts, and gives the soul (that injoyeth them)
a knowledge of their proceeding from it self, and that they can be from no
other, I shall prove by these following Arguments.

Arg. 1. From his appointment unto this witnessing work: were not Adoption a
thing questionable and controversiall in the soul, there needed no calling in
of witnesses. The very use of them is, Luke 22.21
the determination and establishment of a matter against Contradiction, see
Matthew. 18.16. 2 Cor. 13.1. And, it is the special reason why the Spirit (rather
then any other) is ordained as the witness, because that is [truth] 1 John 5.6.

If I question the faithfulness of a witness, the testimony is never certain to
me: and so, the Spirit who is truth it self, is constituted as the witness,
that we might be infallibly ascertained of what is spoken upon the credit of
the Witness or Revealer; and hence, v. 9. The testimony of God is greater --
which imports that the great inducement to receive the testimony, or own and
confide in it, is this, the greatness, faithfulness, and truth of him which
bears record; it is God, who is greater then men, and therefore more to be
credited.

And, this can be no enforcement unto my reception of the testimony, if the
Spirit does not evidence it self to be the author of it, whose truth is to be
my incentive to receiving of it. The maine thing toward assurance would be
wanting (which is the fidelity of him that speaks) if the Spirit should not
evidence its own presence in testifying. Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self
witnesses etc. Here, the Holy Ghost as well directs us to look for its
presence in witnessing, as expresses that it is its office, to bear witness.
And, how little it should contribute toward efficacious witnessing, if it did
not manifest it self, in its operations, you may eafily conceive, by
considering these things.

1. That it is usual for Satan to bring in contradictory testimonies, to those
of the Spirit: and so the soul is in a Labyrinth of trouble and perplexity,
not knowing which to own or choose. A conscientious satisfaction must arise
from assurance that the witness is faithful. If my own Spirit and Satan should
join together in one testimony of my adoption, it were invalid; because the
witnesses are unfaithful. Satan can assert, and give impulsions to receive his
record: therefore, if the Spirit did not evidence its own presence in its
testimony, against Satan's deluding voice, the soul would be no nearer
satisfaction about its state, then before the Spirit witnessed.

2. Then, the Spirit should answer one doubt with another: for, the
uncertaintie about the witness, may create as much dissatisfaction, as any thing
else; yea, it raises a new ground of perplexity.

O (says the soul) I feared my condition formerly, and here is a testimony,
but whence it comes I know not. I doubt as much of that, as I did before of my
Adoption: and O if it should be from Satan and I should own it, my condition
would be yet worse then before. And if it must seek for other demonstrations
whither it be from the Spirit or no, it is in as much darkness as ever: and then
it did nothing to wards the end it is sent to attain, for the matter remains
as dubious as formerly, and the soul no nearer satisfaction.

Arg. 2. The Spirit is the highest Witness. Ergo, It evidenceth the truth of its
own testimony, or its own presence in it.

There must be something to give a knowledge that the testimony comes from
the Spirit: and there can be none higher then the Spirit to give it.

For. 1. It is the Spirit that makes other things witnessing: therefore that
is the chief witness. No graces or experiences can witness without him.

2. It is called [the Witnes] 1 John 5. v. 6. 10. And if any inferior witness
can evidence it self, or the Spirit; that being the highest witness may
evidence it self much more.

Arg. 3. From its special appointment for this very end, to give manifestations
unto the Saints of what they should know: this is a maine use which the Spirit
is intended for. 1 Corin. 2. v. 10, 11, 12. But God has revealed them to us by
his Spirit. i. e. those things, v. 9. that eye has not seen -- and v. 12. we
have received the Spirit; for what end? [That we might know the things that are
freely given us of God] Whereas, if the Spirit did not give demonstrations of
its own presence in its revelations, the soul might question whither the
things discovered, were from God or not: and so the Revelations would be of
little use or advantage, and could not sway the will to a rejection of what it
has formerly owned, contrary to what is at present revealed.

And, what light can have more perspicuitie and clearnes in it, for the
manifestation of Satanicall illusions, then the light which proceeds from the
Spirit, whose office it is to discover or manifest what is unknown? And I am
persuaded, that when the Spirit comes in a witnessing way, its light is like a
candle, or rather a beam of the Sun, darted into the soul; whereby it sees
into the cunning insinuations, unjust accusations, violent and horrid
temptations, and cursed delusions of Satan, more then at other times: and
knows them to have their riste from him.

The anointing of the Spirit, which is within the Saints, is said to teach
them all things, 1 John 2.27. and to help against those Seducers, v. 26.. i.e.
by the word as a means, it manifests what is consentaneous or agreeable to
the mind of Christ: and establishes therein, against all those crafty
sophistications, whereby Satan seduceth many: and the same Spirit takes off
the vailes which are upon the hearts of men, and gives them open visions of
Divine glory. 2 Corin. 3. v. 16, 17, 18.

All which speak out thus much, that Revelations from the Spirit, by the Word,
have an inbred property to evidence their own proceeding from the Spirit, and
to discriminate or difference themselves from those flashes of Satan whereby he
striveth to his utmost, to lead souls into groundles Conclusions, about
matters of the highest moment; else, they would not be effectual to prevent
seduction, 1 John 2.26.
which is one special end, they are ordained to. That which convincingly
discovers a delusion of Satan, must evidence it self to come from God.
Delusions may pretend to the Word, but the anointing within, teaches the
Saints, what is indeed according to the Word.

Arg. 4. From the Lords ordaining the inbeing, or in-dwelling of the Spirit to
be an evidence of our Adoption: if it self were inevident it could not conduce
unto that end: for, every reason from whence any Conclusion is collected, must
be clearer then the Conclusion it self: only light can manifest, Ephesians. 5.13.
That which evidenceth another thing to me, must needs it self be more
discernable. It were impossible for a man successully to try his state by the
inhabitation of the Spirit, if that were not more manisest then his state. And
indeed what can evidence its indwelling, but it self?

Now, this is often made the Rule for trial; as, Romans 8. v. 9. Ye are not in
the flesh, but in the Spirit: Now how shall we know that? [If the Spirit of God
dwells in you] and it is added [He that has not the Spirit is none of his].
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine -- Know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobate? 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that the Spirit of God dwells in you? 1
Cor. 6.19. By all which it may appear that the Spirit does give test money to
it self, in some of its operations, or evidence that neither Satan, nor any
Creature can be the author of them.

Object. But the Spirit is not discearnable in its essence, but in its
operations.

Ans: 1. The application of promises is a special work of the Spirit, wherein
its presence is as discernable, as in any other of its operations.

Ans. 2. Those which are the witnessing acts of the Spirit, have the greatest
aptitude to afford soule-satisfying manifestations of the Spirits presence in
themselves, of all other: for, the intention of the Lord in them is, to
manifest adoption to the soul, Romans 8.16. And, seeing a knowledge of its
presence in the acts is a maine requisite unto Assurance by them; hence, they
cannot fall short of discovering that.

These operations have more then ordinary light, life and strength in them;
they differ in their brightness from other concurrences of the Spirit, as much
as the clearest Sunshiny day, does from that which is most dark and cloudy: and
therefore if ever the Spirit be seen in any operations, it is in these which
are the brightest beams of this Sun. The Spirit by a secret touch irresistibly
strikes the soul into such clear, firm, and strong apprehensions and
persuasions of its adoption, that though it meets with much within and with
ut; from Satan, its own heart, and Christian friends, to work it into a
contrary persuasion; yet, it cannot but say, as, Job 19.25. I know -- or, as,
Romans 8.38. I am persuaded -- As, the Spirit gives effectual Convictions of sin
that the soul cannot deny its guiltines, which formerly has asserted its
innocence; and that without enquiring whither the Spirit has done this or not:
So, it does work effectually into a persuasion of Adoption, that till
afterward, it does not, cannot, or need not reflect to enquire whither it were
the Spirit or no. And so the essence of the Spirit may not be discerneable, and
yet the testimony may be sure to the soul: by operations it may conclude the
presence of the Spirit. Yea, the Spirit does not only give such a persuasion,
but also it discovers some invincible grounds, and gives such undeniable
demonstrations, both of its own presence, and of the reality of what is
spoken, that as one under powerful Convictions thereof, it cannot but fall
down before it, and say to the Spirit, as they did to Christ, Joh. 16. ver.
29, 30. Now thou speak plainly, and speak no proverb, by this I believe
that thou come forth from God. As, from some Divine Attributes, that shine
forth eminently in those witnessing acts.

1. The Spirit causes the soul to take notice of Divine wisdom in the
application of promises: as, in the season of their coming in, and sutablenes
unto its present condition, and in the manner of their working; it finds how
Satan was defeated in his enterprises thereby; his methods and snares
discovered, and he confounded, and then the soul cannot but cry out, as, Romans
11. v. 33. O the depth of the riches of Gods wisdom --

2. The Spirit gives it to see Divine power improved for it in a glorious way:
and hence Ephesians. 1. v. 18, 19, 20. He beggeth the enlightenings of the Spirit for
them, that they might know, v. 19. what is the exceeding greatness of his power
to them-ward who believe etc. The Saints often feel a Divine power in the
application of promises -- but they cannot tell who is the agent, whither Satan
or the Spirit; and so the Apostle asks that they might have a distinct
knowledge hereof: which argues, that the Spirit discovers that there is an
improvement of its own power (and so evidenceth its own presence) in some of
its actings; especially in giving a knowledge of the hope of calling, as, v.
18. And the Spirit convinces hereof, by the exceeding greatness of the power
which is put forth. 1. It overcomes the heart into an acceptance of the
promise: the soul sees its own utter insufficiency in it self, to make such
an application of a promise, as now it has felt; and an utter aversnes, and
real backwardnes thereunto, though there had been ability. It was ready with
Sarah to laugh at the news of the promise, or to say with those, 2 King. 7.2.
If the Lord should make windows in heaven, it could not be accomplished to me:
and yet it was not able to withstand the power that did draw it that way. 2. It
overcomes Satan: the Spirit discovers how Satan raised his utmost opposition
against the closure with the promise, and many temptations are brought to fresh
remembrance, whereby he sought to keep it at the greatest distance from it: yea
it sees the same power that draws to the promise, laid out to the utmost
against Satan therein. And from hence (says the Spirit) it could not be thy
self or Satan, for both run cross to it, and therefore it must needs be the
Divine Spirit that has done this.

3. The Spirit convinces it of Christ's faithfulness herein: Psalm. 89. v. 1,
2.5.8. I will make known thy faithfulness to all generations. v. 8. Who is a
strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round about thee? So, a soul
after such a testimony is exceedingly taken up with the faithfuines of the
Lord, that it speaks to God after this manner. Thou did formerly enable me
to a dependence on thy self in this promise, and when my heart flagged,
fainted, failled, and gave over all hopes of it, yet now have thou accomplished
it, and thrown the mercy into my lap, and discovered thy faithfulness when I
was unfaithful.

4. The Spirit convinces it of Divine goodness, in the application of the
promise: Psalm. 31. v. 19. O how great is thy goodness -- his soul is even
swallowed up with admiration at the extensivenes of it [O how great -- ] and v.
21. Blessed be the Lord that has showed me mavelous kindnes-What makes him
so much wonder at Divine goodness? v. 22. I said in my have I am cut off --
Nevertheless, thou heardest -- So, the Spirit causes a soul to see, how full
of distrust that has been, how ready to say that it was neglected of God, and
how, nevertheless, the Lord dealt thus and thus graciously with it, and it
cannot but cry out, O how great is thy goodness! it is even wrapped up as into
the third heaven, and so taken up with redeeming love in the application of
some promise, as for the time, nothing can put it upon a denial, of the working
of this love toward it.

And thus I have shown what is the primary evidence.

By all that has been said, it may seem that this Question [How a soul may
know this Testimony?] is needless for such as are actually under it; seeing
the very work of the Spirit is, to give a knowledge of Adoption. But in regard.

1. Afterward the Spirit may suspend its operations, and then the soul may
question it.

2. Some have strong Conceits and Opinions, that they enjoy this more Immediate
testimony, of the Spirit, when they are merely under delusions: and this first
answer, though it holds out the primary evidence of it, unto those that
really enjoy it, yet it may seem not to reach so far as to discover who have
it not.

3. Immediate testimonies have admitted of signs for their Confirmation to us.
Luke 1. v. 18, 19, 20. Matthew. 3. v. 16, 17. Act. 2. v. 2, 3, 4. Hence, (though
I suppose such signs are ceased) yet, it not being inconsistent with the
nature of an Immediate testimony, to assert some inferior evidences of it:
and seeing the Spirit does accomplish some spiritual works in the souls of
Saints, in and by its witnessing acts, which may supply the place of those
extraordinary signs, therefore I shall speak further.

CHAP. XIII. Of what does Secondarily Evidence the truth of Immediate Testimony.
Ans: 2. THe Secondary Evidence of the more Immediate Testimony is Faith:
there are some eminent acts of faith drawn out by it; but Delusions of Satan
or the single testimony of our Spirit, lean without these.

1. Faith is exercised upon Christ in that witnessing word which is applied:
that, look how it is to act upon any other word, in the same way and manner it
does upon this. The Spirit applies the promise, but faith, receives it, Heb.
10. v. 22. In full assurance of faith -- if a soul has attained full
assurance, faith has a hand in it, or it is brought in by believing: and
therefore faith is called the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11.1. There are
variety of examples in that Chapter, of faith's acting upon various occasions.
Now, if such acts be drawn out upon witnessing words, as carry a
correspondency with them, unto those in Ahel, Abraham, Moses, etc. upon other
or such words, then they are Conclusive or witnessing. And a reflection upon
those acts of faith must needs be very useful and conducible toward the
discovering a testimony to be from the Spirit. A reviewing of an Evidence is
enough to decide the Controversy.

2. Faith is exercised upon Christ in other promises, besides that which is
witnessing: whilst the soul was full of fears and questionings about its
interest in adopting love, it acted faith very little in comparison of what now
it does. Whatsoever the witnessing word gives it assurance of, faith now
lives upon Christ in the promise for it, Heb. 10.38. The just shall live by
faith. Psalm. 25.2. O my God, I trust in thee. Psalm 63. v. 1.8. When a soul
has a sight of propriety in God, this puts it upon redoubled actings of
says. If it can say [my God] it cannot but say [I trust in thee]. Delusions
set not faith upon the wing for the mercies that it supposes it self to have
interest in. Nay, they do hinder the actings of it. Revel. 3.17, 18.20. She
neglected making out to Christ for all, yea shut the door of her soul against
him, that Christ stands without knocking, and cannot have admittance so long as
the voice of her own Spirit was attended to.

Object. 1. But when is a word or promise received by faith? and so, when does
faith evidence a testimony to be no Delusion?

Ans. 1. When the heart is commanded into a persuasion of Adoption by the
witnessing word, as an act of obedience to the Lord: not barely when there is a
giving in of a word (as I shall show in another place) but when the Spirit
overaweth the soul, with the Majesty that comes along therewith, to yield
subjection to it. Psalm. 42.8. The Lord will command his loving kindness -- he
not only offers it to the soul, and leaves it to freedom whither it will
own it or not, but he exercises his Sovereignty, and uses a Commanding voice,
that his loving kindnesses must visit it; and that in a sensible way, for, he
adds [ his Song shall be with me -- ] Psalm. 111. v. 9. He has sent
redemption to his people, he has Commanded his Covenant -- as when he comes
with a word of Conviction he commands stout-hearted ones to a submission; so,
he commands his Covenant,. i.e. his promises, unto his people, by causing
them to own him therein. Psalm. 133.3. He commanded blessing -- Thus the Spirit
commands assurance into the Saints by promises, and commands faith to own
his loving kindnesses; and so, not barely a persuasion that this promise or
that mercy is mine, does make the act of faith evidencing, but that Divine
authority, that attended the word to the heart, and caused it to give credit
thereunto, out of respect and reverence to the Lord the Speaker. Not every one
that has a persuasion that Christ is his, does enjoy the witnessings of the
Spirit: for Baalim said, My God, Numb. 22.18. and yet had not interest in God,
as his God: and they Matthew. 7.22. shall be consident of their interest in
Christ, and yet shall be found without it.

Satan does raise such false confidences in many profane wretches, and backeth
them with some Scriptures; as, that God wills not the death of a sinner, and
Christ came to save sinners etc. and their own Spirits conclude, that they are
the sinners he came to save. But unless such words have commanded the heart
into such a persuasion out of respect to the Lord, they are not evidencing.

2. When those undoubtedly sinful objections, that swarmed in the soul
before, are suppressed by the reception of the word: unbelief is the great
sin, yet souls are more unapt to be sensible of, and affected with that, then
with other sins. But, if the Spirit has acted faith upon Christ in any
promise, then it is pained and afflicted with the remembrance of its former
mistrustfulnes, and rises up in opposition against it, as, Psalm. 42. v. 5.8.
Why art thou cast down O my soul, why art thou disquieted within me? hope in
God -- Before it gave way to, and fed the carnal reasonings of its own Spirit,
against the free promise of God: but, now it calls off its heart from these,
and calls it up to trusting in God.

Faith is called an Evidence, Heb. 11.1. it is a Logical term, importing a
Conviction by way of dispute, As reason does by premises draw up certain
Conclusions about matters within its Sphaere; so, faith, does something
answerable, (though the things it is conversant about, be out of the reach of
sense and reason) that does in able the soul by scriptural principles and
grounds to dispute down cavils and carnal reasonings against the free promise,
and thus it is an Evidence. Delusions do stupifie men, that they seek not for
a satisfactory deliverance from objections: but, the Spirit like the Sun
causes such mists of darkness to flee away, and puts enough into the mouth
to answer Satan in all.

3. When its reception of the word or promise causes selfe-abasement: Matthew.
15.27. The woman was so deeply sensible of her unworthines, that she
acknowledges her self to be a dog, and then presently Christ owneth her
faith, v. 28. O woman great is thy faith. Great faith causes great
selfe-abasement. When all matter of discouragement that is thrown in the
souls way to its mercy, tends to the making it sensible of its own
nothingnes, and yet causes it to lay faster hold of the promise; and when the
stronger its assurance of the mercy be, the greater selfe-annihilation and the
less selfe-confidence, then faith is acting, and Christ takes notice of, and
sets a Character of respect upon such acts of faith.

But that which causes selfe-advancement is the voice of thy own Spirit, or a
delusion of Satan. Mark. 14.31. Peter was carried out with vehemence of
affection and resolution for Christ; he declared his preferring Christ before
his own life, and yet this was but the voice of his own Spirit, because it
did spring from selfe-confidence, which is opposite unto faith.

4. When the heart is carried out Christ-ward by the reception of any promise:
believing is often called a coming to Christ, as, Joh. 6. v. 35.37. And on the
other side, soul departures from God, are resolved into unbeleife. Heb. 3.12.
when there is, not only a persuasion wrought by the promise, that Christ is
mine etc. but, the whole heart runs out after Christ upon the application of
it. If it takes the promise as from his hand. Ephesians. 3.6. and owneth him in the
purchase of the mercies it is assured of, and builds its confidence upon him
for the communication of them, and is laid under strong obligations and
engagements to Christ for them, it cries out, What shall I render to him?
Psalm. 116.12. accounting nothing too dear for him, and makes improvement of
them by and for Christ, then the word is from Christ. So, Romans 8. v. 35. Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? i.e. from that love wherewith we
love Christ; and thence he adds; Shall tribulations, or distress, or
persecution or famine etc. i. e. None of these hardships, shall break off our
love to him. v. 36. As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day
long -- And when was their love to Christ so strong? v. 33.38, 39. It was when
their persuasion was as strong of the love of God in Christ to them. And now
they oppose Christ without them, against all charges. v. 33. and not the
persuasion within themselves: yet, that persuasion was useful that way, not
abstractively from Christ, but as it was a furtherance to their hearty owning
of him. Faith makes use of such a general, as that Christ dyed, against all
charges, that are brought in against a particular soul.

You may have such strong confidences of your interest in the love of God in
Christ, as no arguments a man can use, can beat you off from these, and yet
you may be deluded, if your hearts be not answerably drawn out after Christ,
to the strength of your confidences. But if they be built and botromed upon
him, and his free favor in the free promises, as, Psalm. 30.7. And if your
affection to Christ rise as high, and be as strong as your persuasion of his
love, then you have enjoyed the witnessings of the Spirit.

And thus, there are many things in that faith which receives witnessing
words, besides the persuasion of the thing witnessed, which may difference a
testimony of the Spirit in this more Immediate way, from a delusion of Satan,
or our own Spirits.

Object. 2. But may I not be very liable to be deceived about such acts of
faith, seeing no Scripture, either expressly, or by Consequence, says of any
particular man, that he is united to Christ, Adopted, Justified, etc? Surely a
certainty of faith cannot be obtained of this, because it is unwritten.

Answ. The soul may have a certainty about this as well as other acts of
faith, if it be in a fit capacity to judge of any, and duly considers all
requisites unto the specificating of an act of faith, and all the ingredients
or concurring acts of the Spirit in applying of such a promise. And the better
to evince this and answer the objection, I shall lay down three things, which
will much conduce to clear this Coast.

1. The act of faith may be a clearer evidence of its being of the right
stamp, then the object: a man may have a right object for his faith, and yet
not having a right act about that object, his faith can witness nothing: thus,
Joh. 2.23. Many believed [in Christ's Name] Here was the right object of faith,
as you may see, Joh. 1.12. and yet their faith is vain, v. 24, 25. and no
evidence. So, Joh. 8.30, 31. They believed on Christ, and yet they had not God
but the Devil for their Father. v. 34, 39.44. So Act. 8. v. 13. Yea, Jam. 2.19.
The Devils believe that there is one God and tremble -- and the Apostle
declares this purposely to prove the defectivenes of faith, though it may have
a Scriptural object.

A man may put forth but a natural act, about a supernatural object; may have
but a humane faith about Divine things, 1 Cor. 2.5. There is more required unto
the specificating of true faith, then this, that there be a crediting or
assenting to what is written.

Now, if the Nature or Quality of the act of faith, be considerable and must be
discerned, before Sonship can be concluded from it; then, seeing those
differencing things about the act, are to be found in that faith which is
drawn out in the application of witnessing words; hence a man is no more
liable to be deceived in this, then in other acts of faith.

2. The Scriptures declare such as do rightly believe to be adopted and
justified, and determines what faith is. Joh. 1.12. Romans 5.1. Act. 13.39. By
him all that believe are justified --

And the giving such a Characteristicall note, must needs be a particularizing
of them, as well as if the Lord should call them by name, and say thou John,
Thomas -- thou art justified or Adopted. If Legacies be given though their
names which they are given to, be not expressly mentioned in the Will, yet a
distinguishing Character is equivalent to a naming of them: so, faith is made a
character of Adopted ones, and so it is written and by good Consequence it may
be concluded from the Word who are adopted.

3. The supervenient act of the Spirit in the effectual application of a word
is enough to particularize it unto the soul, and then the Word it self is
witnessing: it is no where written in Scripture in express terms, that Luther
or Calvin shall be raised up at the last day; yet seeing the general words
about the resurrection, do include all particulars under them: hence, it is
not improper to say it is written, that they shall rise again: but, though the
Scripture says it, yet, it was the Spirits application of those general words
that caused them to believe their own resurrection.

It is no where written that this or that person shall believe, or that he
shall have convictions, or supportments etc. by this or that Sermon; or, that
this Scripture shall be useful to these ends to one soul, and another
Scripture for the same ends to another etc. but there are some special
operations of the Spirit necessary, and hereby a general Call is made
particular, and so this soul believes on Christ, when many that hear the
same Sermon and by the written word had a Call as well as he, yet believe not.

And, hence, many Scriptures are pressed that have a direct tendency to work a
conviction upon a man, and prevail not; but as last one word is singled out
and works mightily that way. At the same word, Act. 17. some mocked, v. 32.
others believed, v. 34. and hence many words suitable to a souls condition may
be viewed and yet are not succouring, and at last one culled out from rest
affords much releife to it.

All which, do abundantly evidence that the operation of the Spirit is
sufficient to particularize a word to a soul, and that the Spirit is
ordinarily afforded for such ends. No soul is converted, but there is such an
appropriating of Gospel invitations to it. And the like Concurrences of the
Spirit with some words, will make them witnessing, which make those convincing,
converting, supporting etc. and the testimony will be as scriptural as any of
those other works, which are frequently wrought by the Spirit as all grant. And
seeing in those testifying acts by a word, the Spirit operateth as
efficaciously, and usually in a more eminent way then at other times; hence,
they are as visible and acts of faith here, as evident as about other words.

All which being laid together I cannot but reckon the assurance of salvation
to be a certainty of faith. The Conclusion being drawn from Scripture both
directly and by Consequence. Though the word alone does not witness, yet by
the Spirits application of it to the soul it does, and that must be by faith.
Indeed the Spirit properly could not be said to witness that [we] are the Sons
of God, nor hardly were a witness at all if the testimony were not a certainty
of faith, and to be received upon the credit of the revealer, so as if it came
from another, as Satan etc. it were not to be owned. And hence, 1 John 4.16. We
have [knowne] and [beleeved] the love that God has to us. And it is a heinous
sin not to give credit to it, and that because the Spirit is the witness. 1 John
5.9.

And, heaven or Eternal life is absolutely promised unto all believers. Hebr.
9.15. That by the means of his death -- they which are called might receive
the promise of eternal inheritance. Jam. 2.5. Joh. 3.15. That faith and hope
are to act upon these, as well as other words, is undeniable: what use else do
they serve to? and how else can those that are called receive them? see Gal. 3.
v. 18.22.29. 1 These. 5.8. Let us put on for an helmet the hope of salvation.
Titus 1. v. 2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie promised --
whither this faith and hope be raised by a present particular application of
the promise; or by a reflection upon foregoing acts of faith; either way they
must be Divine, because built and bottomed upon the promise of God, who cannot
lie. And if the latter way, that strongly proves that the interveening of
reflex acts, cannot hinder assurance from being a certainty of Divine faith.

I might give other secondary evidences of this immediate testimony: as, the
soul is enabled to discern many of its former experiences at such a time, and
many gracious effects are produced by it etc. but these are more fully opened
elsewhere, especially under the general evidences.

Object. But many have had flashes of joy, in the reception of the word, Luke
8.13. yea, have been raised unto a high degree of hope, and even a triumphing
joy, who yet have been hypocrites, Job 8.13. and 27.8. Job 20. v. 5. and others
have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of the heavenly
gift, and the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, and yet
have been under delusions all this while. Hebr. 6. v. 4, 5, 6. How shall I
discern that I go beyond these?

Answ. There are many things already hinted that will difference the testimony
of the Spirit, from such slashes as these are: but further.

1. The witnessings of the Spirit cause glorious transsormations into the image
of the word; delusions or common works of the Spirit leave without these. A
man may partake of the Holy Ghost, in the gifts of it, as Saul did, 1 Samuel
10.10. and yet no imprinting of the word in the heart. Some one affection, as
joy may arise upon the reception of the word, as Matthew. 13.20, 21. and yet the
word have no root, Mark. 4.6. the heart not be changed into the nature of it:
but when the Spirit works effectually by a word, then there is a counterpane
of the word in the heart, and hence, Jerem. 31.33. Hebr. 8.10. The Lord does
promise in the new Covenant, to write his word in their hearts: some principles
and dispositions or inclinations are wrought within, that have a lively
resemblance in them unto the word, 2 Corin. 3.3.18. We -- beholding as in a
glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to
glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

Says Mr Forbes, the working of the Spirit in the wicked is like the smell of
an Apothecaris Shop: which one that passes by, receives, although he never
carry any of these odoriferous things with him. But, the witnessing of the
Spirit to the Elect is by imparting the thing witnessed to the soul, and
making it really to possess it. So that if a man could see the soul of a true
child of God, he should see engraven in it, mercy, peace, love,
righteousness, life, joy, and Christ himself. All the promises of God in
Christ, being written therein according to the Covenant of God.

2. The witnessings of the Spirit, have powerful operations in the heart
toward the attainment of spiritual, Gospel ends there: The end any work
drives at, is a great discoverer what it is, if a man be not lightly, but
effectually carried out after it. The noise of heaven and happiness, is taking,
even with carnal hearts.

Many, with the young man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19. v. 16.22. may be
inquisitive after eternal life, and have desires to enjoy it, and take much
pains to seek after it, and be very sorrowful at the thoughts of missing of
it, and these imply, some tastig of the heavenly gift and the powers of the
world to come. Hebr. 6. v. 4, 5. A man may be elevated with raptures of joy
upon a supposed interest in heaven, and all this may be but in a natural way;
like Haman he may, think, whom will the Lord honor but my self, Esth. 6. v.
6. but with the young man he may mind earthly things more then Christ, or
eternal life, ver. 21, 22. Says Forbes, as a Physician that has prepared a
comfortable potion for the health of a beloved patient, he will give to others
a little of it; to make them apprehend the taste of it; but, not so as to have
any strength to make any operation in the stomach: so, the Lord may let some
carnal men discern some goodness in Christ and eternal life. But, these tastes
do not make them partakers of the refreshing power of these. They may be
wrought into a great reformation, and a glorious outward profession hereby;
but, they have not such an operation as to cause their hearts to mount up
Christ-ward, and place their satisfaction in him alone. But the speakings of
the Spirit make the soul cry out, as, Cant. 5.10, 11. My beloved is white and
ruddy, the chiefest amongst ten thousand etc. v. 16. He is altogether lovely. A
soul at such a day cannot but reckon Christ the top of its glory, and it can
find no rest, but in him and Communion with him, and the smiles of his face;
all other things are nothing to these, in its account. Reall-tasts that the
Lord is gracious, cause the soul to disrelish carnal delights, and imbitter
those sweets to it. Says the soul, should I be taken with the smiles of
Creatures, is not the smiling face of Christ better? should I be drunk with
the sweet cups of worldly delights, is not the Wine in Christ's Cellar better?
should I feed upon ashes after Christ has led me into his banqueting house? O
no. Whither should I go? Thou have the words of eternal life.

But, I shall proceed to the other Questions.

CHAP. XIV. Showing how a soul may know that the Spirit has witnessed its
Adoption by blood.
Qu: 2. HOw may a soul know that the Spirit has witnessed its Adoption by
Blood?

Ans: 1. From the New Covenant or the free promise: we are not to think that
there is an application of material blood; but the Gospel discovers that the
blood of Christ which was shed upon the Cross, was intended and is useful,
for Justification, Redemption, etc. and offers it, for such uses and ends
unto particular souls. The application of blood is by faith: Romans 3.25. and
therefore it must be by a promise, because faith ever must have a Divine word
to fasten upon, and Romans 10 v. 8.10. The Apostle checketh and reproves for
such carnal apprehensions, as, that we must clamber up to heaven for the blood
of Christ: No (says he) the Lord reaches it forth, and makes it nigh to us,
in or by the word of faith: and the same word promises believers that they
shall be saved. v. 9. So that, a Divine word is the instrument for the
conveyance of the blood of Christ unto souls, and for their assurance of
salvation thereby. This is Gods Deed of gift, which they have to show for their
right and title to that blood, and all advantages that come by it: and their
Acquittance or discharge from the debt they did owe to Justice. Many are
possessed with apprehensions that it is impossible to attain assurance of
interest in that blood of Christ, and are filled with inward porplexities about
it, for want of considering the written word as the means of conveyance.
Whereas, if the promise of it be yours, the blood in the several uses it
serves to, is yours also, and that ought to satisfy you: for there is an
inseparable connection between blood and the Covenant. Heb. 10. v. 16.19. and
12. v. 24. and 13. v. 20.

And your Conclusions of interest in any privileges that come in by it, ought
to be grounded, and built upon a free promise, Gal. 3. v. 18.22.29. Hebr. 9.15.

2. From Cordial acts of faith in the application of the blood of Christ:
Faith is necessary to make the promise become particular to a soul. Romans 3.25.
Romans 10. v. 8, 9.10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness --

1. There must be believing; which is the acceptance of that blood from
Christ, in the free promise: What believing is, as it has reference to
Justification.
or a consenting to the free offer of it, that it may be useful to the soul
in particular for such ends as it serves to. If thou haft heartily accepted of
it, then the promise and the blood or righteousness of Christ tendered therein,
are both undoubtedly thine. The primitive act of faith, does not consist in a
persuasion that Christ is mine, or shed his blood for me: this (as Mr Buroughs
says) is, the cream of faith, the riches of says: and a man must be
interested in that blood in order before that belief, else it is a false
faith. But, believing must consist in consenting or receiving; to answer the
offer. And hence, receiving Christ, and believing on his name, are made one.
Joh. 1.12. And, in this respect Justification is so often ascribed to Faith, in
opposition to works. Romans 3. v. 20.28. We conclude that a man is justified by
faith, without the deeds of the Law. Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ.

By faith. i. e. by a righteousness which is attained in a way of Receiving,
not in a way of Doing. It lies out of a man's self, is not a man's own but by
free donation on Gods part, and reception on his part. And hence the Apostle
makes that the grand difference, between the Law and the Gospel. Romans 10. v.
5. Moses describes the righteousness which is of the law, that the man which
does those things shall live by them. But in opposition to that, he declares
the voice of the Gospel to be [ believe with thine heart, and thou shall be
saved. v. 6.9.]. And, Fidei attribuitur salus non tanquam causae: sed tanquam
instrumento. Neque enim fides vis illa est, ut possit servare: sed tota vis est
ill^us qui per fidem apprehe^ditur, nempe Christi. Fayus.
why is it by believing? v. 10. For, with the heart man believes unto
righteousness -- i. e. Faith carries a man out of himself, and finds a
righteousness in another, which avails to justification and life. And thus
Faith does justisie, not as a Grace, or as a work or Quality; but as a means
or instrument Commissionated by the Lord, for the reception of that blood of
Christ which does justify. And hence it is called the righteousness by and
through faith. Phil. 3.9. Romans 10.6. It is not the act but the object of faith
that Justifies.

2. There must be cordial acts of faith. Romans 10 v. 8, 9, 10. the heart is
three times required in these three verses, and an infallible Assurance of
righteousness and salvation is given to all those that believe with it: and
without that the faith is vain. Joh. 2.23. Many believed -- and yet Christ did
not own their faith, because their hearts were wanting. v. 24, 25. and Act.
8.13. Simon Magus believed and yet was in the gall of bitterness still. v. 23.
and the defectivenes of his faith was in this, his heart was not right. v. 21.
When it is [with the heart] many of the following particulars will discover.

3. From its preferring that blood before all other things: Phil. 3. v. 8, 9.
Paul reckoned Church privileges loss, birth-priviledges loss,
creature-injoyments loss, i.e. with the neglect of the righteousness of God by
faith; and he placed all his gain, in gaining that: and 1 Corin. 2. v. 2. I
determined not to know any thing among you, save Christ Jesus and him
crucified. i. e. I prefer the knowledge of him in his death before all other
things.

Some men do not rest upon any other righteousness, nor this neither. Romans
9.30. The Gentiles followed not after righteousness. Others, may follow after
righteousness, yea and cry earnestly for the blood of Christ to; but, riches,
honors, pleasures, performances, carnal company, base lusts, something below
or besides Christ is more affected. Joh 5.44. Revel. 3.17. Romans 9. v. 31, 32,
33.

But do thou find such an utter emptines, in all things besides his blood,
and so thirst after this, as nothing else can quench thy thirst? would thou
be full of distress, under the fullest and most desired enjoyments, without
this blood? can nothing else afford quiet, contentment, or satisfaction besides
that? Is that the great business, thy mind is taken up with, and that thy
thoughts are spent upon? is the attaining interest in it, that which thou
make thy scope, drist, and design, the end thou aimest at, and point thou
art centred upon, in the ordinary motions of thy soul? this speaks a hearty
receiving of it, and so it is witnessing.

Object. But what should raise a souls estimation of that blood so high?

Ans: The excellent or admirable uses and ends it serves to. It is useful.

1. To Justification and salvation. Romans 5. v. 9.18 By this men are freed from
condemnation; delivered from the curse, not only in respect of pain, but also
in respect of loss. Its usefulness toward the re-obtaining communion with
God, and the gracious presence of God, from which they must have suffered
perpetual banishment without that, should make them prize this blood above all
other things.

2. To Reconciliation. Coloss. 1.20. Romans 5.1. By this blood there is
acceptance into favor with God again, whose favor is better then life, and
a blessed amity, and concord is established between God and souls; when else
there would have been an eternal quarrel. The Lord will become a friend
again, will open his bosom, reveal his secrets, express his love, to all
those that obtain interest in this blood.

3. To the obtaining liberty for nigh approaches unto God: Ephesians. 2.13. Made nigh
by the blood of Christ. Heb. 10.19. Having boldness to enter into the holiest,
by the blood of Jesus. By this it may have access to him, and may have hopes
of success in all its addresses to him, and there may be sweet intercourse
between them. And these are advantages that come in by this blood, which may
render it preferred before all other things.

4. From the renuntiation of whatsoever stands in competition with the blood
of Christ, in those uses and ends it serves to: A man may bear up himseife
with Christ's shedding of his blood for sinners etc. and hereupon was confident
of salvation, but if there be a going about to establish a man's own
righteousness, there cannot be a submitting to the righteousness of Christ at
the same time. Romans 10.3. the heart cannot be engaged to irreconcilable
oppofites at once. The great thing magnified by carnal Gospellers is, their
own righteousness, but Paul declared an utter unwillingnes to be found in
that, or in any thing but the righteousness of Christ, Phil. 3.9. Yea, he
differenceth Saints from others, by their having no confidence in the flesh, v.
3. and calls his great privileges and blameles Conversation, flesh. v. 4, 5,
6. A believer, by want of illuminations, or violent temptations, may be hurryed
into a resting upon some particular duties, but the determinations of his will,
and the maine bent of his inward man, are against it. He would not for a world
offer such dis-respect to Christ, and declares his utter disallowance of it
afterward.

Many acknowledge that they could never have yielded perfect obedience to the
Law, but must have been under the curse still, if Christ had not taken away the
rigorousnesse of it: and now, they build their confidences upon Christ in
conjunction with their own actings, in this way of mitigation; as, their
praying, reading, hearing, loving and serving God, and offering no wrong to
their neighbor etc. but as, Gal. 5.2. If you be Circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing. It is evident that they did expect to be profited by
Christ: but, (says the Apostle) if you seek to be justified by any one work,
and Christ together, then you look for justification according to the tenor of
the Law, and so will have no advantage by Christ, but are debtours to the whole
Law, as, v. 3, 4. Such men own merits in practice, when they pretend to deny
them in their judgments. Faith is a necessary and effectual means of our
participation of Christ's righteousness, which is indeed availeable to
Justification. And Gospel works, with faith, are useful for the
manifestation thereof. Jam. 2. v. 18.24. And thus they may raise expectations
of salvation, as speaking them interested in Christ and his obedience, which
undoubtedly has salvation promised to it. But neither faith nor works can be
the least particle of that righteousness which the Lord has promised [the
salvation it selfe] unto. 1. Because the two ways of faith and works, are
incompatible one with the other, and so can admit of no mixture: Gal. 3.12. And
the Law is not of faith -- i. c. Let no man think to mix them together; for,
the Law presents to God a man's own righteousness [ He that does them, Diedat.
shall live in them] but faith receives Christ's righteousness for a gift. No
man can attain eternal life without the righteousness of the moral Law, or
Law of works. In the way of works, a man is to fulfill this righteousness
himself. In the way of faith it is fulfilled for him, by his surety, Christ;
and he is made a partaker of it by receiving. Romans 5 v 17, 18, 19.21. Hebr.
9.15. Gal. 3. v. 12, 13.

2. Because then the reward should be of debt, and so not of grace, either of
which are contrary to. Romans 4.4. To him that works is the reward reckoned not
of grace, but of debt. Perfect obedience due and owing to God as Creator, and
without a promise intervening, could not have made God a debtor to his
creature; neither could that have been of value to deserve life. But if man had
yielded perfect obedience; then by virtue of that Covenant or promise, of Do
this and live, it had become a debt. Now, if Evangelicall actings had such a
promise made to them, or if the promise were partly to Christ, and partly to
them; then indeed, there were more of grace in the condition, but the promise
were equally binding, and so, the reward were no less of debt, after the
performance of it. Salvation is a debt to Christ, but only free grace and the
satisfaction of Christ, (not our Evangelicall obedsence) can make it a debt to
us: or can make any promise establish an obligation upon the Lord, to give out
life, or salvation to us. Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other. 1
Cor. 3.11. Isa. 63.3.

5. From its freenes in choofing and accepting of the blood of Christ for the
uses and ends it serves to: A man may have recourse unto God as Creator, and
use earnestnes for mercy, and yet not find it. He may plead a promise, and
that with importunity, and yet miss of salvation, if he takes it not as, [in
Christ]. For, the Lord has made no promise, but in Christ. Ephesians. 3.6. 2 Cor.
1.20. and is resolved to be merciful unto none, but in the way of the
Mediator; and hence Christ is called, the Mediator of the Covenant. Hebr.
8.6. and 9.15. and 12.24. Not one Covenant mercy, but must pass through his
hands unto souls. So that, if your hearts have not owned his Mediation, his
blood cannot be witnessing to you. Many will not come to Christ that they might
have life, and peace. Luke 19.41, 42. Joh. 5.40. Nature is averse to being
beholden to another for all, and so, many do not own the way of salvation.
But, there may be a crying out earnestly for the blood of Christ, and if it be
by constraint, so as the bent and inclination of the soul be not that way,
then it is not with the heart. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 24, 25.27. Israel engaged that
whatsoever the Lord should speak to them by Moses, they would hear and do
it: and doubtless they meant as they said; for, the Lords uttering his voice out
of the fire, and striking them with the fear of death thereby, this occasioned
their making that promise; and yet the Lord says, v. 29. O that there were
such a heart in them -- which implies more then a possibility, that their
whole hearts were not in this engagement.

So, the stingings and awakenings of Conscience, the servile fear of a curse,
wrath, hell, damnation -- these may force into engagements, to owning the blood
of Christ: but these being extorted from them, the LORD does not account their
hearts in them.

It is with many, as with one that has the Gangren, or some sore disease, upon
a member of his body, and there is no way to save his life, but by sawing off
the member; if the man submits to this, yet it is with abundance of
unwillingnes, merely for the preservation of life: so, many find the voice of
God to be a killing voice, without a Mediator, and to avoyde eternal death,
which else is inevitable, they will look to the blood of Christ; but it is not
out of a free choice, but because they cannot shift it, and escape wrath. I
grant, men are to look unto the blood of Christ, for freedom from wrath:
whither else should they look for this? and this obtained is a great
privilege. Romans 5. v. 9. Being justified by [his blood] we shall be saved from
[wrath] and Romans 8.1.

But, a seeing God as he is. 1 John 3. v. 2. and a fruition of his favor, and
unexpressible tokens of his love, and the attaining everlasting communion with
Christ etc. these are included in Gospel Salvations, and the other is but the
least part of them. And, when the soul freely chooses this complete
salvation, above all other things, and freely owneth the mediation of Christ as
the means to it, then blood is witnessing, else not. Psalm. 4. v. 6, 7. 1 Cor.
2. v. 2.

6. From its being drawn out with such strength after the blood of Christ, as
it has been after other things which undoubtedly the heart has been set upon,
and had freedom for: An unbeleevers utmost (if he did come up to it) is not the
utmost of his heart, because he is under prevailing engagements to fin and
Satan, and is like one in chains. A loving interposure of the Divine Spirit is
necessary to make the heart free for Christ indeed. Coloss. 2.12. Act. 16.14. 2
Corin. 3.5. Joh. 8.36. A man may in a slighty overly way deal with the blood
of Christ, not from terrors of Conscience, but from a presumptuous freenes,
making a light matter both of finning, and going to that for pardon of sin: and
such dallyance with the blood of Christ, is despising in Gods account, and such
must expect the sorest punishments, in stead of great salvations. Hebr. 10.29.
No believer, but can see his heart was set upon something besides Christ,
before his believing: Now, if the blood of Christ be as attractive as other
things have been; and interruptions in its pursuance after that, as burdensome,
grievous, and afflictive to it, as they were there: Or if the drawings of that
blood be stronger and more forcible then of any, or all other things; that it
will leave all behind, it has placed gain in formerly, to press after that;
if that has a commanding power of estate, life and all, then it is accepted
with the heart, and it is witnessing. Phil. 3. v. 8, 9.14.

7. From its feeling the efficaciousnesse of that blood: men's hearts are said
to be sprinkled from an evil conscience, by the blood of Christ Hebr. 10. v.
19.22. and 12.24. when spiritual enemies have brought in strong charges against
a soul, and if it might have followed its own inclination, it would have
joined with Satan against it self; yet it has been caused to oppose the blood
of Christ, in the free promise, to all; and thereby it was secured against all
the roarings of the Law, and temptations of Satan; that now they are all
silenced, their accusations are answered, and a spiritual tranquillity and
peace is established there. And when the Lord has thus given quietness, then,
as, Job 34. v. 29. not sin, nor Satan, nor Conscience, none can create trouble.
And thus I have discovered, when the Spirit has witnessed, by Blood.

CHAP. XV. Showing how a soul may know that the Spirit has witnessed its
Adoption by Water.
Qu: 3. HOw may a soul know that the Spirit has witnessed its Adoption by
Water. i.e. Sanctification?

Answ: There are two parts of Sanctification, either of which are witnessing.

1. The separation of the heart fr^^ sin; or a freedom from the Dominion of
sin: Naturally the hearts of all men, stand toward, and are even destinated to
the service of sin. Romans 6.17. but, after believing the heart renounceth
subjection to it. There is, in every faculty of the soul a new principle to
oppose it. In respect of this, believers are said to be dead to sin. Romans 6.2.
i.e. they are become unwilling and unapt to yield attention unto the motions of
sin, and liveles in the acting of it, yea it has it deaths wound in them. All
they that are in Christ, have crucisied the flesh. Gal. 5.24. Sin is become a
sufferer in their souls, by the death of Christ. They are said to be, free
from sin. Romans 6. v. 18 22. and have a Divine promise that it shall not reign
or have Dominion over them. v. 12.14. And that this does witness adoption see
Romans 6. v. 16, 17. It is made a differencing thing of their two states. And v.
22. Being made free from sin, and become the servants of God, ye have your
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. and Romans 8 13.

2. The Separation of the heart to Christ, and to God the Father by him: Act.
11. v. 21. and 26. v. 20. Psalm. 4.3. And they are said to partake of the Divine
Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. To be new Creatures, 2 C^r. 5.16. because such new
dispositions and inclinations are put into their souls, as naturally were not
there; and are not the products of merely natural principles, though improved
to the height.

There is not barely an alteration, but a work of Creation, else it were not a
new Creature.

It is not barely a mutation, or change of Qualities, but a renovation [all
things are become new]: not as if nature were destroyed, but perfected, by the
infusion of new habits into all the faculties of the soul, which dispose them
to moove Christ-ward. There is new light let into the understanding, Coloss.
3.10. Renewed in knowledge -- And hence there is a discerning of that
spiritual beauty, excellency, and perfection in Divine things, which others
see not. 1 Corin. 2.14. Coloss. 1.9.

There is a new inclination put into the will, and affections, which enableth
them to put forth new acts, upon new objects, God and Christ, and this by the
operation of the Spirit. Joh. 3. v. 5, 6. And, these habitual frames are called
graces, and are diversified, and distinguished, according to the various
faculties of the soul, and the variety of ways they act in, and ends they
drive at.

When these gracious dispositions are stirred up or strengthened to act upon
Christ, then graces are accounted to be exercised or increased, and these are
called Sanctification. 1 Corin. 1. v. 2. and 6. v. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 23. 1
Pet. 1.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. And these appearring in and to the soul do witness
adoption. Gal. 5. v. 22, 23. But the fruit of the Spirit is, love, joy. peace
-- He says such are excluded the Kingdom of God as do the works of the
flesh, v. 21. And this. v. 22. is added by way of Antithesis or opposition, as
the particle [but] does intimate, and so, it is purposely to express who are
interested in that kingdom, viz. such as attain those fruits of the Spirit,
and such as walk in the Spirit, and are led by it, either of which do witness
Justification and Adoption. Romans 8.1.14. According to the parts of
Sanctification, so the Question must be divided into two.

CHAP. XVI. Of separation of the heart from sin, and Adoption witnessed
thereby; four distinctions about it.
Qu: 1. HOw may a soul know that its heart is separated from sin, or that sin
has not dominion over it, and so that it is Adopted?

Before I answer directly to the Question, I shall lay down four
distinctions, which may help weak, doubting Christians, as they will discover
how far there may be sin, and yet one not be under the dominion of it.

There is a Difference.

Distinct. 1. Between the indwelling of sin, and the reigning of sin: Paul was
an eminent believer, and yet sin dwelt in him. Romans 7.17. so 1 John 1.8. A
slave, a captive, may dwell in a house, and yet have no Commanding power there.
Sin may dwell in the heart, and yet have no dominion there. Conclude not thy
self under the reign of sin, barely because thou find the in-being, the
inhabitation of it.

2. Between the Soveraigntie of sin, and the Tyranny of sin: the Saints have
the assurance of a Divine promise, that sin shall not ha^^ dominion over them,
Romans 6.14. But yet believers are in part liable to the tyranny of sin, Romans
7.15. What I hate that do I and v 16.23. I see another Law in my members
warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me [into captivitie] to the
Law of sin -- Thou may not only find strong stirrings of corruption within
thy self, but corrupt motions may sometimes prevail to drive thee into some
sin; may take the prisoner and lead the captive for a time, and that when thou
have waged war against them, and yet sin not reign in thee.

Object. But what difference can there be, between the Saints and others, if
they may be taken captive?

Answ. 1. A Believers, is but a partial captivity, an unregenerate man's is a
total: Paul had a law in his mind that made resistance. Romans 7. v. 16.23. It
was what he would not -- the prevailing part of his will opposed. Whereas
others are wholly or in the greatest part captivated; Romans 6. v. 13.17. 2 Timothy
2.26. Now, a voluntary subjection is that which makes the reigning power. Sins
of believers, are but with an incompleate will.

2. It is both a Sovereign and a Tyrant to unbeleevers. 2 Timothy 2.26. and but a
Tyrant to believers.

3. Its Tyranny over the Saints is by usurpation, but it has a right of
Dominion over others. Satan makes a forcible entry upon the Saints, whereas
others are his proper Subjects. 2 Timothy 2.26. Joh. 14.30.

4. Believers make war against sin. Romans 7.23. Others want spiritual armor
to fight with. Ephesians. 6.

5. Satan captivateth believers but for a little season; by and by they get
victory again, and captivity is led captive. Others at all times are in
captivity.

6. Many gracious ends the Lord does accomplish by it in the Saints, which
others are without. Romans 7 23, 24. It humbled Paul, and much abased him, that
he should beled captive by sin. [ O wretched man that I am -- ].

7. Believers make out to Christ for help; others cry not out to be rescued by
him.

3. Between an habitual frame of heart toward sin, and an occasional falling
into sin: the former argues the reign of sin, the latter not: for, by the
violence of temptation David became guilty of murder and adultery, and Peter of
denying Christ. Yet, besides the after repentance which undoubtedly follow such
falls, as, Psalm. 51. Matthew. 26.45. there is a habitual prevailing inclination
against sin in believers, which is never lost, which differenceth them from
others. It is not their path, their way they walk in, but as sicknesses to the
body, or Eclipses to the Sun, they come very seldom. Wicked men may have
agues, or hot fitts against sin, and gracious men may have cold fitts in sin,
but the bent of their souls, and their ordinary course is another way.

4. Between infirmities, and grosser enormities: the former are incident to the
Saints more frequently: as, every day, and often, there will be vain thoughs,
and words, and corruptions may get some advantages, and graces may not act at
such a height as they ought to do, and there may be backwardnes to some
duties, and distractions in them etc. Such sins of infirmity (though more
frequent) yet are consistent with truth of grace.

But to prevent mistakes, know.

1. That freedom from the dominion of sin, does always, vastly difference the
ordinary course, or Conversation, from such as are under the reign of it: many
call their gross sins, but sins of infirmity: whereas, those that seem very
small sins in themselves, by the aggravating circumstances which they admit of,
may not be reckoned of infirmity. But, ever there is a vastly different
conversation before and after conversion. Ephesians. 2. v. 2, 3. Those that are
called out of this world cannot but walk otherwise, then those that are of it.
Though a man (with Paul) was very religious before, and as touching the Law
blameles; yet, conversion differenceth him from himself in his former state,
in point of conversation, Phil. 3. v. 3.6. and a frequent iteration of manifest
works of the flesh, on living in them, is made a certain evidence of a state
of nature, Romans 8.13. 1 Corin. 6.10. Gal. 5. v. 19, 20, 21. Now the works of
the flesh are manifest, which are, adultery, fornication, uncleanenesse,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and
such like -- v. 21. They which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom
of God. Such are under the dominion of sin.

2. Sins, when really of infirmity, are, such are (through the remainders of
corruption, and weakness of the regenerate part) are unavoydable, or are
against the maine bent and inclination of the will. Romans 7.15, 16. What I would
not, and what I hate, that do I. Gal. 5.17. Ye cannot do what you would. It
is only out of impotency or weakness to withstand, that corruption prevails;
not out of want of will to hinder it. Romans 7.18. To will is present with me,
but how to perform that which is good, I find not. The will against it, is
stronger then its ability to make resistance: the temptation is overcome in the
will, though it prevails; else, I cannot understand how it is of infirmity.

Answ. It may be known that sin has not dominion over a man, from his
choosing freedom, or his consenting with all his heart, upon Evangelicall
accounts to part with sin: herein consists the very reign of sin, in the
voluntary subjection of the whole man to it. Romans 6.13, 14.16. To whom ye
[yeeld your selves] servants to obey, his servants ye are, to whom ye obey,
whither of sin -- So that a free yielding up to the service of sin, is the
reigning of it; and therefore a hearty choosing and consenting to part with
it, or a through unwillingnes to sin, must needs argue freedom from that reign
of it. Consenting expresses Paul's subjection to Gods Law, when he fell short
in practice. Romans 7.16. And so, a hearty consenting to part with sin, argues
freedom from the reign of it, even when one is rushed into the acting of it.
And hence, such as the Lord rejects and appears in the dreadfullest way
against, are described by their choosing that wherein the Lord delights not.
Isai. 65. v. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Measure your selves by your choice: you may be restrained from the gross
sins, that others commit, but if you choose sin, it is all one in Gods account
as if you acted it. Matthew. 5.28.

CHAP. XVII. Some discoveries of such a freedom from and unwillingnes to sin,
as the Gospel owneth as an Evidence of Adoption.
BUt in regard wicked men may have some unwillingnes to commit some sins; and
to help weak Christians, I shall add some discoveries, when there is [a
hearty choosing freedom from sin, and a hearty unwillingnes to sin] such as
the Gospel owneth as an Evidence of Adoption.

1. When it is free in its choice, or without coaction: the Apostle makes an
opposition between doing by constraint, and doing willingly. 1 Pet. 5.2. and
between acting out of necessity and willingly. Phil. v. 14. which clearly
intimate, that if a man acts in Gospel duties (as those were which he exhorts
to) yet if it be by necessity or constraint, then it is not willingly, in Gods
account. Things that a man is obliged to, by the necessity of a Divine
Command, yet if there be not a freenes in coming up to them, it is not
willingly, or out of choice, nor acceptable obedience to the Lord. He that is
in a tempest casts his merchandise into the Sea, not properly by compulsion,
but by a necessity of a supposition or condition. i.e. if he will save the
Ship and his life, he must cast out the goods, yet he does not this willingly.
i.e. not with a voluntary freenes: and yet with a kind of willingness. i.e.
rather then loose his life, and all, he will cast out the goods; such acts he
does willing with a nilling mind, or nilling with willing mind.

So, a man may acknowledge, not only in the general that he is a sinner, but
even particular sins, and may really wish them uncommitted, and make promises
and take up resolutions for the future not to commit them, and may without
dissimulation. i.e. not feignedly, but meaning as he says, be unwilling to
commit some sin that he is pressed on to; and yet may be under the dominion of
sin still. He chooses and consents to part with sin rather then to be
damned; or, to avoyde eternal death, and wrath to come, horrors of
conscience, or such like foreseen dangers; Alas, this is but by necessity or
constraint, and so it is not willingly. Pharaoh concluded his sinfulnes. Exodus
10.16. and Judas. Matthew. 27.3. and repented himself, v. 3.. i.e. it was so
imbittered to him, as he was sorry for what he had done, and wished it had been
otherwise: and both were real in what they said; for it was their distress
that made them acknowledge; and because Judas cast away the gain he had by his
sin. v 5. But, all this being extorted from them by Conscience, they were under
the dominion of sin still. If it be a free choice, that suppose there were no
danger of wrath, hell or damnation for sin, yet the nature of sin would make
you deny service or subjection to it; then, you are not under the dominion of
sin. Romans 6.16.22. Joh. 8. v. 34.36.

2. When the choice is universal: when it consents to part with all sin: Not
that a man can be really freed from one sin, who is under the reigning power of
others: but, he may be restrained from many, and yet be freed from the ruling
power of none. Psalm. 119. v. 104.128. I hate [every] false way. Psalm. 139.23.
Search me O God -- and see if there be [any] wicked way in me -- He was
unwilling to have any sin find entertainment in his heart. The subduing of one
sin may discover freedom from the dominion of all, when the heart is carried
out against the nature of fin, in that one. But, the hearts indulging one
(though never so small) argues the dominion of all: for, the least partaketh
of the nature of sin, as well as, the greatest. Jam. 2. v. 10, 11. The Apostles
scope is, to advance love without respect of persons. v. 8, 9. and enforces it
this way; for, whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point,
is guilty of all. And adds this reason of it, v. 11. For, he that said, do
not commit adultery, said also do not kill. It is taken from the authority of
the Commander: if this did oblige to one Command, the same obligation would
extend to all; because there is the same Divine authority stamped upon one, as
upon another.

3. When the choice is absolute without condition: a man may have a real
unwillingnes to commit one sin, and yet if it stands in competition with
another sin, or something inordinately affected; he will rather commit it, then
relinquish these. Pilate was unwilling to condemn Jesus, as appeared by his
seeking to release him, and his washing his hands etc. Matthew. 27. v. 18.24. And
Herod was unwilling to behead John Baptist, Mark. 6.26, 27. The King was
exceeding sorry. Darius was unwilling to cast Daniel into the Lions Den. Dan.
6. v. 14.18, 19, 20. He was sore displeased with himself, and set his heart on
Daniel to deliver him, could neither eat, drink, or sleep, the night after
he was cast in, and rejoiced exceedingly at Daniels safety. v. 20. All which
argue a great unwillingnesse that Daniel should suffer; and yet all these under
the dominion of sin still. There was a defect here, they were more unwilling to
stain their honors, then to commit the sins; and they choose the sin rather
then their own sufferings that way.

Thus, a man may be so unwilling to commit a sin, as he may take much pains to
prevent the commission of it, and may be exceedingly sorry that he has been
drawn away to it; he may weep for it, and have no rest night or day after he
has been so overtaken; and yet be under the ruling power of it still. This is
the language of his heart, I would not commit this sin, but rather then I will
part with this pleasure, that profit, these honors, I will do that which
otherwise I am unwilling to do. If there be any condition in the world, that
will hire thee into sin, it is not a hearty choice.

4. When there is a conflict between the flesh. i.e. sin, and the Spirit in the
soul by this choice: Gal. 5. v. 17, 18, 19. The flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh -- and his scope is to discover by
this conflict, who shall inherit the kingdom of God, and who not; and who are
given up to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, and who not, as, v. 16.

Qu: When is the Conflict with sin Evidencing?

Ans. 1. When it is between the right parties. i.e. the flesh and the Spirit.
Gal. 5.17. There may be a great struggling in a man's Spirit, by the enterfering
of one corruption with another; or, between the inclination of the will to the
commission of some sin, and the dictates of the natural Conscience. Romans 2.15.
Or, between the judgment and inclination to that which is morally good; and
very corrupt affections. But unless it be between the Spirit and the flesh it
is not evidencing.

2. When the opposition is made by the hidings of the Word in the heart. Psalm.
119.11. Thy Word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. 1 John 3.9. For his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin -- The word within,
is a seed that opposes sin. Thou may have a hundred Scriptures forbidding a
particular sin, which the flesh lusts toward; and as many promises of help
against it; all these may be eyed, and thought upon, and some affections may be
slightly touched herewith: but, if thy heart has not treasured up these words,
thou may be rushed into the sin, in the face of all these. But when the
heart engages by the word against sin, then it is evidencing; for, the word is
the sword of the Spirit. Ephesians. 6.17. The following particulars will further
evidence, when the Contest is between the flesh and the Spirit.

5. When the souls choosing freedom from sin, does lead to, and end in the
mortification of sin: that this is an evidence of Adoption is clear. Romans
8.13. If ye by the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
There may be a cessation from the actings of a sin, and yet no mortification of
it. He that has been a drunkard, swearer, Sabbath-breaker etc. may desist from
these profane practices, which he has followed, and yet be under the dominion
of sin still. Act. 8.11.13.

There may be a change of sin, and no change of heart; one sin may be left and
another taken in the room of it. A cessation chiefly respects the acts of
sin, and aims at the repressing of them; but, mortification strikes at the
root, the nature of sin. Romans 7.24. aims at the destruction of it. Romans 6.6.
That the body of sin might be destroyed -- Yea, in some measure it
extinguisheth the vigor, and expels or drives out the very life of sin.

6. When there is an irreconcilable opposition in the soul against sin: a man
may mislike the way it comes in, as having some ill consequences attending it,
and there may be a kind of parting upon it; sin may seem to soffer
banishment, for a time upon some particular discontents against it, Matthew. 12.
v. 43, 44, 45. The unclean Spirit, i.e. Sin or Satan, is gone out of a man;
but, v 44. it returns, -- there is a re-entrance, and the latter end of that
man is worse then the beginning. But if there be such enmity against, and
detestation of sin, as it can upon no terms admit of any reconciliation; that
mountains of gold, nor the greatest advantages, can win the least token of
favor or respect from the soul toward sin; but it cries out under it, as,
Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am -- then it is freed from the dominion of
sin.

7. When it is upon spiritual and Evangelicall accounts, that it chooses
freedom from sin: A man may be incensed against sin upon natural, civil,
moral, and religious accounts, and yet be under the dominion of sin still. Romans
10.2. They have a zeal of God.

Qu: When does a man choose freedom from sin, upon Evangelicall accounts?

Ans. 1. When the contrariety of sin to the will of God in Christ, does
dis-ingage the heart from it: Christ is often called a King, a Lord, a
Lawgiver -- to note, that all Commands, whither injoyning duties or forbidding
sins, they are to be received not only as from the hands of an All-powerfull,
and infinitely just God, but as from the hands of the Mediator.

Not, but that a soul is to look upon sin as a violation of the Fathers will,
yet, his will, not according to the tenor of the old Covenant. Gal. 3. v. 10,
11. but, as he has revealed it in the new Covenant, and as Commanded over
again by Christ. Joh. 14.15. Keep [my Commandments] and 21.23. Joh. 13.34. 1 John 2.8. Matthew. 5.27. to the end of the Chapter. 1 Cor. 9.21. I am under the
Law [to Christ] So that the lowest duty ought to be service to Christ. Ephesians. 6.
v 5, 6. Servants are to obey their Master in singleness of heart [as unto
Christ].

You may fear sin, and be sorry for it, and make opposition against it, as
contrary to the will of God as Creator, but if its striking at Christ as
Redeemer, carry not out against sin, it is not Evangelicall, nor witnessing.

2. When a sight of the injury offered to Christ by sin, does carry out the
heart against it: a man may have a sorrow for, a fear of, and hatred against
sin, as procuring discredit, or loss of reputation, sufferings etc. and yet be
under the dominion of it still. But, when the soul is touched with a deep
sense of it, in Christ's sufferings for and by it, when its piercing, wounding,
and grieving of Christ, does melt the heart for it, then it acts
Evangelically. Zech. 12.10.

3. When a discovery of the love, kindness, and goodness of God in Christ,
is the constraining thing from sin: when the appearances of the grace of God
teach to deny ungodlines. Titus 2.13. and the goodness of the Lord leads to
repentance. Romans 2.4. Ingenuity did exceedingly affect Saul's heart with his
sin. 1 Samuel 26.21. David had but cut asunder the lap of his garment, when he
might have cut asunder the thread of his life; and this love and kindness of
David in sparing his life, drew out an acknowledgement of his sin in the
aggravations of it, for the present [I have sinned, and erred exceedingly] yea,
it put him upon resolutions against it for the future [I will no more do thee
harme] A man may be much affected with a sin upon some great deliverance, or
the like; may confess it, in its aggravations, and that upon very ingenuous
considerations, and yet be under the dominion of it still, as Saul was. But see
how the Lord seeks to affect the beart of David with his sin. 2 Samuel 12. v.
7, 8, 9. I have anointed thee King over Israel etc. And if this had been too
little I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things. Wherefore
have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord -- And when this love of God had
evercome his heart into an acknowledgment of his sin. v. 13. presently he had a
sentence of absolution. He seems to be interrupted in speaking out his
sorrow, with this [the Lord also has put away thy sin]. When the remembrance
of the former loving-kindnesses of the Lord, does melt the heart for sin, this
is soon followed up with a testimony of remission.

4. When it aims at a Conformity unto Christ in its seeking freedoms from
sin. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23. Custom, and the example of Forefathers, and the
credit of religion in the Country or place a man lives in, as also education
etc. may prevail so far as to restrain very much, and make a man
discountenance sin: but, except Christ be thy pattern of imitation, and thy
sorrow be because thou fallest so short of him, he regards it not.

5. When it aims at the coming up to some special Gospel duty, or the
attainement of some special Gospel privilege, in seeking freedom from sin:
A man may see that sin crosses some carnal interest, or procures some outward
disadvantages, and may be incensed against it upon that account: as, because an
inordinate use of the creature procures diseases to the body etc. a parent may
hate drunkenness, or unlawful games, because his child is like to become a
bankrupt by such practices. A child, being threatened to be dis-inherited if he
follows such ways, may hereupon bridle his affections, and yet may be under
the reigning power of sin still. But if its hindering, in the exercise of some
grace, or in the performance of some duty, or in the attainement of Communion
with Christ etc. raise its fear of, sorrow for, and hatred against sin, then
it acts Evangelically. Psalm. 51. v. 2.7.13. Hebr. 12.1.

6. When it is by the application of the death of Christ in a promise, that it
makes resistance against sin: Romans 6. v. 4.14 Heb. 9.14. Act. 5.31. Revel. 12.
v. 9.11. And they overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony -- Joh. 8. v. 34.36. If the Son shall make you free, then you shall
be free indeed.

This must be an ingredient in all the former particulars; no freedom from
sin, but by Christ. Luke 1.71, 72.74, 75.

7. When sin it self is in subjection: there is an inconsistency, between sins
reigning and its being in subjection; it cannot be both King and Subject in the
same soul at the same time. There may be a Conflict with sin, and yet it may
seem to get the upper-hand for a time: but, when the soul has gotten sin
beneath it; then it is most conspicuous, that sin does not reign. As;

1. When the soul is enabled to a speedy mortification of it upon all its
rebellions: it is like a conquered enemy, that is not able to keep the field
any longer; some parties may rallie, and make some resistance, but they do but
hasten their own ruin thereby: so, the motions and stirrings of sin may be
felt, but the soul is enabled to look unto Christ, and to oppose the Word and
blood of Christ to these, and it is speedily saved. Revel. 12. v. 8, 9.11. Sin,
in the lustings of it, is speedily crushed, suppressed and conquered, it cannot
prevail upon the heart as formerly it has done, but is laid lower by every
onset: this is the report that may be given upon their fighting, corruption is
cast out, cast out. This argues it has not dominion.

2. When even the former prevailings of corruption, are made serviceable
toward spiritual ends: as, when they produce soule-humiliation,
selfe-abasement, and fill it with the more admiration of, and cause it to be so
much the more studious for, the advancement of the exceeding riches of grace in
opening a way to deliverance from sin. Ezekiel. 16.61.63. Ephesians. 2. v. 5, 6, 7. that
it can triumph over sin through Christ. 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. Then sin is in
subjection. And thus I have discovered, when a soul is freed from the Dominion
of sin: but before I leave this, I shall answer one objection.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the souls retaining Assurance, notwithstanding the
prevailings of corruption.
Object. BUt is it possible that a soul may retain Assurance, after it has
found the prevailings of Corruption? If it formerly had it, yet must it not
unavoydably loose it, after a falling into sin?

Premise 1. Sins are either of infirmity only; or grosser sins, which are the
falls of the Saints.

Prem. 2. Either there is a nourishing of these sins, or an endeavor to the
utmost after the mortification of them.

Answ. 1. Assurance in the donation and continuation of it, has a dependence
on the free actings of the Divine Spirit. Romans 8.16. 1 John 5.6. And hence, if
the Spirit pleases, that can continue such a work upon the heart, at such a
time: and if that will suspend its operations, though no such provocation be
given it to withdraw; yet it is not in the power of man to continue it one
moment longer.

2. A man ought not to throw or cast away his Confidence so long as Scripturall
grounds are afforded to found it upon: it is the gross mistake of too many
Christians, if they fall into sin, they reckon it their duty then to question
their estates, and to throw up all former persuasions of interest in Christ:
whereas, this is very sinful: it not only wants a word to warrant it, for a
duty; but it is denied by the word to be one. They ought to hold fast their
confidence firm unto the end. Hebr. 3.6. and Isai. 49.14. She is upbraided for
saying the Lord had forsaken her etc.

You are not to cast it away but upon a Scripture-ground; and seeing it is
evident that falls are consistent with interest in Christ, as in the case of
David and Peter; hence, you cannot have a warrant from the word, to make this
an argument of being without Christ.

3. The nourishing of Corruption has a tendency to deprive the soul of
Assurance: Heb. 10.22. Psalm. 51.12. and therefore it is extremely dangerous to
cherish the least sin.

4. If thou inquire whither Assurance may stand with the nourishing any sin:
either thy Question must look to the time past, present, or to come. If to the
time present, or to come, know, that the Lord has not granted thee liberty one
moment, for the nourishing any corruption; and so, it is a sin to be studious
to make Assurance and any sin dwell together. Put an end to this question, by
ceasing to nourish for the present, and by seeking to prevent nourishing any
sin for the future.

But if it respects the time past; that formerly thou did nourish some
corruption, thy after mortification of it is witnessing.

5. I suppose Assurance may be retained, after, not only sins of infirmity;
but also after the falls of the Saints, when those sins are not nourished. That
it may continue after sins of infirmity is undeniable, because else it were
impossible for any to retain it; seeing the best of Saints are subject to
these, daily. Romans 7.15.24. And for other sins, see, 1 Samuel 12. v. 19, 20.22.
They had made themselves guilty of great wickedness, and were afraid of death
for it, but Samuel forbids this fear, and calls them up unto confidence,
that the Lord would not forsake them, v. 22. for his own names sake. Micah 7.
v. 8.9. Though I fall, yet I shall arise -- Here is Assurance, and yet under a
fall, and it is into sin. v. 9. I have sinned. I say, [when sin is not
nourished] else the considence is very suspicious; for, if there be sensible
Assurance, this will make opposition against sin in the soul. 1 Samuel 12. v.
20.24. 1 John 3.3 [Every man] that has this hope, purifieth himself --

CHAP. XIX. Of separation of the heart to God and Christ.
Qu: 2. HOw may one know that his heart is separated to God and Christ?

Answ. 1. From his esteeming of God and Christ, above all other things: Psalm.
73.26, 27. Whom have I in heaven but thee? a believer would account even heaven
it self, a place of but little beauty, glory or felicity, if Communion with
God and Christ were not to be enjoyed in it. Others desire Christ only for
heaven, he desires heaven chiefly for Christ.

Natural men are even drunk and swallowed up in Creature delights; but, the
interest of Christ prevails with a gracious heart against all other
interests. He may be interrupted in his motion to Christ, in particular acts;
but he is the prime, principal object his soul is moved, and bent toward,
set and fixed upon, and given up to; Romans 8.5. Phil. 3.20. Coloss. 1.18. 1 Pet.
2.7. Col. 3.11. Christ is all and in all. Other-things are as nothing to him,
if Christ be not enjoyed in them; he is all in all enjoyments; all in all
inlargements, all in all duties, all in all comforts. Others apprehend that
Christ it, better then the gnawings of an accusing conscience, better then the
company of damned Spirits, better then flames; but, they see no such beauty,
or excellency in Christ, as should make him best, or all in all here on earth.
They can verbally own Christ as superlatively excellent, but practitally they
deny it. And, they know not Christ in those spiritual excellencies, which
advance him in the eyes of Saints. Take him as clothed with bolines, and
appearing against sin etc. and they prefer other things that are base and
low, before him.

The following particulars will further discover, when Christ is all in all.

2. From his spending his highest desires and endeavors after attaining
Communion with God in Christ: when the heart is set upon Christ, or turned
Christ-ward, it cannot stand still without him, it must be waiting for him, and
enquiring after him with utmost diligence. Cant. 3.3. Saw ye not him whom my
soul loves? Psalm. 130.5, 6. Phil. 3.14.

3. From his willingness to part with all other things at Christ's Call, or for
his sake. Luke 14.26.33. Whosoever forsakes not, [all that he has,] Mark.
8.35. and 10. v. 29.
he cannot be my Disciple. Matthew. 10.37. He that loves father or mother [more]
then me, is not worthy of me --

4. From the carriage of his heart under his withdrawings: when these procure
such heart-sicknesses, as can be cured no way, but by his returnings to it.
Cant. 5. v. 6.8. Tell him I am sick of love.

When the fear of hell is not upon them, yet O, the sighings, sobbings,
cryings, faintings, of love-sicke souls, for Christ's presence. No quiet or
satisfaction without him. Like the child, that nothing can still, but the
breast: so, nothing can fill up Christ's room in the soul. It reckons it
self empty in the midst of fulness, without him. It is resolved for ever to go
in widdow-hood, if he will not own it as his Spouse. This argues a Consent of
heart to the Match, and so a marriage union between Christ and the soul.

5. From his enjoyment of the leadings of the Spirit: these are a certain,
infallible evidence of Adoption to all that have them. Romans 8.14. For [as many]
as are [led by the Spirit] of God, they are [the Sons of God].

CHAP. XX. Of the souls Enjoying the leadings of the Spirit, and when.
Qu: When does a soul enjoy the leadings of the Spirit?

Answ. 1. When a Compliance with the will of Christ becomes natural to the
soul: as there is a propensitie in light things to moove upward, and in heavy
things to moove downward, so in the soul to moove Christ-ward. Suppose there
were no wrath as the Consequences of disobedience; nor no reward as the effect
of Gospel obedience; yet, the sweetness of the ways themselves, and the
respect it owes to the will of Christ, would be as the heart unto an owning of
Christ therein. Psalm. 119.30.173. I have [chosen] the way of truth etc. And v.
35. for therein I delight. So, Romans 7.22. and Romans 8. v. 1, 2. For, the law of
the Spirit of life has made me free, from the law of sin and death.

Carnal men, in their hearts, call a liberty for sin, freedom: but such as
are indeed freed from condemnation, and walk after the Spirit, they call this
their liberty, to be free for Christ, and from the law of sin; and reckon
obligations to sin the greatest bondage and thraldom in the world. The Spirit
raises an admirable freenes in the soul to walk in the ways of Christ. 2
Corin. 3.17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: And hence the
Spirit of Adoption is opposed unto the Spirit of bondage. Romans 8.15. A man may
exercise himself in the external part of all duties that a Christian is
engaged to, and yet be without the leadings of the Spirit. He may have many
carnal enforcements hereunto: but, unless there be a liberty of heart to
these ways; that he would not but be employed in them, and accounts it a
high favor from the Lord that he will use him in any services for himself:
and finds more delectation in these, then in any other ways; that it
becomes even meat and drink to him, to do the Lord service, and it is a
matter of great complaint and lamentation, that he can do no more for the
Lord; that he finds a backwardnes in himself, or any contrary principles,
which seek to obstruct and hinder his following the Lord in his ways. Romans
7.22, 23. Then he injoyeth the leadings of the Spirit.

2. When it has corroborations or assistances against those impediments that
would hinder it, in walking in the ways of Christ: or the Spirit leads by
remooving these: Carnal men wonder that any should complain for want of
strength unto duties, they can easily come up to them. But, it arises partly
from Satan's not molesting them in the performance of duty, because they look
not beyond the external part of it; they strive not to act in a right manner,
or for right ends: or because they are insensible of the working of corruption,
when yet it does act. But a gracious heart, finds, that if it be not
strengthened by a power beyond its own, it cannot act any grace, or perform
any duty in an acceptable way to the Lord: and hence the Apostle prays,
Ephesians. 3.16. That they might be [strengthened with might by his Spirit] in the
inner man.

Israel is said to be led by the Spirit of the Lord. Isai. 63. v. 11, 12, 13,
14. And how does he lead them? it is by dividing the water before them, and
keeping them that they should not stumble --. i.e. the Lord threw up and
remooved impediments out of their way, and took away what might cause them to
fall, and this was his leading of them. So, if thou have been eagerly pursued
by Satan, and he has raged against thee like a Lion spoiled of his whelps,
that thou were beset with temptations, and did find many and strong
lustings of the flesh, to hinder thy following of the Lord Christ in the ways
of his appointment. And, if such mountains have been made plains, and
corruption borne down; when thou have found thy heart so full of deadnes,
hardness, unbelief, and all manner of distempers, that thou have even despaired
of acting in the duty, as, prayer etc. in any acceptable way to the Lord, and
(like the Israelites) thou have cried out, that thy destruction was at hand.

Yet, if these spiritual enemies have been conquered, and thy heart let out
more then at other times toward Christ; here are the leadings of the Spirit.
Romans 8.13. If ye by the Spirit mortify -- v. 14 For, as many as are led by the
Spirit -- The particle [For] argues mortification to appertain unto the
leadings of the Spirit. And, so, Gal. 5. v. 16.18. Those that are led, and do
walk by the Spirit, they [shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh]. Not as if
they were perfect, and had no sin in them, for he adds, v. 17. The flesh
lusts against the Spirit. It does not quite hinder the stirrings, no nor the
prevailings of sin, for he says [ye cannot do what ye would]. i.e. ye cannot
act so spiritually, and so circumspectly, as ye would. Ye cannot, yet ye would.
The will prevails against, and gets the upper-hand of corruption, even
when duty is hindered, or sin acted by the soul; that corruption is not
predominant in the soul. Then they are the fruits of the spirit, when thy love
to Christ is predominant, and ordinarily prevails against thy sinful love to
other things below Christ: and thy Joy in the Lord is predominant or bears
sway against thy sinful and carnal joy in creatures, or lusts: and thy peace,
by the blood of Christ, helps thee to see that false peace which thou had
taken up from other grounds: and thy faith is predominant against thy
unbeleife, which discovered it self formerly, in causing thee to choose and
embrace other objects besides Christ, or in thy not coming up to a hearty
accepting of him; and so for all other fruits of the Spirit, v. 22, 23. There
is an opposition made between the works of the flesh, and of the Spirit, v.
19.22. to show that when the works of the flesh are kept underneath, and
prevailed against, then a soul enjoys the leadings of the Spirit, as v.
16.18.

3 When the heart is under powerful drawings Christ-ward in being exercised in
the ways of Christ.

1 There must be drawings. The word (...) signifies to be moved, acted,
guided, etc. it may be taken from blind men, that stand in need, not only of
directions by word of mouth, but of a hand to lead, help and uphold in a way.
Or from weak persons, as young children, that need a hand to suportand
sustain; yea, an arm to carry them. Men cannot go alone in the ways of
Christ, they may pray and hear etc. but they cannot mix faith with these, or
act spiritually, if the Spirit has not a greater stroke in such actions, then
themselves. Joh. 15.5. Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing. i. e.
nothing in a pleasing or acceptable way to God. Psalm. 17.5. And, the Spouse
cries out. Cant. 1.4. Draw me: it denotes impotency and unaptnes in the soul
for such a motion. No running after Christ, without drawings from him.

2. They must be heart-drawings: if the heart be wanting, though a man
performs never so many duties, yet he is destitute of the leadings of the
Spirit. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 29. and 6. v. 5 and 10. v. 12. All love, or service that
finds acceptance with the Lord is [with all the heart]. i. e. with the
ruling, or prevailing part of it. Romans 7. v. 22, 23. There is a Law in the
mind. i. e. powerful obligations and engagements laid upon that toward
Christ. Romans 6.17. The lowest duties require the heart to the right performance
of them. Ephesians. 6. v. 5, 6.

3. The drawings of the heart must be Christ-ward: A man may be furnished with
eminent gifts, and may have suitable assistances in the laying out of those
gifts, from the Spirit, and yet may be without the leadings of the Spirit, as
Saul. 1 Samuel 10.10. And Christ shall say, depart from me, to many that have
prophesied and cast out Devils, in his name, Math. 7.22, 23.

A man may have preaching gifts, and praying gifts, yea wonder-working gifts,
and may lay out these to the admiration of others: and all these are from the
Spirit. 1 Corin. 12. v. 8, 9, 10, 11. and yet be without Sonship, and
therefore without the leadings of the Spirit which witness adoption, Romans 8.14.
These are rather for the profit of others, then for his that has them. Gifts
exercised cannot suppress corruptions in a man's own heart, and hence, though
they used their gifts, yet they are called workers of iniquity. Math. 7.23.
Gifts do not carry out the heart toward Christ, but graces do. And, if in
the improvement of preaching, or praying gifts, thy heart has been carried out
Christ-ward, though thou have found more streightnings in expression then at
other times, yet thou have enjoyed the leadings of the Spirit. Jerem. 30. v.
21. I will cause him to draw near -- for, who is this that engages his heart
to approach unto me -- Then a man is caused by the Lord to draw near unto him
in any services, when there are real engagements upon his heart toward God:
and such the Lord will own as his. v. 22. And ye shall be my people, and I
will be your God. It a man has had never so much enlargednesse in expressions
in prayer, yet if his heart has not been under drawings toward Christ, it is
not witnessing, Cant. 1.4. Isai. 29.13, 14. But if a duty has been of
advantage that way, then thou have had the leadings of the Spirit, how mean
soever the duty has seemed to be. Ephesians. 6.6.

4. When it has been enabled to own the mediation of Christ, and Gospel
promises in its actings: A man's heart may really go out after some enjoyments,
and feign he would have these; as riches, freedoms from affliction etc. he may
pray earnestly for them; and yet he may be without the leadings of the Spirit.
It is the work of a faithful Leader to carry a man in the right way: and the
Spirit is promised, to speak from God to us, for direction into the way we
should choose, Isa. 30. v. 21. Thine ears shall hear a voice behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it -- The Lord does not account himself
glorified by the best, and most shineing services a soul can perform, nor
does not accept of them, if it deals not with him, by the Mediator. Ephesians.
1.6. and 3. v. 12. 1 Pet. 2.5. To offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to
God, [by Jesus Christ]. Many in words do make use of Christ for acceptance
with God: but unles your hearts have been holden up and strongly drawn to make
use of the name of Christ, and the sufferings and intercession of Christ; you
have not the leadings of the Spirit. And those that attain unto this, do
find acceptance with God. Joh. 14. v. 13, 14. and 15. v. 16. and 16. v. 23.
Coloss. 3.17.

And Gospel promises are the Caskets, wherein the jewel Christ Jesus is laid
up. The Chariots whereby a soul may ride to that King of glory in triumph. The
Ships wherein it may imbarke it self, and go full sail to him, for all the
mercies it stands in need of. 2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Corin. 1.20. And when it heartily
makes use of Christ by these; then it injoyeth the leadings of the Spirit of
promise.

5. When Spiritual things are those which the heart is most affected and taken
up with, and makes out most after. Romans 8.5. They that are after the Spirit,
do mind the things of the Spirit. i. e. mind them, as if they had nothing
else to mind: or they mind these, far more then any other things. They can
see but little excellency in duties that others may highly esteem of; if they
find not the breathings of the Spirit in them. Phil. 3. v. 3. We worship God
in the Spirit. They worshipped God in the flesh before, in a carnal way, but
now in the Spirit. Joh. 3. v. 6. What soever is of the Spirit is Spirit. i. e.
is Spiritual.

When the Spirituality of any ways, is the great attractive and drawing
inducement to affecting of, and walking in, them. When a soul does so savor
the things of the Spirit, that there is a readiness of heart to close with
things, because spiritual, and never thinks it self spiritual enough etc.
this argues the leadings of the Spirit. And hence, believers are described, by
spirituality. 1 Corin. 2.15. He that is spiritual. i.e. a belee ever, opposed
to the natural man. v. 14.

6. When it is enabled to act for spiritual and Gospel ends, in Gospel
duties: when it would not aim at selfe-advancement, or its own name and
glory, as they did. Math. 6. v. 1.5. But when the great things it eyeth, or
would eye in all actings are, the mortification of corruption, and the
attainement of Communion with God and Christ, and increase of all grace, growth
in faith, love, selfe-denyal etc. And when it seeks for outward mercies in a
subordination to these, and in a way of subserviency to the interest and
designs of Christ. And when, as the ultimate end of all, it seeks the glory
of God. 1 Cor. 10.31. Then it injoyeth the leadings of the Spirit, and thereby
has its Adoption witnessed to it.

And thus I having discovered particularly, How a soul may know that the
Spirit has witnessed Adoption. 1. By it self. 2. By Blood. 3. By Water.

CHAP. XXI. Ten Secondary General Evidences which accompany the witnessings of
the Spirit in every one of those ways of witnessing.
NOw I shall proceed to the Secondary General Evidences; many of which, if not
all, will accompany the witnessings of the Spirit in every one of those ways
of witnessing. By temptation they may be sometimes interrupted, yet not long,
whilst a testimony remains.

Evidence 1. When a soul injoyeth the witnessings of the Spirit, it has more
then ordinary manifestations of that excellency which is in the things it is
assured of: If such a word as this, comes in a witnessing way [the blood of
Christ cleanses thee from all thy sins]. The Spirit raises more then ordinary
apprehensions of the blood of Christ. It heard of its virtue and excellency
before, but now it can say, not half was told me. It highly prized it before,
but its estimation thereof, is hereby heightened exceedingly. Now, nothing is
comparable with the blood of Christ in its account.

So, Psalm. 32.5. when he could say [thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin] then
he could hold in no longer, but cries out, v. 1, 2. Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven -- Surely he accounted highly of forgiveness before,
O but he had not such lively apprehensions of it until it was witnessed to
him. v. 5. And, now he writes them blessed that have a partnership with him in
this forgiving grace.

Evid. 2. The witnessings of the Spirit fill the soul with unexpressible
admiration of that Divine love which appears in and about its Adoption: there
were many passages between God and the soul which it passed over formerly and
disregarded, that now are brought to its fresh remembrance, and that to
heighten its admiration. 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of love is this -- when
they enjoyed witnessings, and could say [we are the Sons of God]: when they had
that hope of seeing God, as he is, and of being made like to him. v. 2. Then
their hearts were so full, that they could not hold without broaching their
apprehensions of this adopting love; and admiration is forced to stand in the
room of expressions: words are supplved with wondering [ Behold what manner of
love -- ] Delusions may cause a man to wonder at his own supposed freedoms
from wrath, and advancements to happiness: but Divine love is far less
admired, then his own advantage.

But where the witnessings of the Spirit are enjoyed.

1. A soul discerns unexpressible love of good will, in the first
contrivance of its adoption: it sees that the wisdom of the creature would
have been for ever nonplus'd, if it had been left to that, to find out a way
for its own recovery; and it admireth that God should so love the world, as to
send his Son, his only Son, on this errand, Joh. 3.16. and upon viewing that,
it cannot but say [ what manner of love is this -- ].

2. It finds a love of compassion in his many strivings with it, whilst it
was in a natural condition: this light of the Spirit, helps it to look a
great way back, and it sees the walkings and tenderhearted workings of God
toward it there; how he at such and such a time allured, persuaded, and wooed
it; when it was in the midst of its rebellions against him; and though it went
on frowardly, and in the stubbornenes of its heart, yet he iterated his
invitations again and again; and O (says the soul) that he should not give
over and say, that his Spirit should strive no more with me [what manner of
love is this?]

3. It vieweth his love of delight, which is discovered in its Adoption, and
wondreth at that also: Believers see infinite condescension there, in regard of
their own unworthiness, and so cannot but cry out, with the Apostle. 1 John
3.1. What manner of love is this? that [we] who were enemies and fought against
the Lord of glory. [We] who were full of deformity, and in our blood, cast out
to the loathing of our persons, that [we] should be called the Sons of God; O
height, depth, length, and breadth of this love. If we had been made but as
hired servants, it had been an unspeakable privilege; but to be owned as Sons,
this is far beyond it, [What manner of love is this?]

Evid. 3. Witnessings of the Spirit procure sorrow and selfe-correction for
unkindnesses offered to the Lord: the soul sees, how love wrought in the
bosom of God toward it, in such dealings as it put mis-interpretations upon
before, and had hard thoughts of God for: and then the heart works on this
manner. O I have said the Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten me; but
now I see his thoughts were precious toward me even then. I had wretchedly
forgotten him, but now I see, that though a mother may forget her sucking
child, yet he cannot forget me. It cannot but expatiate, in rebuking its own
heart, for untoward workings against this God, whose love it now feels; it
takes Gods part against it self more then ever. Job 42. v. 5, 6. Now mine eye
sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self -- The clearest sights of God, cause
the greatest selfe-abhorrency. Ezekiel. 16. v. 61. Then shall thou remember thy
ways, and be ashamed -- When? v. 60. When I shall establish unto thee an
everlasting Covenant; and v. 63. When I am pacified toward thee -- That
testimony which blocketh up the way to selfe-detestation, is very suspicious,
though it transporteth with joy and comfort; for the Lord has promised that a
sight of pacification should be attended with Evangelicall humiliation.

A delusion has a natural tendency to the puffing up of the soul, and though
hypocrites may have a shadow of humility at other times, yet there is the
least appearance of it, under high attainements, and a supposall of glorious
revelations. But Divine testimonies are of Correctine use unto a soul. A Peter
after a love-looke from Christ, O how he figheth, sobbeth, melts, mourns,
at the remembrance of a foregoing denial of him. A Thomas, that has risen
high, even unto redoubled actings of unbelief, when he has thus seen, and
felt too, O he cannot but check himself, and say, My Lord, and my God, Joh.
20.28. Under such heart-ravishing revelations, this pierces, wounds, and as
it were stabbeth the soul; that the Lord has had such unsuitable returns from
it, after so large expressions of his love.

Evid. 4. The witnessings of the Spirit, lay powerful engagements upon the
heart toward selfe-purification: though sanctification sometimes lies so
dark that a soul may not be able to make use of that as a witness for the
present, yet ever in witnessing, the Spirit lays obligations upon the soul
to seek after it to its utmost for the future. 1 John 3.3. Not only some men,
but [every man] that has [this hope]. i. e. of seeing God as he is. v. 2.
[purifieth himselfe]. And a little purity or holiness will not satisfy: A
knowledge of Adoption, as, v. 1, 2. puts it upon pressing after the
perfection of it, to be pure [ as he, i. e. as God is pure] Whereas Delusions
tend some way or other to unholines; Satan drives at some corrupt defignes
therein.

Evid. 5. The witnessings of the Spirit procure an expulsion of Satan out of
the soul: Christ evinceth his being no impostour, and that he acted by the
Spirit of God, because he did cast out Satan. Math. 12. v. 25, 26.28. So, if a
testimony of Adoption, conduces to the ejection of Satan, out of the soul in
his temptations, suggestions, etc. this argues it to be no delusion; for, if
Satan should cast out Satan his kingdom were divided, and could not stand. v.
26. The binding of the strong man armed must be by the Spirit, for none else is
stronger then he. When the word abides in a soul, then it overcomes the
wicked one. 1 John 2.14. Every manifestation of Christ, is for this end, to
destroy the works of the Devil. 1 John 3.8.

Delusions dim and dazzle the eyes of the soul, that it cannot see into the
crafty contrivances of that subtle adversary. But the Spirit takes off those
vailes that were upon the heart, and gives notable discoveries of Satan's close
plottings, cross actings, secret undermineings, soule-ensnaring stratagems,
that it sees into his ways and methods more then ever. 2 Corin. 3. v. 16, 17,
18. and 12. v. 7. Yea, it fills the soul with detestation of, and
indignation against him, in his enterprises, and that because they tend to
interrupt some designs of Christ, and to contradict his ends. Math. 3.17. with
4. v. 10. And also, many temptations are overcome hereby, Satan will be
incensed, when he sees himself cast out, and so, floods of new temptations
are to be expected. Rev. 12. v. 13.15.

But, by the witnessings of the Spirit usually a soul obtains a release from
those old ones that it has grapled with, and groaned, yea even sunk under,
many a day. And, it speaks the Spirit to be the author of a testimony, when
it works this way: for, Satan is not cast out, but enters into the soul
when delusions prevail: and Satan is expelled out of the soul, when that is
out of love with him, and when his ways are rendered odious and abominable to
it.

Evid. 6. Satan uses his utmost endeavors, to draw and beat off the soul
from, and cause it to doubt of the Spirits testimony; but he seeks to
prevent a questioning of his own. I do not make doubting an Evidence of
Assurance; but, if thou can be sure that Satan tempts thee to doubting,
and seeks to divide between thee and a promise applied; that argues thy
closure with the promise, not to be by his means. And, if thou be'st sure that
he persuades thee to own a testimony still, which thou bast received, then
it is very suspicious. For, Satan is no such friend or favorite unto the
Spirit or its testimony, as to seek the hindering its questioning thereof.
Neither is he such an enemy to himself, as to beat off from hearkening unto
his own delusions, when the soul is inclined to embrace them.

Evid. 7. The witnessings of the Spirit afford corroborations against the
sharpest afflictions and sufferings: a timorous, fearful Spirit, that formerly
thought it should never be able to hold up against smaller trials; yet after
such a testimony it is undaunted at the sight of greater. The shineings of
Gods face make it willing to do or suffer any thing for God; now it can
venture to the utmost for him. When they could claim interest in God. Dan.
3.17. Our God -- This made them declare their resolutions for God. v. 18. This
will bear out against a fiery furnace. Romans 8.37. In all these things we are
more then Conquerours. [We] i. e. we that can say, That nothing shall separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. as, v. 39. [We] are
[in all these things] in tribulations, persecutions, famine, nakedness, peril,
sword etc. v. 36. Not only after these, but [in] them, and in all these hard
passages of providence, by which many are provoked to doubt of Divine love; yet
[in all these] we are [Conquerours] i. e. whilst we are under them, they are
overcome to us, we are not subdued or kept under in our faith or patience -- by
these; but are kept above our tribulations: and [Conquerours] i. e. of Satan
who fights against us in these, he backeth persecution with temptation, but
we overcome all, and are [Conquerours] i. e. of Corruption that is ready to
take advantage against us under trials and tribulations, but we have gotten
ground of our corruptions, our pride, discontent -- not only after distresses,
but in them; and so we are [more then Conquerours] i. e. we have come off, not
only without loss, but with much gain. Conquerours win the field, but they
loose much in winning of it, many valiant men fall in the battle: O but
Christians gain in their graces, and gain in their strength, and gain in
their comforts, as their sufferings abound, so their consolations abound also,
and so they are [more then Conquerours].

Object. But may not a delusion so engage a man to it self as he may suffer
much before he will disown it? may not a man look death in the face with a
carnal confidence?

Answ. Suppose it, yet it is not the engagednes of the heart to Christ by
sights of his love; or the endearance of his will, name, and glory to it, or
the tasting sweetness in Communion with Christ etc. that bear up against
sufferings: but a soul under the witnessings of the Spirit, is raised above
his troubles and afflictions upon such accounts. Romans 8.35.39. Phil. 3.8. For
whom I have suffered the loss of all things. Carnal confidences are not at
first built and bottomed upon Christ, and are at present sed and supported, by
security, disregard, stupidity, stout-heartednes, will, desire to be accounted
immovable, and unwillingnes to own the shame of former hypocrifie -- and such
carnal props bear it up, and engage to adhere unto it under sufferings, which
are enough to evidence it, to be a delusion.

Evid. 8. The witnessings of the Spirit beget a persuasion in the soul of the
Lords affording it, suitable provision for it, at all times, and in all
conditions: before, it went drooping under fears that it should want,
protecting grace under dangers, and supporting grace under sufferings, and
persevering grace under trials: it feared that it should not hold out to the
end, and was mistrusting God in every condition: but, when the Spirit has
witnessed adoption, then it is delivered from all these fears; it can say with
him Psalm. 23.1. [I shall not want] when it can say [the Lord is my Shepherd.]
This engages strongly against mistrust fullness, which formerly it gave much
way to, and strikes a deeper sense into the soul of its unbeleife then it
had, that it cannot but recall it self: it said before [I shall want] when it
could not say [I do want.] Its mistrust run before its necessity. But, now it
unsayeth it, and chicketh it self for it: yea it runs as far forward in its
says, as before it did in its unbeleife. It does not only say [I do not want]
in the present time, but [I shall not] want for the future. Though I should be
afflicted, tempted, persecuted, etc. yet, I shall not want. Paul could argue
himself into a confidence of sufficient provision, when he saw that nothing
should separate from Christ. Romans 8.32. He that spared not his Son, how shall
he not with him give us [all things?] i.e. all things needful in all
conditions; not all things in the world, but enough of all things; grace
enough, and peace enough, strength enough, wealth enough, etc. this is his
collection from that premise, and how shall he not etc? it is an interogation
that imports, that seeing he spared not Christ the greater, it is out of
question, he will not be sparing in other blessings which are far lesser.

Evid. 9. The witnessings of the Spirit make the soul exceedingly vigilant
against whatever might occasion an interruption in its communion with Christ:
the most glorious revelations are followed oftentimes with the most horrid and
violent temptations, as, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. and Matthew. 3. v. 16, 17. The Spirit
descended and a full testimony is given, v. 17. This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased. And the next news is, Mat. 4.1. [Then] was Jesus led up of
the Spirit -- to be tempted. Question not a testimony barely, because you find
variety of new temptations after it, unless it disposes you to yield and
consent to them, and occasion their prevailing over you: These you are to look
for and expect after such a time. But if the Spirit be the witness, it will make
you watchful against these. Gant. 8.4. I charge ye -- stir not up, nor awake
my love, until he please. She was very fearful of whatsoever might displease
him. And when was it? v. 3. when shes enjoyed left hand supportments and
right hand imbracings from Christ. Souls are double watchful against
whatsoever might interrupt their Communion with Christ after a full fruition of
it.

Evid. 10. The witnessings of the Spirit draw out earnest expectations of full
communion with Christ: the soul is so ravished with what it does enjoy, that it
is even swallowed up with desires after full enjoyments of it. One that
formerly was under bondage through the fear of death, now knows not almost
how to be content to live any longer, but is forced into that holy complaint, 2
Cor. 5.7. I live by faith, and not by sight -- A life of faith is a glorious
life, and yet at such a day it cannot but bemoane it self for its want of
sight: it groaneth earnestly desiring to be clothed upon, and this is the
matter of its lamentation, that it is absent from the Lord, v. 2.6. Christ is
present with the Saints by faith in this life, but their Communion here admits
of many interruptions. There are recesses, as well as accesses. They are
subject to withdrawings and seeming distances, and nothing but immediate
Communion will afford them a fullness of contentment; and therefore with a holy
impatiency, they desire to be dissolved, that they may be with Christ, which is
best of all.

And thus I have finished these Secondary Evidences, which may be useful.

1. For Direction to such as enjoy the testimony of the Spirit: here they may
see what improvement they are to make thereof. 2. For confirmation unto those
that have enjoyed a testimony which has been followed up these ways: let them
beware of questioning it. And the want of these, or many of them, as the issue
of such a persuasion, especially if the confidence remains still, it a
dangerous symptom of a Satanicall delusion.
CHAP. XXII. Four Objections answered.
BEfore I leave this question, I shall answer four Objections.

Obj. 1. May a soul say, I have had some feeble hopes that I have enjoyed the
witnessings of the Spirit, in some of those ways aforementioned: but seeing
Satan counterfeiteth the choice works of the Spirit, and the Prophet says,
The heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it? Jer. 17.9.
How should I know, that I have passed a right judgment on my own condition,
and am not mistaken?

Answ. The Spirit by the word does give an infallible assurance unto souls
that its testimony is true:

It is ascertained unto souls.

1. By the Spirit: 1 Cor. 2.10.12. Romans 8.16. 1 John 5.9, 10.

2. By the Word: that is the touchstone or rule for trial: see Isa. 8.20. To
the Law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. 1 Cor. 14.37. If any man thinks himself a
Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you are
the Commandments of the Lord. Act. 17.11. Though the Spirit does give evidence
to it self, especially in the more immediate way of witnessing, and acts so
irresistibly, as the soul (whilst that work continues) cannot be otherwise
persuaded: yet all the improvements of this immediate testimony are to be
tried by the written Word of God. i. e. both that faith which receives it, and
those effects that follow it, or those operations it has in and upon the
soul, and the ends it aims at. If these be not according to the Gospel
account it a delusion, though the persuasion be very strong. Isa. 8.20. Gal. 1.
v. 7, 8. and 6. v. 16. It is dangerous with Zacharias from an unbeleeving
suspicion upon non Scripturall grounds to doubt: yet it is a duty with Mary for
information to enquire, How shall I know --? Luke 1.18, 19, 20.34, 35, 38.
Though your confidences continue, yet you are to weigh them afterward in the
balance of the Sanctuary.

But that I may clearly resolve the doubt, I shall proceed by these steps.

1. A power of judgment and discerning, or a certain knowledge, whither any,
and what works have passed upon the heart, is attaineable, and ordinarily
granted unto souls. This may appear,

1. From the Lords requiring selfe-examination, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves whither you be in the faith, prove your selves -- Now, what is that, but
to look into the heart, and take a surveigh of that, purposely to gain a
knowledge what the state is? This duty cannot be performed with fruit or
advantage, if there were not a possibility to be ascertained by enquiring what
the soul has met withal; and so, the end of it would be lost, so 1 Cor.
11.31. The knowledge of the heart is necessarily required to make water or
blood effectually witnessing: for, without that there is no ground for an act
of judgment to pass upon.

2. From clear Scriptures. 1 Cor. 2. v. 12.15. The Spiritual man judges all
things -- Ezekiel. 16. v. 61. 1 Cor. 14.25. And thus are the secrets of his heart
made manifest.

3. From Experience: Christians that at some times (through temptation) are
ready to deny such dispensations of God toward them; yet at other times can
make large narrations of many passages they have met withal. They can declare
how and in what manner the Word has wrought within them: and yet such souls
under miserable questionings of their interest in Christ still. It is out of
doubt with them, and they are beyond questioning, whither they have been under
such workings or no; but here they stick, they know not wither these be
witnessings or not.

Beware therefore of harboring any imagination, that either the deceitfulness
of thy own heart, or the counterfeit workings of Satan, should render it
impossible for thee to attain a knowledge of thy own heart, or of what works
have passed upon that. This conceit (raised by Satan) keeps many a soul on
this side Assurance a great while.

2. The works that have passed upon thy heart being discerned, thou may
examine and measure them by the written word whither they be special or
common: if thou be'st ready to doubt and question whither these be sufficient
to testify adoption or not, by renewed recourses to the Word, thou may
find what they are: whether they be such as that calls graces or not, etc.
It is said of the Chymicks that they will so counterfeit gold, that no
touchstone can discover it: Satan has a great deal of Chemistry, he has
many things like graces, as faith, hope, humility, etc. which are not those
graces; and therefore it behooves the most confident souls often to try their
grounds, and here is a touchstone the written word that will never fail; this
will discover his most glistring counterfeit coin.

3. A knowledge or real discerning that those special works have passed upon
the heart is enough to render infallibly assured of the Spirits witnessing: or
may give a certainty that a right judgment is passed upon the condition. You
may undoubtedly know, that it is the Spirit which witnesses, if you can
clearly see, know or find, that those works are wrought in your hearts, which
are warranted in the written word to be witnessing: for, the Spirit only can
create them there; and hence they are called fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5.22.
This is a great perplexing thing to many a Saint; could it but see that the
Spirit were the author of a work, that it has been under, then it could
conclude of its Adoption from it: whereas, there are common works of the
Spirit, which a Saul, a Judas, a reprobate may have; and therefore barely the
proceeding from the Spirit is not enough. But, it is necessary to know that the
work thou have experience of, is a testimony, as well as, that the Spirit is
the agent. There are many works of the Spirit, which cannot be denominated
testimonies of Adoption. Now for the Spirit to bear witness, plainly imports
these two things. 1. The giving of [a testimony] 2. That the Spirit is the
giver of it. If thou best wrought into a persuasion of Adoption by the
application of a word, there is a testimony; and if thou can find that the
Spirit has raised this, that is sufficient. And, if blood be so applied as it
is warranted to be a witness; and so for Water, then the knowledge that they
come, from the Spirit, (with that) is evidencing.

When works are of such a nature as they do witness adoption it was my scope
and drift to discover in the foregoing Questions. In those I have endeavored
to difference the special works of the Spirit from those counterfeit works
whereby Satan and men's own treachourous hearts do prevail to the deceiving of
them.

As the Spirit does evidence its own presence in the immediate way of
witnessing; so, the special nature and Quality of the works themselves may
ascertaine thee that they come from the Spirit, in the testimony of Water and
Blood. If thou can descry those operations within thy self, they may assure
thee that the Spirit is their Author, and that thy heart has not deceived
thee, in thy Conclusions about thy Adoption; and hence, 1 John 5.10. He that
beleiveth has the witness within himself. Some might enquire, How shall we
know that the Spirit and none else is the Witness to us? the Apostle answers
[He that beleiveth -- ] believing does evidence the inhabitation of the Spirit.

If the grounds of thy judgment be certain, then the act of thy judgment
must needs be infallible: that is true or false according to the truth or
falsenesse of the grounds. The act cannot be tried without another act of
judgment, and so there would be no end, and then certainty were unattainable,
if the act were to be tried: for, so long as there is any trial there is an
act of judgment passed. If thou find, 1. That some works have passed upon
thy heart. 2. That they are such as are warranted to be witnessing, the act of
judgment is unquestionable. From thy [discerning] them, thou may conclude,
that thou have the irradiations of the spirit, for none but the Spirit can
discover these. 1 Cor. 2. v. 10, 11, 12. From [the works discerned] thou may
conclude the presence of the spirit, and thy own Adoption.

4. If thou be'st in the dark, or want clearness about the works themselves
which formerly thy soul has been under, thou art ever to beware at such a
time, of drawing up Conclusions about thy condition: many have been ready to
deny the grace of Christ, and have run their souls upon horrible temptations,
and into deep desertions, and have given Satan great advantages to rush them
into unbeleife, by concluding upon the sight of halfe-works, or without a
clearness in the nature, quality, circumstances and ends of what they have met
withal. When the eyes of thy soul are dim (as in a day of desertion) thou art
not a competent judge, but ought to attend unto other duties, that concern
thee in thy present condition, and to wait for the shineings of the Spirit
upon the works thou have had experience of; and if such a candle be lighted up
in thy soul as enableth thee to see, and by the word to discern them to be
special works, then thou may say, as Romans 9.1. My conscience bears me
witness by the Holy Ghost -- and then it is dangerous disclaiming or disowning
the Spirit in its operations.

5. It is the work of the Spirit to discover both the sincerity and the
deceitfulness of the heart: there are seeds of hypocrifie as well as of other
sins even in the best of Saints. They find matter for heartbreaking
complaints of the treacherousnesse of their own hearts. Grace does not tot ally
destroy the being of any one sin. Peter's heart deceived him, when he was upon
high resolves for Christ, and yet a believer. But never does a soul see more
of the deceitfulness of its heart, then upon a discovery of divine love, Job
42.5, 6. Isa. 6.5. Ezekiel. 16.63.

And thus, he that would not be deceived, shall not be left to the
deceitfulness of his own heart.

Object. 2. But I have found that my heart has deceived me, and I was mistaken
in my passing a judgment about other matters, and I had as many symptoms of
my being led by the Spirit of God into those Conclusions, as I have of its
leading me into this; and therefore I fear I am deceived in all.

Answ. 1. Thou might be deceived about some Circumstance, and the particular
end of some dispensation, and yet thy judgment might be right in the maine.

2. Particular mistakes are not to be made general rules: Peter had a clear
testimony of his Adoption, and that from the mouth of Christ himself. Mat. 16.
v. 17. Blessed art thou Simon -- and yet this did not preserve him from a
delusion of Satan that came afterward. v. 22, 23. The same mouth that blessed
him, quickly called him Satan. Christ's testimony was enough to give him full
assurance of Divine love; but yet it did not secure him against a false
Confidence in a particular Case, nor a doleful fall. Matthew. 26. v. 35.70.72.

It thy heart has deceived thee in some particular things, yet do not Conclude
that thou art deluded in all.

3. Yet let thy mistakes provoke thee to the greater watchfulnes against the
delusions of Satan, and thy own Spirit.

And take these as Symptoms of delusions, and beware of yielding to them.

1. Whatsoever has a natural tendency to promote sin or unrighteousness, is
a delusion: unholines cannot be from the holy Spirit; and hence there is a
diametrical opposition between the fruits of the Spirit, and the works of the
flesh. Gal. 5. v. 19, 20.22. that which emboldneth, or gives any
encouragement, or is refreshing to corruption, beware of it.

2. That which arises from, or leads into security, is a delusion. Rev.
3.17.22. They are rich, and increased in goods, etc. and now they conclude,
they want nothing; but, the Spirit of God told them that they wanted all
things. David's security led him into a false Confidence. Psalm. 30.6. From his
present prosperity he Concluded that he should not be moved.

3. That which springs from a supposed selfe-sufficiency, or in its own
nature leads into selfe-advancement, is a Delusion. Psalm. 30.6. David was
confident he should not be moved, and this was built and bottomed upon his
outward accommodations and furnishments for self-defence, and therefore he
checketh, corrects, and recalleth himself, v. 7. By thy favor my mountain
stands strong. So, if thou have overcome this or that temptation, and now
Concludest that thou art able to encounter with any, it is but the voice of thy
own Spirit, and it may be a small one will surprise thee quickly. And so, if it
tends to make thee aspiring, Genesis 3.5.

4. That which begins not with, and ends not in Christ, is a delusion:
Peter engages for Christ, but not in the strength of Christ, and so he fell
(though not totally, yet) shamefully from Christ. The Laodiceans are neglective
of Christ, and take satisfaction in things below Christ, and this produced
false Confidences and Conclusions. Rev. 3.17, 18.20.

Object. 3. But may there not be some sin that I am ignorant of, harbored in
my soul, that may render me deceived in passing judgment on my own
Condition? May not my heart be engaged to some secret sin, that I know not of,
and so I not be married unto Christ?

Answ. Is thy heart carried out to seek for cleansing (through the blood of
Christ) from secret sins which thou know not of? If so, thou art not
deluded, but even these motions of thy heart are witnessing. The best of Saints
are subject to many secret sins. Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors?
cleanse thou me from secret faults. The interrogation has the force of a
negation. i.e. none can understand [his errours] i.e. all his sins: and
therefore he himself beggeth cleansing from those he knew not of. Qui form
aliter and distincti poenitentiam agit de peccatis omnibus cognitis, virtualem
and confusam resipiscentiam habet de ijs etiam peccatis quae non novit. Dr.
Ames. c. c. l. 2. cap. 8.
So that, if thou have such a knowledge of Gosell Mysteries, as thy whole heart
be drawn out after God in the way of the Mediator, Christ Jesus, and be bent
and set against all sins known upon Gospel accounts, and look after
purification from what thou art ignorant of, and would seek the
mortification and abandoning of them, if thou knew them; and can
cordially say, as, Psalm. 139. v. 23, 24. Search me O God, and know my heart --
and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting;
then the defectiveness of thy knowledge is such as is common to thee with the
choycest Saints, and be assured that no secret sin has dominion over thee, but
thou art an hair of the everlasting kingdom, for, Joh. 17.3. This is life
eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent.

Object. 4. I have found a great impression made upon my Spirit, by a word or
promise; but upon a serious search I cannot Conclude whither it be from Satan
or a testimony of the divine Spirit: What am I to do in such a Case?

Answ. 1. Observe what duty thy present condition calls for, and walk up to
that: that impression may be but a forerunner of the mercy which is a coming.
Hab. 2. v. 3. The vision is for an appointed time, thou must wait for it, and
at last it will come and will not tarry.

Thou may be as succesfull in pressing forward, toward what is before, as
in pondering upon what is past or present. Christ did often speak in parables,
and the interpretation came afterward.

Christ warmed the hearts of his Disciples in his talking with them, and
expounding the Scriptures to them; but yet they knew not that it was his voice,
until they came up to some other duties, Luke 24. v. 29, 30, 31, 32.

2. Conclude not either way upon slighty grounds: if it were the voice of the
Spirit and thou call it the voice of Satan, thou offerest a great unkindnes
to the Spirit: if it were from Satan, and thou call it the voice of the
Spirit, thou deceivest thy own soul. Better to leave it dubious, then to
Conclude either way unsafely. Yet having sufficient grounds neglect not the
Conclusion.

3. Be careful to make some improvement of it, for Christ and against Satan:
Say thus with thy self, this dispensation has a great stamp upon it; whither
it be by the finger of the Spirit, or not, I cannot tell; I will see if it may
not be of advantage toward the exercise of some Gospel graces, as, faith,
patience, humility --

If thou can not tell but Christ may have said to thee [I am thine] be sure
thou make use of this toward selfe-resignation, let thy heart answer this
voice, and echo back again [Lord I am thine] Zech. 13.9. And here Satan will
loose ground, though it should be he that spoke to thee.

If Christians did sooner break off those distracting perplexing thoughts
about that Question, Whither those works they have felt, proceeded from Satan
or the Spirit of Christ, when it lies dark: and did seek to find out his
name that spoke unto them, by pursuing gracious resolutions not to let him go
until they had obtained a blessing; O how might they be freed from a great
many of those tossings, fears, faintings, unsettlements, which they labor
under. If they did improve such dispensations to the contradicting the ends of
Satan, Genesis 32. v. 26, 27.30.
they might at last see God as it were face to face, and so the issues would be
glorious.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the means to the attaining, strengthening, and preserving the
witnessings of the Spirit.
Qu: 5. BY what means may the Witnessings of the Spirit be attained,
strengthened and preserved in a soul?

Answ. 1. Wait for the Spirit: the Lord is free, and ready to afford it unto
those he has owned as his Children. Luke 11. v. 13. How much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?

Here is the great reason that so many Christians are so much without
Assurance, because they look so little to the Spirit for it. Neither promises,
nor graces without the irradiations of the Spirit can be effectually
witnessing. 1 Cor. 2. v. 10.12. A true Dyall, has an aptitude to give the
hour of the day, but unles the Sun shines, you can know nothing by it: so, it
may be daylight with your souls, and you may have precious graces that have
an aptitude to witness Adoption, but they cannot do it without the shineings of
the Spirit, upon its own works in your souls.

It is reported that the Sabine Stone is of a dark duskish color till it be
sprinkled with oil, Plin. part. 2. p. 588.
and then it will burn of a light fire: so, graces and experiences are of a
duskish color till the oil of the Spirit be powered on them, and then they will
burn forth with brightness, so as to witness unto souls their Adoption. And
therefore this Direction must run through all those that follow:

2. Maintain a firm persuasion that it is your duty to seek after the
witnessings of the Spirit. Some account it their duty to live in a doubting and
questioning Condition; and are apt to think, they should sin, if they should
seek for Assurance: others breath out sad complaints for their being without
it, and yet look not upon the seeking after it, under the notion of duty.
Whereas they ought to be very studious about that as well as other duties. 2
Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. It is not
barely a permission, but an injunction, and so it will be an act of
disobedience, and your great sin to neglect the pressing after Assurance.

3. Beware of those things that tend to keep off from Assurance.

1. Beware of supposing it impossible to attain it: many labor under
discouragement from hence, and thereupon seek but little after it. That it is
attaineable, see, Isai. 45. v. 24. and 63. v. 16. 2 Cor. 5. v. 1.6. 2. Beware
of limiting the Lord to your time: some would feign enjoy it, but they tie up
the Lord to this duty, and that time, and will not wait his ley sure for it. 3.
Beware of grieving the Spirit. Ephesians. 4.30. If you have any motions from the
Spirit, O cherish, improve, follow up these, for if the Spirit suspendeth its
operations, you will be at a loss indeed for Assurance. 4. Beware of yielding
to carnal and unbeleeving reasonings? many dispute themselves into unbelief,
but he, Psalm. 42.5. reasons his own heart out of it; Why art thou cast down
O my soul? 5. Beware of nourishing any sin: Heb. 10. v. 22. Let us draw near
with a true heart in full Assurance of faith: but, how shall we do that?
[having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience]. What is an evil
Conscience, but one justly accusing for or charging with sin? and there is no
way to be delivered from that evil Conscience, but by a hearty application of
the blood of Christ, for remission and putification; that is the blood of
sprinkling, 1 Pet. 1.2. Many set poreing upon and complaining of some
corruptions, and that because of these they are without Assurance; but if you
would have full Assurance, then seek to be sprinkled from them, by the blood
of Christ. 6. Beware of spiritual sloth, and carnal security: Heb. 6.11.
Show the same diligence, to the full Assurance of hope -- 2 Pet. 1.10.
Negligence is a great enemy to Assurance.
4. Be much in selfe-examination: it is the proper end of this duty to help a
soul into a right understanding about its condition. 2 Cor. 13.5. And, hence
it is that Satan seeks to beat off so much from this duty. But, exercise
your selves much to it, at seasonable times. i. e. when the eyes of your souls
are clear; in a day of desertion, they are dim, and so you will be liable to
misjudge about your state: and you are principally then to attend upon other
duties, as the enquiring into the causes of the Lords withdrawing, and a coming
up to his ends therein, and a seeking for its return etc. but selfe-judging
acts, are of great use toward Assurance, when the soul is not disabled for
knowing its condition.

5. Be much in the observation of Gods dealings with your own souls: Gods end
toward the Israelites, in all their temptations, and miraculous preservations,
was, that they might know that he was the Lord their God. Deuteronomy. 29. v. 3, 4, 5,
6. and it is charged upon them as a great evil, that they soon forgot Gods
works. Psalm. 106.13. Christians know not what they loose, by burying their
experiences: they disable themselves for strengthening the weak hands, and
confirming the feeble knees of others: and it is a great disadvantage to
themselves. The Apostle exhorts to add one grace to another, as one means
to make their calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. v. 5, 6.10. A heap of
experience must needs conduce much, to the clearing up the state. Though you
can keep but the shell, the carcass of your experiences, yet have them upon
record, and afterward the Lord may cause dry bones to live.

6. Be often renewing acts of faith; especially take all opportunities that are
offered, for the most eminent actings of it: when Abraham by an eminent act of
faith, had declared his willingness to follow Gods call in the offering up of
Isaac; then, he obtained a double testimony of acceptance with God. Genesis 22.
v 11, 12. An Angel called to him out of heaven -- This Angel is Christ, for he
speaks, as God, v. 12.16. And his speaking to Abraham is for a double end. 1.
To stay his hand. v. 12.2. To manifest the acceptance of the person. v. 12.
Now I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only
Son from me. And the Lord is not content with this, but v. 15, 16. The Angel of
the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second time -- If Isaac had
died, one sight of Christ would abundantly have recompensed Abraham for his
great loss, but behold after this eminent act of grace, he comes again the
second time.

There were many things that doubtless did endeare Isaac to him; he was his Son,
and only Son, v. 16. and a Son of promise too. Heb. 11.17. and the slaying of
him seemed to cross both Gods Command, that he should not kill; and that
promise, [In Isaac shall thy seed be called]. v. 18. and yet his faith gets
above all, and he has a double appearance of Christ after it.

Object. But the dispensations of God toward me, seem to run cross to the
promises that faith should act upon, and so do forbid my believing. However I
find my heart so out of frame, and my condition so sad, that I durst not act
faith on promises.

Answ. 1. It is thy duty to believe on Christ whatever thy condition be: if
thou have not committed the unpardonable sin, thou can not tell but that
thou may find mercy. If thou want interest in Christ, it is high time
for thee to seek after it, by believing. Trouble and perplex not thy soul so
much, about that question, whither thou have believed or not; but, put it out
of doubt by a fresh act of faith.

A repetition of acts of faith, is very suitable to a Saint in his darkest
Condition. Isai. 50.10. He that walks in such darkness that be has no light,
is enjoined then to trust in the Name of God.

If particular promises fail, or be out of sight, and sensible experiences
fail, that it be a midnight of darkness with the soul, yet there is the Name
of God to run to, and trust in still: what his Name is, see Exodus 34. v. 5, 6.
The Lord God, merciful, gracious, longsuffering, abundant in goodness and
truth, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin etc. When thou can not
see that he is gracious [to thee] or that he has forgiven [thy sins]: yet, put
forth an act of faith upon him through Christ, and in that way wait for his
being gracious, and for his forgiving thy sins.

I would not have a soul upon slighty grounds cast away all former
experiences; but, if Egyptian darkness seems to cover it, the best way to
recover all again, is by a new act of faith. Psalm. 56.3. What time I am
afraid, I will trust in thee. When it is afraid of unsoundnes of heart, then it
ought to trust in God, as well as under other fears.

2. Oftentimes the Lord does cast in matter of discouragement in a souls way
to believing, purposely to draw out acts of faith: Romans 4. v. 19, 20. Abraham's
body was dead, and Sarahs womb dead, before the Son of promise was given. Math.
15.24. I came not, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Here was a word to appearance against her. So that a man may have seeming
impossibilities in the way to his mercy, yea a word may be cast in, and that by
Christ, that may seem to speak against him; and yet it may be intended by
Christ but for the trial of faith, not to hinder believing. But usually in
such Cases, the Lord gives clearnes about what is duty, before he blocketh up
the way to it; yea, and holds up the heart to it, in the midst of such
discouragements: this woman was the more importunate, the more repulses, and
seeming denyals she had from Christ. What the word does undoubtedly warrant to
be thy duty, in that condition thou art in; though thou may seem to have a
word, and never so much against, there, yet thou ought the more eagerly to
own thy duty. And believing is the great Command of Christ, to all that hear
the sound of the Gospel. Mark. 16. v. 15, 16. Romans 10.9. 1 John 3.23.

Yea, it is a duty at all time ^or in all conditions. Psalm. 62.8. and know that
Christ does never contradict his own Commands to forbid any souls, believing:
and therefore nothing should beat thee off from this. It is thy duty to live a
life of-faith, when thou want feeling. Christ was without feeling when he
cried out [Why have thou forsaken me?] and yet not without a faith of
Assurance, for he says [my God, my God.] So Psalm. 89. v. 34, 35, 36. The Lord
engages himself by Covenant and Oath that the throne of David should be
astablished for ever: and presently he was rushed under such dispensations as
did threaten the non-accomplishment of what was promised. v. 38, 39. etc. but
the Lords end herein was, not to lead him into contradictory apprehensions to
his Oath, that he had passed just before; but to give him an opportunity to
believe above and against hope.

7. In all importunities with God, for the testimony of his Spirit, make use
of arguments drawn from God himself: do not present the Lord, with your
prayers, or any performances of your own; but, urge, his Name, Nature, Word,
or free promise, etc. Isai. 63. v. 15. He pleads and expostulateth with the
Lord [ Where is thy zeal and strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy
mercies toward me? are they restrained? And presently there is Assurance. v.
16. Doubtless thou art our Father -- So, Exodus 34.6. The Lord proclaims that
he pardons iniquity, transgression and sin: and Moses takes advantage to
challenge God of his word a long time after, Numb. 14. v. 17, 18. As thou have
spoken, saying, The Lord is long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving
iniquity -- and at last he drew out a testimony from the Lord. v. 20. I have
pardoned according to thy word.

8. Seek for much inward acquaintance with the written word: the word
declares what faith is, and so for other graces. It is the touchstone to try a
testimony by, that is attained. It is a preservative against sin and
temptation, if hidden in the heart. Psalm. 119.11. Math. 4.10. and these yielded
to, do tend to weaken and darken Assurance.

Here I shall add a few Rules about making use of Scripture, that may be
profitable not only toward Assurance, but to other ends also.

1. Some spiritual Considerations, seen to arise from the Word, may be made
use of as well as express Scriptures: if thou have a temptation that thou
can not find any express Scripture to help thee against it, yet some
Scripturall Consideration may be beneficial toward thy relief and
soule-establishment. Psalm. 73. He was tempted by the prosperity of the wicked,
and the adversity of the Saint, to say, v. 13. Verily have cleansed my heart
in vain -- and he was at a great loss, v. 16, 17. When I thought to know
this, it was too painful for me: until I went into the Sanctuary.

But how was he kept up against the temptation, before his going into the
Sanctuary? v. 15. If I say, I will speak thus, behold I should offend against
the generation of thy Children.

This spiritual consideration kept it from prevailing. viz. That if he should
affirm it, he must say that the Lord never had a people on Earth; for Adam,
Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Sons of God that ever were, have
been exercised with afflictions and crosses.

2. That which is agreeable to the drift and consonant to the mind of God, or
his maine end in any Scripture, it to he owned as of God, though not contained
in express words in Scripture.

A Christian is apt to be stumbled, when some part of a Scripture (though of a
perfect and entire sense) be cast in, if there be a variation in some terms
from the words of Scripture, and hereupon he is ready to reject it, and to
reckon it not from God. Whereas, if it bears the sense, of some one place, or
has the drift of the Lord in it, thou ought to improve it, if suitable to
thy Condition: else all interpretations of the word were useles. Math. 4. v. 9.
Satan tempted Christ to worship him, and Christ opposes him with, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and 10.20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him. By [feare] here is
meant worship as fear, Isa. 29.13. is expounded by worship, Math. 15.9. And
[serve him] is intended exclusively of service to any other, as appears,
Deuteronomy. 6.14. And, though neither [worship] nor [onely] be found in the places he
^lledgeth, and the chief stresse of the answer rests upon those two words;
yet, because that is the true sense and meaning of them; hence Christ says; It
is written, thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only, shall thou
serve. So that Scriptures in the true sense of them, are useful against
temptation, and toward Comfort or any spiritual end, though the very terms
be not found in the Word, that be in thy thoughts.

3. A Scripture made use of in one condition, may have much deducible from it,
that may be succouring to a soul in another condition: or that which is used
upon one occasion, may be useful on another occasion: Math. 4. v. 7. It is
written, thou shall not tempt the Lord --

Christ makes use of that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 6.16. Here, it was spoken to
Israel, Christ alleges it against Satan. Here, Israel is forbidden tempting
God, as at Massab; of which see, Exodus 17. v. 1.7. In their distress and want,
they tempted God, by saying, Is God among us? Their not trusting God for
extraordinary preservations and provisions, is their tempting of him; and yet
Christ alleges it against trusting of God for extraordinary preservations
without a Call to it, or when ordinary means is afforded.

4. A part of a Scripture may be intended for thy present advantage, and not
the whole. Math. 4. v. 7. Christ makes use of, but part of that, Deuteronomy. 6.16.
So much of it as wa^ suitable to his present occasion: So, one part of a promise
may be fulfilled to thee, and it is no ground of questioning whither it were
from the Lord or no, because the whole of it; is not accomplished to thee.

5. A bare giving in of a word is not a safe ground for Conclusions about what
is a souls duty or condition: I observe that Christians in these days build
much upon the giving or binting in of words. When they are in a great ftreight
about what is their duty, or what they are called to; if a written word be
hinted, though it speaks nothing to the Case in hand, neither expressly nor
by Consequence; yet if they have inclinations thereupon, to one way more then
another, they are apt to Conclude their call to lie there. Whereas, if the word
which is given in, does evidence this to be duty at this time, or in this
Condition; then, they have cause to bless the Lord for the bringing to
remembrance, a word which is of Directive use to them. But then they are to
make, not the giving in of the word, but the word it felse the rule and warrant
that this is their duty.

Others that know this or that to be the duty of believers, yet they do not
set about it, until they have some particular word hinted in, to encourage
thereunto; and they wait for this, Bless God when you have one: but if the
Spirit has enjoined it once, by the word (which is its own voice) it must
needs be sin and disobedience, to neglect the duty, though he does not add
inward impulsions to it.

Others, upon the giving in of some Consolatory or witnessing word, are apt to
conciude about their in to dit in Christ thence. But all these act very (...).

1. Because Satan (...) an hand in, the use solicitations by a word, as well us
the Divine Spirit: Meth. 4. v. 6. Satan it (...) Christ with an [It is written]
(...) excite thee, to that which as not thy duty, by a word; therefore, unles
thou can certainly promise thy self, that it proceeds from the Spirit of
God, it cannot be evidenting, either of what is thy duty or Condition; unless
the word it false given in, does evidence it.

2. Because, I finder no Rule to Evidence that the Spirits himing in of words,
is a ground for such Conclusions: I have heard many, relate extraordinary
passages of providence, that attended the coming in of the word: as, they did
not know that there was any such Scripture, on where it was? and yet opening
the book it was the first pl^^^ the eye was cast upon etc. Now, they ought to
take notice of, and owns (...) markeable ways as these are (...) of the Spirit
is not hereby, to (...) conclude about their own conditions for mediately,
from the hinting; (...) the word; but mediately, by their coming upon (...)
ends that the word it self (which is hin^ed in) points at.

A believer should think thus with himself; Surely it is of great concernment
to me to improve this word, Lesser providence ought to be followed up toward
Gospel ends, but greater much more; and therefore it stands me in hand to
look about me, that these remarkable ones pass not away without attaining
some special ends. And, if the word be improved for the ends it aims at, as
Quickening, supportment, the acting of some graces etc. These improvements of
it are witnessing. But if these be neglected, the ends of the Spirit in casting
it in, are unattained, and so the Conclusions drawn from it are ungrounded.

3. Because the Prophet David ascribed all such effects to the word it self:
Psalm. 119. v. 24.50.105.133. It was the word that Directed, Counseled,
Quickened, and Comsorted him. Doubtless there was an application of the Word,
else it would not have accomplished these ends. But Application denotes the
Conveyance of the word into the heart, and its implantation, ingrafting, and
working mightily there; which is sarre more then, a hinting of it in, or the
bringing it to mind; and yet, he resolves all, into the word it self
applied, rather then into the application.

4. Because of the inconveniences, and dangerous consequences that usually
attend building conclusions about its duty or condition upon the bare hinting
in of words: as, hence a foul is often ready to reject a word suitable to its
condition, which if owned might be of great advantage to it. O (says the
soul) I know not whither it only came to my remembrance by often reading of
it, or were given in by the Spirit. Whereas thou ought to have familiar
acquaintance with the word, Deuteronomy. 6. v. 7. and it is thy mercy, if thy mind be
filled with variety of words suitable to the several, exigencies, necessities,
and temptations, thou meetest withal. Their being familiarized to thee, should
be so far from occasioning perplexity, that it ought to be reckoned thy great
mercy that thou have them at hand; when many are much at a loss, for want of
suitable words to their conditions. But know that the Lord has bundled up the
Promises in the word, that upon all occasions thou might have recourse to
him by them, for what thou want: and so thou should be so far from
disowning a suitable word, when hinted in, that thou ought to go and take a
word, when it is not given in. It is thy duty to search the Scriptures when
thou art at a loss about any matter, and to improve any word futable to thy
condition, that thou find, as well as if it were hinted in. John 5.39.
Search the Scriptures. Acts 17. v. 11.

Again, some have persisted in the neglect of their duty a great while, for
the want of the giving in of a word, and have lost much Communion with God
hereby. Others seeing themselves mistaken in their Conclusions from the hinting
in of words, have been led into a questioning of all their other Experiences.

Therefore if a word suitable to thy condition be given in, bless the Lord for
it: if not, find out one, and take it, whether it be a witnessing, quickening,
supporting or comforting word, and pray over it, yea give the Lord no rest
until he has made a powerful application of thy heart, so as to draw that
out after Christ by it: and without this improvement of it, for its proper end
it points at; the hinting of it in, will prove of but little advantage to
there, though by the Spirit.

9 Lastly, Hold fast the Doctrine of Perseverance: The Lord has promised that
he will put his fear in their hearts that he owneth in the everlasting
Covenant, that they shall not depart from him. Jere. 32. v. 40. And see Psalm.
89 v. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. If his Children forsake my Law -- if they break my
Statutes, then will I visit their transgression with a rod, and their iniquity
with stripes. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from
him -- My Covenant will I not break -- Here, the Lord declares what he will
do if his people sin: not cast them off but correct them. So Isa. 54. v. 8, 9,
10. As I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth;
so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. For the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on thee.

A Saint may fall into sin, but he cannot fall from his faith. See Luke 22.32.
comp. with John 17.20. Let go the doctrine of perseverance, and thy peace will
be like a morning dew that passes away; but retain this, and then thou may
rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.

FINIS.
ROSES FROM SHARON.

OR Sweet Experiences Gathered up by some precious hearts, whilst they followed
on to know the Lord.

Published for public Soul-Advantage.

Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North Wind, and come thou South; blow upon my Garden,
that the Spices thereof may flow out: Let my beloved come into his Garden, and
eat his pleasant fruits.

Cant. 7.12. Let us get up early to the Vineyards, let us see if the Vine
flourish, whither the tender Grape appear, and the Pomegranats bud forth:
there will I give thee my Loves.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Livewell Chapman. 1654.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
AS Christ the spiritual Aaron, does bear the Names of spiritual Israelites
on his heart: so, they also do bear his name on theirs.

They are the Epistle of Christ, and have his will written by the finger of the
Spirit on their inward man.

There is much intercourse and communion between Christ and them, and many
sweet pussages, which carnal hearts know not of. There are many outgoings of
their Joules toward Christ, and incomings of Christ into their souls, which
others are unacquainted with. These are called Experiences.

It seems to be one work of this Generation to declare Gods works.

Many opportunities and advantages are afforded, for the drawing out
Experiences, which for many years have been denied.

When I first set about this work, I aimed to have the greatest part of this
Treatise made up of Experiences; and only to usher them in with a short
preparatory of my own: but contrary to my intendments, and something to my
affliction, my own discourse has so swelled in my hands, that it does crowd
these Experiences into a little corner. And Reader, take notice, that they are
the Experiences of other Christian friends, not mine own, that are here
offered to thy view. Their sincerity, and uprightnes (whose they are) is
declared to those that are round about them, by their holy, humble, and Gospel
conversation: so that, I durst not but think, that thou have here, what God
has sealed and delivered to them.

If any should stumble at the publishing Experiences, and judge it unmeet,
especially because carnal men may make an ill use of them: I shall desire such
to consider a few Scriptures, Psalm. 66.16. Come and hear all ye that fear the
Lord, and I will declare what he has done for my soul. Psalm. 51. He beggeth
for cleansing or purging, and the restoring the joy of his Salvation, and
promises v. 13. Then will I teach transgressors [thy wayes] i. e. not only
as revealed in the word, but [thy ways] by thy word in my heart, in purging me,
etc. and what shall be the issue of it? [And Sinners shall be converted to
thee.] So that the declaring of Experiences, is one means which we may expect
the Lord will make succes full unto the conversion of sinners. And indeed the
Book of the Psalms is presented to the eyes of men, both good and bad, and
does consist for the most part of Experiences.

And Paul declares the manner of his Conversion to those that persecuted him.
Acts 22. from 1. to 24.

And 1 Pet. 3.15. he ready always to give an answer to every man that asks
you, a reason of [the hope that is in you] with meekness and fear.

To all which I may add, the many uses and advantages that Experiences serve
to. They are useful

1 For conviction unto unrenewed men, who never found it so with their souls.

2 For direction and encouragement to such as are in like conditions: it may
tend much to support, when they be even a sinking, to see others on the other
side of the bank: especially when they take notice, how and by what means they
were succored in such temptations, and sustained in such conditions; and when
they have the same board sent to fetch them over, that others have swum and
were sufely set ashore by.

3 For provocation: when they see what progress others have made in the ways
of God, and what communion with Christ they have enjoyed herein; it gives
occasion unto their reflecting upon themselves, and may create shame for former
negligence, and become a spur unto future diligence.

4 For confirmation and consolation to such as at a great distance may be able
to say, that as face answers to face in a glass, so do their Experiences to
these. Read without prejudice, and it may be it will not be without profit. Try
all things by the word, and hold fast that which is good.

If thy seize be higher, yet despise not others of a lower form, in the
School of Christ.

If these be beyond thee, judge thy self, rather then those thou fallest short
of.

Be as ready to impute thy non-acquaintance with such works, unto thy defect,
as unto their mistake. If thou gain st in thy Graces by reading, give the glory
of all to God, who (for the sake of Christ) has given thee grace, and called
thee by the Gospel to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2
These. 2.14.
So committing thee to the same Lord, I remain

Thine to serve thee in the Work of Christ. SAMUEL PETTO.

CHOICE EXPERIENCES.
Experiences of A. M.
I Have had my soul ftayed upon Christ, by a direct act of faith formerly; and
have been in some measore established by a reflex act. But looking to
Sanctification within, though I had true faith, yet I was often in a straight,
and sometimes had misgivings, not about my eternal Condition, but whither I
did go distinctly to Christ or not; yet desired the Lord to take me off every
false bottom, and to fix me upon himself only.

I had longing desires after further enjoyments of Christ, and was much in the
use of means for that end: and once, going overnight to hear Mr. S. preach, I
was taken up with many troubled thoughts, and in the night I could not take any
rest; yet, my Spirit was much refreshed before the morning. It was hinted in
thus, thou desire a heart enlarged etc. and thou do well; but there may be
self in all this; that thy peace may be furthered, and thy comfort augmented;
and upon considering, my heart was dark, and I was necessitated to cry out,
that all my righteousness was, as an unclean cloth, and presently I was
carried out as Paul in a way of exultation [I thank God through Jesus Christ
my Lord]. Romans 7.25.


I did see my soul was laid upon that better Covenant, upon Christ. I was
marvellously refreshed in hearing Mr S. I was afraid that any friend should
speak to me, after the Ordinance, least they should interrupt me in that which
my soul mert withal in it. He spoke from 1 Cor. 3.1. I could not spenke unto
you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ He
discovered that many Christians were of very little stature or growth, after a
long continuance under fatting Ordinances.

Some time after this the Lord afforded me, a mavelous revelation of
himself, on this manner.

In the night, waking, I being very well, my understanding clearer then even,
Scriptures were cast in very thick, and without any thing of my recollecting
them, or study for them; and clear interpretations come in with them. And it
was by enlightening, not by voice, I was commanded to attend unto what I should
see and hear, or have given in, and therewith I had power also to attend, and
lie still without any pain or disturbance of my body; whereas I was wont to be
restl^^s, and full of pain and disquiet.

I am not able to call to mind, the many Scriptures that were cast in, but
they were.

1. Concerning the [still voice of God] and what this still voice was; the
Lords royce was not in the whirle wind, or the earthquake. As, Job 33. v. 15,
16. when deep sleep talleth upon men, i. e. not so much in a dream or sleep,
as in the season for ress; [then he opens the eats of men, and seals their
instruction]. And so it was with me, in the season for rest, the Lord did cause
me to understand, and my heart was melted into the still^nes of this voice, and
of those things which I did see; I was formed into them. I found a nullifying
of self, and my heart was much desiring he might be glorified how he would,
and my heart crucified in a way of subjection and quiet submission, that I did
see a solid contentment, and enough; yea, my heart was withal commanded to be
quiet. I saw that Gods glory was his own, and he could give it out, how he
would, and the soul is to rest, in the still voice, and the less it rests
in it self, the more it gives glory to God. The Lord assured me that he had
rebuked Satan, and the earth should be a quiet habitation, and also my heart. I
saw what power God had to dissipate sin, and cast it out of my soul, and I
found the nullifying of all earthly affections; I was affected with nothing on
earth.

I did behold the glory of God. I did manifestly see abundance of glory in this
ministration. Yet, not so much to raise my affections: But rather committed to
my understanding (as I apprehended it) then to my affection. I did understand
that it was God.

2. Concerning the patience of God, and how it does differ from that in the
creature. I saw how pure it was, and without all mixture in him, and that he
was free from all such passions, and hurryes as the creature is subject to, and
so I discerned his transcendency above all Creatures. Also, I was made capable
at that time of those Scriptures that formerly I could not understand, my
objections were removed, and by comparing Scripture with Scripture, that were
cast in, those that heretofore seemed to disagree, were reconciled, and made
one, and all the Scriptures were confirmed to me, to be one truth. Many
Scriptures that were dark and mystical, were made clear to me, which before
I knew nothing of, and the interpretations very spiritual.

My memory will not admit, to discover what I met withal this way. As, When a
man's ways are pleasing to the Lord, his enemies shall be at peace with him.

Another seemed to be quite contrary; viz. When they kill you, they shall think
they do God good service. These were reconciled thus. When they persecute, yet
in their Consciences they shall Justify. Their being at peace was, in regard
of their Consciences; not that they should be at peace, as men contrary: but,
though through the vileness of Nature, they have malice against you; yet, in
their Consciences they shall justify and acquit you, and fall down and say,
God is in you of a truth.

So, 1 Cor. 2.15. He that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man. i. e. The Lord gives him a judgment of all things in
himself; and he can judge what is of the Spirit, and what is not: and another
cannot judge him about his having a Spirit of judgment given him.

And it was brought in, that it was the same Spirit I now felt, that Spirit
that did write the Scriptures.

And it was brought to mind thus: these are the things that thy heart did glow
and pant after, though understandingly thou did sh?ot express it.

I was heretofore in a sad condition, my life was a life of begging, when
should I praise the Lord, I begged for understanding in the mystery of the
Covenant, and sometimes this was brought in, that this spiritual understanding
which the Lord did give me into the Scriptures, this was that I prayed for, it
was an answer of these things.

And by the temptation that did follow, this is that thou did pray for etc.
I did remember it was given in so. Many other Scriptures were brought in, which
I cannot recall. After in the day I had something of what I thus enjoyed in the
night; and I would then have recollected, and have considered what it was, but
I could not; my heart fainted, and presently I fell into a cold sweat. I could
not review or recollect for a Quarter of a year.

It pleased the Lord to bring to mind several discoveries to the Apostles, in
what manner the Lord did reveal himself to them, Job. 33.15, 16. Isai. 32.3,
4.
and concerning Job; And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim -- And
the tongue of him that stammereth shall be ready to speak plainly. Such
Scriptures were brought to mind, with the meaning of them, and accordingly that
I should speak plainly, and that I should clearly understand the Spirits
working, from every other thing, that it was from God.

And for the Certainty of it, I did see, and could not doubt of it, that the
very administration was given to me, which was given to the Apostles and Saints
of old. Yet it was rather committed still, to my understanding, then to my
affection. Another night again waking, I had other Scriptures in the new
Testament opened to me, in the same manner as before. Joh. 17. v. 11.21.23. I
understood that, to be one with Christ, was, to have our will melted into the
will of Christ, and it was that I now felt, and I did see the thing to be of
infinite glory, to have our hearts melted into the glory of God.

Another was, Math 26. v. 29. I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the
Vine, until that day, when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.
The wine is that Comfort, and wonderful refreshment which is enjoyed: and that
which I had was a symptom and taste of that wine, that I should ever drink in
the kingdom of heaven, and it was wonderful for the present.

This was in the night, in the day again, I went on in fear and astonishment;
I thought in the morning what it should be, and the end of it. I considered
whither it were the pouring out of the Spirit, which the Scripture speaks of,
and I could not tell what it should be, I could never pray for it distinctly,
and so I had it not in that way, it was above what my heart could conceive of
before I hid it, and so I could not pray for it. This again put me into
melancholy, and my heart fainted; yet I was not able to recollect, for the
probation or trial of what I met withal, whence it came etc. Only the Lord
did discover to me, some of his ends in these things.

Now I had fears that I should never be fit for my Calling again, and there
was no agreeablenes or sutablenes between me and any Creature. But, though my
Spirit was full of trouble, yet I had a staying thought, that the Lord would
fit me for my calling, or let me die.

That word was cast in, Math. 9.17. Men do not put new wine into old bottles,
else the bottles break -- I see it was because of the oldnes of my vessel,
that I was under such fears; but the Lord assured me that he would bear me up,
to the thing that he should declare unto me, and make me able to bear his
enlightenings, and he did bid me be of good cheer.

Another night I had many hard places of Scripture, very spiritually declared
unto me. In the day again I was troubled, and had a kind of weakness and dread
on my Spirit. But, one time I did willingly take a little contentment in the
creature; and there came a terror, that I went about to resist the Spirit, and
astonishment came, and I resolved that I would take heed of yielding to any
such thing any more, and that I would attend unto what should be given in.

In the Concluding of all, The witnessing of Adoption by the Spirit.
it was brought in to me thus: What thou have seen and beheld it was the Lord,
and God justifying of thee, thou have seen his infinite and invincible power;
thy heart has been kept up, and it is made sure to thee that it was the Lord,
thou know it was he and none else, it was irresistible.

Now it is done, I have sealed thee up to the day of redemption, and caused
thee to set to thy seal, that I am true, thou know it was God, and have
sealed to it. Now, go forth into thy Calling, and attend upon it, keep thy
mind intent upon it, and see thou dest not dishonor me. And I did so, and
found some stirrings of corruption, and temptation assaulting, which I did not
before, only fear and dread.

Now the hardship came that day; I had as hard a day of it, as ever in my life;
then Satan set on me with violent temptations, and I was dark, this
ministration withdrawn, I had it no more that day, and my heart was sad.

Tempta. 1. I was tempted that now my earthen vessel should be broken, and I
should be distracted etc. and I had brought it upon my self; and thus brought
it, because I had sought of God that he would reveal the Covenant of grace to
me, and teach me etc. and in the former ministration it was given in, this is
that thy soul desired.

Some business was to be done and I did forget; and it came upon me, do thou
not see, thou have lost the use of reason; had not better have been in a low
condition? But you would be taught of God -- And

1. I was much affrighted that day and full of fears.

2. My heart was so dark that I could not reason the case with Satan; for,
then I might have told him he was a liar: for, I desired understanding in the
mystery of the Covenant, that my heart might go in a right way to Christ. But,
I could not reflect but wholly attend to Satan. And Satan gave me Impulsions to
go read, and try to pray, suggesting to me, thou have nothing to pray, thou
have seen God, and need not faith etc.

3. Yet I kept this all along, that God was my Father; and though I was
distressed, yet not in the least tears of perishing. Satan could never shoot
one arrow, to make me think it was not of God. And in the ministration it was
given in, that sin was Commanded out, that it might not be mingled with his
work, and no battery ever should be made against it. I knew I was safe for
eternity.

4. Yet I considered with my self, had it not been for me to have dyed, and
was ready to say with Peter; Depart from me, Luke 5.8.
for I am a sinful creature, it was a sorrow to my soul that I had so much,
because I knew not how to behave my self under it. I entreated the Lord to
show me Jesus, that was fittest for a mortal creature to look upon; and
presently I fell into a mighty trembling: but immediately recovered my self
thus [the will of the Lord be done] and was quieted again as to that.

5. The Lords day approaching, some of the family wished me to go out to
hear; and I desired every Ordinance; but by the tediousness of the weather I
was then prevented? and being at home in this dark condition all alone; I
resolved to set upon duty, yet had no matter, but to spread my misery before
the Lord.

I did excuse my self thus, Lord thou have been a wonder-working God in my
soul, I entreat thee teach me, and show me Jesus in whom I have believed.
Thou have trodden the wine press alone, and that for me; thou have freely laid
down thy life, and that for me; thou have promised that those which keep the
word of thy patience, thou will keep them in the hour of temptation. Lord thou
know this is the hour of my temptation, I have neither faith, nor feeling.
As thou have made me passive in enjoying, so now make me passive in believing.
And I rehearsed these words three times, The Lord rebuke thee, the Lord rebuke
thee, the Lord rebuke thee.

6. Christ succouring in temptation.
I found immediately an invincible power bearing up my heart, to cast help
upon one that is mighty, Jesus Christ, and so evidently and certainly, that one
should sooner persuade me, that a man which I see and have conference with, is
not a man, then that I did not see Christ by faith. I did see my self taken,
as out of the Lions den; and my heart triumphing in Christ, that from this
hour I could read, and pray, without trouble, and feed upon Christ.

I had another ministration in the night, discovering the difference between
legal sorrow, and Gospel sorrow, and I was put into a condition fit to bear
it, and my heart was melted into that Gospel sorrow: but I am not able to
declare particularly how it was with me here, for a world.

Tempta. 2. After this Satan did assault me very strongly with this temptation,
that I did Idolize the Scriptures. From the first of these discoveries, was
taken with the Scriptures, because all was conveyed by them to me. I received
it that the Scriptures were the word of God, from what I had seen before; but
now I knew it from the certainty of the Spirit, and its making my heart one
with the Scriptures; and now it was suggested that I made an Idol of them; and
upon that I fell into a mighty trembling and fear, for it came very suddenly.

In a little space I had sweet refreshments and distillations of the Spirit,
Help against temptation.
that came in thus.

Not the letter, but the Spirit that wrote the Scriptures.

And my heart was quieted again.

Tempta. 3. Another came, that I did Idolize the Son of God, for I was afraid
of God, and was taken up in believing on Jesus. I was trembling and in a sweat,
and a great hurry upon this. And O had it not been better that I had died! and
I feared I should never be rid of them.

Answ. After a little space it was given in, that the Father, Son, and Spirit,
is one pure Essence, and Christ being in the form of God, Phil. 2.6.
thought it not robbery to be equal with God.

And, the Word was made flesh, and was with God, and was God. And the Son of
God assuming our nature, became a fit Mediator for the soul to come to God
by; and he is to be honored as God: and that temptation went away, and I had
not any of the like nature, after. But I was tempted to doubt of the
Resurrection of the body, and what should be enjoyed hereafter, and I was put
upon it to prove whither Christ was in heaven in his humane nature, and for the
present I had not the Scriptures at hand, nor could not find wherewithal to
answer them: but, it pleased the Lord to stay my heart up with this; that he
was my Father, and I should be quiet with what he would provide. It does not
become Children to enquire what riches or inheritance shall be given, it is
enough that God is their Father: and this was till I had Scriptures to help me.

And one Scripture that did refresh me was, Joh. 12. v. 23.24. The hour is
come that the Son of man should be glorified; verily, verily I say unto you,
except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides alone: but if
it die, it brings forth much fruit. By that I did see that Christ was the
grain, cast under the clod, and being sown, brings up more with him; and so
I did see the resurrection of the body, in the resurrection of Christ. And
concerning Christ, I had relief from that Scripture [The man Christ Jesus].

And as the Scripture was brought in, I did see Satan continually thrown out,
by the Word of God.

Now, Concerning the Effects of it, how I have continued for two or three
years since, I can give it thus.

1. I have found my life wonderfully sweet over ever before; in a stated,
settled condition from my union with Christ; that whatever I want or whatever
condition I be in, I can go to him freely as to a Father.

2. Whatsoever my faith is kept up hanging on Christ for, in a way of prayer; I
have it given in or granted.

3. When faith does not act, then my soul is in a condition as without life;
but if I can feed on Christ, and by fresh acts rely on him, I can sit down
under his shadow with great delight.

4. Yet, I know I have a body of sin, and I find much weakness in my self; but
my life is not made uncomfortable hereby; because I have recourse to Christ
that is my shield, and have him made over to me.

5. Yet I have streights and wonderful fears for a little time: such things
are darted in, if I should loose the presence of God what would become of me,
it would be worse then ever; and am troubled that I should be inordinate in
desiring the joy of the Spirit.

6. In all these things, Christ is helping of me, in every conflict; that
though I desire to follow him in every ordinance; yet, to the praise of his
grace be it spoken, I have a fountain to go to, and one to bring me out of
every such condition, and I have immediately a supply given in, and in this
grace I now stand.

Tempta. I was once since in a mighty fear from hence, how if I should sin,
what should become of me then? and I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul;
though not to loose my soul, yet to loose this presence of Christ by some sin
or other. This was my temptation.

That night I was sad, and on my first waking, my heart was in a kind of
heat, or wonderful glowing, and this presented to me, in a way of
enlightening [I am wounded, I am wounded] And upon the enlightening I fell into
weeping. I considered what it was, and the very thing did fill my heart with
sorrow, and joy; and I considered that Scripture, Zech. 12.10. They shall look
upon him whom they have pierced and mourn: and Zech. 13.6. One shall say, what
are these wounds? and he shall answer, those with which I was wounded in the
house of my friend. Upon this there was a clear enlightening that I knew this
was the heart of Christ rolling toward sinners, God justifying and Christ
dying, and he was wounded by me in a way of questioning his continuance with
me, yet he called me his friend; and thus he was wounded in the house of his
friend.

I knew not where the Scripture was at first, but was certain that it was
spoken of Christ, and the heat of spirit did continue with me, till I found
the Scripture.

I searched and at last found it, and understood the meaning of the Chapter,
and saw it must be meant of Christ, and so I found that it was the voice of
Christ to my soul. And my life still is sweet, how long it will be so I know
not; but I know, he that has kept, may keep still. And though I be vile, and
the least of all Saints, when in this sense of my weakness, I can look on the
free tenders of Christ, I am supported, because all my fullnes, and riches is
laid up in him. And since this condition, though I have pride and unbelief,
and find abundance, yet I have not found it so prevailing as before. It is
rather in my members, then in my mind; my heart is broken off from the love of
all sin, and it is my greatest affliction. And I find Christ crucifying the
flesh in me, that I am not in every duty so bowed under as before; but Christ
makes me a Conqueror over sin and Satan daily.

7. I could not retain those enlightenings any longer then I had them; nor,
when they were withdrawn was there the least ability in me to recover them
again.

8. I perceived that my astonishment did often arise from the coming in of
things so suddenly: but, when I saw my condition was not contrary to Scripture,
but agreeable to it, then my heart was quieted. And under those discoveries, if
news had come that I should be torn in pieces, or met with fire and faggot, I
could not have been senfible of it.

9. In all these discoveries, I had nothing but came with this [As it is
written] and so I did wonderfully esteem and value the Scriptures; and my
heart was wonderfully set against those that pretend to Revelations without, or
not agreeable to or against the Scriptures.

10. I found a resolution to attend on Christ in all his appointments, and a
sutablenes in my Spirit to the meanest of them.

11. There was drawn out a greater love to the Saints then ever.

12. I had violent impulsions to declare it, and set a day apart to praise God:
but, I found it was of Satan; The Lord persuaded me thatit was only concerning
my self, and was witness enough of it self, needed no proving; and I
understood that as Mary. Luke 2.19. I should keep these things and ponder them
in my heart, and remember the still voice, and take no care, the Lords glory is
his own, and he will vindicate it how he pleases; and when he would have me
speak of it, he would fit me a season to do it.

Qu: How do you know that these things proceeded from the Divine Spirit, and
were not Delusions of Satan?

Answ. 1. I know it was of God, by the evidence the Spirit did give of it
self, in its own testimony.

2. By Gods faithfulness in his promise.

3. There was then given me a review of my former experiences of the Lords
workings in reference unto Conversion, and of passages since; and I had a
certainty of all those works that they were true, and from the Spirit.

4. My weakness in natural parts, and incapacitie of my self for such things,
does make it conspicuous, that all this is from the Lord.

5. By the Effects which this work has produced upon me: I am since, looking
for participations and fruitions of Christ, and seeking for Sanctification and
transformations; and this is my business; and I find corruption is not
prevalent as before; but, so soon as I go to the Lord Christ for
transformations I have them.

Experiences of J. M.
Concerning believing.
1. BEing in a great straight, not knowing which way to get out, it pleased God
to cast my eye upon a promise which was suitable to my present straight; yet did
I not find such lively strength in it, as to deliver me: but, I was enabled to
lay my condition and the promise together, down at the feet of the Lord, and
found much quietness of Spirit thereupon.

2. Being once troubled about the difficulty of believing, I had such a hint as
this; that I should view the promise. i. e. look again and again, and
venture upon it, it may be I shall not speed, in obtaining that which the
promise holds out to me; yet, however I will, as duty injoyneth me (it being
the great Commandment to believe) put it to the trial, and stay upon it,
abide and continue to roll and repose the whole weight of all my wants upon
the promise; and I saw plainly, that though I did so, yet I did miscarry. As,

1. I looked at the matter of the promise, more then upon the promiser: ex. gr.
I looked at comfort and deliverance that should come in by the promise, more
then at Christ himself.

2. I did come desirous to obtain what the promise held out, yet was not
thankful for what I had already received: as, in this promise, I will take
away the stony heart, and give you an heart of flesh. I came to the promise as
one that had nothing at all of it; and it pleased the Lord to suffer such a
frame of heart upon me, as I apprehended my heart was altogether stony; hereby
showing me my evil; for, I should have blessed God for any measure of softnes
of heart, which he had bestowed on me.

3. I came to the promise in my own strength; I had this apprehension, as God
has given the promise, so the Spirit of promise also, to apply it; and going
to it, I should as a poor, empty, nothing creature, look in the strength of
the Spirit to apply it. I have found that whilst I have been believing, a
quiet waiting, Gods time for the performance of promises, and not making such
have, as the unquietnes and over-eager hastines of my Spirit has put me upon
at other times.

3. I have had such a sight of God as to make the creature, and all its power,
rage actings etc. to be as nothing.

4. I have been for a time as bold as a Lion, and have not met with such
failings of heart as at other times.

5. Hearing a Christian in private, utter these words [faith works by love] I
had a very sweet apprehension that our faith eying the sweet love of the
Father, and the dear and tender love of the Son, did gather strength thence,
and work effectually by the strength of that love.

6. Being brought to a great stand by reason of the actings of some corruptions
in me, and almost beaten off from believing; that was brought to mind with
comfort and encouragement to the work of faith. Joseph went and asked the body
of Christ boldly: so, I should venture by believing on a crucified Christ.

7. At another time being exceedingly low by reason of some corruptions
breaking forth, I came into the society of some godly people, and hearing one
in prayer mention this concerning Christ's Intercession [If there were one
moment wherein the people of God were not presented to the Father in the blood
of Christ, it were very sad with them]. I found faith recovering a little
hence, as one that has received a wound does begin to recover out of the
swouning fit, it cast him into.

8. Soon after my faith being as it were a bleeding and languishing, it was
thus revived [my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor my ways your wayes] I had
an extraordinary light into that Scripture at that time, which did set me a
breathing after the Lord.

9. Being once through extraordinary buffetings of Satan, brought to such
extremity that I fell into such kind of thoughts as these; were it not better
for me to give over, and never mind any thing of God more? is it a duty for me
to believe? should I not be in great peace if I did at once cast off all?

This came to relieve me; [If need be ye are in heavines for a moment -- Now
you have sorrow, but I will see you again and ye shall rejoice, and your joy
shall no man take from you. Thus was my faith a little revived again.

The very next day I was more sadly set upon then ever, and then this
consideration, Abraham believed God upon the greatdst disadvantages, and so
gave glory to God, so ought I now, and hereby a way was made for my escape.

Concerning Temptation.
I being sadly tempted, and finding Satan buffeting me violently, partly
upbraiding me for former sins, and partly putting me on to sin, I was in great
perplexity, insomuch that I was constrained to cry out by reason of the
bitterness of my soul, and also to call in the help of a Christian friend to
pray with me, he was much affected with my condition, himself having been
under such temptations. I would have believed but could not; I would have put
away thoughts of temptation but could not: the temptation grew stronger and
stronger, my heart was broken by reason of sorrow; yet for a time, marvellously
kept up to strive; I saw I could not hold out, and was ready to yield, and give
over the combat. But, I found the Lord coming in for my help, in a needful
time, when I was without strength. I apprehended the power of Christ very
sensibly set against the power of the Devil, and he began to give ground. I
had sustained many hundred charges concerning the odious nature of my sin,
and the sad curse denounced against the same. After a little retreat of the
enemy, I began to take a little boldness, but never with more trembling, and
despairing in my self, or more cleaving to Christ as a Conqueror: I could
then truly say, my rejoicing is in another, and I have no confidence in the
flesh. And 1. I saw I conquered, yet triumphed in Christ's Conquest. 2. Never
could I so pity those that are tempted as then. 3. Never more sensible of
spiritual sins, then at this time: I apprehended it a great evil for a poor
wretch to cherish the pride of his heart, by wearing gay clothes, etc. O but
how was this comparable to the sin of priding ones self in the precious graces
of the Spirit! 4. Whereas before it had been a great policy of Satan to turn
mine eye from himself and his actings to poor Instruments, vassals of his
own: now I could look at himself, and set my self in the sirength of Christ
against him. 5. I could with an holy contempt, look upon all the designs of
Satan and of his instruments. 6. I was exceedingly filled with the praises of
God; especially that he should take such an advantage of the Tempter, and make
so good a Conclusion of so unhappy a beginning. 7. I was much stirred up to
make an improvement of the temptation, and that thus, by crossing the Devils
maine drift in the temptation, which was, to draw my soul into a greater
distance from Christ; now I labored to get and keep nearer to him. 8. I was
fitted and prepared for some special service (even by the temptation) which
was soon after to fall upon me.


And I have observed these things concerning Temptations further.

1. I have observed that when I have had largest discoveries of the grace of
God in the Gospel, when I have dwelt most upon the thoughts of it, and most
applied it; then presently some desperate temptation has assaulted me, or set
upon me; and the enemy has made this advantage of it. This comes by your
looking so much to the grace of God; do you not see what effects come of it?
were you not more restrained etc. when you looked more to the Covenant of
works.

2. I observe that the enemy strikes at faith by every temptation: ex. gr.
after some slip or fall; what, you a Child of God, how can it be, and give
such way to temptation?

3. The Tempter has (in my experience) appeared to be a liar and full of
malice, many hundred times, in his temptations.

4. I have observed that Satan has fastened the same temptation upon several
parties at one and the same time: ex. gr. I have had a strong persuasion that
such and such were offended at me, and by conference it happened that they have
had the same apprehensions fastened upon them concerning me; and so there has
been mutual strangenes and shuning society each with other.

5. When the adversary has a design to tempt to such or such an evil, he
makes way for it beforehand: ex. gr. ke knows that when such parties meet
together, there will be an occasion for passions to stir, he will cast in
somewhat before, which shall exceedingly moove such passions, as, anger,
revenge etc.

6. I have frequently found that the enemy will cast in such and such thoughts,
as of blasphemy against the Lord etc. and then labor to persuade me, that I am
such a one, and so makes way for further temptation.

7. I have been much stirred up to bewail and mourn over such corrupt
affections, and to strive against them, and to go to the death of Christ by
faith for power to subdue them, to watch also and Covenant against them etc.
but all on a sudden they have been revived, and if temptation have prevailed,
then they have been improved thus; What overtaken again? after all this it is
impossible you should be pardoned.

8. I have often observed that the tempter will always improve his successes:
if he gain but a little ground, he follows on with renewed force, with much
fury, assaulting with violent impulsions, and takes advantage upon yielding:
as, you have yielded so far, and why not altogether?

Concerning Corruption.
1. I have thought it was matter of praise, that the Lord would discover and
convince me of any Corruption within my heart; and have found joy at such times
as discoveries have been made thereof; because the Spirits discovery is in
order to the subduing of it.

2. I have observed that a soul is made sensible of his utter inability to
subdue it, before the Lords time is to have it subdued; insomuch as if he shall
mourn over it, beg, strive, wrestle against it, yet it may see as it were a
reviving, and it may be, it may sometimes much revive, before some notable
wound is given to it.

3. I have found that I have striven against it, in my own strength.

Concerning the Spirits working.
1. This I have always observed in discoveries from the Spirit, that Scripture
is most true, Joh. 16.14. He shall take of mine, and show it to you, and so
glorify me. Look as the Son does put the honor upon the Father, in all that
he does; so, the blessed Spirit of God together with his teachings, leaves
such a frame of heart, as it is admiring of Jesus Christ: O how beautiful is
he at such a time, to the poor believer!

2. I have observed the soul is more looking upon it as it does bring Comfort,
then as it does glorify Jesus Christ, and that may be one reason why the sense
of it is so soon gone.

3. I have taken notice that a little before some notable discovery of the
Spirit, some violent temptation is cast in, which Satan would indispose the
soul by, for the receiving what is a coming: but it pleases the Lord by such
means to put the soul into some capacity, for such an in-come.

Concerning hindering the work of the Spirit.
I have had apprehensions that I resisted the Spirit, these ways.

1. By diverting those holy motions. i. e. turning them out of my thoughts, or
turning my thoughts some other way. 2. By owning them as if they were my own.
3. By poreing too much upon the difficulty that lies in my way to the
performance of that which the Spirit mooveth me to. 4. By thinking the Lord
beholden to me, for the entertainment of them, or doing the thing which the
Spirit does moove me to.
Concerning Desertion.
1. Being once under dreadful apprehensions by reason of withdrawings and the
violent temptations which followed immediately thereupon; I was forced to cry
out, in much bitterness of Spirit, with an audible voice, Lord help me etc. and
suddenly a passage which in the public ministry of the word I had heard a
little before, was brought to mind with much Comfort, from the speech
concerning Ephram [I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himselfe] whence it was
observed, That Christ does sometimes, (when his people cannot keep pace with
him, but through negligence have lost fight of him) as it were stand still,
hearing their mournful cries, and then runs and takes them up again, and so
I thought it was with me. 2. After some time of desertion meeting with a sweet
return, I had very high and reverend thoughts of God, and was more valuing his
presence, then ever before. 3. At another time being again brought to the
enjoyment of God, after long shutting up; that of David came to mind, I was as
a weaned Child. I was weaned from all things; from repute amongst men, from
outward Comforts etc. and stayed much upon the Lord.
I apprehended it was the Lords end in Desertion to make way for establishment,
and to render unblameable before God, and our Father, at the coming of the Lord
Jesus, with all his Saints.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THe words opened, and the point raised, from page 1. to p. 7. Qu: 1. What is
the Witnessing work of the Spirit? Ans. It is a work whereby the Spirit by
some manifest, and special acts and operations of its own, does raise a
persuasion in a soul by the Word or Gospel of its Adoption, opened in many
particulars. from p. 7. to p. 25. Qu: 2. How does the Spirit witness to a soul
its Adoption? Ans. 1. The Spirit witnesses more immediately by it self. p.
25. That the Spirit has such a distinct way of witnessing from Water and Blood
is proved. 1. From the Apostles ascribing it to the Spirit himself. p. 27. 2.
From the aptitude of many written words or promises (by application) to
witness. p. 28. 3. From the number of witnesses which the Gospel owneth. p.
36. 4. From the experience of the Saints. p. 38. Ans. 2. The Spirit witnesses
by Water. i. e. Sanctification. p. 41. Proved diverse ways. Qu: Whither a
soul can enjoy any other testimony, when Sanctification lies dark? p. 45.
Ans. 3 The Spirit witnesses by Blood. i. e. the blood of Christ, as useful to
Justification. p. 47. Qu. 3. Who are capable of attaining the witnessings of
the Spirit? p. 50. Ans. Weak believers are capable of attaining them. Several
things are premised, and then it is proved. 1. From the Spirits being given to
all believers as a witness. p. 56. 2. From the extensivenesse of the promise. p.
59. 3. From clear Scriptures. p. 60. 4. From the Lords requiring of them,
selfe-examination. p. 61. Qu. 4. How may a soul know whither it injoyeth the
witnessings of the Spirit or not? p. 63. Qu. 1. How may a soul know whither
the Spirit has witnessed its Adoption to it, in that more immediate way. p.
64. Ans. 1. The Spirit it self does primarily evidence the proceeding of its
own witnessing acts from it self. p. 67. Proved by diverse arguments. Ans. 2.
The Secondary Evidence of the more immediate testimony is faith. p. 81.
Object. When is a word received by faith? or when does faith evidence a
testimony to be no Delusion? p. 82. Answered in four particulars to p. 88.
Proved that Assurance is a Certainty of Divine faith. from p. 88. to p. 94. How
the testimony of the Spirit is differenced from those flashes of joy etc. that
unbeleevers may have under the word. from p. 94. to p. 98. Qu: 2. How may a
soul know that the Spirit has witnessed its Adoption by blood? Ans. 1. From
the New Covenant or free promise. p. 98. 2. From cordial acts of faith. p. 99.
3. From its preferring that blood before all other things. p. 102. 4. From the
renuntiation of what soever stands in competition with the blood of Christ in
the uses it serves to. p. 104. 5. From its freenes in choosing and accepting
of the blood of Christ. p. 107. 6. From the strength of drawings that way. p.
110. 7. From its feeling the efficaciousnesse of that blood. p. 111. Qu. 3. How
may a soul know that the Spirit has witnessed its Adoption by Water. i. e.
Sanctification? p. 112. This Question is divided into two. Qu: 1. How may a
soul know that its heart is separated from sin? or that sin has not dominion
over it? p. 115. Four distinctions are premised. There is a difference 1.
Between the indwelling of sin, and the reigning of sin. ibid. 2. Between the
Sovereignty of sin and the Tyranny of sin, seven differences are laid down.
ibid. 3. Between an habitual frame of heart toward sin, and an occasional
falling into sin. p. 117. 4. Between infirmities and grosser enormities. p.
118. What sins are to be reckoned of infirmity. Answ. Sin has not dominion
over a soul, when it chooses freedom from, or consents with all its heart
upon Evangelicall accounts to part with sin. p. 121. 1. When the choice is
free, without coaction. ibid. 2. When it is universal, without limitation. p.
123. 3. When the choice is absolute without condition. p. 124. 4. When there is
a Conflict between the flesh and the Spirit. p. 125. 5. When there is a
mortification of sin. p. 127. 6. When there is irreconciliable opposion against
sin. ibid. 7. When it is upon spiritual and Evangelicall accounts. p. 128.
Opened in six particulars to p. 132. 8. When sin is in subjection. p. 132. Qu:
Whither it be possible to retain Assurance after falling into sin? Answered
in five particulars. from p. 134. to p. 137. Qu: How may one know that his
heart is separated to God and Christ? Ans. 1. From his esteeming of God and
Christ above all other things. p. 137. 2. From his spending his highest desires
and endeavors after attaining Communion with God in Christ. p. 138. 3. From
his willingness to part with all other things at Christ's Call or for his sake.
p. 139. 4. From the carriage of his heart under his withdrawings. ibid. 5. From
his enjoyment of the leadings of the Spirit. ibid. Qu: When does a soul enjoy
the leadings of the Spirit? Answered in six particulars, from p. 140. to p.
150. Ten Secondary General Evidences, that a testimony of Adoption is from
the Spirit, from p. 150. to p. 164. Four Objections. Object. 1. Seeing Satan
counterfeiteth the works of the Spirit, and the heart is so deceitful, how
should I know that I have passed a right judgment on my condition? Answered
from p. 164. to p. 172. Object. 2. But my heart has deceived me in other
matters, and therefore I fear I am deceived in all, Answered from p. 172. to
p. 174. where are laid down four Symptoms of delusions. Object. 3. But may
there not be some sin I am ignorant of harbored in my soul, that may render
me deceived in passing judgment on my own condition? Answered from p. 174, to
176. Object. 4. But I have found a great impression by a word, and I cannot
tell whither it be from the Spirit or Satan; what am I to do in this Case?
Answered from p. 176. to 178. Qu. 5. By what means may the witnessings of the
Spirit be attained, strengthened and preserved? Ans. 1. Wait for the Spirit. p.
178. 2. Maintain a persuasion that it is thy duty to seek after them. p. 179.
3. Beware of those things that tend to keep off from Assurance. p. 180. 4. Be
much in selfe-examination. p. 181. 5. Be much in the observation of Gods
dealings with your own souls. p. 182. 6. Be often renewing acts of faith.
ibid. 7. In all importunities with God for Assurance, make use of arguments
drawn from God himself. p. 186. 8. See^e for much inward acquaintance with
the written word. p. 187. Several rules about making use of Scriptures, and
about the hintings and givings in of words, from p. 188. to p. 195. 9. Hold
fost the doctrine of perseverance. p. 195.
FINIS.

