A FIREBRAND PLUCKED OUT OF THE BVRNING.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Margarets Westminster, before the Honorable House of
Commons, at their late solemn Fast, November. 27. 1644.

By Benjamin Pikering, Minister of Gods Word at Buckstead in Sussex: and a
Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Published by Order of the said House.

Jer. 50.33, 34. Thus says the Lord of hosts: The children of Israel, and the
children of Judah were oppressed together, and all that took them captives,
held them fast, they refused to let them go.

Their Redeemer is strong. The LORD of hosts is his Name, he shall thoroughly
plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and disquiet the
inhabitants of Babylon.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Philemon Stephens, and Samuel Gellibrand in Paul's
Churchyard. 1645.

Die Mercurii 27. Novem. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament: That Master Sallowey, and
Master Knightley, do from this House give thanks to Master Pikering, and
Master Gipps, for the great pains they took in the Sermons they preached this
day at the entreaty of this House, at S. Margarets Westminster: It being the
day of Public Humiliation; and to desire them to Print their Sermons. And it
is Ordered that none shall presume to Print their or either of their Sermons
without leave under their or either of their Handwriting.

H. Elsying Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Appoint Philemon Stephens, and Samuel Gellibrand, to print this Sermon.

BEN. PIKERING.

TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons, Assembled in Parliament.
Honorable Senators, Your patient attention unto, and thankful acceptance of
my undeserving pains in this Sermon (now according to your Order printed, and
in all humility presented unto you) emboldens me again to reinforce my
exhortation that you would be of good courage, and go on zealously to work
with God, until he be pleased to make you and all Gods people happy and
blessed in ordaining peace, perfecting Reformation, and working all your works
for you.

Nothing is so prejudicial to your proceedings, nothing so much hinders good
things from us, as many grievous provoking sins in the midst of us. Hence is
it that when peace and freedom with Truth in purity have been flowing in
toward us as a River, the Lord has caused them as Jordan to be driven
backwards: the night seemed to be past, and the day of the glorious Gospel with
peace on earth seemed to spread it self over us; but now the shadows are
again stretched out, black clouds hang over our heads, still threatening a day
of darkness and gloominesse.

The profaneness and incorrigiblenesse of the multitude declare that we are
ripe for judgment, indisposed and unfit for such mercies as have been ever
since the happy beginning of your sitting tendering themselves unto us: The
vitals of this Kingdom are fearfully distempered, the whole head is sick and
the whole heart faint: Our sinful distempers threaten the dissolution of the
whole body: Therefore through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts is the Land
darkened, and the people are as fuel for fire, and their carcasses lie torn in
the midst of the streets: for all this his anger is not turned away, but his
hand is stretched out still.

Certainly it will be acceptable to God, available to the healing of the Land,
and reducing us to a fitness for Reformation, if you could, as you have begun,
set up a faithful Ministry, and establish judgment and justice in the Gates.
If judgment had its free course in City and Country, the course of Gods
judgments would determine. Let your zeal for the Lord burn; and this burning
which the Lord has kindled would be quenched. Phinehas stood up and executed
judgment, and the plague ceased.

Let not the sons of Belial say, There is no law now: Let them not be as when
there was no King in Israel, every man doing that which was right in his own
eyes: let them know that the Kingly power resides in his High Court of
Parliament. Let your terror be on all the wicked: bring the wheel upon them,
or make them flee into desolate places to cut up the mallows by the bushes,
Job 30.
and Juniper roots for their meat. If iniquity were purged and the wicked
took away, God would leave off melting, Jer. 6.
Satan would be rebuked, the enemies unarmed: no weapon formed against you
should prosper.

Every known sin suffered amongst us, if not prevented nor punished by you,
will be as yours, and will give the enemy advantages: Greg. Moral. 10.^.20.
Therefore some think that Satan is said to stand at Joshua's right hand, and
so of his fellow reformers, as having just accusation, and therefore too hard
for Joshua and his fellows: Nam dextra fortius aliquid and majus significat:
to this purpose they bring that in the 109. Psalm, Let Satan stand at his
right hand, and thus expound it: fac ut Satan in judicio superiores habeat
parts: The reason why they thus thought was, because Joshua did not carefully
oversee and instruct the people in Babylon; he was not zealous in exciting to
the building of Gods Temple: And although we read not that he was faulty in
marrying a strange woman, (as some say, (but without Scripture) he did) yet
this was accounted his sin that his brethren and somes by his neglect or
sufferance had done so, Rabb. and Hieron. As Sanctius has it.
Ezra 10.

Thus far this is useful; to excite you to prevent sin in others, and to
take away occasion from all that seek occasion either to asperse, or hinder
your pious proceedings in building the Lords House, and setting up his Worship
and Ordinances in purity: O be careful lest the Adversary get advantage; for
you are not ignorant of his devices.

Justice also requires that you should make speed to hear and to releeve the
innocent that cry to heaven, that cry to you as Gods on earth; let not their
eyes fail with waiting.

Be zealous for Christ's cause: delay not to establish his government and
discipline with vigor: proceed so on in your reforming and treating, that
glory may dwell in our Land; that mercy and truth, righteousness and peace may
meet together, and kiss each other.

Let your wisdom find out a way so, that for circumstantiall differences there
be no rent made by those who are one body: The wisdom which is from above,
which is pure and peaceable, so direct you, that you may take away all
pretenses of separation or schism; that every mouth may be stopped, that
brethren may dwell together in unity, serving the Lord with one shoulder; that
the God of love and peace may be amongst us.

Your religious approbation, and expediting of the Directory for Gods worship,
is no small refreshing to the spirits of all the godly: you have gone far,
but forget the things that are behind, and press on toward the mark: So long
as the Jewish builders and reformers minded more themselves and their own
houses then the House of God, Satan prevailed by the Kings wicked Counselors
in Babylon, and the Samaritancs about Judea, to hinder their counsels and
endeavors: you have given good proof that you exalt God, and prefer his
glory with the hazard of the depressing of your selves and yours. (The Lord is
faithful who will not forget your unparalled zeal and labor of love)
Continue in your integrity, and the Lord will continue a Sun and shield to
you; Psalm. 105.14.
he will for your sakes rebuke Princes; he will rebuke Satan and all his
malignant Instruments, that they shall be as still as a stone: Although Satan
be at your right hand, fear not, so long as our Mediator sits at the right
hand of God: fear not, if you (with Joshua) stand before the Angel of the
Covenant: continue to stand before him as your Master whose work you are
about, expecting what he will prescribe, or enjoin. Continue in his work,
that you may be found so doing; so acquit your selves, that he may say, Well
done good and faithful servants, you have been faithful in all my house,
enter into your Masters joy. Stand before this Angels as your Judge, to whom in
all your just proceedings you may appeal and have relief. Stand before him as
your Advocate, who has undertaken the Patronage of your righteous cause, and
the promoting of your pious undertakings in heaven with his Father; there he
speaks good; there he pleads for you: and the Lord will answer him with good
words, and comfortable words concerning you, and concerning his Jerusalem. To
his powerful Patronage, constant care, and gracious guidance, you and all your
weighty Affairs are commended in the daily prayers of

Your most unworthy, but faithful and humble servant, BEN. PIKERING.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Margarets Westminster, before the Honorable House of
COMMONS, at their late Solemn Fast, November. 27. 1644.
Zach. 3. latter part verse. 2. Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?


IT is the Lords pleasure that the condition of his Church many times should be
such, as the Prophet expresses: I beheld the earth, and lo, it was without
form and void: Jer. 4.23.
and the heavens had no light. Thus it was with Gods people in the Babylonish
captivity: Heaven and Earth, Church and Commonwealth, were in a confusion.

It is the Lords goodness to have respect to his people in such extreamities,
and when all is in a Chaos, to stir up helps and ways to a new Creation of
this heaven and earth.

The God of the spirits of all flesh, for this end stirs up the spirit of
Cyrus, to give way, and of Zerubbabel, Joshua, Ezra, and Nehemiah, to revive
the stones out of the rubbish to build the City and Temple, and to set up the
true worship and pure ordinances of God.

It is observable, that the best undertakings, meet with greatest
discouragements* As these Builders and Reformers did; both from the Kings
Courtiers and Malignant neighbors, stirred up by the Devil: Therefore lest
they should faint and be weary, lest their spirits should fail, the Lord sends
encouragements by his Prophets, Haggai, and Zachary. Ezra 5.1.
The like oppositions (much Honored) you have had, and such encouragements the
Lord has not been wanting in to you.

This Prophet Zachary: First, to fit and dispose the people for mercy,
exhorts to repentance: Thus is a people prepared for the Lord. Secondly, by
sevetall visions, the Lord first shows how he had dealt with them, that is,
with moderation, not according to their deserts, but in measure and much mercy,
Chap. 1. and 2. Secondly, for their comfort, he declares how he would deal
with them, Chap. 3. and 7. that is, he would deal graciously with them, if
they would turn to him, and build his Temple, and set up his worship and
ordinances in their purity.

In this third Chapter, is set down the fourth vision, which the Lord
manifested to this Prophet, that is, Joshua the high Priest, and Satan standing
at his right hand. In Joshua the high Priest, a type of Christ, is set out the
restoration of the Church, and Priesthood, and true worship.

He stood before the Angel of the Lord, that is, the second person of the
Trinity, called the Angel of the Covenant, and verse. 2. of this Chapter,
Jehovah, attending his commands, expecting his aid: he was in vile raiment,
not as the high Priest of old; though the Priesthood and Church be in a vile
despicable condition, you see it is in Christ's eye, he has care of it. Satan
an adversary stands at his right hand to resist. The devil will still be
hindering the acting hand in the things of God: Our Savior found it so, when
first he entered upon the work of a Mediator, and Saint Paul, in his pious
intentions: Matthew. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 1.
Satan hindered us.

The Devil hates all Divine Order and pure Ordinances, therefore he resists
Joshua, in whom the Priesthood and Divine worship were restored.

Hence verse. 3. the Lord is pleased to grant a threefold encouragement to
Joshua and the rest, which is also a threefold discouragement to the adversary.

First, The Lord has chosen Jerusalem, and the Ministry appointed to gather
and build up his people: and the Lord by deliverance of his people has
manifested his election: therefore he will not forsake those whom he has
chosen: Gods choosing is loving, Jacob have I loved. Whom God loves he loves to
the end: therefore fear not.

Secondly, The Son of God undertakes the Patronage of his Church, he prays
for them, he makes intercession to Jehovah God the Father: Jehovah said,
Jehovah rebuke thee: and observing the reduplication, the Lord rebuke thee,
even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee, we may see vehemence of
affection in our Mediator toward his Church and chosen: he was heard always
whilst he was upon earth: Joh. 11.
Father I know thou hear me always. Therefore now he is at the right hand
of God he is heard; The Lord will rebuke the adversary, and answer this angel
with good and comfortable words concerning Jerusalem: This was to Joshua and
the rest, and is to you another singular encouragement.

The third is, in the words of the Text read unto you: that is, present rescue:
This manifests what Gods purpose is toward his people: he has delivered them
out of a woeful captivity likely to consume them, as a brand out of the fire,
therefore the Lord will save them to the uttermost; has he begun and shall he
not finish? what work he begins he will perfect it, the Lord will perfect that
which concerns his chosen: Psalm. 138.8.
Thus may the Lords chosen instruments and servants be encouraged: and thus the
malignant enemy took off.

Upon this third let us stay our souls: I shall not trouble you with variety
of interpretations, nor with multitude of observations which might very aptly
be drawn out: but shall labor to present the sum in this general
instruction.

Gods people may be in the burning, but they shall certainly be rescued and
perfectly delivered. Doctrine.


This I shall labor to explain and prove with the same labor.

Amos 4.11. So this people find it, and so express it, From above has he
sent fire into my bones and it prevails against them: he has burned against
Jacob, Lam. 1.13. Chap. 2.3.
like a flaming fire which devoureth round about.

First, Psalm. 124.
If fire have the mastery it is raging, devouring and wasting: fire and water
have no mercy, we say of them, they are good servants, but ill masters: so if
the cruel enemy get the mastery he ruins all, and lays all waste: A fire
devoureth before them, and behind them a flame burns; Joel 2.3.
The land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate
wilderness, yea and nothing shall escape them. When through the Lords anger
this fire is kindled, it devoureth every green tree with every dry tree, that
is, both the good which are as the green tree, having some sap of grace, and
the wicked which are as the dry tree, fit for nothing but fuel, Ezekiel. 20.47.
and all faces from the North to the South shall be burnt therein: They pity
not the young, nor regard the person of the old: even as the devils malice and
spite cease not, notwithstanding, that Joshua and the Jews were but newly
come out of the fire, Auget culpam Satana. Drufius.
as it were brands half burnt.

Secondly, burning is a tormenting, painful punishment: so is this: The Lord
is angry and malicious men help forward the affliction: and it is more smarting
because it is by their hand: when the wicked devoureth the man that is more
righteous then he. Hab. 1.


Thirdly, fire is unsatiable; it makes no end of burning so long as there is
any thing combustible: Thus are the enemies, and the multitude of those that
distress Jerusalem; they are even as a dream of a night vision, as when a
hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats; Isa. 29.7, 8.
but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and
behold he drinks; but he awaketh, and behold he is faint, and his soul has
appetite: although they load themselves with plunder and spoil, and glut and
make themselves drunk with blood; yet they are no more satisfied then though
they had only dreamed of such things: they are as one of the things that never
say, It is enough: Their rage ends not with the life of the godly, but it
extends it self even to their ashes; as was seen in Wicklif, Bucer, and
Phagius.

Fourthly, Fire is purging: it tries: it separates, and divides things
Heterogeneall: as the dross from the silver: so this evil is to Gods people
as a Refiners fire; it purges them from their hypocrisy, worldly-mindednesse,
and self-love, etc. Also it separates the wicked of the earth as dross from
the godly, as in this season; the truly zealous from the malignant now combined
together; Michael and his Angels, against the Dragon and his angels.

Revel. 12.
that Gods people are often in this burning, and that to some extremity, and
for continuance, the Lord lets them lie in till they apprehend themselves even
consumed as a brand in the fire.

For first, we are not immediately purged, the bellows are burnt, the lead is
consumed out of the fire, Jerem. 6.
the Founder melts in vain; the wicked nor our wickednesses are not took
away: as it is now seen, notwithstanding we are in the burning, yet our
dissentions and fires amongst our selves are not quenched; as it was with the
Jews when they were near to be consumed by the Romans: our Pride, our
Covetousness, etc. are not took away; Then no wonder if we continue yet in
the burning.

Secondly, it may be also the Lord will thus feed the malignitie of the enemy,
till he become prodigious in cruelty, blasphemies, and insolency; and fill up
a full measure of vengeance for himself.

And thirdly, Gods wisdom is best seen when we are at our wits end; and the
Lords power is most manifest, when we are at the extremity of misery, when we
think and say, we are cut off for our parts, Ezekiel. 37.

And secondly, when the enemies are at the height of their malice, and
extremity of cruelty: when the Pope was at his height, then Luther with
others about that time gave him a second deadly wound: and when Gods people in
this Nation groaned under the Hierarchy, as Israel under Egyptian
Taskmasters; even then when Tyranny was come to the height, the Lord was seen
in the Mount; then his wisdom and power wrought for us: There was none to
help, then his own arm brought salvation by Englands Parliament, and
Scotlands Army: Thus some understand the enemies ruin, in Armageddon,
expounding it to be the Mount of Megiddo: Isa. 63.5. Revel. 16. Judge. 5.19.
because the enemies are at a height when they are brought to Horma, an utter
destruction, as Isreal's enemies were at the waters of Megiddo.

Fourthly, contraries are ordinarily cured by contraries: cold diseases by hot
Medicines, and hot diseases by cold: we are a cold Nation; at the most we are
(as we are aptly resembled by Mr. Brightman to Laodicea) but lukewarm;
therefore the Lord applies these burnings unto us, that he may bring some
warmth into us.

Israel was out of Egypt from the Iron furnace, and out of the miserable
captivity in Babylon, where they endured this burning here mentioned: first,
they are in hazard; then certainly rescued: The enemy said, I will pursue,
Exodus 15.9, 10.13.
I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust shall be satisfied on
them: I will draw my sword, mine hand shall destroy them. Thou did blow with
thy wind, the Sea covered them: they sanke as lead in the mighty waters. Then,
Lord, thou in thy mercy have led forth the people whom thou have redeemed.

So they seem to be in their graves when in Babylon, but the Lord that
quickneth the dead, tells them, Isa. 26.19.
Thy dead men shall live, the dead bodies shall arise: awake, and sing ye that
sit in the dust: for the Lords favor is as the dew of herbs.

First, thus the Lords Power, Wisdom, and Truth shine forth when we say, Our
bones are dried, Ezekiel. 37.11.
and our hope is lost; we are cut off for our parts.

Secondly, then the Lord is sought unto, (in their affliction they will seek me
early) and rested upon, when we know not what to do; when refuge fails, and
none cares for our souls: And then the Lord will never leave us nor forsake
us; he will not be as waters that fail.

Thirdly, Gods love is immutable; more constant then the mothers love to her
sucking child: Isa. 49.
No waters can quench it; the coals thereof are coals of fire which have a
most vehement flame; Cant. 8.
many waters cannot quench this love, etc. In wrath he remembers mercy, and
will not contend for ever, lest the spirit should fail before him, Isa. 57.16.
and the souls that he has made. The Lord will repent himself for his
servants, when he sees that their power is gone; and there is none shut up, or
left: Deuteronomie 32.36. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, their
malice is endless; but the Lord in wrath remembers mercy: When his people are
humbled, his repentings are kindled, his bowels are troubled, and acknowledges
that Jerusalem has received double at his hands for all their sins. Isa.
40.2. Duplum in Christo. Junius.


And so one adds an Argument besides those I have set down out of these
words, which may silence the Devil and all implacable enemies: Thus; This
people is sufficiently punished, therefore God is not to be urged to add to
their punishment. Sanctius.


Fourthly, the enemy shall not always blaspheme; the Lord will stop the mouth
of iniquity, he will still the enemy and avenger: Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27.
the Lord would have scattered the Israelites into corners, and caused the
remembrance of them to cease from among men, were it not that he feared the
wrath of the enemy.

Fifthly, thus the Lord takes course for his own Name; although not for our
sakes, yet for his own Names sake he will work for us that his Name be not
polluted. And so Joshua pleads, Josh. 7.
Chap. 7. that for this reason the Lord would not leave his people in the
enemies hand; for then, What (says he) will thou do unto thy glorious Name?

Fourthly, here is implied; that if the Lord begin in mercy he will finish:
Psalm. 102. Psalm. 138.8.
when the time to favor Sion, the set time is come, then the Lord will perfect
his work concerning us: he will do it in despite of all Devils and
Antichristians: though there be mountains before his Zerubbabels, God will
make them plains, and bring forth the head-stone of his work with shouting:
He can make the hardest resistance as Clay, or Wax to the Signet; the greatest
impediment shall give place, as Euphrates did to Cyrus that he might take the
old Babylon; He says to the deep, Isa. 44.
Be dry: and so will the Lord do that he may be avenged on Rome, Revel. 16.11.

Yea, things adverse shall not only yield, but concur: The Lord will make
away in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert; the beasts of the field
shall honor him, the Dragon, Isa. 43.19, 20, 21.
and the Owls, etc.

As the beginnings of the ruin of the wicked evidenceth their certain total
ruin: If Haman begin to fall, he shall not fail but fall: so the beginnings
of deliverance from our Romish enemies, are pledges of complete deliverance;
the beginnings of the repairing of Gods Temple, evidence the certain finishing
of it: beginnings of woe were signs to the Jews of the extremity of woe: and
beginnings of blessedness and purity, are like signs of perfect blessedness
and purity.

First, for the Lord has chosen Jerusalem: and his beginnings declare what he
has decreed: If God has decreed to deliver, to build, to beautify the place
of his Footstool and make it glorious, who can hinder? the Lord God has
purposed, and who can disanull it? Isa. 14.24.27.
he has stretched forth his hand, and who can turn it back?

Secondly, It stands God upon for his honor to go on in mercy, when he begins
in mercy: his Truth, his Wisdom, and Power are engaged: Moses therefore was
much affected when the Lord threatened to destroy Israel as one man, after he
had pulled them out of the Egyptian burnings: Exodus 32.12.
Lord (says he) why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou
have brought forth out of the Land of Egypt with great power, and with a
mighty hand? Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say, for mischief did
he bring them out to slay them in the mountains? Number. 14.15, 16.
And now if thou will kill all this people as one man, then the Nations which
have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying: Because the Lord was not able
to bring this people into Canaan, he has slain them in the wilderness.

The Lord would not have us such unwise builders as begin and cannot finish;
such builders are exposed to scorn and shame; therefore the omnipotent only
wise God will not do so.

The Lord also is tender of his servants honor: he will still the enemy,
Psalm. 8. Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem will laugh Nehemiah and other Worthies
to scorn: Neh. 2.19, 20.
What is this thing that ye do? Neh. 4.2, 3, 4.
Will ye rebel against the King? What do these feeble Jews? will they
fortify? will they sacrifice? Then his fellow: Even that which they build, if
a Fox go up he will break down their stone wall: but Nehemiah, and such, may
be confident and say, The God of heaven will prosper us, therefore we his
servants will arise and build; and make all known to God who cares for your
persons, your names, and honors: Hear, O our God, for we are despised, and
turn their reproach upon their own head. The reproach of his servants he will
wipe away: Isa. 66.5.
The Lord will appear to your joy when they shall be ashamed.

Thirdly, God is constant: so is his love and resolution to do us good: he is
not as the son of man that he should repent: Number. 23.19. Mal. 3.6. 1 Samuel
12.22.
he is God and changes not: The Lord will not forsake his people for his great
Names sake, because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people: Therefore
when the Lord begins he goes on: as Naomi said of Booz, The man will not be
in rest until he finish the things this day. Men are mutable, discouraged,
weary; but the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not: Natura not
dilassatur opere; as the heavens are never weary; the Sun after millions of
revolutions continues still rejoicing as a mighty man to run his race; much
less is the God of Nature, and the God of these Heavens weary: shall the Lord
then begin and not finish? Shall I bring to the birth, Isa. 66.9.
and not cause to bring forth, says the Lord? The Lords care over his Church,
is also a constant care; his eyes are continually upon it: upon one stone, that
is, Christ Jesus, the Cornerstone on whom we are built: there are seven eyes;
that is, many eyes; the Lords eyes are upon Gods House, Populi causam Deus
semel tucudan suscepit, ac proinde qua est constantia ^^nquam deseret came.
Drusius.
his chosen, and so shall be till all be perfected concerning his people. They
may be in the burning, but they shall certainly be rescued: and if so,
perfectly delivered: The constant zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this

First, sympathize and pity Ireland almost burnt: Use 1. Levit. 10.6.
and England in the fire. Let the whole house of Israel bewail the burning
which the Lord has kindled: let your compassions be toward the Palatinate,
that Vine that had strong rods for the Scepters of them that bear rule: but
fire is gone out of a rod of her branches which has devoured her fruit, Ezekiel.
19. ult.
so that there is no rod for a Scepter to rule. This is a lamentation, and it
shall be for a lamentation: let your compassions be kindled so that they may
set you on a course to help them out of the fire: use means (as the Lord has
put into your hands) if so be there may be balm for their healing: if we shall
still look on without contributing to their relief, look for the like measure
from others in our miseries: Who shall pity thee, O England? or who shall
bemoane thee? or who will turn aside to ask how thou do? we have been too
much and too long wanting unto Gods distressed Churches; fear lest the fire of
Gods anger be kindled against us, because we have been a staff of reed unto
the house of Israel. Ezekiel. 29.6.


Secondly, let the Lord be magnified by us. First, for giving warning: he sets
us on fire round about, before his wrath kindle upon us. It is the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed: let your praise be continually of him for
keeping off this fire: when the enemy has been coming in like a flood, the
Spirit of the Lord has lift up a Standard against him: he has appointed
bars and limits unto these raging waves of the enemy, and said, Stay there
thy proud waves and go no further.

Secondly, bless the Lord for chastising in measure, for that he has not
powered out all his anger; he might have scattered Brimstone upon our
habitations, and made us as Sodom and Gomorrah.

Bless our God ye people, etc. For thou O God, have proved us, thou have tried
us as silver is tried; Psa. 66.
we went through fire and through water; hence we have good hone that the Lord
has not ordained us to wrath: for when we are judged we are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

Thirdly, magnify the Lords Omnipotency, that has kept his Church in the
midst of flames. Numb. 21.
The bush burns and is not consumed: Israel was preserved among fiery
Serpents; so are we kept amongst a Malignant company (the brood of the Serpent)
who are set on fire: Magnify the God of Truth who has spoke with his mouth,
and with his hand fulfilled it: When thou walk through the fire, Isa. 43.2.
thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

Is it not mavelous in your eyes that the religious in France have been
preserved in Massacres and Butcheries, and the Protestants in England in the
fires in Queen Mary's reign; and since from the damnable Powder Plot; and
many a time since from the Antichristians set on fire against us, and their
Adherents, brutish men, skillful to destroy?

Fourthly, let the Lord be magnified for making some impressions on the
Antichristian party: The Lord God of recompenses has begun to give burning for
burning. Let all give glory to the Lord for stirring up the spirits of our
Worthies to hate the Whore, to make her desolate, to eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire: O glorify ye the Lord in the midst of the fires.

Thirdly, let us not think our selves exempt: the Lord has brought this fire
upon all his people, and shall we be free?

First, therefore shake off security, and bestirre your selves to prevent and
keep our selves out; we have been as brands in the fire; The burnt child
dreads the fire. Our neighbors house is on fire, we cannot but be concerned in
this. I will not meddle in Politiques, only advise thus. Therefore, first,
kindle not the Lords jealousy by superstitions; cast not a favorable eye
toward the Whore of Rome; leave not an hoof of the Beast in England.

Secondly, tempt not God: complain not of his wise administration: think not,
say not as Israel: Can God do this? can he perfect Reformation? can he give
pure Ordinances? can he subdue such a people as we are to his Scepter? can he
ordain Peace? can he work all our works for us? When the Lord heard this he
was wroth, so a fire was kindled against Jacob, Psalm. 78.21.
and anger also came up against Israel.

Thirdly, purge out every cursed sin by repentance: let this be manifested in
a holy indignation against all remainders of Idolatry and Superstition, as you
have zealously begun: make the stones of the Altars as Chalkestones, beat them
to pieces: Isa. 27.
Every sin makes us as ready to take fire, even as Gunpowder: let us
therefore have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and
godly fear: for first, Our God is a consuming fire: and secondly, this fire of
the Enemy is dreadful: A fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame
burns: all that is desirable will be consumed by them: Gods Sanctuary shall
be laid waste, his Worship, his Ordinances polluted, we shall lose communion of
Saints, the excellency of our strength, the desire of our eyes; no fire makes
such a desolation as this: An Idolatrous Army is the abomination of desolation.
Ezekiel. 24.


And if the Lord have stretched out his hand so that we cannot put it back but
that this fire do kindle upon us, I shall prescribe the same course; Turn to
him that smites: take away the sting from the fiery Serpents: that is, our
sins: The sting of death and every deadly evil is sin: sin is as fuel
and bellows, both increasing the flame, and the wrath of God as a stream of
Brimstone: If we could have broken hearts, the Lord would bind up our broken
State, our broken Church. If we be not found in our sins, the fire can have no
power over us: Dan. 3.
Satan shall not be at our right hand so as to prevail. But if we continue in
our neutralitie, like warmenesse, divisions and heats one toward another, in
covetousness, pride, injustice, unthankfulness, despising the day of small
things, and contempt of the Gospel, grieving Gods holy Spirit, by which he
still striveth with us; the Lord will be turned to he our enemy: how then can
our hearts endure, or our hands be strong in the day that the Lord shall deal
with us? hereunto will be added the burning of an evil conscience, Ezekiel. 22.
a terrible devouring fire: and thus the fire will be as Nebuchadnezzars
furnace, Heb. 10.
seven times hotter.

Be instructed lest the Lords soul depart from you; let this fire that the
Lord has kindled be a Refiners fire, lest the Lord come from his place as a
consuming fire, and everlasting burnings.

Our God has been trying to purge us a long time, he has smitten us with
Pestilence after the manner of Egypt, but we have not turned to him; he has
now drawn out his sword to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, and the fire
of his anger burns; but he may complain as of old, Jer. 6.
The Founder melts in vain; our wickedness is not took away by repentance,
the wicked are not took away by the hand of justice: Or as Ezekiel. 22.18. The
house of Israel is become dross: all they are brass, and iron, and tin, and
lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are even the dross of silver.

Behold therefore, (O tremble at this) I will gather you into the midst of
Jerusalem in mine anger, and in my fury, and I will leave you there and melt
you; yea I will gather you and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, etc. and
ye shall know that I the Lord have powered out my fury upon you. O then hear
the rod and who has appointed it: it is an ill sign when we are set on fire
round about and lay it not to heart: An ill sign when we are with the old
World and Sodom secure; when we put away the evil day, and think when the
overflowing scourge passes through the City it shall not come near us. This
City is the Cauldron, and we are the flesh; and when we make the Lord
complain, as Amos 4.11. Ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning; yet
ye have not returned to me: and when unfruitful, notwithstanding Sun and
rain, like that cursed earth: our end is to be burned.

Secondly, when we are in the burning look up to Jesus Christ, (as the
Israelites being bit with fiery Serpents looked up to the brazen Serpent) thus
we shall have healing: Number. 11.3.
by faith we may quench the violence of flames. Heb. 11.
In Christ we shall have safety. This man shall be the peace when the Assyrian
(the greatest enemy that ever Israel had) comes into the Land.

Thirdly, labor for the Spirit of comfort; The refreshings of this Spirit, as
living water, will cool the heat of the spent soul.

Fourthly, pray that the Lord would mitigate the flames: so he did for those
three, Dan. 4. and for some Martyrs: pray and draw out water as in buckets, and
power it out before the Lord: It will be a sure means of quenching: when Moses
prayed, the burning at Tabera was quenched.

Labor to be constant; hold fast the Name of Christ: the Church of Pergamus is
a pattern to us: that held fast and denied not the faith when Antipas suffered
martyrdom, and where Satan dwelled: do likewise: Revel. 3.
you have covenanted with God: deal not falsely in his Covenant: let not your
steps decline out of the way though the Lord should smite you into the place of
Dragons, Psalm. 44.
and cover you with the shadow of death: for your encouragement hearken to the
Lord of Hosts, Zach. 3.7. If you will walk in my ways, and keep my charge,
then you shall also judge my house, and keep my Courts, and I will give thee
places to walk among them that stand by. (Honorable Worthies) if you will
persevere zealously in the Lords work, you shall be advanced to be among
Angels: though you cannot have the presence and face of an earthly King, you
shall be with the glorious Angels standing before the face of the King of
heaven.

This may be abundant comfort unto you (much Honored) and to all Gods people:
Use 4.
We are in the fire but first, the Lord is with you and all his, Isa. 43.2.
so that the flame shall not devour.

Secondly, you are choice Instruments, Gods people are his chosen; choice gold
will endure the fire, and the Lord will not cast away his people whom he has
chosen: when the house is on fire we take care for our Treasure; our choice
vessels, our jewels: we are not so solicitous for lumber: so the Lord cares
for you and all his; you are his choice Vessels, Mal. 3.
and peculiar Treasure, and his Jewels very precious in the Lords eyes.

Thirdly, Christ the Son of God intercedes for you, and that affectionately;
he will prevail with God to rebuke the Adversary: and that to the purpose.
The Lord rebuke thee, Increpationem tuam contra te dirigat. Dion. Carthul.
the Lord rebuke thee: even as Christ rebuked Winds and Seas; so will he do
with Satan and all his instruments: as Nahum. 1.4.

Fourthly, let the gracious beginning which the Lord has made be a sure pledge
unto you that he will finish: be bold to plead with God: Lord thou would not
that we should undertake a building and not finish it, thou have undertaken to
build thy House here, be not so thy self as thou would not that we should
be.

Fifthly, the Lord has promised great things, and spoke of glorious days
which now hasten concerning his Church: nothing shall hurt in Gods holy
Mountain. The earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord as the waters cover the Sea: Isa. 11.
the waste and desolate places, and the land of thy destruction shall be too
narrow by reason of the Inhabitants; and they that swallowed thee up shall be
far away. Isa. 49.18.
O thou afflicted and tossed with tempest, and not comforted; behold, I will
lay thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundation with Saphires; and I will
make thy windows of Agats, Isa. 54.11, 12.
and thy gates of Carbuncles, etc. And all thy children shall be taught of the
Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children. The time and my strength
would fail to recite the glorious things that are spoken of thee, thou City
of God, the new Jerusalem coming down from heaven with Gods glory upon her: In
that day, says the Lord, Zach. 12.
I will make the Governors of Judah as an hearth of fire among the wood; and
like a torch of fire in a sheafe: and they that have fought against Jerusalem,
their flesh shall consume away whilst they stand upon their feet; Zach. 14.
and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, etc. Thus (Right Honorable)
be comforted over the Church of God now in the burning; and over your enemies
which are ordained for destruction, by the words of the God of Truth. The Lord
bids them take away Joshua's filthy raiment, and restore to the Priesthood its
former luster, signified by change of raiment: Hence says Master Calvin: Plus
expectent fideles quam coniicere licet ex praesenti aspectu: Expect more then
the present face of things can promise: the Lord will be known to be Jehovah in
giving a being to his Word; He will be with you, fear not: Hag. 2.5. Psalm.
68.13.
Though ye have been among the pots, yet shall ye be as a Dove coverd with
silver, etc.

Therefore let every man in his Sphere be encouraged to be active and zealous
to forward and hasten the perfect deliverance of Gods Church, Use 5.
and the perfect building and furnishing of Gods House: be not scandalized, be
not disheartened for every dysaster, or for any present weakness or misery we
are in; the Lord carries on the work of restitution and salvation of his
Church and people in a mystery: when we are at the top of misery, the Lord
will be seen, Jehovah iireth: the Lord will be seen, or will see: even in the
Mount his footsteps are hardly known: the Sun arises and shines upon
Sodom, then the Lord rained fire and brimstone from the Lord out of heaven*
Gods people lie as buried or burnt up in Babylon, then the Lord sends from
heaven and saves them from those that would swallow them up: This is the
season not for shrinking, but for zeal; 1 Chronicles. 14.
the Lord has gone out before you, and broke in upon the enemies as the
breaking in of many waters; therefore now bestirre you: Those of Issachar are
commended because they had knowledge and understanding of the Times, 1 Chro.
12.32.
and knew what Israel ought to do: This will be your wisdom to take notice
that to hazard that Christ's kingdom is in by Enemies abroad, and Schisms and
Divisions among our selves in this season, requires all your diligence, skill,
and power to bring present healing and aid. And so now when Babylons rage and
cruelty is at the height, it is the time, it is the time to render to her
double as she has done to you. In this season we are in straits, as when the
children are come to the birth and there is no strength to bring forth: Is it
not time for us then to stir in these straits; strive, and extend your selves
to get Gods children, and the Lords work drawn out of the womb: let not that
be your spot which was the spot of Ephraim in the like case; the sorrows of a
traveling woman are upon him: He is an unwise son, for he should not stay
long in the place of the breaking forth of children. Hos. 13.13.


Now we are in the fire, let your zeal hence be enkindled: take fire from this
fire: Every man, especially Reformers, Repairers, Deliverers must be salted
with fire, as every sacrifice was seasoned with salt; Mar. 9.
be ye therefore thus seasoned with this heavenly fire of zeal, without which
all will be unsavorie, that you may go on in promoting the great works you
have in hand. Further to provoke you, I add some further incentives.

First, Observe that the builders and reformers had as many discouragements as
are now; they had a great work before them, many enemies about them, and the
Kings Authority and express command against them; E^^a ^.2.
yet they went on and prospered; there were Mountains before them, Zach. 4.7,
8, 9.
but God made all plain in a strange way of providence; Not by Army nor Power,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord: He will do the like for you. Only, as it is
said to Joshua, Be of good courage: The Lord can rebuke the Devil and all his
Instruments with a word, and make them as still as a stone.

Secondly, If ye faint and grow cold, ye lose all that has gone before: (ye
Worthies) ye have done much in pulling down Popery, a Tyrannous Hierarchy,
and the strength of Babylons Armies; ye have begun a glorious Reformation, and
your Zeal has set you upon high undertakings, and effected such things as we,
through our baseness of spirit, neither looked not hoped for: you suffered as
much as did ever any Parliament; hazarding your Persons, Estates, and Families;
endured much contradiction of sinners, and many reproaches; ye have had many
acknowledgements and thankesgivings from City and Country. O then lose not
all that has gone before; let your last be more then the first: Will ye do,
will ye suffer so many things in vain?

Thirdly, Ye work with God, and the Lord will work with you; It is an honor
to the noblest to put their necks to this work: The Son of God appears
upon a Red Horse, going out in a fiery appearance against the enemy: He is
among the Myrtle trees; that is, in the midst of his people, who are his
delight; and with him there are Red Horses also: Michael has his Angels to
take vengeance on the Dragon and his angels: also there are speckled Horses,
useful every way, both for defense and offense.

Fourthly, The great oppositions you have should stir up zeal; the god of
the world is against you; Antichrist, and all that have the mark of the Beast
upon them, are against you: You are engaged in the greatest work that ever lay
upon the children of men; therefore there is required strong endeavors. O be
strong, ye Zerubbabels, he for the Lord of Hosts who has been zealous for
you: and withal take notice that your opposition is from devilish and
malignant spirits; Satan and his Instruments who stand at your right hands to
resist: Then up and be doing; go on, your cause cannot but be good.

Firfthly, Take courage and go on, else ye open the mouth of iniquity; you
will be tried with cruel mockings by those that look and gape to see your
spirits flat and cold: Oh how will they of Gath and Askelon insult? this will
pierce as a sword; Saul chose rather to fall on his own sword and die, then to
be mocked by the uncircumcised Philistines: and Zedekiah would not yield, (but
let come on him whatsoever it was) because he feared to be scorned and mocked:
And consider, I beseech you, that we have made out boast of God, and gloried in
such instruments; let not our confident boasting make us ashamed.

Sixthly, Thus if you go on, you and we may leave happiness to our
posterity: if through our slacknesse and pusillanimitie the enemy prevail,
we shall have nothing left to bequeath but Slavery and Popery.

Sevently, Antichrists end is near: Babylon is (and that shortly) to be
destroyed, therefore faint not: you have given her a deadly wound, follow on
your stroke; let that wound never be healed: the Beast roares, and struggles,
and bestirres her self; she recollects spirits, but it is but as in a dying
man, naturea ultimus conatus, which we call a lightening before death: then now
is the time to extend your selves to make a full end of the Whore; to dispatch
her with swords (as the Prophet speaks) and to burn her houses with fire.

Then keep your spirits up, fall not to an indifferency or base neutrality:
They that be not with Christ are against him: They that come not out to the
help of the Lord, (suppose they be inoffensive moderate men) are cursed with a
double bitter curse. Judge. 5.
The history of the men of Iabesh Gilead may be for our learning on whom these
sad times are come: They assisted not the Beniamites in protecting those
Delinquents, sons of Belial; nor associated with the Tribes of Israel in
their just War, which was (as this War now) to bring such wretches to
judgment and punishment. Upon inquiry these being found Neuters, were dealt
withal as utter enemies; they were all smitten with the sword, both men, women
and children, Judge. cap. ult.
except some virgins reserved for the Beniamites.

I beseech you that my exhortation and advise may be acceptable: I could
multiply many other considerations to set you on in a course of zeal; but if
these I have spoke help not to bring you to a further degree of heat,
especially now that we are in the fire round about; we may fear that gray
hairs are upon us, we are in a decaying condition as David, whom many clothes
could not make warm.

Let all malignant spirits mark: Use 6.
let this consideration take them off from their malice in opposing. Altaschith
is the title of some Psalms: Destroy not, as a caution and a confident
expression of the boldness, malice, and deficiencie of the enemy. Let the
gold and silver vessels, etc. be every one in his place, as it is by Darius
Decree seconding Cyrus: Now therefore Tatnai and Shethar-Boznai, and so Rehum
the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe and such companions must be far from
thence.

If thou oppose the peace of Gods people, and the building of the Lords house,
it is in vain; thou will be found to fight against God; It is hard for thee to
kick against the pricks: therefore meddle not to thy hurt; the Lord will finish
in despite of thee: The Devil and his instruments could do nothing when
Israel was in Chaldea deprest and buried; how much less now when they are
delivered, lift up to Heaven, brought to Jerusalem and the Temple? so the
policy and power of the enemy could do nothing when the faithful were
enthralled under the Hierarchy, when they had all advantages: how much less
now, when the Lord has took off those yokes, and advanced his servants as the
stars into the right hand of Christ? Rev. 1.

But the Devils malice is such, that although he know that his own practices
shall ruin his own kingdom, yet he will not, he cannot desist from
mischief: for malice is natural to the Devil, and therefore he is necessarily
malicious, as the fire is naturally and so necessarily hot and burning: Zanch.
de malis angelis.
and as Zanch. says, id in angelis est casus quod hominibus mors: therefore as
men after death are either pertinaciously evil, or constantly good; so are the
Devils after their fall pertinaciously wicked and malicious: and so it is with
Gods enemies in whom the devil works with efficacy: they are not only
devilish, but even equalize the devil in malice and mischief; Judas was even
a devil, John 6.

The enemies know and see that the Lord is with his Parliament, with his
Armies, yet they go on; the devil drives them and thrusts them on as the
Turkish horsemen do their foot to their manifest inevitable ruin. When thy
hand is lifted up, Isa. 26.11.
they will not see. It is an evidence of and dealings, as Revel. 16. It is
noted that notwithstanding the pouring out of the vials they were vexed and
pained, and gnawed their tongues; yet they repented not: and they repented not.

O let this take thee off, when the Lords hand is lifted upon to deliver his
people, or judge the enemies: Thou will not see, but thou shall see to thy woe,
if thou go on to oppose the Lord. It is usually asked: Is the devil in such
a one whom we see mad and maliciously bent? what devil then shall we think is
in those that will yet in malignitie of spirit oppose themselves? Qua voce adeo
potenter fregit satanae vires, ut nullum postea reliquum fuerit impedimentum.
Zanch. in loc.
This reprehension for ought we know took off the devil himself, as thus:
do thou not see that the Lord has pulled his people out of the fire? he
thinks they have burnt long enough; he has begun their deliverance, and so is
engaged to perfect it: then why will thou offer to be an adversary? how
transcendently devilish then are those enemies of all piety? they see that
there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord; and yet
they will continue obstinate in their malice. The Lord rebuke them, the Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke them: Job 41.8.
O consider, ye that forget God, whom you have to deal withal: Remember the
Battle and do no more.

I add to this an admonition to every one. Use 7.
O let us take heed of hindering the good of Christ's Church and chosen: Know I
beseech you, that it is not only hindered by Malignitie and Neutralitie: but
even the best have a hand in stopping God, which causes him after he has
begun so to pause and to be at a stand: How?

First, by our Infidelity: Thus were Moses and Aaron, and all Israel kept out
of Canaan after their deliverance out of Egypt: Matthew. 13. ult.
The Lord cannot do many more mighty works for us, because of our unbelief;
Thus when things are adverse, we give our selves for lost, our hope is cut off,
as though God were not all-sufficient: when things are prosperous we do nothing
less then rest on God, we lean on an arm of flesh, we have a prudent
Parliament, a potent Army, we have counsel and strength for war: so the Lord
is deprest and these exalted, which provokes the Lord to let us see the vanity
of these without his helping band, and may provoke him to reject our
confidences and swear in his wrath that we should never prosper in them.

Secondly, there has been but bad use made of Gods beginnings. First, we have
despised the day of small things: Thankfulness would make us account small
beginnings great favors: yet what the Lord has already wrought should not
seem small in our eyes: considering what the Lord has pulled down, and what
he is setting up, what he has plucked up, and what he is about to plant, what
taskmasters we are delivered from, and what blessed freedom we enjoy.
Successes have made us more insulting then thankful, and took us off from our
dependence on God who wrought for us.

Secondly, we are a stubborn people; now that Christ would reign amongst us,
we say this man shall not reign over us: now Christ is coming toward us, we
bid him depart out of our coasts: we are loath to subject our necks to his
yoke, our pride is such: This makes him also at a stand.

Thirdly, since the Lord has multiplied mercies, we have multiplied divisions,
and keep in and foment such fires of dissension among our selves, as justly
provokes the Lord to let us lie in the burning: Such a fire was kindled between
Abimelech, and the men of Shechem, fire went out from Sechem and devoured
Abimelech; and fire went out from Abimelech and devoured the men of Shechem;
Judge. 9.
the Lord quench the fire threatening the like evils amongst us: It is a
fearful sign of the fire of Gods anger ready to kindle on us when he sends
and suffers an evil spirit to prevail so between King and people; but for the
divisions of Gods people there should be great thoughts of heart; as for the
divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts, and great seachings of heart. It
is to be lamented with the tears of us all, to see brethren agreeing in all
substantials; serving one God, having one Father and Hope, etc. yet for some
circumstances in matters of Discipline their contentions are as the bars of a
Castle, and the heat is increased, as between Guelphs and Gibellines.
Honorable Senators, here your Wisdom (yea a Divine Wisdom from above must be
obtained for you) would shine if you could repair all these breaches, and
compose things so, that brethren might with peace of conscience dwell together
in unity, then we should see that the Lord would delight over us to go on to
do great things for us: and the graces of God would then shine in his servants
when they would in the spirit of meekness yield one to another, so that the
unity of the spirit might be kept in the bond of peace: This only I add; If
ye bite and devour one another, Gal. 5.
take heed that ye be not consumed one of another.

Fourthly, when we have had mercies showring down from heaven, we have slackt
our hands in prayer: when Moses hands fell down, Amalek prevailed; and so
through our slacknes and coldness in this duty and others, more then through
the slacknesse of our Armies; the enemies who were not long since even prayed
down, have strengthened themselves to our reproach and danger.

Fifthly, Self-love, which sets us upon selfe-seeking, and selfe-ends, is so
predominant, that the public concernments are not so promoted: If we had
public concernments are not so promoted: If we had public spirits, our
endeavors would have had a further influence into the public good then yet
they have had.

And many provocations there are amongst us to bewail; many Achans amongst us,
many cursed things, not only hid in the tents; but brought forth in the sight
of the Sun; they declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it not: much cause
of humiliation these are unto us all this day: and we must not look to see
Gods work-perfected till we All mourn and repent for the many evils in the
midst of us: How long shall I see the Standard, and hear the sound of the
Trumpet? Jer. 4.21.
It is answered in the next words by the Prophet; My people is foolish, etc.
Junius reads it, So long as my people is foolish and sottish, and wise to do
evil. And (Honored Worthies) I beseech you to admit of me that I may use
boldness: This burden concerns all, and calls upon all; it is for admonition to
all, but especially You: When Israel had provoked the Lord by their spell and
bodily uncleanesse, the people were plagued in a fearful manner; there fell
in one day four and twenty thousand: Moses was not blamed, Number. 25.
but the Heads of the people: Hang up the heads of the people that the fierce
anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel: Why the Heads of the people?
They should have looked better to the people in governing, so to prevent sin; or
they should have been more swift to execute judgment, when they fell into
sin: It is not enough that you are not gross sinners, that you are reformed,
so long as there are in the midst of City and Kingdom, even where your Power
also reaches, many abominations; there are as Ezekiel speaks, Ezekiel. 22.
in thee; in thee much excess, many profanations, horrible uncleanness, (I
speak what I know) even abominable incest, not only acted once or twice, but
continued in to the just provocation of Gods anger against you and all of us;
and there is no course for redress, none to punish or put them to shame: there
is in the midst of us oppression and cruelty, there are in the midst of us
many Innocents whose faces are ground, and their bones crushed and broken most
injuriously; they cry for relief, they stretch out their hands to you for
help: O releeve the oppressed, and judge the cause of the helpless, lest the
Lord hear their cry and it be sin unto you.

Delay not, make speed to seek judgment, to bring the wheel upon the wicked;
put not off such things; the delaying of which, delays all your hopeful
proceedings: delay not one day to trouble those that trouble Israel: but as
Joshua said, so do ye; God shall trouble thee this day. These and many such
things lie upon you: therefore provoke your spirits to zeal and courage; fear
not, faint not; if Christ had fainted in the work of our Redemption, what had
become of us? he fainted not, not was discouraged till he set judgment in the
Earth; do ye likewise.

Observe how the Lord describes the Horse, Job 39. His neck is clothed with
thunder, he paweth in the valley, and rejoices in his strength; he goes out
to meet the armed man, the quiver rattleth at him, the glittering spear and
the shield; he says among the Trumpets, aha! and does God care for horses?
glorify God in the creature and learn courage from him; break through all
like lightning: as in natural motion, so the nearer you come to your haven
where you would be, let your motion be swifter: The Lords beginnings engage him
to finish; ye are Gods, as Psalm 82. Follow God: the Lord has been very
zealous for you and us, take heed of coldness in this heat: labor to hasten
Reformation in the Church, that it may be the gladness of Gods people to go
to the beauty of holiness, that the Tribes may go up to the Testimony of
Israel; and for the better governing the Commonwealth, let there be set
thrones of judgment in all places: as Psalm. 122.

And to conclude: Let us all put to our helping hands, arms, purses, counsel,
encouragement, for the help of the Lord against the mighty: let the Ministers
of Christ be careful to maintain unity; to provoke Christians to peace; to
unite against the common Enemy: on some have compassion, making a difference;
and others save with terror, pulling them out of the fire. O let all be
humbled before our God this day, and put our mouths in the dust; and then our
prayers will be very prevalent with God; our legions would be thundering
legions, as Christian armies of old, dreadful to the enemy: let us all help
with our constant prayers, be the Lords remembrancers, give him no rest till he
refine his Church, and pull it out of the fire: he that has neither purse, nor
weapon, nor hands, nor counsel to help, has a heart; O pour it out in
prayer; give not over till the Lord has made Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
It is usual to put words into a Delinquents mouth whereby he is delivered from
death. The Lord deals thus with us; he bids us take words, and he also
suggests words whereby we may be delivered from iniquity, and received
graciously, Hos. 14.2. So Ier. 3.19. He devises a way for us how we should
obtain the lengthening of our tranquillity: It is the Lord that asks the
question: How shall I put thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant
land, even a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations? And I said, thou shall
call me, My Father, and shall not turn away from me: This then is the Lords
way that he would have us take, to cry Father, Abba Father, to pray, to devote
our selves to God, and never to turn from him: No people ever had more
encouragements, and more needs then we have to wrestle with God: O wrestle with
God, leave him not till he bless us: give him not over till we prevail: when
we are Princes and prevailers with God, then shall we see Mercy and Truth
meeting, Righteousness and Peace kissing, then would the Lord be with us in
these fires, or pull us as brands out of the fire; and then, and not till then
we shall be prevailers over men.

FINIS.

