A pleasant new Ballad of the Miller of Mansfield in Sherwood, and how he was
lodged at a Millers house, and of their pleasant Communication.
To the Tune of, The French Lavalto.
HEnry our Royal King would ride a hunting
to the green Forest most pleasant and fair,
To have the Heart chased, the dainty Does tripping, unto merry Sherwood his
Nobles repair;
Hawk and hound was unbound, all things prepair'd,
For the same to the game with good regard.
All a long Summers day, rode the King pleasantly,
with all his Princes and Nobles each one,
Chasing the Heart and Hound, and the Buck gallantly,
till the dark Evening enforced them turn home:
Then at last, riding fast, he had lost quite,
All his Lords in the Wood, late in dark night.
Wandering thus warily all along up and down,
with a rude Miller he met at the last,
Asking the ready way unto fair Nottingham,
sir, quoth the Miller your way you have lost,
Yet I think, what I think, troth for to say,
You do not likely ride out of your way.
Why, what do thou think on me, quoth. the K. merrily
passing thy judgment on me so brief?
Good faith, said the Miller, I mean not to flatter thee,
I guess thee to be some Gentleman thief:
Stand the back, in the dark, light thee not down,
Lest that I presently crack thy Knaves Crown.
Thou have abused me much, quoth. ye King, saying thus
I am a Gentleman and lodging I lack,
Thou have not, quoth. the Miller, one groat in thy purse
all thy Inheritance hangs on thy back,
I have Gold to discharge all that I call,
If it be forty pence, I will pay all.
If thou be a true man, then, quoth the Miller,
then I swear by my Tole-dish I Will lodge thee all night,
Here Is my hand, quoth. the K. that I was ever,
nay soft, quoth, the Miller, thou may be a spright:
Better I will know thee, e're hand I will take,
With none but honest men, hands will I shake.
Thus they went along unto the Millers house,
where they were seething of Pudding and sowse,
The Miller first entered in, then after him the King
never came he in so smoaky a house:
Now, quoth. he, let me see here what you are,
Quoth our King, look your fill, and do not spare.
I like thy countenance, thou have an honest face,
with my Son Richard this night shall thou lie,
Quoth. his wife, by my troth, it is a handsome youth,
yet it is best, quoth. his wife, for to deal warily:
Art not a runaway? prithee me tell,
Show me thy Pasport, and all shall be well.
Then the King presently, making low courtesy,
with his hat in his hand, thus he did say,
I have no Pasport, nor never was Servitor,
but a poor Courtier rode out of my way;
And for your kindness here offered me,
I will requite it in every degree.
Then to the Miller his wife whispered secretly,
saying, it seems this youths of good kin,
Both by his Apparel, and eke by his manners,
to turn him out certainly it were a great sin:
Yea, quoth he, you may see, he has some grace,
When he does speak to his betters in place,
Well, quoth. the Millers wife, young man welcome here,
and though I say it, well lodged thou shall be,
Fresh straw I will have laid, on your Bed so brave,
good brown hempen Sheets, likewise, quoth she:
I, quoth the good man, and when that is done,
You shall lie with no worse then our own Son.
Nay first, quoth Richard, good fellow tell me true,
have any Creepers within thy gay hose?
Or art thou troubled with the Scabbado?
I pray, quoth our King, what things are those?
Art thou not lousy or scabby? quoth he,
If thou be'st surely thou lie not with me.
This caused the K. suddenly to laugh most heartily,
till the tears trickled down from his eyes;
Then to their supper they set orderly,
with a hot Bag-pudding, and good Apple-pyes:
Nappy Ale, good and stale, in a brown bowl,
Which did about the Board merrily trowl.
Here quoth the Miller, good ^ellow I Will drink to th^^
and to all Courteours that courteous be,
I Will pledge you, quoth our K. and thank you heartily
for your good welcome in every degree:
And here in like manner I drink to your son,
Do so, quoth Richard, but quick let it come.
Wife, quoth the Miller; fetch me forth Light-foot,
that we of his sweetness a little may taste:
A fair Venison-pasty then brought she forth presently
eat, quoth. the Miller, but sir make no waste:
Here Is Light-fort indeed, said our King,
I never before eat so dainty a thing.
I wis said Richard, no dainty at all it is;
for we do eat of it every day,
In what place, said our King, may be bought like to this?
we never pay money for it by my fay:
From Merry Sherwood we setch it home here;
Now and then we make bold with our Kings Deer.
Then I think said our King, that it is Venison;
each fool quoth Richard full well may see that:
Never are we without two or three in the roof,
very well fleshed and excellent fat:
But prithee say nothing where ever thou go,
We would not for two pence the K. should it know.
Doubt not said the King, my promised secrecy,
the King shall never know more on it for me:
A Cup of Lambs-wool they drank unto him then,
and then to bed they post presently:
The Nobles next morning went all up and down,
For to seek the King in every Town.
At last at the Mill. house soon they espied him plain,
as he was mounting upon his fair steed:
To whom they came presently, falling upon their knee,
which made the Millers heart woefully bleed:
Shaking and quaking before them he stood;
Thinking he should have been hanged by the rood.
The King perceived him fearful and trembling,
drew forth his Sword, and nothing he said;
The Miller down did fall, crying before them all,
doubting the King would have cut off his head:
But his kind courtesy there to requite,
Gave him a Living, and made him a Knight.
The Second Part of the Miller and the King, showing how he came to the Court
with his wife and son, and what merry conceits passed between the King and him.
WHen as our noble K. came home from Nottingham,
and with his Nobles at Westminster lay,
Recounting the sports and pastimes they had taken,
in this late progress along by the way:
Of them all, great and small, this did he protest,
The Miller of Mansfields sport liked him best.
And now my Lords, quoth. the King, I am determined
against St. Georges next sumptuous Feast,
That this old Miller our last confirmed Knight,
with his Son Richard shall both be my guest:
For in this merriment it is my desire,
To talk with the jolly Knight, and the young Squire.
When as the Nobles saw the Kings pleasantness,
they were right joyful and glad in their hearts:
A Pursevant there were sent about the business,
the which had many times been in those parts:
When he came to the place where he did dwell,
His Message orderly then he did tell.
God save your Lordship, then said the Messenger,
and grant your Lady her hearts desire,
And to your Son Richard good fortune and happiness,
yt sweet young Gentleman and gallant young squire
Our King greets you well, and thus he does say,
You must come to the Court on St. Georges day.
Therefore in any case, fail not to be in place:
I wis quoth the Miller this is an odd jest:
What should we do there? he said, faith I am half afraid
I doubt, quoth. Richard, be hanged at the least.
Nay, quoth the Messenger, you do mistake,
Our King he provides a great Feast for your (...)
Then said the Miller, now by my troth Messenger:
thou have contented my Worship full well:
hold, here is 3. farthings to quit thy great gentleness
for these happy tidings which thou do me tell:
Let me see, hear'st thou me, tell to our King;
We Will wait on his Mastership in every thing.
The Pursevant smiling at their simplicity,
and making many Legs took their reward:
And taking then his leave with great humility,
to the Kings Court then he repaired:
Showing to his Grace in each degree,
The Knights most liberal gifts and bounty.
When he was gone away, thus did the Miller say
here comes expenses and charges indeed:
Now we must be brave, if we spend all we have,
for of new Garments we have great need:
Of Horses and Servingmen we must have store,
With bridles, and saddles, and twenty things more
Tush sir John, quoth. his wife, never fret nor srown,
you shall be at no more charges for me,
For I will turn and trim up my old Russet Gown,
with every thing as fine as may be:
And on our Mill-horses full swift we will ride,
With Pillow and Pannels as we shall provide.
In this most stately sort came they unto the Court,
their jolly Son Richard the foremost of all:
Who set up by good hap a Cocks-feather in his cap
and so they jetted down toward the Kings Hall:
The merry old Miller with his hands on his side,
His wife like Maid Marrian did mince at that tide
The King and the Nobles that heard of their coming
meeting this gallant Knight with his brave train
Welcome Sir Knight. quoth. he, with this your gay Lady,
good Sir John Cockle, once welcome again:
And so is the Squire of courage most free:
Quoth Dick, a bots on you, do you know me.
Quoth the King gently, how should I forget thee?
thou wast my Bedfellow, well that I wot,
But I think of a trick, tell me that prithee Dick,
how thou with Farting did make the bed hot:
Thou whoreson happy knave, then quoth. the Knight,
Speak cleanly to our King, or else go Shite.
The King and his Courtiers heartily laughed at this,
while the King took them both by the hand,
With Ladies and their Maids, like to the Queen of spades
the Millers wife did so orderly stand:
A Milk-maids courtesy at every word,
And down the folks were set at the side board.
Where the King Royally, in Princely Majesty,
sat at his dinner with joy and delight:
When they had eaten well, to jesting then they fell
taking a Bowl of Wine drank to the Knight:
Here Is to you, quoth. the King, in Wine, Ale, and Beer,
Thanking you for all your Country fare.
Quoth, Sir John Cockle, I Will pledge you a Pottle,
were it the best Ale in Nottingham-shire:
Then said our King, now I think on a thing,
some of your Light-foot I would we had here;
Ho, ho, quoth Richard, full well I may say it,
It Is knavery to eat of it, and then to betray it.
Why art thou angry, quoth our King merrily,
in faith I take it very unkind,
I thought thou would pledge me in Ale and Wine heartily,
y're like to stay, quoth Dick, till I have dined:
You feed us with twatling dishes so small,
Zounds a black puding is better then all.
I marry, quoth our King, that were a dainty thing,
if a man could get one for to eat;
With that Dick arose, and pulled one out of his hose,
which with heat of his breech began for to sweat:
The King made a proffer to snatch it away;
It Is meat for your Master, good sir you must stay.
Thus in merriment was the time wholly spent,
and then the Ladies prepared to dance,
Old Sir John Cockle, and Richard incontinent,
unto this practice the King did advance;
Here with the Ladies such sport they did make,
the Nob. with laughing did make their hearts ache.
Many thanks for their pains did the K. give them,
asking young Richard if he would be wed:
Among those Ladies free, tell me which likes thee,
Quoth he, Jug Grumbal with the red head:
She Is my love, she is my life, she will I wed,
She has sworn I shall have her Maidenhead.
Then Sir John Cockle the King called unto him
and of merry Sherwood made him overseer,
And gave him out of hand 3 hundred pound a year,
and now take heed you steal no more of my Deer:
And once a year lets have your view,
And so Sir John Cockle I bid you adieu.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


