(...) OR, A TREATISE OF Phlebotomy Demonstrating the Necessity of it in
diseases; the time for Elections. And likewise of the use and application of
Cupping-glasses, and Leeches.

Whereupon is added a brief and most Methodicall tract of the Crisis.

Written Originally in French, by Dade Plumis Campi Surgeon.

And now faithfully rendered into English, by E. W. Well-wisher to Physic and
Surgery.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, for John Place, Furnifalls-Inne Gate; and
William Place, at Grayes-Inne Gate, next Holburn. 1658.

To the most High and Puissant Princess, Mary De Medici Queen, Mother to the
King of France.
MADAM,
THe cause which has induced me to consecrate upon the Altar of your exquisite
merits this little Offering (composed for the ruin of so many Phlebotomists
of our Age, who most commonly are the cause of the loss of so many persons of
all ages, qualities, and sexes, by reason of their undue Administration of this
Chirurgicall Operation, viz. Phlebotomie) is, the observing of so many
excellent and truly royal Virtues, shine and dart forth their splendour in you,
which are more to be admired, than known; more to be known, then imitated; and
more to be imitated, then equalized, And which have received birth; and being
from the exquisite perfections of your Divine wit, the Fame whereof, serves as
a subject matter, for the most fine Wits to commend; and for an example of well
doing, to the most magnanimous souls. Your fair actions, are as so many
glittering Stars, which imbellish and illustrate the Heaven of our France.
France, who may from henceforth, glory, for having bin delivered from the
devouring Gorge of a storm of miseries, by the sage providence of a Queen; yea,
the most wise of Queens that ever governed it. A Queen, with how great honors
loaded? with what respects honored? with how many Triumphs clothed? and with
how many Laurels adorned? As many humane mouths, so many Trophies to your
Grandeur; as many hearts, so many Temples erected to your Virtue; as many
souls, so many Vows and sacrifices to be imolated upon your Altars. In brief,
Your Virtues are such, that I shall not adventure to handle, rashly, the
praises of them, because I cannot arive thereto, but in admiration, nor recount
them worthily but in silence. This air is too clear for the flight of my dull
Plume; wherefore by the example of the Swallows, which presage Rain, I will
content my self to couch to the surface of the Earth, to beseech You (Madam) on
the behalf of our Chirurgerie, that you will be pleased to dart forth the Rays
of your sweet favor upon this little scantling of its Operations. For
whatsoever apprehension I have had of the greatness of Your Merits, and the
weakness of my judgment; it has not bin able to withhold me from offering it
up unto You for a Testimony, rather of my good will to the Public, then for
any thing that is in it, vvorthie to see the Light under your Royal
Authority, and Divine Greatness. If it have the favor to be well accepted, I
doubt not, but being protected by the Buckler of Your Minerva, it will easily
beat back all the assaults of envy, and be looked upon by all, with a
favorable Eye. And for my part, I shall therein take so great contentment,
that my desires shall be more strongly redoubled to appear; and be
acknowledged all the rest of my life,

MADAM, Your Majesty's, Most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate
Subject and Servant, Campi Chyrurgion.

To the Benevolent Reader.
BAd Masters do occasion the loss of credit to good Mysteries, and
disparagement to good Masters. The esteem, or the stighting of Arts and
Sciences does depend, upon the ability or insufficiency of those who handle
them; and according as they are well or ill practiced The Vulgar, without
entering further into the knowledge of their cause, (as several persons who
will not permit themselves to be reprehended (although they mistake
exceedingly) in an art which they practice, with abundance of more presumption
then knowledge) do adjudge unto them (upon the first veiw) either good or bad
reputation; so that such actions as are commendable, and those that are
reproachful are, (by the Vulgar popularity) measured by the same rule, and
weighted in the same balance, without any manner of distinction, insomuch that
most commonly Virtue gives place to vice, Wisdom to ignorance, and Experience
to incapacity.

So by Capricious ignorance we praise
Vice more then vittue and do seem most glad
All at a venture to bestow the Bays
On ignorance her self, in surplis clad.
And they will take the name of Philosopher, formerly so reverend and so much
respected among the Greeks, that from the time of Pythagoras, It was caused to
be called, (...), that is to say, Wisdom. Notwithstanding, it is certain, that
this word (...), or Philosopher, signifies nothing more, nor less, but A lover
of wisdom. And yet there is not a man in these days so shallow brained, so
inconsiderable a person, nor so great a Lord, but would be very angry, yea
would be enraged and take exceptions in good earnest, if one should take him
for any other but [A person desirous of knowledge] which to express in one
word is (A Philosopher.) A title wherewith Emperor Antoninus himself was well
pleased, to be honored. Let us consider what course that title has passed for
some years past, how it was ordinarily taken; And after what fashion it is made
use of, now.

It is the common Complement, and the little joviall Epithet which one does
usually give, promiscuously at the first meeting a person, though he have the
Countenance of one that has slept rather then watched over his books. If one
meet with a man that does not well know the Court Carveate, nor how to dispute
in a quarrel according to the modern fashion, who discourses with Ergees
framed upon all occasions, upon the foot of a Fly, (thereby showing himself as
indiscreet in familiar common entertainment, as averse to civil Actions,)
presently they give him the Style of Philosopher by head and shoulders.
Notwithstanding that the true Philosophy, if we may herein believe Ulpian, the
Civilian, consists in management of affairs, in the conversation and
conservation of humane society, accomplishment in matters of Law, in Court
affairs, and in all the points of honor; so that a Philosopher, and a person
of honor or Statesman, to speak properly with Ulpian, (who was such an one)
is one and the same thing. What then is it that has imbased it, and brought it
so low from so high a degree? Who has stripped and disrobed it of all its
ancient honors and prorogatives, making it so to serve as a Laughing Stock?
but the impudent ignorance of a crew of Mishappen discomposed Pedants, whose
gesture and discourse stincks strongly of the Mustinesse of the School, who
because they have passed over a bridge amongst a crowd of Asses, without
leaving their pack-saddle behind them, do presently conjecture themselves able
to hold Port with the great Horses. Which fate, or worse (the more the pity)
is also fallen upon the title Physician. For I pray, what is now become of the
ancient splendour of the Science of Physic? What is become of its Glory and
Ornament, and the inclination and well wishing of Ancient Princes and
Potentates thereunto. Who did not think it below them to learn and exercise
this divine Science, (by good right called Divine, in regard it receives that
Elogie from the very mouth of God): But did treat it with great Liberality to
confirm its dignity, and maintain its authority.

(The Science of Physic, I say) which the ancient Hebrews did honor as being
come from Heaven for conservation of health, and prolonging of life. And it is
testified by the holy writ, that the Chirurgicall Physicians are made,
instituted, and recommended by God, as in 38. Ecclesiasticus, Honor the
Physician with the honor that belongs unto him, and for the occasion that thou
have for him, for the Lord has Created him: Do not withhold from him the
reward of his pains, to the end, that he may succor and assist thee in thy
necessity: he shall receive rewards from Kings and the knowledge of the
Chirurgical Physician, shall cause him to exalt his head, and render him
admirable among Princes; As for examples concerning the Liberality of Salaries
and Presents, wherewith the Ancient Kings, Princes, and Emperors have been
pleased to honor Physicians; Pliny relates that the Caesar's did allow unto the
most famous Physicians, who practiced Physic at Rome, two hundred and fifty
Sesterces yearly, which (according to the Common Account) comes to about six
thousand two hundred and fifty Crowns, although the other professors had but a
hundred. Thadeus the Florentine received of every Prince that he served, fifty
Crowns per diem. And he having cured Pope Honorius of a strange disease, he
had allowed him 100 Crowns per diem. And (as Volateran reports) a reward also
of a thousand Crowns. The Emperor Augustus gave to Anthony Musa (who had
helped him in a great sickness) a Gold ring enriched with a stone of a great
price, and not content with this, he honored him with the dignity of Knight of
his own order. And not only he, but also all those who exercised that
profession, were (out of respect to him) honored with the same Title. Darius,
the Monarch of the Persians, had Demades (a Physician) in so great esteem, by
whose assistance he had been freed from a tedious disease, that, (as Herodotus
reports) he gave him two great Chains of Gold of great value. And the Queen
his wife gave him for a present two Bottles made of Massy Gold. Let us leave
the Auntients and their Antiquities, to speak of James Cantier, a most Learned
and excellent French Physician, who had as a Sallery from King Lewis the
eleventh, ten thousand Crowns per mensem: from hence we may collect in what
esteem the Chirurgicall Physicians have been in all times, maintained in all
Liberty and freedom, exempt from all Charges, Subsidies, Tributes, Talleys,
and Imposts. Behold in what dignity the Physician and Physic, was formerly;
and yet notwithstanding we see in this unhappy age wherein we live, (where vice
marches in the same Rank as Virtue) it is so changed, corrupted, and altered
that it seems to be now no more then an Idol or Phantasm, its Countenance
veiled its Credit destroyed, its Honor degraded, its strength abated and
weakened, and its reputation withered; in short, it is fallen from that most
high station of glory, whereunto our predecessors had raised and advanced it:
it is (I say) profaned and trampled under foot by a Crew of ignorant
Impoysoners, Impostors, Mountebanks Quack-salvers, Men of evil conversation,
and Cawterized consciences, who (like new Esculapians descended from the
Heavens) bragg impudently, and promise audaciously the curing of all Maladies:
of whom the ignorant popularity do ordinarily make more Account, and do give
more credit to the exterior apperance of a gallant port and flaunting behavior,
accompanied with the vain glory of sumptuous Apparel; than to Learning and
Experience. Yea certainly, for if there be any Mountebanke, Quacksalver, or
cousening drug-seller, some cracked brain fellow of an extravagant wit, who
giving the Carreer to his fancies shall mount up to a theater, and make some
strange kind of Compositions; or else, if he carry a Gold ring upon his finger,
and his Moustaches well mounted, a well composed demure Countenance, and using
these words often in his mouth, (to wit) Blood, Humors, Spirits, Tumors,
Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures, Dislocation, Hippocrates, Galen, etc.

Behold this is the man, who is reputed of every one, the most famous
Chirurgicall Physician of the whole earth. Soft, soft, my Masters, not so
quick; for you may he deceived: for it is not the habit that makes the Monk.
Words and deeds have a great difference. Ask these Mountebanks, first if they
have the knowledge of Geographie, of the Mathematiques, of Astrology, of
Music, Geometry, Logic, Arithmetic, Rhetorike, of History, Poesy, and
Philosophy: In short, in one word, he must be an Encyclopaedian for he that, in
one word, would call a man a perfect Physician must call him so: for to imagine
a Physician to be separated from the knowledge of his above mentioned
Companions, were to suppose him ignorant, mute, and dead. Again, demand if they
have the knowledge of all things that fly in the Air, of all things which swim
in the water, of all Vegetables, of all things which have sense or life upon
the Earth; finally of all which the Universal Mother does enclose in her
bowels, either of Water, Metals, Minerals, Salts, Juices, Sulphurs. Besides,
if he has entered into himself, there to observe his own structure, to dive
into his own bones, to number his Muscels, to follow his veins, particularize
his Arteries, search out the Cartalages, or admire his Nerves, Tendons,
Ligaments, Films, etc. If they have done all this, and if a solid Judgment, be
the soul of their experience; in truth then you may caresse them with
immunities or privilidges, acknowledge them with applause; or else you are to
blame.

But it may be some Hypocondriack person, will contradict me and say, that it
is not fit for a Surgeon to prescribe rules to Physicians. In good time!
neither do I do it to the Learned Chirurgicall Physicians, (for those we honor
and respect as our Masters); but I speak to a Crew of (I know not what sort of)
Medicasters, viz. without shame or wit, without foreheads. Oh what a number is
there of them! So that now one may take up that pretty sentence of an Ancient
man's; [That the ignorance of some and the incredulity of others are the
reasons, why so many Chirurgicall Physicians are altogether ignorant of the
Maladies, which they hold for incurable], which notwithstanding are curable, as
the Leprosy, the Dropsy, Apoplexy, Palsy, Contraction of the Members,
falling sickness, Quartain-feaver, Hectique fever, Hand-gout, Foot-goot,
Hipp-gout, and Sciatica, and several other Maladies which are hard of
digestion for them. But it may be some one, (who does not well understand me)
will be amazed to observe me to put the Surgeon in the Rank of Physicians;
yet I assure you I do it by good reason, for I do not value a man who does
only vapor, but him that says and does too. Oh miserable age! wherein men
believe that a Surgeon knows nothing but how to apply Cuping-glasses to let
blood, and to spread a Plaster, and it may be it is true too, Alas too true, to
my great grief; but it is not such that I mean. For the art of Physic and
Surgery, is not acquired by money, as some shameless persons have caused
themselves to be called Master Chirurgions by that means.

Oh times, O tempora! O mores, Oh manners! To this purpose has one well said.

It Is Gold that makes the Idiot and the Sot
To be called wise and prudent and what not:
And which is more, (men dote so on their woe)
They Are well contented that it should be so:
For is it not a misery to see
Men of mean parts raised to such high degree,
As to converse in Lives, so uncontroull'd
Not for their wit or Learning but their Gold.
It costs them sometimes two hundren Crowns at a time, a silk Coat,
Embroydered beds, feasts, and Banquets to friends and kindred, and other good
considerations, to palliate their admittance.

Oh good God! what a fashion this is to make Market of men's lives? It was
better consulting with the successors of Cain, to endure a Plague: for then
some, one Hippocrates or Paracelsus, would be found to resist and stop it. But
in this case it so falls out, that those who bring in the abuses and support
them, will take no heed to resist or overcome them. By good reason then say I
that the skill of Surgery is not attained to by money or succession, nor by
reading only, but by a long and painful Laborious industry and search.
Wherefore I do admire that there are such abundance of Chirurgions who do
believe that, which [french Authours] Thibauld and Anceline have determined, as
an Indissolvable Law, alleging that such an Author has done so and so; and
that because it is a custom, that therefore they may do so too. Take notice
here, my friend, that Custom will not serve to demonstrate the Art. And one
cannot call that an art which cannot truly be demonstrated by operation. But
they will neither believe this, nor take the pains to re-illustrate this
famous Surgery, which has been formerly in as great honor, as it is now in
neglect. Yea, one may well be astoniished that so noble a science should be so
degraded from its pristine reputation, that having been Anciently the favorite
of Kings, and the employment and occupation of great Personages; It is now
abject and prostitute to the der^sion of the most inferior of City and Country.

What is there, I pray, more famous admirable or divine, then this holy
Profession and yet you see how it is slieghted of every one? And (which is most
destestable) by those very persons who are grown rich and fatned thereby, for
if one propose unto them some most necessary rule, you shall have them
immediately give the Title of Emperique by the head and shoulders, even to such
as (being friends to nature) would conscientiously raise them from their
weakness: for truly there is no profession wherein one ought to be more
cautious of erring, then in ours of Surgery; in regard of its subject, which
is a Humane Body, a beam of divinity; and yet notwithstanding some take the
less heed to it, and blame the good design of others, and like Aesops Cock
slight the precious Stone, and scatch and escape into the Dunghill. Is it not a
shameful thing to slight things that are good and necessary and to run to I
know not what ill-grounded practice, which is more Empericall then rational? I
shall leave the judgment hereof to those who, stripped of all Passions, do know
the errors which are thereby committed; particularly to those who practice
Surgery, for if they err in the least operation, by much stronger reason
must they needs err in the greater and most difficult; so I say, if upon all
occasions they are at a stand in observations concerning Phlebotomy, they must
needs be so by much stronger reason, in matters of greater Speculation.

Object. But, will some one say, Do you think it an easy thing to know the
motions of the Stars, and to number the Numerous motions of the Starry
Spheres, to comprehend the Directions, Declinations, and Retrogradations of
the Planets, for so small an operation as that of Phlebotomy? Besides,
considering (say they) that these Chymericall observations, are so
unprofitable, that most commonly they pay their Scrutators, with events no
less distant from their expectation then the subject of their Science is from
the Earth.

Answ. To which I answer. That truly I find it most easy, in regard my Art
obliges me, and my reason constraines me to it; but by how much, Sciences do
seem to be difficult and arduous, they are by so much the more subjected to
Calumnies and Censures; because the ignorant, and blind witted (seeing no
further then the nose-end of their simplicity) do slight all things that are
difficult to their understanding. And as for that which concerns the small
benefit of this Science: Stay here a little, you fanatique wits, you enemies of
the Muses, insensible do-nothings, you mercenary Pipers; open the eyes of your
understandings, be not like unto the Numean Lion, (killed by Hercules) which
fed in the Forest of ignorance, making a General destruction of all that
which was good, and conserving that which was bad. Confess ingenuously the
excellence and worth of this Science, which discovers the wonderful effects of
the ordinary motions of the heavenly bodies. For since that those who lop wood
and dig in the earth (considering first the Position of Heaven) are not
ignorant that many mishaps do depend thereupon, as worm-eating and corruptions,
and the like; by much more strong reason ought we to observe the Stars, for
operation upon so noble a subject as a Humane Body. Which also was well
understood by those who do prohibit the provoking of the Menstrue in Women or
Maids in all the four Quadratures of the Moon; not being ignorant of the power,
which the Stars have over our bodies. I pray let us ask the Genethliaque
Astrologers, if when Saturn and Mars do enter into Conjunction, they do not
cause the Plague; alleging as a reason, that the said Planets do endeavor by
all means to destroy man, whose radical humor consists only in heat and
moisture, and their nature and faculty depends only upon dryness and
coldness. But while I spend paper in this discourse, Me thinks I here a noise
or buzzing of Hornets, who love nothing but dirty infectious places, I mean
their own wills, who conducted by their ignorance, always turn about the pot,
(as one may call it) of their old doctrine; (I say) me thinks I perceive these
to scoff at my pen, perceiving I treat of an operation which has been so
learnedly deduced before our time, by some of the most sublime personages which
antiquity has produced.

To this I answer, that (although one would think one could say nothing more
upon this subject, there having been several Volumes of it) yet
notwithstanding they are not performed with that method wherewith I treat of
Phlebotomy in this place; not following the old opinions, because that would be
nothing but singing the same song again; but discovering the fault which people
daily fall into, in this so important operation, I describe a means so to
behave ones self, that one shall very seldom fall into irrepairable faults.
Wherein I do assure my self, loving Reader, that, if putting off all Passions,
thou do come with a favorable eye to look on these Lines, (which proceeding
from an honest Leisure, do run the hazard of Censure) thou will confess that
it is not without great consideration, that I have put hand to pen, to a
Treatise of this matter. Not that I have been provoked thereunto by any
vainglory, but possessed with a good desire to serve the Public. And truly I
should have believed I had faild of my duty, if having received something
peculiar from the Liberal hand of the Almighty, I should not have distrubuted
it to the lovers of true Learning. To the end that all their and my works,
might be to the honor and glory of God, for the edification and health of our
Neighbor, and to the salvation of our souls. To which God, Father, Son, and
Spirit, be rendered all honor, and glory, for ever, Amen.

A Treatise of Phlebotomy.

A TREATISE OF Phlebotomy.
CHAP. I. What Phlebotomy is. Its property, and of that which is to be observed
particularly for the good performance thereof.
MAny Philosophers both Graecians, Latins, and Barbarians after they had
diligently contemplated all sorts of Animals, and curiously sought out their
manner of living and compared their Condition and Nature with ours have writ
that amongst all Creatures breathing and moving upon the Earth;

Man is more miserable then al Animals and the reasons therefore.
There is not any more Miserable than Man by reason of his unsatiable desire
and disorderly Appetite: for continually he is hunting after new food, and
having found any according to his taste, he devoureth them after such a fashion
that I exceedingly admire that the bellyes of many are not already rotten and
infected by that excess of drunkenness and debauchery which they do commit. I
am amazed in thinking of it. And what does there proceed from it? except
abundance of Rheums; Catharrs, and infinite other kinds of diseases, which do
nothing but adulterate change and corrupt, this second part of our generation,
The treasure of life, the seat of the Natural heat, the matter or substance
of the seed, and of the Milk of the Duggs or Papps, that is to say, the Blood:
which is so well dispersed and mingled through all the parts of our bodies,
that there is not any one of those parts which does not receive its nourishment
from it; and there is not any good thing in us which is not maintained and
supported by It. It is the Mother of the spirits which does impregnate the seat
of the faculties, for the maintaining the strength of the whole Body, which
does foment and entertain its primitive moisture; It is so replenished with
spirits, that the conservation thereof is the cause of our life; insomuch that
some have esteemed that it was the proper seat and habitation of the Life, and
that therefore our unruly wills accompanied with our (more then unreasonable)
Debaucheries are causes that this continuance of our lives is almost wholly
extinguished.

One shall see nothing else in the Countries but Doctors and Docteresses for
the renewing of this scource of our lives; so many bloodings made improperly,
that I wonder that instead of helping their Patients, they do not destroy them.

The diligence of the Learned Surgeon praised.
Not that I would here blame the diligence of the Learned and skilful Physician
and Chirurgian, who as friends to nature do endeavor with all their might to
preserve her in her health or integrity. And that by purging and cleansing, or
evacuation; which last is not to be done but by incision of a Vein. This is
called Phlebotomy (...) word Compounded of the Greek words (...), which
signifies a Vein and (...), that is to say, division of whole parts.

The derivation of the word Phlebotomy.
Behold therefore why in particular this word is taken for making incision of a
Vein by which evacuation is made of blood and other humors contained with it:
Galen. 13. Method. Chapter 6. You must take notice that there are several sorts of
bloodings; As of a Vein, of an Artery, Scarrifications and others: we will
speak especially as to Phlebotomy.

For what causes one should open a Vein.
We make bloodings for six principal causes, The first. To Evacuate. Secondly,
To divert turn back or make Revulsion. Thirdly, To Attract. Fourthly, To
Change. Fifthly, To preserve. And sixthly to alleviate; which is according as
all those who have treated of this matter have defined it. But let us content
our selves with these two Causes, (to wit) Plethorall and Chachochymicall: the
one consists in nothing but too great quantity of humors, and the other in the
evil quality.

How far Phlebotomy does extend its self.
But the benefit of Phlebotomy does not extend it self only to the evacuation
of the fullness, (which ought to be made according to the kind or difference of
it) but also to divert, and to drain which are the three sorts of evacuation.
It serves also for great and extreme pains principally when they proceed from
Tention, insomuch that all the learned Physicians and Chirurgions do hold that
blooding, is a most excellent and assured remedy, if the rules requisite
thereunto, be therein well observed: yea more ready and secure then Laxative
Physic, which being taken works immediately and forces its operation, it not
being in our power to hinder it.

Phlebotomy more safe then purging Physic.
But Phlebotomy (the Reins of the Conduct whereof we hold) does nothing but
what seems good unto us, forasmuch as we do stopp it and draw it forth, when we
please. And in truth, among all Chirurgicall operations, blooding holds the
first Rank, because it is the Common remedy of diseases which proceed from
Plethore, and Cacochymie, as we have said before; both which are the Antecedent
causes of diseases.

What Plethore and Cacochymy is.
Let us then define what Plethore, and Cacochymie is, and then we will
appropriate unto them Revulsion and Derivation.

Plethore is nothing else then a repletion of all the humors equally increased,
or else of the blood only.

Cacochymie is a repletion of Choler Melancholy, or Phlegm. Plenitude has
two kinds the one Ad vires, and the other Ad vasa; there is another added unto
them called, Supra vires.

The first, (to wit) Ad vires, Although that the blood be not excessive neither
in quantity nor in quality, yet it may oppress the weak powers
notwithstanding; the other (to wit) Ad vasa surpasses the Natural Symmetry or
proportion; But although the vessels seem to burst by reason of the abundance
of blood, if it does not suffocate the powers, but it happens that the strength
is debilitated thereby; This then shall be (plenitudo supra vires), But it must
be taken notice, that Cacochymie is threefold, Choleric, Melancholic and
Phlegmatique. Enough of this: for he that would see more therein let him read,
Lafframboisiere in his [Loix de Medicine.]

Let us now return to Revulsion and Derivation where we find there is great
difference between the one and the other, forasmuch as the Revulsion is to be
performed on the Contrary part according to Galen.

Galen in the 5. of his Meth. Chapter 5.
If the right Nostril bleed, you must apply a Cupping-glass upon the Region of
the Liver; but if both do bleed, you must apply two; the one upon the right
Hypocondre or flanck and the other upon the left: and if the distemper be
strong, one must breathe the vein under the elbow. If the mouth and the throat
be distempered, open the Cephalique, and it is Revulsion, and if one draw blood
from the veins under the tongue, it is Derivation; In like manner, if the
hinder part of the head ache, you must make Revulsion by the vein of the arm,
then Derivation by the vein of the forehead; also Revulsion and Derivation must
be made on the same side, (if it may be); as, if there be a Phlegmon in the
Liver, you must breathe the Basilique or Mediane of the right Arm; If in the
spleen, on the left; If in the kidneyes, the Bladder, or privities, you must
open the vein of the ham or Ankles. If in the right Leg, on the Right Arm;
Gal. in his 13. meth. Chapter 11. and Aph. 36. d. 6. If in one Arm, on the other,
and so of the rest, (if it maybe) as I said before; forasmuch as if there
happens a Phlegmon in the Liver, and that the Right Arm should be hurt, one
cannot nor ought not to take any blood from it, but you ought to take it from
the other Arm, or from the Ankleveines.

Oribas l. 1. Chapter 22. Note that they Lance the Arteries, especially those of
the Temples, to evacuate the hot windy humors which flow into the eyes and
cause tedious pains of the head, vertigoes or swimmings of the head, which are
principally caused by hot things and windy, and the Arteryes behind the ears
are for the same effect; Gal. 13. Metho. Chapter 22. One never lanceth the Great
Arteries, as those of the Arms and other places; As well, because of the too
great dissipation of the vital spirits, as because there can be no
agglutination or knitting made there, by reason of their continual moving, we
will speak more largly hereof, hereafter.

Observations concerning blooding.
It is time now to know who are they who ought to be blooded, and those who
ought not so to be; Those who can easily bear such lancing and to whom it can
do no hurt, are those who have a strong constitution, the veins bigg, full, and
large, who are neither lean nor wasted, who have their color good and ruddy,
their flesh firm hard and solid: those who are of a contrary disposition
cannot bear it healthfully; neither must one blood Children, before the age of
fourteen; nor old men after threescore and ten; unless in case of great and
extreme necessity; and considering this, That with the blood slides forth part
of the life, which you must always do prudently, (measureing the greatness of
the disease with the power of the Patient's strength) to the end that one may
easily judge of the matter or substance, and likewise of the evacuation; but
you ought not only to consider of the forces or virtue at present, but to know
for the future if they will be sufficient to support the length and
continuation of the disease: also you must observe, if those whom you blood
have been accustomed to be lanced; For those who have not been accustomed to
it, do not undergo it easily, Insomuch that Custom must be considered in all
manner of evacuation especially as to that of blood. Moreover all those who
have weak stomachs, or who are wrought on and oppressed by the Dyarrhe or
looseness and flux of the belly, or who undergo some indigestion, ought not to
be blooded also the women with Child ought to abstain from it, principally in
their first and last months: also those who have used too great sobriety, those
who are of a cold and Phlegmatic Nature, and those who Live in a Region or Air
too cold or too hot, do not easily bear blooding. All things which weaken the
powers, as horror and trembling, the immoderate use of venery, too great
frequenting the bath, the flux of the belly whether it be by nature or Physic,
great perplexity and care, watchings, and labor and tedious diseases, do
prohibit our use of blooding. For conclusion, whether to blood, or not to
blood, All these things above mentioned, and several others, must be observed
(which I shall here omit) for fear of being accused of writing any thing here,
which has been already long ago treated of by the more Learned: and so much
more for that reading their writings I lose my hopes of being able to say any
thing upon this subject, worthy to see the light.

All which would have been enough to have rendered my pen silent in this
affair, if the greatness of the case, (which ought to be examined by diverse
writings,) together with a good will which does move my affection to be able in
something to serve in public, had not imboldened me unto it. And also to
leave unto posterity some mark of my duty; And, that, as well, to solace and
refresh the Memory of my Companions in Surgery (giving them also some
entrance into Astrologicall observation) which few among them know.

The Charity of the Author.
As also, for the health and benefit of those who are to be blooded, having
always preferred, the health of the poor sick persons who need blooding, or
those who use it to preserve themselves from diseases, before the ariving to my
own gain, and profit.

The great error and Covetousness of some Phlebotomists.
Many of the Chirurgions of our time do let blood at all hours, at all times,
at all seasons and all ages, without considering the power and strength of the
party whom they Lance, (induced thereunto by this cursed desire of gain) never
taking heed to the accidents which may come upon those who have bin blooded,
making evacuation of more blood then they ought, or else making operation upon
the Member at the time wherein the Star is ruling or predominant there;
insomuch that some are dead by reason of the undue administration of this
Remedy, which has cut of the use off their life; or if they be not killed
thereby, they have fallen into a prolonged weakness, and their bodies are
thereby cold, wan, and discolored; and all this by the ignorance of the
operant who will put himself to the performance of this so noble help of
Nature, without being provided of all those things which are Necessary for him,
as well gifts of the body and mind, as other external Instruments.

Condition of the Phlebotomist.
As to be young, well sighted, to have a steady hand, and exercised unto
Phlebotomy, a good Anatomist to know the situation of the veins, and of other
parts of the body; for without that, he will be like unto a blind man which
cleaves wood. But it will not be from the matter to note here, that if the
veins, should not be apparent, in the morning, you must not breath them, until
about one a Clock in the day, and then those who are able to walk, let them use
a little Exercise, and then the most occult, and Invisible veins (as one would
say) will appear. But I have not mentioned this here, except only concerning
those who have small veins, and covered, either with flesh or fat; Also shall
I not instruct the Surgeon to fill the veins by rubbings or bathing of the
Member in warm water, Ligatures, and assuring the sick party not to put them
to any pain, for it would be too Trivial.

What Instruments are to be used in Phlebotomy.
But I shall say (to return to our purpose) that the external Instruments by
which this opeation is to be accomplished, shall be good Lancets of several
fashions, Ligatures, Swathes, Boulsters, Red powder, burnt lint, to stop the
blood if there be need of it, or with Cotton Pulverised according as we have
shown in our [Chirurgie Chymique.]

Default in Phlebotomists.
This default especially is found in the greatest part of the Phlebotomists of
our age, viz. That, of the knowledge of that so excellent and wonderful
Astrology, without which it is as it were impossible to be able well to
exercise Physic, or Surgery upon our bodies, which are by good right called
a little world, for their having a great Sympathy with the great one, as I
shall show hereafter by the help of God; as also the observation that ought to
be made in the Concurrence of the Stars, and the influence of them upon our
bodies, to the end that we may avoid those unhappy accidents which we see daily
to happen to the share of those who have been blooded so inconsideratly. That
which has withdrawn me from picking and culling out, all the conditions
requisite in this operation, as well for the Surgeon as for the sick person,
and other things requisite thereupon, is, I not having intended to treat on
this subject, except of the two principal points of this operation, under
which two may be Comprehended all the rest, whosoever will explain them.
Notwithstanding I shall content my self to have traced this little path for
some one who (endued with a more high Style, and accompanied with a greater
knowledge, provoked by one less then himself,) shall have had a desire to have
the knowledge of this science appear (above the small knowledge which it has
pleased the divine goodness to give me) and to make the desires and lovers of
true and perfect Surgery partakers thereof; Provoked (I say) by this desire,
does stretch out his sails of Eloquence to steer in a higher or greater Sea
then I do. But winding up the thread of my discourse, I shall content my self,
(I say) with these two principal Points, that is to say, the time of Necessity
and the time of Election.

The time of necessity from whence taken.
That of Necessity is in all times and seasons, and at all hours, without
considering any thing which may hinder, provided that the Necessity be
certainly known to be the most strong or pressing, as I shall mention in its
place.

The time of Election from whence taken.
That of Election, is taken either from the nature of the body of the party who
ought to be blooded, or of superior, and external things; which ought to be a
fair clear and clean day, and not Rainy, not by no means at new Moon, nor very
near to the full. And rather in the spring then any other season. I shall
declare also upon what parts of our bodies the Planets and heavenly Signs do
particularly rule; also in what day or hour, in what time or season; To the end
that having the knowledge of these things one may not commit so many errors in
this operation, as are committed by the ignorant.

Protestation of the Author.
Protesting that I have not writ this Tract possessed with any other desire but
to assist and help so many diseased persons, who dye for want of being well
comforted by this excellent remedy, and not to receive any glory thereby. But
if I shall receive some one spark, I do Consecrate and dedicate it from hence
forward to the Author of all things. To whom, Father Son and holy Spirit, be
glory, honor and praise, for ever, and ever, Amen.

CHAP. II. How the Surgeon ought not to be Ignorant of Astrology, and the
profit that proceeds therefrom, as well for Phlebotomy, as for all the diseases
which happen to humane bodies, The Sympathy of the Stars therewith, and other
discoveries most profitable to Chirurgions.
FOr good cause did the Comique Poet pronounce this Sentence, which is worthy
of great consideration, (to wit) That there is nothing more unreasonable then
the ignorant man, who esteems nothing good, but the things which he does
himself, and of which only, he has knowledge. The which I make mention of
here, by reason of a Crew of Sophisters, who dare contradict the force which
the superior bodies have upon inferiors, alleging that the Ancients never
took heed to these foolish fancies as they call them, (which they urge) being
ignorant that the great Hippocrates, did Prognosticate the plague which was to
happen to the Iyllnians. And that, only by the knowledge which he had of this
Admirable and divine science of Astrology: By that means preserving a great
number of the Inhabitants of Greece, who in acknowledgement of one so great
benefit, did give and attribute unto him great honors, which he dedicated to
Hercules. Besides having not read that the same Hippocrates restoring and
increasing Physic, did so far praise and respect Astrology, that he has
demonstrated by knowledge, and concluded by reason, that Physic is maimed
without the knowledge of Astrology, insomuch that the Athenians after his death
caused his image to be engraven, after they had built the Notable Colleges,
for Physic and Astrology Lectures. Plin. Lib. 7. Chapter 37. And particularly for
one Berosus a great Astrologian, after the death of whom was erected (in the
College of Athens) a Statue having a tongue of Gold, by reason of his Eloquence
and great knowledge in Astrology. St. Jerome in his Epistle to Paulinus
affirms the profit of Physic, Astronomy, and Astrology, for the preservation
of mankind. St. Dennis the Areopagite, by means of this Science, had
knowledge of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Besides, it is
sufficiently proved in the holy Scripture. Luke 22. where it is held forth that
future events may be predicted by the order of the Elements, even the fair and
rainy days, as also in St. Matthew, (St. Matthew, Chapter 16.) The whole text
whereof I had inserted had I not feared to weary the Reader, and should produce
many other Authorities, and examples drawn from the Doctors of the Church,
(which the most studious could find out) to cheque the presumtuous, ignorance
of the envious: for none can doubt of the verity and necessity of this Science,
which caused Lycurgus the Lacedemonian to cause, that in the Administration of
the Commonwealth, the course of the Stars should be observed, and to ordain by
express Law that the Laconians should not go to war before the full of the
Moon. That Grand Legislator, Moses, had attained the perfection of this
Science, as does testify the Protomartyr, Saint Steven, in the Acts of the
Apostles. And a fore Moses, the great Patriarch, Abraham, did esteem it in the
Land of the Chaldeans: as also the Lybians, Indians, and Sages of Persia,
reported by St. Augustine.

The Auntients great Astrologers.
Which is more; Do we not read that Pericles King of the Athenians and
Emperor, delivered, his Army which was in Amazement from the Eclipse of the
Sun, and this only by the only Science of Astrology, the practice whereof, if
Ilicias had had, he had not lost his fair Triumphant Army in Sicily, being
discomfited by a like motion. Which wound was not small to the Athenians, but
the beginning of infinite misfortune. In short, to the end that such evils
should not fall on the Romans, Sulpitius Gallus did prognosticate the Eclipse
of the Moon, long time before, to the end that his horsemen should not be
affrighted, and lose their courage by seeing these things: which are sufficient
testomies to show, that this Science was known by the Ancients, as well
Physicians, as Kings, Princes, and other great Personages, which I omit for
brevity sake, to the end that I may produce that excellent book of Guidon of
Caulias, whereof our Chirurgions do make so great a Trophy. But it is only to
keep it in their closet, or to make it keep the shop; for if they did read
attentively the most profitable discoveries made therein, they would learn that
then when he speaks of the Superior Root, and the inferior Root in his
Treatise of Phlebotomy, that he understands or means by the Superior Root, no
other thing but that the Surgeon be advised in times of Election, to know
and choose what Planet or what Heavenly sign concurs, in that time or in such
an hour wherein he would make his operation. Also that he know, whether the
Star that Governs the part, be there in the the same time, to the end to
obviate or discover the strange Accidents, which might be followed by death or
great diseases, as Ptolemie says in the twenty sixth Proposition. But they
will say; This would be very good if there were a means to learn all these
things in a short time. In regard that our life is very short, and the Art very
long, as the Prince of Pyhsiticians Hippocrates has well observed. Hip. Lib.
1. Aph. 1.

Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius.
It is true, I agree with you: behold here the reason, wherefore all wood is
not fit to make an Image of Mercury of. Since thou do acknowledge thy self
not to be fit to comprehend all that which is necessary to be known to a good
Surgeon, why do thou not forbear to exercise this so excellent, and so
admirable (yea more divine then humane) Science of Surgery, knowing well
that we shall render an Account before God of all our Actions. And it will not
then serve for excuse to say, You had not a means to exercise any other
calling, having had some entrance in this. And what progress is it, to make a
beard for a Peasant though with a thousand scratches? to pull out a tooth, with
a thousand pain? to know how to spread a Plaster like a Plaisterer or Mason?
and so many other miseries, which are committed by the malicious igrance of
many, all which I leave, that I may not be seen to go out of the line of my
discourse, And say that beyond the great profit that Chirurgions do gather from
the knowledge of Astrology in this operation called Phlebotomy; It serves yet
very much to the healing of diseases, which come upon our bodies, also for
gathering of Plants, and to dig out the Mettalls and Mineralls out of the
bowels of the earth; of which one may prepare by the Art of Alchimy, most
healthful remedies; and administer them to the diseases which come into our
bodies, by the mixtion or meeting of the three principal simples, whereof all
bodies are Composed, (to wit) Sulphur Mercury, and Salt; from which three
substances, all the diseases that proceed there from are called by their proper
names, as Sulphereous, Mercuriall, and Saltine: the which not making to this
matter are contained in another Volume. In his Little Chymicall Surgery.

But some one will ask me why are such names given to all diseases; Making
this question, because they are ignorant (as they confess it publicly) of the
three first substances, whereof all bodies are composed, which are (as we have
said) Sulphur, Salt and Mercury. Which substances Hippocrates. Hip. Lib. de
vet. med. Does call in man; Bitter, Sweet, Salt and Moist: One whereof, (to
wit) the Moist as being more apparent, he has divided into four parts, which
he calls Blood, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy which is but the third part of
that which constitutes the matter. And which also gives us to know the diseases
growing by its depravation. Lib. de Genit. But the two others, his being
silent, or letting them alone neglected has buried the knowledge of diseases
which are of their essence, which is the reason they are held incurable, if
they do not determine by nature. These three substances are demonstrative, and
by consequence may be Anatomized; but the four humors, not. Which things, or
the like caused that pretty sentence to be pronounced by Fabius, that the Arts
and Sciences would be happy, if there were none but wise and good unfolders,
who should give the judgment.

The Common opinion of heading, rejected.
But to answer and clear up what is above mentioned, I say, that it is
material, not only to know them in their true Anatomy, with their original
and cause; but also, to give understanding what ought to be the Remedies, and
the nature of Medicaments necessary for their cure: so that the Common opinion
does not please me in any wise, which says, Diseases are cured by their
contraries. That is to say, the hot distempers by cold Medicaments, and the
cold ones by the hot, be it either in such or such a degree; which does not
seem unto me any way considerable. But rather regard ought to be had above all
things, to the specifique virtue of Medicines, against every disease, because
to heal well, one need not take great pains upon accidents, (As one who would
extinguish the fire, does not take pains about the smoke,) because the
disease being taken away, the accidents discontinue. Notwithstanding, if the
Accidents surpass the disease, in this case one leaves the disease to take
heed to the Accidents, as in the great Haemoragie (or flux of blood at the
Fundament:) Oh thou second Hippocrates (divine Paracelsus) what great
obligation have we unto thee; but rather, what obligation have we not unto
thee! for having conducted us even to the perfection of Physic. If the Learned
Galen were living, I am certain he would say, (seeing the Books of
Parracelsus) as he did formerly when he saw the books of Hippocrates, [Let us
begin at them.] And I believe that instead of disparaging them, (as many
Jack-Apes do,) he would give an entire explanation of them; which Apes, neither
will nor can, take the pains to find out new remedies, for the poor afflicted
sick persons. Therein doing as a bad Shoemaker shooing every man by the same
Last: for in truth I am confident, there is a Thousand and a Thousand of those
who say, that a hot remedy must be used to a cold disease, who know not to
render a reason wherefo e it should be so done. But I will insist upon this,
and do ask, Wherefore names are given to simple vegetalls, which do also belong
to several parts of our bodies, As the little Leaves and flowers of B^thonie
to the head. Mirabolans, Citerinae; Alleluga, or Sorrel; and Mellifol, or
Baulme, to the heart. The Pulmonaria or Lungwort, to the Lungs. The Hepatica
Lichen or Liver-wort, and the Jecoraria to the Liver. The Aspelnum to the
Spleen. The Vmbilicus Veneris for the Navell. The Calamus Aromaticus, and
Cassia fistula, for the Intestins. The Vesicaria for the Bladder. To the hands,
the Palma Christi. The Plantain or five-Nerve, to the Nerves. Savina to the
Veins. For the Tibia, and the bones, Legeranium Ossisana. Mace, for the
Matrix. For the Teeth, Dentaria: For the Throat, the Cervicaria and Vlmaria. To
the ears, the Leaves of Asari, and so of others. Will you answer me, That
because they have some kind of agreement with those parts, that therefore by
consequence, they have some kind of property contrary to the Maladies that
seize upon such parts. Courage! I will wager, (oh rejoice, the Ape who sought
to devour this holy Science is taken his own self) that he cannot escape. But
tell me, consider a little the qualities of these simples, with the cause of
the Maladies that happen in these parts, and you shall find, That men have not
amused themselves to give names to these Plants, for any cause but the Sympathy
which they have with them, giving relief and succor to those parts, when
wrought upon by diseases or Maladies. And this is done by the property which
they have to drive out such or such a Malady, and strengthen the part
affected; and not by reason of their heat or cold. And therefore it is that we
see in Pestilent feavours, they give some Theriaque or Methridate which are of
a hot quality, having in no wise respect to the Feavor which is caused by heat.

Medicaments prepared by Chemical art, are more wholesome then Common ones.
But to the end that such Medicines be powerful, well tempered, and altogether
friendly to Nature, recourse must be had to Quint-essences very dexteriously
extracted from every compost, whether Vegetall, Animal, or Mineral, according
to the specific; virtue which nature has given to every one of them
respectively. The same thing might I say as to Metalls: for, what means this
pleasant harmony, with the heavenly bodies? if they had not some agreement one
with the other; as also of the principal parts of our bodies, with the
Caelestiall, and the Mettalls?

The Harmony which the heavenly bodies, have with our humane bodies.
As the Sun in the middle of the 7. Planets; so is the heart (which is subject
to it) placed in the middle or man, for the first and last mover, having within
it self the Artery beating without rest; which is the Ecliptique of the
Zodiac: (wherein the Sun continues without rendering it self Erratick), which
has as a center to its sphere, the Navell, and the Continent thereof, and
from the Groynes to the Furculary bones, the neck Comprehended, and lends to
the Mass this part of the Lyliaste, called vital power. And as the Sun is the
most excellent above all Planets, in like manner also he has agreement with
the most excellent of all Metal, viz. Gold.

Let us proceed and speak of Saturn the Center of whose Spear is in the
Arteryes, and who has for its Region the Cavity of the Conduits, the
Ligaments, Nerves, Marrow, Joints, the bone of the head, the forehead, the
hollow of the eyes, and the upper part of the Nose; and for its entire body,
the Spleen: and there places the receptive faculty, and has Sympathy with
Lead, as his true Legitimate Child.

Let us come to Jupiter who has for his Sphericall Center the Lungs, and for
its Region the windpipe, Trache, or Artery, the Muscles serving for
respiration, and the Skin of the head, and from him his natural virtue has
Communication with Tynn.

Let us speak of Mars, who has for his Center the bagg of the Gall, and for
Region to his Sphere, has the face from the eyes downwards; the palms of the
hands, the soal of the foot and the neck of the Matrix, where he sowes the
Irascible and expulsive power, and adjoynes to Iron.

Then Venus extends her rule and her Sphere upon the vessels destined to
generation, and gives the Concupiscible faculty and pleasant tickling does
Communicate her power to Copper.

Afterward comes the Sphere of Mercury, which spreads it self in the interior
of the stomach, comprised in the Superior Orifice, wherein fear has its
place, and sorrow in the Inferior, and laughter in the small Guts, and for
Center to its Sphere has the Liver; where he plants the Fantastique virtue,
and has power over Quicksilver.

Lastly, The Moon possesses the bone of the back, the shoulders, the Loins or
virtue in venery; and retains for entire body, Brain, giving the growing
virtue or power, and having Silver for her Inferior.

You must draw Metalique Medicines, for the Maladies of the same kind.
And it happening that one of those parts become depraved, it appears, and is
made known in the place of its Emuncter, and then I pray will it not be
necessary to extract Remedies from Metalls, to heal Metalique distempers
without inquiring sophistically, whether they be hot or cold diseases.
Wherefore it is, that we see Mercury to be the true Alexipharmacon, of the
poison of the Pox; being as it were like in quality to the essence of this
disease. But how much effectual would it be, if the pure of it were separated
from the impure.

From these things we do first learn to know the Metalique Maladies, with their
original, when any of the inferior parts of the body of man is diseased; and
secondly, from whence their most specifique and Neigbouring Medicines should be
drawn, and those of the greatest virtue; which without all doubt is from the
seven above named Mettalls, and from each of them being appropriated to its
Malady, As to the disease of the heart, the Medicine of Gold must be taken: to
the Maladies of the brain, the Medicine of Silver: to those of the Liver, the
Medicine of Quicksilver: to those of the Lungs, the Medicine of Tin: to those
of the kidneys, the Medicine of Copper: and to those of the Call, the Medicine
of Iron.

All which things are not of small worth or consequence, then when they are
brought to the sublime degree of their perfection, the preparation whereof lies
only in the art of Chemistry. An Art truly divine, and whereof so many new
persons date give their opinions so leightly, without knowing the very habit of
it; Notwithstanding their ignorance makes them calumniate this so admirable
Art, for it is hard for a blind man to judge of Colors. From hence it
appears, that the bodies here below are ruled by the Superiors, as true and
Lawful fathers of them. But in regard I have not intended to treat more
largely of these things in this place, as not making to the subject taken in
hand; and also in regard, as I have said before, I do desire (God assisting me)
to discourse more amply of it in my Treatise, de Chyrurgie Chymique Medicinale.
Reg. 2. Chapter 5. I shall pray all young Chirurgions withal my heart that they
will lend an ear to these things, and embrasing my counsel to reject the old
opinions, from whence we see so many miseries are come, they being directly
contrary to true Physic: And let us not fear to be punished like Asa and
Ochasias for having rejected it, who suffered thereby.

Lib. de lege. Hippocrates says of this time, that Physic was so be clouded
by those that exercised it, that it was slighted and rejected, as well by
reason of their abuse of it, as by the people who esteemed them Physicians, and
reputed them like unto Players, who by their gestures and habits represent the
persons who they are not.

In Epist. ad Democrit. The same Hippocrates confesses of himself, that though
he had attained unto old age, he had not attained the end of Physic: since he
does acknowledge that he had not had the perfect knowledge of it, of necessity
there rests something further to be known of it, To wit, whether he that shall
find out the rest, ought to be rejected.

Galen (6. de la Metho.) is not backard to give himself the glory, of having
invented several Medicines unknown, and not in the practice of men before him.
Let us not then reject Novelties, then, when they are for our benefit and
profit, if we may call Noveltie such an Art as is as ancient, as Espugerie. In
which, in truth, one can make no great progress being ignorant of Astrology,
which is very requisite and necessary to this Chirurgicall operation, called
Phelebotomy, considering which I have undertaken this small Treatise. For if
our good Master Guidon, (of whom the whole Aca demique School of Physic and
Surgery make so great esteem) has not despised it, but, as he says in his
Treatise of Phlebotomie, has made a whole book of it: which book is not to be
found through the injury of the times, wherein he discourses at large of the
observation of the Stars for this subject; by much stronger reason we who
pretend our selves his Scholars ought not to slight it, but to embrace and
cherish it with all our heart, to the end that we may commit no error in
performing this operation.

This little Treatise will serve you therein, for a guide by means whereof you
shall never fail or at least not often, if you take heed thereunto, Culling and
gathering out that which is worthy of observation: which doing, you will
therefrom receive a great consolation, according to God. To whom Father, Son,
and Spirit, be honor, and glory, for ever, and ever, Amen.

CHAP. III. Of the time of necessity, wherein are shown the Maladies, in which
Phlebotomy does necessarily fall.
Surgery is the most certain part of Physic.
Surgery, being one of the most noble and comely parts of Physic, as well
for its certainty (for its operations are assured); as for that it has been in
all times exercised among the Greeks, by their Princes and great Lords, has
great extent, and contains many more things then the Vulgar people do imagine.
It is ordinarily divided in five parts. The first concerns Tumors, which the
Common people call Apostumes, which are Maladies increased in quantity and
greatness. The second is of Wounds, which are defined to be, Dissolving of
continuity made in the soft parts, fresh and bleeding. The third is of Ulcers:
and the fourth of fractures which belong to the bones. And the fifth and last
of Luxations, which is when the bones are out of their natural place.

All which Maladies in the cure of them do require the ofttenest, amongst the
remedies, that of blooding, without which the cure of them cannot be perfectly
accomplished, as also in several other sorts of Maladies, which we shall name
hereafter, wherein the necessity of Phlebotomy is requisite and necessary,
Blooding may well serve in the one and the other, but it is not necessary unto
them, but when necessity compells; We will here discourse briefly of them all;
to the end, that the young Surgeon may know what Maladies require blooding,
and which not.

In what Maladies blooding is useful.
So that for a great pain in the head, which is in the hinder part of it, we
Lance the veins of the forehead; in Squinancies, they breathe the vein under
the tongue. Phlebotomy is necessary to all affections or Maladies which take
away the breath, and strangle one; and to those which cause one suddenly to
loose their speech: Also to all great Contusions either of the internal or
external parts, as to full from on high or to receive a blow. Although the
power or force were but small, and though the blood be peccant neither in
quality not quantity, you must use the blooding. What Delire is. Galen. 2. Aph.
2. In the Apoplexy, Plenresie, Burning fever, presently and in the beginning
of the Delire, which is nothing but a depraved and errant motion of the
imagination, hurt; you must let blood, provided that the powers be strong
enough, and the age suffer it, and the season, and region. Lib. 13. de Metho.
Chapter 2. And although that be not yet provided that the power be a little strong.
Also such a one who after a fall vomits blood, you must blood presently;
otherwise the blood may jelly or clott if one suffer it to rest, and grow cold.
You must not blood the sick person in the Rigor of the seavor, for he that does
it, is the Cutter of his throat. But if the feavour does not increase, and also
does not decrease, and we do not hope for any declination of it, in such a case
you must not lose this only occasion of blooding, although it be worse then in
the declination of the fit. In the hand-gout and the foot-gout, one may open
the veins of the foot or the hand; and for the Migren the Arteries and veins
of the Temples: and by this evacuation of the blood, which flows with the
Arthritique powers, and the boiling spirits, which evacuate, the pain presently
cease. But in the intermitting feavour, blooding ought to be not after the
third access, or fit, as Galen would have it; but in the beginning: but this
evacuation of the blood ought to be understood to be if there be Plethory in
the body, and fullness of the vessels: and for the breathing and refreshing of
the Mass of humors, for otherwise there should be no evacuation of the blood,
because it is the bridle of the Choler.

In the quartain feavour, or (again) if the blood do abound, you must take some
from the Mediane or Basilique of the left Arm, or from the splenique vein,
with this Caution, that if the blood do show it self black and dull or thick,
you may let it run, but on the contrary you must stop it pre^ently, if it show
it self fresh and well colored.

In the cure of the Fehris Synochus, a continual feavor, the benefit of
Phlebotomy causes the opening of the belly, and the sweatings to issue forth
very abundantly, a thing much to be wished in this kind of fever, which moved
Galen to say, that one ought to bleed in this case, even until Lipothemie: but
notwithstanding fearing that one should let slip the soul with the blood, one
ought rather to reiterate it several times, as much as the strength of the
sick party can bear it; even in the burning fever, espece de Tierce continue,
one ought to blood in a good quantity, if the powers, the age, and other
Circumstances do permit.

In like manner, you ought to blood, in the quartain fever, (Glistering
first): for the doing whereof Artificially, you must open the vein of the left
Arm, which has more Communication with the Spleen, to which the most part of
this fever is often heaped. We say also, that in Pestilent fevers, we must
not indifferently (as is done presently when they see the person struck with
the plague) prescribe him blooding, which has been often times the cause of
the death of an infinite Number of persons: but if the matter be urgent in
quantity, quality, and Motion, I must draw a conclusion, That in the Plague
occasioned by the viciousness of the Air, with fullness of blood and humors;
Blooding I say together with purgation are there necessary, which is held sorth
by the saying of Celsus, Cells. Lib. 3. Chapter 7. That forasmuch as the Plague is
an Active and Tempestative disease, you must quickly use remedies even with
rashness,

Wherefore you must consider, if the person infected has a burning fever, and
great repletion in the Conduits, and that the virtue be strong, which may be
known by the veins, being full and stretched, the eyes and the face greatly
inflamed, also sometimes in spitting blood with great beating of the Arteries
of the Temples, pain in the throat, pain or difficulty in breathing, pricking
or shooting throughout the body, with exceeding heaviness and dullness, the
waters or urine being red, thick, and troubled, in such case you must blood
presently, to help nature, to discharge her-self, least the natural heat be
suffocated by the abundance of blood. Then you must rather breathe the
Basilique vein of the left side, then the right, because the heart and the
spleen are much affected in this disease, and take abundance of blood thence,
according as you shall see necessary, always having respect to the power and
virtue of the sick person, and taking heed not to blood, whilst the shivering
of the fever is upon him.

Observations in blooding, for the difference of the disease.
But you must here take notice, that in such a repletion of blood, blooding
must be otherwise performed in a simple Pestilent seaver, than in that which is
accomplished with a Bubon or Carbuncle: for if the one, or both together be
conjunct with the great and furious seaver, then it is requisite to open the
vein nearer to the Apostume, or plague soar, and according to the rectitude
of fevers, to the end, that thereby the blood may be draw a forth, and
evacuated directly, in regard that all retraction and Re^ulsion, of infected
blood toward the Noble parts, is prohibited by all good Physicians and
Chirurgions. But enough of the fever, until we speak of Symptomatiques. And
beginning at Tumors in general, I say, that if there be repletion in the whole
body, you must purge and blood, and besides makes frictions and Bathings. As in
the Cure of the true Phlegmon, you must divert the flux, which will be turned
away, if we take away the cause thereof, to wit, the Chachochimie or Plethory,
which is to be done by purging first, but chiefly by Phlebotomy.

Come we now to the Erisipela, for if it be in the face, and does possess it
very much, Phlebotomy is very necessary to it, which must be performed upon the
Cephalique vein; in like manner Phlebotomy is necessary, if there be some
portion of blood mingled with the Choler: but if it be in any other part, and
be not in great quantity, and be made of pure Choler, Phlebotomy is not
necessary, because the blood is the Bridle of the Choler, as we have made
mention before: besides, the Cancre is cured most commonly by purging and
Phlebotomy.

For the Tumors in particular being a Parotide, we say that Phleb. is therein
very necessary, specially when there is redness in the part, which
demonstrates great inflammation and abundance of blood, also for the kernells
great, and swelled, you must purge, but specially purge and apply
Cupping-glasses, behind the shoulders with scarifications, to the end to
obviate the accidents which may come thereupon, as suffocation and consequently
Choking.

The same remedy is necessary to the Tumor or inflammation, and relaxation of
the Uvula, called by the Latins Collumella.

Also for Esquinancy, the Chirurgian ought to be ready and prompt, in reguard
this disease does not give great Leisure, wherefore he must blood the sick
parts on the Basilique on that side where the fluxion is, and the same day on
the veins under the tongue to evacuate the Conjunct matter.

Let us speak of Fellons, or whitlows, the curing whereof consists only in
blooding and purgations; but yet notwithstanding further according to the
prudence of the good Surgeon.

Come we now to Wounds, wherein for the Little ones there is no great necessity
of blooding; but in the great where there is danger of fluxion, or where the
body is repleate, as in wounds of the Joints, Tendon, Nerves, and where one
fears pain, raveing, and inquietude; yea also when they are accompanied with a
fever. And as for the Spasme coming in Wounds through repletion, it must be
cured by inanition, and that by the good government of purging food, and
blooding, and for a resolutive remedy, friction, and sulphured bathes.

As to particular Wounds, if there happen in those of the head, with fracture
or contusion, a Continued fever, and Raveing with great flegmatique
inflammation, accompanied sometimes with the hurting of the Pericrani^; it is
then that you must take abundance of blood, but yet therein the Surgeon must
consider the strength of the Patient, concerning the motion of the Brain, (the
Surgeon seeing that the bone is not fractured, but doubts that there is some
vessel broaken within) let him presently take some blood from the Cephalique
vein, on that side is hurt, in a good quantity; having regard to the
distemper, present and future, and principally of the strength as I have said
before, and other things which ought to be considered in blooding.

You must take notice, that in wounds by Gunshot, there does not come forth
much blood, wherefore the day after he must use revulsive Phlebotomy, and take
so much blood as is proportionable to the fullness of blood; and the strength
of the party; and he must not fear to make aversion of the blood toward the
noble parts, so long as in such wounds there is no venomous quality.

As to that which concerns the blood of great Contusions within the body, it
must be evacuated either sensibly or insensibly, which insensible evacuation is
done by bloodings, Cupping-glasses, or Scarrifications, or by Horse-Leeches,
and that upon the same day, or the next morning.

And unto this Hippocrates seems to agree in his book of Fractures; in saying,
if any one is fallen down from on high, the same day one ought to give him
Physic or blood him: and Galen says upon this subject, that if any one is
fallen from an high place, although he have but little blood, (or nor enough),
It is so that some of that blood must be drawn from him to prevent it from
coagulating and corrupting in the inner parts of the body, being out of his
proper vessels; and in the cure of the Gangreen, one part of its curing lies
in Purgation and blooding. If the habit of the body be Plethorique or
Cacochymicall.

Besides, for curing the scald or Leprosy, if those who are infected with such
a disease, be of a sufficient age, they shall be blooded, and over and above
purged and blooded.

In the cure of the Ophthalmie, or inflammation of the uppermost skin of the
Eye, the Surgeon must propose three points. The first is the regulating
food. The second is evacuation of the Antecedent matter. And the third is the
application of Topicall medicaments: two of which I shall let alone, as not
conducing to this subject; and shall only say, that he who ought to evacuate
the Antecedent matter, shall perform it by purgation and Phlebotomie, and by
Cupping-glasses, applied to the shoulders, in like manner for the Vngula.

In the beginning of the curing, whereof you must use purgation and blooding;
especially if there be great inflammation.

And which is more in the cure of the Mydriasis, which is no other thing but a
dilatation of the pupil of the eye, either occasioned naturally or by
accident; its cure consists in nothing but applying upon the eye, repercussive
things, and to appease the dolor or pain^, and prohibit the defluxion by
regular diet, but specially by Phlebotomy, Cuping-glasses, frictions, and other
things, which one shall see benificiall.

For the pain in the Teeth occasioned by fluxion; one may let blood for
evacuating the antecedent matter, and all by the advice of a good Surgeon.

In the preservative cure of the Stone, especially if there be repletion, you
must evacuate as well by Medicaments, as by Phlebotomy, and vomiting, which is
a singular remedy to prevent the Stone. And if one should come to take it out,
you ought to purge the patient well, and blood him two days after he has
taken the Physic.

In the small Pox or Measles, diseases which are very frequent in Children, you
must in no wise blood them, unless there be great plenitude, or some
Complication of some disease, (as a Plurisie, Ophthalmie, Esquinancy, and such
like) or if it be not at the declination of the disease, or at least the first
or second day of sickness, at the furthest.

But you must take notice, that in several Maladies, you must not attend until
the Malady appear, to the end, to use Phlebotomy afterward, (as Galen says,)
but you ought to foresee it, blooding them in the Spring, as we shall discover
in the Part concerning Election.

Necessity has no set time for blooding in.
Finally, for the Necessity to use Phlebotomy, or not to use it; I say, that
then when the disease requires it, and that necessity presses, one may blood
at all times, in all seasons, and at all hours, be it night or day, always
considering the power and strength of the patient, the quantity and quality of
blood taken out, carrying ones self in all the Phlebotomique operations above
instanced, with a sound Judgment, accompanied with knowledge and experience;
In the contrary practice the Chyrurgion will very hardly arive to his proposed
end, in regard that then when he shall understand it to be necessary to use
Phlebotomy, when the saving of ones life is in dispute; and that he finds
himself all alone, not able to consult with any body, concerning the disease,
he ought not to present before himself any obstacles; whether of the quality or
greatness of the Person, or for fear of making the operation without advice,
for that will hinder him in making a good operation, because fear coming upon
him, and causing his hand to tremble, is sufficient to hinder such an effect of
the operation as we expect. The Plebotomist, ought to be bold.

Times of Election divided into two.
Let us come now to the time of Election, which is divided by Guidon into two
parts, (to wit) the inferior Root, and the superior Root: meaning by the
inferior root; The disposition of the body, of the time, the Region, the
Cu^tome, the force, and strength, and so of others. And by the superior Root;
the observation in the Concu^^^^ of the Stars: which time of Election we shall
deduce briefly, not having undertaken to discourse of any other things here,
save that. Yet, as I have said before, I will do it as succinctly as possibly I
can, by the assistance of the grace of God. To whom father, son, and spirit,
etc.

CHAP. IV. Of the time of Election for the inferior root, and of the superior
root, which reaches to the knowledge of the Stars, as well in the concurrence
which they have to the parts of our bodies, as upon the humors and Maladies
which happen therein.
THe Astrologicall Science is so admirable, that it has caused all the
Philosophical Physicians, as well Ancient as modern to say, that it is most
necessary to Chirurgions, to have the knowledge of it; as well for the
advantage and profit, which one may extract therefrom in several respects, as
for the necessity of knowing the concurrence of the Stars upon the bodies, the
influence whereof the Chirurgions ought to observe punctually upon our bodies,
in all his operations, especially in that of Phlebotomy. And all those who have
Treated thereof, have observed two times, as we have said here before, (to wit)
the time of Necessity, and the time of Election, in which time of necessity the
Surgeon will know how to regulate himself, according to the discourse before
inserted; Now it remains to speak of the time of Election, which according to
the doctrine of the good Guidon, we will divide into two parts, to wit, the
Inferior root, and the Superior root.

Observation concerning the time of Election.
Now the Inferior root may be thus understood. First concerning the concoction
of the food, it must be thoroughly performed, before you let blood, (if you have
eaten lately before): Also if ones blood be gross, it is necessary before
bleeding, to use a little exercise for the subtilising the blood; or at least
that one take some kind of things which have the faculty of subtilising it,
which are, the syrup of the herb Calamint, and such like; In the second place,
one must consider the force, and the strength, the temperature and the
necessity of him who ought to be blooded, to the end, that the re-iteration
thereof be not performed sooner, or latter, then is necessary, choosing a
serene day, and not subject to inconstancy, clear and not dull not rainy, in
the spring, and in Autumn, making choice also of a wind which is uncertain, as
if it be in Winter, you should take a day wherein the southwind blows.

A Digression.
But some one may demand here, If the winds have any power over our bodies,
that we need to make observation of them. To which I answer, that experience
lets us see the effects, which they produce upon our bodies, as the Plague, the
Coqueluch, (a new disease which troubled the French in the year 1510 and 1557.)
Plurisie, Aposthumes, Catharrs, Fluxions, small Pox, and Scabbinesse or the
Itch: also so many venomous Creatures, as Froggs, Toades, Locusts,
Caterpillars, Spiders, Flies, Hannetons, Snayles, Serpents, Vipers, Snakes,
Efts, Scorpions and Asps. Yea in all hot and moist times, if the Southwind
blow, Meats will Corrupt or taint in less then two hours, let them be but
fresh; wherefore one need not enter into doubt, that humane bodies enter in
affections contrary to nature, when the seasons pervert their qualities, by the
evil disposition of the Air, and the wind that is mingled within them. Unto
this I will adjoyn, that which the great Hippocrates has truly pronounced.

Hip. in his preface of Prognostic, and Galen in his Comment. [That the Air
has (I know not what) of divine in it self] in regard that it does (in blowing
through the Universal World) incompasse all things contained within it, and
does nourish them miraculously; sustaines and supports them firmly, and
entertaines them in an Amicable union; the whole Symbolizing with the Stars,
into which the Divine providence is infused; which changes the Air according
to his pleasure, and gives unto it power as well over the mutations of times as
the natural bodies. And therefore the Philosophers and Physicians have
expressly commanded us to have respect to the situation of places, and to the
Constitution of the Air, and concurrence of the Stars, when you are in
agitation for the preserving of health; Or to cure the sick, in which cases the
motion and change of the Air is very powerful.

Hip. his third book of Aphorisms Chapter 5. and 17. The same Hippocrates affirms
our bodies, do receive great alteration by the vicissitude of the times and
seasons of the year, as by the Southterne wind, which does render us subjected
to all sorts of Maladies, which acknowledge moisture for their first cause, and
it does infeeble our natural heat, which (in the opposite case of a cold and
dry wind) does fortify it self, and is rendered more vigorous, and does in
like manner render our spirits more Subtle and Active.

A pretty observation, upon the winds and our bodies.
Besides, there is ascribed to the four principal winds, four Elements, four
humors, four seasons, and four ages. The South wind or Auster does in quality
participate with Tender years, then to fire and Choler, and also to Summer.

Austraphricus, or a middle wind betwixt Auster and Africus, participates of the
stronger years, of the Air, of the blood, and the spring.

Subsolanus, or East wind, particip^tes of the more Grave years, of water,
Phlegm and Winter.

Favonius, or West wind, to the more decrepit and decayed years, to the Earth,
the melancholique humor, and to Autumn.

I should have insisted longer upon the property of the winds, but that I have
treated sufficiently of it in another place, In his Book called Grande Chirurg.
and have only spoken of it here, to show how they have power over our Bodies;
and therefore, not out of rule or order, if we observe them in Phlebotomie
Elective. But returning to our purpose, we say, that if the Veins be small, you
must stay till ten of the Clock in the morning, for at that time, they appear
better then at six a Clock: such are the veins of the Tongue, of the hands, and
the feet; observing also to let blood in the winter, on the left side or part;
and in Summer on the right, as says Guidon. The reason thereof is, says he,
because the humors which at those times, we endeavor to evacuate, are properly
in those parts; it being true also, that the cold humors do rule most in the
left part, and the hot humors in the right: behold therefore, why in Winter
(which is cold) we draw blood from the left part, and in the Summer from the
right.

The Region must be observed in blooding.
In like manner, the natural habit of the Body ought to be considered in the
emptying it of blood; for we do largely empty those who have large veins, and
who are not too lean, nor too whitely or pale; nor have their flesh too tender;
but on the contrary, we do less empty those who have but little blood, and the
flesh tender: in like manner, you must have respect to the Region; for if it be
very warm, as it is in France, the Country of Languedoc, and Provence, in this
place, you must make no great evacuation, the like must be observed in the cold
Region, because that the natural heat being emptied out with the blood, the
Region does chil the body too much, and the hot Region by its heat, does
debilitate the strength, for this very reason, the Summer season, nor the
Winter, are not in any wise, fit to breathe a vein in, but the most proper
time, is the beginning of the Spring, (because it is temperate) breathing the
vein in the morning, (not immediately) upon your wakening.

Besides, you must consider the former life of the Patient to wit, whether he
you are to blood, have used great quantity of meats or drinks, principally, of
such, as give great nourishment; for if so one may blood them boldly, but (if
on the contrary) not so much; notwithstanding, to those, who are too full of
exces, and are drunkards voluptuous, or Gourmandizers, never put your hand; for
truly, one does not help them much, by taking blood from them, because by their
intemperance, they immediately heap up abundance of humors.

Also one ought not neg igently to let slip the Custom of bleeding, for those
who have (...) themselves to it, do undergo it better then those who have not:
so that by very good r^^son, one may blood those, who have lost the benefit of
evacuation of excrements, by having forborne accustomed exercise.

But enough has been spoken concerning the inferior Root, let us speak now
concerning the superior; for as Galen says, (in Libro de Criticis diebus) and
also as Philosophy says, The infer^or World is governed by the superior, so
that it is necessary for Chirurgions, to consider the Influences of the seven
Planets, also of the Signs, and other heavenly bodies, to the end, that having
the knowledge thereof, he may take heed of blooding in the part which is
possessed by one of these Signs; which Planets and Signs, we will put in
order, according to the parts of the Body which they possess.

Upon what maladies the Planets rule.
In the first place, Saturn cold and dry, has respect unto the melancholique
humor, and upon the maladies composed of melancholy, and by consequence, rules
over the Spleep.

Jupiter hot and moist, has respect to the blood, and upon the maladies caused
by blood, and from that reason, governs the Liver.

Mars, hot and dry, has respect to the Choler, and upon Chollerique Diseases,
and by this means, governs the Cystis felix.

Sol, hot and dry, governs the Heart.

Venus, cold and moist, extends her power upon the Vessels appropriate to
generation.

Mercury, of a temperate Complexion, is indifferent to all the humors.

Luna, cold and moist, has power principally upon the Phlegm, and
Phlegmatique maladies, she rules in the brain; but her power is extended much
further, in that which concerns her property for elective blooding; for she
being delivered from her hindrance, and in Conjunction with Jupiter Venus and
Mercury, in the sixth, third, and fourth opposition, in her own sign, it is
excellent for blooding.

The Aspects of the Stars ought to be observed in blooding.
On the contrary, it is not good to let blood, the Moon being in Leo, or in 12
degrees before, or after the Dragon; and principally, you must take heed, that
Saturn be neither in opposition to, nor conjunction with her, or Gemini with
Mars; for such Aspects are very dangerous, but the Moon being in conjunction
with the three Planets above mentioned, which is Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury,
it is very good: Pisces and Sagitarius for the Phlegmatiques: the first part of
Libra, for the Melancholique: for the Chollerique Cancer and Pisces, and their
contraries, which are Leo, the second part of Libra, and the first of Scorpio:
the others are indifferent and mean for Phlebotomie; notwithstanding, we will
speak more particularly thereof hereafter.

Division of the times of the Moon.
But here it is worthy of observation, that the Moon, (the Mother of humors)
is divided into four parts: The first is from the Conjunction, or new Moon,
unto the first quarter, signified by Gemini, which continues seven days,
wherein it is good to blood young Children.

The second, is, from Gemini, until the Opposition, which is the full Moon, 7.
days more, wherein it is good to blood the young and active, about the age of
20. or 30. years.

The third, is from the opposition to the last part of Gemini when you may
blood the strong and ancient, from 30. to 60. years.

The fourth part of the Moon, is the last 7. days of her last Gemini, wherein
you must blood the decaying, who are above 50. years old, only in cases of
necessity; but in whatsoever Aspect the Moon be, you must not make incision on
any member, nor touch it with any Instrument or Cauterizer, either actual or
potential, if the Moon be in the Sign, ruling that member: You must take
notice, that the third quarter is best for Phlebot. Besides, the first quarter
is hot and moist, the second, hot and dry; the third, cold and moist, and the
fourth cold and dry; It Is true, that at all times, the Moon is effectively cold
and moist; but in her several quarters, she does acquire several Complexions,
according to the several Aspects of the Sun, so that we say, Every one ought to
be blooded, in that quarter wherewith he has most agreement, or likeness; and
the first quarter, begins after the Conjunction of the Moon with the Sun. But
you must here take notice, that by Conjunction we mean, when the Sun and Moon
are in the same Sign: And by opposition, or full Moon, we mean, when the Moon
is in one Sign, and the Sun is in an opposite Sign in the half of the Zodiac.

But the Aspects of the Moon are Conjunction, Opposition, Quadrate, Trine and
Sextile, marked by the Astrologers, after this manner.

Conjunction in this manner. Opposition thus. Quadrate. Trine. Sextile.
The propriety of the twelve Signs, upon the humane bodies.
Besides, we consider in the eighth Sphere, which is the Starry Heaven, (and
which is called the Zodiac) twelve Signs; whereof three are of the nature of
fire, which are Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, proper for Phlegmatique persons,
(except in the burning parts above mentioned) Signs which pass by eight
Degrees, unto the thirteenth degree of Sagittarius, and does strengthen the
attractive faculty.

The other three are of the nature of water, to wit, Cancer, Scorpio, and
Pisces, very proper for choleric persons, good to comfort the expulsive
faculty, and to administer Laxative Physic.

The other three, of the nature of Earth, which are Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricorn, very good to sanguine persons, and good to comfort the retentive
faculty.

The other three, participate of the Air, to wit, Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius:
these are very propet for melancholy persons, and good to cherish the digestive
faculty. But for the knowing upon what parts of our Bodies the said Signs do
rule, we will set it down in order; to the end, that the Surgeon commit no
error therein; for the day and hour wherein they concur, you must have recourse
to some good Almanac, Ephemeris, or rather to the Ephemerides of Origan, which
will continue yet, until the year 1660.

You must take notice here, that I send you to the Ephemeris, to know in what
day, hour, degree and minute, the Sign will rule; for it is out of my design,
to teach it you here, or to know their Ascendant Conjunction, or Oppositions,
good or bad, although in my Book called (Grande Chirurgerie) I speak of it
largely enough, wherefore I say, you shall have recourse to the Ephemerides: In
the mean time, I will pursue the declaring upon what parts of the body the
Stars do rule, with their proprieties. And in the first place, Aries is hot and
dry, of the nature of fire, he governs the head and face of a man; and it is
good to blood, when the Moon is there, unless it be in the part which the Moon
governs.

The parts wherein the Signs rule together, with their property concerning
blooding.
Taurus is cold and dry, of the nature of the Earth, and governs the neck and
Windpipe; and it is bad to make use of bleeding, the Moon being in that Sign.

Gemini is hot and moist, of the nature of Air, and governs the shoulders and
Arms, and hands; is ill for blooding.

Cancer is cold and moist, of the nature of water, and governs the Breast, the
stomach and Lungs, and is indifferent: neither too good, nor too bad for
blooding.

Leo is hot and dry, of the nature of fire, and governs the back and sides, and
is ill for blooding.

Virgo is cold and dry, of the nature of the Earth, governs the Belly and the
Intrals, is neither very good, nor bad for blooding.

Libra is hot and moist, of the nature of the Air, and governs the Navel, the
Reins, and the lower part of the Belly; good to blood in.

Scorpio is cold and moist, of the nature of water, and governs the parts for
generation, is neither good nor bad.

Sagittarius is hot and dry, of the nature of fire, and governs the Thighs; is
good to let blood,

Aquarius is hot and moist, of the nature of Air, and governs the Legs; is
neither good nor bad for letting blood.

Pisces is cold and moist, of the nature of water, governs the Feet; and is
neither good nor bad to let blood.

Aries, Libra, and Sagittarius, are very good; Virgo, Scorpio, and Aquarius and
Pisces, are indifferent; Taurus, Gemini, and Leo, and Capricorn, are evil.

Yet we say, that the Moon being in Trixe, and Sextile with Venus, it is a good
time to purge Choler by Electuary; with the Sun, it is good to purge Phlegm by
drinks with Jupiter, it is good to purge melancholy by Pills.

Division of the Signs.
Furthermore, you must take notice, that every one of the Signs, is divided
into 30. Degrees, from whence it follows, that in the whole Zodiac, there are
360. degrees; and again, every degree is divided into 60. minutes, and every
minute into 60. seconds, and every minute into 60. thirds, and so of the rest
following, until ten.

The rising and setting of the Signs.
Besides, you must take notice, that when we have the longest day of Summer,
which is to say, then when the Sun is in the beginning of Cancer, there arises
six Signs in a day, which do rise directly, and in the night six Signs
obliquely; And on the contrary, when we have the shortest day of the year, to
wit, the Sun being in the beginning of Capricorn, then six Signs rise in a day
obliquely, and the six of the night directly; but when the Sun is either in the
one or the other Equinoctial point, then they rise, three Signs directly, and
three obliquely in a day, and in the night in like manner: For there is a Rule,
that let the day or the night be long or short, as you will, six Signs rise in
the day, and six by night; so that either for the length, or the shortness of
the day or night, neither the more, or less Signs do rise. For the knowledge
of which Signs, you must take notice of the Characters following, as the
Astrologers mark them.

Aries with such a Sign. Taurus such a one. Gemini such. Cancer. Leo. Virgo.
Libra. Scorpio. Sagitarius. Capricornus. Aquarius. Pisces.
Let this suffice for the discovery concerning the 12. Signs, let us come now
to the 7. Planets: whereof we should here make a Table or Figure; but because
we have sent the Reader to Ephemerides, in relation to the Signs, we will do
the like concerning the Planets, contenting my self only in this place, to set
down their Characters, for the discovery of the more easy understanding them,
and their differences. Behold then how the Astrologers mark them; Saturn thus.
Jupiter thus. Mars thus. Sun thus. Venus thus. Mercury thus. Luna thus.


Here follows the difference of the Planets, as well for purging and blooding,
as for the making other operations upon humane bodies.

Most good. Indifferent. Bad.
The Surgeon must Encounter the Stars.
And you must take notice, that then when Mercury is with a good Planet, he
augments its goodness, and with a bad one its Malignity: wherefore it is that
when one is wounded, you must take notice whether Mercury be not with some bad
Planet, which rules the part wounded; and if so, then the Surgeon must
Encounter the Stars, and so you must mind these things, but most especially
in blooding; to the end that (we having done nothing improperly through our
negligence) may have an occasion of praise and thanksgiving, to the Author of
all things: to whom Father, Son, and Spirit, be honor, and glory, for ever,
Amen.

CHAP. V. That it is necessary that the Surgeon have the Astronomicall
figure in his study, or in his shop; and of the profit that proceeds therefrom,
as well for the sick persons as for those who exercise it; which is proved by a
History, and other examples. As also, that it is better to keep and cleanse the
blood then to evacuate it. With the description of two admirable remedies, for
this end.
The good desire of the Author.
I Should desire by good reason, as well for the profit of those who search
relief or Remedy from Phlebotomy, as for the spiritual contentment of those
that practice it, (to the end that the whole, might be to the honor and glory
of God) that every Surgeon had within his shop, the Astronomicall figure, as
formerly the Ancients had; and who had recourse unto it, then when they would
know the Domination of a Starr, on the part whereon they were to operate,
observing with all their power the rising and setting of the above mentioned
Signs, and their constellations; insomuch that the Ancients have not found it
to be unprofitable. Of the truth whereof (among several of them) Arnoldus de
villa nova, shall be a most faithful witness. Therefore I shall again heartily
entreat the Chirurgions, that they would take heed unto it, and not to pretend
that their Art is subject to Calumny; seeing it is they themselves, which are
the cause of their arts being so Calumniated, whilst they neglect that which is
most necessary to be known in their profession, to wit, Astronomy.

The ignorance of Astronomy is, cause of great evils.
Insomuch that not having the knowledge of it, there does arive many evil
Accidents, and the vulgar being ignorant of the causes of them, do Calumniate
and slight all the Judgments of Chirurgions and their (so admirable) Art
together. See how it is weighed and esteemed at naught and contemned by the
ignorant, and all this by reason of the small care which Chirurgions have to
mind it well. But, to show that the knowledge of the Stars is most necessary
for a Surgeon, I will insert a History which may serve as an example to
those, who shall know well how to put it in practice.

A Remarkable History.
It happened that at Chatellerault, a Surgeon having blooded a Maid in the
right arm, in the time when the Moon passed under the sign of Gemini: on the
next day about noon there came upon her a great defluxion causing inflammation,
with a fever: at the same time this Maid goes complaining to another
Surgeon, saying, that one had spoiled her, and had pricked her Nerve, and
that it rendered her a Cripple, using revilings concerning him that had blooded
her: they appeased her as well as they could, promising her, it would be
nothing, and that she should be suddenly cured, applying unto her at the same
instant a Cataplasm, continuing Cataplasm upon Cataplasm, and making Revulsion
by blooding; but notwithstanding all they could do, the Arm became extremely
swelled, yea to the danger of her person: insomuch that in a short time, the
same was known through the whose town, and behold here the Poor Surgeon is
so disgraced, as not to be ever received into any house upon any occasion
whatsoever, (the present age is so scruplous, being ignorant of things how they
may happen). Which he seeing, resolved to frame a rational excuse to defend his
reputation, and to maintain his innocence, which he did when there was a pretty
Company together, in the house of the said sick person: his reasons were these.
That she was upon the point of her Terms, and that her body was Cachochymicall
and full of humors, and that at the time when she was blooded, she helpd at
the washing a Buck, and also to do other business of the house, and other
things which might excite defluxion and attraction in the part, having been
blooded before; for if so it had been, said he, that I had pricked the Nerve or
Tendon, the Accidents would have appeared in the same instant, as convulsion,
Spasm, great pain in the part, difficulty in the Action; none of which
happening, (says he), one may thereby judge, that it was none of my fault.

In Lunar purgations, the vein of the Arm must not be opened.
But that is contrary, for his reasons served to fight against himself; for
since she was upon the point of her purgations, he ought not to have been so
rash, as to have opened a vein on her Arm, but rather the Saphena for
provoking them, and several other reasons which rendered him mute, confessing
as it were by his silence, that he was in fault; but if he had known how to
have discoursed or argued, concerning the science of Astronomy, he had been
heard attentively, in regard that was not vulgar to them. Notwithstanding,
continuing to dress the Maid, she was cured in three weeks, but not without
having endured a great deal of pain.

I have been willing to relate this story, (which happened in the year 1613. in
the said Chastelerand in the shop of a Surgeon named Bureau, to the end, I
might induce and provoke the Surgeon to learn the Constellation of the
Stars, with all his power, for otherwise it is impossible that he should come
to his intended end of Phlebotomy, Elective; without some dangerous accident,
which I have seen happen several times: but for brevity sake, I shall pass on.

Yet notwithstanding Guidon dela Nanche speaking of blooding in his Tract,
[Dela Sante Corporelle] says, that he has seen several expert, and famous
Chirurgions of his time, as well at Paris and Mont-pelliere, as at other good
Cities of France, and at the Court, and Armies-Royall, let blood, which has
caused swellings in the Arms, and other parts which have been blooded, and
many other evil accidents, which (as he says, flattering himself) did arive by
the fault of the Patient, pulling back or throwing up his Arm, through fear,
or sudaine apprehension, or by having lain upon his Arm after blooding, or by
sleeping, or by having wrought, or exercised the Arm. In the second Tome, lib.
2. Chap. 16. He here deceives himself exceedingly, for if he had searched
further, he would have found that it is rather the fault of the Phlebotomiser,
then the Phlebotomised; for in regard they are ignorant of the concurrence of
the Stars, and of the hour and time wherein they govern the part, they commit
these blockish and irreparable faults.

Objection.
This is also for answer to that which may be objected. That several sick
persons are blooded at the same time, and yet they are not ill: It may be so,
but I say, that if there happen no Malady in the part touched with the Lancet,
yet there happens other Symptoms, as vomitting, weakness, vertigo,
Giddy-headed, souning, nocturnall pains, and sometimes death.

Accidents ariving in blooding, through ignorance of the Stars.
Objection.
But (may some say) that is by reason of the great evacuation of blood. To that
I answer, that experience lets us see every day, that when there has not been
drawn out, perhaps an half ounce of blood from the patient, that he falls into
some one of these accidents.

Objection.
Yes (but will some reply) that is because he has conceited such a thing but
who has ever heard say that, that which one has premeditated, (it may be a
day or two before) is capable to do us hurt, when we come to effect it? It
cannot be in anywise wherefore let us leave all these Trifles, and let us
follow verity.

Objection.
But (will some one reply) the knowledge of the Stars with the observation of
them, is prohibited?

To that I answer, That in truth if one should believe that the Stars had
Sovereign power over men, he would be worthy of Censure: but we do not find in
any place, that any person has ever been blamed, for knowing and observing the
elevation of the Stars.

Advertisment of the Author.
For Conclusion, I shall content my self, to admonish the Surgeon
Phlebotomist, to behave himself wisely, with reason, in the extraction of
blood, for it is the treasure of life; insomuch that you had better conserve
and cleanse the blood, then to evacuate it inconsiderably; in regard that does
shorten our days, and is the cause of several other Accidents, as we have
said elsewhere.

But, will some say, By what reason would you make use of the extraction of
blood, [in the time of necessity,] as when a man falls from on high, in great
Contusions of the interior and exterior parts; or when one has received some
dry blow, or in the Plurisie, and other Maladies, whereof you discourse, in
your [time of necessity.] To that I answer, that it is true, I discourse of it,
for three causes, which induce me to discourse of it, in that manner. The first
is the honor and respect which I bear to the Hippocratique Doctrine, and that
of Galen, for having been nourished therein, ever since my young years.

The second is, because by that means, I would give to understand, (as I shall
show in a book which I will make apart from this) the agreeing reason and
affimity, that there is between the books of Hippocrates, and Galen, and those
of Paracelsus, as I have made one Chapter thereof in my [Petite Chirurgie
Chymique.] The third reason is, That so the Learned Surgeon may make use of
it, as he shall know to be necessary; for since in all his operations, he ought
to follow Nature, he ought also to take special heed to maintain and preserve
Her, and not to alter her, as he does in the emission of blood, which is the
Treasure of Life, as before I have said.

Definition of the Pleurisy.
For, I pray, how can it be possible, that the blood, which is out of its
vessels spilt, in capacity of certain parts of the body, yea even Clotted and
Coagulated therein, can re-enter into the vessel to be evacuated by blooding,
for example, in the Pleurisy which is a tumor made of subtle blood which
comes out of the vein Azuges, stopped between the Membrana pleura, and the
Muscels Mesopluri; in the curing whereof they prescribe Blooding, Glisters,
Syrops, Tablets, and other like remedies. But I ask what is it that blooding
serves for there? seeing that the blood (which as we have said is out of the
veins) cannot enter thereinto again, to be thereby evacuated; I know well,
that they will answer me, that the matter, continued in the same place, does
not enter into the veins to be evacuated; but that they use it for the
hindering of any more, from flowing into that place; and also that the
Medicaments given inwardly, do work more easily. Oh this is a pretty doctrine,
for the healing of a patient! to weaken nature, (which one ought rather to
corroborate) for the rendering her more strong; to strive against the disease,
for curing the Pleurisy, they evacuate the good and pure blood, which ought to
be preserved for maintaining the strength of the Patient, and leave the impure
blood in the body, which ought to be taken away.

I will not therefore say, that blooding being performed in the beginning of
the true Pleurisy, is not profitable, but is very necessary being performed
opportunely: but (oh unfortunate time!) I have seen those who in all the
seasons of that Malady, do not forbear with too bold a rashness, to evacuate
this Treasure of the life.

But, to the end that none may continue any longer in this error, and that I
may not amuse my self by disputing in these things, therein following Galen,
who is not willing that one should dispute neither of Apollo, nor of
Aesculapius, but that one should endeavor to enlarge the Doctrine, for I know
that one may alleadg Sophistical Arguments to prove falsities, but it must be
to those who know not how to guard themselves from them; I shall only say that
Hippocrates understood well what he said, when he affirmed, that by probable
and subtle fictions in Physic, there did often happen great and heavy falls.
From whence one may perceive that Physic is fallen so miserably, having been
called (by its own props or upholders) opinionate, or subject to opinion, and
Conjecturall. (616. Praecept. Com. 2 Aph. 2. de Comp. me Secund. loc.) That the
verity thereof cannot appear but by subtle Arguments, and that is is
uncertain. This is it which has induced Galen to reprehend Hippocrates for
having called Physic Conjectural, which he had need to do, seeing it is
neither Conjecturall, nor imaginary, but on the contrary, Scientifique.

So that as a kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand, can Physic
subsist when the supports thereof are divided among themselves? That is it which
has given occasion to the Vulgar, to slight it, as it is slighted. But
wherefore do we assemble seven or eight, as well Physicians as Chirurgions, for
consultation upon one disease, which if it be known, what need is there of
opinion upon it?

In short, either the Science of Physic is True, or it is not True. If it be
true, its rules are certain. But it is true, that it is true, because it is of
Gods Creation, and God and nature make nothing vain: It follows then, that its
precepts are true. Which Hippocrates perceived, although he was an Ethnique, in
regard he says, the Philosophical Physician is like unto God; but he cannot
be so, who follows not Truth. That is it which I desire to follow, avoiding, to
the best of my power, Sophistryes, which are the only causes of nourishing
falsities, wherewith (to my great trouble) our Surgery is replenished. But
to the end, as I have said before, I may not keep the Reader in such an error,
I give him two Remedies, for all sorts of Contusions, Dry-blowes, Bruises,
Phlegmatick-Swelling, blood clotted, or congeled within the body, by reason of
a fall from some high place, In which, from these two Remedies borrowed from
Paracelsus, one shall see a very great effect, without running to Phlebotomy,
as many who follow the ordinary error do. One may by these serve himself to
his own great honor, the benefit of the Patient, and to the Glory of God.

Of these two Medicines, the one you may take inwardly, when you suspect there
is some quantity of blood spilt and coagulated in the inner parts of the body;
and the other is to be applied outwardly, when the Phlegmatic Tumor appears to
the sense of the eye; and both of them together may serve, as in Pleurisy,
Eshimose, (collection of Corrupt matter, within the body, between Breast and
Lungs) Empyeme, and such like, as I intend to mention in the book which I have
heretofore promised, by the assistance of God.

Let us come now to the description of these two Remedies, which are as
follows.

A Remedy for the external Parts.
. Flowers of white Mullein M.j. flowers of St. Iohns-Wort M. iij. root of
Asclepias or Swallow-wort M. ss. Mumie j. fresh oil Olive Lib. ij. There
bentine al. Turpentine Lib. j. White Wind Lib. iij. which you must boil
together on a soft fire, for the space of five hours, then you must afterward
put it into a Glass well stopped, and set it in the Sun, leave it there for the
space of a Month or six weeks; then you must strain the whole through a piece
of Cloth, and Squeze well the dregs; and you shall have an oil, incomparable
for the effect above mentioned, which you must keep carefully, and therewith
anoint the part, evening and morning.

A proper Remedy for the Internal parts.
Rec. of good Rubarbe, ij. Mumie, ss. Red Gum, Lack, Sperma Caeti, j.
Bolarmeniack, and Terra Sigillata, an ss. root of Asclepias iij. you must beat
them all to powder, of which you must give the weight of a drag. with the water
Florum Tiliae, Tilia is a tree bearing fruit as great as a bean, round and in
which are seeds like to Aniceseeds, some call it the Linden tree, or the like,
for it is most good to take away the Phlegmatic tumor, as well within the
body as without. There is no necessity of discovering any other of these
Medicines, now, because it is not my intent in this place, for I have not
brought in these two in this place, but only to show that one may cure these
kinds of Maladies, and several others, without having recourse to Phlebotomy,
of which Medicines the Learned Surgeon will know how to make use according
as he shall see occasion; and will invent others, according as necessity shall
require. But above all, I entreat those who shall read this little treatise,
that they will not slight it: for I have not taken pen in hand, to Teach; but
to give wholesome advice and Council for the sick, and most necessary for the
augmentation of the honor, (which the true Chirurgions aspire unto) and which
is more, to provoke to do better, as I have said elsewhere; to the end, that
doing and persuing from good to better, we may go into heaven with God: to whom
Father, Son, and holy Spirit, be honor and glory, Amen.

CHAP. VI. Of Veins to be blooded for several Infirmities which come upon men's
bodies; also of the use and benefit of Cupping-glasses, with scarrification,
and without scarrification; what must be observed in that Operation; and
lastly, of Horsleeches.
ALthough it is true, I have with good reason here before said, that it is not
needful to blood for all maladies, and at random without any consideration, as
is done ordinarily: yet I shall not omit to describe the number of the veins,
proper to be blooded, with the benefit of opening them: together, with the use
of Cuping-glasses and Horsleeches; for I shall thereby please the Galienists
and Paracelsians; and it is also the end which I have respected.

Let us begin then at the Vein, in the middle of the forehead, which is
between the two eyebrows, usually called Recta, sive preparata, the breathing
of that vein is good against old Infirmities, for foul Ulcers, Leprosy,
scabbiness, Morphew, Inpetigine, in Maladies of the eyes, in old continuing
pains of the head, in the affections of the brain, in madness or raging.

The two veins of the Temples, are proper to be breathed in the Megrim, in the
great pain of the head, in continuing maladies, old Inflammation of the upper
skin of the eye (called Ophthalmy) in cloudy dullness of mind, watring of the
Eyes, Pimples, or Scabs on the Eyelid.

The veins of the little corners of the Eyes, which makes a little extuberance
upon the Os Jugale, are to be blooded against the same Maladies, as those of
the Temples.

The veins behind, or round about the ears, which appear in the hollow place,
behind them in the place, where (if you put your finger, you will feel
pulsation) is to be breathed, for the Megrim, old Cathars, the scald, for
reviving or repairing the memory; for Ulcers of the Ears or Neck, for clearing
or mundifying the countenance, for the pain and defluxion in the teeth, for the
pains, and ripe imposthumes and Ulcers of the Head.

The Vein which is between the two Cartilages of the Nose, for the Frenzy, in
acute Fevers, old pains of the Head, the old redness of the Face, for the
trouble of bleared Eyes running with water; for dullness or heaviness in the
Head, for Hemorrhoides, the itching, or tickling of the Nose, and Aposthumes
thereof.

The veins under the Tongue, which are called Ranulles, for Aposthumes of the
Throat, and the mouth, for the Squinacy, (you must first blood the Cephalique)
for the heaviness of the tongue, for the Apoplexy, and for all pains of the
teeth, for the pain and malady of the gums, for Cathars, and other defluxions
of the Head, for the Cough, for the spots of the face, and in the passions of
the Jaws.

The vein, which is between the Chin and the under lip, for the stinking of
ones mouth, for the corroding, breaking out, and for chapt lips, or soreness of
the gums, for Ulcers of the Nose, for an ill complexioned face, for the pains
of the Dugs, or Paps, and for the pain of the Head.

The two veins of the neck, called Jugulary Veins, the one on the right side,
and the other on the left, for the Impetigo, or Ringworm, for Serpigo being
Pushes, and angry read wheals, the Noli me tangere; for the Cancer Corrosive,
in the swelling of the Gums for the Squinacy, for the Asthma, for a hoarse
voice, for the Aposthumes of the Lungs, for the Passion of the Spleen, for the
pain of the sides.

The Cephalique Vein which they call humerall, Cubitall between the thumb and
the forefinger, one may make incision of it, without any danger in the superior
part of it, in the bending of the Arm, against the infirmities of the Stomach,
and the shaking in the hand.

The Median, in the bending of the Arm, between the Cephalique, and the
Basilique, which is commonly called black, and the vein of the heart; and this
is for the evacation of all the humors, in maladies of the whole body,
principally those of the heart, and strengthens the stomach, or appetite, for
all the Passions of the stomach, of the Liver, of the Spleen, of the Lungs, of
the Breast, and of all the Body.

The Basilique, called the great Basilique of the Liver, for the Spleen, the
Breast, the Lungs, the Stomach, the Liver, abundance of Choler, and for the
heat of the Liver, for the pain of the Teeth, of the Back, of the sides, parts
laterales, and of all the members, for the Hemorrhogie of the Nose, for the
itching and pricking in the skin, and in Fevers.

The Salvatella, called the Splenatique vein, between the Auricular, or little
finger, and the Medicus (otherwise called the Ring-finger) declining toward
it; the breathing of that vein, to wit, that on the right hand, is prevalent in
the affections, and obstructions of the Liver, and that of the left hand, in
the stoppings of the Spleen; in short, the one or the other, is prevalent for
the pain or the Heart, Yellow Jaundice to all Fevers, to the obstruction in
the breast, for the yellowness coming in the eyes.

The Apoplectique, or vena poplitis, which is at the bending of the knee, for
the provocation of the Menstrue, for pains in Arms, for affections in the
Loins, for the provocation of Hemorrhoides for pains in the Blather, for
passions in the testicles, for the infirmity of the feet, for all maladies of
the Articulations.

The Ischiadique, or Sciatique Vein, under the Vein which runs acrosse the
outward Ancle of the Foot, called Maleolla, or round about it; for the pains of
the Ischium, or hip-Gout, the Foot-Gout, Leprosy, Varices or Veins sweld with
corrupted blood, for pains in the Bladder, for the difficulty of Urine, for
Ulcers and swellings of the Testicles, in Ulcers and Tumors of the Kidneys, and
other evils.

The Saphaena, under the interior Maleolla, or Ancle, vein of the Foot; yea,
which runs a cross it sometimes; for all the passions of the Matrix, for all
the affections of the Testicles, old scabbiness, salt Phlegm, for the griefs
of the Cox. and tibia, It strongly provokes the Menstrue and the Hemorrhoides;
for the purging of the Vterus, after birth of a Child; it takes away
barrenness; for the affections of the yard, for the derivation of blood from
the Matrix, Yard, and Testicles.

The vena Tarsi, appearing and ending about the great Toes, for the vices of
the Bladder, to the faults or spots of the Face, inflammation of the upper skin
of the Eye, called Ophthalmia; for redness of the Eyes, blear-eyedness, running
with water, being red and soar; for the Cancer, for the Varices of the Tibia,
with corrupt matter, and for the maladies near the Saphena.

The Vein in the middle of the Foot, is to be blooded for pains, or maladies in
the Kidneys; for the weariness, and dull heaviness of the Members of the Body;
Apoplexy, Palsy, and Epilepsie.

Of Cupping-glasses, and of the benefit of the use of them in general.
Intentions for which one should apply Cupping-glasses.
Every one knows well, what Cupping-glasses are.

They are to be applied, where blooding cannot well be performed; some are with
scarrifications, and others without it; those with scartification, are for the
evacuation of a matter Conjunct in one part; and the other is, to make
attraction; they are also applied to make revulsion and derivation in several
parts; as for deflexion into the Eyes, the Cupping-glasses are to be applied
upon the shoulders; for the flux of the blood at the Nose they are to be
applied to the Hypocondryes.

Besides, they being applied without scarrification, are good for diverting of
Aposthumes from the Noble parts, to the ignoble parts; and to draw the heat to
a member debilitated by cold.

They are to be used in the Cholique, being applied above the Navel, or under
it, for easing of the pain, for drawing from the Center to the Circumference.

To evacuate the windiness, to stop the Hemorrhoides, to reduce the members
into their place.

For the pain of the Matrix they being put upon the Navel, the part being first
well warmed.

For the immoderate Flux of the Menstrue, if they be applied about the Region
of the Paps, at the same time.

Also for the Flux or bleeding at Nose, (as we have said already) being applied
upon the Liver, if it be the right Nostril that bleeds; and if it be the left
Nostril that bleedes, you must apply them to the Region of the Spleen.

For drawing pestiferous Aposthumes from the Interior parts, and in venerious
Bubons.

For diverting the blood which flows immoderately to one place.

To stop the Fluxes of the stomach.

For the drawing out of Poison, and for the coldness of the Ventricle.

But in the use of them, you must consider four things.

First, the matter of them.

Secondly, The manner of applying them.

Thirdly, The time.

And Fourthly, The Intentions and parts to be applied to.

In the matter, you must consider three things.

First, The substance, which is either of Horn, or of Glass, or Metal, or
Earth.

Secondly, The quantity of them, which is great, mean, or little.

And Thirdly, The Figure or Form, which is Circular, or round, and somewhat
long, like a Horn.

The manner of applying them, is with fire, or else without fire, and that with
scarrifications, or without scarrifications, (as we have said) deep or
superficial.

The time of the Application, is either necessary, (which being) there is
nothing to be respected, or Elective, and then you must take heed, that it be
with the necessary regularity proposed by Guidon.

Concerning the intentions we have spoken enough thereof already before.

Notwithstanding, you must take notice, that the Attraction of Cupping-glasses,
does not depend upon any natural faculties of them, nor of any similitude, but
upon an accidental virtue of hindering of the Vacuum.

This Attraction is made, when the fire for want of ventilation, or breathing,
(being choked) does degenerate into Air, and possesses less room then when
it was fire; for, as the Philosophers say, one little part of Air, produces
ten parts of fire; and on the contrary, ten parts of fire turn themselves into
one part of air; so that nature to supply the place of the fire, contracts the
flesh, the Spirits, and the humors into its place.

Finally, the parts whereupon the Cupping-glasses are to be applied, are the
shoulders, the neck, the hinder part of the Head, the Hypocondyres, the Reins
of the back, the stomach, the Matrix, the Thighs, the Buttocks; for the better
understanding whereof, we will mention them more particularly, and distinctly,
together, with the maladies wherein they are profitable.

Of the use of Cupping-glasses, as to the parts or places, as well with
scarrification, as without it.
In the first place, Cupping-glasses being applied upon the Head, are very
commodious in madness or distraction, scotomie canicie, manginess, scabbiness,
knots or pimples in the eyes, and in the maladies of the nape of the neck; but
they do prejudice the Intellect, and the memory, because they do stupifie.

They being applied to the forehead, do help very much in the pain of the
hinder part of the head, in the heaviness and swelling thereof, in all
affections of the brain, for madness and distraction; for old infirmities of
the face, Ring-worm or Tetter, Ulcers, Leprosy, scabbiness and Morphew, for
all the maladies of the Eyes, and for the Vertigo, or swimming in the Head; but
they do prejudice the reason and Intellect.

They being applied to the Chyne, are very profitable against Pustules, and
swellings in the mouth, for maladies of the Teeth and Gums, for the Spots and
viciousness of the face, for Wens, for swellings in the throat, for all
maladies of the Jaws.

They being applied between the neck and shoulders, are very commodious for
maladies of the face, of the neck, Teeth, nostrils, eyes, for the stinking
smell of the mouth, for Ring-worms or Tetters, for the Squinacy, having first
opened the Cephalique, or median vein, but they do prejudice the memory, and
cause the head to shake.

They being applied between the shoulders, in the part against the heart and
stomach, are very commodious in the affections of the Breast, in the maladies
of the neck, for the Asthma or Spasme, for the trembling or quivering of the
heart, and for the blood in the throat; but they do prejudice the stomach and
the heart: the which in its trembling, does not send forth the blood.

They, are to be applied upon the breast in the pain thereof, and for the
Asthma, on the Region of the Liver, for the Inflammation thereof, upon the
back, for the pains that happen therein, over against the part grieved.

They being applied upon the stomach they avail much in swellings thereof; and
when it is grown cold, and for the humors and viciousness thereof.

They being applied upon the hands, are prevalent against all the distempers of
the Head, Eyes and Ears.

They being applied upon the Reyns, are prevalent against the Apotemes of the
Coccix, Sabbine, so Hemorrhoides, Gout, Leprosy, for the itching of the back,
and scabbiness there; for the windiness and coldness thereof, and other
distempers for the winds in the Bladder.

They being applied upon the Navel, are prevalent against the Maladies of the
Matrix, and for the Cholick.

Upon the Hypocondries, to draw back the Impetuous issuing of blood at the
Nostrils, and for immoderate Flux of blood from the Uterus.

They being applied to the Loins, stop the Hemorrhoides, and cause the pain of
the back to cease; as also of the Matrix, and of the Loins, to repress the too
strong desire of Venery, to heal the scabbiness and Aposthumes within side of
the Thighs.

They being applied upon the Buttocks, do cleanse the blood, and are beneficial
for the cure of the white Menstrue, for the pains of the privities, and of the
Loins and the Breast.

In the Interior part of the Coccyx, for the Aposthumes of the Testicles, in
the Issues, or sores of the sides, and of the Coccyx.

They are to be applied on the hinder part of the Coccyx, in Aposthemes, and
running sores of the Buttocks.

They are to be applied under the Ham, or bending of the knee, for the
pulsation of the sinew, near the knee, which turns the Leg inwards, which is
occasioned by a cold humor, and for Ulcers and running sores of the Feet.

They being applied to the fleshy parts of the Thighs, they do good to all the
parts of the Body; for the Tumors, or swellings of the Buttocks, and for
Aposthemes thereof; for pains of the Reins of the back, and the Bladder; for
Fluxions in the Eyes, for affections in the Head, for cold Aposthemes, and
tremblings of the knees, for maladies of the stomach, or breast, pains of the
back, for Aposthemes of the Testicles, for wounds and ulcers in the Coccyx, and
in the privy parts; yea, in the old pains of the Matrix, for purging the Matrix
of its superfluities, for the Aposthemes and sores of the hands, to provoke the
Hemorrhoides, and the Menstrue; for the Sciatica, Gout, and Vertigo, or
swimming in the Head.

I should have spoken much more of the utility of Cupping-glasses; but I
forbear for brevity sake. And come now to speak of observation concerning the
manner of the use of them.

Those things which ought to be observed, before applying of Cupping-glasses.
THose who are best versed in the Rules and Observations, Astrological and
Medicinal, are of opinion, that you ought to apply Cupping-glasses, or little
Horns, for that purpose, upon Phlegmatique persons, when the Moon is in Aries,
or Sagittarius. To the Cholerique, when she is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces.
To the melancholique, when the Moon is found in Gemini, Libra, or Aquarius:
notwithstanding, you must take notice, not to scarrifie the part, when the Moon
is in the Sign which governs it, and in general, not to use it, neither with
Glasses, nor with little Horns, when the Moon is in Leo: it is true, there are
Horns applied at all times, but it is without Fire or Candle.

You must also take notice, not to scarrifie before four years of age, nor
after 60. And you must also avoid that operation, in the new and full Moon.

The scarrifications may be made about the second or third hour of the day, an
hour before eating or drinking.

The place where one ought to apply the Cupping-glasses, or Horns, should be
well fomented with warm water, or use frictions for half an hour, or an hour,
with a warm Linen Cloth; especially, to such who you suppose have thick blood;
or, if it be in the winter time.

Besides, you must not apply them, before the Body be empried, or purged;
neither are they proper in a Plethorique body, nor in any part affected with a
Phlegmon; as for the rest, the wise Surgeon will dispense with these rules,
according to the violence of the Malady. Necessity derogating from all Laws.

Here follows the use of Horseleeches.
There is no so dull block-head, but knows what Horsleeches are; they are
ordinarily applied there where Cupping-glasses can take no place, as on the
nose, upon the lips, gums, fingers, privities, Hemorrhoides, at the entrance of
the Os Matricis and other places. One should choose them, such as are bred in
good clear and running waters, which have yellow streaks upon their backs, and
not those among rushes, in bad waters, and which are of a horrible color, and
have a great head, because those are venomous. Gui. Treatise 7. Section 1.
Chap. 1. And you must not apply them, being fresh taken, but keep them a whole
day in clean water; to the end, they may vomit forth that which they have in
their Bellies. Oribas. Lib. 1. Chap. 15. It is good to leave them without
water, three or four hours space, before you apply them; for they will, after
that, be more greedy. You must wash the place, where you apply them, with warm
water, and then dry, and rub the place with a Linen Cloth, until it be red,
(except in places where there is great pain); then having made a slight
scarrification upon every place, where you would apply the Horsleech, put
thereupon a little drop of a Chickens blood, and then apply the Horsleech,
holding it in a clean Linen Cloth; for most commonly, they will not take hold,
if you hold them in your naked hands; and when they have sucked enough, they
will fall off themselves; otherwise, every one knows the way to make them, and
to order them in these things. Above all, let one take heed, not to apply
them, when the Moon is in the Sign, governing the part; for you must observe
the same, in applying these, as in the operation of blooding, and using
Cupping-glasses.

I beseech the Author of all things, that all those who read this Treatise,
may make use of it, to their advantage: To whom, Father, Son, and holy Spirit,
be honor, and glory, for ever, Amen.

The end of the Treatise of Phlebotomie.
A Brief Treatise, Or, discourse concerning Crisis's. Wherein is shown how
people do deceive themselves, in their judgments upon them, being ignorant of
the Motion of the Stars.
All things have a regular motion.
GOd the Creator, according to his inestimable goodness, Clemency, and wisdom
put into the nature of things, well ordered and regulated motions; insomuch
that he has been pleased that not any thing should move by chance, or rashly,
but that all should move by good order and a continual succession; And so the
Stars, The Elements, the Ocean, the seasons of the year, and the Spheres of
the heavens have their motions and vicissitudes, and perform their Courses
absolutely regular.

The humors have a Limited course.
In like manner, the humors which are in humane bodies have their effects,
their proper motions, and certain Periods; so that in every one of the four
Seasons of the year, each humor performs its part, and does exercise its
power and faculties upon the body.

Division of the Sun in its Circular Motion.
So also as the Circular motion of the Sun is divided into four parts, which
are called Quarters of the Heaven, representing the four Elements and Seasons
of the Year, together with the four parts of the Day; from whence re^u^teth
that there is a certain Sympathy as well between the four quarters of the Moon,
and the Elements, and the four Seasons, and the four Humors, and the four
parts of the Day; yea I shall also say with the very four Winds, and four
Ages; Nay such a Sympathy, that it is impossible, that (the one being depraved)
the other with which it does Sympathize, should not have a resentment thereof.

Division of the Seasone with the Elements.
But for the more clear understanding hereof we say, That these four quarters
of the heavens do represent the four Elements, and the four seasons of the
year, That is to say from the Sun rising unto the Midday, The first; from Noon
to the Sun setting, The second; from Sunset to midnight, The third; and from
thence to Sun rising, The fourth: so that the Sun being in the first quadrature
with the fixed Stars therein, Then is the spring which is represented by the
Air; being in the second, then is the Summer, which is represented by the
Heavens or Fire; and being in the third causes Autumn, represented by the
Earth; and lastly being in the fourth, it causes Winter, which is represented
by the water. Moreover we see the Symbolization of the spring, to the Air, to
blood and to youth; of the Summer, to fire, Choler, and manhood; of Autumn, to
the Earth, to Melancholy, and by consequence the first part of old age; and in
fine, the fourth is of the Winter, to water, Phlegm, and decrepit age.

Division of the day for the Elements and humors of the body.
The same division is of the time wherein the Sun moves round the Earth, which
is one day divided into four parts. The first part is from three of the Clock
in the morning until Nine; for the Air, the spring and the blood. And from
Nine a Clock in the morning until three afternoon; for the Fire, Summer, and
Choler. And from that time until Nine, for the Earth for Autumn, and for
Melancho^ly: and from thence following, until three of the morning, for the
Water for Winter, and for Phlegm. And if it so happen, that one of those
Elements be depraved or Malignant in a man, or that thereby a disease of its
temper or degree, insallibly it will discover it self in the time so
appropriate or ordained.

Maladies occasioned by the Signs, are healed by the opposing of contrary
Signs.
Now it is impossible that these humors Symbolizing thus with the Heavens, and
the Elements, can continue without alteration; seeing that the Stars do make
known their effects in them, as we have said in another place: wherefore it is,
that the blood has such force and power, that the Spring being come, and it
being in vigor, does engender Maladies and fevers of its nature, to wit,
continual ones which give no space or respite, which Maladies are caused by
the depravation of the three signs, which govern the above mentioned humor,
such are Gemini Libra and Aquarius: and the healing of such Maladies, ought to
be performed in contrary signs, which are Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus. In
like manner, the Choler in Summer, making its course and recourse by days
alternate, occasions the Tertian fever, and that by the depravation of the
three signs, which have influence upon that humor; that is to say, Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius: which Maladies are cured by opposition of the contrary
sign as Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. Afterward the Phlegm in Winter, when it
is putrified, engenders the Quotidian intermittent fever, also caused by the
three signs which govern that humor, such are Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces: and
those diseases are cured in like manner, as the last above mentioned, and that
is, by the observation of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius: finally the Melancholy
at the beginning of Autumn stirrs up the quartain Fever or Ague, caused also
by the aspect of these signs which govern over that humor, such are Taurus,
Virgo, and Capricornus, and the curing of them is found by the Concurrence of
these three, Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius.

Wherein consists the one-day Fever.
So the Ephemere, or one-day ague, does end in one day or shortly after, in
regard that it does not consist in the Putrefaction of the humors, but only in
an inflamed exhaled spirit. All which things are done by the same reason, the
same proportion and the same order, as the rising and setting of the Sun, The
Ebbing and flowing of the Ocean, and the pleasant vicissitude of Plants, and
Herbs, and Trees, which bear seed and fruit.

How the fits of the Fever appear.
Insomuch that if one do take good heed hereunto, we shall easily observe, that
almost at the same time that the humors are forced by the Stars, they
demonstrate the fit of the fever, not as some would say, who allege that
then (when the humors do every one by its turn perform its office) comes the
fit of the fever, but when the time is completed of each the hours which
serve to the humors, (provided that they be pure, and not intermingled the one
with the other) then they cease and conclude.

A Considerable reason.
But I say, these reasons are not to be received; but, much more to the
purpose, and with more verity, this; that the accesses of the fever appear
then, when the Star which governs the humor concurrs upon it: wherefore it is,
that we see the fits to become retrograde, or to skipp forward, even as that
Star renders it self Retrogade or direct.

So that we ought by good right to consider more narrowly of the Judgment upon
Maladies, that destroyer of that Little World, Man, who is constrained to
suffer Change every four days, which the Vulgar do call Crisis, which is done
by looseness in the belly, by bleeding, vomiting, or sweating, excited and
occasioned by the Course of the Moon, through the points of the Zodiac.

But because I have resolved to speak succinctly of Crisis'es in this place,
and how you ought to observe the Critical days, from the Concurrence of the
Stars; we will discover first what a Crisis is; for of necessity the Malady
quits the patient in the same instant by the Crisis, or else by solution, by
little and little.

Definition of the Crisis.
Now Crisis is a sudden change of the disease either to health, or to death;
which is done then, when nature separates the ill humors from the good, to the
end, she may force them out.

Two sorts of Crisis.
And of this Crisis, there is two sorts; the one perfect, and the other
imperfect. The imperfect is that, by which the matter is not absolutely forced
out of the body, but is evacuated from the Noble parts to the Ignoble, and from
the interior parts to the exterior.

The other, is called perfect, whereby nature even as Mistress and Lady
governing the body, does absolutely and wholly reject the matter out of the
body, and this is done either by vomiting, or by flux of blood at the
Nostrills, or by menstrue, or by the Hemorrhoides or by sweatings, as we have
said above.

A pretty similitude of Avicen, concerning Crisis.
Avicenna, had an excellent understanding of Crisis when he says, that, The
Crisis is no other thing, but the strife and contention of two persons,
pleading the one against the other in a civil case: for, says he, even as in
one civil proceeding there does concur four sorts of persons: that is to say,
he which accuses, he who is accused, the witnesses, and the Judge: In like
manner, do these four concur also, in the Crisis, first the accuser, who is
the power which governs the body, secondly the Malady, which is accused; and
thirdly, the witnesses are, the signs of that Malady, and the Physician is the
Judge.

And even as the civil Judge giving sentence, the one of the parties continues
sorrowful, and the other is joyful; so in like manner in the Crisis, if the
signs are bad, the Physician adjudgeth the patient to die; and then he and his
kindred, continue sorrowful, but if the signs be good, signifying victory of
the powers over the Malady, the Physician makes Judgment, and passes sentence
that the Patient shall recover, and thereby he and his kindred continue
joyful,

The Common Critical judgment, of no value.
It is true, that the greatest number of Chirurgions do pass Judgment, but it
is most commonly of no value; and that by reason of their not being able to
discern that which causes the said Crisis, or rather by reason of his not
observing it; for if they did calculate well the Critricall days, they would
not be deceived in predicting the events, and would in no wife fail to hit the
Mark.

You must take notice in this place, that they hold that the Salutary Crisis
arives ordinarily the seventh, fourteenth, or twentyeth day: wherefore it is
that those days are called Critical days. They foresee the future Crisis by
the signs of Coction which appear, the fourth, eleventh, and seventeenth days
which are called Indicative and Contemplative days; for according to
Hippocrates the fourth day is the Indice of the seventh, the eighth is the
beginning of the other week; the eleventh also is remarkable, because it is the
fourth of the other week, and yet the seventeenth is remarkable, because it is
the fourth after the fourteenth and the seventh from the eleventh: some do not
go to search so many fashions, but they hold simply that the Crisis does use to
conclude either the fourth day or the seventh, or else the ninth and eleventh
and fourteenth days.

The Common opinion concerning the Crisis, is fallacious:
As much upon the one side as the other; the one party are as good shooters in
a Crosbow as the other, for it is most certain that the Crisis is either sooner
or latter, ascribing these days of decision to the effects of the Moon; And so
the Astrologers assign the Indices of Maladies, when the Moon is distant in
degrees about the fourth part, or about half of the Zodiac, from the true place
where she was at the beginning of the Malady. But (because her motion is more
quick or slow at sometimes then at others, and sometimes she arives more late,
and sometimes more early to such aspects) that if it happen that upon a
Critical day, the Moon is in her house, or in her exaltation with Jupiter and
Venus, which are benevolent and healthful Planets, that does denote, that the
change will be good.

A most true sign concerning the Crisis.
And if the disease consist in a great affluence of humors, it is good that
the Moon be in the increase in a quartile aspect, or in opposition. If the Moon
be in the same time in Conjunction with the Sun or Saturn, it is an ill sign,
and denotes that it will be a very dangerous disease, or else of a long
continuance. If the Moon increasing do accompany Saturn, precisely in the
beginning of the disease, it does denote, that the Malady will be of a long
Continuance, or Mortal. But if the disease happens then, when she is in her
decrease, it is a sign that the Malady will not continue long, and will not be
dangerous: for this cause you ought not to slight the salubrious or nocent
signs of the Stars, but to observe them exactly, to the end, that you may
attain the honor of Prognosticating Divinely; for the wise man does oppose
himself to the mutation of the heavens made on the earth. And that no otherwise
then in removing away, or repairing the earthly matter wherein the Heavens do
operate; or else not finding a subject to act upon, his Action is turned in an
Eclipse.

The Charity of the Anthour is Commendable.
Notwithstanding, I desire in this place to make known that the fall of an
Innumerable multitude of men, is occasioned by not knowing any thing but the
name and word only of Crisis, and not the cause of the effect. And that
several men who by by their extreme ignorance, cause the Heaven and the Earth
to be opened, and fix there their ears, and do there bound the eyes of their
understanding, to the end, that they may take notice of the earth, covering or
Entombing their errors, which ought rather to serve as Scarlet, to make them
blush. And behold the manner how!

It is certain that our bodies are moved, and inflamed by the superior bodies,
otherwise they could not suffer; for in the method of the distribution of
things, the body of the Moon in her Sphere does by the points of the Zodiac
produce that mutation which is made from time to time, in all bodies, none
excepted. As for example.

Example concerning the above named opinion.
If it happen that some one is taken sick, the Moon being in the first point of
Aries, infallibly, on the fourth day following, counting from the time of
falling sick, the Moon is found in a point repugnant in property to that
wherein she was at the time of the first falling sick; And then is the Crisis
made either by vomiting flux of blood, flux of the belly, or sweatings, as we
have said before. In this day is prohibited the offering force to Nature,
whether it be by blooding or Physic, either solutive or restringent, for fear
that nature intending to discharge her self by sweat, be not forced to do it by
other Emunctory; and for this cause evacuation is to be practiced upon the
third or fifth day from the beginning of the sickness. And none can deny,
(however he be opinionate of himself) but that this is true.

A too Common error.
But alas, behold the evil which does often (nay most commonly) happen, That
while men are attending the Crisis on the fourth day, because of the above
mentioned motion of the Moon, it happens that the Moon expedites her course,
and comes on the third day to the point which causes the Crisis. And without
taking notice thereof the Physician who would count her hours, makes too much
haste, and only counts the fourth day for the Crisis, and without any other
Ceremony, being bold, causes the sick person to be blooded or purged, and by
that means sends him to ask St. Peter for his Keys to open heaven with.

And when the Moon becomes declining or Retrograde, she is not come to that
point until the fifth day, wherein happens the same oversight. Behold the
reason why Hippocrates. Lib. de flatibus. would have the Physician to have but
a few patients, and to languish with them for whom, as says Paracelsus, he is
created father, and not Doctor.

I should enlarge my self further upon this discourse concerning this matter,
to make seen to the eye, and felt (by the finger) the great error which is
commonly committed in Judgment upon Critical days, and should show the true
means of giving a true Judgment according to second causes, of either life or
death. But because that does require a greater speculation, and that the age of
a man will not suffice for it; I shall so bear, praying to God that he will be
pleased so to bless our Labors, that what we do, may be to his honor and
glory, the edification and benefit of our Neighbor, and the safety and
salvation of our own souls. To whom Father, Son, and holy Spirit, be honor and
glory eternally, Amen.

To the Benevolent Reader. A Quadrine.
Believe not, That, In Ostentation, I have writ this Treatise of Plebotomy:

But as a friend to life, I undertook to show its operation, In this Book.

A TABLE OF THE Chapters.
CHAP. I. WHat Phlebotomy is, Its properties, and that which must be
particularly observed for the good performance thereof. CHAP. II. How that the
Surgeon ought not to be ignorant of Astrology, and of the profit that comes
thereby, as well for Phlebotomy, as for all the Maladies which do happen unto
humane bodies. The Sympathy of the Stars therewith, and other discoveryes most
useful for a Surgeon. CHAP. III. Of the time of Necessity, wherein are
shown the Maladies, wherein Phlebotomy does necessarily fall out. CHAP. IV. Of
the time of Election, for the Inferior Root, and of the Superior Root, which
extends its self to to the knowledge of the Stars, as well in the Concurrence
which they have to the parts of our bodies, as upon the Humors and Maladies
which happen therein. CHAP. V. That it is necessary that a Surgeon have the
Astronomicall figure in his study, or at least in his shop, and of the benefit
that proceeds therefrom, as well to the Patients as those that exercise or
practice it, which is proved by a History, and other examples. Also that it is
better to mundify the blood, than to evacuate it; with the discovery of two
excellent remedies for that effect. CHAP. VI. Of the Veins proper to be blooded
for several infirmities, which arive to humane bodies; together with the
benefit and the manner of using of Cupping-glasses, with Scarrification and
without it; and of that which is to be observed in this operation; and lastly
of Horse-leeches. A short treatise or discourse of Crisis's, wherein is
demonstrated how men do deceive themselves in the judgment of them, not
knowing the motion of the Stars.
FINIS.

