Platerus GOLDEN Practice of Physic: Fully and Plainly Discovering, I. All the
Kinds. of every Disease. II. The several Causes of every Disease. III. Their
most proper Cures, in respect to the Kinds, and several Causes, from whence
they Come.


After a New, Easy, and Plain Method; of Knowing, Foretelling, Preventing, and
Curing, all Diseases Incident to the Body of Man.

Full of Proper Observations and Remedies: Both of Ancient and Modern
Physicians. In Three Books, and Five Tomes, or Parts.

Being the Fruits of one and thirty years Travel: And fifty years Practice of
Physic.

By Felix Plater, Chief Physician and Professor in Ordinary at Basil. Abdiah
Cole, Doctor of Physic, and the Liberal Arts. Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in
Physic, and Astrology.


LONDON; Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the Sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1664.

Books Printed by Peter Cole, at the Exchange London. Viz.
1. A GOLDEN Practice of Physic; plainly discovering the Kinds, with the
several Causes of every Disease. And their most proper Cures, in respect to the
Causes from whence they come: after a new, easy and plain Method of Knowing,
Foretelling, Preventing, and Curing all diseases Incident to the Body of Man.
Full of proper Observations and Remedies, both of Ancient and Modern
Physicians. Being the Fruit of One and Thirty years Travel, and fifty years
Practice of Physic. By Dr. Plater, Dr. Cole, and Nich. Culpeper. 2. Sennertus
Practical Physic; the first Book in three Parts. 1. Of the Head. 2. Of the
Hurt of the internal Senses. 3. Of the external Senses, in five Sections. 3.
Sennertus Practical Physic; the second Book, in four Parts. 1. Of the Jaws and
Mouth. 2. Of the Breast. 3. Of the Lungs. 4. Of the Heart. 4. Sennertus Third
Book of Practical Physic in fourteen Parts, treating. 1. Of the Stomach and
Gullet. 2. Of the Guts. 3. Of the Mesentery, Sweetbread and Omentum. 4. Of the
Spleen. 5. Of the Sides. 6. Of the Scurvey. 7. and 8. Of the Liver. 9. Of the
Ureters. 10. Of the Kidneys. 11. and 12. Of the Bladder. 13. and 14. Of the
Privities and Generation in men. 5. Sennertus fourth Book of Practical Physic
in three Parts. Part 1. Of the Diseases in the Privities of Women. The first
Section. Of Diseases of the Privy Part, and the Neck of the Womb. The second
Section. Of the Diseases of the Womb. Part 2. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and
from the Womb. The second Section. Of the Symptoms in the Terms and other
Fluxes of the Womb. The third Section. Of the Symptoms that befall al Virgins
and Women in their Wombs, after they are ripe of Age. The fourth Section. Of
the Symptoms which are in conception. The fifth Section. Of the Government of
Women with Child, and preternatural distempers in women with Child. The sixth
Section. Of Symptoms that happen in Childbearing. The seventh Section. Of the
Government of Women in Childbed, and of the Diseases that come after Travel.
The first Section. Of Diseases of the Breasts. The second Section. Of the
Symptoms of the Breasts. To which is added a Tractate of the Cure of Infants.
Part 1. Of the Diet and Government of Infants. The second Section. Of Diseases
and Symptoms in Children. 6. Sennertus fifth Book of Practical Physic, Or the
Art of Surgery in six Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers. 3. Of the Skin,
Hair and Nails. 4. Of Wounds, with an excellent Treatise of the Weapon Salve.
5. Of Fractures. 6. Of Luxations. 7. Sennertus sixth and last Book of Practical
Physic in nine Parts. 1. Of Diseases from occult Qualities in general. 2. Of
occult, malignant, and venomous Diseases arising from the internal fault of the
humors. 3. Of occult Diseases from water, Air, and Infections, and of
infectious Diseases. 4. Of the Venereal Pox. 5. Of outward Poisons in general.
6. Of Poisons from Minerals and Metals. 7. Of Poisons from Plants. 8. Of
Poisons that come from Living Creatures. 9. Of Diseases by Witchcraft,
Incantation, and Charms. 8. Sennertus Treatise of Chemistry, showing the
Agreement and Disagreement of Chemists and Galenists. 9. Sennertus two
Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2. Of the Gout. 10. Sennertus thirteen Books of
Natural Philosophy: Or the Nature of all things in the World. 11. Twenty four
Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that Learned and Renowned
Doctor Lazarus Riverius, Physician and Counselor to the late King, etc. 12.
Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books. 13. Bartholinus Anatomy, with very
many larger Brass Figures, than any other Anatomy in English. 14. Veslingus
Anatomy of the Body of Man. 15. Riolanus Anatomy. 16. A Translation of the new
Dispensatory, made by the College of Physicians of London, in Folio and in
Octavo. Whereunto is added, The Key of Galen's Method of Physic. 17. A
Directory for Midwives, or a guide for Women. The First and Second Part. 18.
Galens Art of Physic. 19. A new Method both of studying and practicing
Physic. 20. A Treatise of the Rickets. 21. Medicaments for the Poor: Or,
Physic for the Common People. 22. Health for the Rich and Poor by Diet without
Physic 23. One thousand New, Famous and Rare Cures, in Folio and Octavo. 24. A
Treatise of Pulses and Urins. 25. A Treatise of Blood-letting, and Cures
performed thereby. 26. A Treatise of Scarification, and Cures performed
thereby. 27. The English Physician Enlarged. The London Dispensatory in Folio,
of a great Character in Latin. 28. The London Dispensatory in Latin, a small
Book in Twelves. 29. A New Art of Physic by Weight, or five hundred Aphorisms
of Insensible Transpiration. Breathing or vapor coming forth of the Body. By
Dr. Cole, etc.
Physic Books Newly Printed.
Zacutus Lusitanus his wonderful Practice, Or admirable CASES in Physic, And
CURES. Platerus Observations with Histories of his Famous CURES according to
the Method of his Golden Practice, now also printed.
Divinity Books Printed by Peter Cole, etc.
Eighteen Several Books of Mr. Burroughs's viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's Call to all those that are weary and heavy laden, to come to him for
rest. 2 Christ the great Teacher of Souls that come to him. 3 Christ the Humble
Teacher of those that come to him. 4 The only easy way to Heaven. 5 The
Excellency of Holy Courage in Evil times. 6 Gospel Reconciliation. 7 The Rare
Jewel of Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A
Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, and of Heavenly Mindedness, and Walking with
God. 11 An Exposition of the Prophecy of Hoseah. 12 The Evil of Evils, or the
exceeding sinfulness of Sin. 13 Of Precious Faith. 14 Of Hope. 15 Of Walking by
Faith, and not by Sight. 16 The Christians living to Christ upon 2 Cor. 5.15.
17 A Catechism. 18 Moses Choice, etc.
Dr. Hills WORKS.

Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS. Viz.
1 Of Christ's Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity. 2 The high Privilege of
Believers, That they are the Sons of God. 3 Faith the means to feed on Christ.
4 Of Self-denial. 5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, etc. 6 The Mystery of
Spiritual Life.
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, collected into two Volumes,
Viz.
1 Scripture Light, the most sure Light. 2 Christ in Travel. 3 A lifting up for
the cast down. 4 Of the Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Of Sins of Infirmity. 6
The false Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment.
THE CONTENTS Of all the Five Books in the Three Tomes.
The CONTENTS of the First Book of the first Tome Page 1.
CHap. 1. Of a Weakness of the Mind Page 1 Chap. 2. Of a Consternation of the
mind Page 4 Chap. 3. Of an Alienation of the Mind Page 26 Chap. 4. Of a
Defatigation of the Mind Page 47 Chap. 5. Of the the hurt of Feeling Page 50
Chap. 6. Of the hurt of Tasting. Page 52 Chap. 7 Of the hurt of Seeing Page 56
Chap. 8 Of the hurts of Hearing Page 80 Chap. 9 Of the hurt of smelling Page 87
The CONTENTS of the Second Book of the First Tome. Page 92
CHap. 1 Of the Weakness of Motion Page 92 Chap. 2 Of Impotency of Motion Page
93 Chap. 3. Concerning Depraved Motion Page 115 Chap. 4 Of the Defect of
Breathing Page 119 Chap. 5 Of Breathing Depraved Page 131 Chap. 6 Of the Defect
of Swallowing or passage by the Throat Page 138 Chap. 7 Of the Defect of
Dejection, or going to Stool Page 140 Chap. 8 Of the Defect of Pissing Page 141
Chap. 9 Of the Defect of Bringing forth Children, or other things Page 144
Chap. 10 Of the Defect of Vital Motion Page 148 Chap. 11 Of the Depravation of
Vital Motion Page 152 Chap. 12 Of want of Appetite Page 155 Chap. 13 Of
Depraved Appetite Page 158 Chap. 14. Of Defect of Bleeding Page 160 Chap. 15 Of
Want of Sweating Page 166 Chap. 16 Of want of Milk Page 167 Chap. 17 Of the
Defect and Want of Copulation Page 168 Chap. 18 Of Lust, or Lechery. Page 172
Chap. 19 Of want of Conception Page 173
The CONTENTS of the Second Tome; in one Book, being the third of the whole
Work.
CHap 1 Of the Greifs of the Sight, Hearing, Smelling and Tasting Page 187
Chap. 2 Of Fevers Page 187 Chap. 3 Of Headache Page 235 Chap. 4 Of Pain in the
Eyes Page 241 Chap. 5 Of the pain of the Ears Page 251 Chap. 6 Of the Diseases
or Greifs of the Nostrils Page 253 Chap. 7 Of Greifs or pain of the Mouth Page
255 Chap. 8 Of Toothache Page 258 Chap. 9 Of Pain in the Jaws Page 263 Chap. 10
Of the Griefs or Pain of the Breast. Page 269 Chap. 11 Of Pain of the Heart
Page 277 Chap. 12 Of the pain of Hypochondria, or Sides under the Ribs Page 294
Chap. 13 Of pain of the Belly Page 305 Chap. 14 Of pain of the Privities Page
391 Chap. 15 Of Diseases in the Fundament Page 393 Chap. 16 Of pain in the
Habit of the Body Page 396 Chap. 17 Of pains in the Superficies of the Body
Page 408
The CONTENTS of the third Tome, in two Books: Being the fourth and fifth of
the whole Work. The FIRST BOOK.
CHap. 1 Of Deformity Page 501 Chap. 2 Of Discoloration Page 513 Chap. 3 Of
Extuberances or Swellings Page 540 Chap. 4 Of Defoedation or Defilement Page
580 Chap. 5 Of Consumption of the Body Page 598
The Second Book of the third Tome.
CHap. 1 Of the Voiding or Excretion of parts Page 607 Chap. 2 Of the Falling
and Sticking forth of parts Page 610 Chap 3 Of Efflation or Sending forth of
Wind Page 620 Chap 4 Of the Voiding of Seed Page 623 Chap 5 Of Voiding of Blood
Page 626 Chap. 6 Of Excretion, or Voiding of Matter Page 635 Chap. 7 Of
Excretion, or Voiding of Water Page 637 Chap 8 Of Spetting Page 643 Chap 9 Of
Vomiting Page 647 Chap 10 Of Pissing Page 652 Chap 11 Of Dejection, or going to
Stool Page 660 Chap 12 Of filthy Excretions Page 674 Chap 13 Of the Voiding of
Living Creatures Page 676 Chap 14 Of the Voiding of Living Creatures or Animata
Page 681 Chap 15 Of the Voiding of earthy Bodies Page 683 Chap 16 The Voiding
of things that get into the Body Page 686
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE Hurts of the Functions.
Containing the Hurt of the SENSES.
THe Senses are Internal or External, we shall speak first of the Internal, for
they being hurt, the External Senses and motions are sometimes offended, the
Internal Senses are three. Imagination, Reason, and Memory, which we call all
together by the name of the Mind, when these are hurt they either suffer all
together or particularly.

The Functions of the mind are defective, when they are Diminished or
Abolished. For by accident when the vital motion is hurt, these Functions may
cease as well as the rest in the whole Body, but then they are referred to the
hurts of vital motion, and there explained.

The Functions of the Mind are diminished, when they do not sufficiently act,
in their diverse kinds, as when there is dullness of Mind, slow Wit, Imprudence,
forgetfulness of which we shall speak in Imbecility of Mind, the first Chapter,
Page 1.

The Functions are abolished when they are not, as in diverse kinds of Sleep and
Astonishments as when there is immoderate Sleep, or profound Sleep, Carus,
Lethargy, Typhomania, Devilish Sleep, Sleep with astonishment, Ecplixis,
Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Convulsion, Catalepsis or Congelation, Ecstasy. Of which
we shall speak under the title Consternation of Mind, Chapter the second, Page
4.

The actions of the Mind are depraved when they are, but not decently; as they
should be; or more then they ought to be.

The internal Senses are preposterous in diverse kinds, as when there is
Foolishness, Drunkenness, commotion of Mind, Love, Melancholy, Hypochondriack
Melancholy, Madness, devilish Possession, fear of water, Frenzy,
Paraphrenitis, Saltus vitae, of which under Alienation of Mind, Chapter the
third, Page 26.

The Functions are more then ordinary in Watchings and Dreams, of which we
shall speak in Defatigation of Mind, Chapter the fourth, Page 47.

The external Senses are five: Touching, Tasting, Sight, Hearing, Smelling,
these are either Defective or Depraved, when out of order.

The kinds of Defect and Depravation of Touching are Numness or Stupor,
Formication, false Sense of heat or cold H^modia of which in Hurt of Touching,
Chapter the fifth, Page 50.

The Taste is abolished, Diminished and Depraved in the defect of Tasting and in
a Depraved or half Taste, of which in Hurt of Taste, Chapter the sixth, Page 52.

The sight suffers many inconveniences when either it is not, or is diminished,
or is Evil, as in diverse kinds, especially in Blindness, Anaurosis, Scoloma or
Mist, Amblyopia, Catigo, Evil sight in young or old, Myopia, Nyctalopia,
Vespertina, Acies or Owl sight, Hallucination, Imagination, Nubecula or Cloud,
Colors, false Splendors, Megrim, Scotodinos, of these in Hurt of Sight,
Chapter the seventh, Page 56.

The hearing also suffers, in Surdity or Deafness, thick Hearing, Obaudition,
tinckling, and hissing in the Ears: as in Hurt of Hearing, Chapter the eight,
Page 80.

The Smelling is also Abolished, Diminished or Depraved, as in defect of Scent
and Depravation of scent, of these in Hurt of Smelling, Chapter the ninth, Page
87.

CHAP. I. Of a Weakness of the Mind.
The Kinds of it.
A Weakness of the Mind may be said to be, whenas any one is less able in
Apprehension or Wit, in Judgment or Reason and Memory, then an ingenious and
industrious Man. Which sometimes happens in Diseases, at other times befalls
those that are not Sick, but otherwise Well, of which we will here Treat. But
sometimes these internal senses are all of them together dulled, Dullness of the
Mind.
and both Wit, Judgment and Memory fail, and then it may be called a dullness of
the Mind. Otherwise some want Wit, when they scarcely learn to speak, Of
slowness of Wit.
and they apprehend Learning, and other Arts with difficulty; and it may be
called a slowness of Wit.

Sometimes they are void of Judgment, Imprudence, a defect of judgment.
in judging of those things which they have apprehended, and this may be called
Imprudence.

For the most part the Memory is weakened when they hardly retain those things
which they have apprehended and learned; and its called Oblivion, of which
fault many do complain, Oblivion
especially the Aged, and therefore Physicians have made mention of that only
almost in their Cures, The Memory impaired
under their Titles of the Memory impaired: whereas the defects of the other
internal senses also have the same Causes, and the same Cure; which we shall at
once apply to them all.

The Causes.
But the Brain which is the organ of these senses, The Part affected.
is here affected; the which notwithstanding is not so vehemently hurt, that
these internal senses are wholly abolisht or together with them, the external
senses also and motion; as it does happen in grievous hurts of the Brain. But
that more or fewer senses are weakened, and those more or less, that happens
according as the whole substance of the Brain is affected, or only part of it:
not as the foremost, middle, or hindermost ventricles are affected, as some
would have it; furthermore these things vary according to the Nature of the
Disease, with which the Brain is afflicted, as shall be said.

Some have contracted and derived this weakness Haereditary from their Parents
by inbred Causes; Weakness, a Cause of the Minds weakness.
whence it often comes to pass that as the ingenious and industrious do beget
their like, so drones beget drones which is easily collected by their Signs,
that they were such from their Infancy, and had such Parents. This happens to
some by reason of Age, whence old folks become for the most part forgetful and
sometimes dull, by reason of the defect of native heat, unless it happen from
some distemper of the Brain as shall be said by and by.

A Concussion or blow of the Head, leaving behind it some weakness in the
Brain, may also be the cause of it.

Also too great a shedding of Blood from what part of the Body soever, or some
other too great evacuation exhausting the Spirits: on which score also too much
Venery does very much impare the senses, especially the Memory.

Also a Disease of long continuance destroving the native heat, especially of
the Head, as after a Carus; also after Melancholy, and Convulsion; we have seen
men become very forgetful. Or a Malignant Disease, or proceeding from some
Poison, of which nature perhaps that was, which given to Ulysses companions by
Circe, took away the remembrance of all things past, the which also sometimes
Love Potions have done; and the unhappy use of Narcoticks may do the like.

One writes that by reason of a Wound struck deep into the seat of the Eye, one
did so far loose his Memory, that he was fain to learn a new the grounds of
learning whenas before he was skilled, both in Greek and Latin.

Also when the Functions of the Mind are more remisly employed, then the
native heat growing dull with idleness, and not brought into act, they proceed
but singgishly,

Which also may happen upon the contrary reason, to wit, if the Mind be
disquieted with too much study, thoughts, watchings, cares. Yet when the Memory
for the most part is first hurt, especially in the aged; their judgment
notwithstanding continues acute. That it does not happen to them only by reason
of weakness, though by this means also it may happen, may be elegantly
collected thus, because their Mind, which through the whole space of their life
has received so many Species, Images, and Conceptions of things, is so
overwhelmed with them, that it cannot long retain those new ones which it
receives, as if there were no more place left for them; whence also it comes
to pass that old men do firmly retain to the last, those things which they
apprehended, when young; but those things which they treat and think of now
stricken in Age, they indeed do easily conceive, and they judge right and well;
but they presently forget them again: in like manner after some sort as we see
most old men, to see and judge of things far distant, more rightly then of those
near hand; the which notwithstanding does proceed from another cause, as we
shall explain in the weakness of the Sight.

Furthermore, and if the Mind be distracted with diverse Studies and be
overwhelmed at once with many things, it comes to pass that the sense being
Intent on many things is not only less fit for each particular, but also that
while these things do confound one another, and one is hindered and obscured by
another (as when two griefs molest one part, the more vehement is wont to
obscure the other) the Memory of that which is weakest, does presently also
vanish.

The imperfection of the instrument also does make the internal senses more
languid. The fault of the instrument is a Cause of the weakness of the Mind.
In tender Infants, whose Brain is yet more soft and fluid, and not yet
perfected by grouth it performs but dull operations. In those of riper age also,
if the Brain has not obtained its just bulk, and then for the most part they
have a small Head.

An uncomely Figure of the Brain, and a perversion of its Situation, caused
either by Nature or by Violence does cause the same; which is hardly known
unless the Head answer to the form of the Brain.

The Temperament of the Brain changed from its Natural state, The temper of the
Brain changed does cause a weakness of Mind.
as yet not producing more grievous Diseases of the Brain, does also cause that
sluggishness of the internal Senses.

And that especially when it is more moist then it ought to be by Nature, which
Physicians hold to be the chief cause of the Memory impaired, and that because
in a more moist Brain, and therefore softer, the Images of things imprinted can
less remain. But we believe that comes to pass, because it becomes more languid
to exercise its Operations. But the cause of this Moisture sometimes depends on
some cold and moist Disease of the Brain foregoing, from which, though for the
most part it be taken away, yet this moist constitution imprinted on it does
remain; which also may be from external causes of the Air and Medicines. But
this defect is known to proceed from Moisture, because then they are sleepy,
and by other signs of a moist Brain. Also a more dry constitution of the Brain
is held to be the Cause, because they hardly apprehend things, and because in a
dry Body, things are more difficultly imprinted; and many also do teach that
this Dryness may be the cause of Oblivion, and declare the Cure of the Memory
impaired by Dryness, whenas after burning Fevers, after too much watching and
study, the memory becomes treacherous, which we have taught formerly to happen
rather from a weakness contracted thence.

The Cure.
The defect of the internal senses is incurable if it happen from a weakness
contracted from the Parents, A Praediction.
or by reason of Age, or from some eminent hurt of the Brain: or if it arise
from a perverse conformation of the Brain. Also that praeternatural
constitution imprinted on the Brain, whether it be moist or dry, is hardly
corrected: yet for the correcting of that, to which Physicians do chiefly apply
their Cures, in treating of the Memory hurt: we also shall show the manner of
operation, how those faults may at least be corrected, if not wholly taken away.

Exercise, As it does set an edge on all dull functions, The Cure of the
weakness of Mind, from weakness, and a too moist temper of the Brain.
and as it were bring them into Act, may also do good here in the operations of
the Mind if they be dulled by reason of the sluggish and remiss use of them.
Also in a weakness, although it can scarce be mended; since that the native
heat is renewed by exercise, and custom is a second Nature, the exercise of
the Mind may do somewhat at least in this. But in a moist temper of it, when as
the agitations of the Mind does consume Excrements, it will do good.

This may be done by often exercising these Functions of the Mind, those
especially which are done with pleasure (since nothing is to be done against
Nature) and those either all together; or singly the Wit, if they learn to
speak, learning languages and arts, by which the apprehension and Wit is made
acute, which otherwise grows dull by idleness. The judgment, if they discerue
and judge of things especially things scrupulous, and that often; as we see many
ignorant of law by use to have acquired a natural knowledge and prudence in the
laws. They may whet the Memory by studying to remember and retain, and
committing other arts to Memory; in which this is particularly to be observed,
that those things which are conceived and repeated in the evening after supper
before sleep do remain more firmly imprinted in the morning.

Also a rest of the Functions of the mind, being wearied with too much use and
watchings, and so at length weakened, does much refresh them.

Which is done if they moderat themselves from the too much study of knowing or
handling of things, and from the immoderate affections of the Mind; if they
sleep at due times, and as much as is needful, whenas sleep is the rest of the
Mind, and by it the internal actions of sense are respited, unless in some
sort they do a little exercise themselves in dreams.

As concerning Evacuations, if the sluggishness arise from a too moist
constitution of the Brain, and there be plenty of Excrements in the Brain, they
must be emptied successively, as is wont to be done in Diseases of the Brain,
arising from phlegmatic and serous Humors; which may be done by this Method.

The common Excrements must first be washed away, with this fallowing Clyster
or the like; as, Take of the Herbs Mallows, Marshmallows, Pellitory of the
Wall, Beets, Mercury, Betony, Sage, Hysop, of each one handful; the flowers of
Chamomel, Melilote, Elder, Lavender, of each one pugil; Bran one pugil; Fennel
and Caraway seed, of each three drams; make a Decoction: Dissolve in it, of the
juice of Mercury, one ounce; of Honey, one ounce and an half: Oil of Rue, two
ounces; of Benedicta Laxativa, or some strong Hiera, half an ounce; of Salt,
one dram. Make a Clyster.

Then the humors must be prepared with this Decoction, Take of the Roots of
Orrice, the true Acorus, Elecampane, of each half an ounce; Pellitory of Spain
(it helps the Memory much) Galangal, Ginger, of each two drams; the Herbs
Betony, Marjoram, Time, of each half an ounce; Balm, two drams? the flowers of
Lavender or Spike, Sage, French Lavender, of each two drams; Rosemary flowers,
three drams; Liquorish, six drams; Annis and Fennel seed, of each one dram and
an half; Caraways, one dram; Cubebs, half a dram: Make a Decoction in Wine and
Water; And in a pound and an half of that strained, Dissolve of Honey or Sugar
as much as is sufficient, Aromatize it with Cinnamon and Nutmeg. For five or
six mornings.

A Wine may be made with the infusion of these, with the Honey and Sugar if
they like sweet things, if not, you may substitute Wormwood in their room, with
whose smell they are much delighted, and abhor not the bitterness of it.

The same may be done with Syrups, if less pains, and more gratefulness be
required: Take of the Syrups of Betony and French Lavender, Honey of Roses, of
each half an ounce; of the Water of Betony and Marjoram a double quantity,
Aromatize it with Cinnamon; Let him drink as often of it, as was said of the
Decoction.

This being done, Purge the Body with these Pills: Take of Cochiae Pills, two
scruples; of Castor (it is peculiarly good) half a scruple; with sweet Wine; Make
up Pills.

Or with this potion, Take of the electuary Diacarthamum, two drams; or one
Dose of any other Phlegmagoge, of Agarick infused in Oxymel, one dram; Syrup of
Liquorish, one ounce; the Waters of Balm and Betony as much as is sufcient: And
make a Potion.

This being done, and the Brain strengthened, as it ought to be after purging,
if the Head be still excrementitious, these things may be repeated presently, or
at fit time, or by interuals.

Which may be done by a Syrup which may be prepared out of the precedent
Decoction; adding, Senna, wild Saffron, Agarick, Turbith, to which we may add,
Sea Fennel, since that if it be new, it does purge Phlegm, and with an addition
of Sugar and Honey: Boil them to a consistence.

Also the usual Pills that purge Phlegm, may be made use of.

Wines are less proper if they ought to be kept long, when as they do easily
corrupt; but if purging be to be used for five or six days together, they may
be made of the same things, as the Decoction was, infused in Wine.

Also if a waterish humor abound, the Head must be purged by times; by
particular Evacuations, called Head purges, as Masticatories, Gargarismes,
Errhines, as it has been said in its proper place.

As concerning things Alterative, all those things which strengthen the Head,
and stir up its innate heat, being applied inwardly and outwardly may do good;
amongst which, those that act potentially, ought to be most hot in this moist
constitution of the Brain, whereas this is so imprinted, and the temperament of
the Brain so changed, are hardly reduced, and therefore require stronger means,
that so their operation may better reach to the Brain; neither can things taken
inwardly too much inflame the Brain being a part far distant, nor things
outwardly applied, by reason of the thickness of the Head. The rest found out
by experience, are thought to restore the Memory by a certain propriety.

Those things therefore which are taken chiefly to restore the Memory in a
moist cause as was said, are as follow.

In the form of a Powder this is cried up to be excellent to preserve the
Memory: Take of Male Frankincense or Olibanum, half a scruple: Make a Powder;
Let him take it often by it self or with Wine or some convenient Water.

If both round and long Pepper be added, it is a most commendable remedy thus
prepared: Take Male Frankincense, fifteen drams; Pepper, five drams: Make a
Powder; give one dram every morning for forty days.

Ginger condite in Syrup or dry, as it is wont to be prepared, taken in the
morning is approved of; also the conditure of the true Acorus, that is, the
Aromatic Cane.

Also the Root of Pellitory of Spain, whiles it is new candid eaten like Ginger
is highly esteemed, whose Decoction Paracelsus approves of against
forgetfulness.

The Confection Anacardine was chiefly invented to repair the Memory,
especially if it be prepared without Castor by reason of its ungratefulness, as
Gordonius teaches, of which half an ounce or an ounce or more may be given
according to Gordonius with some convenient water as of Fennel or Smallage,
which if it heat the body too much may be prepared thus:

Take of Confection Anacardine one dram, Conserve of Marjoram, Rosemary, of
each half an ounce: Let him take once or twice a week a dram for a dose.

Compounds of the aforementioned and other things convenient for the Head and
appropriate to the memory impaired as Myrobolans, Cyperus root, the Skul of a
Man and the like, are thus made for the strengthening of the Brain.

Take of confection anacardine one dram, Frankincense two drams, Pepper,
Ginger, each half a dram; Sugar dissolved in Cinnamon and Marjoram water twelve
ounces: make Tables give one every morning, or every other morning.

Others more efficacious are prepared thus. Take of male Frankincense three
drams, Pepper, Ginger each half a dram, Cinnamon two scruples Coral one dram,
the shavings of Man's Skull two drams, Hartshorn, Ivory, each half a dram, ad
of Sugar six ounces or the double quantity and make a powder; or dissolving the
Sugar in Marjoram water make Tables; or abate of the quantity of Sugar, and
with the Infusion of Gum Tragacanth in Rose Water make Lozenges, and use them.

Electuaries also may be made for the same Use of things for the head after
this manner. Take of the conditures of Ginger, the true Acorus, Pellitory of
Spain, as was said each half an ounce, of Chebul and Emblick Myrobalans each
two; of Marjoram, Rosemary-fllowers, Lavender or French Lavender, Sage each six
drams, conserve of Roses, Bugloss each three drams, the Roots of Cyprus,
Galangall, Cloves each half a dram, Pepper two scruples, Cubebs one scruple,
Olibanum one dram and an half, powder of Diamber and Diamoschum each half a
dram, (Musk or Amber we may add) of a Man's Skul if you please, two drams, of
Honey anarcadine as much as is sufficient: make an Electuary. Let him take from
one dram and an half to two drams going to Bed.

They commend also Treacle and Methridate, which we would rather omit by reason
of the Opium which makes all the senses more stupid or languid although the
Composition be old; whenas other things are not wanting, and no pain here or
Necessity requires it, neither is there any malignity of the Humor.

If we must needs use things unpleasing it is best to give them in form of
Pills. Take of Frankincense two dram, Pepper, Ginger, Cubebs each one dram,
Castor half a dram, Musk, Amber each six grains, with the Confection or Honey
anacardine make Pills, give going to Bed two of them for many days.

A Wine convenient for this may be made thus, Take of the Roots of true Acorus,
Galangall, each half an ounce; Ginger a dram and an half, the herbs Marjoram,
Sage, the flowers of Lavender, French Lavender, Rosemary, Roses, each three
drams; Pepper, Cloves, Cubebs, of each half a dram; Infuse them bruised in
Wine, let him drink sometimes a draught in a morning when he takes broth.

Distilled Waters are approved, the simple of Rosemary flowers, or the like, or
compounded of diverse, pouring to them the Water of Wine which they call Aqua
Vitae which they write (also alone) will do good, if in the morn the quantity of
one spoonful be taken.

A Compound one may be made thus. Take of the Materials above mentioned for the
Wine, bruised, and pour to them Spirits of Wine, or Malago wine that it may be
above it one fingers breadth, Confection Anacardine six drams: Let them be
distilled in Balneo Mariae and let him use it.

At meals, many of this sort may be given, especially the more grateful for
Sauces, as the Spices forementioned, Pepper, Ginger, for stuffings, Marjoram,
Sage, and the like.

Also Mustard seed is a Junket with Honey, as it is wont to be presented to
Tables; or the same covered over with Sugar, because this seed does by a
propriety whet the memory.

In Wine also the like Herbs may be infused and steeped.

The like External Remedies may be used, which may stir up the heat and consume
moistures; as these are.

To rub the head in the morning with a Comb, and usually with clothes after
sleep: Sometimes to wash the head with a Lie, but presently again to dry it with
warm clothes smoaked with Frankincense seeing Frankincense as it is said, by a
peculiar virtue helps the memory, but the Lie may be thus made. Take of Agarick
two drams, the herbs Sage, Betony, Marjoram, Celtick Spike, Pennyroyal, Bays,
Rosemary flowers, Spike, Lavender, Red Roses, Chamomel, of each one handful;
Bay and Juniper berries, of each an ounce; Pepper one dram: Let them be bruised
and boiled in a Barbers Lie, made with water wherein Iron has been quenched.

Not only the hinder region of the Brain is anointed in the memory hurt, but
also the whole Superficies of the head for the same, as take of the Oil of
Mustard by expression, anoint it.

It will be more effectual thus, Take, of the Oil of Bean, Elders, of each one
ounce, Mustard seed, long Pepper, each one dram, Euphorbium, Castor, each one
scruple, wax a little: Make a Liniment.

There are some who anoint the head, with Confection Anacardine, dissolved in
spirits of wine.

Quilts and Caps, also are worn night and day, of things that strengthen the
head: of which in their place.

Amulets also do help, if not by their own virtue, at least ways by
imagination, as the tongue of a Lapwing hanged about one, is thought by Rhases
to take away forgetfulness: The Amethist stone worn about one, does quicken
all the senses, as one writes; and also that the Berill stone worn does cause
a good understanding.

In a dry constitution of the brain, The Cure of Memoryimpaired by the dryness
of the Brain.
whence they say the memory is impaired, if the body be foul, it must be
purged, as was said of Melancholy, whenas in pure bodies medicines applied do
more rightly operate.

Let it be moistened with meats of good-juyce such as are described in the
Hectic and Melancholical.

Let him abstain from all drying things, and immoderate evacuations, especially
Venery, then which nothing is more hurtful.

He may use this Electuary at times. Take of the Conserves of the flowers or
Roots of Succory, Bugloss, Borrage, Violets, Maidenhair, Betony, each one ounce
and an half; Of the powder of Diatragacantum frigidum and Triasantalum each
half a dram; with syrup of Violets make an Electuary: Let him take the quantity
of a Chestnut or one dram and an half: Or let him use these kind of Tables. Take
of the Flowers of Bugloss, Burrage, Violets of each one scruple, the leaves of
Marjoram half a dram, male frankincense one dram, the Skul of a man burnt half
a dram; with Sugar dissolved in Violet and Rose Water, make Tablets.

The Topics mentioned in melancholy must be applied to the head, especially
this Lotion of the head and feet is very profitable. Take of the Decoction of
the Head and Feet of a Weather as much as is sufficient, adding the herbs
Bugloss, Burrage, Violets with their flowers (if they may be had) flowers of
Roses, Betony, (for hot things must be mixed with cold: when we moisten, as was
said in melancholy) each one handful: Boil them.

This following also is good. Take of the roots of Marshmallows half a pound,
the herbs Betony Marjoram each one handful; flowers of Violets, Roses,
Chamomel, Melilot, Lavender, each one pugil: Boil them in milk, to wash the
Head.

Also such an Unction is commended, especially after the Lotion. Take Oil of
sweet Almonds, Roses, each one ounce; the fat of a Drake half an ounce, one
white of an Eg, Milk half an ounce; stir them together for a Liniment.

Chap. 2. Of a Consternation of the mind.
The Kinds.
WE call that a Consternation of the mind when the Senses either only oppressed
or almost wholly taken away, either they sleep after a non-natural manner, or
are Stupid; and that either with a languishing and resolution of the body, or
with an Agitation or Convulsion of it, or with a Rigidity or Stiffness; which
four are the chief and highest Kinds of Consternation of mind, particularly
here to be explained.

That is a preternatural sleep which lasts longer then a natural, and then it is
called immoderate, and which does more lull the Senses, and therefore it is
called profound; sometimes too great a propension to sleep, or a very
proprofound sleep happens to them that are well; at other times it befalls them
in Diseases, and sometimes without, sometimes with a Fever, sometimes also it
invadeth with Ravings or with Stupidity.

Too great a propension to sleep in those otherwise well, is a frequent fault
in some men; Immoderate sleep.
not when this befalls certain natures by reason of their Age, as in Infants and
old folks, it is accustomary and good; or by reason of the Country* (in which
it is natural for some to sleep night and day) but when it proceeds from a cause
that ought not to be, whence not only too long indulging to sleep by night,
they rise late in the morning; but also by day time, especially presently after
taking of meat, and chiefly in a hot place or season, they are so forced to
sleep, that it is altogether necessary for them to sleep, to which some are so
prone, that though they do no ways at all compose themselves to it, but do
somewhat to shake it off, Profound sleep.
yet notwithstanding they fall asleep in that very work, and I have seen one of
them, even when he drank at Table, and moved the cup to his mouth, in that
posture fallen asleep; or doing somewhat else, he was wont to sleep in that form
of body.

Profound sleep sometimes does steal upon sound men after drinking of Wine in
Drunkards, or some other Narcotick taken; which is not lasting if the use of
them has been gentle; but if more vehement, it is turned into a Stupidity, as
shall be said there.

In a Disease heavy sleep is called, Caros, Coma, Cataphora, Lethargus,
Veternus, Subeth, in which as in that natural, they sleep with their Eyes
shut, and Body prostrate: but in that that the internal Senses, and by
consequence the external do not only rest, as in a natural sleep, but are as
it were overwhelmed, they are more or less dulled, so that they can scarce or
never be roused up, and being wakned, they complain of no Pain, only that they
feel their Head heavy and weighty, and so fall asleep again. The motion also of
the body is more languid, yet not abolisht as in the Apoplecticall with a
resolution of the Limbs, neither is their breathing hindered as in them, but
free and easy, unless in some it be depraved with yawning and noise, their
pulse also although it be weaker, yet it does not cease as in a Syncope.

Sometimes a Fever is joined with Sleep which if it begin together with this,
Sleepiness with a Fever is a Lethargy.
it has obtained the name of a Lethargy, which notwithstanding is common to
the rest also, in which besides the signs of sleep, a preternatural heat of the
body, a quick pulse, a deep dyed Urin, declare a Fever present: but also a
Caros sometimes following a Fever, and is its Symptom.

Besides these Species of Sleep, there is one also found in which though there
be the greatest propension to sleep, Sleep with Deliration.
and they express the same by lying down with their Eyes shut, notwithstanding
they watch, and diverse shapes and apparitions are presented to them; or if they
do sleep, they are troubled with diverse horrible dreams, which afterward when
they awake they declare; who being forced do hardly lift up their Eyes, and
look upon him that touches them, but know him not, and though they do feel and
are moved, yet they cannot rise out of the bed, and do the work of one awake;
this they call a Cataphora or a sleepless Coma; Some call it a Typhomania, as it
were an astonished madness; neither may it unfitly be called a Raving sleep and
be referred to Delirations, or a heavy sleep with terrible dreams: another
Species of it is described; the common people call them Exstatical, as if they
were taken with an Ecstasy.

Hither also may be referred the Daemoniacal sleep of Witches, Diabolical sleep.
in which they think that they are carried through the Air, feed deliciously,
dance and lie with the Devil, and waking they continue in the same error.

I have seen another kind somewhat like to these, in a certain Baron who for a
long time astonished and sleepy, Sleep with Stupidity.
did nothing according to reason, he would ask for no meat, nor take it unless
thrust in by force,; neither would he go to bed unless compelled, but all day
long leaning with his Arm on the Table, and with his eyes shut, he sat as one
asleep; neither would he answer any thing unless asked and often admonisht, and
then that which was little to the purpose.

A Stupidity with a Languidness or Resolution of the body is called
Obstupescentia, Ecplexis, or an Apoplexy; and it is an affect in which they do
not sleep, Stupidity with a resolution is an Apoplexy.
but astonished they lie stupid like stocks, all the Senses alike, and motion
also being abolisht together: which accidents are sometimes more mild, at other
times more grievous, in which both the internal and external senses are taken
away together, whence they have understanding of nothing; neither do they see,
though some of them do seem to look upon a man with fixed eyes, neither do they
hear a noise, neither do they show any sign of sense, though you prick them or
burn them: Also being deprived of all motion of the body in a moment, they fall
down, and all their members being resolved do languish: they neither speak nor
swallow, breathing only remaining, and that very obscurely, the blowing forth
of which from the mouth or nostrils can sometimes hardly be discerned, by the
motion of a piece of Cotton applied to them, or the motion of the breast to
detect that, by the motion of a cup of water placed on the breast; or the
breath is drawn with a great deal of difficulty and noise, as in dying people;
the pulse being in the interim full and strong in this difficulty of breathing,
but discovering it self to be very unequal; and that so long, till their Senses
returning tthey come to themselves again, which happens in a gentler species of
it; or if it be more grievous, they continue resolved; or if it be worst of
all, their breath being wholly taken away they are by and by choked, froth
then flowing out of their mouth.

A Stupidity with a Convulsion or vehement agitation of body is called an
Epilepsie and it is an A Stupidity with Convulsion is an Epilepsie.
disease in which all the Senses are suddenly taken away, and the whole body for
a time is shaken and pulled with an inordniate motion, assailing a man by turns
or fits, which because it does suddenly apprehend one, has the name of
Epilepsie; because it pulls him, the name of Convulsion, of which we meet with
chiefly two different kinds, in as much as one is of Continuance, another Short.

The Diuturnall is that which lasts long, and whether it happen before the age
of youth, and does not leave them when that comes; or whether it begins first
after that age, for the most part it assails the sick for the whole life time,
sometimes at certain times, hours, days, months, years, or changes of the Moon
(whence it is also called the Lunatic Disease) whose Functions because it does
not suddenly destroy them, but only weakens them by degrees, therefore it comes
to pass that when they are free from the fit, they can nevertheless go about
their business, and because they fall, if they be taken with this evil, whiles
they are about their business, hence also it is called the Falling sickness,
and whenas their sudden fall, and horrid symptoms, are wont to strike a great
terror, so that some from the apprehension of it only, have presently fallen
into the same affect, and upon that account most men do fly the sight of them;
and if it happen in a Congregation of people (as in our age in assembles) the
company is dissolved, amongst the Ancients their meetings upon the same cause
were dissolved, whence called by them the Comitial Disease which name it
retains; which also by reason of its pertinacy, was called the Great, Sontick,
and Herculean Disease, and it is to this kind to which they have applied the
name of Epilepsie rather than to the rest, when notwithstanding it agrees with
them all.

The Short and not so continued Cinvulsion is which either presently ceases, or
at leastwise is not protracted so long as the former, which again as it is
either Gentler or Worse is divided into two Species

The Gentler though it be not free from danger, is accounted that, whose cause
is neither great not persevering; as that which happens to Infants, when their
Teeth first break forth, or Worms disturb them, and by amd by cease: and that
which befalls Virgins before their Courses flow, but they coming it remits: and
that which betides great-bellied Women chiefly at the first month; but at the
middle time of their going, or after the birth presently ends: This, that they
might not bring fear by the dreadful name of the Falling Sickness, because it
often happens in Childhood, they call the Childrens Disease, mitigating the
cruelty of the Disease by the smoothness of the name.

The Worse and highly dangerous Species is, which following grievous diseases,
as Wounds, Fevers, pains of the Colic, and others, at any age, sometimes with
one or two fits, sometimes with more, and that continual, or sometimes with
intermitting accessions, does perplex the Patient with a terrible aspect, and
for the most part kill him; or if he be helped, yet sometimes it leaves behind it
the worst of symptoms, as Contraction of the Limbs, hurts the Voice and Senses,
or other discommodities; which Species they call a Convulsion or Spasm only,
not an Epilepsie, when notwithstanding those affected with this Species, are no
less suddenly taken in this case than the Epileptical, and call that general to
difference it from a particular Convulsion or Spasm: of which kind also there
may be found, in the Senses being unhurt only some parts are convelled, we
shall show in the hurts of motion: But this Species if it happen to Children,
as it is wont often to kill them, both Infants, and of riper years: they call
it also the Childrens Disease.

The accidents in all the Species of an Epilepsie both continued and short do
almost concur the same; and they may as well vary in all, as well those which
are observed in the hurts of the senses as of motion.

For all the Internal senses and by consequence the External too, are abolisht
in all, the whole time they are possessed with the fit, they understanding,
judging or feeling nothing at all: wherefore they refrain not from violent
motions though thereby they hurt themselves; and after they come to themselves,
they remember none of those things they have sufferd, neither do they know that
they have sufferd this evil, unless they be told of it, or suspect it, by
taking some signal, from the mark of some hurt left behind, as a Wound or
Contusion.

All Motion also both voluntary which wholly depends on our power, and that
which is performed by help of Nature, as breathing and evacuating; and that of
the Pulses which Nature alone performs, continuing in all these Species
distinguishes the Epileptical from the Apoplectick, and Syncopal in whom these
motions do fail (the Pulse only remaining in the Apoplectick.) The which
notwithstanding being deprived in the Convulsive, does cause that they fall, and
use inordinate motions.

But they fall, not by reason of a privation of the senses, but because their
whole Body at once and of a sudden is convelled; so that unless they be
forewarned by a Vertigo which is wont sometimes to go before it, or being taught
by Custom of the fit at a day or hour, if it be wont to come at set times,
they have a care of themselves, being seized with it whiles they are upright,
they presently fall down like to the Apoplectick and those that fall into
Swonings and as it is commonly said are free neither from Water nor fire, but are
in the greatest jeopardy by danger of the fall: and if upon this account it is
less danger for those, who lying in their Bed by reason of some sickness,
cannot fall when the Convulsions come upon them, yet they are more hazarded by
the cruelty of the Disease: So that every Epilepsie is horrible and abominable,
which the ancients therefore called the sacred Disease as sent by the Gods by
way of punishment, and others have Superstitiously imposed the Names of the
Gods on it.

They also so stir their Body with inordinate motions. That oftentimes it is all
of a fire, and the pulse becomes more swift, and sometimes sweats break forth.
Wreathing and distorting their Back, Neck, Head Arms, Feet, into diverse
Figures, and with them beating and shaking every thing in the way as the Bed,
Walls, Ground, bruising and wounding their own Limbs, gnashing with their Teeth
set, and bitterly biting their Tongues if they be out, rolling their Eyes
about, which being opened and very much drawn asunder, as also the bending of
the Face toward the hinder parts, do usually give the first sign of the fit
assailing; which at length in the end of the fit, lying as men wearied and
astonished, they keep fixed and stern, til they come to themselves again.

Their breathing also is very unequal, whenas sometimes they hold it for a while
so that from the stopping of their breath, and vehement striving, they sometimes
cast forth their ordure and Urine, and seed to, especiif it abound. But at
other times they fetch their Breath with difficulty and noise, both when an
Epilepsie of the Womb has the said strangulation its companion and cause, and
when Phlegm falling upon the Jaws and Nostrils hinders it; and they bring forth
a froth at the Mouth and Nose, arising from Phlegm, confused and stirred there
with the Air (which happens not to the Apolectick and Strangulated unless they
die, says Hippocrates;) and oftentimes they make a noise with crying out.

But these accidents which we have related, as they come on a sudden, so the
fit ceasing they presently remit: Yet sometimes certain relics of them do
remain, and the senses being yet weakened, they cannot rightly understand
Reason, or remember any thing; or an alienation of Mind coming upon it, they
do all things amiss and blaspheme, or they break forth into a great Laughter,
perhaps that which Cicero calls Sardonian; and that till a new fit return,
which is wont to attend these foretelling signs: but before and after these
fits, some particular convulsions sometimes either went before or remain, as a
distortion of the Mouth, a difficulty of swallowing or a spasme of some other
parts as shall be explained in its place; or that Spasme which they call
Flatulent which sometimes also threatens Convulsions if it be by reason of the
Nerves as shall be said; as also that convulsive Palpitation which also caused
from an affect of the Nerves does oftentimes along while forego an Epilepsie
and remain still in the Members after it, and exercise it self: or other
Symptoms of motions do sometimes trouble them, as with Gesticulations, sometimes
Dancings or some other disturbance of the Limbs, and tremblings of them.

A Stupidity with Rigidness of Body, is a rare and wonderful affect, A
Stupidity with rigidness is a Catalepsis.
which is called a Catoche or Catalepsis, that is, a laying hold off, which
they call also a Congelation whenas they are as stiff as if they were frozen: in
which all the internal senses and external are suddenly abolisht; but only the
motion of the Body is depraved, whenas they keep that form which the Body had
before it was seized on with this evil, whether Lying, Sitting, or Going, and
being taken like a statue they cannot change it, neither of their own accord
nor by compulsion; and with their Eyes open, whence they have called it the
watchful Stupidity, yet bl^hd and altogether speechless, breathing in the
interim not taken away, or very much hindered nor the Pulse. But it happens also
in some, A Stupidity with hearing remaining.
that though they lie rigid like a stock without motion and speech, yet
nevertheless they perceive those things, which the standers by do speak off,
and can afterward relate them, which they have called Ecstatick. But others
remaining in the same state like to dead Men, although they heard nothing, A
Stupidity with motion remaining.
nor saw not, now being pricked fet nothing, yet if any thing were put into
their Mourh, they swallowed it, and being lift up do stand, being forced do
walk, and keep their Members fixed in that posture as they are bent for them. In
a certain Woman thus taken, only the Belly and Breast were very much moved, all
the rest of the Body being stupid.

The Causes.
In all the forementioned kinds of Sleep and Stupidity with Languishing,
Convulsion or Rigor it must needs be that the Brain is affected whenas all
motion and sense proceed from that. Neither here as they would have it, are the
Functions diversely weakend, as the former, middle or hinder Ventricles of the
Brain are hurt; nor as the Brain is affected before or behind, whenas the
substance of the Brain does on every part perform its Functions, but as it is
more or less hurt, it loses more or fewer Functions. For if the hurt be great
so affecting the Brain that all the senses be abolisht, then it must needs be
that motion also does cease; other Functions in the interim remaining, which
the Brain is not the cause of, as the Pulse which the Heart yeids; and whenas
the motion of breathing is partly Natural, partly Voluntary, and therefore does
proceed from the Or-Organs of both motions, both the Midrif and Lungs, it is no
wonder, that that also, if the Brain be very much hurt, so that all Voluntary
motion do cease as it comes to pass in the Apoplectical the Midrif or Muscles
of the Breast then contributing nothing to Motion, but the Lungs only after a
sort moving themselves still, and whils they are dilated and filled with Air,
which they do by their prover Natural motion, a little lifting up the Breast)
do a little while Persevere, but very much hinderd and difficult, so that
unless that hurt of the Brain do speedily cease, the Patient must needs be
choked breathing being wholly taken away; but when voluntary motion is not
wholly taken away with the senses, that then respiration does remain still more
free. But if the Brain be affected with a less affect compared to the former,
by which the senses are only oppressed as in a sleepiness or gentle Stupidity,
then motion, though it do rest a little by reason of Sleep and Consternation,
yet nevertheless it does persevere; or if this come to pass only by reason of
the spirits of the Brain only extravagant, as shall be said in a Convulsion and
Catalepsis that motion does also continue, and they sooner return to
themselves; as shall be explained how this comes to pass, in the Particular
causes from which these proceed. But the causes of all Consternation of Mind
that happen are, either some offect so hurting the Brain (which gives Sense and
Motion) by it self or by consent that these its Functions do more or less fail;
as are Distemper, Repletion from a phlegmatic or sanguine Humor: some eminent
hurt; a Tumor, a distemper of the Brain proceeding from a Vapor or Malignant
quality; or a defect of the Animal spirits of the Brain; of all which causes
and their effects we will now treat in Particular.

A cold Distemper only without matter altering the Brain, A cold Distemper, the
Cause of Stupidity; a Moist; of immoderate Sleep.
because it is wont to hurt the Functions, may make it Stupid. And if it be
Moist too, which is seldom without matter, it may also cause Immoderate Sleep;
as sometimes by Reason of Age or the continuance of a Disease, a distemper left
in the Brain, does make men perpetually Prone to Sleep or as it was said in the
Weakness of the Mind more dull; which we have taught does happen rather by
reason of Weakness then Coldness.

Or induced by other causes, especially from the cold external Air, the North
Wind blowing, outwardly cooling the Head, or by the Pores percing to the Brain,
it may cause a great Stupidity.

They write also that a watchful Stupidity or Catalepsis may arise from a Cold
and dry distemper congealing the Spirits: but whenas the Spirits cannot be
congealed, or if they could be, then a greater Stupidity would follow, we
cannot at all allow of this.

That Convulsions are sometimes caused from Dryness which they call Inanition is
a common opinion, which does not happen in this Convulsion, but in a Particular
one as we shall there explain.

Phlegm is very often the cause of Sleep and Supidity (under which Name we
comprehend all the Watery, Cold and Moist Excrements of the Brain) which
immoderately heaped up within the Skul (as the Brain does ever and a non heap
up such things, from Phlegmatic blood varried up to it. and the weakness of the
part) if it be suppressed and flow not forth through the passages appointed for
it, then if it perfuse the substance of the Brain with a large humor, and cool
it, it causes a Carus. Or if by its long impulse it so moisten the same, that
that great bulk of the Brain becoming more soft and lax, do suddenly flow
abroad and sink and press the original of the Nerves at the basis of the Skul
proceeding from the Brain, and stop the passage of the Animal spirit, it
procures a grievous Apoplexy. As when Phlegm does suddenly fill the Ventricles
or Cavities of the Brain, not by obstructing, whenas the Animal Spirit is not
seated in them but every where in the substance of the Brain and Nerves,
neither does it pass through the Ventricles but after the same manner by
oppressing the basis of the Brain, it may also induce an Apoplexy; the which
notwithstanding, if the humor descending from them, do follow the course of the
Nerves, may end in a Palsy. That all these things are thus in a Carus and
Apoplexy we have learnt from the dead, because this humor has sometimes flown
from their mouths in a plentiful manner. And we have observed also by diligent
dissection, that the thick Membrane of the Brain opened, in some abundance of
Humor has presently lept forth, by the Region of the Head, and descended even
to the Breast: and the very substance of the Brain in a certain old Woman which
died of an Apoplexy dissolved like to Cream, after the same manner has run all
over her Face. But we know that these affects proceeded from the Cause, by the
precedent constitution of the Body, especially in old Age, which is Obnoxious
to this evil; and from a cold constitution of the season and Air; and because
they have first complained of a heaviness in the Head and a weight with
slaggishness, darkness of the sight, and also of a want of that accustomary
voiding of Phlegm by the Nose and Mouth: and because in the dead, of an Apoplexy
especially, often times a great quantity of Phlegm flows forth by the said
passages.

From the same Phlegmatic Humor obstructing the passages of the Brain; many
have written that as an Apoplexy so also an Epilepsie may be caused; and
therefore as in that so in this, that all the senses are abolisht, but do
presently return again, because the Brain by concussion, does speedily shake it
of; and then that motion with the senses does no way cease here, as is an
Apoplexy because the Ventricles are not altogether, but only in part,
obstructed, or as others will have it, the former only are obstructed, the
hindermost being unhurt, so that a portion of the Spirits may nevertheless pass
by to the Nerves. Which though it may be condemned for many things, yet let it
suffice to have brought this especially to destroy this opinion; viz. that if a
sufficient quantity of the Animal Spirits did not descend, the Functions of the
Brain would rather follow to be impared in sense and motion, then partly
abolisht, partly depraved; and that if Phlegm were the cause, and that suddenly
shaken of from the Brain did flow down, it would induce that Palsy which is
wont to follow an Apoplexy for the same Reason.

They teach that Phlegm putrefying in the Brain, does Cause a Lethargy, and a
Fever its companion is kindled from thence: but whenas we have showed in
Fevers that from the Putrefaction of Phlegm especially in the Head, that a
Fever can in no wise be kindled; and we find no reason, how the same
Phlegmatic Humor being putrified, by its coldness can cause a Carus, and by its
heat a Fever, and one and the same thing can be cold and hot, when as
contraries are inconsistent in the same subject; we shall assign a far
different cause of a Lethargy by and by when we treat of a Carus caused by
consent, and that not much different, from the Carus which follows Fevers.

They teach also that phlegm not simply but mixed with choler, does cause a
watchful stupidity or Catalepsis for this reason, Fleam causes Sleep, Choler,
Watchings, and so from the mixture of contrary causes are produced contrary
effects; which indeed might be, if they were in diverse places, but two
contraries mixed and confounded in the same subject, do produce a certain middle
effect, or rather one compounded of them both, than contrary: for which reason,
these causes were found out rather from the effect, than their certain signs,
that they might show by what means at the same time, a man might be stupid and
watchful (not sleeep, since it is impossible to sleep and watch at the same time)
and attribute to each its proper humors.

Blood also continued as yet in the ventricles of the brain, Blood the cause of
a Carus and Apoplexy.
as there is at other times a great quantity of it there, so it abounding more
yet, if it be more crude, serous, cold, by oppressing the brain may make it
more stupid, or by cooling it, may make it sleepy; The which doubless a pain of
the head praeceded, and sometimes does still remain its companion, and this is
known by a fullness of blood and redness of the face.

Aetius tells us that from much blood abundantly and suddenly overwhelming the
substance of the Brain, that Species of a Catalepsis is generated, from which a
young man was freed by a flux of blood from his nose; which flux of blood being
often accustomary in solution of Diseases by natures motion, cannot therefore
argue this Disease proceeding from blood, for which we shall propound another
cause; as we can neither grant that lighter species of it, called an Aphony
when the voice only is intercepted, to proceed from a fullness of blood
intercepting the passage of the animal spirit, as Hollerius writes, for which
we shall by and by alleadg another cause. Neither can we allow that an Epilepsie
which some also have delivered from plenty of blood possessing the Ventricles
of the Brain, and obstructing the passages of the spirits, does arise from this
humor and after this manner. As neither from Blood or a melancholy or
Choleric juice from which some teach, that species of a Catalepsis is
generated, which is wont to happen to persons melancholical: and by reason of
the coldness and dryness of that humor the spirits to be so congealed, as was
said in the like distemper, which we have denied to be for that reason, and
from Melancholy we have thought to proceed melancholy accidents rather than
those of a Catalepsis unless some other cause be joined, as shall be said;
neither can we by any means admit an Fpilepsie also to arise from the same
obstructing the Ventricles as some have spread abroad these opinions: when as
the aforementioned affects as lasting no longer, but seazing and ceasing by
course have no fixed cause in the Brain, but happen, that being affected only by
consent, as shall afterward be declared.

The Blood carried out of the Vessels, if infused into the substance of the
Brain, it breeds not an Inflammation, and then a Frenzy would follow, but it
obstruct the Windings and Ventricles by suddenly filling of them, and it
oppress the beginning of the Nerves then it causes a Stupidity and Apople y^^
as it often happens a Vein being broke, and that sometimes by reason of a
fullness of the Vessels, especially in those in whom some accustomary
Haemorrhages of the Courses, Haemrods or Nose are stopped: in whom yet living,
and after their death, I have observed that a great quanttity of blood has
broken forth from their mouth and nose, that sometimes I have persuaded my self,
that this was the chief cause of an Apoplexy. The same may happen from an
external violent cause, as a Contusion of the Brain from a Blow or Fall
although the substance of the Brain be no ways wounded that the blood also may
fill up the Cavities of the Brain, and its substance, in those places especially
where it is contused; as Women do daily see comes to pass in the Brain of Bulls
killed with a Hatchet, whenas they first purge the Brain from the clotted
blood, before they boil it; fromwhence it must needs be that an Apoplexy does
suddenly arise unless the blood presently break forth by the Nostrils, Ears,
and other parts or adjoining passages, as sometimes also it does; or if the
fall be lighter, there follows rather a lighter obstupulesency: though
oftentimes also the flux of blood turned into clots and retained a long time if
it putrify it causes a Phrenzy, Convulsions which before death do follow
Lethargies and Apoplexies and kill the Patient.

But also from the same violent external cause, if the substance of the Brain
be hurt, by Contusion, or by cutting or pricking, seeing it is a principal
part, whose action is then destroyed, it must needs be that an Apoplexy does
suddenly follow. A hurt of the Brain is the cause of a Stupidity and Apoplexy.
Or if the Skull be only broken thereby or deprest so that it press the Brain
lying under it, it happens also that a Stupidity does follow. Or if from some
stronger force the bulk of Brain rush together and press the beginning of the
Nerves, an Apoplexy likewise follows; all which are made manifest from the
causes foregoing.

A hard preternatural Tumor, A Tumor of the Brain is the cause of a Stupidity
and Apoplexy.
affecting rather by its weight, than distemper causes a Stupidity by degrees
engendered with the Tumor, but of long continuance: which is hardly discovered
till after death the Skull being opened, as was found in Noble Bonecourtius who
for some years like to one astonished as was said before, lay Stupid; viz. a
great hard Glandule being generated over a callous body with plenty of humor,
which watring the Brain, did cause a sleepiness joined with a Stupidity, as we
have formerly expounded this kind. The cause of which might be a blow with
which he was struck on the head, although it were done a long time before he
fell into the disease; but they being ignorant also of the true causes of a
Catalepsis, phancying many other besides those above mentioned, they have
thought also that it might proceed from a Tumor of the Brain. And some also
have writ that a Lethargy does proced from a phlegmatic Imposthumation; the
which whenas we have formerly showed, that a Fever could not be caused from any
cause lying in the brain, the same we assert cannot happen here: and some also
have held that an Abcess may be the cause of it, the which notwithstanding
generated in the brain from hot stumors, does cause rather a Frenzy and
Convulsions than a Lethargy A Vapor carried up to the Brain, A Vapor the cause
of fleep.
or heaped up there, may be the cause of immoderate sleep caused by consent if
it be carried thither plentiful and steeming do oppress the spirits, or being
crude it do so moisten the brasn, that it becomes languid to perform its
actions.

Such a one is raised from plenty of Meat or drink, or from that which is
vaporous or more moist; which if they be more moderate, procure that sleep
which is wont^o molest men after dinner or supper, especially if they drink
Wine as it is usually the custom, which we shall by and by show has certain
narcotick virtue, and the constitution of the brain be moist, as it is in old
folks which propension to sleep is customary after meat, the rest of the body
also does very much further, which after labor whiles they take their repast,
is completed by sitting still, and so much the more also inviting the mind to
rest by sleep by how much they are longer at dinner or supper, and if the heat
of a South Sun be joined, or of the Country or place as of a hot-house, it
helps somewhat, both because heat calls the vapors upwards, and because
recreating the wearied bodies, and more aptly disposing them to quiet, it
causes that the mind also is inclined to rest. But immoderate Sleep also may
be caused from the immoderate use of meat and drink or certain nourishments not
dulling the brain by a stupefactive quality, but filling of it with many
vapors: which is known by this, if after carrousing though not to drunkenness,
of which hereafter, or after the use of certain meats, they suffer thus, and
afterward come to themselves.

Vapors raised up and and down the body from humors and vaporus and moist
excrements are sometimes wont to beget sleep. A Vapor the cause of deep sleep.
If they be gathered together in the Stomach or Womb, whence many other
diseases of the brain caused by consent do proceed, and sometimes also they
induce immoderate sleep, if the brain be troubled with those vapors which is
easily known by the affects of those parts, that it proceeds from thence, from
Worms putrefying in the Guts, such evaporations sent to the head do often cause
sleep especially in Infants: and by the signs of Worms it is shown from whence
it proceeds although this sleep is commonly promoted by reason of a Fever
accompanying.

The matter intermitting Fevers putrifyfying in the mesaraick Veins as the
most capacious receptacle of humors corrupting for a light cause by reason of
the neerness of the Guts, A Vapor the cause of a Carus and Lethargy in Fevers.
and the most dangerous fuel of many diseases, being attenuated by heat and
carried plentifully up to the head cespecially at the first invasion, breeds
this Sleep happening in some Tertians and Quartans at the beginning of the fit,
while coldness yet possesses them, and the body is not yet through hot, and
sometimes it lasts to the end of the fit. And also in continual Fevers I have
often observed that the Brain weakened with a long continued and grievous pain
foregoing in the vigor or after it, being struck with a Carus following, has
brought the Patient into a great deal of danger. The which also if it happen in
the beginning of continual Fevers and by and by, by reason of too much
evaporation, this principal part the brain, especially by some means disposed
to a Carus, be so weakened, that a heavy sleep do follow, it will be that
Lethargy which is coupled with a continual Fever and presently after invades
with it, no otherwise differing from that other Carus which happens in the
declination of Fevers, which is also dangerous, but in this that it presently
begins with the Fever.

Many assert that from evaporations from the Stomach, Womb, and the rest of the
body assailing the brain, an Epilepsy by consent is caused: as also some have
written that some species of a Catalepsis does proceed from Melancholy vapors,
and how it is done they variously assign, whenas some of them think it is done
by filling up the Ventricles of the brain, or affecting it some other way, or
by irritation; the which notwithstanding how it comes to pass by reason of the
nervous kind affected, we shall by and by explain.

Sometimes an occult quality by an unknown propriety is wont to be the cause of
Sleep and Stupidity of which kind is the narcotick virtue, which acts not by
coldness as has hitherto been believed, but by that propriety by which it
lulls asleep the senses; and by such medicines taken and entering into the body
(although by their smell also they may offend somewhat, A Narcotick virtue is
the cause of sleep and stupidity
but being only applied they scarce work so far as to induce a Stupidity) if
they be gentler they cause a sleep not natural but as it were artificial^ but
if it work more powerfully stronger things being given, it makes them so
stupid, that like to the Apoplectical they lie without sense and motion, and
unless they come to themselves they are choked for want of breath; as we have
often found has hapen'd from the juice of Poppy and other things, upon which
account their use is very dangerous; and also from the immoderate use of Wine;
not by reason of the evaporations as some have thought, but by reason of its
narcotick virtue, immederate sleep and stupidity also do follow in Drunkards,
which makes them no less astonished, than if they had taken Opium and often kills
them: as it happens also from the Liquor extracted from Wine which they call
the Spirit of Wine, and by so much the more powerful, as its force is reduced
and collected into a narrower compass, by the drinking of which we have seen
killed some Infants that drink of it by chance, and some of riper age lying
astonished.

Some venomous things do cause the same effects by a hidden virtue, A poysenous
quality is the cause of sleep and stupidity
being outwardly inferred, by a stroke of certain Beasts, as from the biting of
the Asp a deadly sleep follows, as Plutarch writes in the death of Cleopatra
which kind of malignant virtue may be raised also in the body from the humors
degenerating into a poisonous quality: in malignant and pestilent Fevers, by
whose evaporations the brain infected, may be oppressed with a heavy sleep and
Lethargy which happens also in an Epilepsie proceeding from thence, toward
the end of the fit, that they are longer oppressed than with sleep or stupidness;
not so much by reason of the brain tired by too much stirring, as because these
malignant vapors which before did cause those Epileptical motions by affecting
the nervous parts, as shall be said by and by, afterward weakening the brain do
induce a sleep or stupidness for a while, til these vapors are discust, and the
fit be ended: which also may happen in a Catalepsis for the like reason, since
that it is a certain species of Convulsion.

If the cause of that doting sleep proceed from the Devil with which he deludes
Witches it is not our task to search out those hidden causes, The Devil the
cause of Daemonical sleep.
which the Witches attribute to the ointments with which they anoint things, by
the Devils command, or to Decoctions with which they dream they can cause Hail,
and draw Clouds from Heaven: such as Eotis in Apuleins and Homers Circe did
prepare by bruising together Garlic Wild Time and stinking Plants which we
renounce.

By reason of a defect of animal spirits in the brain, it must needs be also
that a stupidity follow, the functions of the brain being taken away; which may
happen upon a double account, they being either wasted or at leastwise poured
forth and extravagant.

The Animal spirits being wasted in the brain, The Consumption of the animal
spirit is cause of an Apoplexy*
if they were only impaired or too few whence follows a weakness of the brain,
its functions also must be weakened, as has been said in the Weakness of the
mind: but if they be altogether, or so far consumed as that not only a weakness
of the functions do follow, but a total Oblition of them, there will be a
grievous Apoplexy and suddenly killing the Patient, of which we have oftentimes
seen old men die of, and the common People still has believed it caused from a
Phlegmatic Humor; as we see the vital Spirit being impared there follows a want
of strength, but being wholly consumed Death.

The Animal Spirits being shed or poured forth from the Brain into the Nerves
continuous with the Brain (for they can be extravagant no where else, Too great
a pouring forth of the Animal Spirit from the Brain into the Nerves is the
cause of a Stupidity of diverse kinds of a Catalepsis and Epilepsie.
whenas they can consist no where but in the Brain and Nerves) then it happens
that the Internal sense, either all or some do cease, according as a greater or
less quantity of them leaves the Brain; but the motive power is no ways
abolisht, since as those Spirits do yet persist in the Nerves, neither are the
Nerves left destitute of them, as it comes to pass in a resolution, their
passage from the Brain to the Nerves being then hinderd: furthermore since that
the Animal spirit is contained also in the Nerves, as well as in the Brain, of
which they are portions, though the the Functions of the Brain may cease for a
while, yet they nevertheless may still for a time exercise the power of moving,
which they contain in themselves: the which also we may very well guess does
proceed rather from the Nerves, then the Brain in some creatures, who excel
more in motion then in the senses, because they have none or a very little
Brain, but a marrow of the Back, large and plentiful, part of which also cut
off from the rest, yet nevertheless moves for a while: and this is the true and
Legitimate cause, why the senses being abolisht, yet motion nevertheless may
persist for a time: in sinding out of which both the ancient and modern
Physicians have so much tormented themselves, and delivered their far different
opinions, viz. This effusion of the Spirits into the Nerves: which proceeding
chiefly from two causes produces accidents somewhat diverse, as shall presently
be explained.

The first of which is the too much, Vehement, and Persevering operation of the
internal Senses by which, as in great passions of the Heart, we see the vital
Spirits so carried forth, that thence follows a Fainting away: and so if there
be a dissipation of the Animal Spirits into the Organs of the external senses
by a more vehement Cogitation and intention upon some thing, it may come to
pass that as men astonished they may be lightly stupid, and either by and by,
they returning again they may come to themselves, or if they continue longer,
those diverse Species of a Catalepsis may proceed, which we have demonstrated
in the explication of the former kinds, to have sometimes happened from too much
Study, or Love, or some other great affects of the Mind, especially
Melancholy (whence it came to pass that many have put a Melancholy juice as
the Cause of a Catalepsis) In which if the Spirits being not wholly poured
forth, some portions of them remain in the Brain, some Senses also will remain,
the other ceasing, and as they are poured forth into the Nerves, Motion may
also either at least remain, or exercise it self with a rigidness without
concussion, if there be no contraction of the nerves as shall be said in an
Epilepsie and this seems very likely to be the cause of the diversity of
Species of a Catalepsis as we have showed formerly in diverse Histories of it,
yet as also if the spirits be so carried forth, by a violent affect of the
Mind, that for awhile they cannot recollect themselves, we have seen them fall
down like to the Epileptical their pulse remaining, by which they were
distinguished from those that faint away and some when they made a speech or
despute at great meetings, by reason of the too great contention of the Mind
and Senses, fear sometimes or shame coming upon them, the Spirits being
troubled, have sufferd the like; from whence perhaps because the same was wont
to happen for this reason at some meetings, an Epilepsie was called the
Comitial Disease. In which vehement motions of the Mind as it may come to
pass, so it is commonly believed also that from Anger Convulsions may easily
proceed; which opinion happily had its rise, because in those disposed, the fit
is by this means promoted: unless perhaps this may happen by the stirring of
Choler through Anger, as we shall declare by and by.

But the other and more frequent Cause of pouring out the Spirit into the
Nerves, from whence follow the more grievous Symptoms of an Epilepsie and
Catalepsis is an irritation of the Brain: such a one by which its expulsive
faculty stirred up, rising to cast of that which is troublesome to it, does
together drive forth the Spirits: as Nature every where feeling pain and
trouble is wont to thrust Spirits thither, and together with them blood also,
oftentimes so powerfully that there follows an inflammation of that part which
receives them.

Which trouble or irritation of the Brain indeed, they demonstrate to happen
rather by consent, and compassion with some part then from its proper effect;
because we see Convulsions happen rather from an affect and Disease of another
part. Sometimes also far distant from the Brain, then of the Brain it self, as
from a Nerve Pricked, or some violent Medicine taken: where as if it did happen
from some grievous Disease of the Brain (as indeed it must needs be a grievous
Disease, which must induce so vehement a Symptone) the accidents of Convulsions
which it causes, would not so soon remit; as also in other hurts of this
principal part, we see there succeeds long continued and lasting symptoms as
you see in an Apoplexy: and those affects which happening to the Nerves do cause
Convulsions as a Puncture Inflammation if they were in the Brain would not cause
them, but an Apoplexy and Frenzy; although the Brain thus molested by consent
also, if the cause offending be great, and follow continually, not only
irritating the Brain it self, but also by its vehemence and frequency so
hurting it, that it contract also its proper disease, then the contention of
Convulsions lasts almost continually, neither do the sick exactly come any more
to themselves, or the fit wholly cease, till the Patient be quite dead. Yet it
may be also that from the same Cause as we shall by and by speak of that which
is Poysenous, both the Nervous kind and the Brain hurt together, Convulsions
may happen coupled together with other hurts of the Mind,

But that we may find out this part which is first affected, and with which the
Brain condoles, if we consider the Symptoms, viz. the inordinate motion and
privation of senses, that must be it which has so great consent with the
Muscles exercising voluntary motion, and with the Brain communicating senses,
that that being hurt, the Muscles are forced and the Brain cease a while from
its Function which we say is that Nervous kind because it proceeds from the
Brain and ends in the Muscles, under which Name we understand all the Nerves of
the whole Body both within and without the Skul, especially those endued with
the sense of feeling and the Nervous parts which are compounded of them, which
are of most exquisite sense: the which being so hurt, that the Functions of the
Brain are abolisht by sympathy and those of the Muscles augmented, it must
needs be that Convulsions follow; which how it comes to pass we will Explain.

The offense of the Nervous kind, not that which weakens its Functions, but
that which by bringing trouble to it does rather stir up its faculty, if it be
caused either in one place or more, a Nerve or Nervous part is affected; and if
the offense be great, then the whole nervous kind rising up, whiles it endeavors
to shake off that with which it is offended, does together exagitate the Brain
from whence it proceeds, and draws it into consent, so that that also feeling
these affects of the Nerves whiles it endeavors to help them to expel the
trouble, driving the animal Spirits from it self into the beginning of the
Nerves, it is a while left destitute of its Functions: no otherwise then we
observe sometimes in a Syncope that the Heart without any proper affect of its
own, the Spirits wandering for some other cause, does cease from its Function
til they return again. In which effusion of the Spirits into the Nerves, it
happens that the motive Power does continue in them, not only as was declared
formerly, by also by reason of the plenty of Spirits of the Nerves, the Muscles
also are stirred up to exercise Motion; but chiefly that inordinate and violent
Motion in the beginning of Epileptical Fits is performed for this cause, that
whiles the nervous kind does endeavor to expel this Offense, it is contracted
into it self, and then again dilated, and it forces the Muscles of the whole
Body, into whose beginnings the Nerves are inserted, by consecution to commit
those inordinate Motions, by pulling or drawing, and then remitting them; and
that so long till the hurtful Matter is expelled from them, or by reason of
dejection of strength and as it were weariness, when they can no longer
exercise Motion, yet notwithstanding they retain their Limbs convulsed or
artracted, stiff and fixed for a while, till at last they come wholly to
themselves. The which happens in a Catalepsie presently at the beginning, no
agitation of the Body foregoing, perhaps because in that there is not so great
an effusion of spirits into the nerves, whenas in that sometimes some senses do
yet remain, and there is a less irritation of the Nerves, whence it may be
accounted a certain lighter sort of Epilepsie, yet very seldom happning,
otherwise proceeding from the same cause which breeds an Epilepsie, but which
either does less affect the nervous kind by irritation or else has that
propriety, that it produces that stupidity or rigidness of the Members rather
then Convulsions.

But that these causes of offense to the Nervous kind, from whence an Epilepsie
often proceds, a Catalepsis more seldom, are diverse and frequent it is no
wonder, whenas the Nerves by reason of their most exquisite sense, are not only
unable to endure great troubles or pains, but also are so easily offended by
the slightest, that they cannot suffer the touch of a Body, (on which account,
whiles they are carried in the body, Nature has provided for them that they
touch not the bones, neither are they joined to any other parts, besides those
into which they are inserted) from which notwithstanding they are not
exasperated by diverse incursions; unless they be great and violent, so that
they be convulsed; of which sort are those which may happen to them from a
wound, irritation or infection either acting singly, or more of them together.

That a Convulsion may be caused from a Wound made either in a Nerve, or
nervous part such cases frequently happening, do sufficiently declare; yet not
from every wound of a Nerve, but only from that almost, by which a Nerve is
hurt by pricking, Convulsions are wont to follow its function, being there
stirred up by reason of the offense, which if the Nerve be wholly cut in two,
is rather abolisht; for which reason also, if we cut off a Nerve convulsed, we
cure the Convulsion caused in it; but this molestation of the Nerve, proceeding
from the solution of its continuity, is yet more increased by an Inflammation,
or putrefaction from the corruption retained in the narrow hole of the Puncture
of the Nerve, and by the great pain from thence, which for the most part do
attend this affect: or if the Wound happen from Iron of its own Nature an enemy
to the Nerves, commonly by reason of its Rust, or because it is infected; or a
bite or blow of a poysenous Beast.

But also a nervous part being wounded especially in that place, where the
Nerves go under it, and constitute the greater part of it; as the Bladder being
hurt at the Neck, the Muscles about their beginnings either by chance or whiles
the Surgeon and lithotomist attempt a Section of the Body, most commonly
dangerous Convulsions succeed; which a difficulty of swallowing going before
(which the Chirurgions so greatly fear, calling of it as was said before, a
spasme of the Stomach) is wont most commonly to foretell.

An irritation of the nervous Kind, if it be vehement, may also cause
Convulsions; the which proceeds either from the cause which because it torments
the Nerves with grievous pain, makes Convulsions by accident, or the which by
it self stimulating the Nerves by a manifest Quality, and causing Pain or none
together with it, does convell them: which cause proceeds either from Medicines
or internal Humors as Blood, Choler and Phlegm molesting the Nerves by their
proper substance, or by a Vapor only.

But Convulsions are chiefly caused by occasion of pain, either if the Torments
be unreasonable and of long continuace such as in Cholicks do often cause
Convulsions, or if they trouble Bodies endued with most exquisite sense and
which by reason of their Tenderness, do hardly undergo such torments: on which
account also Infants, not only in diverse sorts of sicknesses, but when they
begin to breed Teeth, being exasperated with pains, are often times convulsive:
and also immoderate Tickling made in the like Bodies, because that also gives
trouble and a sad sense, experience does testisie has caused Convulsions in
some; nay it is confessed by all that even a light Tickling caused by Worms
creeping up and down the Gutts and Stomach, and sucking them with their Mouths,
does move in Infants not only horrors, and scratching of the Nose, but also
light epilepticall Convulsions.

Medicines taken which stimulates the expulsive Faculty of the stomach and
Guts, if they excite those parts too much, as they cause a convulsive Motion
which is by Hiccoping; so if they be very biting and burning, as those things
put up into the Nose, they move Sneezing; and so a purging Faculty especially
joined to them, by which they solicit Nature at once very much both by Vomit
and stool, by reason of their eminent efficacy they often produce Convulsions,
such as happen from Hellebore and the use of other things; and those deadly too
if by too much insinuating themselves into thee parts, they cease not to
exagitate them: but not yet deadly if when they first begin to solicit
Nature, being repulsed by her, they be cast forth upwards and downwards; as I
have observed from the use of Antimony and Asarabacca some feeling only
forerunings of a Spasme in their Thighs but others also convulsive, to have
returned to themselves.

Corrupt and putrefying Blood if it be carried into the nervous kind by
affecting of them, may also cause Convulsions. As it sometimes happens from a
blow of the Head penetrating the Skull, yet not deviding the substance of the
Brain (whence rather an Apoplexy would follow) but only wounding the Membranes
of the Brain; the Blood then being poured forth, and retained under the Skull,
which putrefying infects the Membranes of the Brain with a malign quality, by
consent of which and also that sinking, and possessing and affecting the
beginning of the Nerves produced from the Basis of the Brain, it breeds
Convulsions which follow Wounds of the Head: which sort of Convulsions also in
Imposthumations, are sometimes wont to follow a Phrenzie that went before.

Choler of all humors is wont to be the chief, both the Yellow, and the Green
and Black, which by its acrimony is wont to stimulate and irritate the Nerves
and nervous parts the which also by its thinness it easily enters: which in
Pains of the Colic does cause those Convulsions, not only because it breeds
these Torments, but also because insinuating it self into the Stomach and Guts,
it does too much solicit them with a kind of caustic virtue, which
Convulsions last, as long as this acrid humor ceases not to irritate; that
there is no need to fancy any other reason that it is far fetched to the Nerves,
if it ought to cause Convulsions: and also if a Convulsion proceed from anger,
they think it may happen by reason of the boiling and effusion of Choler,
although that rather proceed, from this too much motion of the mind, stirring
up the spirits as was said before.

Also from thin salt and acrid phlegm falling down from the brain into the
spaces through which the Nerves are carried and pulling of them, an Epilepsie
may be caused; as in a Palsy sometimes bedewing the Nerves, it first causes
Resolutions, afterward by its acrimony, which it either had before, or by
putrafaction has newly acquired, soliciting the Nerves, it raises those
Convulsions which sometimes follow Palsies; which, sneezing arising, from the
same phlegm, distilled also from the Brain into the Nose, is wont to go before
and foretell; whence perhaps the custom of praying after sneezing took its
first rise, whenas they had sometimes observed that sneezing was a forerunner of
an Epilepsie.

Also filthy and acrid vapors especially if some malignity be joined, as shall
be said, being raised in the body and especially pulling the beginning of the
Nerves or else where soliciting, especially the greater, do beget an Epilepsie
which they say is caused by consent such as are from vicious, corrupt and
putrid meats, humors, excrements, worms, collected in the stomach, guts, womb,
veins, in diverse diseases of those parts, or of the whole body as those raised
from Fevers which do produce Convulsions which are wont to follow these
diseases.

But those things which cause Convulsions by a poisonous and pernicious quality
are various; which according to the diverse nature of the poisons, and as they
are either inimicous only to the nervous kind, they do infect that only, or
also the brain together with that, do produce either Convulsions or the brain
being hurt also other accidents, which sometimes also after the Epilepticall fit
is over do continue in the hurts of the senses, especially in an alienation of
mind and depraved motion, as has been said. Amongst which poisonous causes
that sometimes also offers it self, which by its propriety and private hurt
brings forth the accidents of a Catalepsis rather than of a true Convulsion;
yet because it is a disease very rare, it evidently shows, that seldom such a
venenate quality, is raised in our body, which may produce such an effect in
the body, as also that which causes true Convulsions is most often: but of
what kind soever that be, its Fountain and Original sometimes lurks
intrinsecally in the brain, or bowels, or in the veins or babit of the body and
sometimes extrinsecally to the body.

Fernelius witnesses that he has found by disection, an Epilepsie of long
continuance caused in the Brain from the corruption or imposthumation of the
membranes of the brain and by reason that a filthy vapor raised from them, at
set times entering the ventricles did cause the fits; but that these things do
cause rather short and deadly than long continued Epilepsies and not because
they send a filthy vapor to the Ventricles, but for another reason, has been
demonstrated formerly, whenas if they did possess the substance of the brain or
its Ventricles and so much hurt them, they would induce rather an Apoplexy than
Convulsions. In the interim notwithstanding we do no ways deny the cause of an
Epilepsie oftentimes to lie in the head; and we confess we meet with many
faults within the Skul, both in the membranes of the brain, and in its
substance also, or in its humors, which raging with their poisonous and adverse
quality at set times as the nature of the poison is, by soliciting the
membranes and nervous kind, do cause that long continued Epilepsie and almost
incurable. Yet the nature of which cause as also of other poisons, we can no
otherwise know, then as by dissection made, sometimes a Speck is discovered,
sometimes some humor black or froathy in some inward part of the Skul or bone or
membrane or brain, but sometimes nothing at all; but that it is a poysenous
faculty we collect from this, because it is not with a manifest cause, or of
such moment, nevertheless produces such horrid symptoms, and yet in the
interim does not kill the man, nor yields to no Remedies.

And also this poisonous cause lying in the bowels produces the like long
continued and pe^inacious Epilepsies; as poisons taken in the Stomach and Guts
which have some propriety of begetting an Epilepsie: or meat changed into the
nature of poison or excrements putting on a venenate quality contained in those
places, or also in the Womb as they would have it. Of all which that these are
the causes and do lie in the veins is judged and known from the affects
concurring with them, as has been said, or from others offering themselves
about the heart strings and the veins, and from the faults of the womb and
stomach.

The Veins also if they be filled with malignant and venenate humors of this
kind, as it often happens in pernicious diseases especially in the pestiferous,
epidemical, and contagious, and that malignant virtue do besiege not only the
heart but especially the nervous kind, then deadly Convulsions do follow, such
as are wont to happen in Fevers, not by reason of too much extinction of the
Nerves from vehement heat, but by reason of the malignant nature of the humor:
or also if without these diseases a humor heaped up in the veins changed into a
malignant quality do put on that nature inimicous to the brain and Nerves, that
induces rather epileptical accidents than others (as in melancholy that such a
poisonous quality is there also wont to cause the true melancholy and madness
we shall show in the alienation of the mind) then I suppose that long continued
and incurable Epilepsie does chiefly proceed from this cause: as also a
poisonous cause raised from the same place, does cause that madness that lasts
so long; the which also for the like reason it is probable does happen in the
mesaraick veins such matter being collected there, which do produce rather an
Epilepsie than hypochondriack melancholy: where also many do write that a
Catalepsis is contained, to wit a melancholy humor which we moreover hold to
be malignant, from whence vapors raised up do cause it. And the manner of
curing a Catalepsis they apply to this place and humor, as we shall by and by
show.

And also in Women such matter is wont more commonly to be heaped up about the
veins of the Womb; where also the blood retained and corrupted rather than the
seed (which we think can scarce come to that malignity) does cause Convulsion,
such as are often wont to happen in Virgins and Women that are hysterical their
courses being stopped before and after their childing, and it may also give an
occasion for a Catalepsis.

That the like quality may arise in the habit of the body and cause an
Epilepsie experience witnesses; with which Galen and Fernelius being
instructed they write that they have observed, the one that an Air in an
Epileptick Child ascending from his Foot, the other that a Vapor running from
the Crown through the outward parts of the head, did give occasion of the
Epileptical fits as often as they came; and we also have sometimes observed that
an Air running from the hand where afterward an Imposthume has bred as also
from the feet other or places has done the like.

That the like poison entering the body from without does occasion Epilepsies
for the like reason, as in other Countries the bitings of virulent Beasts
especially of the Viper and stinging of the Scorpion do show; so in our
Countries it is manifest that it does happen from the biting of a mad Dog and
besides the symptoms of madness and other cruel ones, they are endangered by
Convulsions and at length by many fits the Patients are carried away.

It Is not yet sufficiently manifest, whether there be any things found out,
which can produce an Epilepsie anew only by their malignant smell yet that
epileptical fits are furthered by the smell of some things is certain, which do
it either by a certain propriety, of which are reckoned, the ashes of an Asses
hoof, Goats horn, Weathers feet burnt, also the smell of Bitumen, Myrrh,
Smallage, and also the breathings of the Goats flesh, or the Liver of the
Hee-Goat and so much the more if they be eaten: or because by a vehement and
subtle vapor they assail the head and the nerves, made weak by the continuance
of this disease (as also Wine which besides this, does easily alof its own
nature trouble the Nerves) they occasion Epileptical fits.

The Cure.
In these kind of cases proceeding from the brain, all the operation of the
Physician which consists in prediction and Cure, must be applied to the Cause,
nor neglecting in the mean time that symptom which is most urgent.

If therefore from a simple distemper cold and moist imprinted on the brain as
we have said in old folks might happen by reason of their age, The Cure of
sleep and stupididity from a cold distemper.
or from a disease of long continuance, they become sleepy or stupid yet are
not altogether sick, as that is hardly corrected, so this fault is hardly taken
away; yet this distemper may be somewhat mended, as was said in a weakness of
the mind generated from the like causes, by the same altering medicines and
nourishments, both taken and applied.

As also if the stupidity happen from a cold and dry distemper those things will
serve which are spoken of there in mending of the same distemper; but if a
stupidity follow the brain actually cooled by the external air or wind, it will
be amended by applying of skins and feathers and other things actually hot,
also by suffumigations, which because they serve also in a phlegmatic cause
they shall there be explained more fully.

But if a heavy sleep be from phlegm or an afflux of a cold humor or from the
excrements of the brain as was said, The Cure of a Carus and Apoplexy from
phlegm.
although the common people despair of them, which they judge not oppressed with
sleep but touched with an appoplexy and indeed they are not free from danger,
yet the hopes of Cure is not to be cast off, whenas many of them are cured,
unless some grievous accident supervene, as a Convulsion and the humor
putrefying an accute Fever as shall be said, do accompany it, as in a Lethargy
which in old folks is deadly; though I have seen also after some fits of
Convulsions they have nevertheless recovered of a Carus, yet there was left in
the sight and memory some error which afterward by reason of old age could no
ways be amended.

But if phlegm cause an Appoplexy then unless that falling downwards into the
beginng of the spinal marrow do cause a Palsy as was said, the breath being
taken away it presently kills the Patient.

Whether phlegm cause a sleepiness or stupidity the Cure is almost the same, but
that stronger things must be used in an Apoplexy whenas its cause is greater,
and there is more have to be made in the Cure by the reason of the danger; that
which ends in a Palsy must be cured as a Palsy: and they apply also to a
Lethargy no other Cure than to a Carus only a few things changed as shall be
said, by reason of the Fever.

In all these therefore we will revell the phlegm from the head by general and
particular evacuations; and we will derive it also by neighboring places
destined for the evacuation of phlegm, as the Mouth, Nose: and we will endeavor
to resolve it with things that draw it to the Superficies of the head: and with
things altering inwardly and outwardly applied we will endeavor to dissolve and
wast it, to heat and strengthen the Head by proceeding as follows.

In sleepiness if there be a great fullness they persuade drawing of blood by
opening that Vein of the Arm which is called Cephalic, and in an Apoplexy the
same signs appearing they grant it also sometimes for Revulsion, but done
sparingly, and if it seem to have done any good they reiterate it: sometimes
also they open the vein of the Forehead, others in these diseases would rather
open a Vein in the Foot, all which must be done considerately especially in the
Apoplectical left we may seem thus to have hastened death.

The belly must be provoked in both species, and be stimulated that they may
stool, both for Revulsion and to stir up the faculties laid asleep, and that by
casting in sharp Clysters and Suppositories, whenas otherwise they scarce go
stool.

Suppositories seeing they do egregiously irritate, and may quickly be prepared
and by reason of their dullness they cannot keep Clysters, are very convenient
and oftentimes to be repeated, especially in the Apoplexy, in which also those
things that burn, whenas the sick are without sense, can no ways do any harm.

Therefore the gentler being first tried, if they do no good, the following
stronger things shall be used: Take of Honey two ounces, juice of Mercury, half
an ounce; Bulls Gall half an ounce: boil them, add toward the end of the root
of white Hellebore and Pellitory of Spain of each half a dram; Coloquintida
half a scruple, Salt Gem half a dram: make a Suppository, or that it may be
prepared sooner let these pouders be mixed with raw Honey and make Suppositories.

Clysters are good not only before opening a vein if that be done, to wash the
Guts, but also after it, made first of things emollient and hot stimulaters
proper for the head, by and by also of strong irritaters, which also whenas
they do not keep them long must be repeated, and by so much the oftener as the
disease is more urgent, as in the apoplectical.

At first therefore let such a Gentle one be given. Take of Mallows, Mercury or
Beets, Sage, Rue, Pennyroyal of each one handful; fresh Orrice roots three
ounces, Bran, Chamomel flowers, Rosemary flowers of each one pugil; Carraway
seed two drams; make a Decotion, dissolve in a fit quantity of it, of Honey one
ounce, Benedicta Laxativa two drams, Oil of Bays and Rue of each one ounce,
Salt one dram, make a Clyster.

A stronger may be made thus, which may be given after the first, presently at
the beginning, if the evil be urgent. Take of the Roots of fresh Orris,
Solomon's seal, Sows bread, of each one ounce; Master wort, six drams; the Herbs
Rue, Time, Sago, Bays, Pennyroyal, Organy, Calamint, Hyssop, of each one
handful; French Lavender, Rosemary flowers, of each one pugil; Caraway, Cummin
seeds, of each two drams; Bastard Saffron seed, Bay, juniper Berries of each
half an ounce; Agarick tied in a Rag, two drams; Make a Decoction: Dissolve in
a sufficient quantity Hiera of Coloquintida, three drams; Honey of Rosemary
flowers, one ounce; the juice of Mercury, or Beets, one ounce; of Ox Gaul,
half an ounce; Oil of Rue, two ounces; of Castor, half an ounce; of Fossile
salt, one dram; Make a Clyster.

The strongest of all highly irritating in an Apoplexy: Take of the Roots of
Orice, Pellitory of Spain, of each one ounce; of Cuckow-pintle or grass
Plantane, half an ounce; Hellebore Roots, one dram; the Herbs Rue, Sage, Time,
the tops of Centory, Watercresses, of each one handful; Caraway seed, half an
ounce; Nettles and Rue, of each one dram; Mustard seed, two drams; the Pulp of
Coloquintida tied up in a Rag, half a dram; Rosemary flowers, two pugils; Make
a Decoction; Dissolve of Hiera of Coloquintida, half an ounce; Honey, one ounce
and an half; Oil of Rue, three ounces; Castor, Euphorbium, of each one scruple;
Fossile salt, one dram: Make a Clyster,

Although it were good to move Vomiting both because that straining does rouse
them up, and also revel, yet in the Apoplectical it is not to be attempted, for
fear of suffocation, whenas if an endeavoring to Vomit do urge them of their
own accord; or a Cough, they are sooner strangled being forced by that violent
motion, as I have seen it: Yet, in a Sleepiness if their strength be firm, a
vomiting caused, for the same reason does very much help; which may be actually
done by irritating the Throat, or by giving of a Vomit destined also to
Evacuate Phlegm.

Purgers given to the Apoplectick by the Mouth, when as they swallow nothing,
either flow forth again without any benefit, or if, as it often comes to pass,
they fall into their rough Artery, they induce a danger of suffocation, but when
they are come to themselves, then they are to be purged as those palsied as
shall be faid in a Palsy. But in a Carus or lighter Stupidity when as they can
take somewhat; at first present Purging Medicines must be administered to them,
but such as in a small quantity may quick be swallowed by them, whiles they are
roused up, as at one draught, with little pains, whenas they are scarce
obedient.

And therefore if we would give Pills whenas it is hard to take them, we rather
dissolve them nothing fearing here their ingratefulness, whenas they being a
little stupid, do little observe that, as Take of Cochiae, foetidae Pills half a
dram, Castor half a scruple, dissolve them with Sage or Rosemary or Cinnamon
Water, and give to drink.

But we shall more rightly give Lozenges dissolved as of Diacarthamum,
Diaturbith, of the Citron solutive or the like Electuaries as Diaphaenicon,
Indum majus, and other purgers of Phlegm; the Heirae of Coloquintida we may
infuse, unless their extraordinary bitterness do hinder.

In the progress also purgers must be repeated, the humor being first prepared,
especially if it be thick, and they must be reiterated again, if the evil
yields not to the former and that the Patient recover.

It shall be prepared therefore after this manner. Take of the Syrup of
Bettony, of Hysop each two ounces, Oxymel of Squills one ounce Syrup of french
Lavender half an ounce Rosemary, Sage, Bawmwater each two ounces, make a Julep
for four doses, aromatize it with Cinnamon or somewhat else.

Or take of the opening Roots steeped in Wine each one ounce, of Orice half an
ounce Angelica two drams, Lyquoris six drams, the herbs Sage, Marjoram, Time,
ground Pine, Bettony each half an ounce, Anise, Fennel seed each one dram,
Gith, Parsley each half a dram, the flowers of Rosemary, Lavender, or french
Lavender, Elder, Primrose each two drams, make a Decoction and to a pint and
half add Sugar or Honey, or some of the foresaid Syrups to sweeten it, clarify
it and aromatize it with Cinnamon for four doses.

Or let these simples be infused in white Wine adding the Topps of the lesser
Centory two drams, because it does very much devide Phlegm, Wormwood three drams
to give it a good smell, and let him use it.

If you will make the Syrup for your use add to the forementioned Decoction of
bastard Saffron, Sena each an ounce and an half, Agarick three drams, Turbith
two drams, Ginger one dram, and with Honey or Sugar let it boil, let him take
one ounce at a ^ime.

After the same Rule you may make a purging Wine by mixing these Purgers with
other things according to art.

A purging Potion also may be made thus, Take of Agarick infused in Oxymel and
Sage and Rosemary Waters one dram and an half, of Ginger likewise infused one
scruple; strain it, dissolve afterward of Diaphaenicon and Diacarthanum each
two drams and an half, make a Potion.

By the passages destined to purge Phlegm as the Mouth, Nose, and Eyes, we must
derive the Phlegm from the Head, with those Medicines which do this by
irritating the coat of the Mouth and Nose which is very sensible, that the
expulsive faculty being stirred up by these may drive forth the Phlegm and Tears
by these parts and the Eyes adjoining; but when as they are not able to Gargle
or Masticate we do not use this form of Head Purgers till they come to
themselves.

But we rub the Palate with those things that draw forth Phlegm, yet in that
quantity and form, that if they do fall into the rough Artery of the
Apoplectical they may not suffocate them.

Mustard seed which is very powerful; does so provoke Phlegm, that it presently
moves tears. It Is boiled in Aqua vita or strong Wine and the Palate is rubbed
with that Decoction; or reduced into a Powder and mixed with Honey, it is
anointed: instead of which the common Composition will serve, which being made
of Mustard seed is used at meals for savce, which we may have quickly ready at
hand.

The Root of Pellitory of Spain boiled in Oxymel does the same, used after the
same manner.

Euphorbium also dissolved in Aqua vita, and other things that fire the Jaws,

As also Castor mixed after the like manner and given.

Some rub the Hierae and other Purging Electuaries on the Palate, but without
any fruit or benefit, instead of which it is better to use the Confection
Anacardine which does somewhat inflame.

Or make such a Composition; Take of Mustard seed, long Pepper, the root of
Pellitory of Spain, Powder them and mix them with Honey and the juice of Rue,
Horseradish. Make an Ointment. we omit the Vinegar which they add, because it
duls the virtue of those acrid things, as we see itcomes to pass in Onions and
Radishes if they be eaten with Vinegar.

A vellication of the coat of the Nostrils which is very sensible, does
Egregiously draw forth Phlegm, either dropping from the Nose without violence
and flowing forth by Tares from the Eyes, or with a certain violence by
sneezing; which if it happen to the Apoplectical, is a good sign. Yet this
violent rousing up is not to be attempted in a Sleepiness before the matter be
a little emptied, least the humor yet filling the Brain being moved do oppress
it, or suddenly falling into the beginning of the Nerves, do breed a
convulsion or resolution the which is scarce to be feared in the Apoplexy when
as they are no otherwise cured, unless a Palsy follow it; but these things may
be done diverse ways, amongst which Errhines are less proper, when as the sick
do not attract them, there fore this may be performed after another manner.
Thus,

Let the Nostrils be anointed with the same Ointment which we said ought to be
rubbed on the Palate, or least that thicker things should stop up the Nostrils,
which ought to be free for respiration sake in the Apoplectical, we must use
these that are more thin; Take of the juyces of Radish, Onions, Orrice, of each
equal parts; Let a Feather dipped in these be often put up into the Nose.

Let the Pouders of Hellebore, Pellitory of Spain, Pepper, Euphorbium be blowed
up, but in a small quantity.

The actual Irritation of the Nostrils with a Fiber of Hellebor, or a Hogs
brissel, or some thicker Hair, does powerfully work and draw forth Phlegm.

The smell of Onions does wonderfully provoke Tears upon which account if the
thin outward Rind be taken off and they applied to the Nose it does much good:
the smell of Mustard seed also and Radish do the same, and the Leaves of Spear
wort bruised and smelt to do it most powerfully.

These being done, if so they come to themselves that they can use Errhines,
Masticatories, Gargarismes, then these must not be neglected, as shall be
explained in their place.

We will endeavor also to revel the Humor from the part affected by those
things that draw to the superficies of the Body whether they do it by heat or
pain, the which also will work more powerfully, if together by dissolving the
continuity they open a passage for the Humor attracted by which it may be
emptied.

Upon this account strong Frictions must be made with the Hands or with a rough
Cloth, beginning with the Head and going downwards by the Back: Also of the
Arms, Thighs, and those places which are most cold, which we ought to rub til
they grow hot and red, adding sometime also hot Oil or Salt.

For which cause also Ligatures must be made in the extreme parts which may
cause pain which must be sometimes loosed and tied again.

Lotions also of the Feet will do good, of the Decoction of Sage, Rue, Bettony,
Pennyroyal, Calamint, Dill, Chamomel, Roses.

Cupping-glasses also with a great deal of Fire, must first be applied to the
hinder part of the Head, if perhaps the Humor may be derived through its great
mouth, for which cause they must by and by be applied to the hinder part of the
Neck; then to the Shoulder blade and Shoulders.

And sometimes also Scarification must be made in those places before the
Cupping-glasses be applied, and the Wounds made must be rubbed with Pickle.

Pulling of the Hairs about the Privities, from under the the Armpits, also
vellications of the Beard and Hairs made up and down the Body, and Prickings
and Burnings will profit much.

A frying Pan or Shovell, or some other Iron plate red hot, so long applied to
the Region of the Head till it heat it very much, and as it were curle the Hair
yet does not burn the Head, by egregiously drawing outward, has oftentimes
caused the Apoplecticall to come to themselves; the use of which the Arabians
brought up.

A Dropax also or Pication applied to the Region of the Head being first shaved
and being often taken off whiles it is yet hot and renewed, does help also by
calling forth the Humors to the superficies; both if it be simple, and if it be
Compounded, the which also may be thus made more effectual, by the addition of
most hot things and it will raise blisters; Take of Pitch, half a pound; Oil of
Rue, as much as will suffice that it may melt, perhaps to one ounce and an
half; add of the Root of Pellitory of Spain, M^stard seed, Pepper, of each one
dram, Euphorbium, half a dram. Mix them.

Sinapismes will do the same applied upon the Head and those both simple, or
thus Compounded; Take of the Pulp of Figs extracted from a light Decoction of
them, Mustard seed, of each one ounce and an half; Pigeons or Swallows Dung
(which is found every where in their houses) three drams; Pepper, Euphorbium,
of each half a dram; Castor, one dram; Oil of Spike, six drops; Mix them with
the sharpest Vinegar.

The leaves of Nettles, do as it were actually raise blisters, which are rubbed
on the Nape of the Neck, and for revulsion on the Thighs.

Also Spearewort bruised does do it most powerfully, if it be laid to the
hinder part of the Neck.

Also a Potential cautery applied to the Region of the Head, or to the said
part of the Neck, although when necessity does require as in an Apoplexy an
actual one is more rightly applied, whenas it works sooner, and they do not
feel it, by which the Hairs of the Head may be burnt, and the Skin also a
little.

Things altering which ought to dissolve and discuss the Humor and strengthen
the Brain, are given by the Mouth rather in those that are sleepy, then
Apoplectical who swallow nothing almost, the which notwithstanding if they be
prepared in a very little quantity and yet eflctual, may be by drops also
poured into the Mouth of the Apoplectical, when as being contained in the Mouth
they exert their virtues; the which notwithstanding falling into the rough
Artery, that they may not move coughing or suffocate them, ought rather to be
Liquid.

So stilled Waters are chiefly commended such as are especially that of
Rose-mary, Sage, Rue, Lavender, which being dried and infused in Wine, if they
be distilled, do yield a more efficacious Water: the distilled Water of
cinnamon as it is pleasant and Odorous so it is highly effectual, the water
extracted from the flowers of the Lilly of the Valleys and of the Linden Tree
whiles they are yet fresh in this case is highly esteemed amongst the vulgar:
Some also commended the water of Ma^igold flowers and the water of the Herbs
Celandine and Balm.

Those Compound are more effectual, of which sort there are described
innumerable we from the more choice and appropriate may prepare such a one, As,
Take of Sage, Rosemary, Time, Marjoram, of each half an ounce; Rue, two drams;
Lavender flowers, three drams; French Lavender, one dram; Rocket seed, one
dram; Cinnamon, half an ounce; Nutmegs, two drams; Cloves, one dram and an
half; Cubebs, one dram: Powder them, infuse them in the most excellent Wine
that it may be above them the space of two inches, then distill them; give one
spoonful, two, or three, according as he can swallow: Castor may be mixed with
the same Water being sometimes strained and so given; neither is it to be mixed
with the whole conposition as they are wont to do; for it is better to reserve
that which is grateful still for your use, and when there is need, to mix these
ungateful things with some part of that and so give it: they think that Mastick
mixed with these stilled waters or infuston does very much increase their virtue.

Also if you infuse the above mentioned Herbs in the spirit or most excellent
stilled liquor of Wine; and macerate them a long time in the Sun or some other
heat or make it stronger by reiterated infusions you shall make a most
excellent liquor for these uses, or if out of every herb a part, you make such
an infusion every one shall be effectual for the same; as also if you mix many
of them so together then also you may so give a strong compound water; amongst
which the water which is made of the infusion or distillation of Rosemary is
extold above the rest; but though the spirit of Wine have some stupefying
virtue, yet because by the extreme subtilty and heat with which it is endued,
it carries the virtue of other things strongly to the brain, and casts forth
phlegm and stirs up the native heat and drowzied faculties, by reason of these
commodities, the aforesaid simples commodiously infused in it, do lay down
their virtues in it and dulling its narcotick virtue do make it a fit medicine
for the cure of the foresaid affects: the which spirit of Wine yet to give
alone, as some do advise we think is not good by reason of its stupefactive
power; as neither can we allow Treacle waters or others made of Opiates, as
neither the Electuaries themselves by any means, by reason of the Opium which
they contain, which though they be old, yet do in no wise leave their narcotick
virtue which in a stupidity and sleepiness we ought by all means to shun.

Oils extracted by the art of chemistry from the aforementioned things above
all the rest do exert the greatest power, given in the least drop, and
therefore in all those that are stupid are most profitable, if one or two drops
be powered into the mouth or dissolved in a convenient liquor be given to those
that can swallow, of which sort is the Oil of of Marjoram, Sage, Lavender and
that sweet Oil of Cinnamon and of Cloves. Hollerius extols the Spirit of
Vitriol rather than which they call the Oil which because it is sharp may cause
watchings; they attribute much also to the Oil of Amber.

More solid Medicines may be given after the like manner infused and diluted as
long as they hardly admit of medicaments, and when they are to come to
themselves that they can also take grosser things, then, as also in the whole
process of the disease afterward these may be given also in other forms.

The Confection Anacardine as it is approved of in all cold diseases of the
brain, so here also chiefly, which we will use rather than Treacle or other
Opiates giving it by it self or dissolving with Aqua Vitae in which the
aforementioned are first infused. Galen gives Castor four or five grains weight
with Oxymel in a Lethargy the which we may use also in the other species, to
which we may add some grains of Euphorbium the which also may be given with
spirits of Wine made by infusion.

Mustard seed bruised and given in like manner half a dram weight is
wonderfully convenient, because its virtue is carried upwards to the head, or
give the condite of it, and add it to the meats by way of Sauce.

The juice of Onions may be given with Rue or Sage water or with the said
infusion to two drams or with Wine that it may be more grateful.

The cating of Woter-cresses also is approved, whose sharp juice for the
quantity of one spoonful may be given after the like manner as the rest.

The following Electuary is very convenient, the which we may use in the
progress of the Disease. Take of the Conserve of Orrice, the true Acorus that
is the Calamus in shops of each one ounce; of Sage. Rosemary, Marjoram, French
Lavender or Lavender each half an ounce; Confection Anacardine two drams, the
powder of Diambra Diimoscum each half a dram; the seeds of Rocket, Rue, of each
one dram: with Oxymel of Squils or Honey Anacardine make an Electuary, let him
take the quantity of a Chestnut every other day.

One dram of this Confection may be taken, and some grains of Castor or
Euphorbium may be mixed with it, when necessity urges, and so drank off.

The Chemists give the Extract of Sage in an Apoplexy for a great secret.

Of those things which are applied outwardly for alteration sake, those things
also which are moved to the Nose do it most effectually, seeing their virtue
penetrates in a strait way to the brain, wherefore the nostrils must be
anointed with these juyces. Take of the juyces of Rue, Marjoram, the strongest
Vinegar (which is chiefly used in a Sleepiness that it may cause watchings) of
each alike quantity, and with a Pencil or Feather dipped in them anoint the
nostrils within,

Or thus, Take of Castor, Assa Faetida each some quantity which dissolved in
the strongest Vinegar apply it after the same mannerr

Also take of Oil of Rue two drams, Vinegar of Squils one dram, the juice of
sea Onions half a dram, Castor one scruple, mix them for an ointment for the
nostrils.

Oils extracted by the art of Chemistry are most powerful, if one drop be put
into the Nose such as we have formerly said might be exhibited; especially Oil
of Spike which by its subtle evaporation does wonderfully hear, and by
mordication of the Eyes, does also draw forth Tears.

Odors also by penetrating to the upper parts do very much help, such as is the
most strong smell of Vinegar received at the Nostrils which by drying does cause
Watchings.

A Suffumigation also from that if it be poured upon a red hot plate, and
received by the Nose is convenient.

Grosser Fumes, so that they choke not, admitted at the Nose will do good, as
the fume which is raised from man's hair burnt, especially if before they be
burnt, they be first moistened with Vinegar; and that which is caused from
feathers burnt whose matter is the same with that of hairs, amongst which the
common people judge the feathers of Partridges and Peacocks to be best.

And being made thus also it will very much help. Take of the hairs of a man
cut small and moistened with the strongest Vinsgar half an ounce, the shavings of
Hearts horn half a dram, Gum. Galbanum, Amoniack, Opopanax, the Agat each one
dram; Castor half a dram, Gith seed one dram; mix them: let some of it be cast
upon the coals, and let him receive the fume.

The smoke of Brimstone fired is wonderful effectual, which is sufficiently
apparent by this that makes red Roses white.

Also things put into the ears if they be very effectual, may do some good, as
if Oil of Spike be dropped into them, or spirit of Wine with the infusions as was
said formerly; also the Oil of Rue, but that which is extracted by distillation
rather than by maceration.

Also the following things are applied to the superficies of the Head first
shaved for alteration sake, as fomentations or embrocations as follows, Take
of the roots of Orrice, Cyperus, the true Acorus of each one ounce; the herbs
Marjoram, Bays, Sage, Wild Time, Penny royal, Savory, Balm, of each one
handful; flowers of Lavender, French Lavender, Chamomel, of each one pugil;
seeds of chaste tree one dram; boil them in a Lie adding a little Wine, foment
or irrigate the Head.

Or thus. Take of the Oil of Nuts two pound, Aqua vitae one ounce and an half,
juice of Rue one ounce, Pennyroyal, Wild Time, Sage, of each two drams; cut
them and boil them for a fomentation of the Head.

Afterward anoint the Head with these things following. Take of the Oils of
Rue, Bays, of each two ounces; the juice of Rue one ounce, Vinegar one ounce,
Aqua vitae one ounce: boil them to a consistence adding Castor one dram,
Euphorbium half a dram, anoint the head.

It will be more effectual thus. Take of the Oils of Rue two ounces, of Pepper,
Mustard seed of each one ounce; the distilled Oil of Spike, Oil of Rosemary or
Time made by distillation of each half a scruple; the Gums of Opopanax,
Bdellium dissolved in Aqua vitae of each half an ounce; the seeds of Rue,
Mustard each one dram; Castor, Euphorbium, of each half a dram; the Hairs of a
man burnt half a dram, Wax as much as is sufficient, make a Liniment.

A Plaster, may be prepared of the same adding Pitch or Rozin, or a Cerote the
quantity of the Wax being increased, in the preparing of which the weight of
the Gums is augmented, adding also Ammoniacum and Assafoetida, which being thus
prepared, they are applied to the head like a Cap.

Cataplasms of herbs and roots bruised may be made after the like manner. As,
Take of the Leaves of Rue, Pennyroyal, Sage, of each one handful; fresh Orrice
roots two ounces; boil them in strong Wine, to which you shall mix of Vinegar,
Aqua vitae each one ounce, adding afterward of Sea Onion roasted under the
ashes one ounce, rotten Apples one ounce and an half, bruise them and
afterward add Oil of Orrice, Rue, of each one ounce, Oil of Spike half a dram,
the root of Pellitory of Spain one dram, Pigeons or Swallows dung, two drams,
Castor, Euphorbium, of each half a dram: mix them and make a Cataplasm.

Some apply the Lights of a Hog in a Lethargy.

Others anoint the Head with the blood of a Batt.

Besides these Remedies which are applied to the Head, there are Remedies also
applied to the Backbone in the Apoplexy that the matter may be carried
downwards, to the beginning of which this attractive Plaster is applied. Take
of Gum Opopanax, Sagapen, of each one ounce; dissolve them in Aqua vitae,
afterward mix of Mustard seed two drams, Castor, Euphorbium, of each one dram;
make a Plaster, apply it to the nape of the neck, and afterward anoint the
whole Backbone with hot oils such as is Oil of Rue drawing your hands downwards.

It will not be unprofitable also to rub the palms of the hands of Persons
apoplectical with Sulphur and Vitriol dissolved in hot Oil and mixed together.

Amongst Amulets they affirm that the Emrold hanged about the neck does very
much good if it touch the bare flesh: a Nightingale laid under the Pillow, the
head of a Bat laid between the Tiles of the house, are thought by a propriety
to rouse up from sleep.

If the sleepiness be from blood, The cure of a Carus and Apoplexy from Blood.
because the blood is then remaining in the vessels it is easily cured, unless
some more grievous disease lie hid: but if a vein being broke the blood poured
forth into the brain do cause an Apoplexy, whether this happen from a
plenitude, or a violent cause, unless it presently break forth out of the Skul
by the Nostrils or Ears, as it often comes to pass, being presently turned into
clots it brings death, and so much the sooner if the substance of the brain
be also hurt; a Convulsion then going before, if the blood first putrefie,
before the Patient die.

But we ought presently in cases of this nature, and that very speedily whiles
the matter is yet flowing, to revel, derive, and drive forth the blood in the
order following,

First of all a vein is to be opened if nothing hinder, to wit the shoulder
vein in the Arm and if the plenitude be great in both Arms; then also in the
Leg the vein of the Ham or Ankle must be opened, which some do before that of
the shoulder that there may be the greater revulsion the which notwithstanding
is more rightly performed in the Arm, and then the vein of the Forehead and
Nose may be opened, which Rondoletius does by pricking with bristles, or under
the Tongue for derivation sake Revulsions being premised, the which will suffice
if the plenitude be not very great for it is dangerous to open the jugular
vein, as some teach: and thus sleepiness proceeding from plenty of blood is
easily remedied; and in a contusion of the Head it brings great help.

Scarrification with Cupping-glasses applied there especially where the
jugulars run up by the neck, does very much derive, the which also they approve
done upon the chin: the which also may be continued by Leeches if time give
leave, especially if they be applied to the fundament the Haemroides being
suppressed, the which if they were accustomary before, and now are stopped, or
otherwise swel, we ought to open.

Cupping-glasses alone also applied to those places, and to the shoulders and
shoulder-blades when the plenitude is not so great may suffice.

The which also Ligatures and Frictions of the extreme parts may perform.

Moving of the Belly in this cause, does equally revell, as if it were from
phlegm; and that by Suppositories or clysters highly stimulating, yet less
inflaming than in another cause, and that presenly after a vein opened which
here ought to go first as the better.

Such will be this following Clyster which that it may be presently at hand is
thus easy to be made. Take of herb Mercury or Beets in the winter time two
handfuls, Of Violet Leaves one handful, pour to them of Lie as much as is
sufficient, make a Decoction, and in one pound of it dissolve of Honey two
ounces, Fossile Salt one dram, Butter or Oil one ounce (least the too great
quantity may infringe the virtue of the others) make a Clyster.

It Is good to cause sneezing in the Apoplectical after some Clysters
administered yet not too violently.

We must repel with Oxyrrhodines if it appear that the head be very hot, but
with such as are astringent rather by drying than cooling, yet by warily using
of them, least we drive the matter inward if it be in the superficies; and
therefore Rondoletius does use only a drying Ointment and Sinapism in a Carus
yet when necessity requires such a one made, Take of Rosewater three ounces,
juice of Plantane one ounce, or the water of it two ounces, because the virtue
of this inhibiting the influx of blood is wonderful, of Rose Vinegar one ounce,
the Whites of Eggs beaten two, mix them. Oils are omitted by reason of their
laxness.

A young Pidgeon Chicken or Puppy dog cut in the middle and applied to the head,
have a wonderful virtue in discussing the blood, as also other things expressed
in a Frenzy, Rondolenius writes that Watercresses eaten in Broth or Sallets
do heal a Carus proceeding from blood.

If a Contusion appear in the head and there is suspicion of clotted blood in
the brain those things which shall be spoken of in Contusions, must be outwardly
applied.

Of which sort is this Cataplasm. Take of Wormwood one handful, Flowers of Red
Roses and Chamomel of each one pugil; make a powder, boil it in Oil of Roses,
beat it adding of Bean flower one ounce, Sanguis Draconis two drams, Mummy
three drams, and apply it.

When they can take any thing by the mouth upon the same account things
dissolving clots of blood are given, of which we shall treat in their place.

But if that the substance of the brain being hurt does cause an Apoplexy,
whenas it is deadly, both because the continuity of a principal part is
dissolved, The Cure of an Apoplexy from the hurt of the brain.
and because by the injury offered from without, it must needs be that the
bosoms of the membranes are hurt too from whence comes a great flux of blood,
they are to be left to Prognostics, yet in the interim as long as they live,
the Wound nevertheless whether cut, pricked or coneused, so it ought to be
handled.

But if a deprest part of the Skul broken do cause a Stupidity by pressing the
Brain it must be lifted up and drawn forth by an Instrument and other Arts, if
there be any small Bones the which also do often prick they must be taken out:
the Blood must be washed out, and as Fractures and Wounds ought to be healed,
must here also be proceeded, for so if the subject part be no ways hurt, they
come to themselves and are restored to health.

If a Tumor in the Brain cause a Stupidity or as some have thought a Lethargy,
The Cure of a sleepy Stupidity from a Tumor of the Brain.
because it can hardly be known the man living, there is scarce any other Cure
applyable to it, then that which is due to cold Humors, when as this Humor must
be cold, which can cause that, for a hot one would rather cause a Frenzy; but
the Stupidity, will then be of long continuance, and Mortal when this Tumor hid
in the Brain, cannot be mollified nor resolved.

Vapors alone, unless there be some occult quality, as shall be said, scarce
breed a Stupidity, though some write that an Apoplexy may be caused thence,
which by the tossing and concussing of the Body only, the vapors being
discussed, is healed: but they often cause a steediness in which we ought to
have respect unto the part that sends them, or the Stomach, Womb, Guts and the
Veins in Fevers, and the part receiving them, viz. the Head.

If by default of the stomach after eating and drinking that inclination to
sleep do happen, which is wont to trouble many after Dinner and Supper, in
those accustomed and some Natures, it does good rather then harm by refreshing
the wearied Body and therefore they become afterward more cheerful to undergo
their Duties; but if so be that it oppress the Head and cause plenty of
Excrements in it, it will be prevented by parsimony and temperance in means by
the moderate use of Wine and that small, if also they protract not their Dinner
too long nor sit too long at Table but after a short Dinner, presently rise,
Walk, and do things sportful, which by inviting the mind another way, do no
ways suffer it to be at rest: the which in some is done by Music in others by
Play or some other actions agreeable to every ones Genius; and when heat
causes sleep, if at that time they take their Victuals in a temperate or
rather somewhat cold place, and and be conversant there, and studdy to correct
this ill custom by degrees leaving it off,

But if a deep sleep be caused by reason of the plenty of Meat and Drink taken
that is too much Vaporous, The Cure of a deep sleep from a Vapor.
a Vomit will help, being repeated if it do no good at the first time; and
emptying the stomach by Pills will be profitable.

But if Vapors raised up from Humors existent in the stomach induce a Carus
they must be emptied, and the stomach strengthened, as also if they proceed by
reason of the Womb, the remedies must chiefly be applied to that; and if from
Worms the scope of curing must be directed to the killing and voiding of them.

But if that a Vapor elevated in Fevers from the Veins, The Cure of Carus or
Lethargy in Fevers.
do cause a sleepiness, the companion of the Fevers, in the Cure of that we
must also have respect unto the Fever, which if it begin presently in the said
Lethargy, finceu it is very dangerous, and for the most part kills old folks,
and upon that account does draw the Cure rather to it self then to the Fever
it must be thus ordered, that when as hot remedies do agree with that also as
in another Carus; by reason of the Fever accompanying, In other Fevers if a
Carus supervene in the declination, because the Fevers is now ceased, the whole
Cure must be directed to the turning away of this grievous Symptom. In
intermitting Fevers sleep invading at the beginning of the Fits when as it is
not very dangerous, it requires no other private Cure then what is agreeable to
the Fever only as shall be said by the way, respect must be had unto the Head.

But for the Brains sake which receives those Vapors which produce sleep, those
things must be administered, which may hinder the ascent of them.

By giving those things which do as it were depress and beat back those Vapors
raised in a part; which may be done if they rise from the stomach by astringent
remedies and those which discuss them and also Wind: and in Fevers if altering
things be given which repress their Evaporation, as was said in those places.

Then we must draw back those Vapors already carried to the Brain by things
that revel and derive them from the part affected, especially if that grievous
Lethargy invade and a Fever after the same manner as in a simple Carus with
the same things which we said did revel Phlegm from the Head, and by so much the
more here, because Vapors do assail the Head, therefore in a Lethargy also
this must be attempted by Bleeding, Scarifications, Cupping Glasses, Clysters
and other things: the which also take place when a Carus follows a Fever.

Outwardly those things must he applied to the Head which do repress Vapors in
all the Species caused by consent especially in Fevers and a Lethargy also at
the beginning.

Of which sort are these following Oxyrrhodines: Take of Rose water, three
ounces; Vinegar of Roses, three ounces; Oil of Roses, one ounce: Mix them,
apply it to the Head as it ought to be, or anoint the Head with it.

In the progress make it thus if the Disease continue: Take of Vinegar of
Roses, two ounces; Oil of Roses, one ounce; of Camomel, half an ounce; Oxymel
of Squils, one ounce and an half: Make an Oxyrrhodine according to Rondeletius.

Afterward we must proceed to stronger and hotter things by degrees, if the
Lethargy do not yet cease, such as already are explained in a Carus when as in
the progress of the Disease, the cure of a Lethargy ought little or nothing to
differ from that of a Carus and therefore for the most part they are described
by Practitioners in the same Chapter.

If a certain hidden quality cause a heavy sleepy and Stupidity the Cure must
first be distinguished, whether they come from a Narcotick or Malignant quality
or whether they proceed from the Devil.

If the said Narcoticks being taken do induce sleep or Stupidity then Vomiting
must be procured speedily, The Cure of sleep and Stupidity from a Narcotick
quality.
by actually irritating the Throat, or giving of Vomits if they can swallow.

Also those things must be given to drink which can abate the virtue of the
Narcoticks of which sort hitherto has been believed hot thing are, which by
abating the coldness of the Narcoticks do so do good, and therefore they give
the hottest things, such as are juice of Onions, Garlic, Pepper, Castor,
Euphorbium. But we who have elsewhere sufficiently declared that Narcoticks
also are hot, do think, if these do any good they do it rather because they
stir up the benumed faculty and the native heat then that they abate the
strength of the Narcoticks, but Treacle which many approve of in this case, we
do no ways allow, by reason the Opium which is in it, wherefore it rather
increases than impaireth the strength of the Narcoticks, whence neither do we
give the strongest wine as they teach also much less its spirit upon this
account, since that these also are Narcoticks; whence Dioscorides writes truly
that Hemlock if it be given with Wine does kill the sooner, although here they
feign another cause why it does i^; viz. because it carries the virtue of the
medicine sooner to the brain.

But those things which indeed do debilitate the strength of Narcoticks are
those which by leanifying by a certain temper do correct their heat rather than
coldness, the which we then chiefly use when the body is vehemently inflamed by
a Narcotick as we have said by Spirits of Wine a deadly Stupidity and also an
excessive heat is raised in which case as also in others raised from the like
cause, we give Natural Milk and Factitious made of Almonds and Guord Seeds also
Butter, common Oil and Oil of Almonds and other Fat and mucilaginous things the
which also we said were proper in corroding poisons.

Also Acid things given, as they do quel the heat of Acrid humors and Choler,
so also the efficacy of Narcoricks which I am wont rather to give, as Acid
juyces or syrups or Vinegar it self which therefore we have said elsewhere is
the most certain Remedy for Drunkenness, the other things which do it by a
certain propriety shall be explained in the Remedies.

If a malignant quality, The Cure of a sleepiness and stupidity from a
malignant quality.
which we cannot rightly explain, come from without from the Stroke of a Beast
from whence a Sleepiness or stupidity ensues, then things antipharmacal
resisting these Poisons must be given, such as are described in their place,
but if that such a Malignity be raised up in the body as in Malignant Fevers
we have said that then also a Sleepiness and Stupidity does happen, and then
applying those things which the malignity of the same method of cureing is to
be observed which was mentioned in a Lethargy.

If a Daemonical Sleep delude Witches as we have said, The Cure of Daemonical
sleep from an evil Spirit.
seeing the cause is preternatural, it will not be cured by natural Remedies
but by prayers and amendment of life, but if they refuse to do that they are
worthy to be purged by sire.

The animal spirits being spent in the Brain, The Cure of an Apoplexy from the
wasting of the animal Spirits.
if a man become Apoplectical death it self prevents al manner of cure, which
we ought to foretell to be ready at hand.

But the Spirits being spent in the Brain by great meditations if sometime they
become stupid they easily come to themselves again upon the return of the
spirits, The Cure of an Epilepsie Catalepsie and Stupidity from the too much
profusion of the animal spirit out of the Brain.
but if that by some vehement affection of the mind the spirits be so carried
forth, that being taken with a grievous stupidity, with Rigor they become
Cataleptical; then the evil is very pertinacious and that especially if this
disease have its original from Melancholy for those thus affected are hardly
cured, and though they be freed from it, yet they continue Stupid and
Melancholy. And if from Anger also they fall into an Epilepsie they are not
free from danger, in which species whiles they are in the Fit, the same
Remedies are likewise applied, which are used in the rest of the Epilepical to
the quickly taking off of their fits, the which ceasing, the cause must be
turned away, this being done if the evil do still return, whenas by that we know
that the internal cause is yet present, which the external did first move, then
the care must be fitted to the taking away of that, which in a Catalepsis they
apply to Melancholy, in an Epilepsie to the purging of Phlegm, as shall be said.

But if that a Convulsion, or which seldomer comes to pass, a Catalepsis do
follow from a Disease of the Nerves drawing the Brain into consent and sometimes
affecting of it too, the Cause it self must be diligently considered, and
according to that we must foretell and order the cure; which we have said was
in that continued Epilepsie as also sometimes in a Catalepsis, but seldom
happening, a certain malignant, melancholy, and poisonous humor, consisting in
the hidden parts of the body, of the Veins, about the inward parts of the body,
or also the outward parts, and otherwise lurking in the habit of the body or
also within the Skul arising from some fault that does not yet destroy the
brain, but by course affecting the Nerves, but of a milder and Shorter
Epilepsie, certain evaporations proceeding here and there from the inward
bowels from a Causeless persevering and sometimes also Pains or only Troubles,
when though they have no such great cause, in weak Children, yet they may
produce Epileptical fits, but of the rest of Convulsions which are Short we
said the internal causes were a poisonous humor, also in the Veins in Fevers,
which these Convulsions do follow; or otherwise Acrid, Pernicious choleric or
serous humor, or blood corrupted, or it depends on the taking of things
destructive or poisonous, or proceeds from grievous pain, either from a Wound,
or the biting of Beasts.

In all which species since they are all difficult, we must not rashly foretell
any thing of good, although a fit cure and benefit of nature does sometimes
mitigate the Prognostic: to wit, The long continued Epilepsie so called, if it
begin before the time of youth, and cease not when that time comes, viz. when
men can eject seed, or when women have their courses, as also that which first
begins after youth is Incurable and desperate which will afflict them to the
last day of their lives for a long time, unless the cruelty of the symptoms
does make death more speedy; but from the Shorter Epilepsie that Convulsion
which is called the Worse is deadly, and that also which is called the Milder
species, wants not its danger.

Which things since that they are thus, these Prognostics being premised, the
Cure must nevertheless be attempted, which we shall not first of al divide
according to the Causes seeing they are so various and abstruse, but proceeding
by the manner of operation we shall explain how by medicines emptying and
altering found out partly by Use and partly appropriated to the Cause for some
Reason, we ought to heal Epilepsies and Convulsions or at leastwise to keep off
or mitigate their fits.

Evacuating Remedies are those which do carry another way the Causes
procreating or Fomenting Convulsions, whether they be vapors or humors, either
by revelling and deriving from the part affected, or by Repelling and hindering
them to come to the part, and that either by opening made by Cutting, Sucking,
Burning, or by Purgations ordered by diverse passages of the body, or by other
operations outwardly applied.

Amongst the kinds of Cutting, Phlebotomy presents it self for the lessuing of
the blood, which in a long continued Epilepsie will take place, if the Patient
be Plethorick or the Hemthoids which before were accustomary, be suppressed, some
general eminent and appearing Vein being made choice of for this purpose; yet
many do advise to open the Shoulder-vein called the Cephalic for the heads
sake, also blood taken from the Veins of the Ham and Ankles is very convenient,
and so much the more if the Courses be stopped in Women: the which also some
commend if taken from the Veins of the Forehead and Tongue, and if we do
conjecture its cause to depend upon malignant blood, these detractions of blood
must be often repeated, whenas we have showed that in Madness, in a Cause not
very much unlike, this is the Principal Remedy; whence here also, if it proceed
from corrupt blood this kind of Remedy often used will profit very much, as also
in a Catalepsis if it arise from the like reason, whenas it is sometimes cured
by a Haemorhage flowing voluntarily from the Nose: But in other causes placed
out of blood espeally in bodies wasted with a long Epilepsie, and also in
Convulsions following Diseases in which the strength of the Patient suffering
the Convulsion is impaired by the cruelty of the Disease, it is no ways to be
advised to draw blood, but Scarification is not unprofitably ordered instead of
bleeding in Children and Aged, whenas we would rather turn the blood another
way, then let it out, making it at those places where our intent is to draw the
blood: and also a Paracenthesis, and Opening made by Setons and Trepanning by
taking out part of the Skul-bone may be made trial of in these desperate
Diseases.

Sucking drawing forth blood is done by help of Leeches which being applid to
the Forehead and the rest of the compass of the Head they write does good in
Curing of an Epilepsie, but especially when the Hemroids are suppressed being
fastened to the Fundament by sucking out this blood, which we can otherwise
hardly provoke by any other Art, in this case they are very convenient.

Burning made both by an actual and potential cautery as in desperate Diseases
it is the last Remedy, so here also the evil preserving, especially if the
cause be in the Head it may at length not irrationally be applied, if by chance
by this means the cause may be derived from the Nerves to the more ignoble
parts; by which means it is reported that at Florence they are wont to burn the
the Head of new born Infants to avert the Epilepsie which in those places is
accostomary to Infants; for which causes and being moved by experience we think
it not unadvised to attempt burning with a red hot Iron (the which whiles they
are possessed with the Fit, and are stupid we may act in them without any sense
of pain) or by applying a Caustic to experiment the same, in a long continued
Epilepsie if it reject all other Remedies; which some also do apply not only in
that part of the Head, where the Sutures meet but also in the Neck and Feet: or
if in some certain place an Air elevated does cause an Epilepsie a Caustic
applied to this part does very much revel it.

Purgations by the appointed places of the body the Belly, Mouth, Nose, and
Womb in Women are ordered diverse ways; amongst which that dejection which is
made by the belly carrying forth diverse excrements, which is wont to be caused
by the use of Purgers is diversely accomplished according to the diverse kinds of
Convulsions.

For in a long continued and falling Epilepsie whenas in all long continued
diseases there is plenty of excrements, that the body may be made pure it must
be purged again and again by course, and as often as they are heaped up anew,
at convenient times; first by washing the Belly, afterward by preparing and
bringing forth humors which give occasion of this affect. In which whenas
Authors as it was said do so much vary, it is no wonder that also diverse purging
medicines are ordered by them, for many use above the rest Phlegmagoges and
those which draw Phlegm from the head, who are persuaded that an Epilepsie is
bred from that humor; others who hold that Yellow or black choler is the cause
contend that amongst Purging medicine, Cholagoges rather, or Melanagoges, are
more prevalent than the rest; but we as we find the body either stuffed or
polluted with humors do fit our Remedies to the drawing forth of this or that
humor, making our choice of them from this especially, whether there be need of
Gentler or Stronger Catharticks to expel the humor (ommitting that too
scrupilous and obscure propriety and similitude of Catharticks with the humors)
we choose those which are either more mild or more efficacious as the nature of
the humor, and the strength and constitution of the body do require, and those
which are approved of by the ancient and modern, especially in this case
commended by the authority of Dioscorides of which sort for the Gentler we
allow of Whey, Agarick, Seny, and for the Stronger Hellebore, and being
according to the aforesaid intention, we think them conducible in an Epilepsie;
but chiefly having a care, that when an acrid or malignant matter does cause an
Epilepsie we do not stir the body beyond measure, with too Hot or Acrid or too
strong Purgers, and if the cause be doubtful or abstruse, that by too
solicitously relying on the emptying of one humor according to the common
opinion, we do not more weaken the bodies than help them, and also to the like
fit Cathartick medicines those things must be mixed which by a peculiar virtue
visit resist an Epilepsie, are proper to the Nerves, amongst which the juice of
Peony taken plentifully does also loosen the Belly, and those things which do
prepare to, if it have need of preparation) all which shall be explained in
things that alter) and also those things which do open the Courses and
Hemorrhoids if they be stopped, being mixed with them do procure that they are
easier provoked, because the expulsive faculty is then forced diverse ways.

But that we may demonstrate these thing also by examples, observing this
method in a long continued Epilepsie as also in a Catalepsis, we must thus
proceed.

First of all the Belly must be moved, that the excrements and the filth mixed
with them may be brought forth from the first passages, and that both before
the use of Purgers and also sometimes in the Fit that they may fooner come to
themselves, or by course also if the belly do not sufficiently answer your
desire.

Which may be done by any Suppositories or by putting up these following. Take
of Honey, the juice of Rue of each alike quantity; boil them and add toward
the end as much Salt as is sufficient, and a little powder of Peony root.

Or cast in Clysters, First Laxative, then Stimulating, at last Stronger,
appropriate both to the Brain and Nerves.

Of which sort this may be the chief for the Phlegmatic. Take of the roots of
Lillies, fresh Peony, of each one ounce and an half; of round or common
Birthwort, half an ounce, the herbs Mallows, Beets, Sage, Rue, the lesser
Century of each one handful; the flowers of Lavender or french Lavender,
Rosemary, Primrose, Chamomel, of each one pugil; Bran one pugil, Seed of Peony
one dram and half, Carawaies one dram. make a decoction, dissolve of juice of
Mercury or Beetss Honey or Red Sugar of each one ounce; Hiera Piera and Logadij
of each two drams; Oil of Rue one dram and an half, a little Salt make a
Clyster.

The humor abounding is prepared before Purging as it is either Phlegmatic or
Choleric, or Melancolick, giving what follows for three or four daeis.

The Phlegmatic after this manner. Take of Syrup of Hysop two ounces ('it is very
much commended in this case) of french Lavender, Oxymel of Squils, of each one
ounce, the waters of Betony, Piony, Hyssop, Balm, of each two ounces; mix them,
aromatize it, or let him take a convenient Lozenge, by and by after the taking
of it.

Or make a Melicrate. Take of Hysop, Calamint of each one handful; french
Lavender flowers, red Cicers of each one pugil; adding Honey boil it a little.

Or a Decoction. Take of the Roots of Peony, thick Galangal of each one ounce,
Missleto of the Oak, Elecampane roots, round Birthwort, of each half an ounce,
the roots of Grass, Asparagus, Liquorish of each one ounce; the herbs Hysop,
Betony, Balm, Calamint, of each one handful; flowers of french Lavender,
Rosemary, Sage, of each one pugil; Anise, Fennel seed, of each two drams; seed
of Basil, Peony, of each one dram; Raisons two ounces, make a decoction,
dissolve in one pound of the streined Syrup, of Hyssop, of Vinegar, of each two
ounces, mix it, make an Apozem.

Or a Wine. Take of the herbs Wormwood, Groundpine, Germander, Calamint, Hysop,
the flowers of french Lavender of each alike, infuse them in Wine.

Amelancholly humor will be prepared thus. Take of syrup of Fumitory two ounces,
of french Lavender, of Hysop each one ounce; with the waters of Betony,
Bugloss, Fumitory, Hysop as much as is sufficient.

Or this Decoction which will be proper also in a Catalepsis. Take of the
opening Roots steept in Wine of each half an ounce; the roots of fresh Bugloss
one ounce, Peony half an ounce; the bark of Tamarisk six drams, the herbs Balm,
Fumitory, Hysop, the tops of Tune of each one handful; of the Cordial flowers
of each one pugil, the seeds of Parsley, Fennel, Carawaies, of each one dram;
and in one pound dissolve of Sugar as much as is sufficient make a Julep
clarified and aromatized with Cinnaraon.

If a Choleric humor abound make it thus. Take of syrup of Endive, of Vinegar
simple of each three ounces, the water of Endive, Sorrel, Peony, of each as
much as is sufficient.

Or make this Decoction. Take of the roots of Grass, Asparagus, Succory, of
each one ounce, the roots of Piony, missleto, of each half an ounce; the herbs
Endive, all the Capillary, both Buglosses root and all, of each one handful;
Betony, half a handful, Violet flowers one pugil, Anise seed one dram and an
half, Peony seed one dram, Raisons one ounce, Prunes in number six, make a
Decoction, dissolve Syrup of Violets and Endive of each two ounces, mix them.

The humor being prepared such like Purgers may be administered, first of all in
a phlegmatic body.

The following Potion made of usual Electuaries is effectual but bitter. Take
of the Electuary of Diaphaenicon three drams, Hiera of Coloquiutida and Rufus
one dram and an half, Syrup of Fumitory compound one dram, the waters of Hysop
and Piony as much as is sufficient make a Potion, in stronger bodies also the
shops Hiera Logadij may be given.

Another with a convenient decoction. Take of the roots of the Acorus, Peony,
of each half an ounce, Liquorish six drams, Missleto of the Oak two drams, the
herbs Hysop, Balm Betony, of each two drams; the flowers of french Lavender one
dram and an half, the flowers of both Buglosses of each one dram; Peony seeds
two drams, Fennel seed one dram, Polipody, Senna of each six drams, Dodder of
Time two drams, Raisons one ounce, make a Decoction, infuse Agararick one dram
and an half, Ginger half a dram, and strein it, dissolve of the Electuary Hiera
of Coloquintida one dram, or if they refuse bitter things, of Diaphaenicon two
drams, syrup of Roses solutive one ounce, make a Potion.

Or in the form of Pills after this manner; Take of pills Cochiae half a dram;
Sine Quibus of Sarcocal, of each one scruple; with syrup of French Lavender, or
Hysop water: Make Pills.

In the Choleric and Melancholy the things following are more convenient; Take
of Polypody six drams; Senna half an ounce; Dodder of Time two drams; Fennel
seed one dram; Piony Roots half an ounce: Infuse them in Goats Whey, Boil them;
Dissolve of Catholicon half an ounce; Confectio bamech two drams; Syrup of
Fumitory, one ounce: Make a Potion.

Or thus, Take of french Piony Roots one ounce; the Herbs of Betony, Clary,
Succory, Endive, Hops, of each half a handful; the Cordial flowers, Broom
flowers, of each one pugil; Annis, Fennel seeds, of each one dram; Raisons
twenty, Prunes, Sebestens, of each ten; Polipody, six drams; Senna half an
ounce; Tamarinds, half an ounce; Citren, Myrobalanes rubbed, with the juice of
Roses, one dram and an half: Make a Decoction, infuse choice Rubarb one dram;
Spicknard one scruple; Strain it, dissolve syrup of Roses solutive, or of
Fumitory, or of sweet smelling Apples half an ounce: Make a potion.

Those things which are used many times either continually or by intermissions
are prescribed in these forms.

Such a Syrup may be made; Take of the fresh Roots of Piony two ounces; the
true Acorus Roots, Misleto of the Oak. of each one ounce; round Birthwort half
an ounce; Squil prepared, Pellitory of Spain Root, of each two drams; Fennel,
Liquorish Roots, of each one ounce; the Herbs Hysop, Betony, Sage, Marjoram,
Balm, of each one handful; Rue, Time, Prim-rose, Ground Pine, Endive, Hops,
Fumitory, of each half a handful; the flowers of French Lavender, Rosemary,
Burrage, Bugloss, Broom, of each one pugil; Piony seeds two drams; Seeds of
Rue, Fennel, Annis, Mountain Hartwort, of each one dram; Raisons forty; Figs,
Prunes, of each ten; Polipody, four ounces; Dodder of Time six drams; Senna,
wild Saffron, of each three ounces; Agarick five drams; Rhubarb three drams or
half an ounce; Turbith three drams; black Hellebore, thick Galangal, Nutmeg, of
each two drams; Gingar, Spik, Cardamom, of each one dram: Make a Decoction
according to art in water and a third part of Wine, and add to that strained of
the juice of Piony Roots, and sweet smelling Apples, of each two ounces; the
juice of Mercury one ounce; the juice of Hysop half an ounce; Sugar half a
pound. Boil it to a consistence, of which let him take from one ounce to two
ounces with Pionywater.

A Wine to be taken for some days, may be made of the same things or fewer,
Thus; Take of Senna, one ounce and an half; Agarick trochiscate, half an ounce;
Turbith two drams; Pulp of Coloquintida half a dram; Tartar three drams; the
Roots of Piony, Acorus, of each half an ounce; the herbs Wormwood, Hysop,
Bettony, of each three drams; the leaves of Rue one dram; flowers of French
Lavender or Lavender two drams; Fennel seed one dram and an half; thick
Galangal two drams; Ginger one dram; Cardamome half a dram: Bruise them, add
Wine that they may be well steeped; let him try the quantity of one draught,
and drink it for some days after.

A usual Electuary may be made, thus: Take Hiera of Coloquintida one ounce;
Diaphaenicon half an ounce; Diacarthamum, Diasena, of each two drams with Syrup
of French Lavender and Hysop: Make an Electuary for your use, beginning from
two drams.

Or in form of Pills. Take the speacies of simple Hiera half an ounce; Agarick
two drams; Rhubarb one dram and an half; black Hellebore one dram; Trochisks of
Alhandal two scruples; Lazulus stone prepared one dram; the pulp of Piony
seeds, Arabian Saechas, of each one dram; Castor six grains; Salt Gem one
scruple with syrup of Hysop; Make a Mass: Let him begin with half a dram.

In the Gentler called the Childrens Epilepsie we must use Purgers also, but
the gentlest, because it is not safe to purge Infants or great bellied Women,
with stronger, which seeing they are vehemently hot, in those they would too
much inflame the body and in these they would expel the Child:

Therefore the Gentler of the aforementioned may be made use of, or if they be
Infants still, because they refuse ungrateful and bitter things, we may give
sweet things as Manna, or Cassia with Sugar; or give Milk in which Roses,
Violets, Senna, and the like have been boiled; but if they suck still, let the
Nurse also be gently purged, that the Milk which they Suck may be less
excrementitious.

To others give of this Confection of Raisons, which is thus prepared
convenient for this case. Take of the Leaves of Senna one ounce, Agarick, Peony
roots of each half an ounce; Hysop leaves two drams, infuse them in water and
boil them a little, strain it, then put to it one quarter and an half of
Raisons boil them again and strain it, and boil it to the consistence of Honey,
give first one drammaking trial according to the age.

A Powder also may be given which is thus. Take of Tartar two drams, Diagridium
half a scruple, Anise one scruple, of Peony root half a dram, Sugar six drams;
give half a dram.

But especially if the Epilepsie do arise from Worms those things must be made
choice of, which besides that they do purge, may also kill Worms of which sort
are Aloe, Rhubarb; and we must mix with them, those things which resist
putrefaction as are the juyces and seed of Citrons, Lemmons, Hartshorn and
Corals, and those things which resist an Epilepsie, as the root and seed of
Peony, Missleto of the Oak and the like, and they are given in the form of
Pills, or Pouders, or Lozenges.

Pills are very convenient by reason of the Aloes if they can swallow them,
such as these are, Take of Aloes, Rhubarb, each one dram; Wormseed, Coralline,
the pulp Peony seed, of each half a dram; Diagridium six grains, mix them up
with Syrup of Lemmons, make little Pills, let him swallow them.

For the most part they are more pleased with Lozenges which may be made thus,
Take of Rhubarb one dram and an half, VVormseed half a dram, the pulp of Citron
and Peony seed, the shavings of Har^^ horn, Ivory of each one scruple; Coral
two scruples, Missleto of the Oak one scruple, Diagridium half a scruple, Sugar
dissolved in Purslane water, adding the juice of Lemmons or a little Vinegar to
one ounce and an half make Lozenges, let him take for one dose one dram.

But in the worser Convulsion which casts down the strength already weakened by
the cruelty of the Disease which it follows, or whose cause has a sudden
progress from things external; to enervate the body with Purgers is either
superfluous or dangerous; yet if it happen after pains of the Colic from the
same humor not yet, or not sufficiently purged forth, then with one and the
same labor, by purging we shall provide against the Colic pains and Convulsions
arising from thence; amongst which Clysters for the most part performing both,
are commended above the rest (although the common people do evilly think that
by use of them the Convulsions and Palsies do happen which are wont to follow
those Colic passions) the which also being used in other evil Convulsions in
which otherwise we ought not to use Purgers, they are to be preferred before all
other forms of Purging, because they revell, and in the interim do not too much
offend nature.

Amongst the kinds of Evacuations which are made by the Mouth, and Nose a Vomit
will help them, when the Epilepsie has its rise or increase from things taken,
or other repletions of the Stomach; which also in the Fit it self being caused
by thrusting down a Feather into the Throat, or by other means, does make the
Fit shorter if Vomiting do follow.

The which also may be done by Sneezing caused at the same time (the which as
it does sometimes go before the falling in an Epilepsie so sometimes it ends it)
the which is commodiously moved in this case, by blowing up of Pellitory of
Spain into the Nostrils or with this following powder, Take of the roots of
white Hollebore half a scruple, Pellitory of Spain, Pepper, of each one
scruple, Peony root, Freneh Lavender flowers of each half a scruple; make a
sneezing powder.

Errhines put up into the Nose will do the same, such a one as this may be, Take
of the juyces of Rue, Sowsbread of each two drams, the juice of Peony one dram,
Castor, Gall, of each half a dram; Honey one dram, make it like a Liniment for
the Nostrils: Errhines also when the Patient is out of his Fit being used by
course, will yield some benefit if the head be stuffed with phlegm.

As also Spitting upon the same account caused much in a morning is convenient,
which as Dioscorides teaches is here profitably moved, by chawing of Pepper or
by other Apophlegmatisms as masticating the following forms. Take of Mastick
half an ounce, Roots of Pellitory of Spain three drams, Cubebs, Mustard seed of
each one dram; Root of Peony, Nutmeg, of each half a dram; Make a Powder, mix
them with Wax and make Masticatories. They very much commend the root of Acorus
candied and chawed a good while.

The Courses promoted through the Womb in the Faeminine sex, both by those
things which are given by the mouth and those that are put up into the orifice
of the Womb and applied to the Region of that, if the cause of the evil do lie
in the blood retained there, they do oftentimes cure an Epilepsie.

Amongst those things which do it these Pills are very profitable, Take of
Agarick trochiscate, Aloes of each one dram; Rhubarb one dram and an half,
Myrrh half a dram, Castor one scruple, the pulp of Peony seed half a scruple
with the juice of a Leek make Pills; let him take from half a dram to a dram at
midnight.

Also such a Pessary put up does powerfully move the Courses, Take of the root
of Orice, the seed of Gith, of each one dram; Electuarium half a scruple or
Coloquintida one s^^uple, Castor half a scruple, mix them with Honey, the which
let them be boiled to a convenient thickness with some part of juice of
Sows-bread or Mercury, and make Pessaries.

To move the Haemorrhoids by things given and applied, is a singular Remedy, if
the cause of the Epilepsie lie chiefly in the mesaraick Veins as was said; the
which also may be done by Leeches, and other Remedies expressed in their place.

Amongst the other operations which are outwardly performed for Evacuation
sake, both in the Fit and out of it, the application of Cupping-Glasses is
numbered, which sometimes are applied to the hinder part of the Head, sometimes to
the Shoulders, sometimes to the Hypochondries, sometimes to the Groyns for
diversion; as also frictions of the extreme parts, by all which revelling
vapors and humors from the nerves we make the Fits both fewer and shorter; and
also Galen on his Epileptical Child has committed to memory upon experience,
that a certain Air giving cause to an Epilepsie from some part which may be
bound, if ligature be made above the Rise of it, it may be hindered that it
shall not run forth to cause an Epileptical Fit: as also some do testitifie,
that by Repellers outwardly applied to the Head the same success has sometimes
been.

Tht altering Remedies which are applied in the Cure of Convulsions, are fetched
from things which do resist the malignity of their Cause by a certain
Propriety, and that rather by an occult then manifest Propriety viz. by which
they are adverse to an Epilepsie in general, from what cause soever it is
raised; or they are alexiterial the which whether an Epilepsie or Catalepsis
proceed from some venenate quality, are contrary to such kind of Poisons, or
the which helping the Nervee do effect, that it is not so readily afiected by
the Cause, and that because they render it firm by strengthing it, or smooth it
by lenifying or make it impatible by stupefying it; or which altering the whole
Body do change its Constitution which was pron^ to an Epilepsie.

Use has found out and approved of many Remed^^ that do drive away an
Epilepsie by a certain Propriety, as are Piony, Misleto of the Oak, the Skulls
of a Man, an Ass hoof, a Swallow, and many other such like helps explained in
the Remedies; which though they may be used in all Causes of it, yet whenas
besides this Virtue they are also either hot or cold or temperate, although
they use them confusedly without respect to these we think it more advised,
that they ought to be selected according to the Nature of the Constitution of
the Patient or the Disease and this or that to be preferred before the rest;
what things do return the venenate quality inducing an Epilepsie or Catalepsis,
besides those which we have said already do by a propriety resist an Epilepsie,
and what Antidotes are privately adverse to this Poison, (as in other Poisons
there are found those things which do resist them,) hitherto no Experience has
found them out which can readily and quickly do it: wherefore if the Epilepsie
be from a poisonous Humor or Vapor, those common Remedies Alexipharmacall which
in general are adverse to all poisons, as Treacle and the like Compositions as
they are used in all venenate and pestiferous Diseases, so also in these cases
being mixed with those things which by a propriety resist the Epilepsie, they
are given to destroy and correct the cause thereof; and if Poison from without
by the blow of a Beast, or the biting of a mad Dog entering into the Body has
caused an Epilepsie, we cure the same with things alexiterial, as the rest of
the Symptoms arising thence.

Those things which add strength to the Nerves are apppropriate Remedies, which
being repared of capital and arthritical Simples, Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram,
Bettony, French Lavender, Primrose and Ivy, are good in the Palsy and other
cold and moist Diseases of the Brain, which soeng they furnish the Nerves as it
were with new forces, that it may the stronger resist those things which do
molest it, they are wont not unprofitably to be added to the rest of the
Medicines which we use in an Epilepsie, but not for that end or intention, but
because they believed that an Epilepsie was caused by Phlegm obstructing the
Brain, they have applied not only these hot things appropriate to the Nerves,
but those things which are moist, hot that the thick Phlegm might be cut and
attenuated, Castor, Euphorbium, Pellitory of Spain, Squills and diverse Spices,
for the most part Remedies in the Cure of an Epilepsie; the which
notwithstanding we, if an Epilepsie be from an irritation of the Nerves,
because they do more inflame the Body, as we do no ways see it is cured by
these things, so we have known by Experience that they do irritate more,
promote and exasperate its fits; and therefore whenas we have either found or
received from apvroved Authors and worthy of Belief that they do more hurt by
their heat then they can do good, unless in a cold and moist Constitution of
Body or when they are furnished with another Propriety above, by which they
resist Poison or this Disease we think them otherwise not rashly to be
administered.

Of which sort for Examples sake we will describe the more choice Remedies from
the Observations of the Ancients and modern, and our own, as well those endued
with an occult contrariety as those appropriate to the Nerves or those
compounded of them both together in their different forms in which are either
given or proposed for smell or are otherwise applied to the Body.

Amongst those things which are taken many of those appropriated many be used
amongst Nourishments as the brain of Swallows, Kites, Dawes, Cuckows, Chickens,
Hare eaten. The rest which Nature abhors and which are not accustomary we omit,
as Blood drunken up hot from a man killed, which the Common people so much
approve of; dry Figgs also are commended Plantane with Lentil, the Topps of the
black Vine as Dioscorides teaches the which may be taken with Vinegar and Oil,
as also Capers which Fontanous so much commends; and if the Meats be sauced
with Hysop, Sage, Marjoram and other simples appropriate to the Nerves.

Amongst things medicinal this Drink may be given. Take of the Roots of Piony
one ounce, of Misletoe of the Oak half an ounce, the Roots of Asarabacca,
Birthwort each two drams, Piony seeds one dram, Anise half a dram, Chamels hey
one scruple: make a Decoction in Broth, or Wine and Water or an appropriate
Water, dissolving Honey of Squills half an ounce, make a Draught, give it when
the Fit is feared.

In plethorick Bodies this Decoction may be prepared; Take of the shavings of
Guaicum half a pound, Misletoe of the Oak a quarter of a pound, Piony root one
ounce: boil them in twelve pound of Water to the consumption of a third part,
let him drink it instead of wine or allay wine with it.

They put into the Mouth in the fit, the juice of the greater Housleek or Rue
presently pressed forth, sometimes adding a little Castor.

Or such like Medicines may be thus prepared, that they may be always ready
for use. Take of the juyces of Misletoe, Rue the greater, Housleek, blessed
Thistle each two ounces, of Sage, Marigolds each one ounce, Sugar four ounces:
boil them to the consistance of a Syrup, let him take often one or two
spoonfulls.

A Syrup of Piony may be made for use after this manner, of the juice of Piony
six ounces, Honey of Squills an ounce and an half, Vinegar of Squills half an
ounce, Sugar two ounces: boil them to the consistance of a Syrup, it is laxative,
and because somewhat sharp, by so much the more pleasing: Syrup of Succory is
much commended for Children.

A Compound one may be made thus; Take of the roots of Piony one ounce and an
half, the Roots of Eringoes, Dropwort, white Dittander, Birthwort each one
ounce, the Roots of Masterwort, Pellitory of Spain, Squills prepared each half
an ounce, Misletoe of the Oak six drams, the herbs Hysop, Sage, Marjoram, Rue,
Bettony, blessed Thistle, Ground pine, Germander, Milfoil, Cinquefoil, St.
John's Wort, Plantane, white Vine each one handful, Flowers of French Lavender,
Lavender, Violets, Clove Gilliflowers each one pugil, Piony seed three drams,
of Rue, Trifoyl each one dram and an half, Anise, Fennel seed each two drams:
make a Decoction and to that strained ad of the juice of the Roots of Piony and
of Hysop each two ounces, Honey of Squills three ounces, Sugar five ounces,
aromatize it with Cinnamon two drams, and make a Syrup boiled decently that it
may keep, of which let him take often from half an ounce to one ounce by it
self or dissolving it with some convenient Liquor.

A Wine may be prepared in a Vessel from the same things and infused in four or
six measures of Wine or the same may be done with fewer of them, either if you
put in Wine, Guaicum shaved, Misletoe of the Oak, adding Piony root, as was
said formerly of the Decoction, or if you give the Wine of Squills as
Dioscorides teaches.

There are usual Waters prepared for these Uses, and reserved, which either a
part or mixed may be made after this manner. Take of the waters of Piony
flowers, Lilly of the Valleys, Linden-tree, black Cherries ripe each half an
ounce, give it from half an ounce to one ounce in two ounces of which Water if
you infuse one scruple of Castor it will be more effectual, and much more if
you add so much of Assa foetida, the which notwithstanding by reason of its
stinkingness is scarcely admitted by the Patient unless in the fit being then
stupid.

A most effectual Water made up of diverse things may be prepared thus; Take of
young Swallows fifteen, the Daws, Cuckows young ones four or if they cannot be
had, Swallows twenty five, of Man's or Goats Blood three ounces, the skull of a
Man one ounce, Castor half an ounce, Piony Roots one quarter of an ounce and of
the seed one ounce, Squills prepared two drams, Misletoe of the Oak, half an
ounce, the herbs Rue, Hysop each two handfuls, Bettony, Marjoram, Sage,
Rose-flowers, Lavender one handful, Cinnamon two drams, Cloves, Cubebs, Pepper
each one dram, the most excellent Wine or Malligo three pound, the water of
Lilly of the Valleys, and the flowers of Linden-tree each two ounces, Aqua
vitae one ounce, let them steep only a few hours that they be not corrupted,
then distill them; it is given from half an ounce to one ounce for prevention,
the which Water also given in the fit does rouse them up, and the sooner if you
infuse Assa foetida in part of it, as was said before.

Another may be prepared out of Blood after this mannir. Take of the Blood of a
Man newly killed, or gathered from a Vein opened in a sound Man half a pound,
fresh Piony Roots sliced two ounces, Piony seeds half an ounce, Hysop, Rue each
one handful, the Skull of a Man one ounce, draw forth a Water presently whiles
it is hot, of which give one ounce for prevention.

Pouders are made thus; Take of the Root and seed of Piony, Misletoe of the Oak
each one dram, Marjoram, Nutmeg, Anise seed each half a dram: make a Powder.
You may add of the Skull of a Man poudered one dram, and if there be worms in
Children, Dittander root, shavings of Hearts Horn each half a dram, Wormwood and
Purslane seed each one scruple, Coral half a scruple: make a Powder, give it by
it self or adding of Sugar make a Tragem, or Lozenges, the Sugar being
dissolved in Piony water or other.

Or thus, Take of a Man's skull one dram, an Asses hoof, Swallows ashes each
half one dram, shavings of Ivory one scruple, red Coral one dram, Pearl
prepared half a dram, filings of Gold one scruple, Piony seed half a dram,
Diamoscum one scruple, (which Powder is thought appropriate for curing an
Epilepsie) make a Powder, there may be added as much Sugar as is sufficient and
the Powder remain, or it may be reduced into Lozenges with some convenient
water.

Electuaries and Conserves are made thus; Take of the Conserve of the flouers
of Peony, and french Lavender, Rosemary, Sage, Betony each one ounce; Conserve
of the flowers of Succory and Violets each half an ounce; of the roots of Peony
and its seed one dram and an half, Roots of Pellitory of Spain, Leaves of
Hysop, each one dram; seeds of Basil half a dram, a man's Skul one dram, with
Honey of Squils as much as is sufficient, make an Electuary.

Or thus, Take of the roots of Peony, Pellitory of Spain, each one dram an
half; Hysop, seeds of Peony each two drams; Honey of Squils as much as is
sufficient, make an Electuary.

Galen does very much comend a Remedy made of Squils which will be more proper
made thus, Take of fresh Squils sliced, the choicest Honey each half a pound;
add to it of the powder of Peony root one ounce, and of the seed half an ounce,
the root of Pellitory of Spain one dram, Missleto of the Oak, Leaves of Hysop,
Rue, Agarick, each two drams; (...) of a man three drams: let these be received
in a (...) shut up and suffered to steep in the heat of dung or of Sand in the
Sun for fifteen days days, afterward give the Juice pressed forth by it self,
or let it be first gently boiled, that it may be kept for use, let the Patient
take one or two full spoonfuls twice or thrice in a week.

Or thus make a Remedy composed of diverse things, and as it were an Antidote
against the Epilepsie, Take of the roots of Peony, Missleto of the Oak of each
two drams; Roots of Tormentil, Round Birthwort, Dropwort, Cinquefoil,
Dittander, of each one dram; Squils prepared one dram and an half, Agarick, the
Leaves of Hysop, Marjoram, of each two drams, flowers of french Lavender, and
Lavender of each one dram; Peony seeds one dram and an half, seeds of Clary one
dram, seeds of Hartwort of Candy, Basil, Cresses of each half a dram, Cinnamon,
Cubebs, Cardamom, Nutmeg, of each one dram; Long Pepper, Ginger, of each half a
dram, Powder of sweet Diamoscum, two scruples; Pleres Archonticon, cold
Diamargaritum of each one scruple, the Skul of a man poudered half an ounce,
Asses hoof two drams, Swallows and Cuckows ashes of each one dram and an half;
the shavings of Ivory and Hartshorn, of each half a dram, a Hares Runnet two
drams, Benjamin, Mastick, Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar of Squils of each one
dram; with Honey of Squils make an Electuary.

Or those things which resist Poison in general, and privately the Epilepsie,
and do somewhat dull the Sense, make an Opiate thus. Take of old Treacle three
drams, the root and seed of Peony Missleto of the Oak each one dram; seed of
Clary, Basil, of each half a dram; the Skul of a man twodrams, with Honey of
Squils or Syrup of Poppy if you would stupefie more, make an Opiate, give one
dram at night to him going to bed.

In form of Pills ungrateful things are given for prevention after this manner.
Take of Castor, Assa foetida of each half a dram; Gum Ammoniacum, Sagapen
dissolved in Vinegar of Squils of each half a scruple; the Gall of a Bear half
a scruple; Oil of Amber (which is highly commended of the Chemists) four drops,
with the juice of the root of Peony, make a Mass: give him half a scruple going
to bed.

The same things dissolved in the juice of Rue put into the mouth whiles they
are possessed with the fit, do shorten it, as also Castor alone mixed with Oxymel,
anointing the inner parts of the mouth with it; the which also done with Gall
does very much help, whenas these ungrateful things by powerfully moving the
sense of tasting do cause that they come sooner to themselves.

Upon the same account Odors and Suffumigations are applied to the Patient to
smell to, which though they do oftentimes further and discover Epileptical Fits,
yet by discussing them, as they say, especially put into the Nostrils in the
Fit, they make them shorter, and rouse up the Patient.

This is chiefly performed by Castor, Assa foetida, Galbanum, Rue applied to
the Nostrils which are endued with a stinking and strong smell.

Or make a Suffumigation of these things following, Take of Ladanum two drams,
Benjamin, Styrax Calamite, Mummy (by reason of the Bitumen) Mastick of each one
dram; seeds of Gith, Peony of each half a dram; make a powder, burn it upon the
Coals.

And also out of the Fit the Chamber may be fumed, yet with things not too much
stinking.

And carry a Pomander, and smell to it often, which is made thus, Take of the
roots and seeds of Peony each three drams; Leaves of Hysop, Rue, seeds of Gith,
Coriander each one dram; Ladanum half an ounce, Styrax Calamite two drams, Gum
Ammoniacum as is sufficient make a Pomander.

Of things applied to the Head, Pouders may be sewed in a Cap which they may
wear a nights, or be applied in Bags or put into Pillows used to lie under
their head, or the hairs of their head being first anointed they strewed on
them.

Such a one as this is, Take of the roots of Peony two scruples, Cyperus,
Orrice, Missleto of the Oak each one dram and an half; Rue, Hysop, Marjoram,
Coriander seed prepared, Peony seed each one dram; seeds of Basil, Gith, each
two scruples; Cloves, Red Roses, Lavender flowers, each half a scruple; Gallia
Moschata one dram, make a Powder.

Or thus, Take of the roots of Orrice two drams, Galangal, Cyperus, each one
dram; Nutmeg, Cloves, each half a dram; Leaves of Marjoram, Balm, each one
dram; flowers of Lavender, Rosemary, Roses, each one dram; Dying berries half a
dram; make a Powder.

The Head being first shaved is anointed with these things following, Take of
the Oils of Chamomel, Lillies, Elders, each one ounce; Aqua vitae one ounce,
mix them together.

The Head also must be somented with things moderately hot, as with this
Fomentation, Take of the roots of Marshmallows, white Lillies, each one ounce;
herb Mallows two handfuls, Betony, Sage, Marjoram, Balm, each one handful;
flowers of Chamomel, Elder, Rosemary, each one pugil; seeds of Flax,
Foenugreek, each half an ounce; Caraway seed; one dram, make a Decoction in
Water and Wine or in a weak Lie, for a Fomentation or Lotion of the Head.

Repelling Oxyrhodines are applied to the Head if it be from Vapors, Or this
most fine Powder is strewed on the Hairs, Take Coriander seed prepared two
drams, Myrtle berries, flowers of red Roses, Mastick, red Saunders, the root,
of Cyperus, and Peony each one dram, of Cloves, Rosemary, flowers each half a
dram; make a Powder.

If the Backbone be anointed with Oil of Lizards it is good, or with other
things strengthening the Nerves, as was said in the Remedies.

Also the following Plaster may be applied to the Region of the heart and to
the Pulses, Take of Treacle or Mithridate half an ounce, the Roots of Peony,
the Leaves of Rue bruised each two drams, mix them with Vinegar into a body.

Add this applied at the same time to the Region of the Neck will do good.

Lotions of the extreme parts or Baths made of Plants appropriate for an
Epilepsie, and for the Head and Nerves, as of Peony, Rue, Hysop and and other
things as was said in the Remedies will benefit much.

The usual Amulets that we hang and bear about, for the most part are, Peony,
Missleto of the Oak, Elks hoof, the rest have been explained in the Remedies.

But those Remedies which by Lenifying do assuage the Nerves as they are
profitably applied in all kinds of Convulsions so especially when there is
great danger imminent from the Nerves so much affected, by reason of the
vehemence of the Cause, to wit, in those which are called The worser Species of
Convulsions, which by their moderate heat, humor and temper by Moistening and
Mollifying may Relax and Refresh the contracted and convulsed Nerves, many of
which sort are explained in a particular Convulsion in which the Muscles with
the Nerves are truly bound up.

Which for the most part are applied outwardly to the Backbone where is plenty
of Nerves and their original, by anointing Oil of sweet Almonds, of Violets,
Butter, Mucilages and the like; and by application of Cataplasms such as are
prepared of Mallows, Marshmallows, Oil of Violets, and the flower of Flaxseed.

Or they are administered in form of a Bath, moist, Fat, and Warm, in which let
him stay a while, in which Mallows, Peony, Chamomel, and other things may be
boiled.

Or they apply them to the Head also, embrocating them with Milk, especially in
Infants, for which Cause their Mothers do milk out the warm Milk from their
Breasts upon their Heads; or by anointing it with Oil of Violets.

The same also is done by benefit of emollient and moistning Glysters.

And by giving fat things with the meat or Medicines, as fresh butter, and Oil
of sweet Almonds drank plentifully, which is counted a singular Remedy for
Convulsions; upon which acount Dioscorides commends the drinking of Whey and
the Decoction of Violets, the Syrup also is approved of in Children, and Almond
Milk is profitably given to drink, to which may be commodiously mixed an
Emulsion of Peony seeds, of which a Lambitive being made by adding of Sugar,
and given to the Child before it be suckled, is made a a profitable
Preservative against the Epilepfie as some write.

Things that stupefie the Nerves, because by dulling their sense, they cause
them to be less affected with their trouble when they are irritated, and for
that reason are not so easily convulsed; if the Gentler of them be given in
Grievous and Dangerous Convulsions which proceed from an acrid and malignant
matter, I have often found by experience they have done very much good; upon
which account I think Treacle and other Opiates to be convenient in Convulsions
(which in this case practitioners allow of to strengthen and heat the Nerves)
not only because they do infringe the povsonous cause of an Epilepsie, but
because also they do in a manner lay asleep the Exquisite sense of the Nerves.

Experience has proved that those things which do change and alter the
constitution of the whole body, and make as it were its Temperament new as in
many long continued desperate Diseases, so also in a long continued Epilepsie
and otherwise incurable they may sometimes do somewhat singular: which are
perfected by great changes and new evacuations, made in the body.

By change of Age it sometimes happens, whenas the temperament of the body
either is changed too, as that which invaded in Childhood is cured when Youth
comes; and that which first happens to those of ripe age, if it cease not in
old age, yet it undergoes some change; so also the change of the Country,
especially if it be from a place where this disease is Popular, or otherwise
from an unhealthful to a healthful place, it brings much help for the cure of
this evil; and a change of the sex as it were, which by eunuchism makes the
body which was virile and masculine to be effeminate, done by the ancients by
Gelding, has been commended as the last Remedy in an Epilepsie.

New and not yet accustomary evacuations especially those natural ones of seed
and blood coming at their due time, whenas they do also very much alter the
body, it is no wonder that if the years of youth beginning, the Epilepsie does
then cease, not only by reason of the change of age, but also because that then
they begin to eject seed, and Maids have their menstruous blood flow; and the
Haemorrhoides breaking forth in some natures, the same sometimes ceases; and
the Epilepsie forsakes Great-bellied Women after they are delivered and well
purged: the which whenas Physicians see succeeds well by these like Purgations
which nature attempts, they also in a desperate Epilepsie make trial of diverse
evacuations, ordered oftener by chance than method.

By reason of the Symptoms of which sort we meet with diverse in the sundry
kinds of consternation of mind, besides the lawful cure which is due to
removing the cause, the which being taken away they also cease, presently when
they are urgent, we must administer some things; the chief of which to which we
ought to have respect, are Suffocation, Falling, Violent motion, Sleep and
Stupidity, Dotage, Weakness.

From a sudden and unexpected fall the Apoplectick and Epileptick are in very
great danger, by which oftentimes dashing their head they are killed; or
otherwise grievously hurt, unless by custom, or a Vertigo going before, the
Epileptical be forewarned of the time, and then by sitting or lying do prevent
their fall.

Danger of suffocation hangs over those that are sick of a grievous Apoplexy
because they are not troubled only by reason of breathing hindered, but also by
an impediment that their Teeth being fast set, and their mouth shut, the free
passage of the Air is intercepted. Therefore their Teeth must be presently
opened and if they yield not easily they must be pulled a sunder by an instrument
thrust in by force, and keeping that between them we must have a care that they
be not shut again, and it must be hard, that they do not bite it off, for which
purpose either a bone or hard piece of wood will serve' whatsoever we light on
first (as spoones for the most part are most readily found for this use. whose
handle may be interposed) the which if they cannot be thrust in betwixt the
Teeth already closed, they must be parted by a dividing Instrument made for
that purpose, and by interposition of that as was even now said they must be
kept that they be not joined, or if they cannot be disjoined thus neither, then
a Tooth or two must be pulled out; then the Body must be so placed that the
Breast being less pressed may be moved more freely, yet we must not stir it too
violently whiles we move it whence follows quick breathing, the which whenas
they cannot so speedily perform, they are suffocated, as it often happens for
want of care.

We shall prevent the Epileptical from wounding themselves, or otherwise
hurting by that vehement commotion and Agitation of the Body, if by interposing
soft Cushions, Clothes, we take care they hit not their limbs against hard
things; for it is no ways safe either to hold them or to bind them, seeing the
matter of the Epilepsie is shaken of and discust by motion; and because in such
like Convulsions of the Body they bite also, and sometimes vehemently wound
their Tongue, we must put presently between their Teeth before they be shut,
not our finger, which standers by offentimes rashly do with danger, but an
instrument; as this in the Apoplectical ought to be done for fear of
Suffocation, so in the Epileptical to relieve the Tongue when as they are no
ways endangered of suffocation; and if the Tongue be already laid hold on by
the Teeth, we must succor it with a dividing Instrument.

Sleep and Stupidity in these affects; if they continue long, or return often
do oppress the Native heat, therefore the Apoplectical also being taken with to
much or profound Sleep and a vehement Stupidity they must be roused now and
then, and hindered that they relapse not, which may be done by moving the
outward senses with strong objects that they may force and provoke the internal
ones into act: thus the hearing is moved with crying in the Fares making a high
sound and noise; the sight with much shining of light and fire; the taste with
bitter and sharp things the smell with stinking things mentioned before, but
especially the feeling seeing it does very much move the sense, if it be done
with pain in parts endued with exquisite sense, as in the Skin by pulling the
hairs, Burning, Pricking, does very much rouse them up which also may be done
by irritating the Nostrils, which have an excellent sense, with ordors and
other things which move sneezing too, by which the Body shaken is more roused
up; as also if we stir up the Eyes with a sudden light, and prick them with
other things that move Tears; also we may solicit the belly with
suppositories to excretion, the throat with our finger, a feather to vomiting:
of all which whenas they do at once revel and derive the cause we have already
spoken formerly.

The weakness is not so urgent, that there is due to this any other
restoration of strength then to other Diseases, by course of Diet or Cordial
Medicines amongst which notwithstanding External things which are wont to be
applied to the Region of the Heart and Pulses challenge the first place, when
as before they come to themselves, they scarcely take any thing, and if the
Disease be of long continuance, they must be restored with an efficacious
course of Diet, and other means.

Chap. 3. Of an Alienation of the Mind.
The Kinds.
AN Alienation or error of the Mind is called a Paraphrosyne when they feign
judge and remember those things which are not, as if they were, or those things
which are unlikly and besides reason, and that either together or a part,
whether this be done only by Cogitation, or they express the same by words and
deeds.

This for the most part coming from inbred Causes is a certain innate
foolishness otherwise proceeding from external causes if from things taken it is
called Temulency, if it arise from some vehement affect it shall be called a
commotion of the Mind; but sometimes depending upon internal causes it is
desipiency, which happening either without a Fever accompanying it, is
Melancholy, or with fury is Mania or Madness, or coupled with a Fever, it is
called a Frenzy, all whose accidents we shall explain singly.

Foolishness although it be not ascribed to children only when they are yet
destitute of Judgment, Foolishness
and old Folks who are said to be twice Children (the which notwithstanding is
rather a weakness of Mind in them, then a depravation) but also to every Age
and all men upon that account, that all their humane actions seem to be foolish
as Erasmus in his Moria Brandus in navi Stultorum have elegantly showed it in
all states of men; yet it is properly said of them who being borne truly Fools
and Silly do presently even in their very infancy give signs of folly by
gesticulations besides the custom of other Infants, and do not easily obey,
are blockish, so that oftentimes they learn not to speak, much less to
perform other Duties, in which any industry is required; which in some
Countries is a common evil as they write of Egypt, and at Bremis a Village off
Valesia as I my self have seen, and in the Valley of Carinthia, it is wont to
befall many Infants, which besides an inbred foolishness, sometimes with an
unshapen head, a great and swelled. Tongue, being dumb oftentimes with a
strumous Throat, do show a deformed sight, and setting in the ways and looking
upon the Sun, and putting little sticks between the spaces of their Fingers,
and variously wreathing their Bodies, with an open Mouth, they move Laughter
and admiration to those that pass by.

But others on whom some mark of folly was first imprinted from their birth or
afterward, although they rightly perform all other actions of their life, and
in some things are able to do singularly well beyond others, and are strong in
wit and excel in some Art, as of Painting, Engraving, Building, Music, and
others, yet betray their Folly by these things, that they willingly hear
themselves praised that they tell and act ridiculous things, for which thing
great men are delighted with their company, whom also by reason of the diverse
Phantasms that present themselves to them, they call Fantastical.

But others yet more fools with diverse Trifles, gestures and jests, as it is
said, do thrust forth their Asses Ears, some of which have in them vices not
acceptable to all and those oftentimes grievous ones, which according to the
variety of their natures they bring forth sometimes in Anger, sometimes in Fury,
sometimes in Sadness, sometimes in other things, all which it were superfluous to
express.

Temulenlency or Drunkenness proceeding from Wine and certain other things,
Temulency
as shall be said in the Causes, and not yet going so far, as to cause
sleepiness and stupidity of which we have already spoken, but going beyond the
bounds of Mirth, in which Wine moderately does cheer the heart of man, making
them mad, according to the diversity of natures as before was said also of
fools, does discover diverse effects of Temulency and Drunkenness; whenas some
Drunkards are rather like to fools in their profuse and immoderate laughter,
laying open their folly by their laughing and cackling (whence is the Proverb,
By much laughing you may know a Fool) also by prating, Singing, laughing,
kissing, loving: but others do rather express the manners of mad folks by
Clamors, Anger, Blows, Biting. Others are sad like melancholy men, Weep, talk
much of Religion and Death, which desipiency of theirs for the most part sleep
or stupidity following, as was explained there, it does so far alay it, til
rouzed up they return to themselves again being oftentimes forgetful of the
madness that went before, and some time after being troubled with a pain and
heaviness in the Head they do penance for their Folly.

A vehement or lasting commotion of the mind, The Commotion of the mind.
arising from some affect of it as shall be said in the Causes, is likewise a
species of alination of mind so much depraving it, that that it either acts or
thinks many things estranged from reason; as is that foolish too much Joy with
which being puffed up they speak many and strange things childishly, and
undertake them vaporing, and in laughing do cry for joy as the Comaedian says.
Also that short madness in which the Anger-strucken do swear and are carried
headlong, fearing no dangers that they may be able to revenge themselves, and
then that melancholy conceived out of sadness and fear, which oftentimes is
wont to degenerate into a true and lasting one, as shall appear in the Causes;
and hitherto also ought to be referred the pertinacious Phansio of them who are
oppressed with great Love springing from a corrupt judgment and imagination, Love
is a Species of commotion of mind.
which does so change men, that as he says, you cannot know them to be the
same; which does not only make men mad but women also young men and old folks,
which sort of madness they call by the name of Heroical because it is wont to
happen to Heroes or rich men but very inconsiderately, whenas the poorest
cannot escape Cupids darts; this conturbation of the mind is a certatn affection
compounded of all the other passions of the mind, whenas sometimes the effects
of joy shine forth in it, sometimes of Sadness, sometimes of Anger, and nothing
is more unconstant than Lovers, who that they may enjoy their love, become so
thoughtfull, that they neglect things necessary for the body, as to take meat,
to sleep, or other duties, who omitting weighty and serious businesses, or
following them slowly, spend their time rather in Neatness, Music, and other
things which may please their Mistress: and when they persuade themselves that
they can obtain somewhat of their love, breaking forth into profuse joy, they
often speak many foolish and obscaene things, and act them too, and laying
aside all shame sometimes commit filthy wickednesses, and fear not to expose
themselves to grievous dangers; or if they despair of mutual love and good will,
they continually afflict themselves with mourning and lamenting, and by no
means admit of comfort, they refuse good counsels, and express their grief by
shedding of tears, often sighs, paleness (for every Lover is pallid) and pain
of the heart with which they chiefly complain they are troubled; whose pulse
also is instable according as their mind is raised or deprest, and by beholding
or remembering their Mistress it is raised and stird up (by which sign
Erisistratus discovered love) or by despair it becomes languid and calmed: with
which accidents being oppressed, at last they fall into grievous Diseases and
hasten their own death, or oftentimes in despair lay violent hands on
themselves.

Melancholy denominated from black Choler, Melancholy
is a species of alienation of the mind in which the imagination and judgment
are so perverted, that without any cause they are very sad and fearful, and
they can alleadg no certain cause of their sadness and fear, but that which is
of no moment, or that false opinion which they have conceived from depraved
apprehhension.

As when they persuade themselves that they are damned, that God takes no care
of them, that they are not predestined, although in the interim they be godly
and religious, and they fear the last judgment, and eternal punishment, which
horrible melancholy (and often times driving men to despair) is the most
frequent species, in the curing of which I have oftentimes been much hindered,
with which those that have been taken have oftentimes confessed to me with many
tears, deep sighs, great anguish of heart and trembling of the whole body, that
they have been stirred up to Blasphemy against God, to commit horrible things,
to lay violent hands on themselves, to kill Husband, Wife, Children, Neighbors,
their Prince, being moved with no jealousy, no envy toward them whom they
intimately love, but are compelled as it were against their will, and such
thoughts do steal upon them whether they will or no, when in the mean time they
cease not instantly to beg of God, that he would vouchsafe to free them from
those wicked thoughts.

But others are very much troubled with the terrors of death and the fears
thereof, whiles they falsely imagine with themselves, that they are out of favor
with the Princes and Magistrates, and that they have committed somewhat, and
are drawn to punishment; or who otherwise do highly fear death, which they
fancy is even now hanging over their heads.

Others by other triffling falsehoods conceived and imprinted in their mind, do
deceive themselves, as he who thinking himself to be made an Earthen vessel
gave way to every one he met, least they should break him with a touch: as some
have believed themselves turned into brute beasts: and another who thinking he
had a very large Nose, would not change this Opinion, til the Surgeon
deceived him by a Counterfeit stroke, and showing him a piece of flesh, that he
had cut a part of it. And as that Woman who was wonderfully grieved that she
was forced every day to put on her clothes and put them off again: and another
woman who as often as she though that when she was dead, her Husband would
marry another Wife, she was transported to these accidents: some think they
have swallowed Serpents and Frogs and that they carry them still alive in their
body, or by other tricks are deluded; and they dream of many and wonderful
things of this nature, which sometimes relating with a great deal of affection
and grief, I have heard sometimes with laughter, sometimes with great admiration
and Pity: in all which cases they show marks of sadness and fear, whiles they
complain, cry, with many and continual tears, and do wonderfully exagitate both
body and mind.

Otherwise they are idle and silent, being asked answer not, being driven
scarce go forward, they love solitudes and shun the company of men which
species for that reason is called Misanthropia from the hatred of men; and if
hating the light, they covet darkness repair to woods, and hide themselves in
lurking places and caves as the holy writ testifies of Nabuchadnaesor then
they call it Lycanthropia from the custom of Wolves, others the wolfish
melancholy.

With which perverse imaginations, pains and cruel tortures of mind, those
afflicted oftentimes not only many months, but years also, and at last
overcome, unless they return to themselves and be helped by Counsel and Art,
either they die wasting, or that death which before they feared they hasten to
themselves by hanging or drowning, or by some other violence, as we have known
many sad examples of this nature.

Which forementioned passions of Sadness and Fear as they do not produce equal
effects in all, but do pervert the mind in some more in some less, so they do
continually possess those which they have once invaded. Yet they have by
courses their exacerbations and remissions, as we have, showed also they did
otherwise happen in continal Fevers for a cause contained in the Veins after
the like manner; yet we have observed some to be thus troubled only at certain
times, as some season of the year or change of the Moon, and especially Women
while they are with Child, or have brought forth, or have their Courses.

There is also another species of it which they denominate from the place
affected Hypochondriacal Melancholy, Melancholy Hypochondriacal a Species.
in which the forementioned accidents do often intermit and again return upon
the same day, and those who are sick of it, as often as they come to themselves,
otherwise then the rest (who unless some other thing be joined, do only
complain of a pain of the Head, or sometimes of a Heaviness) do acknowledge that
they are truly sick, and though they scarce or seldom lie by it, and
notwithstanding are able to undergo other duties, yet they complain perpetually
of a pain of the Hypochondries especially in the left side (which they call a
pain at the Heart) a Heat, Pulse, Murmur, Belchings, Vomiting, Spitting, pain
of the Head, Vertigo, a ringing in the Ears, beating of the Arteries, and
innumerable other affects which they feel, and sometimes Fancy to themselves;
and they try Physicians, desire Cure, and try diverse Remedies, and unless
they be eased presently, they change Physicians and Medicines.

Mania or Madness is so great a depravation of all the the Functions of the
Mind, Madness.
that they feign judge and remember most things falsely, acting not only as the
mournful an fearful Melancholic, but all things besides reason, and sometimes
without fury they commit more modestly those things which they speak and do,
but most commonly being turned to Madness, by their stern aspect and by their
words and deeds they express the violence of their Minds, whenas they tell
false, obscoene and horrid things, cry out, swear, and with a certain brutish
Appetite they go about diverse things like beasts, and some of them otherwise
unusual even to men; and especially some of them desire Venery very much; as I
have seen it befall a noble Matron otherwise most honest, who did invite both
men and dogs to Copulation by most filthy words and gestures. Moreover they
strive to offer violence both to themselves and others, wherefore they pull out
their hairs, tear their clothes and sometimes hurt their own Body, by biting,
and other ways, and unless they be diligently restrained with Bonds and
Chains, the which they study to break with all endeavor, and be kept close in
custody, where they try to break open the gates, and oftentimes by a certain
industry digging their Prison to make a passage for themselves, falling
violently on the standers by, like Beasts they endeavor to scratch them, bite,
strangle, kill.

But some amongst these maniacal or Melancholic some times showing forth these
accidents more vehement, Possession by the Devil a sort of Madness.
sometimes more mild, and also acting and speaking things preternatural and
monstrous, do manifestly declare that they are possessed by the Devil, which
for that reason they call men possessed and Daemoniacal; who besides the depraved
actions of the Mind, as was said, are wont diversely as the Devil does to impose
marvellously upon Men, and to bewitch them, oftentimes they continue dumb for a
long while; sometimes also they abstain longer from meat, then Nature otherwise
could bear, yet without any hurt: and sometimes they so wreath their Body, bend
and wind it, that as I have seen with my own Eyes, it could by no means be
done Naturally without Luxations of the Joints; or by guessing, prophesying,
they divine and foretell things otherwise obstruse, or they speak with Tongues
which they learnt not, neither understood when they were well, the Devil as it
were speaking thorough their Mouth, the diverse stories of which we could bring,
we purposely omit.

There is also a certain sort of Madness, Hydrophobie a Species of Madness.
in which those bitten by a mad Creature are converted into the same madness
with which the Creature was troubled; as if this be done by a Dog they bark
like Dogs, or if it happen from a Wolf, they howl and set upon those they meet
to bite them, shunning the light and those things which are clear and bright,
when as in them does appear the Image of the Dog, by which they were hurt,
instead of the proper figure of a man, as some would have it, and especially
fearing water, and trembling at the sight of it, whence this Species of Madness
is peculiarly named Hydrophibia, long exercising the man with a distension of
the Nerves, and a Redness of the whole Body especially of the face, and with
sweat, and at length killing him unless releived.

Hither also is to be referred that horrid and wonderful but rare affect in
which being struck with a certain mad fury of skipping, Vitus dance.
they continually desire to dances, which Disease they therefore call Vitus
dance from a Saint by invocation of whom they believe they are freed from it;
which though some counterfeit that they may extort the greater Alms, or are
therefore suborned that they may imprint the false opinion of the common people
the more in the minds of men; yet there are some found of both Sexes, which
indeed being possessed with this evil are carried with an inordinate desire to
dancing, as that no time interposed that desire to dance with others without
any rest night and day not only for some days but weeks also, and in the
interim are scarce yet tired, but are wonderfully recreated and refresht, and
unless they do so they are very much hurt; whence when they take meat by
compulsion, or being oppressed with sleep they are forced a little while to cease
from dancing, yet they do no ways obstain from the Agitation of their Body,
and presently again laying hold on any body they solicit them to dance; and
that so long till at last their strength being wholly overthrown and feet
bruised, coming to themselves again they feel an exceeding weakness, from
which they can hardly be restored and made up again; an example of which I when
I was a young man saw in a Woman here at Basil dancing thus a whole months space
in a public place for whom the Magistrate suborned certain persons, strong
men, that should dance with her by turns, seeing one was no ways able; and
many writers do testefie, that it has sometimes happened, and the common people
also is wont to imprecate this as a known evil: and some Arabians have called
it the dancing disposition of the Limbs, and would have it to be a Species of
Convulsion when yet here is no Convulsion of the Limbs, but the Mind Alienated
is carried and forced into this madness and perverse appetite, as also in other
Species of Melancholy and Madness they are possessed with a desire of other
things. which after another manner appear also too horrible; as even now we
said those who are bitten by a mad Dog are rather tormented with the fear of
water, as according to the nature of the venenate cause these different
accidents proceeds, as we shall say in the Causes: if so be that this
inordinate dancing also do not proceed from the Devil, and befall men by way of
punishment by Gods permission, because they have offended by dancing.

A Frenzy is a Dotage, Dotage.
in which equally as in Madness, the Mind is wholly Alienated, yet more or less
as the affect is great, the which also they make known after the same manner by
words and deeds, now sporting it more pleasingly with Laughter, Jests and
Trifles, now raving Angrily with Scoldings, Clamors, Blasphemies and desiring
also to do hurt as the Maniacal: to whom this happens peculiarly, that because
they think, that Flies, Locks of Wool. Straws are before their Eyes, and
diverse apparitions do appear from their false Imagination, they endeavor to
hunt them, pull them, gather them, drive them away.

But besides these like faults of the Mind which are common to them with the
Maniacal there is a companion another grievous hot Disease, A Frenzy is a
Species of Dotage.
especially a Fever to which if a Dotage be presently coupled at the first
invasion, A bastard Frenzy is another Species of Dotage.
this affect is called a Frenzy; if that come after the Fever has lasted a
little while, and a pain of the Head also went before, about the state
especially if the Fever be continual; or if it come first at the beginning of
the fit, or in the vigor, if the Fever be intermitting then it is designed by
the name of a Bastard Frenzy.

Therefore together with a Dotage which is sometimes very grievous sometimes more
mild, as was said, the Symptoms also of a continual Fever do concur, more
vehement or gentler also as the feverish heat offers it self greater or more
pleasing, as are by Reason of the heat of the heart a swift pulse quick
breathing and sometimes drawn with sighs by long intervals, faintings away, and
by reason of the Natural parts enflamed, thirst, dryness of the Tongue but
especially by reason of the Brain over heated besides a Delirium, Watchings,
Dreams, Suffusions, Vertigoes, which if the Brain be more vehemently inflamed,
do present themselves more and more grievous, as shall be said in the Causes.

The Causes.
The Cause of every Alienation of Mind, is one Preternatural proceeding from an
evil Spirit, the other Natural, a certain affect so affecting the Brain the
seat of Reason, by it self if the Cause lie hid in that, or by consent if it be
else where that the Functions of the Mind are rather depraved then impaired;
but there is sometimes aquality working by an occult propriety, which does it,
the which seeing we are not able to explain, from the effect we will call one
the drunken virtue, the other the poisonous: but otherwise it will be some
Disease to wit a certain distemper of the Brain, of which sort is that abstruse
and unknown one, whose high efficacy is sufficiently known by this, that it
vehemently disturbs the Mind, but seeing that makes an evil of long
continuance, and yet in the interim the sick do no ways lie by it, when
nevertheless other manifest distempers of the Brain if they continue long, are
very dangerous for hurting the Brain; certainly it is very difficult to be
explained which we do certainly find that this comes to pass by reason of the
Spirits of the Bain which are every where implanted in it, and connate and
bound up to the substance of it, do call a to great Agitation and Confusion of
the Spirits of the Brain and the other Species we would rather call a
perturbation of them, or a mixture of them with a strange matter, then feign
such a distemper, which cannot cause that, as they write of the cold one: but a
manifest distemper of the Brain, also inducing a dangerous Disease, may
likewise cause it; of which sort is a vehement hot one, especially if it be
joined with a Tumor: and also a fault in conformation; also some speck or
putrefaction found in the Brain, all which how they do Alienate the Mind, we
shall express in order.

An Evil Spirit the Devil, because he is the enemy of mankind, An Evil Spirit
the Cause of those possessed.
does not only continually infest the Mind, the most ezcellent and as it were
the divine Function of Man, and so trouble them, that acting many things evilly
against the divine Law he leads them into sin; but also exagitating, bewitching
with his Arts does oftentimes induce a grievous Melancholy, or a Diabolical.
Madness, or altogether entering the Body, makes them called the possessed and
Daemeniacal the which to dispute or enquire how it is done, is not our intent,
(although Matthiolus that he might refer all these kind of Madnesses to black
Choler, affirms that the Cacodaemons do this by Mediation of that Humor, in
which he says they have their residence) this surely is certain, that there
were such also in old time, as diverse Histories Sacred and Profane do
testify, as also we can no ways deny but that they may be found in our Age
too.

The Drunken Disposition so called because it assailes the Head, The Temulent
quality caused by Drunkenness.
arising from the propriety of certain things, produces an Alienation of the
Mind, which they call Drunkenness or Temulency, this proceeds from those
things, which according to the diversity of Natures, and as they are used can
induce Sleep and Stupidity and for that reason also are called Narcoticks.

Some of which taken inward do it, as Wine more commonly then the rest, because
it is ordinary Drink, which causes this species of Temulency called
Drunkenness if it be drank too immoderate or strongly, yet not so far as to
cause a perfect stupidity; and that for this cause, because by its propriety it
lightly obscuring the Senses (whence is the beginning of Stupidity) amongst
which the memory for the most part is wont first to fail, by producing a
certain oblivion of griefs and labors, it brings a foolish joy and that
effusion which happens with reason from Wine yet moderately taken; its heat
moreover helping, by which at once heating and inflaming the spirits it does to
much exagitate the actions; which happens more powerfully from distilled Wine,
because its concenterd Virtue, and heat is greater, upon which account Country
Fellows are wont to drink it in the morning, that afterward they may be more
cheerful to perform their services. This also the Juyces of some other Plants
will do, if those Plants be eaten, or their Juice pressed forth be given or
extracted by Decoction; as are Hops from which Beer takes its Virtue of foxing,
and flies if they drink of it do dye taken with stupidity, Hemp also, whose
Powder if it be given with Wine, does fox the sooner; the seed of Darnel and
Gith perhaps the false Nigella in Bread, which faults of Corn if they abound,
the Bread made of these makes Men sleepy, and by continual use hurts many every
where, the which notwithstanding they do not observe: and such is that Plant,
or rather the seed of it, a sort of Millet called Avate of which the Indians
make an intoxicating Drink called Caou-in; but also other Narcoticks may do it,
especially if they be used mixed with things very hot, both Virtues then acting,
as was said even now of Wine as if Henbane seed be boiled in Beer as some are
wont to do, it foxeth sooner and vehemently; if the Bark of Mandrake be boiled
in Wine till it look red; if Opium be drank with the strongest wine; as
Bellonius relates Turks do drink without any harm Opium half a dram with Wine
when they go forth to battle, that being more bold and furious they may less
fear danger; as also Dioscorides writes that Hemlock taken with Wine does work
more effectual and kill the sooner; yet all which as we have said formerly of
wine do more or less make mad, according to the variety of Temperaments: as
also I have observed, that a weakness of the Brain may be the cause that they
are sooner affected, in him who by reason of a fall had a piece of his Skull
taken out, and therefore was quickly drunk.

Some things applied to the Head can do the same as Rondeletius witnesses
bringing an Example of him, who whenas he had applied Henbane leaves to his
Head to procure sleep, became mad.

By Inspiration also drawing in the fume of Henbane of Peru, which they call
Petum or Tobacco, sucking it through their mouthand Nose, or as the English
call it drinking it who for the voiding of Phlegm, and also to induce Mirth do
highly esteem the accustomary use of it, that men are made like to Drunkards,
and loose all Appetite of eating and drinking and so can suffer Hunger a long
time, those that have writ of it, and tried the same, do witness. The which
also happens as Matthiolus shows if the root of the greater Nightshade, which
they call deadly be infused in wine, and the Infusion given that hunger and
thirst do cease; til by taking of Vinegar that fault is corrected but Sleep
coming does cure them both, as also in others.

A poisonous Quality entering the Body from without, A poisonous Quality the
cause of Madness.
or proceeding from things taken in (for concerning that which is raised
intrinsecally in the humors, shall be spoke off in a Melancholy humor) from
some poisons which hurt rather by Alienating the Mind then any other way, as
the effects and hurts of Poisons are Various, may also disturb the Mind; of
which sort Dioscorides proposes many things which can do it rather by a
poysenous then narcotick quality and we purposely omit them when as they are
rare with us: amongst which also Pliny thought, that menstruous blood devoured,
was able to make Mad both Men and Dogs.

As also we oftentimes find by experience that from biting of Creatures turned
Mad, the Poison entering man's Body by the Spittle, the like Madness does befall
them, especially from Dogs, which do easier become Mad then other Creatures, to
wit, about the heat of the Dog days, so called for this Reason; or also about
the greatest cold as Dioscorides will have it; and they are known by this, that
they loath meat, send forth a foam, hang down their tail, and fly upon those
also which before they loved, and bite them: whose biting though at first it
bring no greater discommodity then the wound and pain, yet if it be neglected,
sometimes the first fortieth day, sometimes sooner, sometimes after six months or
a year, it induces that Hydrophobite and Madness wonderfully changing the Mind
of a man, as was said formerly, and converting it into doggish manners. In
which there is so great virtue of Poison, that some amongst whom Avicen is one,
have dared to testify for truth, that some have pist forth Whelps or some
flesh like to them: and Dioscorides proves by the Testimony of one that this
evil has layen hid for seven years, and then first of all broke forth; and
Matthiolus writes that the touching of certain woods especially the Dog-tree
and the Bloody-rod, will occasion that this Madness do sooner appear: and
Dioscorides also has delivered, that by the Conversation only with one
infected, a certain man contracted the like affect; and Galen teaches that the
spittle of Mad Dogs, if it touch the naked parts of the Body, is able to make
Men Mad, all one as if they were bitten.

Which things as they do more commonly happen from Mad Dogs because they live
with men in great plenty and more familiarly then other Creatures, so also they
witness that they happen from Wolfes run Mad and I have twice observed a
dreadful and deadly Madness proceeding thence, and doubtless as Aristotle has
write the same from the bitings of other Mad Creatures as of the Camel and
Horse, and Avicen of the Mule so also the same may happen from the bitings of a
Fox, a Weasil, a Poulecat, a Ferret whose bitings at other times have somewhat
of Poison in them, Nay of an Ape also, and even of a Man himself now sick of
this Madness whose spittle has put on the Nature of Poison.

As it is very likely also that Madness may be raised from the Blood of some
Poysenous Beasts as other accidents from other Poisons, of which seeing we are
destitute in our Countries, and therefore no danger hangs over us from them,
it is needless here to speak more.

The too great Agitation or Confusion of the Spirit of the Brain, The Agitation
of Spirits the cause of commotion of Mind.
inducing not only a light or short affection which presently cease, but
sometimes an imprinted and permanent affect, is the cause of a commotion of the
Mind in those especially which are disposed to it, or who by reason of their
cowardice, or weakness of reason, cannot resist affects; but that is done by
that Commotion which is done suddenly with a certain violence as by Joy,
Anger, Fear, or by that which is wont to happen vehement and of long
continuance as in Grief, or that which happens long continued and depraved in
counterfeit Folly.

Great joy for some thing obtained, especially if it happen unexpectedly, and
that to the weaker sort as old Men and Women it begets that foolish species of
perturbation of the Mind with foolish joy as was said, the spirits being so
poured forth with the Blood, that the Face is not only over spread with red,
but tears drop forth of their Eyes and all their Members being heated are
unquiet.

Anger for some offense raises that furious species of commotion of the Mind
the spirits and blood being vehemently inflamed, and cast forth with desire of
revenge, yet by and by returning again by reason of grief of mind, whence they
look so red at first, by and by wax pale and yellow; the which happens more
easily to hotter and choleric Natures, and to those who are first heated with
Wine, and made sottish, hence then many Causes concurring together, they are as
it were mad.

A Fright or grievous Fear especially happning of a sudden does not only
astonish the Mind, but if it be so imprinted in the mind, and move, change and
confound the whole Body and Spirits, especially in those disposed, that it can
either never, or very difficultly be got out of it, it oftentimes induces a
true Melancholy and that most grievous and worst almost then that which happens
from an internal Cause, as shall be said by and by, the impression being so
made upon the Spirits and Humors, and the Brain it self, that it can hardly be
drawn forth, unless the whole Mass of Blood be exhausted, as shall be
explained; and this is that species of Melancholy in which as it has been
showed, they are vexed with horrid and wicked Temptations, the which species I
have often met withal, possessing both Women and Men, not sparing even the
younger sort.

But this proceeds either from some horrid Vision appearing either by Dreams or
in deed as of some Ghost, or the Carcass of a Man hanged, as in that Maid who
beholding one hanging upon a Cross without the city, fell into such a
Mnlancholy which ending in Convulsions caused her Death; and a Woman who
passing by a Gibbet late, and fearing least being shut out of the, City she
should be forced to lie there all Night fell into a long continued Melancholy;
another also who by chance be holding the Carcass of a Thief, who hanged
himself in the Prison, whiles he was put into a Barrel to be cast into the
River, being astonished in Mind, miserably remaining many years Melancholic
could scarce any more come to her self: the which also oftentimes proceed from
the Imagination only and fear of some Danger of Thieves when they converse
alone in Woods, or at night in the dark, in which all things become more
dreadful; or they proceed from fear of eternal Judgment for some grievous sin
committed, as that Concubine of the Priests pretended in her grievous
Melancholy, because she had brought forth so many Children from an unlawful
Bed; which imagination and persuasion conceived from that, even those that do
now suffer this affect do retain, and do express by words and very deed such
like things which gave them the occasion, as was said in the accidents of
Melancholy.

Sadness or vehement Grief lasting long does also beget a Melancholic
Perturbation of the Mind, which also may degenerate into the true one if it
take deeper root and disturb the Spirits, and change the Temperament of the
Body; or it induces a certain Fancy sometimes foolish, sometimes maddish,
and sometimes desperation as we have described in explaining the kinds.

But this Sadness of Mind proceeds from grief or mourning most commonly for
some things lost of Money, Honor, or any other thing, as the Death of
Children, Parents, Friends, with which the Mind oftentimes is wonderfully
tormented and afflicted for a long time; or from Shame and Bashfulness, with
which generous minds especially are so troubled for some error committed, that
it is plain some have thereby been driven to despair; as they write it happened
to Homer, because he could not resolve the Fishermen their Riddle. Envy also
does so afflict a man, and as they are wont to say gnaw the Heart, that these
also become wholly Melancholic and by their Face and Gestures express envy all
manner of ways, as Ovid sets it forth. Also diverse affects of the Mind
proceeds chiefly from the too great Appetite or Concupiscence of some thing
honest or dishonest which they persuade themselves will be profitable or
honest; as seeing by the immoderate study or Science men oftentimes being too
intent, do procure to themselves a certain Fancy, and those whom ambition and
vain glory torments, and who are taken with the love of themselves (Philauty)
boastingly, they talk and do many foolish and ridiculous things, which the
Comaedians have elegantly shown in the vain glorious Soldier under the persons
of Thraso and Pyr, Gopolynices in their Comaedies, or when the desire of
revenge not ceasing after anger, being carried into a permanent Hatred, and
Enmity, which can scarce any more be blotted out, continually thirsting
Revenge, and intent on that, they do nothing rightly, but most things
unhappily, being troubled in Mind; or carried on the Coveteousness, the love of
Riches; they are so madded, that they run headlong into many Vices, Sins and
enormous Deeds; whether. also that Dotage of the Alchymists ought to be
referredwho seeking the Philosophers stone with so great heat, all though they
see they loose their Labor and Cost, and can do nothing, nor know nothing done
by others yet they bate not of their unwearied Labor, and led on by continual
Hope, no ways ceasing from their Labor, they wast their whole substance; last
of all and chiefly that vehement Heat and Concupiscence proceeding from love in
both sexes, when they cannot always enjoy it, or not all, it is a Cause of that
Grief (for every Lover mourns) with which being overcome at last, they are vexed
and tormented with so many different Passions of the mind, that despairing they
think attempt and perform, things ridiculous or weighty and dangerous, as was
said in the accidents to which love, sometimes and elegant beauty, sometimes
lovely conditions, every one according to his Fancy, for the most part with a
blind judgment, sometimes a certain Sympathy and confirmity of manners, gave
the beginning, occasion, and fomented it.

Counterfeit Folly and long continued, constantly exagitateing the spirits
depravedly does cause that by this custom changing Nature, some Fools who for
their gullet Belly and profit sake, exercise their Folly before great Men, who
delight in the Conversation of Fools, seeing they have fitted and accustomed
themselves to this from their Youth, they acquire that Habit in it, which
afterward seeing it can no ways be blotted out, they continue Fools indeed.

A perturbation of the Spirits of the Brain not that which raised from the
Affections of the Mind does too much exagitate and confound them, A
perturbation of the Spirits the cause of Melancholy and Madness,
or aflects them with an occult quality of which we have spoken already, but
that which being raised intrinsecally from some matter mixed with the Spirits
does cloud obscure, darken the animal Spirits which ought to be bright clear
lucid and most pure; may induce the said Melancholy and Madness also, if it
Act more vehemently:

Which matter they call Melancholic because they think it is black, and they
contend that it does alter the Mind not only by troubling the Spirits, but also
by cooling the Brain; seeing they hold this humor is cold and dry, but seeing
we have showed in Sleepiness and Supidtiy that from the coldness of the Brain,
whether joined with moisture or dryness its Functions would rather be impaired
or abolisht, then intended; this Melancholic matter which we also call
Turbulent impure and filthy does not by cooling, but because it is mixed with the
spirits disturbs them, and the Brain in whose substance the Spirits are every
where connate, we have proved in Anatomy; and by a certain Malignity which it
has also attained it does at last imprint that hurt from which follow such
enormous, accidents, the which notwithstanding cannot therefore suddenly bring
Death, because it is an evil of long continuance. The which matter is either a
Melancholic vapor or humor.

A Melancholic filthy Vapor troubling the Spirits and affecting the Head
breeds that Species of Melancholy which they call Hypochondriacal, A Vapor the
Cause of the perterbation of Spirits in Hypochondriacal Melancholy.
because they chiefly complain of that place affected; for the cause of this
evil lurkes in the parts of the Belly under the Ribes or Hypochondries, which
the Arabians call Mirach and from thence denominate this Species mirachal
melancholy, and from that part a vapor raised upwards to the Head at a certain
time, then when it assails it, it makes this melancholy exert it self. Most
men write that the fuel of this is the Spleen because it is the natural seat
of melancholy and because they are most troubled in the left side, but others
affirm that this matter is contained in the stomach also which does most
possess the left hypochondria, and in its neighboring part: others also place
in the Liver and Mesentary and the Veins of that called mesaraicks: which we
also affirm is heaped and lies hid in the mesarick Veins not only those that
through the mesentery and call, but also the other natural bowels, especially
in those places where these branches of the Vena porta being more and greater
do tend toward the Spleen and Stomach in the left side, although this matter
may be heaped up also in other places, upon which account they feel their pain
most commonly in the left side, yet sometimes in the right part of the
hypochondries and back, where the Spleen and chief bowels lie hid.

But most do give out that the matter lying there, from which this evaporation
rising does affect the mind, to be melancholy blood, which we also can no
ways deny, but we deny it to be cold, seeing that burning which the Patient
feels in that place where the humor lurks does sufficiently declare the
acrimony and heat of the humor: for as it was said in Fevers that the blood in
the Vena cava did cause continual Fevers, but that in the branches of the Vena
porta, being more choleric and excrementitious which is continually heaped up
from the meat and drink lately changed into chyle, when it putrifies it does by
its evaporation cause intermitting Fevers; so also it happens in this case, as
we shall by and by show, that as from melancholy blood contained in the
branches of the Vena cava the true melancholy is caused, so from that which is
accumulated in the branches of the Vena porta and there fills up the Veins in
certain places, yet does not putrefie, but is adust, faeculent, and has also
some malignity; if the vapors of that raised up, keeping the condition of the
humor from whence they proceed, do assail the brain they will cause a
melancholy returning by course which lasts so long, til they being discust
again do grant some ease to the Patient, so long til new vapors arise, which
for the most part is every day.

And hence it comes to pass that this melancholy otherwise than the true, has
its intermissions, then especially when some excretion of wind chiefly, with
which this evaporation does fill the Stomach and Guts, is made by belching;
which carries with it a heat by reason of the humor from whence it proceeds,
and an acidity by reason of the Stomach, in which that a certain acidity is
always contained we shall declare in its proper place, or when these vapors
which tend upwards are partly emptied by vomiting or partly reveld by Farts and
Stools, or when by cold meat yet moderately taken, those heats being mitigated
and vapors represt they do a little ease the evil, as by taking that which is
hot and plentiful, that affect by reason of the boiling of those parts and
plenty of wind, is exasperated: because the stomach is comprest with these and
pained puffed up, and together with the Guts makes a murmuring, rumbling and
waving the aforesaid winds are so frequent in this affect, that it is called
also the windy melancholy and diverse Excrements thrust thither from the
mesaraick Veins are the Causes, by reason of which also they then feel hears in
those places where this matter principally lurks, as has been said: but also
these filthy vapors ascending upwards, because the heart also by the way is
oftentimes grieviously affected they complain of a palpitation of the heart,
and beating of the Arteries and the Midriff being somewhat hindered of some
suffocation: so that scarce any other evil does so long torment a man as this
affect does, if he lie not down by the Disease, with so many accidents in the
hurts of the natural, vital, animal parts infinite of which they continually
complain.

But the cause and original of this melancholy blood collected in the
mesaraick veins proceeds from an ill course of Diet long continued, begetting
the melancholy juice, or thick choleric, whence by degrees a great filth of
it is heaped up at length: as in intermitting Fevers for the like reason we
said that choleric blood was produced; which may come to pass from all meats
of evil juice, hard concoction, being corrupted, and from those that are hot,
rather than from the cold and dry (unless in as much as these being hardly
disgested do corrupt also) in which we offend chiefly for gluttony and
pleasures sake, whenas they are sweet, salt Fat, Acrid: although most men
believe the flesh which is taken from wild Beasts and from solitary or
melancholy creatures, as that of Hares, Venison, to be more apt to produce a
melancholy juice, as amongst Plants, Colewares, and Lentils; and it gives a
great and principal occasion of this evil, if the excretions went to be made at
some certaintimes, by which nature was wont to evacuate these things at first
collected in the stomach or guts, as loosnesses of the belly or Vomiting be no
more; or if this filth being collected in the mesaraick Veins, the Hemorrhoids
be suppressed, especially if they did once flow, which sometimes is the chief
original of this evil.

The humor producing true melancholy and oftentimes madness is called a
melanchollick blood such as they think to be either black choler it self, A
melancholy humor is the cause of the perturbation of the spirits in melancholy
and Madness.
or that which is faeculent, but we have already said formerly that this matter
does no ways want some malignity and we may by right also call it poisonous
seeing it cannot otherwise be rightly explained, as Galen shows l. 6. de loc.
affect. that a poisonous matter is generated from seed and blood corrupted; the
which its enormous accidents do sufficiently declare, which show themselves in
them as if they were struck with poison especially madness; when
notwithstanding there is no other hurt, no manifest disease nor danger of
death, and seeing they suffer these things for many years, oftentimes without
any other damage; which certainly can no ways be caused from a cold humor,
such as they think the dregs of blood to be, nor from black choler which if it
be confounded with the blood is wont to bring the black jaundies and other
grievous diseases of the Skin; therefore we should rather recur to a malignant
poisonous and occult quality such as we shall often declare is found in many the
like pertinacious and horrid diseases, which they thought did spring from black
Choler, as has been said, and in which by reason of their malignity Mathiolus
asserted the Cacodaemons had their residence; then teach and allow of those
things for true, which are thus believed out of a certain custom and thought it
to be seen in that blood let which is black, when notwithstanding congealed
blood of its own nature even in the sound is wont to look blackish, and bein
kept long, to appear black like pitch and we will embrace truth rather than
Opinions, or we will openly confess that we are not able rightly to explain the
true cause.

But the blood now mentioned is contained in the branches of the Vena Cava as
that which caused a hypochondriacal melancholy is in the branches of the Vena
porta and therefore it raises a melancholy or madness persevering not
invading by courses as the hypochondriacal does, unless as it has its
exacerbations and remissions, as we said also it came to pass in continual
Fevers for the same cause; as has been explained that by reason of the
difference of these Veins, in which the matter of Fevers is contained, for the
same reason they become continual or intermitting.

But it is certain that the matter is contained sometimes in the veins of the
head only, and other times in the veins of the whole body, especially in the
greater, and upon that account does cause more grievoius or more mild
accidents; for as it was declared in continual Fevers if the matter putrify
about the heart there is caused a most burning Fever called a Causus, so it
falls out here, to wit, that if such matter be contained in the ventricles of
the brain, where otherwise the blood of the Veins and Arteries confounded
together is very hot, a madness or grievous melancholy is raised or if about a
more noble part as the Womb the Blood which is wont to abound there and the
seed also being retained be corrupted and changed into that poisonous matter as
was alleged formerly by the testimony of Galen; it causes that madness of
the Womb in which they so much desire enormous and brutish copulation, as has
been demonstrated by the example of a Woman who by reason of a long continued
sickness of her Husband, by reteining her seed fell into this disease, and
coveted copulation with dogs: and by how much the further situation it has
from a principal part in the lower parts, by so much the more mild melancholy
arises.

All which things must be judged how they are, by the nature of the accidents,
and from this that no other external causes went before, as was said of a
fright from which a grievous melancholy is commonly caused; rather then by the
constitution, which they set forth to be melancholy from the hairs of the
body, the color of the Skin, and the habit also from the excrements, seeing
these diseases may happen not only to people swarthy, lean, and sad by nature,
but to all Na^^tres, all Ages, as I have often observed.

But that the cause of it may depend upon a melancholy constitution, which
they have contracted to themselves by nature or by an ill course of living, as
was showed in the hypochondriacal, we do no ways deny, seeing melancholy
blood being turbid and impure does the easier acquire malignity; as also we
have sometimes found that hypochondriacal melancholy has passed into the true
one, the blood in the Veins being at last infected by the long continued
evaporation of heat: and also that melancholy which proceeds from the
affection of the mind if it fall upon a fit constitution, called the
melanchollick it will have a double cause concurring to excite a true
melancholy; lastly from the suppression of such excrements which easily pass
into this poisonous matter, as from the retention especially of the menstruous
bleod or seed, as sometimes a Suffocation of the Womb does proceed, so at other
times a madness of the Womb as has been explained.

A hot distemper affecting the brain and its membranes, A hot distemper the
cause of dotage, a hot vapor the cause a hot distemper and dotage in a bastard
frenzy.
for the most part cause that first a pain of the Head and if it be more
intense, a dotage, by too much exagitating the functions of the mind; but it
grows hot sometimes from a hot vapor which is raised up either from hot meat and
drink but unless then there be joined a Narcotick or madding faculty as was
said of Wine, heat alone will scarce bring a deliration but only a pain of the
head: but this is sooner done from hot humors, blood too much evaporating,
especially if it contract some malignity also which is wont presently to make
the brain mad, as has been showed in the causes of melancholy, which easily
happens in blood altered or putrified whether in the Veins or out of them that
by corruption it acquires some malignity, from that therefore the like vapor
being carried up to the brain it breeds a bastard frenzy so called, in many
diseases generated from such like humors, whose symptom it is.

So sometimes a dotage is wont to follow, a hot expiration raised foom blood in
diseases generated from inflamed blood, as in diary Fevers, a sinochis and
internal inflammations, which is known to proced from thence by the disease
accompanying it: also from humors putrefying and so getting a preternatural
heat a dotage does sometimes invade all putrid Fevers at what time chiefly the
hot expiration does very much assail the head, as in intermitting Fevers
oftentimes at the beginning, otherwise about the State, and then also chiefly
in continual Fevers; the heat of the brain helping, which by reason of the
Fever together with all the parts of the body is heated also; for the same
reason also Children do oftentimes Rave, by reason of Worms when they putrify
a Fever for the most part coming upon it. Choler poured forth into the Stomach
sending also a hot evaporation to the brain, because it is acrid and subtle,
does rather cause a pain and a Vertigo than a dotage as shall be said in its
place.

Also Blood made too hot and especially too thin contained in the ventricles
and Vessels of the Brain, An hot Humor it the Cause of a hot Distemper and
D^tage in a bastard Phrensit.
inflaming the brain not only by a vapor but also by its proper substance
induces a bastard Frenzy; as it sometimes comes to pass, when by a blow, or
Fall, or in Fevers it flows thither.

But if that it be carried out of the Vessels and poured upon the brain and its
membranes, An Inflammation is the cause of a hot distemper or Dotage in a
Frenzy,
it breeds an Inflammation or Erysipelas according as the Blood is, then it
causes a true Frenzy which also is called a Syriasis especially if it befall
Children whose external and violent Cause may be that which shatters or hurts
the Head, or the internal, a Fullness of Blood and inflammation of it whence a
synochus Fever arising, pouring forth a portion of its hotter blood into this
principal patr, which before did very much abound with blood it makes this
grievous Disease, whose Companion is a continual Fever as has been declared
in Fevers: differing therefore from a bastard Frenzy, because the fever in
that goes before the Dotage but in a Frenzy they both invade together; by
which sign also it is chiefly known.

An evil Conformation of the Brain, as if it be too big, or little, or
otherwise be not rightly formed for the most part creates the said Foolishness
bred in some from their Birth, whenas this proceeds from implanted Causes, as
from the seed of the Parents, who either were Fools themselves, or their seed
had contracted some fault; and it is easily known by this that they were Fools
from their Birth, because the Head answers the unshapen Brain in Greatness or
Smaleness or Deformity; An evil Conformation, the Cause of Folly.
which fault if it reach to the Nerves also and other parts it is no wonder that
these are sometimes born as we have described, either deaf or dum or crooked, or
or otherwise faulty; the which certainly is the chief Cause of Original Folly,
as sometimes this apparent Deformity of theirs does show, sometimes it is not
discovered but by opening after Death.

So also we do not deny that this may happen from an evil Distemper of the
Brain, Distemper the cause of Foolishness.
the which notwithstanding seeing it cannot be rightly explained, nor
corrected, is no further to be enquired into.

It has been sometimes found out, that a certain black speck in the brain or
membranes discovered by Dissection, A speck in the brain the cause of Madness.
has been the Cause of Madness, as sometimes also Putrefaction bred in some
part of the Membranes of the brain, Putrefaction in the Brain the Cause of
Madness.
from which it is likely that filthy Vapors being continually raised did trouble
the Spirits, which some also have delivered may happen from Worms generated in
the Brain; Worms in the Brain the Cause of Madness.
which hidden faults seeing they are first manifested after Death by opening
the Skull, we can hardly conjecture what they are while the Man lives, unless
in General, from this, because other signs are wanting here which should
demonstrate other Causes.

The Cure.
In the Cure the Causes must be distinguished, and the Remedies fitted to them;
which we said were either a malignant Spirit, or a drunken or poisonous
Quality; an agitation or perturbation of the Spirits, a bot Distemper and some
faults of the Brain.

The preternatural Cause proceeding from the Devil as it does no ways belong
to the Physician, The Cure of those possessed with the Devil.
so neither the Cure; for the Devil is forcibly expelled by the Prayers of
Divines and godly people in the Name of Jesus; as Christ cast forth Devils and
gave his Disciples that Power; but also the Devil sometimes feining himself of
his own accord to be put to flight by certain Words and Ceremonies of men, does
delude Mortals.

If Drunkenness arise from Wine and other inebriating things as has been said,
The Cure of Drunkenness from a temulent quality.
after some hours the Vapors being discust, especially by the intervention of
sleep, they come to themselves of their own accord; and if Vomiting follow it,
it is good, upon which account Avicen thought it good to be drunk once a month.

But if they continue this Course of life, the Nerves being weakened by reason
of their frequent stupidity, which is discovered by this even then to come to
pass, if presently after that they have not yet drank immoderately, they begin
to stutter and stumble; they become Tremulous, Paralytical, Gouty, Hydropical,
as shall be said in those places.

Therefore that they may have a Care of themselves they are to be admonisht
from Drunkenuess and to be frighted by declaring the Danger of it; and if they
cannot refrain some have delivered that this may be effected, that they shall
wholly loath Wine, by strangling an Eele in Wine, or a Frog or the barbel Fish,
or the Rotchet Fish being putrefied in it, or the Sea Grape, and that Wine
afterward being drunk off.

But if sometimes a Necessity of drinking and contending in Cups do urge, as
this is brought into use as a Civil thing at Banquets to the great hurt of
mankind, for prevention it has been observed that these things following being
taken before do prevent Drunkenness or at least wise make it more gentle.

Five or fix bitter Almonds eaten before meat.

Wormwood also, whose Wine notwithstanding the Swillers do use rather the day
after a Fox, that they may correct their Stomach offended with Choler, (whenas
to contemperate that they fill themselves with drink again) from whence these
Verses.

If thou be hurt by drinking over night
Rise early to it this Medicine is full right.
Rue because it makes the Cup safe, as the Verse sounds, is commended for this
use, which I think is rather said so, because it preserves from Poison.

Coleworts taken at meat hinder Drunkenness, and so does its Seed.

If one drink Milk fasting, he shall be safe that day.

Pliny teaches that the Lungs of Creatures roasted eaten and do keep of
Drunkenness other express by Name the Lungs of Sheep.

One writes that the powder of Swallows burnt being taken, will not suffer one
to be drunk to Aeternity.

A powder hindering Drunkenness may be made thus, of which give one spoonful
with Austere Wine. Take of the seeds of Coleworts one dram, Coriander half a
dram, Camphire two grains: make a powder.

A more Compounded one may be made thus, of which give one spoonful or two
drams with Wine of Pomegranates, or with some other acid, stiptick, or with
cold Water, or with Sugar let it be reduced into the form of Lozenges, Take of
the seeds of coleworts one dram, of Plantane, Purslane, Bar-berries each half a
dram, Coriander prepared two drams, flowers of red roses, water lillies, red
Sanders each half a dram, Mastich, Amber each one scruple, burnt Ivory one
scruple, salt half a scruple, Camphire six grains: make a powder.

This may be used in the form of an Electuary, and given before drinking, Take
of conserve of Roses, the Rob, of Currance and Barberries each half an ounce,
bitter Almonds branched and bruised twelve seeds, of Coleworts one dram, red
Roses one dram, Syrup of Slots as much as is sufficient make an Electuary.

An elegant Syrup of which one ounce ought to be taken before they drink Wine,
Take of the juice of white Coleworts, sour Pomegranates, Currance each two
ounces, Vinegar one ounce; boilthem together for your use.

They are less foxed who drink larest not till their stomach is well filled
with Victuals; but they quickly who hasten to drink Wine fasting, or presently
at the beginning of a Meal.

Outwardly Ivy applied to the Head like a Garland or the Juice of it moved to
the Head keeps off Drunkenness.

Also the wearing of an Amethyst ston^ is believed can do the like.

But to cure those that are already drunk, that the wine may do them the less
hurt, Vomiting does very much help; or if you give them acid things presently
at the end of the Meal, or the sooner the better, and let them be taken
plentifully, because as it was said in Narcoticks they weaken the efficacy of
the Wine, of which sort are these following.

Frumenty of Milk and Barley flower with Vinegar also sour Milk as it is wont
to concrete. Sour Apples eaten, also acid Peaches and their juice as also
Quinces.

The Heads of Coleworts condite, and Rapes till they grow acid, as our Country
men are wont to prepare them, do very much help.

Vinegar drank diluted with water, or taken by it self in a good quantity, is
an Antidote against Drunkenness, with which a certain eminent Foxer, for a long
time being daily drunk, was wont to guard himself, that he might take no hurt
by it.

Besides these, Lettice, Mint, Wormwood, Myrtle-berries being eaten, or the
Juyce^ of them taken do keep off Drunkenness.

The distilled water of Saffron flowers being drunk does the same.

The smell of Camphyre and Saunders likewise do good,

Also Oxyrrhodines applied to the Head.

And if the Cods be moistened with Vinegar or cold water.

All which doubtless will do good not only in that temulency which is
contracted by Wine, but also in that which proceeds from the like inebriating
things, as has been said, as also we have said that Narcoticks for the same
reason are corrected by acid things; and for the taking of mad Nightshade we
have showed that Vinegar is a Remedy,

But what things besides these mentioned, do by a certain propriety resist some
as well Narcoticks as others, shall be explained in their place.

Melancholy or Madness arising from Poison either taken in, The Cure of
Hydrophoby from the biting of a mad dog.
or by a bite or blow entering the Body, that Madness only which is caused by
the biting of a mad Dog is here propounded, whenas the other species are rarely
existent because the Cause is rare, neither is there any other cure applied to
them, then what is due also to other Poison.

In the biting therefore of a mad Dog or Wolf (for they differ not in the Cure)
although it be a very dangerous affect, yet Remedies being suddenly applied
very many are healed; but after the evil has so far gathered strength, that
they now are afraid of the Water, they are very hardly restored, as Dioscorides
mentions and most of them die; in which notwithstanding some hopes of recovery
is conceived by this sign, if looking upon a looking Glass or the Water, in
which the image of a Dog is represented to them, as has been said, they take
notice that it is an error, and that they are deceived, or that not appearing
they acknowledge their own figure offering it self.

Presently therefore the wound made by a bite must be dilated and the Lips of
the wound must be scarified that the Blood may flow very well, and with Cupping
glasses applied with much fire or with Leeches if they be at hand, the strength
of the Poison must be drawn forth, because though the wound be great and large,
which by reason of the plenty of blood flowing forth, with which part of the
virulent spittle is exhausted, is better then if it were small and narrow,
nevertheless it must be done, and the flesh torn and cut round about with a
Penknife must be cut off.

Burning also made with an actual Cautery seeing the fire does tame Poison and
suffer it not to go further, is a most ready Remedy: and we must have a Care
that the escar falling off, the wound be not cicatrized, before the fortieth
day or till after that time, and that either by a septick or corroding Medicine
such as is precipitate the which also we may use at first if he will not endure
burning instead of that, or else burning must be repeated; and we must take
Care that the wound be rather sordid and ill disposed, then clean, and that it
be not closed up, by applying those things, which besides that they do attract
Poison, may also suppurate the flesh.

Which may be done, if grains of Whea^ chewed or baked be applied to the wound,
because they suppurate and dilate the wound, and when they are chewed by reason
of the spittle they help also by a propriety.

An Onion, wild Garlic and Rue bruised together, and made up with Honey and
Salt do egregiously attract Poison, and the more if Treacle also be mixed with
them to which Dioscorides adds the Cyrenaick juice.

If a fourth part of Opoponax and a sixth of Vinegar be added to Brutian pitch,
or instead of it you may take the common, it will make an attractive Plaster
most effectual for these things as Galen teaches.

The salted flesh of the Fish Smaris and Omotaricbus applied and other salt
things do good; also the sauce of all salt Fish applied for Fomentation.

Sour Docks, pounded, stinking Horehound, Fennel Roots, Rue, Angelica Roots,
Laser, Herculean Panax, bruised with Honey and Salt do the same.

Such Remedies also must be given presently to drink as may by a propriety
overcome the force of this poison, such as are made of the true River Crab
called Carcinus, which Diascorides and Galen have much approved; instead of
which Rondeletius takes the sea Crab, and that found in the standing Pool by
the Sea of Monspessulus; and we perhaps may take with equal success our River
Crab since that also resists poisons.

But these Antidotes must be prepared after this manner, Take of the ashes of
the true River Crab burnt in the prunings of the white Vine and poudered two
parts, the roots of Gentian most finely poudered, one part, mix them, give two
spoonefuls with clear wine for four days after which give the trebble weight,
Diosco^ide^ does witness that this one thing has benefited many, and
Damocrates before Dioscorides described this Antidote in Verse, and Galen so
commends it, that he testifies no man died that used it.

Galen also prepares and gives the powder of the simple ashes the Crabs being
burnt alive in a copper Dish.

Or he gives it Compounded thus, which he relates he had from his Master
Aeschion the Emp^rick, and he highly commends it, Take of the ashes of tiver
Crabs burnt ten parts, the Roots of Gentian five parts, Frankincense one part,
instead of which the Ancients added Rosin of the Turpentine tree, make a
powder, give every day the measure of a great spoonful sprinkled in water for
forty days, or if the Physician come late let him give two spoonfuls at a time.

There are who prepare this Medicine thus. Take of the ashes of Crabs parts
two, Gentian roots part one and an half, Myrrh part one, make a powder.

Besides these Antidotes Dioscorides and Galen do magnify the Liver of a mad
Dog roasted and given.

Also the blood and urine of a Dog, as also the Runnet of a Hare, Fox, or Goat.

Galen's Dry Alysson given forty days together in Hydromel, he testifies is
Archigenes Effectual Remedy.

Aetius teaches that Iudiack Bitumen one dram, drank with Water does cure this
affect.

The roots of Swallow-wort drank one dram and an half weight, with the Water of
Blessed Thistle for forty days, is Mathiolus Remedy. Star-vervain also is
good, and the bark of Wild fig tree, drank with water, also the root of Vipers
grass or the juice of it, as also the root of Angelico with Niter.

Also Honey of Roses drank says Dioscorides,

Mithridate and Treacle, as they are adverse to all poisons, so to this also.

But those things which profit both taken and applied, are as follow.

The Seahorse wrought with Honey and Vinegar.

Balm, Mugwort, Wormwood, Centory, round Birthwort, Germander, Pennyroyal, the
root of roundish leaved Dock, shard Dock and Bryony.

For matter of Diet, it is good if they eat Garlic, Leeks Onions, also the true
River Crabs, season their meat with Spices, drink pure and sweet Wine. Avicen
commands to drink Irond, or steeled water, also Milk Curds which moves to
stool, and tames poison,

In the first place drinking of water which they so much fear, does cure the
Hydrcphobous, wherefore they must be deceived by all means that they may drink
it through a long pipe, or by some other slight and not behold it, for which
cause they advised to boil back Vetches in it which also resist poison, that so
the water being made more darkish to him to behold it, it may represent no
Image which may strike fear into them, and also that they may be made very
thirsty a young Dogs runnet is given to drink with Vinegar for then Aetius
writes that they are taken with a desire of water, and he highly commends it.

Avicen teaches that the provocation of urin, so far and with such strong
medicines that they piss blood too, does very much help, who as it has been
said, thought that puppy Dogs or somewhat like them has been voided by urine.

And for this cause commends the use of Cantharides, which may more rightly be
given thus, Take of Cantharides breaking off their tender wings one dram,
Lentiles cleansed half a dram, Spike, Cloves, Saffron, of each half a dram; give
halfia scruple with Wine to them fasting for three or fou^daies til they void
blood.

Sharp Dock if it be given to drink causes a plentiful and turbulent pissing
with which plant alone given, if also the wound be fomented with the Decoction
of it and be anointed with the juice of it, a certain man did perfectly cure
those bitten with a mad Dog, as Avicen teaches.

Dioscorides teaches that the provoking of sweat before and after meat does
good.

The same writes that Evacuations by the Belly do also bring great help, if it
be caused by Hiera of Coloquintida or by Hellebore whose quality he thinks is
so great that it will cure almost the desperate, the which also may be done by
other purgers chiefly destined to melancholic Humors.

Dioscorides also uses Dropacismes, Sinapismes over the whole Body as some
also do allow of Cauteries applied to the hinder part of the Head and behind
the Ears.

Amongst Amulets a Tooth drawn from the Dog that bit and tied to the Arm also
Hares pulled from the same Dog and laid on the wound are thought to do much.

They write that in some places the Priests do cure this evil with exorcismes
which seeing they are things preternatural, we leave them.

A perturbation or commotion of the Mind conceived from a vehement or long
continued affect of the Mind sometimes ceason of its own accord, sometimes hardly
gives way, oftentimes can never be corrected: for profuse joy easily vanishes,
The Cure of commotion of Mind from agitation of the Spirits.
anger also is a short Madness especially in those, who presently grow hot and
look red but suddenly again abate, who then are wont almost to be sorry that
they were angry; Sadness from grief of Mind cease with time, seeing there is
no grief as Cicero says, which the length of time does not either change or
diminish, envy conceived is hardly blotted out; ambition in some, and
coveteousness especially in the aged once imprinted in their Minds, can scarce
be rooted out; all which notwithstanding do not so much make men mad as Love
does in which although there seem to be only a light Alienation of the mind at
first, yet if it take deeper Root, it does so disturb it that sometimes it
drives men to true madness and despair: a true and persevering melancholy
arising from fright is more pertinacious then all the rest, and hard to be
cured, oftimes tormenting and consuming a man for many years and at length
making them desperate; and also we cannot correct that Folly contracted by
custom,

Yet the Cure must not be neglected, if the evil persevere, and there be hurt
or Danger, which may be done,

First of all by taking away the Cause and the occasions from which these
proceed, if they being still present do foment or increase the affect; as in
anger by turning away that which offends, in sadness that which troubles, and
so of the rest; but chiefly the principal Remedy of Love is to remove the
object and sting of it, speedily a far off and a long time which the vulgar
intimate by this Proverb, out of sight, out of mind; and what is wont to be
said is good in the Plague quickly, a far off, slowly, here also is the
principal Rule of Cure.

Oftentimes the affections of the mind are mitigated or driven away by Counsel,
Admonition, Persuasion, by propounding according as the mind is affected that
it is nothing or of no moment, then by explaining the Discomodities that follow
from thence, sometimes the offense to God, and comforting them with the hopes of
changing the present life for a future that is better and not far off: the
which if they avail not, by severely threatening also Gods displeasure and the
punishment of Hell, by reproving them, and chastising them also with stripes if
they obey not, til those things which they love be loathsome to them, as
Gordonius writes.

But principally in some passions of the mind it brings a great deal of help,
to move the affections of the Mind which are contrary to this affect that
troubles, and so to bring them into a contrary passion, seeing they do bring
them to a mean, as contraries are wont to be cured by contraries, and so those
things are taken away which otherwise would not give place; thus those lifted
up with too much joy, if they hear ill News, do presently abate; and those that
are sad are refreshed with unexpected and vehement gladness; so the angry are
mitigated if they be frighted, if those frighted be stirred up to anger they
are freed; those that hate vehemently are reconciled being moved with mercy;
and those that are oppressed with grievous Love if they can be driven to hate the
person which they Love, they are most certainly freed, whether they may
sometimes be brought, if they hear dishonest and filthy things of her, which are
either invented or true, but blind Lovers see them not, but especially in
generous minds, if they think themselves despised by their Love and suffer a
repulse (for nothing fosters love equally as reciprocal love, and nothing is
more deer than to be beloved again) presently indignation follows which
persevering, unless it be extinguished by some false and extorted tear, breeds
hatred: hither also is referd the vehement intention of the mind upon some
other things which is wont to put out that conceived before, or at least ways
to diminsh it, whence the Poet says, Shun Idleness and Cupids darts are lost,
and if the apprehension be divided into two or three affects though the same,
it comes to pass that being divided or dispersed it is less strong than if it
were united; for the sense intent on many things is less able for each
particular whence Ovid reckoned it amongst the Remedies of love for one man to
have two Mistresses.

But what chiefly concerns the operation of the Physician, in sudden and
vehement passions of the mind, he must diligently observe the commotion of the
spirits and humors, which in some affects are moved from the Center to the
superficies, in others on the contrary, and must reduce them by a contrary
motion to the seat destined for them; but we call forth those which do as it
were oppress the heart in frights and sadness with frictions and pleasant
exercises and especially with those that are proper, and with a bath; and again
those which are poured forth with Anger, Joy, we repel again to the inward
parts, not only by a contrary affect of mind as has been said, but also by
sprinkling of cold water and bleeding, the which notwithstanding ought not to
be done in the very madness, but a little after.

But in persevering passions of the mind and those that already change the body
according to the constitution of the body, and redundancy of the humors viz. of
a plenitude or Cacochymie, we will order the evacuations and alterations both
for the cure and preservation if they be disposed to these or those affects;
and if a true Melancholy or maddess do follow thence, as has been said does
chiefly happen from a fright, the cure must be perfected after the same manner
as shall be explained there.

If a melanchollick, thick, burning and malignant blood contained in the
mesaraick veins as has been said, by its vapor do produce the said
hypochondriacal melancholy, although it be milder because it is sometimes
mitigated or cease, than the true one seems to be, yet it is also very
grievous, both because it does not only dlsturb the mind but also induces so
many other affects offering themselves especially about the natural parts, as
has been expounded; and because it is an evil so pertinacious and lasting, and
so hardly admitting of cure, and that therefore, because the matter of it lying
hid in the mesaraick veins and being ever and anon new, increased from the
excrements of things taken continually heaped up, and cannot be drawn forth by
drawing of blood unless this be done by the hemoroidal veins, nor does easily
give way to purgers, as also we have demonstrated in Fevers that the cause of
continuance of a quartan Ague does happen by occasion of this place, and almost
the like matter, into which also this affect is often changed, if putrefaction
invade the blood, or otherwise it breeds obstructions and tumors of the
neighboring bowels, the Spleen, Liver, and of their veins, and sometimes by its
vapor infecting the mass of blood in the rest of the body, it is converted into
the true and persevering melancholy.

The scope of curing consists in this, that that melanchollick matter contained
in the mesaraick veins, be emptied either by bleeding, or by calling it forth
to the stomach and Guts, by vomit, and stool, with those things which open
obstructions and solicit nature to excretion, than by preventing that new
matter be not generated again, by ordering a good concoction; and by diverting
the vapors that they be not carried upwards, and disturb the head especially,
and create trouble also to the heart; and by strengthening these principal
parts, and providing for the stomach, Liver, Spleen, that they be not hurt.

Taking away of blood would be very convenient, if it could be done from the
branches of the Vena porta, which seeing they can be opened no where unless
about the Arse, or the mouths belonging to the Stomach and Guts, and this
unless nature do it of her own accord, it is dangerous to attempt otherwise with
medicines which must be highly acrid, as Coloquintida (unless things vehemently
bitter could do it as Aloes which is wont to open the veins, and is convenient
here also as shall be said) nothing will be more excellent than to open the
Hemorrhoids, unless they flow of their own accord, by applying of Leeches or by
other applications, and if they swell, and appear, by Section: the which
flowing either of themselves or being opened by force this affect has been
often cured, which before could not be cured; also by the courses Women will
find very much help, seeing it is a natural evacuation, if being suppressed they
be provoked, because by these also perhaps the mesaraick veins may exonerate
themselves; but to open the other cutaneous veins which are branches of the
Vena Cava unless a plenitude persuade it, or that blood also be already
infected is, otherwise supervacaneous.

A Vomit, especially in those used to it, and the evil being now very far
protracted, is very convenient, because the excrements which in those places
are continually almost collected at the first concoction, are suddenly cast
forth, and sometimes the matter retained in the mesaraick veins also, by this
passage, as was said in intermitting Fevers, or some part of it, especially
the chollerick, the which notwithstanding may be ordered with gentler things at
first, afterward if they help not, with stronger in strong bodies.

An irritation and laxation of the belly do revell the vapors flying upwards,
and makes a way for the wind generated of them, as also from crudities to break
forth and it will do so much the more good, if the belly be bound. This is done
by Supositories, and to more benefit with Clysters, which seeing they do wholly
enter the Guts, they do empty part of the filth from the mesaraick veins also;
which if they be cast in every other day or daily, it will be far safer than to
give things too much purging, which they loath at last, and by reason of the
long continuance of the disease do scarce endure, and so to draw down the
mat^er successively from the neighboring parts to the Guts, wherefore they must
be often repeated, which are prepared after this manner, of things moist,
lenitive, discussing, wind-stimulating, and purging. Take of the leaves of
Mallows, Coleworts, Mercury or Beets, of each one handful; roots of Oak fern
one ounce, Dodder of Time or Vetches, Time, of each two drams; Flowers of
Chamomel, Feverfew, Dill, Violets (by reason of the heat) of each one pugil; of
Bran one pugil, make a Decoction, and in a decent quantity of that strained,
dissolve Honey of Roses one ounce, red Sugar half an ounce, Hiera Picra, two
drams, Oil of Lillies, Chamomel one ounce and an half; a little Salt, make a
Clyster; if you would evacuate stronger, in the Decoction add Fumitory and
Senna (we omit Hops because they assail the Head) and dissolve Confection of
Hamech, or the juice of Mercury, etc. as shall be explained in the Clysters in
Melancholy.

Purging must be used which may drive forth the matter from the Mesaraick Veins
and often reiterated by course, the passages being first opened which are wont
to be obstructed, and the humor prepared for Evacuation, yet we must have a
care of things strongly Heating, Drying, because they increase the Disease,
administering them almost after the same manner, as they ought to be used in
Quartane Fevers.

It shall be prepared therefore with this Julep taking it for some days before
Purging: Take of Syrup Bizantine simple, Endive, of each two ounces; sweet
smelling Apples, Dodder of Time, of each half an ounce; the waters of Bugloss,
Succory, Fumitory, of each three ounces: Make a Julep, Aromatise it with Powder
of Diarrhodon, or let him take a Lozenge of it afterward.

Such a Decoction may be given instead of that after the same manner. Take of
the Roots of Grass, Asparagus, Borrage, of each one ounce; Liquorish half an
ounce; Endive, Succory, Maiden-hare, Ceterach, Betony, of each one handful;
Flowers of Borrage, Bugloss, Scabious, Tamarisk, of each one pugil: Rosemary
flowers, half a pugil; the four greater cold Seeds, Annis seed of each two
drams; Fennel seed one dram: Make a Decoction, and in one pound of it add, of
the juice of Apples boiled away to a third, three ounces: Aromatise it with a
little Cinnamon.

Or, Let them use it with Wine if they would open more vehemently, after this
manner, with better success for the most part, because our Wine does not heat
so much, as has been said elsewhere: Take of the roots of Succory, Grass, of
each one ounce; Elecampane (because it makes merry) two drams; Miltwaste,
Asparagus, Germander, Fumatory, of each two drams; of the Cordial flowers, of
each one dram and an half; Fennel seed one dram: Being bruised, infuse them in
common white Wine, or if it be strong dilute it, let him use it four or five
days in the morn.

Let him be Purged then with a gentle Decoction, for the evil is exasperated by
strong Medicines, of which sort this of many is convenient. Take of Senna
cleansed, Oak fern, wild Saffron, of each half an ounce; Dodder of Time two
drams, Raisons twenty, Prunes ten, fresh Borrage Roots one ounce, Liquorish one
ounce, of the Cordial flowers, of each one pugil; Ann is seed half an ounce.
Make a Decoction in Water and white Wine; in four ounces of that strained,
Dissolve of Catholicon half an ounce, or syrup of Roses solutive one ounce.

Or let him use this following: Take of Catholicon one ounce, Confection Hamech
one dram and an half, Syrup of Roses solutive with Rhubarb, infused one ounce
with the waters of Bugloss, Fumitory as much as is sufficient, and a little
Cinnamon, to Aromatise it.

Purgers must be repeated by course in a long continued Disease, especially if
he will not use Clysters, or they must be used successively, that the
obstructions being taken away, and Nature constantly solicited may the rather
cast off the Excrements to the Guts from the Mesaraick Veins; and that in
diverse forms of Syrups, Wine, Pills so prepared that they may be kept long for
use: before which preparatives ought always to be premised for some days, or
must be mixed together with them in the Compositions of which we will bring
these few examples.

A thickened Syrup therefore may be made thus, which he may use every other day
or three days together; and after some few days repeat it: Take of the Roots
of Grass, Succory, of each one ounce; Fennel, Parsley, of each half an ounce;
Orrice two drams, fresh Borrage one ounce and an half, Asarabacca two drams,
the bark of Capers, Tamarisk, of each half an ounce: the berbs of Fumitory,
Hops, Germander, Ground Pine, Milt-wast, Betony, of each one handful; the four
Cordial flowers, and of Tamarisk, of each one pugil; Annis seed half an ounce,
Fennel seed two drams, Raisons one ounce, Senna two ounces and an half, Oak
Fern, wild Saffron, of each one ounce and an half; Dodder of Time half an
ounce: Make a Decoction, and in that Strained, infuse Rhubarb two drams,
Agarick three drams, Cinnamon one dram, Ginger half a dram; the juice of Appels
thickened three ounces, of Borrage one ounce, Sugar three ounces: Make a
Decoction to the thickness of a Syrup: give two ounces, more or less as it
shall work, dissolve it in Water, Broth, or Wine.

Matthiolus does very much commend Syrup of Oak Fern against this affect.

A Wine may be prepared of the same thing dried and infused, adding Wormwood
three drams, Marjoram one dram: But because it corrupts being long kept, let
only one half of it be infused, and let him take it for two days, afterward
when there shall be need again, make a new infusion of the other part.

Pills in this case as in all the like obstructions are most profitable, the
which provoke both the Hemrods and Courses: Take of Aloes two drams, Myrrh half
a dram (against putrid Humors) Dodder of Time one dram, Roots of Gentian,
Asarabacca, of each half a dram; Gum Amoniack dissolved in Vinegar one scruple
(if there be a hardness about the Glandules of the caul and Mesentery, as
oftentimes there is) Parsley seed half a dram, Choice Rhubarb one dram and an
half, Spike one scruple. With joyce of Wormwood, Make a Mass, let him take two
scruples every other or third day, Mesues Tryphera of Dodder of Time if it be
given every other day is a singular remedy in Hypochondriacal Melancholy.

After the use of Purgers let the Patient be strengthened the next day, by
using Conserves of the roots of Bugloss, or some such like.

In the interim that the obstructions may be dissolved, and the matter be
called forth from the Mesaraick Veins to the Guts, remedies must be applied to
the whole Belly, because through that, the Mesaraick Veins do enter into the
caul and Mesentery

And first make a Fomentation after this manner, with which the Belly may be
fomented warm with a Sponge, once a day before taking of meat, or twice in the
morning and evening at the first: Take of the Herbs Wormwood, Southernwood,
Feverfew, Time, of each one handful; Flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, Elder,
Broom, of each one pugil; Bay berries one ounce and an half, Annis seed two
drams, the Bark of Danewort, Roots of Oak fern, Senna, Dodder of Time, of each
three drams; Make a Decoction in equal parts of Water and Wine, adding a little
white Wine Vinegar or of Squils, for a Fomeutation.

Instead of a Fomentation, a Bath of sweet water, and other temperate and
moisting things is convenient.

After the Fomentation or Bath let the Region of the Stomach, Hypochondries and
Belly be anointed with such an Ointment: Take of Oil of sweet Almonds,
Chamomel, Dill, of each one ounce; of bitter Almonds, Elder, Capers, of each
six drams; of Orrice, Spik, of each half an ounce; juice of wormwood one ounce,
white Wine Vinegar of Squils one ounce; Boil them to a Consumption of the
juyces, add Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar one ounce, Asarabacca root one
dram, seeds of Gith, Coleworts of each half a dram, Saffron one scruple, Wax as
much as is sufficient: Make a Liniment.

Cupping Glasses sometimes applied on the Belly without Scarification, with much
flame, do egregiously discuss wind, and call forth the matter.

Rnbefiers also upon that account are sometimes applied, amongst which the
Plaster of Mustard seed is very much commended, there are also who do apply
Vesicatories. Pication made on the Belly being first anointed with Oil, is very
much approved off in some.

But that matter may not be continually heaped up a new, we must take care by a
good Course of Diet of good juice, temperate, and no ways windy. Upon which
account those things which discuss wind, as Annis seed, Fennel seed, Carawaies,
Pepper, Ginger are added to the Meats, yet in that quantity that they do not to
much inflame which we must chiefly have a care on for which cause also if they
can intermit the use of Wine, Rhazis says they need no other Medicine, he
understanding strong wine, because that which is thin and gentle can no ways
hurt especially those that are accustomed to it.

Last of all the Vapors and Wine may be discust by giving a Powder every other
day after Meat or before, the weight of one spoonful, which may be prepared
thus, Take of the seeds of Annis half an ounce, Fennel two drams, Carawaies one
dram, the Cordial flowers, of each half a dram: Make a Powder, add of the
Tables of Sugar Rosate two ounces.

We must divert the ascent of Vapors with Frictions, Ligatures, and Lotions of
the extreme Parts rightly applied to their due time.

We must also have a care of the principal parts; the Head, Heart, Stomach,
Spleen, Liver, which are at last hurt by the long continuance and Malice of the
Disease; by watring, Anointing the Head which is chiefly affected, as shall be
said in the true Melancholy; by strengthing also the Heart with Epithems,
Bags, which is hurt and palpitates by reason of these Vapors: by comforting the
Stomach which belches being troubled with wind, with external and internal
Confections that further Concoction, yet not too hot: and by taking care that
the Liver and Spleen be not hardend, by external and internal means, as shall
be propounded in their faults of this Nature.

A Melancholy blood in the Vena Cava, The Cure of Melancholy and Madness,
from a Melancholy a Humor troubling the Spirits.
such as we have described to be Malignant, abounding either in the Head or
about the greater Veins of the trunk of the Body, or about the Womb in the
Blood there, which is the matter of the menstruous Blood and Seed, producing a
Melancholy or Madness, if it be worse, because it can hardly all be drawn forth
as long as there yet remains some portion of that blood, so long that
pertinatious and long continued evil lasts; with which oftentimes they are
miserably afflicted, not only for some months but years also sometimes to the
end of their life; and if they be Mad, they are kept enclosed in Prisons,
nevertheless performing the other Vital and Natural actions; unless these be
weakend, because when they are troubled in Mind they offend in many things,
and because they waist themselves with grief if they have yet any Reason left:
therefore we ought not rashly to promise any hopes of recovery, although we
have known many Cured as shall be said especially by large Bleeding, and some
Mad and Raging from their youth until extreme old age, in which they have so
come to themselves, that afterward going about free from their Prison and
Bands, they would no more hurt any Body, or provoke them with words; and then
also there is better hopes, if they yet act all things moderately, and do
things rather laughing then with a stern look, and are sometimes obedient to
those that admonish them, and do admit of Medicines.

The Method and Indication for Cure will be such; that we Evacuate that matter
out of the Veins and divert it from the more Noble Parts that are hurt by it,
from the Brain chiefly and the Heart; for as experience has taught that other
Diseases also generated from a certain Malignant matter are sometimes cured by
many Evacuations (as is apparent in the French Pox) so we have seen oftentimes
both in Melancholy and Madness proceeding from this Malignant matter that
Empericks by many and frequent Evacuations have cured many left off by other
Physicians, who were afraid to use them, and we our selves have often tried it
with happy success, which may be done by diverse forms and manners as by drawing
blood from the body, or deriving it to other places by Purgations made by stool
and by vomiting; then we will correct with things altering or changing that
distemper or Melancholic constitution in the Blood almost of the whole Body,
and in the ptincipal body, and in the principal bowls especially the Brain and
Heart, by giving of Medicines and applying outward helps to the Head, Heart,
Liver, Spleen, and certain other parts of the Body; also with actual operation
by gelding, and hanging on Amulets, in the interim providing for the strength
also by a fit course of living which also may correct these faults. Last of all
we must have respect unto some other Symptoms which sometimes are supervenient
to them, all which how they must be prepared and administered we shall explain
in order.

Letting of blood therefore in some great and apparent Cutaneous Vein when as
it may not only Evacuate the Blood but together with that the matter of this
Disease lurking in the Veins, it will be the prime and principal remedy for the
Cure of these affects, if they proceed from this cause; which though very many
I know have not taught it, and some also have disallowed it, yet I have known
by long observation that innumerable have been cured by this means, by certain
Chyrurgeons or others who did professedly labor in curing these Diseases, who
by opening of a Vein twenty nay fixty times have so restored the perfectly Mad
or Melancholic, that afterward they have yet lived in health a long life; who
were not Scrupulous in choosing some certain Vein but sometimes opend a Vein of
the Arm, by and by this or that in the Foot, anon in another place without any
difference, which kind of remedy therefore we also ought to use and no ways
neglect, but with greater care and providence then they who undertake to cure
only those who are as it were given over, Methodically premising always
washings of the Belly, and Purgations intermixed, as shall be said.

Therefore some Vein of the Arm which is most apparent must be first opened and
reiterated; next must be opened a Vein in the Hand especially the Salvatella of
the left Hand, privately for the Spleens sake, with which it is thought to have
consent; and also in the Feet the Vein of the Ankle called the Saphaena and the
sooner if the Courses flow not right; or that which runs to the great Toe which
Empericks do open chiefly in this case, because it is thought to communicate
with the Head. Also the Vein of the Forehead, if the Evil do continue, and the
Cause be discovered to lie chiefly about the Head, must be opened, and Blood
must be provoked from the Nostrils, by thrusting of Bristles, applying of
Leeches, and putting up other rough things, also knotted Veins appear in the
Thighs or else where seeing they contain a great quantity of this like
Melancholic matter thrust thither by nature and there heaped up, they must be
opened and the filth must be let out this way, which cannot but profit very
much; a Provocation of the Courses if they be not decently purged, or be stopped,
will help much, seeing they may be the cause of this evil as has been said;
also the opening of the Hemorrhoids, although they be branches of the Vena
porta in those that are accustomed to them will help very much: Hither also may
be referred Scarifications, made especially in those places where otherwise we
ought to open a Vein, as in the Arms and Feet, or sometimes where we are not
wont to open a Vein as in the Shoulders, which certainly do not only evacuate
the blood, but if Cupping-Glasses be applied, they do also egregiously revell
the matter from the Head, and as I have observed do oftentimes profit much.

Upon which account also are applied, Frictions, Dropaxes, Vesicatories,
Cauteries and Cuttings made in the Head, and Trepanning in those that are
desperate, part of the bone being taken away, and the hole left open for a
month.

It is conveninent to Cleanse the Guts often from their excrements with
Suppositories and more rightly with Clysters, which although they do not so
much empty the Melancholy matter lurking in the more distant veins, as they do
in the Hypochondriacal, in which it is near to the Guts, yet before Bleeding
and other Purgations, that they may succeed the better, it is safer first of all
to bring forth the thicker excrements by Clysters, to which sometimes we must
mix those things which are good to evacuate Melancholy, which being continued
will effect something also in a cause more difficult.

A more simple one therefore which is most excellent Egregiously stimulating
may be made thus, Take of juyces of Mercury or Beets two ounces, Mallows one
ounce, common Honey two ounces, let them be dissolved with the fat and salt
broth of flesh, and let it be given.

A more Compound one may be made thus which he may use by course, which is
Emollient purging and stimulating, Take of the herbs Mallows, Orach, Bleets,
Beets or Mercury, both Buglosses, Fumitory, of each one handful; flowers of
Chamomel, Melilot, Elder, of each one pugil; Figs twelve, Bran one pugil, Flax
seed half an ounce, Mallows, Fennel, of each two drams; make a Decoction,
dissolve Honey of Violets or Roses two ounces, juice of Mercury or Beets one
ounce, Benedicta Laxativa two drams, Oil of Chamomel, Butter, of each one ounce
and an half; a little Salt, make a Clyster.

In Mad Folks especially, it shall be prepared of stronger Purgers, thus, Take
of the roots of Marshmallows one ounce, the herbs Mallows, both Buglosses,
Mercury, Hops, Fumitory, Time, of each one handful; flowers of Chamomel, Elder,
both Bugloss, Violets, of each one pugil; Flax seed, Guords, of each half an
ounce; seeds of Mallows, Fennel, of each two drams; seeds of Rue, Chaste tree,
of each one dram; Figs twelve, Tamarinds half an ounce, Bran, Barley, of each
one pugil; Oakfern, Senna, wild Saffron, of each six drams; white Hellebore
half a dram, or black one dram, make a Decoction, dissolve Honey of Violets,
red Sugar, of each one ounce; Hiera of Coloquintida, Diasena solutive,
Confection Hamech, of each two drams; juice of Mercury one ounce and an half,
Oil of Violets, Chamomel, Lillies, of each one ounce; Salt as much as is
sufficient, make a Clyster.

It Is convenient to Purge this Matter out of the Veins beginning with the
Gentler and going to Stronger, and continuing them for a long time, for they
can endure it for the most part easily, and though they be somewhat weakened,
nevertheless it does good, seeing upon that account they become more calmed and
quiet, neither can it hurt them much, seeing they may also be continually
refreshed: therefore the humor being first prepared, Evacuation ought presently
to follow, being administered once, twice, or thrice together, and this must
weekly be repeated once or twice, intermixing letting of blood, as has been
said; and once in a month also as Avicen teaches, we must give a very strong
Purger, for the chief nature of the Cure consists in those great Evacuations of
the blood and Excrements, whence successively the matter of the disease is
taken away as has been said.

The Humor is prepared before Purging, by observing whether they be very
Choleric that are affected with this evil, for then we must use things more
Cold and Acrid, after this mauner. Take of Syrup of Violets, Borrage, of each
two ounces, of Vinegar simple one ounce, the waters of both Buglosses, Lettice,
Water Lillies, of each as much as is sufficient, make a Julep for four or five
times aromatizing it with the powder of the three Sanders, or giving a Lozenge
of it after every dose.

Or make one thus of Juyces, Take of the juyces of both Buglosses, of sweet
smelling apples of each two ounces and an half, the waters of both Bugloss,
Fumitory, of each three ounces; Sugar two ounces, boil them, and clarify them,
and aromatize it with Cinnamon, for some doses.

By a Decoction or Infusion let it be prepared thus, Take of the Roots of both
Buglosses, Liquorish of each one ounce; the bark of Tamariisk half an ounce,
Fumitory one handful, Miltwast half a handful, the Cordial flowers, of each one
pugil; Water-lilly flowers half a pugil, Time one pugil, boil them in common
water and a Cup of Wine, add of Sugar and the juice of Apples each two ounces,
aromatize it for some doses.

Or let them be infused in thin Wine adding for the scents sake a little
Wormwood, and let him drink it.

Then let the Humor be purged as has been said by giving of diverse forms
dedicated to the Melanchollick humor, which if the Patients will not obey, may
be prepared thus, that under the form of Wine or of some other Medicine that is
most familiar to them, we may be able to deceive them, many of which have been
spoken of the in Melanagoge purging Remedies, here we will propound certain
choice ones.

At the beginning therefore, the Humor being prepared let this presently be
given, Take of Catholicon one ounce, Confection Hamech two drams, Syrup of
Roses solutive one ounce, dissolve them in Whey or Bugloss water, and give it.

Or, Take of Senna Oak-fern, of each half an ounce; Dodder of Time two drams,
infuse them in Goats Whey add of fresh Mercury one ounce, Anise seed two drams,
Syrup of Fumitory compound, or of sweet smelling Apples half an ounce, make a
Potion.

Or, Take of the Pills of the five kinds of the Indian Myrobolans, of Lazulus
Stones, each one scruple; with white Wine make Pills.

That the body may be purged successively and at many times, the following
things are convenient.

First a Compound Apozem which may be made thus, Take of the roots of Polipody
three ounces, the Leaves of Senna two ounces, wild Saffron seed one ounce,
Dodder of Time half an ounce, Turbith three drams, Mirobalans, Indian, Citrine,
Chebuline, rubbed with Oil of sweet Almonds of each one dram; black Hellebore
one dram, White half a dram,) if you would purge Gentler we omit Hellebore if
sironger, we increase it) the roots of Grass, Cinquefoyl, Liquorish, of each
one ounce, Elecampane half an ounce, the barks of Ash, Tamarisk, Danewort, of
each half an ounce; the herbs Mercury, Fumitory, Hops, Hart's-tongue, both
Bugloss with their roots, Miltwast, Maidenhair, Time, Balm, of each one
handful; the cordial flowers, of Tamarisk, Scabious, Broom, of each one pugil,
seeds of Anise, Melons, of each half an ounce; Guord seeds six drams, Purslane
seed two drams, seed of Basil, Chaste tree, of each one dram; Tamarinds,
Raisons, of each one ounce and an half; Prunes twelve, Jujubes, Sebestens, of
each ten; make a Decoction according to art, in two pound of that strained,
infuse of choice Rhubarb half an ounce, Cinnamon two drams, Spike one scruple,
strain it, add the juice of sweet Apples one pound, boil them again a little,
let him use this Syrup for four or five days early in the morning.

A Syrup also may be made of the same Decoction to be kept for use, with all
things doubled, if a just quantity of Sugar be added to the Decoction or
instead of it the Decoction of Apples, and it be boiled to a thickness: of
which when you have a mind to purge you may give two or three spoonfuls
according as it works.

Another Gentler may be prepared thus of the Juyces, Take of the roots of
Polipody two ounces, Senna cleansed four ounces, Dodder of Time half an ounce,
flowers of Borrage, Violets of each one pugil; Anise seed half an ounce,
Cinnamon two drams, bruise them a little, pour to them the juice of Sweet
Apples three pound, the juice of Borrage clarified three ounces, let them stand
in a hot Infusion twenty four hours, then let them boil a little, strain them,
boil them again to half the thickness of Wine boiled away, or of a Syrup, let
him take two ounces more or less by it self or with Wine.

Being Infused also in Goats Whey, they will do good, or in Broth of an old
Cock, and give the Decoction.

A Wine very profitable for this use, may be prepared thus, which must be given
at three or four times, seeing it cannot be kept longer, unless it be prepared
in a Barrel in a greater quantity, all things being doubled or trebled,
according as the quantity of Wine or Must shall be greater or less, and those
things which are put in be first very well dried. Take of S^nna two ounces,
Turbith three drams, Agarick two drams, Mirobalans Indian citrine, chebulane of
each one dram; Dodder of Time, Time, of each three drams; the Cordial flowers
of each two pugils; the herbs Wormwood, Fumitory, of each three drams; Fennel
seed three drams, Ginger half a dram, let them be bruised and infused in four
pound of white Wine boil them a little in a double vessel let him drink it
three or four times.

And because the Remedies ought to be changed, other forms also may be thought
upon, as of the following Electuary, for trial of which he may take at the
first time three ounces, by it self or dissolved, and according to the success,
increase or diminish the dose. Take of the pulp of Tamarinds and Cassia
extracted with white Wine (for gratefulness) each one ounce, choice Manna, six
drams, of Catholicon or Mesues Triphera, of Dodder of Time, or the Perfian, or
the great, two ounces, the bark of Myrobalans Indian, chebuline, rubbed with
Oil of Sweet Almonds of each one dram, Rhubarb a little Mollefied in wine one
dram and an half, Senna first washed in wine, Dodder of Time, of each two drams;
Annis seed two drams, Cinnamon three drams: Make a most fine Powder, and with
Syrup of Roses solutive, Make an Electuary; If you would have it work more
powerfully in a less quantity, Take two drams, and add Confection Hamech one
dram, and give it.

Such a Powder may be prepared to deceive the sick, which shall be given at once
by it self or with Wine, broth Milk, Hydromel: Take of Lazulus stone washed
oftentimes in Hydromel two scruples, Dodder of Time one scruple, Sugar one
dram; Powder them. Or thus: Take of Lazulus stone prepared one scruple,
Digredium half a scruple, Turbith one dram, Sugar one dram and an half; give
it: Or a usual Compound one, may be made thus, of which give at first Time one
d^am and an half, by way of trial, afterward proceeding with that quantity
which shall be found rightest: Take of Lazulus stone often washed in wine and
water two drams, Diagridium half a dram, Turbith one dram and an half, Senna
half an ounce, Dodder of Time two drams, Tartar one dram, Annis, Cinnamon, of
each two drams; Saffron half a scruple, Sugar Candy, the weight of them all,
powder them.

Lozenges may be made of them, or others may be given such as are, the Tablets
of the Electuary of Citron etc.

Vomiting caused sometimes does very much good, seeing it does egregiously
solicit nature to excretion, especially if it be provoked by giving of those
things which do at once empty upwards, whenas they being more robust do easily
endure these also, as has been said in Purgers, but amongst the rest Hellebore
especially is so much commended in Madness that it is become a Proverb, Those
who are Mad have need of Hellebore, but it is given diverse ways, as when we
would purge more by the lower parts we rather choose the Black as has been
said in Purgers, but if we would chiefly cause Vomiting we take the white, the
Powder of which or rather the Infusion in Wine is most conveniently given, when
they have eaten much and drunk Broth, that they may be hurt the less: or the
slips or fibers of it thrust through thin slices of Radish and left all night,
and afterward diligently taken out again and the slices steeped in Oxymel, and
so give one of them to drink.

This following Helleborism is very much commended by many, if one spoonful of
it be given with fat Broth, Take of the shavings of Hellebore one ounce, infuse
them three days in Rainwater four ounces, boil them with a gentle fire to a
third, to that strained add of Honey well Skimmed two ounces, keep it for your
use.

But if we be minded to empty downwords also, give one spoon full of this
following, Take of the powder of Hiera of Coloquintida four scruples, Dodder of
Time, Senna each two drams, make a powder, mix it in Honey of Hellebore.

Now they often give for this use, the Powder of Stibium burnt til it looks
clear or only lightly calcined, as I have tried it, in a few grains, or the
Infusion of it in Wine, from whence they are wont plentifully to Vomit, and
send downwards Choleric, Yellowish or Green matter, the which also Mathiolus
commends and I have often tried it in strong bodies without any hurt.

The Medicines which they ought to take for alteration sake, are prepared of
those things which by a temperate Moisture do correct the force of this filthy
and acrid humor, and by a propriety its Malignity; and amend the distemper of
the brain which is chiefly affected, and the heart whose complexion in these
cases Avicen thinks is chiesly corrupted, having respect also unto the Spleen
where they think the seat of Melancholy, and the Liver which they Suppose also
to be affected by reason of that, of which these Medicines are made up, which
if we consider the accustomary Compositions, they are almost wholly Cordial,
the which seeing they do not only refresh, but also do resist the malignant and
venenate matter, of which sort this is, we also do allow them, but shunning
things too hot and dry, and do prescribe them as follows.

For an Infusion in Wine or Decoction the which either we use simple, adding
Sugar Spices, or to make a Syrup these things may be taken, to be used by
course, Take of the flowers of both Buglosses (which are appropriated to the
heart and Spleen) as much as is sufficient, let them steep in ordinary Wine, or
let them be boiled in Broths.

For the same reason also other things may be infused in Wine as the Leaves of
Hart's-tongue, which the common people is wont to do in this case.

A more Compound infusion or Decoction may be made thus: Take of the flowers of
Roses, Violets, both Buglosses, Scabious, Tamarisk, of each one pugil; the
Leaves of Betony, Balm, Hart's-tongue or Milt-waist, of each one handful; the
Root of Elecampane two drams, the seed of Basil one dram: Bruise them for your
use.

A Syrup may be made of this Decoction as has been said; or the following be
prepared of Juyces: Take of the Juyces of sweet Apples one pound, of Borrage
three ounces, of Mallows (which is thought very profitable) two, clarify them
and adding, Sugar half a pound: Boil them to a consistence.

We use also Juleps rather, then those Compound Cordial waters which some
prescribe, because they too much inflame the Body: Take of Rose water three
ounces, Bugloss two ounces, Balm one ounce, Cinnamon half an ounce, Orange
flower water (which they call water of naffe) two drams, whitt wine one ounce,
the whitest Sugar as much as is sufficient, Make a Julep.

Electuaries to be taken by course every other day, drinking after a little of
the said Julep, or its water with a little wine are made thus, of fewer or more
things. Take of the conserves of Roses, Violets, the flowers of both Buglosses,
Water Lillies, the Roots of Bugloss and Citron Pill candied, of each half an
ounce, the Root of Elecampane one dram, seed of Basil one dram, Powder of
Diamargaritum Frigidum one dram, with Syrup of sweet Apples: Mix them.

Another made of many rare and precious things, is thus prepared: Take of the
Conserves of the four Cordial flowers, of each one ounce, Conserve of water
Lillies, Scabious, Clove-gilli-flowers, Tamarisk, Succory, Lange-debeef,
Eringoes, Satyrion, Rose-mary, Betony flowers, of each half an ounce; the Roots
of Bugloss, Lettice, Coleworts, Guords, and flesh of Citrons, Citron pill
condited of each one ounce, Emblick Myrobalanes two, the seeds of Guord and
Melons cleansed, of each half an ounce, Citron seed cleansed one dram, seed of
Basil one dram and an half, seed of Lettice one dram, kermes Berries two drams,
sweet Sanders half a dram, Cinnamon one dram, shaving of Hartshorn, Ivory, of
each one dram; Unicorns horn (for Rich men) one scruple, Red Coral one dram,
the Powder of Diamargaritum frigidum or the Electuary of Gems half a dram,
Rosata Novella, Diasmoschum, Diarrhodon, Aromaticum Rosatum, Trionsantalon, of
each one scruple, Trochisks of Camphire two scruples, Confection of Alkermes
and Hyacinth of each one dram, Rhases Laetificans two drams, with Syrup of
sweet Apples boiled thick, that the Confection which ought to be kept a long
time be not corrupted, Make an Electuary.

Theophrastus commends Southern-wood taken with Honey and Vinegar.

We may also use Pouders, and adding Sugar one ounce and an half, to one dram
of them, Make Comfits, or dissolve the Sugar in the Waters and Julep expressed,
to make Lozenges.

The first shall be such; Take of the Roots of Swallowwort one dram, Citron
pill, seeds of Basil, of each half a dram; Pearl half a scruple: Make a Powder
for use as has been said,

Or thus, Take of the Cordial flowers, the Leaves of Balm, Marjoram, of each
one scruple, Citron pill, Basil seed, of each half a dram; sweet Saunders one
scruple, shaving of Ivory one scruple, Coral half a dram, Pearl half a scruple,
Cinnamon half a dram: Make a Powder.

Or out of the usual Pouders, as Diamargariton, or the Electuary of Gems and
other things in the said Electuaries both Pouders and Lozenges may be made.

Lozenges made after this manner are very Cordial and appropriate to the Head:
Take of Confection Alkermes or of Hyacinth one dram, Powder of Diamdrgaritum
Frigidum, Electuary of Gems, of each half a dram, Diamoschum, Aromaticum
Rosatum, of each half a dram; seed of Basil one scruple, Sugar dissolved in the
Juice of sweet Apples as much as is sufficient; Make Lozenges.

Remedies are outwardly applied to the Head in which the Brain residing is
always affected in these Diseases, either by it self or by consent, and where
sometimes the cause of the evil lies hid.

And first of all at the beginning use only Repellers if it be Hypochondriacal
Melancholy from a Vapor lifted up, or a great fury in Madness: then in the
beginning we use an Oxyrrhodine to which notwithstanding we add Oil of Violets
and Chamomel that it dry not too much.

Or we anoint the Head with Oil of Roses, Myrtles, Quinces, Violets and
Chamomel. But afterward we must use things very moistning which may also
disolve a little, and strengthen the Head, and also cause sleep, because they
are much troubled with watching. Let Irrigations or Embrocations be made which
are more accustomary to our people, or washing and wetting of the Head, and
that once a day, or twice, Morning and Evening for many days, according as we
conjecture there is more or less need by their watchings and restlesness; the
which also if we use with a Bath before and after the use of it, as shall be
said we must irrigate the Head with the same Bath.

But here we do no ways use Lies, because they dry too much, but the following
Decoctions; Take of the Roots of Marshmallows one ounce, the Herbs of Violets,
Lettice and Mallows, of each one handful; Flowers of Violets, water Lillies,
Burrage, Chamomel, Melilot, Barley, of each one pugil; Flax seed one ounce, (
Faenygreek by reason of its strong smell we omit) Poppy half an ounce: Make a
Decoction in the Broth of a Calves Head and Gethers, add a little Wine for an
Irrigation.

Another when we would also procure sleep, which for the most part is
necessary; Take of the Leaves of Willow, Lettice, Violets, tender Rushes,
flowers of Violets, water Lillies, Chamomel, Feaverfew, Time, (especially
toward the end) of each one pugil, Guord seeds bruised one ounce, Coriandar
two drams, seeds of Lettice, Marshmallows, Dill, of each one dram, of the bark
or Heads of Poppy or Roots of Mandracke one ounce, the Leaves of Henbane one
handful: Make a Decoction in the Broth of the Head and Feet of a Weather, or a
Calf, or of Chickens, or Swallows, or of a Rams Lungs, adding a little Wine,

Or thus, Take of the Emulsion of the seeds of white Poppy and Guord seeds made
in Violet water three ounces, Milk two ounces, the Mucilage of the Seeds of
Fleawort one ounce, stir them together and apply them.

A ptofitable washing or Embrocation may be thus prepared out of Unctuous
things: Take of Oil of Violets, Lettice, of each two ounces; Chamomel one
ounce, the whites of Eggs well benten two, Women's Milk or other Milk four ounces
or more; Mix them deligently.

An Unctuous anointing or application to the Head may be made about the
Temples, Forehead, and if it be shaved, also on the Hairy part, for the same
intention, afterirrigation when it is dry again, or else without it, oftentimes
by it self, after this manner: Take of Oil of Violets, Water Lillies, sweet
Almonds, of each one ounce; Chamomel half an ounce, fresh Hogs grease one
ounce, the Mucilage of Flax seed one ounce, white Wax as much as is sufficient:
Make a Liniment.

A more simple one but nevertheless effectual, may be made thus: Take of the
Mucilage of the seed of Flax, Fenugreek, Mallows, Butter, of each two ounces:
Hog's Grease four ounces, the Marrow of an Ox or Hog one ounce; apply it.

But a Compound one and more effectual, will be this: Take of Oil of Violets,
Guord seeds, of each two onuces; of Poppy seed half an ounce, the Mucilage of
the seeds of Fleawort one ounce, of the seeds of Lettice, Henbane, of each one
dram; Coriander, Myrtles, of each half a dram, Saffron one scruple: Mix them:

Or if they be very much troubled with Watchings: Take of the seeds of Henbane,
white Poppy, of each two drams; Mandrake Root one dram, Opium half a scruple,
Saffron six grains: Mix them with Oil of Violets one ounce Chamomel half an
ounce: Apply them to the Region of the Head.

About the declination hotter things must be added, in Irringations and
Ointments, made of Time, flowers of Rosemary, French Lavender, Lavender.

And to strengthen the Head, we must strew the following Pouders on the Hair at
night, and in the morning by gentle combeing cleanse them again: Take of the
seeds of Coriander half an ounce, Myrtles two drams, of Lettice, white Poppy,
of each one dram; Alkermes berries two drams, flowers of Violets. Roses, each
one dram and an half; flowers of Rosemary, Chamomel, of each one dram; Citron
pill one dram, Mace, Cloves, of each one scruple: Make a Powder.

It will be very convenient in a high Fury and Madness, if we apply to the
Crown of the Head, the Lights of a Ram newly taken out, whiles they are yet
hot, or if they be cold, heat them again, or apply a Lamb so cut open through
the back and Emboweld, or we may lay on the Head a young Pegion cut in the
middle and sprinkled with the Powder of Henbane, and other things which shall
by and by be spoken of in a Frenzy we may use for the like reason.

The heart also which we have taught is affected and troubled in these affects,
as it has been demonstrated that it ought to be strengthened by things taken,
so it must be furnished with External things endued with the same virtues, that
it may be able to resist this venomous humor.

Epithems received as they ought to be in fine linen must be applied to the
Region of the Heart, whiles they are yet fasting, or to the Pulses. such as
these are: Take of Rose water three ounces, of Violets, water Lillies, Bugloss,
of each two ounces; Balm one ounce, the juice of sweet Apples, Odoriferous
wine, of each one ounce; Vinegar of Roses of each half an ounce, Seeds of Basil
two drams, of Sorrel one dram, Wood of Aloes and Musk, Sanders, of each half a
dram, Trochisks of Camphyre, Powder Diamargaritum Frigidum, of each half a
dram: Make an Epithem, Saffron should be added; if its yellowness, with which
it stains things did not hinder, and Ambergrease, also if it were not too dear.

Two Cordial bags may be prepared of a square figure, guilted as they ought to
be, one of which ought to be sprinkled with Wine and Rose water, and if it be
too moist, to be squeesed and so applied daily, and when it is removed, the other
dry one must be laid on and worn continually.

Which may be made thus: Take of the four Cordial flowers, water Lillies of
each one dram; Rosemary flowers one dran, the Leaves of Balm, Marjoram,
Coastmary of each one dram and an half; seeds of Basil, Citrons, of each two
drams, Sorrel, Lettice, Purslane, of each one dram; Alkermes berries one dram,
Musk Sanders one dram, Wood of Aloes half a dram, Cloves one dram, white and
red Ben, of each half a dram; Powder them for your use, also the usual Cordial
Pouders, Diamargdritum, de Gemmis, and others may be added.

The Liver and Spleen must not be neglected, as being principal parts also if
they suffer a preternatural heat, or any hurt from this filthy humor, but they
must be refresht also with Epithems and Ointments.

Also remedies applied to certain other parts of the Body may correct its
perverse distemper, and refresh it, as if the chief part of it be plunged in a
Bath the Feet be washed, the Back bone and Breast be anointed.

A Bath of River water will do good in young and strong bodies being sometimes
repeated, by swimming in it for a while when it is fitting by reason of summer
or by setting in it at home being made warm; or if by the addition, of
moistning things, it be made Artificial, let the patient set in it warm a
little while before meat, and afterward let him rest in his bed, and without
using any force, let him sweat of his own accord.

As this is, Take of the Herbs Mallows, both Buglosses, Sallow, the Vine,
Lettice, water Lillies, Violets of each one handful: flowers of Chamomel,
Melilot, of each one pugil, Marsh-mallow roots two ounces, Flax seed one ounce:
Let them be boiled in River or Rose Water, to which may be added some fat or
glutinous Decoction, made with the parts of living Creatures, or Milk for Rich
Folks.

With the same Bath the Head may be irrigated, and the Feet washed.

The length of the Back bone under which lie the Trunks of the Vena Cava and
the great Artery, in which the principal cause of the Disease is, after bathing
is anointed,

After this manner: Take Oil of sweet Almonds two ounces, Violets one ounce,
Hens grease one ounce and an half, white Wax a little; Mix them.

The Breast being anointed with the same, it will benefit those parts.

Gelding was wont to be used by the Ancients in certain desperate Diseases as
was said in an Epilepsie, because it changes the temperament of a man, quels
his virility and vehemence, and renders the Body more lax and moist, in mad Men
especially that have been long imprisoned and are disperate, being otherwise
unserviceable, it is good to see what benefit can be reaped by it, the which
all circumstances being diligently examined it is lawful to make trial of, if
other things help not.

Amulets must not be neglected, amongst which they write thus of one; that
Stone found in the Mawe of a Swallow which is red, tied to the right Arm, is
good against the Fantastical Illusions of Melancholy, cures the Lunatic and
Mad, and makes them lovely and pleasant.

The Course of Living or Diet, must be so ordered, that both laudable hnmors
may be generated, and the Malignant distemper of others and evil constitution
of the Body may be amended and contemperated, and the strength refreshed, which
may be done thus.

An air and place temperate and pure are convenient; and also the changing of
these do very much good, especially if certain places be suspected, or be
contrary to them, or do afford some occasion of sadness by which alone Diseases
otherwise of long continuance and very grievous, are oftentimes cured.

Nourishing Meat that is by its Nature of a temperate moisture is good, which
ought to be of a good juice easy of disgestion and somewhat moist, such as is
the flesh both of Animals and Fishes, not that which is old, and hard, and kept
a long time, or smoak-dryed, or too salt, or very much seasoned with Spices or
other hot things, but that which is young, fresh, and simply boiled or roast,
amongst which the flesh of a young Hauk and Night-Owl being eaten, it is
thought to be of force by a propriety, as on the contrary the flesh of Goats,
wild Beasts, Hares, are thought to be hurtful for the causes forementioned;
Milk, good Chees, not too much salted, nor rotten, Butter, common Oil, and Oil
of Almonds may be granted to those that are accustomed to them.

Eggs also are convenient unless they do corrupt, as it most easily comes to
pass in choleric Stomachs, Bread made of pure flower, not tainted with the
faults of grain, whence by reason of Darnel many have been brought to a
Stupidity or Madness, Levend a little, salted and rightly baked, is good: and
of Grains and Pulse, Barley and all kinds of Pears, so boiled and prepared that
they may easily be disgested, and do not puff up, but Lentils and Beans are
disallowed because they are thought to beget a Melancholy juice. Of Fruits
Apples especially are convenient as Appropriate all manner of ways, and other
fleeting Fruits, and those which are kept hanged up or dried, as Prunes,
Raisons, Cherries and the like, and of harder things Fresh Nuts, and Almonds;
of Plants those that are temperate are allowed, as Spinach, Lettice, Endive,
Beets, both Buglesses are extold in the first place as appropriate, only
Coleworts is condemned, because it is believed to produce Melancholy; the which
notwithstanding I judgeing by its taste, do think if it be rightly prepared that
it does rather cause good Blood then other Plants, seeing it is tender and
sweet.

There must be special care had of the Drink, and we must allow somewhat to
custom, in those that drink Water or Wine, seeing Weak-wine can no ways hurt,
nor Strong if it be diluted and moderately taken, but seeing it makes merry it
does rather profit them, but if that we see that they become more sad or more
fierce by the use of it, we must temper it yet more, or wholly withdraw it; the
same judgment must be of drink: and also the drinking of Whey is very much
commended in these diseases, because it is laxative, as also Almond milk, which
can no ways so much assail the Head as some have thought.

Sleep is very much commended, not so much because it moistens, as they would
have it, but because it refreshes the body and mind, and therefore if it do
not invite them, it must be procured by giving Soporiferous things or
application of Externals as shall be explained.

The Inordinate motions espacially of Mad Folks must be quelled with the same
Soporiferous things, and they must be restrained with Chidings, Blows, Bonds,
Guards, Prisons, for this also as experience teaches, makes for the Cure of
Mad Folks, whom Empericks beat with Rods and Scourges.

We must procure that natural Excretions be done decently, and if Nuns or
Virgins do rage with a turgid matter by reason of the retention of their Seed,
if they marry they are cured.

Affections of the mind in the first place must be removed from them by
Arguments especially when they proceed from no manifest cause, as has been
said in the preturbation of Mind; and if they pretend false causes, as one the
Greatness of his Nose, or another Plenty of of Setpents in his body, that by
satisfying of them this Opinion conceaved may be taken away, they must
ingeniously be deceived and made believe that these are cut off or purged away,
by showing some such like thing privately conveyed, or by some other art:
they must be recreated also with pleasant things which must be offered to their
Senses, and with those things which we see them chiefly delighted with, with
which notwithstanding for the most part they are not moved; or if they be
altogether made they no ways understanding nor apprehending them, do neglect
and slight them and are the rather more offended by them.

The other Symptoms which betide the Melanchollick and Mad if they be too
urgent they must be corrected as shall be explained in their particular
chapters, amongst which Watchings also are corrected with those things which we
have said must be applied to the Head and by Lotions of the Feet, and if they
be very troublesome by giving things that cause rest expressed in Watchings, and
every where in this Book, a Pain of the Stomach, Belly, Womb, a distention of
the Hypochondries are corrected by Unctions, Fomentations of the Belly, and
other things as shall be taught in their places, and if any thing be given by
the mouth upon that account, must always mix with them, those things which do
resist melancholy.

As if in plenty of Winds and bad digestion such a powder be prescribed to be
used after meat. Take of the powder Diacydonides sine speciebus two drams,
Anise seeds three drams, Coriander prepared two drams, Cinnamon three drams,
Squinanth half a dram, Indian Leaf, Marjoram of each one scruple; flowers of
Roses, Bugloss each half a dram; Pearl one dram, make a powder, add Sugar the
weight of them all.

A Hot Distemper of the Brain if it cause a Raving and it be a true Frenzy
which arises from an Inflammation and its membranes, The Cure of a Frenzy
and bastard Frenzy from a hot distemper and Inflammation of the brain.
and presently invades with a Fever it is a most dangerous and most acute
Disease, which sometimes is terminated on the third day; but if they be less
fierce, and Rave with Laughter, these things afford us great hopes of recovery;
but if it be a bastard Frenzy and the brain be not yet inflamed, but is only
heated by a humor or vapor, as it commonly comes to pass, and it follow a hot
Disease, chiefly a Fever, we must foretell according to the condition of the
Disease; for if this be in the fits of Intermitting Fevers either in the
beginning or state, as this is wont to be common with Children the Fever remits
again together with the Fit; but if this happen in continual Fevers about the
state, it can in no wise be free from danger, the brain consenting then with
the heart that is oppressed, where yet if nature overcome the Disease, the Fever
declining, the Raving also cease; also in Pestilential Fevers according to
the nature of the Disease which is Curable or Killing, the Raving becomes
Deadly or no ways such yet it denotes no good if it supervene, and then if the
pulse also remit, and spots break forth, Death is at hand; in the Worms of
Children also it is judged according to the nature of the Fever and oftentimes
foretells Convulsions to come upon it, otherwise without any hurt it is taken
away with the Fever.

The intention of Curing in a true Frenzy is this, that first of all with
things evacuating we revell and derive from the Head, the bloody humor heating
or inflaming the Brain, and that chiefly by taking away of Blood and also by
Medicines that loosen the Belly, next that by things altering used inwardly and
outwardly, and by a course of diet we correct the heat chiefly in the Head,
also in the Liver, Heart, which also as the whole body have grown hot by reason
of the Fever and toward the end discuss the remaining matter, in the interim
also having respect unto the Symptoms, if there be any besides these; the which
also are administered in a bastard Frenzy but guided by the nature of the
Disease accompanying, from whence it proceeds, in which also let it be your
intention to hinder by this means the ascent of Vapors, and to revell those
already carried up.

Drawing of Blood for Revulsion sake ought to be suddenly done in a true
Frenzy, and that largely or often repeared in a Vein of the Arm most
apparent, especialry the Shoulder Vein. But the Vein must not be openled with
too large an orifice as the French are wont to cut with their Lancets; lest
whiles they are nnruly the flux of Blood cannot well be stopped. In a bastard
Frenzy likewise if we see a great afflux of humors carried to the Head, by
the greatness of the Raving and the Veins of the Eyes swelling, unless by
reason of the Fever because it is in its state, or because lasting long, or by
its malignity it has overthrown the strength, we be compeld to forbear it, and
nothing else hinder. A vein also must be opened, although it has been alreaddy
opened in respect of the Fever.

Also for Derivation in a Frenzy always, and sometimes in a bastard Frenzy,
if the Raving be vehement whence we suspect the vehement heat does raise an
afflux of humors, even at that time when we are forbid to open some general
vein, sometimes being forced, we ought to open a particular one, by which there
may not be so great an effusion of Blood, although it be in the state, for fear
lest the false Frenzy should be changed into a true one: of which kind
chiefly is the Vein under the Tongue, which being opened does oftentimes very
much help in Ravings: upon which account it is convenient also to open a Vein
in the Forehead, when great necessity urges, and we are not compeld to dilate
it, by girting the Neck with a Swath, by which the blood is too much forced
upwards; and to open the Veins of the Nostrils with Bristles or other rough
things by pricking and rubbing them; or to suck out the Blood applying Leeches
behind the Ears, to the Forehead, Nostrils, Fundament.

Scarification also does good with Cupping-Glasses applied for Revulsion in
both Species of Raving; and when it is not fit to open a Vein in a Bastard
Frenzy, then also instead of that it shall be applied for revulsion sake to
the Shoulder-blades, Shoulders, Arms; which I am wont to do with good success
instead of Derivation on the sides of the Neck about the jugular Veins, others
also approve of it done on the grisly part of the Ears; for which Scarification
if they will not endure it, Cupping-Glasses only may be used.

We ought also by Frictions of the extreme parts to revel, and by making
Ligatures also in those places, to restrain the too much motion to the upper
parts, the which also may be performed by Lotions of the Feet which we shall by
and by prescribe, for the causing of sleep.

If they admit not of Clysters they must be cast in by force, and that they may
keep them, their Fundament must be stopped with a Cloth, for they revel much by
stimulating, and correct the heat of the Body by altering, and evacuating the
Choleric Excrements, upon which account, both by reason of the Raving, and the
Fevers accompanying it, they are convenient in both Species of a Frenzy: the
which ought to be cast in before bleeding, and afterward must oftentimes be
repeated, many of which have been prescribed in Fevers.

For example sake we propose these only: Take of Cassia newly drawn six drams,
Red or course Sugar one ounce, Oil of Violets three ounces, juice of Beets or
Mercury one ounce, Salt one dram, with the Decoction of the four Emollient
herbs, Make a Clyster.

A more Compound one is made thus: Take of the Herb Mallows, Marshmallows with
the Roorts, Pellitory of the Wall, Beets, Mercury, Lettice, Violets of each one
handful. Whole Barley one pugil, Guord seeds half an ounce, Prunes six: Make a
Decoction. In a fit quantity dissolve Honey of Violets, Red Sugar, of each one
ounce. Catholicon, Cassia, of each half an ounce; juice of Beets or Mercury, of
each one ounce; Oil of violets three ounces, a little Salt; Make a Clyster.
Laxatives and somewhat Stimulating may be given, especially in those that are
bound to loosen the Belly, chiefly when they will not admit of Clysters or do
not keep them. But we must have a care of purgers that heat the Body, in which
thing Empiricks knowing nothing else but to purge, are oftentimes grievously
faulty.

Therefore a day after a Vein has been opened such a solutive Medicine may be
given: Take of the simple Syrup of Roses solutive two ounces, water of Violets,
Lettice, Bugloss as much as is sufficient, to dilute it, and give it.

Or this, Take of the juce of Roses one ounce and an half, Sugar six drams,
dissolved in Rose water; Boil it gently, strain it and give it.

Otherwise after this manner: Take of Syrup of Roses solutive, Violets, of each
one ounce, with Mesues Decoction of Fruits, give it.

If at any time we must pass to stronger Medicines, it may be done thus: Take
of Rhubarb four scruples, infuse it in Water of Roses and Violets, strain it,
add Syrup of Roses solutive one ounce or more, give it.

Or, Take of Sena (whose juice is not unlike the juice of Rhubarb) two drams or
three, Polypody half an ounce, somewhat sharp Prunes six: Boil them, to the
strained Liquor add, Syrup of Roses solutive, Violets, of each half an ounce:
Make a Potion.

Things altering are given both by reason of the Fever accompanying, and
because of the hot distemper of the head, in a form chiefly acceptable to them,
especially of drink, because they are very thirsty, for they do not willingly
take things Medicinal, with which also we ought to prepare the Choleric Humor,
if there be any, before we purge it, you meet with various compositions of
these in Fevers therefore here only a few examples are proposed.

In their Broths are boiled, Sorrel, Lettice, Bugloss, and their Waters are
mixed with them, as also the juice of Citron and Rose Vinegar.

Instead of Beer, we must mix with the boiled water which he drinks, Syrup of
Currants, Pomegranates, Lemmons, Wine of Pomegranates or other Acid juyces.

Or you may give by course, Juleps in a fit quantity by themselves, or mixed
with Beer after this manner: Take of Syrup or Wine of Pomegranates, of
Barberries, of each two ounces, Violets one ounce, of Poppy (by reason of
watchings) half an ounce, water of Lettice, Sorrel, Roses, Bugloss, of each
four times the quantity, let him drink it. In place of Syrups, Juyces may be
used.

A Conserve made for the same use to be often taken, As, Take of the Conserve
of the four Cordial flowers of each one ounce; Coleworts, Lettice, flesh of
Citrons condite of each six drams; seeds of Sorrel, Endive, Purslane, of each
half a dram; Pouderof Diamargaritum frigidum one scruple, Syrup of Pomegranates
or Curians: Make an Electuary.

Things cold and somewhat astringent must be applied to the Head at the
beginning presently, whiles the Humor flows, or Vapors ascend, the which do
repel them

Oxyrrhodines are fit for this use, prepared thus: Take of water of Roses,
Plantane, of each two ounces; Oil of Roses two ounces, Vinegar of Roses one
ounce. Mix them.

Or thus, Take of the Oil of Roses Omphacine one ounce and an half, Unguentum
Populeum, Vinegar, of each half an ounce, the white of an Egg, beat them
together and apply them to the Forehead.

But a repelling Decoction may be made thus, Take of the Leaves of Sallow,
Lettice, Plantane, of each one handful; Flowers of Roses two pugils, Violets
one pugil, seeds of Plantane, Myrtle, of each two drams; boil them in iron'd
water.

Afterward Coolers and Moistners are applied, with which we mix things causing
rest

In this form, Take of the juyces of Lettice, Nightshade, of each two ounces;
Plantane one ounce, let clothes dipped in them be applied.

In Summet time we prepare them of Waters, Take of the waters of Roses,
Nightshade, Lettice, Water Lillies of each two ounces; Plantane one ounce, let
clothes dipped in them be applied.

A Decoction for Irrigation may be made thus, Take of the Leaves of Violets,
Lettice, Nightshade, Waterlilles, Housleek, Purslane of each one handful;
flowers of Violets, Water Lillies, Borrage, of each one pugil; seeds of
Lettice, Poppy of each two drams; of Henbane one dram; make a Decoction for an
Irrigation.

Afterward let the Head be anointed with the following Unguent, Take Oil of
Violets Water Lillies, of each one ounce; of Roses six drams, of Poppy,
Mandrake, each half an ounce; Unguentum Populeum one ounce, (we add no
Camphire, because it causes watchings) mix them with a little white Wax, for
an Ointment.

Then we may strew Pouders on the place anointed, after this manner, Take of
the flowers of Roses, Violets, Water Lillies, Lettice seed, of each two drams;
of white and black Poppy of each one dram; red Saunders, Coriander, of each
half a dram: mix them.

When the raving begins to abate, we add certain discussive things to the
forementioned forms, such as have been prescribed in a Melancholy humor,
causing Melancholy and Madness, but somewhat more temperate: and then
especially we are content with Anointings adding Oil in which Mother of Time
and Chamomel have been boiled: and afterward Sinapizing the head as they call
it.

As with the following Powder which also strengthens the Brain. Take of
Coriander seeds two drams, flowers of Roses, Chamomel, Lavender, Rosemary of
each one dram; Orrice root half a dram, of all the Saunders one dram; make a
Powder.

Besides these things, when the raving is at the highest, there is a singular
and approved Remedy, made of the Flesh and Blood of Animals, being applied to
the Crown of the Head whiles they are yet hot, which being roasted as it were
with excessive heat of the Head, when they are laid aside, do seem to send
forth a certain vapor, and I have often observed that they alone almost have
helped: which whether they do it by discussing as some would have it, or by
stopping the force of the blood, I will not here any longer dispute, this I
know, as shall be said in the Haemorrhages that these do wonderfully stop the
blood flowing out of a wound, but for this use the following things are for the
most part made choice.

Certain whole Animals cut through the back, and presently unboweld, as a Lamb,
a Puppy-dog, a young Pigeon or Chicken, or the bloody parts of them, as the
Lungs of a Ram Gelt, of a Lamb, or the Livers, or also other fleshy parts, hot
from the Creature new killed, as also other things must be applied, or if they
be cooled, they must be heated again.

For the hearts sake, strengthening Epithems are ap plied to the region of it,
by reason of its double disease, both of a Fever and because of its Weakness,
which also may be bound to the Pulses in a cloth, such as have been proposed in
Fevers and formerly in Melancholy.

And a more simple one may be made thus. Take of Rose water four ounces, of
Violets, Bugloss, of each two ounces; Vinegar half an ounce, of all the
Saunders each one dram; Saffron half a scruple, Camphire five grains; mix them.

For the same cause also regard is had to the Liver, and Epithems are applied
to that.

The Breast also is anointed with cold relaxing Oils as Oils of Violets.

And the Cods are cooled with things working actually and potentially.

The Thighs and Arms of the whole body are washed for coolness sake, and that
they may the easier sleep, with the Decoction of the Plants of the Vine,
Violets, Lettice, Poppy and the like.

A Course of diet is to be ordered, not so much to preserve Strength, as to
help somewhat by Alteration.

Let the Air incline to cold, but whether they ought to be kept in Darkness or
Light, that they may rave the less, some do very much trouble themselves,
seeing false apparitions do appear to them, as well in the light as darkness,
but it is better that they be kept in a place somewhat obscure.

Their meat ought to be cooling and moistning, such as is convenient for the
Feverish, seasoned with herbs and other cool things, as Lettice, Endive and the
like, also with the juice of unripe Grapes, and Vinegar, and other cold juyces,
and seeing these Delirous know not what they do, and oftentimes do not devour
their meat only, but also other abominable things, we must not humor them, but
when the Diet ought to be Slender we must withdraw it, and they must be fed
with Barley, Prunes, and other lighter things.

Let their Drink whiles they rage be Water, taken of it self, or first prepared
with boiling, to which we may mix Syrups, as was said before, for preparation
and alteration sake.

Those things which concern sleep, motion, and the affects of the mind, shall
be explained now in the Symptoms.

For the symptoms which happens besides Raving are others also supervenient to
them, both by reason of the disease of the head and of the Fever accompanying,
to which we ought to have respect.

Watchings by reason of the excessive heat of the brain, are common and hurtful
to them, which in general are corrected with the same Remedies that resist the
disease, as has been said, seeing they cool and moisten, especially the
external ones, to which upon that account are added things soporiferous, and
privately for their sake soporiferous medicines are given mix with Cordials as
shall be said in its place.

Inordinate motions do so disturb them by reason of their depraved imagination
that they endeavor by all force to rise out of the bed, and to cloth
themselves, and if they be not restrained, to make an escape, whence oftentimes
being void of reason, they fall from a high place, and kill themselves; which
unquietness is likewise amended by things given to cause sleep seeing the mind
being at rest the body must needs rest also: and that they may be restrained,
which is very hard, seeing madness makes them strong, they are oftentimes bound
in bonds, the which notwithstanding sometimes when they are angry upon that
account, and more fierce, we ought to loose them, and give them way a little,
yet using great caution that they hurt not themselves nor others.

A Suppression of the Urin is a Symptom peculiar to them, whenas being so
intent upon their imaginations, they feel not the provocation of the Urin, and
therefore care not to make it, by the retaining of which the Bladder being too
much filled and distended afterward voids the water with a great deal of
difficulty; the which we must cure, by seasonably admonishing them, and showing
the Chamber Pot and by applying external Remedies, of which we will treat of in
the retention of Urine.

The dryness, blackness of the Tongue which denote the highest burning of a
Fever is corrected, as shall be explained in its place.

Thirst does very much torment them by reason of their heat, it is corrected by
altering things cold and moist, especially given in their Drink, as has been
already said, and shall be said in thirst in general.

Their weakness and overthrow of strength known by the Pulse, seeing their
unquietness otherwise stirring them up, does seem to add strength to them, as
has been said, is repaired by a course of Diet and cordial medicines, used
inwardly and outwardly, as also with them already mentioned.

To undertake to Cure Folly bred in a man from his birth by an evil
conformation, The Cure of Folly from an evil conformation and distemper.
seeing it is impossible to fashion otherwise the parts once formed, were to
attempt to wash and make a Blackmore white; as also it is impossible to change
any thing, if this happen from a perverse temperament the which notwithstanding
is sometimes amended, by the change of age, by Gelding, as has been said in
madness, where also custom may do much, by which it came to pass that Cimon for
love of Iphigenia, when he knew his foolish behavior did displease her, by
little and little changing of them, from a Fool became a wise man, as this
whether true or fabulous is agreeable to reason.

If madness be sprung from Putrefaction, The Cure of madness from putifaction,
a speck, Worms in the brain.
or a Speck, or Worms as they would have it, by reason of vapors sent from
thence to the brain, we can scarcely fit a Cure for these, which are almost hid
from us, yet if that Cure which was described in madness arising from a
melancholy humor be also applied here, it will be no fault; but if the malady
be grievous it is incurable.

CHAP. IV. Of a Defatigation of the mind.
The Kinds.
WE call that a Defatigation of the mind when the internal senses are
exercised more, or longer than it is convenient; or when they rest not at the
time prescribed them, by sleep, which is the rest of the mind, or not
sufficiently as it comes to pass when they sleep not, in too much Watchings, or
when they sleep but unquietly, by reason of grievous dreams: the which both in
the sound and sick do sometimes cause weakness, create trouble, and increase
diseases.

Too much and preternatural Watchings are, Watchings.
when they sleep not at all for some days, months, or not sufficiently fill up
the term of seven or eight hours or more according to the custom of natures,
seeing Children sleep more than they wake. These whether they be symptoms of
Diseases or happen without them, do at last bring hurt, seeing they heat the
spirits by their too much use and exagitation, whence it happens that the
humors also are set on fire, especially the hot ones, and the same are at
length consumed.

And hence must needs follow at last, a weakness of some functions of the body,
as the animal spirits being wasted, there is some defect of the internal
senses, and by consequence of the external also, chiefly of the sight, seeing
for the exercise of that there is need of so great a quantity of spirits; and
then by a certain consecution there being a dissipation made of the vital
spirits also, there follows a languishing of the whole body, and the natural
spirits being offended too, the natural actions are hurt, and chiefly
concoction, not because sleep as they think does digest, but because concoction
that it may be rightly performed, wanting more plentiful spirits and heat, for
want of them is for the most part offended sooner then the other actions.

And also immoderate watchings do bring troubles and pains to certain parts;
and that because not only ^he spirits are heated, but the humors also by
infection from them, whence the spirits and blood by too much watching growing
hot first of all in the Head, a pain of the Head, redness of the Eyes, and hot
tears flowing thither, an itching does befall the watchful that they are often
forced to rub their Eyes; and if they last long and the mass of blood be
inflamed, diary Fevers are caused; and if this Symptom urge in other Fevers
the heat being increased, the symptoms of the Fevers grow stronger Choler.
Also in the choleric growing hot for this reason through too much watching and
poured into the Stomach and boiling there, breeds gnawings of the Stomach, and
other accidents of it, and by consent with that, pains of the Head, and Megrims.

Preternatural Dreams are, Dreams.
when in sleep the external senses only do seem to rest, but the internal do
not only lightly exercise themselves, as is in natural Dreams, but immoderatly
and with vehemence and labor as if they were waking, although exercise
themselves depravedly, and do also exagitate and diffipate the spirits, that
being rouzed up they seem to be rather wearied than refreshed.

Immoderate Dreams that make the body weary and weak, are those which besides
the custom do last longer, almost all night; but this happens to some naturally
that Dreams do then begin first, when the vapors which caused a sound sleep,
are now discust, after the first sleep as they call it, but on others as
laboring men tired with labor, and sleping presently after meat, sleep so
steals on them by reason of the plenty of vapors that they have no dreams at
all, or if they have some wandering, they no ways remember them; the which also
though it be natural too, yet that Country fellow not thinking it convenient,
that he could rehearse no Dreams to his Companions amidst their Cups, for this
reason takes counsel of the Physician, and receiving from him a strong purging
medicine sleeping upon it dreamt that he shit a bed, afterward awaking he
found in very deed, that he had dreamed, and that a true and fatal one.

Grievous dreams are which do not only lightly exercise the mind, as natural
ones (which therefore seeing they are not very much imprinted on the Brain)
they do easily slip out of the memory either wholly or in part, that being
wakend they can recite little of them) but do very much exagitate it, and do no
less affect the senses then if those things did truly fall out, which appear to
them in their sleep, in so much that oftentimes being stricken with fear they
suddenly start up, or if nevertheless they continve in their sleep, they are
altogether unquiet, and toss their Body variously in their sleep, Sweat, and
sometimes Talk, Prate much, Cry, Laugh, call out, Nay and sleeping still,
nevertheless rise out of their Bed, and as Galen writes it has befallen
himself, they walk and survey many places, concerning which the common people
persuade themselves many superstitious and old wives tales, how they can climb
without danger, if they be not hindered, nor wakend being called by their own
name, those difficult places, otherwise impossible for the wakening to do: many
grievous dreams of which nature, it is well known to all, are daily objected,
both to the sick and otherwise sound.

But they are such, if horrible things are presented to their minds whiles they
are a sleep, with which they are either vehemently frighted, as when they dream
that they are in danger by some violence offered, a fall from on high, of Fire,
Water, or by reason of some great offense, or for the loss of some grateful
thing represented to them, they are Angry, Sad, and Greive.

Also Portentous Prognosticating Dreams, especially those that portend any evil
do very much astonish, and though they presage some good, nevertheless they
move a little, the which so many sacred and profane Histories do testefie, are
sent to men, from a good and evil Spirit,

The Causes.
The Cause both of watchings and dreams, one is supernatural depending on God
or the Devil, another natural, from custom, which is a second nature, or it
lies in the Head and it is a too great Commotion or Perturbation of the Animal
Spirits, or a hot distemper of the Brain.

The great and good God as he makes known his will to us watching, and puts it
into our minds, so also he will sometimes admonish us by Dreams of things to
come or things present or past; sometimes by sending of visions unknown by
themselves. The preternatural cause of Dreams.
Yet the interpretation of which he granted to some, as to Joseph, Daniel: but
at other times he has set before our Eyes as it were in Dreams the thing it
self as it is, as to Pharaoh the Dearness of provision to come, to Daniel the
Monarchies to come, Julius Caesar's present danger to his Wife, the past Death
of Ceyres the Husband, to his Wife Alcyone.

And the Devil also by Gods permission as he does often didude the sleeping
with false Images and Apparitions of things, so also he troubles men in their
Dreams with true ones sometimes, that signifies something certain, if he can
hurt them, seeing otherwise he is a liar.

Custom oftentimes makes men to be raised at a certain hour of the Night and
to watch a long while, Custom is the cause of watchings and Dreams.
as we have oftentimes already taught that Nature being accustomed, does
observe her times in excretions also, and others of her Natural Operations;
which is very familiar with old folks in watchings, who though they be Prone to
Sleep, and presently betake themselves to Bed; yet being roused either about
midnight or sooner or later, can Sleep no more. And after this is wont to be
accustomary to them, care and thought in the interim joining themselves, by
which whiles they search into, and dispose of diverse things, they are awakend
more. Also some dreams come to a habit from a certain Custom that afterward
for a long time they dream dreams of the same kind, and do not only conceive
them in their mind, but by words and deeds express them in their sleep.

The too much commotion or perturbation of the Animal Spirits, A commotion of
the Animal Spirits is the cause of watchings.
are the cause of preternatural watchings and dreams, which come to pass the
internal senses being too much affected, for then the Spirits being stirred,
because they can not rest, they can no ways sleep but watch, or if they do
sleep, either they are vexed neverthelels with too much Dreams or those more
grievous; which impulsion of the internal senses either befalls them by accident
by reason of the external senses, or by it self. For the external senses being
very much moved by their proper objects, do move also the internal and suffer
them not to be quiet, or if they be quiet, nevertheless they disturb and force
them: as the sight moved by too much light, the hearing by a great noise turns
away sleep, and makes the sleepers unquiet, or rouzeth them up, because silence
and darkness are rather required to sleep: the touch especially affected with
pain and trouble does cause watchings. Upon which account in Diseases that
torment with pain they are also troubled with watchings, and in dreams they
represent the pain to them asleep; and those that are troubled with a pain at
the Heart the stomach being to full, they sleep unquietly; the which happens
also to them who suffer any other trouble in Diseases, as to those that are
very thirsty, who watch by reason of the thirst, or if these kind of people do
sleep, they are tormented also in their dreams with a desire to drink; as it
betides them also who are vexed with a difficulty of breathing, in diverse
Diseases of the Breast, and in a Dropsy, that they cannot sleep, or if they do
sleep being straitend with danger of suffocation, they have also such Dreams.

The senses also being too much moved by themselves, by a vehement intention of
the mind upon some things, the spirits being stirred, at it comes to pass in
vehement and lasting passions of the Mind, viz. in Joy, Anger, Fear, Sadness,
Love, they are afflicted with too much watchings, or if they do sleep,
nevertheless they are exagitated in Dreams with their affections; and also so
many Species and Images of things, arising from the studies of diverse Sciences,
Arts, and human actions, being apprehended and imprinted on the Brain, do not
only exercise the Memory of the waking so that they sleep less, but being
obsersant to them sleeping and moving the Spirits, they spring forth again in
their dreams. And those things which we met withal either the same day, or the
precedent days or a long while before, do represent themselves either in the
same form that they were in or from a mixture of them diverse forms springing
up wonderful apparitions ofter themselves to us, which either have not happend,
or are not to be found in Nature. And hence it comes to pass that oftentimes
such Dreams by reason of their enormity, are thought portentous, the Cause of
which notwithstanding is Natural, viz, this commixture of forms (as if one
has seen in the day time a fine Horse, and a Man, he may Dream that he fees a
Centaure) and the common People by Reason of the diversity of dreams, which it is
no wonder that they vary so according to so many conceptions of the Mind, do
persuade themselves by a great error that every one does portend something.

Also the manner of lying by which the Animal spirits being moved, are less
quiet in their seats, but do easier change their place, make much for the
causing of more Turbulent Dreams, (as we see this may be done in Members
retained a long while in a non natural Situation, that suffer a numness by
reason of the Spirits hindered, and in a Vertigo from a wheeling of the Body by
reason of the Spirits running up and down,) as we see it happens by lying one
the Back especially the Head bending downwards, the Spirits then from the Head
penetrating more the Spinal Marrow, and so causing motion and sense, that
though they be not wakend, yet nevertheless they are more exagitated in their
Dreams.

Also a Perturbation of the Spirits of the Brain, A Perturbation of the Animal
Spirits, a Cause of Dreams.
from Impure, Filthy, Melancholic Vapors or Humors, causes Grievous and
Turbulent Dreams, and the like apparitions appearing in Sleep; and as pleasant
and merry Dreams do show forth a healthful Constitution, so these sad and
borrid Dreams for the most part show a Melancholic Constitution and oftentimes
Diseases to come; and in Diseases of this Nature, generated of Melancholy, and
a Malignat matter, together with other accidents of the Brain and Dotages they
do vehemently Exagitate a man, and also cause watchings, but Dioscorides also
writes that terrible Dreams are caused from certain things taken, as if Beans,
Lentils, Fitches be eaten, and also if the seeds of Bind weed, and Venomous
Tree Trefoile be taken, doubtless the Spirits being wont to be troubled by
their strength, they are cause Dreams.

A hot Distemper of the Brain, A hot Distemper of the Brain is the cause of
watchings and Dreams.
also heating the Spirits because it makes them unquiet, may be the Cause both
of Watchings and Preternatural Dreams, which sometimes happens from hot Vapors
proceeding from things taken, as hot Meats and especially Wine which though it
cause sleep by its Narcotickness, yet it breeds unquiet Dreams; a hot
Evaporation from Humors or Excrements, or the Bloody Humor it self inflaming
the Brain as they do produce a pain of the Head, so also Raving, Watchings, and
Grievous Turbulent Dreams, and such as resemble the Nature of the Humor,
oftentimes in Fevers, in a Frenzy, and other hot Diseases.

The Cure.
In the Cure we must respect the Cause and the Symptom, The Cure of Dreams
from a preternatural Cause.
but we have said the Cause of watchings and Dreams was from God, the Devil,
Custom, an Agitation and Perturbation of the Spirits and heat of the Brain.

The Dreams sent by God because they are good, and nothing proceeds from God
but what is good, or tends to a good end, we cannot, nor onght not to change;
the tricks of the Devil are turned away by Prayers, Fasting, amendment of life
and a steadfast Faith. Custom as a second Nature is not easily changed, The
Cure of watchings and Dreams from Custom.
but by a contrary Custom; wherefore they that are wont to be raised at a
certain hour of night; let them go to bed later or some other way let them
change this Custom, and in time of sleep, as much as they can let them abstain
from deep thoughts, also if Dreams do so accustomarily vex men, that they are
unquiet, Skip, Talk, Walk, then they are sometimes to be wakened by frighting,
for hence it comes to pass, that that fear repeated, at length offering it self
to them in their Dreams, does rouse them up of their own accord, and by degrees
turns them from this evil Custom. As one that was wont to walk in the night,
being sometimes beaten with rods at length left off this Custom; and that
Cobbler who because he thought in his Dreams that he was sowing, and with
opening his Arms, as they are wont to do drawing their thread, he smote his
companion by him, being oftentimes soundly kicked again by the same man feigning
himself to Dream that he was riding, at last he was freed from this Error.

But if they be compeld to watch, or grieved with Dreams from the too great
plenty of Spirits, the Causes which exagitate them, must first be turned away
as if sleep be hindered by too much light or noise, or they sleep unquietly,
these things must be declined, by inducing of darkness and rest: if affects of
the Mind do cause it, as has been said in that Species of Alienation of
Mind, they must be corrected, and those things be given, which can bring
gladness, and also procure rest, as Wine; but especially if too great an
intention upon some thing and Ratiocination made on it, do hinder sleep, and
the mind cannot be drawn from it to take rest, sleep is the easier procured
after this manner. The mind being called away from the former by the
Meditation of another thing, as we do observe those that watch a nights, if
they be devoutly very intent on their Prayers to God, forgetting other cares,
they do sooner fall a sleep: but if some trouble make men watchful or disturb
them in their sleep, as thirst, then salt things which do cause that, must be
omitted especially at Supper, and Sleep must be expected, which supervenient is
wont to quench thirst, if it persevere, it must be amended as shall be said in
its place so also if they sleep unquietly by reason of fullness, a sparing and
sober Supper is wont to correct this fault, and that chiefly if they sleep not
presently after the taking of meat; if a difficulty of breathing contracted by
their lying down do so vex them that they cannot sleep, they must be so placed
upright that they may breath free. And yet the Body may rest, at shall be
explained in a Dyspnaea as also if by lying on the Back they are troubled with
grievous Dreams if they sleep on their side with their Head more lift up, they
shall be less oppressed. If also a great pain in some Disease do hinder sleep,
as this is most frequent, and that cannot be mitigated by any other means, by
soporiferous medicines we shall with the same labor procure sleep and mitigate
pain, because they induce a Stupidity: rather giving them inwardly, if great
necessity do urge, because so they do work more powerfully; as with Wine, or if
we must use stronger, Syrup of Poppy and other Opiates, or we must use Unguents
applied to the Temples and Forehead such as Populeum, and Lotions of the Feet
which for the procuring of sleep also can do much, as in Hypnoticks diverse of
that sort shall be explained. If watchings or Dreams proceed from a
perturbation of the Spirits, The Cure of Dreams from a Perturbotion of the
Spirits.
the Cause also must be taken away, which if it proceed from Meat or Medicine,
we must have a care of making use of any Pulse, and other things that Evaporate
upwards; if this happen from Vapors or Humors by diligently searching out, what
Excrement sends forth its vapors upwards, what humor offends, and being intent
upon the emptying of these, if there be a plenitude, by Bleeding, if a
Cacochymie Purging, by giving those things also which do repress vapors,
especially after supper, and chiefly by the Diet at Supper being moderate,
taking care that the like be not engendered, nor ascend, we shall complete the
scope of Curing.

If a distemper of the brain cause Watchings and Dreams, and there is a certain
hot evaporation from meat or chiefly from Wine as we have said, cold things
being taken at the end of meals as was said of Vinegar and other things which
do actually refrigerate, will correct it, upon which account, some if they
drink cold Water when they go to sleep, their rest is the sweeter: but if this
happen in diseases, then those things which are convenient for curing the
disease, seeing they are cold will also do good here, especially if soporiferous
and narcotick be mixed with those things which are applied inwardly and
outwardly as has been explained in Ravings and hot Headaches.

CHAP. V. Of the hurt of Feeling.
The Kinds,
THe Sense of Feeling is first hurt, Stupidity.
when it it is abolisht, and it is called a Stupidity or Narce, not for that
reason, as when the functions of the mind are abolisht, we call it a Stupidity
or stupidness of mind; or when from the immoderate passion of the mind we say
they are astonished, so that oftentimes though they be wounded yet they feel it
not, till they come to themselves again, but here it is properly called
Stupidity, when a part is so deprived of the sense of feeling, with which it
was endued, that it can no longer perceive the qualities of the thing objected,
and that either altogether not perceiving as if it were dead, or otherwise very
impairedly as if, as it is commonly said, it were asleep.

Otherwise a stupidity is general, at once happenning to many parts of the
body, which most commonly happens in a Palsy motion being abolisht together
with sense, in which the palsied member, either is wholly stupid or only in
part; sometimes a stupidity seizes first before motion is abolisht, and goes
before a Palsy and at last ends it; that general sttpidity is seldom found
alone yet Fernelius testisies that he saw the like happen from Drunkenness, in
which the body was all over stupid.

A particular stupidity happens only to certain parts, not only to those
affected with a particular Palsy but that sometimes is wont to happen to parts
that are not palsied, sometimes in the Hands, Feet, Face, as I had after an
Epidemical disease a stupidity left me in part of my Hip for many years; and
perhaps that may happen intrinsecally in the Bladder and Fundament not only
when they are palsied, but also only the sense of feeling being abolisht, they
lose their goad, and are not solicited to excretion to perform it rightly, and
it may be the cause why some are sometimes so slow to stool and piss, as shall
be said there: but also in those parts endued with sense of feeling, which are
no ways moved with voluntary motion, and therefore cannot be palsied, as the
Skin, Membranes, inward bowels, Stomach, Guts, this solitary Stupidity may
happen, as well as in others which are moved.

The sense of Feeling is depraved, not when it is so affected by its object,
that there is a sad sensation, which they call pain and refer it to the sense
of feeling depraved, but we because it then percieves its object such as it is,
and as it offers it self, do think that pain is not to be referred to the
depraved sense, but rather to the simple accidents amongst the symptoms, as we
shall say in its place; but when it perceives falsely, and errs as it were, as
the other senses do, when they think they See, Hear, Taste, those things which
are no ways such as are represented; the feeling we say if it be thus
affected, does perceive depravedly.

Such is that sense which from the touch of any thing feels it not rightly but
the patt feels in it self somewhat else, A Fornication.
as when they feel a certain running up and done through a part as it were of
Ants whence the Modern have called this affect a Formication.

Also that other sense when a member touched with Air or Water they depravedly
feel it to be affected and perfused, A false sense of heat and cold without and
within.
as if they were excessively cold or bnrning hot.

To which also is added a new Species more rare, first of all sometimes observed
by me that is a troublesome sense of the Air or Water, Hot or Cold, about the
Gullet and Stomach chiefly manifesting it self in swallowing; a symptom
sometimes befalling the Paralitical or Convulsed with difficulty of Swallowing,
Speaking, Laughing, Coughing, as shall be showed in them; or also without the
resolution of those parts very much tormenting men, only with this troublesome
sense.

Hither also is referred the Sense of vehement and intolerable heat, with which
we have seen a Man troubled in his Jaws and Cheeks, and a Woman also on the
sides of her Tongue, without any appearance, even to the last, very long for
many years.

Which Sensation we may refer to the depraved sense of Feeling, or if this
happen the member being half stupid, and nevertheless perceiving this trouble
(whence Archigenes called it a stupid pain not so unhansomly, as he is
reprehended for it by Galen) we may at least refer it to the sense of Feeling
impaired, or hold it an Affect compounded of these.

Whither also we refer that troublesome sense which sometimes is wont to besall
the Teeth in chewing, which they call Haemodia, Haemodia.
and count it a stupidity of the Teeth.

To which also seems due to be ascribed that sense of the highest pain, which
the Fingers being cooled even to a stupidity, and suddenly again Heated,
reaching even to the roots of the Nails, by reason of the praeceding stupidity,
yet because here happens a high and lasting Pain by reason of the sudden change
and alteration we shall refer it to pains and there explain it.

The Causes.
The Cause almost of every true Stupidity lies in a Nerve, which may be in
every Nerve, seeing every Nerve is endued with the sense of feeling, and does
communicate the same to the part into which it is inserted, with an influx of
the animal spirit and communication of its own substance, as we have taught in
our Anatomical work; the which being thus affected, that communication is
intercepted, or wholly, or in part, impeded, if this come to pass in a Nerve,
which being inserted into a Muscle, together with the sense of feeling does
give it motion too, it must needs be that both a Resolution and Stupidity do
happen together, as shall be said in a Palsy; which when it comes to pass in a
general Nerve affected and communicated to many parts, there must needs follow
also a more general hurt common to many Muscles, An affect of the motary Nerve
is the Cause of a stupidty happening with a Palsy Resolution or without it.
and yet not only to them, but also to the Skin and Membranes, seeing from the
Nerves of the Muscles, branches carried to these parts also do bestow on them
the sense of feeling; but if it happen in some private Nerve carried to one
part only, then it must needs be that that only is hurt; as this shall be more
fully explained, in the Resolution of Voluntary motion or a Palsy, seeing this
Function which is abolisht, is the more excellent.

But from the forementioned affect of the same Nerve, whether it be a general
or particular one it may come to pass, that Motion may languish or cease, the
sense of feeling remaining nevertheless, either entire, or at leastwise
obtusely, seeing for the exercise of motion, there is, required a greater
firength of spirits, than to feeling, as also shall be explained in a Palsy.

Yet it may also come to pass, that a Nerve being affected, An affect of the
sensitive Nerve is the Cause of stupidity without a resesolution.
there may only be a Stupidity, motion still remaining in the part, viz. if
only a sensitive Nerve be affected, which ends not in the Muscles, but in the
Skin or a Membrane, or only in their other immovable bowels; which eminent
cutaneous Nerves, we have showed in the divisions of the great Nerves, are only
implicated in the Skin and Membranes, and carried to the natural parts, Nerves
of the fixth and seventh conjugation do only communicate the sense of feeling
to many of those parts which are not moved; and other sensitive Nerves are
carried from the motary Nerves inserted in the Muscles, to those parts also
which are not moved, which sensitive Nerves or motary Nerves also being hurt,
but carried out of the Muscle, then it happens that that part only becomes
stupid into which they are inserted, either altogether, or in part, according
to the greatness of the hurt; yet the cause of all which may be the same as
that of a Resolution, only differing in the diverse seat.

Also that Depraved sense of Formication so called, The affects both of the
motary and sensitive Nerves cause Formication
with trouble in the parts may happen by reason of any Nerve whatsoever, both
Sensitive and Motary, to wit then, when the Animal spirit being retained a
while in the stupid or palsied Member does run back again into it, with a
certain force and violence, the impediment being taken away, for then about the
extremity of the Member especially, as about the Fingers whether the spirit is
carried at the first violence, or elsewhere also where it reaches, an itching
and sense of pricking does trouble them up and down, the spirit every where
pricking as it were and tickling the member, so long, til they being
sufficiently flowed to it, the part return to its ancient absolute sense of
feeling; the which also sometimes happens upon the strong percussion or smting
of some sensible Nerve, as on that which wound about the gibbous part of the
elbow runs forth to the little and ring-finger, which being violently forced by
a fall, these two fingers, suffer that sense of Formication for a while til the
Nerve which was comprest by the blow be dilated again, and the spirit being
sufficiently transmitted, the which also may happen in other places in
cutaneous Nerves.

As also a Nerve being filled with the Afflux of a cold humor, The affect of a
Nerve both motary and sensitive induces a depraved sense of heat or cold.
the members which are affected do perceive a Sense of that Air, or of Cold
Water (as we find with our Tongue, the like cold air comes forth out of a
hollow Tooth that is troubled with a cold defluxion) The which hot Air or Water
from the plenty and violence of a hot spirit, which cannot pass a Nerve
obstructed, being there plentifully gathered together, by its heat giving such
a sense, in like manner as was said of the Cold, molests the member which it
affects; which as it may happen in all the Nerves that bring resolution also or
stupidity so also it happens in them which, from the sixth and seventh
conjugation give motion and sense to the vital and natural parts, it produces
about the Stomach and Gullet that heat we meet with as has been said: the
Causes of which we shall more rightly explain in a Palsy, seeing that does
either go before, or accompany, or follow these affects.

That the Cause of Stupidity may be in the Instrument of the sense of feeling,
An affect of the membranes and skin producing stupidity without palsying.
to wit in the skin and Membranes, seems very likely, seeing their substance is
made up of a Nerve dilated, not when the native heat being wholly extinguished,
these parts die by a Gangrene, but when they are stupid only, so that these
instruments of sense either feel nothing or obtusely; the which Fernelius has
writ has sometimes happened in the skin of the whole body, as has bin already
said, from Drunkenness; in which case if Wine did not do this by its Narcotick
virtue, because it caused a general stupidity as has been said in a
Consternation of mind, certainly its Narctick faculty did manifest it self only
in abolishing the sense of the Skin; the which notwithstanding could scarce be
done by Wine or other Narcoticks, but also the virtue of the brain and Nerves
must be dulied too; and therefore after the Drunkenness was over, perhaps by
reason of the external coldness of the Air, in which Drunkards oftentimes lie
astonished, it might befall this Drunkard also his skin being thus stupefied:
seeing the cold from without being a long while received perhaps may sometimes
cause such a stupidity in some part of the skin which endured this cold: for
otherwise this can scarce happen from an internal cause; bur how it has
hitherto been believed that the insensible and stupid skin of the Elephantiacal
is rendered so from some internal cause and Disease of the skin, that being
pricked it feels not, and upon what account that is true, we shall declare in the
Elephantiasis.

Neither could I ever find, that by an external Narcotick applied to the skin,
that could be rendered stupid or free from pain, that I might know somewhat
certain, I have applied a Mass of Opium mollified to a Gouty part full of pain,
but without any profit; but what they write for truth that this may be done
from the touch of a Torpedo not only taken in the hand, but also if it be
touched with a Fishers Rod, it will stupifie his hand; I seeing I observed no
such thing at Mo^tpelior where they handle and eat Torpedoes dare not affirm it
for truth; wherefore we say this disease is rare, and which can scarce happen,
that the skin only became insensible, the member which it covers not being
stupid too by reason of the Nerve affected; unless perhaps occasion be given,
when by reason of an impediment, that the Skin being more thick and hard, then
that it can perceive the true feeling of any thing exactly, we would call it
the cause of that Stupidity the which notwithstanding is no ways a true
Stupidity.

The Membranes also being Intrinsecally affected, and Nerves not hurt too, a
Stupidity can scarce happen for their sake only.

And neither is that Stupidity which befalls the Teeth or rather that trouble
when the teeth are an edge from the Teeth alone, An affect of the Nerves about
the Teeth, causes a Haemodia.
because they are distitute of the sense of feeling as other Bones, but that
the Teeth are too much exasperated and refrigerated by the eating of acid and
cold things, which both by their thinness and coldness are enemies to the Teeth
and Nerves, that happens from the continuation of the Nerves and the sensible
Membrane with their roots, by which it comes to pass that the Tooth it self
seems to feel. The like Distemper may be impressed by contact on that part where
the Teeth touch, and so their feeling being changed, as when the Teeth being
pressed in chewing, they press them as swelling up, thence arises that trouble
some sense which they call the Teeth an edge.

The Cure.
The Cure of a Stupidity because it has joined with it other, The Cure of a
Stupidity from what cause soever.
and for the most part grievous Symptoms, which proceed from the same cause,
it shall rather be explained in them, that we need not repeat the same cure
twice: as if it be by fault of the Nerves as we have said that all Stupidity
happens by reason of them, and there be a resolution also, the same cure is due
to them both, as shall be explained in a Palsy, or though that be not yet
present, but only a Stupidity possesses the part, yet because it proceeds from
the same cause as a Palsy does, whence they call Stupidity, a Diminute or
imperfect Palsy with the same labor, the Cure of it also will be described
there.

The sum of which Cure is this, That if it be from a Humor it be emptied, if
from blood by the taking away of Blood by Revulsion and Derivation, if from
phlegm or other Excrementitious Hnmors, by purging it out with general and
particular Purgers, if from any other external cause by removing of that in the
first place, also by refreshing and strengthening the Nerves with things that
alter. Then that we Allure and Attract the Animal Spirit to the stupid part
which is destitute of it, by things that do it actually and potentially, the
which shall be explained in a Palsy and Atrophy, because they attract the
blood also, amongst which these are chiesly used in the Cure of a Stupid Member.

By Friction of the Stupid part with the Hand, applying also warm clothes, by
Application of Cupping-glasses with much Flame, by Pication also often
repeated, and by other things that cause pain, we allure the Spirits.

Also rubefying Sinapismes are used, applied to the ^ffected part, anointings
with diverse hot Oils, amongst which that is chiefly commended, in which
Nettle-seed has been boiled; also Time, Rue, and other things appropriate to
the Nerves are commended, and other Ointments which we are wont to use in an
Atrophy, we use here also.

Fomentations and Baths of warm water, first a little warm, by and by hotter
are convenient, increasing the heat by degrees, to which we add sometimes Wine
and Lie, and oftentimes we boil in it, Time, Rue, Sage, Chamomel, and hot
Seeds.

A Cataplasm of Pigeons dung, Goose dung, adding Bayberries, is approved of,
also with Oils and Fats and hot Herbs,

The treading of Grapes, if the Feet be stupid, or if the stupid Member be
thrust into a heap of fresh Grapes whiles they are hot, or be dipped in new Wine
are accounted for singular remedies in turning away the Stupidity.

Also the which forementioned Topic Remedies applied to the whole Body may do
good, if the Stupidity come from a too great refrigeration of the Skin and the
Nerves lying under it.

And if a depraved or impaired sense of feeling arise in the said Formication
or with a sense of that Air or Water, The Cure of Formication and the false
sense of heat and cold.
because here also is some Stupidity, it shall be cured after the same manner.

But if in the same sense depraved the pain does exceed the Stupidity as in the
Stupidity of the Teeth, The Cure of a Haemodia Tobe explained in the pain of
the Teeth, as also of the pain about the Nails.
which they call Haemodia, or in the pain of the fingers reaching unto the
Nails as has been said, the Cure shall be more rightly explained in the pains
of those parts which are afflicted.

CHAP. VI. Of the hurt of Tasting.
The Kinds.
THe Tasting fails, because the Gustatory instrument does not perceive at all
or impairedly, The defect of Tasting.
the savours of things; the which because it is endued also with the sense of
Feeling, either it looses the same also with the Taste, or the Taste only is
weakend, he sense of Feeling remaning.

A Depravation of the sense of Tasting, is when it perceives the savors of
things not such as they are, A Depraved or false Tasting.
but conceives them as if they were of another relish, then indeed they are,
as when those things which it tastes, whether they be Infipid, Alimental or
Medicamental, it thinks them to be dry, Sweet, Salt, Bitter, Sharp, Sour, when
yet their relish indeed is nothing such.

The Causes.
The Cause of the hurt of Tasting seldom lies in a Nerve, unless the Brain
being hurt too as was said in an Apoplexy does produce an Abolition of all the
senses, of which we have already treated; but more commonly in the Instrument
of the sense of Tasting, viz. in the common coat encompassing the mouth.
chiefly there where it invests the Tongue and Gits the Palate, if it be either
too much dried, or covered with filth, or besmeared with a strange Humor or
Vapo^r.

If it be too much dried and hardened in that called a Roughness and Ruggedness,
The dryness of the coat compassing the Mouth, is the cause of the defect of
Tasting.
then the taste is hindered, or lost, or impaired so that all things seem unto
them to be tastless and wooden, as they are wont to complain, because for the
sense to perceive aright, a decent softness and moisture are required.

But this proceeds from the Inspiration or drawing in of the Air not by the
Nostrils (because so the Air naturally passing through the largness of the
Nostrils presently into the rough Artery, and not touching the inward parts of
the Mouth, it can no ways dry them) but when it is drawn with an open Mouth,
then sucking up the moisture of the Tongue and Jaws, and by so much the more,
if it be both hot and dry, it dries up those parts, and makes them hard and
rough, and unfed and useless to taste aright, the which as it is wont to happen
to the waking, so especially to those that sleep with their Mouth open, both
sound and sick, either from an evil custom or because the Nostrils being
obstructed when the Natural way of respiration is stopped up, either wholly or in
part, they are compeld to draw in the Air through the Mouth either all of it
or the greatest part, if it come not sufficiently through the Nose.

The which also comes to pass, if the Body being too much heated they have need
of a greater inspiration of the Air, The dryness of the Coat compassing the
Mouth with blackness is the cause of the want of Tasting.
then the Nostrils alone can admit, that then they draw it both with full
Nostrils, which upon that account are at that time wont to spread themselves for
drawing in of Breath. and with an open and dilated mouth, as it befalls them in
their sleep who have filled themselves with hot Meats; and in hot Diseases,
internal Inflammations and Fevers the dryness of the Tongue is a frequent
Symptom, in which the necessity of Inspiration does not so vehemently dry
those parts, as the hot Expiration kindled from those hot Diseases not only
passing through the Nostrils but the Jaws also and dies them with a Black, or
Green, or Yellow color.

Which dryness of the Tongue, Jaws and Nostrils is felt by the Patients
themselves, because they very much complain of them, and the Chyrurgeon may
easily know it, by the touch, and sight; the which also oftentimes grows so
strong, that the Tongue appears cleft, not only long ways, but cut cross
ways also, and when for these causes they utter their words ill, the Patients
oftentimes stutter, whence the Physician sometimes guesseth at these affects of
the Tongue, before he looks upon it.

If the Tongue or Jaws be covered with that called Slime that they cannot by
contact exactly perceive the savors of things, The slime of the Coat compassing
the Mouth, the cause of the defect of Tasting.
they are so hindered byinterposition of this infensible matter, that those
things which they taste seem to have no relish. But this Slime is generated of
the Spittle; otherwise naturally moisting the Jaws, but then especially in
those places where it adheres to the Jaws, either by reason of its dryness
obtaining a Tenacity, or by the mixture of some other humor, having gotten a
thickness. For it is dried for the same cause, from which we have said the
Succingent Coat was arefied, whence a dryness of the Jaws and plenty of this
slime, especially on the Tongue do often concure in the same causes and
Diseases, and then also they do more prejudice the Taste the Cause being
doubled; but the spittle grows thick there by mixture, by reason of a Vapor
continually evaporating upwards from the first concoction, cleaving to the
Tongue, Jaws and Teeth (to which thisslimy matter grows, and at length is
turned into that which is Tophous) and mixed with the spittle sometimes with
various colors and stinkingness fouling those parts: the which also is wont to
happen in sound Bodies, especially if they sleep at night with their mouth
wholly shut, so that the Vapor ascending cannot evaporate, and they do not wash
their mouth in the morning; whence the forementioned parts for the most part
are successively infected with this white slime, and in sick people resembling
the condition of the putrid and malignant humors, being sometimes white like
pulse, sometimes yellowish, sometimes black it affects and bespots the Tongue,
Jaws and Teeth, but the spittle being made more Tenatious by the mixture of
Phlegm, sticks to these parts, as if it were glewed; the which also oftentimes
befalls the sound from defluxions, or the sick, and sometimes for that reason
acquires so great a Viscosity, that it can scarce be washed or scraped off: and
also it takes from Tenacious Viscous Nourishments, a certain viscosity, by
which it grows to the said parts.

And this slime is easily known by its color and substance, and by this the
affect, whence it proceeds.

The Coat also encompassing the mouth destined for tasting is seasoned with a
Humor and Vapor endued with a strange savor, A seasoning of the Tongue the
cause of a depraved taste.
the which as long as it perceives, it cannot rightly apprehend other things
offered to the taste, and judge what they are, but thinks them also to be of the
same savor, with that which it is already affected with.

This sometimes comes to pass from some things taken whose savor is so imprinted
on the taste, that it cannot so quickly yield and give place to other savors, or
being mixed with them, it does also present a false savor of the thing unto the
taste; the which ungrateful things do, if they be taken often, or those things
which do very much affect the taste with a strong savor. As when meats endued
with an Alimental savor are offered to the sick, which for the most part, they
are wont to loath, and are thrust in as it were by force, then whatsoever they
take afterward though of another savor they persuade themselves, has the same
Alimental relish, or smells of it: and when sweet things are given to those
that are feverish, being for the most part ungrateful to them, they judge all
things afterward to be sweet; and also in the sound, things being tasted that
are very Bitter, Salt, Austere, and adhearing long, they do chang the relish
of those things that follow; and hence it comes to pass that after taking of
rotten cheese after Vinegar in sauces, if they drink Wine, it appears not such
as it is, but either bitter, or to others more sweet, according to the
diversity of Natures.

A strange savor proceeding from an internal Cause does also deprave the Taste
if such a Vapor or Humor do infinuate it self into the Coat which perceives the
the Taste. And hence it comes to pass, that sometimes they think all things
which they taste to be sweet, if sweet Phlegm, or a sweet and alimental Vapor
ascending from the Nourishment out of the Stomach, does season the said Coat.

Or if an acid Vapor belcht up from the Chyle which we have elsewhere shown is
always acid, or from meat half digested, or four Wine taken, or by vomiting
raised up even to the mouth, they do infect the mouth with an acid savor. Or a
salt savor also may be imprinted on the said parts from the Serum or salt Phlegm
falling thither; or when the Mouth is so bitter that it judges all things
which it tastes to be bitter too, which oftentimes happens by reason of Choler
if it be collected in the Stomach, by a certain communion with the Coat
incompassing the mouth, which does also invest the Stomach; and also in
choleric sound bodies if by long fasting it be carried thither, or being moved
with Anger it be poured thither; or in other choleric Diseases and Fevers,
either abounding in quantity, or boiling with heat it empty it self into the
Stomach, or be generated there from things taken that produce Choler, or that
do end in Choler by Corruption.

The Cure.
This disease if it proceed by consent from the Nerves or the Brain, its Cure
will be common with that of an Apoplexy and other resolutions of the Nerves
which then are also present: but if the gustatory instrument the Coat of the
Tongue and Jaws be affected by Idiopathie, and that either grow dry or be
coverd with slime, or be seasoned with a strange savor, to these the Indication
of Cure shall be applied.

In a Dryness the Cause must first be turned away, which if it arise from an
evil custom that they sleep with their Mouth open, it must be changed by
forbearing to use it; The Cure of the want of Tasting from the dryness of the
coat of the mouth.
especially if they are compelled to breath so, their Nostrils being obstructed,
then if they sleep with their head placed higher, and the pillow under it be
raised up, experience teaches that they may thus attract the Air more freely,
because the largeness of the Nostrils is then the more dilated; and if snivel
or phlegm obstruct the Nostrils, they must be purged by Errhines and if a hotter
course of living does bring this dryness, let them abstain from hot and salt
meats, let them dilute their Wine well, let them use Sallets at Supper
especially, of Lettice, Succory, and the like, and let them not heat their body
too much no other ways; then that the Air may not often enter the mouth and
dry it, they ought to speak little, and spit seldom, seeing the spittle
retained a long time, because it is glutinous, does chiefly moisten the Tongue,
and if it be dried, does lenifie it again.

If this happen in some Internal hot disease especially as in burning and
Continual Fevers the Cure must chiefly be directed, to extinguish the heat of
the Fever, and chiefly then, cold Epithems must often be applied, to the
Heart, Liver, and parts from whence the heat chiefly arises. Afterward
Remedies shall be fitted to the coat of the mouth by lenifying and moistning
this roughness with things soft, glutinous, and fat, which either they may keep
in their mouth, chew, lick, or wash the mouth with them, or if they cannot, let
their Tongue be anointed with the Finger or a Stick applied to them.

Prunes, Tamarinds, Sebestens, such as are kept dried, if being mollified
again, with a gentle heat, they be kept in the mouth, lenifying with their
grateful relish, they correct this fault.

Fresh Apples sliced, chewed and held a little in the mouth, de perform the
same, as also the flesh and juice of Melons, Guords and especially of Citruls,
fresh Purslane as being eaten it does presently correct the roughness of the
Teeth, so also it does very much lenifie the jaws, the which also Lettice held
in the Mouth and chewed, does.

If those things be contained in the Mouth, which do actually Refrigerate, by
extinguishing the heat they correct the dryness, as Cold water, and Stones
amongst which the Crystal is believed to bring somewhat peculiar.

The following Remedies also must be licked, or put into their Mouth which do
correct the dryness of the Tongue and Jaws, by their mucilaginiousness.

As, Take the white of one Egg, beat it well with Sugar til it grow white, use
it.

Or thus, Take of the Mucilage of the seeds of Quinces and Fleawort extracted
with Rose Water, of each half an ounce; Syrup of Violets one ounce, mix them
well.

Or, Take of the aforesaid Composition one ounce, to which also you may add of
the Mucilage of Apple kernels and seeds of Mallows half an ounce, the Infusion
of Gum Tragacanth in Rose Water half an ounce, Sugar candy (espocially if the
Tongue be foul too) Honey of Roses of each two drams, mix them.

These Compositions made a little thicker being received in broad baggs, and
often moistened with Rosewater, he may lay on his Tongue, and so keep them a
while; or let Clothes be moistened in these Liquors and be applied in like
manner.

Which also may be done in this Decoction. Take of Sweet Prunes six, Violet
flowers one pugil (because they have a glutinousness) Barley cleansed one ounce,
Quince seeds two drams, Fleawort one dram, Gum Tragacanth half a dram, boil
them in Water for the said use, adding a little Honey or Sugar.

Things somewhat Unctuous, but made of those which are most pleasing, being
administered after the same manner, do egregiously contemperate this dryness.

Of which sort this is, Take of Fresh Butter, or instead of that, Oil of sweet
Almonds newly drawn, as much as is sufficient, White Sugar, or Candy, or Sugar
of Roses, beat them together, and let him lick it.

Or thus, Take the white of one Egg, Starch Corn one dram, Milk as much as will
suffice, beat them well, boil them a little till it becomes a Frumenty, add of
fresh Butter the like quantity, the whitest Sugar as much as is sufficient,
make a Hasty pudding, which let him use.

The Fat of a Hen or Capon boiled a little that it may be the more grateful,
may perform the same.

Syrups of Violets, Jujubes, or others, may be licked so, or held in the Mouth.

Lotions for the Mouth may be made of the same things, dissolved for this use.

Or after this manner, Take of Syrup of Violets, Jujubes, of each one ounce and
an half; the Decoction of Barley cleansed four ounces, let him use it.

Or thus, Take of the fresh Leaves of Purslane and Lettice of each one handful;
the flowers of Autumn Mallows, Dogshhead, Barley cleansed, of each one pugil;
the Roots of Liquorish one ounce, the seeds of Fleawort two drams, the seeds of
Poppy one dram, boil them in Water, and in one pound dissolve the white of one
Egg beaten, Honey of Roses cleansed, Syrup of Violets, of each one ounce; let
him use it.

It is very convenient to wash the Mouth often with cold Milk, especially with
Butter-milk.

But if that Blackness, Greenness, The Cure of the want of Tasting from a
dryness of the Tongue with blackness joined to it.
Yellowness, joined with the Dryness, does signify that the Tongue also is
infected by Malignant vapors it is an ill sign, and so much the worse, if heat
be added to it. ^ then those things being first administered which are due to a
burning, malignant or pestilent Fever, we must use things more cold and
repressing malignity, especially acid things, adding always some things
Lenitive, that they do not too much exasperate, of which also we will treat in
the Inflammations of the Jaws, to which also we add these following.

Let them keep in their mouth sharp Fruits and chew them, as of Physic fruits,
Orenges, Lemmons, Citrons or Pomegranats, or other Apples, Prunes, Cherries,
Currants, and bunches of Barberries, and of herbs, Sorrel, Lettice, Purslane,
but first steeped in Vinegar or acid juyces; or in Sallets, as flowers of
Succory, Violets, with Vinegar, and the like.

Then let them wash their Mouth often with Rosevinegar diluted with Water; or
with Sorrel-water.

Or with the Acid Broth of that seasoning of Coleworts and Rapes, and use that
Acid Liquor either crude, or distilled first, which is Surgeons most
excellent Remedy for these things approved on by experience.

If a little Camphire be added to pure Water it is also a fit Remedy.

Or let it be made after this manner, Take of Rosewater three ounces,
Nightshade water two ounces, the white of one Eg beaten, Camphire dissolved in
Vinegar half a scruple, mix them.

Or such a Julep, Take of simple Syrup of Vinegar two ounces, of simple Oxymel
one ounce, the waters of Roses, Violets, Water Lillies, of each three ounces;
mix them.

Some commend this very much, Take of the Water of the greater Housleek, to
which add a little Salt Ammoniack.

Yet after the use use of these, we must always come to those things which
Lenifie also, the which have been already spoken of.

Amongst which this also is commended above the rest. Take of the pulp of
Gueard seeds, choice Manna, Sugar candy, of each one dram; with simple Oxymel
make Forms, which he may keep in his mouth.

The other Remedies, especially if there be a great heat joined and as it were
an Inflammation, are explained in the Inflammations of the Jaws.

If slime growing to the Tongue and Jaws, do prejudice the Taste, and do also
bring trouble, by its tenacity and stinking, the cause must first be removed.

Which if it proceed only from the taking glutinous things it is easily
prevented by washing the mouth always after meat taken, The Cure of the want
of Tasting from slime of the coat compassing the mouth.
till the relics of these meats, or thick juice, which do adhere, be washed of.

The same must be done also in the morning always after they are up, if such
filth be collected, either by reason of this Cause or from Vapors raised from
the Meats at night, and the Teeth must be diligently cleansed and rubbed, as
also shall be explained in their faults.

And that Fewer and less thick Vapors may arise, we must take Care the Supper
be sober.

And lest that these exhalations being retained in the mouth, in progress of
time may grow to the said parts, they must accustom to sleep with the mouth a
little open, which when some are not used to do, by interposing a cloth, or
holding a little cane in their mouth, they ought to make a way for the vapor.

If phlegm breed this Tenacity in the Spittle, the afflux of that must be
diverted, and that must be forced and spit forth by hawking, premising if it
come hard, the Lotions that shall presently be named, to cut and cleanse it.

But if the Cause or a hot Disease, an acute, malignant Fever, by drying or
sending up filthy vapors and so incrassating the Spittle, do produce this thick
filthy slime; first having respect to the Disease and the Cause as has already
been said formerly, Topic means as well in this as in another persevering
cause, must be apdlied to the part affected as follows.

We take then out of the Mouth chiefly from the Tongue, Teeth, Gums and Jaws,
this slime if it abound very much, with those things which have ^n absterfive
power, and if it be very tenacious, incisive also, with which are mixed things
lenitive, that they may not exasperate the Tongue, especially if that be dry
too, applying also things that work^actually, in the interim ever and anon
washing it, and if it yield not easily, seraping it.

The mouth is washed with things abstersive, as with the Decoction of whole
Barley. Also with Whey, with Milk and Sugar.

Or with this following, Take of whole Barley, Red Pease or Vetches of each one
pugil; roots of Liquorish one ounce, Figs twenty, flowers of Autumn Mallows one
pugil, make a Decoction and in one pound dissolve of Honey or Sugar two ounces.

After washing let him hold Sugar candy in his mouth, or Lozenges of Sugar,
Roses, or Manus Christi, or let him lick a little Honey of Roses.

If there be need of a greater Abstersion and Cutting, cerrain hotter things
and acid things are added too, if the phlegm be very tenacious.

As, Take of Barley, Vetches, of each one pugil; Liquorish one ounce and an
half, Leaves of Sage, Marjoram, Hysop, of each two drams; Quince seed one dram,
make a Decoction in Water and white Wine, add Honey of Roses two ounces, Sugar
Candy one ounce, wine of Pomegranates or Vinegar a litttle, mix them, make a
Lotion for the Mouth; if you add as much Alum or a good quantity of it, when
it is very tough, it is most powerfully abstersive.

Or, Take of the waters of Roses, Plantans, Nightshade, of each two ounces; the
waters of Sage, Marjoram, of e^ch one ounce; simple Oxymel two ounces, white
Wine Vinegar a little.

Let him take often one spoonful of Oxysaccharum, or Hydromel, or of simple
Oxymel, or of Squils, if it be very tenacious, and after some time let him wash
his mouth, and again repeat the Syrups, to which if it give not way, some
portion of Alum must be mixed with them.

Or Vinegar of Squils diluted must be held in the mouth, with which I have
sometimes observed, that the most tenacious matter, which formely could be taken
away by no means, has at length departed from the mouth.

This matter also must be scraped off, if it stick pertinaciously, yet so that
we do not too much exasperate the Tongue, and so give occasion to a greater
Inflammation, especially if it be very dry and cleft, in which thing
Surgeons offend often.

But this is done by rubbing the Tongue, as also the Teeth, Palate, with the
finger or an Instrument fitted for it, coverred with a Linen cloth, and dipped
in the Lotions abovementioned; which also is commodiously done with the Leaves
of Sage, Mint, moistened after the like manner: also that filthiness is scruped
off with a round usual Instrument made of Sallow or silver, such as Surgeons
have, drawing it leasurely over the Tongue, in the interim oftentimes washing
the mouth and by and by again lenifying the Tongue with an Ointment; but
oftentimes the phlegm is so tenacious and the slime thick like Frumenty it may
be laid hold on by the hands and so taken forth, or drawn, and by that means
forced to yield.

If a Vapor or Humor season and fill up the Tongue with a strange savor, The
Cure of a depraved taste from the seasoning of the Tongue.
that it perceives not other things at all, or amiss, the cause also must first
of all be declined.

Which if it proceed from things taken, seeing it does no ways induce a long
lasting affect, and cease of its own accord, it is neglected; or will easily
be amended with the contraries, as shall be said by and by.

But if this arise from an internal disease, a filthy vapor or a choleric
alimentary humor heaped up there, the intention of curing is directed, to the
evacuation of these humors, and healing the Diseases.

But if that adverse savor does no ways cease the cause being taken away, but
persevering a long time, be troublesome to those otherwise sound and to the
sick, the contrary savor being procured by things given, we either take away or
amend the former which did trouble.

So the Sweet savor as well the Alimental as that which is sweet indeed being
very adverse for the most part to the Feverish and other sick folks, the which
notwithstanding was otherwise most grateful to them in health, is corrected
chiefly with acid or tart things, which do not only mend that, but also bring
an appetite too, which sweet things take away, and assuage the thirst, which
sweet things increase; which acid things let them keep in their mouth, and
lick, amongst which acid Cherries such as are wont to be kept dried and
softened again, and many others of that nature, which shall be explained in
thirst do very much and this nauseous unsweetness of the mouth.

The which bitter things also do likewise correct, being more acceptable to
some natures, especially if they confist of a sweet smell as principally
Wormwood in Wine which adds a greater gratfulness to it.

As the bitter savor again too long sticking on the Taste is corrected with
Sweet or Acid things, and with those that are insipid, which also do dull the
virtues of them which otherwise would inflame the Jaws.

With which also the salt savor is contemperated, as again the salt savor is
dulled with things insipid.

CHAP. VII. Of the hurt of Seeing.
The Kinds.
THe Sight is wholly abolisht in some, Blindness.
that at all times and always they see nothing, and it is called Blindness; in
which Species if no fault appear in the Eyes which may hinder seeing, and they
are blind with open and clear Eyes, it is called Amaurosis; Amaurosis a kind of
blindness.
for if either a Speck or a Coat, or a Humor appearing about the black of the
Eye, makes them Blind it obtains a private name from the Cause as shall be said
in the Cause.

But otherwise they lose their sight only, at a certain time, the which
nevertheless by and by returns again, no impediment then also being conspicuous
in the Eyes; as when from an external cause by reason of brightness or
darkness, objected too much or too suddenly to the Eyes. Scotoma an
Obtenebration a kind of blindness.
Tthey are so darkened, that the seeing being hindered first as it were with a
Cloud or Fume impeding, through which there seem to run, certain small bodies
sometimes dyed with a red' yellow, or black color, by and by is for a while
wholly taken away, in the affect which is called Scotoma.

Sometimes the Sight is only impaired in some, Amblyopia a weakness of the Sight.
when those species of things which the sight otherwise ought naturally to
attain to, wheresoever and whenever, they behold not well, or obscurely; and
that for the most part, no cause also showing it self in the Eyes and they call
it Amblyopia that is an obscurity, dullness or darkness of the sight. Darkness a
kind of weakness of Sight.
Although some think if the Eyes by some manifest fault do see impairedly as
with a mist before them, it might more properly be called a dullness, and in old
folks they call this fault a darkness.

Hither also is referred that weakness of sight, The sight perceiving things
distant more rightly than near.
when the sight perceives things near no better than those remote as naturally
it ought to do, but those near the Eyes it apprehends less than things distant,
and therefore when they would see small things, or read them, they are forced
to remove them far from their Eyes; a fault familiar to those that grow old,
which when it may be amended by a fit pair of Spectacles, let them continually
use them in apprehending of smaller things, for which cause I am wont to call
it The old folks sight.

But it happens also on the contrary manner that some can no ways judge rightly
of things remote, Sight not rightly discerning things a little distant.
yet not so remote that sound men also cannot sufficiently see them by reason
of the too great distance, but only removed for a little space, although they
be very great; whence oftentimes not knowing their Neighbors, they pass them
by unsaluted; Pictures, Writings, unless they draw near with their Eyes, they
can neither see nor read handsomely, unless they use spectacles appropriate to
correct this fault, imbred for the most part with young folks from their birth
and remaining even unto extreme old age, which approaching, sometimes it comes
to pass, that then they see better those things distant which they saw less in
youth, and how much the elder they grow, so much the farther sighted, which
species therefore I am wont to call, The young man's sight.

But of those also who do less behold things somewhat remote, Sight not rightly
judging of things unless close to the Eyes is Myopia.
there are some who unless they apply close to their Eyes things somewhat small
or writings as it is commonly said, touch them with their Nose, they cannot
rightly discern or read them, beholding them with askew and closed eyes who
from their cradle even unto old age for the most part, seeing after this manner
are called Myopes, some of which are helped by the benefit of Spectacles,
others not.

We meet also with another weakness of Seeing, Nyctalopes.
when at night by the light of a Candle, they see little or nothing almost, but
in day time by daylight they perceive no impediment in their sight which they
call Nyctalopes, the Latins call Lusciosi.

But it happens also in some, that they see in the Night in the dark without
light more acutely than in the day time, The Evening Eyesight.
as Owls, a rare disposition which they call the Evening Eyesight, for we
would rather retain those names which are usual and rightly design the things,
then confound them amongst themselves as commonly they do, signifying many
things by one name.

The Seeing is depraved first of all when things are represented unto it
otherwise than they are indeed, Hallucination.
as if they see those things which are single for double, as sometimes it fares
with Drunkards, who behold straight things for crooked, or some other way
things under a false shape, which fault is called Hallucination.

Secondly if they think and Imagine with themselves that they see things that
are not whence they call this affect Imagination; Imagination
as it happens when in an Alienation of mind and Ravings, as has been said
there, they think that they see diverse apparitions whiles they are waking, such
as otherwise they are wont to meet with in Dreams, or that Flies, or Gnats, fly
up and down, Nubecula a species of Raving.
Straws, Locks of Wool adhere to things, the which also sometimes is wont to
happen to those no ways besides themselves nor otherwise sick; that the same
insects or locks of Wool, and filaments, Spiders webs and the like small things
and Atoms, seem to appear to one Eye or to both together, in which because for
the most part they think that they see also a little Cloud, this fault is
called Nubecula.

Thirdly hither belongs that false vision when also without any hurt of the
mind other colors then are, Colors a Species of Imagination
are offered to the sight, now red, then yellow, Brightness a kind of
Imagination.
or green or some other way representing themselves with a full light; the same
appear colored like a Rainbow in the compass and as it were the circle of the
flame of a Candle, or of some other thing lighted: or Brightness like
lightning, or other shining bodies obscure the sight.

Fourthly to the depravation of sight these also must be referd, when the
things which they behold, although they be firm and stable yet they think that
they are carried about, driven round, and wheeled about, so that though they
know this is a false imagination, yet when from that turning round of things,
the sight does no more perceive a firm seat where the body may subsist, that
also stumbles and staggers; sometimes also if the pavement on which he stands
seems to him to be inverted, as if he also were inverted with it, unless he be
sustained or kept up, he falls and suddenly rusheth down, and beats the Earth
with his Feet, whiles he endeavors to stay himself, all the other senses being
nevertheless entire, by which sign this fault called Dinos, or Vertigo, is
easily distinguished, from an Epilepsie. Apoplexy, Syncope, with which those
that are stricken, do presently also fall on the ground.

But besides this unquiet Vision those troubled with a Vertigo there comes also
sometimes another depravation of it, A Vertigo with Iminginations.
which we have called Imagination and a little Cloud (and upon this account,
they have named these imaginations, A beginning or small Vertigo) a Cloud or
other bodies, or Colors also with them offering themselves to the sight; the
which notwithstanding if it does happen, for the most part it is wont to go
before a Vertigo.

Sometimes also a darkness of the sight which we have formerly called Scotoma
does accompany a Vertigo, A Vertigo with darkness in Scotodinos.
when also the Eyes being shut nevertheless al things are objected to the
Internal sense as if they were turned round, and then the Disease compounded of
them both is called Scotodinos.

All which Depravations of the sight for the most part happen, no fault being
conspicuous in the Eyes (unless it be offerred in that, when a strange color
does sometimes appear with which the Eye is indeed extrinsecally colored)
whether this be in the Sound or Sick.

The Causes.
The Cause of all the declared Accidents of the Sight is either in the part
communicating the visive power, viz. the Brain, The part affected.
or consists in the Instrument receiving that power and also the species of
external things, to wit the Eye; which when as it consists of many more parts,
then the other Organs of the senses, and humors also, in every one of them some
causes prejudicing the fight may arise.

First of all in the visory or net-like Nerve implanted into the Eye, and the
principal Instrument of Seeing; then in the three humors that fill up the Eye
and serve the visory Nerve, last of all in the Membranes themselves that
constitute the Globe of the Eye and intrinsecally distinguish the humors. If
the Cause lie in those places where they are pervious to the sight as about the
Black of the Eye, and where only if the impediment of seeing do consist, it may
be seen and known, for if it be elsewhere it is so hidden that it does no ways
appear to those that behold the Eye.

As all Senses may be hurt by reason of the Brain so also Seeing is weakened;
The Cause of the Hurt of seeing in the Brain.
both if it suffer a Disease General or Special and especially in that part
where the optic Nerves come forth, or those Nerves themselves produced from
the Brain and carried unto the Eyes, are affected; which affects may be various.

A Cold Distemper sometimes breeds Blindness the other senses being sometimes
unhurt; A cold Distemper of the Brain, is the Cause of Blindness, or weakness
of sight.
if the Forehead and Eyes being much and a long time refrigerated by cold wind,
which being less covered, are the more exposed to the injuries, and the cold
penetrating even to that part, where the optic Nerves have their original, the
said parts are so hurt, that they become Blind; or there remains afterward a
certain weakness of sight, which I have seen befall a noble Matron in the
Headache from the too much application of Oxyrrhodines actually most cold, who
all her life time could no ways recover her sight any more; that this also
does happen, if the whole brain be hurt by the same distemper has been showed
in a stupidity, but then the rest of the senses are abolisht too, and its
easily known by that, whence the cause proceeds, as if it be from externals
it is plain of it self.

That a Hot Distemper of the Brain does bring together with a Depravation of
the Mind also A hot distemper of the brain is the cause of error of the sight
and of Imagination.
a Hallucination of the sight, and the said Imagination in which various false
Images of things are offerred to the sight, has been said in a Frenzy.

As also it has been explained there, A malignant distemper in the brain is
the cause of error in the sight.
that that distemper which arises from the Perturbation of the spirits in the
Brain from Malignant humors, together with Madness and Melancholy, does
likewise represent false Apparitions to the sight.

Too much Dryness of the Optic Nerve induced by burning Fevers the easier
into that Nerve, A dry distemper of the Brain is the cause of blindness.
seeing it is thick, does produce a Blindness remaining after these Fevers.

The beginning of the Nerves being comprest or bedewed as we have showed that
an Apoplexy is caused, in which all the Senses are taken away at once, so also
if this be only about the rise or meeting of the Optic Nerves, or in the other
carriage of them out of the Eye, which then must needs be from an afflux either
of a bloody or phlegmatic humor, it is sometimes wont to happen, that a
Blindness does suddenly follow, if the humor presently fall down thither.

But more commonly the Optic Nerves being irrigated or too much moistened by
the watery phlegmatic excrements of the Brain, which in this middle seat of the
Basis of the Brain, where the optic Nerves break forth, always flow down to
the Infundibulum which is next to these Nerves; and together with the Nerves,
and near them break forth into the Chamber of the Eye and amplitude of the
Nostrils, a darkness of sight is wont to happen in old folks and phlegmatic; or
if they be refrigerated by the same humor or be comprest in those streights
rather then obstructed as they would have it, a blindness also is wont to
follow; which abolition or weakness of the sight, together with the hurt of the
rest of the senses happens, if this fault be extended to their rise or progress
in the Basis of the Brain, or the sight only is abolisht, if that seat chiefly
be affected, and that commonly in both Eyes by reason of the meeting of the
Optic Nerves and their short passage to the Eye, that is rare that one Nerve
only can be so affected; the which does proceed from phlegm or a waterish humor
as is sufficiently manifest, by the signs of that humor abounding in the brain;
and it is easily known also that a Nerve is affected, when nothing appears in
the Eye, which can bring such loss or Obscurity of the sight, neither have we
found this sign to be true, which they have thought most certain, to wit, if
the unsound Eye being comprest the Apple is not dilated, this comes to pass by
default of the Nerve, because the influx of the Spirit into the same is
impeded, seeing the animal spirit does not distend the Eye like wind, neither
fills it up but persists in the netlike Nerve.

Hither also shall be referred that not unusual Cause, The Contusion of the
visory Nerve in the brain is the cause of blindness.
but by no man as I know rightly described, of that blindness which is sometimes
left, after grievous and frequent Convulsions; the which is not from an afflux
of humor as they would have it, but because in those great Convulsions by the
Convulsion fits of all the parts and the Eyes also, in which they also
oftentimes appear convulsive and very much stretched out and bowed down, the
Optic Nerve growing to them being thus attracted and too much distended, and
that being wreathed too, and hurt, and the passage or visory spirit being
hindered it happens that the Eyes are deprived of Seeing, and that it proceeds
herefrom we have found out by diligent examination, and consideration.

The Substance of the Brain being hurt as by an Apoplexy there is a privation
of all the senses, The solution of continuity in the visory Nerve of the Brain
is the cause of Blindness.
so a Nerve being contused or wounded there which some do testify has
sometimes happened from a puncture made by the Forehead a manifest Blindness by
reason of the Solution of Continuity or a Callus left has suddenly happened,
and so from a blow.

A Weak Constitution of the Brain, the spirits being dissipated and wasted by
reason of old Age, or by some grievous and long continued disease, too much
evacuations, especially of Blood and Seed whence is a great effusion of spirits
and immoderate Venery for that reason does very much prejudice the sight; A
Weakness of the Brain the Cause of weak Sight.
also by reason of too much Watchings as has been said there, it induces an
Amblyopy or weakeness of sight and also of the other sensenses especialy of
those that have a more subtle object as of Hearing, often familiar to old
folk, as appears in these external causes of them, remaining in those that are
recovering, and accustomary to those that live intemperately.

Besides this cause which proceeds from a defect of spirits which there can be
no doubt, we can by no means be induced, to feign another here in the thickness
or thinness or subtilty of the Spirits as many indeed do propose these things
with more subtilty than truth, out we are moved by many things to dissent from
them; seeing the animal spirit being well nigh ethereal, does no ways suffer
such changes, but is most easily dissipated, as no man neither has ever dared
so much as to fancy the Vital Spirits to grow thick or be attenuated; as also
wesee, unless now the defect of seeing happen from the Spirits its other
discommodities, whence things far distant or near, are less truly discerned, do
happen rather from the fault of the Instrument as by and by shall be explained,
not by reason of a certain thickness or subtilty of the spirits, as they have
thought, seeing they are so subtle, that they cannot be more subtle.

Diverse sorts of hurt of the sight are wont to proceed, by reason of the
perturbation or agitation of the spirits of the Brain and the brain, also being
affected by consent with them; as if being mixed with a hot, subtle vapor, A
preturbation of the spirits of the brain by vapors is the cause of error and
Imagination with an alienation of mind.
either turbid, or malignant, they do not only pervert the mind, but corrupt
also the sight so that they think they see many things which are not; as if
from the like vapors the spirits and brain grow hot, then together with the
Raving, false Apparitions also are objected to the Eyes, as has been said in a
bastard Frenzy, and as if a certain Narcotick virtue be joined with the heat,
as has been showed to be from the evaporation of Wine then together with the
Drunkenness of the mind, that there is also an error in the sight in which they
think they see diverse things which are not, or those things which are they judge
of falsely, has been declared in Drunkenness (as the story of him who being
drunk always thought things to be double, being decived by his Wife, burned
his hands, gives credit to this business) furthermore when other filthy and
malignant vapors from the Region of the Hypochondries do assail the Brain and
disturb it and its spirits they do not only pervert the Mind but also sometimes
propose the sight being caused by consent seeing they trouble the Mind too they
belong to the Alienation of the mind where it has been largely treated of them.

But also it oftentimes comes to pass that the seeing is hurt by the too much
agitation of the spirits, The too much agitation of the spirits of the Brain
the cause of a Vertigo.
not by that which in the affects of the mind, the spirits being not only
agitated, but rather confounded together with the humors contained in the Head,
Heart, and whole body, does only disturb the mind, and scarce hurts the sight:
but by that in which the spirits in the Brain being moved either themselves or
with the mixture of a vapor, without any perturbation of the mind, those called
a Vertigo, Imagination and Scotomie are wont to be raised.

For the spirit contained in the Brain and its Arteries and Ventricles, being
moved and stirred more vehemently, even without the mixture of a vapor,
representing to the Imagination the like commotion in things without it breeds
the said Vertigo of which commotion there may be diverse causes; for a vehement
moving of the head after the same manner continued long does cause that the
spirits for the same reason being stirred and following the Head afterward
resting, yet nevertheless they still for a while run up and down after the same
manner as the motion of the head was made, till they rest again; as it comes to
pases if the Head together with the body be turned long Round, for then a
Vertigo follows, so that if this be done longer a strong one comes, that they
cannot stand on their Feet, but sometimes necessarily stagger and fall, as it
often happens we see these things both in men and beasts; so the head being bowed
a long while downwards, the spirits then tending from that upwards to the
beginning of the Nerves, when that it is erected again, the same spirits with
violence going back again to their proper seat, from that motion sometimes a
Vertigo is perceived.

But if it happens not from this motion of the body only, but also from a
persevering or vehement commotion of the mind the spirits being often and
strongly exagitated, in profound and daily cogitations, and other passions of
the mind, as also in Watchings, that those thus accustomed, moved from some
light internal cause, fall into a Vertigo; as we do observe Vertigoes do
sometimes trouble them that do very much labor at their Studies when they are
fasting, for the causes by and by to be mentioned.

But from the long beholding of a thing whirled round or otherwise moved
swiftly whether this be so, or seem to be so, as the Earth seems to be moved
and run, to them that sail, which happens to some from their Imagination when
their Eyes are shut, some are seized with a Vertigo, the spirits also by that
agitation of the sight which follows at the sudden commotion of the object,
being stirred after the same manner, and as it were following the swiftness of
the sight; which as it happens to those whose spirits are easily stirred, so in
those disposed to the Vertigo it gives occasion for the fit to seize, although
the cause be but light. Also looking downwards from a high, steep, and
dangerous place breeds a Vertigo in those that are not used to it, the spirits
being too much diffused, and drawn back again with fear, and so moved
unequally; and therefore this no ways happens to those that are not afraid,
unless they be otherwise disposed or some other cause joined, as if from such a
high place they behold things which are wheeled about, or Whitle-pools of
Waters.

But as this Vertigo does happen from external causes by reason of the too
great impulse of the spirits, so also the spirits of themselves collected in
the Arteries of the Brain, especially being more hot and plentiful because
they are unquiet do cause a Vertigo and are easily agitated of themselves, or
from a light occasion joining; the which does long and much torment men from a
light cause either alone or also with a pain accompanying it, whose Arteries do
beat vehemently in their Head and Ears, with a tingling of them sometimes and
often in the rest of the body, and they are scarcely cured unless by opening of
them, as shall be said; but this may come to pass by it self, the blood being
so heated and attenuated in the Arteries, or by the mixture of a thin Vapor, as
shall be said by and by.

But we have found our another cause of a Vertigo proceeding from the spirits
in the Arteries and Vessels of the Head, by dissecting a certain Merchant our
Countryman, who many years being sick of a Vertigo was neither able to walk
nor to rise out of the bed, but he fell down, to wit, the veins of the Brain and
all its Arteries from their rise and ingress within the Skul, in their whole
passage through the Brain, grown together, and hard, and distinguished with
little Glandules in their whole progress; from which obstruction of them, the
spirits being impeded and retained in the Brain, being wheeled about by a light
motion, bred an incurable Vertigo.

But by reason of vapors mixed with the now declared spirits of the Brain, there
are wont to be produced not only a Vertigo, but also the said Imagination and
Scotomie, either seazing at once, or apart; and they according to the diversity
of the nature of the Vapors and place from which they arise, and to which they
are carried in the Brain; for if they being plentifully confounded with the
spirits of the brain in its Vessels, filling up those places and seeking
passage out, together with them they be brought to the sides, by offering to
the sight, such a sense and motion in things external they breed a Vertigo as
has been said formerly; lighter or more grievous according as their agitation
is greater or less

The which also does affect a man alone, if the Vapor be subtle and no
otherwise polluted, or if it be too hot there is joined also a pain of the
Head; if it be turbid or some other way polluted, colored, shining, as it may
diversely exhale from diverse humors and Choler as shall be said by and by, then
there are caused Imaginations also with a Vertigo by which there falsely
represented to the sight diverse small bodies, Insects, Atoms, Colors,
Shinings; or if by their obscurity rather than thickness, as they would have
it, they darken the sight, they cast Clouds, Fumes, or Darkness before the Eyes
together with the Vertigo in the said Scotodinos affect for though they see
nothing, (as formerly has been said of their Eyes closed) yet they may feel a
Vertigo.

The which Imaginations notwithstanding and Obtenebrations or Darknesses do
oftentimes also happen apart without a Vertigo, if that Circumaction of the
spirits in the Head be not made, but only a mixture of the Vapors with them;
the which for what reason it can befall the sight, in so great a variety of
Opinions concerning this thing, we must a little more diligently search out.

Many have believed these Vapors ascending and breaking forth of the Chamber of
the Eyes which are before the Eyes like a Fume, do either deceive, or hinder
the sight being moved with this reason, because they saw tears provoked, and
the Eyes look red from Vapors which in like manner did penetrate to the Eyes
and prick them; yet this seeing it rather comes to pass, from the pricking of
the sensible coat of the Nostrils, by reason of its communication with the
adnate coat of the Eyes, this comparison will no ways take place; and seeing
the vapor, if it did so come under the orbite of the Eyes, and creep about
them, it would presently fly forth before it could touch them, we reject this
Opinion as weak.

But others have thought that these Vapors do wholly go under the Eyes and
penetrate even to their innermost parts so that intrinsecally they are seen by
the Eyes, but whenas after this manner there is no passage to the Globe of the
Eye, and that is so thick by reason of the horny coat on every side whole, that
the Vapors can no ways pass through it, into which a Needle can hardly be
thrust, when a Suffusion is to be taken off, this Opinion of some is vain, and
by so much the more foolish, because they would palliate and cover their errors
with the perspirability of our body.

But others that they might explain after what manner these vapors might enter
into the Eye, seeing they knew that there was no other entrance into the
chamber of the Eye, then of the Optic Nerve, Vein and Artery; they have writ
that these Vapors indeed did first assault the Brain, but from thence descended
by the Veins and Arteries to the Eye; not understanding what we have deliverd
in our Anatomy, that these vessels only run through the adnate coat of the Eye
and do no where come neither into the horny coat of the Eye, nor the inner part
of the Eye, seeing if blood should enter the Eye, by its color it would
represent all things red unto the sight (as it comes to pass when being poured
out of the Vessels it falls upon the Horny coat) for this reason it has been
proved by this demonstration that the Vapors are not carried neither afthis
manner to the Eyes.

Others more considerately teach that it comes to pass, by reason of the optic
Nerve, which they hold to be the chief instrument of sight, the which we also
do admit of, yet we grant not that this is done for that reason, as they who
have thought that the vapors can enter the optic Nerve and through that as
through a pipe are carried from within the Scul even to the Eye; seeing turbid
vapors can no ways be carried through the Nerves full of animal spirit, and
seeing this is against the nature of vapors to be carried downwards unless they
be driven by some violence (which here is not at all.)

But we rather probably think that it happens thus, to wit, that these vapors
assaulting the fore parts of the Brain especially, and being confounded with
the animal spirits, there with the brightness of the Images which are offered
to the Brain by the optic Nerve, where all sensation and distinction is made,
by the mixture of some sparks, by which their light is rendered unequal, or
darkened in certain places, they represent to the Brain these like false
apparitions confounded with the true Images, in this hurt of Seeing which is
called a little Cloud; for that this is done in the Brain and not in the Eyes,
the Vertigo which for the most part does accompany these imaginations as has
been formerly demonstrated, does sufficiently show, the spirits then in the
Brain being affected and agitated too, whence they that then labor of a Vertigo
have not these imaginations, but seem to themselves wholly to be turned about,
and a Scotomie or Obtenebration of the sight, that they become almost blind
sometimes following these little Clouds, the spirits being then wholly obscured
by a multitude of vapors, does evidently declare it; all which has been
sufficiently demonstrated to happen in that part of the Brain which gives the
Original to the optic Nerves, and is higher than the rest, and therefore seems
chiefly to prejudice Seeing, but not in the Eyes if it proceed from vapors.

As in an internal fault of the Eyes arising from a Coat growing there, we shall
by and by show, that that these Clouds also, and the other aforesaid may be
offered to the sight, and the sight also be wholly obscured, in that called A
Suffusion of the Black of the Eye; wherefore these little Clouds generated from
vapors they have falsely called by the name of a Suffusion because they thought
that then also vapors were spread over the Eyes, and did there generate a little
skin, which we have more rightly indigitated to be little Clouds, and
Imaginations; which also are distinguished from a true Suffusion by these signs,
because in a Cloud and imagination there is no Speck in the Eyes of the
affected, these accidents of the sight being objected to both Eyes at once,
which do sometimes abate and cease and return again at a certain time, seeing in
a true suffusion the fault appearing in one Eye, but scarce perfectly in both
at once, it hinders the sight without intermission, as shall be said there.

But the Cause of these Evaporations whence a Vertigo imagination and Scotomie
proceed, may consist in diverse parts of the body, seeing sometimes vapors raised
from the lower parts are sent into the Head, most commonly they proceed from
the Stomach, in which a choleric humor especially, bringing a hot subtle
evaporation, and sending it not only into the Nose (as the vapor rising from
Onions Radishes, Mustard, is wont only to vellicate the Nostrils and presently
again is dissipated) but also into the head it self, sometimes causes a
Vertigo, sometimes Imaginations: which for the most part imitating the nature of
Choler, sometimes are yellowish, sometimes green, or blackish: and seeing Choler
in the Stomach is most fierce and boiling hot whiles it is empty, and the
vapors then being hindered, are the more freely carried upwards, it happens that
the said accidents are troublesome to the choleric whiles they are yer
fasting, and that upon the taking of meat, because the vehemence of Choler is
abated and the vapors represt, they grow milder, and at last cease; the which
happens also the vapors in the head being discust of their own accord, and so
much the sooner by how much they are more subtle, till new evaporations being
made, these evils do return; but it is known that this proceeds from Choler, by
the bitterness of the mouth and gnawing at the mouth of the stomach, which they
call the heart, and by other signs of this humor; which also sometimes brings
with the same labor a pain of the Head too, with a Vertigo.

The same vapors proceeding from the Mesaraick Veins in which the choleric
juyces are wont oftentimes to abound, as has been showed elsewhere (as by
those vapors raised from the same place, and carried upwards by the Veins and
Arteries, intermitting Fevers, hypochondriacal Melanchollies do invade a man
by intervals) so also they oftentimes raise the said symptoms, which is done
the vapors being carried upwards from thence through the Veins, and sometimes
through the Arteries which are annexed to the Mesaraick Veins; then especially
when those vapors are subtle, that they induce rather these accidents than
Perturbations of the mind which has been showed do rather proceed from their
malignity the which therefore do sometimes produce Vertigoes only or as they are
qualified, Images and Scotomies together with them, or without them; which we
had rather alleadg as the truer cause than Pretend Crudities, from which Wind
rather than these like Vapors are generated.

But also from some other seat of the body these like vapors raised from a
thinner blood through the Veins and Arteries may cause the same: as from that
part which is about the Womb, as the Courses being stopped this symptom also does
happen; as other also oftentimes upon this account: and from some part of the
Foot or of another member a vapor proceeding like to some Air being carried
upwards, as we have observed it has been the Cause of an Epilepsie, so also of
a Vertigo, whence sometimes Vertigoes go before an Epilepsie and presage that
will presently follow, when from the like vapors vellicating the Brain,
Epilepsies also may be caused, as shall be said in its place.

But the cause of these diseases sometimes consists in the Head it self, in
which not only spirituous, hot and plentiful blood collected, may cause the
same (as has been said formerly) but also from humors contained there, the
like Vapors raised and mixed with the spirits may produce these accidents; which
we do believe does arise rather from the Blood of the Vessels and Ventricles of
the Brain, and the humors mixed with it than from phlegm, the which also we do
not deny to be a cause of the Vertigo, but not because it sends forth vapors,
but after this manner now to be explained.

It Is certain that a Repletion of the Brain caused by a watery humor, The
Fluctuation of a watery phlegmatic humor in the Brain is the cause of a Vertigo.
as well that Serous as Phlegmatic does cause that Vertigo which is wont to
precede and threaten an Apoplexy or Carus; which being frequent and of long
continuance unless it be prevented, is wont to terminate in these Diseases with
great danger of life; but it does not this by cooling and moistning the brain,
seeing this agitation of the spirits which is in a Vertigo would so rather be
hindered than promoted; but this comes to pass, when filling up the windings and
spaces of the Brain by its great plenty filling the Skul, and also generating
plenty of Wind (which are oftener engendered from waterish humors than Vapors)
it waves in it; for then as in the cover of the heart, water abounding does
cause a Palpitation of the heart, when it is stirred; so here also, it every
where filling the Brain when the Head is moved, the humor being stirred and
following the motion of the Head, as we have said of the spirits, it gives such
a sense to the head; which does sufficiently appear by their relation, who
complain of such a fluctuation, and the Skul being opened, we have often found
an immense plenty of this humor, as has been said in an Apoplexy, and in him
in whom even now we said that the Arteries too were grown hard, we have found
so great plenty of it, that the Skul being opened it has come forth by floods,
the which together with that obstruction of the Arteries, producing a double
cause of the Vertigo, made it so lasting and incurable, in which that humor for
continuance watring the Brain, had bred that Carus of which he died. But it is
known that this is the cause of a Vertigo not only from that sense of
fluctuation, but also from other signs of phlegm abounding, explained in a Carus
and Apoplexy, to which those that are prone become at once sleepy and more
stupid, and at last fall into these Diseases unless prevented.

By occasion of the Visory Nerve implanted into the Eye and dilated like the
form of a Net, The Visory or Net-like Nerve in the Eye is the cause of the hurt
of seeing.
most discommodities of the fight do happen, seeing that is the principal Organ
of seeing; and that for the most part by consent of other parts, when by reason
of them it is disappointed of those things which are required to Seeing, viz.
the spirit and the proper object, or else it cannot rightly enjoy them, for
otherwise being immersed in the Eye it is so grounded, that it is scarcely
troubled with any disease, unless by consent of the Brain.

It is disappointed of the Animal spirit either altogether in blindness, A
Privation of the animal spirit in the Net-like. Nerve is cause of Blindness or
darkness of sight.
or in part in a weakness of the sight, by reason of the Optic Nerve, such as
are Distemper, Compression, Hurts, and Weakness proceeding rather from the
defect of spirits, than that fansied thickness and subtlty of them.

The same happens also, the spirits flying from the visory Nerve toward their
beginning: in the Eye pressed a long time, and by consequence the Net-like Nerve
by reason of humors filling up the Eye, it sometimes happens that they are
afterward so long blind til the spirits return again.

And also the spirits being too much idle in the visory Nerve and as it were
laid asleep, or being retreated when there is no use of them, the Nerve it self
being made dull, in those who being kept in darkness for a long time, as in
Prison or other dark places, have seen nothing for a long time, when they
return into the light, they scarce recover their fight, or slowly, or never any
more.

And seeing the Animal spirit has a constant need of the vital, this by
swooning being for a while dissipated, and the Animal spirit being hindered by
consent, amongst the cessations of functions, the Seeing first of all is
darkened in those that swound, and by and by it is taken away with all the rest
so long till they come to themselves.

By reason of the proper Object, A Privation of the Object in the Netlike Nerve
is the cause blindness or dark sight.
viz. the Images of things entering the Eye by light and brightness; the
Net-like Nerve suffers a hurt of seeing if it be offered to it too violently
and it be so affected with it, that afterward it perceives no more, or nor
rightly.

As when one very much stricken with the brightness of the Sun, Lightening,
Fire, afterward thinks that he sees sparks for a while, and either their Eyes
are altogether blinded for some time, or as it often happens, they afterward
continue blind.

Or if the Eye be destitute of light by which the things ought extrinsecally to
be illuminated, and the Eye intrinsecally that it may see; by reason of the
external darkness, it cannot know the species of things.

Which also how they happen by reason of the stoppage of the black of the Eye,
we shall explain in the faults of the Membranes of the Eye, as also when it
happens by reason of humors, it shall be said there.

Likewise an Impediment in the sight may happen, The humors of the Eye the
cause of hurt of sight.
by reason of humors contained in the Eye, especially of the Chrystalline,
through which as through a Spectacle, the Net-like Nerve does first collect the
Images of external things, and again receives in its cavity, those dispersed,
dilated, and made bigger, to which Chrystalline humor the other humors are
servants only, and this comes to pass, when either they fail because either
they have flown forth, or are wasted; or when they change their natural
situation, or their substance is changed, or they are infected with a strange
color, which how it may be done we shall explain in the particulars.

And sometimes the humors flow forth of the Eyes more commonly the watery one
seeing it is placed in the fore part, A flowing forth of the humors of the Eye,
is the cause of blindness.
and is more fluid, the others seldom unless the cause be great, and then
Blindess is caused; for the watery humor being flowed forth, the Globe of the
Eye is somewhat fallen together and wrinkled; whence the hole of the black which
ought to let in the light, is shut up; and the rest of the humors falling
forwards out of the cavity of the Netlike Nerve, do cause that that does
somewhat fall together, whence it must needs be that seeing does cease; and by
much the more if the Chrystalline humor does fall forth with the glassie, in
which it inheres, seeing that (as has been said) is altogether requisite to
seeing and then the Net-like Nerve being wholly fallen together, can no longer
comprehend the species of things in its cavities.

Of all which the apparent Cause is wont to be a Wound or Ulcer of the Eye; if
a large wound being made it is opened through the horny coat so thick and hard;
for by a light puncture with which they are wont to perforate the Globe of the
Eye in taking off a Cataract, the watery humor which has its tenacity also,
cannot flow forth,: and I have sometimes seen that an abscess of the Eye has
been generated from an Inflammation also, in which part of the horny coat is
converted into matter, which being broke, it sometimes pours forth the humors of
the Eyes with the matter; and I have observed in a pestilent Fever that it
has hapend in both Eyes, the Crystalline humor slowing down to the Beard, and
sticking there.

The Humors of the Eye also are wasted especially the glassie seeing it is
thinner; A Consumption of the watery humor is the cause of Blindness or Darkness.
and then the Eye not being sufficiently distended (which is required that the
black may remain exactly open) but somewhat fallen together, the hole of the
apple of the Eye although not wholly shut up, yet loosing its largeness or
roundness, and the situation of the rest of the humors being troubled by the
way there follows a weakness of the sight, or if the confusion be greater,
Blindness: as in long acute Diseases wasting the body with a high and long
continued pining it happens to some more rarely, but more frequently in extreme
old age, in which both the glassie and crystalline humor may be dried up, as
shall be said by and by; whose Eyes appear somewhat wrinkled, which the vulgar
therefore are wont to call Cracked, especially when in the Agony of Death being
now destitute of heat and spirits they flag.

A Perverting of the natural situation of humors, the Chrystalline and glassie
(which seeing they are more solid, being restrained by their proper membranes
they ought to stick fixed in their proper place) does also bring hurt to the
sight whose places being changed, the watery humor filling up the space left by
them easily gives place.

The which sometimes happens in the glassie humor (to which the crystalline
humor is set over, The perversion of the situation of the glassie humor is the
cause of error.
and a little way immerst in its former part) if the same part of it carried
forward be set before the crystalline humor; where also being oftentimes
contained, it may be seen lie a white Speck under the apple of the Eye, for
then it is not necessary that blindness do yet happen, seeing the humor is
bright as Glass, but some Error; seeing it is thicker than the watery humor, as
it is wont to come to pass in a Suffusion beginning, as shall be said: unless
perhaps so great a quantity of it be fallen thither, that it wholly obliterates
the crystalline humor, and presses it backwards, or very much inverts it, for
then both humors being troubled, more grievous accidents of the sight are wont
to follow, as shall be said in the crystalline humor; but the cause of this may
be a blow, or Contusion, or more frequently a puncture in couching a Catarract,
being forced too deep to these humors, and breaking their thin membranes to
which they cohere: for otherwise scarce as they would have it, can a great
straining by holding of the breath in going to stool, in Labor, or Convulsions
in which the Eyes appear as if they were thrust forth, cause that intrinsecally
in the Eye.

The Crystalline humor being especially hanged like a Sun in the middle of the
Cavity of the glassie humor, somewhat distant from the hole of the apple of the
Eye looking directly on that with its bulk, and receiving the light through
that equally dispersed into it, and diffusing it to the cavity of the visory
Nerve, or the Netlike semiglobular, placed in the hinder part of it, so that it
fills it every where with its brightness, if it does very much change this
natural situation, it cannot be done without hurt of the sight; which faults of
it, seeing the humor it self cannot be seen in the Eye, are no ways
conspicuous in it, unless it wholly fall into the apple of the Eye, as has
been said of the glassie humor.

But this comes to pass, The situation of the crystalline humor inverted or
departing from the middle to the sides is the cause of error and strabism.
if being in some manner inverted by its broader part which is flat like a
great Lentil, it is not rightly opposed to the hole of the apple but declining
a little to the side it looks on it obliquely or transversly; or when being
carried upwards or downwards or to the sides from the middle seat of the Eye,
it does somewhat decline from the aspect of the hole of the Apple; the which
happening either from the birth in some, in others from some violent cause, as
was said even now in the glassie humor, it happens that either blindness is
caused, if the recess be great from the natural situation, or if it be less an
obscurity of the sight or rather some Error in which things seem to be either
double, or crooked, or bent: moreover some light declination only of the
crystalline humor from the center of the apple although yet it does little hurt
the Sight may be the cause of Squinting; for as in Seeing if the crystalline
humor be rightly opposite to the hole of the Apple, the Apple also does
directly look upon the external things which it beholds, so if the
crystalline humor be a little turned from the center of it, that they see with
the apple not rightly but obliquely opposite to the things, those troubled with
a Squinting do so invert the Eye, that they are judged to look upon somewhat
else, than the thing objected; the which notwithstanding may happen also by
reason of the contorted situation of the apple as shall be said by and by, which
things do thus befall men for the most part from their birth.

But especially if the crystalline humor have its seat a little in the hinder
part of the Eye toward the Netlike nerve it is the cause of this The situation
of the crystalline humor drawn backwards or forwards is the cause of that
sight, in which they see not things unless very near or things distant better
than near.
sight in which they cannot rightly discern things more distant, the which
happens to many from their Birth, that the Crystalline Humor does not reside
more toward the fore parts at the Apple, as it is naturally wont to do, but
has its Situation exactly in the middle of the Eye, and it is so common, that
Anatomists for the most part have described its Natural Situation in the midst
of the Center of the Eye; whence it is no wonder that this sight which we have
called the youthful, does befall many from their Birth, that they can discern
things near rightly and acutely, but not things distant, and that when the
Spectacle is too much inclined backwards from the things which we behold, which
therefore will be sufficiently illustrated only with those nearer, but from
those Images objected at a distance, unless being collected by the Mediation of
a thick Spectacle made of Crystal they be so offered to the Eye more
effectually, they cannot sufficiently illustrate that: And hence it happens
that seeing the Situation of it does so continue, this seeing is no ways
altered the whole course of life, unless this be from some other Causes.

And also if it be yet more removed from the middle of the Eye toward the
hinder parts, they are forced yet to apply far nearer to their Eyes, the things
which they would see, and use a thicker Spectacle: the which yet is not very
common, and happens only in them, which we have said are called Myopes or
Purblind.

Which truer Causes, which happen by reason of the Instrument vitiated, and
therefore may be corrected by another Instrument to wit a Spectacle, he had
rather alledg then to refer them to the Spirits, which in those young Folks,
with whom this fault is familiar, and who see most acutely things near, are
neither defective nor changed, because they may be mended by a Spectacle.

And also for the contrary Cause, after a different manner, there arises an
Impediment of the sight, to wit when the crystalline Humor from the said
Natural Seat does more incline forwards, toward the Apple, for then with a
greater discommodity they less see things near but the same removed far from
the Eye, they behold more rightly, unless they correct this defect, by applying
a thin Glass Spectacle, which as it performing the place of the Crystalline
Humor and receaving and differing the Images of things, and through the
Crystalline representing them greater to the Eye, and therefore they have
always need of a Spectacle to read and see acutely; the which happens to most
people growing old, to some sooner, to others later, not by reason of the
defect of Spirits as they have thought, seeing so there would follow rather a
weakness of the sight, as also of the other Senses, which a Spectacle could no
ways mend, nor suggest new Spirits; but because by that bowing down of the
Head which the whole time of our age we must needs cast down our Eyes, in
reading, and in what Business soever proposed to our Eyes, and acted by our
Hands, the Crystal Humor by process of age together with the glassy is carried
by degrees to the fore parts, and at length subsisting there, brings this
defect to the sight, especially if in them also, the watery Humor being somewhat
wasted nothing do resist it, and the glassy Humor lying upon it, do more
strongly depress it; which defect and a far more grievous, Blindness or
Weakness of the sight do follow, if the crystalline Humor wholly falling down
to the Apple, be manifestly seen to stick there, and to stop up the Eye: which
is wont to be more frequently the Cause of the hurt of seeing, in Horses and
other Creatures, which go with their faces downwards: the which as it happens
by degrees by reason of age, so sometimes suddenly after a Blow.

The substance of the Humors of the Eye changed does also bring a fault in the
sight, The hardening of the chystalline Humor is the cause of defect of sight.
as it comes to pass, if the Crystalline Humor be too much hardened, as it may
happen either by reason of age or other Causes, but with which, not unless the
Body be vehemently and a long time dried; and then because it loses its
Transparentness either in part or wholly (as it appears being boiled) it is the
Cause of Blindness or Dullness of sight, which as in that so also it may happen
after the same manner in the glassy Humor.

But if yet by its Natural Conflitution or progress of age, The Obscurity of
the crystalline humor is the cause of a Nyctalopy.
it become more solid or obscure, because then it has need of a greater light
that it may be illuminated, it comes to pass that they cannot see perfectly but
by a full light, and when that fails, though it does a little clear, with the
splendour of light, yet they see not rightly, and thence follows the said
Nyctalopy.

But that is the watrish Humor whose substance is more easily changed, A
Tenacity of the watery humor is the cause of want of sight in a suffusion
seeing it is wont oftentimes to acquire a Tenacity by which by degrees growing
to the hole of the Apple, and at length drawn out and turned into a skin by
breeding Clouds first, and afterward a Suffusion, it makes blind: which fault
being very common, and to be seen outward also, shall be explained in the
grapy Coat.

The Humors are scarce infected with a strange Color, A discoloring of the
crystalline Humor breeding error.
seeing no veins or other vessels carrying the humors do enter into the inward
parts of the Eye, or touch its Humors: the which notwithstanding they have
delivered does sometimes come to pass from the moistures of the Eye, in the
Crystalline Humor, and that as also the glassie humor is dyed with a grayish
color, and therefore they have called it Glaucoma, and they have writ that the
sight is then vitiated as if they saw thorough a Cloud; when notwithstanding
the Ancients made a Glaucoma the same disease with a Suffusion, then especially
calling that so, when the Skin being not yet well confirmed, it appeared to the
Beholders like a thick Glass, of a greenish, or azure Color, and was not yet
white.

The sight is hurt by reason of the Membranes constituting the Globe of the
Eye, The Membranes or Globe of the eye are the cause of the hurt of sight.
if that do consist in that part which appears darkish or black by reason of
the Apple or Hole opening the inward Chamber of the Eye which is black and
opacous, which Hole seeing it does transmit the outward light into the inward
part of the Eye thorough a transparent Horn spread over it, if it be so
obliterated in any part that the Passage of the light into the Eye is hindered,
it must needs hinder the sight; the which happens either by reason of the
outward thick Membrane, bestowing a Horn on the Eye, or of the grapy Coat under
it, that makes the Hole, those giving occasion for this thing either severally
or jointly.

This happens by reason of both Membranes, The shutting the eye is the cause of
the sight taken away.
if an Impediment be objected out of the Eye, which may interrupt the light,
that it cannot come to the seat of the Eye to which it ought, as it is wont to
come to pass the Eyebrows being shut, with the Hands and other things.

But from this following fault also that may happen, A Perversion of the Apple
or black appearing in the Eye is the Cause of squinting.
if the seat of the Eye which is pervious and transparent is hindered by the
Neighboring parts that seeing cannot rightly be performed; as it comes to pass
if the Apple be not placed in every fore part of the Globe of the Eye, bare and
in that middle, but declining from it, is more to the sides of the Eye, which
befalls some from their Birth in a squinting in one side of those Eyes, for
that reason there appears more white; so that every one by that may know that
they look a squint; and because when they would look upon things, wreathing the
Eye that they may oppose the apple right to the things, they make such a stern
aspect.

Although this may happen also, the apple consisting in its natural place, by
Convulsion of the Muscles of the Eye, the Eye drawn somewhat to one side and so
inverted that the apple do rather look that way; whence it comes to pass, that
when they would look upon any thing would direct the apple to it, either they
bend their head aside, or draw back their Eyes by the opposite sound Muscles,
that the apple may be reduced again some way to the fore parts: as they also
whose eyes have a natural situation after this manner drawing them aside
purposely, can express the eyes and looks of Squinting, which Convulsion unless
it befalls the eyes in a true Convulsion of the whole body, to wit, an
Epilepsie, in which they show the like aspect, for the most part it befalls the
Squinters from their birth; the Muscles being somewhat contracted rather, then
convelled, and continuing in that situation. And that has been explained by
others to be the only cause of Squinting, when notwithstanding that very thing
as has been said may come to pass, the apple being impressed on one side and the
crystalline humor being removed out of its natural place that they behold
things by distorting their eyes after the like manner: all which
notwithstanding do hurt the sight only on this account, that the Eye being left
in its seat, they see those things rather which they meet with sidewaies, then
those which are placed before their face, til the Eye being reduced so far,
that it is opposed to the things placed right before the eyes, they behold them
also.

But this rare and memorable thing befell one from a wound made near the inner
Angle of the Eye by which the Globe of the eye was so inverted, A perversion of
the apple, the cause of a wonderful affect in the sight.
that the apple being brought even to the great corner, and covered with the
Skin of the wound healed, he was forced to see through the cavity of his Nose,
and he could see, nothing any more, unless through the hollow of his Nose as
through a pipe, whence he must needs direct his Nose to that, which he would
see, which by the relation of men worthy to be believed, is apparent was done
in our time.

The private faults of the horny coat, do then prejudice the sight, when they
possess that part of it which is set over the apple like glass or a transparent
horn and either only stick there or are dispersed further through the white of
the eye; which then may be manifestly seen and known when it is spotted or
covered.

This diaphanous seat of the horny coat being steined with a strange color, so
that it is not any more bright and clear, but obscure and colored, it either
stops the brightness which in seeing ought to enter into the Eye, like a foul
glass which lets in the light, or offers something false to the sight.

And this chiefly comes to pass, An obscurity of that transparent seat of
thehorny coat, arising from an obscure color or white Speck of it in darkness,
Albugo, a Skar, is the cause of want of sight.
if it be infected with an obscure or white color with which sometimes the whole
seat of the horny coat appears changed, and brings the said darkness especially
in old men, to whom this chiefly happens; but if that only in some part of it
such a white speck do grow it is called Albugo; in which fault if the speck be
perfectly white and spread over the whole region of the apple, there arises
blindness; but if it first begin to grow white, it darkens the sight as if it
were hindered with a Cloud drawn over it, or if it comprehend a little space of
the apple, or from that incline more to the Circle, it breeds a certain error
in the sight.

But such an Obfuscation or whiteness of the horny coat arises either from the
dryness and hardness of the whole horny coat: or if there be only a speck from
the dryness and and in duration of that part only which is seen white. For as
we see other things which are transparent as the white of an Egg and the
crystalline humor in the Eyes of creatures being dried by boiling do become
white and lose their transparency, so it happens here to the horney coat that
by old age in which the membranes are wont to be dried, or by a disease of the
eyes after Ophthalmies, Epiphories either it being wholly dried up, or dryness
being left only in certain places of it, it does allor in part become white;
the which also we may see sometimes come to pass from the thicker part of the
nourishment with which it is nourished, being carried thither, and remaining
there, and leaving a white Speck, as in the Nails, which in the like manner are
marked with white specks sometimes are superficial, and other times being more
deeply imperinted they penetare the whole horny coat.

And also from a Wound or Ulcers of the eyes especially after the small pox in
Infants, a Skar or Callus being left, higher sometimes deeper and thick for the
most part causes such a white Speck in the white of the Eye, sometimes large
sometimes oblong which is called a Skar, which does obliterate the fight either
wholly or in part, or if it be long and narrow, it cuts it in two as it were
and divides it.

Besides these discoloring of the horny coat we meet with red specks or
sometimes yellow, A red or yellow discoloring of the bright part of the horny
coat is the cause of error.
from blood rushing from a blow of the Eye, or from an infusion of choler in
those troubled with the Jaundise, but for the most part appearing only in the
white part of this coat, which the adnate coat carrying the vessels does only
invest, and then they do not prejudice the fight. But if they reach so far as
to the bright part of the horny coat (where oftentimes a red speck is
conspicuous a long while, the blood persisting in the substance of the horny
coat without corrupting, as it were an insect in Amber) they represent to the
sight the same color, either red, or yellow in all the Images the Eye sees.

The same transparent part of the horny coat is extrinsecally invested with a
new coat growing to it; The horny coat being coverd by a little Skin or Ungula
is the cause of blindness.
which sometimes wholly growing to it grows in one, or adheres to it without any
connection, unless where it arises, and in the compass, on the other part it is
only spread over; sometimes proceeding from the greater corner of the Eye, and
sometimes from the less, and being first spread over the white of the Eye by and
by it covers the black of it, either in part or all: and it is at first thinner
then growing thicker it becomes fleshy interweaved with many bloody veins and
it is called a Pannicle. And oftentimes it is so augmented that it may be laid
hold on by the fingers, and a little way be elevated from the Eye; and sometimes
a part of it has been cut off, that has weighed two ounces. But at other
times being hardened it grows white and then it is called Ungula, Unguis,
Pterygium, Zebel, putting out the sight wholly or in part, as it occupies the
Black of it more or less.

The which growing out either from a Spontaneous afflux of Blood, or after
Exulcerations it is called a Hypersarcosis or Chymosis: otherwise from a private
fault offensive especially to the Membranes, it very often befalls the
Elephantiacal as shall be explained there, otherwise seldom betiding man: as I
have often seen it befall Fishes if they be kept a long time in Fish ponds in
foul water, the mud growing to them and blinding them. Sometimes the said Unguis
grows from the Superficies of the horny coat corroded, when part of that
nourishment then breathing forth, does concrete into a matter like unto that
which resembles a Horn or Nail, only it is not transparent; as the Periostia of
the Bones being corroded we have said elsewhere that Knobs are generated, and
from the Skin wounded, Skars, from the Juice that was wont to nourish them.

The faults of the grapy Membrane hurt the sight, when its hole, which they
call the Apple, being pervious in that part of the Grapy coat which lies under
the horny coat, yet no ways grows to it, and letting in that light into the
Eye, is either stopped up with some humor, or filth, or is Contracted, or
Dilated; all which may be seen and known, Extrinsecally also in the Back of the
Eye and its compass, whenas the horny coat which is seated over it, is
transparent, although the hurt lie under it.

Sometimes this hole is stopped by a Humor and the Passage for the sight is
intercepted; An obstruction of the hole of the Grapy coat or the Apple from the
proper Humors of the Eye is the cause of Error in sight.
and this come to pass sometimes from the proper humors of the Eye the
Crystalline and glassy falling into it; as from the change of the Situation of
the Humors as has been said, and from the too great largness of the Apple as
shall be said, it may come to pass, and the sight may be so hindered; which is
seen then also when it appears lik an Albugo, in that seat of the Eye.

The same may come to pass from blood infused by a blow not only into the horny
coat as has been said before, An obstruction of the Apple from Blood and
matter in a Hyposphagma and Hypopion is the Cause of Error or defect in the
sight.
but also penetrating even unto this empty space, between the Horny and Grapy
coat, and filling up that either wholly or in part, and stopping up the Apple,
which being red at the first, but then growing livid, by and by blackish, it
appears that it lies there (because blood infused into the spaces of the Body
is presently corrupted, otherwise then when the horny coat drinks it up, where
without any change it persists red oftentimes for a long while, as has been
said) and then it either depraves or darkens the sight: more or less, as it
Possesses a little or the whole space and it is properly called Hyposphagma, a
sugillation of the Eye.

The sight also may be hindered by matter collected in that seat, and then that
Disease is called Pyosis, in which if the matter collected plentifully do seem
to possess all the black of the Eye, or to fill up the whole space of the
Circle, and to shine thorough the Horny Coat, it is called Hypopios; but if a
small portion of that said seat do seem only to shine through like the pairing
of a Nail, it is called Onyx or Unguis, the Nail.

The Cause of the collection of which Matter for the most part is wont to be,
Blood fallen into the Eye, as has been said, and at length converted into
Matter; or an Inflammation of the Eye going before, and leaving an abscess
behind it, not that, in which the horny Coat is corrupted too, and being broke
it pours forth the humors of the Eyes, as has been said formerly, but in which
the Blood being discust after an Inflammation, or External cause: this
collection of matter also is sometimes caused after pains of the Head; which
when it comes to pass, it is probable this was done, by the watery humor so
suppurated and ripend, as we have else where shown, that matter may be
generated by the like humors; because the Blood otherwise can scarce be brought
hither, unless the horny coat be contused by violence, the Veins as has been
said, no ways reaching thither.

A Tenacious snivel sticking in the compass of this hole, An obstruction of the
Apple by snivel at length concreting into a Skin, called a suffusion is the
cause of want of Sight.
or on the brink of the Apple, and spread over it, and by degrees thickening,
for the most part only in one Eye although the other sometimes also does
presently begin to be affected in like manner, the seeing does most commonly
suffer a Blemish; and, because it is suffused or poured out on the Apple, it is
called Suffusion, Hypochyma: which at the beginning seeing it is yet a
transparent snivel and does transmit the Light, yet by reason of its thickness
it breeds an Impediment and Error in the Sight, as if it were darkened with a
Cloud spread over it, and things were seen with many Atoms slying as has been
said, whence then it is called Imagination and a little Cloud, as has been
shown: and this is not yet well conspicuous in the Eye, but that the black of
it, which they call the Star, does not appear exactly black as it ought to be
wholly black, but somewhat troubled; by which also, if this be seen only in the
Eye, the other being yet pure, it is distinguished from that Imagination and
Clouds which by reason of Vapors offer themselves to the Eye almost in the like
manner, except that they do affect both Eyes equally.

But at last that Snivel by degrees being more and more thickened and loosing
its perspicuity, is easier known by the sight, and does commonly manifest it
self, by a gray or ash Color, as the Oculists call it, and somewhat blotting
out the black of the Eye, then also it does more offend the sight: because when
it is yet more soft and watrish, it cannot yet be deprest with a Needle, as
shall be said; which the ancients have named Glaucoma, from the gray color
which is a fault of the Crystalline Humor, and because the Crystalline Humor
being dyed with this Color does carry before it a show of an immature
Suffusion, some not knowing that, have made a Glaucoma properly called, the
same with a Sussusion.

But last of all, the forementioned Snivel, being wholly incrassated and made
white as we have formerly said that bright things by drying do become white, and
loose all their perspecuity, so it happens here also, and then the sight being
wholly taken away, a perfect Blindness follows: unless by chance as I have
often seen, a very little of the black do still appear pointing or circularly
in some part of it, or in its Compass, thorough which the Sparks of a little
Light, do still illustrate the Eye with an obscure Light, by which
notwithstanding they can judge rightly of nothing; and this is called a
confirmed Suffusion, which they are wont to call ripe, if so be it can be
exactly seen, because then first of all the Chyrurgion may take it in hand; and
they commonly call it a small Skin and Web, because being spread before the
Apple like a Coat it intercepts the Light: not unlike in Color and Tenacity to
the skin growing to the white of an Egg that is boiled; and though of it self
it seems to be of no moment, yet it is wont to bring so great calamity to many
men in the loss of their fight.

They refer the cause of this snivel growing to the apple to the rising of a
Vapor, or influxion of a humor, but it has been showed formerly that from a
Vapor this Suffusion is not caused, but those simply called Imaginations, and
how that comes to pass, and truly it were the work of a man too much at
leisure, to confute with many words so vain an opinion.

But all the rest do think that it is caused by an influx of humor, and do
vainly apply all their care to turn away this, as shall be explained, and
therefore they foolishly call this affect a Catarhact, others a descent of
waters into the Eyes; the which notwithstanding can be proved by no reason, nor
shown by demonstration. For first of all if it were caused from an afflux of
water or humor into the globe of the Eye, not only this small matter would
grow, and scarce as big as a Lentil, but the whole Globe of the Eye would be
distended, and swell as it were Hydropical; besides that there is found no
empty space in the Eye which can admit this water, seeing it is all every where
so filled and distended with its proper humors bred there from the birth, that
there is not room for one strange drop, or can the horny coat by any means be
distended or dilated more: and then by what way I pray, shall this water flow
into the Eye, when that cannot be through Veins and Arteries which as has been
declared formerly, do no ways enter the inward parts of the Eye: but they say
this comes to pass through the Optic Nerve, an excellent shift indeed, to hold
so noble a part fit to conveigh these excrements, through which nothing can
pass besides the ethereal animal spirit. But grant that humor does descend
through this Nerve, How I pray can it be the hole of the Apple? when neither
the Net-like Nerve can come to admit it into its cavity, which is wholly filled
with the glassie humor, neither can it pass through the Grapy Coat which every
where about grows transversly to the horny Coat with browy processes: the which
certainly, they who do patronize such like opinions, contesting with sense and
reason, if that the fabric of the Eye were thoroughly known and perceived by
them, with that dilgence as is meet, they ought first to consider and rather to
search out the true ways through which the humors may be carried, than being
ignorant of the proper causes of Diseases always to fly to that common refuge
of Ignorance, Defluxions, and I know not what transpirability of the body.

But we having thoroughly searched into these things a long time and much, and by
long observation having more nearly contemplated innumerable suffusions and
their beginning, increase, and pricking, we have found that the cause of this
snivel does proceed, from the watery humor acquiring some tenacity: for that as
has been said formerly in the explication of that and other humors) seeing
from the birth it is more tenacious (for we have seen also oftentimes that
those new born have brought this fault with them into the world, or it has
presently followed upon them) either being dried by process of age, in old age,
in which it often happens; or arising from very hot Diseases after Burning
Fevers or Inflammations of the Eyes or from a vehement external heat in those
who perform most business sitting by the fire and looking upon it; or the watery
humor being thickened by the use of Collyries too hot and drying, and being
made more viscous as has been said, by degrees it grows to the brink of the
membrane of this hole which it continually washes, and by little and little
thickening in that part where it stops up the hole, as we see the said Skin
grows on Frumenty, for that reason as it has been showed being hardened it
loses its brightness, and successively but in a long time being converted
into a Skin it takes away the sight: which if it be deprest, as shall be
afterward explained, the remaining portion of the warry humor, on whose
superficies it grew, being yet transparent, the Sight presently returns, but if
that also by much drying has already lost its brightness, as most commonly it
happens, although the superficies of it be taken off, nevertheless they remain
blind, and by reason of that the Oculists labor will be in vain.

The too much narrowing or Imminution, as they call it, The narrowness of the
Apple is the cause of a Nyctalopy.
of that hole in the Grapy Coat which is called the Apple, does scarce take away
the Sight, when even thorough the narrowest hole the light may enter the Eye,
and illuminate it, as much as is sufficient for seeing; whence we have observed
that those, who from their birth have happened to have a very small Apple,
nevertheless do see as acutely, as those that have it large, may sometimes more
acutely, and things more distant: and as we can behold the Sun through a little
hole with less offense to the Eye, so they are less offended than others, by an
external brightness and great light; of which seeing they have a more abundant
need to see well, beyond others; it comes to pass that a little before night, or
darkness somewhat growing on, they see less, than by a full light, and this is
the chief cause of that Nyctalopie in which they see not sufficiently, by a
slight brightness of the Moon, Stars, or light set up: although this also as
has been formerly explained, may happen by reason of an obscuration of the
horny coat or humors, because then also they have need of a greater light, that
they may be illuminated, neither is a small Apple observed in all those that are
Nyctalopous or cannot see in the Night.

Which as it is born with some, so it can scarce come to pass, as some teach,
that by reason of the spirits distending the Eye, or so great dryness of the
Globe of the Eye, that by that means the Apple may wholly fall together; as
sometimes it happens from a wound of the Eye, the humors flowing forth, and the
coats falling together, they become wholly blind, as has been declared
formerly.

A Dilatation of the Apple called Mydriasis by shedding plenty of light into
the Eye, A Dilatation of the Apple or a Mydriasis is the cause of an evening
sight.
hinders the cleerness of the sight, darkening it with too much brightness; and
if the enlarging of it be great, in a light somewhat more obscure and darkish
they see more rightly than in that too much shining, and that by reason of the
internal brightness of the Eye, sufficiently illuminating the Air for seeing:
as we have had an example of this rare disease, in a certain Foundling living
in our Hospital the year 1625. who by day time, and in presence of light was
blind, but by night and in the dark, did see the smallest things; hence we have
observed that amongst Birds, the Owls; and amongst Animals the Cat which also
do see by night, can by twinkling contract the hole of the Apple, and of their
own accord dilate it again, and so streighten it at the brightness of the
Light, or a Candle, that only an oblong black cleft does appear, but by night
and in the dark, dilate it so, that the whole former region of the Circle seems
black, and for that cause Owls also receive obscure Images, with a very open
Eye, and in the day time, that they may not be hurt by them too much appearing,
they join them again, and covet darkness. For otherwise this largeness or
narrowness of the Apple, makes little for the seeing things distant, better, or
less, as some have thought; seeing these defects of seeing which we have called
the young and old men's Sights, may happen as we have often observed, both to
those endued with a long and a narrow Apple, and what I have observed in many,
and in my self, that though the Apple of one Eye be far larger in the same man,
than that of the other Eye, yet the seeing is alike in both Eyes; neither could
we observe yet, that though such a dilatation of the Apple do happen, the
things which are seen should be represented less than they are, as some have
been opinionated.

But for the most part this dilatation of the Apple befalls certain living
Creatures from the birth, as those for which it was convenient to see by night;
and unless it altogether exceed a mean, otherwise than has been said, it does
no ways prejudice the seeing, but rather seems to bring some benefit, as one
has declared unto me; who seeing he had a most large Eye-ball, he could
comprehend and know by his sight without moving his head, not only those things
which were before his face, but those things vhich were far apart on one side,
which could not be seen by others, unless by bending the head that ways; the
which I did so much the easier believe him telling me, seeing this has
happened to me my self in my youth, and at one look at the Table I was able to
see at once many sitting round about, and to take notice of their gestures; but
if that by a wound or some other hurt, the apple of the eye be rather
dilacerated than dilated, than upon that account, because the humors are too
much carried to the foreparts, as has been formerly expounded, it sooner
offends the sight than it can bring a change after that manner as has been
said; from influx of humors as they have thought, it has already been declared
that it cannot come to pass; but from a vehement impulse of of the spirits by
straining, if the eye being dilated, the apple also were enlarged, yet the same
ceasing it would by and by return to its natural largeness.

The Cure.
The Cure of all these hurts of sight, viz. of Blindness, an Amblyopy, of that
which we have called the old and young man's sight of a Myopie, Nyctalopie,
evening sight, of Error, Images, a Scotoma, Vertigo and the rest, is ordered in
relation to the cause, which is, as has been said either in the Brain, the
affects of that bringing hurt not only to the sight, but also to other Senses;
or privately and chiefly prejudicing the sight, to wit, a Hurt, Contusion,
Dryness, Refrigeration, Agitation and trouble of the spirits, or a repletion
from a watery humor; or it is an affect of the Net-like Nerve caused by
consent; or Diseases especially organical in the humors and membranes of the
eye, to wit, a defect of the humors of the Eye, the situation of the hole of
the Grapy Coat or Apple, or a perversion of the humors of the Eye, and a change
of their substance, the smalness or too great largeness of the Apple: a white
speck appearing from a Suffusion, Albugo or Skar, and a pannicle spread over the
Eye, or a humor as Choler, Blood, matter collected in the Eye, concerning which
we shall explain in order what is to be done and foretold in every one of them.

If the hurt of Seeing be by fault of the Brain, The Cure of the burts of the
sight with the ober senses if they be by fault of the Brain.
and that be general not only viriaring the sight, but also taking away,
impairing, or depraving the other senses also, both internal and external and
by consequence prejudicing also the sight, the Cure, as also the whole handling
of them has been explained in these general hurts. As in an Apoplexy,
Blindness hapening together with the other abolitions of the senses; in a
madness and Raving, Aparitions, Images, and Vertigoes which are supervenient to
them also with other accidents; and in a weakness of the mind, the weakness of
sight which accompanies the defect of the internal senses.

But if these diseases consisting yet out of the Eye in the Brain or Optic
Nerve do chiefly hurt the sight, The Cure of the proper defects of the sight if
they be by reason of the optic Nerve yet lying in the Brain.
they shall be handled here, and according to the nature of the Cause the Cure
or prediction must be ordered.

If therefore the sight be taken away, by some eminent hurt, or by a Wound
about the Eye, forced even to the Optic Nerve as we have said has sometimes
happened no other hurt following it, that Blindness will be incurable.

And if also blindness be induced, the Optic Nerve being contorted by
Convulsions as has been said, unless the sight return of its own accord within
some few days as I have seen it come to pass, the Recovery is desperate; as
afterward I have observed them to remain Blind the whole time of their life.

Neither will there be any hopes of Cure if Blindness be left by too much
dryness of the Optic Nerve after most Burning Fevers, seeing those things
which we have said ought to be applied outwardly to the Forehead and Head for
to moisten, in the weakness of the memory contracted by dryness, although they
be convenient here also, yet for the most part they profit little, and can
hardly put forth their strength unto the Nerve.

And also if Blindness be caused by external cold from Wind, or by the
application of cold Oxyrrhodines, seeing cold is wholly an enemy to the Nerves,
that hurt is almost incurable, yet the Forehead and Head must be fomented and
anointed with things actually and potentially hot; and chiefly sweer things
must be ayplied to the Nostrils which are hot, and do reach nearer even to the
Nerve, the forms of which Remedies we have already explained, in a Stupidity
caused by cold.

Neither is there any health to be hoped for if that long continued Vertigo be
caused by fault of the Arteries hardened, The Cure of a rare Vertigo happenning
from the Arteries of the Brain being hardened.
as we have said has sometimes been found; the which notwithstanding seeing it
can scarcely be guest at while the man lives, to foretell any thing certainly
of it, were rashness, till after death dissection being made, the cause of the
evil being discovered, may excuse the Physician.

But if a Vertigo be caused by an Agitation of the spirits in the brain only,
The Cure of a Vertigo caused by an agitation of the spirits of the Brain.
from an external cause by reason of a motion of the Body or only of the Mind,
no other cause intrinsecally concurring, the cause ceasing, that also cease
of its own accord, and the sooner if by a contrary motion made, the spirits be
reduced and stopped; as if a Vertigo be caused by turning round of the body to
the right or left side, by an opposite motion to the left or right side, it
cease the sooner. In whom also lying on the Back does good, the which
notwithstanding, if the Vertigo proceed from an internal cause or from
drunkenness, it does rather provoke it; if it cease not so, Frictions of the
extreme parts do help, and Sleep coming upon it, takes it away.

But if this Agitation and Perturbation of the Spirits arise from Vapors
carried upwards, The cure of a Vertigo, Scotoma and Imagination caused by
Vapors.
whence are caused Vertigoes, and Scotomies and Imaginations, either severally
or together; then the Humors which are contained either in the Stomach, or the
Mesaraick Veins about the Womb, or else where in the Habit of the Body, and
sometimes in the Head it self, from which these Vapors rise, which we have said
were choleric, sanguine, impure rather then phlegmatic (seeing we have showed
that Phlegm does cause a Vertigo and Amblyopy for another reason) must be purged
forth, and diverted together with the Vapors, by letting of Blood,
Scarifications, Frictions, Cauteries, Vomits, and Purges; and that with things
given inwardly and applied outwardly; and by Course of life these Vapors must
be inhibited, as follows.

Letting of Blood by opening the Shoulder-vein of the Arm is good in the
Plethorick not only if the fuel of the evil lie else where in the Blood, but
also if either plenty or spirituous Blood abound in the head and be a Cause of
the Vertigo; for seeing in the Cavities of the Brain, both the blood of the
Arteries and Veins is confounded, by opening a Vein the spirituous blood also
may be drawn forth, in which if the whole evil almost do lie, the principal
scope of the Cure is in bleeding; and for that cause they commend also to open
the jugulars in the Neck: The which notwithstanding cannot be done without
danger, and fear of a great flux of Blood and Barrenness, if we believe
Hippocrates; Nay, spirituous blood causing a Vertigo; most men do teach, that
it cannot be cured, unless the Arteries behind the Ears be opened, and it is
proved by experience, that after diverse remedies a long time tried in Vain,
this kind of remedy has helped at last, the which nevertheless ought not to be
done, unless all things else have been first tried, and when we are certain of
the cause, and we know that it does proceed from that spirituous blood by the
continual beating of the Arteries, as has been said, yet using the greatest
diligence, because the Wound does hardly grow together, the Arteries being
first laid bare, that afterward it may be tried. Also a Vein may be opend in
the Forehead in a Vertigo arising from this cause, and in the Foot, if Vapors
ascend from thence; and if the Courses were suppressed, the Ankle Vein,
especially if the cause sending up the Vapors lurk about the Veins of the
Womb; upon which account the Haemrhoids also are most profitablly provoked if
the Fuel of the Evil be contained in the Mesaraicks. Scarifications for the
same reason do good, being made instead of bleeding and after it, for
Derivation, on the sides of the Neck, Shoulders, Cupping-glasses being applied
to, although the cause be in the Head, or from elsewhere be carried upwards by
Vapors and Scarification in the Region of the Wrist, or that outward part of
the Hand which is betwixt the Thumb and the fore Finger is thought a peculiar
remedy in the Vertigo the which also made in the extreme parts is good, if an
Air be felt to ascend from thence, in that place from whence it is known first
of all to arise.

Frictions ought to be made from the Neck by the Backbone to the lower parts
by degrees coming to the extreme parts and rubbing them. For so the Vapors and
Spirits are recalled; after which, that that collected in the Head may be
discust, let the Head be rubbed with a new cloth (not heating it, as otherwise
they are wont to do, that there be no attraction of Vapors to the Head.)

And also if a Vapor proceed from some part, binding it with Ligatures, the
Vapor may be hindered that it ascend not.

A Cautery in a persevering evil, or a Vesicatory which empties more humor,
must be applied for geater diversion sake, upon the same account in the middle
of the conuext part of the Head or behind the Ears, whether it be Actual or
Potential; and sometimes also in the Feet or other places, if a Vapor be felt to
rise from thence.

A Vomit will help very much, if the matter in the Stomach or Mesaraick Veins
especially the Choleric as has been said, does produce Vapors; in
imaginations, Scotomies and Vertigoes proceeding thence; which must be caused
first with the gentler, by and by with stronger, if the matter lurk in the
Mesaraick Veins, many times repeated, if they are able to bear it.

Purges must be used in all those Species, if the matter sending forth Vapors
consist in the same first passages, or else where in some other seat of the
body, and if such an Evaporation arise in the Head from impure blood, that
filth must be purged forth, fitting them rather for the drawing forth, of
Choleric, And impure humors from which these Vapors rather, which are subtle,
are elevated, then for the purging of Phlegm: of the Evacuation of which, if it
be the cause of a Vertigo or weakness of sight, we shall treat hereafter,
having respect also in the interim to the constitution of the the Body, in the
choice of them. But this will be performed by giving first of all some gentle
Stomach Pills made of Aloes and the Hierae, or a Bole.

Then we must first prepare the matter if it want preparation, and chiefly open
Obstructions, after this manner.

If the matter lie in the Stomach, and Choler, or crudity be the cause there,
Take of simple Oxymel, Honey of Roses, of each one ounce; Syrup of wormwood
Wine, Pomegranates, of each half an ounce; the waters of Wormwood, Marjoram, as
much as is sufficient. Make a Julep.

Or if it lurk chiefly in the Mesaraick Veins, Take of the Syrup of Snccory,
of the juice of Endive, of each one ounce; of the two opening Roots half an
ounce; the waters of Wormwood, Succory, as much as is sufficient. Make a Julep.

Or, give Wormwood Wine which especially in those, Species of a Vertigo is very
much commended; and that either simple or in which the opening Roots and
Marjoram and other opening things have been first infused.

Then he shall be purged with a stronger Medicine. As, Take of Pills of Hiera
or Mastick half a dram, Cochiae half a scruple, Oil of Fennel, or Anise, or
Carawaies (by reason of the Vapors) one grain, Piony seeds four grains with
white Wine. Make Pills.

Or usual ones may be made thus, of which let him take sometimes two scruples:
Take of Pills of Hierae Compound, Aggregative, of each two drams, Agarick
Trochiscate, Rhubarb, of each one dram; seeds of Cummin, Piony, of each one
scruple, with Syrup of Roses solutive. Make a Mass for your use.

Or let him take this Bole; Take of Cassia three drams, the Hiera of Hermes two
drams. Mix them.

Or make a good quantity, of which let him take by intervals a Bole of half an
ounce: Take of Cassia one ounce and an half, the Hiera of Hermes one ounce, of
the five kinds of Myrobolans of each two drams; Dodder of Time one dram, powder
of Peony root half a dram, Cummin seed one scruple, Syrup of Roses solutive as
much as sufficient: make an Electuary.

Or give this Potion or Infusion. Take of Rhubarb one dram, Agarick two
scruples, Citrine Myrobolans two drams, Wormwood one dram, Cinnamon half a
dram, Ginger one scruple, infuse them in thin white Wine, strain them and
dissolve Syrup of Roses solutive one ounce, Give it.

Or thus, Take of Agarick trochiscate infused in Oxymel and strained one dram,
of Rhubarb infused in wine diluted with Wormwood and Bettony water, two drams;
Cinnamon infused with Rhubarb half a dram, Syrup of Roses solutive two ounces:
make a Potion.

In the Interim the Vapors must always be represt, which in the Vertigo,
Scotoma, and Imaginations do assail the Head, the place in the mean while being
considered from whence they arise.

For if this be from the Stomach and Mesaraick Veins the following Electuary is
convenient, which shall be given after Dinner and Supper, and sometimes in the
morning the quantity of a Chestnut, as, Take Conserve of Roses two ounces,
Marjoram one ounce, Flowers of Peony half an ounce, Quinces candid one ounce,
Citron pil half an ounce, one Emblick Myrobolan, the Rob of Currants (in
Choleric bodies) half an ounce, the powder of Diacitonites without the species
one dram, Coriander seed prepared one dram, Fennel, Peony root of each half a
dram; Coral one dram, Mastick half a scruple, with the Syrup of the Conserve of
Citron pill make an Electuary.

Or let him use one spoonful of this powder called Post pastum, Take of
Coriander seed half covered with Sugar one ounce, Anise seed condite in like
manner half an ounce, the powder of Diacytonites without the species one dram,
Diarrhodon Abbatis, Red Saunders, dry Citron pil, of each half a dram; Leaves
of the greater Eyebright one scruple, Mastich half a scruple, Lozenges of Sugar
of Roses two ounces, make Powder.

Lozenges may be made of the powder of Diacytonites without the species one
dram, Red Coral half a dram, Shavings of Ivory one scruple, with Sugar
dissolved in Rose water to two ounces: make Lozenges.

A most excellent Remedy also to hinder Vapors is, if the Paroxysm befall them
fasting as it is wont to be, to give them meat, the which being taken it
presently grows mild, or the Vertigo, Imagination, Scotoma cease, and by this
only some have been restored, shunning Fasting.

Sleep because it discusseth Vapors does help very much in these cases,

Plasters, Cerecloaths are applied outwardly to the Region of the Stomach if
the Vapors proceed from thence and the Mesaraick Veins, that they may hinder
them; which they wear in the night.

As a Plaster of Mastick or some other made for the Stomach, malaxed with some
astringent Oil, or Galens Cerecloath for the Stomach.

Or such a one, Take of red Roses, Leaves of Wormwood of each two drams; dried
Citron pil, Labdanum of each half an ounce; Mastich two drams, Powder them and
with Oil of Quinces or Mastich, adding Wax, make a Cerecloath.

If these Vapors rise from about the region of the Womb, let the same Plasters
of Mastich or pro matrice be applied to that part, and let the Woman wear it
for some time, unless the stoppage of the Courses forbid it, for when they
flow, they must be omitted.

If a Vapor ascend like an Air from some other part of the Body as the Feet, or
others, does create a Vertigo, as has been said; then the washing of those
parts does very much divert it, as also if it be done in other causes.

The which may be done thus, Take of the Leaves of Sage, Rosemary, Celtick
Spike, Groundpine, St. John's wort, flowers of Chamomel, Roses, Lavender, as
much as will suffice, boil them in Wine and Lie.

Afterward let him anoint his Feet with the following Ointment, Take Oil of
Bays, Worms, Wall-flower, of each one ounce; Aqua Vitae half an ounce, a little
Salt: boil them for your use.

If necessity urge very much, Oxyrrhodines must be applied to the Head which
may repel vapors, and if it continue, we must add things more strongly
astringent, as Juice of Plantane,

And successively such a Cap may be worn, as, Take of the roots of Galangal,
the true Acorus, Citron pill, of each one dram; Coriander seed, two drams,
Myrtles one dram, flowers of Roses, Rosemary, of each half a dram; Cloves half
a dram, make a Powder for a Cap.

Some have put Remedies upon the Eyes in Imaginations and Scotomaes, which we
think superfluous, seeing the Vapor does no ways reach unto the Eyes.

In course of Diet let all things be moderate, the meat simple, not too much;
also let them drink Wine sparingly or diluted; let too much motion of the body
be avoided and chiefly too much agitation or bowing down of the Head, and let
them beware of looking on things wheeling about, or very bright; and let them
abstain from too much agitation of the mind by study and watching.

They think that Crystal worn is of very great force in a Vertigo, and for the
same benefits sake they drink out of a Cup made of it, or they put crystal into
their Cups.

It has been said that a Repletion of the Brain from a watery, The Cure of a
weakness of the sight and Verigo proceeding from a watery and phlegmatic humor
of the Brain.
serous, and phlegmatic humor does cause a Vertigo by its fluctuation and wind,
and by an afflux of the same humor to the optic Nerve, Blindness does
sometimes arise, or by an irrigation of it an Amblyopie, and besides these
hurts of the sight which are by reason of the Brain, it has been demonstrated,
that no other faults of the Eye prejudicing the sight can be caused from phlegm
or any afflux of such a humor which can neither enter the Net-like Nerve nor
the Eye; and therefore we apply this Method of Cure only to these Diseases
which is due only to this cause, neither do we refer it as others have done, to
Suffusions or other affects of the Eye which also they believed did proceed
from an influx of phlegm.

But here although such a Cure be convenient, as is due to a Carus, Apoplexy,
and other phlegmatic Diseases of the Brain, and therefore perhaps ought not any
more to be repeated in this place, yet that we may understand after what manner
they are to be applied to the sight in these Diseases, we will here explain.

But a Vertigo springing from thence is dangerous, if there be a great
Repletion of the Head, such as has been demonstrated, we have often found,
which seeing it can hardly be taken away, sometimes it ends in a Carus and
Apoplexy, the which it presageth: as also an Amblyopie, if it happen from
thence in space of time is converted into blindness which sometimes is wont to
be at the first presently from the beginning, the humor flowing abundantly: the
prevention of which therefore in a Vertigo and Amblyopie springing from thence
we shall study to Remedy this following manner.

First we will endeavor to take away those excrementitious, serous and
phlegmatic humors of the Head, by Emptying, Revelling, and driving them from
the brain; then by heating the brain which does generate them, and again is
moistened and cooled by them, and by strengthening it, by those things which are
appropriate to it, the Nerves, and the Eyes; and also the hindering that the
cause be not generated anew, or fomented: which shall be performed by Remedies
applied inwardly and outwardly, by Purging by the stool by the Mouth, and Nose,
or by drawing away of Blood: Or by things applied to the Head, or other parts
consenting with it; or by giving things that alter, and by course of diet, not
neglecting Amulets.

Purgations by the stool for drawing away of phlegm from the Head, and for
hindering that the cause be not generated anew, are thus methodically ordered.

A Goading and sharp Clyster is premised, the which also is profitably injected
by intervals or weekly.

And in these hurts of the sight it will be thus more applicable. Take of the
fresh roots of Orrice, Peony, each two ounces; the herbs Centory the less,
Betony, Rue, Eyebright, Fennel, of each one handful; flowers of Camomel,
Lavonder or french Lavender of each one pugil; Fennel seed two drams, Carawaies
one dram, Senna (which by a propriety is good for the Eyes) half an ounce,
Agarick tied in a rag three drams, Bran one pugil, make a Decoction, dissolve
of common Honey or Honey of Rosemary flowers one ounce, Hiera of Logadius or
Hermes half an ounce, Oil of Rue, Lillies, of each one ounce, Niter a little;
make a Clyster.

The humor is prepared before Purging for some days, by a Julep, or Decoction,
or Wine.

A Julep shall be made thus, Take of Honey of Rosemary flowers (instead of Honey
of Roses or Oxymel, which by reason of the Vinegar, will not be so profitable
for the Nerves) Syrup of French Lavender, of Betony, each one ounce and an
half; the waters of Eyebright, Peony flowers, Fennel, Marjoram, each three
ounces; mix them, aromatize it with Nutmeg and Cinnamon.

Thus may be the Decoction for some Doses, Take of the roots of Orrice, Peony,
each one ounce; the herbs Speedwel, Eyebright, Fennel, Rosemary, Mint, each one
handful; flowers of Rosemary, French Lavender, Peony, each one pugil; seed of
Fennel, Anise, each two drams; Carawaies one dram, Damask Prunes ten, Raisons
twenty, boil them and in one pound and an half infuse of the powder of
Galangal, Ginger, each one dram; Cinnamon two drams, afterward strain them,
adding of the best Honey or Sugar as much as is sufficient, or of the
forementioned Syrups, till it grow sweet.

Or make a Wine when bitter things are added as Centory which here is very
profitable, Take of the Leaves of Eyebright, Speedwel, Centory, all dried,
Fennel seed each half an ounce; Carawaies two drams, Nutmeg one dram, bruise
them, for one measure of white Wine for your use.

Afterward Catharticks that purge phlegm must be given, but such as are
appropriate to the sight, as those which have in them Senna and Fumitory, and
of compounded ones those which admit the juice of Fennel.

Such as are the greater and lesser Pilulae lucis, so called beause they bring
light to the Eyes, and those also called Arabicae and sine quibus; and of
Electuaries the greater and lesser Indum, we may use these that follow.

First of all Pills which he ought to take at midnight, if he be not unfit for
swallowing of them, Take of pills sine quibus half a dram, Lucis the greater,
the Arabic pills, powder of Hiera of Coloquintida, each half a scruple; with
Water of Eyebright, or juice of Fennel, make Pills.

Or let him take this Bole, Take of Electuary Indum, the Hiera of Hermes, each
two drams and an half, with Sugar make a Bole.

Or Decoction, Take of Fumitory, Eyebright each one handful; Senna half an
ounce, make a Decoction in Water and Wine and Honey (instead of Hydromel or
Oxymel) infuse Agarick, Turbith, each one dram; Ginger one scruple, Sal-Gem
half a scruple, strain it and dissolve Syrup of Fumitory compound one ounce,
make a Potion.

Or we may take one dose of the following compositions and give it instead of
these, for seeing in these diseases of long continuance, we ought to use once
in a month or week by course, Phlegmagoges, and in the interim Purgers
appropriate to the sight, sometimes the Preparatives being repeated again, the
following forms may be prepared for this use.

The Form of Pills is wont commonly to be more fit and usual than the rest, by
which they may more commodiously swallow things that are ungrateful, which here
are very necessary; by making a mass for your use, the quantity of whose dose
shall be from two scruples to a dram, Take of Aloes two drams, Turbith, Agarick,
Rhubarb, Senna, each one dram; Myrrh, Mastich, each half a scruple; Tartar,
Salt Gem, each half a scruple; Ginger one scruple, seeds of Fennel, Rue, each
one scruple; Castor six grains, with the juice of Fennel and Rue, make a mass
and if you add Hiera of Coloquintida and a little Scammony they will work more
strongly.

Or make them thus of the usual ones, Take of the Pills sine quibus, Aureae,
each one dram; Lucis the greater, Arabicarum, each half a dram; Powder of Hiera
of Coloquintida one scruple, Oil of Fennel two drops, juice of Fennel as much
as is sufficient, make a mass.

If he had rather have an Electuary make such a one, of which let him take from
three drams to half an ounce, at once by it self or dissolving it with
Eyebright and Fennel water. Take of Electuary Indum the greater, Diaphoenicon
each half an ounce; Hiera of Hermes five drams, Fennel seed one dram, Cinnamon,
Cloves, each half a dram; with french Lavendar, make an Electuary.

If he delight more in a Powder, let the third part of this following be given
with a Julep made of Syrup of French Lavender, and Eyebright water, Take of
Turbith, two drams, Senna half an ounce, Tartar two drams, Ginger half a dram,
Fennel seed one dram, Scammony one scruple, Sugar one ounce, mix them, make a
Powder.

A usual Syrup will do it, prepared after the following manner, from which first
of all a Decoction being made may be given for three days together, and
afterward out of all the same in double quantity a Syrup may be boiled to be
kept for use, Take of the roots of Fennel one ounce, Orrice half an ounce,
Acorus, Galangal, Elecampane each two drams; Liquorish six drams, the herbs
Fennel, Vervain, Eyebright, Betony Fumitory, each one handful; Time, Hysop,
each one handful and an half; flowers of French Lavender, Rosemary, Borrage,
each one pugil; seeds of Fennel two drams, Carawaies, Anise, Hartwort, Mountain
Seseli of Marselles, Rue, each one dram; Raisons twenty, Senna two ounces,
Oak-fern, wild Saffron, each one ounce and an half; Agarick trochiscate half an
ounce, Turbirth two drams (for the rich you may add Rhubarb) Ginger one dram,
Cinnamon two drams, make a Decoction, add Sugar two ounces, for three doses, or
all things being doubled as has been said, let it be reduced into the form of
a Syrup.

A purging Wine is more pleasing to some, and more effectual, seeing it is made
only by maceration, or with a light boiling, and bitter things given after this
manner, are not so ungrateful, which after the same manner as the Syrup may be
drunk three days together, and afterward the Powder being divided into three
parts, and one always being infused in the Wine for one dose may so be given
by course without corruption.

Which Powder for to steep may be made thus: Take of Wormwood two drams,
Centory one dram, Eybright, Verveine, Rue, of each three drams; Seeds of Fennel
two drams, of Rue one dram, Senna one ounce, Turbith two drams, Agarick half an
ounce, Bark of black Hellebore two drams, Tartar two drams, Ginger one dram:
Make a Powder for the Wine.

After the Body has been purged, we must derive it from the Brain, by the
Mouth and Nostrils as through a way destained for the purging forth of Phlegm;
which purging is so much the more convenient because it presently purges from
the very seat affected it self, those Excrements of the Brain collected there,
to which seat this way leads strait; and this is done by Head purgers or those
called Apophlegmatismes used in the morning fasting, in the form of an Errhine,
Masticatory or Gargil; of which the following may be here used.

Errhines which are attracted with the Nostrils, shall be made thus: Take of
the iuyces of red Pimpernel, of the roots of Beets or Mercury, Marioram, of
each one ounce; Fennel, Rue, of cach one ounce; white Wine half an ounce, Mix
them: if the juice of Sowbread can be had, and be added it would be more
effectual, as also Gauls, but if they be attracted into the Jaws they offend
them with too great bitterness.

When they do not willingly use Errhines, anointing of the Nostrils is good, by
daubbing them even to the very bottom, with some of the stronger forementiond
juyces especially of Sowbread.

Or with this Liniment: Take of the juyces of Marjoram, Sowbread, the roots of
Beets or Mercury, of each two drams; Elaterium six grains, Oil of Orrice three
drams, Honey and Tupentine a little, that you may make it like Nutritum.

Let him chew the following Masticatory spitting often; Take of the Roots of
Pellitory of Spain, the seeds of Staves-acre, of each one dram, Cubebs, Pepper,
Fennel seed, of each half a dram; Marjoram one scruple, Mastick two drams,
receive them in the Pulp of Raysons adding a little Wax ^f they stick not, to
make small Bals.

Such a Gargle will be convenient, with which he may wash his mouth and Gargle
his Throat, Take of the Roots of Pellitory of Spain, Orrice, Angelico or
Masterwort, of each half an ounce; the Herbs Marjoram, Sage, Hyssop, Rue,
Ey-bright, of each one handful; flowers of Lavender, Rosemary, of each one
pugil; seeds of Fennel, Rue, of each two drams; Nutmegs two dram; Let them boil
in Wind and Water, adding Honey as much as is sufficient: And make a Gargel.

By drawing of blood by a Vein opend we cannot turn forth the Phlegm from the
Head, unless it be Phlegmatic in the Brain, and so by drawing it out we do by
this means in some manner substract the matter that did generate these
Phlegmatic Excrements, which notwithstanding is not to be done except in the
Plethorick and to whom it is accustomary and whose blood appears very impure,
unless some other Disease joined with it as a pain of the Head, do persuade it.

And also that revulsion of the blood to another part, which is done by
Scarification will do good upon no other account, but as by the attraction of
Cupping-glasses applied, the serous humors also are emptied too, as shall by
and by be explained.

Remedies are applied to the Head that these Excrementitious humors, which are
the conjunct or Antecedent cause of the Disease, may be altered, discust and
called forth, and the part it self may be strengthend too, and that after
diverse manners.

Lotions of the Head being sometimes made, are thus convenient, which being very
appropriate do consume the Humor. Take of the root of Orrice, Bay or Galangal,
of each one ounce; the leaves of Marjoram, Rue, Sage, the tops of Fennel, and
Rosemary, Verveine, Celandine, Eybright, Betony, Ground Pine, of each one
handful; Flowers of Chamomel, Lavender, French Lavender, of each one pugil;
Berries of Bays, Juniper, of each one pugil; Fennel seed half an ounce, Rue
one dram, Senna one ounce, Agarick three drams: Make a Decoction in a Lie, made
of the Ashes of Juniper, Roses, Bays, adding a fourth patt of white Wine for a
Lie.

A Cap performs the same but successively, being worn, especially by night,
stuffed with these things following, which also breaths forth a pleasant smell:
Take of the Roots of Orrice, Angelica, of each two drams, the true Acorus,
Galangal, of each one dram; the Leaves of Marjoram, Rosemary, flowers of Roses,
Lavender, of each half a dram; Nutmeg, Cloves, of each one dram; Coriander seed
prepared one dram and an half, Gith half a dram. Make a Powder for a Cap, the
which also if it be strained on the Hairs sometimes does work more powerfully.

Suffumigations do the same, whose virtue enters the Head and dries the better,
whose clausets, and Caps it is better to suffumigate, then their Nostrils, for
thus they would move a Vertigo and hurt the sight.

Which prepared after diverse manners, and being made of Juniper berries, they
are also appropriate to the sight. Dioscorides writes that smelling to Galbanum
does take away the fits of the Vertiginous.

Lotions of the Feet being sometimes used, by a certain communion with the Head,
do very much divert the Excrements from it, and strengthen the Head; which may
be prepared of the same things, with which we have said the Head ought to be
washed, or also with other lies hot, sweet, especially Cephalic things being
first first boiled in them.

Vesicatories and Cauteries do more strongly call forth serous Humors, and the
Excrements of the Brain, applied to the upper part of the Head, or behind the
Ears or in the Neck.

A Puncture made in the Skin of the Neck and a string run through it, which
they call a seton or Setaceum does the same.

And Hollerius writes that Scarification made in the hinder part of the Head
with Cupping-glasses applied, has sometimes suddenly restored the sight lost
by reason of the Optic Nerve, even whiles the Cuppingglass has yet stuck on.

The same things given inwardly in a Vertigo and weakness of sight proceeding
from phlegm, do agree with both, the which ought to be appropriate to the Head
and Eyes, and to heat and strengthen them and to hinder the production of phlegm
by helping the first and third Concoction, and especially to repress Vapors
which by oppressing the head do hinder the fit and hurt the sight and to
discuss those as also wind; which are used in diverse forms and manners.

Some things given in Bread do good, as if seeds of Carawaies, Fennel and Mace
be mixed with it in working, or if Ginger, Cloves bruised, with Aqua vitae
poured to it, be added to it in like manner, which Paracelsus did very much
approve off.

And also the other meats may be seasoned with these, or such a Powder be
prepared for the Meat: Take of Annis, Fennel seed, of each two drams,
Carawaies, Mace, of each one dram; Cinnamon three drams, Sugar two ounces, make
a Powder, to be strewed on Rice or other Meats.

But such a one may be made, which is used with Meats, or with a potched Egg.
Take of Salt one ounce, Nutmeg, Mace, Caraway seed, Leaves of Eyebright,
Marjoram, each half a dram; mix them.

Other most effectual Pouders are diverse ways made thus, to be given
themselves in the morning, or with some particular water as of Eyebright mixed
with Wine (seeing Waters given alone, are not so grateful or fit for the
Stomach) of which this singular one has oftentimes been happily used, as Take
of Mace two drams, Cinnamon one dram, Leaves of Eyebright one ounce, Sugar the
weight of them all, give two drams.

Another very profitable if the Vertigo does threaten an Epilepsie, Take of the
ashes of Swallows, a Man's Skul each two drams; Viper half a dram, Fennel seed
two drams, Carawaies one dram, Peony, Mace, each half a dram, Cubebs one
scruple, Leaves of Eyebright, Marjoram, each two scruples; Lozenges or Sugar of
Roses the weight of them all, make a Powder.

Of those mentioned Lozenges, may be made, as also of the usual species,
especially of Diatrion Piperion, Diacuminum, Dianisum, Arromaticum Rosatum,
Diagalanga, Rosata Novella, Diambra, Diamoschum, adding of those that are more
temperate, Diarrhodon, Trionsantalon, the Cordial species and of Gems.

After meals Pouders are used especially to drive away Vapors and to order a
good concoction, after this manner, Take of the following seeds half coverd
with Sugar, Coriander one ounce, Anise half an ounce, Fennel two drams,
Carawaies, Cubebs condited also each one dram and an half; Leaves of Eybright,
Marjoram, red Roses each one dram and an half; Cinnamon three drams; Mace half
a dram, the species Diacitonites cum specibus one dram, Sugar the weight of
them all, make a Powder, let him take one spoonful.

Some add to the pouders after Meals, Senna two scruples, and so they think the
Vapors are more strongly represt.

Others prepare them thus of Rhubarb in manner following, to repress Vapors yet
more powerfully, Take of Rhubarb two drams, Cammels hey, Origany each one dram;
Tables of Sugar of Roses two ounces with syrup of Mint make a mixture, let him
take one spoonful one hour before Dinner.

If he going to bed does swallow two or three grains of Mastich, the Vapors are
very much repressed.

In like manner dry Sugard Confections are taken after meat, made of seeds of
Coriander, Senna, Anise, Carawaies, Cummin and Cubebs covered with Sugar,
Citron pil and others.

But also the bare seed of Fennel or Carawaies, or Juniper berries eaten in the
morning do good in a Vertigo and weakness of the sight, especially if
afterward they so receive their breath with their hands before their mouth,
that thence it ascend upwards to the Eyes.

The usual Electuaries are approved of to be taken in the morning, as Treacle,
Mithridate, Asyncritum, if they be very old. Also the Tryphera of King Sabor,
and Hollerius his Electuarium Regium, by themselves or mixed and taken with
other things.

Of the other Conserves and Conditures that are kept and are convenient here,
we may make such an Electuary, Take of the Conserves of Sage, of Rosemary
flowers, Marjoram, French Lavender, Lavender, Betony, flowers of Clove
Gilly-flowers, Groundpine, each half an ounce; of Roses, Borrage, Diacorus,
each one ounce; Emblick Myribolans condited one, Citron pill one ounce, Leaves
of Eybright, Organe, each one dram; Fennel seed one dram and an half, with the
Syrup of Green Ginger make an Electuary, let him take in the morning the
quantity of a Chestnut.

Or the following Confection which is most effectual may be made thus. Take of
the roots of Peony Missleto of the Oak, each one dram; the leaves of Eyebright,
three drams, Marjoram, Rosemary flowers, each two drams; Organy one dram,
Fennel seed two drams, Anise, Carawaies, each one dram; Cummin, Hartwort,
Basil, Peony, each half a dram, Cubebs, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon each half a
dram; Corral two scruples, Pearl half a scruple, the Skul of a Man one dram,
Ivory half a dram, make a Powder, mix it with Honey of Rosemary flowers or with
the juice boiled, let him take in the morning, the quantity of a Nutmeg.

Stilled Waters are commended which maybe taken by themselves or after other
things, as Cinnamon Water sometimes taken.

And such a one may be provided, Take of Vervain, Eyebright, Rue, Marjoram,
Groundpine, each half an ounce; seeds of Fennel two drams, Cinnamon half an
ounce, steep them in Mallago Wine and distill them, let him take sometimes one
spoonful, to which you may add Sugar, that it may be the more grateful; the
rest you shall find in the cold Diseases of the Head.

The Chemists magnify the Salts, Essences, and Oils of the forementioned
things.

As concerning the Course of life that is necessary to the conservation of
life, it shall be so ordered, that the cause of these affects be not augmented
by it, but rather diminished, and the symptoms themselves be mitigated, which
will be done by temperance and mediocrity in all things, of which we have spoken
already, as also of the Amulets which are agreeable to the Sight also, in the
former Cure, of the Cause of a Vertigo the other Remedies of it we shall
describe by and by in explaining the Oxydorcical or sight-cleering Medicaments.

The Net-like Nerve being affected by consent, The Cure of the want of sight by
reason of the Net-like Nerve in the Eye affected by consent.
which is made for the spirits sake with which it ought to abound; if this come
to pass by reason of the influx of the spirit hindered, by occasion of the Brain
and the Optic Nerve growing to it, what must be foretold and acted, has been
already explained in their diseases.

And if Blindness be caused by pressing of the Eye the spirits flying back and
staying for a while, by and by that cease of its own accord, the spirits
returning back again, unless there have been some eminent hurt caused.

But if they being laid asleep in the Nerve by reason of long continued
darkness cannot for a while enjoy the light which is at length offered to them,
and they are Blind or dark-sighted, then the spirits must be raised again and
brought into act with Light, by degrees not by too bright an one at first, by
and by offering a greater light, that so by little and little they may
accustom to endure, until they come again unto the perfect custom of seeing.

But the contrary must be done in those whose sight is darkened by too much
brightness, that they may the sooner and truer receive the use of it, to wit,
by offering them Darkness by degrees, first placing them in the shade then in a
more obscure place, at last for a while in the dark it self.

Which custom of Light and darkness in them both being reduced by degrees,
unless it do good, there is danger of a persevering blindness or dullness of
sight the which we ought to foretell, not neglecting in the mean time
sight-clearing Remedies.

But if the Net-like Nerve be affected by consent, because it is destitute of
the external light, and that cease by reason of darkness induced in the air,
by and by, by the brightness of the Sun or fire (besides which nothing hitherto
has been found out, which can sufficiently do it) that being illuminated
again, the light returns, and the Eye sees again.

But if the light be withdrawn from it, by the impediment of the humors or
Membranes of the Eye, the Cure shall be declared in their faults.

If a defect of humors of the Eye cause Blindness, The Cure of Blindness from a
defect of the humors of the Eye.
all the humors falling forth together, through a Wound or Ulcer, nothing must
be attempted here besides the Cure of the Wound and Ulcer, which shall be
explained in the pains of the Eyes, and the evil must be foretold to be
incurable.

The which also is to be done and said, if only the watery humor be poured
forth, seeing it cannot be repaired; unless by chance, if a narrow puncture
being made in the eye, either by chance or purposely, by reason of taking away
a Suffusion, the watery humor threaten a flowing forth (the which
notwithstanding scarce comes to pass, if the Needle be thin and drawn forth
gently) then shutting close the Eyelids and afterward pressing the Eye and
laying astringent things upon it, and a Roll applying (as we shall declare by
and by in pricking a Suffusion) we repress the flowing forth of the humor, til
the hole grow together again.

But some part only of the watery humor being poured forth out of a Wound, or
being wasted by Diseases or Age, so that it hurt the sight if it be little, and
there is yet no other fault in the Eye adjoined. In young folks in whom that
humor may be repaired by the nourishment of the Eye, we may yet Hope well, and
commit it to nature, but in other there is no Good to be judged.

If the Perversion of the natural situation of the structure of the Eye do hurt
the sight, The Cure of some impediments of the sight and of squinting by reason
of the situation of the Apple contorted.
and the whole Eye be so contorted, that the apple stand not forth in the middle
seat of the forepart of the Eye, but be hidden in either side, as we have said
has sometimes come to pass by a Wound, that being thrust to the inner part of
the Nose, it could not see but through it; or otherwise from the Birth, the Eye
being inverted it is so coverd with the Eyebrows that the Sight is hindered,
these faults can by no means be amended; as neither that, if from the first
Nativity the Apple being not altogether hid, but yet enclining too much to one
side, the Eye being as it were near Convulsed, or otherwise drawn thither does
give occasion for a squinting as has been said; the which also are let alone
seeing they little or nothing prejudice the sight.

But if that the Crystalline humor by some means bowed or a little way drawn
from the Circumference of it, The Cure of some hurts of the sight and of
squinting from the bowing of the crystalline humor or motion of it to the side.
does breed a weakness or Error of the sight, or be one of the causes of a
Squinting; then if this were suddenly done by some violent cause, unless by and
by of its own accord it recover its natural situation, it is now impossible to
effect by art; and by so much the less, if this fault be contracted from the
Birth.

But if that the same crystalline humor otherwise placed right, except that a
little going backwards from the forepart which it ought naturally to occupy,
The Cure of those sights by which they see not things unless very near; or by
which they see things distant better than those near, by the carrying of the
crystalline humor forwards or backwards.
possessing the exact middle or more hinder region of the Eye, does induce that
sight in which they do not rightly see things a little more distant, and for
that cause they are compelled to apply things nearer or close to their Eyes;
seeing this for the most part happens from the birth, and we cannot reduce the
humor into its natural state, it is impossible to alter this seeing, unless it
be changed by course of Age, by that long continued bowing down of the head
toward the fore parts the whole life time, the crystalline humor always
bearing forwards and by degrees being brought thither: as I have often found by
experience, both in others and my self, that this seeing, is changed when they
grow old, so that then they can see things better at a distance, than when they
are younger; and then this benefit accrews in the correction of this fault (if
so be it be a fault, seeing what is lost in the sight for knowing of things
more distant, is gained by it in more rightly discerning of things near) that
when necessity requires to know things far distant, we can by applying a most
bright prospective made of a thicker Crystal Glass which represents things to
the Eye lesser than they are, correct this defect of the inner prospective, to
wit, the crystalline humor, because it is too near to the net-like Nerve and so
obtain in Seeing that which we desire: the which Prospective notwithstanding,
it is not requisite should be always of one kind, but as the crystalline humor
is more or less gone backwards, it ought to be applied more or less near to the
Eye, and to be less, or much more thick; as we see in those that are called
Myopes some are convenient for some, not others, and yet not much different, as
experience shows us this, that what Glass ought to be chosen, is rather to be
done by trying it by the Eye than by any explicable description, unless they
that make them, know how to do it.

But as this sight springing from the Birth can no ways be changed, but only
be corrected by another Instrument applied, that more grievous impediment of
the sight by process of again which they cannot rightly see things near hand,
but better if they be far removed from the Eye, which we have said does come to
pass by the crystalline humor carried too much forward, cannot be amended any
other way than by a thin Glass spectacle representing things to the Eye greater
than they are; the which they having continual use of, that they may see handle
and read the lesser things, they always carry about them; and two Glasses are
so formed in a frame, that fastniug such an Instrument to the ridg of the Nose,
by the great mercy of God they can use it to the right discerning of things.

The Crystalline humor being made more solid or obscure if it induce that
weakness of sight in which, The Cure of Nyctalopy proceeding from an obscure
crystalline humor.
darkness growing a little on they see obscurely or nothing, or sometimes that
being wholly hardened they become blind it cannot be corrected by Remedies nor
Spectacles seeing they cannot bring brightness unto it.

A too small and narrow hole of the Grapy Coat called the Pupilla if a too
large hole effect that the sight be easily darkened with too much light, The
Cure of a Nyctalopy from the narrownesi of the Apple.
and it discern more rightly in a darker place; because this fault is Original
also it cannot be mended neither by Medicines nor Spectacles; because the cause
is in the Membrane and not the humor unless in as much as they whose sight is
offended with brighness, The Cure of the evening sight from the largness of the
Apple,
may be prevented from too much light by partly shutting up their dwellings
places, or from the brightness of a candle by interposing some glassy Obstacle,
at night while they read, or earnestly behold some other thing, that they may
not molest the sight.

Although many do attempt to Cure these and other faults formerly mentioned, no
ways appearing in the Eye (being ignorant of the true cause of them, and
referring all things to the thickness of the Spirits and Defluxions) and for
gains sake, do rashly promise that they will do it; in Vain tormenting the sick
with purges and other things and applying Eye clearers: Oxydorcical remedies
which are convenient to restore the sight in its various hurts are here
explained in general
The which notwithstanding we may use, if we are minded to try, let the event
be what it will: those things which can no ways hurt, but may be used without
trouble: of which sort you will find many in the remedies which are proposed
almost the same, both in a weakness of the sight and Nyctalopy and evening
sight and Myopsie; of which we will add these few examples of our own.

If at any time it be needful to administer purges either because the Body
otherwise has need of Evacuation or by reason of the Stomach from whence
Vapors carried upwards do also prejudice the Sight or for some other causes
rather then by reason of the Disease in the Eye which of it self does no ways
require Pugers; they must be made according to the Cacochymy abounding in the
Body.

Yet they are chiefly to be made choice off, which amongst Purgers are
appropriate to the Eye, as Senna, which we have formerly said both taken and
applied, does by its whole property refresh the sight; Fumitory also, which as
is reported does clarify the sight.

Of which we may prepare such a Composition, as this following; adding also
other things appropriate to the sight: Take of the leaves of Senna one ounce,
dried Fumitory half an ounce, Dodder of Time two drams, Eybright, Germander, of
each one dram and an half; Fennel seed two drams, Mountain Heartwort one dram,
flowers of Rosemary, French Lavender, of each one dram and an half: Make a
Decoction in Goats Whey, infuse Rhubarb two drams, Cinnamon, Spike, long
Pepper, of each half a dram; Or for the Flegmatiek, Agarick, Turbith, of each
one dram and an half; Ginger half a dram, Salt Ammoniack half a scruple, strain
it; add Syrup of Fumitory and Roses solutive, of each one ounce and an half:
Make a Potion for two Doses.

Let the younger sort drink for some days only Senna and fresh Fumitory with
Fennel seed diluted in Goats Whey.

They use also stonger Compositions, and those phlegm purgers for the most part,
because they thought all those affects did proceed from a defluxion of phlegm,
the which may be used if otherwise it abound in the Head, and also prejudice
the Nerves, as we have said formerly in a Weakness of the Sight and Vertigo,
from Phlegm of the Brain.

We must make choice off, Pilulae Lucis, Arabicae, Electuary Indum, and others
especially fitted for the Sight.

Of things taken inwardly which are appropriate to the sight and do help the
Head and Stomach, we may make forms thus.

The which if we would use amongst nourishments let the Meats be often seasoned
with the following Pouders and Salts.

A profitable Aromatic Powder with which the meats are seasoned instead of
other Spices: fitted for the sight: Take of Cinnamon three drams, Cloves one
dram, Nutmeg or Mace half a dram, long and black Pepper, Ginger, of each one
scruple; Salt one ounce and an half: Mix them.

Neither are Radish or Mustard so to be feared amongst Junkets; because as has
been showed in the Remedies they help the Sight by a propriety, and being taken
upon that account, they do good rather then harm.

The use of rapes boiled, especially with Caraway seed, as our Country men are
wont to prepare them, is very convenient, because they are appropriate.

Eybright Wine, is wonderfully commended by all; which either is made simple by
infusing the dried leaves of it in Wine or new Wine whiles it is hot; or that
it may be more effectual and pleasing by mixing Wormwood and Fennel roots,
because our Country men are rather delighted with Wormwood Wine, and
Dioscorides reckons up Wormwood amongst the Sightquickners.

Distilled waters must sometimes be taken, which may be prepared thus,
profitable for that purpose: Take of the waters of Rosemary flowers, the Herbs
Fennel, Eybright, of each two drams; Cinnamon water half an ounce, Aqua vitae
two ounces, Lozenges of Sugar, of Roses as much as you please, if you will; Mix
them: let him take from half an ounce to one ounce.

More Compound waters: Take of the fresh roots of Radish one ounce and an half,
of Fennel one ounce, of Celandine, Avens of each half an ounce, the Herbs
Eybright, Vervain, Rue, Celandine, Germander, Fennel, of each three drams;
Time, Sage, Marjoram, Savory, of each two drams; Rosemary flowers three drams,
of French Lavender, St. Johnswort, of each one dram; Fennel seed three drams,
Mountain Hart-wort two drams, Carawaies one dram, the Liver of a Goat sliced
with the filth and Gall sticking to it half a pound, Cinnamon half an ounce,
Cloves two drams, Nutmeg one dram, long Pepper one dram: Bruise those things
that are to be bruised and sprinkle them with white Wine, distill them, and let
him take part of it by it self or diluted with other Water, if it inslame too
much.

The Pouders which are taken in the morning by themselves or with a crust of
bread dipe in Wine, or going to bed also, are made thus: Take of Leaves of
Eybright two drams, of Marjoram one dram, Rue half a dram, Rosemary flowers one
dram, the seed of Fennel two drams, of Rapes one dram and an half, mountain
Hartwart one dram, Carawaies, Bay Berries, of each half a dram, Cinnamon one
dram and an half, Nutmeg, Cloves, of each half a dram, long and black Pepper,
Ginger, of each one scruple, Curral one dram, the Ashes of the Heads of
Swallows or Serpents half a dram, Sugar the double weight of them all: Make a
Powder.

Lozenges may be made of this Powder if you form one dram of that, with one
ounce of Sugar, Dissolved in Fennel Water, adding some drops of Oil of Fennel.

Which also being made only with Oil of Fennel mixed with Sugar, are convenient
here.

An Electuary shall be made of the same Powder if you receive it in Skim'd
Honey; Boiled with Wine or convenient waters, or Sugar into the form of a
Syrup, with the same Waters in the same measure or more plentiful (if any one
desire to have it so more grateful to the Palate.)

Or after this manner prepared of the Juyces, which are more effectual then the
Leaves of the Plants: Take of the clarified juyces of Fennel, Eybright,
Vervain, of each one ounce and an half; Marjoram, Rue, of each one ounce; Honey
boiled off with Wine six ounces, or so much Sugar: Boil them with the Juyces to
a consistence; adding, of the Conserve of flowers of Rosemary, Eybright, of
each half an ounce; the flowers of Sage, and French Lavender, of each two
drams; Nutmegs condite two, Cinnamon three drams, Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, of each
one dram; long Pepper, Cubebs, of each half a dram; seeds of Fennel one dram
and an half; Mountain Hart-wort one dram, the dried root of Celandine or its
Leaves one dram, Species Diambrae, Rosatae Novellae, of each half a dram: Mix
them, make an Electuary.

Pouders or Confections to be taken after feeding or meat are allowed off,
especially if Vapors also be troublesome; As, Take the sugared confections of
Fennel seed one ounce, Coriander, Annu, Carawaies, the seeds of Rapes or
Turnips covered with Sugar, of each half an ounce; Rocket seed two drams: Mix
them, let him take one spoonful after meals.

Or, Let there be added of Liquorish roots scraped half an ounce, Galangal
sliced and Citron pill alsomost thinly slioed, of each one dram; Cinnamon one
dram and an half, leaves of Eybright one dram, red Roses, Marjoram, of each
half a dram; Curral one dram, shavings of Ivory half a dram, Species
Diacytontes sine speciebus one dram, Sugar the equal weight with those things
are not covered with Sugar: Make a dry Confection.

The Remedies to be applied to the Eyes, if they do not too much affect them,
are put into them, but if they be very strong especially when they are used
upon a hazard, without any respect to the cause, they are more rightly applied
outwardly to the Eylids least some new affect may be caused by them; and if
they strain them, wash them again in the morning with Fennel and Eybright
waters, which are made as follows.

Of the Waters alone after this manner: Take of the Waters of Eybright,
Vervain, Celandine, Fennel, Rue, Mix together, or Dilstlled together, equal
parts, let him put it often into the Eyes, or let him wash them in the morning
with these waters, adding sometimes a little Rose Water,

If a darkness be from the thickness of the Coats the water of Honey is very
convenient.

Or thus: Take of the fresh Herbs of Fennel, Ruc, Eybright, Vervain, Celandine,
wild Lettice, of each one handful; flowers of Rosemary, Sage, Roses, of each
one pugil; Fennel seed two drams, Mountain Hart-wort one dram, Juniper berries
two drams, Cloves, long Pepper, of each half a dram; Sarcocol, Aloes
Socotorine, of each two drams; Camphyre, white Vitriol, of each half a dram;
Bruise them and sprinkle them with a Boys Urine and white Wine; Till they are
reduced into the form of a past; adding, (especially for a Nyctilopy) the Liver
of a He or She Goat sliced half a pound, leaving out the Gall, Hens Galls one
dram, Honey of Rosemary flowers one dram: Mix them and distill them for your use.

Waters or Liquors are made thus by long infusion without distillation: Take of
the juyces of Fennel, Rue, Vervain, Celandine, sour Pomgranates, wild Lettice,
of each one ounce; of the filth which flows from the Liver of a she Goat,
while it is roasted with the Gall half an ounce, the Gall of Hens or Partridg
one dram, Sarcocol steeped in the juice of Fennel, Socotorine Aloes, of each
one dram; Honey, Sugarcandy, of each half an ounce; Camphyre half a scruple,
white Vitriol one scruple, Tutty one dram and an half, Pearl half a dram,
Golden ducats two, long Pepper, Cloves, Lignum Aloes, of each one dram; add, of
a Boys Urine and white Wine, of each three drams: Let them steep a long time in
a glazed Vessel stopped, either in the Sun, or in a furnace, afterwads set them
a part for your use.

Sometimes we anoint the Eylids with juyces, or we drop them into the Eyes,
after this manner: Take of the juyces of Fennel, wild Lettice, sour
Pomgranates a little thickend, and afterward wrought with Honey, adding
sometimes a little of the Gall of Fishes or Birds.

Or which is good in a Nyctalopy: Take of the filth which flows from the Liver
of a she Goat two drams, the blood of a Partridg one dram, a little Honey: Mix
them.

We use other liquors as follows, let him chew Fennel seed and Juniper
berries and afterward anoint his Eylids with his spittle, and carry his breath
upwards to his Eyes by holding his Hands before it.

Diverse mixtures which they call Collyries are prepared thus: Take of Tutty
prepared two drams; Antimony often washed with Fennel water one dram, Curral one
dram, Pearl half a dram, the Cacochymy of Gold half a dram, Sarcocol steept in
Fennel water one dram, Mirrh, Socotorine Aloes, of each half a dram, the apples
of the Eyes of Fishes hardend by boiling one scruple, Swallows heads burnt half
a dram, Lizards dung one scruple, Salt Ammoniack, white Vitriol, of each one
scruple, Camphyre half a scruple, long Pepper half a dram, Saffron half a
scruple, Sugar Candy two drams: Make a Powder like an Alcohol, receive it in
the mucilage of Fenugreek seed, made with Rose Water: Make a Trochiske for your
use; Dissolve one when we would use it, in the Waters of Fennel, Rue, adding
the juyces, and sometimes the Gauls.

An Ointment for the Eylids may be made after this manner: Take of a Serpents
fat, which is collected while it boyles, or of the Fish Thymallus, or of them
both, the juice of Germander, Honey, of each equal parts; for an Ointment; and
there may be some of the aforementioned Trochisks be mixed with it.

The Pouders which are strewed on the Eyes are used rather in specks of the
Eyes, then here; yet they may be made of the Trochiskes described.

Or after this manner: Take of the leaves of Germander, Eybright, of each one
dram; Pearl, Tutty, of each half a dram; leaves of Gold three, Sugar Candy half
a dram: Make a most fine Powder.

Sometimes the Eyes are somented that the Oxydorcical, or Sight-quickning
Medicines applied, may work the better: after the same manner as shall be said
in the Specks.

Or after this manner: Take of Fenugreek seeds half an ounce, Fennel two drams,
mountain Hart-wort one dram, leaves of Eybright, Celandine, of each three
drams; Radish roots half an ounce, Oate chaff one ounce: Boil them in Wine and
Water, for a Fomentation in a Sponge, or in Bags.

Also the Vapor of this Decoction receive'd into the Eyes do prepare the Eye,
or others also do good to the Eyes, as the steem of a Goats Liver boiled
received by the Eyes in a Nyctalopy.

Barley Bread baked with Fennel and Caraway seed and cut in two while it is hot,
and the Exhalation from it received by the Eyes.

Looking upon green things does refresh the Eyes, and things polisht, as a
bright Glass of Steel, upon which account the beholding of Jewels and Gold,
rather then the Application of them, does recreate the sight, and strengthen
the vital spirit.

They cry up many Amulets that do good being hung about the Neck and worn in
Rings which we purposely omit.

Mathiolus does very much commend a stone of the Gaul put into the Nostrils.

Rhazes writes that burnt Ivory the quantity of a Lentil put into the Nostrils
with Oil of Violets, does quickly cure Nyctalopies.

A white speck appearing more or less in the Eye, if springing from the fall of
the Glassy Humor or Crystalline in to the hole of the apple, The Cure of the
defect of Seeing caused by the obscurity of the horny coat by white specks and
by the obstruction of the Grapy coat by white specks.
it does put out the sight; which we have said was sometimes wont to happen from
a contusion of that Eye, the hole of the apple being cleft, or the Coats
containing these Humors in their place, being broken, or by too deep forcing
the needle in curing a suffusion, then all hopes of recovering the sight being
taken away, we will only fit the Cure to the external hurt if there be any. But
if this white speck presenting it self about the Region of the apple, be a
suffusion from the watery Humor by degrees and in a long time, converted into a
snivel and at length into the said Skin bringing first of all an error of the
sight but afterward when it is hardened, a perfect blindness: or if from too
much dryness of the Horny coat, and induration of it, an Albugo does proceed,
or from a Wound or Puncture closed up there be a Skar left, which two last, as
they are broad or narrow, they do more or less hurt the sight, then what must
be foretold and done in them all three, because they do not much differ amongst
themselves, we will explain altogether.

But seeing a Suffusion, Albugo, and Skar, are difficultly cured, we must not
rashly promise any thing, seeing if the Skar be superficial only; possessing
the thin lap of the horny coat, it may perhaps be taken off in the younger
sort, and yet scarcely then, but if it be a little deeper it cannot be taken
away, unless that being shaven, we would make a new solution of continuity,
which were to make a Wound afresh.

The same also we may affirm of an Albugo if it has taken deep root;
especially if the horny coat being wholly hardened has bred the said darkness
in old folks, or being dried in some bright part of it only it does cause an
Albugo; the which how difficult it is to correct, we may see in the thin lap of
some horn, Pecten, or Nail, affected in like manner, how it can hardly be wiped
off: Yet if some portion of the groser nourishment being left under the Horny
coat do cause this, because that does sometimes change its place, and is carried
from the region of the apple into the white of the Eye, then it no longer hurts
the sight, which for the most part happens rather of its own accord, then by
the use of Medicines.

A Suffusion also is a Pertinatious disease, which when it is confirmed and
hardened, makes blind, and can be taken away by no further Remedies, unless by
a needle the which notwithstanding when it is done, does not help or succeed in
all, but only in certain suffusions as shall be said by and by, and is often
attempted with ill success: that beginning which does only cast clouds before
the sight, can scarely be prevented, but that it will increase in time.

Nevertheless in these cases Remedies must not be neglected, and in a Skar,
Albugo, and Suffusion, the Cure must be ordered thus, to wit that we dispose
the Body in general that we may rightly make the better Cure, and that we apply
Topic means to the Eye, which may waist the Suffusion by discussing it, the
which also are convenient in an Albugo, the which notwithstanding that we may
be able to wipe away also from the thin lap of the horny coat, we must try to
take away with stronger Detersiues, and the more still, if there be a Skar in
which the Detersives wont to be applied in a confirmed Suffusion must be used
mixed with discuffives; so that the same Remedies almost are convenient for them
all, yet so distributed, that we use the thinner Remedies in a Suffusion
beginning, the thicker and stronger in an Albugo, Skar, and confirmed
suffusion, as you shall hear by and by, the external Pannicle does require
stronger yet, the which notwithstanding must be so tempered, that the Eye be
not wholly dried up, or inflamed by the use of them, if all these things help
not, we must come to cutting.

That the Body be clean and free from Excrements, we must procure by ordering a
good course of Diet, and Emptiers, according to the Nature of a Plenitude or
Cacochymy if there be any, for so the whole cure proceeds the righter: and
though here many Practitioners do wonderfully macerate the Body with many
Evacuations, in a Suffusion especially, which they thought was a descent of
water into the Eyes, and therefore was to be called by the name of a
Catharrhact, by making Purgations was well by the Stool as by sweats and by the
Mouth and Nostrils, also making Revulsions and Derivations, by Scarifications,
Application of Cupping-glasses, and by Frictions, and then by Cauteries,
Setons, as we have taught in a Phlegmatic Vertigo, how these things onght to be
done, yet we who have demonstrated that the cause of these does consist in the
Eye, and that a Defluxion of water can no ways be carried into the Capacity of
the Eye, have many times seen and found by experience that these are
administered to Bodies without any benefit, unless in as much as they may keep
the Body pure, as we have said; let therefore this preparation of the Body by a
fit Diet and decent Evacuations suffice, being made of the same Remedies which
have been explained in a Phlegmatic Vertigo, choosing the gentler or stronger
as there is need, and fitting them to the constitution of the Body.

But neither can the Oxydorcial Remedies which are so much commended in this
case being taken by the Mouth, or hung about the Neck, or otherwise applied do
any thing singular here, unless they have that virtue of clensing away and
discussing the speck, as many of them are endued with it, because the sight is
here no other ways hurt, then that the Eye by reason of an Impediment spread
over it, is deprived of the external light; that if we would mend the sight
with sharpning Remedies; they ought to bring to the Eyes the brightness rushing
from without, which certainly no man is able to do, or to take away the vail
drawn over the Eyes.

We will propound therefore the more choice Topic Remedies that are convenient
in these cases, in this order, that the gentlest be first described, then
stronger, at last the strongest of all which also are convenient in a Pannicle;
the which are either put into the Eyes, if they can endure them, or are applied
to the Eylids, where they retain them longer with less hindrance and hurt,
especially in the night whiles they keep them shut, and though their virtue
does not so quickly exert it self, as when they are put into the Eye, yet by
continual use, because their faculty does easily penetrate through the thin
Eylid, they do work at length being thus applied, because those things which
are put into the Eye, do by and by flow forth again with the Tears, or do
irritate the Eyes, and create some trouble.

The Distilled water of Honey, is very profitable and accustomary, which is
oftentimes dropped into the Eye.

Also that called the Water of Wine, or Aqua vitae, does discuss Egregiously,
but it must be tempered with Water of Honey and Fennel, added to it in equal
portions.

A more effectual one will be made thus: Take of a Boys Urin four ounces,
white Wine one ounce, Honey one ounce, Gaul half an ounce: Extract a Water.

Or yet a stronger: Take of a Boys Urin four ounces, the juyces of Fennel,
Celandine, of each two ounces, white Wine one ounce, the Gaul of Fishes (as
Salmon or Carpe) or of Birds or of other creatures two drams, Honey two ounces,
Turpentine half an ounce, live Sulphur two drams: Distill them, if the Urin
before it be added to this composition, stand for some days in a brass Vessel,
afterward washing the Vessel soundly with it, the preparation will be yet more
effectual, which if it bite, being tempered and thickened with the white of an
Egg, anoint the Eylids with it. Sometimes such a Powder is blowed in, but it
ought to be very fine as an Alcohol, that it do not exasperate the Eye: Take of
the Bone of the Fish Sepia of the Fungous matter of a Pummystone, of each two
drams; white Pompholix, (which is the soot from Brass) half a dram, Sugar candy
two drams, Bean flower half a dram: Make a Powder.

The juice sweating forth from Willows, being dropped in the Eye, is very much
commended.

Of Acid juyces these are very convenient: Take of the thick juyces of unripe
Grapes, also of the juice of sour Pomgranates thickened, receive them in the
Mucilage of Fenugreek seed, apply them to the Eylids.

Or thus, one more disgesting: Take of the juyces of the lesser centory,
Fennel, Celandine, of each two drams; the Gaul of Fishes one dram, Aloes,
Sarcocol, Mirrh, of each half a dram; Sugar candy one dram, Honey as much as is
sufficient: Make an Ointment.

Or thus, one Egregiously abstersive: Take of Lizards dung one dram, the bone
of the Fish Sepia burnt, Hart-horn, Massacumia, of each half a dram; Honey as
much as is sufficient: Make an Ointment.

Or without Pouders but very effectual: Take of the juyces of Fennel,
Celandine, sour Pomegranates, of each half an ounce, of Onions, Radish of each
two drams, Gaul one dram and an half; Lizards dunge half a dram, Honey as much
as is sussicient: Mix them.

Or make such an Unctuous Ointment: Take of the fat of the Fish Thymallus two
drams, of Gaul one dram, Lizards dung one scruple, Gum Ammoniack dissolved in
Aqua vitae one dram, Sarcocol half a dram: Make an Unction.

Acrid Liquors that work vehemently are made thus, which if the Eye cannot
endure, they are tempered with Milk or Waters til they can bear them, or being
mixed with the Mucilage of Fenugreek seed or the white of an Egg they are
applied to the Eylids: Take of Antimony one dram, Marchasite half a dram:
Powder and infuse them in Rose and Fennel Water, of each four ounces; often
passing it through a Filter; for your use.

Out of Urin thus: Take a Boys Urin, let it stand in a Brass Vessel, for some
days; scraping or rubbing the Vessel often, for your use.

Or a linen cloth is set one fire in a dish or on a Tin or Iron plate, and
the juice which sticks to the dish is taken for use; this juice will be more
effectual, or rather that Oily substance sweating forth, if the cloth be first
wet with the spirit of Wine and be dried again, but afterward be lighted and
burnt on a Plate of Steel.

Of those stronger yet it is made thus: Take of white vitriol one dram, rust of
Brass six grains, being powdered; Mix them with the white of one Egg, beat them
well, and pouring them upon a Paper, the greenish water collected by
inclination is taken for your use so far as it can be endured, it is tempered
with Rose water or Milk.

A most effectual Ointment is made thus: Take of white Vitriol one scruple,
rust of Brass half a scruple, Antimony half a dram, Marchasite half a scruple,
Lizards dung half a scruple, the Bone of the Fish Sepia half a dram, Camphire
two grains, Fish Gauls half a dram, Honey two drams, Sugar one dram, with the
mucilage of Fenugreek seed: Make an injection.

Sometimes a Fomentation of the Eye being made, before the use of these, it
causes that they work more rightly, and does the better dispose the Eye to
receive them, and it discusseth also by it self.

Which may simply be made thus: Take of the seeds of Fenugreek one ounce, of
Fennel two drams, Chamomel flowers, Oate chaff, of each one handful;
Marsh-mallow roots one ounce: Boil them in Water and Wine for a Fomentation.

A Suffumigation from this Decoction if it be received in the Eyes, will be
instead of a Fomentation.

To breath into the Eyes after the chawing of Fennel seed does the same; and in
Infants if the Nurse do that it wipes away their Suffusions if they first chew
Gum Ammoniack and the like.

Amongst Amulets the roots of Garlic, and Snakeweed, hung about the Neck, is
in high esteem with Chyrurgions.

By Manual operation or Chyrurgery, in a Suffusion when it is grown to a Skin
or Web as they call it, to free and divide it from the compass of the apple, to
which it is grown, by putting in a Needle through the horny Coat, and by
degrees forcing it to this part, is the last remedy: which if it succeed, and
the sight as yet be in the Eye, as the Chyrurgeons speak, that is, if by reason
of that long continued blindness which has lasted so many years, the Visory
spirits as has been said formerly being idle, be not extinguished, or the
Optic Nerves become sluggish: then this way being opened, and its obstacle
taken away, the light again entering and Illuminating the Eye, it causes that
in that very moment, in which the Web is taken off, they recover their sight
again.

But before the operation be began, these things must first be considered,
first of all that if both Eyes being covered with a Web they are rendered
wholly blind, by so much the rather let it be attempted, because worse cannot
befall them, although the operation do not succeed they then remaining blind as
they were before; but if that one Eye only be affected, the other being sound,
because that is sufficient for seeing, and no greater necessety urges, the
business is not to be attempted with such rashness.

Next of all that we do not attempt it before the Skin be wholly concrete and
perfect, and as they call, it be ripe. Which sometimes is scarce completed in
the space of three years, sometimes five, or more, and it is known by the color
of it, which then is exactly white like to the thin Skin compassing the white
of a boiled Egg, although sometimes it represent somewhat an ash color, and then
because it does somewhat deceive the judgment, it makes us more uncertain as
concerning its Maturity, the which notwithstanding is known by this to be now
perfect, because it is not changed, but persists so for a long time. And
although many do not require its absolute, but moderate concretion, yet we have
found by experience, that there is less error, and it is more easily handled when
it is perfectly concreted: for that which is unripe, because it is yet soft and
snivelly, it does not resist the point of the Needle, and therefore cannot
wholly be removed, but being cut and divided grows together again, and then
being made thicker and more Callous and Sprinkled over the watery humor, it
causes that then they do not only see nothing, but all hope of Cure by a new
operation is taken away, because if it be done twice, for the most part it is
done in vain,

The which happens also, if the Needle being forced too deep, the Crystalline
or Glassie Humor be hurt, or their Coats, or also the Grapy Coat it self be
toren in the compass of the hole, for then the humors being confounded, they
remain blind and a whiteness with a Tumor appears in the black of the Eye.

Therefore it is a very doubtful kind of Remedy in doing of which they easily
err, or if it succeed rightly, yet by reason of a long continued blindness, as
has been already said, sometimes the sight does not return, wherefore we must
promise nothing rashly as Mountebank Oculists do, who are nothing moved with
shame, although they perform not their promises, if there be any hopes of gain.

Yet necessity urging, if they be altogether blind, imploring Gods aid, and
applying all diligence rather then promising safety, the operation shall be
thus perfected as I have oftentimes seen it, and in part have my self put a
hand unto it, seeing the thing otherwise hard, if you consider the Industry and
Art, is not so very difficult as they make it.

Let therefore the Patient sit in a feat, and over against his Face, the
Chyrurgion so near that he may receive the Patient with his seat between his
Thighs spread abroad, and let him bear up his hands leaning on both his Thighs,
but let a Servant stand at the back of the Patient and hold his head raised up,
fast with both his hands and if one Eye be sound and see, let him bind it with
aswath, that he see not.

Which being done, first of all let the unsound Eye be rubbed, the Eylids being
stretched above the Eye, the Chyrurgion for a while drawing it up and down with
his Thumb.

And let him often breath into the Eye being opened, having first chewed Fennel
seed.

Then take the Needle which they will have of Silver for brightness sake more
then for profit, and so much the more if the point of it be guilt, the which
ought to be long and with a wreathed handle that it may be held the faster, and
toward the point, sharp and thinner by degrees: But also a common Iron Needle
of a mean size fastened in a handle that it may be held fast, is as commodious
for doing this, neither is there any rust to be feared in this short stay as
they imagine.

This therefore being taken in the right hand if the left Eye be affected, or
in the left hand if the right Eye and leaning the hand by the seat of the Eye,
in the outward side of the Eye, looking toward the middle seat of the Apple,
in the white of the Eye somewhat distant from the circle, it ought to be impressed
into the Horny Coat, and not violently thrust in, but wreathing it by degrees,
til it penetrate that coat. The which because it is done without any pain, they
easily suffer and remain quiet, and because the Eye is fastend to the Needle it
is kept firm by it, and it is prevented from rolling.

The Needle being thrust in, by and by is directed toward the Apple, and is
forced so far, that coming forth in the brink where the Skin grew to it, it is
set before the fore part in the midst of the Skin, the which is done by so
much the more commodiously, because the Needle may be seen there, through the
horny Coat, and thefore may be directed right. Being carried thither; it is so
ofttimes pressed gently backwards, that it may break off the Skin from the
compass of the hole of the Grapy Coat, if it succeed not at the first time,
and if it be any where freed, it is wholly separated by the Needle from the hole
where it yet sticks, and is deprest downwards from the Region of the Apple,
into the lowest obscure part of the Eye. But others endeavoring to free it with
the Needle, first of all from its upper part, and by degrees proceeding
downwards, do after this manner force it to the lower parts. Which both ways
may be rightly done, and as the Skin follows they must be ordered, or as they
are easier done after this or that manner. Taking care chiefly that the Web
peirced through be not cut in many parts, for so those portions of it, though
pressed down being easily again carried upwards before the Apple, by floating
there would darken the sight; the which if the whole Skin thrust down does do
it, it must be deprest again, least if that should come to pass when the Needle
is drawn forth, the Puncture must be repeated again, which would be
inconveniently done, and for the most part with out success.

Which being rightly performed if it succeed well, the Apple appears black
again, and they see presently, but otherwise there will be little hope, but
howsoever it be, the Needle must by degrees be drawn forth again, the Eylid
being first deprest and the Eye shut. Neither is there any fear of the watery
Humor flowing forth, because the hole in this thick Coat does by and by close
again, after the drawing forth of the Needle.

Then those things which do repress an Inflammation of the Eye must be applied
with a four doubled cloth dipped in the white of an Egg, being first beaten with
Rose water, and other things to be mentioned in an Inflammation; and they must
always be renewed three times a day for the space of five or six days, and
the first Application if it stick fast, when it has been first mollefied in
the same humor, it must be taken off, and a new one applied, to which if you
add milk it will stick the less.

At which time, that the Eye not yet accustomed be not overwhelmed with sudden
and much light, they ought to stay in darkness, and by degrees to accustom the
light. And least that the spirits may be forced to the Eyes by violence, they
ought to have a care off all vehement motion of the Body, as Coughing,
Sneezing, Crying out, and off vehement straining in casting forth their
Excrements and the like other things.

A Pannicle beginning, The Cure of the defect of sight from the horny Coat
covered with a Pannicle and Ungula.
sometimes may be hindered that it increase not being increased it scarce yields
to Medicines though most strong; it may be cut off if it grow not to the horny
Coat; if it be hardened like to a Nail, it yields to no Remedies. In the
Elephantiacal, as neither the Disease, so neither can this part of that Disease
residing in the Membranes of their Eyes be taken away. Yet sometimes it may be
hindered that they be not wholly made blind, which of all things which
otherwise they suffer is to them most miserable.

The Cause which is an afflux of blood we will endeavor presently at the
beginning to draw forth, Revel, Derive, by Bleeding, Scarification, Setons,
Causticks, that the evil do not increase, also by a slender course of Diet, and
many Sweats and Purges, fit for a foul body.

The Topic Remedies ought to be vehemently drying, and unless they help, they
must at last be corrodeing.

We must make choice of the strongest of them which we said did cleanse away
white specks, and those which we commanded to be applied to the Eyelids here
must be laid on the pannicle it self, and Pouders seeing they dry more
strongly, must be laid on the Pannicle it self, not neglecting the more liquid
mixtures which we drop into the Eyes; in the interim applying certain things to
the Eyelids that they may do good by turns, and sometimes also applying a
Fomentation to prepare the Eye, as has been said there.

We may use at the beginning the powder above mentioned in the white Specks,
then we must proceed to a stronger; the which yet must dry without biting, and
therefore it ought often to be repeated; which shall be made thus, Take of
Curall, Tutty, each one dram; Pummy stone, Egg-shels, each half a dram; the
stone of Dates and Myrobolans, each two scruples; make a most fine Powder if it
be sprinkled with Vinegar, or Urine, and dried, it will be more effectual.

Or thus a stronger, Take of the powder of Diarrhodon Abbatis one dram, the
bone of the Fish Sepia burnt, Lizards dung, each half a dram; the Bloodstone
two scruples, Sugar Candy make a Powder.

A stronger yet, Take of burnt Lead, Antimony, the stone Calaminaris, each two
drams; Tutty, white Lead, each one dram and an half; the ashes of Horstail, the
bone of the Fish Sepia burnt, each one dram; make a powder wash it with Smiths
astringent water, and dry it for your use.

Mixtures are made thus, Take of the compound water described in the white
Specks distilled with Urin steeped in a Brass vessel, and to six ounces add the
powder of Nabath Lizards dung, the bone of the fish Sepia, each half a dram;
being poudered mix them first in Mucilage of Fenugreek seed made in the
foresaid water and use it.

Or a thicker after this manner, Take of the juice of nuripe Grapes, and Lees
of Oil, and of sour Pomegranates dried each two drams; add of the powder of the
bone of the fish Sepia, and Lizards dung, each half a dram; mix them.

Or thus, Take of the powder of Nabath two drams, Tutty prepared, White Lead
washed, each one dram; the bone of the fish Sepia burnt and washed half a dram,
Sarcocol, Myrrh, Aloes, Lycium, each one scruple; the Gaul of Birds or fishes
two scruples, mix it with Honey and the white of an Egg, for an Ointment.

Of corroding Compositions, that is convenient which in the white Specks is
prepared of Vitriol, the rust of Brass, Antimony, the Marchasite.

Or a Colliry of Coppras, but applied warily, because it is strongest of all,
and it is made thus. Take of burnt Brass, Coppras, each half a dram; Rust of
Brass two drams, Salt Ammoniack, Niter, Arsnick, Sublimate, each one dram; make
a most fine powder poudring it much and long; mix it in the mucilage of Gum
Tragacanth make Trochisks, one of which dissovle with the Mucilage, and apply
it warily.

Rondoletius commends the powder of Precipitate, I have often used my Caustic
which at first time burns, but presently abates.

Manual operation is made two ways, by Ligature, and by Cutting.

If the Veins which nourish the Panuicle be bound about the root, then the
growth of that flesh must needs be hindered, or if it be already grown, it must
needs wither, which may be done with a crooked Needle thrust under the Vein
drawing the thread under it and tying it; this if it be made of Silk, or of a
Bristle, or of a Woman's hair will be more commodious, because then it scarce
putrifies.

Also if those veins be opened that the blood flow forth, and it be often
repeated, the same will be effected.

The Pannicle is cut off after this manner, as I have seen it done, the Patient
is placed in a chair, and the Eye is first prepared, as has been said in the
cutting a suffusion, then a Needle containing a strong third is thrust through
under the Panicle, yet so that it hurt not the Horny Coat, and laying hold on
both the ends of the third drawn under it, drawing it a little way upwards, it is
raised from the horny Coat and afterward is cut from it with a sharp Razor,
or Knife, by degrees and warily, that the horny Coat be not hurt; the which
being done if the black of the Eye appear clear, the sight returns: But if
otherwise, or that the Pannicle has so grown to the horny Coat, that it cannot
wholly be taken from it, the operation will be in vain.

Section being made, the pain will be allaid in the same manner, as has been
said, in the cutting of a Suffusion, and that it be not generated again anew,
it will be prevented by cutting of the Veins of the adnate coat if they swel
again, and laying on drying things, and lest the Eye, if by chance it were
ulcerated should grow to the Eyelid we ought to hinder it by often moving the
eye.

If the bright part of the horny coat be possessed with a strange humor so that
either a depravation or darkness of the sight does follow, than if choler
which in those troubled with the Jaundies is wont to dye the white of the Eye,
and what is more rare does make a yellow aspect of all things be carried
thither; that vanishing of its own accord this fault cease, or it is taken
away by some abstersive Lotion, as shall be said in the Jaundies.

But Blood being poured forth into the Diaphanous part of the horny coat if
that Depravation of the sight does happen, The Cure of the darkness or
depravation of the sight from Choler, Blood, or matter, in a hyposphagma and
hypopyon.
in which all things appear Red, or Livid in the said Hypophagma, or if it
penetrate the horny coat also, and under that concrete by the hole of the
Apple, or being converted into matter in the said Hypopyon it darkens the
sight, then the cure must be ordered thus.

If there be Pain and an Inflammation be feared by reason of a blow from which
commonly these proceed, then presently at the beginning we must use, bleeding,
and Repellers, and things that allay pain; and if that it being long retained
do suppurate, and whiles the matter is generated there arise pain, the horny
coat being affected, and then also the adnate coat by consent, the same must be
done for fear of an Inflammation, otherwise if there be no pain we must abstein
from Repellers seeing they condense the blood more; and by and by we ought to
apply our care to digest and dissolve that blood, which although it be
converted into matter must be done nevertheless, if part of it can be consumed,
seeing the greater part of the matter being resolved, that which remains
sinking downwards from the hole of the Apple can then no longer prejudice the
sight, and at length it is wasted either of its own accord, or by use of
Medicines.

But it is discust after this manner, you must take the blood of Pigeons,
Turtles or other Birds, and that while it is yet hot must be cast into the Eye,
or if a young Pidgeon be at hand, we must pull a feather out of his wing whose
swelling root because it is newly grown is filled with blood which is contained
there in its proper Vein as in an Intestine, and the blood must be pressed out of
that, and dropped into the Eye, for how much power blood has in discussing of
Blood we have taught elsewhere, in Haemorrhages that are to be stopped by blood
of this nature.

Stronger discussives may be put into the Eye if it yield not to these, such as
are explained in discussing a Sussusion, made of Waters, Juyces, Gums, Gauls.

To whice also we add these approved by their effects. Take Aqua vitae (which
also does wonderfully discuss Black and Blewness elsewhere) Rhadish water, each
half an ounce; dissolve of Camphire (which does the same in discussing as Aqua
vitae) five grains, drop it in.

Or thus, Take of Radish water one ounce, steep in it Saffron half a scruple,
til it looks yellow, strain it and dissolve in it Frankincense one scruple,
Fish gaul half a dram, use it by it self or apply it with a Mucilage.

Or a thicker to anoint the Eyelids may be made thus, the which also may be put
into the Eyes, Take of the juice of Radish two drams, Fish gaul half a dram,
Myrrh, Frankincense, each one dram; Saffron half a scruple, mix them with a
sufficient quantity of Honey.

Or thus, chiefly in the declination, Take of sour Grapes, Lees of Oil, each
two drams; Myrrh half a dram, Saffron half a scruple, mix them with Honey.

Or wholly to discuss it, the Compound waters explained in Suffusions are
convenient, by themselves, or applied with a Mucilage.

Fomentations also shall be applied which do very much discuss, such as we have
prescribed in Suffufions.

Or this which is very powerful, Take of Radish roots half an ounce, Fenugreek
seed one ounce, Fennel, Hartwort, each two drams; the herbs Fennel, Celondine,
Eyebright, each one handful; Flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, Elder, Lillies, Oat
chaff cut, each one pugil; make a Decoction in Wine and Water for a Fomentation.

Plasters laid upon the Eye to discuss are of force, amongst which this is the
best; If the Lungs or Liver of a Pidgeon being yet bloody and warm be placed
and bound on the Eye, which if Pain and Inflammation also were present, upon
that account also they would do very much good, as shall be said in an Opthalmy.

A Plaster also is made of a Rotten Apple profitable for discussion.

Or Compounded after this manner, Take of Radish sliced one ounce, the pulp of
a rotten Apple half an ounce, Pulp of Raisons one ounce, Pigeons Dung half a
dram, bruise them with the Mucilage of Fenugreek seed, mix them with Milk, and
apply them.

A Suffumigation from the Decoction of the Fomentation prescribed, will also
discuss very much.

Manual Operation also takes place here, if the matter that is generated do not
yield to Discussives, and there be great plenty of it, which blots out the
Apple, which may be attempted by Puncture as has been said in a Suffusion, but
with a greater Needle seeing otherwise nothing would flow forth; and if it
succeed not, by thrusting in a bigger yet, but in the same hole of the
Puncture, or by putting in a hollow pipe so sharp that it may enter the same
hole and so by sucking out the matter, so long til the Apple be in some sort
freed from it, for if we would draw forth all the matter it is to be feared that
the watery humor may follow. For that sucking, the Instrument or Pipe must
consist of a large Belly that the matter sucked up may be carried into that and
not into the mouth of him that sucks, such as Chvmists are wont to use, for the
sucking of Waters or Oils in seperating them one from another.

CHAP. VIII. Of the hurts of Hearing.
The Kinds,
Deafness. Sometimes the Hearing is wholly abolisht, so that either they hear
not outward sound at all, or if they receive any sound at their Ears, yet they
cannot discern the differences of it, and therefore cannot judge what it
signifies and this is called Deafness, Cophosis; and these are oftentimes Dumb,
if they be born Deaf, and then it is an Original Deafness. Yet of Deaf folks,
some of them can after a sort, hear themselves speaking, but others not all:
and there have been also found, those who otherwise being Deaf pressing a
Musical Instrument while it sounds with their Teeth, and biting some part of
it, or only some other part contiguous to it, could apprehend that sound. Which
may happen not only to those that hold a Pipe in their Mouth, and Piping, but
to those also who hold fast with their Teeth, part of another Instrument which
consists of strings, whiles it is played upon. And in like manner it happens
also to those that are sound, if stopping their Ears diligently, that they can
hear nothing that way, they do the same thing, as every one may make trial of
it.

But it is impaired only when they can hardly perceive or discern a sound,
Thick hearing Barycoia.
in thick hearing called Barycoia, because they do not hear or understand a
sound unless it be very high and lofty, whence they that talk with them, are
forced to lift up their voice, and sometimes call aloud, but others cannot thus
perceive their voice, unless those that talk with them, speak and cry aloud
into their Ears.

A Depraved hearing, or Obaudition, Obaudition, that is, a sound in the Ears.
is when it perceives the external sound falsely, and that by reason of an
internal sound preternaturally raised in the Ears, outnoising this external
sound, or mixing it self with it, and confounding it, and that either
continually, or only by fits, besides which Impediment it breeds no small
trouble to a man, and makes him unquiet.

But this sound raised in the hollow of the Ears varies very much, and as the
outward sound is various, so is this also, the diverfities of which, as of that
cannot otherwise be rightly explained, unless by comparison, and names are
given to them almost by an Onomatopaeia.

And one Species of it, is more frequent, A tinkling of the Ears is a species
of Obaudition.
which is called a tinkling of the Ears, when that sound does express in the
Ears the noise of a little Bell, for the most part gives a shril sound when it
is struck upon, and as the Names sounds, it tinkleth.

Another is a Hissing of the Ears, a sound which is heard, Hissing a sort of
Obaudition.
and yet not rightly resounding, as ( si) the first syllable of the word
sounds, and as wind when it passes forcedly through a narrow hole.

A third Species is a Pulse, A Pulsation in the Ears is a sort of Obaudition.
or Pulsation in the Ears, a sound such as offers it self, whiles a thing is
lightly beaten upon by a blow or sall of a drop of water by course, and the
first syllable of the Name (Pull) does seem also somewhat to signify it.

A fourth is a Wave, or Fluctuation in the Ears, A Fluctuation in the Ears is a
sort of Obaudition.
a sound not unlike to that which is from Waves striking one against another,
or against other things, caused by intermitting courses, which also the
beginning of that word (Fluc.) does Elegantly express.

Besides these sounds, those which offer themselves after another manner, or are
made by a mixture of these, they are called by a general name, a noise in the
Ear.

The Causes.
Every cause of the defect and depravation of hearing is either in the part
sending as the Brain, The part affected.
or in the Instrument receiving as the hollow of the Ear.

A general fault of the Brain as it brings hurt to the rest of the senses, The
hurt of hearing, from a fault of the Brain.
so also to the hearing, and if it arise in particular, about the beginning of
the Auditory Nerve or its progress into the Chamber of hearing it does
prejudice the hearing rather then the rest: and this befalls it either by proper
fault, some Disease, or weakness of it, or by consent, by reason of Vapors, or
its proper object.

A grievous and vehement Disease of the Brain, proceeding from a cold
Distemper, Repletion, Eminent hurt, as it does either abolish or debilitate the
rest of the senses, so also the hearing. The which also oftentimes happens from
a weakness of the Brain, the spirits being wasted and dissipated by reason of
old age, or of a great Evacuation, or some grievous and long continued Disease,
that even as the sight is hurt upon this occasion, so also the Hearing is
weakened. All which how they come to pass, has been said in a Weakness and
Consternation of Mind; also a hot distemper of it as it is wont to deprave the
Mind and the Sight, so also in raving it does not only offer various
apparitions to the Eyes; but also it represents sounds to the hearing which
they think they do hear; especially as shall be said by and by, the Arteries
then beating vehemently in the Ears.

From a Vapor, not yet breaking into the Chamber of the hearing (as shall be
significd by and by) But affecting the Brain, as the Mind is depraved. and
false imaginations are offered to the sight, so also if it trouble that part
where the Auditory Nerve comes forth, it may represent false sounds to the
hearing for the same reason as has been said in the error of Sight.

As we have said the sight is affected with its proper object, so also the
Nerve being offended and the spirits dissipated by a violent and too great
sound, penetrating suddenly and abundantly through the Ear, even to the
Brain, sometimes Deafness has ensued, or the Spirits returning, but not
sufficiently, a tinkling in the Ears has been left: which sound also if it be
caused with a greater violence, may bring damage also by hurting the Organ of
hearing as shall be said by and by.

By default of the Auditory Instrument, The hurt of Hearing, from default of
the Ear.
that receives that outward sound, the Hearing is hurt diverse ways, because
this Organ also which we call by the Name of the Ear, is composed of many
parts, as Membranes, little bones and the Auditory Nerve, all whose several
faults may prejudice the Hearing. Which we will explain, not as we have done in
the Eye, beginning with Particular parts and a scribing their faults to them,
but distinguishing the whole passage of the Ear into two Cavities, viz. the
outward and the inward, we will set forth what Diseases occurring in them both,
do hurt the Hearing.

The outward Cavity of the Ear, which they call the Auditory passage, being
Extrinsecally open wide and Conspicuous, ending even at the Membrane of the
drum, with which it is stopped, containing nothing otherwise in it self besides
Air, and admitting the outward sound, if it be stopped up or obstructed by
diverse external Causes occurring, or by internal Humors, or Tumors, whether
wholly or only in part, or it be otherwise hurt, then it happens that the
Hearing is hurt; which causes also occurring here, can only be perceived by our
senses, or if they lurk more inwardly, they may be searched out by putting in a
Probe, and if any thing come forth from thence, they may be known by that
voided forth.

If the outward Cavity of the Ear be wholly shut up by external Causes (which
otherwise naturally can no ways be shut as the Eye) as it comes to pass the
hindermost Cartilage of the Ear being pressed, A stopping of the Ear, is the
Cause of the hurt of Hearing.
either by Application of the Hands, or of other Bodies, or by the water whiles
in swimming the Head is covered in it; or the Ears being obstructed by some
gross matter thrust in, or fallen in, as by a Kernel, or by some living
creature which do wholly stop up their Cavities; or by water which fallen in,
does wholly fill them up; the Hearing is so hindered, that they do not perceive
the outward sounds either at all, or not rightly, as one Ear or both, are more
or less stopped. Unless perhaps that sound be somewhat perceived another way, and
by another Artifice, as by the Mouth, we have said may be done, holding an
Instrument in their Teeth, that gives a sound. Which we think happens upon a
double account, both by reason of the Similitude and Consent of the substance
of the Teeth, in hardness, which is almost stony, and in smoothness, with the
Bones of the Chamber of Hearing (which bones are very like to the substance of
the Teeth, and that the sound might be the better caused in them they are most
hard and stony) and so with the little bones of the Hearing it self, endued
with the same substance; and by Reason of the Nerves lying under the Teeth,
which are carried thither from the Nerves of the Tongue, and the Nerves of the
Tongue are mutually conjoined with the Auditory Nerve in their branches (as we
shall explain hereafter for what reason the Deaf are also born Dum) by which
consent it comes to pass, that because the sound through the Air does beat
upon the Teeth by contract, this continuation being made through the inner
parts, it is perceived by the Ears: as also the Mouth being exactly shut, and
the Teeth set one against another, or the Tongue forced to some part of the
Mouth, although the Ear hear not extrinsecally, yet we perceive the sound
through the inner parts; and also by reason of that consent of the Teeth with
the substance of the Organ of Hearing, we see that by a harsh noise, made by
the rubbing together of rough things the Teeth are offended even without
contact. Hither perhaps it makes somewhat, that as the strings of one Instrument
being played upon, we see the strings screwed up to the same tune in another
Instrument, are moved though it be far distant, so that if any thing be laid
upon them, either it trembles, or if it be light, as Chaff, it falls off, so
also the Drum being retcht to receive all impulses of sounds, being struck by a
continuation made through the intermediate teeth and Nerves does represent the
sound to the hearing; of which many things might be disputed, but to our
business.

But though the Ear being wholly stopped, the outward sound be no ways
perceived, yet some sound nevertheless is sometimes felt in the Ear; which first
of all is wont to happen by reason of the Air which has remained in this
Cavity of the Ear and does more or less force and beat upon the Drum; and it is
by so much the greater, by how much the Ear, though it be stopped, yet being less
filled with strange matter, does contain in it self more plenty of Air, whence
is perceived a waving sound, the air rouling it self and as it were fluctuating
in the Ear, hence we see, that if that which is hollow be applied to the ear
and therefore contains Air in it, this sound in the ear is felt more vehement,
which we experience by applying the hollow part of the hand to the ear, whence
Children are wont to relate that pressing a Sea shel to their ears they hear in
it the waves of the Sea, the air then making a greater noise by reason of the
winding in the Skul: the which also happens the head being plunged in the
water, so that the ears be wholly stopped up by it, the air then temaining, which
offers a sense of fluctuation; and I have oftentimes observed, when being a Boy
I was delighted with swimming, that if a noise were made under the water by
moving of the Stones, that that also was perceived like the tinkling of a Bell,
although the greatest sound made out of the water even from a Gun shot off,
could by no means be heard; and also by reason of the Pulsation of the Arteries
in the ears, a beating sound is somewhat felt in them when the ear is stopped,
which is not taken notice of when the ear is open, by reason of the outward
sound, seeing it is greater, and does obscure and drown this lesser, the which
also many relate that they hear in the night, if they bind their ears too
straight with a Cap and wrap them up in a pillow, especially if their head
being somewhat hot, does cause a vehement pulse, and that in Diseases it does
preternaturally cause trouble, we shall by and by explain.

But if the Cavity of the Ear be not wholly shut up, Ill hearing from things
fallen into the Ears.
by the forementioned external Canses so that the outward sound entering them
nevertheless be heard, and yet there is a hurt of the hearing not only because
it is impaired but depraved, seeing the Ear does hear that sound made in the
Ear keeping a Noise, from every Inward Contact, not only of the Drum, but also
of the rest of its Cavity, which according as the Contact is becomes various;
for that which is the passage of the drum, resembles a certain waving or Noise:
but if some Insect creeping in, as a Flea or others, be carried to the Drum and
touch that, whiles it moves, there is heard a sound in the Ear making a Noise
like the flying of a Butterfly, very troublesome: also if one drop of Water or
more flow so far, it is perceived as if the head were hollow, and such a sound
arises in it, as also these or other sounds are perceived if a Worm with many
legs or some other thing, that does not wholly stop up the Ear, but
nevertheless is troublesome to be contained in it.

If the Ear be filled up with internal humors the same comes to pass, A
Repletion of the outward Cavity of the Ear with internal humors is the cause of
hurting the hearing.
that the Hearing is either taken away or impeded, or depraved; as if the Ear
be obstructed with the choleric filth of the Ears, which they call Cerumen,
being long retained, grown thick and hard, especially if they be forced even to
the Drum with an Ear-picker which sometimes happens by neglect, whiles they
endeavor to take them forth, which afterward sticking there, seeing they do
not afterward easily give way, they bring a great impediment to the Hearing;
the which also may happen from blood congealed after a hurt of the Ear, and
from matter after an Imposthumation being some time retained, the which
notwithstanding seeing they do not stick long, but flow forth of their own
accord, they do not so much hurt the Hearing, as they prejudice the Ears upon
another account as we shall show in pains of the Ears.

The Hearing may be hurt by a Preternatural Tumor obstructing the Ears rather
than by a distemper hurting them, A Tumor in the inner cavity of the Ear is the
cause of the Hearing burt.
and that lastingly if a piece of Flesh or Callus be left after some
exulceration of the Ear, which is very rare.

A hurt of this outward passage unless it hurt the Drum (as shall be said) can
scarce prejudice the hearing, unless it leave an excrescency behind it, as has
been said, and Fernelius writes that sometimes a Pulse does remain in the Ears
from an Ulcer not well consolidated, the which because the Artery is no more
well covered with the Skin, but bare, and for that reason does more strongly
beat upon the neighboring parts, must needs happen in the cutaneous Artery of
this outer chamber, which is carried thither, as shall be explained in the
Ulcers of the Ears.

The inward Cavity of the Ear distinguished from that called the Outward, by
intervention of the Drum, A spirit, vapor, wind, in the inner chamber of the
Ear are the cause of the sounding in the Ears.
being full of winding, containing small Bones, and a Nerve and Artery, being
affected by a spirit, Vapor, Wind, or humor contained there, or if that and its
parts be ill conformed or labor of a Distemper, they may also dammfie the
Hearing; which faults because they are hidden we cannot attain to them by our
senses, but know them only by their signs.

If the Artery which goes under this part be filled with a plentiful or hot
spirit, or it be too much agitated in it, then a strong pulse being made in the
Ears, there is a beating sound in the Ears, the which notwithstanding is more
manifestly felt when the Ear is shut, as has been said formerly, and if it be
more vehement when it is open, it also depraves that sound which comes from
without; the which as it comes to pass that the pulse is more intense by the
vehement heat of the body in the rest of the Arteries, so here also in the
Artery of the Ear; as it is felt after strong exercise sometimes in Baths; and
also in acute Diseases, pains of the Head, this pulsation creates trouble in
the Ears: the same also happens by motion and violent agitation of the spirits,
as we see in a swooning beginning, the spirits flying away, and the same
ending, those returning again, there is felt a pulse and tingling in the Ears,
by which from the relation of the Patient, we know that swooning is at hand,
the which also happens in many affections of the mind, by reason of the same
commotion of the spirits.

A thin and subtle vapor, as it can enter the smallest passages, so doubtless
it does sometimes penetrate hither through the narrow holes (of which sort we
have showed in our Anatomical work that there are six that do end in this inner
chamber of hearing and transmit their vessels) and so they may not only deprave
the Brain by affecting it, as has been said formerly (as also we have showed
formerly that the sight is depraved by Vapors only assaulting the Brain, and
not entering the Eye, seeing there is no way for them) but also by reason of the
said holes, some of which end hither from the inward parts of the Skul, others
meeting without the Skul do not reach hither also, seeing there are many ways,
it is certain they may come even to the Organ of Hearing, which when it comes to
pass, it must needs be that a Hissing, Tingling, and noise is offered to the
Hearing: and this is more commonly the cause of preternatural Sound than an
influx of humor, as shall be said by and by, seeing it is often wont to come to
pass in Drunkards or others, and in many Diseases from Vapors sometimes thinner
and choleric as they call them, and sometimes thicker, that their Ears for that
cause do tingle and make some other noise, which does last long, the vapors
persisting for a time, or they being presently dissipated, it does vanish: And
this is the chief cause why after a Crisis in acute Diseases which accompanied
with a pain in the head amongst other symptoms, the Hearing in those that
recover health does suffer some hurt oftentimes of long continuance; the
matter, which was then the conjunct cause of the Disease of being resolved out
of the Veins into Vapors, and emptied by sweats and insensible transpirations,
and part of it breaking out of the head through the aforesaid ways into the
capacity of the Hearing and staying there awhile.

Wind or Air may cause the same, which if it break into this inner chamber of
the Hearing and be carried through a narrow way, as it were by force, it makes
a hissing: if through another hole so framed as it is wont to be fashioned in a
pipe it causes a tingling; but if it run through larger passages and through
the windings of that place, it makes some other noise, this often happens, if
it be driven thither by force, as when the Nostrils being pressed, and the Spirit
or the Air being vehemently impulsed, we would blow our Nose. Sometimes it comes
to pass that part of it does break through the hole from the largeness of the
Nostrils, to the double channel of the Organ of Hearing (as we have showed in
our Anatomical work) and does raise a Hissing or Tinglingt that oftentimes
lasts long. Sometimes the Air breaking forth again the same way presently, it
cease, which comes to pass the sooner by swallowing often, as I my self have
often experienced; this Wind also in the chamber of Hearing may be raised from
an internal cause, if from excrementitious moistures collected about the
Periostia of the Skul, and converted into Wind, they be heaped there, whence in
ancient Headakes and Pains of the Head and about the Bones in the French Pox, a
Tingling of the Ears is very troublesome.

A humor falling down or purged from the Head into this inner Cavity of the Ear
through the hole which admits the Auditory Nerve; A humor in the inner chamber
of hearing is the cause of the defect of hearing.
as if it be plentiful it causes Deafness or thick hearing, so if it be
subtle and little it depraves the Hearing; and if this happen from a desluxion
of it, it comes suddenly if it be heaped up there by degrees, this hurt also
grows by degrees, all which for the most part do beget a Disease of long
continuance and persevering, seeing the humor is hardly discust here; but this
proceeds from a Catarrh which falls down also to other parts, and sometimes from
the head to this part; and it is known by the signs of that, not only in that
hurt, but also by other appearances; the which is familiar to the aged, by
reason of their plenty of excrements and accustomary to some natures from their
Infancy that it molest the Organ of Hearing, as it may come to pass by reason
of the Country, as in the Alpine Regions we see that many for this reason have
difficult hearing from their Birth, or presently in process of their age,
together with the King's Evil familiar with them for the like cause: and also in
acute Diseases by a Crisis chiefly, as has been said formerly, not only the
cause of the Disease converted into a Vapor does enter this chamber, but also
oftentimes part of the excrementitious or choleric humor does fall into it,
sometimes pure, sometimes mixed with Blood still as some would have it, and breeds
a more pertinacious hurt, than if it were caused by a Vapor.

Default of the Confomation and structure of the Organ of Hearing is also hurt
which seeing in this inner chamber it is made up of the auditory nerve, The
fault of conformation in the inner chamber of Hearing and its parts is the
cause of the defect of Hearing.
the Drum and three Bones, and Labyrinths of this chamber, in which soever that
happens, it may hurt the hearing.

By reason of the Auditory Nerve not rightly formed, or carried from the Birth,
it sometimes falls out that they are born deaf; and we know that it happens by
reason of the Nerve, because most of them are also dumb, seeing the Tongue
which wanted many Nerves for the sense of Tasting, Touching, and the exercise
of vehement motion, has obtained not only its proper Nerves, but also has
received another from the auditory Nerve, for that cause breaking forth of the
chamber of hearing, by whose means the Tongue is continuous with that, the
which being hurt, it comes to pass that the Tongue, although the senses remain,
yet is not sufficiently moved to utter speech, seeing a greater force is
required for motion, than to perfect the sense; neither does it hinder, that
that is only a sensory Nerve of which the Tongue is here deprived, seeing we
have often proved already, that every Nerve has in it a power of moving and
Feeling, the which it does also exercise, being carried to a convenient
Instrument.

By reason of the Drum the Hearing is more commonly weakened, if as we see in a
Soldiers Drum covered with skin, if it be not whole, or not sufficiently
retcht, or too much.

The Drum wounded, seeing it can no more resound, breeds Deafness, the which
seeing it lies hid, it seldom comes to pass, unless an Ear-picker be thrust in
perforce; the vulgar think it may happen from the Insect Scolopendra (which
they call in the German language Orenmettel, as it were the Worm of the Ear,
which may easily creep in in Gardens) but seeing if either that, or any thing
else which may hurt should creep in, it is easily remedied, this can scarce yet
be done; as neither from matter retained, seeing that is wont presently to flow
forth, and I have often seen very much flow forth without any hurt, unless by
chance the Ulcer of the Ears be so deep that an abscess being made, the Drum
also is hurt.

If the Drum be slackly and conveniently retcht, it can no more give a Sound,
which as it sometimes happens by force from a violent sound, a Clamor made in
the Ears, or from the blow of a Gun shot off by the Ear, so also by continuance
of time, long use and much hearing, especially of great sounds, being so often
beaten upon, and rendered slacker it makes difficult hearing in old folks (which
seems to be the frequent cause of their thick hearing) The which also may
happen from much moisture or Unctuosity of Oil or other Liquors be often poured
into the Ears, the which is wont to be done, sometimes for a long while, to
restore the Hearing lost for foam other Cause.

Also being too much retcht, and so tied up that being beaten upon by the
external Air it cannot yield at all, it becomes unprofitable. And this
happens, when either by reason of Age, or after acute Diseases it is too much
dried and hardened. The which as it may befall all other Membranes, so this
also, and by so much the easier and more frequently; becauss it has no moist
Bodies near it, nor is not anointed with fat, as many other Membranes are, but
is free, unless in its compass where it grows to them. And perhaps this is not
the least cause, of difficult Hearing, which oftentimes is wont to grow upon
the aged, and is left in people recovering after Diseases. Which Exiccation of
the Drum, Rhazes writes may happen after watchings and fastings.

The mutual Construction and Coarticulation or Conformation of the three small
Bones being Vitiated, brings hurt to the Hearing: which may happen from the
Birth, from implanted Causes; or from violent Adventitious Causes, as a blow,
fall, and vehement sound, the Drum to which they adhere, being most commonly
affected too.

In the diverse Passages, Cavities, and Meanders meeting there, if any thing be
not right from the Birth, doubtless it also offends the Hearing.

A cold Destemper, as it is an enemy to the Nerves, A cold Distemper is the
Cause of the defect of Hearing.
Membranes, and Bones, so it is very hurtful to the structure of the Organ of
Hearing, which is composed of them, and so much the more, because the Ears
always lie naked and open to the external cold Air, and so are the easier
hurt by external things, as the cold wind; especially penetrating through the
Auditory passage, even to the Drum, and there cooling the hidden parts, and the
Nerve it self. Whence sometimes Deafness, and frequently an impediment in the
Hearing, have followed; the which also is one of the principal causes, why in
cold places, as the Alps, and windy places, they commonly are sooner sensible
of a defect of Hearing, the which also may happen from most cold water falling
into the Ears by chance, or in swimming.

And the too much use of Narcoticks, The use of Narcoticks, the cause of the
defect of Hearing.
sometimes to the Ears does so affect the Nerve not by cooling, but by too much
stupefying it, that it can no more return to it self; which last cause is to be
referred to weakness.

The Cure.
The Cure of all the hurts of Hearing, which are, as Deafness, thick Hearing,
Tingling, Hissing, Pulsation, Fluctuation, Noise; is first to be fitted to the
Cause. Which we have said, was either in the Brain affected, either by it self
or by consent from a Vapor, or the object, or in the outward Cavity of the
Ear, a Stoppage, obstructions from external Causes, or things fallen in, or
internal Humors, Tumors; or in the inner Chamber of the Hearing repletion or
trouble from a Spirit, Vapor, Wind, Humor; or a fault of Conformation, or
Construction, or a Distemper; of all which we shall speak, what is to be hoped
and what to be done.

By reason of an affect of the Brain, if the Hearing be hurt together with
other senses, and the cause lie there and not yet in the Instrument, we must
proceed after the same manner, as has been said in the hurts of the sight from
the like cause: as if this come to pass from a Vapor affecting the Brain by
consent, no other Remedies must be applied then those in a Vertigo which we
said were convenient in a Depravation of the sight.

If the Hearing suffer a defect from some Impetuous external sound, The Cure of
the hurt of Hearing from a violent sound.
sometimes they return to themselves of their own accord, otherwise hardly or
never, viz. when the Spirits are so dissipated, that they can no more return
back, or not sufficiently. Whence there is left a Perpectual tingling. Or if
the drum impulsed by the force of the Air, be too much hurt and laxt, a
Deafness or thick Hearing, is ever after troublesome to the man.

Yet nevertheless by applying Cupping-glasses about the Ears, and by Frictions
and other hot things outwardly and inwardly appropriate to the Ears; we must
endeavor to draw back the spirit, having respect to the constitution of the
Body, of which we will treat by and by.

If the Hearing be intercepted by the stopping of the Ears extrinsccally, The
Cure of the defect of Hearing, from the stoppage of the Ears.
it is easily corrected by removing those things which hinder it, whether they
be only applied extrinsecally, or they be thrust in a little way.

But Bodies fallen in, or thrust in, The Cure for things fallen into the Ears.
that do wholly enter into the Cavity; or if living creatures have crept in,
they do not so easily yield, therefore there is need of greater art to take
them away, either by washing them out, or shaking them out, or drawing them
out, or enticeing them out, or killing them.

Sometimes they give way by washing, if they stick not very fast. Which is done
by pouring in those things which make this way flippery, and moisten and dilate
it, as the common Oil of sweet Almonds, Butter, Milk; or some relaxing and
smoothing Decoction.

We shake them out by a certain violence, causing Sneezing. For so those parts
being shaken with the impulse of Spirit, that which is fallen in, ofttimes
leaps forth, or at least is forced forward, which will the sooner be done, if
the way be first dilated, as has been said, by Dancing and beating the Foot of
that side, as the Ear affected is, against the ground, in the interim holding
the Head with the Hands, and bending it toward that part. Things are also
shaked out of the Ears; which way Water and other Liquid things that are flown
into the Ears are commodiously cast forth, as Boys are wont to shake it out
after bathing in the River, if any thing has flowed into their Ears,

If these succeed not we draw it out with an Instrument fit for for this
purpose. Yet we must Studiously take Care, that whiles we put it in, that which
sticks be not forced in farther, whence afterward it is taken forth with
greater difficulty. This is done with an Earpicker, with which the filth is
wont to be taken out, whose hollow part must be very thin, that being there put
behind the things contained, they may the more commodiously be drawn forth. Or
they must be laid hold on and pulled out with a pair of Tongs fitted for that
purpose, sharp on both sides and rough, or if this succed not neither, laying
hold of them with another Instrument, if they be hard Bodies, as a Kernel or
Stone, we break them, and then as has been said, with liquor poured in, we
wash them forth.

Sometimes we Allure living Creatures, with certain things which are pleasing to
them, that they may creep outward, and so then they may be laid hold on; as if
we apply Milk with Sugar in a Sponge to the Ear, or thrust it in gently, or
the inside of a Fig, or a crust of Bread, or an Apple, or the like, or Bacon
Grease, with which Worms are sooner enticed, and that especially, if whiles
they hold these things in their Ears, they turn them up to the Sun. By pouring
Blood into the Ears, Leeches that are got in by chance are drawn forth.

We kill living Creatures, if they stick in the Ears, and give no way, and then
being dead they do no more outnoise the Hearing, and they are the easier washed
out, or shaked out; and that is done by choking of them, if Liquors be poured
in, so they are wont, taking on their Finger spittle, which is ready at hand in
the night, to drop it into the Ears, if Fleas have crept into them, which by
its Tenaciousness does presently stop up their Pores, the same is done by
pouring in their own water. If those things poured in be bitter, they sooner
kill insects, as the Juice, or the Decoction, or the Wine of Centory, Wormwood,
the juice of Rue, also kills insects; Also Gauls and Aloes, Acrid things do
the same; Vinegar, the juice of an Apple, and of Onions; And the rest which
shall be explained in the Woms of the Ears.

If the Ears be stopped by filth or choler, clotted blood, The Cure of the
Hearing, from a Repletion of the Ears.
Matter, they must be extracted with an Ear-picker, or by some other Art, as
has been said. And if they be so thick, or Tenacious that they do not easily
give way, then they must be cleansed, dissolved, and washed out, by casting in
liquors often, and flowing forth again, such as in clensing of matter shall be
expressed in the Ulcers of the Ears. And Honey and Water, or Hydromel is chiefly
good; or if we must cleanse more powerfully, that must be done with the
Decoction, or bitter juice a fore mentioned, of Wormwood, Centaury, Lupines,
adding Honey or Gall which above all other things, as has been often said,
does make fluid those things which are viscous, and has great strength in
dissolving Ear Wax, into which it does egregiously insinuate it self, by
reason of a similitude of Nature with it.

If a fleshy Tumor stop up the Ears, it is scarce taken away, seeing it cannot
be cut, and Causticks or Septicks are put in with danger to the Drum, the
Callus left is hardly mollefied, Yet Emollient remedies may be tried.

If a Pulsation be left in the Ears after an Ulcer. Fernelius writes that it is
perpetual, which Impediment nevertheless, is diminisht or cease, perhaps the
Skin being drawn over the Wound, and in space of time growing thicker.

If a sound be felt in the Ears by reason of the more vehement Pulsation of the
Arteries in the Ears, The Cure of a Pulsation in the Ears, by reason of the
Arteries.
that remitting, as it is not wont to be of long continuance that sound also
ceases; if that come to pass from too exquisite a sense, then it feels it
either always, or from a light intension of the Pulse, and in proceess of age,
the senses remitting, it is mitigated, or it is corrected by putting in
Narcoticks if it be very troublesome, as if the juice of Henbane be dropped in
with Oil or Vinegar.

If the Hearing be hurt by a Humor, The Cure of the hurt of Hearing, from the
repletion of the inner Cavity of hearing.
or Wind, or also a Vapor contained in the Cavity of hearing; then if the
matter be very thin and Vaporous, it is at length dissipated of its own accord.
Or if it be thicker and stick there, it often produces an evil of long
continuance.

In the Cure of which, whether Deafness, or thick Hearing, or mishearing be
caused from thence; Emptiers are chiefly used after the same manner, as they
are described in a Vertigo, and weakness of the sight, caused by watrish
Serous, and phlegmatic Humor, and the altering means, which are described in
the Oxydorcical, or Eye-clearers are convenient for them also. And Topic
remedies must be applied too, and into the Ears, which may waste, Dissipate,
and Discuss the matter contained there, and which by a propriety do restore the
Hearing, all which shall be Methodically appointed in the following order.

The filth of the Guts must first of all be washed out, by Suppositories, or
Grysters, or giving a Minorative purge; as has been said in the places
forementioned, and shall be said in the Excrementitious Diseases of the Brain.

Bleeding if there be a Plenitude, or if Choleric matter together with blood
flowing to the Ears, has caused Deafness in the crifes of Diseases, will be
convenient as has been said.

The Humors are prepared, if Phlegm abound in the Brain, after the same manner:
or thus, giving the things following for some mornings, and at night when he is
going to bed, if there be need of great preparation; as, Take of the syrups of
Betony, French Lavender, of each half an ounce; Oxymel of Squils two drams, the
waters of Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, of each one ounce: Make a Julep for once,
Aromatize it; or let him take Lozenges after, it must be repeated as has been
said.

Or let this Decoction be prepared, which is more effectual: Take of the roots
of the true Acorus, Orrice, of each half an ounce; Elecampane two drams,
Liquorish one ounce, the Herbs Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, of each one handful;
Time, Rue, Balm, of each half a handful; flowers of Betony, Lavender, French
Lavender, of each one pugil; Fennel seeds two drams, seeds of Caraway, Rue, of
each one dram; Bay Berries, two drams: Make a Decoction, and and in one pound
and an half of that strained, Dissolve of the best Honey eight ounces: Boil
them to half the consistence of a Syrup, and hang in it a rag tied up with
Cinnamon two drams, Cubebs, Spicknard, of each two scruples; long Pepper,
Ginger, of each one scruple: Let him take four ounces at a time.

An infusion made in Wine of the same things, and Plants and Spices may be
used; adding, if he be delighted with bitter things, Wormwood, Ground Pine, and
Hore-hound, that it may be drank like wormwood Wine.

If a Choleric humor abound in the Body, that is rather to be prepared, as it
ought.

Then let him be purged after the same manner as has been said in the hurt of
the sight from Phlegm of the Brain, chiefly with Cochiae pills, sine Quibus,
Lucis, or with Electuaries, as Indum or others, or if the matter be Choleric,
with things appropriate to Purge that Humor.

And taking by course gentler Pills, and sometimes stronger, or in other forms,
as these things have been explained in the Remedies.

Sweats are very convenient here, because they call forth the thinner
Excrements from all parts, even those that are hid, and do discuss Wind and
Vapors; wherefore they are to be procured, the Body being first purged, by the
heat of a dry Bath, or moist. Artificial, or Natural, amongst which it is
vulgarly believed, that Baths do good to the Hearing, and some chiefly commend
the Suphur Baths, and think them so effectual in curing of Deafness, that if
the Patient while he sets in the Bath, receive the hot water flowing through
the Conduit cock, in a large sponge which does compass the who Head, and that
twice a day, it is the most excellent Remedy for it, and also they may be
sometimes moved, by giving of Sweaters and applying if need be, the said Diet in
full bodies, which in Deafness is oftentimes the last Remedy, viz. by making a
Diet as they are wont to call it.

The Excrements of the brain must be called forth by the Nostrils and mouth,
and enticed thither, whence oftentimes there is great Revulfion from the Ears,
and sometimes some purgation: for by Masticatories, whiles the excrements of the
Brain are drawn forth, they are not only revel'd, that they flow not so to the
Ears, but also by frequent spitting, an expurgation by this impulse, both of
humors and wind being sometimes made through the said holes that in the basis of
the Skul do enter the Organ of Hearing, it frees this part from Obstruction; as
experience shows, that by strong swallowing often repeated sometimes the Vapors
and Air which has broke into the Cavity of Hearing when the Nose was blowed
with violence, there causing a Sound, is as it were drawn forth again, the same
way it entered, and as it was suddenly caused, so that sound of the Ears does
suddenly cease; wherefore swallowing also, in the interim pressing the Eears
outwardly, is a Remedy for bringing forh of the Wind, not to be despised.

Errhines also may do the same, and a strong excussion of the Air by blowing of
the Nose, where nevertheless, if the Nose whiles it is blowed, be so pressed,
that the Air cannot conveniently go forth, but oftentimes recurring breaks into
the chamber of the Ears through the said holes as has been showed, and so
depraves the hearing; for which cause it must be so blowed, whether with the
hands or with a handkerchief, that there may be free passage for the Air
through the Nostrils.

Sneezing does this far more vehemently which often shakes forth of the Ears
Wind or Humor speedily by the same way; but being so caused, that the force of
the Air be not stopped, with the same caution as we declared even now in blowing
of the Nose.

Scarification made in the Wrist is believed to derive much from the Ears: but
it will do more good, if it be done in the Neck about the Jugular Veins, whence
they have present case. Cupping-glasses also applied to these places, or to the
shoulders are profitable. And last of all a Caustic.

The Remedies formerly mentioned are applied to the Head, whether outwardly
administered or received by the Nostrils in a suffumigation, amongst which
Remedies that are various, this is a singular help, which is done by
Embrocation of Sulphurous water, as has been said formerly.

The same Remedies taken inwardly which have been explained in the said places,
and strengthen the Head, Alter, wast, and discuss humors, Wind, Vapors, are
convenient here also both in a decent course of diet, in which old strong Wine
is commended by Rhazes, and in other Medicines and Confections, to be taken
fasting and after meat.

The Remedies which are put into the Ears in the said causes, Topic Remedies
for the hearing.
called Acoistica, are various; the more select and corrected forms of which,
we will here explain.

Simple Aqua vitae so called is good.

A more appropriate one made thus. Take of the water of Organy stilled from the
dry herb steeped in white Wine, let him use it.

A more Compound Water. Take of the roots of Radish, Leeks, Onions, each one
ounce; Sowbread half an ounce, white Hellebore one dram, the dried herbs of
Organy, three drams, Rue, Marjoram, each two drams; Lavender flowers one dram,
Fennel, Cummin seeds, each one dram; Bayberries fifteen, bruise them all, and
add of a Cows gaul one dram, White Wine as much as is sufflcient, that they may
be reduced as it were into a Pultise, and distill them.

Another easy to be prepared, used a long time with no small success. Take of
an Oxgaul two pound, fresh Onions sliced, fresh Radish sliced, each four
ounces; fresh Castor sliced one dram, let them stand all night, then distill
them, let that Water be kept for use.

A Decoction may be made thus. Take of the roots of white Hellebore, Sowsbread,
each one dram; the herb Organy two drams, Cummin seeds one dram, boil them in
white Wine, strein them for your use: if you take Vinegar of Squils, it will be
more effectual.

Another Decoction yet more excellent and very much commended. Take of the
roots of White Hellebore half a dram, Saffron, Castor, Niter, each one scruple;
bruise them together, let them boil in Vinegar half an ounce, Aqua vitae two
ounces, strein them for your use.

Many Juyces are used, as of Onions, Leeks, Radish, Rue, also the Tears of Ash
and Vines when they are pruned, especially in a hot cause.

Oils are often used for the Ears otherwise then for the Eyes, the more common
are Oil of Bitter Almonds and Spike.

Oils drawn by distillation are most effectual above all other Remedies,
extracted from hot odorous Plants and Seeds chiefly, as of Rosemary, Marjoram,
Sage, Rue, of the Seed of Cummin, Carawaies, Fennel, and Bay berries, and what
is every where to be had, Oil of Spike, or Oils of Spices, chiefly of Cloves,
all which are scarce given alone, by reason of their too great vehemence, but
dissolved in some Liquor, or mixed with other things, they are most happily
dropped in, as shall be said.

Compound Oils are thus made, amongst which this is excellent. Take Oil of
Bitter Almends half an ounce, the juice of Organy purified one ounce, White
Wine Vinegar two drams, let them boil til they are wasted fit for use.

Or thus, Take Oil of Bitter Almonds, Spike each half an ounce, the juyces of
Leeks, Radish, Vinegar, each two drams; boil them to the consumption of the
juyces, and let him use it, if you add Castor one scruple, Euphorbium half a
scruple, it will be more effectual.

Or many things added it will be most effectual after this manner. Take Oil of
Spike, Bitter Almonds, each one ounce and an half; the juyces of Radish, Leeks,
Onions, and Rue, Vinegar, each half an ounce; Aqua vitae two drams, add of the
pouders of the roots of white Hellebore, Sowsbread, each one dram; the pulp of
Coloquintida one scruple, the Leaves of Organy Cummin seeds, each one dram;
Long Pepper half a dram, Castor one dram, Euphorbium one scruple, Niter two
scruples, boil them to a fit consumption for your use.

Or make a hole in a great Onion or a Squil, or great Radish, and fill it it
with one or more of the aforesaid Oils, adding also other things and boil it
under the Ashes and use it; the which done in an Apple of Coloquintida, will be
more powerful.

Mixtures are made of the aforementioned, such as this is very proper. Take of
Aqua vitae two drams, in which dissolve Camphire two grains, Oil of Spike one
or two grains, or so many drops of other Chemical Oils, and if it be too
strong, dilute it a little with Water of Organy.

Another mixture of Oils and Juyces, Take of the mixture of the Oils of Spike
and Organy made after the same manner each half a dram; Oil of Lavender two
grains, a little of the white of an Egg, beat them very well, that they may be
all mixed, and it become like Milk, and when you would use them beat them again.

Or thus, that it may be made like an Ointment. Take of Oil of Castor,
Goose-fat, each one dram; Cows gaul half a dram, Castor half a scruple, Rozin
of the Larix tree a little, mix them, anoint a Tent and put it in, some drops
of Chemical Oils may also be mixed with it, as of Cloves or Cumminseed, and it
will be more effectual.

Trochisks to be kept for use may be made thus. Take of the roots of Hellebore
one dram, Sowsbread half a dram, the pulp of Coloquintida one scruple, Saffron
a dram and an half, Niter two scruples, Labdannm one scruple, Euphorbium half a
scruple, Musk six grains, powder them and make them up of the juice of a Leek,
dry them; let one of them be dissolved for your use in Vinegar or some juice,
of a Leek or a Radish.

Suffumigations admitted into the Ears before the use of these, and afterward
also, do very much good, and penetrate to the innermost parts.

Such as this may be. Take of the roots of Hellebore one dram, the Plants
Laurel, Marjoram, wild Time, Pennyroyal, Calamint, Rue, Balm, Hysop,
Southernwood, each half a handful; Organy one handful, flowers of Lavender,
Rosemary, each one pugil; Juniper and Bay berries, each half an ounce; seeds of
Cummin, Carawaies, Fennel, each two drams; bruise them and add pulp of
Coloquintida half a dram, Niter one dram, make a Decoction in Wine and Vinegar,
let him receive the Vapor or Fume, caused by quenching Stones in the Decoction,
into his Ears by a Syringe.

Or which is more effectual. Take Oil of Nuts two ounces, Vinegar one ounce,
Aqua vitae half an ounce, Sulphur one dram, boil them and while it boyls, let
him receive the Smoke.

The Ear also may be fomented with the forementioned Decoction described for a
Suffumigation, or a Sponge dipped in it, may be applied to the Ears whiles it is
hot.

Bread made of Bran or Flour, and wrought with Caraway seed before it is baked,
then after a little baking, being broken in two and applied to the Ear
affected, whiles it is hot, does help wonderfully in sounds of the Ears.

A Bag of the same things applied to the Ears for the same uses, and a pillow
in the night is laid under the Ear affected, and such things may be sowed into
a Cap in that part where it touches the Ear.

Which may be done thus. Take of the roots of Sowsbread, Orrice, Asarabacca,
each two drams; the herbs Calamint, Basil, Pennyroyal, each one dram; Organy
two drams, French Lavender, Rosemary each one dram; Caraway seeds two drams,
Grummel seed a little bruised three drams, Spikenard half a dram, Lignum Aloes
one scruple, Storax two drams, Salt three drams, mix them, fill a Bag or Pillow.

A Board of Cypress or Juniper, heated and applied does good, especially if
first of all it be strewed with powder of Organy, and it is a secret Remedy for
many things.

If the hurt of hearing has proceeded from the fault of conformation from the
Birth, The Cure of the hurt of hearing from the fault of conformation.
whether it be in the Nerve whence for the most part they are born Deaf and
Dumb, or in the Drum or small bone placed there, or in the Cavities and
Maeanders there variously carried, being ill formed or built, then all Cure
being in vain, though diverse acouistical Remedies be tried.

An eminent hurt of the Drum from an external cause, as a Wound, is incurable,
and if by reason of the same cause it be too slack or retcht, it is hardly
reduced to its natural state; yet when it is too much laxed, those Remedies
which restore the hearing are convenient also, but when it is retcht by reason
of old age or after a Disease' then things laxative; upon which account, as we
do otherwise command a Restorative and Moistening course of Diet in old folks
and those recovering, so even upon this account it is profitable, and we infuse
warm into the Ears things lenitive and moistening such as are warm Milk,
especially a Woman's, and temperate Oils, of sweet Almonds, Butter and the like.

If there be a weakness of the Hearing from a cold distemper extrinsecially,
The Cure of defect of Hearing from a cold Distemper.
the Air or Water bringing hurt to the Ears, the Remedies which we said were
convenient in a cold internal cause, here also either laid on the Ears, or let
in by Suffumigation, will do good.

The which also will take places, The Cure from the cause of Narcoticks.
if this happen from the use of Narcoticks put into the Ears, making choice
chiefly of those which have Vinegar in them, which we have often said does
above other things infringe the force of Narcoticks.

CHAP. IX. Of the hurt of Smelling.
The Kinds,
THe Smelling is wholly abolisht, The defect of Smelling.
when it perceives no Scent at all not only of things distant, but of those
applied to the Nose and taken inwardly.

But it is impaired only seeing the Smelling perceives not things unless very
near to the Nose, and those which breath forth a strong smell, whether also may
be referd that case, when they smell not things unless they be thrust into their
mouth, which one writes has sometimes happened, when notwithstanding otherwise
the Scent of things put into the mouth, is in no wise naturally perceived this
way.

The Smelling is depraved seeing it judges the Scents of things not such as
indeed they are, but falsely, A Depravation of the Smelling.
to be otherwise Scented, as when it perceives those things which are otherwise
endued with a grateful smell to send forth an ungrateful Scent, or when it
thinks those that smell well, do stink, which for the most part happens the Taste
being depraved too, seeing the Judgment of things taken inwardly, does partly
belong to the Smelling, or when Nourishments of themselves grateful both in
Sent and Taste, are often judged in Diseases, to Savor and Smell ingratefully,
but either we do in no wise refer those things which are truly stinking,
though they offend the Smell, as neither do we refer Grief to the depraved
Touch, seeing it does rightly perceive that which indeed is so.

The Causes.
In the part sending, Defect of Smelling by fault of the Brain.
viz. the Brain the same which the Senses of Tasting and Feeling, may be the
cause of this hurt, as has been explained there, the which also is known by
this, because these senses are hurt too.

If the cause of the hurt of Smelling consist in the part receiving the sent;
because it consists of many that is either out of the Skul in the Cavity of the
Nose, together with the prominency and patency of the Nose, or it is profound and
hidden, or within the the Skul, in the holes of smelling and its Organ.

Unless the two prominent Channels, A stoppage of the Nostrils, is the Cause of
the defect of smelling.
which they call the Nostrils, Extrinsecally drawing in the sent, by pressing
on both side the Pins of the Nostrils, or by applying other things be stopped,
and for a while do take aaway the sense of smelling, which how it comes to pass
by chance: because the hurt, which then it brings to breathing is greater then
that which takes away the smelling, it shall be explained there, and when this
is done on purpose and voluntarily; and that, that we may not smell external
stinks: Because it is then no ways counted a fault, we need explain it: As
also if against ourwill they be stuffed with Snivel, or Tumor, unless this be at
once in both Nostrils, and they be wholly stopped, whence the smelling would be
hindered, (the which yet can scarce be done, that so great quantity of Snivel
should long stick there, and a Polypus is wont to possess one Nostril only)
because that does rather prejudice the drawing in of the breath the smelling
this cause also must be refered thither.

In the profound largeness of the Nostrils, An obstruction of the deeper Cavity
of the Nostrils, is the Cause of the defect of smelling.
not that which is carried transversly from the Nostrils to the palate (because
through that only the scent, which we meet with outwardly does no way ascend,
but that also which breaths from those things, which are put into the Mouth, as
has been said, is kept off by reason of this transverse Situation, and is not
perceived, unless some other cause be joined) but that which is next to the
Skul, the sive like Bone, and the spung Bones of the Nose. If there be so great
a Repletion, or such an obstruction, about the holes of the said sivelike Bone,
which may hinder the sent of things that it cannot Penetrate, a defect of
smelling oftimes happens.

Which oftentimes happens from thick Phlegm distilling thither from the Brain,
and being long retained, and sometimes becoming mucous, and highly viscid, and
upon that occount the smelling is hindered, and when putrefying it begins to
stink, or strainge matter endued with a strong sent is mixed with it, it is
depraved, till that matter being cast off, which is done by vehement blowing of
the Nose, or by Sneezing, they are freed from that Disease.

That this has sometimes happened from a Gypseous and Tophaceous matter, or
from a Stone bred in those narrow passages, the voiding of these things has at
last made manifest.

And what is rare, that a Worm bred there and a long time retained, and after
many years voided all hairy, from a Woman of Berna, has given occasion of this
fault, the Physician of that place has signified to me, and sent me the
draught of that Worm.

They teach also that it may be done by matter retained, but unless somewhat
else be joined, as a Callus from an Ulcer, or an Excrescency, matter cannot be
so long retained, not in no wise grow so thick.

And also this defect sometimes betides those whose bones of the Nose are fallen
down in that place, either by a Disease the bones being eaten, as in the
Elephantiacal, or those troubled with an Ozena, or by a fall, or blow made upon
that part, and the bones being broken which also happens to some from their
Birth, that their Nose being deprest about the root, they do not smell well.

The small holes of smelling in part of the thick Membrane of the Brain, A
stoppage of the holes of the Organ of smelling, is the cause of the defect of
smelling.
which is spread over the sivelike Bone perforated in like manner, if they be
filled with any Humor, because nothing ought to be carried through them
naturally, but the sent, do cause a defect in the Smelling.

As it comes to pass, when a thin Rheum, or the serous Excrements of the Brain
falling down to this higher part within the Skul, and passing through the
narrow holes, and distilling from the Nostrils do produce the said Coryza. Then
some portion of this matter remaining in the said holes, and obstructing them,
it brings a desect of smelling, which is wont to accompany, or follow a Coryza,
the which also may happen from other matter heaped there.

And also it happens by fault of conformation from the Birth, that these holes
being absent, both in the Membrane and the bone, and omitted by the desect of
Nature, or being but blind ones, this becomes an original fault with man, that
he smells nothing, as on the contrary it is credible, those who have these holes
larger, as they seem to to be in Dogs which are quick of sent, that they smell
more acutely, and truly.

That also may happen by default of the Organ of Smelling or Nerve, A Repletion
of the Organ of smelling with Phlegm, is the Cause of the defect of smelling.
if it be too much moistened, as has been already said, by a thin Humor
flowing down to these holes, on on which the Organ of Smelling lies; or be
pressed with an afflux of of another Humor, as has been said of the rest of the
Sensory Organs, or Nerves, which also may befall them from the Birth, by the
fault of Conformation, if either they be wanting, or if they offend in
Situation and Figure.

The Cure.
The Cure must be prepared according to the Diversity of the place, The Cure of
the defect of Smelling by fault of the Brain.
chiefly where the Disease, or its cause lies, which we have taught does
consist in the Brain, or the Cavities of the Nose, or in the holes of Smelling,
or in the Instrument.

If it be by reason of the Brain, then we must oppose it here, as has been
explained in the rest of the senses, in like manner hurt together with the
Smelling.

If the Patent, or hidden Cavity of the Nostrils be stopped, The Cure of the
defect of Smelling, from obstruction of the Nostrils.
or obstructed with Snivel, or thick Viscous Phlegm, then we must try by purging
it, if it can be so removed, or by blowing it to take it away by degrees. And
we must endeavor to shake it off by Sneezing, chiefly by irritating the
expulsive faculty, if it be already prepared for excretion.

Putting into the Nostrils, if they yield not easily, or lie deep, those things
which may mollefie them if they be hard, or attenuate them if they be thick, or
cleanse them if they stick Pertinatiously, and may stimulate also the expulsive
faculty, whence they may afterward more easily, as has been said, either be
taken out, or blowed out, or forced out by Sneezing, which we shall most
commodiously do, by drawing up of Errhines or pouring them into the Nostrils.

Emollient Errines and abstersive are made of Whey, Hydromel, and the like.

Incisive and clensing are made of Wine, Vinegar, a Lie, and such like.

Abstersive and Stimulating, are made of Niterous Herbs, and acrid things, and
others, amongst which Gaul does chiesly dissipate things viscous, several forms
of all which are every where expressed.

By receiving in at the Nostrils the Vapors of some hot Decoction that does cut
and prepare Phlegm; we prepare it for an easier expulsion. Such as we have
formerly taught, were admitted into the Ears in the defect of Hearing, are here
also convenient, and their like.

That matter is in some sort attenuated, and stirred up to excretion, only by
the smell of Acrid things; as of Mustard, Radish, and if we advise them often to
smell to those things endued with a strong sent; either grateful, as Musk,
Amber, or stinking as Castor, Assafaetida; we shall not only devide and provoke
Phlegm, but also we shall stir up, and recall into act again the the faculty of
Smelling, which was laid a sleep by the intermission of Smelling.

And if some other Tophaceous Body, or Stony, or living Creature, as has been
said of a Worm lurk in those Caveties, which is very rare, then because we can
scarce guess at it, we can scarce apply remedies for it; and if they be there,
and can give place, by the same means, as we have said a thick Humor was
provoked, these also are sometimes cast forth by Sneezing with admiration.

But we may guess that a Worm is there, by this: Because there has been one
cast forth before, and now the same Symptoms appear again, which were then
before it came forth; and we must mix bitter things, Gauls, the juyces of
Wormwood, and Aloes, with the Errhines and Vinegar also, that we may kill it.

If the holes and Organ of Smelling being mollested with thin phlegm, The Cure
of the defect of Smelling, from phlegm in the Organ of Hearing.
do produce a Coryza with defect of Semlling, the Cure shall be explained in
that Symptom which is most grievous, viz. how the body is to be purged, and
respect is to be had to the Head, and those Fluxes are to be stopped, or to be
derived another way.

But if the evil be organical from the birth, then it can no ways be mended,
The Cure of the defect of Smelling, from the fault of Conformation.
and it must be wholly committed to nature, which sometimes of it self in its
great changes does somewhat, as also if it be by reason of the Nose deprest from
the Birth, or from Diseases or a blow, this Figure being vitiated, can never be
corrected.

The End of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE Hurts of Functions. HANDLING the HURTS of MOTION.
THe Motions whose Operations are discovered by our senses (for we do not treat
only of those Functions) are some of them voluntary which are done, or
regulated by our will, others involuntary which are perfected of their own
accord by strength of Nature, not by our Will.

All voluntary Motions fall under the senses, some of which are performed,
while a part is moved from a place into a place, the which do depend soly on
our will, which we call simply Voluntary, others are made by drawing in, and
sending forth the Air, and that partly by a Voluntary, partly by an involuntary
Motion, and it is called the Motion of Breathing; but others are perfected by
taking to them some matter, but chiefly by voiding it, and some both ways,
which we call Motions of Excretions, from whence there will arise three chief
kinds of the hurts of Motions, of the Voluntary, of Breathings, and Excretions.
Which hurts of them sometimes come to pass by accident, and that either by
reasan of that hurt of the internal senses, by which these motions are also
offended, of which we have already spoke in the hurts of the internal senses,
or by reason of a Cessation of the vital Motion, whence it must needs be that
these do rest, or are weakend when they are impaired, the which we will handle
in the defect of vital Motion; but otherwise these Motions are hurt not by
reason of the said hurts, but by themselves, as now we shall show in these
three kinds.

The Motions called simply Voluntary, are of the external Members of the Body,
and those either most strong in those parts, which being strengthened with
Bones, are most able to endure them, such as are, to bend or raise up the Body,
and with that the Head, by benefit of the Back, to lay hold on and handle
things with the Arms, Hands and Fingers, to stand or go with the Thighs and
Legs, with the mandible (which alone of all the Bones in the Head is firm to
exercise most strong Motions) firmly to take things and devide them with the
Teeth; the Motions weaker then these are, those which are perfected only in the
fleshy and menbranous Members placed in the Face. As to open and shut the Mouth
and Lips, the Ey-brows, or Eyes, also to move the Eyes, the hurts of which
Motions have two differences chiefly, that either they are defective or
depraved.

Voluntary Motions are defective, because they are weakend by themselves or
Abolisht, for by accident also when by reason of pain in a part, its Motion is
omitted, because it would increase the pain; yet, it is improperly said that it
cannot be moved, which case is to be referd to pains, where also it shall be
explained.

But Voluntary Motions are debilitated, A Weakness of Motion.
especially the stronger, when they are done with a certain weakness in its
diverse Kinds, which are Sluggishness, Weariness after labor, a Spontanious
Weariness, which we will explain together in the first Chapter of the Weakness
of Motion.

Voluntary Motions are abolisht, Impotency of Motion.
both the strong and the weaker, when they are not perfected at all, or at
least wise not so much as was needful, as it is wont to come to pass in its
diverse kinds, the chief of which are, a Palsy, Spasme, Contraction, and their
diverse Species, as a Flatulent Spasme, a Trisme, a wreathing of the Mouth, a
Doglike Spasme, a Gibbus, Strabisme, etc. of which we will treat together under
the title of Impotency of Motion, in the second Chapter.

Voluntary Motions are depraved, The Depravation of Morion.
chiefly the strong, but with them the weaker also, when they proceed not
rightly, or more then was fitting, as it happens in some of its kinds which are
chiefly, Restlesness, Trembling, Palpitation, Rigor, Horror, Retching, Gaping,
Tinckling of the Eyes, which shall be handled in Depraved Motion, Chap. III.

All motions of Breathing, also are apparent to the senses, and are perfected
by diverse Organs of the Breast, Neck and Jaws, and that two ways by drawing
in and breathing out the Air, which Motion we cannot intermit at our will, when
nature does attempt it; whence it shall be called Natural Respiration, the
other is performed only by breathing out the Air with a sound, which with our
will we can omit: and it may be called a Voluntary Expiration, or because it
vtters a Voice, Vocal expiration, which also is twofold, as it brings forth a
Voice simply, it is called a Voice; but as it makes an Articulate voice, it is
called Speech; the which three, Respiration, Voice, and Speech do vary in that,
that either they are Defective, or Depraved.

They are defective, The defect of Respiration.
when they are not done or not sufficiently in many kinds of it, which are,
Strangling, Suffocation, difficulty of breathing, Asthma, Suffocation of the
Womb, Nightmare, defect of Voice and Speech, Stammering, which we will
describe together, in the Defect of Respiration, Chap. IV.

They are Depraved, when they are done, Evil Respiration.
either not Naturally, or Violently, in diverse kinds; as are, quick Breathing,
Sighing, Yawning, Hiccups, Sneezing Cough, Hoarsness, which shall be explained
in Evil Respiration, Chap. V.

The motions of Excretions (under which we may comprehend not only those, when
some things is cast forth of the body) which are naturally perfected by the
passages of the body destined for it, that fall under the sense, and are done
by our Will, or at leastwise are regulated by it, are the passage through the
Gullet, going to stool, Pissing, Bringing forth, which motions in as much as
they are functions of the body, are sometimes defective, when they are not done,
or not as much as was convenient, sometimes they are depraved, when they are not
retained to the destined time, which come to pass, when the excretion is
unseasonable, or too much; but because something is rejected in all of them, we
will describe in the Rejections all such like natural excretions with those
Preternatural, but here we will handle them, in as much as these functions are
Defective or are not performed.

One passage through the Gullet or Aesophagus is, The defect of passage through
the Gullet.
which is naturally inwards, in swallowing; but the other by compulsion
outward by vomiting, of the kinds of both defects, viz. the difficulty of
Swallowing and Vomiting, we will treat in the Defect of passage through the
Gullet, Chap. VI.

The one kind of defect of dejections, which is performed partly by nature, The
defect of Stools.
partly by the will, viz. Costiveness of the Body shall be explained in Defect
of Stools, Chap. VII.

The Defects of Pissing, The defect of Pissing.
which the Will effects partly and chiefly, yet Nature helping, which are an
Ischury, Dvsury are described in the Defect of Pissing, Chap. VIII.

The two kinds of Defect of bringing forth, which motion is made by the force
of Nature, our Will assisting which are a Difficulty of bringing forth, and an
Imperfect Birth shall be explained in the Defect of bringing forth, Chap. IX.

Involuntary motions are not all of them, but some only are conspicuous to the
senses; which Nature alone does attempt, either for preservation of life,
called Vital Motions, or for Nourishment and are called Nutritive Motions, or
for Propagation of the kind, and and they are named Motions of Generation, from
whence also proceed three kinds of hurts of Involuntary motions, viz. of the
Vital, of Nutrition, and Generation.

The Vital motions do manifest themselves in our strength and in the motion of
the Heart and Pulse of the Arteries, which are hurt in this, that either they
are Defective or Depraved.

They are defective when they are abolisht or impaired, The defect of vital
motion.
in the following kinds, a failing of the strength, a defect of Courage, in the
Agony of Death, which we shall explain together in The Defect of Vital motion,
Chap. X.

They are depraved when the motion of the Heart and Pulses are too much or
amiss, Vital motion depraved.
in these two kinds, the Motion and Pulse of the Heart Depraved, the
Palpitation of the Heart, of which we shall treat in the defect of Vital Motion
Depraved, Chap. XI.

The Motions of Nutrition or which are made for Nourishments sake being four,
to wit, Attractive, Retentive, Concoctive, and Expulsive, cannot all of them be
perceived by the Senses, neither do we perceive how the Retentive or Concoctive
works, or when they are hurt, by the proper hurt of that motion, but we know it
by other things which follow from thence. But in Attraction we manifestly find
that Motion when Nature desires Meat and Drink; and in Excretion when Nature
expels somewhat out of the Body by its proper force, we plainly observe its
motion, as in other Excretions in which our Will is Auxilary to it; whence we
meet with only two kinds of the Hurts of the Motions of Nutrion that fall under
the Sense, of Apetency, and Excretions.

The Motions of Apetency are hurt in the desire of Meat and Drink when they are
defective or depraved.

The Appetency is Defective when there is lictle or no Appetite to them, of
which faults, Defect of Appetite.
which are chiefly, an Anorexy, Want of Stomach, or Nauseousness, Apositia Want
of thirst, or a loathing of certain meats, we will treat in the Defect of
Appetite, Chap. XII.

The Appetite is depraved when it desires either too much, The Appetite
Depraved.
or that which is not convenient, of whose kinds which are, a Boulimy, Dog-like
Appetite, immoderate Thirst, a Pica, we will treat in The Appetite Depraved,
Chap. XIII.

Of the manifest Motions of Excretions which Nature alone does perfect, as
necessary, serving to Nutrition, one is of the Blood, another of the Serum,
another of Milk, the hurt of which three Humors Kinds of Excretions do consist
in this, sufficiently, or they are Deprvved when they are made immothat either
they are Defective when they are not made or not derately or out of season, in
which two seeing always somewhat flows forth, in that voided, we will explain
such like depraved Excretions together with all the rest, as well natural as
preternatural things, which do not offend in defect, but because they are made,
what way soever that comes to pass, in the hurts of Excretions, but here we will
treat of them, in as much as these Functions are defective.

The Cessation and Diminution of a natural afflux of Blood, whose kinds are,
The Defect of natural Haemorrage.
a Suppression of the Courses, aand Haemorrhoids, a Defect of Purgation after
bringing forth, as also of other Haemorrages, shall be handled in the Defect of
a natural Haemorrhage, Chap. XIV.

One Kind of defect of Sweating out the Serum shall be explained in the Defect
of Sweating, Want of Sweat.
Chap. XV.

One kind of Deficiency of Milkshal explained in the Defect of giving Milk,
Chap. Want of Milk.
XVI.

The Involuntary motions which are made for Generation or Procreation sake,
whose hurts are conspicuous, are conversant only about the act of Venery and
Conception. For of Bringing forth we have formerly spoken, because the Will
does help that.

The act of Venery which is perfected by the appetive motion of Nature,
rendering the Members fit to exercise that Act, and by voiding of Seed in both
as well the Male as Female, sometimes is Defective, sometimes Depraved.

Sometimes it is so Defective that it cannot be performed, in an Impotency,
Defect of the act of Venery.
Languidness Imperfect Venery, or Hindered, or Extinct' of which we will treat in
the Defect of the Act of Venery, Chap. XVII.

It is Depraved when they Covet it too much in, Lasciviousness, Salaciousness.
Venereal madness, a Priapism, of which we will handle in Salaciousness, Chap.
XVIII.

Conception which is performed by the motion of Nature, Attracting, Retaining,
Defect of Conception.
and Forming the Seed in a Woman only is Deficient or Depraved.

It is Defective when it is not, as in Barreness, or not as we we would have
it, in Defect of Procreating Males or Females, of which we will treat in Defect
of Conception, Chap. XIX.

It is Depraved when it is done ill, which Disease seeing it can scarce be
known, and falls not under the Senses, til that which was ill conceived, be cast
forth; we shall rather treat of that in things rejected together with Abortion
and the rest of Excretions.

CHAP. I. Of the Weakness of Motion.
The Kinds.
WE call that a Weakness of Motion, when they exercise sluggishly, or slowly,
or hardand with some trouble, the Voluntary motions of the body, and amongst
these especially the stronger which have need of strength that they may be
accomplished, for if upon another account a defect befall them that they are
not sufficiently performed, seeing they happen from the same cause also, from
whence we shall show an Immobility does proceed, they shall be explained there.
But this of which we here treat, either is an accustomary Sloth, or a
Weariness supervenient after labor, or a Spontaneous Weariness foregoing
Diseases.

Sluggishness, Sloth, Slowness, Idleness, Sluggishness.
loathness to do any thing, is accustomary to the weaker sort either by Nature
all their life time; or to Infants, and old Folks by reason of their age, or
those recovering after a Disease, for some time or always after, and other
while it is familiar to the stronger sort also by reason of Laziness with which
they are more delighted, and do accustom themselves to Sloth, all which can
hardly endure heavy labor, nor persevere long in undertaking it, being rather
intent on Rest and Sleep.

A Weariness or Defatigation after Labor, makes that they are not only unfit
for the same labors which they have formerly undergone, and for undertaking of
others, but they feel also a troublesomness still remaining for a while, not
only when they do somewhat, but when they rest also, to wit, that sense of
stupidity in their Limbs too much agitated, which they call Formication,
Tingling, and a certain Distension as if they were dry or bound up, and
therefore they are hardly and with trouble, bent or extended, whence Galen has
elsewere called it, a Squallid Weariness. Or if they be Cacochymical they
perceive that painful sense of which we shall speak by and by in a Spontaneous
Weariness; this does more or less show it self, according as the whole body or
its parts have been strongly exercised, seeing the whole body is sometimes so
cast down by weariness, that even in rest or lying down the weariness does not
wholly cease, seeing in that too there is some attraction or extension of the
Members by the Muscles; whence they are forced by night variously to toss their
body, that they may find a fit situation for their body, in which they may
commodiously rest and sleep: but sometimes certain parts which endure the
labor do only feel it, as the Feet after a long Journey, the Arms after long
continued blows, the Hands not only after Stronger motions, but also as I have
often experienced, by long and much writing, as also I have observed that the
Mandible may be wearied by much speaking; and that the weaker motions also, of
the Eyelids, Lips, Eyes may be tired, even this does manifest, because those
that are Weary can scarce lift up their Eyelids, a sure sign of Sleepiness and
Weariness.

A Spontaneous Weariness, that is, not proceeding from Labor, but happening of
its own accord, such as Hippocrates teaches does threaten or forego Diseases,
does manifect it self in the Limbs, with a certain sense of pain, which either
offering it self in the superficies of the Skin, and the Flesh under it grows
worse by touching, expressing some sense in the parts, and that is, either of
an Ulcer, and it is called an Ulcerous, Elcodis weariness, or of an
Inflammation, and it is called an Inflamatory Phlegmonodis weariness; others
feel that painful sense deeper, and that either about the Joints as if they
were retcht, because they are hardly moved, and it is called a Tensive, Tonodis
weariness. Or about the bones themselves, as if they were bruised, and it is a
contunding weariness which Galen has named Ostocopum. And also more Species of
these troublesome senses meeting together, are joined with this weariness.

The Causes.
The Cause of every weakness of Moving is, either feebleness of Strength, or
too much intermission of Motion or Exercise, or Idleness; or exercise or
Labor, or plenty of Humors.

In Feebleness, Feebleness, the Cause of weakness of Motion
as all Functions are weakend, so especially voluntary Motion, because a
greater strength is required to exercise that; but this happens by reason of
the defect of Native heat, either succeeding in old folks by reason of Age,
who are therefore sluggish and presently tired, or proceeding from a Morbifick
cause, as after too great Evacuations; or issuing from the Disease by reason of
the continuance of it, or Acuteness, or Malignity, overthrowing the strength,
that weakness still remaining for some time even in those recovered of the
Disease, or always, when they have contracted, as they call it, old Age by the
Disease.

Those that Indulge too much to Idleness, Idleness, the Cause of Sluggishness.
either from a perverse Custom, or being hindered by the bulk or fullness of
Body, are less exercised, are Sluggish to undergo even the lightest labors and
are quickly wearied.

By Labor or exercise both of longer continuance, Labor, the Cause of weaness.
and stronger then is conconvenient for every Nature, the Body becomes Sluggish
and Weary. For, because nothing can last long that wants its rest by course, it
comes to pass, that those who are exercised longer then it is fitting, or who
take a long journey, and Labor all day, become wearied: so also they are tired,
if they be long about a strong and vehement work in doing of which, there is
need of strength or quickness. And that because the Muscles Nerves and Tendons
are retcht when the Limbs are bent, the joints extended and brought about, and
then also when they rest, the like sense and disposition remains, as was wont
to be in the Motion, and there is felt a Tensve or Stretching weariness. And
then because the Members grow hot by Motion, they become weary, for so there is
a certain Consumption of the viscid Humor, with which the Joints are besmeared
to exercise their Motion the easier, not a Colliquation of fat, as some would
have it, (of which the joints are wholly destitute) which Humor being wasted,
the Members as being made dry do bend more hardly, and they seem as it were to
be retcht. Also by reason of that heat raised in the Members by Motion, the
blood provoked to the outward Flesh and Skin, does cause there a sense of
Inflammation, or if it be acrid and thin it shows some sense of an Ulcer, or if
it be Cruder, it only oppresses and distendeth.

If the body be laden with plenty of Humors, A Plenitude and Cachochymy, are
the Cause of Spontanious weariness.
it is presently wearied, not only when it Labors, but also without exercise it is
troubled with the said Spontaneous weariness, which also does foretell that
Diseases, by and by will follow, from that Redundancy of Humors; thus in a
Plenitude of blood, there is felt a Tensive and Inflamamtory weariness; and in
a Cacochymy of Choleric, Sharp, Salt Humors, an Ulcerous weariness, in that of
crude cold Humors, a contunding and gravative weariness.

The Cure.
In the Cure of Defatigation, The Cure of Sloth and Weariness, caused after
labor; and of that Spontaneous, from what cause soever.
caused after Labors; we need not take much pains, seeing they return to
themselves of their own accord; but in that which comes of it self: because it
is a foreteller of Diseases, we ought to provide, not so much to correct the
Weariness, as that Diseases do not follow. Sluggishness, because it does weaken
the body, and makes it languid, is not to be suffered; that which arises from
the want of native heat, is scarce or never taken away; yet for the mending of
all which, we do use, either Restoration of strength, by Rest, Exercises,
course of Diet, Baths, or other Applications, or Evacuations.

Rest Cures Weariness after labors, the labor then ceasing, but chiefly being
caused by sleep; because in that the Members do rest better and that especially
if they be placed in that Situation and form, which is called a Mean, all the
Muscles being relaxt, so that they suffer no violence whether crooked or
straight, yet let every Member have its competent Figure, and also because by
Sleep, the Humors too much provoked by Motion, are discust, therefore weary
Bodies are better refresht by this means.

Exercise, does correct Sluggishness, sprung from Idleness; if they accustom to
exercise their Body with that, which is most delightful to them, or is
necessary for the sustaining of life, the weaker sort, or those who by reason
of a greater bulk of Body, cannot undergo buisness or exercise; by gentle means
which they may perform themselves, or with which they may be exercised by
others, as by Frictions, become fitter to undergo labors; it corrects also
weariness contracted by vehement labor, if it be more gentle then the former,
for so it does better reduce weary bodies to rest, then altogether rest, seeing
every sudden change is hurtful, as it is done by going, walking, after
running, and other stronger works, rather then by setting still. And thus Galen
says one weariness takes away another, if to that of yesterday, the like be
applied the next day; also a motion contrary to the former Motion, does refresh
wearied Bodies, as if one be wearied with climbing up a hill, by going down
again, he will sooner be eased: and again because gentler exercise does discuss
the Humors called forth by that which was more vehement, upon that account,
also it cures painful weariness; for which reason the Ancients did not only
dispose their Bodies by Friction before Labors, which for the most part they
underwent for healths sake, to relax the parts, and make the Excrements fluid,
which they called Praeparatory, but also after Labors they applied it at last,
to relax the parts more, and to purge away the Excremants attracted, and they
called it Apotherapia. And they made a gentle Friction by which the Body was
lightly heated, to loosen and relax, which they called soft and little, or a
stronger Friction in which the part was more heated and dilated, which they
called, hard and much; and they maintained that this did diminish, that did
bind: or a mean Friction which in quality and quantity and strength, was the
middle between these: to which operation of the Hands, they applied also
anointing with common Oil, or Oil of Savin, that it might be the better
accomplished instead of which we may take Oil of Chamomel or sweet Almonds.

A moist and hot Bath may make good the use of Friction, and in our Age it is
more usual, whether the greater part of the Body, or only the wearied parts be
dipped in it, as the Feet after running, which does wonderfully refresh weary
Bodies, resolving as Friction does, by an actual moderate heat, either more or
less increased, and provoking the humors, and relaxing the bound parts: which
is prepared of simple water in which sometimes are boiled Mallows, Chamomel,
Betony, Hyssope, Organy, Pennyroyal, Sage, Ground Pine, Mugwort, and other
things to increase strength, after the use of which, anointing is convenient,
as in Friction.

Other applications, as anointing of it self, administered without a Bath made
especially along the Backbone or the wearied parts may alone mitigate weariness
as also Friction, and a Bath, yet more lightly, when the lesser Friction is
made with anointing, and the actual heat in the Unguent is less: Dioscorides
teaches that Mugwort applied to the Feet with grease, does take away weariness
after a journey, and if a Traveller carry Mugwort with him, some teach he shall
not be wearied in his journey; some relate for certain, that the same comes to
pass if the Feet be anointed with Goose Grease.

Restaurative meat and drink does Egregiously refresh weary Bodies, and that
especially by giving of Wine, which recreates the weary and makes them active,
and the weaket sort also that are more sluggish to all operations by these
things do assume some strength.

Evacuation in a Spontaneous weariness proceeding from plenty of Humors, does
take it away, by carrying the Humors away; and does prevent, that the Bodies
fall not into Diseases, which shall be done by drawing of blood in a Plenitude,
and in Cachochymical Bodies, by Purges appropriate to the Redundancy of
Excrements.

CHAP. I. Of the Impotency of Motion.
The Kinds.
WE call that an Impotency of Motion, which also we may call an immobility,
when either we cannot at all, or not sufficiently perform those motions which
are made by our will only, the which seeing they are many and various in the
Body, so many and diverse kinds also of Immobility do offer themselves; of which
sort are, in the defect of stronger Motions, not to be able, or hardly able, to
raise one self up, or bend; to stand or go, to lay hold on, and handle things,
to take things firmly and break them with the Teeth; but in the defect of
weaker motions, not to be able to open or shut the mouth or the Lips, the Eyes
or Eyelids, or cast about the Eyes.

Which first of all do chiefly differ in this, that in such like Immobilities,
sometimes the member which ought to be moved, is Relaxed and Languid, and it is
called a Palsy, a Resolution, which is as it were a particular Apoplexy, when
that is done without an apparent hurt, but if it be with a hurt it is called
according as that is, sometimes a Fracture, sometimes a Luxation, sometimes a
Wound: but at other times the member is attracted or for a time Convulsed and
then it is called either a Spasm, or particular Convulsion to distinguish it
from a general Convulsion which we have called an Epilepsie and Catalepsie, of
which the Spasm here properly called is a part, seeing it is improperly also
called a Spasm which the Germans call Krampf, the Arabians Alcuzez, of which
notwithstanding the cause is far otherwise, than of a true Spasm, whence this
also is called Flatulent; but at other times, when the member is attracted it is
only named a Contraction, a certain persevering stiffness of some member, which
particularly if it be in the back is called a Gibbus; which names afterward we
shall use in this signification; but in these kinds of Immobility sometimes more
motions together do fail, sometimes particularly only some.

Sometime more of the forementioned Motions are taken away together, The
immobility of many parts together, or a general Palsy or resolution is a
species of general immobility.
in a Palsy therefore called General, the Members which ought to exercise
motions, being Palsied, Languid, and impotent, without pain, as how this comes
to pass in every motion, we shall show in particular Palsies: which sometimes
happens in the Members of both sides, and in their motions, which Species of a
Palsy is called Paraplegia; but sometimes this happens in one side only the
right or the left, which Species they call Hemiphlegia, in which nevertheless
this most commonly falls out, that either side of the trunk of the body being
palsied, and its motions abolisht, the motions of the rest of the parts placed
in the Face, remain sound and whole, sometimes some only receive damage, as the
motion of the Lips, but also to the forementioned Immobilities of voluntary
motions sometimes are joined some other Defects of the motions of Respiration
and Excretions, as shall be explained in their places: amongst which Speech
often fails. And it happens also that both the Voice and Breathing do suffer
hurt together that when they would speak out any thing clearly, or fetch breath
strongly, they are vehemently troubled with crying out, Laughing, Weeping,
Coughing, and in danger of Suffocation. To these sometimes is added, that they
cannot retain their water, and they cast forth other Excrements.

But also besides these Defects of Motions, the sense of Feeling is abolisht in
the palsied Members; yet sometimes that also remains, seeing a Palsy is a
symptom of Motion rather than of Sense.

But in others there is discovered rather a Stupidity with sense of Formication
or of Heat or Cold, as has been said in a Stupidity. In a peculiar Palsy but
very frequent in our times which follows the Colic pains, besides a
resolution of certain parts, which oftentimes is wont to begin and continue
with a trembling of the Member, a grievous and cruel pain does moreover possess
the plasied Members: which Palsy is wont for the most part to turn to
Convulsions, and kill the Patient.

Some would have it, that all the Voluntary Motions may be abolisht together, A
Spasm or particular Convulsion is a Species of general immobility.
and all the Members may be convelled, or rather be rigid, and as it were
congealed, in the said Spasm, as it is in an Epilepsie and Catalepsie, so that
it shall differ from them, especially from a Catalepsie, no otherwise, than that
here, because the senses remain otherwise than in them, they feel cruel pains
in their Members; which Disease Celsus has called a Tetanos or Rigor, A
Tetanus or Rigor is a species of Spasm
and Galen has reckoned it amongst the peracute Diseases, because it kills a
man in four days space, and he has declared that it is very rare, seeing the
cause which causes it must needs be great as he says, which can breed such
grievous pains, that it does rather cause a true Epilepsie, or Catalepsie.

Yet it comes to pass more frequently that a Spasm does not invade at once all
parts, but only some, which otherwise as shall be said, it is wont to possess
singly, and it is perceived in the Back and Joints, and some parts of the Face,
sometimes also for the same reason as a Palsy, does by slackning, so this by
contraction, does prejudice, the Speech, and Voice; which particular
Convulsion, certainly manifesting themselves in many places, are the
Foretellers, and as it were the Preface, and sometimes the beginnings of a
general Convulsion or Epilepsie by and by to follow, but sometimes are the
relics remaining after a Paroxysm of an Epilepsie that went before, which is
now cast off, as has been said in an Epilepsie. And we have seen also in a
certain man a certain Spasm of the Members that has lasted twenty years,
sometimes abating a little, sometimes contracting the Back, Feet, Arms, and
moreover with a pain running up and down, wonderfully afflicting him; so that
at the least touch of any thing he would cry out, and the pain beginning in
that place, and discovering it self by a yellow speck which presently grew, now
it runs like an Air into the ends of his fingers, by and by into the tip of his
Nose, and other outward parts, at the touch of the which he cried out: and also
that Spasm which they call Flatulent is oftentimes wont to molest many parts at
once, A flatulent Spasm.
and to be troublesome to certain men by Fits, which does not so much differ
from a true Spasm, both in the cause, and danger.

Sometimes also Voluntary motions may fail apart, An immobility of private parts
or a particular Palsy, Spasm, Contraction, is an impotency to exert or bend
the body.
their parts being slackned, or convulsed, or contracted, or otherwise hurt, as
being now about to explain these in particulars: by what means it may come to
pass, we shall reckon up diverse particular kinds of impotency of motion.

Sometimes a Raising up or Bending of the body cannot be performed, the back
being palsied which scarce happens to these motions of the back apart, but also
with other motions taken away too, as has been said in a general Palfie: from
this Spasm in the back it sometimes happens that it is convulsed, as the senses
being entire, we have sometimes seen that by this means it has a long time
bent one upwards from the bed, and again relaxing him smite the bed: the which
also may happen from a Contraction without a Spasm, first of all in general,
that it cannot be bent, and the body remain rigid and stretched in that called
a Tetanus or Rigor (which name although they apply it only to the Back
Convulsed, A Tetanus Epistotonos Opistothonos are a species of contraction.
yet we also may apply it to that, if it proceed from a Contraction) or that it
cannot be erected, and they go with a crooked body, and it inclines either to
the foreparts in that called an Epistotonos or to the hinder parts in an
Opisthotonos, or to either side. Also some part only of the Back being
contracted its motion is somwhere stopped, either some part of the Back bunching
forth backwards in that called a Gibbus, A Gibbus is a Species of Contraction.
or toward the sides, or which seldomer happens it being bent forwards, and
that in every one more or less, and a greater or lesser portion of it being
carried thither; whence they cannot erect the Body and they show it short,
crooked, with an uncomly figure of the breast, the breast especially hanging
out very much, and the Back pressed in, and the Head inclining backwards if the
Back be crookt to the foreparts, but the Back appears immovable also by
another means, it loosing its motion by a Contusion or Wound.

Going and Standing, Holding things, and Handling them, sometimes cannot be
deformed; and that oftentimes, the Thighs, Arms being palsied, but chiefly the
Hands, Feet, and their Fingers and Toes their motions being taken away apart,
or many together, as has been showed in a general Palsy; and then one part,
or more so affected do languish, and hang, and cannot be moved but by the
benefit of a sound part, and because they are idle, they are found cold and
moist by the touch; and sometimes are insensible or stupid, after diverse manners
as has been said formerly; also some motions of them are sometimes hindered by
a Spasm and certain parts causing them, either more or fewer are troubled with
it, not only with that which is called Flatulent which does so often cramp with
the highest torment the Toes of the Feet and sometimes also other parts, but
also certain rudiments of a true Spasm do create trouble in these places, for
the same reason as a Flatulent one does, such a one as we have said in the
causes of an Epilepfie has sometimes manifested it self upon the taking of a
violent Medicine; and also the motions that are performby the Joints do cease,
if these parts are contracted, which if it be done singly is wont to happen to
some one only: whence they appear Crooked, Bowed, or Stiff; which is a
permanent and frequent evil in the Feet and Hands and their Fingers and Toes,
in those whom the common people call cramped, The Contraction of those which
the Germans call Contrakt is a Species of impotency to go or lay hold of a
thing.
although when these parts are palsied and pendulous about the Wrist, they are
bound up and contracted in the Fingers, and Atrophy moreover of the Hands
supervening especially betwixt the Thumb and Forefinger, the flesh being wasted
there, and a conspicuous hollowness appearing, an evil most commonly remaining
after Colic pains: this happens also with another fault of the forementioned
parts in form and situation, that they cannot be moved, when either being
abreviated, or otherwise crooked, bent or hurt in their length, or about the
Joints, they are found to have changed their situation, and that with pain of
the place especially whiles they endeavor to move their Limbs, there being
joined sometimes a heat with a tumor and sometimes a hollowness appearing in one
part, especially about the Joints, they and a certain proturberancy in the
opposite place to it, as we shall show in the causes does befall broken and
luxated bones, where also we shall explain how an Immobility of these parts does
happen with a Wound and other manifest Hurts.

Sometimes they cannot take things firmly and divide them with their Teeth when
the inward Cavity of the mouth can no ways be shut, An Impotency to Bite and
Eat.
but remains open with the Teeth drawn asunder and the Mandible hanging down;
and that comes to pass without pain that being palsied which seldom happens
particularly to that, much less in a general Palsy; or with pain and trouble
that being palsied, the mouth standing right or crooked if this come to pass
only in one side, sometimes there is some other eminent hurt, or a solution of
Continuity. But at other times the Mandible cannot be opend, and it is exactly
bound up, or only in one side, with the Teeth joynd together, neither does it
suffer them to take in meat, or any thing else, and it is either a Spasm called
by a peculiar name Trismos if it befall this part, Trismos a Species of Spasm.
or some other Contraction: sometimes the Teeth being set on edg by this
trouble, they are hindered in chewing of meats.

Sometimes they cannot shut or open their Mouth, An Impotency to open and shut
the mouth.
or decently join and disjoyn their Lips, which chiefly prejudiceth Sucking and
Supping; and then the Lips either are wanting or they hang down being palsied
chiefly in a general Palsy, seldom in a particular Palsy only of this part,
but most commonly it happens in the Palsy only of one side that this motion
might not altogether perish, seeing both the right and left part of the mouth
joined together, makes one month, one side of which being hurt, the other
remaining moveable does draw the immovable side, and then the Lips with the
Cheeks hang down on one side only. As also if they be convelled or contracted
on one side, they also are drawn thither upwards. A wreathing of the mouth, is
a species of Spasm.
And because then in both sorts, one part of the mouth hanging downwards or
drawn upwards, the mouth is rendered Oblique and Wreathed as it is wont to
appear in those that cry, whether it be from a Resolution or Convulsion or
Contraction, they have called it, a wreathing of the mouth. But if the Lips
with the Cheeks are drawn together on both sides in a Spasm, then the Mouth is
wont to be seen drawn transverse, as in men Laughing, or in Dogs when they gape
being angered, The Dog-like Spasm, a species of Spasm.
and they call it a Doglike Spasm; as indeed Laughing also and Crying are kinds
of a certain particular Spasm or Cramp, seeing they do involuntarily so distort
the mouth, as by and by shall be said in the Causes.

Sometimes also they cannot cover and hide their Eyes with their Eyelids, An
Impotency to open and shut the Eyes.
and the Eye remains bare and open, and is more exposed to external injuries,
which evil some call Gessa and whom this befalls, they rest not commodiously in
sleep, which is best acted with the Eyes shut, Seeing being so hindered; which
discommodity may also come to pass by a Palsy, for although it were palsied,
nevertheless it would remain collected in the upper part of the Eye (for so the
Eyelid ought naturally to be when it is not drawn, whence also in the dead
their Eyes remain open) but this yet scarce happens, unless the Palsy be
altogether general, as in the Apoplectical their Eyes continue open: but as
this sometimes happens from a Tumor which then also appears too, so frequently
that the Eyebrow and Eyelids, when the Cheeks palsied do hang downwards, do
somewhat appear depending on the outer side also. But if the Eye cannot at all
be opend, then the Eyelids drawn over the Eye and gathered together do hinder
the sight, but if they be only lightly drawn asunder then they are said to wink
with their Eyes, the which notwithstanding in some does more rightly direct
their sight than hinder it; this also scarce happens from a Spasm that the Eye
is wholly covered (unless this fall out with an impediment of the motion of the
Eye, as shall be said by and by) as it is that the Eyebrow is somewhat drawn down
with the Cheeks; yet sometimes that also comes to pass from some private hurt or
Tumor of it, which sometimes meeting in the Eyelid, or Eye, bring such an
Impediment, as shall be said there: in sleep they wink naturally.

The rolling or moving of the Eye is scarce abolished, An Impotency to roll the
Eyes.
unless in an Apoplexy, with which those that are taken have their Eyes fixed,
and always with the same aspect, as has been said there, and in Convulsions
also they appear Convelled, Contorted, and as they call it Broken.

Yet sometimes also a certain short Spasm or Cramp as it does convell the other
Members, so the Eyes also with a certain pain, not suffering them so long to be
rolled, as neither the Eyelids to be opened.

The which befalls some rouzed out of a deep sleep, that whiles they endeavor to
open and move their Eyes, seeing they are bound up as it were with a Spasm, yet
they cannot do it last, but with Labor and Pain.

Sometimes also Squinting is caused, Squinting a sort of Contraction.
rather by a Contraction from the birth than by a Convulsion, the Eye being
somewhat perverted, and the Eye a little turned hither and thither, looking upon
one not straight but obliquely, it rather gives a stern Aspect than hinders the
Sight, seeing the apple is scarce carried so far as to be hid by the Eyelids.

The Causes.
Every Cause of the kinds of voluntary motions hurt, both of the stronger and
weaker (which we call impotencies) is either in the Organ sending, or
communicating the power of moving not in the principal the brain; for then also
the internal senses should cease together with motion, as has been said in
their hurts, which comes not to pass here, but it is in a Nerve or the
Instrument which moves, a Muscle, or in the part which is moved, as we shall
now explain.

The Nerves (under which name we comprehend both the Spinal marrow and Nerves)
seeing they are portions of the brain, The cause of a Palsy in the Nerves.
every where full of animal spirit, which by conferring their proper substance
on the parts with the spirit, do communicate the power of moving and feeling;
if they be so hurt, that they can no more do that, than one or more Muscles
into which they are inserted, loosing that power of moving, and no more
attracting the member which it ought to move, there follows a resolution of it,
or Palsy, that is, it becomes languid and unfit for motion, the sound part
then, as they say drawing the sick: and if the hurt be vehement the sense of
Feeling also is taken away too, not only in the Muscle, but in the Skin drawn
over it, which receives sensory Nerves from the same Nerve that is hurt. Or if
the hurt be not so great, because greater force is required to exercise Motion,
then to confer the sense of Feeling, this sense may subsist either whole, or
impaired, yet the Motion being taken away: as also if another cause moreover be
joined there may also be felt a pain or trouble too, in the part (although it
be immovable or hardly moved) as we shall now describe, both what Nerve, and
by what Disease affected, does produce the diverse Species of Palsies.

This hurt of the spinal marrow often happens, seeing it is very much exposed
to external injuries, and because it lies under the Brain, fit to receive its
excrements; which if it be affected in the beginning of its passage made by the
Brain through the Backbone, next to the Brain, by depriving all the Nerves,
which spring from that, of the Animal spirit, it makes a general Palsy, in
which all Voluntary Motions cease, as well the stronger of the Body, as the
weaker of the parts of the Face. And besides these, Breathing, the Voice, and
Speech, Swallowing also, and some Motions of Excretions do suffer some hurt, as
has been said, if the hurt be near to the Brain and great: because the
Conjugations of the Nerves do issue forth there from the beginning of the
spinal Marrow, and then also are hurt, as shall be said by and by; but if in
the rest of the progress of it, there happen any such hurt to the Back, then by
taking away that faculty from those Nerves only, which are under it, it makes
those Members Palsied, into which they are inserted; by whose hurts it is
easily known, where the cause lurkes in the spinal Marrow; which in what place
soever it is, if the hurt be in both sides, the cause is in both, if only in
one (as the spinal Marrow is perceived to be truly distinguished) the Cause
only in that side, makes a Palsy, and by so much the more general, by how much
that is affected more toward the Original.

If paires of Nerves proceeding from the Spinal marrow be hurt, then according
as a general Nerve communicating Nerves to many parts, or a special one
communicating to some only, is seized with the Disease, more, or one part
suffers a resolution; by which also we shall easily find out, what Nerves are
affected, if we know which are communicated to every part: and hence many
Particular resolutions may be made in the Members, which have received Nerves
from the paires of the spinal marrow, yet not in all, because the Muscles
moving the Breast especially the Midrife, and those of the Belly also being
compeld by a necessity of breathing, especially seeing breathing is caused also
by the help of natural Motion do nevertheless perform their office in the
palsied, in respiration and casting forth of Excrements; hither also makes
somewhat, that the Midrif does receive Nerves not only from the spinal marrow,
but also from the conjugations of Nerves as shall be said, as we shall declare
things further in the defect of Respiration; besides which parts, the rest
which are moved by the Muscles, may suffer a resolution.

The Contractions of Nerves derived from the Brain that do communicate Motion,
if they suffer a Disease, then that part is hurt, to which the Nerve hurt is
peculiar, and by the Palsy of the part, the Nerve affected is known; as if
that called the second Conjugation of Nerves derived to the Muscles of the Eye
be affected, there is a Palsy of the Eye, the which nevertheless can scarce be
done in this Nerve unless the neighboring Brain be hurt, as it comes to pass
in an Apoplexy, but as more commonly the Conjugation of Nerves carried to the
Face, Lips, Ey-lids and temporal Muscle, being affected, there is a resolution
of the Lips and Ey-lids, but seldom of the lower Jaw; seeing the Temporal
Muscle does receive more Nerves: and if the Nerve of the Tongue, called the
third Conjugation does suffer, the Tongue being Palsied, the Speech suffers a
blemish and then commonly by reason of its communication with the Auditory
Nerve, if the hurt be so great that they become wholly mute, they are Deaf
also: The same may happen in that conjugation of Nerves, which they call the
sixth and seventh, which falling from the Brain, and joined into one descending
Nerve, and communicating the sense of Feeling to many Interior parts, and
giving also Motion to the Muscles of the Laryux, Tongue, Jaws, Midrife; also to
the Muscles of the Bladder, Fundament, if it be hurt about the original or
somwhere also in its Progress, it breeds Palsies of the parts into which it is
inserted, if they be moveable, in others a certain sense of Stupidity, and
hence if the recurrent Nerve be affected, there is a defect of the Voice and
Speech, if the Nerves which go to the Muscles of the Jaws be hurt, seeing
swollowing is caused by them, and not by the Fibers of the Oesophagus, as they
have thought, there follows a difficulty of swallowing, and also there comes
some Impediment in Breathing, if the Nerves which go to the Midrife be hurt,
and that especially in violent sending forth the Breath, when they would utter
a great Voice, or are compeld to Cough, for then not being able to express it,
they come into some danger of Suffocation; because otherwise for the perfecting
of moderate breathing, the Midrife which causes it, seeing it does receive also
from the Spinal marrow, as has been said, it can nevertheless in some sort
perform its office, although these Nerves be hurt; in which hurts of Motions,
an offense of the sense of Feeling being joined, that sense of heat and
tingling does so much molest the sick about the Stomach, especially where the
Nerves are greater, and about other internal parts, as has been said; but if
there be a certain general hurt of the same Conjugation; because then both the
Sphincters of the bladder and Anus, and the rest of its Muscles are Palsied, an
involuntary Pissing moreover, and a relaxation of the Fundament, is coupled
with the other Species of a Palsy, as we shall explain all these more at large
in the defect of breathing, and of Excretions, and in the difficulty of
swallowing.

But the Disease with which the spinal Marrow or Nerve is possessed, The Diseases
of the Nerves, from whence a Palsy is.
is that, which deprives it of the Animal spirit, which it has need of to
exercise its Function; for being so affected, it can neither any more
communicate to a Muscle the power of moving, nor to the sensible parts the
power of Feeling, if the Nerve be wholly destitute of that, and the remaining
part of it from the place affected even to the part, into which it is inserted,
becomes unprofitable. As it comes to pass, if its continuity with the part be
broken, for then this passage is interrupted: or if the Nerves be so
straightened, that the Animal spirit, which requires a free passage through them,
can no longer pass through them, or fill them up, or not sufficiently; seeing,
though it be most thin and subtle, and does Illustrate the Nerves like the
rays of the Sun, yet nevertheless it may be hinderd, as the Sun Beams also
may: as this happens if it be so pressed in any part of it, that its substance
does wholly sink down, or if its substance be so condensed that also by this
means the passage for the spirit is intercepted. And also the same may fall out,
if some part of the Nerve do so labor of a distemper, that it can no ways
perform its Function; as how these Diseases, viz. A Solution of Continuity, a
Straitness of the Nerves, a Condensation and simple distemper, or with an
Afflux of Humor, and Repletion, or with a preternatural Tumor, or some fault of
the Organ do proceed from Internal or External Causes, to wit a Phlegmatic
humor, or Bloody. or from a distemper, or some hurt by Compression, Ligatures,
of from a wound, or some other blow, we will now expain.

As it has been explained in the Causes of an Apoplexy, that an Apoplexy which
is a Palsy of the whole Body, is generated from Phlegm or a Watery, Serous,
Cold, moist Excrement of the Brain, bedewing the brain or pressing the original
of all the Nerves, so if this happen in the Nerves a Palsy is generated; for
such a humor, heaped up plentifully in the Head, for the causes there assigned,
and cast off from the Brain in an Apoplexy which it has first produced, or
without that, falling down from the Head, not though the substance of the
Spinal Marrow, or Nerves, but either discending through the Cavity of the
Vertebraes of the Back, which does contain the Spinal Marrow, and there
stopping about the beginning or progress of it, or sliding down further through
the passages, which the paires of Nerves proceeding from the Spinal Marrow do
every where run through in the Body without any Connection, or falling from the
Head and following the like passages of the Conjugations or pares of Nerves and
somwhere sticking about the Nerves, in what place soever this happen, whether
about the Spinal Marrow, or about the paires or Conjugations of Nerves, by
compressing or bedewing them, as if this come to pass in the Brain it
procreates an Apoplexy, so if it happen in the foresaid places it produces a
Palsy, of more or fewer parts, according as a general or particular Nerve is
affected: whenas if plenty of Humor flow thither, in those narrow places
compressing the Nerves with its weight, it may also intercept the passage of
the Animal spirit, as has been said formerly, and by so much the longer, if
being detained there by a long stop, it become thicker and Mucous; but
principally because by its moisture it continually bedewing, filling, and
cooling the substance of the Nerves, it destroies their proper temper in that
place, and hinders that they cannot be filled with the Animal spirit, nor enjoy
it: whence also by reason of the interposition of this unprofitable part of the
Nerve affected, the other part of the Nerve which is carried to the parts,
being also made unsit to exercise its Function, there must needs follow, if the
hurt be great, a perfect resolution of the parts unto which these Nerves are
communicated, and that by so much the more lasting and pertinatious, by how
much the hurt of the Nerve is greater, which we have found by dissection to be
the true cause of a Phlegmatic Palsy, the spinal Marrow being swelled up with
a watery Humor, that there is no need to fancy here any obstruction in the
Nerves which are solid, or made up of Filaments; nor any Cavity which may admit
that thick humor, as some do write. Or if indeed they do grant this moistning
of the Nerves: yet to assert that that comes to pass by this means, because the
Nerves being made longer an slacker, they become unfit for motion; because as
has been formerly said, the Nerves do no ways attract the part; and far less
to contend, that a Palsy is from the same Phlegm as obstructing the Nerves, for
filling of them, so it must needs be that Convulsions do ensue, which we call
Contractions, and for that cause to assign the same Cure to them both.

But also such an excrementitious humor from elsewhere than from the Brain,
Other humors possessing the Nerves are the cause of a P^lsie and Spasm.
being carried to the Nerves of certain parts, or heaped up there, does induce
a Palsy proper to certain parts; which oftentimes also mixed with other acrid
and choleric humors, or otherwise putrefying, not only by bedewing but also by
irritating the Nerves does cause pains offering themselves with the resolution
of the part and sometimes ending in Convulsions as this has been said in
Convulsions; such a kind of Palsy as has be en explained in the kinds, as is
wont also to happen in Colic pains, with torments of the Limbs, Heat,
Tingling, and other troubles.

The same might come to pass from Blood out of the Vessels falling into these
Cavities of the Nerves and retained there a long time; but seeing that does
presently putrify it does sooner breed an Inflammation, as also if it
insinuate it self into the substance of the Nerves, whence other accidents do
follow rather than those of a Palsy: but in the Veins if from a fullness, or
non-natural situation of a Member (as if the Arm be held a long while lift up
on high) the blood be carried into one place more plentifully, because then in
some sort it presses a neighboring Nerve, seeing the Nerves are always wont
to follow the course of the Veins, it rather causes a light Numness or
Tingling, than any Disease or long continued Palsy; the blood easily going
back again, and not so stopping, but as in the brain it is abundantly powered
forth into its ventricles, it may may cause an Apoplexy as has been said there.

Also a streightening may be caused from a hard Tumor of a Nerve, A Tumor of a
Nerve is the cause of a Palsy.
as from a Callus or a Skar after a Wound, or bruise growing in the Nerve, or
from a bunching out arising from the proper clammy Nutriment of a Nerve which
does stop its animal spirit; but from an Oedema, which also they hold to be the
cause of it, that cannot be done, unless some one would call it Irrigation and
swellings of the Nerves, as has been formerly said, an Oedema; the same also
may happen from the Tumors of other parts pressing a Neighbooring Nerve.

By the fault of conformation or shaping from the birth, The fault of
conformation in a Nerve is the cause of a Palsy.
the Nerves being not rightly formed or otherwise carried, the same also may
come to pass, which often happens in the Nerve of the Tongue as we shall by and
by explain in the defect of Speech, that they are born Dumb and Deaf, as has
been said in the hurt of Hearing.

From a Cold Distemper, or too much cooling (as we shall by and by explain in
the Muscles) if not only the Muscles but also the Nerves themselves with the
Muscle into which they are inserted, A cold distemper of a Nerve is the cause
of a Palsy.
or without that, in their course out of the Muscle, seeing Cold is a very
great enemy to them, be so affected, that they are either bound up and
condensed by Cold, whence the animal spirit has no longer a free passage, or
be so hurt, that their function perishes, then also there follows a Palsy of
those parts whose Nerves are affected.

Trallian teaches that there is a Palsy caused from dryness and heat, The
Dryness of a Nerve the cause of a Palsy.
which certainly must needs sall out so, if it be such as may harden the Nerve
that the spirit can pass through it; as the same may come to pass from the
Causes to be explained in the exiccation of the Muscles.

A vehement and lasting pression of a Member, The Compression of a Nerve is the
cause of a Palsy.
caused by a heavy burden, or some other force, especially in that place where
the Nerves are greater or lie bare under the skin, first of all the spirits
being repulsed, hindered, and running up and down, induces the sense of
Tingling in a stupidity, by and by an abolition of motion, and at length a
perfect stupidity in the part, into which the compressed Nerve is inserted;
this often comes to pass when at rest, especially in the time of sleep one part
lying long upon another, as the body on the Arm, one Foot on the other, and
pressing the same it renders the part immovable and insensible and as they
call it asleep: but if that this compression be suddenly caused with a strong
blow of a Nerve, then there is only felt some stupidity yet mixed with pain and
a sense of Tingling; as this is often wont to fall out by chance in the
stricking of the Elbow there where the Nerve lies almost bare; and in the
Ring-finger and little finger.

In vehement Ligatures of the Members, chiefly if a Nerve be contained in the
bandage, the motion and sense of Feeling of the part do cease, as also the
recurrent Nerves being bound we shall show that the Voice does perish, by and by
in the defect of Speech.

The Vertebraes being luxated and the Bones of other Joints, if the neighboring
Nerves be there pressed, a Palsy follows; the which yet can scarce be done,
because they easily give way, as also other discommodities do ensue, as in the
luxations of the Vertebrae of the Neck, Impediments of Breathing and
Swallowing, as we shall explain in their hurts; but in the other Vertebrae of
the back, unless there be so great a luxation as does vehemently press the
spinal Marrow, there is no Palsy caused; as we see some Gibbus in whom many
Vertebrae luxated do cause a crookedness of the Back, which the marrow that is
within it does follow without a compression, that they are yet no ways
Palsied; unless by chance one or two Vertebrae being vehemently forced forth,
making an acute Angle in the Back, do press it, the which scarce can be, by
reason of the firmness of the Back.

A Nerve being cut off by a Wound; The hurt of a Nerve is the cause of a Palsy.
because then this continuation with the part is wholly taken away, the Member
becomes Palsied and Insensible also, unless it receive sense from other Nerves
that are yet unhurt; the which also a Contusion of it does often cause, the
Nerve being so hurt and filled with blood, that it becomes unprofitable; whence
the spinal Marrow being so affected by a fall there oftentimes follows a
general Palsy, but at other times the Nerves being Contused elsewhere, a
particular Resolution, oftentimes also after a Contusion, a Callus being left
being left behind it, that happens as has been said.

Also from the Nerves affected, Convulsions, The cause of a particular Spasm is
in the Nerves.
or particular Crampings of the Members may be caused, not being filled with
phlegm (as they would have it, and have written that from the same humor sliding
into the Nerves diverse Diseases may be produced, and that both a Palsy and
Spasm may be caused) but being irritated and molested from the same causes as
has been explained in an Epilepsie, yet not being so grievosly hurt, as to
draw the Brain into consent, for a general Convulsion or Epilepsie would be
caused, as this sometimes follows this particular Spasm, especially if the
greater Nerves be affected, and the hurt be grievous: in which particular Spasm
also, as in a Palsy according as more general or private Nerves are affected,
as there happens a Palsy so here a Convulsion of more or fewer parts; and the
parts of the Back being affected, it manifests its self here in the inordinate
Motions of the Back, Arms and Hands; which does either very much Convel and
Attract these Members, in that called a true Spasm of them, or only lightly
draws the Fingers, Hands, Arms, or other Members and relaxeth them again, in
a Convulsive Palpitation, therefore so called because it threatens true
Convulsions. Also the Conjugations or pares of Nerves being molested, it often
causes that diseased crookedness and distorsion of the Mouth which they call a
Dog-like Spasm, or also that light Species of a Spasm, which happens
unvoluntarily to those that Cry and Laugh, and that from a too great affection
of the Mind, the Spirits being poured forth thither with the Tears and forcing
the Nerves; as how this comes to pass, and that from this cause, only more
grievous Convulsions do arise, has been explained in the causes of an
Epilepsie, and Catalepsie; although these also generated from other things do
produce not only that Spasm raised in the Mouth by the affections of the Mind,
and ceasing by and by, as they remit, but also a lasting and dangerous one;
such as that Sardonius Laughter was, described by Cicero, that killed folks;
the which also being Supervenient in a general Convulsion together with other
things, is accounted for the worst sign, and oftentimes when the Paroxysm is
off, it remains still, by reason of an Alienation of the Mind as was said in an
Epilepsie: and also this Particular Convulsion presents it self not only in the
forementioned hurts of Motions, but also in others, and in the Motions of
Breathing and Excrements, if the Nerves destined for them, be affected; amongst
which that difficulty of swallowing which the Chyrurgions call the Stomach
Spasm, and which they so much fear in wounded People, is wont to be very
frequent: as these shall be explained more rightly in their proper places.

A Muscle, seeing it is the instrument of voluntary Motion, In the Muscles or
their Tendons, is the cause of a Palsy, a windy Spasm and other Species of
Immobility.
which moves the Member, if it be so affected, that it can no more attract the
Member, then there is a resolution or Palsy or if its Disease be such, that
the Member be drawn against our will, then there follows not a Convulsion of it
properly called, which we have said was only caused by reason of the Nerves,
but either a Convulsion improperly called, viz. a Flatulent Cramp, or that
called by us a lasting and strong contraction of the Member, which certainly a
Nerve, so small a chord, if it be compared with so heavy a Member, cannot
effect, but so may a Tendon of a Muscle that is so strong. But after this
manner the Muscles almost proper to every part are hurt, whence also only
Particular resolutions or contractions of those parts do ensue, or of one part
only, if its Particular Muscle be hurt, or of more, if one Muscle send Tendons
to many parts, yet sometimes also many Muscles being affected together, also
these more general hurts of the parts which they move, do follow; the which may
come to pass by reason of the neerness of the Muscles, and because many being
collected together, in certain places they are as it were included in one
Membrane, as shall be said; which hurts, whether of one or more Muscles they
depend on these causes; to wit, if they be possessed with a Humor or Wind, or
suffer a Preternatural Tumor, or are wasted being dried up, or suffer a cold
distemper, or are hurt some other way, or have contracted an Organical fault.

From a Humor filling up the Muscles, or Besmearing them, A Phlegmatic humor
possessing the Tendons, is the cause of a Palsy.
or Insinuating it self into their spaces, a Palsy is seldom engendered, as it
is frequently if it possess the Nerves, as has been said formerly. For if a
Phlegmatic, serous, or Excrementitious Humor flow down to the Bodies of the
Muscles, or be heaped up there, then it breeds pains, and for that causes that
the Member can scearcely be moved, rather then a languishing or insensibility
of it, as we shall explain in pains arising from Desluxions; the which also if
Blood be there poured out of the Vessels, happens together with an Inflammation
of the part; yet sometimes it comes to pass, that a watery humor, a long time
washing and bedewing the Tendons of the Muscles, they being too much relaxt,
and lengthend, there follows a Palsy of that part, which they ought to
attract. Which for the most part happens only in those places, where many
Tendons are carried in a fleshless and narrow place, about the bending of the
Joints, being bound and joined together with Ligaments as it were with Rings,
as in the Region of the Wrist and instep, where sometimes a Humor retained by
reason of the narrowness of the place, and many spaces of many small bones,
combined together in the Wrist and afterwrist, Ankle and Instep, and moisting
and relaxing the Tendons it causes that the Hands or Feet do continue Palsied
in some all their life time: and it ceasing in other parts, only a Palsy is
left in these, even when the Humor is wasted, the Tendons remaining longer then
is fit; whence all their life time, they carry their Hands and Feet hanging,
and when they endeavor to lift up, or lay holdon any thing because
nevertheless they can move their Fingers or go, yet because they cannot do that
by benefit of the Muscles, they are wont to cast them up on high, by the
inpulse of the Arm or Thigh; in whom also for the most part appears an eminency
as it were a certain Tumor in the superficies of the Wrist, arising by reason
of Extenuation which is wont to be its companion, the bones bunching forth
there, or by reason of a Callus or Node, which often grows here, for the causes
afterward to be mentioned; the which our Germans call Contracted, when
notwithstanding they are Palsied; and that perhaps because, as has been said
formerly, with a Resolution of them caused about the Wrist, there is sometimes
also joined a Contraction of the Fingers: which comes to pass, because in the
Hands laboring also of an Atrophy by reason of the compression of the Veins,
which about the streits of the Wrist are pressed by a Tumor, and are cooled in
those bloodless parts, so that for those causes there is not sufficient passage
for the Blood the Ligaments and Tendons also being wasted and dried do cause,
that those Joints of the Fingers be at length stopped, but not the Joints by
which the Hand is moved, which were already Palsied before: and thus in the
same seat are found, parts Palsied, Contracted, and wasted.

From the same Phlegmatic or Watery, or Excrementitious Humor, so filling up the
Body of the Muscle or Tendons, that being distended and made shorter, it
attracts the part into which it is inserted, it seems that a Contraction also
may be caused. But when an Humor fallen down to the Muscles possesses their
spaces, by which they are joined together; a pain rather does follow, and upon
that account that difficulty of moving the Member than Contraction of the part,
and if it bedew the Tendons or Nerves, a Palfie rather enfues.

After the same manner from Wind breathing in, Wind in the spaces the Muscles
is the cause of a flatulent Spasm.
not into the bodies of the Muscles, but those Spaces which the Muscles make
being joined together, or knit together by neighboring parts, and by its plenty
distending one Muscle or more, so that being made shorter, they attract the
part for a while, violently to themselves, does that Cramp which therefore they
call Flatulent, arise; as many have delivered which most strong extension of
the member yet can scarce be caused from Wind only, as we shall show that called
a Flatulent Palpitation does frequently arise from thence, unless some other
cause over and above be joined, of which we shall speak by and by in the too
great attraction of the Muscles which as it happens oftentimes in diverse parts
of the body, so most commonly in the Toes of the Feet, the fleshy Muscles of
the Calfe being then affected with the highest pain by reason of their
distention, and protuberancy.

But this Flatulent Spasm is caused by plenty of Winds, the Largeness of the
passages, or foresaid Spaces betwixt the Muscles especially helping, being fit
for the receiving of Wind; which happens to some either by Nature, the which
also are more obnoxious to this evil. Or if it falls out from a vehement motion
of the Muscles, for so, being as it were pulled from one another and from the
neighboring parts, the Spaces which come between them, by degrees become wider,
especially if such motions be often repeated, into which afterward Wind does
easily slide in and for a light cause, especially whenas the Muscles being very
much contracted in motion, does make way for it, as shall be said by and by; as
in Hides Excoriated we easily know that such like Wind does lie betwixt the
Membranes and the Flesh by the Bubbles appearing there.

A hard preternatural Tumor growing in a Muscle as sometimes it causes that
they keep the Members attracted to it, A Tumor in a Muscle or Tendon is the
cause of the said contraction of the Member.
so sometimes bound up: as a Schirrus or Node gendred from the excrements in
the Muscles, and especially about the Tendons where many meet in the Region of
the Joints, as has been said formerly of the Wrist, and I have seen sometimes
come to pass in the Knee, the Foot being then so drawn upwards, that the Heel
was next to the Tail. Also a Callus in a Muscle or a Tendon being left after a
Wound, by which they were wounded yet not wholly cut in two, and contracting
the Lips of the Wound, because then it shortens the body or tail of the Muscle,
it causes that part into which it is inserted, is more or less bound up; the
which also I have seen come to pass in a hurt of the temporal Muscle, and the
Mouth then was so drawn up, that it would scarce admit the most liquid meats.

The Muscles or their Tendons being dried, An Exiccation of the Muscles on
their Tendons is the cause of the Contraction of the Members.
and with them sometimes the Nerves inserted into them being so far wrinkled and
bound up, they are become as it were Hardened and Callus, that they cannot be
extended or bent; then in what situation they remain firm, in the same also
they keep the Member which they are implanted, fixed and immovable, and more or
less Contracted; as oftimes we see by reason of Old Age or of too much and long
continued labor, some parts to become Stiff and diversely crooked, and those
especially which have been much and long exercised with too much working: and
that they go with a Crooked Back, and cannot raise themselves up straight, who
have a long while carried heavy Burdens, and that they have Crooked Fingers and
Hands, who have too much used their Help, or that Old Folks do labor of a
Tetanus, or other species of Contractions: the which may come to pass not
always by reason of the Joints as shall be said afterward, but also from the
foresaid Exiccation of the Muscles, their Humor being then Wasted by the
forementioned causes, so that being consumed by Leanness (the which appears
manifestly in the Muscles of their Limbs, especially in the greater even
outwardly) their bodies and Tendons seem to consist rather of Fibers than
Flesh, and to represent dry Cords, not soft Nerves: which Dryness is helped by
the defect of Fat, which is wont first of all to be wasted by the said causes,
whenas it growing both Extrinsecally to their Membranes, and being
Intrinsecally inbred with the Fibers of certain greater Muscles especially,
anointing them that they may the easier be extended and contracted in motion,
but if they be deprived of it rendering them unfit for motion, also the
Consumption of the Glue with which the Tendons upon the same account are wont
to be smeared, from the same causes, for which the Humor and Fat do fail; which
Exiccation we have demonstrated does depend on an Atrophy, formerly in a
pituitous humor possessing the Tendons of the Wrist: the which also may happen
from a vehement Heat from without, through great Heats if either they persevere
long, or are so powerful, that they burn almost, the Tendons and Muscles rather
the more membranous than fleshy being then bound up from thence: But there can
scarce be such an Exiccation of the Muscles from internal heat even in the most
burning Fevers, seeing in Hectic Fevers, the body being otherwise almost
reduced to a wasting, the members do not appear contracted by reason of that,
unless by chance this happen in the Midriff and in the Tongue, the which being
dried, as shall by and by be said, its Function also is weakened, as we shall
speak of in the Breathing hurt: for that the Convulsions also which follow
these Fevers, which we have said do very much differ from Contraction, do not
proceed from the Exiccation of the Nerves as they would have it, but from their
Irritation, has been explained in an Epilepsie.

The Muscles being very much Cooled by an external cause, A cooling of the
Muscles is the cause of Impotency of motion.
so that the native heat being laid asleep, their Function is weakened, then
either they cannot rightly move the member, or scarcely, as it oftentimes
happens in the Hands and Feet, parts more exposed to injuries by reason of the
Air, Wind, Water, Cold, that then they cannot rightly lay hold on things with
their Fingers, they being either numed together, or affected with a great pain,
manifesting it self about the roots of the Nails, as has been said elsewhere,
but also they think that Spasm is caused by cold which is wont to betide those
that swim in very cold Water, by binding up the Muscles and Tendons, the causes
of which nevertheless we have expounded to be other, the which notwithstanding
this may help.

The Muscles or their Tendons being Cut, The solution of Continuity in the
Muscles or Tendons is the cause of a Palsy.
or only Wounded a little way transversly there follows a Languishing or Palsy
of that Member which they ought to draw, which as it happens in diverse places
of the body, it does bre^d many sorts of Palsies; so if it come to pass in the
temporal Muscle, the lower Jaw is Palsied.

Moreover the Tendons of a Muscle being too much Extended by a violent motion,
The too much lengthening of the Tendons is the cause of Impotency of Motion.
so that being as it were drawn asunder they become longer than is meet, it
comes to pass that afterward they cannot sufficiently elevate the Member, and
because then they hardly recollect themselves again, the Evil becomes lasting,
which sometimes happens in the Hands by lifting up heavy burdens, in that strong
streining: as also I have seen it happen in the Joint of the Knee, being so
forced by violence, that the many Tendons which meet there, being dissevered by
that violent and sudden motion, and become longer, or freed from their
connection with their Ligaments, they could no more afterward rightly bend that
part, and the Patients have afterward remained Limping.

And also an Attraction with violence oftentimes befalls the Muscles and their
Tendons, Too great attraction of the Muscles and their Tendons is the cause of
a Flatulent Spasm.
that they being too much bound up, beyond their term, or otherwise distorted
or bowed, or somewhat declining from their natural situation, so that they
cannot be relaxt again presently, they draw the Member beyond a mean figure,
and that Spasm is caused which so often seazeth on men for a time, when they
extend their Members violently or with an inordinate motion: as it more
commonly happens in the Feet when they put on their Shoes with pain, or
Swimming in the Water, they stir them after an unusual manner, in which Spasm a
Prominency of the Muscle appearing, and vehement pain, does sufficiently show
that it is wound up by contraction, and too much streightened in it self, Wind
then also breaking into that Space, which it causes by its elevation, as has
been said formerly, and helping its distension; and that so long til the Muscle
being relaxt again, the Spasm does cease again: which is the sooner performed
by the opposite Muscle drawing the part which the Muscle fastened to it does
follow; the which nevertheless, if the part be disposed as has been said
formerly in Wind, and there is plenty of Wind, it is wont sooner and the easier
to return, and sometimes to molest men not only in some one place, but in many
places; which every one, if he rightly consider the business, may know to be
the true cause of the Cramp that does so violently and with pain extend the
members: seeing the true Spasm which is caused by reason of the Nerves
sometimes in these or other parts, cannot extend the members so violently, or
cause so great pain, as when it arises by reason of the Muscles.

But also if this Organical Disease from inbred causes befall the Muscles or
their Tendons from the Birth, An Organical fault of the Muscle is the cause of
the Impotency of motion.
that in more or fewer places, they are longer or shorter, there follows either
a Languishing, or Astriction of those Members: as we have seen some Born with a
Rigid or Bowed back, or contracted in other parts, or also palsied.

The parts which are moved in voluntary motions, are the external Members
strengthened with Bones, which do perform strong motions, as has been said; in
which if the cause of immobility consist, it is for the most part in their
Bones or Ligaments and Cartilages, and the parts of the Face that exetcise the
weaker motions, as the Lips, Eyelids, the Eye; whose faults which are
prjudicial to their motions, now we will explain in particular.

If the Bones be so affected, The Cause of Impotency of motion in the Bones.
that they cannot be moved out of their place, then neither can the part which
is composed of them and strengthened by them, follow; which comes to pass from
an eminent hurt of them, they being broken or cut off, or Contused, or
otherwise pressed by some weight; or if they be dislocated in the Joints, in
which they are joined together for the exercising of motion.

The Bones then of the moveable parts being broken or cut off, A Fracture of a
bone is the cause of Impotency of motion or some other hurt of them.
or contused, or pressed (for concerning other hurts of them we shall treat
elsewhere) it comes to pass, that first of all if they be broken and wholly
broke off, then though part of the broken Bone, into which the Muscles and
Tendons are implanted, be attracted (the which cannot be, by reason of the pain
which is present, and is increased by the least motion of it) seeing the part
broken off does not follow, the part can no ways be rightly moved: the which
soonest comes to pass in the long and round bones of the parts which are moved,
the which are the easier broken, if they consist only of one bone, and then if
the Fracture be so great, that the ends of the bones broken off do part from
one another, that portion of the Bone which grows to the Tendons, which are
always retcht, being drawn upwards, seeing nothing does resist, there follows
an abbreviation of the part, as it often comes to pass in the Bones of the
Thigh, Arm, and Fingers, but in those parts which are strengthened with two
Bones, that this may come to pass, they must both be broken and diffevered
after this manner, whenas if one only be broke, the other does yet sustain the
part, and therefore there follows no shortness of it, neither would the motion
of it then be taken away, unless pain did hinder it; as in the two Bones of the
Leg and Elbow this sometimes happens; and in the distinct broad Bones of the
lower Jaw, it may fall out on both sides, or only on one side: but if the part
be compounded of many long Bones, as in the Instep and Afterwrist, seeing all
of them are scarce broken together, pain (as long as it lasts) rather than an
Organical fault, will then hinder the motion: also if short and thick bones be
broken, then also by reason of pain, the motion is so long hindered; as when the
Vertebrae of the Back have been broke off, as I have once observed it, seeing
the bodies of them can scarce be thoroughly broken, as neither no other small
Bones. Yet the Ankle being broken (which I have seen by chance wholly pulled in
two in the middle) the motion also is taken away of it self, and not only by
reason of the pain: and if this come to pass in the Knee-bone, which in some I
have oftentimes noted to be broken into two parts very much separated and
distant, then seeing the Knee does no way constitute the Joint, but because the
Knee-pan only does retain the wandering Tendons, that they turn not aside, the
motion of the Joint suffers an Imperfection.

All which forementioned Bones both long and short cut asunder in like manner
by a Wound do produce the like Impotency in Motion for the same reason.

As from a Contusion of them, as long as the Pain molests, the motion is
hindered by reason of that rather than any thing else, unless there be a
Fracture, the which is wont sometimes to happen in the Vertebrae of the Back,
and in the lesser bones of the Wrist and other small ones of the Feet.

All which, as well Fractures, as Wounds and Contusions, do befall them from a
violent cause coming from without, as from a blow or fall: also from
corruption of the Bones, by a Sphacel, not only of the lesser, but also of the
greater. We have seen some parts of them so eaten and corrupted, that the bones
have fallen, as if they were broken, and have been rendered unfit for Motion,
and that both by reason of the French Pox, and other causes; as also we have
observed from the Cancer of the Gums, that part of the lower Jaw together with
the Teeth, has been taken out on one side, and the Maiden which suffered this,
could nevertheless chew her Meat.

And also the bones being burdened by a weight, Flesh, or Fat, they follow
more slowly to move.

Two Bones being Dislocated which mutually joined and bound together with
Ligaments, A Dislocation of the Bones of the joints, is the cause of Immobility.
do form a Joint for Motion: if this happen in the Joints which are moved by an
apparent Motion by a Diarthrosis, then this Immobility will be more manifest,
and more prejudicial, especially if the Luxation be great; which comes to pass,
if the Head of the Bone do wholly fall, forth of its socket, and then they call
it an Exarthrema for jf it be only carried to the Brow of it, then the Luxtion
is lighter, and it is called a Parathrema, which some call only a Separation,
both which if they happen in the joints, joined by an Enarthrosis as of the
Thigh with the Hip, and the Head falling out of its receiver and thrust to the
upper parts do stop there, retained by a Lax Ligment, the Thigh also is
shorted, and there is an apparent prominency in that part; the which also
happens if it be carried to the hinder or utter parts; for if it be led to the
inner or fore parts, because it subsists about the brows then the Foot rather
becomes longer. And if this come to pass in the Joint of the Arm with the
Shoulder, as it may the sooner be by reason of its plain socket, the Arm for
the most part falls down to the lower parts under the Shoulder, and then the
eminency of the top of the Shoulder is lost, and in the place of it a
hollowness does manifest it self; and if the Jaw be Luxated after this manner,
it makes that mouth open, fixed, and crooked, if the Luxation be only in one
side: the same may happen in the Joints, composed by a Gynglymus, their Heads
and Sockets going a part, to to this or that side, as in the Leg with the Thigh
and Feet, in the Luxations of the Elbow with the Shoulder and lower part, and
of the Joints of the bones of the Fingers, for which reason also the Knee-bone
if it fall out of its Socket, it does prejudice Motion by diverting the
Tendons, as has been said in the Fracture of it, and upon no other account.
But in the Trochoidal species of Articulation, by which the Head is moved upon
the Vertebrae, seeing that hinge, which the first Vertebrae makes with the
second, can scarce be lift up so high, that it should fall out of its Socket,
and it is so firmly bound up with Ligaments it can scarce come to pass, that the
Head should loose its Motion, by reason of a Luxation. But if a Luxation happen
in the Joints which are moved by an obscure Motion, by a Synarthrosis, and this
be in that Species, which we have called the moveable Joining, or Coalessency,
by which the Vertebrae of the Back are joined together, then the Cartilage
which does also Conglutinate the Verbebrae together being relaxt, it slacking
somewhat in many Spaces of them, espacially about the middle part of the Back,
and the upper part of the loins, seeing it is found there more plentiful, it
comes to pass, that many Vertebrae (because one alone can scearce be carried so
outwardly, and the Cartilage with which it is knitted be so Relaxt) more or
less parting from one another, do produce a crookedness in the Back, and when
it cannot erect it self, also a shortness of it, and with that of the whole
Body, in those called Gibbous, and then the Prominency arising from thence
bunches forth to the outer parts, rather then to the inner, because the bones
of the Vertebrae do not suffer them to be so wrested thither, and according to
the various manner of severing the Vertebrae it causes sometimes an Acute,
sometimes an Obtuse bunch, and greater or less. Sometimes the Vertebrae bowed
toward the sides, do fram the Body wreathed and short after another manner:
and in all those crookednesses of the Back, because the Ribs annexed to the Back
do follow, the breast also appears either lift up or deprest, or otherwise
deformed; whence follows difficulty of breathing if the structure of the Breast
be very much vitiated; or also danger of Suffocation if the Vertebrae of the
Neck be Luxated, the which notwithstanding cannot be unless by great violence,
because there intercedes a little Cartilage, but as sometimes the first Vertebra
which is loosely joined by an Arthrody, if it be Luxated, it causes the sixth
species of a quinsie so called by Hippocrates.

But in the other Structures of small bones mutually joined, as of the bones of
the Wrist, Foot, Instep, this seldom comes to pass, because they are strongly
bound together; and if it do happen, because all of them are moved very
obscurely, they cannot bring any great impediment in Motion.

But this great perversion of the natural Situation of the Joints, that the
joints loses its moveableness, and that hinge, as is said cannot be turned,
proceeds from diverse causes; sometimes from a violence offered to the bones and
deviding these Conjuctions of the bones, as if either bone which frames the
joint, be forced or thrust by a blow, or fall from its Conjunction with the
other, which as we see in many joints, so in that of the Shoulder, otherwise
naturally prominent there, it easily and often happens by a fall; the same also
may come to pass from the Attraction of a bone made beyond measure, or to a
place, whether it ought in no wise to be drawn, as in Yawning the mouth being
too much or crookedly distended, a Luxation of the Jaw, or a Contorsion of
other bones by Gestures or seriously by a rack. But also this happens by
degrees, if a moveable part be often inclined to the same part, and be kept a
long while in that Situation, whence at length by continual use the joints
being relaxt, they are drawn asunder, and because they cannot be reduced to
their natural Situation, they cause an Immobility of the Member, whose Figure,
also they corrupt, for which reason a bunch is wont to grow in the Vertebra of
the Back of Maids, because by custom they sit crooked a spinning, and of
Infants, because they lie in an uncomly posture of Body; by which means also
they increase the beginning of the crookedness of the Back, whether caused from
the birth or by chance by inclining themselves that way, both in their going
and lying down, and not resisting by a contrary Motion. A Luxation also may
happen of its own accord, not by the fault of a bone, but of the Ligaments as
we shall now explain.

By reason of the Ligaments that do enclose and retain the Joint, In the
Ligaments of the Bones of the joints, is the cause of the Impotency of Motion.
the Joint may be Luxated, and so its Motion may cease, or otherwise it may be
stopped and hindered without a Luxation.

By reason of the continuity of the Ligaments dislolved, The Continuity of the
Ligaments dissolved, is the cause of Immobility.
which ought to retain both bones in the Joint, that they should not be
dislocated; a Luxation of them also, or at least wise an Elongation of the
Member, so called by some, may be caused, the which yet can scarce happen from
the breaking of them, seeing these are most strong bound, unless this befall the
round Ligament, which knits the Head of the Thigh to the receiver, being broken
off from the bones by violence: But the same may come to pass from a wound
penetrating to the Membranous Ligaments which do outwardly compass the joint,
and cutting them in two, but this seldom comes to pass, because these lie in
hidden places. The Ligaments also may be eaten through by matter Suppuration
being made there, the which is wont sometimes to fall out in the joint of the
Thigh with the Hip by reason of Sinuous Ulcers, which arising there about the
Membranous parts, do continually pour forth a white Viscous matter, by the
Buttocks and Hip, and Intrinsecally corrupt these Ligaments; of which sort we
have seen many so affected, with a Luxated and shortend Thigh to have remained
perpetually lame, or at leastwise that not being Luxated, to have limped with
one Foot longer then was meet. Sometimes also the Ligaments that compass the
joints, being too much drawn asunder and as it were torn in part from the
bones, to which they grow, by some violent forcing of the joint on the rack, or
by some chance, the Motion of the Joint is left somewhat hindered, with a pain
at first, oftentimes a long while troublesome: as I have sometimes observed,
has happend in the joint of the Knee, and Shoulder and in others; and Casparus
Wolphius, an eminent Physician, my true friend, has told me, that by violent
drawing on of Boots, when they were put on, his Hip joint has been thus hurt.

But also by reason of a slackness of these Ligaments, A slackness of the
Ligaments, is the cause of the impotency of Motion.
as in the joints which are moved by a manifest Motion, this naturally befalls
them, that they are more Lax, neither do they hinder the joint, which ought to
be moved freely, by strict binding it, it comes to pass that these joints are
more easily dislocated then others, so also if these which are more Lax then
others, and others also if they be broad, be yet more amplified, and those
which are round, be lengthned, then the Member stands forth, further then is
meet, and gives a helping cause, that a Luxation be the easier made, and from a
less force. Which things befall some from their birth, whence they can both bend
and extend their limbs, somewhat beyond their natural bounds; or they have one
limb longer then another, or as some would have it, they presently grow with
dislocated Members; or it happens by reason of the Age, because of the softness
of the Ligaments, and appendixes of the Bones, that from the joint which remain
for some time Cartilaginous; and most have thought that might come to pass from
a watery, Phlegmatic, Serous humors so bedewing these parts, the which yet is
not very likely, as appers from hence, because in the Leucophlegmatia and other
Species of the Gout, the Humor staying there a long time, yet there follows no
Luxation of the part.

The Ligaments also being dried, and hardend, A dryness of the Ligaments, is
the cause of the impotency of Motion.
and being bound up and Callous, or hindered with knobs in the Gout, or with
Nodes, the Motion of those joints remains sixth and immovable, or otherwise
they are hardly moved, and sometimes they make a noise and crackling, as if they
were broken, if they be urged with geater force. The cause of which sound also
is, if it be driven by force further then the joint ought to be moved by a
moderate Motion; but such an Exication of the Ligaments, sometimes proceeds from
old age, and a most acute fever drying up also the Bones and Nails, as has
been said elsewhere: or from some other hurt, whence a Callus or Node grows
there, or from a Humor turned into a knob about the joints, as shall be
explained in its place.

The Cartilage, In the Cartilages of the Bones of the joints, is the cause of
immobility.
which crusts over the Heads of the moveable bones, if it loose its
slipperiness, and clamminess, and be dried up, or Exasperated from the said
causes; it does also hinder Motion, as a hinge tainted with rust.

By Reason of an affect of the Lips opening the Mouth it happens, In the Lips,
is the cause of their immobility.
that their Motion is weakend, and the largeness of the Mouth depraved; if they
be so cut off, or dissected, that they cannot follow Motion, or otherwise, as
we have seen it fall out in the French Pox, if they be eaten with Ulcers and
corrupted; but their other faults do prejudice rather by pain, as we shall show
in their places.

It scarce happens that by fault of the Ey-lide the Eye cannot be shut, In the
Ey-lids, is the cause of their immobility.
unless a Tumor or some excrescence growing there do hinder it; but it falls out
that the Eye cannot be opend, only the upper Ey-lide being cut in two, and
scarce for any other causes.

By Reason of a Disease of the Eye, its Motion scarce fails, unless this
proceed from a Tumor of it, that it cannot be rolled about freely, pain then
chiefly hindering the Motion; but a squinting though it be from the Birth, does
rather arise by reason of the Muscles of the Eye, as has been said, and if
this comes to pass, the Eye being wounded or digd out, the Eye does not only
loose it Motion; but also becomes unprofitable.

The Cure.
The Cure of all these kinds of Immobility, whether it be a general Palsy of
many parts, or proper to particular moveable parts, or a Spasm, or Contraction,
or Bunch, Luxation, Fracture, Wound, or other hurt, is ordered according to the
Nature of the cause; which we have said, was a humor possessing the Nerves or
the Tendons of the Muscles, a cold distemper of the Muscles and Nerves, a
distension of the Muscles from Wind; a dryness or emptiness of the Muscles,
Tendons, Ligaments; a hard Tumor in the Tendons Ligaments; the compression of a
Nerve, a Wound or Contusion in a Nerve, Muscle or its Tendon, Ligament; or
Member; a Fracture of the bones, a Luxation of the joints, and last of all an
Organical fault in all the Instruments serving for motion, in every one of
which what must be foretold, or done, we will now propound.

If a Palsy be from Watery, The Cure of a Palsi^ engendered by Phlegm, which they
apply also to a particular Spasm which they say proceeds from the same Humor.
Excrementitious, or Phlegmatic, or serous humors, simple or mixed together,
Bedewing or pressing the Nerves, or cooling them, whether it be general to many
parts, or only particular to some, the following way of Cure must be ordered;
the which also they think likewise convenient, and prescribe it for the Cure of
a Convulsion or particular Spasm or Cramp, which they have thought was caused
from the same Humor: but we who do hold the same to be the Causes of particular
Convulsions which we said were of a General Convulsion; as concerning general
Remedies, we think the same also which have been explained in an Epilepsie, are
rather to be used. But the Topic which are described here to be convenient in
a Phlegmatic Palsy applied to the place affected in a Spasm we judge may do
good, if so be that a Convulsion caused from thence or Pain do urge it,
subscribing to common consent of Physicians, yet the Attraction which is in the
Spasm of the Members for the most part does not so much require Topic Remdies,
as the danger of an Epilepsie by and by to follow, does admonish us to apply
the use of those things which do prevent it, as both those things which are
Intrinsecally taken and Extrinsecally applied upon that account, have been
explained: as also if a Flegmamatick Humor falling down upon the Muscles, does
breed these distensions with Pain, the Cure shall be explained in Defluxions.

In a Phlegmatic Palsy therefore, as they call it, A Prediction in a
phlegmatic Palsy.
whether general to both sides, or only in one side, whether this follow an
Apolepsie, or begin of it self, because it is a Cronical Disease, and the sick
do scarce continue so long in the use of Medicines, and good government, the
Cure goes on very hardly, especially if it it befall Old Folks or otherwise
those whose Strength is exhausted; or if it cease in some places, it sometimes
leaves a lasting fault, in the Speech or Hands or elsewhere: nor does a
particular Palsy less require a long Cure, which also sometimes ends in a
General one, whose foreteller it often is. Sometimes also a Palsy is Dangerous
because it threatens an Apoplexy, in which unless it be cured, it is wont often
to terminate and kill the Patient: yet in the Interim if we proceed rightly in
the Cure of a Palsy and desist not in a Disease of long continuance, and the
sick be obedient, and nothing more grievous does hinder, that sometimes succeeds
happily or from a more General one, the humor not subsisting about the
Original, but in the process it is changed into a Particular one.

Which Cure we will so order, that in relation to the Cause, The Method of
Curing in a phlegmatic Palsy.
we will revell another way from them, derive, or purge out of the body the
humor that possesses the Nerves, or otherwise discuss or consume it in the
part, and prevent that new Excrements be not generated, from which these humors
are either increased or fomeneed, but in Respect to the Disease we must correct
the Cold and Moist distemper in the Nerves. Last of all by occasion of the
Symptoms we must strengthen the weak parts, and allure the Spirits again and
Virtue to the Muscles, and must provide for the strength of the whole body.

Which ought to be done in this order, first of all we turn our selves to those
things which purge by the Stool, and before we use the Stronger we wash out the
common Excrements of the Guts and their dregs, by things taken and Injected,
for so this filth being first cast off, the strength of Purgers being not
broken by them, does the better disperse it self, afterward we must prepare
the Phlegmatic Humor with hot incisive things that are appropriate; which being
done, we must administer Purges which do egregiously solicit nature, for the
calling forth of humors from the depth, and for the casting of them forth by
this natural way destined for the purging of Excrements, and so may revell them
from the part affected; all which if they help not presently in this Disease of
long continuance, they must be often repeated, that we may continually
accustom nature, that she rather empty her self that way; we must also attempt
evacuations by other parts, yet that which is made by stool going first: as by
the Mouth and Nostrils, which are done, either to prevent a new Colection of
Excrements, which seeing they are wont to be heaped up in the first concoction
not rightly performed, Vomiting upon that account must be caused both by things
taken and actually, or chiefly, that excrements of the Brain, which the brain
is wont naturally to expel by these passages, may be allured hither, and so may
be diverted, that they follow not the course of the Nerves. Which is done by
putting things into the Mouth and Nostrils; also we draw forth the humors
through the habit of the body by insensible transpriration, manifest Sweats, by
giving those things which can move them, or by outwardly applying them, or by
motions of the body; or we assay it with manifest openings; also we heat and
strengthen the parts, giving and applying diverse Remedies, which by drying may
wast the humor; in the interim, we must preserve the Strength both by
Nourishments taken, and other things rightly administered, by which the body is
preserved.

But these things which are administered both by reason of the Cause, the
Disease and Accidents, we do perform, either by things taken or swollowed into
the stomach, or by thing thrusts up into the Guts, or into the capacity of the
Mouth and Nostrils; or by things outwardly applied to the body, the palsied
Members, the Backbone, the Head or by encompssing Air, or Motions of the Body
and Mind, or by manifest Openings, of which we will treat in this order.

The Remedies which we give to the Sick to be taken and swallowed, although
oftentimes they perform many things together, yet they are chiefly given to
cause Expurgations by the stool, by Vomit, by Sweats, or other ways; or they
are given for Nourishment for Strength sake, with which also we mix things
Medicinal; or for the preparation of the Humors before Purging, or to Heat and
Strengthen the Nerves.

The Remedies given to purge the Humors and Excrements by Stool, which with the
same labor sometimes also do alter too, are some of them Gentler which are
used before other Purgers and their Preparations; and are used by course, to
keep the belly open, which by long lying and sluggishness is wont easily to be
bound, and they are chiefly given in the form of Pills. Of usual Pills Assaireth
are convenient, because they have French Lavender in them, Alephanginae,
because thep contain many Spices, which adding of Agarick will be more
effectual, and whiles the matter flows Rhubarb may be added, Mastich, and
Castor that they may heat more powerfully.

After this manner. Take of Pills Assaireth two drams, Alpehanginae one dram
and an half, Agarick, Rhubarb, each one dram; Mastich half a dram, Salt gem one
scruple, Castor half a scruple, with syrup of French Lavender make a Mass, let
him take one scruple for a Dose by course.

Or they are prepared of other things. Take of Turpentine half an ounce, let
him take it by it self or diluted with Honey and water of Ground^ine; and it is
an appropriate purging and singular Remedy for the Palsy, to which some add
the Species of Hiera, and give it often.

Of convenient Liquids taken after the same manner, also a Minoration, as they
call it, or gentle purge, may be made.

Then stronger purgers must be given, yet scarce before the fourteenth day,
after the invasion of the Disease, which times is to be spent in the
preparation of the Humors, least that as it often comes to pass in Diseases
from Defluxions, whiles it yet flows, it be stirred more by the use of these
things, especially if Gums which diffuse the matter, do enter into these
compositions, as it often happens in Pills, which are therefore to be omitted,
if we must purge sooner, and certain astringent things are rather to be mixed.

The most convenient form of Pills, will be this. Take of Pills, Faetidae,
Cochiae, of each one scruple; Opopanax half a scruple, with syrup of French
Lavender, Make Pills. If they work not enough they may be quickend with five
grains of Trochisks of Alhandal.

One dram of Pills of Ground Pine given, will do the same with great success:
of which afterward.

Such a Potion may be taken instead of the Pills. Take of the Electuary,
Diaphaenicon, the greater Indum, of each two drams; syrup of Diacnicum six
drams, Cinnamon water two drams, Ground Pine water, as much as is sufficient;
make a Potion.

Or, Take of the tables of Diacarthamum of thy description one dram and an
half, Lozenges of Citron solutive two drams: Dissolve them with Sage water, for
one draught.

A Decoction may be made instead of these. Take of the seeds of wild Saffron,
the leaves of Senna, of each three drams, Hermodactils one dram, Liquorish root
half an ounce, Raisons forty, Figs twenty, Annis seed two drams, Rosemary
flowers one pugil: Make a Decoction. Infuse in it, of Agarick trochiscate one
dram and an half, Turbith one dram, Ginger half a dram, Cinnamon one dram:
Strain it, Dissolve in it Honey of Roses laxative half an ounce: Make a Potion.

The Purgers must be repeated by course, if the Disease continue, especially if
there be great plenty of the Humor flowed down, as in a more general Palsy,
and the Body be full, which shall be done, the Humor being prepared a new, and
purged again, or giving for some time, things made of those following, for
three days together, then interposing a day or two and resting the while, or
every Month, or at the seasons of Spring and Autum.

The form of Pills is most convenient to receive any thing, and especially
those Pills of Ground Pine, or Ivae so called, are commended, which Mathiolus
holds for a present remedy, and Bened. Victor calls a glorious help: if one
scruple be taken before sleep at night, every day, or at least twice a week,
the description of which produced by them both in the same manner, we make thus
more commodious: Take of Coloquintida prepared half a dram, Scammony prepared
one dram, Turbith one dram and an half, Agarick two drams, Rhubarb one dram and
an half, the Powder of simple Hiera half an ounce, Ginger one scruple,
Spicknard, Fossil Salt, of each half a scruple; Lavender, French Lavender
flowers, of each one dram; Opopanax half a dram, Mastick one scruple, Castor
half a scruple, the Distilled Oil of Marjoram and Rosemary, of each five
grains; the juyces of Ground Pine newly drawn, and boiled like to an extract,
as much as is sufficient; Make a Mass.

A usual Syrup shall be prepared thus, with less labor and cost; Take of the
roots of the true Acorus half a pound, dry Sage one ounce, Ground Pine, fix
drams, flowers of French Lavender and Lavender, of each half an ounce; Caraway
seed two drams; Make a Decoction, and in that strained infuse, Agarick one
ounce and an half, the leaves of Senna four ounces: Let them boil gently,
Aromative it with Cinnamon two drams, Ginger one dram, add of Honey a
sufficient quantity: Make a Syrup, boiled to a consistence for your use, making
trial of at the first, giving of an ounce and an half.

Or one very much compounded, shall be made thus, Take of the roots of the true
Acorus, Orrice, of each one ounce, the roots of Angelica or Master-wort,
Elecampane, Pellitory of Spain, Hog Fennel, round Birth-wort, of each half an
ounce; Galengal, Cyperus, Valerian, Dyers Madder, of each two drams; the Herbs
Sage, Marjoram, Betony, Balm, Penny-roval, Poley, Hyssop, Time, wild Time, of
each one handful; Ground Pine one handful and an half, flowers of French
Lavender, Lavender, Rose-mary, Prim-rose, of each one pugil; seeds of
Carawaies, Fennel, mountain Hartwart, Piony, of each two drams; Rocket, Rue,
Chaste Tree, Angelica, of each one dram; Bay and Juniper Berries, of each half
an ounce; Liquorish root one ounce, Figs twenty four, Raisons forty, wild
Saffron seed two ounces, leaves of Senna three ounces Turbith half an ounce,
Agarick six drams, Hermodactils three drams, the roots of Grass Plantane two
drams, Mechoacan three drams: Make a Decoction according to Art, Aromatize that
strained, with Cinnamon half an ounce, Ginger one dram and an half, Salt Gem
half a dram; add of Sugar half a pound: Boil them to the consistance of a
Syrup, Let him take for one Dose two ounces, or more.

An usual Electuary will do the same: Take of the Electuary, Diaphaenicon the
greater, Jndum, tables of Citron solutive, of each one ounce; tables of
Diacarthamum of thy Description six drams, the Powder of Hiera of Coloquintida
three drams, Mastick, Opopanax, Sagapen, of each half a dram; Nutmeg, Ginger,
Cinnamon, Cloves, of each one dram; with syrup of Ground Pine or French
Lavender: Make an Electuary, let him take from two drams to sour.

Some also attempt Purgations by Vomit, giving the very strongest, as Stibium,
by the use of which I have indeed observed twice or thrice, that they have
become presently Palsied, who formerly were not so; therefore it ought to be
moved rather by giving thogentler, (unless it succeed of its own accord, or be
actually provoked) in those that are sooner accustomed.

By sweats often repeated, by giving of the Decoction of Guaicum, China, or
others, because it cannot be removed by any other way, this long continued
Disease is often cured; which will be made proper, if Sage and Ground Pine be
boiled in the same, and it be Aromatized with Galangal and Nutmeg, as thus:
Take of Sarsaparilla two ounces, Guaicum three ounces, Orrice root one ounce,
roots of Elecampane half an ounce, Roots of Acorus half an ounce: Make a
Decoction in Water, according to Art, for a sweating and ordinary drink.

But also it will be very convenient to move sweat, sometimes by giving of other
things, as the Rob or Quiddeny of Dwarf-Elder two drams: Dissolve it with the
water of Ground Pine and Sage, and let him drink it.

The Courses, Hemmorrhoids, if they be stopped, are prositably moved, by taking
of remedies that provoke them.

Those things which are granted them to be necessarily taken for the
nourishment and sustinance of the Body ought to be administered sparingly and
seldom; for to use a sparing Diet, and sometimes to suffer hunger, does very
much hinder the product of Humors; which will be done, if they take meat
moderately only twice a day, or sometimes forbear their Supper. Or their Sweats
being continued for some time, and other Evacuations, in making of their Diet,
as they call it, they join a Detraction of their meat, or if otherwise, meat be
administered to them sparingly.

The which also if it be of good juice it will be sufficient, and produce fewer
Excrements, as if he eat Eggs, and of Birds, Threshes, Mearles, Larks,
Chassinches, birds like Nightingales, Sparows, or those which most do write, do
by a peculiar virtue resist this Disease, as chiefly wild Pigeons, Turtles,
Swallows, the brain of a Hare, which therefore they put also into Compositions:
which are convenient roasted rather then boiled, and moreover they become
Medicinal, if they be stuck and stuffed, with Sage, Marjoram, Time, wild Time,
and other sweet things, and Spices, especially with Nutmeg.

If the seeds of Carawaies, or Fennel, or Annis, or Gith, be mixed with the
bread when it is baked it will be more convenient, and if he sometimes use
Aromatical Diet or ginger bread, Sugared, as they are wont neatly to prepare
it, or honied, which they call the Bread of Life, Pine-nuts, Pistachoes, are
very much commended here, and are believed to strengthen the Nerves.

Junkets of Mustard seed administered at table instead or sauce are very much
approved, as also pickeld Capers.

The Salt with which meats are salted is approved, and that made of Treacle and
Vipers, as this following: Take of Salt one ounce and an half, Nutmegs one
dram, the rtots of Pellitory of Spain half a dram, the leaves of Sage,
Marjoram, of each one scruple: Mix them.

It will do good if they drink but little, and wholly abstain from the use of
Wine, or of clear Wine, and instead of that, drink Water and Honey, which shall
be prepared of ten parts of Water, and one of Honey, boiled to the Consumption
of a third part, and Aromatized in the end; Or if he drink it more Compounded,
as shall be declared by and by.

Those things which are given to prepare the Humors are used before purging
Medicines in the beginning of the Disease, and are repeated, when in the
progress of the Disease, the purging ought to be reiterated; but also otherwise
given they do help, because they at once waste and alter the Humors, as shall
besaid.

This is done by Syrups after this manner: Take of the Syrups of French
Lavender, Hyssop, of each two ounces; Honey of Rosemary flowers half an ounce,
the waters of Sage, Ground Pine, Hyssop, of each one ounce and an half: Make a
Julep, Aromatize it with the Powder of Rosata Novella, for four or five times.

Also Nicolaus his Syrups of Ground Pine, are convenient, of the Conserve of
Acorus Honey of Squils, although they approve of Oxymels, we omit them, the
waters of Matjoram, Betony, Prim-rose, Balm, are allowed.

In place of these, Water and Honey, boiled with Acorus, French Lavender,
Lavender flowers, or with Sage, is very convenient.

Also the following Decoction may be given to drink instead of these. Take of
the roots of the true Acorus, Orrice, of each six drams; Cyperus, Elecampane,
of each three drams; the Herbs, Sage, Marjoram, Ground Pine, the tops of Time,
of each one handful; Hyssop, Betony, Pennyroyal, Calamint, of each half a
handful; the flowers of Rose-mary, French Lavender, or Lavender, Elder,
Prim-roses, of each one pugil; seeds of Annis, Fennel, of each two drams; Rue
one dram, Liquorish root one ounce, Raisons three ounces: Make a Decoction,
adding Honey or Sugar, as much as is sufficient, Aromatize it with Cinnamon, or
with some Aromatical Powder, let her use it instead of a Julep.

The Remedies which are given to Drink, to heat the sluggish and cold Nerves,
and also to waste the Humors ought to heat very much, so that they may kindle a
fever, because if that supervene, the whole Body then grows hot, and the
moistures of it are Egregiously consumed: with which also are mixed those
things which are appropriate to the Neres and do resist Disease by a peculiar
virtue.

But these are used presently after purging, and in the whole progress of the
Disease, being given in the morning to them fasting, or once or twice toward
night, in the form either of a Decoction, Infusion, Waters, Pouders,
Electuaries, Pills, the choycest of all which we will propound.

Sometimes the more grateful Decoctions are given upon that account, because
they loath ungrateful things in that form: of which sort Compound Hydromel or
Mead is very effectual, if it be drank sometimes before Meat, or otherwise,
which is thus made: Take of Water twenty pound, Honey one pound and an half,
the roots of Acorus, dried Sage, of each one ounce; the roots of Orrice half an
ounce: Boil them to the Consumption of a third part, Aromatize it in the end
with Cinnamon, Nut-meg, of each two drams; Pepper half a dram: Make a
Melicrate, the which also may be done after the same manner with Sugar.

Other Medicinal Decoctions may be reduced into the form of a Svrup and used,
which may be boiled, as has been said there, with the formentioned
preparatives and purgers, or taking away those things which purge and so be
given.

Or of juyces after this manner: Take of the juyces of Sage, and Ground Pine,
of each one ounce and an half; the juice of Marjoram one ounce, Lavender water
two ounces, the most generous Wine two ounces, Sugar or Honey two ounces: Boil
them to the consistence of a Syrup, Aromatize it with Nut-meg, and the roos of
Galangal, of each one dram: Let him take often one spoonful.

Infusions, especially those made in Wine do good, for though Wine, especially
if it be strong, is no ways convenient, yet acquiring the strength of other
things to it self, and being to them as it were a Vehic^e to the Nerves, it
becomes profitable, being sometimes taken by way of Medicine, but it is prepared
of the simple Infusion of Sage, or of some convenient Plant.

Or a Compound one, as follows: Take of the roots of Acorus two ounces, the
leaves of dried Sage one ounce and an half, Ground Pine, Cow-slips, of each one
ounce; Wormwood half an ounce, Nutmeg one ounce, Zedoary half an ounce, white
Wine, or new Wene, or Wine a little boiled twenty pound: If you add of the
shavings of Guajcum one pound, the wine will be more effectual. Distilled
waters or those made by infusion, are highly magnified by some, which are given
by themselves in the morning, or are mixed with others, as the more simple ones
of Rosemary, Sage, Marjoram, Time, Lavender, especially, if the Liquor be
extracted out of them dry, being first steeped in Wine; Cinnamon water, as it
is grateful, so also it is effectual, the water of Ground Pine and Primroses are
chiefly appropriate.

Many Compound ones are made for these uses, such as we have described also in
an Apoplexy, this also will be rightly fitted for the work. Take of the roots
of the true Acorus, Angelica or Masterwort, Elecampane, of each fix drams; the
leaves of Sage, Marjoram, Rose-mary, Ground Pine, Rue, the flowers of Lavender,
Prim-roses, of each half an ounce; Galangal, Nutmeg, Zedoary, Cinnamon, Cloves,
of each there ounces; Being thus pouderd steep them in strong-wine, or in that
first distilled, till it be thick as Frumenty, afterward draw forth the
Liquor, give one spoonful often in the morning; it will be more effectual if
you infuse a little Castor in part of it and give it, or if you fear the strong
seml of that, let a few grains of Musk be added.

Diverse commodious pouders are prepared, which are either drank by themselves
from one dram to one dram and an half, being dissolved in the waters of Sage,
Marjoram, Lavender, Cinnamon, Groundpine, and also with Honey and Rosemary
flowers, or Anacardine, or of Squils, or with other Syrups. Or eight parts of
Sugar being added to one of Powder, they are so taken, Or the Sugar being first
dissolved with the said Waters, Lozenges are made, and then they are given in
greater quantity. Or they are mixed with Conserves and Electuaries.

Of the usual ones the most excellent are, the Powder of Diamoschum Dulce, and
Amarum, Diathamaron, Pleres with Musk, Rosata Novella; and other Aromatical
Pouders, are convenient.

Instead of which these following also may be prepared, that called A more
simple one of Nutmeg after this manner. Take of Nutmegs three drams, root of
Pellitory of Spain two drams, make a Powder, of which if one dram be given for
some mornings with Sage water and Honey of Rosemary flowers, it will be a
singular Remedy.

Another of Nutmeg being more compounded, will be thus made, Take Nutmegs not
roasted, as they would have it, in number three or half an ounce, the root of
Pellitory of Spain one dram, the Leaves of Marjoram, Sage, Flowers of Lavender,
Rosemary, each half a dram; Gith seed one scruple, Cinnamon one dram and an
half, Cloves, Galangal, each half a dram; make a Powder, of which, if adding
nine ounces of Sugar dissolved in Sage water you make Lozenges they will supply
the stead of the Lozenges called de nuce Moschata.

A third called Aromatical will be made thus. Take of Cinnamon two drams,
Nutmeg, Galangal each one dram and an half; Cloves one dram, Pepper, Ginger,
Zedoary, seeds of Fennel, Anise, Mountain Hartwort, Peony, Leaves of Marjoram,
each half a dram; mix them, and make a Powder.

The fourth compounded one shall be made thus. Take of the roots of Pellitory
of Spain one dram, Asar^bacca half a dram, Angelica one dram an half, Seeds of
Bishops weed Carawaies, each two drams; Nutmeg, Galangal, Cinnamon, Cloves,
each half a dram; the three Peppers, both Cardamons, Cubebs, Ginger, Spikenard,
Wood of Aloes, each Mastich half a dram, one scruple, the Ashes of Swallows,
and a Man's Skul each half a dram; Coral half a dram, make a powder.

Of Conserves and Condites, the Conserve of Groundpine made with Sugar, if it
be given to the Paralitick at night going to bed, by a continued course it is
said to be a certain help. Also the Conserve of Sage prepared with Honey boiled
and clarified, brings great benfit. Likewise the Conditure or Conserve of
Acorus, is approved by many.

By mixture of many things, such a Conserve shall be prepared. Take of the
Conserve of Sage, Groundpine, each two ounces; of the true Acorus and Nutmeg
condite, each one ounce and an half; the Conserve of Primrose one ounce,
Conserve of Marjoram, Rosemary flowers, French Lavender or Lavender flowers,
Ginger condite each half an ounce; mix them, let him take morning and evening
one dram and an half.

Adding the pouders the following Electuary will be convenient. Take this
Confection made of Conserves and Conditures, and ad of Confection Anacardine
half an ounce, and of the former powder prescribed, which begins, Take of the
roots of Pellitory etc. half an ounce, of Honey Anacardine as much as is
sufficient, make an Electuary, let him use it by it, self drinking afterward,
the waters of Sage, Marjoram, or Groundpine, or dissolve it with them, and let
him drink it.

One dram of the Confection Anacardine being taken does good, especially if it
be taken every day twice, by the use of which if a Fever be kindled, as has
been said formerly it will do good upon a double account.

Opiates also are very much commended by Practitioners, which though they be
old, are suspected by me by reason of the Opium, in a stupidity and weakness of
the Nerves.

But they give Treacle, Methridate, Aurea Alexandrina, to one dram with Sage
water.

Or these some are mixed with other Remdies after this manner. Take of Acorus
condite one ounce, Conserve of Rosemary flowers, French Lavender, Sage, each
half an ounce; Methridate, Aurea Alexandrina, each two drams; Pleres with Musk
one dram, syrup of French Lavender as much as is sufficient, mix them.

Pills too prepared of things ungrateful, and which are hardly taken in other
forms shall be made thus. Take of the root of Pellitory of Spain, Pepper, each
one dram; Mummy or Bitumen half a dram, Euphorbium, Castor, each one scruple;
Oil of Amber and Turpentine, each four grains; receive them in Honey of
Rosemary flowers, or of Squils and make a Mass, of half a dram make ten Pills,
let him often take five at night going to bed.

The Chemical Oils of Sage, Marjoram, Cinnamon, and other Spices being mixed
with Sugar, and used, or made into Lozenges are very profitable.

Suppositories are put up, and Clysters injected, both to solicit and loosen
the Belly, and also to heat; the which as the custom is, are used both before
the use of other Purgers and in the progress of the Disease, being prepared in
like manner, as we have prescribed in an Apoplexy, amongst which the Gentler
will work more than in them, seeing the sense of excretion is not taken away
here, as in an Apoplectical, as also the Stronger will work yet much more.

Such Suppositories may be made. Take of Honey, the juice of Mercury or Beets,
in the winter time each two ounces; boil them a little, afterward add of an Ox
Gaul two drams, boil them again sufficiently, and add the root of Pellitory of
Spain half a dram, Salt Gem one dram, make Suppositories.

Clysters which provoke excretion, and alter too, are very convenient, bewaring
of those too emollient, by which the Backbone being more relaxt, would rather
be hurt, that the Vulgar do not rashly believe, that Clysters in those troubled
with the Colic have given an occasion of a Palsy, the which yet rightly
prepared does do good, and if the cause lie about the lower parts of the back,
they are as it were Topic Remedies.

A less laborious Clyster will be prepared thus. Take of the roots of Lillies
two ounces, Mallows, Beets or Mercury, Sage, Rue, Hyssop, Organy, Groundpine,
each one handful; Flowers of Chamomel, Lavender each one pugil; Caraway seed
two drams, Bayberries one ounce, Bran one pugil, make a Decoction adding a
little Lie, dissolve Honey one ounce and an half, Butter half an ounce, Galens
Hiera two drams, Salt a little, make a Clyster.

If it be made of Juyces it will work more strongly. Take of the juice of Beets
or Mercury two ounces, the juice of Rue, Hysop, each one ounce, Honey two
ounces, Oil of Nuts or Butter two ounces, dissolve them in salt Broth, or in
the Decoction of Sage, or a Boys urin, make a Clyster.

Of those things which are principally convenient in this case, such a one may
be composed the which also if you take out some things, will nevertheless be
effectual. Take of the root of the true Acorus (for the Marshy one, as
Rondoletius will have it, will not please) Orrice each one ounce, the herbs Beets
or Mercury, Mallows, Sage, Marjoram, Rue, Betony, Groundpine, Cowslip, Hyssop,
Organy, Penny royal, Calamint, Centory the less each one small handful; or a
greater, if you take fewer herbs, the flowers of Chamomel, French Lavender,
Rosemary, Primrose, each one pugil; the seeds of Carawaies, Fennel, Nettle,
each two drams; Wild Saffron seed one ounce, Agarick half an ounce, make a
Decoction, dissolve in a sufficient quantity, Honey of Rosemary flowers, or
common Honey one ounce and an half, the Hiera of Galen, or Hermes, or Logadius,
or of Electuary Indum, Benedicta Laxativa, each one dram; or take fewer of them
in a greater dofe, Oil of Rue, Spike, or Costus each one ounce and an half;
Fossile Salt one dram, make a Clyster.

Those things which ought to be put into the Mouth are these, either there is
made an actual Irritation of the Jaws to procure Vomiting, which proceeds in
those accustomed to it, or that have first devoured somewhat, as has been said
in giving of Vomits.

Or they are Masticatories that draw forth the slegm, both drying and altering
also, which are very convenient, and in a Palsy they empty from the Head, and
revel from the beginning of the Nerves. In a Distortion of the Mouth they
derive also, if they be often used in the morning.

Nutmeg often chewed is held by all for an excellent Remedy,

A Junket made of Mustard seed, being held in the Mouth, does work powerfully.

A profitable Compositiou may be made thus. Take of Nutmegs two drams, the root
of Pellitory of Spain, Mustard seed, each one dram and an half; Cubebs, Pepper,
Galangal, Angelico root, each half a dram; Mastich one dram, Wax a little, make
Masticatories, if a little Castor be added, and they refuse not the smell of it,
it will be most effectual.

Gargarisms perform the same. Take of the roots of Angelica, Pellitory of
Spain, the true Acorus each half a dram; the herbs Sage, Marjoram, Time,
Hyssop, Organy, each one handful; Mustard seed two drams, Staves acre, Long
Pepper, each one dram; Nutmeg half an ounce, make a Decoction in Water add
Honey of Squils or of Rosemary flowers one ounce and an half; mix them, let him
wash or gargle his mouth; there may be added of Wild Saffron seed six drams,
Turbith half an ounce, or Spurge two drams, but if there be danger that they
may swallow them, they must be omitted.

Liquid Errhines drawn up into the Nostrils, or the Sick lying on his back,
they being distilled by drops into the Nostrils, they do also provoke phlegm by
their passages. Take of the juyces of Pimpernel with purple flower, of the
roots of Beets each one ounce; the juice of Marjoram, Rue, each half an ounce:
the seeds of Gith, the root of Pellitory of Spain, each half a dram; Castor
half a scruple, Honey of Squils half an ounce, Wine one ounce, make an Errhine.

Or anoint the Nostrils with this following. Take of the juice of Sowsbread,
Pimpernel, each two drams; the juice of Marjoram one dram, Trochisks of
Alhandal one scruple, Pellitory of Spain, seeds of Gith, each half a dram;
Castor half a scruple, Honey Anacardine as much as is sufficient, make a
Liniment.

Or sometimes let a powder be blowed into the Nostrils. Take of the root of
Pellitory of Spain, the seed of Gith each half a dram; Castor half a scruple,
Euphorbium six grains, make a most fine Powder.

Suffumigations also are received by the Nostrils' as are those Fumes which are
prepared in a Dry Bath, of which hereafter, and those things principally
applied, which by drying the brain do prevent new Desluxions and strengthen the
Nerves.

Outwardly are applied to the Body in the Palsy, both to the parts palfied and
to the Backbone and Head, those things also which can heat very much, that
they may recall the Heat of the Nerves and Members, and those things which
ought to be exhaust and dry up the humors, and refresh the Nerves and Brain.
The which also are convenient for a Humoral Spasm, and these things are then
administered by dawbings of Ointments, Waters, or by Plasters, Garments, Caps
applied, or by Baths and Fomentations.

But anointing are chiefly used, which ought to be applied about the Region of
the Nerves, there where the Disease lies in them, as in a general Palsy about
the hinder Region of the Neck called the Nape, where if the evil do lurk within
the Skul, they may also thrust forth their strength so far; or in other
particular Palsies of the parts in the seat affected of the Back or of other
Members. Sometimes also they are not unprofitably applied to the parts Palsied,
because they allure the spirits into them, and send by communication their
virtues even to their affected Nerves, upon which account also the Hands and
Feet, and their parts if they be Palsied are anointed with them, and the Cheeks
in a distortion of the Mouth; the which anointing of every part or of the
Backbone will work the better, if the anointing be actually hot, if there be
joined strong Friction with the Hands, and the Hands with which we rub, be
first wet with Aqua vitae, or the part which shall be rubbed; here also we must
observe that we proceed from gentler to stronger by degrees, in this long
continued Disease; but these remedies are administered in the form of an Unguent
or Water.

The Unguents are made of diverse Oils, made by Infusion, Expression,
Distillation, which are reserved for these uses, chiefly the Oil of the seed of
Asphaltites Trifoil, which is called de Andacoca, is accounted for a singular
remedy.

But by the mixture of Oils such an Ointment may be made: Take of the Oils of
Rue, Costus, of each one ounce, of Bricks, Foxes, Worms, of each half an
ounce: Mix them, make an Ointment.

This excellent remedy may be made of Goose grease: Take a Goose Picked,
unboweld, washed with white Wine, And let it be stuck every where with Cloves
and Nutmeg, being cut first that they may be thrust in, and let it be stuffed
with Sage leaves, adding to the same leaves the Fat of a Fox, or wild Cat one
ounce, Powder of Myrrh, Frankincense, of each half an ounce, Castor,
Euphorbium, of each half a dram, Worms stifled in Vinegar, twenty: Let them be
all sowed in, and the Goose roasted on a Spit, white Wine Vinegar being put in
the pan, into which the juice and fat sweating forth may distill, and afterward
the liquor being cooled, let the fat that swims a top be gathered, most
excellent for these uses.

Another Ointment, more effectual is made thus: Take Oil of Bricks, Spicknard,
of each one ounce; of Turpentine six drams, of Euphorbium half an ounce,
Frankincense three drams, of the seeds of Gith one dram and an half; of Castor
one dram, Saffron half a dram, Wax a little; Make a Liniment.

Or if it ought to work more powerfully: Take Oil of Baies, Mustard seed by
expression, of each one ounce and anhalf; of the following Gums dissolved in
Aqua vitae, to wit, Opopanax, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Serapinum, of each half an
ounce; Euphorbium two drams; Mix them, add Oil of Turpentine half an ounce, Oil
of Bay Berries, and Spike, of each one scruple; Oil of Agath or Amber by
distillation half a scruple, the roots of white Hellebore, Pellitory of Spain,
Mustard seed, Pepper, of each half a dram; Salt Ammoniack two scruples, Castor
one scruple, Wax as much as is sufficient: Make an Unguent.

This will be a most excellent Oil: Take of expressed Oil, old Oil of Olives, or
Lamp Oil, or that in which Bricks have been quentcht four ounces, old Oil of
Nuts two ounces, Oil of Baies, Mustard seed, of each one ounce; Oil of
Juniper Berries half an ounce, Spike one dram, distilled Oil of Turpentine six
drams, of Peeter three drams, the juyces of Sage, Rue, Ground Pine, Orrice, of
each one ounce; Aqua vitae two ounces, the fat of a Fox and Goose, of each one
ounce and an half: Earth-warms first washed in wine twenty, Gum Opopanax,
Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Serapinum, dissolved in Vinegar of Squils, of each six
drams; Storax, Myrrh, Mastick, Frankincense, of each half an ounce; Euphorbium,
one dram and an half, the roots of Pellitory of Spain, Hellebor, Costus,
Galangal, Nutmeg, Pepper, Mustard seed, the Bituminous Trifoil, Gith, Lavender
flowers, Castor, of each one dram; Anacardium, salt Ammoniack, live Sulphur,
Bitumen, of each two drams; Saffron half a dram: All being rightly prepared,
powdered and mixed, let them be boiled by a slow fire to the Consumption of the
juyces. Let the Oil be reserved for use, either used by it self or mixed with
other things.

The other Oils distilled out of Plants, besides that already spoken of, of
Spike and Juniper, which are extant every where, and are prepared in great
quantities, are convenient, as of Sage, Rue, also of Spices, which being added
to these Liniments do very much increase their virtues.

The usual Unguents convenient here, are of Bdellium, Agrippa, Aregon,
Martiatum and the like, used by themselves, or mixed with the rest.

Waters made by a long Infusion in a hot place, or extracted by heat, do
Egregiously penetrate, especially if Oil also does distill forth more
plentifully with them, and being laid on instead of Unguents, they profit very
much.

The more Simple are, if Sage, Rose-mary, Time, French Lavender, and other
things Appropriate, and sweet smelling, being steeped in Aqua vita, be applied.

Of those Compounded, many called Compound Aqua vitae's are made for these
uses, of which this will be very convenient: Take of the roots of Orrice,
Hogs-Fennel, Angelica, the true Acorus, both Galangals, Costus, Pellitory of
Spain, white Hellebore, of each one ounce; Cyperus, Zedoary, Ginger, of each
half an ounce; the leaves of Sage, Time, Rose-mary, Rue, Marjoram, Ground Pine,
of each six drams, the flowers of both Lavenders, French Lavender, St.
John's Wort, Prim-rose, of each half an ounce; the seeds of Mustard, Gith, of
each two drams; Juniper and Bay Berries, of each one ounce; Nutmeg half an
ounce, Cloves, Mace, of each two drams; long and round Pepper, Cubebs,
Spikenard, wood of Aloes, Yellow Saunders, of each one dram; Saffron half a
dram, Frankincense, Myrrh, of each half an ounce, Liquid Storax three drams,
Euphorbium, Castor, of each two drams; Earthworms washed in Wine twenty,
Salt-Niter half a pound: Being prepared and powdered, let them be bedewed with
the most generous Wine, till they are made like to Frumenty, then distill them
according to art.

Those called Artificial Balsomes which yield more Oil, are prepared diverse
ways.

One more single is thus prepared: Take of Danewort, the leaves and root, Sage,
Lavender, Rue, all with their leaves and flowers, fresh, bruised, bedewed with
Aqua vitae, of each one handful; Castor two drams, Turpentine half an ounce,
Salt Ammoniack two drams, Worms washed in white Wine twelve: Draw forth a water
with the Fire of ashes, fitted for these uses.

A Compound Balsom, shall be made thus: Take of Frankincense, Mastick, of each
one ounce; Storax, Benjamin, Myrrh, Gum Opopanax, Bdellinm, Elemi, Serapinum,
Ammoniacum, Sarcocol, of each half an ounce; Euphorbium three drams, Aloes,
Ladanum, of each two drams; Castor one dram, the root of Galangal, Costus,
Nutmeg, of each half an ounce; the leaves of Sage, flowers of Lavender,
Groundpine, of each three drams; Juniper Berries half an ounce, seeds of Gith
one dram, Turpentine or Rosin of the Larix tree the weight of them all, viz.
ten ounces: Let them be distilled according to Art, and there will flow forth a
Water and Oil, the which may be anointed together or a part.

Also if the Backbone be anointed with Confection Anacardine* and Aurea
Alexandrina, dissolved in Aqua vitae, in which Sage has been infused, it will
be an effectual Remedy.

Plasters made of the same Unguents, adding Pitch and Rosin, which are good of
themselves, or Cerecloths made by increasing the quantity of Wax, do perform
the same, and because they may stick long, they work powerfully; the which are
worn applied to the Backbone also, or to the part affected.

Of the usual ones are commended, that of Bay Berries, de Betonica, Ceroneam;
as, Take of the Plaster Ceroneum, of Bay Berries, of each one ounce;
Frankincense half an ounce, Castor, Euphorbium, of each one dram; the seed of
Gith, Cresses, Mustard, the root of Pellitory of Spain, Saffron, salt Niter, of
each half a dram, with Oil of Bricks or Turpentine: Make a Plaster.

The Powder of Worms, applied Plaster wise to the Nape of the Neck, with Pepper
and Honey, does wonderfully profit.

Coverings and Garments of Skins and Feathers, do good not only by retaining
and cherishing the heat in the parts, but some of them, also are believed to
help by a propriety, if the Palsied Member be wrapped, clothed or coverd with
them, as Fox and Hares skins, Goose Feathers, and those of Doves, Cranes, and
wild birds; the which also, as other things which ought to come about the Body,
if they be smoaked with Frankincense, Mastick, Storax, Benjamin, with Spices,
and other sweet things cast upon the Coals, they will do it more effectually.

To the Head and Neck these things may be applied in a dry form: Take of the
roots of Acorus, Galangal, Orrice, the leaves of Sage, Marjoram, Balm, flowers
of Lavender, French Lavender, Rosemary, of each one dram; seeds of Coriander,
Gith, of each half a dram; Nutmeg two drams, Cubebs half a dram, Frankincense,
Mastick, Storax calamite, of each one dram and an half: Make a Powder for a a
Pillow, or a Bag which may be laid under the Head and Neck, or for a Cap to be
worn.

To Plunge or bury the Members for a while in Sand, or hot Ashes, or boiling
Wine presses, or hot Dung, does very much help.

It is counted a singular Remedy, by some for resolved Members to thrust them
oftentimes into a Tub in which Aqua vitae, or the Spirit of Wine has been
kept, one end being taken out, and it being heated with lighting of Juniper
wood, to provoke sweat out of them.

Sage is thought to do good, being only carried in the Hand, perhaps rather by
its sent then touch.

If they Plunge their Body, in a heating and drying Bath, so that it contain
the Palsied Members and the greater part of the Back, by altering and calling
forth the Humors, sometimes they may help upon that account, the which
hotwithstanding ought to be effectual, least that they moisten more by their
actual Humidity, then they potentially dry.

For which reason they are sent to Natural Baths, if other Remedies help not,
and the Disease be now a long time prolonged, and the Patient otherwise labor
of no other fault, and nothing hinders, as to the last refuge, the which they
are commanded to use for a Month and further, till their Skin be florid, and
whole again: but the Alum and Nitrous Baths are chiefly convenient, because they
dry, they likewise commend the Sulphurous ones but they mollify very much;
the Atrimental, Acid, cannot do so much good. Because acid things are enemies
to the Nerves: the Salt ones Seawater, or Spring Water heated, because they
dry, without doubt will be profitable.

Artificial Baths will do the same; if you mix with the Waters Salt, Alum,
Tartar of Wine to make them drying, and often quench Iron or Steel in it, such
as Smiths-water is, or adding the Ashes of pruning of Vines, of Bones, and
Lime. You may make like a Lie and that the Bath may be more appropriate, and
heating, you may boil the Plants by and by to be reckoned up, in a dry Bath, in
some Water prepared of those things even now spoken of, adding a Lie or Smiths
water. Or if you boil the same Plants in the Decoction of a whole Fox.

But if particular parts palsied be plunged in these, or be fomented, or washed
with them, as the Hands or Feet, they will do good.

For which this is also convenient. Take of Sage, (...) niper berries and
Leaves, the greater Spurge, each as much (...) ^fficient, boil them in a Lie,
with which foment (...) the part.

(...) Palsied parts as the Hands or others may be ^^^ged in the like Liquid
Oils or Liniments, it will be ^^^enient to foment them awhile with them, for the
^^^formance of which seeing a good estate is required, ^^is ought rather to be
done in rich folks.

By the encompassing Air, the strength is not only preserved, but also if it be
pure, the body is made less foul, and as the cold Air is chiefly hurtful,
seeing the Members of the Paralytical are otherwise cold, and Cold ^an Enemy to
the Nerves, so that which is Hot and Dry does very much good, because it
corrects the Distemper; but such is either by reason of the Heavens, and must
be let in from thence, whence it may be had, or is made such by Art, by Fires,
by Suffumigations; and also if Pigeons be converfant with the Patient in the
same Air of the Chamber, they say that it does by a propriety resist the Palsy.

If also it be applied so Medicinal, viz. made Hot, Vaporous, or Smoking, that
it draw forth the Humors, by insensible Transpiration, or manifest Sweats, the
body being first fitly purged, it is a Remedy which does wast from the part
affected, but the conjunct and Antecedent cause, and oftentimes is the prime
Remedy in curing this long continued Disease.

But let the Air be thus heated in his Chamber shut up or under his bed, and
that either with Fire alone or also with the Vapor of some Decoction, which
exhales of its own accord whiles it is hot, or if red hot flints or metals be
quenched in it, it sends forth a Vapor and Smoke, in which let the Patient
fasting, sit Naked, and repeat it often according as he can well endure.

But the Decoction for this Evaporation, may be prepared of things following
which do together powerfully heat and strengthen. Take the root of Danewort
three ounces, of Acorus, for the rich, one ounce, Hogs Fennel of Dioscorides
two ounces, the herb Sage, Groundpine, Primrose, each two handfuls; Organy,
Pennyioyal, Wild Time, Calamint, Hyssop, Marjoram, Rosemary, Time, Bays,
flowers of Chamomel, Elder, Juniper berries, of every one of them or some of
them a greater or less handful, according as they are taken boil them in Water,
adding a Lie and Wine, for a Stove or Dry Bath as they call it.

In a great and almost desperate Palsy or Rosolution of the Limbs, much may be
done if Sweat be provoked oftentimes with intermitting rest, in a Chest made
convenient to lie in, being every where close shut, the Patient being placed
with Pillows under him, with his Head out, and the hold of the Chest about the
neck of the Patient, being very well stop, the Vapor entering the Chest through
the beak of an Alembick full of many holes, by another hole in the bottom of the
Chest, in the bottom of which Alembick put under, the following things have
boiled by Balneum Mariae.

Take of the Alcohol of spirits of Wine four pound, the Essences of Sage,
Rosemary, Lavender, Marjoram, Time and Organy each two ounces; let the Vapor be
so long admitted into the Chest as the Patient can well endure it, but when the
Patient is now sufficiently moist, and the heat being too much increased, the
beak of the Alembick is drawn forth, let that which drops forth, till the
matter contained in the bottom be cool, be received in a Receiver large enough
and well closed up, that it may be kept for further use, which shall be with the
same Liquor or Spirit heated to moisten and rub the palsied Member and parts of
the Patient, after that being taken out of the Chest and the Sweat wiped off,
being placed in his bed he has sweat again; but first wiping off the Sweat.

If the Palsied Member be suffumingated before the fire, with Frankincense,
Mastich, and other sweet things, it will very much strengthen and stir up the
heat in it.

We shall help by motions of the body by decent exercise which does egregiously
wast the humors and stirs up the parts laid asleep, and recals the animal
spirit into them, heats the Cold and stregthens the Soft.

The which if they cannot eerform of their own accord that onght to be
accomplished in them by the help of Servants, by raising and bearing them up,
that they may be able in some sort to walk, and the Patient himself must
endeavor to use his languid Members, and being idle, continuallystir and
exercise them.

Friction is chiefly convenient, being made both for Diversion sake in the
sound parts, and performs the same benefit being applied to Sick, seeing
nothing does more powerfully allure the spirits, which is done only by the
hands of the standers by or also by applying a rought hot Cloth, or the Patient
himself may do it by rubbing the sick parts with the sound.

All which will be administered with better success in a fitting time, the
Patient being fasting, and the body first purged.

By motions of the mind also we discuss the humors, in Watchings longer than
usual, for a good while continued, and we prevent that they be not heaped up by
immoderate sleep.

They feel benefit by some Affections of the mind that inflame the body, if so
be that they do not too much weaken, as by Anger, seeing a Fever also as has
been said, does not hurt,

Amongst manifest Openings, only Bleeding takes place in the Plethorick, seeing
we know that the abundance of this Phlegmatic humor is produced from the planty
of crude blood or fomented by it, but then also it must be done sparingly in
the Arm, of the sound part, neither must we credit the Arabians who teach us to
draw so great a quantity of blood, seeing by that their languid heat is
extinguished.

Scarification also brings some help, not by reason of the drawing forth of
Blood, but by reason of the Cupping-Glasses applied upon it: the which yet are
more profitably fastened to the sick parts, but without Scarification that they
may more strongly attract the spirit thither; and that they may divert the
humor from the Nerves possessed with it, diligently observing the place
wherethe cause of the evil lies, especially if this be about the Marrow of the
Back, the Cupping-Glasses being fastened a little below descending by degrees to
the palsied member, they oftentimes free the Nerves from it.

Instead of which Rubefiers and blistering Remedies, stronger than these do
effect the same more strongly. Of which they are wont to apply the stronger
Vesicatories, or instead of them Causticks and Setons, to the hinder part of
the Neck, which they call the Nape, which will be then most convenient, if in a
general Palsy the cause be near to the Brain, although also it does good, if
the cause lurk there about the beginng of the spinal Marrow in a Hemiplegia,
because it calls it forth, and moves it from its place, and also Causticks
applied to the Arm, do revell the humors.

If a Palsy be caused from a Watery Phlegmatic or Serous humor, The Cure of
Palsy or Spasm from other humors.
mixed with acrid choleric humors, not only bedewing the Nerves but also
irritating them, as after Colic pains we have said it does most frequently
happen in our age, with Pain and sense of tingling; then the Cure as long as
the Colic pain lasts shall rather be applied to that, and those evil humors
must be purged forth, as has been said there, and those things ought rather to
be applied and given, which by lenifying the Nerves may hinder Convulsions into
which it is wont easily to terminate, as has been said in Convulsions; in the
interim not rashly foretelling any good event: because if Convulsions be
supervenient, it is wont easily to kill; but if that other Disease ceasing,
that do accompany these Palsies, they do remain in many or particular parts,
then the same cure must be administered, which has been explained in a
Phlegmatic Palsy.

It has been showed, that from Blood a Palsy cannot be caused, especially a
lasting one which if it be as Practitioners have writ, because then the Blood
consisting yet in the Veins, easily goes back by its part inverted, if it be
caused by the perverse Situation of it, and by and by cease: or if it be
from a Plenitude, it will be Cured by bleeding, and by other things that revel
and derive.

If from too much Refrigeration of a Muscle and Nerve by the external cold (for
concerning that which is caused by a phlegmatic Humor has been spoken already)
not only a Stupidity as that happens, The Cure of a Palsy from cooling.
but also a Resolution of the Member be caused, then as has been showed in a
Stupidity, it is corrected by things actually hot, applied by degrees and by
Frictions, by which unless it cease, those Topic Remedies which have been
explained in a Phlegmatic Palsy, viz. anointing, Fomentations and Baths
according as their form is appliable to the part affected, will here also take
place.

If a Flatulent Palsy be caused from Wind, The Cure of a Flatulent Spasm from
Wind.
therefore so called, whether they be the cause of it, or if it be caused from
the too much astriction of the Muscles, by increasing of it, they render it
more vehement and lasting. Then if this happen but seldom, it can signify no
evil, because it proceeds from a manifest cause, too much Motion, or
Refrigeration, and therefore it is neglected, but if it return often, because
it breeds great trouble, and weakness, the Limbs because it has an internal
cause accompanying it, plenty of Wind, and an undecent Connection of the
Muscles, as has been said, it must not be neglected, because sometimes it can
scarce be wholly taken away.

Which if it molest not only in the Feet and Joints but also elsewhere, as in
the Back or lower Jaw or Mouth, it wants not its danger of falling to an
Epilepsie, and therefore as has been said there, we must provide against it
betimes.

But in other Causes, the following Remedies shall be used both for prevention
out of the sit, if it return often, or in the fit if it continue; which dispel
Wind and Relax the bound up Muscles.

There are given to hinder the Product of Wind and to discuss it, as well in
course of Diet, as in purging Medicines, heating, and strengthening, such us in
windy cases, especially of the Stomach, we shall explain in their proper places.

There are applied to the Muscle affected, which we know by the bunching forth
of the place, and pain) those things in the fit which are Actually or
Potentially heating, and discussing Wind do help by Lenisiing and Relaxing the
part. But out of the fit, those things which do also by strengthening the part
with a light astriction provent the often returning Disease by using almost the
same, which in a Phlegmatic Palsy and true Contractions we have showed to be
the gentler, and have there described them.

Anointings are made with Oils of Chamomel, Lillics, Dill, or after this
manner, if the part must be strengthend too: Take of Oil of Chamomel or another
of those three, one ounce, of Foxes or Worms, Mastick, of each half an ounce:
Mix them, anoint the part hot, your Hands or the part being first moistend with
Aqua vitae.

Oil of Guaicum anointed with Aqua vitae and Sage helps speedily.

Or make Plasters amongst which Martiatum is convenient.

The Waters and Balsom Oils explained in a Palsy are convenient, amongst which
simple Aqua vitae applied alone, gives present help, if it be hot.

Treacle dissolved in Aqua vitae, rather then in Oils as they teach, and
anointed, will profit very much.

Fomentations, Incessions, Baths, reckond up in a Palsy and Contraction will
do good, being actually or potentially hot. Amongst which a Lie may be applied,
as shall be said in the Gout, for prevention sake, because it confirms the Lax
parts and those which receive the Humors or Wind, adding some things that
strengthen.

This Plaster is very much approved: Take of Wormwood, Pennyroyal, of each one
handful; Bay Berries one pugil, Cummin half an ounce: Bruise them, boil them in
strong Wine and Honey: Make a Cataplasm.

The Bags prescribed in a Palsy being first bedewed with Wine will do good
also, or thus when by strengthening we would prevent the evil: Take of the
flowers of Chamomel, Melilot, Roses, Bran, Juniper or Bay Berries, of each one
pugil; Myrtles half a pugil, Orrice roots half an ounce, seeds of Faenigreek,
Carawaies, Cummin, of each three drams; Salt one pugil, for a Bag.

A Bag may quickly be prepared for use, only of Millet, Bran, and Salt.

Hot Skins, and other the like things are convenient.

Also gentle Friction, with the Hands or hot Cloths.

By drawing back the part affected, we shall make the fit shorter, or that it
presently cease, if the Muscles that are involuntarily violently extended, or
bent, and by that drawing the Member, we do voluntarily endeavor by a contrary
motion and straining, of the Muscles which are opposed to the diseased ones, to
draw them back together with the Member: for so being bound up or out of the
way, they are Relaxt again with the Members, and recover their natural
Situation, and the Wind, which did possess the spaces of them contracted, when
the Muscles return into their place, is repeld from those places and forced to
give way, which in the Muscles that constitute the Calf and Feet and move the
Toes, being contracted we daily find by experience, is done by a contrary
extension and the pain presently ceases.

From dryness or Inanition, The Cure of Contraction from dryness.
as they would have it, of the Muscles, or their Tendons that draw the Member,
and sometimes of the Nerves or Ligaments that compass the joints, if there be a
Contraction of that part to which these serve for Motion, whether it happen in
the Back or other places, if their dryness be great, the evil is incurable; as
when this comes to pass, by reason of Age and labor. But also it is hardly
cured, if caused for other reasons, it has been of long continuance, as we see
for the most part, those Contracted in the Hands, Feet, and laboring of a
Tetanus, do remain contracted in those places all their lise time, or are only
changed a little for the beter.

Yet nevertheless the Cure is ofttimes prositably applied at the beginning with
success, and by this Method, by applying outwardly to the part affected,
Moistning and Laxating Medicines, of which because some of them do cool, the
chief part of the Cure is performed by mixing hot things with them, and those
that strengthen the Nerves, to wit if they be applied to the Muscle and its
Tendon and to the Body which sometimes is neighboring to the Member that draws,
but at other times far distant, and is extended to it by a long, sometimes a
very long Tendon; also to the joint if the Ligaments are bound up.

The Back therefore with the Bone is anointed in a Tetannus, or the Members in
other Species of contraction after this manner: Take of Oil of sweet Almonds
fresh one ounce and an half, of Violets, Lillies, Chamomel, Flax made thy
expression that is new, Worms, of each one ounce; Oil of St. John's Wort, the
Mucilage of the seeds of Flea-wort, Flax, the fat of a Duck, the Marrow of
Calves legs of each half an ounce; Turpentine two drams, Sulphur two drams and
an half, powder of Worms one dram, flowers of St. John's Wort, of each half a
dram; Saffron one scruple, Wax as much as is sufficient: Make a Plaster.

They magnify the fat of a man in this case, as also of Eeles, perhaps because
that is counted appropriate, and this more moist, because it is taken from
Fishes.

A Bath in a Tetanus, or Irrigation in others, or a Fomentation of the place
affected, may be made of these things, applied Warm, of sweet Water, Milk, fat
broth of the Head and entrals of a Weather or Calfe; Water and Oil, or Oil
alone, especially of Violets.

Or of the following Decoction: Take of the roots of Marshmallows, Bryony,
Lillies, of eech one pound; fresh Orrice root half a pound, the Herbs Mallows,
Violets, Lettice, Arach, Cole-worts, of each one handful; Sage, Gronnd-pine of
each half a handful; Flax seed, clean Barley, of each one pugil: Boil them in
Water for a Bath to which also the other things may be mixed.

Sulphur Baths have a great virtue to Mollesie, because nothing is fatter then
Sulphur, as has been demonstrated eisewhere.

Palsters applied to the part because they remain there, do highly profit, as
Melilot, de Mucilaginibus, Resumptiaum, and the like, prepared of the
forementioned Unguents.

Or Cataplasms also are made of the foresaid Plants in the Bath, which do help
more then the rest being worn a long while and often renewed.

This also is most commendable: Take of the fresh roots of Marshmallows,
Briony, of each two ounces; of Mandrake one ounce, fresh leaves of Henbane
(which I have known by experience, as also Mandrake do wonderfully Mollify)
Mallows, of each one handful: Boil them in Milk, bruise them, adding the flower
of Flax seed two ounces, Flea-wort, Quinces, of each half an ounce; Hogs and
Goose grease, of each one ounce; Oil of sweet Almonds, fresh Butter, of each
half an ounce; Bay Berries two drams, Saffron half a dram: Make a Cataplasm.

The Caul, Mesentery, Kidneys, with the fat, being made watm, are laid on the
sick part.

Skins of themselves or first anointed with Oil, being newly pulled off,
especially Fox Skins do good, and a Goose Skin with the Feathers.

We can scarce do any thing singular, by things taken inwardly, or injected
here, unless by accident in relation to that Disease but in a Convulsion or
particular Spasm, they help very much.

If the contracted Members can be separated by manual operation, then though
they be not made moveable again, the which yet sometimes comes to pass,
nevertheless another form may be fitted for them, which brings a less
impediment in Motion: as if the Fingers being extended be stopped, then if they
be contracted, they are less prejudicial in laying hold of things; if the Foot
stick drawn upwards, being drawn back to the ground, although the joint of the
Knee remain fixed, yet it restores the going which before was taken away.

But this we may sometimes do in some places with our Hands, or application of
Instruments forcing it somewhat down daily, not with a great force, but by
little and little, in process of time more and more relaxing the bound up
Tendons and Ligaments, and that according to the Nature of the Member
contracted, diverse ways; as if by reason of the joint of the Knee fixed, as it
often comes to pass, the Foot be drawn upwards, putting on the Shoe and tying
it else where, by continually drawing it down, whiles they sit and do any
thing: or by hanging a weight to it ofttimes depressing it; the which also is
neatly performed, if two oblong plates hollow in the middle, fitted to the Leg
and hinder part of the Hips and joined about the joint, by interposition of an
Engine and turning it as long as he is able to endure, the Foot be forced by
degrees from the upper parts downwards, and also it is commodiously performed
in other places after the same manner by an Engine having caannelling, because
if it be turened, by degrees pressing those parts into which it is inserted, it
forces the fixed Member, and because the Engine so turned remains immovable,
the same does substain and return the Member as far as it has thrust it. Which
I have made trial of in many with success, the Instruments being Ingeniously
made. As also if a Finger remain extended, a Ring being put upon it, which must
be Contiguous and fastend to another Ring applied on the next Finger; whiles
this Finger is moved, the other which is fixed being continually forced, is at
length compeld somewhat to yield and bow.

If the Member be stopped by a hard Tumor, Callus, The Cure of a Contraction, or
Spasm from a Tumor.
or Skar growing in the Tendons, and Ligaments, or if by possessing or pressing
a Nerve they cause a Palsy, there is no other manner of Cure ordered then by
Emollient things, which is due to these also arising in other places, as shall
be explained there: in the interim the fixed Members, if they be very
prejudicial in that Situation, they must be continually drawn into a righter
and less incongruous form, by actual labor, as was said even now.

If a Palsy be caused from a violent compression of a Nerve by a burden or
bound, The Cure of a Palsy from compression.
then these Impediments must be removed, and the bands loosed; the which being
taken away, if a Stupidity or Palsy do continue, the spirits must be recalled
by Frictions and other hot things applied, spoken of in a Phlegmatic Palsy;
seeing a Nerve is scarce pressed by a Bone Luxated, but rather other
discommodities follow from thence, they shall be explained in them.

If a Palsy be from a Wound, a Tendon, The Cure of a Palsy from a solution of
continuity.
Nerve, or Ligament being cut in two, it is incurable, yet there are
Chyrurgions that are wont to sow together Tendons cut in two. If this come to
pass from a Muscle wounded transersly, the same cure must be made as in other
Wounds, the which also oftentimes helps; but if it be wholly cut off, because
then it is drawn back both ways, and is hardly joined together again or
retained, nevertheless there remains an immobility of that part, when the Wound
is cured.

If a Palsy be caused by a Contusion, Blow, or Fall, if there follow an
Inflammation in a Nerve a Convulsion easily ensues, which is deadly; that this
therefore may not be, the Blood must presently be revelled by opening a Vein
and otherwise; but upon the part contused, cold, astringent things must not be
applied, but those which digest too.

Such a Plaster as this. Take of Mastick, Frankencense, Gum of Ivy, each half
an ounce; Mummy two drams, Powder of Worms one dram, flowers of Chamomel,
Roses, of each half a dram; Oil of Roses, Chamomel, Wall flower, of each one
ounce; Turpentine and Wax as much as is sufficient: Make a Plaster.

At the end, when there is no more fear of an Inflammation, let it be anointed
with the Unguents mentioned in a Phlegmatic Palsy; if the Palsy continue
still, to recall the heat of the Nerve, and the Palsied parts, this will be most
excellent: Take the roots of Pellitory of Spain four drams, Pipper three drams,
Sulphur five drams, Powder of Worms two drams, Castor two scruples, Euphorbium
one scruple: Let them boil in ten ounces of Oil to the Consumption of half;
anoint the Vertebrae of the Neck and Back, the Emunctories also, and places
affected.

If a Callus be left in a Nerve, how we must proceed, has been already said in
a hard Tumor.

The Contusion of a Muscle or part which is moved, requires no other Cure then
a general Contusion, of which we shall treat in its place.

If the Fracture of a Bone be the cause, The Cure of Immobility from the
Fracture of Bones
that a Member cannot be moved, then by manual operation chiefly we shall
endeavor to set the broken Bone. If it decline from the other, and shorten the
Member; then we must retain those now joined, or those which though they be
broken, yet do still hang together, that they part not a sunder: afterward we
must apply Medicines to the place affected, that assuage pain, and keep off an
Inflammation, if need be, and those things which help also the Bones that they
may be Conglutinated, and grow together, or Consolidated. Which they do by
accident, chiefly by taking away the Impediments, and by somewhat binding the
Fracture, and as it were obliterating it by an Emplastick virtue, because
otherwise the Concretion it self of the Bones is perfected only by the labor of
Nature, by the benefit of the juice that nourishes the Bones, as of Glue, as
has been said concerning Wounds.

We set and join again the broken Bone (if nothing else hinder, as the Splints
of Bones broken, which must be first taken away, as shall be said in its place)
either by our Hands only, or moveover applying Instruments, as shall be said in
a Luxation, drawing it by degrees so far, till it come to the end of the
Fracture of its Bone to which it was joined, and then thrusting it with the
Hands it must be decently joined again with it, and that as much as may be most
evenly, for so both suddenly and easily it grows together with it again, but
if it do not join it self with it, nor rightly as before, then it must needs be
that they grow together again, by a Callus intermediating, so large, as that
distance remained. From whence, because that cannot be done so suddenly, the
Cure is prolonged, and the Member oftimes remains crooked, or otherwise ill
shaped.

We retain the broken Bones together, if first of all we wrap them decently in
Swaths, then putting about them thin boards or Bark, or the like Instrument on
the part affected being first swathed up, which may comply with their
hollowness, we must bind them so, and that the bound up Bones may not easily
move out of their place, we must tie them straight, and so faterwards they keep
the part quiet.

Sometimes we Foment the place affected, before it be swathed, according as we
would allay pain, or bind, for fear of an Inflammation, either with red Stiptick
Wine, or with the Decoction of Elm and Myrtle leaves, or with Oil, Wine and
Vinegar mixed together, with unwasht Wool: or the Swath it self is moistened
with Oil of Roses, or Oxycrate before it is applied.

Or the place affected is anointed first with Oil of Roses, Mirtles and the
like, by reason of the pain, for when we would bind, the following form is
more profitable.

The part being already bound, as has been said, it is encompassed with Plasters
the which also are sometimes applied to the naked part, if necessity require it,
and afterward the part is bound, but then they must be often changed.

The more simple ones are: Take of Comfry, the roots of Cranes bill, as much as
is sufficient, bruise them, and being mixed with Hogs grease, let them be
applied.

Another, Take of Mastick, Frankincense, of each half an ounce; Bole one ounce,
Aloes, Dragons blood, or the binding Bean-tree, of each two drams; Gum
Tragacanth, Arabic, of each one dram; the Volatile Flowers of a handmeil two
ounces. With the white of an Egg, Make a Plaster.

Or thus; Take of the Volatile flour of a Handmil half a pound, the flour of
Barley and Beans, of each three ounces, Bole two ounces, Parget one ounce, the
Blood stone half an ounce, Frankincense three ounces, Comfry root half an
ounce, the Ashes of Crabs shells two drams: Make a Powder, which the Chyrurgeons
may keep for they use, that then when there is need, they may mix it with the
white of an Egg to the form of a Plaster, adding Oil of Roses that it dry not
too much, and may stick.

Certain things given to drink, are thought to help very much the Consolidation
of the Bones, as we shall say concerning Vulnerary Potions. Thus Dioscorides
approves the Decoction of Mullein: Matthiolus the juice of Prim-rose; the more
modern give of the sandy Stone of Osteocolla one dram pouderd with Wine, in the
morning three times at the least, whose efficacy they wonderfully commend, and
I have made trial off.

As concerning a course of Diet and other general help, we must take care that
the Body be kept clean and pure, and be not Constipated by its lying down: and
Blood must be taken away, if an Inflammation be feared.

If a Luxation of a joint caused by force, or by reason of the Laxness of the
Ligaments does stop Motion, and the Separation of it be only slight, sometimes
it returns again into its place, of its own accord, by the proper Motion of the
Member. But if there be a total Dislocation, there will need greater force to
reduce the Bone, by drawing, forcing, pressing it, and that it fall not out
again, by retaining and confirming the joint, that it slip not again, and by
taking away the Impediments. which is performed in some joints easier in others
with greater difficulty, in some not at all, if it has been of long
continuance: and the Bone has made it self a socket elsewhere.

We draw the Bone which in an Exarthrema from another Bone, being carried
upwards by it, does shorten the part, till it be reduced again under the Cavity
of the other Bone. Which is performed either by the Hands alone, if it give way
easily, but if otherwise, by applying a Swath also by the help of others, or by
the succor of Instruments. As in the Thigh Luxated, there is need of great
endeavor to reduce it, but the Jaw being Luxated we reduce it diverse ways
laying hold of it by the grinders and drawing it: but we draw back the
Vertebrae in a bunch of the Back crookt outwardly, inwardly, or to the sides,
and removed out of their place by a contrary straining, by standing or setting
so bowing the Back, that its crookedness is raised up by degrees, because this
cannot be done by any force used. Wherefore that is done most rightly in such a
posture of lying in which they continue longest, chiefly by the help of an
Instrument, by which the part in the Interim is pressed, as shall be said.

We force it by violently thrusting the Bone, which in an Exarthrema is
attracted, or in a Pararthrema is departed from the middle to the
Circumference. As also in Arthrodies, if many Bones have parted a sunder, by
pressing the Bone there, where its top stands forth, toward the opposite seat
which is hollow, so far till it fall again into its socket, or be put again into
its place, which we sometimes know by the Noise that it makes. But this is
commonly done easily by the Hands alone, if so be it be forced to the right
place, but at other times there is need of greater strength to do it, when the
Shoulder is fallen downwards under the Arm-pit: for then when the Arm is
extended, it is raised up by a Chyrurgions Shoulder put under it, or by some
other Artifice it is pressed upwards with great force, which is not performed
without great pain, as it were of a rack.

By pressing the Vertebrae of the back by degrees, dislocated in their moveable
Connection the bunch of the back bunching forth backwards sometimes we correct
its crookedness whiles it is yet in making and not confirmed, commonly in the
younger sort only. Which seeing it is not completed, but in a long time, there
will be need of an Instrument fit for it which continually cleaving to the
part, may successively press it. Such as is a breast plate put on of Paper, or
pitched Leather, or made of a Plate of Iron, pressing the Gibbous part, the same
is effected by a Cloth breast plate, in which a Plate of Iron, or Lead is
sowed, or by some other Art.

We keep the Joint being joined again, inquiet, that it be not again separated
or dislocated, if we keep it immovable, and that until the parts which were
relaxt, being confirmed, the Joint afterward, can subsist in its own place,
when it is moved again: which will be more rightly done by underpropping the
Member putting Pillows and Cushions under it; or also hanging it in a string
cast about the Neck, in which putting in the arm, we keep up the the Shoulder
that it fall not down again. But also in danger of a Luxation, a part being
lengthned and relaxt, seeing we cannot always abstain from Motion, we must
take care at least that it be not too vehement; as also they who do easily
suffer a Luxation of the Jaw, they must abstain from that strong opening of the
Mouth by yawning. And they that have a bunch growing, they must be moved, so
that they do not very much incline or bend their Body, but as much as may be,
they must keep it upright, and that by the Instrument even now mentioned, not
only the bunch be pressed, but also the Back be kept upright.

Also Ligatures are applied, if the Bone reduced do hardly stay, and the part
can be bound a little.

Moreover Remedies are sometimes applied extrinsecally, if pain urge, the which
presently cease, if the Member be rightly reduced. Or if any thing else be
joined, as an Inflammation, Fractures, or sinvous Ulcer, which sometimes pours
forth its Matter by the Hip, as has been said, whose Cure shall be explained
in their places.

To confirm the Joint when there is fear of a Luxation, or if there have been
one, and being reduced again, that it may not easily return, astringent
Remedies are applied to it, which by drying may wast the Moistures of the
place, especially also if they be the cause of it.

The Joint is to this intent most profitably wrapped up in a Cere-cloth that
does allay pain, and strengthen the Juncture. Take of Rams fat, white Wax, of
each half a pound: Dissolve them, mix of Volatile flour of a Mill two ounces,
Frankincense, Mastich, Bole, Dragons blood, of each one ounce; Comfry roots
half an ounce; and whiles they are hot, stir them together, and dip the cloth,
till this matter grow to it, apply it.

Such Plasters also as we have described in Fractures are here convenient, or
this following: Take of Frankincense, Mastick, Colophony, Rosin, Pitch, each
one ounce; Wax and Oil of Roses, as much as is sufficient: Make a Plaster, let
him wear it.

A Cataplasm if necessity require, may be made thus, especially when pain
urges: Take of the roots of great Burr (which Dioscorides teaches does very
much assuage pain in the Luxated) of Daffodil, of each half a pound; leaves of
Plantane, Nettle, of each two handfuls: Boil them in red Wine, add of the
Mucilage of Comfry roots two ounces, the flower of Faenugreek seed one ounce,
Honey two onnces, Salt two drams, Oil of Myrtles or Mastick two ounces: Bruise
them for a Cataplasm.

A Cautery also or Vesicatory applied on the part does powerfully dissolve, and
calls forth the moisture, with which the Joints being possessed are easily
Luxated.

Some write that the juice of Prim-roses given by the Mouth, does help in
Luxations.

If an Organical fault do cause Immobility, The Cure of Immobility by fault of
the Organ.
and it be from the Birth, it is incurable, because we cannot fashion the parts
otherwise; but if it be from an adventitious cause, the Tendons being too much
Relaxt, and Lengthened, by some force or humor, the same Topic means will do
good, as in the said Palsy, especially the phlegmatic one. But if they being
too much bound, that a slatulent Spasm be caused, the Cure has been explained
in Winds: but if there be a true Contraction and lasting, the same Cure as that
for Dryness will be convenient as has been said.

CHAP. III. Concerning Depraved Motion.
The Kinds,
WE call that Depraved motion, when Voluntary Motions especially, are exercised
either Immoderately, or unseasonably, or otherwise undecently; as it comes to
pass when the Members that perform those Motions are Restless or Cramped, or
Tremble, or Be^^ or are Shaken by a Rigor, or are Extended by re^^^ and
yawning, or otherwise moved by twinkling.

The Members are said to be Restless when they are acted too much, Restlessness
and rest not, as when men besides themselves, mad men, and phrenitical, do
exercise such various and violent motions, and angry, furious folks do things
so headlongly, but chiefly those who labor of that disease called Vitus his
Dance, do tire their Feet with Running and Jumping beyond measure, of whom we
have spoken in an Alienation of the mind. Those also that lie by it, in other
Diseases both Waking and Sleeping are sometimes very unquiet, and it is properly
called Inquietude, and he that is sick of it, is called Assodis, it is a
Symptom of many Diseases, that overthrows the strength, with which they that
are affected, sometimes toss their body variously hither and thither, whence
they have called it jactation, and some Jectigation, sometimes they often raise
themselves up, sometimes continually exercise their hands and feet, retract
them, change them. Sometimes they roll to the Feet, which in acute Diseases
(with which this is a familiar accident) Hippocrates reckons it amongst the
deadly signs; in the healthful also such like restlessness is wont to be
troublesome both to them Waking and Sleeping whether also may be referd that
unseasonable Nightwalking in Dreams of which has been spoken in Watching.

The Members are said to be convelled, A Convulsion.
when they exercise those inordinate Motions, as has been said in a general
Convulsion or Epilepsie, and it happens also in a particular Spasm, especially
in that Species, in which the Members are yet agitated, and their motion is not
yet stopped, they being attracted by a Convulsion, as in that called a Convulsive
Palpitation, has been shown in a particular Cramp.

The Members are said to tremble, when they are stirred upwards or downwards
with an inequal motion, A Trembling.
and it is called Trembling, which then is caused chiefly, when we would use
them, which sometimes tremble more sometimes less, which often happens in the
Hands when somewhat is to be laid hold on: and sometimes in the Feet which
tremble as they stand: and sometimes in the Head, which continually is moved
hither and thither: sometimes the lower Jaw becomes tremulous, the which often
happens before Vomiting which it presageth, we have seen a Citizen of ours
Tremble in all the parts together even from his birth unto his old age, with
his Arms, Hands, Fingers, Feet, with which he danced as it were while he went,
with his head also which he shaked, and with his Jaw with which he chewed as it
were.

The Members are said to beat or pant, not when they are shaken, A Palpitation.
being about to do something, as in a trembling, but when they are somewhat
attracted involuntarily, and are again relaxt as in Convulsive Palpitation, we
have formerly said, it does come to pass after the same manner, which
Palpitation may be referred to that Species which they call the flatulent
Spasm, having almost the same cause, as shall be said, and therefore it may be
called a flatulent Palpitation, yet more gently exercising the Members rather
than strongly drawing them, as the other does; seeing the Members are properly
said to palpitate, when the Muscles and the Skin over them are somewhat lifted
up, and sink again, and that with pain for the most Part and trouble, the
Members in the interim not being attracted or very little.

We say the Members are shaken by a Rigor, A Rigor
when there is a certain Convulsion of the whole body, or of its parts, almost
as it befalls those that tremble, but with a certain sense of cold and
involuntarily, whence it is called a Rigor, as in the beginning of the Fits of
intermitting Fevers, the whole body by this means is extended, bowed, shaken,
oftentimes so strongly, that the Teeth knocking together make a Noise, which
they call the Gnashing of the Teeth and continual Fevers also do invade with
the like Rigor, and sometimes when a Crisis is at hand, it is a foreteller of
it; at other times the Agitation is lighter and then it is called Horror or
shivering in which a greater sense of cold runs through the body, Horror.
and the hairs stand upright and the pores bound up make the Skin rough: and
sometimes Cold only does molest a man as has been said in Fevers: but also out
of Diseases a Rigor or Horror, like unto these does somewhat shake the Body from
External cold, Fear, and sometimes a Rigor arises from external Causes without
Cold.

In that called Reaching, the Arms especially with the back are very much
extended, Reaching.
and bowed with a vehement opening or drawing asunder of the Mouth which they
call Gaping, the which also may be caused apart; these two if they trouble
often without occasion, do presage Diseases or are Prefaces to the Fits of
Fevers beginning: but otherwise out of Diseases they are signs of sloth, or
they arise from some Imagination as shall be said.

We call that Nyctation when the Eyes are forced to twinkle, Nyctation
that is the Eyelids fall down, and they are coverd with them and can hardly be
kept open, as it happens in the slothful when they are full and heavy to sleep,
sometimes also it happens in Diseases.

The Causes.
The Causes of these Kinds of Depraved motion, may be various, in the Brain,
Nerves, Muscles, and Members: either an agitation of the Spirits, a
Perturbation, or Irritation, Distension, Weakness.

The Spirits stirred by the affections of the Mind do cause a heat in the
Brain, A perturbation of the Mind, is the cause of restlesness.
or being troubled by a Mixture of Humors, Vapors, by Alienating the Mind, and
offering diverse imaginations, do cause that they are so unquiet, and do attempt
and perform diverse things, as has been explained in an Alienation of the Mind.

An Irritation made in the Nerves, which way it causes that the Body is
convelled, An Irritation of the Nerves, is the Cause of a Convulsion.
or Exagitated with inordinate motions, has been said in a convulsion. But
from Irritation and trouble also, other Motions are diversely forced according
to the diversity of the cause, that they are made too much, or not rightly. For
the said restlesness is often caused from heat, not only because it promotes
actions, and brings them into act, or causes a raving in the Brain heated, but
when the whole Body boyles with it in Fevers, and because it makes a great
trouble, Heat the cause of restlesness.
it makes the Body unquiet, and it is a Symptom of the feverish, especially of
the continual, continent, burning; and then also of the intermitting when in
the fit an exceeding heat does chiefly afflict, Pain the cause
as shall be shown in Fevers. The Body offended with some other grievous pain,
and afflicted with it as with an enemy, can subsist or rest in no place, and in
driving away and mitigating it, it does reinforce all its actions: from Acrid,
Choletick or Salt, or Putrid humors, passing through the sensible parts, and
the flesh of the Muscles, and as it were pricking and Irritating them, because
their Expulsive faculty endeavors to repel the trouble, that concussion of the
Body is caused in the said rigor or shaking fit as this does happen in the
beginning of Fevers from the like matter exhaling and passing through the Body.
And upon that account first of all, Retchings and Gapings do follow, and by and
by horrors or rigors. Sometimes also that they do manifest themselves before a
Crisis, has been said in Fevers, in other Evacuations in which the like acrid
Excrements are cast forth, as in making water, stooling, sweating, a rigor or
horror, does somewhat shake either the whole Body, or certain parts, whiles they
are a doing; the which also is wont ofttimes to fall out, before these
Evacuations are made, and to presage them at hand, Nature being now stirred up
to attempt them. As some horror in a Crisis and out of it, sometimes is a
foreteller of sweats at hand: and the lower Jaw for the most part is wont to
tremble before vomiting, and as it were to solicit the Mouth to a voluntary
opening, the natural faculty so forcing it.

From Breathy Vapors, Breathy Vapors the cause of reching.
as they call them, collected in the Spaces of the Muscles, soliciting nature
to Excretion, rather by their plenty then by a vehement Acrimony, that Motion
of distension of the Limbs or Pandiculation also does proceed; because in that,
the Muscles which are chiefly possessed with them, being bound up to drive them
forth, do so draw the Members; and that especially, because then a weariness
being joined to, either Spontaneous, which arises from the plenty of these
Excrements collected about the Muscles, or that proceeding from labor, from
which also there is a congestion of Halituous vapors about the Muscles, by this
constriction of the Muscles in Pandiculation, not only because then the Vapors
are driven forth they are somewhat refresht from their Weariness, but also
because the Muscles being relaxt by too much and long continued motion, and
when they rest feeling that Weariness, when they are bound up again, they do
less feel the Weariness, as has been formerly said that one Weariness is cured
by another, they acquire some ease of their labors by reaching and therefore in
weariness they are invited to exercise it, and being invited are forced. And
this is the cause, that commonly reaching does accompany the natural weariness
and sluggishness before sleep, till the Body afterward rightly resting by
sleep, be freed from the weariness, and after sleep also so long, til that
which remains of the Halituous Vapor, be expelled, by yet extending the Body.
And because in a Spontaneous weariness going before Diseases, both by reason of
the plenty of Vapors, and this weariness of the Body that also does manifest it
self; as the same weariness and plenty of Vapors does cause that drawing a
sunder of the Mouth and blowing forth, in the said gaping, the Muscles of the
Breast, and lower Jaw, and Cheeks working together and as it were consenting to
the endeavor of the rest of the Muscles, if gaping be joined with reaching, or
these Muscles acting severally, The Immagination, is the cause of gaping.
to mitigate their weariness and discuss the Vapors, gaping arises. The which
also arises from the Immagination, if one see anoother gaping, or think of it,
being so invited as it were to do the like; yet more easily in the sloathful,
and drowsy, or those disposed, then in others. And the same cause also
depending on the weariness of the Muscles that move the Eyes and Eylids, and on
the Vapors collected about them, does breed the same twinkling of the Eyes,
which is not only coupled sometimes with reaching and gaping in the sloathful,
but also arises by it self always, when sleep invites. And that because by
reason of the continual Motion of the Eyes they are always made weary, and
because the shutting of the Eyes, which this heaviness of the Eyes does so much
force, that they remain shut also in those that sleep, is necessary for the
righter taking of Sleep.

From the said Halituous vapors, Halituous vapors, the Cause of Palpitation.
but thicker and more plentiful, collected in the habit of the Body and running
up and down to seek a passage out, the said Palpitation is caused; which if
they break forth under the Skin, and wander between that and the Membranes of
the Muscles under it, here and there lifting up the Skin in some one or more
places, and variously changing their place, they cause there an apparent
Palpitation, sometimes with a sense of pain. But if they run under the Muscles
and their spaces, and be unquiet they cause that the Members be also somewhat
attracted, yet not strongly or lastingly as we have said it was done in that
called a Flatulent Spasm, but only by intervals then when the wind gathering it
self as it were into one place does force the Muscles alluring the part, but by
and by letting it alone, the wind flying back again and giving place. So that
if this Agitation of the Members be from this cause, as has been said, it may
deservedly be called a milder Species of a Flatulent Convulsion, or a Flatulent
Palpitation, as that which is caused by the Irritation of the Nerves, as has
been declared in a Convulsive Palpitation. The causes of which Flatulent
Palpitation also whether they be Wind or Vapors, have no other original, then
that which has been propounded in a Flatulent Spasm.

That weakness of the Muscles by reason of which, their action does not wholly
cease, but only cannot be be sufficiently performed, does not cause a total
Impotency to move, but only an impaired one, manifesting it self depravedly and
with trembling, and that because whiles the Muscle does endeavor to lift up the
Member, and it cannot keep it so long, by reason of its weakness, that sliding
back indeed by a natural Motion by reason of gravity, but the Muscle drawing it
back again upwards by a voluntary Motion, by this intercourse, and as it were
contention of Motion amongst themselves, the Member stirred upward and
downwards, arises that called a trembling: which will be so much the greater
if the Member which it ought to move, be heavy, or do not follow, and the
Muscle also be in some sort involuntarily stirred up to move; where we observe
in some, although their Member rest, yet they tremble.

But this their weakness happens sometimes by reason of the defect of the Animal
spirit, The defect of the Animal spirit is the cause of trembling.
not absolute, as in a Palsy, but only such a one, by which the sense of
Feeling is yet indeed communicated but there is not sufficient force ministered
to the Muscles to move, because a greater portion of it is required to Motion
then to the sense of Feeling: which sometimes happens when they are spent,
whence arises a lasting trembling; and that either by reason of Age, whence
old Folks become Tremulous, or by reason of a grievous and long continued
Disease, after which they oftentimes tremble a long while; or of immoderate
Evacuation especially by Venery, shedding of blood, purging and great labors;
but otherwise the spirits being only dissipated they tremble til they return;
as by a vehement affect of the Mind, or sudden, in Fear, Anger, Joy, they
tremble for a while: and in strong or swift Motion, as when they carry heavy
burdens, or do somewhat else which is above strength they tremble: and when
having sufferd grievous labors, they rest, the Members being too much wearied
do tremble for a time; also the Spirits being hinderd, yet not wholly
intercepted, as in a Palsy, whence a perfect resolution of the Muscle follows,
but only in part, the weakness which arises in the Muscle causing a trembling,
which even then is, as it were a certain Diminute Palsy, sprung from the same
causes affecting the Nerve, as in a Palsy, yet not so powerfully, and
especially proceeding from Excrementitious humors, possessing the Nerves: but
other affects of the Nerves also do induce a trembling, A hurt of the Nerve, is
the cause of trembling.
not by intercepting, the spirits, but by weakening or hurting the Nerves
another way; as if from Excrementitious humors, as has been said, this
weakness in the Muscle does cause a trembling, not only by intercepting the
Spirits, but also by irritating the Nerve does sometimes force it to the motion
which is made in trembling, whence also the cause being increased, or lasting,
the trembling ofttimes ends in a convulsion. And if the Nerves also, by
Narcoticks too much or often taken, do at length contract that weakness from
that Stupidity, that also the Muscles by reason of them be weakend, a trembling
also is bred from this affect of them; as it has befallen some, not only by
the use of Opium or of other strong ones, but from a Suffumigation of Henbane,
and we observe that by the Narcotick virtue of Wine, they who are given to
drunkenness, do at length become Tremulous, the which notwithstanding they
persuade themselves does proceed from the drinking of cold Water, which
drunkards drink in the morning to quench their thirst caused by Wine, that they
may not be compelled to abstain from Wine. Which suspicion of theirs is
augmented also by this, that whiles they are yet fasting and sober, they
tremble, and after they are heated again with Wine, the trembling cease, or
at least ways shows it self less, the which yet does not happen, as if Wine
were not the cause of this trembling, but because whiles the Wine increasing
the heat of the Body renders its actions lively, that as long as it is hot with
Wine, and as it were refresht, it does less feel the weakness which otherwise
always remains, for that reason, as those refresht with meat and Wine, being
made stronger, is the cause that they tremble less.

After the same manner trembling is sometimes bread from other Poisonous things
being taken and applied, chiefly besetting the Nerves, as it is sometimes wont
to happen from the Suffumigation of quicksilver (not from the touch, as some
would have it) to Goldsmiths in gilding their Vessels, if they have not a care
of themselves, but draw it in; for which cause also in the French Pox those
suffumigated with Cinnabar, especially if then also they drink Wine, by which
the Nerves being already made feeble, are easily hurt, do oftentimes fall into
a trembling, the which also ofttimes befalls them, who in the same Disease being
anointed with quicksilver do thence get a trembling, which hurts of the Nerves
proceeding from quicksilver, either proceed frrom its Antipathy with the
Nerves, or from some other propriety of it, almost proper to it, by which it
moving the Humors driving them to the Jaws it moves plentiful spitting, and
driving them to the superficies and extremities of the Body, it also affects
the Nerves, and so much the worse, if the Humors which are moved be evil, and
be not decently purged by sweats, by which also if the Nerves suffer more
vehemently, after tremblings they suffer Convulsions which often follow these
cures made by the use of quicksilver. There may be some fault in the Nerves
from the Birth, whence some are born trembling, as has been formerly showed by
the example of one; but what trembling that was, can hardly be explained
because though trembling, he nevertheless performed his Duties for a long
course of life, and married a Wife.

The Cure.
We will divide the Cure according to the diversity of the Kinds, and we will
explain in every one what is to be done.

What must be done both in a general and particular Convulsion, The Cure of a
Convulsion.
has been taught in Convulsions; in that also called a Convulsive Palpitation,
in as much as this threatens true Convulsions we must study to prevent it by
Application of the same Remedies, but by reason of its motion, seeing it is not
very urgent, nothing peculiar is applied to the members.

In Restlessness, The Cure of restlessness from trouble of mind.
if that spring from a perturbation of the mind, what then must be done in
respect of the Disease and also of this Symptom, by reason of which, how it
ought to be quieted with Dormitives and be restrained by using of force, has
been explained in an Alienation of the Mind.

If they be restless by reason of Pain, The Cure of restlessness by reason of
Pain.
then smoothing the pain with Anodines and things enducing sleep, and if it
urge more vehemently causing a Stupidity, together with the Pain, we correct
the Restlessness.

But if the Restlessnes arise by reason of the Heat, not only of the Heart and
Brain, but also of the whole Body in Fevers, then this Symptom because it
dejects the strength, draws the Cure to it self; the which yet is used no
otherwise, than that which is wont to be applied to Fevers in quenching that
burning, except that here the strength of the Remedies must be increased and
upon that account when the Cure urges, we attempt a more plentiful Evacuation
and diversion of the Blood, unless somewhat hinder, or we reiterate it: also we
increase the quality of Coolers both with Internal and External Remedies, The
Cure of Restlessness by reason of by reason of heat.
and those things which may augment the Heat we take away, as too much
clothing, and the rooms being shut up, we open them, and chiefly in respect
of the Symptom, by rubbing the body diverting from the Nerves the vapors which
do cause or increase the the restlessness, and afterward lenifying it with
anointing the Backbone, with Oil of Violets, sweet Almonds etc. we correct
that tossing of the body: the which also is done if we admonish the sick, that
they weaken not themselves with too much motion, or hinder Sweats by making
themselves bare, and that we may somewhat quiet them, we may procure Sleep.

In Trembling we must proceed according to the Nature of the Cause, and if they
tremble from some Passion of the Mind, or by reason of Labor above their
strength, those ceasing, the Trembling also cease.

But if the Spirits being dissipated or wasted by reason of old Age or Venery
and other profuse Evacuations, The Cure of Trembling from defect of Spirits.
or it follow after grievous diseases, it is easy to repair the strength
dis^^pated, but very hard that which is lost: the which yet must be tried by
that called a Restorative Cure, which is chiefly accomplished, by a fit and
moderate sleep, by moderate and seasonable exercise, the which will profit more,
if the Trembling were induced by vehement labor, if it be gently undertaken,
than altogether idleness; by a cheerful Mind, or if the Trembling remains,
from some passion of Mind, it is corrected by the contrary passion of the Mind,
by a clear temperate Air, pure and sweet, by nourishments of good juice and well
nourishing, also by things that repair the spirits and increase the heat, as
Wine, which moderately taken does so refresh, that it does correct the
Trembling caused by Wine, by its refreshing, if it be taken as has been said.

But if it proceed from a Disease of the Nerves and is as it were an imperfect
or dimunite Palsy and it be from the Birth, The Cure of Trembling from an
affect of the Nerves.
or otherwise from a grievous disease, it sometimes is incurable. But if it
proceed from an Excrementitious humor possesssing the Nerves, no other method
of Cure is applied for the curing of this disease, then what was spoken of in a
Palsy, and is applied to other diseases of the Brain and Nerves, engendered
from excrements, amongst which also is a Convulsion, which if they would use
timely, and continue in it, doubtless they would be sooner cured than the
paralytick, but because they neglect it, unless the trembling be very much, or
are content with a few things, it comes to pass that the Trembling does not
only not cease, but old age coming on, it is increased.

As therefore it has been said in a Palsy, so here also we must proceed, and
the body first of all must be generally purged, and that, if the evil persist,
must be repeated at certain times and particular Evacuations and Diversions
must be ordered, and the same altering things must be drank, and the like must
be outwardly applied, and Baths must be ordered, if it yield not to other
things; and we must chiefly take heed, that the trembling hands be not exposed
to the cold, or washed with cold water, instead of which they may be washed
with Decoction of Sage, Lavender flowers, and the like, amongst which Lotions
they teach that if the parts be washed in the morning with Piss, it does very
much, help.

If the Trembling have its original from Poison those Alexiphamaca which resist
this must be used; and if this be from the use of Quicksilver, which more
frequently comes to pass, they give Treacle or Cordial Medicines, with which
they mix the filings of Gold, seeing they say that Gold has such an affinity
with Quicksilver, that if it be in the body, and Gold be drank, that so draws
it with it that afterward voided by the stool, it is found pure in the
Excrements sticking to the Gold, which affinity of theirs they have taken from
that, that in gilding, Gold can be fastened to no Metal but by the intervention
of Quicksilver.

At this day the Electuary of Orvietanus is chiefly commended for a singular
Remedy in this case of which kind if this following be not, yet it may supply
its room. As, Take of the roots of Gentian, Bistort, Carline, Tormentil, white
Dittander, Aromatic cane, round Birthwort, Wolfsbane, the herb blessed
Thistle, the seeds of Vipers Bugloss, Alkanet, Citron each one ounce; make them
all into a fine Powder, to which add the roots of Vipers grass pouderd the
weight of them all, of Honey clarified, with a sufficient quantity of generous
Wine three times as much, and toward the latter end of boiling, mix of the
best Treacle one pound and an half, keep it for use, the Dose is from half a
dram to a dram.

There are some who have taught that they can draw Quicksilver out of the body
by Sweats, that it shall stick plainly to the Skin like Sand, and afterward
being washed with water shall appear shining, by this means, if every other day
in a Stove suffumigating the body one day with the Wine of the Decoction of
Sage and Wormwood poured forth on red Bricks, but the other day with
Frankincense cast upon the Coals, they draw forth Sweat, and as often as they
go out of the Bath they must rub their body with Aqua vitae distilled with
Balm, and continue it for twelve or fourteen days: afterward let them anoint
themselves six days with Oil of Turkey, Millet and Foxes til as they say, the
aforesaid Sand does stick to the Skin, but we who profess that Quicksilver in
substance, cannot pass the body neither by its Suffumigations nor anoyntings,
as no other Medicines also, but that they attempt what they perform, by their
virtues only carried thither we do judge this opinion of the Vulgar and of some
Physicians to be false, although it be very much imprinted in the minds of men,
and Deceivers pr^^^ely conveighing quicksilver in a Plaster, confirm it in the
vulgar: and in the like case, we advise that Goldsmiths whiles they gild, do
sit out of the house in the open Air, as for the most part they are wont to do,
that the Wind may drive the smoke from them; and if there be need of
quicksilver in the Cure, we give order that it be fitly and moderately
administered; yet if a trembling arise from thence, we advise the same Remedies
especially the Topical mentioned in a Palsy, which help the Nerves rather by
strengthening and somewhat binding as Rondoletius will have it, than by affecting
them with an eminent heat. And we wash the trembling parts with the Decoctions
before quoted.

If the trembling arise from Narcoticks, and their force causes it; how it must
be broken has been said in a Numness: but if the Trembling remain, the same
Topics shall be tried which by strengthening do heat also, not because the
Nerves are cooled by Narcoticks, as they think, but because when they are
stupid, they are stirred up by heat. But if Drunkeness with Wine has caused a
trembling, either it cease of its own accord, if it be not accustomary, but
if Drunkenness has been already a long while continued, the Trembling arising
thence is hardly any more taken away, especially when Drunkards have contracted
so perverse a habit, that unless they fill themselves again with Wine and are
heated by it, as has been said in the Causes, they are troubled more with the
Trembling, yet in the interim they may mend this perverse kind by Temperance
and Sobriety of life, also the Remedies that strengthen the Nerve will do good
both given and applied.

In that called a Rigor if it be gentle, The Cure of a Rigor from acrid Humors.
or only a Horror, seeing it does not much trouble, or continue long, we need
not take pains to correct it, and also if it be vehement seeing Nature by that
in the beginning of Fevers, does endeavor to expel the hurtful matter, neither
is it then easily to be curbed, or Natures Motion to be hindered, as neither if
it go before a Crisis, seeing Hippocrates says, a Rigor coming upon a Burning
Fever, its dissolved.

But if it so trouble the body, together with a troublesome sense of Cold, that
the sick suffers it with a great deal of trouble, and are weakened by it, then
it is rather to be mitigated, then wholly to be hindered, seeing this cannot be
done without damage, and the Rigor being wholly taken away, the course of the
whole Fever is stopped, or is caused, that it is not decently, so that though
those Remedies which suffer not the Rigor to break forth, are believed to cure
a Fever, yet by retarding it they do rather cause, that afterward it follows
worse, or is changed into more grievous accidents; unless perhaps that
unprofitable Rigor persist rather from custom than the Morbifick cause which is
already taken away, for then also it must be wholly prevented, as these things
have been largely explained in Fevers.

Also by what means the Fit of the whole Fever may be hindered with the Rigor
has been likewise taught in Fevers, but for Mitigation of it the things
following will suffice,

If the body be somewhat actually heated, for whiles we provide against cold,
also the Rigor is appeased; which is with less hurt done in the Feet, heating
them with Clothes or other ways, as with warm water in a Brass Vessel, or with
Stones or Tiles heated and wrapped in a cloth.

Diverting the matter by Frictions and Ligatures of the extreme parts, we amend
the Rigor.

That is ^^fly performed by anointing the Backbone with any heating Oils and
proper to the Nerves. As, Take of Oil of Chamomel, Dill, St. John's wort, each
half an ounce; anoint it, first besprinkling the hands with Aqua vitae.

Or after this manner. Take of the flowers of Chamomel, St. John's wort, the
Leaves of Southernwood dried, poudered, each two drams; Pellitory of Spain one
dram, pour as much Oil of Nuts as to cover them, Aqua vitae two drams; boil
them, strain it, and anoint the Backbone.

Or of Juyces and Oils. Take the juice of Mugwort, Southernwood, each half an
ounce; Oil of Dill, Rue, each one ounce; Aqua vitae two drams, Saffron half a
scruple, boil them a little, make an Ointment.

Many mix Treacle with Aqua vitae and Oils and anoint the Backbone, others if
the Cold be great mix Spices.

The Ointment of Spiders explained in Fevers, as also other things expressed
there do the same also, with which also the soals of the feet are rubbed.

There are some who approve of Baths, if the Feverish heat hinder not, and the
Rigor lie highly hurtful, of the Decoction of Pennyroyal, Calamint, Rue,
Southernwood, Mugwort, and the flowers of Chamomel, and Melilot.

In Reaching and Yawning, The Cure of reaching and yawning from halituous
Vapors.
seeing these can bring no damage, but rather do good, there will be no need of
any Cure there, unless in as much as, if these together with a Spontaneous
weariness do as signs foretell Diseases, they do admonish us to apply Remedies
that we may prevent them.

If from Yawning the lower Jaw be easily luxated, we advise that they do
somewhat repress it, and gape not with such a wide mouth, as also in reaching,
because it is uncivil too much to extend the Members, we teach them somewhat to
restrain their limbs, for Civilities sake, rather than any benefit.

CHAP. IV. Of the Defect of Breathing.
The Kinds.
IT is called a Defect of Breathing, when it is either abolisht, or is done
with difficulty, which may happen both to natural Breathing and to voluntary or
vocal breathing forth in utterring the Voice and Speech.

The Breathing which is continually performed by virtue of the Heart, Breathing
abolisht in a Syncope.
naturally by drawing in and sending out of the Breath, can no ways
perseveringly be wholly abolisht, while the man lives, but for a time it may
altogether cease, in a true Syncope, and in that which accompanies that which
we call strangling of the Womb, in which cases as long as, the mind fails in
them, as they call it, or the Life, or rather the vital motion, so long no
breathat all is perceived in them, or it is so obscure that we can observe no
breathing forth of the Air even with a Feathers laid to the Nostrils, or
shadow of motion in a Cup full of Water laid on their Breast, but they lie like
dead folks without all motion and sense.

But Breathing oftentimes proceeds difficultly, when they fetch it with great
labor and impediment; and if this be with high streining, so that they are in
the beginning of Suffocation, it is called Suffocation and strangling, the
which also will follow, if it did not cease: In which danger because they are
more conversant when they lie down, to turn that away they are forced to breath
upright with their Breast raised up and their Neck straight, and then they are
called Orthopneumatical, and because if they move their body they, they are
more grieved, their Breathing being made swifter, they are compeld to be quiet:
but otherwise they Breath with less anguish, yet difficultly also, and it is
simply called a Dispnoea. Sometimes laboring more do send forth the Breath,
sometimes to draw it in, at other times both being hindered together.

But a Dyspnaea or Strangling, do diversely offer themselves, A strangling from
things external.
for sometimes it is bred and shows it self, some manifest cause concuring, from
which also it is, as shall be said in the causes.

Sometimes difficulty of Breathing has a Catarrh its companion, A suffocating
Catarrh.
in which also sometimes they are suffocated, all Breathing being suddenly
intercepted, and this evil is called a Praefocating, or suffocating Catarrhe.

Ofttimes it is coupled with affects of the Breast, with a Cough, Wheezing, in
that called an Asthma, in which they fetch their breath often with difficulty,
as if they were wearied with too much Motion, whence they are called
Shortbreathed and Suspirious, and they Cough, but spit forth nothing mattery,
and sometimes in their Lungs there is heard a certain Piping, or Wheezing, and
this evil assails them either continually, ot upon a slight cause, and it
returns and has its Exacerbations, and it is of long continuance, and
stubborn.

A Dyspnaea is sometimes joined with a difficulty of swallowing, A Quinsie.
and there is a pain or trouble both in the Jaws and Neck, especially in that
called a Quinsie or Cynanche, because by reason of their breathing hinderd,
they gape like Dogs with their Mouth open, which affect sometimes a Fever does
accompany.

At other times also the breathing labors highly, Suffocation and a Dyspnaea in
an Apoplexy, Palsy, Spasm.
with a resolution of the whole Body in the Apoplectical, and the sick are
choked, as has been said there: and then a Dyspnaea is sometimes joined with a
Palsy or some Species of Spasm, as has been said there, that then when they
would breath forth strongly, which is required to the uttering a great voice,
and being forced to Laugh. Weep, call out, or to Cough they are compeld to
breath forth powerfully, the which because they cannot do for the causes there
expressed, they fall into danger of Suffocation.

Affects of the Womb, sometimes go before that Species called the Suffocation,
The cause of the defect of Speech and Voice.
or Strangulation, or Praefocation of the Womb, with which being suddenly
seized, sometimes the breathing being wholly taken away, at othertimes very much
hinderd, they are so tormented, as if their Jaws were tied with a bond, and
those thus affected, then they call Hysterical.

A swelling, distension of the Belly, are also with a Dyspnaea in the faults of
the natural parts. A Dyspnaea in the faults of the natural Parts.
But especially in the Hydropical, to whom it is very troublesome, so that they
are forced to breath upright, like to the Orthropneumatical, and lying down
they are in danger of Choking.

There is also a certain Nocturnal suffocation, The Night Mare.
that befalls those that Sleep, called Pnigalion, or the Nightmare, because
they think and Dream that they are suffocated by some thing lying upon them and
pressing them, and afterward waking, they think that they have sufferd that
from an Enemy, or Witch, or Devil, and that they were invaded and oppressed by
them, whence they call it Ephialtes, and Doting, for a time they do somewhat
persuade themselves so.

The Voice, or Vocal breating, which at our pleasure we can wholly omit, yet
not make, unless there be a breathing forth, can no ways be long abolisht by
reason of Respiration, because that cannot long cease; The defect of the Voice
in a Dysnaea.
Yet it happens that it is utterd obscurely by reason of that, if the breathing
be very small; but more commonly it happens in a Dyspnaea, that the Voice cannot
be utterd very clear and loud: but sending forth of the breath not being
hinderd, In a Palsy.
the Voice nevertheless cannot sometimes be expressed by us, or at other times
also can only be brought forth silently and lowly; both which sometimes happen
in a Palsy, other Motions also being then hurt together, as has been
explained there; but at other times without this the Voice is lost for a time,
and returns again, as I remember an excellent Physician Theodorus Zuingerus,
An Aphony.
my Godfather and Colleague, when we were in the School of my Father Thomas
Platerus, that was Master to us both, A defect of the Voice with a pain of the
jaws.
has ofttimes been so Stupefied, that he could not answer one word, though
asked with threatening, and has so returned home mute and astonished, his senses
otherwise entire, which Species they call Apolepsie and Hippocrates an Aphony,
some would refer it to the Species of a Catalepsie, sometimes also when the
Voice is lost, or weak, there is felt a pain in the Jaws, a Tumor, or some
other fault, and sometimes it is apparent.

Speech, or an Articulate voice may be intermitted at our desire or will, A
defect of Speech the Voice failing.
but we cannot speak, unless there be a vocal Respiration, and therefore by
reason of the defect of the voice, as has been already said, the Speech is
either abolisht, or not sufficiently utterd, but also sometime they cannot speak
without an Impediment of the Voice, and they are called Dumb, in a Palsy
either peculiar to the Tongue, or common also to other parts; Dumb.
sometimes they are both Dumb and Deaf from their Birth; but oftentimes when
they cannot exactly express certain Syllables or letters, Deaf and Dumb,
Stutterring.
those especially which that they may be pronounced, do require a various
doubling of the Tongue, as in R. and S. to be pronounced with a noise or
hissing, they Stutter and are called Blaesi, or Lispers, the which also happens
with some faults of the Lips, or Teeth, or Jaws.

The Causes.
Every cause of breathing taken away or diminisht, A Suffocation by reason of
the Brain in an Apoplexy.
of the Voice and Speech how these do fail in an Apoplexy, all the senses being
taken away, by reason of the Brain affected, and in an Epilepsie also, has
been explained in the Consternation of the Mind.

For which reason as long as the Motion of the Heart cease, Breathing
abolisht in a Syncope by reason of the heart.
so long also Respiration may cease, seeing then there will be no need of it,
but if that be hinderd, the Motion of the Heart not first ceasing, that a man
must needs die, we will show in a Syncope.

But if these fail without a Disease of ^he principal parts, of the Brain and
Heart, this comes to pass by reason of the Nerves that carry the virtue, or of
the moving Muscles, or of other Instruments that effect and help Motion.

By occasion of the Nerves affected, An affect of the Nerves of the Tongue is
the cause that sometimes they are Deaf and Dumb.
that the Speech, Voice, and Breathing may be weakened, has been formerly
explained in the Impotency of motion, their Muscle being then palsied, or
contracted, by the causes declared there, that the Speech sometimes may be
particularly abolisht, the third conjugation being affected, which makes the
Nerve of the Tongue, and if the hurt be great, especially a fault of
conformation from the Birth, that then the Hearing is commonly taken away too
by reason of its Communication with the said branch. And that the same also
comes to pass, An affect of the recurrent Nerves is the cause of the defect of
of Speech and Voice.
if the branches of the Nerves of the sixth and seventh conjugation called the
Recurrent Nerves, folding with the Muscles of the Tongue do suffer. An affect
of the Nerves of the sixth and seventh Conjugation is the cause of a Dispnoea
with a Palsy.
And if this be in the branches of the same Recurrent Nerves that infold the
Larynx that the Voice does then also cease, the dissections of Anatomists do
manifestly declare, who for experience sake, have in a Hog taken the recurent
Nerves in a band: which Aphony by reason of the recurrent Nerves arising from
internal causes seldom happens particularly to the Voice, and if it be, it
proceeds either only from some thick vapor, as they would have it, or only from
a Defluxion fallen down thither, but this fault more commonly happens to the
Voice and Speech in a Palsy, from the causes mentioned, together also with
other Impotencies of motion, to which also that Impediment of Breathing which
in uttterring of a strong voice we have said did offer it self, as in Crying
out, Laughing, Howling, Coughing, Snezing is sometimes added, if the other
Intercostal branches enfolding the Muscle be affected too; for Breathing alone
seldom suffers a Defect, singly without other hurts, by reason of the Nerves;
seeing the Midriff whose motion is sufficient for moderate Breathing, has
received Nerves, as has been explained there, not only from the said
Conjugation of Nerves, but also from the Spinal Marrow great Nerves on both
sides, proceeding from its first pairs joined together, and descending to the
Midriff, for which cause it does not fall out that the Breathing cease,
unless both the Spinal Marrow, and the Conjugations or paires of the Nerves be
hurt together, which can scarce be but about their beginning in the Brain, as
has been said in an Apoplexy, as neither can it be hindered in a Palsy unless
the hurt befalling both, the Paires and Conjugations of the Nerves and reaching
also the Nerves of the Midriff, The Nerves of the Midriff troubled with a
Defluxion do cause an occult Asthma.
does prejudice many motions. yet it also comes to pass, that especially the
greater Nerves of the Midriff proceeding from the Spinal Marrow, singly and
soly troubled with defluxions or other Diseases may breed a certain Dyspnaea,
such as we have observed in the Asthmatical continually molesting the sick, no
other signs appearing of the Lungs affected.

By reason of the Muscles, Natural and Vocal breathing fails, An affect of
the Muscles of the Tongue is the cause of the Defect of Speech.

Of the Muscles, of the defect of the Voice.


as the Speech if the Muscles moving the Tongue (for we shall treat afterward
of the faults of the Tongue, as it is an Instrument that is moved) the Voice if
the Muscle of the Larynx being troubled with Defluxions cannot do their office,
they by moving the Tongue, these by dilating and straitenning the cleft of the
Larynx for diversely shaping the Voice. Or if this happen from an Inflammation
of them, or some other Tumor hindering their Function.

But the defect of Natural Breathing sometimes happens by reason of a Disease
of the Muscles that constitute and move the Breast, neither does Breathing
suffer damage only when we would make a strong breathing forth, which these
Muscles do chiefly perform, but also if the cause be great, Natural drawing in
the breath is also hindered, and that commonly from a Defluxion falling down
upon the Muscles of the breast and the Intercostal, A Disease of the muscles of
the breast is the cause of a Dispnaea.
whence oftentimes follows a great streightness of the Breast with pain, the
which also comes to pass, if these Muscles be bruised or inflamed, whence
Swellings and pains show themselves outwardly, and if this happens to the
Muscles of the belly which also do move the breast and press forth the
Excrements, they can no longer exercise that vehement endeavor, which is
required by holding the breath and pressing these Muscles in the casting forth
of Excrements.

The Midriff since it is the principal Organ of Natural breathing, The Midriff
affected by it self is the cause of a Dyspnaea.
if it be hurt not only by consent of its Nerves as has been formerly
declared, but by it self, then it is the chief cause of breathing hurt. But
this comes to pass especially, if the Defluxion which falls down on its Nerves,
or slides into the intercostal Muscles does reach also to the Midriff, whence
we have seen some vehemently tormented. But if it be assaulted by other
Diseases, the motion of the Midriff is rather depraved, than weakened, as we
shall explain there: although it may also come to pass, And by consent.
that the Midriff, because it lurks free in the inner parts, exposed every
where to the internal heat, being dried and bound up in a Burning Fever, upon
that account a Dyspnoea may arise, which oftentimes falls out in these Fevers:
but its motion is more commonly hindered, if it be molested, by Vapors, Wind,
Humors, or the Neighboring Bowels.

Vapors raised in the lower Belly of a manifest quantity or quality, or
malignant and poisonous, and being gathered about this transverse space or
Midriff, and stopping there some time, until they are carried further, and
hindering its free motion, which is required in breathing, by diverse ways,
especially if they be plentiful, sometimes induce a Dyspnaea, sometimes fear of
choking and other accidents moreover: both because the Midriff has a great
consent with the heart by reason of the Pericardium, and with the Brain,
because it is a nervous part and has eminent Nerves, whence it comes to pass
that if it be troubled, it does not only hinder breathing, but also accidents
of the Heart and Brain do follow, and so much the more, if furthermore the
vapors from it do reach also to these principal parts, the which if there be a
malignant or poisonous quality in them, may easily come to pass, as also these
are wont at other times to prejudice these parts, the Midriff not being
offended, as we have said in the hurt of internal senses and shall show in the
affects of the Heart, the which accidents yet do presently cease the Vapors
being repeld, or otherwise discust and dissipated, or flying back, by the
motion of the Midriff: unless by the continual arrival of the cause, the
Midriff be so molested or infected, that either foam permanent Disease does
follow, or most grievous accidents of the Functions of the mind do ensue, which
are wont to be hurt by the fault of the Midrif (as that being inflamed we see a
Frenzy does follow, whence they have called the Midriff, Phrenas, that is,
the Mind) as the Fallingsickness, Madness, and at last the Brain being long and
much smitten, an Apoplexy, which evils these Symptoms of Suffocations invading
oftentimes by fits, are wont to foregoe and foretell.

But that such like Vapors are for the most part raised up from the Veins, as
from crude, impure, bad, and Malignant blood, yet not putrefied (otherwise a
Fever would be caused) has been shown in a Madness and an Epilepsie, for as
there, diversely here and there in the Body, such vapors being raised, from
blood collected in the branches of the Vena Porta and Cava molesting the Brain
do produce the forementioned accidents, so also in the lower Belly chiefly,
being collected as in a sink of Excrementitious blood, and abundantly in great
plenty flying upwards to the Midrif and molesting that, either they create
Suffocation only, or other discommodities moreover.

But from the Mesaraick Veins especially the greater dispersed every where
about the Heart to the Bowels, Vapors from the Mesaraick Veins affecting the
Midrif, the Cause of a Nightmare.
and in which by reason of the many Excrements of the first Concoction, impure
blood is easily collected, such like Vapors sometimes arising, and stopping
about the Midrif, they produce a Suffocation which they call the night Mare,
which invades rather in the night then when Concoction ought to be made,
because at that time, the evil Vapors collected, therefore the most part are
wont, by the accession of Crudities, to be increased and moved, and to be
carried upwards, and by reason of lying down to torment the more. Whence in
their Dreams feeling these streits they Dream of diverse causes whence they
proceed, and being often raised up, if the Mind moreover be somewhat affected
with them, they remain in the same persuasion, and though they being raised and
set upright, the Vapors being then discust the evil cease, yet often
returning, if the Fuel of the evil remains, at last it threatens and brings
more grievous accidents to the Brain, as has been said. The cause of which
evil certainly depends upon an ill course of Diet and that a long time
continued, as in other affects sprung also from Vapors there, especially in
Hypochondriacal Melancholy and Intermitting Fevers, as has been shown in
them. This is therefore an accustomary affect to Children, and those of ripe
Age, who do sooner and longer offend in their Diet.

In the Female sex this more commonly proceeds from the Veins of the Womb,
Vapors from the Veins of the Womb affecting the Midrif, are the cause of the
Suffocation of the Womb.
in the strangulation of the Womb therefore so called; which when being derived
from the branches of the Vena Cava, and many of them and great ones do creep
along the Womb and its Membranes, if the filth of the blood does stop in them,
which from the whole Mass of it, is wont to be purged thither, in impure Bodies,
that at the set time it may be emptied by the Courses. Which is wont to come to
pass more commonly in the unmarried by a stoppage of the Courses, not so easily
in the married by reason of Copulation, and the Vapors from thence assail the
Midrif; they produce diverse kinds of Suffocations of the Womb as they prejudice
the Midrif and the neighboring parts or those that consent with it, and as the
plenty and nature of those Vapors is diverse. For if it hurt only the Midrif
either it breeds only a Dyspnaea, if the plenty or offense be less, or if it be
greater, it breed only an Agony of Suffocation; but if that, it also brings
hurt to the Stomach, that is continued to the Midrif, then with a Dyspnaea and
Compression of the orifice of the Stomach which they call the heart,
Nauseousness, Vomiting, a Vertigo, and pain of the Head being caused by
consent, the Hysterical accidents do show themselves. Which passions are wont
to happen in great bellied Women at the first Month, the young one being not
yet increased, nor able to consume the blood that is retained, especially if it
be impure, from which also they take a sign that they are with Child.
Hysterical Women are far more grievously affected, if these Vapors especially
the Poysenous being communicated to the Heart too, by reason of its communion
as it has been said, do also bring damage. In which species the Motion of the
Heart wholly ceasing, all breathing also cease, and as it were seized on by a
Syncope the Virgins fall by degrees to the ground, and are held in that fit,
some a short time, others the space of an hour, before they come to themselves.
But at other times the Midrif by reason of the consent which it has with the
Brain, as has been said, or both together affected with these Vapors, with the
said strangulation of the Womb, that called the Madness of the Womb, or
Convulsive Motions, and other hurts of the Brain offended, do manifest
themselves.

All which also may be varied, not only by reason of the parts affected, but
also if a Poysenous cause be joined, according to the diverse Nature of the
Poison, by which they are wont chiefly to beset this or that part, as we have
expounded in other diseases of the Womb, that vicious blood breathing forth
such like Vapors is generated from diverse causes, and collected about the Womb.
Amongst which they have believed that the seed retained and corrupted is not
the least cause in Virgins with whom this affect is familiar, the which yet can
scarce be, as long as it is contained in its proper Vessels. and if poured out
of them, it be retained, it rather produces an Erosion of that part, then such
accidents, as we shall explain elsewhere.

Winds filling the Capacity of the Belly, because they distend that, Wind
hindering the Midrif, is the cause of a Dyspnaea.
as also the Midrif which shuts up the upper parts of it, they cause a
Dyspnaea: which also the puffings up with Wind of the Stomach and Cholick Gut
that lies under the Stomach do effect, by reason of the neerness and Adherency
with the Midrif, and they know that they proceed from thence, by the murmuring
and distension of that place, but that they write that they would no ways have
a Nightmare to be caused by the same Winds or thick Vapors, the far more
grievous evils which do then fall out, and follow from thence, do sufficiently
declare.

A watery Humor also distending the Belly and drawing a sunder the lower Ribs
of the Breast, A Humor possesssing the Midrif, is the cause of a Dyspnaea.
extending the Midrif does breed a difficulty of breathing, in an ascites
Dropsy, as shall be declared in a Dropsy. But the Humor which is collected in
the Cavity of the Breast does cause a Dyspnaea rather by hindering the Lungs
then the Breast, as we shall show in the Lungs.

The Bowels lying under the Midrif, and growing to it, The Bowels hindering the
Midrif, are the cause of a Dyspnaea.
or hanging by it, if they acquire too great a bulk, drawing down the Midrif
with their weight, do not suffer it to be moved freely, or in those that lie
down, lying upon it, they hinder it by pressing it, as when the Liver, Spleen,
being obstructed, hardened and increased into a bulk in the Hydropical do cause
that high difficulty of breathing, which oftentimes does discover a Dropsy a
long time before a Tumor does appear, with which they are molested lying down,
and therefore are compelled to sit upright; the swelling of the Belly also
increasing it, as has already been said.

A Dyspnaea also may happen from the Stomach too much filled with meat, which
vexes so long till the things taken are disgested, or are returned by Vomit,
or are eased by belching. The which when it succeeds not, and the Repletion is
great, they may be Suffocated; which as it may happen from the quantity of
things heaped in, so from the quality of certain meats, as of Mushrums, which
are wont to Suffocate.

The Instruments by which breathing, the Voice and Speech are performed or
governed, are the Cavities of the Mouth, Nostrils and Jaws, containing the Air
for the performance of all three, the parts placed in the Mouth for the
uttering an Articulate Voice or Speech by their Motion are the Tongue, or by
tuning, are the Palate and the Teeth, the passage or pipe carried from the
Jaws to the Lunges, that makes the Voice and serves for breathing in drawing
down the Air, is the rough Artery, or Windpipe, the Bowels, or Bellows
receiving and sending forth the Air by a Natural Motion for breathing, is the
Lungs; the Breast doing the same by a voluntary Motion with the Lungs to which
it applies it self.

By reason of the Largness of the Mouth. The stoppage of the Mouth and
Nostrils, the Cause of Suffocation.
Nostrils and Jaws, these defects happen, if the Mouth and Nostrils together
be stopped up by external Bodies or by water, or otherwise the Teeth being bound
together, that the Mouth cannot be opened, the Nostrils in the interim being
stopped up with Snivel, upon which account sometimes the Apoplectical and
Epileptical are in danger of Suffocation, especially because otherwise
breathing is made obscurely in them, but if that the Nostrils only be stopped
with Snivel or other things, because they may draw breath with their open
Mouth, then breathing is only somewhat hindered, when the Air cannot be
sufficiently let in, or rather because then it is fetched quick, it is depraved
and an uncomely voice is utteied. The hinder largeness of the Jaws being
likewise stopped, The narrowness of the jaws stopped, is the Cause of Suffocation.
the same comes to pass, especially about its narrowness in which even the
least thing that sticks, makes work: and that especially if the passage into
the Windpipe and Gullet being possessed by a Tumor arising in the incompassing
coat, or in the Muscles of the Jaws and Larynx or in the Glandules, or Palate,
or by the Palate fallen down, be obstructed: Or if the Vertebrae of the Neck
being Luxated inwardly (which is most commonly in the first Vertebrae, which is
loosly joynted with the Head and by reason of the weight of the Head sustains
great Motions) These passages be straightened, especially if then the Nerves also
and rough Artery be pressed; from which accidents they can neither sufficiently
breath, or utter a voice, or speak, or swallow. Sometimes also a pain being
joined, as we shall explain these things in a quinsie. A Species of which also
it is said to be, if it be from a Vertebrae Luxated, and in the other painful
Diseases of the Jaws.

By occasion of the Tongue, A dryness of the Tongue, is the cause of Stammering.
the Speech suffers a defect, if that as it is a Musculous Instrument (for, of
the other hurts of its Muscles we have already spoke) it be too much dried and
hardened from the causes explained in the hurt of Tasting. For because then in
the pronouncing of certain Letters it cannot be sufficiently rolled, (the which
that they may be plainly expressed do require a more various doubling of it)
whiles they shape their words they stammer. The Tongue too much increased is
the Cause of hindering the Speech.
The which also happens from a Tumor arising under it, or if it swel or be
inflamed, or otherwise if from the birth it have too great a bulk, which
oftentimes is so great, that they cannot speak at all.

A familiar fault with some Fools who from their birth are born Fools and Dumb,
A little Tongue the cause of defect of Speech.
as has been said in an Alienation of the Mind; the which also happens if it
be framed too small, The bond under the Tongue tied up, the cause of the defect
of Speech.
or if it be cut off, or maimed, by a punishment, or some other chance, and in
Convulsions the Tongue being strongly laid hold on and bit of by the Teeth; the
same also comes to pass by reason of that bond by which it is knit, if that be
too strait bound up, and not sufficiently loosed in Children new born, so that
it hinders the free Motion of the Tongue.

The Palate seeing it is the quil of the Voice, if that be wanting or mained,
The want of the Palate, is the Cause of the want of Speech.
it does prejudice the voice; as also when the former Teeth are wanting,
because they ought to resist the Motion of the Tongue in the pronuntiation of
certain Letters, and that in the want of them cannot be done, they Stammer a
little.

By reason of the Diseases of the rough Artery or Wezand, The want of Teeth the
cause of stammering.
which is the Pipe through which natural and vocal Respiration is uttered, the
breathing, Voice, The binding, or stopping of the chink of the Larynx, is the
Cause of the defect of the Voice.
and Speech do fail, for if the chink of the Head of it, called the Larynx, be
too much bound, which happens by occasion of the Membrane in which that is cut,
when it is dried and wrinkled more then is fit, by the cold Air, or cold Water,
or the use of astringent things, then a small or hoarse Voice is uttered. Which
impediment also of the Voice happens from a thick slime long sticking there,
for if it be wholly obstructed with that, or some other Body slipped in, or drawn
in with the brearh, and continuing there long, the which yet seldom happens,
because it is forced to give place, by the Cough, which it suddenly moves
unless by reason of its sharpness the thing sticking there be fastened into it,
it must needs be that the Patient be suffocated. As Histories testify that
Pope Adrian died by a Fly flying into his Throat, and we have observed a Child
strangled by Swallowing a Gold Noble. And what they suffer also, in whom water
by chance flows down into this Wind-dore of the rough Artery, and what straits
it breeds, and how with great violence a Cough does cast it thence through the
Mouth and largenss of the Nostrils, we often see in others, and sometimes we try
it in our selves. But the chink of the Larynx scarce labors of any other
Disease, unless when by consent it is hindered or pressed by the neighboring
parts, as from the Vertebrae of the Neck Luxated, of which has been spoken
already: For it can scarcely happen that it be relaxt more than is fit, by a
Humor, seeing it is convenient for it always to be moist: that it should be
torn, seeing it is a thick Membrane, is impossible, as also it is very hard to
be wounded.

The passage of the rough Artery or Windpipe, The binding of the pipe of the
rough Artery is the cause of Suffocation.
from the Head even to the Lungs, if it be intercepted by outward force the
Neck being bound up as shall be said in the Gullet, it brings strangling, and if
it be pressed by the first Vertebrae of the Neck luxated, it causes difficulty
of breathing, which Hippocrates called the sixth sort of Squinzy. The rough
Artery can scarce be filled otherwise, with things that fall into it, but as I
said breathing may be stopped about the sides thereof. And they that are
drowned, are not choked so much by the Influx of Water as by the hinderance of
the passage of the Air. And if any thing fall into the passage and hi^^er
breathing, it is by its sticking fast and causing a continual Cough.

The connection and Obstruction of the Lungs are the Diseases that cause a
Dyspnaea. The Cause of Dispnaea or difficulty of breathing is the connection of
the Lungs with the Breast.
The connection of the Lungs with the Unequal part of the breast being streighter
than it should be, suffers them not to move freely, and makes them short-winded
in motion. This by Anatomies has been found to have been natural to some, and
to others from a fall or Pleurisy. The Obstruction of the Lungs causes an
Asthma.
When the Lungs are stopped inwardly in the branches of the rough Artery that
are dispersed through them, there is a difficulty of breathing, because the Air
cannot freely pass. This comes often from a watery humor falling from the Head,
in time of sleep and lying down, without sense by degrees, through the rough
Artery to the Lungs; which staying in the narrow branches thereof, and growing
slimy and stopping the passage, it causes breathing with Snorting and noise
and a Cough. And if by reason of the toughness thereof it cannot be hawked
forth, it causes a long Disease called Asthma: which by a new defluxion, at
night time and in moist weather, and after a Surfeit, is not violent. And if the
defluxion be great and suddenly fill the passages that were formerly stopped,
it causes the Suffocating Catarrh. The same may come from the Excrements of
the Lungs there long detained and made thick. For as the Brain by reason of the
plenty of Blood, which fills the Cavity of the membranes, being crude,
continually gathers Excrements; so the Lungs whose vessels are full of blood
if it be excrementitious or crude, it causes many excrements: so that it is
not necessary that all the phlegm which is spet up must come from the Head to
the Lungs. Both these Causes are discovered by the phlegmatic constitution of
the body, and the signs of abounding phlegm, and rattling, and other hurts
mentioned. A white chalky matter, and hard, is made rather of the Lungs, than
of phlegm which is slimy like Bird-lime, but not crumbling. This obstructing
inwardly the branches, causes that long Asthma wherein there is no sign of
phlegm. And the same may cause the Stone in the Lungs, which is hard, brittle,
smooth or rough, according as the vessels are, as we have seen Anatomies. And
such have been coughed out after a long and otherwise incurable Asthma, which
were the cause thereof.

The Compression of the Breast is the cause of difficult breathing.
The Diseases that hinder the Breathing besides the Muscles of the Breast
mentioned in those which hinder the motion both of the Lungs and Breast both
which are required to breathing. This is when it is outwardly compressed, or
when astringent things are laid thereon, as common Physicians suppose. The
hardness of the gristles of the breast is the cause of Dyspnoea.
If the Gristles of the Ribs, which are about the Breast to cause the more
easy motion, be turned into a hard substance like the other Ribs: which
happens in some through age, in some sooner, especially in Women, by reason of
their Breasts held up thereby; for then the breast cannot be sufficiently
dilated: And this makes them sigh, when they have great breasts and lie upon
their backs.

When a Rib or two are broken and thrust inward, The Ribs thrust inward causes
difficult breath.
because they hinder the dilatation of the Lungs, and the motion of the breast
they hinder breathing: And so do the Ribs dislocated, and the Vertebrae or
spondits of the back bent inwards. These two hurts as they may come by an
external force to the Ribs: so Fernelius testifies that a Rib has been broken
by great palpitation of the body: which I rather believe might be displaced.

If the Cavity of the Breast be filled with matter in an Empyema and Corruption
of the Lungs, The Repletion of the Cavity of the Breast is the cause of
Dyspnoea.
or Water in a Dropsy; Or Blood from a Vein broken: If these be in great
quantity, they cause a Dyspnoea by hindering motion of the Lungs, Breast and
Midriff. Also Wind may cause the same if in the Breast: as I gathered from one
in a Dyspnaea who had a noise about his breast with no rattling.

The Cure.
If Breath be stopped from Fainting of the Heart, The Cure of want of breath in
Swooning.
when strength returns, they recover. And what must be done in Swooning shall
be showed in the defect of strength,

If men in Apoplexies from a distemper of the Brain are in danger of
Suffocation, The Cure of Defect of breathing from an Apoplexy.
we showed what must be done in the Consternation of mind. Also when breath is
stopped by Convulsions.

If there be Defect of Breath, The Cure of want of Breathing and Speech in a
Palsy and Cramp and other Diseases of the Nerves.
Voice, or Speech by reason of the Nerves in a particular Palsy or Convulsion,
it must be cured as a Palsy or Convulsion.

If it come from the Cramp you must give things to prevent a general
Convulsion, as was there showed.

And if it come from Looseness of the Nerves you must proceed as in a Palsy, by
purging and altering.

When the Speech or Voice is lost, things applied to the Mouth and Throat are
best, because they draw forth phlegm by the right way, and being near the part
affected, consume and alter the humor. Masticatories and Gargarisms are most
proper, not such as draw phlegm thither, as in the Palsy of other parts, but
which dry and draw out the humor that is fallen thither.

This Masticatory is good. Take Nutmeg two drams, Long Pepper, Cubebs,
Galangal, Water-cresse sceds, Mustard seed, each one dram; Salt, Gum Elemi,
each half a dram; Mastick one dram and an half; Turpentine which is highly
commended, and with Wax make Pills, add half a scruple of Castor.

These Pills are excellent to be held all night under the Tongue. Take
Bayberries one dram, Castor and Euphorbium cach six grains; with the Infusion
of Gum-traganth made in Rose water, make Pills.

It is admirable to rub the Tongue with Mithridate and Castor. And to wash the
mouth with Brine, or a Decoction of red Wine, Sage, and Salt.

Or this. Take Acorus roots one ounce, Galangal, Cypress, Costus, Nutmeg, each
half an ounce; Sage, Marsoram, each one handful; boil them in Water and Wine,
and add Honey of Rosemary flowers, make a Gargarism.

Black-Cherry water to wash the mouth and to drink is vulgarly admired in loss
of Speech, but this is better. Take Black-Cherry water, Lavender, Sage, and
Pennyroyal water, each equal parts; Anoint the mouth often.

Some have written it as a secret that the juice of Nettles put into the Ears,
restores the Speech.

The same external medicines are to be used as in the Palsy. And the Ointments
and things which are applied to the original of the Nerves, are to be applied
to the nape of the Neck, and let the Jaws be anointed therewith.

Sinapisms, Dropaces, Vesicatories and Cauteries which draw back are to be
applied to the hinder part of the Head.

If there be plethory it is good to let blood under the Tongue in the Palsy
thereof upon the same side and to apply Cupping-Glasses under the Chin and the
hinder part of the Head.

It is good to bid them use the Tongue and endeavor to speak.

If Voice, Speech or Breathing be hindered it is a Desluxion upon the Muscles,
The Cure of want of Breathing.
which distendeth and inflameth them; whether it be in the narrow Muscles of
the Jaws or of the breast, or upon the Diaphragma, it shall be spoken of in
Pains and Defluxions.

But if it come from the Diaphragma which is so troubled with Vapors that
Nocturnal Suffocation or Fits of the Mother follow, then because this Symptom
is most urgent, The Cure shall be as follows.

If a Vapor arise from the Praecordia and hinders the Midriff in the Sleep, The
Cure of Incubus or Nightmare.
and brings danger of choking, as in the Incubus it is dangerous, for fat
folks and Children. Otherwise if it continues, it sends the Vapors to the
Brain, and causes worse accidents as Hypochondriack Melancholy, or Madness,
or Falling Sickness, for the cause is the same only the part affected
differreth; and if the brain be much hurt it may turn to an Apoplexy.

Therefore it is good to prevent it betimes, and the Crudity and Cacochymie and
Repletion in the first passages is to be taken away. And the Vapors are to be
kept from rising to hurt the Diaphragma or other parts either in the Fit or out
of the Fit, and to be diverted and discussed, as we showed in the Melancholy,
Epilepsie, Catalepsie, and the like Diseases from the same cause.

This is done first by purging the thick Excrements by Clysters or otherwise,
and then letting blood if it be much or impure. Then cleanse the Cacochymy by
vomit and purge; as the humor is, especially with things against Melancholy,
and Wind, that are good for the Head and Falling Sickness. Then use particular
Evacuations, provoke the Haemrhoids or Courses if they be stopped, and purge
the Excrements of the Brain by the Nose. And in the mean while to make a good
Concoction, give and apply things to the Stomach, avoid Crudities and things
breeding Excrements and Wind. Look to the Head, for the Imagination is hurt,
and to the Heart by reason of Fear, and to the Breast for it is troubled. All
these must be respected out of the Fit. In the Fit use Clysters, and then
outward Applications, that draw down vapors, and these may be continued after
for prevention of the Fit.

If you give no Clyster, use this. Take Diacatholiconsix drams, Diasenna
Solutiva one dram, give them alone or in Wormwood Water.

Pills. Take Species Hiera of Galen, half a dram, Aggregative one scruple, with
Syrup of Stoechas make Pills.

The Humor is prepared thus. Take Syrup of Hysop (for the Head and Breast)
Stoechas and Lavender, Honey or Rosemary of Bugloss each ^^e ounce; Oxymel
simple half an ounce, Wormwood, Mints, Succory, Bugloss and Peony water, each
three ounces; give it for three or four times with Nutmeg.

Or thus. Take Fennel, Asparagu^ and Liquorish roots, each one ounce; Pe^ny
roots and Capar bark, each half an ounce; B^ttony, Hysop, each one handful;
Endive, Succory, Bugloss, Agrimony, Hops, each half an handful; Bugloss flowers
one pugil, Raisons stoned one ounce, Annise and Fennel seed each two drams;
Dodder one dram, Schaenanth one dram, boil them to a pint, strain it, and
dissolve Oxymel two ounces, Sugar one ounce, Diarrhodon Abbatis one dram, for
four Doses.

In Crudities, Infuse in Wine, Fennel roots two ounces, Capar barks half an
ounce, Galangal three drams, Wormwood, Germander, Groundpine, each three drams;
Cordial flowers each two drams; Fennel and Parsley seed, each one dram.

Then purge. Take Liquorish half an ounce, Raisons one ounce, Anise seed two
drams and an half; Cordial flowers one pugil, Epithymum, Senna, each half an
ounce; boil them and add to the straining Rhubarb one dram, barks of black
Helebore prepared half a dram (if the Patient be strong, or increase the
quantity of Senna) Ginger, Grains of Paradise, each half a scruple; strain it,
and give it with half an ounce of Syrup of Roses.

Or give other Potions with Diasenna, or Pills of Cochy etc.

Evacuate at diverse times by the former; or by Magistral Syrups, Electuaries,
etc. mentioned in Melancholy Diseases.

Let these Pills be in readiness. Take Species Hierae Archigenis one dram, Black
Hellebore prepared one scruple, Agarick, Rhubarb, each half a dram, Epithimum
half a dram, Peony seeds and roots each half a dram; with Honey of Squils make
a Mass: let him take three or four or more bigger or less as they work. Let him
use them often fasting foam hours before Dinner or Supper.

Hiera Archigenis alone will do the same.

Spare Diet, and avoiding Suppers is excellent; especially if it come from
Surfets. Let him beware of crude and windy things that stretch forth the Belly
and increases shortneness of Breath. Let the Diet be of good juice, and easy
Concoction, with warm Spices. For Drink, Wine is forbidden because it disturbs
the mind, and Water because it puffs up, and Mead is allowed, but in young
people by reason of the Honey which turns into choler, it is not so good. We
allow Wine moderated with Water, as in other melancholy Diseases.

A Honey-water for old men that are phlegmatic. Take Liquorish one ounce,
Fennel half an ounce, Raisons stoned two ounces, Annise seed one dram, Bugloss
flowers one pugil, boil them to one pint and an half, and Dissolve Sugar, and
Honey, of each two ounces: Boil them again a little and strain them.

The Wormwood wine mentioned to prepare, is good also to strengthen, taken in
the mornings.

Pouders after meat to help Concoction, and hinder Vapors.

As, Take Coriander seed prepared half an ounce, Aniseseed two drams, Powder of
Aromaticum Rosatum one dram; Diamargaritum frigidum one scruple, Cinnamon half
a dram Mace one scruple, Piony seeds and Coral, each half a dram; Sugar of
Roses, as much as all the rest: give one spoonful after Meat.

Or this mixture after Meat. Take the Marmalad of Quinces, candied Citron
peels, Conserve of Roses, each half an ounce; Conserve of Marjoram half an
ounce, Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamoschu dulce, Diamargariton, each one scruple;
Piony seeds half a dram, red Coral one dram, Sugar of Roses, as much as is
sufficient, give one spoonful.

The Lozenges of Aromaticum Rosatum, Diarrhodon, or Diamoschun, are good taken
at bed time.

Or this Electuary. Take Conserve of Roses, Borrage, Marjoram, each one ounce
and an half; Citron peels, Myrobalans, and Ginger candied, each half an ounce;
Elicampane and Galangal, each half a dram; Piony-seeds one dram, Coral, Ivory,
each one dram and an half; Diarrhodon, Dianthos, each half a dram; Cordial
Spices one scruple, with Syrup of Bettony, make an Electuary. Let him drink
after it a little Wine, with the Water of Lillies Convallies.

Old Treacle is good once in a week taken at Midnight.

We give Clysters before Purging to prepare, and after to expel wind, and
loosen the Belly. And in the time of the Fit. Of which you have Examples in the
like Diseases.

Purgers of the Head by the Nose and Mouth after general purging to prevent
other Diseases of the Head must be used.

Apply Caps and Pillows to the Head of these. Take Cypress roots, Angelica,
each two drams; Marjoram, Rosemary, Lavender flowers and Roses, each one dram;
Coriander seeds one dram and an half, Cloves half a dram: make a Powder.

Baggs are applied in the fit to the Heart and Pulses, sprinkled with Wine,
Balm-water, Rose and Orange-flower-water. Take Galangal, Cypress, Citron peels,
each two drams; Citron and Basil seeds, each one dram; Balm and Cordial
flowers, each half a dram; Cloves one scruple: make a Powder.

Let the Stomach and Breast be anointed in the Fit. Take Oil of Dill and
Chamomil, each one ounce; white Wine one ounce, Aqua vitae two drams: boil them
till the wine be spent.

Often washing externally does revel Vapors from the Head and Midrif.

Also Frictions from beneath till they come to the Head, and combing of the
Head backwards, are good.

Let Cupping-glasses be applied to the Thighs, and then to the Shoulders,

A Dropax made of Pitch and Oil of Mastick must be applied hot to the Head with
a Clout between; if the Head be afflicted.

In Plethorick and Cacochymical Bodies, a vein must be opened on that side,
which is most heavy, first in the Arm, then in the Foot, and in other parts,
for revulsion of Blood from that part, to which the Vapors most ascend.

They must be wakened in the Fit, and not disturbed in Mind.

Let them sleep with the Head high upon one side, and take heed of sleeping
upon the Back, because it does not only cause Straightness, but troublesome
Dreams.

If the Vapors be about the Womb, and cause Hysterical accidents, The cure of
the Suffocation of the Womb.
because there are diverse kinds thereof, one produces a pain of the Heart,
another Swounding, another raging, another convulsive Motions with Suffocation,
of which is spoken in those Diseases, yet since the Spirits are hindered in
all, and they are all called Suffocations of the womb we shall speak of them.

They are in most danger who fetch no breath, but ly like dead people, because
sometimes they die in the Fit, and sometimes return to themselves. Also if they
have raging madness or Convulsion. But often they recover after these.

The Method of Cure is, to evacuate the Excrements about the Womb, provoke the
Courses, and to repress the Vapors that rise from the womb, and to revel,
discuss and consume them, diverse ways, among which some take away the fit.

We give Evacuations, as in foul Blood and Melancholy according to the
Constitution, and Humors abounding, which must be repeated, if the Disease
cease not, always adding things that provoke the Terms. These are best.

To provoke Vomit, give one dram and an half of Agarick, with Oxymel.

Let the Potion following be given every week to purge. Take Agarick in Powder,
and Triphera magna without Opium, each one dram; dissolve them in white Wine
and Water of Mugwort, or Mother-wort.

Or thus. Take Agarick, Briony roots, each one dram and an half; Ginger and
Cinnamon, each half a dram; infuse them in the best white Wine, strain them,
and add Syrup of Mugwort one ounce.

Turpentine is much commended, and this Purge. Take Agarick troches'd two
scruples, Ginger, one scruple, insufe them in white Wine, strain them, adding
Turpentine three drams, dissolved in six drams of Honey, and the Yolk of an Egg.

Usual Pills. Take Hiera Colocynthidos one dram, Agarick trochs'd one dram and
an half, Carrot, Agnus Castus seeds, each one scruple; Myrrh, Castor, each half
a scruple; Diagredium half a scruple, with Turpentine make a Mass for Pills,
give from half a dram.

The Food must be moderate and good, and because Wine causes the fit, let him
drink Anise-seed boiled in Water or Mead.

Medicines to alter must discuss Vapors, and move the Terms, strengthen the
womb, and the principal Parts, and resist the venomous Humors. Thus,

A good Water. Take Balm and Mint-water, each one ounce and an half;
Cinnamon Water two ounces, with a little Castor, or distill one of these Simples
following, with a little Castor.

Or make this Decoction of them. Take Roots of Solomon's Seal, Valerian, each
one dram and an half; Balm, Pennyroyal, Organ, Calamints, Jet, each one dram;
boil them in Wine, adding Vinegar of Squills, strain it, and ad Syrup of
Mugwort half an ounce for two Draughts.

Or this Syrup. Take Roots of Solomon's Seal, Briony, Valerian, Spignel,
Coltsfoot, white Wine, Master-wort, Angelica, each half an ounce; Plantane,
Balm, Pennyroyal, Min^s, Calamints, Fleabane, Nep, Bettony, Mugwort, Thyme,
each one handful; Rosemary, Lavender flowers, each one pngil; Seeds of Cummin,
Carrots, wild Parsnips, Sorrel, Piony, Anise, each one dram; Bay Berries, each
two drams; boil and strain them, add Juice of Plantane one ounce and an half,
Sugar six ounces, boil them thick, and add Cinnamon and Cloves, each one dram
and an half; give one ounce by it self, or with convenient Liquor.

A Potion. Take Mithridate one dram and an half, Powder of Moschu dulcis half a
dram, Syrup of Mugwort half an ounce, Balm-water as much as is sufficient, with
a little Cinnamon Water, make a Potion.

Pouders to drink with Liquors, with Sugars, or to be taken in Lozenges or
Electuaries.

One easy made. Take Cummin seeds one dram, Juniper Berries eleven, powder
them, give it in Wine or Cinnamon, or Plantane, or Rose Water.

Or thus. Take Cummin seed, wild Parsnip and Carrot seed, each one scruple;
Cloves half a scruple.

Or, Take Cummin, wild Carrot seed, each one dram; Gith, Agnus castus, Rue,
Piony, Dittany roots, each two scruples; Amber, Crystal, Jet, each one scruple;
Cloves, Cinnamon, Pepper, wood Aloes, each half a scruple; Musk five grains:
make a Powder, give a dram in Liquor, or with four ounces of Sugor make a
Tragema, or Lozenges, or with Honey, or Syrup of Mugwort an Electuary.

Pills of stinking things are made thus. Take Castor one scruple, Assa faetida
half a scruple, Myrrh, Galbanum, Sagapenum, each one scruple, with Honey of
Squills, make Pills, take half a dram.

Or of very sweet things thus. Take Musk six grains, Benzoin half a dram, Sugar
one dram, with Cinnamon Water make Pills, give half a scruple.

Suppositories revel Vapors. Take Honey one ounce and an half, boil it to a
consistence, add Hiera, Cummin, and Nigella seeds, each one scruple; Sal Gem.
half a scruple, make Suppositories.

A Clyster does the same. Take Bay and Juniper-berryes, each one ounce;
Pennyroyal, Calamints, Rue, Savine, each one handful; Cummin two drams: boil
them, and dissolve Hiera Coloquintidos two drams, Oil of Wall-flowers and Rue,
each one ounce; Salt one dram, make a Clyster.

Provoke vomiting with the singer, or a feather in the Throat.

Put powder of Mustard into the Nose in the sit to provoke Neesing, or a little
white Hellebore therewith, some blow up Rhubarb with good success, if she
sneese it is good, by which we perceive life.

Strong Scents are applied to the Nose that stink, in the Fit, which drive down
the Womb being sensible thereof, as some suppose. But we think they do good by
dispersing vapors, and stir up strength in the Heart and Brain, whether they
pierced being subtle, and because they stir up the expulsive Faculty which was
a sleep, that they may come to themselves; therefore we bid them smell such out
of the fit. Castor because it is strong, is good to smell too.

Also Assa foetida, Galbanum, Opoponax, Bitumen and the like; Trefoyl that
stinketh, Petroleum, Rue, and Chimches, both Domestic, and in Plants, which
stink moist horridly.

Also Onions, and Garlic which have a piercing sharp Scent.

Also strong Vinegar in a sponge, or mixed with Castor and Sulphur to anoint
the Nose.

A stinking Fume is better, of burnt Feathers, Leather, horn Hoofes, Candles
ends put forth.

Or these Troches. Take Castor one scruple, Assa foetida half a scruple, Pitch
half a dram, with Turpentine make Troches; light one, and take in the vapors at
the Nose with a Funnel, but not too thick, least it suffocate.

To the womb pleasant things are applied to fetch it down by delight: but we
suppose that they do it by piercing being hot, and so discuss the vapors sooner.

A Fume for the womb with a funnel. Take Storax, Benzoin, of each one dram;
wood Aloes half a dram, Musk five grains; with the infusion of Gum Traganth:
Make Troches and lay them dry upon the Embers.

Or thus: Take Troches of Gallia Moschata, Mesues and Nicolai.

These scent a sweet scent, if they boil in Rose Water.

The Privities must be anointed with Civet by the Midwife.

Or this Linament: Take Gallia Moschata Mesues one dram, Powder Diamoschu,
Diambra, of each half a scruple; Civet three grains, Saftron six grains, with
Oil of sweet Almonds or Been: Make a Linament.

Or mix Musk, Amber, or Civet, in Cotton: Or this Powder, Take Storax, Benzoin,
Gallia Moschata, of each one dram: Cloves, Cinnamon, wood of Aloes, of each
half a dram; Saffron half a scruple. This may be sprinkled with Rosewater and
put into a bag and used like a Pessary.

Or this, which is not only well sented, but provokes the Terms. Take Balm,
Marjoram, of each one dram; Cloves, Mace, of each a dram; Pepper, Saffron, of
each one scruple; Jet, Pitch, of each half a dram; Salt Peter one scruple,
Alipta Moschata, which has Camphyre half a dram, with Oil of Bays and
Lillies, and a little Storax: Make a Pessary.

Or others for the Terms which are there mentioned.

They which think it comes from stoppage of seed apply sharper and provoke the
seed by diverse Arts. Which we omit because we speak of another cause, yet w^
^llow lawful Copulation: which revels and provokes Terms and alters the Nature
of Virgins.

These are applied to the Navil and Share.

A Cataplasm: Take Fern leaves, Lovadge with the roots, of each one handful;
Rue half a handful: Boil them in Wine, and with Grease, make a Cataplasm.

Or thus: Take Honey and Figs equal parts, boil them in Wine and Water, beat
them; and add Oil of Spike and Dill.

Also Flax from the Spindle dipped in Oil of Dill.

Also Henbane bruised, with Oil of Spike, applied to the Navil.

An Emplaster for the Share: Take Galbanum one ounce, Storax one dram, with Oil
of Spike and Powder of Cloves.

Another: Take Emplastrum Ceroneum, or for the Mother one ounce, Troches of
Alipta Moschata one dram; Storax half a dram, with Oil of Spike: Make a Plaster.

It is good to wash the Feet to divert and strengthen the Womb, As; Take Orris
roots, Lovage, Fern, Motherwort, Calamints, Nep, Pennyroyal, of each one
handful; Chamomil flowers one pugil, Juniper and Bay Berries of each half a
pugil; Carrot, Carway and wild Parsnip seeds and Agnus Castus seeds, of each
one dram; Coriander two drams. Boil them in Water, add a little Wine.

A Bath of the same after purging, or to go to the hot Baths is good.

Frictions also or rubbings of the Lungs and Soles of the Feet, with Salt
Vinegar and Oil of Bays, are good in the fit.

Also pull the Ears, Nose, and Hair upon the Privities.

Bind the Hips above the Knees, and the Hypochondria with a Girdle.

Apply a great Cupping Glass below the Navel and small ones to the Hips.

Apply a Dropax and Sinapisme to the Loins and Share.

A Cautery in the Coronel suture is good if the Head be afflicted. If the Terms
be stopped, open a Vein in the Foot; and Scarifie under the Ham, and apply
Horsleeches to the Ankle.

Let her avoid cold Air, in the lower parts chiefly, and Feet which must
always be kept warm. Let her exercise moderately, and sleep moderately, and
not be disturbed in mind.

And if in other Diseases the Diaphragma or Midriff be hindered by Wind or
Humors from other parts. The Cure of short Breathing from wind and humors in
the Belly.
The Cure is by those Diseases: as in the Wind of the Colic, Stomach,
Repletion, Tympany, Dropsy, Hardness of the Bowels and Schirrhus.

It is done by Vomiting with the Decoction of Radish, The Cure of Suffocation
by Mushrooms.
or with dried Hen-dung and Oxymel. Or, Take Oxymel one ounce and an half, Sal
Niter half a dram, and drink after it Wine of the Infusion and Decoction of
Wormwood and Balm.

If the Instruments of Breathing, Voice and Speaking, as the Mouth, Jaws,
Palate, Tongue, Rough Artery, Lungs and Breast be hurt, you must proceed as
follows.

If too much dryness and hardness of the Tongue hinder the Speech, The Cure of
S^utt ering from dryness of the Tongue.

The Cure of Shortwindedness from the hardness of the Gristles of the Ribs.


or of the Jaws, the Voice the Cure is showed in the privation of Taste. But if
the Gristles of the Ribs are hard, and cause ^^ld men and women to be
Short-winded (being wholl chested as they call it) this cannot be cured.
Therefore they are constrained to be at rest, and not cause the least breathing
violently by motion, that they may spend the remainder of their days in quiet.

When the Tongue is grown biggar or less or otherwise deformed, The want of
Speech from the greatness of the Tongue.
whereby the Speech is hindered, this cannot be cured if it be from the birth.
But by Practice some that cannot pronounce some sorts of Letters, they learn
them as we read of Demosthenes. If the Tongue be swollen, seek for the Cure in
Tumors.

When the want or defect of a patt is the Cause, The Cure of the hinderance of
speech from the want of Tongue, Palate, or Teeth.
there is no Cure. As when the Speech is hindered from a disfigured Tongue, or
loss of Palate, or absence of Fore-Teeth: yet some can make Artificial Teeth of
Ivory or Bone that will stick fast being placed in the space.

A great solution of continuity, or when the rough Artery is cut, The Cure of
the cutting the rough Artery.
and the passage stopped for breath, there is no Cure, because they are commonly
choked, Yet we have read that some have been cured by diligence.

If a Rib be broken and thrust inward and hinder the motion of the Lungs it
must be reduced to its place: The Cure of Dyspnaea from a wounded or broken Rib.
and cured as a Fracture. If a Ribbe displaced it must be reduced first, and
then held there as a dislocation.

If the Lungs be joined by small fibers to the Breast it being an organical
Disease, The Cure of Sighs from the growing of the Lungs to the Breast.
it is incurable: And they are constrained as those whose Gristles are hard, to
live with strong motion.

If Speech be hinderred from the streightness of the Ligament or string of the
Tongue, The Cure of defect of Speech from the Contraction of the Tongue or of
the Tongue-tied.
as when Children are Tongue-tied, it is cured with the Finger, or Cutting: But
when it is grown hard, it is incurable.

When the Breast is silled with matter, Water or Blood, The Cure of Dyspnaea
from Repletion of the Breast.
it causes Coughing rather than hinders breathing, which sends it forth, and
therefore it is to be treated of in things sent forth.

If the stoppage of the Mouth, Nose, The Cure of Suffocation from the stoppage
of the Mouth, Nose or Jaws.
and Jaws hinder breathing and come from external injuries as diving under
water, or hanging, or from a weight upon the Breast, the cause taken away the
breath will return. But if there be fear of Suffocation from the fixing of the
Teeth, or stoppage of the Nose with filth, in an Apoplexy or Epilepsie, we
showed there how the Teeth are to be opened, and what else is to be done.

If the rough Artery be suffocated from a Spondil dislocated which lies
thereon which is difficult to be: The Cure of Suffocation from the tying of the
rough Artery.
it easily kills. And if crookedness of Back cause short breathing, because
the bones cannot easily be reduced, the Disease is desperate. If strangulation
be from any thing fallen into the rough Artery, it cannot get out but by
Coughing: and because a Cough does come of its own accord, when any thing falls
in, we need not provok it. But neesing does very much help the expelling of it,
and strikeing upon the back as the vulgar suppose. But that which falls in is
either cast forth after long Coughing, or the matter sticks so fast, that the
Cough and straitness do so perplex that they may be choked, as we showed in
the Causes.

If a preternatural tumor in the Almonds of the Ears cause difficult breathing,
The Cure of Dyspnaea from a Tumor in the Jaws.
we showed the cure in pains and Tumors. And we spoke in the Muscles of the
Tumor thereof.

The Cure of Asthma.
If an Obstruction in the Lungs by a tough phlegmatic Excrement produce an
Asthma, and it continue long, in old men it is incurable, in others it is
difficult, especially if they spit not forth the matter that stops; And the
Disease is increased with a new Defluxion: which if it be great in a Fit when
before they feared Suffocation, it often suddenly suffocateth. But if the
Asthma came from a Clay or Gravel-like matter, in one part only, it does not
suffocate as that from phlegm which takes up more room, except a Defluxion comes
upon it, and and so increase the stoppage, neither is this easily cured except
it be cast forth by the long force of a cough, and then the old Disease is
suddenly cured.

The Method of Cure is, to cut the humor so fixed, and to cleanse, and to dilate
the breast that it may expel it. And this will expel the Gravel by medicines
inward and outward. Then if a Catarrh cause or feed the Disease, the Body must
be cleansed: the head must be dried and the humor that flows from thence must be
revelled. And if straightness come from Wind that stretches the Stomach or
Belly it must be discussed. All these are to be done by Fumes, by Attractives,
by Burners, cutting and motion of the body, as we snal show.

Purgers are to be given out of the Fit if Defluxions cause or increase an
Asthma, in respect of them, for otherwise they will draw nothing from the
Breast. And in other causes that the body being cleansed may be better ordered.
But these are not to be strong except the body be very foul: but gentle and
often, except the Defluxion be very troublesome, and then you must do as shall be
showed, but for the Asthma Thus.

Gentle Purgers which expectorate are Cassia, Manna, Polipody. Take Liquorish
half an ounce, Raisons stoned and Figs each one ounce; Jujubes half an ounce,
Polypody dried six drams, boil them and dissolve three ounces of Manna or one
ounce and an half of Cassia.

Old Cock Broth is commended of all men in which dissolve Cassia or Manna as
was showed, or other Electuaries that purge phlegm.

Or thus, Take an old Cock, kill him, pluck him, and gut him, then take Raisons
and Figs each four ounces; beat them into a past: Carthamus seed and Polypody
each two ounces; Senna one ounce, Agarick two drams, Annise one dram, Turbith
one dram and an half, Ginger half a dram, beat them with the past, with which
stuff the Cock and boil him in Water. Take it thrice, and if it work not at
first, add Cassia or Manna. Or you may first boil the Cock, and after, the
ingredients in his Broth.

Another used long is an excellent Remedy, Take a Cock, and one ounce of Fox
Lungs, Raisons stoned and Figs two ounces, Leeks two ounces, Liquorish one
ounce, Elicampane two drams, Hysop, Savory, Horehound, Time, Calamints dried,
Pennyroyal, each one dram and an half; Fennel and Anise seed each one dram;
Carthamus seeds and Polypody bruised each half an ounce; white Tartar one dram,
two yolks of Eggs, fresh Butter half an ounce. Powder and cut them and beat
them into a past, sow them into the Cock and boil him til his flesh fall off in
much Water in a great Vessel, then strain it, and to ten pints of the Broth add
one pound of Honey, that it may not quickly corrupt, give a draught with Manna
and Cassia each half an ounce; in the morning for many days. And this will work
better if you give after it one dram of Turpentine with Penedies in the form of
a Bolus.

Three drams of the Troches of Violets without Scammony are good for the Breast
and purge phlegm, with a pectoral Decoction or Water.

Stronger are thus made, when the slegm is much. Take Violet flowers six drams,
Turbith four drams, Agarick three drams, juice of Liquorish, Manna, each two
drams; Scammony one scruple, with syrup of Violets make Trochisks give two
drams.

This Potion is good. Take Agarick one dram and an half, Turbith one dram,
Ginger half a dram, powder them and Infuse them in Oxymel or Hydromel one
ounce, and as much of white Wine, Hysop and Fennel water, strain them, dissolve
Diaphenicon and Diacarthamum each one dram and an half; Manna, Syrup of Violets
each one ounce.

Pills. Take Pills of Agarick, Cochiae, each one scruple; Troches of Alhandal six
grains, with Oxymel of Squils make Pills.

This Wine is good if there be Wind which straiteneth. Take Senna two ounces,
Agarick half an ounce, Turbith two drams, Squils two drams, Wormwood three
drams, Bayberries ten, Anise seed one ounce, Fennel, Caraway, each two drams;
Infuse them in Wine and Honey and let him drink thereof in the morning.

The pulp of Coloquintida infused in Wine is excellent.

An usual Electuary. Take Manna, Cassia, each two ounces, Diaphaenicon and
Diacarthamum, each one ounce; Syrup of Violets and Oxymel of Squils, each half
an ounce; make an Electuary: give two drams and after more at a time.

A day after purging use, Mithridate or proper Conserves to refresh.

Vomits are given, out of the Fit least, too much straining should bring fear
of Suffocation. Tobacco water distilled is most excellent.

The humors must be prepared before Purging, with things to cut phlegm, and they
must also be given afterward,

Thus: Take of Syrup of Liquorish and Hysop each one ounce and an half; Oxymel
of Squils one ounce, Hysop, Fennel and Coltsfoot water each three ounces; make
a Julep for three days to be continued, mix Powder Diaireos, or give a Lozenge
thereof after.

Or with this Apozeme. Take Liquorish one ounce and an half, Elicampane and
Orrice each half an ounce; Horehound, Maidenhair, Hysop, Coltsfoot, each one
handful; Scabious and French Lavender flowers, Violets, Mallows, each one
pugil; Anise and Fennel each two drams; Raisons stoned, Jujubes, each one ounce
and an half; Dates three, Figs ten, boil them adding to the strained Liquor
Oxymel two ounces, aromatize it with a little Cinnamon, let it be taken like a
Julep.

Observe the same diet, as in the Nightmare, thin, of good juice, easy
concoction, not windy, crude, astringent.

Among others Dioscorides commends old Cock broth, and Snails.

For Sauce, mix Saffron, for the Breast, and Mustard with Honey does
expectorate well.

Beans, Barley, Orobus, Almonds, Pine-nuts, with Carua and Fennel to correct
the wind and Figs, Raisons, Dates.

Take Leeks two ounces, boil them in Water or Cock broth til they be soft, add
the Yolk of an Egg and Butter two ounces, Sugar one ounce, boil them again a
little, let him eat one half at Dinner and another at Supper.

Let him drink Mead or Hydromel with Hysop boiled therein.

Or this Ptisan. Take Barley one pugil, Liquorish two long sticks bruised,
Raisons stoned twenty, Figs fifteen, boil them in eleven measures of Water to
eight, adding Jujubies twelve,

There are diverse Medicines which cleanse, lenifie and cut matter in the Lungs
that it may be coughed up, and are good in all causes.

This Decoction, for morning and evening. Take Liquorish one ounce, Elicampane,
Orris, each half an ounce; Maidenhair, Hysop each half a handful; Raisons and
Figs, each one ounce; Saffron one scruple,, boil them, and add Honey.

Or thus. Take dried Horehound, Germander, Hysop, each one handful; Staechas
flowers one pugil, boil them in Honey and Water.

Or thus. Take Orris two drams, Horehound, Rue, Calamints, each one dram;
Nettle and Fenugreek seeds, each two drams; Raisons stoned one ounce, boil
them, add Honey or Oxymel of Squils.

Or this. Take Liquorish two ounces, Orris, Elicampane each one ounce; Horstail
one ounce and an half, Valerian, Squils, each two drams; Maidenhair, Coltsfoot,
Bettony, Veronica, Hysop, Savory, Horehound, Calamints, Time, each one handful;
flowers of Staechas, Rosemary, Scabious, each one pugil; Anise and Fennel seed
each half an ounce; Nettle, Rocket and Watercress seed, each one dram; Figs,
Raisons each four ounces; Jujubes, Sebestens, each ten; boil them in Water and
Honey, add Peper and Spike each one scruple: let him drink of it often, or with
more Honey or Sugar and Manna, make a Syrup.

Another Syrup. Take Radish roots four ounces, Leeks three ounces, Orris two
ounces, Elicampane, Dragons Green, each one ounce; Squils half an ounce,
Liquorish one ounce and an half, Savory, Pennyroyal, Hysop, Savin, Horehound,
Germander, of each one handful; Coleworts, and Coltsfoot, of each two handfuls;
flowers of Staechas one pugil, Faenugreek and Carthamus seeds, of each six
drams; Bay Berries half an ounce, Spike half a dram, Saffron one scruple: Make
a Decoction, and with Sugar and Honey and Syrup.

A Wine. Take Liquorish one ounce and an half, Orris one ounce, Elicampane half
an ounce, Angelica, Squils, of each two drams; Horehound, Hysop, of each three
drams; Annis, and Fennel, of each two drams; Nettle, and Watercreses seeds, of
each one dram; Honey clarified six ounces, white Wine one pottle.

Sows or Hoglice tied in a clout and steeped in Wine and strained, is an
excellent Medicine experienced by some.

Wine, Vinegar, Honey, and Oxymel of Squils, given in the fit are excellent.

Also juice of Scabious and Sowthistle, alone or with Honey.

Or, Take juice of Elicampane, Hysop, Horehound, of each one ounce; water of
Hysop, Coltsfoot, of each three ounces; Boil them with Sugar, give it often.

It is thought good that they drink their own Urine.

A Spoonful of this water often taken is excellent: Take Squils prepared two
drams, Elicampane half an ounce, Leeks one ounce, Mustard and water Cress
seeds, of each one dram; Cinnamon three drams: beat them, and with strong Wine
draw a water, add Honey of Rosemary, or of Squils.

Also Oil of sweet Almonds, or fresh Butter.

Let Figs toasted and steept in wine be eaten.

Also roasted Leeks and Onions, with Honey and Butter, or Dragon roots so
ordered. Or, Cuckowpints, but if they inflame the Mouth, beat them up with Oil,
Sugar, and Honey. Or, boil them and throw off the water. Also a roasted Squil
with Honey is good.

Or this: Take juice of Leeks two ounces, juice of Dragons one ounce, juice of
Squils, Radish, of each half an ounce, juice of Hysop, Elicampane, of each one
ounce; with Honey six ounces: Boil them to an Electuary.

Let him often eat Conserve of Orris and Elicampane.

And Take one dram of Turpentine, with the Yolk of an Egg and Honey.

Let him take every morning Brimstone prepared, that is washed often with
Coltsfoot water, with Orris root, and a little Salt in a rear Egg.

Things that are licked are of Syrups of Hysop, Horehound, Oxymel, Lohoch of
Fox Lungs, Coleworts, Coltfoot, Carthamus, Pine-nuts, Mucilages, Lochsanum, and
of Squils. And the Species of Diairios, and Salomonis, Pleres Archonticon and
Diahysopi.

Other Eclegma's are thus made. Take Gum Ammoniake dissolved in Aqua vitae two
drams, water cress and Nigella seeds, of each one dram; Sal Ammoniak half a
dram, Sulphur prepared one dram, Saffron five grains, prepared Fox Lungs one
dram and an half, with Honey of Squils and convenient Syrup two ounces: Make a
Lohoch.

Or thus, Take Althea roots two drams, Orris one dram and an half, Elicampane,
Birthwort, Asarum, Bryony, of each one dram; Gentian, Cuckowpints, of each half
a dram; Savin, and Coltsfoot, of each one dram and an half; Fenugreek, Time,
and Carthamus seed, of each two drams; Bayberries one dram, water Cress, and
Nettle seeds, of each half a dram; Powder of Fox Lungs and Gum Ammoniack
dissolved in Vinegar of Squils, of each two drams; Sulphur vive, or
Quickbrimstone washed in Coltsfoot water, and boiled Turpentine, of each one
dram; Storax half a dram, juice of Liquorish one dram with Honey of Squils, or
one of the former syrup: Make a Lohoch.

If the Belly be bound: Take the Mucilage of Marshmallows, and Lineseed, of
each half an ounce; Manna, Cassia, of each one ounce; Agarick, Turbith, of each
one dram; Oil of sweet Almonds, or Butter and Penedies, of each one ounce.

Also this Powder: Take Liquorish, Polipody, of each two drams; Orrice,
Elicampane, of each one dram; Dragon roots half a dram, Watercresses seeds and
Nettle seed, of each one dram; Cinnamon one dram and an half, Saffron one
scruple, Powder of Fox Lungs two drams, Sugar half as much as all: Or with
Coltsfoot water, make Lozenges with more Sugar.

This is commended highly: Take Saffron one scruple, Mosch one grain, give it
in white Wine.

Pills: Take Gum Ammoniake dissolved in Vinegar of Squils two drams, Storax,
Sagapenum, Myrrh, of each half a dram; Turpentine, boiled one dram, Spike one
scruple, Saffron half a scruple, with Honey make Pills, the Dose is half a dram.

If there be a Catarrh, to stop it and stupefie the sense of the Breast,
thickners and Stupefactives must be given of which in Catarrhes.

We may use this: Take Barley cleansed steep it six hours, then boil it well,
that it may be dissolved, then take sweet Almonds three ounces blanched, Gourd
seeds one ounce and an half, Melon seeds one ounce, white Poppy and Lettice
seeds, of each half an ounce: beat them, and with Barley Water, make a milk,
which being mixed with two pound of the Pulp of Barley, must be boiled and
sweetened with Sugar; let him drink ten drams in the morning in his bed, and at
evening. This is an usual Medicine with the French and Italians to stop Fluxes.

Also Treacle, Mithridate, Philonium, with powder of Liquorish in the fit, or
with Diapenidian or Lohoch of Fox Lungs,

Let him hold Diatragacanth in his Mouth: or, Take the Powder of Diatragacanth
Frigid two drams, Frankincense one dram, juice of Liquorish half a dram,
Saffron half a scruple, with Syrup of Violets, make Forms.

Let this Fume be taken at the Mouth but not suddenly, or much least it
Suffocate: Take dried Coltsfoot one dram, Frankincense, Mastick, Storac, of
each half a dram; Sulphur one scruple, with Turpentine, Make Troches.

Caps and the Chamber also may be smoaked with the same.

Anoint the Breast with loosners and concocters, As Take Oil of sweet Almonds,
Lillies, of each one ounce; juice of Hysop one ounce and an half: Boil them
till the juice bc consumed, add fresh Butter, Mucilage of Faenugreek and
roasted Lillies, of each one ounce and an half? Ducks Grease half an ounce,
Saffron one scuruple, white Wax a little.

Or use the resumptive Ointment.

Apply things outward to the Stomach, if it be stretched with Wind, which
increases the Asthma.

And to the Head to stop Catarrhs, dry and strengthen the Head, if the Disease
come from thence.

There are washes for the Head also, and hot washes for the Feet, do revel from
the Head and Breast very much: Of the Decoction of Sage, Lavender, Chamomil,
Elder and other hot sweet scented Herbs.

Also Frictions are good.

And Cupping Glasses to the Shoulders, Thighs, often used to draw the Humor
that flows to the Breast, backwards and downwards: and if they be applied under
the Breasts they discurse the matter.

Also Issues in the Arms, Legs. And Vesicatories in the Wrists, and Palms of
the Hands, or behind the Ears. And in the middle of the Breast, they are
excellent in all sorts of Asthmaes. Aetius, bids that part to be burnt. And
others apply a Dropax.

If there be a Plethory, open a Vein.

And if the Belly be bound, use Clysters that expel wind, and loosen, and
Suppositories.

Belching and Farting are difficult without Art do help, (though some can suck
in the Air and belch it out again, and kneel down with their Arse lifted up and
fart at their pleasure) It is good to put the Finger, or a Father into the
Throat and provoke Vomiting.

In the firt let him rest and move not, nor speak much, for so breathing is
made quicker which will perplex more. And if he lie down let his Head be very
high, with diverse Pillows.

CHAP. V. Of Breathing Depraved.
The Kinds,
WE call it a Depraved Respiration which is evil, either too much, or
disorderly, not only without the evil, or involuntary. But Voluntary.

Respiration is involuntary, when Inspiration, or Breathing in is too quick or
too great, or when Expiration or Breathing out is violent or interrupted, too
short or too long, in diverse kinds, either with diverse noises, or with manifest
voiding. These in sound men are from small causes, and are but light
afflictions: but sometimes they are greater and fortel Diseases, or are
constant, and Symptoms of Diseases, and if great Excretions are voided they are
referred to that Head.

Often and quick respiration when the Air is suddenly drawn in and suddenly
sent out, Quick Breath.
may be in some men, and be also the Symptom of a Disease.

Great Respiration in Sighing in which the Air is attracted with great labor
and thrown out again with a lamentable sound, Sighing.
may be in the sound, and sick.

There is great Respiration in Yawning, Yawning.
or Oscitation, in which the Mouth is wide opened, and the Air drawn in much,
and presently sent out with a doleful sound. With this Pandiculation is
commonly joined, as we showed. They are both in the sound, and sick.

In the Hicket there is a short and interrupted Respiration, Hickets.
the Air breaking forth with a sound in a moment. It is in sound people; and in
sick a dangerous accident, and holds many hours.

In Neesing, Neesing.
there is a sudden sending forth of Air with more force and noise and a shaking
of the whole Body. It is many times together sometimes, causing Tears and
throwing out whatsoever is in the Jaws, or Nostrils. It foreruns Catarrhs and
great Diseases, as the Falling Sickness sometimes. Hence come the crying of God
bless you, at that time as we showed in Epilepsie. It sometimes follows
Diseases, and puts an end to them, and in some people it comes upon a slight
occasion.

In a Cough the Air is thrown out with as much force as the other, Coughing.
and with a noise but chiefly from the Mouth, it is sometimes long sometimes
short and returns, usually sending humors to the Mouth that are spit forth
afterward, then it is called a moist Cough, as that in which nothing is
voided, is called a dry Cough, and if it be small, Tussicula, or a Kecking. But
if it be vehement it causes Vomiting, Weeping, and Hoarsness by clamor, or
takes away the Voice: And if it continue it causes pain in the Breast and
Belly by the shaking thereof. This Cough may be in some Men from outward
causes, but in old men it is so usual that it seems a Natural Excretion. In
many Diseases it is troublesome and the chief Symptom.

There is a more strong and continued sending forth of wind in belching,
Belching.
in sound and sick, it is stinking or otherwise.

In Vomiting, Vomiting
there is breathing forth with greater straining, sometimes without matter sent
forth, and it is the Symptom of many Diseases, lasting long and much afflicting.

There is also a Voluntary sending forth of Air from the Mouth and Nose in
Vociferation or hollowing and in Anhelation which is hot breathing,
Vociferation, Anhelation, Sufflation.
and Exsufflation which is cold breathing.

Emunction, Emunction.
or blowing of the Nose is voluntary with force and Noise, sending forth Air,
and Humor; with holding of the Nose that the part being strightned, the sending
forth may be more violent: or else the Nostrils are open and the matter is
snuffed out.

We cast out Humors voluntarily, Spitting.
also by spitting with the Mouth contracted that the Wind may be stronger. And
by Hawking we ferch it out of the Jaws into the Mouth, Hawking.
and so squirt it forth. These two are sometimes Symptoms of Diseases. Sometimes
sound men have them from plenty of Humors in the Jaws; or from custom. As when
Orators spet at every full point.

Hoarsness, Hoarsness.
is when the Voice is rough and unequal. The Articulate Voice or Speech is sent
forth badly, Stammering.
when men Stemmer in pronouncing some Letters: But when they cannot speak them
plainly it is to be referred to Speech diminished, as we showed in the defect
of Respiration. But when there is no defect but they pronounce some Letters
with a double sound, as R. then it belongs to Depraved Speech.

The Causes.
All the Causes of all the Kinds of Depraved Respiration are from the Heart and
Organs of breathing. Respiration, and especially Inspiration is from the Heart
to get vital Spirits. And it is enlarged if there be not sufficient Air: or
when the Spirits are moved vehemently.

If the Heart be deprived of Air by respiration intermitting, Affection of the
mind is the cause of sighs.
which the heart must have for the generation of vital spirits: then to recover
what was lost it fetches a great Inspiration or Sigh; by which the Air being
largely attracted, the Defect is made up. Respiration is intermitted when the
mind through affection is so intent upon other things, that it forgets
breathing til necessity constrains it and makes it greater.

The Cause of sighing or great Inspiration, is the too much commotion of the
spirits of the heart, by reason the preturbation of mind with Pain, Oppression
and Suffocation, of as we may perceive in passions. For thereby the heart is
cooled and refreshed, as we perceive plainly in sighing. And this is the cause
rather, than intermission, and forgetfulness, in regard in the night when we
think of nothing we breath sufficiently.

Vehement motion of the whole body, Vehement motion is the cause of quick
breathing.
as Running, Climing up a hill, which dissipate the spirits, is the cause of
quick respiration to restore them, not only to cool the heart, for respiration
may be from motion without heat.

Respiration is quicker if the body grow hot with too much pain whereby the
Spirits are more consumed, Heat is the cause of short breathing.
especially when the heart is hot also, as it may be by hot houses, as well as
motion, also by violent motions of the mind, as Anger, Joy, and Fevers, in
which one Symptom is short breathing.

And if the Organs of breathing are burdened or provoked, the expiration is
greater.

We showed in depraved motion how the Organs of breath, A Vapor, Idleness or
Imagination is the cause of yawning.
being burdened with vapors, and desiring to relax themselves cause oscitation
and pandiculation,

The Organs of Respiration being molested cause blowing or exsufflation, when
any of them being very sensible, as the Membrane in the Aspera Arteria, Lungs,
Nostrils, Mouth, Jaws, Throat, Stomach, Guts and Midriff is offended, whereby
they labor to blow forth what hurts them, and then the blowing is more or less
according to the part affected. And we shall now show how it may come from
diverse causes, splendour, vapor, air, humors.

As a great Light as that of the Sun by disturbing the Eyes causes tears: The
Brightness of the Sun is the cause of sneezing.
so it causes snezing, by affecting the sensible Tunicle of the Nostrils with
which that of the Eyebrows has consent, in those that have thin humors or
exquisite sense of those parts.

A sharp scent or vapor, as that of Garlic, A sharp Odor is the cause of
sneezing.
Onions, Mustard, Radish, causes Tears and Neezing by pricking the Membrane of
the Eyes and Nose.

Much cold Air drawn in, Air and cold Water, is the Cause of Coughing and
Hoarsness.
that molesteth the Tunicle of the Jaws and rough Artery causes a dry Cough
with Hoarsness, when by binding and drying it exasperateth and makes rough the
parts that should be smooth and slippery. And then the Voice is lost, and by
causing a Defluxion, it may by accident produce a moist Cough.

Cold Water drunk much does the same, and astringents much used.

If humors or other thick bodies fall into the rough Artery (being it is of
exquisite sense, Things falling into the rough Artery cause a Cough.
and cannot so much as have a touch of them) a cough is caused, and it is
greater if the things be rough or sharp. As it is when in eating or drinking
any thing goes the wrong way in at the Larynx or Windpipe; as it often happens
to them that speak when they are eating, which enlarges the windpipe, Water,
Wine, or a crum of bread gets in, or the like which cause coughing by which
they are sent out at the mouth or Nose. Also dust or powder may be drawn into
the Windpipe and cause the same.

And if the like be snuffed or drawn into the Nose with the breath, Things
snuffed into the Nose the cause of neezing.
being sharp and pricking they cause neesing, as Pepper, Pellitory, Hellebore,
or sharp juyces. And if they get into the Windpipe with the Air, they cause
coughing.

Also things that burn the Jaws, Things held in the mouth, cause spitting.
and prick the mouth, chewed or held therein provoke spittle, as Pellitory,
Stavesacre, and the like.

A watery humor, thin, or thick, A humor from the Brain causes a Cough.
simple, or mixed with choler, which is salt, or is chewed in a Catarrh, if it
fall into the Windpipe, it causes a Cough which is greater, according to the
quantity or sharpness of the humor. And it continues when the Flux continues,
and is rather dispersed than sent forth by coughing.

All these are milder when the humor is watery, and not sharp, as when it falls
at night only, and is easily spit up the next morning.

Also the same humor falling from the head into the mouth or Windpipe causes a
hauking which brings it into the mouth and so sends it forth. A humor from the
head is the cause of hauking.
If it be tough and sticks long, it causes a hoarsness, by making an
inequality in the part which hinders the voice, or it lies under the Tunicle
and swells it. Use of Quicksilver is the cause of spitting.
When filth is sent hither from the whole body, it causes a constant spitting,
as after anointing with Quicksilver; by which means an ulcer may be caused,
which may cause hoarsness.

If the humor from from the head be sharp and thin, An humor from the head is
the cause of sneesing.
and flow to the Nose, it causes by pricking, neesing and often sniffling in
the disease Coryza: and if it continue; Inflammation, and ulcers, from the heat
of the humor.

When Blood falls into the Jaws it is hauked out: Blood falling down is the
cause of hauking and cough.
when into the Lungs it is coughed out. And if it be sharp and about the Nose
it causes neesing which foregoeth bleeding at the Nose.

Also Phlegm in the Lungs from their crude nourishment causes coughing which
continues according to the toughness as we showed in Asthma. Phlegm or Gravel in
the Lungs the cause of coughing.
As also stones or gravel growing there, especially if they be in the greater
branches of the Windpipe where the sense is more exquisite, and labors to
get forth.

Also matter in the Lungs causes coughing: Matter in the Lungs, the cause of a
cough.
of phlegm long contained and ripened: or of excrementitious blood without an
Ulcer; for which cause in the Pleurisy and Peripneumony it is gathered rather
from the Inflammation of the Lungs than strained through the Lungs from the
breast which causes coughing as I shall show there: sometimes it comes from an
Ulcer or Imposthume of the Lungs, and it is always spit up in Consumptions. In
all which if the matter be white, concocted and temperate, the Cough is milder,
but if yellow, green, black, sharp or stinking, it is worse.

Also the matter in a Pleurisy and Peripneumony sweating through the Lungs at
the first causes a Cough. Matter and blood in the Lungs, cause a Cough.


And Blood in the passion of Blood-spitting. Evil Vapors causes Hickets.


If the Midriff in malignant Fevers be troubled with evil vapors and stirred to
send them forth, it is contracted and suddenly relaxed, as we showed in
Convulsions, and causes the same in the Hickets as we see in deadly Diseases.
And in a burning Fever when the Midriff is dried, this cannot be, but a
dfficulty of breathing.

If the Midriff be wounded with the Stomach, it causes depraved motion; for
the Midriff lies upon the stomach, and has the same Tunicle with the Stomach
and the Nerves, therefore it must needs consent therewith: And when the stomach
labors to expel any, the Midriff moves to resist it, with the other Muscles
of the breast, as it does assist the Muscles of the belly to press down the
Excrements by stool.

If any thing offending the inward sides of the stomach only, The pricking of
the stomach is the cause of Hickets.
be to be cast off, the motion of the Hicket is sufficient; by which the
Midriff shakes the stomach, and helps the expulsive faculty, that it may cast
the matter sticking thereto into the hollow of the stomach, and mix it with the
rest: And then the pricking cease, and also the motion of the Midriff, except
the matter cleave again to the stomach, and then the Hickets return. The
Stomach is pricked thus by sharp things, or such as burn, or are enemies unto
it, as Pepper, Onions, Purges, Poison, stinks, or choleric malignant humors
there bred, or sent thither.

When the stomach is offended by consent of the inward Tunicle, Heart-burning
the cause of Nesing.
nature strives to disburden it by a stronger motion, which is Neesing, by
which they which have pain at the Heart are suddenly refreshed, because the
matter is by that means shaken into the stomach.

And by the same consent not only with the stomach, The Cause of Cough and
Sneesing from stomach and Guts.
but guts and bowels adjacent there is a dry cough: as it appears in Children
that have the Worms, which cause a dry Cough by their disturbing of the stomach
and Colon, and sometimes Neesing: before which the Nose itched by the consent of
the same Tunicle. And in other obstructions of the bowels, the Midriff being
burdened with their weight, there is a dry Cough.

Belching is a stronger motion than Hickets for the Midriff helps the stomach,
Wind the cause of Belching.
when it is filled with Wind to throw it out, which swells like the matter that
caused it.

When the matter is more solid as meat and Drink and humors, Trouble in the
stomach the cause of Vomiting.
there is a stronger motion of the Midriff and Muscles of the breast by
Vomiting, by which the stomach is not only forced but turned, by which the
matter and air is sent forth with great noise by an unaccustomed way. This
Vomiting is caused by things in the stomach that offend in quantity or quality,
as we shall show in Excretion and things cast out.

Also the Inflammation of the stomach and Midriff, Some Diseases cause Hickets.
and other Diseases that hurt them, cause the Hickets; And also great Diseases
of the parts adjacent.

Preternatural Tumors and Ulcers in the Chaps, cause hoarsness, Diseases are
the cause of Hoarsness.
as we observe in the Leprosy and French Pox.

It is commonly from the Birth, The Tongue disordered in the cause of
stammering and Wharling.
that the Tongue is so disordered that it cannot pronounce R. but like a double
R. the Tongue is bent or otherwise. The cause of stammering is showed in the
Defect of Respiration.

The Cure.
Some kinds need no Cure, others are mentioned in other places.

If it come from strong motion, The cure of Short-breathing.
there must be rest, or by a contrary motion, as when it comes from ascending,
to descend.

If it come from passion, when that is past, the motion of the heart is past.

If from outward heat, cooling abates it, etc. In Fevers.

If it come from disturbance of the mind and be often, it cease with it.
Sighing.
Sighs show the greatness of the Disease in the Mind, Head, or Madness. In
other Diseases when the mind is not disturbed, often sighing declares
Pusilanimity or strength lost.

If it come not from weariness or want of sleep which is natural, and be often,
Concerning Yawning.
it foretells a Fever or Ague as we showed in Pandiculation which accompanies
it. It is caused by Imagination, easier in lazy people than in Active.

If Hickets be in acute Fevers and continue, it threateneth Convulsion, The
cure of Hickets.
because the Midrif is greatly affected, and death. If it come from the Stomach
much offended with Hellebore, Poison or corroding things, or a great Disease,
o^ Inflammation, it foretells the same from other causes; it is easily cured.

In the cure, first remove the cause as the Inflammation in a malignant or
sharp Fever, if from the stomach being pricked lenifie it. And in all causes
stop the inordinate motion of the Midrife which comes by the Hicket. They are
done by these following, as the cause is sharp, hot, choleric, biting,
malignant, or cold and phlegmatic.

If the cause be in the Stomach, Vomiting is best, for the Midriffe in the
Hicket helps the stomach to expel together with the Muscles of the breast.

The Vomit must be such as cleanses, and allayeth sharpness and heat, thus.
Take syrup of Vinegar and Oxymel simple, each six drams; Oil of sweet Almonds
two ounces, with Water of Nuts or Decoction of Raddishes, give it.

It must be repeated, if the Hicket cease not, and stronger given such as are
mentioned.

Also purge. And if the Humor be tough, prepare it with Cutters and Cleansers,
as Juleps, Wormwoodwine, which is good both in a choleric and phlegmatic Humor.

Stomach Purges are given for this as Hiera etc. in the Diseases of the
Stomach. As in a hot Cause: Take Wormwood one dram, Senna three drams, Rhubarb
one dram, Infuse them in Wine, let them boil and be strained.

In a cold Cause: Take Agarick, Turbith, of each one dram; Ginger half a dram,
Sal Gem six grains, Hiera two drams Diagrydium one scruple, with Oxymel make a
Mass, give one dram.

These may be repeated if the Disease return.

These following stop the Hickets, cleanse the Humor, and Lenifie the Stomach,
and after strengthen.

In a hot cause when the humor is sharp and burning, or in a distemper or
emptiness, these following are good.

Broth in great quantity and often, Ptisans, cold or hot, water in great
quantity, Oil of sweet Almonds.

Or, Take juice of Pomegranats half an ounce, Vinegar two drams, Mastick, dried
Mints, of each half a dram; Let him drink it.

Or other sharp Syrups.

In a cold Elegmatick Cause: Take Galangal, Ginger, of each half a dram,
spanish Wine one ounce and an half, Cinnamon water half an ounce: Or thus, Take
Galangal three drams, dried Wormwood and Mints, of each two drams; Spike,
Marjoram, Dill and Carva seeds, of each one dram; Cinnamon, Cloves, of each
half a dram; Steep them in Wine.

Also: Take Aqua vitae one ounce, infuse Cinnamon and Galangal, of each one
dram; shake it often.

Or this Electuary: Take Acorus, that is, Calamus Aromaticus and Candied
Ginger, of each one ounce; conserve of Marjoram half an ounce, Powder of
Galangal one dram, with syrup of Mints.

Or these Pills: Take Castor half a dram, Mumie one scruple, Mastick half a
scruple, with Honey of squils: make a Mass, for two Doses.

We also allay the sense of the Stomach with Treacle Methridate, powder of
Tormentil, and if it come from Poison, they do good against the Hicket And
other Antidotes. You may give other Narcoticks if it hinder Sleep.

And Clysters to revel downwards, and Suppositories, that Nature may rather
send downwards then upwards.

The smell of Dill boiled with Mastick stays the Hickets.

Neesing Cures Hickets, because the matter offending is sent from the Stomach
and Midrif by a greater force.

Wash the Mouth with cold Water and Gargle.

Apply things outwardly to the Stomach, as this Fomentation: Take roots of
Elicampanc three drams, Mints, Wormwood, Spike, Dill, Pennyroyal, Calamints, of
each one handful; Lavender, Rosemary and Cammomel flowers, each one pugil,
Cumin, Carua, Dill seeds, of each one dram; Bay and Juniper berries, of each
half an ounce; Mastick two drams; Boil them in Wine to foment the Stomach
before.

Also hot Ashes with Aqua vitae and Sack put in a bag or bladder and applied to
the Stomach.

A Fomentation with Rose Vinegar and a Sponge is good in a hot cause.

Anoint the Stomach before and behind with loosning Oils and after with
Astringents.

Or apply this Bag: Take CArva seeds half an ounce, Ammi and Dill seeds, of
each two drams; Galangal, Cloves, of each one dram; dried Mints two drams,
Mastick, Frankincense, of each one dram; sprinkle them with Rose Vinegar.

Emplasters also, in a hot cause the Cerot of Sanders, Unguent of Roses, of
each one ounce; Mastich half an ounce, Citron peels and Quince, of each one
dram; with juice of Houseleek and Turpentine, make two Emplaisters for the fore
and hinder side of the Stomach.

It is good to wash or bath the Hands and Feet in hot water.

And to bind the outward parts.

Apply Cupping-glasses first to the Shoulders and Navel, and then to the
Stomach before and behind.

If you hold your breath, it stops the motion of the Midrif and abates the
Hicket.

Or, Swallow down suddenly water or gulp diverse times without it. Or, if you
hollow and roar or runn, it causes more breathing and then the Muscles of the
Breast with the Midrif help the Stomach to expel what is hurtful.

Also sudden passions of the mind by calling in the spirits, take it away by
frighting or noise or the like. And chiefly by dashing the Face suddenly with
Water.

Dioscorides, Teaches that Alysson held in the Hand stops it.

Neesing is sometimes, a good sign and in sound people sends forth that which
troubles, The cure of Neesing.
and in the declining of a Disease shows recovery. Sometimes it is a sign of a
distillation coming or Epilepfie in those that are addicted to it. None of
these ought to be stopped. But in bleeding at the Nose, and in Ruptures,
because it provokes the Gut down, and in Diseases of the Eyes because it
causes tears, and sends blood thither and other Diseases, in which it
increases pain, it is to be stopped. As also when it is so immoderate and
continual that it causes Headache, and disperseth the spirits.

It is then stopped by things that purge Excrements from the Head, if it come
from the Flux of them into the Nose as shall be showed in Coryza.

They say the Decoction of Basilicon stops it.

Palliate the Nostrils, with the Vapor of warm water, and anoint them with
Butter, Milk, Oil, Oil of Gourds, Poppies, Henbane, and with the white of an
Egg and Mucilages. All fresh.

The smell of Narcoticks, as of Opium, Oil of Roses or Willows, represeth the
sharpness of the Humors. As the smell of sharp things raises it.

Oils, as those of sweet Almonds, Dill, Chamomil, Roses, Willows, Gourds, and
juice of Basilicon, are good to be put into the Ears.

And the Decoction of Basilicon to wash the Head. And Chamomel flowers in the
Pillow. Foment the Breast to strengthen the Muscles with this: Take Chamomel
flowers two pugils, Metilot and Basil flowers and Bran, of each one pugil; put
a stupe into the Decoction and Foment the Breast with it Squeezed.

Use Frictions, and Ligatures of the extreme parts. press and rub the Ears and
Eyes, and pull the Nose, rub the Palate with the Finger and Comb the Head.

Holding of the breath as it Cure the Hickets, so does it Neefing, if the Nose
and Mouth be stopped.

Also frighting will Cure Neesing, as soon as Hickets.

Strong drawing in of the breath does stop Neesing, which when the vulgar smell
unto Bread, they impute to the sent thereof.

Sleep also stops it.

And darkness, as light increases it. Therefore after a Cataract is couched
they are kept a while in the dark, and you may do so in other Diseases unto
which Neesing is an enemy.

Let the Head be laid high.

If there be great Diseases with a Cough look for the Cure in them. The cure of
a Cough.
As in Dyspnaea and Asthma. When blood or matter is spet, see in Haemoptoica
Passio, Pleurisy, Peripneumony, Phthises. And for the Cure of that which comes
from the fault of Natural parts, in other places. But that Cough which is
alone, is to be judged by the diversity of the Causes, and to be so Cured. If
it come from things fallen into the wind Pipe, then if they be not choked as
we showed in Dyspnaea, the Cough cease when they are cast out. And if there
be provocation in the jaws after, use the Lenitives following. If it come from
cold, only use actual and potential heat, and Lenitives, and they will easily
Cure. If it come from a thin Defluxion sharp and salt, the Cough is
troublesome, provokes much, and it is not voided by coughing but dispersed
only, neither does it stop till the Catarrh is gone, and the matter be thick
and concocted, and then it is easily voided, and the Cough abates. If it come
from thick Phlegm fallen down or otherwise it is hard to be cured, if new matter
still come, after the old is voided.

In the Cure of both Coughs that come from Excrementitious Humors; we keep
Humors from flowing, and stop them. And we study to expectorate that which is
the conjunct Cause and Lies in the Breast; by thickning it if thin; by cutting
if it be thick; by concocting both and a little blunting the exquisite sense.
And these chiefly correct this Symptom of Cough.

Thus give Juleps to prepare before evacuations, and after to expectorate, if
the Humor be thin and sharp, for three days: Take Syrup of Jujubies and
Violets, of each one ounce and an half, Honey of Roses, Syrup of Poppies, of
each half an ounce, water of Coltsfoot and Violets, of each four ounces: Make a
Julep.

Or this Decoction: Take Jujubes, Sebestens, of each twenty, Prunes ten,
Clean-barley half an ounce, Liquorish one ounce, Violets two pugils, Roses, one
pugil: boil them, add Penidyes one ounce, for three doses.

If the Humor be thick and cold. Take Syrup of Liquorish one ounce and an half,
of Hysop, Oxymel simple, each one ounce; Water of Bettony, Horehound, Hysop,
each three ounces. Make a Julep.

Or this Decoction: Take Liquerish one ounce, Elicampane two drams, Raysons
stone, twenty pair, Figs ten, Dates five, Anniseeds two drams, Fennel seed one
dram, dried Hysop two drams, Maiden hair, Coltsfoot, of each one dram: Boil
them, and add Honey two ounces, for three or four Doses.

If the Cough come from a Desluxion give Purges, but not too strong least, you
increase the Desluxion, therefore mix Astringents.

If the Defluxion be thin and hot thus. Take yellow Myrobalans two drams,
Rheubarb four scruples, Agarick one dram, Spike six grains: Infuse them all in
white Wine, strain them and dissolve the Electuaries, of the juice of Roses one
dram, syrup of Roses solutive one ounce.

Or give half a dram of Aggregative Pills, and one scruple of Pill Aureae,
Mixed with Wine.

In a cold thick Humor purge thus: Take Agarick one dram, Turbith half a dram,
Spike half a scruple, Ginger one scruple; Infuse them in Wine and Honey, strain
them and dissolve Diaphaenicon two drams, Honey of Roses solutive one ounce and
an half.

Or with Pills: Take Pills of Agarick two scruples, Cochy one scruple. With
Wine, or Cinnamon water, Make Pills.

If the Body needs more Purging, give this Decoction three or four mornings:
Take Liquorish two ounces, Orris one ounce, Elicampane half an ounce,
Horehound, Coltsfoot, Hysop, Betony, of each one handful; Annis, Fennel seeds,
of each two drams; Raysons twenty, Figs ten, Dates five, Carthamus and Senna,
of each one ounce and an half: Boil them in Water and a little Wine, infuse at
the end Agarick three drams, Turbith two drams, strain them, add Honey of Roses
four ounces; Boil them a little and strain them, and let him drink it.

Keep the Body loose and Purge sometimes.

This Electuary is the best Lenitive: Take Raysons one ounce and an half,
Currants one ounce, Sebestens fifteen, Figs twelve, Dates five, Cassia new drawn
one ounce and an half, Tamarinds one ounce, Steep them and Boil them in white
Wine, make a Pulp, and add to it Manna three ounces, syrup of Violets and Roses
solutive, of each one ounce; boil them a little, give a spoonful or two before
Supper.

When we will gently Purge and stop the Catarrh also; Take Agarick two drams,
Mastick and Frankincense, of each half a dram, with juice of Hysop make a Body.
Take half a dram at night, or take one scruple of Mastick Pills.

If you will have them stronger: Take Pill Asajaret, Agarick, Rhubarb, of each
one dram; Frankincense, Mastick of each one scruple, Saffron half a scruple,
with syrup of Poppyes: make a Mass, give half a dram at Bed time.

It is good in Defluxions when they continue to sweat after purging.

Alteratives shall be declared which stay the Catarrh, if it cause a Cough with
their healing and drying quality rather then with astringing: and which
Expectorate, by thickning if the humor be thin, by cutting if it be thick, by
cleansing if it stick; also to Lenifie the passages and stupefie; many whereof
were mentioned in Asthma especially to cut and cleanse.

The solid forms for a Cough, are to be held long in the Mouth: and they stop
the Catarrh from falling to the Windpipe, and mix with the spittle: or to be
chewed, as troches, little things like Lupines, or Tablets, dry, like Pills to
be held under the Tongue, at bed time, for in sleep they are held better, and
are not presently Swallowed down when Melted. These may be also held in the
Cheeks where they hinder not the Speech and get into the Windpipe better when
you speak.

The root of Liquorish is so held and chewed which Lenifieth and cleanses, and
the juice thereof; but it is a little unpleasant alone.

Sugar Candy, especially that sticks to the Glass where syrup of Roses or
Violets are kept is also good for the same.

The white Troches called Bechici, are more usual.

But the red are better by reason of the Bole, or these. Take the best Bole one
dram, Mastick, Starch, of each half a dram, Spike, Gum Traganth, Arabike, of
each one scruple; Camphyre two grains, Penidies and Sugar Candy, of each two
drams, with Mucilage of Fleabane, make little Balls.

The black are Compounded of juice of Liquorish, with Storax, etc.

There are yellow Troches also, very pleasant and good. Take Starch three
drams, Liquorish two drams, Elicampane, Orris, of each half a dram; Angelica
half a scruple, Saffron six grains, Penidies and Sugar Candy, of each two
ounces, with infusion of Gum Traganth, make Troches; add Oil of Annis seeds two
drops.

The usual Lozenges, are Diatragacanth Frigid: Diapenidion without the Species,
Sugar of Roses in a hot cause. In a cold, Diaireos simple, and Solomonis
Diatragacanthum Calidum, etc.

A Linctus, or Eclegma, is usual for a Cough, because it goes down by degrees,
and comes to the breast, it is to be taken with a Liquorish stick.

In a hot cause, Lohoch of Fleabane, Marshmallows of Mucilages; in others
Lohoch Sanum, of Pine-nuts, of Fox Lungs, Coltsfoot, and Coleworts.

Many are made without Pouders and Lenifie more.

Others are Unctious, and the better for that, to which things of other virtue
are added; And this kind is good for Children, because it smells like meat, and
is sweet.

Junkets of Butter or May butter, are usual in Germany and very good taken by
little or licked, Take Starch one ounce, dissolve it in Milk, boil it to a
pultis, add fresh Butter four ounces, Sugar a good quantity, when it is cold it
grows hard.

An Eclegma of Oil excellent for a Cough. Take Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn
one ounce, Sugar Candy half an ounce, Mucilage of Fleabane made with Rose water
half an ounce, lick it often.

This Mucilage is Lenifying: Take Mucilage of Lineseed, Fenugreek, Fleabane,
Quinces, all made with Rose water one ounce and an half, Penidies one ounce:
Infusion of Gum Traganth, in Rose water, or Cinnamon water, half an ounce,
Sugar Candy, or Penidies as much as will make a Linctus.

This is good to Lenifie and loosen the Mouth and Belly: Take Cassia, Manna, of
each three drams; Penidies and Sugar Candy, of each two drams; Oil of sweet
Almonds and fresh Butter, of each as much as will make a Loboch. Of which let
much be taken if you will Purge much.

Or, Take Turpentine one dram; one yolk of an Egg, fresh Butter two drams,
Honey half an ounce: Mix them, lick it.

Syrups and Robs are made of Decoctions and juyces for to be licked. Syrup of
Myrtles is most usual.

Also of Violets, Jujubies, in a hot cause, in another, of Liquorish, Maiden
hair, Hysop.

The Rob or thick juice of fruits boiled is used instead of Honey, which in a
thin Defluxion moves it too much. Or use this, Take Liquorish, Pease shells, of
each three ounces; Raysons, Currants, Figs, of each four ounces; Prunes ten,
Jujubies, Sebestens, of each twelve pair: boil them tell the fruits are
dissolved, strain them and boil them to a Rob.

Or thus of Juyces: Take juice of Coltsfoot, red Cole, Purslain, of each one
ounce; juice of Horehound, Hysop, Sage, of each half an ounce; juice of
Liquorish two drams, Sugar and Honey, of each three ounces; Boil them to a
Syrup.

Or of a Decoction in a cold cause: Take Liquorish, Marshmallows, of each one
ounce and an half; Elecampane, O^ri, Fennel, of each one ounce; Angelica two
drams, Comfrey half an ounce, Maidenhair, Hysop, Pennyroyal, of each one
handful; Horehound half a handful, Annis seed one ounce, Fennel seed half an
ounce, Line seed three drams, Fenugreek two drams, Violets and Rosemary
flowers, of each one pugil; Pease shells cleansed two ounces, Raysons stoned
three ounces, Figs twelve, Jujubies and Sebestens, of each ten pair; Boil them,
strain them, and add Honey and Sugar, of each four ounces, and a little
Cinnamon; Boil it to a Syrup.

Those that have Pouders, if they be not finely sifted will cause coughing.
They are diversely made.

As of Seeds and Roots thus: Take Line seeds, Fenugreek, of each a dram; Nettle
seed; Bryony root, Marshmallows, Orrice, Elicampane, of each half a dram; Gum
Traganth one scruple, juice of Liquorish dissolved in Oxymel one dram: Make a
Lohoch.

Or of Fruits stoned: Take sweet Almonds, Pinenuts, of each an ounce; Gourd and
Melon seeds, of each half an ounce; Penides and Sugar Candy, of each an ounce;
Manna half an ounce, with syrup of Violets, or Liquorish: Make a Lohoch.

This of Sulphur is good: Take the best Sulphur one dram, Orrice half a dram,
Sugar Candy one dram and an half: Make a powder, let it be licked, or taken
with a rear Egg.

For Compound Pouders. In a hot cause: Take powder of Diatraganth frigid,
Diapenidies without species, of each one dram; Lohoch of Fleabane, Coltsfoot,
of each half an ounce; Penides and Sugar Candy, of each six drams; Mallows and
Cotton seed, of each half a dram; Line seed one dram, Liquorish one dram and an
half, with syrup of Jujubies: Make an Eclegma.

It is good to give things with Meat and Drink for a Cough, though they work
less, because they mix with the spittle, and leave their Virtues therewith.

Also to Eat Figs, Raysons, and Prunes.

It is a usual Medicine for a Cough, to steep Figs in Aqua vitae, and then dry
them and after eat them.

Also Almonds, Pine and Pistach nuts alone, or candied, March pane and other
sweet Meats also, and the junkats mentioned of Butter.

Also Meats of Barley, and Oats, and of Beans, ccording to Dioscorides.

Especially Barley and Almond Milk is excellent to stop a Catarrh, as we showed
in Asthma.

Or this, taken some spoonfuls toward bed: Take Barley Meal, Starch, of each
half a dishful, two whites of Eggs beaten: Boil them with Milk, and add Sugar.

Also a roasted Onyon with Butter and Sugar, or filled with Treacle and roasted
and the juice taken out and mixed with Sugar Candy to be licked. Also Leek
Portage are good.

And Radishes with much Oil, a little Vinegar and Honey.

Eggs also rear dressed with fresh better and but a little Salt, for it
provokes coughing.

Spinach and Rocket buttered.

A meat made of Eggs boiled Wine and Butter, or Eggs, Wine, Sugar, and Butter,
which the Dutch call Beanwarm, that is Warm-bones.

Also warm Milk drunk with Penidies or Sugarcandy.

A Medicine well of sented, sharp Apples, is excellent, and for to restore the
strength also in other Diseases: Take sound Apples sliced round, Lay them upon
sticks in an earthen Vessel in a Wine-seller, sprinkle Sugar Candy thereon:
Take of the juice that you shall find in the Vessel which fell from the Apples
two ounces, Aqua vitae, Rosewater, of each one ounce; Oil of Cloves and
Cinnamon, of each two drops: Mix them, and give a spoonful or two often.

Another Lenifying Decoction: Take Raysons, Pease shells, Liquorish, of each two
ounces; Jujubies, Sebestens, of each ten pair; Barley cleansed one ounce: Boil
them, strain them, and Clarify them, let him often drink a draught, you may
add Sugar and Honey.

Another to Expectorate: Take Hysop, Penyroyal, Maidenhair, Cole worts, of each
one handful; Figs ten, with Honey: Boil and scum and strain them, drink it.

Or thus. Take Line-seed, Faenugreek bruised, each two drams; Anise and Nettle
seed, each one dram; Basil seed half a dram, Liquorish, Marshmallows, each
half an ounce; Pennyroyal, Goldy-locks, each one bandful and an half; Mallows,
Violets, each one pugil; Figs ten, Dates five, boil them and add Honey and
Syrup of Liquorish.

This is good against a Catarrh. Take Frankincense, Mastich, each one dram;
Liquorish one ounce, Raisons stoned ten pair, Figs five pair, Jujubes,
Sebestens, each six pair; boil them, add to the straining Penidies, for a Drink.

Wine with things infused or boiled, especially that of Elicampane is good,
boiled thick.

Wine wherein Juniper berries are boiled is good for a Cough in Children, and
it is stronger with Hysop and Mother of Time.

Also the flowers of Gourd dried and boiled in Wine. And of bitter things, Take
Elicampane half an ounce, Orris, Squils prepared, each two drams; Horehound,
Carduus, Germander, Sage, Pennyroyal, Paul's Bettony, each one handful; steep
and boil them in Wine.

Some drink powder of Ginger in Wine, at nights, in Winter. And if the Cough be
of Cold it must do good; And because it heats the mouth, and the virrue is
carried by consent to the Lungs it expectorateth. And Dioscorides commends
Pepper.

Brandewine is good with Sugar Candy, also the same burnt while it will flame,
and so brought to an Oil.

Some commend the essential Oil of Sugar thus made. Put four ounces of Sugar
often washed with Sack, and dried, into a Glass; lute it well, set it in the Sun
or Ashes over the fire, and sublime the Sugar, which will make a noise. This
take out, and put it in the hard boiled whites of Eggs, and place them in a
Wine-celler til you have a clear Oil. One spoonful of this swallowed by degrees
is excellent.

The water of Paul's Betony or, Powder of it with Sugar is good.

Also new drawn Oil of sweet Almonds.

That which stops the Catarrh, expectorateth, and takes away the provoking to
cough by stupefaction, is excellent.

As Diacodium at bedtime, or syrup of Poppies, or Lohoch of Poppies.

Or thus, Take Syrup of Poppies or Diacodium one ounce, Syrup of Jujubes one
ounce and an half, Mucilage of Fleabane seeds half an ounce, make a Lambitive
or Linctus.

Or this. Take Garden Poppy heads almost ripe three ounces, Pease shells,
Liquorish, each one ounce and an half; boil them, add Penidies and Sugar Candy,
each four ounces; boil them to a Consistence, let it be licked at night.

Or, Take Lohoch of Poppies one ounce, Lohoch of Fleabane half an ounce, Powder
of Diatragacanth frigid. one dram, Henbane seed half a dram, Bole one scruple,
Penidies half an ounce.

Some write for a secret that red Poppy water and Sugar Candy drunk at night is
excellent.

Also Pills of Hounds-tongue or Storax are taken one or two of six grains in
weight at bedtime.

If you will use them often; Take Storax, Myrrh, Frankincense, Galbanum, Spike,
each one scruple; Saffron, Opium, each five grains; mix them with Honey for
Pills: let him hold one of half a scruple in the mouth, and if it does not help
take one scruple at bedtime.

Errhines are put into the Nose, to bring the Catarrh into the Nose. And
clysters to draw it downwards, of which see in Catarrhs. Masticatories and
Gargarisms which draw rheum to the Mouth cannot be good fumes to dry the Brain,
taken in at the Mouth and Nose, do reach the Lungs and Brain, and dry both.

Let him take into his mouth the hot vapor of this Decoction. Take Mastich,
Frankincense, each one dram and an half, Salt two drams, Sulphur one dram,
Calamus three drams, Coltsfoot, Horehound, each one handful; boil them in
water and take up the vapor by a Funnel.

A Fume from things burnt is stronger, if it be not in great quantity or sharp.
Take Coltsfoot dried half an ounce, Schaenanth, Storax, each two drams;
Mastich, Frankincense, Myrrh, each one dram; Henbane seeds half a dram, with
Turpentine, or Infusion of Gum Traganth in Rose Water make Troches.

Some things are applied to dilate the breast, and to allay its pain, and to
concoct the matter.

In a hot case this Ointment. Take Oil of Violets one ounce, Oil of sweet
Almonds, sweet Butter washed in Violes water, Hens grease, Mucilage of Fleabane
made with Coltsfoot water, each half an ounce.

In a Cold this. Oil of Lillies, wall-flower, each half an ounce; Mucilage of
Time and Faenu-greek seed each half an ounce; Orris half a dram, Saffron one
scruple, with Wax make a Liniment, see the rest in Asthma.

Also the Resumptive Ointment.

An Emplaster of Lillies and Onions boiled, and butterred.

And this Epithem warm. Take Oil of Cammomel, Violets, each one ounce and an
half; Milk or cream of Almonds, made with Barley water well boiled four ounces,
dip Clouts strain and apply them.

Keep the Breast warm.

Use spiced Caps or pouders to the Head, wash the Thighs with warm water to
divert Catarrhs, in which Head herbs have been boiled. And when the Cough is
hot, or sleep is wanting, use cold herbs.

Apply Garlic and Bears grease to the feet, it is accounted an Ointment that
cures.

Ligatures also, Cupping-Glasses, Cauteries, are good to revel, as we showed in
a Catarrh.

Holding of the Breath stays Hickets and Neesing, and also Coughing; not
because then a greater heat is raised in the breast, but for the cause
mentioned in Hickets.

Warm Air is best when the Cough is from Cold.

A hot house is good, because Sweating after purging is proper.

Let him take heed of a cold Air and the North Wind, and a moist or Night-air
or Westwind: the East astringeth. Also from the Head being inflamed with the
Sun.

It is hurtful to lie with the Face upwards, because so the humor falls sooner
into the mouth, except it be when you take Pills in the mouth.

Fast sometimes or eat little, exercise gently, sleep moderately, and they will
hinder the increase of humors.

If Hoarsness come from a Tumor or Ulcer of the Jaws, The Cure of Hoarsness.
it must be cured as I shall show in its proper place; for that being cured, the
hoarsness cease: but if that be not cured, or so cured that there remains
unevenness, the Hoarsness is uncurable. As I have known many from Leprosies and
the Pox to be ever hoarse. If it come from cold and dryness, it is cured by
warm, moist, and suppleing things. If it come from a Defluxion, after spitting
of the humor up, it cease. But if the Defluxion return or the humor stick
fast, use things mentioned for a Catarrh. But for expectoration, it is best
here to use Clensers and Lenifiers such as are mentioned there, to which I shall
add these following choice things.

Myrrh held in the Mouth til it dissolves is excellent.

Also the Infusion of Gum Traganth in Violet or Rose Water.

Hot Milk with the white of an Egg or Mucilage is good for a Gargle.

A raw Egg is experimental; but a rear Egg is better, because there is nothing
from beasts eaten crude, but it is nauseous, except Milk.

Boiled Snailes also by reason of their sliminess, but they without Salt, are
not eaten pleasantly, nor Eggs.

Also buttered Leeks, Coleworts and Arrach.

Also crude Purslane does wonderfully take away roughness not only of the
Teeth, but Jaws: And it is good boiled.

Also Cubebs beaten with Raisons: especially when it is from cold.

Juice of Liquorish held in the Mouth.

Juice of Coleworts boiled with Honey.

Oil of sweet Almonds, Fresh Butter.

Mathiolus commends the water of Phyllitis.

These Compounds are also good. Take Myrrh, Frankincense, Sugar Candy, each
equal parts; with Mucilage of Gum Traganth make small Troches like Lupines to be
held in the mouth.

Or thus. Take Turpentine two drams, dislolve it with the Yolk of a small
Hen-egg: add Orris, Myrrh, each half a dram; Cubebs one scruple, meal of
Orrobus and Starch, each two drams; Penidies half an ounce, Honey to make a
Lohoch.

Rondoletius commends the Pills of Benzoin, and Helidaeus Avicens Pills to be
held in the Mouth.

Lobel says that with this Syrup he cured Women that had been ten years
Hoarse. Take Erysimum or wild Mustard with the roots six handful, Elicampane
and Coltsfoot green, Liquorish, each two ounces; Borrage, Succory, Maidenhair,
each one handful and an half; Co^dial flowers, French Lavender, or Bettony
flowers, each half a handful; Aniseed six drams, Raisons stoned two ounces:
boil them in Barley water and Honey, add Juice of Watercresses six ounces: add
as much Sugar to two or three pints of the strained Liquor as will make a Syrup.

Or this. Take Liquorish two ounces, Marsh-mallow roots green three ounces,
Orris, Galangal, each half an ounce; Erysimum three handful, Coltsfoot,
Coleworts, Arrach, Mallows, Purslain, Green, each one handful; Mallows,
Violets, each one pugil; Gourd and Melon seed, each half an ounce; Cotton seeds
one dram, Barley and Beans, each one pugil; Raisons stoned twenty pair, Cubebs
one dram, boil and strain them, and with Honey or Sugar make a Syrup.

Or this Gargle. Take Liquorish and Marshmallows, each two ounce; Mallows with
the roots one handful, Beans, Orobus beaten, each one pugil; Raisons stoned
twenty pair, Figs, Jujubes, Sebestens, each six pair; Myrrh, Frankincense each
three drams; boil them and with Honey or Sugar make a Gargarism.

Belching, Vomiting, Snorting, Spitting, The Cure of other kinds of Depraved
Breathing.
Hauking: if they be preternatural shall be treated of in Excretion, here they
are mentioned only for order sake.

Whooping, Panting, and Breathing or blowing hot do little hurt of themselves;
so that we neither mention further their Causes or Cure. We mentioned in the
Kinds what was different from natural Respiration.

CHAP. VI. Of the Defect of Swallowing or passage by the Throat.
The Kinds,
WE say the passage through the Throat is wanting or defective, when things
cannot go downward or upward as they ought sometimes.

Sometimes they cannot swallow or it is with difficulty. Difficuly of
Swallowing.
And the hinderance is the greater, because the action is natural and usual.
And then there is something appears in the Jaws, or there is pain; sometimes
there is a defect of swallowing without a Palsy or Convulsion, as we showed in
Impotent motion.

Sometimes things cannot be sent upward, or with much difficulty. And though
this be not natural or usual, yet it is sometimes necessary, and it hinders if
it be not. It is either when by nature they can neither Vomit nor Belch.

Sometimes there is a desire to Belch and it is troublesome if it cannot be;
Hinderance of Belching
but the passage is stopped, and there is a burning of this in a Cardialgia.

A desire or endeavor of Vomiting is called Nausea or Loathing, Difficulty of
Vomiting.
and not only some things are loathed, but they feel the stomach troubled and
provoked to Vomit, and the Rhewm sent to the mouth, and yet nothing is voided.
This is worst for them that are used to vomit at certain times, because it is
to them natural and the suppression thereof is troublesome.

The Causes.
The Cause of the Defect of these motions in the passage of the Throat, is
either in the part that communicates the force of motion, or in the Instrument,
the Gullet or Stomach.

Difficulty of Swallowing follows from the Resolution and Convulsion of the
Nerves of the sixth and seventh Conjugation, The distemper of the Nerves is the
cause of difficulty of Swallowing
that come to the Muscles of the Jaws (which Fallopius says cause the first
swallowing not the hairs in the Gullet) and comes from the same Diseases with
Convulsions of other parts; and then it is a kind of symptom of the Stomach if
it be from a wound, or of a Palsy or Convulsion; as was showed in impotent
motion. If it come from a Palsy it is harder to swallow down liquid things
than solid. And from the affliction of the same Nerves, in some Palsies they
cannot speak plain, or cough, or vomit, though Nature force without danger of
being choked.

When the passage is stopped in the Gullet and swallowing hindered: which they
say comes from the relaxing of the tufts as I showed in the Muscles thereof:
but because the Gullet moves not of its own accord, by its own villi or hairs
but by the Muscles of the Jaws, as as we showed this cannot be granted. The
Causes that hinder swallowing are when the gullet is too dry and cannot send
meat down as in burning fevers: or if it be stopped by things swallowed
either, great or sticking or rough, or sharp, or otherwise as Rhasis speaks of
Horsleeches. From which being great and hard as nuts-shels, bones, because they
press the Membranous side of the Windpipe which is joined to the gullet and so
straiten it, breathing and swallowing are also hindered, even as both passages
suffer the same when from external injuries, tying or dislocation of a spondil,
The dryness of the Gullet, is the cause of difficulty of Swallowing.
and are contracted when the Gullet is inwardly straitend by a Tumor of the
Neck, or Inflammation or Defluxion, Obstruction of the Gullet, is the cause of
difficult swallowing.
the Patient swallows with difficulty. Also when it is corroded or pricked, it
cannot suffer things to pass for pain with inflammation. And this comes from
sharp things or vapors, or humors; As a Boy that eat fish greedily and was
choked with a sharp bone that fixed in the Gullet after a great Tumor and
Inflammation. Of the causes mentioned, some hinder Vomiting when it should be,
Obstruction of the Gullet, is cause of Vomiting hindered. The streightness of
the Stomach causes difficult Vomiting.
but not all, because Vomiting being more forcible, Natural and Voluntary
motion will sooner make way then swallowing which is only from our will.
Besides these Diseases of the Gullet, if it be in a straight place, it cannot
be dilated, and so Vomiting is hindered. Hence it is that they that have
straight Breasts, and short Necks, are unfit to vomit.

Vomiting is difficult from the fault of the Stomach. And the streightness of
the Neck causes the same.
If it be not too loose nor the right Orifice too large, as it is naturally,
and therefore men that have good Stomachs concoct well, yet being sick and
stirred to Vomit by Medicines or Excrements, yet they cannot vomit but with
great pain: And contrarily they who have too much dilated their Stomach by
gluttony and drunkness, vomit upon the least occasion.

When a sharp and hot humor boyles in the stomach, A boiling humor in the
Stomach, is the cause of difficult belching.
as we shall show in Cardialgia or hartburning, it causes a desire to belch
from the breaking of those bubbles which it raises and which send forth, a
wind or burning vapor to the Mouth of the stomach; but because the wind is
dispersed before it come into the Gullet, there is no belching.

And if a Humor stick fast in the Stomach, A tough humor in the Stomach is the
cause of difficult Vomiting.
and Solicit vomiting, yet it will not cause it, because it cannot come forth,
but the things taken may be vomited up. Though often the Humors are vomited and
the meat retained, though but lately eaten, by natures choice to cast out the
worst, as we shall show in immoderate Vomiting.

The Cure.
That we may know what to do in difficulty of swallowing, vomiting, and
belching, we shall speak of each Particularly.

If difficulty of swallowing come from the Nerves affected and the Muscles of
the Jaws loosned, The Cure of the difficulty of swallowing, which is a kind of
Palsy.
in a general Palsy, it is the worse; because it signisies that, not only the
pairs of Nerves in the Back, but also those of the sixth and seventh
Conjugation, are hurt.

Except it be a Particular Palsy, as of the Tongue and parts adjacent which is
also bad and threatens a general; The same Cure is to be used, as in the
Palsy, in respect of the causes. If it come from a Defluxion of water to the
Nerves, it must be purged, revelled, and consumed, and the part confirmed.

Amongs which Mustard held in the Mouth, is excellent, as I showed. And
Pellitory of Spain, it draws water plentifully. And Tablets of Nu^megs,
according to my uncles receipt, are excellent.

Also Gargarismes that reach the Muscles of the Jaws. As this: Take Calamus
half an ounce, Sage, Rosemary, each one handful, Lavender flowers one pugil,
Cypress Nuts four, Nutmegs two, Cloves one dram: boil them in Water and the
fourth part Wine, and in one pint and an half, dissolve Honey of Rosemary, and
Squils, of each two ounces: Vinegar of Squiis, half an ounce.

Or thus: Take ^^amoron, Oxymel of squils, of each one ounce and an half; Sage,
and Lavender water, of each four ounces: Make a Gargle.

There are many Oyn^menrs for the Neck, mentioned in the Palsies, to which add
these: Take Oil one ounce, Oil of Spike, Masitch, of each half an ounce;
Labdanum, Frankincense, Storax, of each half a dram; with a little Wax make a
Liniment.

If it be a kind of Spasmus, The Cure of difficulty of swallowing, which is a
kind of Convulsion.
it must be cured, as that is; And the Topics applied as in the Palsy. It is
deadly from a wound, as we showed in Spasmus.

If it be from heat in Fevers, see Fevers and cool with Epithems, The Cure of
difficult swallowing from the dryness of the Gullet.
to the Liver chiefly, and Gargarisms and Linctus, as in hoarsness, that comes
from roughness of the Chaps, give moist meat, Unctions, Broths, Barley, Cream,
Emulsions, etc.

If the body fallen in be thick, The Cure of difficult swallowing from things
fallen into the Windpipe.
or sticking, or Membranous, we must use diverse arts, upwards and downwards.

Oftentimes things are driven down by a great draught of water, or washed off
if they stick, or with a piece of Bread; or by neesing; but chiefly by
vomiting, which is easier, if they can first take a great deal of Water and
Oil, and as Rhasis says, if we strike the Neck of the Patient; If the thing
may be seen and laid hold upon, we have Instruments for to take it out, as the
forceps, etc.

And other bending things that may fit themselves to the passage, and so we
thrust it down, as a thick stick of a birchen broom, or Beets, or any thing
they will bend and not break, being green. If it be dry soften it in hot Lead,
or anoint it with Oil, Rhasis uses Lead. But a Wax Candle dipped in Oil, is
best.

They say that a piece of a Sponge tied to a string and swallowed down, and
after much water is drunk to swel it, pulled up again will fetch any thing out
of the Throat: but this is best in thin and sharp things that trouble the
Gullet, for it can do nothing except the Sponge be swallowed. This may be done
by a great bead, which will be swallowed more easily, and may be done often.

We give Oil or Butter to make the part slippery; and anoint the Throat to
enlarge it.

If a Hors-leech creep into the mouth, and stick to the Gullet, Rhasis shows
the cure. But we advise it to be pulled out with the Forceps, if it may be laid
hold upon, or provoke it to ascend with drinking hot water, and holding
afterward cold in the mouth: or we drive it downwards as other Worms, with
things that displease them, as by drinking Vinegar, eating Salt things, Onions,
Garlic, Mustard, and the like, that are contrary to Worms, as shall be showed
in their places.

When the Gullet is strieghtened within or stopped by a Tumor, The Cure of
difficult swallowing from a Tumor.
Inflammation, or Desluxion, or hurt by things taken in, if there be pain, the
Cure shall be mentioned in the pains of the neck.

If it be pressed by external Injuries or loosning of the Spondil, From
Compression of the Gullet.
in regard it hinders breathing which is the greatest danger, we showed in
Respiration what should be done.

If Vomiting be profitable to prevent Diseases, The Cure of hard Vomiting.
as Avicen commends it once in a month or oftener; or if it be necessary in
Diseases to expel things that trouble the Stomach: and if it be difficult by
reason of the unfitness of the Constitution by reason of the short neck and
streightness of the breast, and mouth of the stomach; it is often inconvenient
to force it. But if in such natures, it is necessary, and there be striving
without success. We have showed in diverse Diseases where Vomiting is required,
how to provoke it by filling the Belly and subverting it as they call it, and
tickling the Jaws and Throat.

We shall show in Cardialgia or Heart-burning, The Cure of difficult belching.
how that imperfect Belching with heat of stomach, is to be cured.

CHAP. VII. Of the Defect of Dejection or going to Stool.
The Kinds,
THere is a Defect of natural Excretion of Excrements from the Belly, and it is
called Constipation, or Astriction, or binding of the Belly. Belly-bound
In which either nothing is voided, and the Belly is wholly stopped: Or the
Excrements are voided seldom or less than is fit, or with great labor and
straining.

This is sometimes in sound people, whose nature is to go seldom to stool. Or
according to Hippocrates it comes from the change of age, so that they who are
in youth loose-bodied, are bound in old age, and so contrarily. In others it is
from an evil custom and life, as shall be showed, and is the cause of diseases.

It is a Symptom in diverse Diseases both of the lower belly, joined with
Heart-pain, Colic, Jaundies, Ruptures and other accidents: And of the Head,
with pain, giddiness and the like. And in Fevers this is a familiar symptom.
And in other diseases it is so usual that it is the first and last symptom of
which the Patient complains.

The Causes.
The Guts containing the Excrements must needs be afflicted in every
Constipation or binding: either primarily when they are stopped, or secondarily
when they have lost their expulsive faculty.

When the Guts are straightened, so that the passage of the Excrements is
hindered, the Belly is bound. And this straitness may come from astriction or
Convolution.

We call it Astriction when the Guts have lost their slippriness, Dryness of
Excrements is the cause of Constipation or binding.
and are dried and wrinkled; or when they are bound and made straiter. Hence is
it that Driers, Binders, sower and sharp things taken, as they astringe the
Gullet and wrinkle the Jaws; so if they be taken imoderately especially
fasting, they stop the Guts and their passages, and bind the belly. And this
may come from long fasting, and too much evacuation. And from heat that dries
the guts, or rather the Excrements, as we shall show. Some say that the Guts may
be pressed and stopped by a Tumor in the Mesentery: but we think it not to be
possible, because when a Woman is with child, that great Tumor dorh not cause
constipation without some other accident.

The thin Guts are sometimes so rouled together in the disease called
Convolvulus, Convolution or rouling together of the Guts the cause of
Constipation, or Costiveness.
so that they are closed and the Excrements cannot descend: but are vomited up,
either with pain called Ileon, when the Guts are inflamed, or with repletion of
excrements without, Inflammation, as we shall show in pains.

But this is most usual in Ruptures when the Guts fall into the Cods, from the
breaking of the Peritonaeum; by reason of the evil position of the Guts.

There is an ordinary Constipation from the Obstruction of the Guts with proper
Excrements, Obstruction of the Guts by excrements is the cause of Constipation.
not only when they abound, but when they are dry, hard, thick, clammy, and
hinder the Excrements that follow. This is usually in the Orifice where the
thin Guts use to open themselves into the thick, by reason of the straitness
there; where they have been so fixed, that the constipation has been deadly as
we have observed in Anatomy. This is often in the Colon, in the great turning
thereof before it comes to the Rectum, by the hard dung retained and stopping
and binding the Belly, with the pain of the Colic. And sometimes such hard dung
is in the Arse-gut, and not voided without great straining, or help of Art.

The dung grows hard when the meat is too solid and dry; as we see in Dogs that
eat bones: especially when they drink little. The same comes from the use of
hot and dry meats. And it is in hot natures when the Liver and parts adjacent
are too hot; in whom, if they go not every day to stool through long sitting,
riding or lying in the bed (because the excrements fall down better when the
body is upright or moved) the Excrements grow hard from their internal heat
that dries them. Hence it is that Senators, Riders, and old Men, complain of
costiveness. And as it comes from moderate heat, so may it come from hot
diseases and Fevers. From fasting also, the Guts and excrements that remain
may be dried, not only in the time of fasting, but after, if they be very
hungry. And that because nature being exhausted draws whatsoever chylus or
humor is in the meat, to recruit her by the Mesaraicks, and so leaves the
Excrements dry and hard. Hence it is that after a long Disease, when the
Patient eats much, he complains of a constipation: And though, they who nourish
well have rather a dry than moist belly, the Guts can scarce be so stopped by
any thing but Excrements: Stopping of the Guts by other things besides
excrements is the cause of constipation.
for things that are swallowed though great and hard if they pass the Gullet,
may also pass the Guts, except they stick in the Fundament: And what is written
of the stone in the Guts it is rare, and can scarce be so big as to stop the
Guts, except dung as they say, be turned to a stone.

If the Guts lose their pricking and the expulsive faculty does not move them,
Loss or Dullness of sense is the cause of Costiveness.
our will is also at rest being not admonished thereby, and there is no
dejection. This is when the Guts either feel not or very little, from the fault
of the Nerves of the sixth or seventh conjugation from whence the Nerves of the
Guts arise. And in a general stupefaction they suffer with the other Nerves,
and there is no dejection, as here in particular. The same may be from the
Excrements when they are few, wherefore in want of appetite where little is
eaten, little is voided, or from great purgings, til more excrements are made,
which requires some days. Also if acrimony be wanting in the excrements,
which naturally provokes the Guts to stool, which is caused of Choler mixed
with the excrements for that purpose there is also costiveness: as in
obstructions when choler is not carried to the Guts, but to other parts in the
Jaundies and the like, as appears by the excrements which are not tinctured,
but white or ash-colored.

The Cure.
Every constipation of the belly needs not cure, as when some go seldom to
stool, from nature and custom, or moderate diet, which causethfew excrements
and declares that the body is well nourished; as it does after sickness or
Famine, except the Guts be dried and shrunk, which being dangerous requires
cure, which is difficult. But if costiveness come from dry meats, that bind,
and are hot, it is cured by abstaining from them, and using the contrary. And
so you must when the body is bound by natural heat through long sitting: and
also when it comes from a hot temper or constitution: But in Diseases when
constipation is a symptom, as from heat in Fevers or stoppage or convolution
of the Guts in the Convolvulus and Rupture (in which if the excrements are
vomited, death is at hand) or from the loss of provocation in Stupefaction,
Jaundies, or the like Diseases, we shall in treating of them show you what you
must do in respect of the cause.

But the Medicines that are used chiefly for constipation, Medicines that
loosen the belly.
are to be taken in or injected, or otherwise, and here we shall mention some of
them, the rest are mentioned in the Diseases that cause costiveness.

The gentlest that moisten and soften the hard excrements and by their
slipperiness loosen the passages, and provoke nature by pricking, are of things
nourishing. Young flesh boiled, especially Veal, also that which is fat and
mucilaginous or slimy.

Butter and Oil.

Temperate Herbs, boiled or raw, as Spinach, Beets, Arrage, Bugloss, Coleworts;
and stronger, as Mallows, Violets, and tops of Hops and Asparagus.

All moist Fruits open the belly that are temperate and sweet, but sharp do it
rather by troubling than loosning.

Drinking of Water or Milk.

Of Physical things, Cassia and Manna in broth. Juice or Syrup of Roses,
dissolved in spring water.

Stronger are such as puge, as the Infusion of Senna with Wormwood and seeds,
the rest are mentioned in Purges for diverse Diseases.

For the Fundament there are diverse Suppositories.

And Clysters which prick and dissolve the hard Excrements, by washing,
mollifying, and opening the passages. These are best in costiveness, and there
are diverse of them mentioned in the Colic.

Some things to loosen and soften are applied outwardly to the belly, as Oils
and the remainder of the Glysters.

Also Baths of Sweet waters and Decoctions.

Also exercise makes the Ezcrements fall down, and medicines that loosen do it
sooner thereby.

And in regard none can go to stool without straining, which is done by the
will with holding the breath and contracting the Muscles, nor with the Will
only with the expulsive faculty moving thereunto, we must endeavor so to
accustom nature that it may consent to the will in the same: And this is done
by endeavoring morning and evening before and after sleep to void the
excrements. Because nature observes order not only monthly and daily, but
hourly in eating and expulsion of excrements. And if we observe this order at a
set time, and solicit nature to dejection, and continue it; it will be very
helpful to evacuation by stool.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Defect of Pissing.
The Kinds,
THere is a defect also in Pissing, which is a natural excretion, at certain
times.

Sometimes it is wholly stopped called Ischuria, Ischuria or not pissing the
Bladder being full or empty.
with a great distention in the Pecten and a Tumor by reason of the fullness of
the Bladder: sometimes without, and there is an empty bladder, and this is
called also Ischuria, but improperly.

Sometimes there is not a sufficient Evacuation by Urin, being seldom, Little
and seldom Pissing.
or in small quantity in respect of the drink, which is particular to the
Ischuria or Dropsy Ascites. Dysuria or pissing by Fits.
Sometimes it is with difficulty by Fits before the bladder be emptied called
Dysuria with pain; or by Drops called Strangury: Strangury or by drops.
Both which are referred to pains, when the pain is more than the difficulty.

These come alone sometimes in them that were formerly sound: sometimes they are
joined with other Diseases as the Colic, Stone, Dropsy, Fevers etc.

The Causes.
The cause of defect of Pissing, is either the matter, or Serum when it is not
plentifully bred, or when it is carried another way, or the passage hindered.
Or from the instruments of Pissing, the Reyns or Kidneys in which the Urin is
separated from the blood, or ureters by which it goes into the Bladder; or
Bladder, which receives it, or the Neck thereof which voideth it.

If the Serum be produced in small quantity, Little Serum, is the cause of
little and seldom Pissing.
it is necessary that little and seldom Pissing do follow; in people that drink
little and are of a dry constitution, and use a drying Diet. Or when it is
carried otherways; it is the cause of little and seldom Pissing.
But if part of the Serum, which should be attracted by the Kidneys, be carried
to the habit of the Body; And there consumed with heat, or sent out by sweat,
it comes to pass that they which sweat much Piss little. And this is also from
a Diarrhaea, when the Whey, or Serum is voided by stool, in abundance, or from
purging. And as this is Natural and hurts not, so it is preternatural, and a
Disease when it is from obstruction of the Bowels, especially the Liver which
stops the Passage of the Serum: which being turned another way causes the
Dropsy ascites, The passage of the Serum stopped, and the thickness of the
serum causes little and seldom Pissing.
in which there is little pissing. And if the Serum be not thin enough, but is
hardly strained from the blood by the Kidneys, it causes the same. This comes
from things taken which thicken the blood and the Serum also; as red wine and
the like, by use whereof we observe the Urin is lessened, and by the use of
contraries, as hot Diuretikes, it is enlarged.

Pissing is seldom stopped from the cause in the Kidneys and Vreters; for the
Kidneys being two, the one being hurt, the other will supply. But it is selsom
seen that both Kidneys are afflicted with the Ureters which are remote from
them, so that the Function perishes: And it cannot be but from a great cause.
As the Consumption of the substance of both, as I saw once in an Anatomy; Or an
obstruction in the beginning of the ureters, by matter or a stone in both
together, Consumption, obstruction, drying of both Kidneys, or ureters, or the
absence of one ureter, is the cause of suppression of Urin.
which is seldom. Or, when in burning fevers both the ureters are dried up, or
when one ureter is wanting, or twisted and the other stopped, as I saw in an
Anatomy. And if these be the Causes, and the Bladder empty, there is no pain
from distention, nor desire to Piss.

There is seldom defect in pissing from the largness of the Bladder except it
be wounded, A wound in the Bladder causes Suppression of urin when it is empty.
as in a Fisher that pissed from a hole in his Groyn and not from the Yard.
Pissing is chiefly hindered from the Neck of the Bladder when it is obstructed,
and this being a narrow passage is easily stopped, or straightened by cold, and
then there is pain, or by outward compression, with long sitting, or the like,
in regard of the stoppage of that part between the Fundament and the Yard,
through which the Urin passes in men. Or by inward compression by the straight
Gut filled with Excrements or Wind. The same may come from Inflammation of the
parts adjacent, or a great Tumor. The Urin is most stopped when after long
retention, the Bladder is stretched much, and the Neck thereof so contracted
that it cannot be opened: This is incident to them that sit long at banquets
and are ashamed to rise and make water; or otherwise for want of a convenient
place, stay so long that they cannot Piss. Doting people that are very
contemplative forget Pissing and other Functions which depend upon the will in
part. Doting, or Delirium, is the cause of Ischuria.
Moreover in the Convulsion or twisting of the Neck of the Bladder, Also the
twisting of the Bladder by a Rupture, is the cause of Ischuria.
as we showed in the convolvulus of the Guts, Urin may be wholly suppressed, as
we showed in the Fisherman whose bladder from a Rupture in the Groyn fell into
the Cods, and lay stretched out and voided no Urin, but by a Catheter: while an
ignorant Chyrurgion, let it out by cutting thereof, which gave ease to the
patient, with great danger: from which being freed, he pisseth yet through a
Fistula that remains, by drawing forth a tent wherewith it is stopped. If it
come from obstructions of the Neck of the Bladder, A Stone in the Bladder
flopping it, causes Ischuria and Strangury.
it is a stone usually that stops it, if it be a great one, or a little one
that passes into the Yard in men: As we shall show in the pains of the Reins.
A Caruncle or Callus, from an Inflammation not well cured, An excrescence in the
Neck of the bladder or humor, is the cause of Ischury or Strangury.
being in the same passage causes stoppage of Urin, as also Warts, and clotted
blood and matter, though not of so long continuance other humors cannot cause
it because that they come not to the Bladder, and if they do, Stupefaction of
the bladder, is the cause of little and seldom Pissing.
they are so mixed with the Urin that they can get easily forth therewith.

When the Nerves of the Bladder are afflicted, and the sting is lost, the
expulsive faculty acts not, as it is the cause, as of not going to stool, so
of not pissing. Also when there is no pricking of Urin and the Bladder is not
full, yet we may make water by pressing the bladder with the Muscles of the
Belly: which cannot be in going to the stool, except the expulsive faculty help
by our own will: because there is need of more force to send forth thick humors
then Urin. Therefore though the bladder and its Neck and Sphincter be
stupefied, yet Urin may be voided: as in the Palsy, and when the Sphincter is
loosned there is involuntary pissing, because it is the office of that Muscle
to retain, not expel the Urin.

But it is true that, if the Bladder be Stupefied, we piss more seldom: as when
it is of exquisite sense, more often. Because the expulsive faculty forces out
will to make water, as we shall show in often Pissing.

The Cure.
If Pissing be seldom, What we must foretell and do in defect of pissing, from
what cause soever.
from drinking little, or dry Diet; much sweat, or purging, or in less
quantity, it needs no Cure, because it does no hurt.

But if it come from stoppage of the bowels in dropsies: the Serum being so
retained that they piss less then they drink, which causes a Tumor of the
Belly; we shall show the Cure therefore in the Dropsy.

If it come from thickness of the Serum, through things taken in, there must be
a contrary Diet and thinner drink.

If from the Kidneys and Vreter on both sides, which is seldom seen, if there
be no Urin in the Bladder, it is mortal and incurable.

If from a wound of the Bladder, so that the Urin falls into the Belly, or comes
forth at the Wound, either they die, or, as we showed, there is a Fistula
through which they piss; but it is rare, as is also the bladder falling into
the Cods, which had been deadly without the chance mentioned.

If it come from cold because it causes pain, it shall be mentioned there.

If from compression of the Neck of the bladder, it cease when the Excrements
and Wind are voided.

If Urin long held stretch the Bladder, and there be Inflammation or Tumor the
Cure is to be applied to them. If it come from a Stone, Caruncle, or other
Tumors or Humor, which stops the passage, when these impediments are
removed, the Urin is voided.

If from the Stupefaction of the bladder the pissing be slower, you must not
meddle therewith, for when it is full it will come forth, or by straining at
stool.

We shall now show what Medicines are to be used internal and external to
provoke Urin in diverse causes, Remedies to provoke Urin and help Pissing,
especially when the Serum is thick, and the passages about the Bowels, Reigns,
Bladder and Vreters are stopped.

These are called Diuretics, that cause it to be more, or quicker either by
increasing of the Serum, or making it thin and fluid; and separated from the
blood that it may pass easily from the Kidneys to the bladder, or by making the
Serum and Urin hotter and sharper to stir up the expulsive faculty, as we shall
show.

One dram of the Powders following are to be given in a good quantity of Wine,
Ale, or Milk, or other convenient Liquor: and if you will keep them long make
them into Troches.

The first: Take Water-cress seeds one dram and an half, Powder them.

The second: Take Acrons and Hazel nuts dried in an Oven, of each one dram and
an half: give it with Goats Milk, morning and evening.

The third Powder: Take Madder roots, Asarum, Fennel, Parsley, Lovage, Water
cress, Nigella, winter cherry seeds, of each one dram; Valerian half a dram:
make a Powder.

The fourth: Take roots of Asarum and Valerian, Spignel, Calamus Aromaticus,
Fennel, Smallage, Pursley, Carrot, Seseli seeds, of each one dram: Savin,
Schaenanth, Spicknard, Cinnamon, Pepper, of each half a dram: Saffron one
scruple: make a Powder.

The fifth Powder: Take Amber, Gum of Plums and Cherries, of each one dram;
Turpentine boiled half a dram, the Jews-stone, Alkekengi Berries, Parsley
seeds, Asarum roots, of each half a dram; with Cinnamon one scruple: make a
Powder.

The sixth: Take of Egg-shels that are hatched, and the Skin taken out one
dram, or nine swims of Herrings: give them in Powder.

The seventh: Take the Ashes of earth Worms, or Crayfish, of each one dram; of
Hog-lice half a dram, Spanish flies, or Grass hoppers their thin wings taken
out, or Scorpions half a scruple, Cinnamon one dram, Cloves half a dram, Sugar
two drams.

The eight Ponder, quickly made in time of necessity: Take two Cantharides, and
one dram of Sugar Candy, beat them well, give it with Honey and Water, or the
Decoction of Linseed, or with Milk.

These Decoctions following are good: Take Radish roots two ounces, Asparagus
and Rest-harrow, of each one ounce; Asarum half an ounce, Mallows, Pellitory,
of each one handful; Berries of winter Cherries two drams, Watercress seeds two
drams, Smallage seed half a dram: boil them in red Pease broth.

Or this: Take one Onion, and a head of Garlic: boil them in broth, and drink
it being strained.

A Diuretike Oxymel is given, two ounces; with covenient Water or Wine, to
provoke Urine.

Also Wormwood Wine, or Malmsey fasting, or white Wine, in which white Flints
have been quenched till they turn to Powder.

Or this Composition: Take roots of Parsley, Fennel, Rest-harrow, of each one
ounce; Asarum, Elicampane, of each half an ounce; Wormwood, Rue, Strawberry
leaves, Savin, Hysop, of each one handful; Broom, Elder, and Chamomil flowers,
of each one pagil; Smallage, Parsley, Lovage, Rocket, Nigella, Water cress
seeds of each one dram; Juniper Berries half an ounce: Infuse them in white
Wine.

Also this Lixivium: Take Juniper, Bean stalks and shales dried; burn them, and
mix the Ashes with white Wine, and straining it often, make a Lie or Lixivium:
Let him drink a Glass: And with the ashes of Broom, or Bitter-sweet, it is
better.

Other Potions: Take Oil of Sulphur two drops, spirit of Vitriol one drop, with
Wine and Water.

Or: Take Oil of Scorpions half an ounce; with Milk or Wine.

Or; Take Oil of sweet Almonds two ounces, with much Milk.

Two or three drops of Oil of Wax, given in great Nettle water, provokes Urin
violently. The fresh juice of Pomegranate, does the same.

Or thus: Take Horse Radish roots green, bruise them, sprinkle them with Wine,
and take two ounces of the juice.

Or thus: Take juice of Pellitory two or three ounces, juice of Watercresses
one ounce, add Wine, Sugar and Honey.

Waters pierce most, as that of Pellitory, Alkekengi, or Winter-cherries,
Lemmons, Nuts, or of Broom flowers, with Cinnamon water, also of Horseradish,
Watercresses, and Sea-fennel.

Another Water: Take Horseradish roots half a pound, Rest-harrow,
Winter-cherries, of each four ounces; Cherries and Peach kernels, of each two
ounces; Broom and Elder flowers, of each one ounce; Fennel seed two drams,
Turpentine half an ounce, with spanish Wine, a fingers breadth above them being
bruised, distill a Water, give one or two ounces.

The water of Peach kernels, drawn with Spanish Wine is also good.

The buds of Asparagus boiled or raw, make the Urin stink, and provoke it often.

Make a Sallat of Purslane, Watercresses, Chervil, and Parsley, with young
Onions, and Horseradish sliced, and Cowcumbers if the season afford them, with
Vinegar and Oil: It will provoke Urin if it be eaten for a Supper.

Or this Bole. Take Turpentine two drams, Wintercherries one dram, Amber half a
dram, with Sugar.

Make Pills of unpleasant things. Take Galbanum, Bdellium, Myrrh, each half a
dram; Oil of Sulphur four drops, with Turpentine make Pills, give half a dram at
a Dse.

Sometimes we mix Purgers with Diuretics, because the Urin is easier rendered
when the Excrements are voided, and because they prick and stir up the
expulsive faculty of the Guts, and give the same force to the Bladder.

Or this Bole. Take Cassia new drawn half an ounce, Benedicta Laxativa, Agarick
in Troches, each half a dram; Winter-cherries one scruple with Sugar.

Turpentine does both. Take two drams thereof, dissolveit with Honey and the
yolk of an Eg, and drink it with Wine.

Or thus, Take Electuary Indum the great two drams, Catholicon half an ounce,
Winter-cherry water as much as will make a Potion.

If it come from clotted blood you must give things at the mouth, which
dissolve such blood, among which Amber is best in this case.

Clysters are good in this case, and Topics to the bladder. As,

Take Mallows with the roots, Pellitory, each one handful; Chamaemel flowers
one pugil: boil them, and dissolve Cassia, Benedicta Laxativa, each half an
ounce; Turpentine dissolved in the yolk of an Egg, and Honey half an ounce, Oil
of Chamaemel and Scorpions, each one ounce; Salt two drams, make a Clyster.

Another more compounded. Take marsh-mallow roots, and Radishes, each two
ounces; Onions, Garlic, Leeks, each one ounce; Pellitory, Watercresses,
Parsley, each one handful; Chamaemel and Melilot flowers, each one one pugil;
Smallage and Lovage seeds, each two drams; Juniper berries half an ounce, boil
them in Wine and Water, and dissolve the aforesaid things therein.

Or this of Juyces. Take Juice of Mallows, Mercury, Pellitory, Rue; each one
ounce and an half; of Watercresses half an ounce, white Wine two ounces,
Butter one ounce and an half, Honey one ounce, Salt one dram, make a Clyster.

Diverse things are applied outwardly to the Share near the Bladder, that dilate
it and provoke Pissing.

A Fomentation and Bath of these. Take Valerian root two ounces, Mallows,
Mugwort, Parsley, flowers of Chamaemel, Melilot, Dill, each one pugil; Linseed
and Fenugreek each one dram^ Smallage seeds two drams, boil them, and add Wine.
These are good when the bladder is so full they cannot piss. Also you may add
things that dissolve the clodded blood, if there be any; And Coolers if there
be Inflammation.

Or this Emplaster. Take roots of Marshmallows, Radish and Pellitory, boil
them, stamp them, and add a little Butter.

Or. Take Radish, Watercresses, Garlic, Juniperberries, stamp them, and fry
them with Wine, adding Butter and Oil of Scorpions.

Hot Cow Dung also with Cummin-seed and Oil of Scorpions.

It is good in the Strangury to boil Hempen thread newly spun, in Water and Lie,
with Mugwort and Chamaemel, and apply it.

You may use these Ointments with the former or alone. Take Oil of Scorpions,
and Cunney grease each half an ounce.

Or, Take Juice of Watercresses, Parsley, Onions, each one ounce; Sea-fennel,
Oil of Scorpions, each two ounces; boil them and add Oil of Turpentine two
drams, and with Cunney grease make a Liniment.

Boil Wine Vinegar and Honey, thick, with Linseed meal, and apply them to the
Pecten to provoke Urin.

Inject with a Syringe into the bladder things that loosen the passages; as Oil
of sweet Almonds, or in which Mallows was boiled: or that prick, as Oil of
Scorpions: to cause Urin and the Stone to be voided. Or Whey or other clensers,
as Honey and Aloes, if the humor be thick, or things that break the Stone. If
there be a Caruncle or hardness, inject Mollifiers, and Clensers as
Aegiptiacum, and after Dryers, as that of Litharge, Tutty, Antimony, Ceruss and
Aloes thrust in at the end of a Wax Candle.

If the Bladder be full of Urin, put in the Catheter, which is good in all
stoppages, for it drives back the Stone, breaks the Caruncle, and dissolves
clotted blood or matter, it is made hollow that the Urin may flow through it.

Chimches, Fleas, and Lice may be put into the Yard, or small Hairs, to provoke
Urin.

They say Galbanum applied like a Plaster to the top of the Yard, provokes
Urin.

Also a Fume of Hedghogs bristles and Agarick, and of Grass-hoppers does it in
Women.

Sometimes the only pressing of the swollen Bladder with the hand does it. And
when a Stone is gotten into the Yard, it may be pressed out by degrees.

Sometimes they must be cut for the Stone or Caruncle, when other means fail, as
we shall show in the Stone.

CHAP. IX. Of the Defect of Bringing forth Children, or other things.
The Kinds,
THere is a Defect of natural excretion by which a Woman sends forth, at a fit
season, either a Child or a deformed Mole.

The Birth is Defective when it is difficult, as it may be preternaturally, and
naturally. Or when it is not at its time appointed by nature, or before it; or
when part thereof remains behind.

Birth becomes difficult and painful, when it is Natural when the Child is
ripe, A natural difficult Birth.
and the Woman has foregoing signs, by which she is provoked to hold her
breath, and press the Muscles of the belly, as in other digestion: All which
are increased when the Child comes forth. Also after birth some pain remains
called after-pains: of which seeing they are natural to the bringing forth, we
shall speak in the hurt of that Function rather than in pains.

Sometimes Travail is not preternatural from some impediment and so with more
difficulty and slower as is mentioned; A preternatural difficult Birth.
in which great pain afflicts with straining, heat, and sweating, when the
Child sticks cross in the passage (where the Midwife may feel it) or when the
Hand or Foot hangs out and not the Head (for when that comes first, the birth
is easy) Hence it is that either the Mother or the Child often dies.

It is said to be no Birth when the Woman goes beyond the natural time, Birth
hindered.
which is usually the tenth month (though the seventh month be also allowed)
and there is nothing brought forth, though the Child be ripe, or there be a
mole. And then she falls to sounding, which kind of fainting is here most
deadly, through pain, labor and bleeding. Also she has her throws at the
time, and seems to be fit for Travail, and is so disposed by the Midwife, and
her Urin breaks from her, as is usual in that condition. But all these cease,
and no birth follows. And if they return not, the Child is dead, and
putrifies, and breeds Fevers, and Faintings, and so infecteth the body, that
the Mother dies, as many have done (especially one who went five months beyond
her time with a dead Child, and a stinking flux, with the Navel-string hanging
forth, before she died) which so infected, that the Womb and Child were black
and very stinking when she was opened. And when the Mother lived she had
sometimes clear bladders about her Navel, which signified putrefaction, through
which the Back-bones of the Child were seen, and taken forth after they brake.

This causes death as we showed, if it be not speedily voided; and may be
before the Child is perfect, and then it must be cast out presently, and it is
easily done while it is little; but when it is great, there is, as we said,
want of birth. As also if there be a false conception or Mole, which the sooner
it is cast out, the less is the danger, therefore when we are certain thereof,
if nature be slow, we help her with Medicines.

The Child is known to be dead if the Mother feel no motion, which she
formerly felt, and the belly is still big (which often deceives by the Terms
retained, and these breaking forth it suddenly falls flat) about the flanks.
And if the Womb be cold and the Paps which were swollen, grow lank, At length,
if it continue there follows water, matter and filth, and pieces of the
secondine hang out, there is a Fever, Heartpain, and Swounding. We shall show
in depravate Conception when there a Mole and no Child, and how you shall know
it.

The Birth is imperfect when the Child is voided and the Secondine remains
whole or torn, Imperfect Birth.
growing to the Womb, or stopped; and causes great danger of a Fever, or
sudden Swounding, or Death.

The Causes.
The Scripture witnesses that natural difficulty of Travail was caused by
original sin, Sin.
from Eves fall in Paradise, for which the Creator was pleased to inflict pain
in Travail. Yet let us show some natural cause of both, why it should be
naturally or preternaturally defective or imperfect: which is either from the
greatness of the Child, Situation, or weakness, or form of the Womb, having
three orifices or from streightness of the Neck thereof.

When a Child ready to be delivered, is great (as when it can no longer be
contained in the Womb, Greatness of the Child.
but seeks another mansion and Diet) in respect of the passages, the Delivery
cannot be without pain, though it be natural. And the rather when the Child
being great by the Father, is born by a little Woman which brings forth with
great danger always. As also when there is monstrous Conception, or many at
once.

There is also either no birth or very hard, Evil position of the Child.
when the decent roundness of it is changed, by breaking the coats, and flowing
of water, whereby the Child comes not forth with the Head first, but the Feet,
or lies cross, or when the hands or feet which were close to the sides are
stretched out.

And in regard the strong Throws of the Mother are required in Travail,
Weakness of the Mother.
the more courageous the Woman is, the easier is the Delivery, so they that are
weak, as very young and old Women, and such as are weak-spirited and fearful,
dull and sloathful, are tired out and in great danger.

If the Vessels by which the child wrapped in Membranes with a cake of flesh in
the middle cleaves to the Womb be not ripe, The Vessels connection not divided
in the Womb.
they are unfit to be divided, like the stalks of unripe Apples, without
tearing and force, and bleeding, (nor does bleeding after birth, which is
ordinary, come from this cause as shall be showed) And then they growing
together, and being forced before the time, the birth is more difficult, with
pain, and bleeding, and Inflammation of the Womb, sometimes with a Fever, and
danger of life: The same symptoms follow when the Secundine, remains fast,
either being whole or rent. And also after a fall, stroke, or taking of a
violent medicine, there is untimely birth. Or from the violent usage of the
Midwife taking these pains for Throws, they do often provoke with great danger
of life. And some I have known die of the ^ame, and some I have cured. These
pains of the Womb go before Throws in many, for which they send for the Midwife
which increases them, but should rather use hysterical means to mitigate them,
for these pains do rather hinder the Throws than further them.

Sometimes there is difficulty and impossibility of bringing forth from the
Orifices of the Womb within and the neck without, and the cleft of the
Privities, through which the Infant must pass. The inward orifice of the Womb.
It is also no wonder if there be hard Travail when the inward orifice of the
womb is so straight when the Woman is with Child, that nothing can pass in or
out, and the orifice of the neck of the womb without, is no larger than to
receive the yard, and they both must be so enlarged as to let the Infant pass
through. And the more when they are by nature straiter and harder, The outward
orifice of the neck straightened.
as in those who have not of a long time had Children, and old women, which all
have hard delivery. Or if they be drier, in regard the water which moisten the
passages is spent.

The Infant may stop in the Privities when they are too strait, or short, The
straitness of the Privities.
because they cannot be enlarged as the orifices and swel as they do in
Bitches: in Women the Privity is always of the same largeness, as shall be
showed in Conception.

Also the straitness of the neck of the womb to the Privities is the cause of
hard Labor, The straitness of the neck of the womb.
although it be large yet it must be stretched to let out the Child, and this
stretching causes pain, then (as Rondeletius supposes) the separating of the
Secundine from the Matrix: he was mistaken in thinking that Travail was without
pain when the Secundine remained fast. For we showed, that if the time be come,
that will separate without pine. And I have often observed that the pains
continued when the Secundine remained. Also there follows bleeding from the
opening of the Menstrual Veins in the Neck of the Womb, which is stretched, as
in the time of the Terms. And that part of the Neck suffers not where it lies
under the bones of the Privities, in a strait place, which also contains the
strait Gut. Although it be larger in Women then in Men; by reason of the
loosning and Relaxing of the Grisles which joins the bones, and the going back
of the Rump; except the Woman be strait and short loyned, being of little
stature, and then the difficulty will be increased. And also when the strait
Gut is full of Excrements, or the Rump pressed in by sitting.

They report that fat women especially about the Womb, Whether fat can cause
hard Travail.
have hard Travil, though experience teaches the contrary; neither is there
any fat in the Womb, or its Neck. And that fat which is without in the Belly
cannot hinder, except it be by making them more heavy, or slow in the time.

The Cure.
If the Child be too big to be delivered, A Praediction.
especially if it come not from the Womb, it will die there, and the Mother
will be in danger if it come forth, she usually dies of the second or third
Child, if she breed them so great. Also when the Child comes cross, or the
Orifices, or passages be strait. Many women that have the Secondine growing to
them after Travil, do die. If she has a mole, we shall show in depraved
Conception, what is to be foretold and done for that. In all cases if the
strength be abated much, and she faint, bleed, or have a Fever, it is
dangerous.

If these dangers, are feared, we must prevent in time, The forewarning and
Cure of difficult Travil.
before the delivery, by a good Diet. And nothing must be given to provok,
before the last month.

Let her Diet be sparing, and of little nourishment, if she use to bear great
Children, and be fat: Let her abstain from Wine, or drink it with water; let
her bleed in the middle of her being with Child; and if she be plethorck, let
it be done again a while after, and let her not sleep too much.

Presently after Conception, let weak people be refreshed with good Diet. Let
the Diet be moist and slippery, if the Orifices be strait, and let her use
Baths.

In the last month, let things be used to make easy Deliverance, but not
before the throws. Let some light things be given then to provoke, especially
Baths and Ointments, to loosen the passages. Increasing their strength by
degrees, as the time draws on, and when the throws come proceed to strong
expellers of the Child. And at last if the Child be certainly dead, or the
Secundine not voided, use the strongest things, such as would have killed the
Child, had it been living, and therefore were not to be used before. All these
are to be performed in, and before the Birth, either by the Husband, or the
Mother, or the Midwise, or by the Chyrurgion, or by the Physician; by remedies
taken, or applied.

Many teach, and it is agreeable to reason, that if a man use his wife often, a
little before, or in time of the Birth, the Labor will be easy, and she will
be more lightsome.

Travil is quickened by the help of the Mother, if she stand up often and walk
in the last month up a hill, especially at the time of dilivery.

The endeavor of the Mother is very necessary, for nature cannot do it alone,
therefore she must strain and contract the Muscles, as when she goes to the
stool. And when she perceives her pains coming, being taught by the Midwife,
that her delivery is at hand, (for she must not be forced before, least the
Child be delivered without the Secundine, as I showed. She must hold her
breath, strain and contract the Muscles of her belly, to expel as much as
possible, and the Midwife with others, must exhort her thereunto. And let her
be put upon a stool that is hollow, and that will not keep the Rump from going
back, and so let her lean backwards. Or if more force be required, let her
stand up and lean, or be held up by the Arms. If fatness hinder, let her Face
be down toward the ground, to her Knees. And let her take large steps when she
is wearied with straining, and knock her Feet upon the ground; And if the
Secundine be retained, or the Child come not, let her stamp strongly, that she
may be delivered, as Hippocrates shows of the Tire-woman. Also pressing of the
belly will help the throws, with both Thumbs below the Navil, and the Hands
upon the sides, by a strong woman. And the same is good to bring forth the
Secundine after delivery.

Also Neesing causes strong, though short straining by attracting of the
Muscles of the Belly, especially if the Mouth be a little stopped and the Nose.

Let the Midwise take half of the Child when it first begins to appear, and
draw it gently forth by degrees pressing the upper part of the Belly. But if it
lie deep and be turned, let her put in her Fingers or Hand, being anointed, and
place it right with the Head downward, and gather the Limbs together.

If these succeed not, and the Midwise perceive the Child dead, let a
Chyrurgion enlarge the Orifice with a Speculum Matricis: And if so it cannot be
taken forth, let him pull it out with Instruments, or cut it out by pieces.

When all hope is gone, some do so, and keep the Mother alive. The bladders
that appear in the Belly, as I showed, when a Child is rotten, through which
the Child may be seen, of which I am an Eye witness, gave occasion I suppose to
this way; which none attempt while the Child is alive, except both be
desperate. It is more safe and honorable when the Mother is dead, and the Child
alive, to cut it out by opening the Belly; by which means many have been
preserved, and Caesar was so called, because he was cut out of his Mothers
Womb, and thence this birth is called Caesarian. Also we dilate the Privities
to let out the Child, with an Incision Knife. But it is dangerous to open the
Orifice of the Neck of the Womb by Incision. And it may be unprofitable,
because it has the same largness with the passage.

There are also things given to open, and stir up the faculties which provoke
Terms, and expel the birth; the weakest first, after stronger, and then
strongest which may hurt the Child; when dead, or when the Secundine is
retained.

The stilled water of Savin, Mugwort, Mullein, Orris, white Lillies, and
Chamomil.

And these boiled in Wine, Pennyroyal, Mugwort, Savin, Beans, Wall-flowers.

Or this Decoction: Take Dittany half an ounce, Birthwort, Madder, Cassia
barks, of each two drams; Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Savin, of each one handful;
Lavender, Chamomil, Wall-flowers, of each one pugil; Cinnamon three drams,
Saffron one dram; Boil them in white Wine.

This is stronget: Take Birthwort, Sowbread, of each one dram; Savin, Tamarisk,
of each two drams: Boil them in wine, drink it at once or twice.

These juyces are good, of which you may make this Electuary to be given in
Travail: Take roots of Elicampane, Comfrey, Marshmallows, of each three
ounces; five leaved Grass, Bittony, Hysop, of each one handful; bruise them,
and clarify the juice with Sugar and with Cinnamon, make an Electuary: Let her
take two spoonfuls thrice in a day, in the morning, before supper, and at bed
time.

Or give juice of Savin, Mugwort, and Leeks, and of Sowbread alone, or with
wine.

Let these Pouders be given with wine, or waters mentioned, or with Sugar made
into Lozenges.

Take the bark of Cassia Fistula, white Dittany roots, of each one dram;
Cinnamon half a dram, Saffron one scruple.

Or thus: Take Lavender seeds half a dram, Plantane and Endive seeds, of each
two scruples; Cinnamon, Pepper, of each one scruple: Saffron half a scruple,

The yellow tops of the Chives, of white Lillies, are good to be drunk, the
Italians steep them in Oil, in the Sun, and drink that.

One dram of Amber, is good when there is a Flux of blood from the retention of
the Secundine, to stop one and expel the other.

Or this Powder: Take Powder of Date stones and Hartshorn, Canes of Cassia, of
each one dram; Peach kernels one ounce, Cinnamon two drams, Sugar one ounce:
Let her take two or three spoonfuls, and drink convenient water afterward.

This is stronger: Take Borax one dram or four scruples, Cinnamon, Crocus, of
each one scruple; Ginger half a scruple, give it with Cinnamon water, or Sack,
or with Confection Alkermes, in a Bolus; in the greatest weakness.

Another: Take Borax, Myrrh, Birthwort, of each half a dram; Saffron, Pepper,
of each one scruple: Make a Powder.

These are good to expel a dead Child and the Secundine, Chemical Oil of Amber,
Camphur, Savin, anoint the Navil with a little, and give four drops in white
wine. Some commend a Medicine made of the wrappings of the Child. Let the
Midwife dry the Navil string and Vreter in a Oven, and to two drams of the
Powder, add Cinnamon and Pepper, of each half a dram; Saffron half a scruple:
and with juice of Savin; make Troches: give two drams in Powder alone, or with
other Pouders.

Rondeletius teaches, that the Secundine so burnt and given, cures the after
pains.

Also one dram, or one and an half of the Troches of Myrrh, or Gallia Moschata,
are given with Sage, Wine, or made into Pills.

These Pills of bitter and stinking ingredients are very efficacious: Take
Galbanum and Mirrh, of each one dram; round Birthwort, Dittany and Gentian, of
each half a dram; Castor and Assa Faetida, and Saffron, of each one scruple;
with juice of Savin: make Pills, give from half a dram to a dram.

Cassia and Tryphera loosen the Belly and cause easy deliverance thereby: And
purges that are sharp stir up the expulsive faculty of the womb also;
therefore to avoid Abortion we give no strong purges.

There are diverse Restauratives to preserve strength, which are useful in the
throws, and to refresh them for Labor: both for Diet and Medicine. Confection
Alkermes is Cordial and stirs up the faculty. It is given with wine and Borax.
Or: Take the Ponder of Diamargariton Calidum, and Diamoschu, of each half a
dram; give it with wine or water, or make Lozenges thereof.

Fumigations and sents below, pierce into the womb and are good if made of very
stinking things, let them be directed into the womb, by a Funnel.

Of sweet scents: Take Labdanum one dram, Storax half a dram, Musk and Amber
grease, of each half a scruple; Sugar a dram: Make a Powder, or Troches to be
laid upon Embers.

Anoint the Orifice of the Neck of the womb with Oil of Spike, or put it in
with bread.

Also the fume of Amber, or Horse, or Ass hoofs is good.

Or: Take the Powder of an Asses hoof, and mix it with Horse grease, and burn
it.

Or: Take Galbanum, Myrrh, Asphaltum, of each half a dram; Castor one scruple,
and with the Gall of an Ox^ Make Troches, burn them.

Dioscorides commends the fum of Brim-stone, if the Child be dead.

The fume of the Decoction of Dittany and Mugwort does the same.

Sweet scents are applied to the Nose to refresh, nor may you fear the rising
up of the Womb, because it is otherwise, as I showed in the Sunocation of the
Womb.

You must put into the womb things that relax and make it slippery, and that
provoke excretion.

Of loosning things, this Decoction is best: Take Marsh-mallow roots one ounce,
Linseed, and Fenugreek, of each half an ounce; Savin three drams; Boil and
strain, and add one ounce of common Oil or Butter, or use Oil of Chamomil, or
of sweet Almonds, by injection; or Oil wherein Fenugreek has been boiled, with
Oil of Flower-de-luce, or Cream.

Or thrust greasy wool into the Womb, dipped in Butter, Honey, Mucilage of
Lin-seed and Goos-grease, with a little Saffron.

Also dip wool or Sponge in juice of Leeks, Saffron, and Myrrh.

Or thus. Take Galbanum, Opopanax dissolved in Vinegar each three drams; Myrrh
two drams, Saffron half a dram, with Oil of Orris make a Pessary.

If the Child be dead, use juice of Peny-royal, lesser Centory, Leeks, Mercury.

Or a Pessary of Dittany root, or of Madder, or Briony green, and anonyted with
Oil.

Or Take Mercury bruised with Parsley as much as will make a Pessary, Nigella
seeds, and Sowbread roots each one dram; fill a little bag therewith.

A stronger. Take Agarick two drams, Birthwort and Asarum roots, each one dram;
Coloquintida (which opens the Veins very much) one scruple, Myrrh three
drams, juice of Mercury boiled with Honey to a Syrup, make Pessaries in Bags.

We inject things to suppurate the Secundine if it come away, that it may come
forth like matter, and this may be done without hurt to the Womb, for Nature
separates the corrupt parts from the sound, of her self.

Thus. Take Starch one ounce, dissolve it in the Decoction of Mallows and
Lin-seed, adding two yolks of Eggs, and Turpentine dissolved two drams, inject
often, adding Honey, also to cleanse, Basilicon dissolved in Milk, or Common Oil
is an ordinary ripener.

Also Aegyptiacum when we know the Secundine is rotten by the matter that comes
forth, is good with Lie to cleanse and cause nature to expel it.

Suppositories help by loosening the belly. And pricking nature to increase the
Throws, because they are near the Womb; especially Clysters, they work better
than any outward applications.

Baths are to be used often in the last month to loosen the passages, when a
Woman is used to have hard Travail; made of Wormwood-water, or the Decoction of
Loosners, and let the belly be anointed with Grease, Butter, or Oil.

If she sit in such a Bath in the time of her Travail, or foment the Privities
therewith, it will dilate and help.

If we desire chiefly to loosen make it thus. Take Lillies, Briony roots green,
each half a pound; Marshmallows, Mallows, Pellitory, Coleworts, each one
handful; Linseed and Faenugreek, each half an ounce; Chamaemel and Melilot each
one pugil; boil them for a Bath to sit in, or a Fomentation. Or take one pint
thereof, and with Honey, juice of Mercury, Hiera, make a Clyster.

If we will urge forth the Child or Secundine. Take fresh roots of Briony half a
pound, of Dittany and Birthwort, each two ounces; Pennyroyal, Savin, Rue,
Mugwort, each one handful; Lupines, Bay and Juniper berries bruised each two
ounces; Lavender flowers three pugils, boil them in Water, add Wine, let it be
used as the former. Or make a Clyster therewith as the former Clyster.

It is good to bring forth the Secundine, if you dip a Cloth in the Decoction
of Birthwort, Pennyroyal, Savory, made in Wine and apply it to the belly.

If you use no Baths, wash the Legs and the Thighs with the former.

Anoint after bathing, the lower part of the belly, and the Privities, and the
Loins, and Rump.

A loosning Liniment. Take Oil of Lillies, Wallflowers, Dil, Butter, Goose and
Hens grease, Mucilage of Lineseed and Faenugreek each one ounce; with Saffron
half a dram.

The Resumptive Ointment will do the same.

Provoke the Child with this. Take Oil of Wall-flowers and Rue, each two
ounces; Juice of Savin and Mugwort, each one ounce and an half; juice of Leeks
half an ounce, boil them till the Juyces are consumed, add Myrrh and Gabanum
dissolved in Vinegar, each half an ounce, liquid Storax one dram, roots of
Asarum, Birthwort, Sowbread, each one dram; Cinnamon half a dram, Saffron one
scruple, with Wax make an Ointment.

Emplasters work stronger, applied to the Navel and Share. This is best, Green
Leeks, and Polipody each half an ounce; Birthwort one ounce, Mugwort,
Coleworts, Organ, Tansie, Savory, Orris leaves, each one handful; stamp them,
with one ounce of meal of Lupines, apply it like a Cataplasm, and renew it when
it is dry.

Also Cupping-Glasses, Frictions, Ligatures to the Thighs and Feet, draw down
and hasten the Birth.

The Vulgar commend Amulets in difficult Travail, which though they have no
strength, yet because they encourage the woman, may help.

A Snakes Skin about her middle is most commended.

And Saffron about her neck, And a Lodestone in her hand.

Also the Eagle-stone, bound to the Thigh or soal of the Foot.

We shall not mention superstitious words and looks, and the giving of some
things to be chewed by the Husband before they be applied.

CHAP. X. Of the Defect of Vital Motion.
The Kinds,
WE call that Operation, by which all the parts of the Body live; the Vital
motion or Life: The Defect of which, we call also the defect of strength, and is
known in parts that are moved, not only in respect of a voluntary motion, but
when all the Functions Vital and Natural are taken away, or diminished, in
parts movable and immovable: This is either general to the whole Body, or
special to some parts.

We perceive the want of strength in the whole body not only by the want of all
the Functions mentioned, but by the remission of the motion of the Heart and
Arteries; which is either weak or cease wholly.

If the strength fail in general; and the motions mentioned are slower, General
weakness.
it is called a general weakness; which is greater or less, sometimes natural
from the birth, sometimes going before Diseases, or in the beginning or end of
them.

In this the whole body acts dully and with difficulty, not as in Impotency of
motion, when the Members are palsied or their actions hindered, but when the
Members are faint and bruised more or less as the weakness is.

Then is the pulse or beating of the Arreries diminished. And either the Artery
is not so dilated as it ought to be, which is called the little pulse: Or when
it is pressed, it presently stops, and the pulse is less, which is called a
faint pulse. Or the Artery extended slowly, and it is called a slow pulse. Or
it beats at a great distance, and is called a rare pulse. Or it stops one or
two or more strokes, and is called an intermitting pulse. Or it is obscure of
two or three sorts, of which there are many kinds, as the pulse like a
Mousetail, Grasshopper, or Worm called Miurus, Formicans, Vermicularis.

Likewise the motion of the Heart is weak, and then the pulse is remiss, slow,
and Dull. Physicians mention no other in the Heart, for it is sufficient by
touching the Arteries to know the vital strength, especially in regard the
motion of the pulse is answerable to that of the Heart. Also the Defect of the
Heart is known by the breathing.

In the pangs of Death there is extreme weakness, Extreme weakness in the hour
of death.
which is more or less, longer or shorter. In which, although the conflict
between life and death, or Convulsions, the Members are moved, yet the strength
is gone. And the pulse intermitteth and cease, like the flame of a Candles
end, that sometimes blazeth with a little refreshment from the grease, but goes
out again when that is wanting. And the motion of the Heart and Breathing, are
much stirred up in the Agony before they cease so that the whole breast is
shaken, and the Nostrils moved, the body sweats and farteth (which caused the
Poets to say the Soul went out) And death being at hand the heat leaves the
external remote parts, as Hands, Feet, Nose by degrees, and the rest while the
breast is warm a while; til all the breath cease, the mouth and Eyes
remaining open and the body turned like a clay color, we are certain the Soul
has left the body.

Sometimes while the man lives the strength is taken away for a time, Syncope
or Swooning.
and all the Functions of the whole body suddenly, Pulse and Motion ceasing, so
that it cannot be felt at least. In the Disease called Deliquium, Lipothymy, or
Lipopsychy in Greek; if it be great it is called Syncope. And then all breath is
gone so that you cannot perceive it by a Feather applied to the Nose, or the
like; which may be stopped (in this case only during the Fit, while the motion
of the heart is stayed, and has no need of Breathing) without Death. But while
the the Heart moves it cannot want Breath, because it procures vital spirits.
In this Syncope they fall suddenly, only with a noise in the Ears or hissing,
the strength being lost as in an Apoplexy, if the Syncope be great: but they
differ in this, that in the Apoplexy, the Heart and Arteries beat, and they
breath though with difficulty and obscurity. There is also a cold sweat called
Snycoptical or Diaphoretick, not from the digested substance of solid things,
but from the conflict of nature and the dissipation of the Spirits; which is so
great, that not only thin humors, but also the Dung and Urin break forth. And
because then heat vanishes from the outward parts, there is a cold sweat
remaining, and a paleness all over, in those places that should be red by
nature, showing it self first in the Lips.

Sometimes there is a particular weakness when the internal or external Organs
are deprived, Particular weakness.
and it is called the weakness of that part; not every weakness that comes from
a Disease, but as shall be showed in the causes, that which comes from the loss
of the flourishing virtue. Such as is sometimes in the Stomach, Liver, Brain,
Eyes, Joints or Members: which shall be spoken of in those accidents which are
produced thereby.

The Causes.
The Cause of all failing of strength, The cause of all want of strength is in
the vital spirit in man, when it is not nourished with another spirit or
moisture, or consumed.
fainting, and weakness of particular parts, depends upon the inbred and
inhaerent spirit of the similary parts, which makes the spiritual substance of
parts, as they call it, and gives living virtue, or life, and strength, and
heat, which is natural. This natural spirit or heat being inbred in every
substance of parts as in the Heart (which though it abound with other, yet has
this in it as necessary for life) has need to be continually nourished and
renewed by the vital spirit, made in the left ventricle of the Heart, and
communicated to all the parts by the Arteries, as to the substance of the Heart
by the coronary Arteries called the influent spirit, that it might be the
matter that sustains the innate spirit; and because it easily disperseth, it
ought to be in great plenty through the body. And hence is it that the heart
being the shop where that spirit is made, always stands in need of Air and
Blood whereof it is made. Wherefore if they be wanting, or but little, there is
one cause why strength fails. As when for want of breath the heart wants Air,
then Death follows except its motion were hindered by other causes, as shall be
showed in the causes of swooning. Because the Heart being dilated by motion
often not filled with matter for vital sptrits, dies: And this cannot befall
it while it moves not, because it may subsist a while with its own spirits, as
other parts. So we showed in a Syncope, wherein they revive after a long
stopping of the breath. But seeing Blood mixed with Air in the Lungs affords
fit matter for animal spirits, if it be consumed by great want of nourishment
or Arrophy; or stopped in the Vessels, so that it comes not to the parts,
there must be weakness. But no man living can be so without blood, that the
Lungs should be so empty which usualhave so much; or the Vessels that are so
large by which the Blood is carried with Air from the Heart, should be so
obstructed. Only strength fails in this respect, that spirits are not made, or
being made, they are suddenly dissipated, which causes the innate spirits to
subsist no longer. And that either when they altogether vanish and leave the
body, as in the Agony of Death; or they depart for a time from the Heart and
return again, as in swooning: Or when they are fewer then are necessary, as in
Weakness. Also strength must needs fail when there is want of substance making
moisture, in regard the innate spirit is nourished not only with the infinent
spirit, but by radical moisture which consumes daily. And so it is the
occasion of Death, or Weeknes^ as it is wanting in the Heart (where it is the
proper nourishment of the spirit) or in any other parts. But if the innate
spirit ca^^ed the spiritual substance of the parts, or called the natural heat
be extinguished or weakened, or any part cold: Then if it be in the Heart
(which has as I showed, its proper native heat or innate spirit besides the
vital, which it abounds with, otherwise there had been no coronal Arteries)
and be spent, Death follows, but if it be diminished, there is a general
faintness of the whole body, as a particular weakness of some other member, if
it be in them. But now I shall show what causes the dissipation of both the
innate spirit called native heat, and of the Influent spirit by which it is
sustained. And how the humor that feeds it is consumed by natural and
adventitious courses.

They who have more innate spirit, or natural heat, The constipation of radical
moisture through age is the cause of weakness.
and radical moisture, are more strong and active, and they who have less, are
weak, and sooner die. And when that flourishing humor is consumed like Oil by
the heat of the spirit, by degrees, in age men grow more weak and dry.

Among internal and external causes, Diseases that dissipate the influent and
fixed spirits are the cause of weakness.
all great Diseases dissipate the vital spirits if they continue long, and at
length consume the innate spirits with the radical moisture wherewith it is
joined; from whence the weakness is more or less.

Great and often Evacuations either by chance, or willingly, Evacuations that
dissipate the natural fixed, and also the influent heat cause weakness.
or in Diseases, exhaust and dissipate the spirits, and abate strength,
especially if good humors be voidded, as Seed in the running of the Reins, or
by Venery. Also great bleeding, purging by reason the stirring of the spirits
abate strength, as in Diarrhaea's, and great and often sweating, and much
pissing. Also the sudden effusion of things besides nature, as of Water in the
Dropsy, matter in an Empiema does weaken. These violent excretions being
painful, as in a Dysentery, weaken more.

Great pain which violently stirs the spirits, Pain moving the spirits
causes weakness.
to bring them to the part afflicted with the blood, for help; causes
weakness, and if it be very great, fainting. Especialy if the part suffering,
Pain of the Mouth of the Stomach cause of Cardiaca, or fainting.
have great affinity with the Heart. Hence it is that they who have the
Cardialgia or Heart pain are very weak by reason of the consent of the Stomach
with the Heart, and do easily faint: this fainting is called Cardiaca. And so
it is in other painful and long Diseases.

Great and sudden Passions of the Mind, Trembling of the Spirit, is the cause
of weakness, fainting.
because then the spirits are carried in and out with force, cause debility,
and sometimes fainting and death; Thus we have seen some swoon with joy that
has thrown the spirits outward, and have read that others have died so. In
anger the spirits are so enraged that they look red in the Face: And when the
spirits presently return, as the paleness following shows, they are in little
danger of life, but they are weakened thereby, as appears by their trembling,
and there remains a weariness though anger be over. Nor is the cause of men not
dying with anger as with joy, because angry men are stronger, as is supposed:
in regard old men and sick men that are peevish, are easily moved to anger. But
it often hapens that by great fear, the spirits being violently moved, some die
and many are weakened. And shame and bashfulness may cause the same; by which
they say Homer died. Also if the passions be of long continuance and strong; as
sadness, and fear, and the like, they stir the spirits with continual
Cogitation, and at length consum them, and as they say dry the bones, and this
is a Consumption of the Spirits.

A strong and constant heat, does not only dissipate the spirits but consumes
them, Heat dissipating the spirits and consuming their nourishment, is the
cause of weakness.
and their nourishment; as when the body is weakened by heat, fire, labor, there
is fainting sometimes. And in Fevers, it is so especially in a Causon, or
burning Fever. And in a Hectic the accidental heat of the heart, though not
great, yet continuing, devours the radical moisture of the heart and solid
parts, and the spirits, and causes weakness and Consumption.

A cold distemper quenches the native heat, Cold restraining the native heat,
is the cause of weakness.
or makes it less: so some have been frozen to death. And others have been
killed with staying long in cold water. Also some parts are benumed and blasted
with cold, or so weakened that they come not again to themselves. And this may
come to the Stomach, by drinking cold water. And hither may be referred those
that for want of exercise, bring not the native heat into action, and grow
stupid. Also the parrs grow weak, by using things inwardly and outwardly, that
are Potentially cold a long time, they grow weak, but the native heat is not
wholly extinct, as by actual cold. Although hitherto it has been believed, to
come from Narcoticks, that are very cold: which as we showed, do not kill by
cooling, but by stupefying the brain. Nor do we grant that the Pores being
obstructed, that the heat is Suffocated for want of fanning, or Eventilation;
for as we showed, the Skin has Pores not to let in Air, but to let out other
things.

A Malign quality affecting the Heart, or mixed with its spirits, A Malign
quality in the Heart, is the Cause of weakness.
causes an extinction of native heat thereof, and by consequence of all the
Body: or diminishes it, and begets a Syncope, or weakness, or Death, according
toits diverse qualities. So when the Air is infected, men in the Plague,
suddenly faint, are weak and die: or in swouning Fevers, which always begin
with fainting. And when Poison is taken, or bred in the Body, it gets to the
Heart, and endangers life, and causes weakness. And this may happen to other
parts, when Poison is more contrary to them then to the Heat.

If a Wound pierce the left Ventricle of the Heart, A Wound in the Heart, is
the cause of weakness and Death.
the spirits suddenly vanish, and there is sudden Death. And if the right, or
it pierce the Superficies, or cuts the Coronal Veins, they die suddenly from
great bleeding. I suppose non can escape, if the substance only be hurt and
divided, because a principal part cannot endure it. Fernelius writes that he
saw one that consumed, before he died of an Ulcer in the Heart that came from
an inward cause. The like may be from a Tumor, which is rare, and not known but
by dissection, because the Heart feels not. I faw in 1644. in a Woman that I
opened of a Dropsy in the Breast, such a swolen Heart loose and greater then
it should be with the Vessels, especially the Arteria Aorta three times bigger
then usual, and both the Ventricles, especially the left, and the Langs and
Cavity of the breast, silled with waterish blood. Also a great corruption in
other parts extinguisheth the native heat.

The Cure.
We shall show how it is to be done in diverse weaknesses, The Cure of weakness
and swouning.
and chiefly in general Imbecility and great fainting: which also may be for
particular weakened parts although in their Symptoms, we shall also speak
thereof. We must act and prognostic, acctording to the diversity of the cause,
of weakness; If it come from want of Air and breathing, we showed the Cure in
the defect of Breathing. If it be from the birth or old age, we labor in Vain,
because natural causes cannot be changed, nor radical moisture renewed. If it
be from Evacuation, it is worst from Venery, or bleeding, which is in a
Dropsy. If from sweat, it must be stopped, as we shall show in its place. If
from pain; take away the cause, and allay the pain; for pain of the Heart,
causing swouning vomit, purge and strengthen the Stomach, as in Cardialgia;
some die of joy, and that weakness which is from other passions, if it
continue, especially from fear, it is hard to be Cured. If it come from a hot
or cold distemper, Cure it by contraries. A Malign quality, Plague or Poison
often kills, for which we use Evacuations and Antidotes. A Wound in the Heart
is deadly, and a corruption of the parts thereof, uncurable.

These things observed, though the evil be desperate, yet with Restauratives
and Cordials, we may ply them to the last breath: that if there be any hope,
and the weakness not fixed, cure them: And we may be the bolder if it come from
Evacuation, Pain, or Passion, or after a Disease. And if there be a Syncope, we
may remove it, and prevent it. Examples of all which do folfow.

Let the Diet be of good juice, Cordials.
and in little quantity, easy concocted, give them little and often.
Especially if old men are lately sick, or such as have had great Evacuation.
And if they cannot digest thick, give broaths, things strained, or Jellies.

A good Julep: Take Capon broth, and boil Rise therein, with Borrage, add the
yolk of an Egg, and a little Rose Vinegar, or a little juice of sharp Apples,
or Citrons or Wine, Marjoram, Nutmeg, Saffron and Salt.

Or boil and strain the flesh of a Capon in broth, and give it with the rest.

The German dish of yolks of Eggs, Wine, Sugar and Butter, does restore
excellently.

The Gravie of a roasted Capon, mixed with the yolk of an Egg, the fat being
taken off, and boiled with Nutmeg and Salt, does the same.

There are diverse jellies; As, Take a Capon and Mince it with a little Veal
salted and Spiced with a little Wine, and boil it in Balneo Mariae, and take
the juice, and strain it from the fat, and keep it till it congeal in a cold
place. This may be given by it self, or with others. Wine does suddenly and
greatly refresh, as experience shows, give it alone, or with Sugar, let it be
well sented and sweetish, or mix Cinnamon therewith.

It is good in swouning to give a sop in Wine, with juice of Apples, Lemmons,
Pomegranats, and Cinnamon.

The Medicines to refresh the Spirits and preserve them are these.

Take the julep of Roses two ounces, Cinnamon water half an ounce; give it often

Or thus: Take the juice of sweet sented sower Apples half an ounce, Sack and
Cinnamon water, of each two drams.

Or thus in the Heart pain: Take of Balm and Lavender flower water, of each
half an ounce; Cinnamon water, juice of Lemons, or of Apples, and Sack, of each
two drams.

Juleps are usual in Fevers and in thirst: As, Take syrup of Violets, Bugloss
water, Lillies, of each one ounce; julep of Roses one ounce and an half, Rose,
Bugloss, and Balm water, of each two ounces; Cinnamon water half an bunce: give
two or three ounces.

A Distilled water to restore: Take the broth of a Capon, and Oxes, or Dears
Hearts well boiled, four pints; Sack one pint, an Orange, or a Lemon cut in
pieces, Galangal, Balm, of each one dram; Cinnamon half an onnce, Cloves two
drams, Coriander and Basil seeds, Roses, Scabious and Bugloss flowers, of each
one dram; Saffron one scruple, Hearts horn and Ivory shavings, of each one dram;
Distill a Water.

Or thus: Take dried Citron peels, Angelica roots, Balm, Borrage flowers, Basil
seed, of each half a dram; Cinnamon three drams, Cloves, and species of
Diamargariton Frigidum, of each one dram: Infuse them in spirit of Wine, give
one or two spoonfuls with Sugar of Roses, or white Wine.

Cordial Potions to be given at the point of Death, to refresh. Take Confectio
Alchermes one scruple, species Diamargariton Frigidum half a dram, syrup of the
juice of Citrons half an ounce, syrup of Poppies three drams, with Rose,
Bugloss, and Cinnamon water, make a Cordial. This is good in extremity, with
more Poppy water.

Or thus: which is good against Poison: Take Confectio de Hyacyntho half a
dram, or Diamargariton Frigidum, Diamoscum dulce, of each half a dram; Syrup of
the juice of Citrons one ounce, with Scabious and Balm water: make a Potion.

Treacle is good if fainting come from Poison, or an evil Medicine.

Also Lozenges of Sugar of Roses, and Diamargariton Frigidum.

Or these: Take species of Diamargariton frigidum, of the Electuary of Gems, or
Cordial species, of each half a dram; Oil of Cinnamon four drops, Sugar
dissolved in Rose water two ounces: Make Lozenges.

Or: Take Coral one dram, Precious stones, Pearls, Ivory, of each half a dram:
Citron seeds, Sorrel and Basil seeds, of each one scruple; Cinnamon, Mace, of
each one dram; wood Aloes one scruple, Musk two grains, with Sugar, make a
Powder, or Lozenges.

To these you may add the Oils of Pearls, Coral or the like.

Portable Gold, or spirits drawn called Elixirs, are commended by Chemists, to
strengthen and hinder old Age. And they attribute much to their holy Oil of
man's blood: Take of a sound man's blood, of thirty, or forty years old three
pints, Sperma Ceti, Marrow of Ox bones, of each one pound; Distill them in a
Lembeck well luted, keep the last water which is red; and they say will change
with the Moon; give three drops in Wine, or Cordial water.

Sweet scented things, refresh and fetch swouning people again, we shall
mention some only to be applied to the Nose, which are at hand.

Apply Vinegar of Roses with a Sponge, or Cloth, to the Nose, or mix it with
Penniroyal bruised, or Basil: or let him smell to Wine.

They use to chew Cloves, and breath into the Mouth and Nose of the Patient.

Or this: Take Cloves, yellow Sanders, Roses, of each one dram; Camphire one
scruple, beat them with Vinegar and apply them to the Nose.

Or: Take Rose water one ounce, juice of Apples, and Vinegar of Roses, of each
half an ounce; Cloves half a dram, Oil of Spike one drop: apply it to the Nose.

Or anoint it with Civet, or Chemical Oils of Cloves and Cinnamon, with white
Wax.

Apply Epithems to the Heart and Pulses: As, Take Rose water three ounces, Wine
that is sweet scented two ounces, Vinegar of Roses one ounce, juice of sweet
Apples, or Lemmons half an ounce, Cloves one dram, Saffron one scruple.

Or this: Take water of Roses, Balm, Scabious, of each two ounces; Vinegar of
Roses, juice of Apples, of each one ounce; species Diamargariton frigidum one
dram, Camphire one scruple, Saffron half a scruple: Make an Epithem.

You may boil Pouders, put into Bags, in Wine, and apply them: Take Cloves two
drams, Gallia Moschata one dram, Saffron half a scruple, Basil seed one
scruple, Camphire half a scruple.

Or anoint the Pulses: Take Oil of Cloves and Cinnamon, of each three drops:
and mix them with a little Wax.

Anoint the Heart, with those mentioned in the Palpitation thereof, or Oil of
Jesemin, or Ointment of water Lillies, or Citrine Ointment.

Or: Take Oil of water Lillies two ounces, juice of Citrons, and Vinegar of
Roses, of each half an ounce: boil them to a Consistence: add of all the
Saunders, Roses, and Sorrel seed, of each one scruple, Coral one dram, Pearl
half a dram, Camphire half a scruple: with Wax, make an Ointment.

Or apply this Emplaister: Take Treacle one dram and an half, the Cerot of
Sanders half a dram, the species of Diamoscbu and Diambra, of each half a
scruple.

A Cordial Bag. Take of all the Saunders each one dram; dried Citron peels, the
four cordial flowers, of Scabious and Leaves of Balm, each half a dram; Ivory
or the Bone of a Stags heart two scruples, Species Diamoschum one dram, make a
little Bag, sprinkle it with Wine and Rosewater, or Fume it therewith, apply it
to the heart.

It is good to raise them, to sprinkle Water, and Rose Water, and Vinegar and
Wine upon the Face.

Also to bind the Limbs and rub them very hard.

Also to stop the Nose and pull it, and open the mouth, and rub the Tongue.

They are soonest raised with great Noise, and Neesing.

And to place them with the Head down, and the body high.

Let them be quiet after the Fit, for weak people faint upon the least motion.

CHAP. XI. Of the Depravation of Vital Motion.
The Kinds,
IF the Vital Motion be Depraved which may be seen, as I showed in the
Voluntary and Involuntary Functions of the parts, Heart, and Arteries: we do
not observe it as in the defect: for none can live too much, and the body and
its parts cannot be too strong: And if any parts that move voluntarily, move
too much or wrong, that belongs to the depraved voluntary motion, of which we
have spoken. We observe Depravation of Vital Motion in the pulse of the Heart
and Arteries, when it is oftener or more vehement than it ought to be by
nature, or proceeds otherwise disorderly.

Oftentimes the pulse of the Heart and Arteries is more frequent than is fit,
The quick beating of the Heart and Arteries, whether great or small.
both in sound and sick, the breathing being also quick; and if this pulse be
great also, it is with pain in the Breast, Neck, Head, Ears. It is to be felt
in those parts, and by Physicians at the Wrists.

Vehement and immoderate pulsation or beating of the Heart and Arteries,
Heartbeating.
is a symptom often by it self, or in cathectick Maids before they have their
Terms, or such as have the Hypochondriack Melancholy. This is called
palpitation or trembling of the Heart, because the motion is unequal. And being
always strong, it is perceived plainly in the left side of the Breast, often
in the Neck, sometimes under the Ribs, especially on the left side, it is very
troublesome, and weakneth him much if it continue. Sometimes it forces the
Ribs, and as Fernelius says puts them out of their place. Aneurisma
Sometimes it so dilateth the Artery and drives it out that it causes the
Tumor called Aneurisma, which is great and beating. This Symptom sometimes
remitteth and comes again sooner or later; and it continues longer or shorter
time as we said. I observed a grievous and wonderful palpitation of the Heart
in the year 1627. in a noble Virgin of Narbo in France who was always held in
her fit by two strong men that bare down the left side of her Breast with her
hands til it ceased, otherwise she complained that her Breast and Ribs would
break.

An Inordinate and uneven Pulse causes trouble, An uneven Pulse.
but that which beats low is considered not as a Symptom, but only a sign
showing the Disease and the strength: And therefore Physicians feel it.

The Causes.
It is most certain that the Heart and Arteries cause this depraved palpitation
by their motion; because no other parts do beat. When these beat moderately,
sound people ought not to perceive it, least the noise should be a hinderance;
as it is when they beat vehemently: especially where the Arteries are great and
many, and free, not sunk into the Muscles, as in the left side, not only by
reason of the left Ventricle of the Heart, and the Ear that moves it self
there, but by the great Artery that comes from the left side of the Heart, and
descends by the left side of the Vertebrae. Also in both fides of the Throat,
which the great Artery ascending goerh through being divided and there
produces the sleeping Arteries, and those of the Arms: Also under the Ribs
especially or the left side, because the great Artery descending thither, lies
chiefly on the left side: As also because it produces great Arteries which
accompany the branches of the Gate-vein on the right side, especially those
that go to the natural bowels and the Spleen. For which causes, when the
Arteries beat much, the putefaction is perceived on that side, and is
troublesome. In other places where the Arteries are less or hidden, though they
beat stronger, yet are they not perceived, except it be by the pain of the part
adjoining, which is troubled at the least touch of an Artery. As in pains of
the Head, by reason of the great Ventricles of the brain beating, and in
Inslammations. Or when a little Artery beating too violently in a strait place,
and hurts a Nerve, as in the Ears, wherein we may hear the pulsation. But in
naked parts without flesh, you may touch a pulse and judge whether it be natural
or depraved; especially in the Wrist. The truest causes of the great beating of
the Heart and Arteries is the dissipation of vital spirits, and the repletion
and dilatation of the Arteries, among which there are others less probable. If
the influent vital spirits be suddenly or too much dissipated, so that the
innate spirits cannot enjoy them sufficiently, because it is necessary that new
be always sent from the Heart to the whole body, which must be done by the
pulsation of the Heart and Arteries; It is therefore no wonder if their motion
be enlarged and more quick, and if the cause be great more vehement with great
breathing, which as is said, brings matter to make vital spirits. And this may
come also from the spirits stirred with the blood, the Heart and Arteries being
inflamed.

When the spirits are suddenly tossed hither and thither, The too great
stirring of the spirits is the cause of quick and great pulsation of the
Arteries.
and dispersed, and not equally communicated to the body, the Heart and
Arteries beat quick for new, and the respiration is greater, or otherwise
strength would fail. This comes from the motion of the body and mind as we
showed in quick respiration which comes from thence. Hence is it that the
pulsation increases by the passions of the mind, as anger, Joy, Terror, Fear,
Shame, the spirits being moved: which Erasistratus knew when from the sudden
motion of the pulse from the beholding of the Nurse that was beloved, he
discovered a Disease to be from the mind; that is Love.

This Palpitation of the Heart is sooner in weak people and such as are
disposed to it; Stirring of the Spirits causes palpitation of Heart in them
that are subject thereto.
the least exercise will cause it in some: One confessed to me that he had it
presently in the act of Venery, and was so troubled therewith that except he
gave over, he should be stifled, as it fell out afterward.

This pulsation also is greater when the spirits are dissipated from other
causes, as at the point of Death, when they are vanished though there be great
weakness by which nature labors to assist them in the greatest danger, by this
motion and recollection of Spirits.

When the Spirits grow hot with the blood, Over-heating of the Spirits is the
cause of quick and great pulsation.
there is great motion of the Heart and Arteries, not so much because the
spirits are hot and unquiet, but because they then are sooner spent, that what
is suddenly lost, may be suddenly repaired. Whether it come from the external
causes, as the Fire or Fume, or from internal, and the rather if the Heart grow
hot, and continue so, as in a Fever. Or if the heat come from motion of the
body: or exercise in heat. Or when the mind is so affected that not only the
Spirits are troubled but set on fire thereby as in anger. Or when all these
concur; As we knew a Noble man that playing at Tennis, was so hot and angry,
and so moved in the Pulsation and Respiration, that he could not recollect
himself, nor could the motion cease, but he died suddenly.

When the Arteries are too full of blood, and too much dilated thereby (in
regard they ought not to be filled as the Veins are, that there may be room for
the Vital spirits) the Pulsation which before was not perceived when moderate,
is felt by the Patient, and that vehement Diastole about the Heart and great
Arteries, mentioned in the Palpitation of the Heart, is raised. Especially when
the blood flows to the left Ventricle of the Heart and to its Ear, which may
be much enlarged, to the great Artery, whereby they are too full and extended.
And it cease when it flows from those parts, and does not more lift them up
and dilate them. Or it molesteth continually if an Artery be so dilated as
Fernelius observed, Yea, that the great Tumor called Aneurisma does follow. And
if this Aneurisma be within, in any part of the great Artery, or in the breast,
Throat, under the Ribs, or in the Ear of the Heart, which will be very much
stretched, it causes a perpetual Pulsation, as an external Aneurism, and is
the cause of that Palpitation of Heart which lasts so long and kills so many,
as some have observed in Anatomy.

It is plain that this Palpitation comes from plenty of Arterial blood, Plenty
and heat of Arterial blood, that fills the Arteries causes palpitation of Heart.
because the Arteries have nothing else in them; And Galen seems to grant it
when he says all such are cured or eased by bleeding. And this pulsation is
greater, by how much the blood and the spirits mixed therewith, which fill the
Arteries, are the hotter. Fernelius witnesses that he saw such blood in the
Arteries burnt like black choler. And we prove that that choleric hot blood
is gathered in the Mesaraick Arteries and and sent to the great Arteries by
these Arguments. Because as such juice as is frequently bred in the mesaraick
Veins from meat and drink does inflame and pollute the blood being carried from
the branches of the Gatevein to the hollow vein: so does it get into the
mesaraick Arteries which are joined to those Veins, and so into the greater
Arteries, and so to the Heart, and so fills them, and does what is mentioned.
And the rather because these mesaraick Arteries are branches of the great
Artery, but the meseraick Veins come not from the hollow Vein, nor are joined
to it, but by the substance of the hinder. Hence is this Disease so usual in
Virgins from the stoppage of their Courses, which begets an evil habit, and in
those that have Hypochondriack Melancholy. In which, as the fullness and
foulness of the Venal and Arterial blood causes Cachexy and Melancholy, so do
they cause palpitation of the Heart and Arteries.

Some say this may be from Wind filling the Arteries, which we cannot allow,
because none has observed that the Veins can be filled therewith. Nor do we
grant that vapors gathered about the Midriff, Spleen, or Womb, and so sent into
the Arteries and Heart, or a thick vapor shut into the Heart, that came from
another place, as some have written, can so fill it that they may cause this
Pulsation. As for other causes of palpitation of which they write, especially
wind or water in the Pericardium, we count them not the true cause of
Palpitation, but of some fluctuation when the body is moved, as may appear by
the noise in the breast; as we shall show in preternatural Swoons in the body.

Other Diseases of the Heart besides these mentioned may cause it to move
inordinately and quicker, as heat that moves the Spirits and disperseth them,
and too great Repletion by the blood of the Arteries. Such are those, that so
offend the Heart it moves violently to cast them off, rather by a natural
sensation than by feeling which the Heart wants. A Venomous quality from
within or without, A malign quality stirs up the Heart to palpitation.
does cause palpitation, or any malignity in the arterial blood which fills the
Arteries causes the same by stretching them and by troubling the Heart. I
understood that one who died of a continual Trembling of the Heart, had a Bone
or Gristle found in his Heart.

The Cure.
That Palpitation which comes from vehement motion of mind, or body, The Cure
when it comes from vehement motion.
or Heat, cease when they cease, as we showed in Short-breathing which is
joined therewith. But when many causes concur, it is dangerous as we showed.

When it comes from plenty of blood, it is dangerous, and lasting, Cure of
Palpitation of heart
and troublesome by continual motion, but wasting of the Spirits: many have dyed
hereof, others have long been troubled therewith, many have been cured by
removing the cause. And because the Cause is commonly about the Meseraick
Vessels which are distributed in the natural parts, and there is the plethory
and filth, it is cured as Cachexy Cachochymie and Hypochondriack Melancholy;
which are usualy joined therewith. By preventing too great increase of Blood,
Humors, and Wind, and such humors as chiefly abound, by purging of Choler, and
strengthening the natural parts, and mixing Cordials with all things. And in
regard it is hard to evacuate the conjunct cause in the Artesies and Heart, we
must strengthen them with Cordials. Thus.

Letting of blood except some thing hinder, is good according to Galen. And
best from the Arteries, which will either take away the cause, or diminish it:
as we showed a Vertigo, or Giddiness is cured by opening an Artery, when it
comes from such a Repletion. But it will help, if the blood be taken from the
Vessels, both for the diminishing of the Anticedent cause, and because when the
Veins are empty, they often fetch blood from the neighbor Arteries. Therefore
the great Vein in the Arm, must be opened on the side, that beats most. And if
it does good, it must be repeated. Also open the Veins of the Legs, to draw
down, especially if Terms be stopped.

It is good also to provoke the Haemorrhoids, because we cannot draw blood
directly from the Meseraicks, another way.

In Evacuations of Cacochymy, or burnt Melancholy, always mix Cordials.

Prepare the Humors and open obstructions first with Clysters, then with Juleps
and Decoctions, for three or four days. Thus, Take Syrup of the juice of
Citrons or Lemons, or Apples, of Vinegar and Bugloss, of each one ounce;
Fumitory, Bugloss and Endive water, of each three ounces.

If obstructions prevail: Take syrup of Maidenhair, of the two roots, and
Bugloss, of each one ounce; Balm, Rosemary and Bugloss water, of each three
ounces.

Or give this Decoction: Take the opening roots steep them in Wine, of each
half an ounce; Balm, Sage, Fumitory, Hops, Ceterach, Maidenhair, of each one
handful; Rosemary, Violets and Bugloss flowers, of each one pugil; Dodder,
Sorrel and Annisseeds, of each one dram: Boil them, and add juice of Apples two
ounces, and with Sugar and Cinnamon: Give it for three or four Doses.

Or: Take opening roots, of each half an ounce; bark of Tamarisk, Wormwood, and
Balm, and Fumitory, of each three drams; Cordial flowers, Citron seeds, of each
one dram, steep them in Wine.

Purge with gentle things: Thus often, Take Rhubarb four scruples, yellow
Myrobalans two drams: bruise them, and sprinkle a little juice of Citrons, or
Apples thereon, till they are soft, then infuse them in Wine or Balm water two
drams, and Cinnamon water; strain it, and add syrup of Roses or Manna two
ounces.

It he love a bitter Potion: Take Rhubarb four scruples, yellow Myrobalans two
drams, Agarick one dram, Senna two drams; steep them in Wormwood Wine.

Or: Take Catholicon half an ounce, Electuary of Citrons solutive two drams,
syrup of Roses solutive one ounce, juice of Apples half an ounce, with Balm and
Rosewater.

Make this Decoction for many Doses, or a syrup thereof: Take Succory roots,
Sorrel roots, of each two ounces; bark of Tamarisk half an ounce, Bugloss,
Fumitory, Hops, Time, Balm, Maidenhair, of each one handful; flowers Cordial
of Scabious, Rosemary, water Lillies, of each one pugil; Annis, Purslaine and
Citron seeds, of each one dram; Raisins, Tamarinds, of each one ounce; Polipody
two ounces, Senna one ounce and an half, boil them, and add to the strained
Liquor being hot, Citron and Emblick, Myrobalans, of each three drams; Turbith
two drams, or Agarick half a dram, Ginger and Spike, of each half a dram,
strain it, add syrup of Bugloss, and Roses solutive, of each two drams; for
three or four mornings, or with Sugar make a Syrup.

If hehad rather take Pills, make them of the extract of Myrobalans and
Rheubarb: Or, Take yellow Myrohalans one dram and an half, Agarick and Turbith,
of each one dram; Basil seed one scruple, Spike half a scruple, with juice of
Roses and Wormwood: make a Mass, give one dram.

Let the Diet be temperate, by which, and blood-letting many have been cured,
as Galen says. Avoid things that breed Crudities and wind.

The Hearts of four footed Beasts, and of Birds often eaten do good, by
Propriety. Especially if roasted with Cloves.

This Cordial water is excellent: Take the Heart, of an Heart, Ox, or Hogg one
pound: to these add the Hearts of Patridges; cut them small: add these Pouders
of the Cordial flowers, Rosemary, Majoram, Balm, Basil, Hartstongue, of each
two drams; seeds of Basil, Citrous, of each one dram; Citrm peels three drams,
Cloves two drams, Cinnamon, Sanders, wood Aloes, of each one dram; Mace,
Zedoary, of each half a dram; Saffron one scruple, Musk or Amber greese half a
scruple, sprinkle them with Sack till they be like a Pultis: Distill a water,
give from half a dram, to six drams, alone or with Julep of Roses, or syrup of
the juice of Citrons often.

The Oil of Coral, or Pearl, given with Sugar is good.

Or this Syrup: Take of Cordial flowers, each one pugil, Balm, Basil, of each
one handful; Cloves two drams: Boil them in Wine and Water, Clarify them, and
with Sugar and Cinnamon; Make a Syrup.

Or this of the juyces: Take juice of sweet Apples, Pomegranats, of each four
ounces; juice of Bugloss, Roses, of each two ounces; juice of Citrons, Lemmons
and Plantane, of each one ounce; Rose and Balm water, of each two ounces; Sugar
half a pound: boil them to a Syrup, and add Cinnnamon and Cloves; give one
ounce alone, or with Wine or convenient Waters.

An excellent Wine: Take Angelica, Elicampane, Tormentil, white Dittany, of
each half an ounce; Zedoary, Galangal, of each two drams; dried Citron peels
one ounce, Cloves an ounce, Cinnamon two drams, Cordial flowers, of each one
dram; Rosemary and Lavender flowers, of each one dram and an half, Balm, Sage,
Basil, of each two drams; Basil seeds, Marjoram and Citron seeds, of each one
dram; Myrtle berries two drams, bruise them, and add twelve or fifteen pints of
the best Wine, keep it in a Vessel, that is first seasoned with hot Wine,
wherein Cloves were boiled, or with the Powder of Cloves. Let him drink in the
morning when he takes broth, or before Dinner.

Give these Pouders with Gilly-flower water, Balm, Basil, Sorrel, Plantan or
Scabious water; or make Lozenges thereof.

The first: Take roots of Angelica, Galangal, Zedoary, Citron peels dried,
Balm, each half a dram; Basil seeds and Cloves, each one dram; Purslane seed,
Mace, Cinnamon, Sanders, of each one dram; Saffron, Camphire, of each a
scruple; Coral one dram, make' a Powder, give one dram.

The third: Take Coral, Pearl, Cristal, Ivory or Bone of a Stags Heart, or
Unicorns horn, of each half a dram; Basil seed two scruples, Cloves one
scruple: make a Powder.

Or give Tablets of Diamargariton frigid, Diamoschu or Diambra.

Or thus: Take species Diamargariton frigid one dram, Species Diambra,
Diamoschy, of each half a dram; Troches of Camphire half a scruple, Sugar
dissolved in Rose water three ounces, Balm water two ounces, Cinnamon water one
ounce: make Lozenges and guild them.

Make Electuaries of Conserves, with syrup of Bugloss, Violets, Roses, Citrons,
Sorrel, Apples and the like.

Thus: Take the Conserve of the four Cordial flowers, of Sorrel and Balm, of
each an ounce; candied Citron peels, Myrobalans, of each one ounce, candied
Ginger and Nutmegs, of each two drams, of the Pouders aforesaid two drams, with
syrup of Apples: Make an Electuary, give two drams, and the Wine or Waters
mentioned to be drunk after.

Confectio Alkermes, and de Hyacintho, and the like are good, of which we speak
in defect of strength: Pills, Take Amber half a dram, Smaragds, Hyacints, of
each two scruples; Pearls one scruple, Basil seeds one dram, Camphire half a
scruple, with juice of Citrons: make a Mass, give half a dram.

Bags for the Heart of red Silk quilted, sprinkled with Wine, or Rose water, or
Balm water. Thus: Take Citron peels, Balm, Spiknard, Baies, red Roses,
Rosemary, Lavender, Borrage, of each one dram; Basil seed two drams, seeds of
Citrons, Myrtle berries, of each one dram; Cuchineel half a dram, Sanders, wood
Aloes, Cloves, Mace, of each half a dram; Coral one dram, precious stones half
a dram, Troches of Camphire, Species Diambra, of each one scruple; Make a
Powder for a Bag.

Anoint the Heart and Pulses, morning and evening, with this: Take juice of
Mother-wort, Oil of Spike, of each half an ounce: boil them a little, add Oil
of Cloves half a scruple, Camphire one scruple, Saffron half a scruple, with
Wax: Make a Liniment, add a little Musk.

Or this Epithem: Take Rose water three ounces, Balm, Lavender water, and Wine,
of each one ounce and an half; Camphire one scruple.

Heat Balm upon a hot Tile, and sprinkle it with Wine and apply it to the Heart.

Perfumes go to the Heart speedily: As this, Take Balm, Basil, Gilly flowers
dried, of each two drams; Angelica roots, dried Citron peels, of each one dram;
Saffron half a scruple, Camphire six grains, tie them in a clout, and sprinkle
them with Rose, and Balm, and Wine, and let it be smelled to.

A Fomentation is good to the left side, with a Spung wet in this Decoction;
Take Chamomel and Melilot flowers, of each one pugil; Annis and Fennel seeds,
of each two drams; Fenugreek half an ounce: Boil them in Wine.

It is good to rub the Limbs, especially the Legs and left side.

And to apply Cupping-glasses to the left side, or Hypochondria.

Rest does allay the Palpitation, as motion increases it.

Camphire hung about the Neck, is reported to be excellent.

CHAP. XII. Of want of Appetite.
The Kinds.
WE call it a Defect, or want of Appetite, when men neither hunger nor thirst,
or when they disdain certain things, which are to be eaten and drunk.

Some hunger not at convenient times, that is, Anorexia, or Appetitie dejected.
when the Stomach is empty, and the Appetite is wholly, or for the most part
gone, this is called Anorexia, and if they disdain, or loath Meat and suppose
it unpleasant, which is pleasant, it is called Nausea and Apositia, Nausea or
loathing.
and if all meat be refused, Asitia. If this be in some men, except the cause
be manifest, it presageth Diseases, because all men require meat, that are
sound. In some it is a usual Symptom of Diseases; and therefore in Children and
Beasts, though they cannot otherwise declare it, we take it for a certain sign
of sickness, if they refuse to eat.

If they thirst not, and refuse all drink, Aposta; or not drinking.
it is called Oligoposia, or Aposia, this is rare, for though some sound men
drink little, and live upon moist meats, which is seldom; yet is it ordinary
that they which desire no meat, desire drink, and they which Eat desire drink.
In Diseases though the appetite of meat be dejected, yet they are so far from
being not thirsty, that they are very dry, so that they had rather have moist
things then other.

If usually happens that things that are usually eaten, Loathing of some Meats.
and are pleasant to the taste, as most nourishments are, and sower sweets that
are clean and good, are disdained of some; And this is either by an aversness
of nature, to some things which abhors them, and by which they receive hurt, as
we have known by many concerning Cheese, who though they eat Milk and Butter,
they disdain. Others hate Wine by nature called Abstemious men, from Abs which
signifies without, and Temetum which signifies Wine. Others hate other
things: This is also usual in Diseases, they hate some meats, that nourish, and
not only for being fleshy, fat, and unctious, but for the scent. Also sweet
things, which most love, are disdained by them, and Wine. Others refuse things
offered from a distaste, supposing their taste to be otherwise, as we showed in
Drepraved Taste.

The Causes.
In regard the Stomach desires by its natural sense, Meat and Drink, it is
necessary that it should be afflicted in all kinds of defect of Appetite, so
that it either loses sense of hunger, of thirst, wholly, or in part, or is
afflicted with a contrary sense, and loathing of all Meats, or of some. This
may be from the lightest afflictions of the Stomach, because the Stomach must
be well constituted, that it may rightly hunger, or thirst, and therefore this
Disease is so frequent, both in sound and sick. And it is either from its
constitution, or Repletion, or Offense, or Distemper, or Weakness.

The Stomach has originally such a constitution, A certain constitution of the
Stomach, is the cause of loathing of diverse Meats.
or temperature many times, from innate causes, that it disdaineth some things,
as Cheese, or Wine, which other natures abhor not. Which temperature we cannot
describe, but that it delights in some meats and refuses other, as some
creatures can digest things that a man cannot, as Birds do Stones, and
Estridges Iron. Yet the Apprehension of the Mother being with Child, has been
a cause, from her dislike, and loathing of certain Meats, especially if she
were troubled with the Pica, or longing which made an impression upon the
Child. And we have seen Children refuse the same, as soon as they were born
this loathing they bring with them into the world. Apprehension, is the cause
of loathing of some Meats.
Also we find that the constitution of the Stomach in other causes, is so
changed by apprehension that it refuses those meats that it is wont to take,
because they have been taken either immoderately, or indecently, or uncleanly.
Or because in Diseases, they have been abhorred; as after a Fever, we have
known some long abstain from Flesh, others never eat any more thereof.

Custom is another nature, and therefore we delight in things we have usually
eaten from Infancy, Want of Custom is the cause of Loathing.
and abhor things that are universal, though rare and Savory: And this is the
cause why diverse kinds of Creatutes are not used but in extremity, and that
they who use themselves to eat Frogs and Snails, take delight therein, which
cause Loathsomness to those that never eat them before. And why? Raw flesh and
the like unclean things are nauseous to people that are used to a clean Diet.

Repletion of the Stomach which stupifieth the sense thereof, takes away
appetite which is caused by the Chyle which it makes, and retains too long:
as when it is cleansed from the Chyle, it desires more meat to make new;
therefore while the old Chyle remains, it desires no more meat; And this
comes from the defect of distribution of the Chyle, from the Obstruction of the
Meseraick Veins, from abundance of blood in the Meseraicks and the Stomach,
therefore when they suck little or not at all, there is little or no Appetite;
because the Stomach being full of blood desires no new juice. As in plethorick
men that exercise not (in regard the substance of the body consumes slowly,
they have no such need of other juice, being it is slowly distributed) these
hunger little, except they have gotten preternatural hunger from a custom of
gorging.

The same comes from a stuffing of the Stomach with humors: Slime, Fat, or
Humors in the Stomach cause want of Appetite.
As when it abounds with Slime, with which the Guts are naturally anointed and
the stomach also, and which the Butchers use to scrape away when they wash
them; Then the Stomach being covered with this slime waxing hard, loses sense,
and is satisfied therewith being sweet, and not so disagreeing as Chyle. Fat and
clammy meats cause this, used immoderately. Also this want of Appetite may come
from fat which grows on the left side of the stomachs bottom, where it is
found in Anatomies; or about the orifice thereof as Fernelius observes. Also
if any other humor, or crude excrement, unsavory, waterish, or slimy, or
flegmtaick, bred of meat or drink, or flowing thither from another part, fill
the stomach or stick fast thereto, Moistness of Stomach causes want of Thirst.
it destroys appetite in the like manner: And if the stomach be continnally
moistened thereby, they never thirst.

If the stomach be greatly offended it causes vomiting, Offense of the stomach
causes loathing of some meats.
if but a little, an inclination to vomit, which is loathing called Nausea, by
which it disdaineth things therein, and which ought to be taken. This may come
from sharp meats, Medicines and Poisons. Especially from Choler, Yellow, Green,
or Black, in many Diseases that come thereof; or other humors, bred in the
stomach or brought thither.

A hot distemper of the stomach takes away appetite not only by relaxing it,
Heat of the stomach causes want of Appetite.
but by causing Thirst; because Thirst and Hunger cannot meet together in the
Stomach and when one prevails, the other is quiet, as we showed. Also if the
body be so hot from an internal or external cause, so that the stomach be
inflamed, which causes Thirst, they desire drink rather than meat: And if they
use hot meats, when the stomach is empty as when strong Wine is drunk at meat,
or sweet or spiced things be eaten first, they lose Appetite. And in all hot
Diseases in which either the stomach alone or with other bowels adjacent, or
the whole body, as in Fevers is inflamed, the appetite is cast down.

Other Weaknesses which hinder Concoction, and distribution, Weakness of the
Stomach causes want of Appetite.
take away appetite which serves them. And if they be right the appetite is
good. These come from the birth, or age, or great Diseases, and the Stomach
digesteth slowly, and less desires meat. And passions of the mind also cease
the Cardialgia or Stomach-pain, and they who are grieved in mind, and sad at
heart lose appetite. And in regard the Stomach being very seusible, consents
with so many darts, it comes to pass that the appetite is gone in diverse
Diseases of other parts.

Also if from stupefaction of the stomach in the sense of touching which is
joined with Tasting, Dullness of the Stomach causes want of Appetite
it be decayed, there is no appetite: This may come from the use of Narcoticks,
especially from the Decoction of Nightshade in Wine, which Mathiolus says
cures the Glutton. And I suppose the reason why Drunkards eat so little, is
not the heat of the Wine, but the stupefactive quality thereof.

That natural Ferment or sharp juice which is in the Stomach for Concoction,
The Leaven or Ferment of the Stomach being consumed causes want of Appetite.
is the cause of want of Appetite in Man or Beast.

The Cure.
When sound men want Appetite and eat not with delight, The Cure of Appetite
dejected and loathing of Meat and Drink.
it must be cured, but in other Diseases which have greater accidents it is not
so much regarded, especially when eating will do hurt: And when the Disease
being cured it will return, though it be last, and that by which we discover
health. Want of Thirst, in regard it hurts not of its own self, is cured if it
be preternatural, by no other than taking away the cause in the Stomach which
breeds other inconveniences. Nausea or Loathing both in the sound and sick if
it incline to Vomiting, must be cured as we have showed in Vomiting. It is hard
to cure the loathing of some meats, which is natural from the Birth. In all
these kinds of what cause soever, we must use these diverse Medicines.

Custom is of great consequence to keep up appetite at a certain time;
therefore keeping constant meals accustometh nature to an appetite. And without
that there is a confusion as in other operations of nature. And as we showed in
the causes, custom is the cause of loving and loathing of some things, we may
alter it to the coutrary by degrees, persuasions, and deceits, as we have seen
in them that have hated Wine or Cheese. Fasting is good if it come from
Repletion of meat, or Chyle, or abundance of Blood, or Fat; or when the stomach
is foul with slime, or wet with water; for it will consume them all, and they
will be taken away by the Meseraicks which are not idle: But it is worst in
Choler abounding.

Moderate execrcise, and strong in those that can endure it, stirs up all
the Functions, and Appetite, by distributing the meat, rather then Concoction.
This must be before meat, hence foam laboring men eat three or four times in a
day: and they who are idle, scarce once; in sick people that cannot exercise,
Frictions are good.

They say sleep takes of loathing, but it provokes not Appetite, but by
accident, because distribution of the chile is rather in the time of waking,
and that done the Appetite presently returns. Therefore we sooner hunger being
awake, between meals, in the day time, then in the night.

Vomiting is good, if it proceed from Excrements, Humors, or Choler, or the
like in the Stomach. And if they stick fast, it must be caused by sharp
cleansers, as Oxymel, and Syrup of Vinegar, with other Liquors.

If Vomiting does it not, Purge the Stomach, especially with bitter things,
which cleanse and strengthen it, with Aloes, Pills of Hiera, Alephanginae.

Or thus in any Humor: Take Rheubarb, Citrine Myrobalans, of each one dram;
species Hiera two drams, Mastick, white Sanders, of each half a scruple; with
syrup of Wormwood: Make a Mass, give one dram, or sharpen them with Diagredium.

Or give Wormwood Wine, with Rhubarb, Myrobalans and Senna, and if Phlegm
prevail, with Agarick infused.

Other things restore Appetite, by cooling, if it be lost by heat, either
actually, or Potentially, especially sower things, which allay the sharpness of
Choler, if that be the cause. Others prick and stir up the Stomach, by a
propriety, as shall be showed in Depraved Appetite. As the sharpness of
Melancholy juyces, from the Spleen, is supposed to do; But we impute that
rather to the sharpness of the chile, and its natural Fermentation, of which we
spoke formerly, in regard every Vomiting, if not after Wine, is sower;
especially if sower things have been taken: which take away the force of
stupefying Narcoticks. Also others do it by cleansing, as Salt things which
purge slime, and sweet juice, and prick the Stomach. Bitter things do the same,
by cleansing Phlegm, and Choler, which deject the Appetite. Others do it by an
unknown property. Things pleasant to the taste, stir it up chiefly, and abate
loathing. Therefore in Fevers they refuse sweet, and desire sharp things, and
a little Salt. Also strengtheners of the Stomach, take away loathing, but these
are best when it is weak; they are hot and astringent, and these cause thirst.

If Appetite be lost from heat, let the meat and drink be actually cold.

Cold Water is good before Meat.

And they who drink water have the best Stomachs; therefore beasts that eat
crude things, and drink water, eat so much.

Let the meat be seasoned, with the juice of sower Fruits; as of green Grapes.

Also let the bread be well Leavened, and Salted.

And in hot Natures let sharp wine be given to those that have used Wine.

Use Vinegar in Broaths, and Salats; or drink it before meat.

If loathing come from drinking Wine, with Nightshade boiled there in, give
Vingar; or if it come from other Narcoticks.

Peaches that are green, are good in a hot cause, use Oranges, and Lemmons
sliced, with Rose water, and Sugar.

Also the German Sallats, of Picklet, Colewarts, and Turnips.

Also Sorrel, and Purslain, with Vinegar.

Also Olives, and Cappars for sallats.

Garlic is good to get an Appetite. Thus, stamp Garlic, and mix crumbs of
Bread, and sweet Almonds therewith, and give it with broth.

Drink Wormwood Wine before Meat, if it come not from heat, it is good in all
other cases.

Also give the Essence, or Tincture of Wormwood, Zedoary, Master-wort, and
Saffron before Meat, with Broth or Wine.

Also Syrup of Peaches, juice of Citrons, Pomegranates, Currants, Grapes,
Sorrel, Vinegar, and Sugar, of Wormwood boiled with Vinegar are good.

Or thus: Take juice of Peaches one pint, of Pomegranates, and sower Apples
four ounces, juice of Citrons two ounces: boil them with Vinegar and Sugar:
give one ounce.

Or this Electuary which cleanses: Take Honey one pound, scum it, add juice of
Pellitory, and Wormwood, of each four ounces: Boil them, give morning and
Evening as much as a Chestnut.

Or, Conserve of Roses, Sorrel, Currants, of each one ounce.

Chamomel water drunk provokes Apetite.

Things that strengthen shall be after mentioned, among which Pepper is
commended, by Dioscorides. Also Powder of Masterwort, and Hens gizard skins
which help Concoction and Apetite, and a Sopp in Sack; season the meat, with
Mints, Calamints, etc. these take away Aposia, or want of thirst.

Cleansing Clysters are good, when the Stomach is foul: as that of the Urin of
a Boy, or gentle Lixivium.

Also: Take white Beets, with the roots, Mercury, Coleworts, of each one
handful; Barley one pugil, Agarick one dram, Senna two drams, Carva seeds one
dram: Boil them, and add the urin of a Bay, or Lixivium four ounces; strain it,
and dissolve juice of Mercury, or Beets one ounce; Honey one ounce and an half,
Salt one dram; give it without Oil that it may cleanse well.

If it come from heat in a Fever, give cooling Clysters: As, Take Lettice,
Endive and Violet water, of each four ounces; juice of Purslane, Lettice, of
each one ounce; Oil of Lillies, Violet, of each half an ounce.

Sweet sents correct Loathing, as we shall show in stopping of Vomiting; as of
Vinegar, sower Fruits, Wormwood.

Apply to strengthen the Stomach, cold or hot astringents, as the cause is:
Take heed of Oily sents that are unpleasant, as we showed in other Symptoms of
the Stomach.

Use the Epithems that are prescribed to cool the Liver, if Loathing come from
a hot cause, as in Fevers.

External cooling of the Body, is good in a hot cause, as cool Air, is better
then hot; also Bath, and wash the Feet in cold water: Also change the Shirts
and Linen often, to get an Appetite.

It is good to let blood, if there be Plethory, and if the Disease, of which
want of Appetite is a Symptom, will permit.

CHAP. XIII. Of Depraved Appetite.
The Kinds,
WE say the Appetite is Depraved, if they desire Meat or Drink more
immoderately than is natural, or when they desire other things besides meat and
drink.

There is immoderate hunger, when more meat than is fit is desired, Boulimos or
great Appetite.
when they are not satisfied, or desire more before the first is concocted.
This is sometimes in sound men, sometimes the symptom of a Disease called
Boulimos, or insatiable hunger; with other accidents sometimes, as heaviness of
the stomach from great gorging til it is digested. Others take more than they
can bear, Dogs Appetite.
and vomit it up again as a Dog does; somehave a Looseness after gorging which
carries it away. Others faint if they eat not presenly and swound and die:
this comes to some from weakness and pain in the Cardialgia, the Appetite being
rather abated than increased, and if they have been long so; they have a weak
stomach and loathing.

They Thirst immoderately who desire drink much between meals, Immoderate
Thirst.
or when they cannot quench thirst. It is usual with sick and sound, and
intolerable, worse than Hunger, because the want of things that quickly
satisfy and cause sudden delight does more afflict than the want of those that
do it slowly. Therefore in Fevers they complain most thereof and in other
diseases; They that are thus, spet white and froathy and speak with difficulty
and stammer, because their Tongues (as they say) stick to their mouths, and if
they want Drink they faint.

When People desire other things besides meat and drink, Pica.
it is called a vicious Appetite, or Pica. Men have it seldom, but Women with
child often, in the first month sometimes, and then it is called Malacia,
Malacia.
and it is sometimes in the Green Sickness in Maids.

There are diverse kinds hereof according to the diversity of things desired,
some love raw flesh like Meneaters, some have been like beasts and bitten
peoples Arms by violence. Others desire and eat Sawces and Sallets, and Spices
in abundance without hurt, as one that eat pounds of Ginger, another that drank
Vinegar in abundance, and the like. And another that came to me, being an
Hostess that eat abundance of Pepper, without any hurt or heat of the stomach.
Commonly they love dry things as Meal, Ashes, Chalk, Clay, Shells, old Rags, and
Leather; which they eat with great delight. And Fernelius mentions one who eat
abundance of unslaked Lime without hurt.

The Causes.
All immoderate Hunger or Thirst comes from a natural cause, that is from the
natural Appetite, which if immoderate is preternatural, as from the sense of
the stomach from want of nourishment or moisture. Sometimes this overgreat and
strange appetite is from a preternatural cause, as a cold and dry distemper of
the stomach or other quality.

The stomach desires from sense which is mixed with Touching and Tasting and
if it be exquisite it is easily afflicted, Exquisite sense of the stomach
causes too great Appetite.
and feels a Defect, and desires more. Or Evil Custom.
This is from the Birth in some who eat more then others from the Cradle; some
have it from a custom of gorging continually not suffering the stomach to be
empty; and except it be full always, crave; as Gluttons, who serve their
bellies night and day not so much from pleasure as from custom, or inbred
ravening.

Want of nourishment which is daily consumed as it causes a natural hunger;
Want of Appetite.
so if it continue long it makes people ravenous. This is from a long want of
meat, or because they have eaten things of small nourishment and quick
digestion; or because they have long sickness, and want of Appetite eaten
little or nothing: therefore upon recovery they are greedy. And when they have
eaten, nature suddenly draws away the Chyle, which causes them to be usually
costive as I showed in the suppression of the Belly; they are presently hungry
again, and if they moderate not themselves, they get hurt and the accidents of
Boulimos mentioned, and relapse into their Disease.

If the Chyle be snatched from the stomach too soon by exercise evacuation,
sweats, Distribution of the Chyle too soon causes quick Appetite.
the same happens. Or if the Chyle be wasted too much as Rondoletius observes
with moist meats or drinks, and stay not in the stomach but descends presently.
Or if it be snatched away by Worms as they say, which must needs be very many to
cause such a Disease. Some suppose it comes from the broad Worm, which is
longest if it be so, it is not because the Wormseeds upon Chyle which is not
alive as I showed, but because the Chyle breeds it.

As a natural Thirst is for want of moisture, Want of moisture in the stomach
cause of Thirst.
is so the preternatural when it is long absent: And this is like Hunger for
want of meat, when drink has long been wanting or not actually cold which
quenches Thirst the best. This may be also from long Spetting which dries the
mouth and stomach; Hence they say much talking which causes spetting causes
Thirst.

Some say that a cold distemper of the stomach causes immoderate Appetite,
Coolng of a hot stomach restores Appetitie.
because they saw some who lived in a cold Air and drank cold water eat very
much. But in regard cold does not whet the sense but blunt it, we propound
another cause if the stomach be hot, and the Appetite lost thereby, as we showed
cold by correcting the Heat, and bringing the stomach to its natural temper,
provokes Appetite, rather than causing a cold distemper. And because in Winter
through outward cold in cold countries, the heat is driven in and there
contracted as Hippocrates says, the stomach is more hot, men need more meat,
And therefore desire more meat: so, that as the same Hippocrates says they
that grow have more natural heat which increases the Appetite, and Cold
diminishes it. This being so, neither does a sharp humor cause a Dog-like
Appetite, although it may restore a dejected Appetite, and raise the stomach,
as we showed in defect of Appetite. Nor can a Melanchollick or phlegmatic Humor
as they suppose, do the same by coldness or sharpness,

Dryness of the inward coat thereof, Dryness of the Stomach causes Thirsl
preternatural.
which goes to the Gullet and Jaws if it be in any part thereof, causes
preternatural thirst, as only the want of natural moisture causes thirst. And
the greater the dryness, the more the thirst. Heat causes it by consuming the
moisture, and the thirst is greater, because the stomach being hot also,
desires cold as well as moisture; As when the whole body is inflamed and the
stomach by the same, Bathes, motion of body or mind, and in Fevers, there is
great thirst, And if the heat be great the heat is intolerable: Or if the
stomach only be inflamed from things taken in, as Wine, sweet things or Spices,
or with sharp things, Herbs, rotten Cheese, or the like, all these taken
intemperately cause a preternatural thirst. Also from the Heat of a Purge there
is thirst. Also Choler in the Stomach from meats eaten, or sent thither in
Diseases causes thirst, and the greater when it is hotter. And this may also
come from hot vapors sent thither: And from things which only dry and do not
(of their own nature) heat as all Salt things and such as are smoak-dryed: Also
by Air long taken in with an open mouth, because it dries the Jaws and the
stomach by consequence. Some write that thirst may come from the heat and
dryness of the Windpipe and Lungs, to the Stomach. But, in regard the Lungs
want sense of feeling, if thirst come them or from other Diseases of the
Breast, it is from the consent of the Tunicle of the Stomach, Gullet, and
Windpipe, that the stomach is affected: Or by reason of much spitting, or from
a Fever. Neither does white spittle signify that it comes from the Lungs; for
the same may be made in the mouth from dryness, and Air.

If any quality or propriety alter the stomach; An occult quality in the
Stomach is the cause of Dog-like Appetite.
so as to raise the Appetite, it is the cause of disorderly Appetite, as we
observe by melancholic humors which breed in the mesaraicks and mix with the
blood, and get into the stomach by the Veins of the Spleen and other branches
of the Gate-vein: which cause it not so much from sharpness which is in
melancholy, and astringeth the stomach which causes appetite; as from an
hidden quality, which stirs up immoderate sense: which we conjecture to be so,
because, sour things that bind prick, nor cold, as we showed, nor other quality
manifest, can so stir up the function, as to increase, but rather allay
appetite; except there be some hidden force in the humor. As those humors which
Physicians call melancholy, corrupted, and burnt to ashes can put on diverse
venomous qualities, and cause Dog-like Appetite or Pica which is a desire of
abominable things. And therefore the cause of these is a venomous force, An
occult quality in the stomach is the cause of Pica. Poisons cause Boulinos and
Thirst.
which is better known by the effect than described, in the humors sent to, or
bred in the stomach, As Dioscorides speaks of some Poisons that touchedor taken
in do the same; or cause thirst as the biting of the Serpent Dipsas; such
humors Galen says may breed in the body and be turned into Poison. That it is
no wonder that women with Child and Virgins that want their Terms should have
the Pica. Or others a depraved appetite from a Cacochymy or evil juice.

The Cure.
Of the three kinds of evil Appetite if Hunger or Thirst cannot be satisfied,
The Cure of Bouimos or great Appetite of Thirst and Pica.
or if it be they are sick or pained at heart, or Vomit, or purge; or if they
be weak and faint for being satisfied; this is to be cured. And it is more
easily done in Hunger than Thirst, and great Hunger is easier taken away than
satisfied. When strange things are desired that must not be neglected, because
it signifies a preternatural cause in the body: as also because they delight
in such things and think they cannot hurt, which they find otherwise.

First be temperate in eating and drinking, not too much nor too little;
especially after long fasting and sickness, and then take a little and often,
such as is of good juice and nourishes well and is easily concocted. In other
causes, eat things that fill much and are solid, and not soon digested, yet in
small quantity; for as an evil custom makes Gluttons and Drunkards, that they
are not well except full, so a good and decent custom takes away immoderate
appetite, and brings it into good order.

Vomiting is good if there be an evil humor that causes it, and if it come not
of it self, provoke it. And in Dogs Appetite, at the first, before it is too
violent, provoke it to take away the cause. In other cases vomiting increases
it, except it come from choler; In which also thirst is raised, which cease
when that is spent.

Purging is good in these cases mentioned both against Thirst and Hunger, not
in other, except there be a Diarrhaea, in which you must help nature to take
away the cause, with things that are gentle and astringe; First preparing the
Humor. All these we choose, by other observations than by the sharpness of
phlegm or melancholy. And though purging cause thirst, if it come from Choler
they may be used. If it come from Worms give bitter things to drive them down.

We use hot and dry things for the stomach when this Disease comes from humors
after they are purged. Which do not alter the coldness of the stomach, but heat
and dry it, causing thirst, which cures hunger: give meat actually and
potentially hot, spiced, and sweetened, which are best fasting. And sweet Wine
that is strong and spiced, and Aqua vitae which the laboring people drink in
the morning, that they may better endure hunger. Also hot medicines for the
stomach, as sweet, sharp, burning, and well scented: Or anoint foment or
Plaster the stomach with hot things. Or use exercise and Baths.

Things that loosen, or are fat or viscous, subvert the stomach, and by
greasing it take away the sense, and Appetite, as Butter, Oil, Fat, Glutinous,
as Calfes, and Sheps Feet, and if they be loathsome they are the better; as they
speak of roasted Dormice.

Things take away Appetite by propriety, by their adverse force, or
loathsomness. As Wine in which an Ele has been drowned, causes men always to
loath Wine: But this must do it by another quality, if they that are ignorant
of it are cured thereby. Antidotes do the like, if it come from venom. Others
stupifie the sense of the stomach, as we showed in the causes of dejected
Appetite. And Wine or spirit thereof taken fasting, does the same, not by
heating, but stupifying. And the infusion of nightshade roots in Wine; Also
Treacle and Mithridate, with Wine, are stupifying by reason of the Opium; And
other Opiates, though no Antidotes, abate Appetite, but it will return again by
taking Vinegar.

Cold and moist things, Cure all sorts of thirst; And Rhazis says, that cold,
or cold water hurts the actions of the Stomach, largely taken, and cold Air
cures Hunger.

Drink does this chiefly by wetting the dry Belly, if it be actually cold and
potentially also.

Water actually cold (which we showed to be potentially temperate) is best,
either crude or boiled to take away the windines. Or with sour Juyces, or
Vinegar, or with Spirit of Vitriol-waters cure Thirst.

Wine may be given to them that are used to it, especially if small, or mixed
with Water.

Also Milk to young Children, and such as use it, and Whey: But they are
prohibited in Diseases in which they corrupt easily.

An Emulsion of sweet Almonds in water, called Almond-milk, is pleasant.

Or Decoctions, as that of Barley-water, or beaten Bread, or of cold Seeds, or
of Prunes, Cherries, Raysons, with Cinnamon, Anise, Fennel, etc.

Broaths of Flesh-Capons, let the Fat be taken off, restore and quench Thirst.

Beer or Ptisan, with Juyces. As, Take Water two quarts, Juice of
Pomegranates, or Grapes two ounces, Sugar half an ounce: boil them a little.

Or of distilled Waters. Take Sorrel, and Endive, water, each two pints, Juice
of Currance, and Grapes, or Pomegranates, each three ounces; Juice of Lemmons,
or Apples: boil them, and sweeten them a little.

Julep Alexandrinum. Take Rose Water one pint, Sugar half a pound: boil them to
a consistance, add Water boiled.

Or thus: Take Water one pint, Rose Water four ounces, Juyces of Cherries, or
Grapes two ounces, Sugar four ounces: boil them.

Sharp Syrups, as of Currance, or Goos-berries, Grapes, Medlars, Cherries,
Prunes, Pomegranates, Sorrel, or Vinegar, with Water or distilled Waters, or
Syrup of Violets.

The Juice of ripe Anguriae, or Pomegranates, is good.

Other solid things to chew, made of Sorrel, or woodsorrel, Lettice, Purslane,
Endive, Succory, Buglossflowers in Sallets.

Coleworts, Rapes, Apples boiled, Bar-berries.

Medlars, Peaches, Apples, Cherries, Prunes, Pomegranates, Bar-berries, Grapes,
Raisons green or dried, Liquorish chewed, quenches Thirst: Also Sugar candy,
with Syrup of Violets held in the Mouth.

Manna, Sugar of Roses, and Conserves, with Spirit of Vitriol, Conserve of
Violets, candied Lettice, Coleworts, Guords, Citrons.

Or: Take Conserve of Roses two ounces, of Sorrel one ounce, of Violets,
Bugloss, Water Lillies, of each half an ounce; of Currants, as much as will make
a sharp Electuary.

Take the Mucilage of Fleabane, and Quince seed, Gum Traganth extracted, with
Rose water, with Sugar, or Syrup convenient: Make a Linctus.

Take of the Mucilages mentioned one ounce, Syrup of Grapes half an ounce, with
Sugar: Make a Linctus.

Or put seeds of Fleabane, and Quinces, in a clout, and add Sugar, cool it in
water, and lay it upon the Tongue.

Take the four cold seeds, of each one dram; Purslane seed, Search, juice of
Liquorish, of each half a dram; with Gum Traganth: make Troches to hold in the
mouth.

Or Troches of Saltpeter, that is, Salprunella, with Sanders, and Sugar, and
Gum Traganth.

It is good to cool the mouth with water, and Vinegar, Candied Coleworts, or
with Rose water, or Sorrel water, etc. or to hold Crystal, or a Stone, or Ice
in the mouth and chang it often.

Some anoint the Tongue with Mucilage of seeds, and Oil of Roses.

Cold air Cures thirst, by cooling the Lungs, if it come from them: and by
correcting the heat of the whole body, in regard the Tunicle of the Mouth, and
of the stomach, are all one.

Baths for the Feet and Hands of cold water, and change of Linen does the same.

Also Epithems applied to the Liver and Heart.

And anointing of the Throat and Neck with Oil of Violets, Water Lillies,
Willows, Poppies,

Some anoint the Head in Fevers, with the same, because the Nerves of the Head
consent with the stomach: but I suppose it does good by provoking sleep.

Hippocrates says that sleep slaketh thirst, not because it moistneth, as some
say, but because heat is carried outward by sleep, as appears by sweating,
which is then most easy to be cause.

Rest is good, because it keeps the body cool.

And also little talk, for much increases thirst.

CHAP. XIV. Of Defect of Bleeding.
The Kinds,
THe wants of bleeding, which is diverse ways at set times; differ first, in
respect of the place; as they are not, or not sufficient, either from the womb,
Fundament, or Nostrils, or the like.

A suppression of the Terms, is when the monthly Evacuation of women, Stoppage
of Terms.
by the womb for forty years, in which they are fit to bear Children; is
wanting, and they are neither with Child, nor give suck. Some women, but it is
rare, never have them and without inconvenience, these are Virago'es, because
they are like men. Others have had them, but they stopped and never returned.
Some have wanted them a whole year, or some months; In whom Laziness presageth
Diseases: Then follows heart pain, want of Appetite, and loathing, with
inclination to Vomit, Palpitation of heart and Arteries, Headache, troublsome
dreams, palness of face, and crudity of urin, discovers it. And as these are
preternatural in Plethory and Cacochymy, so are they Natural in Women with
Child, whose Terms are stopped, they vomit in the first month. Also suppression
of Terms, is when they flow too slowly for the constitution, in less quantity,
or shorter time then is meet. This causes inconveniences.

There is another flux of the womb after Childbearing, that is necessary, Want
of cleansing after childbearing.
and continues some days, more abundant then the monthly, the blood is called
Lochia. If these flow not, they cause great Diseases, Colic, and Convulsion.

There is a flux at the Fundament in both sexes called Haemorrhoids, Stoppage
of Haemorroids.
in some Natures, either once in a year, or at a certain time, this is said to
be stopped, when it has been, and is called suppression of Hemorrhoids.
Physicians explain this defect chiefly, when there are other accidents from the
retention of them; as Cacochymy, Cachexy, Quartan Fever, Melancholy, and the
like. The Patient disdaining the Flux, Complains not of the want of it, but
when he is Pained by the swollen Veins, which cannot open, which are called the
blind Hemorrhoids.

Some have a natural Evacuation at the Nose, The want of bleeding at Nose.
at a set time, which are young and Plethorick, and bleed at no other part, as
women that want their terms that are with child, or Virgins, before they have
them; And hither may be referred, the critical evacuations in Diseases. If any
of these are stopped, the Physician must endeavor to procure them.

If blood flow another way, though sometimes it does good, Defect of bleeding by
other parts.
yet in regard it is not so according to nature, it belongs to the defect of
Natural bleeding if it stop.

The Causes.
The defect of these bleedings, is either from the want, or foulness of blood;
or from the stoppage, or straitness of the Veins.

Women fit to conceive, must have more blood then is fit to nourish the body,
to nourish the Child, if they do conceive, (...) to be purged forth, at the end
of the month, if they conceive not. If this plenty of blood be wanting, or not
sufficient, there is little, or no Flux of the Terms. And though this want of
blood may come from diverse causes, yet all do not cause this suppression.

There are Women, but few, in which as nature before they are ripe to conceive;
A manly Constitution, is the cause of suppression of Terms.
breeds no more blood then will nourish the body, so she keeps the same course,
when they are fit to conceive, these are barren; and without other
inconveniences. These are called Virago'es from their manlike constitution.

From want of juice, of which blood should be made, Spare Diet causes the same.
the Terms flow less, rather then cease: because nature keeps the the same
order, when blood does not abound. Yet there may be a defect of Terms from long
fasting, or use of bad meats, so that the body may grow very lean.

In sharp Diseases, the blood being spent by violent heat, Blood sent another
way causes want of Terms and Hemorrhoids.
if it continue long the same may be; but being short it rather causes a Flux
then stops, and often in a Crisis cures the Disease. And great Fluxes by
provoking the expulsive faculty provoke the Terms; except they be bloody, and
then they hinder, as the Terms hinder them and bleeding at the Nose. So these
Fluxes are stopped by deriving of the blood to another part. And the chief
cause of suppression of Humorrhoids is, when nature retains, or sends it
otherways.

Thickness of blood causes also suppression of Terms and Hemorrhoids, when it
will not flow, being too thick from the juice of meats eaten, or want of serum
to carry it. And this is the cause that in Cachectickes, Thickness of blood,
causes suppression of Terms.
and Hydropicks, the Terms are stopped, the serum, or whey sweats through the
Veins, and when a Vein is opened the blood is thick, and if it stand, like red,
or white Coral.

Crude and impure blood, Crudities and impurity of blood, causes suppression
of Terms.
if it be thick (as it will be when it is cold, as we have observed with a
thick skin at the top;) or foul: will not flow by the Terms; for the purest
blood is sent to nourish the Child, and to breed milk. If therefore it be foul,
or there be obstructious, then the Terms are wanting. Therefore Cachectickes,
Leucophlegmaticks, or Virgins in the Green Sickness, while their blood is bad,
have not the Terms, but when it is putrified, have. Hence it appears, that this
natural flux of the Terms, is not for to discharge foul blood according to the
vulgar error, which will rather hinder it, if it abound; And it is not from the
quality of blood that is evil, but from the quantity abounding. And it is
preternatural when it is immoderate, or without order; And we shall show that
women after they are past the Terms, may so bleed. And though the impurity of
the blood, cause the Flux of the Hemorrhoids, it is no argument why the Terms
should flow from impurity naturally, for they differ greatly; for though foul
blood be usually purged by the Hemorrhoids, yet it is easy in those that are
accustomed to them.

Obstruction of the Veins, Obstruction of the bowels, and elsewhere causes the
same.
causes defect of natural bleeding, chiefly in the great Vessels, or those of
the part by which blood should flow. Because the natural distribution to parts
that should void it, is hindered; As we may observe that cupping or bleeding,
hinders bleeding by revulsion, and bleeding at the foot, provokes Terms. Hence
is it that Cachectickes have not the Terms so much, because they have impure
blood, but because of obstructions. And when the Meseraicks are obstructed the
Hemorrhoids flow not, which causes great Diseases by putrefaction, as Fevers,
Melancholy, Epilepsies; which are not cured, except the Hemorrhoids return.

If the obstruction be in the part by which they bleed, the flux is stopped,
Obstruction of the parts that should bleed.
as the Veins of the Neck of the Womb stopped, hinder the Terms, the Veins of
the Womb stopped hinder the after flux; if of the Nose the like. Either by
thick blood, or other humors.

Straitness of the Veins and of their orifices, stops blood: Fat, a Callus,
or scarre, causes stoppage of Terms.
as when fat grows too much in the Womb, or a scar remains after an Ulcer, or
other hard Tumors; A Tumor also causes suppression of Hemorrhoids.
by which last the Veins in the Fundament may also be stopped. Especially if
they be swollen hard; as shall be showed in the blind painful Hemorrhoids. The
Womb also may be so naturally formed, that the Veins may be wanting, Evil
Conformation. Or, Weakness, causes want of Terms.
or closed in such as never had Terms, called Virago, s.

Although it be the common opinion that a cold distemper stops the Terms, and
therefore they take heed of Cold, and cold Meats, and impure it to eating of
cold things. Yet these parts cannot be so cooled that the Orifices of the Veins
should be stopped; except cold keep the blood from flowing freely. Or comes
after the native heat is weakened, which weakneth the expulsive faculty and
makes the terms flow less and more seldom.

The Cure.
In the Defect of terms keep this method (of the rest we shall speak hereafter)
If it be when the woman is not fit for Children it is natural and not meddled
with. The Cure of Terms suppressed.
You must not attempt til fourteen, and when they are evil colored; And if they
stop after forty four they must not be recalled; nor when the woman has
conceived, or gives suck although there be more blood than is needful, and
some have their terms sometimes then. Nor at a time when they use not to flow,
except to prepare the Body, but in that week wherein they used to flow, must you
givethings to provoke them, especially if they be strong: Or when there are
signs of them, as pain of the back and the like, or have drops appear.

It is impossible to bring down the Courses in them which are from the Birth of
a man-like constitution, or have the Veins closed, when they never had them,
and are barren.

If they cease for want of blood, or fault thereof it is in vain to attempt
their recovery in lean people, but it is better to repair the blood, by good
diet: And then they will come of themselves. If they have been turned another
way, and flow not at the Womb, they must be brought thither again.

If foulness of blood or obstruction of the bowels cause it, we must open them
and cleanse the blood, and give things that provoke the Terms. And these are to
be used in the stoppage of the Haemorrhoids when the foul blood remains in the
meseraick Veins.

A hard Scirrhus or Callus in the neck of the womb if it hinder the Courses
must be taken away, And then if the Terms flow not, they must be provoked. If
the Veins of the womb be so hidden with Fat, that they cannot bleed, it must be
consumed by Fasting.

In other causes, as thickness of humors and obstruction of the Veins of the
womb, or coldness, we must proceed as follows, when we intend to move them.

Purges are good if they be stopped by reason of the foulness or impurity of
the blood; which, though they provoke the expulsive faculty and cause dejection
or going to stool, yet because they also stir up and move the veins of the
womb, they so provoke the Terms also: Wherefore when Courses flow, to abate
them and prevent them in Women with Child, we dare not give Purges. And in
those that are stopped we often do more by purges that are mixed with things that
provoke the Terms, than with such things as only provoke them. And these we
proportion to the humor abounding whether it be Phlegm, Choler, or Melancholy.

We first loosen the belly with Catholicon, Hiera, or the like.

Then we prepare the humor thus. Take syrnp of Mugwort and the five roots, of
each one ounce and an half; Oxymel simple one ounce, water of Mugwort,
Motherwort, each two ounces and an half; water of Pennyroyal and Nepp, each one
ounce; make a Julep for three or four doses sweetened with Cinnamon.

Or this Decoction. Take the five opening roots steept in Wine each half an
ounce; roots of Madder and Eringus, each six draws; Valerian roots half an
ounce, Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Motherwort, Balm, Nepp, Germander, Chamaepytis or
Groundpine, Time, each a handful; Tops of Hops and red Pease, each a pugil;
Bayberries half an ounce, Anise and Fennel seeds each two drams; Parsley and
Dodder seed, each one dram and an half; Flowers of Rosemary, Elder, and of both
Buglosses, each a pugil; roots of Polypody one ounce: make a Decoction, sweeten
it with Sugar and Cinnamon, and give it several days.

Then purge with this Potion. Take of Catholicon six drams, Agarick one dram,
the species of Benedicta Laxativa half a dram, Saffron five grains: make a
Bolus with Sugar, or drink it with Rosemary or Wormwood Wine.

Or thus in choleric bodies. Take Tryphera Persica six drams, Rhubarb one
dram, Spike one scruple, Electuary of the juice of Roses one dram, Syrup of
Roses solutive one ounce; with Bugloss and Fumitory water make a Potion.

Or this Decoction. Take Liquorish one ounce, Red Pease a pugil, Mugwort a
handful, Annise and Fennel seed, each two drams; Cordial flowers a pugil,
Polypody roots, Carthamus seed, Senna, of each half an ounce; Epithymum two
drams, make a Decoction: Infuse Agarick two drams, strain it and add one ounce
of syrup of Roses solutive for a Potion.

Or this Powder. Take Turbith four scruples, Agarick two scruples, Cinnamon,
Ginger, of each half a dram; salt Gem one scruple, Saffron five grains, Sugar
two drams, make a Powder, give it in white Wine which has Mugwort infused or
the like.

Or these Pills. Take the species of Hiera and Benedicta Laxativa, each half a
dram; Pil Faeridae one scruple, or more, according to the strength, make Pills
with white Wine.

It is good to purge with things that provoke Terms, at the time we expect them.

To weak people and Virgins we give gentler medicines, and because bitter
things are best we give them in Pills, As. Take Aloes one dram and an half,
Agarick and Rhubarb, of each one dram; Myrrh and Gum Amoniack dissolved in
Vinegar, roots of Gentian and Asarabacca, each half a dram; Spike, Cinnamon,
Mastich, each one scruple; Saffron five grains, with Syrup of Mugwort, make a
Mass. Give half a dram or two scruples, sometimes quickened with Scammony.

Or make this Infusion. Take Succory rooots, Parsley and Fennel roots, each
half an ounce; Asarum roots two drams, Wormwood and Mugwort each one dram and
an half; Senna one ounce, Rhubarb two drams, Spike a scruple, Agarick two
drams, Ginger a dram, shake them in Wine for three or four Doses.

We make a stronger like a Syrup thus. Take of the opening roots one ounce and
an half, of Liquorish and Peony root; green, each two ounces; roots of Asarum,
madder, Eryngus, white Dittany, each one ounce; roots of Birthwort and
Valerian, each half an ounce; Sowsbread two drams, Mugwort, Motherwort,
Pennyroyal, Balm, Marjoram, each a handful; Savin, Savory, Horehound, Carduus,
Thyme, of each half a handful; Rosemary, Elder, and the Cordial stowers, each a
pugil; Wall-flowers one pugil and an half, red Pease a pugil, Juniper and Bay
berries, each half an ounce; Annise and Fennel seed, each two drams; Dodder,
Smallage, Parsley and Lovage seed, each one dram; Raisons one ounce and an
half, Figs ten, boil them in Water and Wine: in the strained Liquor add,
infused Polypody and Carthamus seeds, each two ounces and an half; Senna six
ounces, dried Briony roots one ounce, boil them again, strain them and add
Agarick and Turbith of each half an ounce; and if you will purge strongly
Hellebore one dram, Ginger one dram and an half, boil them again gently and
strain them, add six ounces of Sugar, make a Syrup, give one ounce more or less
as it works, with Pease broth, twice or thrice in the time the Courses
should come, or in the full of the Moon which is thought a proper time.

An Infusion of dried bitter things in Wine is good As, Take Asarum roots half
an ounce, Sowbread roots two drams, Gentian roots one dram and half, Wormwood,
Centory tops, Savin, Horehound, Carduus, each two drams; Marjoram, Pennyroyal,
each one dram; Rosemary and Wallflowers, each two drams; Annise and Smallage
seeds, each one dram; Senna two ounces, Agarick, Briony roots each half an
ounce; Turbith two drams, Ginger one dram, powder them and infuse them in Wine
two fingers breadth above them, give it some days.

Remedies given at the mouth to provoke the terms, Either do it by increase of
blood in such as want it, as nourishing things: Or by heating and extenuating
the blood, and opening the mouths of the veins, as Diuretics: Or by some
property unknown to us. Of these we shall here speak.

They are diversely prepared and given at the time the courses used to flow, and
that fasting, sometimes at the going into a Bath, or coming out. For so they do
best, and one helps the other; and also before the opening of a vein in the
Foot. The examples of which follow.

A Broth. Take red Pease one pugil, Parsley roots two ounces, Borrage flowers
one pugil, one Leek or an Onion: boil them, give the Broth with Butter and
Salt, Saffron and Cinnamon every morning.

Strong People may eat Sallats of Watercresses, Radishes and Onions.

Give Pouders in Wine, Water, Decoctions, and other Liquors, or with Honey,
Water or Wine, Syrups, Sugar, or made into Lozenges, or in Electuaries, or
Pills, drinking some convenient Liquors afterward.

They are thus made. The first, Take Saffron half a scruple, Mace and Cinnamon,
each one scruple; and drink it in Powder in the morning for some days.

The second. Take Nigella seeds half a dram, Myrrh one scruple, Cinnamon one
dram, Saffron half a scruple, make a Powder.

The third. Take the Troches of Myrrh without Assa Faetida half a dram, Nigella
seed and Borax, each one scruple; make a Powder.

The fourth. Take Asarum roots, Leaves of Savin, each half a dram; Smallage and
Parsley seed, each one dram; Cinnamon half a dram, Saffron a scruple, Myrrh and
Amber, each half a dram; make a Powder, give a dram.

The fifth. Take Asarum roots, white Dittany, Madder, Flower-de-luce roots,
each half a dram; Sowbread roots, Leaves of Savin, Pennyroyal, Rue,
Wall-flowers, Nigella seed, the cane of Cassia, and Cassia Lignea, Date stones,
each one scruple; Cinnamon one dram, Schaenanth half an ounce, Saffron half a
scruple, make a Powder for many Doses.

The sixth. Take Date stones, Borax, Lavender seeds, each one scruple; Mace
half a scruple, Saffron five grains, make a Powder for one Dose.

The seventh and the best is. Take the Spleen of an Heifer gelded, dry it in an
Oven, take a dram thereof, ad Cinnamon half a dram, Saffron three grains,
powder them, give it with Pease broth, often. Paracelsus gives the essence.
Crollius commends and teaches the extract of the Liver and Spleen of an Ox.

Salts of Mugwort, Balm, and Celondine roots, are commended by Chemists.

Theriaca Diatessaron one dram, is an approved medicine for the terms.

One dram and an half of Tryphera Magna without Opium, is the like.

The Electuary called Haemagogon given in one or two drams is also good.

The Electuary of Rhasis made of filings of Iron given in the quantitity of a
Chestnut is good especially in Women of evil habit of body. And Crocus martis is
commended by Chemists.

Another thus made. Take roots of Birthwort Flowerde-luce, Madder, each a dram;
Savin, Horehound, each half a dram; Schaenanth, Spike, Wood Aloes, each a
scruple, Gum lac, half adram; make an Electuaoy with Honey.

This is best. Take Juice of Mercury and Honey, each equal parts; boil them to
a Syrup add the Powder of Nigella seed, a little Cinnamon, and half a scruple
of Saffron, make a thick- Electuary, give one scruple or make it into Pills.

Conserve of Borrage given in Wine is a secret among Women.

The usuallest Pills are those of Castor.

The Troches of Myrrh are best, given in Pills by reason of the stink of the
Assa Foetida.

Thus: Take Troches of Myrrh one dram, Castor half a scruple, with Juice of
Mugwort, make small Pills.

Or thus: Take Myrrh one dram, Aloes half a dram, Lupines, Nigella seed, Madder
roots, Gentian, each half a dram; Saffron a scruple, Borax half a dram, with
Syrup of Mugwort, make Pills, give half a dram.

Or thus of Gums. Take Myrrh one dram, Galbanum, Assa faetida, each half a
dram; Castor a scruple, Saffron half a scruple, Nigella seed and Asarum roots,
each two scruples; with Juice of Savin and Honey make Pills, give half a dram.

Or thus. Take Agarick, Hermodacts, each half a dram, dried wild Goats dung one
scruple, Gumlac, Myrrh, each two scruples; with Syrup of Mugwort make Pills,
give a scruple,

In Women of evil habit of body to open obstructions and provoke the terms.
Take the Troches of Capars and of Rhubarb, each half a dram; Gum Ammoniack
dissolved in Vinegar one scruple, Gentian and Asarum roots, and seeds of
Smallage and Parsley, each two scruples; Troches of Myrrh half a dram, with
Syrup of Mugwort and of the five roots, make Pills, give half a dram, or two
scruples every other or third day.

In liquid form we give to drink, Waters, Juyces, Infusions alone, or together,
with Pouders or Electuaries.

The best waters are of Mugwort, Savine, Pennyroyal, Motherwort, Balm,
Calamints, Catmints, Nip, Parsley, Fennel, Radish, Acorus, and Cinnamon, alone
or together mixed we give them.

The Juyces of the same plants are good, but the pleasantest are of Radish,
Eryngus, Leeks. We give also the juice of young red Osiers and white Wine.

Or thus. Take the juice of Radish and Eryngus, each two ounces; of
Flower-de-luce one ounce, with Sugar as much, give one ounce and an half with
Wine.

Or thus. Take the juyces mentioned, add juice of Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Parsley,
each one ounce; Sugar as much as of all, make a Syrup, give one ounce and an
half or more in Wine or by it self.

The Oil of Savin four drops or five, in water of Savin, Pennyroyal, Mugwort,
Balm, or the like, or a spoonful of Sack, does quickly dissolve the courses.

Decoctions or infusions in water, or wine, or other Liquor are made of the
Plants aforesaid, of which we draw waters; and the Decoction of Pease is most
commended. Of Juniper berries also, and of Lupins, of Burnet, Chamomil flowers,
and Barley, there is a good Decoction to be made.

Compounds of these are thus made: Take Mugwort, Pennyroyal dried, Balm, of
each three drams; Juniper, and Bay berries, of each half an ounce; Boil them in
Wine.

Or thus. Take roots of Smallage, Fennel, each one ounce and half; Red Pease,
Barley, each a pugil; boil them add to a pint, Honey four ounces, Wine two
ounces, boil them again, and strain it, drink it often.

A bitter Wine most excellent. Take Gentian, Valerian, and Asarum roots dried,
each two drams; Madder roots half an ounce, Sea Onions prepared one dram, dried
Wormwood, Carduus, Mugwort, Savin, Rue, each three drams; infuse them in Wine,
and boil them in a double Vessel, give three ounces.

Hippocras also or Claret made of Spices and Honey is good.

A Syrup for the same is thus made. Take of the opening roots each two ounces;
Eryngus and Madder roots, each one ounce; Asarum half an ounce, Mugwort,
Pennyroyal, wild Thyme, Savin, Balm, Calamints, Nip, Rue, each one handful;
flowers of Rosemary, Chamaenul, Broom, St. John's wort, Wallflowers, each one
pugil; Smallage, Lovage, and Fennelseeds, each two drams; Red Pease one pugil,
suniper berries half a pugil, boil them in Wine and Water in three pints of the
flrained Liquor, dissolve six ounces of Honey, boil it, and strain it, and so
use it, or keep it boyld up to a Syrup.

Syrup of Mugwort, Calamints of the opening roots, all the Oxymels are good.

Potions are made of those mixed: As, Take Syrup of Mugwort one ounce and an
half, Pennyroyal and Balm water, of each two ounces; Cinnamon water two drams:
Make a Julep, give it at once.

Or thus: Take Parsley roots one ounce, red Pease a pugil, Pennyroyal one
handful, Fennel and Parsley seeds, of each a dram: boil them in Wine, dissolve
in the straining Triphera magna without opium or Thereaca Diatessaron one dram,
syrup of Mugwort one ounce, Saffron half a scruple: Make a Potion for one Dose.

Of Topics, make Baths or Fomentations for the womb in the time when the
courses are expected, some days, morning and evening for an hour; not to
provoke sweat; but to warm, for that would hinder. Therefore they must not dry
and astringe: but loosen. Hence it is that women find so little good by dry
Baths. These are made of sweet and hot Plants boiled in greater quantity for a
Bath, then a Fomentation, and with wine and water.

They are easily made even in the winter: As, Take Savin green, Rue, Lavender
flowers, of each two handful, or more: Juniper berries two pugils: boil them
for a Bath to fit in, or a Fomentation in Summer; add green Mercury two
handfuls.

Another for the Poor: Take Onyons, Leeks, and if the scent offend not,
Garlic: boil them alone, or with some of the abovesaid.

The third is this: Take roots of Lillies, Valerian, Mugwort, Savin, Rue, Balm,
Lovage, Pennyroyal, Calamints, of each one or two handfuls; Chamomil and Elder
flowers, of each one or two pugils; Fenugreek and Lin seed, of each one ounce;
Carua seeds half an ounce, Bay, and Juniper berries, and red Pease, of each a
pugil: boil them.

A Compound of many thus; if you have not all, take more of them you have: Take
roots of Lillies, Marshmallows, Flower-de-Luce, of each four ounces; roots of
Madder, Birthwort, Valerian, of each three ounces; roots of Asarum one ounce
and an half, roots of true Acorus and Elicampane, of each one ounce; Mugwort,
Savin, Rue, Southernwood, Motherwort, Balm, Calamints, Nip, Pennyroyal, Organ,
Spikenard, Lovage, Savory, sprigs of red Osiers bruised, of each two handfuls;
seeds of the lesser Centaury, Carduus, Marjoram, Bay leaves, of each one
handful; Chamomil, Dill, Elder, Lavender and Wall flower, of each one pugil;
Fenugreek and Line-seed, of each one ounce; Nigella and Watercress seeds, of
each half an ounce; juniper and Bay Berries, of each one pugil; seeds of
Smallage and Lovage, of each two drams: Boil them for a Bath.

A Fomentation of the strongest, is thus made: Take of Madder, Asarum,
Birth-wort and Sowhred roots, of each one ounce; of wild Cucumbers and Mercury
leaves, of each one handful; of Myrrh half an ounce: boil them in Wine and
Water, add the juice of Savin and Mugwort, of each half an ounce; Ox-gal half
an ounce: Make a Fomentation.

If the Thighs to the Feet, are washed with the aforesaid Decoction, or if the
Feet be bathed therein often. it is good.

And if you make Clysters of them, because the Neck of the Womb joyneth to the
straight Gut, they do as well, especially if the body be bound; because
Clysters of Mercury, Benedicta Laxativa and Hiera, by stirring up and forcing
the Belly do work upon the Womb.

Or thus: A Clyster often repeated, is good: Take Lilly roots three ounces,
green Flower-de-Luce roots one ounce and an half, Valerian roots one ounce,
Mugwort, Savin, Rue of each one handful; Centaury tops, Chamomil, Melilot and
Lavender flowers, of each one pugil; Fenugreek, and Line seed, of each half an
ounce; Carita and Nigella seed, of each two drams; Bay berries half a pugil,
red Pease one pugil: Make a Decoction, add Benedicta Laxativa Hiera Logadij,
each three drams, juice of Mercury and Flower-de-luce, of each one ounce; Honey
of Squils one ounce and an half, Oil of Wall-flowers two ounces, Ox-gal one
dram: Make a Clyster, give it without Salt, that she make keep it longer.

To anoint the Privities and Loins, after Baths, is good, and otherwise, with
hot and loosning Oils and Fats.

Oil of Wall-flowers and Flower-de-Luce, of each an ounce; is proper.

Or that called Moschatum or Moschelinum: Or this Ointment: Take Oil of bitter
Almonds and Lillies, of each one ounce; Oil of Wall-flowers, Flower-de-luce and
Broom-flowers, of each half an ounce; Goose grease and Marrow of Calves Legs,
of each half an ounce; the Mucilage of Fenugreek six drams, Asarum, Birthwort,
Sowbread and Flower-de-Luce roots, of each one dram; Wax enough to make an
Ointment.

Emplaisters are applied to the Share, and about the Privities; made of the
former: As, Take roots of Lillies and Orris, of each two ounces; Leeks one
ounce, Mugwort, Savin, Pennyroyal, of each one handful; Figs ten: boil them in
wine, stamp them, add wild Goats dung two drams: Oil of Lillies and Wall
flowers, of each one ounce: Make a Cataplasm.

Or: Take Oil of Wall flowers, Orris, Moscheline, of each one ounce; Storax and
Galbanum, dissolved in Aqua vitae, of each half an ounce; Sal Nitre one dram,
Rosin of the Larich tree, as much as is will make a Plaster.

A Fume taken into the womb by a Funnel, or through a hollow stool, provokes
the courses, if made of Aromaticks, and other hot things, as Hippocrates says;
it is used after Baths, or at other times.

They are made of the Vapor of the Decoction of the things aforementioned.

Or thus: Take white Dittany roots and Madder, of each one ounce; Mugwort,
Hops, Pennyroyal, Savin, Baies, of each one handful; Bay and Juniper berries,
of each one pugil; roots of Galangal and Ginger, of each two drams; Myrrh and
Bdellium, of each half a dram: boil them in wine, and let her take in the Fume
while it is hot.

Oil of Spike or Civet put into the womb does by its scent strongly draw down
the courses.

The following sweet fume does the same: Take of Storax two drams, Benzoin,
Frankincense, Gallia or Alipta Moschata, of each half a dram; Cloves, wood
Aloes, Schenanth, Cassia Lignea, of each one scruple; Sugar two drams: make
them up in Troches for a Fume, with Gum traganth infused in Cinnamon water.

Or thus: Take the wood of Berry bearing Savin, and Juniper, and cast it upon
the Coals, or Juniper berries.

This is stronger but stinketh: Take Mummy two drams, Galbanum, Bdellium,
Opopanax, of each one dram; Frankincense, Storax, of each one dram and an half;
roots of Asarum, Schaenanth, of each one dram; the hoof of an Ass, or a Horse,
one scruple; Powder them, with the Rosin of the Larix tree: Make Troches, use
them in a close stool.

The strongest Fume to provoke the courses quickly, is made of all kinds of
dung dried, and poudered, and mixed with Saffron to be burned upon live coals,
and sent into the womb by a funnel.

Pessaries put into the Womb, or Nascalia applied thereto, when Virgins, are
the last remedies, such as may open the mouth of the womb with heat and
sharpness, and not exulcerate.

A Radish made like a Pessary, and applied does it.

Pot Mercury bruised, and put into a bag, is good, and better with flowers of
Centaury; the true Scordium, Jack of the hedge, or sauce alone called Alliaria
does the same.

Or thus: Take juice of Mercury, Onyons, Ox-gall, of each one ounce; Honey two
ounces: boil them to a Suppository consistence.

To which you may add these Pouders: Take roots of Asarum, Sowbread, of each
half a dram; Agarick one dram, Myrrh two drams: boil them with Honey to a
Pessary.

Or thus: Take Aloes half an ounce, Myrrh two drams, Gentian roots one dram and
an half, Nigella or Gith seeds one dram: Mix them with Ox-galls, and make
Pessaries.

Another of Species: Take of Species of Hiera Picra, and Benedicta Laxativa,
and troches of Myrrh, of each one dram and an half: Make a Pessary with boiled
Honey.

Another made of Antidotes: Take of Triphera Perfica without Opium, and
Theriaca, Diatesseron, of each two drams: Mix them with Powder of Nigella, to
Pessaries.

This is most excellent: Take of Myrrh half an ounce, Nigella seeds two drams,
Agarick one dram, Sal niter half a dram, with juice of Coleworts or Honey: make
a past for Pessaries, and if you add Troches of Alhandal half a scruple; it
will be stronger.

Another of perfumed things: Take the Troches of Gallia, and Alipta moschata,
of each three drams; of Civet, Musk and Amber-greese, according to the purse of
the Patient, make them up into a Pessary with Storax.

Or thus with Oils: Take Oil Moscheline two drams, Storax liquid one dram, Oil
of juniper berries six drops: Mix them, and dip Wool therein for a Pessary.

If you make Injections of the Decoctions aforesaid into the Womb. they are
better then in Baths or Fomentations.

Or this: Take Madder and Asarum roots, of each half an ounce; Mugwort and
Pennyroyal, of each one handful; Nigella or Gith seeds three drams, Lupines one
ounce: boil them, and in half a pint, dissolve juice of Savin two ounces,
inject some in.

Letting blood in the Foot, at the time is the usual remedy; for when the blood
above strives to descend into the parts beneath, by reason of their Emptiness
through blood-letting, that blood which lay idle about the Veins of the Womb,
is stirred up, and rather gets into the usual passage then another, by which
means the Terms are brought again. Wherefore we use this remedy of bleeding in
the Foot, not only in full bodies where we open a Vein in the Arm also first;
but also in lean, except other matters hinder: And we usually open that under
the inward Ancle called the Saphena in that Foot where it most appears, which
we first put into hot water, and also after it is opened that the Veins may
bleed better. But it will be as good in the Ham Vein, and bleed better. If you
bleed in both Feet together, or in one in the morning, and in the other
afternoon it will be better, at which time if you bind the Hip with a Ligature
fast, that the blood may not descend, it will sooner be carried to the Womb.

Horsleeches if they suck well may supply the Lancet.

Cupping-glasses applied to the Hams, inside of the Thighs, and Privities draw
the blood thither, especially with Scarification.

Ligatures in the Hips and Feet, do the same, and strong frictions from the Leg
downwards.

Copulation if it may be lawfully done, Cures Virgins of this Disease: and they
which are sick thereby and pale, are cured the night of their Marriage, by
having their Courses, which is the token of their Virginity, to them which are
sound, and have them then before the time.

The Purgation after Childbearing, is a kind of bleeding, The Cure of the want
of Courses after Childbearing.
which produces great inconvenience, if it be stopped, and therefore is to be
provoked, this is done by the same Medicines, of which in consideration of the
weakness of the woman that lies in, we choose the mildest, and coolest,
especially if there be a Fever which is often.

And in that case we give this Powder: Take roots of Piony (which provokes the
Terms, and if there be a convulsion, is also good against that) one dram,
Mallow seeds half a dram, Mirrh, Cinnamon of each a scruple; Sugar two drams:
give it at twice in white Wine, and Piony water, or the like.

Or this Decoction: Take Piony roots half an ounce, Maiden hair, Celandine, of
each one handful; Mugwort half a handful, Violets a pugil; red Pease a pugil,
Barley half a pugil: make a Decoction, add Sugar and Cinnamon one dram, and
Schenanth half a dram, for two Doses.

We give stronger, if nothing hinder us; As, Take Mugwort, Vervaine, Celandine,
Juniper berries; boil them in Wine, give it to be drunk.

Or these Pills: Take Birthwort roots one dram, Mirrh half a dram, Pepper one
scruple, with juice of Leeks; make Pills, take half a dram.

The rest are like those former that provoke Courses, as Infessions of
Marshmallows, Chamomil, Mugwort and the like: and Ointments, Fumes, Pessaries,
Frictions, Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, Bleeding in the Foot sometimes,
considering the strength and accidents.

If the Haemorrhoids have been usual and stop; The Cure of the stopping of the
Haemorrhoids.
and we perceive manifest danger at hand thereby, we must study to move them
again. As sometimes we do, when they never, were before: if the cause of the
Disease may be carried that way; as we ought to do when the cause of Fevers
and Melancholy and the like lies in the Meseraiks. Also when the blood labors
for passage at Haemorrhoids, being swollen we must help nature: Thus,

Sometimes we purge by stool, by reason of the impurity of the blood, which is
retained in the Haemorrhoids suppressed, because they have power to stir up and
provoke the Haemorrhoids, as well as purge, specially if things proper for that
be added, as Aloes Coloquintida, and the like, as we showed in the Terms, the
examples of which may be referred to this treatise.

As the Electuarium Haemagogon, and the like, which is good to provoke both
Courses and Haemorrhoids.

Topics are better for moving the Haemorrhoids than the Terms, because the
Veins appear more than in the womb, sometimes they are outward and swell, though
sometimes more inward and blind, but always easily to be reached by Medicines.

This may be done with Ovntments, this is the mildest. Take roots of Orris,
Sowbread, each half an ounce; tops of Centory, Motherwort, each two drams;
powder them, add Oil of Nuts a fingers breadth above them, juice of red Onions
one ounce, boil them a little, and strain them, and anoint therewith.

Or thus, Take Bacon, the rind and Membranes taken off, one ounce, Hogs-gall
half an ounce, Pigeons dung two drams, Niter half a dram, make an Unguent.

Another. Take Hiera Piera, Benedicta Laxativa, each two drams; roots of
Sowbread, Birthwort, Centaury the less, each one dram; make an Ointment with
Gall and Honey.

These are stronger. Take juice of Leeks and red Onions, each one ounce; Hogs
or Ox gall six drams, roots of Sowbread, pulp of Coloquintida and Euphorbium,
each half a scruple; with Honey make a Liniment, if you add the juice of Esula
or Lathyris it will be strong, but remove it if it burn.

It is better in form of Suppository if the Haemorrhoids are inward, and be not
sore, thus. Take Honey, Juice of Onions, Gall, each one ounce and half: boil
them, add Hiera Piera one dram, Myrrh half a dram, Sowbread roots half a dram,
Sal Nitre a little, make a Suppository, add a little Hellebore it will be
stronger.

The root of Orris, made like a Suppository, and dipped in Gall or in Oil of
Orris is good.

A head of Garlic or Onion does the same if you take off the outward skin, and
thrust it in, and a Sowbread root green.

Baths or outward Fomentations, and Clysters such as provoke the Terms are good
in this case.

We use Leeches to the Haemorrhoids to draw the blood, that after they may keep
their course: We anoint the Veins with blood to make them fasten, and set them
on with a reed. This is the surest and most certain Remedy.

Friction with a rough cloth, or Figg leaves, or with Borrage, does open or
prepare them.

We may do it also with a Lancet if the Veins appear, but we must be wary of
missing the Veins: some prick them with Bristles til they bleed, and open the
Veins in the Feet, but not so properly, for the Haemorrhoids proceed from the
branches of the Gate-vein, and not from the hollow vein as the menstrual do,
and because none of them come forth to the skin there can be no proper
Evacuation.

It is not amiss to provoke bleeding at Nose, The Cure of defect of bleeding at
the Nose.
where it has been usual, and is stopped (especially when any Diseases of the
Head, Eyes, or Ears are approaching) to prevent them, and cure them except
nature of her own accord open the Veins in the Nose. And this is no small help
to a Cure.

It is a difficult matter by reason of their smallness, and distance to open
them with a Lancet, but some do it with Bristles.

It is best to fill the Nostrils with a Pessary made of sharp and rough plants,
and to smite them, as with Yarrow, Burrage, Madder, Goof-grass, and the flowers
of Reed-grass, or the like.

An Ointment of Mints and Honey, or Madder and Oil does the same.

Diascorides says that the Decoction of the root of Crocodilium or small
Crocus, being drunk, causes bleeding at the Nose.

In other parts, as under the Tongue, or in the Forehead, Arms, The Cure of
want of bleeding in other parts.
or Feet (as when they itch from the foulness of blood, requiring the
evacuation which was formerly made in that place, and which nature of her self
sometimes forces out, as we often observed in Horses) if it be requisite to
bleed for the prevention or Cure of a Disease, it is best done by a Lancet; and
to make the veins appear, you may first foment them with Decoction of Sa^^, or
the like. And it is good to heat the body with things given internally and
applied outwardly, to make the blood thin that it may be the betaer evacuated.

CHAP. XV. Of the Want of Sweating.
The Kinds,
WE call this a Disease when the Evacuation made by the pores of the skin with
moisture called Sweat, is stopped, when it is necessary and ought to be: Or
when a Vapor comes forth instead thereof: Or when the Sweat ought to be general
through the whole body, and yet only some few parts, as the Head or Feet do
sweat.

This is sometimes in found people that are plethorick or full of humors,
Cacochymical, The suppression of usual Sweating.
or of evil habit, and moist-bodied: who use to be refreshed by Sweating, which
when they want is called suppression of Sweat.

When men by exercise or Baths labor to provoke Sweat for preservation of
health and cannot, The want of such Sweating as is necessary for health.
then is there a want of Sweating, which is requisite for health. And this we
have observed to be in some who by no means or bathing could produce the least
sweat.

It happens in many imperfected Crises of sharp Diseases, The want of sweat
which in time of sickness is necessary.
and in some lingering diseases, that no sweat can be procured by Art or Nature,
which should expel the cause thereof: and this is a defect of Sweat requisite
in the time of Sickness.

The Causes.
As is the Serum or watery humor so is the Sweat, and Urin, The cause of want of
Sweat is when the moisture decaieth or is turned another way.
for it causes both, and when there is little Urin there is little Sweat. And
when the Serum is not carried to the habit of the body but otherways as by
much Urin, Seege or the like, then there is a defect of Sweat. Wherefore in
Diseases when Nature endeavors evacuation by sweat, it is hindered by other
passages. Moreover it may happen by obstructions that the passage of the Serum
may be so hindered that there may be great difficulty in Sweating and Pissing:
wherefore men in Dropsies piss little, and sweat with difficulty, though it be
necessary for them. Also the thickness and sliminess of the serum may hinder
both Pissing and Swearing, as in phlegmatic persons; and in sharp Diseases
there is no sweat til the humor is concocted and made thin; therefore
attenuating medicines do provoke Sweat, as we showed in the defect of Pissing.

The usual cause of want of Sweating is the not drawing of the Serum to the
habit of the body, The cause of want of Sweat is because the serum goes not to
the habit of the body.
which is done by external heat, which being abrent, Nature cannot sweat
without great Violence, especially if the pores are astringed or stopped by cold
external; for only closing of the pores cannot hinder sweat except there be
external cold,

The Cure.
If any want serum or natural moisture it is in vain to provoke them to sweat:
The Cure of want of Sweat.
also when it is plentiful and turned another way, except it be against natures
intention; for if nature incline to sweat we must not use other evacuations,
but hinder them. Also in Obstructions and crudities if we intend to evacuate by
sweat, they must first be opened and the matter prepared. But if there be
abundance of excrementitious moisture in the Veins and habit of the body, we
must use this evacuation for the preventing and curing of Diseases, and it must
be attenuated and concocted from its thickness and crudity: and first we must
remove external causes which may hinder sweat, and then give Sudorificks or
medicines to cause sweat such as follow.

Among Sudorisicks, Sudorificks or medicines to cause Sweat.
some are such as cause sweat by a great quantity of Liquor taken in when there
is external heat to further it; hence it is that when we drink fasting and warm
in bed in any quantity, sweat will follow.

And this is caused by cold drink as well as by hot, for the entrals being
suddenly cooled, the heat external sooner draws the serum to it.

And this is soonest done by things that are piercing, and sharp, and these are
called Sudorificks.

Among which distilled waters by reason of their thinness are the best, as for
example, of hot herbs, Cherfoyl and Carduus, of cold plants, Fumitory and
Lemmons.

Many Decoctions are made for this purpose as of Guajacum, Sarsaparilla, China,
and other Woods, Roots and Herbs, boyld in much water. Or Horstail, or the
lesser Polygonum, or the like, boiled in Wine.

This following is commended. Take Millium or Pannicum hulled, one pugil, boil
it in Water, to four ounces of the Water strained, add two ounces of white Wine
for one Draught, this is called St. Ambrose his Syrup.

Or this. Take Hysop and Marjoram, boil them in Chicken Broth, and ad thereto
two drams of the Emulsion of Hemp Seed.

This is excellent. Take Nep and Citron seed each one dram and an half; Water
of Carduus and Sorrel each one ounce and an half or two ounces; make an
Emulsion, add Syrup of Carduus or of Sorrel six drams, of Roses two drams, let
it be given at bedtime, some give the root of Asarabacca two darms in powder
in three ounces of Carduus water which is a good Sudorifick.

Treacle and other sleeping medicines are given dissolved to provoke Sweat, for
in a deep sleep Sweat does easily come forth.

Also the juice of Elder or Danewort given with distilled waters, or in a
Decoction does the same.

Or, Take Saffron one scruple, Ginger half a dram: give them in Powder with
Almond Milk.

Or, Take one dram of Brimstone with the Yolk of an Egg.

The Chemists give Salts, Oils, and Spirits, as Spirit of Vitriol with
convenient Liquors. Their Bezoardine Mineral, Diaphoretick Sol and Luna,
Diaphoretick Antimony, the Sulphur of Antimony, Spirit of Tartar, and the
Treacle water of Crollius, the secret of Carduus, and the like.

All things that outwardly heat the body, so that the blood may be carried
thither, and the serum with it and open the pores do cause Sweat: And they may
be, greater or less as the humor abounds and the Constition requires, as
follow.

As many Clothes and Coverings, Skins, and Feathers, Hot Air caused by the Sun,
or Fire, which outwardly inflames the body.

Hot Water either natural or Artificial.

Ointments for the Back and great Veins, which gently heat with Oil of Lillies,
Pellitory, and the like.

Also Violent motion.

And the passions of the mind which inslame the spirits and humors, as Anger,
Joy, or such as shake the spirits, produce Sweat, as Terror, Fear.

CHAP. XVI. Of want of Milk.
The Kinds.
ALthough the natural excretion of Milk or giving Suck, which ought to be from
the Birth to the moderate growth of the Child, is not so necessary, that the
defect thereof should prejudice the Woman: for we see many Women which for
preserving of their Breasts near, give no suck and receive (...) hurt thereby:
except it be through plethory, or foulness, or Inflammation of their Breasts
for want of giving suck: yet because it is an inconveniency to the Mother or
Nurse, and also to the Child which must be nourished with Milk, it is called, a
Defect. And it is diverse, Sucking hindered
either when the sucking is hindered or cannot be, or when there is want of Milk
wholly, Want of Milk.
or in part; and this is called the want of Milk.

The Causes.
This Defect comes from want of Blood in the Veins of the Breasts, Want of
blood, Foulness or thickness of blood, is the cause of want of Milk.
which is the matter of which Milk is made, And this comes from diverse Causes
as we showed in the want of Courses, chiefly in Women with Child, who through
squemishness eat little, or that which is not nourishing, from the Disease
called Pica. Or when they have too many of their courses after Childbearing,
or when they flow in time of giving suck, which they ought not to do;
especially violently and beyond their strength. Or when they have immoderate
bleeding other ways. Or when they have in time of giving suck an acute
disease, which makes them lean, Also when the foulness of the Blood is such
that it is brought to the Breasts, for Milk is made of the purest blood which
was the Child's food in the womb. Also thickness of the blood as it is the cause
of stopping the Courses, hinders increase of the milk wholly, or in part,
because it cannot get into the Veins of the Breasts.

Milk also is wanting, when the Veins of the Breasts are stopped by some hard
Tumor or otherwise. Stoppage of the veins of the Breasts nipples without
passage or absent, or hurt, cause the want of giving suck.
Or when there is no passage in the Nipples. Or when Nipples are wanting which
comes from scratching when young Women have itching Breasts, being
marriageable, this causes Ulcers which either stop the passage or leave a
Callus or hardness which does it.

Also the clifts and pains which Women have from their strong-mouth'd Children
when they suck may hinder giving suck while they cease.

The Cure.
If it comes from want of blood she must be high fed, The Cure of want of Milk.
if from evil humors purged, if from thickness of blood, it must be attenuated
or made thin, if from hurt of Breasts or Nipples, they must be cured as we
showed elsewhere.

For this we must use things that by a propriety cause Milk, Medicines to cause
or increase Milk.
or make the blood so thin by heat that it will pass into the Breasts.

Milk, Eggs, Udders of beasts, and brains are good not only for their
nourishment, but for the property in them to increase milk.

Also such Fruits as have a milky juice, as Almonds, Pine-Nuts, and the like,
eaten or drunk in Emulsions.

The Germans use a Broth of Eggs, Wine, Butter, and Sugar.

Also Rise-milk.

Broth of Coleworts, Mallows, Rocket, Dill, Fennel, Parsley, is good: and
though Lettice is said to increase milk, we cannot believe it, because it
extinguisheth seed:

Onions boiled or roasted are also good.

And the root of purple-flowr'd Goats-beard boyld in Broth,

As Barley and Pease broth.

The best Wine nourishes, and warmeth, and is good for Nurses.

These Decoctions also. Take Barley one pugil, Fennel and Parsley each one
handful; boil them, and add Sugar.

Or thus. Take Eryngus roots, half an ounce, Mallows, Polygala, Fennel,
Parsley, Dill, Rocket, Basil, Mints, each one handful; Barley, Pease, each a
pugil; Line-seed two drams, boil them, drink it with Sugar every morning.

Of juyces thus. Take juice of Sowthistle and of Goatsbeard, each half an
ounce; give it with white Wine and Sugar.

The Decoction of Earthworms in Flesh broth with Fennel and Barley is good,
but let not the Nurse know what she takes.

Dry things are less profitable, yet some seeds are commended whose herbs are
better.

As, Take Annise seed two drams, Fennel seed one dram, Rocket and Nigella seed,
each half a dram; make a Powder, give two drams with any fit Decoction.

Or, Take Powder of Earthworms three ounces, Sugar half an ounce, Annise seed
one dram, Ginger and Cinnamon each half a dram; make a Powder, give a spoonful
with some Decoction.

Or, Take Crystal in fine powder, me dram, or Coral.

That which comes from the Alps called Lac lunae, given one dram is accounted
good.

Diverse things are applied to the Breasts, for the drawing of Milk unto them.

As hot Fomentations which enlarge the Veins.

And bruised Mints.

Or make this Plaster. Take Parsley, Fennel and green Mints, each one handful;
boil and stamp them, add Barley meal one pugil, Storax two drams, Nigella seed
one dram, Oil of Lillies two ounces, make a Cataplasm.

Some use Sinapisms and Dropaxes, made of Mustard or stinking Gums, to attract
Milk, but they are too violent and inflame.

Friction of the Breast is better.

And Cupping-Glasses to the Arm-holes upon the great Veins which bring the milk
to the Breasts, and look blew, are good.

Also to let them be often sucked or milked.

Also if Nipples be wanting, there may be an Instrument made of hollow Glass,
for the Child to suck.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Defect, or Want of Copulation.
The Kinds,
THere is a Defect of the Venereal act, when the Male and Female cannot
perform, or weakly join together.

Men are more deficient than Women, for the man does more in that act than the
Woman.

And they are called Impotent which cannot engender at all for want of
erection; Impotent men.
Weak men.
and such as do it faintly with small extension are called weak men; and when
they spend no seed in the act whether done strongly or faintly, Imperfect
Veuery.
they are called Imperfect men. Nor is it a Defect when it is done but seldom,
because that may be surest. And the more moderate, the better.

In Women, this defect is rare through fault of the Member, which will always
receive while it is sound, neither does it wont to recruit, as man's does; nor
are they confined to a certain time of lust, as Bitches: Venery hindered and
imperfect women.
Yet sometimes there is a defect in the Womb apparent, or close, so that they
cannot, or at least with difficulty, they endure a Man, and will not retain him
long. And so Venery is hindered, as it is imperfect, when there is none or small
pleasure in the act, especially if they have not been tired, but always
dislike, as I have known three women who advised with me that for many years
never perceived any more pleasure then by an external touch, Venery extinct in
women.
and this is called Venery extinct.

The Causes.
We must search out the cause in both sexes of this defect, whether the members
be unsit for the act, or seed cannot be spent, or whether the seminal Vessels,
which contain the Seed and conveigh it, be disordered.

This act is defective, from the want of a Yard sometimes; The cause of
weakness, or impotency in man, is the evil shape hurt, or numness of the Yard.
as some are born Eunuchs: others have lost it by accident, or by force:
sometimes by loss of a part, as a stone by gelding; sometimes by smalness of the
Yard, as Hermophrodites, which resemble women, and have but a very small Yard
sometimes by largness or thickness, so that the Womb cannot receive it without
torment: sometimes by crookedness or windy swelling like a pudding, as in
Hydropical Persons; or by an excrescence, hurt or Ulcer especially in the Glans
or Prepuce, by which means it cannot endure any force by unclean Copulation, or
violent acting, or when the Prepuce, or Foreskin is so straight that it will
not come from the Glans; for these causes, either the action is not performed,
or difficultly and imperfectly. And it is caused also by a cold distemper which
hinders the flowing of blood to the part, which is requisite, as I shall show,
for the distension, or stretching of it. And when it is stupefied and
insensible from hurt of the Nerves, as in a Palsy: And also by enchantments,
when the exquisite sense of the Yard is so lost that it will not rise by the
tickling, which we shall show proceeds from the seed. Hence it is that either
there is no act or very faint.

Venery is defective from a fault in the neck of the Womb, The growing together
straightness, or hurt of the neck of the Womb, is the cause of defect of Venery.
when the passage is not open: For Children born without an Orifice, cannot
live for want of Pissing, as has been known; except it be made by Art. And
this is sometimes by birth, and sometimes by an Ulcer after it is heated: but
seldom; Yet a woman which through difficulty in Childbearing was hurt in that
part, whom I know, was so modest that she would not reveal it, but committed it
to natures Cure; so that proud flesh grew about the Womb, and stopped her
Courses from coming forth, and the Orifice was so closed, as appeared after her
death, though living she would not declare it, that there was a thick Escar
upon it, and it could not be seen, or perceived: This Orifice in Virgins is
often closed with a Skin called Hymen, which causes the first Copulation
painful, and if it be thick, hinders Copulation till it be removed: Also it may
be made straighter naturally, or by an excrescence, a Tumor, or Callus, or hurt
of the neck of the Womb, which may cause such pain that she cannot admit of a
man.

From the affliction of the Seminal Vessels which bring the blood which begets
seed, made, The causes of hindered, or imperfect Venery in both sexes of
quenched Venery in a Woman, is either no Seed, or that which is naught in the
Vessels.
contained and sent forth from them, Venery may be hindered, or weak in both
Sexes, if there be either no seed, or at least such as will not provoke to the
act. For the sharpness of the Seed, causes the Itch (not wind, as has been
thought) and stirs up nature by the spirits, in the Arteries and fills the
Spungy Body of the Yard and Glans therewith, so that it is enlarged, swollen,
hard, red, and hot, and fit for the action; especially when it is in the proper
Vessels hot and labors to get out. But when it is weak waterish and crude, or
little in quantity or none, then there is no pricking, without which there can
be no erection, as in Eunuchs, and so there can be no performance, or very
little and weak. And if this be in a woman, and the provocation, or pricking be
wanting, they grow not warm, nor desire Venery nor find any pleasure therein.
These distempers of the Seminal Vessels hinder the voiding of seed, when it is
not wanting, and cause imperfect Venery.

The affects, Weakness, coldness, ill fashion of the Seminal Vessels, is the
cause of defect of Venery in both sexes and of that which is called coldness in
man.
by which Seed is wanting, or cannot be spent, or grows weak, are either
weakness of the Seminal Vessels, by reason of old age, or a Disease especially
about those parts, or too much Venery which relaxeth and weakneth them. Or
coldness of the parts, especially in men when the Yard is refrigerated and
cannot be filled and stretched forth with blood, for which causes little or
none, or dull seed being produced, they are not stird up to Copulation; or their
seed flows from them without sense. This also may come from an evil composition
of the Vessels at the first; the kind whereof is difficult to be known in
people that are alive, except it be conjectured from this, that they having
perfect Members for generation, and no cause aforegoing to hinder it, cannot
use Copulation; but when they are dead we may, as I have found, perceive in
their opening want of Seminal Vessels, or disorderly passages, sometimes on both
sides of the Reins or the like.

It often happens to men that by incantation, Enchantment is the cause of
impotency in men, from whence they are said to have the point tied.
or witchcraft their Reins or Yard, or both are so weakened, that they cannot
perform. These they call bound or locked (because it is caused by tying of a
Point, a Bulls pizle, or Wolfes pizle, or of some other Lecherous beast. How
this is done being preternatural, does not concern us to enquire.

By the cutting of the Spermatical Vessels, which bring the matter of the Seed,
Gelding is the cause of impotency in Eunuchs.
as when both stones are taken off (for one cannot do it) in men, because seed
cannot be made, they cannot spend, nor have they a desire. Yet sometimes from
other causes blood may so flow to the Member, that it may enter into a woman,
but to no purpose; Wherefore when they will have true Eunuchs, to whom they may
commit their women, they take of the Yard at the root: This is too often done
to men, for the Cure of the Rupture, but I never knew it done, either for any
Disease, or to take away lust.

Also the stoppage of the vessels by a thick humor or Tumor, The Obstruction of
the seminal vessels is the cause of want of Venery.
may cause a defect, especially in men when the passege of the Yard for both
Seed and Urin is stopped by a Caruncle or Excrescence, a Callus, a Stone, or the
like, that neither can come forth. Stoppage or streightness, or Perforation of
the passage in the Yard, is the cause that hinders Copulation or makes it
Imperfect.
Or when the member is weak, in the act of Copulation, and the passage is not
direct, nor sufficiently enlarged, so that the seed being little, is not
directly conveyed but stopped til after it come forth of it self. Or when
there is a hole through the Yard, by reason of a Fistula therein, as I have
seen, by which means the Seed passes not the right way. And this is not an
hinderance to the Act as I shall show, but only of Conception.

The Act of Copulation is not wholly hindered from a want of sufficient Blood to
produce Seed, for little is required; wherefore poor men that are in want of
Food, and such as have long been sick, and are in Consumptions, may do the
feat, but they who have more blood do it to better purpose. Now that Copulation
should not be desired in some Diseases where there is disturbance of mind and
grief, it is no wonder, when pleasure and delight, which stirs up this act, is
taken away.

Neither can thickness of blood cause it, when it is brought and dispersed for
the extension of the Yard, for the arterial blood which has most spirits is
chiefly sent thither; yet we suppose them to be most lustful, whose blood is
hottest and thinnest.

The Cure.
We must consider first whether the fault be hid or manifest and accordingly
foretell and Act.

If men are born without a Yard, The Care of Impotency, Faintness, Copulat on
bindred, or imperfect, or extinct, whether in man or woman.
or with a misshapen one not fit for the work; or if it be cut off, or the head
cut, or if the stones are both taken out, the Cure is impossible. And Women
that have the womb so closed that it can be opened by no Art without danger of
life they are incurable. Other defects in men and Women, as Tumors, Ulcers,
Wounds or Bruises, stoppage of the passage of the Yard, shall be spoken of in
other Treatises. But we shall here show the Cure of the streightness of the
passage in man, and the largeness of the Hymen or Membrane in Women; but if
none of these appear, and the Yard will not stand nor seed be spent, or if the
Woman without or with little delight perform the act and these be in sound
people, there is some original fault which we perceive by what they have been
from their youth; And this is incurable. Or when it comes from Incantation
which is not our part to untie. But when from Weakness, Coldness, or other
Diseases, which hinders Seed, or makes it unprofitable, though long
continuance may make difficulty, yet in these cases chiefly we undertake the
Cure.

We give things that cause seed, and this as we said by its plenty and
sharpness stirs up a desire to the Act, and disposes the members for it. These
are such as cause much blood, which is the matter of which seed is made. To
these we add hot things which may make the blood hotter, and by consequence the
seed, which will more stimulate or provoke; and by its heat and thinness come
sooner and in greater plenty to the Yard. And when the serum is hereby inflamed
and carried to the bladder, it being near to the seminal vessels, and promotes
the cause, as we have seen by the use of Spanish flies the Bladder has been so
inflamed that it has been ulcerated, and the Urin has been much and bloody,
and the heat so sent to the parts adjacent that they have violently provoked
Lust; this sharpness of seed may be cured with Salts mixed with other things,
as I shall show. And we shall show that it is our opinion that such medicines
work by a manifest quality, rather than by stretching the Yard with Wind as
some say (which cannot be) besides their secret hidden quality which was
observed by the first teachers of such things, from the whiteness of the flesh,
fruits, and roots, resembling seed: Or because taken from Lecherous Creatures;
Or from their shape resembling Stones, as the Satyrions or plants called
Dogs-stones; or like a rough wrinkled Cod, as Toad-stools or Mushrooms.

Many things are given for this, especially at Supper, or after at Bedtime, if
we expect the effect that night, or (if you will have them successively to work)
in the morning.

Of meats they are best that nourish well, and cause much blood, and they are
chosen which are white and full of marrow, as Brains, Stones, especially of the
most lecherous Beasts, as of Cocks, Quails, Sparrows, Foxes. Also the flesh of
the Castor, because his Stones cannot be eaten by reason of their stink: but
they are thought to be Bladders and not Stones. The flesh of Craw-fish, Crabs,
Lobsters, Oysters, and other hard Fishes that have Gristles, Cuttle-fish,
Polypus, Milk, Eggs, Almonds, Nuts, Pine-nuts, Pistachaes, Chestnuts, Beans,
Pease, Rise, Barley, Hartichoaks, Parsneps, Rapes, Scirroots and roots of
Goars-beard, and such as cause Milk, cause Seed also, also Onions, Leeks,
Mushrooms, also Rocket, Coleworts, Asparagus; all these diversely dressed and
eaten do the same, especially if they be prepared and salted: for Pepper
stimulateth and provokes Venery, and we suppose that when such things are so
eaten it comes rather from the Sauce than the Meat.

The usual meats to provoke Venery is the white Broth called in Dutch,
Beinwarm made of Wine, Eggs, Sugar and Butter, with which the Bridegroom
restores himself in the morning. Or that called Lebersuls made of Piggs Livers
which helps Conception with Wine, Spices, and Saffron, this according to
Diascorides increases Venery; and that which the Germans give at Weddings
called Pseffer strong of Pepper, and that congealed saffron'd Galren made of
juice of Flesh and Fishes well spiced.

Diverse Junkets are made of Sugar, Honey, and Spices, given after Supper or at
night at the Greeks Collation time called Epidorpismus-

As dried Confections of Kernels and Seeds with Sugar, among which Rocket seed,
Pine and Pistacha Nuts are the chief.

Or March-pane, as this. Take Almonds, and small Nuts, each four ounces; Pine
and Pistacho Nuts, each one ounce; beat them, Cinnamon half an ounce, Pepper
one dram, Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cardamoms the great, each half a dram;
Rocket seed two drams, and if you will have it yellow, Saffron; or red Saunders
and Sugar as much as is fit, mix them and bake them in an Oven like Bread.

The Bread of Life called in High Dutch Lebfuchen well spiced and honeyed was
invented with the rest to provoke Venery.

Rocket, Watercresses and other sharp Herbs eaten at supper with Botargo or
Honey after the Spanish fashion provoke much.

Strong sweet Wine well spiced with Cinnamon and Pepper, taken moderately heats
and refreshes the body, and makes it fit for the work: but immoderately;
stupifies and makes unfit and sluggish.

There are diverse pouders to be given with Wine, Milk, or the like, or made up
with Sugar in Tablers.

The first: Take Pepper ten grains, only bruised that it burn not the mouth,
let him drink it in Wine or Milk at bedtime.

The second: Take Pepper half a dram, Saffron half a scruple, make a Powder,
take it with any convenient Liquor.

The third: Take Pepper one dram, Nutmeg half a dram, Salt one dram, take it in
a reat Egg.,

The fourth: Take Pepper a dram, Ginger, Rocket seed and Leek seed, each half a
dram; Sugar two drams, take a dram.

The fifth: Take Rocket seed two drams, Ashen keys, Burdock, Line, and Annise
seed, each a dram; Parsnep, Nepp, Radish, Onion, Leek, Mustard, Nettle,
Watercresses, and Asparagus seeds, each half a dram; Pepper a dram and half,
Ginger, Galangal, Cloves, Mace, each half a dram; Saffron a scruple, Ivory
shavings a dram, pizle of a Dear or Bull; the flesh of the Scincus each half a
dram; Sugar as much as all the rest, Cinnamon two drams, make a Powder, give
two drams.

The sixth better than the rest: Take Rocket seed half an ounce, Parsnep Rape
and Leek seed, each a dram; Watercress seeds and Pellitory roots each half a
dram; Pepper a dram, Ginger, Cinnamon, of each half a dram; Saffron a scruple,
spanish Flies without wings nine, Boraxa dram, Musk some grains, Sugar an
ounce, make a fine Powder, give a spoonful at first in Warm Milk, and more if
it fail.

The seventh and strongest of all: Take two spanish Flies the wings being taken
off, Cinnamon one scruple, Sugar Candy one dram, give it in Milk. if it do not
the feat, take three the next time.

The Chemists highly commend the blood of Satyrion which Quercetan teaches how
to prepare.

Among Electuaries the Diasatyrion of Nicolas one dram was invented for the
same use; also Confectio Anacardina which inflameth highly.

Another may be made thus. Take Satyrion and Eryngus roots candied each one
ounce; Ginger candied, Conserve of Acorus each half an ounce; Pine and Pistacha
Nuts each three drams; the Kernels of Indian Nuts one dram, Line seed and Ashen
keys each two drams; Roeket seed one dram and an half, the Electuary of the
three Peppers one dram, the species of Diambra and Diamoschu each half a dram;
Cinnamon one dram, of Stags or Bulls pizle and Scincus of the Sea dried, each
half a dram (for Women add the dried matrix of a Hare, and an ounce of Sugar)
add Honey as much as is fit for an Electuary, give two drams or more.

The nauseous Pills are thus made. Take of Mousedung half a dram, Rocket seed a
dram, Pepper half a dram, spanish Flies the wings taken off five; mix them with
Turpentine, give a dram.

You may make a Syrup to be kept til you have occasion thus. Take the green
roots of Eryngus, Satyrion and Parsneps each two ounces; roots of Pellitory and
Dracunculus each half an onnce; Rocket two handfuls, Watercresses,
Hedg-mustard, each one handful; Rocket seed half an ounce, Line seed, Ash-keys,
Asparagus seed, each two drams: Anise seed (which is thought to cause Milk)
half an ounce, Dates five, boil them in white Wine, and add to the strained
Liquor, Sugar, Cinnamon and Pepper, boil them to a consistence or height, give
an ounce alone or with white Wine.

We have observed that gentle Purges corrected with hot Spices, whether they
work or not, do vehemently provoke Venery: so that before they work they cause
erection, as some have confessed to me, who thought I had mistaken in my
intention when I gave the Medicine.

Sweet scents provoke not only by refreshing, but by heating and piercing, as
Ambergris, Musk, Civet.

In men outward applications are best for the Yard, and beneath, by the heat
whereof the blood may come to erect that part: and that blood may come into the
seminal vessels to make seed, we anoint the Stones, Loins, and Privities, and
sometimes the soles of the Feet, these are made of hot Attractives.

Of usual Oils thus. Take of Oil of Pepper, Euphorbium and Castor, each equal
parts.

Or thus. Take Juice of Rocket, Watercresses, Aqua vitae each an ounce;
Pellitory roots two drams, Mustard seed one dram, Euphorbium half a dram, Line
seed Oil one ounce and half, boil and strain them.

Otherwise, Take Oil of Nutmegs by expression two drams, Oil of Spike two
drams, Oil of Cloves half a scruple, mix them for an Ointment.

Without Oils thus. Take the Gall of a Bore or Hogg one dram, Civet half a
scruple, Honey, anoint the Yard and parts adjacent, if you add three or four
spanish Flies it will be better.

Oil of Ants which have wings; made by boiling of them in Sallet Oil is
excellent.

Also the Fat of a Hedg-hog.

A good Ointment. Take roots of Pellitory, Pepper, Ginger, Mustard seed, each
one dram; Euphorbium half a dram, Castor one scruple, dried Ants half a dram,
powder them, add Oil of Spike and a little Wax; make an Ointment.

They say that if the right Toe be anointed with Oil of Spanish Flies it will
provoke Venery: which we cannot deny to be possible from the virtue we have
declared in them for provoking bloody Urin of which we have experience.

These Ointments in the Loins and Privities of Women stir them up when dull:
But privately before Copulation, let the man anoint his Yard wit Civet or Gall
of a Hen.

The use of hot natural Baths is counted the best Remedy to restore heat in
cold and decayed persons.

Also other Baths and Fomentations for the Feet and other parts being actually
and potentially hot do the same, As the Decoction of Flower-de-luce roots, Nep,
Calamints, Nettles Marjoram, Rocket, Hedgmustard, Lavender flowers, and of
Chamomil, and the like.

It is good to wrap the Feet in soft furrs (which by their gentle tickling stir
up Women and effoeminate Persons) to preserve the Heat, and prevent Cold.

Sometimes weakness is taken away by manual Operation, in a Man when the
Foreskin is so strait that it will not uncover the Head of the Yard, we
stretch or divide it by cutting. In women, when the neck of the womb is too
strait, or covered with the skin called Hymen, or with a Callus, we open it
with a thin Groat or Instrument made on purpose, to cut both sides.

Other things belong to the Cure of Incantations, as shaking of the Pillows,
pissing through the weddingring, or the Axle-tree of the Plough, or the
changing of shifts, before they go to the sport, shiftings of the left Foot,
and the like, these belong not to us.

Nor care we for Amulets, to which much is attributed. They say the ashes of a
black Lizard carried in the left hand cause Erection, and in the right hand
hinder it.

Imagination and apprehension of former sport, provoke Venery extremely; by
remembrance beholding or hearing of things passed: and much more touching.

Sweet affections, as Joy advance, Sorrow and grief hinder the Act: This joy is
brought by recreating the senses, as the Sight, the Hearing, and the rest,
especially by Music.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Lust, or Leehery.
The Kinds,
WE call that Lechery which is an immoderate inclination to Venery, A Venerial
Itch.
and it is either continual; or an often itching and lust, which being
unsatisfyed, disturbeth and provokes people to sordid, nasty actions, except
they have government. This is sometimes in Males and Females, but differs, in
that men are sooner hot: Women are longer cooling.

There is another kind which is far worse and preternatural, Lustful fury.
called an insatiable frenzy in lust, which when it is excercised, has no
allay, but grows higher, and is unsatisfied.

This is oftener in Women then Men, as weakness is oftener in men then women; As
in foul and pocky women, or the like, which have the Priapismus or Frenzy of
the womb, so called. The History of impudent Semiramis and of other, shows
that some have been so, and unsatisfied with innumerable men, and this Disease
occasioneth many to try unlawful things, and to fall into great sins to appease
lust. And sometimes when the fury of the womb comes, they desire Copulation with
beasts, (as she of whom I spoke in the treatise of Madness, which desired the
English Dogs to Lime her.)

This is more seldom in men, though some are so Lascivious, Priapismus, or
immoderate erection.
that they can do it often in one night, not naturally, but by the pride of
appearing strong, and by provocations and forcing: these have sometimes a
venomous Gonorrhaea, or running of the Reins. This is called Priapismus,
Tentigo, or Satyriasis, from Satyrs painted with standing Yards. And there is
another Disease called by that name, which we shall after mention.

The Causes.
All Causes of immoderate lust come either from much seed, sharpness, or motion
which stir up Venery, or from blood, which stretches the Member in men, as we
showed in defect of Venery.

If Seed be plentiful, it causes Sanguin men, Plenty of seed and heat is the
cause of a Venereal Itch.
by reason of fullness, or heat of the Vessels, which continually attract blood,
which desires expulsion where it abounds, to be Lascivious.

Especially when the Seed is hotter then ordinary and sharper, Sharpness of
seed, is the cause of Frenzy of the Womb in Women so called.
this we have showed, may come of eating hot Spices, or Medicines. And of hot
humors and sharp, not in the Womb of salt Phlegm and Choler, as is usual, but
from the seed which is venomous and sharp, from the heat of which comes the
unsatiable Itch, which is usual in unclean Women, who infect men therewith. Men
when they are thus infected, have a running of the Reins, which sends it forth,
but women have it not so usually. Some say that the cause why Lepers are not
Lecherous, is because they are separated from women, and constrained to be
abstinenr.

Seed raised from its Vessels, Shaking of the Seed, causes a Venereal Itch.
and desiring passage causes Itch, and is scarce hindered from flowing: for
this is the condition thereof while it is sound and in its own place, except it
abound, that it does not much prick: But when it is removed, it is very
troublesome to get forth; so it is, for by imagination, dreams, and handling,
Seed may be spent by both Sexes.

When much Arterial blood sils the Yard and continues, The cause of
Priapismus, or Erection preternatural, is the plenty of blood gathered in the
Privities.
it causes Priapismus, or constant standing with a desire, of which we now
speak: But it may hapen that there may be Erection, before the blood come to
prick the part, and a desire afterward from thence. Also it may come from heat
of the Reins and parts adjacent, by blood, caused from lying upon the back,
upon feather beds, or boards, which posture makes blood come sooner to the
part, and makes Erection and greater Appetite, as experience shows. And heat
of the bed makes men rise at midnight, as the Proverb is. If it come from other
causes, as Pain, Inflammation, Wind, or Water, it belongs to another treatise.

The Cure.
If Men or Women are provoked to Venery, to prevent unlawful acts, The Cure of
the Venereal Itch and Frenzy, and of Priapismus.
the heat is to be allayed by hindering increase of Seed, and heat thereof, as
also of blood; and preventing the commotion of Seed. Thus,

Purges are chiefly requisite when foul and sharp humors corrupt and sharpen
the Seed, and cause lust.

To cool lust, we give things that quench, or that dry, though hot, if they
consume it, by a propriety: nor do we spend time to Cure and expel wind which
is not the cause, as we said: we give them evening or morning often, for the
effect will not quickly be seen.

Sallats at supper of Lettice, Purslane, Mints with Vinegar are proper, without
Spices.

And this Electuary: Take Conserve of Water Lillies, and Mints, of each an
ounce; Lettice and Coleworts candied six drams, seeds of Agnus Castus, (so
called from its virtue) one dram and an half, Rue half a dram, Coral one dram,
Crystal half a dram, Camphire a scruple, with syrup of Purslane: Make an
Electuary.

A convenient Powder: Take Snakweed roots one dram, Mints, Rue, Water Lillies
dried, of each half a dram; the seeds of Vitex one dram and an half, Hemp
seeds, Grapes, Lettice, of each one dram and an half; Crystal one dram,
Camphire a scruple; make a Powder, take a dram in broth, or syrup of Purslane,
or with a little Sugar, or made into Tablets with Rose and Lettice.

A convenient Syrup: Take juice of Lettice and Purslane, of each two ounces;
juice of Mints half an ounce, Violet and Rose Water, of each an ounce; Vinegar
of Roses half an ounce, Sugar three ounces; Boil them to a Syrup, give an ounce
often.

The Decoction of Lettice, Purslane, Endive, Mints, is good in broth.

Cold water drunk in great quantity, allaies lust.

Some affirm that they can take away all desire and use of Venery, with Wine
in which the Fish called Mullus is infused, others give forty Pismires in drink.

Outwardly, cool the Feet, Privities, Loins, so to wash the Yard in cold
water, makes it presently fall, this remedy my Father told me, a learned man
used who the first year of his Marriage, lost his Wife and Child at once in
Childbed, that he night die a Widdower without desire of Women.

Things that Potentially cool, mixed with driers and applied by Fomentation to
the Privities extinguish lust, as the Decoction of Lettice, Plantane, Purslane,
Willows, Water Lillies, and the like.

Especially if they be applied to the Feet, with Vinegar.

The juyces of the same to foment the Stones, adding a little Vinegar and
Camphire is better; and injected into the Womb, does the same for Women.

Vinegar of Roses, does the like.

It is good to anoint the Reins with this: Take Oil of water Lillies, two
ounces, juice of Lettice one ounce and an half, Vinegar half an ounce: boil
them to the consuming of the juyces; add seeds of Vitex one dram, Camphire half
a dram, white Wax a little: Make an Ointment.

Unguentum Album, with Camphire, or that cooler of Galen for the Reins, with
Camphire, does the same.

And also Plates of Lead to the Reins.

Sugar and Crystal of Lead, with Ointments, and Correcters, given in a small
quantity, are commended by the Chemists.

The smell of Camphire stupifieth lust, therefore they teach that it is to be
worn to preserve chastity, which it does by touching it, or tying to the Arms;
And Vitex and Vervain, they say, does the same.

Great fasting does somewhat allay lust, especially abstinence from hot Meats,
Spices and Wine, which rule they ought to observe, which pretend to chastity,
by abstaining from certain Meats, as the Friars who pretend to mortify by
eating of Shel-fish and Botargo, and the like, in the holy time of Lent.

The sorrow of mind and grief, take away lust.

And Diseases with pain, whether hot or cold.

By letting blood, something is abated, but it cannot make the Body lean or
weak, without some other inconvenience. It is reported that one cured his Wife
of her unsatiable desire, by opening all the usual Veins. And Hippocrates
teaches by the example of the Scythians, that the opening of the Veins behind
the Ears makes Sterility and Impotency.

Gelding is the extreme remedy, for extreme Lechery, and taking off the Yard,
is the surest way, for which cause they say Origin Gelt himself; And I know a
Priest that having been often punished for sin, in that kind, did the same, and
Masters usually do so to their Servants, to whom they commit their Wives: but
they deserve this punishment best, that sin in Adultery, and Fornication, and
therein persevere.

The surest remedy is Marriage which is granted by God to all that want the gift
of Chastity.

CHAP. XIX. Of Want of Conception.
The Kinds,
WHen a Woman is of Age to Conceive and has her Courses naturally, Barrenness.
and has the use of a Man, and conceives not, it is called Sterility or
Barrenness. And if she have conceived and brought forth, and after brings not
forth (which is usual, in the space of three or four years) it is a defect of
Generation, which is necessary for the propagation of mankind.

Of those which are thus barren: some are sound of a good habit of Body, and
are often fatter then those which have born Children, and look not quickly so
old. But oftentimes there are defects of the Womb joined with this defect,
Viragoes, or manlike Women.
either they never had their Courses, and therefore called Viragines, and
because they also engender not. Or their Courses which they had, either flow
not, or little and disorderly, with difficulty and discolored. This often
happens to such, as have the whites, a Disease usual with barren Women. And
they have other inconveniences, which either cause barrenness, or come from
thence.

As when some bring forth only Females, which may hinder the Progeny of the
Name.

The Causes.
The Cause why a Woman conceives not, when there is no defect perceived in the
Venerial act, is either because she receives not the Seed into the Womb, or
retains it not being received: And this happneth from the Seed, or Genitals of
the Man or Woman.

This comes from the occasion of man's Seed, The Cause of Barrenness from the
Man, is little Seed, or Crudity.
when it is not sufficient in quantity, or fit for Generation; and though a
Woman receives it, either there is no Procreation, or its in vain, as a Mole,
whereof we shall speak; for if there be not so much as will fill the Cavity of
the Womb, which therefore was made little, a Child cannot be conceived. And
this is the cause, that if the Seed be not enough for Generation, but often by
too much Venery or running of the Reins abated, that such Generate not, as they
who use it seldom, and either for Procreation, or health sake, are very
temperate. Hence it is that old men marrying young maids get Children, as my
Father after fourscore, in regard they are less hot and eager then young men,
and go to it but seldom. Also if the Seed be not concocted, but crude thin and
waterish, or too cold, and with spirits, or the like, which takes away the
virtue, it cannot beget Children. This comes from weakness of the Vessels, or
mixture of evil humors, and from the causes mentioned in Impotency and Lechery:
sometimes there is a secret fault in the Seed which does not hinder Procreation,
which passes to the Children, and shows it self then, and conveighs the like
to the Grandchild when it is of the age the Father was when his disease first
appeared: Hence it is, that the Gout, Leprosy, and the like, are propagated.
It is probable that this defect is in the seed of the Man when he begets no
Males but Females, The seed of a Man and Woman is the cause why Males or
Females are begotten.
because it is weaker than the Woman's which bears away the Bell for the sex:
It is better to impute the secret causes to the seed, than to the temper or the
change of the sex or to the seeds coming from this or that Stone; for a Man
with one Stone, of what temper soever may beget Children of both sexes.

It is necessary for Generation that the Woman's seed should be mixed with the
man's, When Barrenness is from the Woman it comes from Crudity impurity or want
of seed.
for the Generation of a Faemale, as may be seen by the likeness of the Mother
in both: now if the seed be defective, or be in less quantity than is fit,
Barrenness is by the woman's cause, and oftener than by the man, for a Woman
without seed may suffer Copulation, but a man without is unfit for it; and this
is the cause why Whores which spend their seed for gain so that they are
sapless, cannot conceive though they receive. And if if it be impure, crude, or
the like, not only Harlots, but other Women are impotent and diseased. But if
the temper of the Woman's seed be the same with the Man's they say there can be
no generation from the equality, but diversity. But we affirming the seed to be
hot, do not place the generative virtue in it, but in the seemly temper of them
both.

It seldom happens that a man is in fault by reason of the Yard, so it can but
act, for though it be not so long as others it hinders not, but the seed may
be sent into the Womb if there be no other obstacle, for the womb being then
hot and greedy after seed, easily condescends and takes it in. But if the hole
in the head of the Yard which sends forth seed and Urin, The opening of the
Yard being wrong is cause of defect in Conception.
be not in the middle, so that it may directly aim at the inward Orifice of the
womb, but in the side or beneath, as I have known in some, who have been born
so, or if there be a Fistula beneath so that it is not sent to the mouth of ths
womb, it is nothing worth.

If Barreness come from the Womb, it is seldom caused by the neck thereof, but
by accident, as it hinders Copulation as I said: But this may be often caused
from the Orifice of the bottom of the womb or the substance thereof.

The inward Orifice of the womb, The largeness, looseness, closeness, of the
orifice internal of the womb, is the cause of Barrenness.
or that clift which is close and narrow, and opens at the time of
Conception, drawing the seed unto it; if it be too large though then it easily
receive the seed, yet because it reteineth not it long enough, it is the cause
of barrenness. This comes from an evil birth, when the child has been
violently taken away by reason of the bigness or ill posture, when it is so
stretched that it cannot return, as in other cases, to its former proportion.
And this is the cause why many times Women after difficult Travail never
conceive again; some Women also are unfit for Conception by reason of the
looseness of the Orifice, by moist excrement, either in the Womb, or the neck
thereof, by reason of the Whites. And when the Orificeis shut up so that it
cannot be opened, there canbe no Conception, because the seed cannot be
admitted; this may be naturally, or by a scar, or excrescence of flesh, after
the parts have been ulcerated, or torn in hard Travail, by which means the
outward Orifice though larger, has been closed, as I showed before. It is
seldom stopped from other causes. What they say of Fat in the neck or bottom of
the womb, we have showed cannot cause barrenness, but the cause is the not
opening of the womb in conception, for at other times it is naturally closed,
and after Conception closes, and opens not, but when there is a
supertaetation or taking too much.

If the substance of the womb be too hard, or want blood, The cause of
barrenness is the hardness and dryness of the womb.
it is a great cause of want of Conception: for a Woman is then fit to
conceive, when the womb which is thick and nervous, and unfit for conception
while it remains so, becomes fleshy and soft by heat and affluxion of blood,
and as in salt Bitches we see their privities swollen, so does the Orisice in a
Woman, and the clift is larger to entertain the seed. But if it continue in its
natural condition, or grow harder, there can be no Conception, because the
Orifice will not open and receive the seed. And this is from the constitution
and temper thereof from the original, the substance thereof is too dry,
otherwise it is only in age, and then but natural, because they then cease to
breed; but if it be hard before old age, it makes sound Women barren and so
they remain. This befalls them who by too much Lechery and the like, have dried
the Womb, or them whose wombs are hard by a Tumor, or after an Inflammation.
But if blood does not moisten the womb, When the substance of the womb is not
moistened with blood it is barren.
which is required for the enlarging and softning thereof, and for the increase
of the Infant, either not at all, or by suppression of the Courses, or come not
to the bottom of the womb by reason of the hardness thereof, or streightness of
the Veins, or Obstructions: it comes to pass that Viragoes or Women that never
had Courses, or that have them so much that they cannot be dispersed into the
Veins for want of heat are barren. And hence it is that they who have long
abstained from the use of man, or not conceived for other causes, and made
their womb without blood through want of exercise, causing it to flow rather to
the Veins of the neck of the womb to be purged by Courses, by reason of
discontinuance or want of practice when they grow old; though they use a man,
they conceive not so easily, as they who keep a constant moderate exercise
from their youth.

The weakness of the womb is the cause why it is not fit for Conception,
Weakness of the Womb is the cause of barrenness.
for the functions thereof being hurt the chief whereof is the conceiving of
seed, it cannot attract, or retain it. This is from the birth, or from
coldness, or other Diseases, these are slow to Venery, and subject to other
Diseases of the womb.

The Cold and moist distemper besides the cold and dry is a hinderance of
conception, A moist distemper of the Womb is the cause of barrenness.
and this is usually looked at in Cure, as being the most usual. This comes from
moist excrements in the womb made from evil and crude nourishment, which
moisten and loosen the orifice, or from too much Lechery in Whores, which
causes slipperiness in the part. This cannot be from a defluxion into the
Womb, beause there is no passage, besides the body purges the excrements by
the usual veins monthly: But in both when it comes from defect in the blood,
the women that conceive not, are of an evil habit and ill-colored.

The Cure.
If a Woman conceive not, The Cure of defect of Conception.
which has no defect of the Venereal act, or in her Husband, we must
diligently search out the cause thus. If it come from want of seed which is
most the man's fault, then let them seldom engender, and use things to increase
seed, as we showed. If from the crudeness of seed or foulness we we must cause
good blood, and strengthen the vessels that breed seed. If it come from a fault
of the Yard of the man which has a hole in the wrong place, the Fistula must
be cut, or first opened otherwise; and after united together and healed up,
that the seed may come the right way. If this be from the birth it is
incurable. If Barrenness be caused from the Wombs defect, as when it is hard,
or the orifice closed with a Tumor, or hurt by Childbearing, the Cure is
desperate in women otherwise sound, which have either never conceived, or have
been hurt at the time of Travail, as in those who never have their Courses. In
others who want Conception from Weakness, Moistness, Coldness, or excrements
abounding in the womb, which have their Courses disorderly, or are troubled
with the Whites, or other such like, there may be Cure.

First let her be purged, observing her constitution, Remedies to procure
Conception.
and the humor abounding, and whether she have her Courses duly or the whites.

Generally thus. Take Catholicon one ounce, Syrup of Roses solutive two ounces,
with Burrage and Mugwort water, make a Potion.

Then open a Vein if she be plethorick.

Then give this preparative. Take Syrup of Mugwort and Maidenhair, each one
ounce and an half; Burrage, Mugwort, and Nep water, each one ounce; with a
little Cinnamon make a Julep, give it three mornings.

Or this Decoction. Take the opening roots steept in Wine, each half an ounce;
Eryngus roots one ounce, roots of Elicampane, Valerian and Masterwort, each
half an ounce; Mugwort, Motherwort, Nep, Pennyroyal, Germander, Ladies-mantle,
Marjoram, of each one handful; both Buglosses roots and Leaves, Succory,
Endive, Fumitory each one handful; Wall-flowers, Broom and Rosemary, Burrage
and red Pease, each a pugil; Anise and Fennel seed each a dram; Parsley seed,
Siler montane and wild Parsnep seed each a dram; beat, boil, and clarify, and
sweeten them, with Cinnamon and Sugar make an Apozem for three doses, or four,
or five, or make a Wine of the Infusion of them.

If we will have it purge when the body is foul, we add Liquorish two ounces,
Asarum roots two drams, Pot-Mercury one handful, Raisons twenty pair, Senna and
Polypody, each one ounce and an half; Carthamus seeds bruised six drams, give
them boiled as formerly with Wine and Water.

Then purge with this Potion. Take Rhubarb four scruples, Cinnamon one scruple.
Infuse them in Wine and Endive-water, strain and dissolve therein the solutive
Electuary of Citrons and Diaphenicon two drams, syrup of Roses solutive two
ounces, make a Potion.

If Pills be taken. Take Pills of Cochiae, Agregative and sine quibus, each a
scruple; mix them with white Wine into Pills.

After purging give a dram of Triphera magna without Opium in the morning.

We also keep the body loose with ordinary Pills or Electuaries before bathing
or use of outward medicines, as. Take Catholicon two ounces, Diaphenicon one
ounce, Cassia newly drawn two ounces, Pulp of Sebestens one ounce, syrup of
Roses solutive one ounce and an half, mix them, take it with Pease broth, or
Wine, or in a Bolus.

Usual Pills are either the former, Or. Take the Aromatic pill called
Alephangina, and that of Agarick, each one dram and an half; Cochie one dram,
Troches of Alhandal half a scruple, with syrup of Roses solutive make Pills,
give a dram.

Often sweating is good for moist Women, because it evacuateth from the whole
body: as with the Decoction of Lignum vitae using a spare diet, a Friend of
mine used this diet and proved with child before it ended.

Also dry or moist Baths; Bleeding in the Foot to provoke the Terms as we
showed.

The things mentioned to provoke Lust, increase seed, are chiefly used for
Conception: these are given to men, for they are most subject to impotency: but
women may use them to heat and increase seed; and sometimes both together, lest
one prove slow in performance. It is good to add for Women things proper for
the womb, hot and dry, and such as provoke the terms if wanting, and consume
humidity, Thus

With these pouders, the first is. Take Nutmeg one scruple, Musk two grains,
Salt a little, in a rear Egg every morning.

The second. Take seed of Siler montane one dram, Rocket seed half a dram,
Ivory shavings two drams, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, each a dram; Musk six grains, Sugar
two drams, give it in Sack one dram for a Dose.

The third, Take species of Diamoschu and Diambra, each half a dram; shavings
of Ivory one dram and an half, seeds of montane Siler two drams, Cinnamon one
dram, Sugar two ounces, or dissolve the Sugar in Cinnamon and Mugwort water,
and make Lozenges, give two drams.

The fourth. Take Boars stones two drams, Bulls pizle one dram, of the Matrix
and Runnet of a Hare, each half a dram, dry them, and powder them, adding
Cinnamon one dram and an half, Nutmegs, Cloves, each half a dram; Pepper,
Ginger, each a scruple; Rocket and Parsnep seed, Siler montane and Ashen keys,
each half a dram; Watercerss and Peony seeds, each a scruple; shavings of Ivory
and Goats-horn, each half a dram; Musk and Ambergreese, each six grains; Sugar
ten ounces, give a dram in Powder or Lozenges.

It is better to make Confections of Nuts, than Pouders or Electuaries, for
they will decay so.

A dry Confection. Take the preserved Kernels of Almonds, Hazel Nuts, Pine and
Pistacha Nuts, each an ounce; Cieron peels, Cinnamon, Cloves and Ginger candied
each half an ounce; Rocket seed candied two drams, mix them, give a spoonful at
bedtime.

Make Marchpane thus. Take sweet Almonds four ounces, Hazel Nuts two ounces,
Pine-nuts two ounces, Pistachoes one ounce, steep them in Milk, then bruise
them, and add species Diambrae and Diamoschil, each half a dram; Cinnamon two
drams, Ivory shavings one dram, beat them in round Cakes.

These Electuaries following are good. Take Conserve of Eryngus and Dog stones,
each one ounce and an half; Conserve of Rosemary flowers, Scabious, Citron
rind, Ginger candied, each an ounce; mix them with two or three drams of the
first, second, or third Powder aforementioned.

The rest are to be found in the Provokatives.

Or give one drame of Triphera magna without Opium in Sack.

The best Junkets are thus made; Take Nutmeg a dram, Ginger, Pepper, of each
half an ounce; dried Marjoram a scruple, Rocket, siler mountain, and Carua
seed, of each half a dram: Make a Powder for the following Receites.

Take the Brains of a Hog: boil them in Sack, then add the Powder
aforementioned and Salt, let her eat them often, at supper.

Or: Take the stones and Combs of Cocks, and use them as the former.

Or the stones of a Ram, slice them, and wrap them in the Powder mentioned, and
Sage leaves the Caul being wrapped about, let them be roasted for supper.

Also other nourishing meats are good.

This dish is pleasant and excellent: Take Mints, Scabious and Burnet, cut them
small; add two or three Eggs, Onyons, Nutmegs and Salt, make a Tansey thereof;
or wrap them in Past and bake them, with Colewort leaves, in the Embers, let
the Man and Woman eat thereof fasting, and go to the work four hours after,
eight days after her Courses.

This Decoction is infalible: Take Eryngus roots, Mugwort and Sanamunda: boil
them in red wine, a glassful of it warm morning and evening with a dram of
Triphera Magna, without Opium for nine days together.

This is a secret, and of great force, give Chemical Oil of Marjoram and Musk,
of each one or two grains; with the Runnet of a Hare.

If the Womb be loose and moist, we must warm, dry and strengthen it with
Baths, Fumes, Ointments, Pessaries, and sometimes relax it, when hard.

Baths, Insessions are chiefest, if used for five, six, or eight days after
the Courses, before the Husband be admitted, before bed time, or supper, or in
the morning, repeating them monthly three or four times, if she conceive not,
which we know by a stoppage of the Terms.

If we will make a Bath of hot drying and strengthening things; Take of these
more or less, white Lilly roots, Valerian, Orris, Mother-wort, Mugwort,
Pennyroyal, Nep, Organ, Calamints, Marjoram, Baies, Savin, Juniper, Chamomil,
Rose, Elder, and Lavender flowers, Bay and juniper berries, of each a pugil;
seed of Siler Mountane half an ounce, Alum three drams or more, or Salt: Boil
them in Rainwater, adding Lixivium, Smiths forge water, and Wine.

If you will have it more binding, add Galls, Pomegranat slowers, of each a
pugil; Bramvle and Oak leaves, of each one handful; Alum half an ounce: Boil
them as before, with more Forge water.

When we desire to relax: Take roots of Lillies, Mallows, and Marshmallows,
with the leaves of Pellitory of the Wall, of each as much as is sufficient, add
Marjoram, Pennyroyal and others that strengthen the Womb, with Lime and
Fenugreek seed, of each a pugil; flowers of Chamomil and Melilot, of each two
pugils: Make a Bath.

If you will purge the womb from moisture, add to a hot Bath Bryony roots,
Mercury and Arsmart; make a Bath, or Fomentation.

She may be bathed for a month together, every day if her Body require it.

The last refuge is the use of natural hot Baths for a month, every day for
many hours sweating, as of Alum, Niter and Sulphur, with mollify exceedingly
in the hardness of the womb, but they will make sound women Barren and help
over moist bodies by drying. Also Salt water by its self, or which other proper
things is good. A Fume taken into the womb, is also good, from a Decoction in
the swearing chair, or in the Bath.

A hot and strengthening, is thus made of sweet Plants, as of the Decoction of
Motherwort, Pennyroyal, Calamints, Organ, Sage, Hysop, Basil, Marjoram,
Rosemary, Chamomil, with Fumitory and Burnet, the roots of Masterwort, Valerian
and Acorus: Boil them in wine and water.

If we will astringe more, and dry more: Take roots of Snakweed, Agrimony,
Acorn cups, Cypress nuts, with red Wine and Water: Make a Decoction.

Let her take into her body a Fume of Pouders or Troches, upon live Coals,
Thus made: Take Benzoin, Storax, of each two drams; Labdanum one dram, wood
Aloes one scruple, Musk half a scruple, Sugar three drams: Make Troches with
Gum Traganth, use one at a time.

Or thus: Take Troches of Gallia and Alypta Moschata; put one upon the Coals.

Or this not so pleasant: Take Mastick, Frankincense Storax, Labdanum, of each
a dram; Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cypress nuts yellow Sanders, of each half a
dram; Castor a scruple: Make a Powder sprinkle a little upon the Coals.

Things that are put into the womb are called Nascals and if they be far put
in, Pessaries; they are to purge the womb from moisture, after Purging and the
Terms, when the whites flow, before bathing, or at that time; for two or three
nights continuance, or to make the Courses flow kindly, a little before they
appear.

Thus: Take Mercury leaves green, bruise them, and put them in a silk bag,
anointed with Batter. If it be too sharp use Honey and yolks of Eggs.

Or thus: Take Pulvis Benedictus half an ounce, Agarick three drams, Gith seed
one dram, Goats-gall one dram and an half, Pease flower one ounce, with juice
of Mercury, or Beets: Make a Pessaty.

To heat and dispose the womb for Conception, after bathing and Fumes, when she
is in bed, let her use the following Remedies all night the three last nights
of bathing.

Thus: Take Triphera magna without Opium one ounce, Mastick half an ounce,
Storax one dram, the runnet of a Kid or Hare half an ounce, Civet or Musk half
a scruple: make Pessaries in Bags.

Or thus: Take Mastick half an ounce, Frankincense three drams, Ivory shavings
one dram and an half, Cypress nuts one dram, Balm, Nep, Cloves, Spicknard, of
each half a dram; Civit or Musk half a scruple, or one scruple of Castor with
the Runnet of a Hare or Kid, and three drams of Storax: Make Pessaries.

In Viragoes whose womb is hard, and dry, it must be enlarged thus: Take Goose
and Hens grease, Mucilage of Faenugreek made with Wine, yolks of an Egg, each
half an ounce; Rosin of the Larch tree, Runnet of a Kid, of each two drams;
Orris roots three drams, Storax two drams, Wax, Musk and Castor: Make Pessaries.

You must anoint, after bathing, the Navil and Groins, above the Privities, Oil
Moschalinum, is the best.

Or thus: Take Oil of Wall flowers, of Nard, Hens and Goose grease, of each
half an ounce; Storax two drams, Cloves, Mutmegs, Mace, of each a dram; wood
Aloes, Schaenanth, of each half an ounce; Gallia moschata one dram, Wax as much
as will make a Liniment.

This is best: Take Oil of Marjoram and Cloves by distillation, of each a
scruple; Oil of Nutmeg by expression one dram, Civit and Musk some grains; with
Wax, make a Liniment for the Navel and Womb, some days after bathing, before
she come to her Husband.

She must have a Plaster also to the Reins, and Perinaeum, to cause the womb to
attract Seed, and strengthen, to retain it at the same time, or when bathing
Fumes, Ointments, and Pessaries are over, and she begins again to go to her
Husband; using it continually, or at least every night, to the last week
wherein she expects her Courses.

As this: Take the Plaster for the Womb one ounce, Gallia moschata one dram,
Storax one dram and an half, Cloves one dram, Mastick two drams with Oil
Moscheline: Make a Plaster.

If the Terms be stopped a month or two, and we fear she is sped with Child, you
must rest and expect a week or two, and let her be quiet, and except they
return, let the Plaster following be applied to the parts aforesaid, to keep
Conception and prevent Abortion, and she must keep it on every night: Take
Emplaster of Mastick an ounce, Snakeweed roots three drams, Cyprussnuts,
Hypocystis, of each two drams; red Sanders, red Roses, Cloves, of each a dram;
with Oil of Mastick: Make a Plaster.

Decent Copulation is very necessary for Conception, and it must be when both
Male and Female have a vehement desire, and it is better when desired from long
want of enjoyments, then from provocatives. And this is the cause why men
returning from Travail and Women from bathing, or abstinence from Venery do
sooner procreate. Then it must be ordered that both seeds may meet at the time,
and not be presently parted. And when the Woman thinks she has her due let her
abstain til the Child be grown to the Womb and well confirmed. If they go to it
a day or two after the Courses, then there is hopes of Conception: somthink the
best time to hit, is when they have their Terms. But we think it may be done at
any time, while the Womb is hot, as was showed. There are some that teach
diverse filthy postures to cause Conception, and which is worse, paint them
forth.

If a man before Copulation anoint his Yard with Civet, in regard the Womb is
delighted with the scent thereof, some think the Seed will be sooner received.

They report that the smell of Civet, Amber greese, Musk in baths, or Cloves, or
Pillows, especially at night, makes Women apt to Conception.

That a Male may be conceived, The Reason of getting Males, or Females.
rather then a Female: some think it may be by their using both a hotter and
dryer Diet then ordinary, that Males are gotten, which are of the hottest
Nature. Others say that if a man before Copulation, eat the Matrix of a Hare.
and the woman take the Stones dried and Poudered, in white wine, a Male will be
begotten. Or if the man anoint his Yard with Goose grease and Turpentine three
days before Copulation. Some think that of the Seed of the right stone, the
Males are begotten, and the Females of the Seed of the left: And that by
binding this, or that stone, at the time of Copulation, a Male or Female, may
be begotten. These follow Aristotle, who advises this to be done to Cattle.
But this is false, as may be seen in those that are Gelt of one stone, and yet
beget both Sexes, as we showed. Also reason teaches, that except the binding
be so straight, that the Seed Vessels be intercepted, the passage of Seed
cannot be hindered: And if that be done the man cannot be without great pain,
and so will have little mind to the sport, I Will warrant you.

Others thinks that Males are begot in the right side, and Females in the left
side of the womb, and therefore advise women to turn on the right side after
Copulation: Others Superstitiously bind the right Foot with a white rowler of a
Boys, and the left Foot with a black.

THE SECOND TOME IN ONE BOOK;
Which is the THIRD OF THE Whole Work.
Of Dolors, or Griefs, or Pains.
BY Dolor we understand here every Molestation or trouble of the five Senses:
of which sick people complain more then of the hurt of any Function, which is
joined therewith, we therefore shall not speak in this Book of Pain or Dolor,
as it is in the sense of Feeling, but as it is in all the Senses. These Dolors
are distinguished in respect of the senses wherein they are, for all the senses
may be offended, but diverse ways. For the four senses in the Face, and the
fifth which is over all the Body do suffer diverse ways.

The Senses in the Face, as Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, have not such
great pains, as the Sense of Feeling, and are sooner allayed. Of these we shall
speak in the first Chapter, Page 187.

The sense of Feeling, which is through the whole Body, has diverse grievous
and continuing pains; as Heat, Cold, Itching, Tickling, Pricking, Burning,
Cutting. And we shall show their differences, as they are through the whole
Body, or the parts thereof.

All the parts of the Body, that have the sense of Feeling, can scarce be
pained at once. Yet many parts together, or some outward parts, as the Skin,
may have a general pain. And when the Body is weak or loose, albeit it seems
to be pained all over, yet because the Patient complains rather of want of
Motion and strength: you may seek for the Cure thereof in our Treatise of
Weakness and defect of strength and Motion: when the whole Body has a
distemper, if it be great, all sensible parts may be offended. And this cannot
come of a cold distemper, so that every part is at the same time affected,
except it be deadly, but of a hot. So in Fevers all the parts of the Body are
inflamed, and all sensible parts are offended, of this we shall speak in the
Fevers, the second Chapter, Page 187.

There are pains of all sorts of some parts of the Body. And these are either
hidden or more manifest in diverse parts.

The hidden pains are inwardly in the four distinct parts of the Body: The
Head, Neek, Breast, and Belly, and the Cavities thereof, and are distinguished
according to those parts.

The pains which are in the inward part of the Head within the Skull, shall be
spoken of in the third Chapter, Page 235. Of the pains of the Head.

The pains that are in the inward Cavities of the Face shall be described, as
follows.

The pains in the Eyes shall be spoken of in the fourth Chapter, Page 241. Of
Pain in the Eyes.

Those in the Cavities of the Ears, in the fifth Chapter, Page 251. Of the
Pains of the Ears.

Those of the Nose, in the sixth Chapter, Page 253.

Those of the Mouth, in the seventh Chapter, Page 255.

Those of the Bones of the Mouth, in the eight Chapter, Page 258. Of the
Toothach.

The pains which are in the inward parts of the Neck, shall be spoken of in the
ninth Chapter, Page 263. Of the Pain of the Jaws.

The pains which are in the Cavity of the Breast, shall be treated of in the
tenth Chapter, Page 269. Of the Pain of the Breast.

The pains which are in the Cavity of the Belly or Panch, shall be thus treated
of.

The pains which are in the upper part about the Heart, shall be spoken of in
the eleventh Chapter, Page 277. Of pains of the Heart.

Those on the Sides, shall be spoken of in the twelfth Chapter, Page 294. Of
Hypochondriak pains.

The other Pains shall be spoken of in the thirteenth Chapter, Page 305. Of
pains of the Belly.

Other pains in the parts adjoining to the Belly, manifest themselves by things
voided, as by Stools or Urin, of these we shall speak in the treatise of things
cast forth: Other pains which are in certain holes and parts thereof, shall be
hear declared.

The pains in the inward parts of the Privities, shall be mentioned in the
fourteenth Chapter, Page 391.

Those in the Arse, shall be spoken in the fifteenth Chapter, Page 393.

The pains that are outward in the Body, are more manifest, and are thus
distinguished.

Some are more deep and profound, these shall be spoken of in the Pains in the
Habit of the Body, sixteenth Chapter, Page 396.

Those which are more outward and higher, and appear more, shall be mentioned
in the seventeenth Chapter, Page 408. Of the Pain of Superficies of the Body.

CHAP. I. Of the Griefs of the Sight, Hearing, Smelling and Tasting.
The Kinds,
ALthough that Irksome sense which the Touching feels be properly called
Dolor, yet we may call them molestations or Troubles, which the other Senses
endure, by that name, when the Function is not lost but offended. This comes
diversely to the Sight, Hearing, Smelling and Tasting, from whence there are
diverse kinds, which are easy to be perceived, but not to be described or
named. The Offense of the Sight or Hearing. The Insuavity of the Smelling or
Tasting.
The Dolor of the Sight or Hearing we call The offense of them, and and the
Dolor of the Smelling or Tasting we call insuavity or want of Relish.

The Causes.
These four mentioned dolors of the Senses comes from the violent quality of
their objects which does strike upon, or disturb them: from the object of the
sight, by Brightness: of the Hearing, by Grating; of the Smelling by Stink;
from the object of the Taste by its unsavoriness.

A Splendour or great Light if it be vehement, Splendour or Brightness causes
the offense of Sight.
as of the Sun, or Flame, or come suddenly to the Eye, as of Lightening,
molesteth it. Hence it is that men shut their Eyes at the sight of them. And
the sense of Feeling perceiving the molestation in the Eyes and Nose
caussneesing to shake them off, as we showed in Sternutation. Also Light when
it is discolored, and shines much and long, and strikes much upon the Sight is
an enemy unto it.

A great Noise by Crying, Ringing of Bells, Noise hurts the Hearing.
Trumpeting or Drumming, or otherwise coming suddenly, especially near the
Ears, as of a Musket or Cannon, hurts the Hearing.

A strong Stink or Smell, as of Soot, or things burnt, A Stink hurts the
Smelling.
or from Excrements molesteth the sense of Smelling: And sometimes by twiching
of the Nostrils, and provoking their sense of Feeling, they cause neezing, and
by offending the Neighbor Palate and Taste, they cause Loathing and Vomiting.

An unpleasant and ungrateful savor, as bitterness, or extreme saltness, or
sourness, or the like, coming externally from things taken in, or from external
humors or exhalations, An evil Relish is the cause of Insuavity.
sent to the sense of Tasting, causes molestation, and also offends its
sense of Feeling.

The Cure.
Take away the Cause and the Effect cease. If it be external which uses to
offend all the four Senses, it either quickly cease or may be allayed. If
internal which only hurts the Taste, it is amended by purging of evil humors
and repressing of stinking vapors. If offense remains by an impression upon
the senses, it is to be cured by evacuations and things that alter and change
the impression, as too much Light, by Darkness, offensive Colors, by such as
please the Eye, Stinks, by Sweets, evil Relishes, by savory meats, as we showed
in the depravation of the senses.

CHAP. II. Of Fevers.
The Kinds.
AFeaver called Puretos is a Disease in which the whole body is inflamed with a
preternatural heat which continues, it begins with cold and shivering, and
brings forth diverse molestations and symptoms. There are two chief kinds of
Fevers that differ, in that they are either constant, or cease and return
again. Those are called Continual, these Intermitting. Continual Fevers.
Continual Fevers are those whose hear from the first to the last never wholly
cease, of these there are diverse kinds, the first sort we distinguish in
respect of heat into sharp, and gentle or lingering, we call them sharp or
acute, in which the Patient manifestly perceives heat and thereby molestation.
These are twofold, Pure, whose pure heat only heats the hand that touches it,
and Impure when the heat does not only heat but prick the hand. We call them
gentle, when the Patient feels little or no heat, and not constantly though the
Fever be constant, of these there are two sorts, Hectic so called because the
body has gotten a habit of them, and simply gentle or lingering when there is
no habit. If any of these have a Venom they are called Malignant, these are
threefold from diverse causes, Putrid malignant, or Pestilential, or Venomous,
but to divide them according to their apparent accidents (for better
understanding) some are called Solitary which have only the accidents of
Fevers, others accompanied or which have the accidents of other Diseases with
them.

Continual solitary Fevers are such as are not accompanied with other
accidents of other Diseases, but with such as belong to Fevers, and these
accidents come from sharp lingering, or malignant heat, either single or
together from hence some Fevers are called simple, others compound.

Simple continual and solitary Fevers, Simple continual Fevers.
are when one sort of Fever only possesses the body: These are shorter or
longer, or more constant and lasting, if they have their Courses,

The shorter reach not to the seventh day, or to the weeks end: such are some
acute and Malignant.

This is that sort of pure Fevers, of which we did speak, The pure Fever, is
a kind of continual Fever.
and is called continual, not Puttid Fevers, and Diaria, because it continues
but few days. This comes of external causes and continues sometimes but one
day, Ephemera, is a kind of pure continual Fever.
and lasts scarce twenty four hours, and then is called Ephemera: sometimes
it lasts two, three, or four days: And then it is called a Diary Fever of
many days, or Synochus pure, or simple. These end not suddenly with a Crisis,
but by degrees by hidden transpiration, or moisture, or by manifest sweat: or
they turn into impure Synochus after three or four days, and that lasts
longer: or into an Hectic which is longest, and we shall show by signs, into
which they will turn.

The accidents or Symptoms of Diary Fevers are these, sometimes they begin with
a little shivering, especially if they be any thing impure, sometimes without
shivering, from an external heat.

A feverish heat following a shivering, or without, is never increased with
fits, from the beginning to the end, but either is in an equal degree, as in
Ephemera, Synochus, Acmastick or Uniforme, or Seems, to be increased in that,
which is called Epacmastick that increases, or Paracmastick that decreaseth.
The heat varieth in them for it is milder, as the Fever is shorter, as in an
Ephemera, this is called gentle, because the Skin feels moist; or stronger,
as it is longer, as in Synochus called sanguin, sometimes with sharpness, when
it is choleric and begins to grow putride.

The other accidents which are worse, or better, as the heat and constitution
of the body is, are pain and beating of the Head, thirst more or less, and
bitter rast; in choleric persons unquietness, weariness, watching, or deep
sleep, short breathing, quick pulse, strong and great, yet not uneven, a red
face, swolen, great Veins, a soft Skin, and dry, in chollerick persons; Urin
not much altered, when the Fevers are short, if long; red sweat not ill
sented, or troublesome.

A Malignant short conrinual Fever, is sometimes Pestilential, The Pestilent
Fever, is a sort of the continual Fevers
and is not unlike the formentioned acute Synochus, so that it is scarce to be
distinguished from it, but by the generality of it in time of infection, and by
the sudden taking away of strength. And if it have a botch, as is usual, it is
not distinguished, hence it is that many infected with the Plague, suppose they
have only a Synochus for a Pestilent Fever, comes also from external causes,
but they are occult: and suddenly and secretly smite the body, as in a moment,
and ends in a few days, as a Synochus does, except death or a Crisis appear.

As for the accidents of this Fever. It begins commonly with a little horror
or chilness, and after follows heat; which is sometime so gentle that the
patient complains little thereof, And the Urin is little, or nothing different
from a sound. Yet the Pulse argues weakness. But sometimes there is vehement
heat and sharp, as in a Synochus, and then the accidents are alike, as pain of
the Head, doting, watching, and thirst, and sudden loss of strength. And also
sweats, which in Pestilential Fevers come at the first, and return in again,
and yet do not put a period to the Disease.

The long continual solitary Fevers, are a week or two, or more a coming, such
are some acute and Malignant.

An Acute long continual solitary Fever, A Putride Fever, is a short
continual.
is one of those called impure, and is called also a continual putride Fever,
or a weeks Fever, distinguished from the Diary, or days Fever. Which
beginning of it self, or from a pure Synochus turning impure (which is thus
known, when the pure ends not in the fourth day at farthest, and the heat
increases especially if there be a new chilness, as is usual;) when after the
beginning it stays a little in the increase, and so comes to the state, or
height; the Patient is freed from it suddenly, by a Crisis and it declineth,
except death prevent. And if the Crisis be imperfect, which comes again, it
either kills, or cures: Sometimes, but seldom, this Fever, especially that sort
which is called burning if it fix, seems to degenerate into a new sort, which
suddenly consumes the body: And this is called a burning and melting Fever,
which some say is a sort of Hectic; And sometimes it turns into a true Hectic,
as a Diary Fever does,

There are more and more fierce accidents in these Fevers, then in Diaries, in
so much that by reason of the violence of some accidents, the Fever sometimes
gets a new name, as if it were of another sort. And these molest the Patient,
with horror, or amasment, heat, thirst, dryness of Tongue, Headache, which hurt
the functions, disturb the mind and weaken the strength, there are other
accidents observable by the consumption of the Body, and the Excrements.

Thus; At the first coming there is horror and shivering, especially when they
come of themselves and not by being changed from others; and then there is
little or no shivering; this presently ceasing, ever after there is no
trembling, except sometimes when a Crisis is at hand; neither will it return
although there be fits, or Paroxysmes: And if it should return it comes not
from this continual Fever, but from an intermitting joined with it, as I shall
show in Compound Fevers. But from this chilness, or horror, the outward and
inward parts also are cold, and sometimes only the inward, and sometimes only the
outward, when the heat is great within.

The heat which follows this horror, or chilness, according to the four times
of these Fevers, has diverse changes: for at first it is vehement and sharp,
An inordinate Synochus, Quotidian, or Quartan, is a kind of continual Putrid
Fever.
and from that to the state or highth it increases. In which time sometimes are
Paroxysmes or fits, and then they are called Synochae continuated distinguished
from putride Synochus. In which if the fits, or Paroxysms come often in a day,
so that the fever is twice or thrice cooled, then it is called inordinate and
continual, especially if the day after it come but once or not at all. But if
the Paroxysme come the next day and keep the same order after, which is rare,
then it is called a continual Quotidian. The third day is usually the fit day
in these fevers and then it is called a continual Tertian. The Quartan
continual, is seldom seen, because the fits are seldom put off so long.
Synochus, a sort of putrid continual Fever.
Sometimes these fevers have no distinct Paroxysm^s and then it is called
Synochus putrid, which is called also Epacmastick, Paracmastick or Homotonos,
or Equal, as it increases or is diminished. But if there be a great burning in
a continual putrid Fever which continues, as one fit it is called Causos or a
burning Fever; Causos is a kind of putrid continual Fever. Leipyria is a kind
of Causos.
in which the inwards burn and the outward parts are cold, it is called
Leiyria. But when these come to their height if there come a good Crises to
abate the heat, they decline, and this is by Sweat, Pissing, or the like
Evacuation: But if the Crises be for the worst, Death follows. And if the
Crises be not absolute, and the heat abate not, then by a new Crises we judge
of Life or Death.

Thirst is very troublesome in these Fevers, wherefore they desire moist, cold,
and sharp drinks. There is total loss of Appetite, and Loathing of Sweet, Fat,
and nourishing things. And sometimes of sour meats which in drink is pleasing.

Sometimes in burning Fevers there is dryness, blackness and Inflammation of
the Tongue, by which means the disease is called by the Germans Breune or
Braunchrot, that is an Inflammation with blackness, especially if there be
malignity and the Fever is common with this symptom. Also there is sooner or
later in the declining Inflammation chopping or exulceration of the Lips.

At the beginning there is great Headache, except they be senseless and perceive
it not, for which cause in Germany it is called the Headache or Hauptwe with
beating of the Temples and redness of Face. There is also Heart-ach. And a
beating pain of the Bones, Loins, Back, and Joints.

Doting, after sometimes, comes upon them, more or less, and Madness; for which
the Germans call them Daubhaptwe or mad Headache, especially when it is
malignant and vulgar. Sometimes a Convulsion follows these Fevers, but
watching is the most constant.

Sometimes by reason of the Fevers constancy the strength fails, A swooning
Fever is a kind of continual putrid.
and in the Fit day there is swooning and then it is called a Swooning Fever,
and then the pulse is great or small according to the strength.

At length the body pines by a long Fever and a melting heat, A melting
burning Fever is a kind of Causon.
especially in the declining thereof, by much Sweat and Pissing: Sometimes a
sudden consuming of the body follows these Fevers, especially a Causon or
burning Fever, as we showed in a melting Fever.

As for the Excrements, some vomit very much, others have the Hickets, and
sometimes a flux thereupon. There is often much Urin made after a Crisis in the
declining of the Disease. Sweat breaks forth sometimes and follows the Crises:
Otherwhiles bleeding at the Nose, or by terms, is critical or judicial,
sometimes it is not. The Stools and Urin are very much changed, and diverse in
substance and color: The Sweat is sometimes ill scented, sometimes of none. All
which changes and what they presage we shall speak of before the Cure.

A longer malignant and Continual Fever, A putrid malignant Fever is a sort
of a Continual Fever.
is often among Putrid malignant Fevers not much differring from the former,
which is acute and putrid, only it is more vulgar like the Plague, among people
of age, and especially men. It comes secretly upon some, and suddenly destroies
them. This is prolonged some weeks as the putrid, and is ended by a Crises, and
some evacuations as the others, but not so certainly.

There are also the same accidents which are in a putrid Fever; but greater
and more dangerous. Yet the heat is more disorderly and unequal.

The pain of the Head and doting is the most manifest, first and chiefest
symptom.

Also Inflammation of the Jaws and Tongue.

Also there is a sort of malignant fever which came first out of England into
all Europe, The English Sweat is a sort of putrid malignant and Continual
Fever.
which declared it self by a continual Sweat, and destroyed many. This was
called The English Sweat.

Also a daily constant Fever alone, The Hectic Fever is a kind of Continual.
which continues not only some weeks but months is a sort of Hectic. This
comes from a change, when another fever ends in a Hectic, as a Diary, if it
turn not into a Putrid, ends in a Hectic after three or four days, or a
putrid Fever of long continuance, or very burning, as also intermitting
Fevers if long and vehement. These end in Hecties, and kill a man at a
distance.

As for the accidents, the Patient feels no great heat, and thinks he is not
feverish, except an hour or two after meat; and that the Arteries are hotter,
and more stretched out and hard, and swifter in motion, as in other Fevers.

Extenuation follows this Fever, or it is increased after it was begun in the
putrid that went before it, so that at length the whole body is pined away; for
which cause (as the Consumption is in the beginning, increase, or State) there
are three sorts of Hecticks, not accounted so from the heat but Consumption,
they are called, Beginning, Increased, or confirmed Hecticks. In the last there
is nothing left but skin and bone, and it is called Marasmodes. Also when Fat
is voided by Urin, Marasmodes is a Hectic.
or like Bran, or Orobus, the Fever is named from thence, but we showed that
they could not be but from distemper of the Reins and Bladder.

By reason of long continuance, there must needs be great weakness; so that the
Pulse though quick, is small and weak.

Compound Fevers are when diverse sorts meet in the body, Compound constant
Fevers.
at the same time, which happen diverse ways either by mixture of continual
with continual or intermitting Fevers.

Diverse sorts of constant Fevers aforesaid mixed together do afflict the body,
A Fever compound of a putrid and a Hectic.
as when a putrid is joined with an Hectic of its own producing.

In this the vehement heat does so hide the gentle, that the putrid is thought
the chief, only the Hectic is discovered by the Consumption especially when
the putrid declineth. And this Hectic sooner dispatcheth the Patient. And it
is distinguished from a melting Fever that comes after a burning, because in
that the Fever is most ardent and sooner kills.

Also all other continual Fevers may be joined with an Hectic which went
before, and will sooner destroy the Patient, as other diseases coming after an
Hectic. This mixture is known by the new heat of what sort it is, and by its
signs.

Continual Fevers are often mixed with intermitting, A putrid Fever mixed with
an intermitting is a semi-tertian.
and make also continual Fevers called persevering, and these are discerned
easily, by a new chilness coming at the time of the fit of the intermitting
Fever. All continual Fevers may be joined with an intermitting, and seem to
be one when joined with continual acute, called Putrid. And because an
intermitting tertian is usually joined with a quotidian, it is called a
semi-tertian, and it is greater when joined with a continual quartan, also a
continual and intermitting Quartane may be joined together.

If the continual Fever be first, it begins with astonishment and horror or
trembling, if the intermitting be first, with chilness; and there are two fits
in a day, one is from chilness of the intermitting, the other is an increase of
the continual without horror: And the second day they make but one fit, and
keep that order til they both go together or follow each other. Only an
intermitting Quartan joined with a continual, has two fits the fourth day.

Every Fever has symptoms according to its kind, especially because cold
falls in with the heat of a continual Fever which has inflamed the body, and
then in the fit of the Tertian the Patient feels both heat and cold, Epiala a
sort of semi-tertian.
this is called Epiala. Now the the heat in these compounded is greater than in
simple Fevers, because the heat of the Tertian is every other day joined with
the heat of the continual: Hence the symptoms of heat are vehement and alter
the body and the excrements, A swooning Fever is a sore of Jemi-tertian.
and weaken, and cause swooning at their meeting. And Rondoletius made a
swooning Fever one with a semitertian.

Also an intermitting Fever may be joined with a Hectic which it caused, An
Intermitting Fever compounded with an Hectic.
this is known by great leanness, and in the day of rest the lingering Fever
will be present which is known by the pulse and other signs. And so also you may
know when a Hectic comes after an intermitting Fever.

They are called continual accompanid Fevers, Accompanied constant Fevers
when there is another disease from them, or causing them, adjoined. These have
distinct symptoms that come from that Disease and change the the nature of the
Fever. Of this sort some are pure others impure, malignant, pestilential,
venomous, and hectical; if these Fevers go before the disease they are called
Primary, if they follow, secundary and symptomatical. And they differ in that
the Diseases accompanying are apparent outwardly, as Inflammations or Tumors,
as Carbuncles or Spots: Or are inward, as Pain, Cough, ill habit, and show
themselves by things voided.

An Ephemera with an external Inflammation.
Sometimes a day's Fever called Ephemera or a Synochus follows an external
Inslammation and has its accidents.

But if Inflammations come from a poisonous sting or bite, and have a Fever,
it is called a venomous Fever, this stays not above a day and has grievous
accidents, as Trembling, Convulsion, and the like.

A pure Synochus sends forth an Erysipelas, A pure Synochus and Carbuncle with
an external Eryfipelas.
and this denominateth the Disease the Germans call it Carfunkel or Carbuncle,
like a jewel or Hyacinth of a red yellowish color. This goes on as a simple
Synochus, and is ended or changed in some few days: And has the like
accidents, sending also forth a Tumor, the same day or the second or third day,
or inflammation in the Legs or Face, seldom in other parts; and the kernels
thereabouts do swell. These remain sometimes after a Fever, as we shall show in
Tumors.

An Ephemera or pure Synochus produces a Carbuncle, An Ephemer, pure Synochus,
Pestileneial, or venomous, joined with a Carbuncle.
as the other, an Erysipel as thus differing; it comes under the Ears, in the
Armpits or the Groyns, with pain and redness. This Fever is called by the
Germans Carbuncle as also the Ephemera and Synochus.

Also a Pestilent Fever sends forth one or more Carbuncles or Bubo's at the
first, or not long after, in the Groyns, Armpits, and behind the Ears, with
pain, these continuing and being inflamed turn Apostems and are grievous, and
bring a new Synochus. Sometimes they lie hid, especially in fat men, and
discover themselves only by pain and redness of the part.

We shall show in the Causes how that great pains may be in both Groyns in a
venomous Fever.

Anthrax comes often forth in some Fevers, An Anthrax or Carbuncle may be with
a pure, or putrid, or malignant pestilent Fever.
especially Pestilential; at first it is but like a Wheal, itching and burning,
and after it is an hard Ulcer. From this we have often observed (which is a
deadly sign) a long red line to the Bubo commonly accompanying it, or to the
heart.

Sometimes a continual, putrid, or single, or malignant Fever goes before an
Anthrax, not pestilential, and follows not except there be great burning.

Ecthymata or small Pox are thrust out by some continual Fevers, A Feever,
Synochus putrid and malignant accompanies the small Pox.
and they are commonly putrid malignant, few children escape them, and many are
infected in a place, aged people have them seldom. These Fevers are shorter
sometimes in which the pulses sooner come forth, sometimes longer, and then they
come forth slower. And the Fever lasts a week, and longer in people of
years. They end without a Crises certain, but by degrees and with a stinking
flux of the belly sometimes.

The accidents are the same with those of Synochus putrid, but milder in
Children, greater in men; and worst when most malignant. They come forth the
third or fourth day without a Crises or loss of the Fever, over most part of
the body, til they turn to matter, and then depart, as shall be showed.

There has been a pestilent Fever like small Pox which has killed many
Children and some men.

The Meazles come from the same Fevers, A Synochus pure, putrid, malignant,
pestilent, or venomous is joined with the Measles.
and as the other are pusles, so these are spots, red and broad over the body,
and especially the Face and Breast: Some Children have them both but at diverse
times, the Fever is alike in both.

In putrid malignant Fevers, red spots such as after flea-bites, or black, or
blew, break forth in the height or state of the Fever, these are signs of
malignity and Death. Sometimes there is a broad spot under the breast, as I saw
in a maid before her Death, in a malignant Fever. And in the year 1649. I saw
a blew spot which turned black upon the Heart of an old woman, before her
death, and her neighbor died of a Carbuncle in that place, where it appeared
ten years before, when he had the Plague.

The like in a Pestilent fever, show the infection and death, and are called
the tokens.

In venomous fevers, diverse spots declare the Poison.

Also a small Ephemera, or pure Synochus may be with the Gout, Colic, Stone,
bloody Flux, and breeding of teeth, and in hard travil, but this has no great
Symptoms.

A pure Synochus, which degenerateth at the end, may have other pain and
accidents from internal Inflammations, but if it follow them it is not long or
vehement nor dangerous, but by reason of the Inflammation. If the fever be
first, and the Inflammation follow (which is sometimes very sudden and doubtful,
which was first) if there be a cough of bloody and filthy matter in the Lungs,
and a pain, as the Pleurisy; or heat and stretching pain in the Liver or
Spleen, with this fever, it lasts longer, then a single Synochus, and
according to the Disease accompanying, it is longer, or shorter, or changed
into a putrid fever: As in the causes shall be showed. The accidents of these
fevers are less then ^^ose of a single Synochus, they seldom have the Headache,
although the Symptoms of the Disease accompanying be great and dangerous. And
they are not called by the name of a fever. But if a doting in a true
Frenzy, or Suffocation in a quinsie, which follow these fevers, as the
Inflammation of the Tongue follow the Disease called in High Dutch Brenne come
here upon, the companion of the fever is as the former. Albeit other dangerous
accidents (for which these are called very sharp Diseases) come from the
Disease.

There is with a Cough and mattery spitting and Consumption, The Tysick
accompanies a Hectic Fever.
at first a gentle fever which turns into a Hectic, this is not unlike a
simple fever, but kills at a distance. This heat being small, breeds no great
Symptoms, except at the night. The Pulls is often swift and inequal, but not
strong, when the fever increases, by reason of the Patients weakness. The
Urin is little changed.

There is sometimes a gentle Symptomatical fever joined with Cachexy or evil
habit, Cachexy, or evil habit joined with a gentle Fever.
which is either when the body is swolen and discolored, as in
Leuco-Phlegmatia, or grown less, as in Atrophy, the heat of this fever is not
sharp, but so gentle that the Patient feels it not: Like a Hectic, for which
it is usually taken; It is commonly in new born Children, and when they are
weaned, and in Virgins before they have their Terms. It is known by sharp
breathing, beating of the Heart, and Consumption of the body, which is seen by
the sticking forth of the Sword-bone in the breast, and of the Ribs and
Shoulders; it turns sometimes into a true Hectic, and is cured by taking away
the Disease that caused it.

When the Afterbirth, a dead Child, A gentle Fever from the Retention of foul
humors, or the like.
or Worms, or congealed Blood is retained, there is a preternatural heat, and a
Fever known by the Pulls and other signs that last not long, because the cause
is not of long continuance, as shall be showed. This is at first gentle and
Symptomatical.

Intermitting Fevers, that go and come at certain times, Intermitting Fevers.
are of one sort, and are called impure Acute, because there is an apparent
molesting heat, which is pricking and impure: Yet in respect of the days in
which they come, they are diverse.

These are solitary or alone, not accompanied with others, as continual fevers
are; for though they produce another Disease, yet it is distinct from the
fevers; Besides they follow not Diseases, for as we shall show in the Causes,
when a Disease causes a fever it must be continual; nor are they
Symptomatical but Primary, and begin of themselves.

But intermitting fevers are single, as the continual are, in which not one
alone, but two or three sorts come in diverse fits: and therefore it is called a
single, a double, or a triple intermitting fever. Any of these joined with a
continual, is Compound, as the Semitertian, or the like, wherein the Patient is
always in a fever.

The Course, of this Acute impure intermitting fevers, of what kind so ever,
is the whole time of the other, sometimes for a week or longer, or for many
months. In which time a fever coming extraordinary in the time of the sit: by
which we know the time. This is properly called the worst time of the fever,
and the time of rest is called remission: both which are named from their
circuit, which from the accession either returns the same day, or the
following, third, fourth, or fifth.

Those that return the third day are the most frequent, called Tertians, An
intermitting Tertian.
and sometimes they come at the same hour, often sooner: but later when they
decline. The accession of these fevers, is sometimes at four hours, twelve, or
fourteen hours distance, and there are so many sits, or more before it cease.
They are most in Summer, and young people: When they come in Autum, and in old
men they last longer, and are dangerous.

They which come the fourth day are called Quartanes and are usual, An
intermitting Quartan.
either sooner or later, the fits are as long, or longer then those of a
Tertian, and the whole course, seldom lasting less then three or six months:
Sometimes above a year, or two, These begin in Autum and scarce ever leave till
the beginning of the next Spring, and are more frequent with people of a middle
Age.

They which come the next day are called quotidians, An intermitting Fever.
and Amphimerinae. The acession is eight hours, and the intermission six,
according to the ancients, but we know it not. These Quotidians are of the kind
of Tertians, or quartans, not a new sort, for if either seize upon a body, and
another fever follows, as is usual, either presently or a little after, of
its own nature, or of another sort; Then there being diverse, one comes one day
and another the other; so there are diverse accessions or fits daily, not equal
nor at the same hour; till one is gone and the other returns to its former
order, either the third, or fourth day: as in double Tertians, and triple
quartans, A double Tertian. Triple Quartan. Double Quartan.
but if it be a double quartan, the fit is two days, and the intermission one:
If a Tertian meet with a quartan, the fit is three days together and the
intermission one day, if it return the same day, it is not a new sort; but when
quotidians come sooner, one may come, when another departs. And if the later
fever, that it fall in with the former in the time of the fit, then the fit is
longer: and may continue eight or ten hours, but it is two fits, of two Agues,
the one begins with a new chilness at the end of the other.

Some return the fifth or sixth day, A Quintan, or Sextan Fever.
but they are but quartans, which stayed longer away than usually.

There are diverse accidents of intermitting fevers, which are troublesome, as
cold, heat, thirst, Headache, and change of Excrements.

Intermitting fevers not only begin, but return with a cold fit first, as the
continual do, with yawning, shivering, and coldness of Hands, feet, Nose and
Ears, first; then shaking: the Germans therefore call it Kaltwee or Frierer,
from the cold. This is greater or less, An Ague, in Highdutch called Kaltwee or
Frierer.
according as the Ague is. Sometimes the body is very cold, and the chilness
come sooner in a Tertian, slower in a quartan, the Body shakes, the teeth
gnash. Both begin sometimes with less cold, but then they last longer; sometimes
the cold is felt inwardly and outwardly also; sometimes more within or without;
And when every part feels cold with heat, it is called Epiala. But we suppose
that this is, because intermitting fevers meet in the same day, and the cold
of one begins, before the heat of the other is past. Or when intermitting
fevers meet with continual, as we showed Semitertians, for in the continual,
there is always heat, and when the intermitting comes, it begins with cold.

The heat which follows the cold and shaking, or mixeth with it, in most
vehement Tertians, presently kindled, dispersed through the body, sharp,
quickly at the highth, and quickly declining. In others it is gentler, nor so
general in the whole body, but like the burning of green wood, as in tertians
that have lasted long. It is also vehement in quartans, but not equal over the
body, but with mixture of cold, and as it were pain of the joints and bones.

Thirst is the greatest Symptom in tertians and quartans; they call for drink,
as for life. And sometimes in the cold fit, especially when the cold is outward
and the heat inward, they desire drink.

Sometimes there is Headache, at first, but it cease before the end.

The change of Functions, is seen chiefly in these: They sometimes dote in the
time of the fit, they are unruly, and tossed, when the heat is at the highth: And
they cannot sleep sometimes: Sometimes they sleep too much, as in Children. They
draw much breath: the Pulls at the first is small; afterward quick and often,
and great, and more or less uneven. There is weakness, except the strength be
renewed, in the time of intermission: There is in some a swounding from whence
it is denominated. A swounding fever, is a sort of intermitting Fever.
At the end of the cold fit there are often bitter Vomitings. Also after every
fit there is plenty of vaporing and hot sweat, by which they decrease, and by
which they are judged: Sometimes they void much Urin often, and have sometimes
the Haemorrhoids, or Courses.

There is alteration of Excrements to be seen by the Urin, which is of a yellow
or flame color and substance, and in Tertians ptesently, or in quartans at a
little distance; they turn white and waterish at first. Also a black Urin is
not always bad in a quartane, if the matter of the disease be thereby purged.
The stools are choleric and yellow sometimes black.

The Causes.
The first Cause of all Fevers is a Disease, A hot distemper is the cause of
all Fevers.
which is an hot distemper or preternatural heat making all the body hotter
than it should be. The heat which disturbeth the Patient is a symptom. First we
shall consider the place, then the essence of this heat whether it be a Disease
or a Symptom.

The place affected is not one but all parts of the body: In all Fevers the
whole body is the seat of the hot distemper.
not only the fleshy parts which are sooner inflamed, but the Membranes and
bony parts take this preternatural heat. The heart grows first hot and then all
other parts more or less begin to burn by consent, as they are by nature hotter
or colder: But this is not a Fever, except the heart be also inflamed though
the whole body burn with the blood, spirits and other principal parts, as the
Brain, Liver and the like. Nor can the heat of the heart cause a Fever if it
be little, or if it be short, though vehement, such as comes by Anger, or
Motion except it be fixed.

The essence of this preternatural heat in Fevers (...) not the same in all,
and the difference thereof makes different Fevers. For this heat is either
adventitious and mutable, which is called a fiery heat, and that is either pure
and single which inflameth only the body and causes pure or not putrid
Fevers. Or impure and mixed with putrefaction, infecting the body, and making
putrid or impure Fevers. Or it is malignant and putrid together, or alone, and
infecteth, causing malignant putrid, pestilent and venomous fevers. Or this
heat is fixed and constant, or a change of the temper of body into a more hot,
hence come those called Hecticks. How these come, whether of pure heat, or
filthy, shall be showed in these three causes.

A pure simple heat when it only is a little increased, A pure heat is the
cause of pure or not putrid Fevers.
first in the Spirits and Blood, Veins and Arteries, and so sent to the Heart
and fixed to the matter that nourishes it, and so communicated to all parts
causes pure, simple and continual fevers; when the heat being once kindled
goes not out till it be quenced. These are either solitary, or without any
other disease in their course; or accompanied with another disease that went
before or comes after. The cause of this variety is when the cause of the
disease is either in the vessels or out of them.

If Blood is kindled or inflamed in the vessels, that is, Heat of blood and
spirits coming to the heart is thecause of pure continual Fevers. Heat
remaining in the vessels causes solitary Fevers.
in the Veins and Arteries, and so the heart set on fire, and a fever
produced, and it continue to the end without moving into other parts, then the
fevers are called Solitary, or accompanied, or symptomatical, as they come
from or not from the disease.

If no Disease cause these Fevers; but the blood is inflamed in the Vessels,
then they are called Solitary, and Primary, being accompanied with no other
Disease, or accidents: and as the heat is more, or less, they are shorter, (as
for a day, except they turn into putride fevers:) or longer, when the heat is
more fixed which causes the Hectic. And this is not, as some would have it,
that if the spirits are only inflamed, the heat should depart in one day, which
causes Ephemeral fevers. And if the blood be enflamed, the continuing longer
causes a Synochus; if the heat be in the substance of the Heart, a constant
Hectic: Because in all these kinds, neither the Spirits nor the Blood can be
enflamed by themselves, being confusedly together in the Vessels, and the
substance of the Heart must be inflamed together with them: And every Fever,
and other Disease, must have some solid part to subsist in, as their subject,
and not the Spirits and Humors. But this diversity of fevers, comes from the
Cause, from whence they proceed, and the Subject (which is the body of man)
wherein they are.

In respect of the external cause, as it works these in the body, and
continues longer. These Fevers differ in time and greatness: and this
external cause, is either from things without, or taken in, or from exercise.

Of things without, these by themselves inflame, as hot Air, or Water, if long
continuance be made therein by accident, these vehement cold and sudden,
especially taken when the body is hot, by outward Air, or Water. Because the
heat being suddenly struck inward by the cold external, inflames the Spirits,
Humors, Bowels and the very Heart. And this is more probable, then to say (as
others) that it comes from the stoppage of the Pores of the Skin by cold,
whereby the Air, which should pass through to cool and Ventilate (as they call
it) is hindered, and so the blood is inflamed and putrified. But we showed
formerly that the necessity of Respiration, or Breathing was ordained not to
cool the Heart, which being in health, it needs not; and the use of
transpiration was not to cool the blood, which being temperate, it needs not;
But for the Evacuation of Excrements, as we shall show in putrid Fevers, which
proceed from the want of that.

Things taken in, which actually or potentially inflame, especially if they
pierce suddenly, do the same; as strong Wine, and strong Waters drunk in great
quantity, and the Anacardine Confection being very hot. And we shall show that
neither crudities nor corruption of meats, as some think can produce these pure
Fevers, but other Diseases, or putrid Fevers.

Vehement motion, especially running, by heating, may cause the same, as we see
in Horses after Races, that we perceive to be feverish, from their short breath
extreme heat and sweating. And Women long lying in hard Travail, by a continual
motion, and hard, and often throws are in a fever, which is increased by pain.
Also immoderate motion of mind by watchings, chiefly sudden motions by anger,
frights, or joy, if they do not only stir the spirits and blood, but inflame
the heart, also cause fevers. But we suppose that fear and sadness cannot
cause these fevers, except there be also putrefaction.

From the subject Body, afflicted with these fevers, they are also diverse. Any
constitution is capable of them, from an external cause, by which heat being
stirred up, may differ in respect of the constitution, as it is temperate,
hotter, or impure.

If a temperate body be inflamed from without, Inflammation of the Blood, or
Spirits, (from an external cause) in the Vessels may cause an Ephemora.
in regard that heat cannot continue long, but the body must return to its
former temper, there may be a short fever called Ephemera. And the heat being
united, there is no great change made, and being not impure it begins not with
shaking, or Crisis, and it goes away by degrees through sweat, which is caused
by a gentle breathing, or exhalation from the same heat.

That is an over hot constitution, which is more fit to receive heat, and if it
be enflamed from an external cause, then from the double heat comes a Synochus
simple Fever, which lasts longer, and is hotter. This constitution is either
Sanguin, or Choleric.

The Sanguiue constitution, A sanguine Synoch, is caused by blood and spirits
inflamed in the Vessels from an external cause.
is sooner enflamed, when there is more blood or heat then ordinary. Therefore
young persons and Plethorick, or full bodies, and hot, and such as want their
usual bleedings by Haemorrhoids, Terms, or at the Nose, are sooner in these
Fevers. And these, by reason of the efficient cause meeting with the adjuvant,
or assisting continue above one day, to the third, or fourth day, and are
called simple bloody Synocks. These have a greater heat, and other Symptoms
from the causes mentioned, but otherwise they begin and end as the Ephemerae.

A Chollerick constitution being hotter, A choleric Synoch, is caused by
Instamation of Blood and spirits in the Vessels, from an external cause.
is easily enflamed from the same causes, with a Fever like a Synoch, called a
simple Choleric Synoch. And it keeps the same progress with a Sanguine except
some accidents arise caused by choler by which it is turned putrid.

If a foul body take a fever from an external cause, A Synoch which
degenerateth, is caused by Inflammation of blood and spirits in the Vessels of
an unclean body.
then if the blood be apt to putrify, the fever is no longer simple and pure,
but an impure Synoch and of longer continuance. But if the blood be somewhat
impure, and yet not apt to putrify, then the Synoch is pure, but the accidents
are more and greater then in the former. There is also a Synoch called
accompanied, when nature drives out of the Veins some of the impure blood.

If these Fevers come from a Disease and the blood being enflamed stay in the
Vessels, The cause of pure Symptomatical accompanied Fevers, is a hot disease
that enflames the blood and spirits.
then because they follow a Disease, they are called Symptomatical simple
Fevers. These are like the Ephemeral or Synoch Fevers, except they be turned
into Putrid, by the Disease that caused them, or their Course, or Symptoms
altered thereby.

The Diseases that cause Symptomatical fevers, are of some part, and send
forth such heat, that first it inflames the blood in the part, and then the
whole Mass, and the Heart; and the blood in the part is commonly more then
ordinary, by reason of the Disease and pain which attracteth. These hot
Diseases which cause fevers from hot humors, as Blood and Choler may produce
them without corruption; for Blood and Choler only of all the Humors, can
produce fevers, without putrefaction.

When Blood gets out of the Veins, A Disease of Blood, is the cause of
Ephemera, or Synoch. Or, Symptomatical Fevers.
not from the Fever aforegoing, (of which hereafter) but from some other
cause, as heat or pain, and falls into a part where it begets either a bare
distemper, which may cause a Fever in tender bodies: or an Inflammation, or
Erysipelas of diverse forts according to the variety of the Flux; if it inflame
it begets a Fever, in which the inflamed blood sometimes falling out of the
vessels (as hereafter we shall show) may renew the old, or cause new
inflammations. These fevers are simple and pure, not putrid, and as the heat
of the Disease is, they increase or abate, and end before it be quite over
except there be a suppuration or a new pain or putrefaction. These
symptomatical fevers are in diverse hot Diseases, of the Bowels, Membranes, and
other parts. And the more vehement or long as the Disease is nearer to the
Heart, and the parts adjacent, or great Veins, or as the heat is greater, or
the body by nature more hot, as in Infants who have a Fever many times only by
the breeding of Teeth. They are milder and shorter when they are from the
fountain of heat, or outwardly, in these there is little heat, but horror, and
sometimes not that.

The Choleric humor being most hot, A choleric disease is the cause of the
symptomatical Fever of the Ephemera or Synochus.
seldom causes these kind of fevers. But when it is not in its proper place
where it does no hurt, nor mixed with the blood, nor qualified with the Whey
which so tempereth it that it cannot produce a fever, as we observe in the
Jaundies, but separated into sensible parts the Stomach and Guts, and gets into
their substance, causing Erysipelas, about the Belly and the fever Lipyria in
which the inward parts burn with intolerable heat and pain as Aetius observes,
about those parts and great thirst, except it be cast forth by nature, it fires
all the parts adjacent with the blood and Spirits, and causes small fevers
which follow such Diseases. These we often see in the disease of Choler, when
it is vomited and purged, and in the Dysentery, and in the Colic coming from
Choler and Erysipelas in the Guts, as we shall show. And they cannot be great
fevers because their cause is far from the Heart, and lodges about the
Meseraick Veins,

If Blood inflamed from the causes aforesaid, Some Blood inflamed and sent out
of the vessels into other parts causes a Synoch primary and accompanied
get out of the great vessels into any part internal or external and inflame
the heart, and cause a Fever (as it usually does by its plenty, heat, or
thinness, or impurity, either at the beginning of a Fever, or after by the
force of Nature, as in the Crisis of these Fevers we may see by their bleeding
at the Nose) Then it causes a new disease in the part where it comes, and a
Fever which is accompanied therewith, but not symptomatical, because it
follows not the Disease, but goes before it as I shall show. And these observe
not the course of other simple Fevers, but being increased or abated by the
accidents of the Disease they are longer or shorter, greater or less: And when
nature has sent a good quantity of burning blood from the Veins, thy are not
so hot, nor so thirsty, nor full of Headache as in solitary Fevers. And this
chiefly when the blood flows into the bowels or superficies of the body.

Sometimes this flux of blood in Fevers is into the Bowels capable thereof;
The effusion of inflamed blood into the inward pars is the cause of Synochus
accompanied with Inflammation of the Bowels.
especially such as are most fleshy and bloody and full of Veins joining to the
great Veins and near to the Heart, and chiefly into the Lungs, which it
inflameth and causes a Peripneumonia and sometimes Pleurisy (as shall be said.)
These Inflammations go not before the Fevers, because the Fevers show
themselves before there is a pricking pain or signs of Inflammation, with
horror and heat following, and sometimes go some hours before: Nor are they
caused by those inflammations but as they were first raised from Fevers and
increased by a new heat in some part near the Heart which shows that the Fever
did not there first begin, and that is not putrid (as others thought) because
the heat raised from the Inflammation increases the fever rather by its
quantity then filthy quality. Nor does it acquire or get any putrefaction from
the inflammation, especially when it first comes, except the blood suppurate,
and then as Hyppocrates says it is increased. But we suppose this may be
rather from the pain that is then increased, and not a new putrid fever from a
putrid exhalation, because it presently cease. Except this happen from an
Ulcer that follows these inflammations, as when a Pleurisy or Peripneumony
turns into Phthisis, the fever being turned into a putrid symptomatical
Hectic, or from blood which is putrified and sent out of the Veins, as I shall
show in putrid fevers. These happen, as in the Lungs from the situation and
for to receive the flux. So may inflammations which follow these fevers and
increase them, be from blood in a Synoch sent into the Liver or Spleen, because
they are boody parts, and have large vessels. These fevers in all the said
inflammations of bowels, are longer than other solitary Synochs, in respect of
the Disease accompanying them. And they vary as the inflammations are true, as
Phlegmons, from whence some are called Phlegmonodes. Or Erysipelas, wherein the
fever is more sharp called Typhodeis though this name be proper to the fever
in the Erysipelas of the Liver. As the fevers from the Erysipelas of the Lungs
are called Crymodes. The same may come from blood sent into the brain in
fevers, which has large cavities and is easily filled: And then an
inflammation of the Brain is joined with the fearver, which turns suddenly with
doting into a Pleurisy, with a pain of the Head which went before, and caused
blood to come thither and makes the fever more dangerous and violent. This may
be also in the Stomach, Guts, Womb, Bladder, when the blood is sent thither in
fevers. But when another way which leads into the fleshy parts being
membranous have only meseraick veins, or are far from the great vessels and the
Heart, it comes to pass that when these parts are inflamed by pain which comes
quickly to such sensible parts, that the fevers rather follow the Inflammation
than go before them and are (as is said) symptomatical. As that inflammation
which is in fleshy parts which are not so sensible of pain, comes from the
fevers and is a symptom of them.

These Fevers send blood from the veins into other internal parts, Inflamed
blood sent into the habit of the body causes a Synoch, these inflammations are
red and painful.
as in the muscles of the Neck and Glandules and makes inflammations in the
mouth, Tongue, and Jaws, and Quinsie. And though they begin not from fevers
but other causes, yet when a fever comes, they increase. Sometimes these
fevers go before pains and swellings of the Gout, when Nature by them drives
blood into the Joints, and then they are red and swollen except the tumor lie
very low. So that such as are inclined to the Gout (being easily taken with
this Fever Nature being used to disburden her self into the outward parts,
joints, or skin) are subject to these Diseases. Also, albeit these fevers go
before Defluxions or Catarrhs, and promote them, yet because they do it not by
affording matter to them, but by moving the flux with their heat, they are not
differing from solitary fevers, though they may also be joined with other
diseases.

Nature does often discharge blood into the superficies of the body, Inflamed
blood in a Fever sent to the superficies of the body is the cause of Synoch
with a Botch, Erysipelas, small Pox, Measles or Carbuncle.
the Skin especially Glandules, and internal Membranes in these Synochs, and
cause there Redness, Heat, Tumors, or Pustles, sooner or later, and as the
blood is Pure, Thin, Thick, Yellow Black or Waterish; or impute, yet not putrid
(as we shall show) the Tumor and Heat and Pain are different. This Difference
is chiesly in respect of Tumors and Pustles.

These Fevers often produce Tumors or Redness called Carbuncles. These are so
usual to some Natures (by reason of the Heat, Thinness and Waterishness of the
blood, or Impurity) that they have them upon the least occasion at certain
times if the blood be but a little inflamed; nor do they spare old or gouty
people. They are diary as we showed, and a Tumor follows them, seldom the same
day, but two or three days after, either in the Glandules of the great Veins,
in the Groyns, Armpits, and Chine, if blood go along with them: And these are
with pain, and sometimes with inflammation. The blood often falling into the
lowest parts of the Legs, there is often an itching and then a burning in the
Ankles, and after a redness with Yellow or Black as the blood is in thickness,
if it be an Erysipelas. Sometimes it swells and is inflamed if it be an
Erysipelas with a Flegmon, when better blood flows thither, and if the blood
bewaterish, the whole Leg swells with an oedematous Erysipelas. These have a Bubo
or swelling in the Groyn going before them; the fever commonly abates at their
coming forth, so that former Writers were deceived that thought the fevers
began with them, and were symptoms to them, which are the contrary, for the
fevers appeared before there was sign of inflammations, And if the Glandules
only swel, there is no great heat, and it cannot be from a fever.

The small Pox, though it be usual in malignant fevers are sometimes in pure
fevers; And the Measles in Infants by reason of the fullness of blood or
disposition to be inflamed, they come forth the third or fourth day, but in a
pure fever they are not infectious, and depart themselves.

Nature labors also to do the same in Synochs, not putrid if the blood be black
which it desires to expel, by a Carbuncle not pestilential either alone, or
with a Bubo. And many fear they have the Plague through ignorance.

A Heat mixed with Foulness first raised from putrid humors or parts of the
body, A putrid heat causes putrid Fevers.
and so carried to the Heart; and inflaming it, and sent from thence to all the
parts of the body, causes putrid fevers, which continue or return while the
putrid vapors or humor go to the Heart; which they will do, because they are
bred in the Veins and Arteries by which they may be directly carried thereunto:
For these go to the heart with great Orifices conveighing humors and spirits
into it, and they cannot be carried another way. For if a stinking Vapor
couldpass the the cavity of the Breast another way into the Heart to inflame
it, we should always have a Fever from the vapors sent from the Excrements,
which though thin and hot, so that they may be let fly, and burned to flame,
yet cannot reach the upper parts to infect them, unless it be by making a
stinking breath: As we shall show. And although a poison or venomous quality
can reach the heart wheresoever it is bred, or by any passage, yet these vapors
bred in a thick putrid matter constrained to a certain place, but by the
manifest passages aforesaid. By which means as a simple heat sent to the heart
in the spirits and blood causes a pure simple Fever, so does a putrid vapor,
or matter by the same way, cause a putrid Fever; which is diverse according to
the diverse places, in which the matter is bred, which matter also is not
always of the same Nature. The stinking Matter is either bred in the veins or
arteries, or out of the vessels in the humor of some part, or substance thereof.

The Humors that cause putrid Fevers, either putrify in the vessels, that is
the veins and arteries, either continued to the heart, or in them that are not
joined by continuity to the heart, but can send a vapor by vessels that are
continued. And this is cause why among putrid Fevers some are continual,
others intermitting.

The vessels continued to the Heart are the Veins and Arteries except the
Mesaraicks. Foulness of blood in the vessels continued to the Heart is the
cause of putrid continual Fevers.
If any humor putrify in these, being largest and dispersed through the whole
body, because the way is open to the Heart, the vapor and part of the humor go
to the Heart and sets it on fire, causing continual fevers, because the cause
is included in the vessels. These if they kill not by the vehemence of the
cause and the Disease, or melt the body with heat, go slowly off, and and
continue til the heat of the Fever has consumed the mattter by Vapors, and
Nature has made Concoction of it and discharged it by a perfect Crisis.

The humor putrefying in the vessels, is blood, which being too hot and moist,
easily putrifieth, as we may observe by it out of the vessels. But all will not
putrify but from a great fault, but a little only: some remaining good (though
by reason of the Disease and fasting the Patient gets no new) and this is
separated from the bad into other places: And if it were mixed and grew hot,
yet it did not stink, but the filth being separated it returns to its former
purity. As we observe in letting blood it flows sometimes pure, sometimes impure,
and sometimes confused or mixed. Moreover though blood has diverse parts, yet
one cannot be corrupted alone, but all is made thinner, thicker or fatter
rather than cruder (which cannot make perfect blood as I showed) for the blood
in the Veins is made of them not distinct but confused or mixed (though they
seem divided) in cold blood; and there is no part of blood but is made of them.
This is manifest by the Urin and Sweat when the serum is putrified Hence are
diverse sorts of putrid fevers, not because diverse parts thereof called humors,
as Blood, Phlegm, Choler or Melancholy are corrupted, but from the place in
which the humors putrify, and the diversity of the blood so corrupted.

There are distinct Fevers in respect of the place wherein the humor
corrupts, first in the respect of the veins and arteries.

The corrupt Blood that causes putrid Fevers, is constantly in the branches
of the hollow Vein, and in the greatest of them, in which more may be contained
and from which the Heart may be sooner reached which cannot be done in the
least branches. Therefore in the trunk of the hollow Vein, which passes
upwards and downwards from the Heart, by the Backbone, or in the great branches
that come from it into Throat and Groyns, this corruption of blood, being
contained and always disturbing the heart; it causes diverse putrid fevers,
as the filth is nearer, or further the Heart.

Any corruption near the Heart which sends it self, Corruption of blood in the
hollow Vein near the Heart, is the cause of putrid Synoch, causon, Leipyria.
or vapors to it, makes a Synoch fever, which increases, or decreaseth, or
stands at a stay, according to the corruption. And in a causon, or bruning
fever, because its heat is near the Heart, there is no manifest change,
because the heat is equal; especially when the heat is at the height and cannot
be raised, but by death. Yet the Patient may find about the Breast, Midriff,
Back, where the corruption lodges, a burning which troubles the Heart and
parts adjacent: And this is the cause why in a Leipyria, which is a sort of
causon that the inward parts do burn.

When the corruption is in the branches of the hollow Vein distant from the
Heart, Blood corrupted in the hollow Vein remote from the heart, is the cause
of a Synoch exasperated.
because it causes not so much heating, it begets Fevers with fits, which
have different heat. For when the Vapors, whose matter is forced of, are
hindered by the long passages, and cannot come in order, and the same measure
to the Heart, it comes to pass when it is increased it comes with more violence
and increases both the heat and fits, without horror, as at the first, because
the fever was before. These fits go away when the Vapors are discussed, but
not the fever, for heat once kindled, although the cause abate, cannot thereby
be extinguished: as we showed concerning simple heat from an external cause,
which cause being removed the Fever cease not, till the Heart return to its
former temper. And this is the true cause of fits, which come sometimes twice in
a day when the stinking vapor is much and not far off: and the other day once,
because the day before some part was discussed, and keep or change their course
in respect of the cause which acts. Also when the cause is far of, or is
less, the fits come every third day at first, and so continue for a time,
seldom the fourth or every other day. For which causes these putrid continual
Fevers are called ordinate, or inordinate quotidians, Tertians, or quarrans.
But in those whose cause lurketh in the Veins remote from the Heart, there is a
heaviness, or pain, or burning in the part, where the matter lodges in the
Neck, Loins, or Joints. There is always a pain of the heart also, not that
the matter lodges there, but from the hot Vapors.

Also in all these putrid Fevers whether the matter be near or far from the
Heart, A Portion of putrid blood which causes a putrid Fever, sent from the
hollow Vein into other parts causes continual Fevers accompanied with other
Diseases.
a part of it may be forced by nature out of the Veins, as in pure Fevers, by
which she is disburdned into some internal or external parts, producing Tumors,
Pustles, or Spots, which are not signs of Inflammation, but Putrefaction. As in
Children, the small Pox and Meazles break forth (as Fernelius says) plentifully
in a Fever, like a putrid Synoch: but they are not infections, but in
Malignant Fevers.

It is a question whether blood can thus corrupt in the Arteries to cause
Fevers. Corruption of blood in the great Artery causes a burning Fever.
For it being hot and spritful, may easily burn and conveigh a a simple pure
Fever to the Heart, but it can scarce alone, or separated from the blood of
the hollow Vein, which is very pure, be corrupted; though with it, it may, or
be infected by neighboring humors: especially because vapors that come from
putrid blood, are carried that way to the Heart, both in putrid and
intermitting Fevers. But if corruption should be in the Arteries, from the
causes aforesaid, the fever will be most violent: as in a causon, when
corruption is in the trunk of the great Artery near the Heart. These fevers
also differ in respect of the blood, in respect of its temper, or distemper,
before it caused them.

Temperate blood which offends only in quantity and which is not naturally
inclined to putrefaction, if it corrupt, Corruption of temperate blood in the
Vessels, is the cause of a putrid Synoch.
causes a putrid Synoch, which is either made so from a Simple Synoch, wherein
the blood was first inflamed, and then corrupted, or from the external causes
at the first. Therefore some call the beginning of them, putrid Ephemera, which
come from outward Causes. But we, because this putrid heat ends not in one, or
sometimes many days as a simple does, cannot call the ephemeral, but putrid
Synochus, because in them the heat is milder then in other continual putrid
Fevers, and more equal, from the temper of the blood, having no fits from the
equality of the blood, and because being near the heart in the great vessels,
it is first afflicted with the external causes, and so the heart beats with an
even Pulse: As we showed.

If the blood be distempered, Corruption of hot blood in the Vessels causes a
burning Fever.
before it corrupt, it must be hotter then ordinary, for if it be too cold or
crude, it rather causes Cachexy or ill habit of Body then Fevers. And if it
be so, Corruption of hot blood in the hollow Veins and Arteries near the Heart
causes a melting Fever.
before the fever come, whether it be too thin or too thick or corrupted, it
causes Inflammation, and the more when it is in the Arteries, or any place near
the Heart, hence come burning fevers continuing in the same state, so
violently burning that except they kill, the substance of the Heart is melted
away therewith and dried, so that the whole body consumes, as we showed in a
melting fever.

Praeternatural Heat or fault in the blood is the antecedent Cause of
Corruption of it in the Veins.

If the blood beinflamed with heat, we showed, that it caused diary fevers,
within a sanguine and full Body, as we showed in a simple Synoch, except the
heat abate of it self, or by cooling medicines, cause a suppuration, either in
the blood or in the parts. So that the mass of blood being corrupted by long
heat, there is not a simple heat but a compounded fever, with putrefaction.
And this is the cause why a Synoch not ending the second or third day, becomes
putrid. This is known by the signs of an Ephemera and simple Synoch, the one
whereof is, that the heat began externally. And this is the reason why fullness
of blood which many say is the cause of putrid fevers, causes a change of
simple fevers into putrid.

Foul or evil blood, which has the seeds of corruption in it, or is disposed
thereunto, if it be gone so far by its plenty or corruption, that nature cannot
order it, that is amend or purge it, causes by putrefaction diverse putrid
fevers differing according to the place wherein, or the matter of which, the
putrefaction is. These are foreseen before they come, by a constitution, not
perfectly sound, nor sick, by reason of some secret fault in the blood: in
which there is a laziness, haviness and pain of the Head, troublesome dreams,
stretching of the sides or Hypochondria, Heart pain, Nauseousness, loathing of
Meat, change and stink of usual Excrements, or not usual as sweat, spitting,
vomiting, belching. This fault of blood comes either from things taken in, or
from Excrements retained, or from outward things.

Things taken, as meat and drink, which are the matter of which blood is
caused, if they be of evil juice or corrupt, cause this fault in the blood.

Meats of evil juice, though after they are eaten they are somewhat changed by
concoction, and turned into blood, yet in regard the former condition remains,
if they be often taken produce these putrid fevers: which are popular or
common, when the meats ordinary eaten by most people from necessity, are such,
as Herbs and Fruits, or Corn eaten in too much plenty, when unsound, as in time
of dearth, these infect the blood, and cause Epidemical Fevers in Cities and
Armies.

Also if the food be naturally good, and be putrified before it be taken, it
infects the blood. As when they are too old or corrupt by too much moisture,
whether Flesh, Fish, or Cheese, by stink and Putrefaction, being long taken,
infect the Blood, and cause Fevers. And common Fevers come by corrupt Water,
Bread, or Flesh at Sea, or from Corn, that is mowed up wet.

Those most easily corrupt, being eaten, which have much Excrementitious
moisture, as summer fruits, the eating of these in summer abundantly, causes
Fevers in Autumn or the Spring following. Things that nourish, as M^^k and
Eggs, or sweer things, soon corrupt in hot Stomachs, and turn to Choler, which
causes other Diseases rather then Fevers: So do hard Meats and slimy, when
the Stomach, Liver or Spleen are afflicted, for want of concoction cause crude
blood and obstructions rather than Fevers: Except there be other accidents.

The retention of the Vapors and Excrements of blood usually sent forth by
insensible Transpiration, or sweat infects the blood and causes Fevers. This
may be from diverse causes, from idlness and sluggishness of nature in expelling
of Excrements, obstruction of the Skin and pores thereof, and want of Air. Not
that the blood is inflamed and then corrupted for want of Air through the pores
to cool it, as we showed in the causes of a Diary Fever; Nor that it can come
from a sudden cold taken in while the body is hot. But because the skin being
made thick, the Excrements usually purged by the pores cannot come forth. And
because the body cannot be refreshed with Air, to consume the moist Excrements
under the skin; As we may observe by things kept in close places, where fresh
Air comes not, they grow moldy and musty: so by the long retention of these
moist Excrements, for want of Air the blood may be infected, and Fevers follow.

When the Air is infected with evil Vapors from stinking Carkases, and taken
constantly into the body, it infects the Spirits, Blood and Heart, and causes
putrid Fevers, and they are sometimes popular, when many live in it, and are
disposed for it. Or contagious, when the putrefaction comes from the breath or
sweat of sick men. This is from a malignant or venomous quality, rather then a
simple corruption.

The vessels not continued to the heart of veins and arteries are only the
meseraicks, Corruption of blood in the meseraicks, is the cause of intermitting
putrid Fevers.
branches of the gate-vein which comes from the liver, dispersed through the
bowels in the lower belly, and no where else, never coming forth to the skin
but in the Fundament, where they are called Haemorrhoids. For the Arteries
which accompany these, as also those that accompany the branches of the hollow
Vein, coming all from the great Artery, are continued to the Heart thereby.
Therefore if a humor corrupt in the meseraicks: though their passage be
intercepted by the substance of the Liver, in which all their branches are, yet
because the branches of the hollow Vein are also in the same substance of the
Liver, and are joined to the mouths of of the branches of the Gate-vein, and
because there is a constant passage of the Blood in the Liver by them: And also
because the Arteries coming to the Heart, are joined to the Meseraicks in the
Spleen, Stomach, and Guts. By this communion and vicinity it happens, that as
often as evil vapors rising from the Meseraicks, do fill the branches of the
hollow Vein and great Artery, they pass that way to the Heart, and cause putrid
Fevers by their stink; but these are not continual, but intermitting. And
because the putrid Matter is not far from the Heart in continual Fevers, they
may a little intermit, but not wholly cease: For the Heart once on fire, before
it be wholly quenched, and a new vapor in the Veins that come unto it, must
have fits at certain times: As we showed. Also this is from other Causes, a
filthy vapor in the Meseraicks, which causes a Fever, which does not
constantly touch the Heart with the same force, by reason of the distance, this
is not always unequal, but wholly cease, by reason of the stoppage of
passages to the Heart. And so long intermitteth while the putrid Matter
confined to its fire, swells, and sends forth a vapor to the Heart, with some
of it self. For it being abundant, and of an evil quality, provokes Nature to
send it into the branches of the hollow Vein and great Artery, and so into the
Heart, where it causes Fevers, to continue so long, till all the fuel be
burnt up, or sweat out: After which manner a Fever wholly cease, till a new
fit comes by a new motion and heat of the Matter, sooner or later, and not in
the same form: As shall be showed. Now let us consider what humor it is that
putrifieth in the Meseraicks, what is the conjunct cause of intermitting
Fevers, and the antecedent Cause of Corruption.

The humor contained in the Meseraicks is Blood, yet not so pure as that in the
Liver purged from the waterish and choleric Excrements, and fit for
nourishment, although some part of it for nourishing the membranes be pure, it
is waterish, and some part thick, it is full of excrementitious Humors that
pass with the Chyle, and being purged from these in the second concoction it is
sent into the hollow Vein. These excrementitious Humors seem whey-like and
choleric, for Serum or Whey coming from much drink, and moist food, and
passing through the Meseraicks, and carrying with it other crude humors,
passes in greater quantity to the emulgent Veins, and so to the Reins and
Bladder. The choleric Matter, rifing from Meats and Drinks mixed with Blood,
is first purged by the liver, and then sent to the Gall. Besides these two
Humors for which nature has made two receptacles, we can find none; nor can we
by reason or sense perceive that the Spleen was ordained for that purpose.
Therefore a putrefaction in the Meseraicks nor in the hollow Vein cannot be
distinct in any part of this blood, or in the excrements mixed therewith, but
must needs corrupt the whole mass. And if it come to the height that it sends
most hot vapors (which only can reach the Heart) then it produces these
fevers. Nor can they come from a crude or waterish blood which will not so
corrupt and grow so hot to send such vapors, but other Diseases may. As when
the matter which abounds in this blood is choleric, and is not sufficiently
cleansed in the Gall, but makes the blood too choleric, and putrifieth it, then
causes intermitting Fevers by hot and subtle vapors sent to the Heart. And
for this cause we affirm that this blood corrupted with yellow or black Choler,
such as we have seen voided by the Haemorrhoids in the Cure of such fevers; and
Children have voided abundantly by stool, causes these intermitting fevers.
Thus, The choleric blood being long in the Veins before it produce a fever, at
length corrupting, and swelling and burning about the Midriff, and sending
forth dry vapors (which first offend the sensible Nervous parts) by pricking
the expulsive faculty causes cold at the beginning of the fit (the heat being
sent in with the blood) and when nature strives to shake off that which
offends yawning, chilness, shaking; as we may observe in other places when
any sharp matter strikes upon sensile parts the body shivereth, also Vomiting
is often in the beginning from the stirring up of the expulsive faculty. These
are at the beginning, but after when the Vapor from the Midriff ascending to
the Heart by the ways aforesaid, enflameth it, a heat follows, and the cold
and shaking cease, except the Vapor go so soon to the Heart that the heat
appears before the cold be gone, and there be both heat and cold at the same
time, as in the fever Epialis. This heat being raised from the Midriff, the
whole body is inflamed, a great thirstand other accidents from heat continue so
long, til the Vapors being discussed by insensible transpiration or sweat, the
fever departs or intermits, so long til new matter corrupting in time of rest,
cause as many vapors as may make a new fit. And this course of fits continues
till all that matter which was apt to corrupt be taken away by help of Nature
and the Physician, for in every fit part of that choleric matter corrupted is
turned into a Vapor and discussed by heat, or sweat out, or pissed forth, the
Urin being after the fits yellow, red, sharp and stinking: sometimes the whole
Disease is dissolved by sweat; and if any thick part of the choler stick in the
skin, there follows the Maunge or Scab, or the like: sometimes by vomiting
phlegm and choler sent into the Stomach from the Gall is voided by which the
cause is taken away and the Ague cured. These are by Art or Nature separating
the feverish matter from the blood in the Meseraicks, and the Vomits and Stools
are bloody often, when there is a Cure, but it is dangerous because the way is
not ordinary, except the cause of the fever come forth with blood at the
Haemorrhoids, by these means we have seen quartans cured, which could not be by
other bleeding, which draws from the branches of the hollow vein only, and the
Meseraicks only appear at the Haemmorrhoids. Nor can the cause be so taken
away, except when the branches of the hollow vein are emptied, theseverish
matter gets into them out of the Meseraicks. But if there be such a passage,
and the putrid blood be mixed with that in the branches of the hollow Vein, an
intermitting fever is made a Continual as I have often seen by unseasonable
bloodletting, when the choleric matter is purged from the blood and the blood
tempered with serum and carried thereby into the branches of the hollow vein,
and so into the habit of the body and Urin which it tinctureth, then the fever
either cease with the Jaundies if the the whole cause be carried thither.
Sometimes this matter isinfused into the fibers or small veins of the Guts and
produces Erysipelas and Colicks, the fever ceasing or not as the matter is
wholly or in part carried away: from whence if Convulsions arise they are
dangerous as I showed. Fernelius says that he found a pound of this choleric
matter about the Membrane of the Liver and the Nerves of the Back in one that
he dissected after his death of a Fever. Therefore if choleric blood corrupt in
the Meseraicks, it is the true cause of all intermitting fevers, they come and
go, by reason of stoppage of the way to the Heart and thinness of the Vapors.
The diversity of them comes from the diversity of the place and matter.

The matter of this putrefying choleric blood is not always the same, but as
we see choler separated from the blood, is now yellow, now green, and black,
thicker or thinner, so is this diverse in the Mesaraicks, especially thinner or
thicker.

The Corruption of thin choler in this blood before it can cause a fever,
Corruption of thin blood in the Mesaraicks causes an intermitting Tertian
exquisite when pure. Nothus or Bastard tertian when impure.
must be three days after the first Corruption is discussed; hence it is
called a Tertian, which comes every third day. And if as much be corrupted as
before it comes at the same hour; or if more be corrupted, it comes one hour or
two sooner; when less corruption or matter for it remains, the fits are later
and the fever decaies. But as this chollerick matter is pure or impure, the
course of the whole fever and its fits varieth.

Pure Choler which is mixed with blood being hot makes an exquisite Tertian:
and because the vapors are sooner discussed the fits are shorter, and the
fever lasts scarce seven fits by reason of the quick motion of the matter.

If it be impure mixed rather with crude than phlegmatic humors and blood, it
causes a bastard tertian, in which the fits are longer, more disorderly and
the fever longer, because the matter is much and unequal.

If the Choler be thick and burnt; Corruption of thick blood in the
Mesaracauseth an intermitting quartan, or sextan exquisite or Nothus as the
matter is pure or impure.
because it is longer corrupting, it requires a longer time to get to the Heart
to make a fever, therefore the fit is not til the fourth day, and it is called
a Quartan. This comes sooner or later, is exquisite or bastard, has a shorter
or longer course for the same cause that a Tertian from which in heat and other
accidents it is much different, only by reason of thickness of the humor it is
longer and worse to be abated. And if the matter grow so tough that it
corrupts not under five or six days, to send up vapors that cause a fever,
then these fevers which are rare are called quintans or sextans.

These vary according to the place as the matter is in one or diverse places.

If in the same it putrify, the fever is a simple-tertian or quartan,
exquisite or Nothus in respect of the matter.

If in diverse places, it will be either in the Mesaraicks only, or also in the
branches of the hollow vein.

If Choler corrupt in the Meseraicks only not in one but two or three places
about the Liver, The cause of a double tertian or triple quartan, or confused,
is when thin blood putrifieth in one place and thick in another place of the
Mesaraicks.
Spleen, Mesentery or Caul, the fever is double or treble, and one ceasing
another follows the the next day, or the same. Hence it is that Quotidians are,
not as some talk from phlegm though they cannot prove it, for they are double
tertians or treble quartans, which have every day a fit or more, for I observed
in a double bastard tertian two fits in a day, and three in twenty four hours.
And to these may the double quartanes (which come two days and intermit one)
be referd, and as these are when Choler of the same nature corrupts in diverse
places. And when the Choler is diverse in diverse places, as thick in one, thin
in another, there are Tertians mixed confusedly with Quartans diverse days.
These are known by their symptoms.

If blood corrupt not only in the Mesaraicks but Branches of the hollow Vein,
Asemi tertian is caused by corrnption of blood in the Mesaraicks and vessels
continued to the Heart, at the same time.
then there is a continual with an intermitting fever called a semi tertian;
where in respect of the diversity of the matter tertians or quartans, single or
double, bastard or legitimate, are joined with a continual fever, that either
has no fits, or upon certain days. Hence it is that the fever is always
either with sharpness from the continual, or fits from the tertian.

The antecedent cause of this corruption in the humors of the Meseraicks which
causes fevers is either efficient or adjuvant.

The efficient is meat and drink by which hot, sharp, chollerick or burnt juvce
is bred in the stomach or first passages. This being long gathered nor well
separated from the blood, but in the Mesaraicks or another place, or diverse,
when it corrupts it causes fevers agreeable to its humor shorter or longer,
or otherwise differing. This juice comes from food that has such in it self,
or gets it by corruption.

These have sharp chollerick juice, Onions, Garlic, Leeks, Rotten Cheese, and
like, naturally.

By corruption these turn into such juice, especially in hot stomachs. Sweet
things which easily turn into choler, and fat. Raw fruits, by eating whereof in
Autumn come Dysenteries or bloody fluxes from choler, and also quartans. Also
other moist meats as Eggs and Milk, which nourish much, by corruption turn into
sharpest choler; of which this filth proceeding if it be not purged, it is
carried into the Veins and, gets fevers, though the vulgar impute them to
other causes.

The cause adjuvant is the disposition of body in respect of constitution or
season.

They who are hot and chollerick are soonest taken, and they of middle age, and
Infants by intemperance, and have the matter from the Womb like black
chollerick blood, and bring these fevers into the world with them. Sometimes
they suck them from their Nurse, as March 27. 1640. I had a Son born in the
seventh month when the Mother had the third fit of a bastard tertian, which had
at first the fever at the same time with the Mother, and two sits after, it
had sucked, and in the third with some light Couvulsions it departed being not
fourteen days old. Sometimes old men have them, but they are seldom. The
hottest time of the year and when the diet is worst, is the time to get Agues
in Autum tertians and quartans are usual by reason of the Summer Diet, in
Spring and Summer, Tertians are frequent.

Putrefaction out of the Veins and Arteries causes fevers, Corruption out of
the Vessels is the cause of gentle symptomatical Fevers.
when it sends evil vapors or corruption to the Heart and afflicts it with a
stinking heat, hence come symptomatical fevers which follow a disease caused
by this cortuption. These are gentle and unequal, because the matter out of the
vessels, cannot send to the Heart so much as when it is in the vessels, nor
keep that order: these are quicker or slower to the taste, as the matter is;
either in a Natural or Pretertatural humor, or a Natural or preternatural body
or part thereof.

When a few humors contained out of the vessels corrupt without the
putrefaction of the parts containining they cause putied fevers. Corruption of
some humors out of the vessels causes gentle symptomatical Fevers.
Some say all humors whether hot or moist being corrupted out of the vessels
will cause it, but this we shall examine. These are hot, viz. natural blood
falling out of the Veins, and diverse choleric excrements, These are moist, the
waterish and phlegmatic humor.

If blood flow from the veins into any part and cause inflammation it causes
only a pure symptomatical fever and not a putrid though it corrupt, except the
part corrupt also. But if blood coming from veins open or broken congeal, and
by continuance corrupt, especially in great quantity, and in a place near the
Heart, as in the breast and Lungs, then putrid but gentle Fevers follow these
Affects or Diseases, but seldom when it is in the stomach or Guts, because it
cannot stay long there; or in the Reins or Bladder, because the Urine washes
it away.

If either that Choler which comes from the Mesaraicks into the Gall or Spleen
to be purged as they say, or that which breeds in the stomach of things eaten;
either corrupt in its own place or in another, some think it begets putrid
Fevers if yellow, Tertians, if black, quartans, exquisite or Nothus as it is
pure or mixed. But we not observing any such black Choler in the substance of
the Spleen, and perceiving no Gall or Bladder to receive it, as there is for
the yellow Choler in the Liver, and knowing that the use of the Spleen is more
excellent than to be the Receiver of Melancholy, nor finding any other black
Choler than that which is made of the yellow, cannot be convinced, that such a
humor in the Spleen can produce either quartan or other Agues. And if they call
the melancholic juice corrupted so, and make it the cause of a quartane, we
will not grant that to be in the substance of the Spleen or elsewhere distinct
from the blood whose dreg it is. But if they understand by it, the thickest
part of the blood, in that they confirm our Opinion which teaches that some of
the blood in the Mesaraicks corrupting causes intermitting fevers: because
Faeculent blood is rather in the great Veins of the Mesaraicks than in the small
of the Spleen by reason of the plenty of Arteries filled with thin rather than
thick blood; In which Mesaraicks if corruption in the dregs of blood causes
quartans, as they grant, then they must confess that the cause of Tertians is
from the same blood, but in a diverse part as we showed: But we do not affirm
either excrementitious choler gathered out of the Veins, whether yellow, green,
or black, to be the cause of intermitting fevers if it putrify, in regard it
is a very hot and sharp humor being in the Belly, especially if it corrupt, or
be heated more, and it causes rather Colicks, Heart-pains, Vomitings and
Choleric fluxes by pulling the parts than Fevers, except by inflammation
through pain there be a little fever which seldom follows these Diseases. And
if it be so hot it cannot stay so long, to raise corrupt vapors and send them
to the Heart to cause a fever: but this being moved and hot by a feverish heat
brings forth accidents that signify Choler as we showed, of which the fever is
rather the cause, than Choler the Cause of of the Fever; which being naturally
mixed with the excrements and corrupting with them and sending stinking vapors
does not infect the superior parts.

They say that superfluous phlegm in the Stomach, Guts, Mesentery and about the
Bowels, corrupting causes Agues called Quotidians, and if it be glassie or
sharp, Epiala's. And some say that the corruption of waterish phlegm causes a
gentle Fever in Dropsies called Leucophlegm and Cachecticks. But how can slegm
which is cold, get so much heat from putrefaction that it may produce sharp and
hot vapors, to cause Fevers, because if it be long kept, and the part be hot,
it will turn rather slimy than putrid. And no Authors mention any kind of putrid
phlegm, moreover these Fevers answer to the three humors excrementitious as they
say viz. to Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy. And there is another cause of Epiala
in which heat and cold are both at a time. As for the waterish phlegm that
brings a Fever we shall show (treating of the serum) that serum is the cause
there of and not phlegm.

For as Serum or Whey washes the blood, and by its moisture allay's the heat
and the Choler in the Blood, in the Jaundies: So when it is mixed in the
Meseraicks with Choleric blood putrified, in a great quantity it causes
lingering and long bastard Fevers. But this Whey being separated from the blood
into the Abdomen that is Belly or Breast, or under the Skin, and there
contained a long time corrupting, and turning, stinking, and sharp, as we have
often seen it green and stinking, when it has been let out in Dropsies: It
causes little Fevers, especially when it is near the Heart, being hot and
thin, and corrupting the parts that contain it. Such Fevers are in Virgins
that have the green sickness, says Fernelius.

Fleshy moist Bodies, because they easily corrupt, and so have a preternatural
heat, beget putrid Fever caused by the humors, which are out of their vessels
whether they be Natural as parts of the Body, or contained in the Body as a
dead Child, or Secundine, or preternatural, as Worms.

Corruption of some parts of the body, Corruption of some parts causes gentle
symptomatical Fevers.
causes gentle putrid Fevers, if any part of the corruption or Vapor from it
get to the heart. And these are of long continuance especially if there be
corruption of any noble part or near the Heart, by which means viz. the
continuance of the Fever and corruption of the part, the body consumes. This
corruption begins from some humor fixed and stinking, corroding or infecting
the part. Or from an Ulcer or Imposthume after Inflammation, or outward hurt,
or a Vein broken: We shall show the reason why this falling in some parts
causes Fevers, in others not.

In the Phthisis or Consumption the Lungs are usuallyulcerated, corrupt, and
filthy, and consumed for the most part, and the heart being constantly by their
neerness infected, there is a gentle symptomatical Fever, which turns into an
Hectic, which from the loss of a noble part makes the whole body lean and
destroys it.

Corruption of the Liver and Spleen, by reason their substance is alike, comes
from the same causes in both, which we find often after Death with great stink;
and it brings lingering symptomatical Fevers which produce Atrophy and Cachexy,
and the vulgar take to be Hecticks, from the want of blood, most usual in
Virgins and Children, such Children may have at the time of sucking and in the
small Pox when they refuse drink, and want moisture to cool them, the Liver
growing hot, hard or swollen.

Corruption of the Reins causes no constant Fever, because it goes away by
Urin; neither does the body pine away, for if one Kidney be consumed, the other
will officiate for it, and so a man may be long preserved.

The Brain and the Heart, being noble parts, cannot be corrupted to produce a
Fever while a man is living. Though Ulcers have been observed in the Heart,
which have caused Death, before a Fever.

Also corruption in the Membranous parts about the Stomach, Guts, Bladder, and
Womb, the Mesentery and Cawl causes a lingering Fever. Also in any part of the
body inward or outward, and the farther from the Heart, the corruption is, the
more uneven is the Fever and intermitting.

If the Child in the Womb with the Secundine joined by the Vessels to the Womb
be putrified, and continue til the Womb be infected, and other adjacent parts
(as I have seen) there is a Fever of the same sort, which disturbeth the body
after a diverse manner and is long, if the Patient die not.

Also preternatural things bred in the body, Corruption of preternatural bodies
causes lingering symptomatical Fevers.
as Worms or Flesh join to other parts, corrupting and infecting other parts
produce the same Fevers which shake and consume the body: but not except they
corrupt; albeit Infants that have live Worms are feverish, and it is like a
Synoch from an external cause, sharp not gentle, and as that has other
accidents, so in this Children have Worms.

A great heat with a malignant quality strikeing the Heart, gets constant
malignant Fevers, and if it infect others, contagious; thus differing, as the
heat comes only from malignity or corruption with malignity.

Corruption with a malignant quality, A malignant putrid heat causes putrid
malignant Fevers.
not only offending the Heart by it self as we showed in putrid Fevers, but
with malignity, causes malignant, and contagious but not pestilential Fevers,
these are in Infants in the Meazles and small Pox, seldom in men: but in them it
causes common Epidemical Fevers without Bubo or Carbuncle, or great symptoms,
but Headache and doting, which destroy. We shall show how this corruption gets
malignity and in what place, and what is the cause thereof.

The place in which this corruption is bred, is the same in which simple
corruption is bred in the vessels of the hollow Vein, or in the Meseraicks, or
without them; and it is as I showed in the same humors and bodies.

If blood corrupt in the great vessels of the hollow Veiu, Corruption of blood
in the vessels that go to the Heart causes putrid malignant continual Fevers
and of diverse sorts, from the same causes as other putrid Fevers are diverse
and has a venomous quality, which is communicated to the heart by the vessels
as we showed in putrid Fevers, disturbing it with stinking and malignant heat,
it causes continual Fevers, dangerous for two qualities. In which if Nature
send any of that malignant blood into the pores of the Skin or the Membranes,
it causes Spots and Pimples small Pox and Measles aforesaid, but if not,
nothing breaks forth, but some small spots which declare the secret venom and
Death. But then these Fevers differ in respect of the corruption and malignity
which meet together.

The fevers that come from putrefaction of blood are like putrid Synochs and
other continual Fevers, and as the blood corrupted was temperate or
distempered, or is near the Heart, or farther off, the symptoms are better or
worse, and the whole course of the Disease varieth. Hence some of these are like
Synochs, and have no strong Fits, as in Children of the small Pox; when Nature
sends the filth forth, the Fever is milder. In malignant Fevers in men, if the
Corruption be not great, and apear not in Urin or Blood, there is great heat,
and accidents following. And if the Corruption increase, in an intemperate body
near the Heart or other princcipal part, then it begins with Horror and Heat as
other continual Fevers and sometimes it is like a Causon or burning Fever in the
symptoms.

From a malign quality joined with Corruption, if it prevail and weaken the
Heart, in regard Nature being hindered cannot valiantly and in order encounter
the Disease, it happens these fevers whether less or greater or more hot, keep
not a certain motion, nor time by which they are to be known. Yet sometimes they
end with a Crisis. Those like Synochs putrid end not so, but by filth sent
forth, as in the small Pox.

Choler in the Meseraicks, if it be malignant as well as putrid, it produces
intermitting malignant Fevers, if it be green blew or black and venomous,
Nature offended therewith, presently labors to expel it by fluxes or Vomits,
and a malignant intermiting Fever is seldom seen, but if it come by the long
reteining of that malignity, those Stools or Vomitings are deadly.

When humors corrupt out of the Vessels, in regard they can scarce produce
simple Fevers; If malignity happen, it begets not putrid malignant Fevers but
swounings, Convulsions, and other accidents; and if there be venom which of it
self causes Fevers without putrefaction, then it begets such Fevers which may
come only from malignity, of which hereafter.

The cause of this malignant quality in the blood joined to Corruption, from
whence these putrid malignant Fevers arise, is either from things about us, or
things taken in and retained.

Air or other bodies about us, if they be not only unclean but malignant, and
we receive the malignity by breath or touching to infect the blood, then it
produces these Fevers, especially when the blood was foul before. When it
comes from things about us, it comes from great changes, or exhalations.

Change of Seasons or inordinate great and sudden tempests, foreshewed by
Meteors going before or then appearing, or demonstrated rather than caused,
cause these faults in the Air which produce these malignant epidemical Fevers
like the Plague. Among these, is a wet spring with much Southerly Wind.

Exhalations stinking and venomous coming from the Earth, Ditches or Pools, and
the excrements of living Creatures formerly infected, as sweat, breath, bodies,
pollute the Air to infect the body, and cause these Fevers, most common to them
that live in the place from whence the seed of the infection sprang.

Corrupt Diet which not only fouls the blood, but is malignant, if it offend
the blood caused by it both ways, makes not only simple but malignant Fevers,
such as they have who have been in a Famine, as the Greek Proverb is, After a
Famine comes a Plague.

Corrupt blood long retained in the body, as when it is sent out of the Veins
into some part, and turns venomous, causes such symptoms as they have who are
stung with venomous Beasts. Also Blood corrupted in the Veins and growing old
where it cannot produce a Fever and malignant, causes not only putrid Fevers,
but malignant and spotted Fevers; these are in some men of impure constitutions
when there is no epidemical Fever, that have been il disposed a long time
before. This malignity is known by the sudden failing of strength, spots and
other signs of secret poison. Al so Infants though Nature presently casts forth
the venom have such Fevers from the same cause, by which they cast off the
filth of blood they brought with them, and after they renew their bodies by
Scabs, and Itch, and other natural purgations. This came not only from the
Mothers Courses as they suppose because the Child is not nourished in the Womb
with impure but good blood, and the excrements gathered to the time of bringing
forth, after the Child is born are sent forth by stool not only red and green,
but black. But there may be new corruption and venom from change of Diet.

A malignant quality alone, and without corruption may cause a Fever
pestilential and venomous. A malignant heat is the only cause of malignant
Fevers.
This quality is seldom seen in the body, but a Corruption went before it to
which it is joined, such as has power to strike the Heatt as soon as it is
taken, and to infect it and the whole body, spirits, humors and parts, getting
Fevers like Ephem^^a's or Synochs, with great weakness alone, or joined with
other D^eases. But these Fevers differ in respect of the Poison taken in. For
there are diverse sorts of Poisons which strike at diverse parts of the body, and
afflict the Heart, and some inflame it and cause Fevers, and indeed we cannot
declare what this propriety is, but we know by the effect that it does so. We
shall therefore make two kinds of poisons which cause Fevers from the diversity
of the effects which they produce. The one we will call manifest inflaming
poison, the other secret pestilent poison.

We conclude that there is an inflaming Poison from stinging and biting of
venomous Beasts which causes venomous Fevers, Inflaming poison is the cause of
malignant venomous Fevers.
from inflammation of the whole body, great Thirst, Horror and Shivering, as
Nicander and Dioscorides describe it. Nicander that the biting of the Serpent
Dipsas inflames the Heart. These Fevers are proper to them that are so stung,
and have the aforesaid and other accidents. In which if any part of the Venom
be sent forth by nature to the extreme parts, there are blew spots in the Skin.
And sometimes there are Bubo's as in the Plague, as Nicander says, when they
are stung with the Serpent Cerasta, and have great pain in both Groyns;
sometimes where the sting is and the poison entered, there is a Pustle or
Inflammation which shows the way by which the Poison entered.

A Pestilent Poison of what kind soever causes a Pestilent Fever: Pestilent
Poison causes Malignant Pestilent Fevers.
for there is seldom a Plague, without a Fever, though in some it is
discovered only by the Pulse, this is deadly and contagious or the cause of
Popular infection. It is manifest that this Pestilent poison comes first to the
Body from without, because it striks a Man suddenly. But when it invadeth
privately we know not the place whence it came, being internal, except we
suspect some body that was infected, and near the Patient. Some say this Venom
is in the Air, and gets into the Bodies therewith, either sent from Heaven into
it, or by change or exhalations, it is so corrupted, that it has not only
malignity to cause putrid, malignant Fevers, but also Pestilence. But omitting
many other Arguments: We shall conclude it not so from hence. That after great
and long tempests, though there be other Diseases, there is often no Plague,
especially where the Contagion of dead Bodies is avoided. And the Plague is
many times, when no change of times, or Stars went before, or is present, as in
the year 1564. in that great Plague in Germany no man could accuse the Air of
Intemperance. But chiefly, if the Plague should arise from a poisoned Air,
every Man that breaths therein, should be infected, because it is the Nature of
Poisons, that being contrary to us in their whole substance, they sease upon
Bodies howsoever they are disposed. This coming to pass, that the Plague taking
but here and there some that are in the same Air, we cannot conclude that it is
in the Air and so communicated to Mankind. But it is more probable, that as
other Poisons are bred in some Bodies, from the beginning of the World, so this
pestilent poison is not only in some bodies infected, and others not feverish
as yet, but in their Clothes, and so passes from body to body, not only by
touching but by the Air intervening; This Pestilent Poison, taken by breathing
in, presently strikes the Heart, and makes a Fever in a moment; Or getting
into some part of the Body, gets by degrees into the Heart by secret passages:
Or staying there sometimes infects the Body but not with a Pestilent Fever. But
by this the same body or another may be infected sooner or later.

Hence it is that some infected persons flying from the place infected to
another, where there is no infection, and there staying, have the Plague after
many days, or infect others before they are themselves infected therewith. As
we know by experience, and Fernelius witnesses, that a Harlot that has laien
with a man that has the Pox, has not been infected herself, and yet has
given the Pox to another, And therefore we dare affirm that this Seminary
Plague, lodges always in some part of the world (as other Poisons do) in some
bodies and from thence goes into others, by the way we showed. As we know the
Pox does, which came first from the Indies, and so crep from body to body to
us, and is no where but in men's bodies. And it sometimes appears not in some
places, and sometimes it does, and is carried by men from one Country to
another. So the Plague although it has long been unseen in some places, yet
being in some bodies upon the Earth, it is derived in time into others, so that
it is not necessary when we hear no news of it, to think it is taken out of the
World, or that it is newly begot in the Air, when it returns. Although we deny
not but that the Air may be infected, and may get into the body, as in Putrid
Malignant Fevers was showed: As the Plague may come from infected bodies by
the Air, but that it took the beginning from the Air, we cannot allow for the
reasons mentioned. All which as they are probably to be found in the seat and
original of this pestilent Venom, so it is very difficult to explain how this
poison goes from body to body, and why it infects one rather than another in
the same place, in regard this is not done so plainly as in other poisons but
secretly: But it is easier to show, why Fevers differing in nature, accidents
and signs should come from thence. All these happen either in respect of the
Venom, or the dispotion of the subject body so infected, or in respect of
strength.

The contrary effects which cannot come only from the constitution of the body
affected show that Pestilent venom, is not all of the same nature: for some
Plagues take all or most with one distinction, others only few; others kill all
they touch: others are most of them cured. But we cannot describe what lies
hid in the venom that causes the variety and whence it comes.

To find out a fit disposition of Body, or of the Heart, as Fernelius says, to
receive this poison is as impossible as to show the nature of it: because men
of all constitutions, and those that are not only foul bodied, but pure and
sound are easily infected: so that no disposition is required, or if any, it is
difficult or impossible to be known, as Fernelius says and we confess. And
therefore in the former case and this, we fly to divine providence, which
stirs up this Plague here or there for the punishment of man, and sends it
to what place he pleases, to kill those he marked out, and to chastise others.
Yet though we can no otherwise describe this disposition which makes men fit or
unfit for the Plague, in regard the Pestilent Fever is not one and the same
that comes from the venom, we can prove that it comes from the diversity of the
subject body that is affected. As fire burns more or less according to the
variety of the fuel, so when the Plague is in any body, it has a different
Fever in respect of the different constitution.

If it gets into a temperate body (for it spares not such as Children, Virgins,
Youths and well habited bodies) it causes sometimes a mild Fever like a Diary,
only the spirits being inflamed with the Heart, and then the heat and the
accidents following are milder, nor is the Urin changed much.

If the Plague strike a Sanguine or Plethorick person then it will be like a
Synoch Fever and the Spirits and Blood will be inflamed with the Heart: in
which there is greater heat, and accidents as Headache, redness of Face and the
like, that disturb the Patient grievously.

If the Plague seize upon Choleric persons, then by reason of the heat of the
Heart, Spirits and Humors, there is with other Symptoms of hear, Vomiting,
Stools, and other accidents from choler which are grievous.

Unclean bodies, especially that have corrupt blood, and subject to Fevers, if
they take the Plague, then it is putrid continual and Malignant with great hear
and other Symptoms, and then are foul excretions by reason of corruption.

The reason why they who have the Plague are in more or less danger, is in the
strength as well as the poison, for strong persons oppose it more then weak.
And this is the reason why some have spots and others none: for if nature be
weak the poison will lie at the Heart and no tokens thereof appear. But if
nature send it forth, then it inflameth every part it touches and burns it
red, with pain and impression under the Armpits, or Tumors under the Ears, or
Carbuncles, which inflamed increase the Fever. And when nature disburdens her
self by the pores of the Skin, there are Spots and Pustles: These are caused by
the Poison sent out by Nature: And are not sent as marks or tokens, as some
call them, of the Plague, at its first entrance: for though some appear at the
first, Nature does cause it by expelling from the Heart that which so suddenly
smore it: except a Pustle come by touching of a dead body infected, as I once
had in my hand, but when I felt the pulse of a man in a mortal sweat, that died
of the Plague; and both I and my Surgeon that was with me had a pustle in
our Feet which suddenly vanished and though we were infected we had neither
Fever nor any other inconvenience. And in the year 1634. I touched the pulse
of a sweating man dying of the Plague, and presently after I had black spots
from my middle Finger and the outside of my Hand to my Wrist; yet they
presently went away after I had washed my Hands with Vinegar and Treacle. And
Bubo's come in the Plague sometimes, not from the poison sent to the
Emunctuaries, but from the heat and pain of some Carbuncle that is near, as in
other Inflammations: Yet sometimes they come from both causes, and there are
diverse in the same, or diverse places, and these being inflamed and brought to
suppuration join a new Fever to the former. I have by long observation found
out these things, having fix times been a practiser in the time of great
plagues to the end of them, and been constant to my patients, and therefore I
declare them for Favor of no man, but for Love of the truth.

A fixed constant heat in the Heart and other parts, Heat fixed in the Body, is
the cause of Hectickes.
not mutable or that called fire by the Greeks, which comes and goes without
change of temperament, (the parts that were hot returning to their former
state) as Fernelius shows may be in the ninth Chapter of his Book of
temperaments. But when the temperament and proportion of the Elements to use
the words of Fernelius are turned hotter and dryer, so that the heat can scarce
be removed or the temperament changed, then Fevers will be continuing long and
constant, never to be cured. Hence they are called Hecticks, because they are
in the habit of the body, called in Greek (...) and cannot be easily removed,
as habit is not easily taken away; And in regard the heat in them is not fiery,
as in other Fevers, but a change of the temperament into more hot and dry, as
I showed: thefore they scarce feel the heat, although all similar parts of the
Body are changed and dryer and hotter to the touch, and the Heart is perceived
to beat quicker and harder. This heat is not always alike, but when the body
is more inflamed, as after meat, which they always perceive, or violent motion
and other causes, it is increased with the pulse and motion of the Heart. Also
the Consumption called Marasmus which follows these Fevers, is not the melting
of the body by violent heat, by which means they say some pieces of the body
come away by Urin, but falsely, for that is only from the foulness of the Reins
and Bladder, and otherwise in the most burning Fever the parts cannot be so
roasted and melted. But this leanness comes from the temperament of the
similary parts turned hotter and dryer by reason of the heat of the Heart. And
this is the reason why they are not rightly nourished, but fall and pine away
in a Consumption.

Another Fever going before it, is the cause of an Hectic, because the heart
cannot loose its temperament so much from any other cause then the heat of a
violent Fever, which by its strength and continuance may at length change the
Heart. Hence it is that these Fevers come seldom from a simple and pure heat
and Diary Fevers. But if they end not in an exact time as they use to do, and
turn not into putride, they turn into Hetticks. But more usually they come from
putrid Fevers alone or Malignant, which last long, especially when the Heart
has been long scorched, and after quenched and then Distemper remain, which
causes a long Hectic which consumes the Body, when the burning Fever is
gone. This is not that Fever which while the burning Fever remains, so
broyleth the Heart by its violent heat, that the whole body is suddenly
consumed which is called, A melting Hectic. Also Hecticks may be produced from
long intermitting burning Fevers after the same manner. And Fontanonus
teaches, that they may come of continual Fevers when a semi-tertian abides
long. Also from other putrid Fevers though gentle, if long, and heat the Heart
constantly, may a gentle Hectic follow gentle and lingering putrid Fevers, as
in Cachecticks and Consumptions, because the Cause is more near the Heart. Also
they begin and are joined with Putrid Continual Fevers which are known as we
showed, by the accidents of the aforesaid Fevers still continuing, and a great
or Consumption then was in Putrid fevers; As when an Hectic is joined with an
acute Putrid, Lingering, or Intermitting; This is caused by the disposition of
the Heart, if it be by nature too hot which grows sooner hot and dry by the
fevers aforesaid. And by a Heart that is tender and quickly receives other heat
which destroies the Natural. For this cause young Children have often Hecticks,
not only after a long but a Diary fever.

The Cure.
The general Cure of all Fevers the Indication being taken from the Disease is
moistening and cooling because they are hot and dry. But because the heat is
not always the same in every kind of Fever, and the causes diverse, the Cure
must be diverse. The chief kinds are solitary or alone Fevers without another
Disease, and these are simple or compound; or accompanied with another Disease.
The Cure differs according to the Cause of these three kinds of Fevers.

They are simple solitary Fevers which are of one kind, under which are diverse
sorts in respect of the diverse Causes, for which the Cure is different. When
they come from a simple or single heat, they are pure and single called
Ephemeral and Synochs; when from a putrid heat, they are Putrid, Continual, and
Intermitting: When from a malignant heat, they are Putrid, Malignant,
Pestilential and Venomous. When from a fixed heat, they are Hecticks. To these
eight kinds we shall prescribe particular Cures.

An Ephemeral Fever Pure, Single or Alone, The Cure of an Ephemeral Fever
ends of it self many times the first day before twenty four hours pass, and
brings no danger. If it continue longer by some error or greatness of the
Cause, it turns to a Synoch, seldom to a Hectic: To prevent which they must be
thus ordered by Altering and Evacuating means.

For the Evacuation of the matter which is thin, and and sooty, and dissolves
and breaks forth by heat increased, by the pores insensibly or Sweat, we shall
help Nature those ways, for she will of her self do it, if she be not hindered.

By keeping the body warm, lest the Vapor be struk in.

By giving no meat before the Fever decline lest we hinder Natures motion, or
very little and that when the body is weak.

By giving to drink sometimes such things as help transpiration or sweat as we
shall show in the Synoch accompanied.

If the Belly be loose there is less danger of its turning into a Synoch, this
is better done by Clysters and Suppositories than by other means.

If the Fever come from a Surfeit, or Wine especially, a Vomit will not be amiss.

Altering things, in regard the heat is small, are not many. If the Air be too
hot in the Chamber, it must not be too much cooled but qualified, lest we
increase the Fever by sudden sending the heat to the Heart, or by stopping
transpiration or sweating. And we refresh them with moderate drinking, if they
thirst, by which they will sweat better.

A simple pure Synoch if it be alone, The Cure of a Synoch not putrid.
although the heat be great, if it be well ordered departs the third or fourth
day at the farthest without hurt either by transpiration or Sweat. If not, it
turns to a Putrid or a Hectic. But usually when some blood gets out of the
Veins, it produces Erysipelas, Bubo, or inward Inflammations, as we shall show
in treating of Synoch accompanied.

To prevent these betimes while the the Fever is solitary, especially lest
Inflammations should arise which are very dangerous, we study speedily to
quench the blood, and keep it from going out of the Veins, and discuss
whatsoever is turned into Vapors, and to correct the greatest accidents, By the
things following, observing the constitution whether it be sanguine or
choleric.

Blood-letting is the first thing to cool that Inflammation, and to draw it
from falling into noble parts, and causing dangerous Inflammations ( Fontanonus
therefore says it must be done quickly, and by so saying, he affirms my
Opinion that these Inflammations go not before but follow a Synoch) Therefore
in plethorick persons it must be done speedily, if it were omitted the first
day expecting an Ephemera, the next, because the Fever remaining concludes it
to be a Synoch. And a general Vein opened, and a great quantity taken away,
even to swounding in strong plethorick persons, as Galen says. Or which is
safest it must be done often. In choleric and young persons it must be used
sparingly, if there be danger of Inflammation I fear not to open a Vein in a
Child of ten years old.

Purging is to no purpose, because it takes away none of the Cause, and only
inflames the body. But before blood-letting it is good to loose the Belly, By a
Clyster is the quickest way, and it also cools. Thus, Take of the four
emollient Herbs, each one handful; Lettice half a handful, Barley a pugil, boil
them, add Cassia one ounce, or juice of Beets and Lettice each half an ounce;
Honey, Butter, each an ounce; with a little Salt make a Clyster. And this may
be given again after bleeding if the body be bound.

Or give two ounces of Syrup of Violets or Roses with water, or simple
Diaprunes, or other gentle Electuaries, by which the Cacochymie or evil juice
is diminished. If Nature be accustomed to it, and tend that way, a Vomit may be
allowed, especially if the Fever come from a Surfeit of Wine, or Eating, or the
like. And if Choler be hot and troublesome in the Stomach it will help much.

We give also things to quench the heat of the blood, or allay it; and to
thicken it that it may not get out of the Veins easily, these are actually or
potentially cold; and such as keep away putrefaction, which blood inflamed is
easily turned into, to prevent a Putrid Synoch. They are sharp, or four things
which do both cool and hinder Putrefaction, and are excellent when Choler is
much inflamed. Also they take away the bitterness of the Mouth and Thirst.
These are in diverse forms.

Drinking of cold water is good to allay the heat of Blood. This done in
abundance to satiety, and bloodletting till they faint, was accounted
sufficient for the Cure. But custom and constitution must regulate the quantity
of these.

Crude or boiled Water, with Barley, a little Vinegar, or Juice of
Pomegranates, Lemmons, or the like, to sharpen it, is good to be given instead
of Drink.

Also distilled Waters of Purslane, and Sorrel, with the Decoction of Barley,
or the Decoction of Lentiles which is best when an Erysipelas appears to send
the matter forth.

Also Juleps of Syrup of Currants, Pomegranats, Lemmons, Sorrel, Citrons or
Jujubes, are good mixed with Waters to thicken the blood, as those usual of
Roses, Violets, Maidenhair.

If the Belly be bound Thus. Take Syrup or Julep of Violets (the one is made of
the Juice, the other of the Water of Violets) each one ounce and an half; Syrup
of Ribes or Currants one ounce, Barley water six ounces, Bugloss and Sorrel
water, each two ounces; make a Julep, with a little Cinnamon or Galangal to
sweeten it.

If the Belly be too loose. Take the Alexandrine Julep or Julep of Roses (which
by reason of the Rose water astringeth, the Syrup loosen) two ounces, the
Decoction of Barley four ounces, drink often.

You may give a spoonful or two of the syrups aforesaid.

Put Oil of Vitriol some drops in Water to make it sharp for a Julep. And the
Chemists commend in these fevers the Spirit of Niter, and the Salt called Lapis
Prunella or Crystal Mineral in cold or distilled water in a good quantity.

You may give Conserves thus. Take Conserve of Roses one ounce, Conserve of
Sorrel and Barberries, each half an ounce; Candied Citron peels half an ounce,
with Syrup of Barberries.

Or thus. Take Conserve of Roses, Sorrel, Barberries, (if the Belly be loose)
each two drams; Coral one dram, red Sanders half a dram, with Sugar of Roses,
make a Conserve.

We alter by external Remedies to the Heart, Liver, and Reins that are cold, by
consent of which parts all the body is cooled.

To the Heart with this Epithem. Take Rose water three ounces, Bugloss and
Burrage water each two ounces, Vinegar of Roses half an ounce, Juice of sour
Apples and Lemmons, each two drams; red Sanders a dram.

To the Liver with this. Take Endive and Sorrel water, each three ounces;
Vinegar of Roses half an ounce, Spikenard a scruple, mix them.

We anoint the Reins with Galens white Cerote or Ointment of Sanders.

It is good to bath in sweet water in the declining of the fever to refresh and
to discuss the Relics, if after you anoint with Oil the whole body or Backbone.

Friction or Rubbing is also good in the declining of a fever to dissolve the
Vapors raised from the hot blood, if it be gentle with a hot Cloth, and anoint
the body with Oil of Chamaemel.

Sleep Refreshes, takes away Thirst, and provokes Sweat.

For correcting the accidents, let the Diet be thin and nourishing to sustain
strength, as Barley-Cream, Ptisans, Almond milk, boiled fruits, with other
Cordials to restore the Patient.

Let Headache, Watching, Doting, Thirst, Dryness, of Mouth, Roughness of Tongue
be amended as we showed how. But if the the former things be rightly
administered they cease of themselves.

A Continual solitary fever though it has diverse kinds as a Continual Tertian,
The Cure of Constant putrid Fevers.
Quotidian, Quartan, and that called inordinate which is most usual, and a
putrid Synoch and Causon, yet because their Cause is the same, that is blood
corrupted in the Veins, though the species or kinds are different in respect of
the place and blood, we shall speak of the Cure of them altogether because most
if not all the Remedies may be applied in part to every one.

As for the Prediction, in regard Hippocrates says the Judgment of acute
Diseases, meaning Fevers is uncertain, we must not rashly pronounce Health or
Death. But we may declare danger or good hope by observing signs and accidents,
and chiefly the Critical days, and among them those called Indices or
declaring days, to foretell what will be (from the signs) in those days
following good or bad, from whence as the Ancients did, so can we with wariness
pronounce something, all things diligently considered: for if the Crisis ought
to tend to the best, which leads to health, upon the directory day good must
happen, which is the seventh of the first week, and the fourteenth of the
second, and the twentieth not one and twentieth of the third. And after in the
same order the twenty seventh, thirty fourth and fortieth. These are indicated
by the fourth the eleventh, and seventeenth and the rest, always going before
them three days, and therefore are called Indices. If the Crisis or Judgment
ought to be for the worst, which brings Death, the Directory falls upon an evil
day, which is the sixth or eighth or tenth or twelfth: that is an uncertain
Crisis in which the fever abates not at all, and therefore called Imperfect or
doubtful, tending to good or evil at its return. This is often the third,
fifth, or ninth day. But the Prognostic signs and accidents by which we judge
of the event of fevers are these chiefly that follow.

The Urin is to be observed all the course of the fever, because the matter is
in the Veins, and therefore it is much changed. If it be Saffron-like, or high
as Gold, it shows heat, or purging of Choler by Urin. Black shows greater heat
and danger, except the melancholic humor sent forth by a critical evacuation
cause it. If it be thin, of what color soever, or crude it is worse than thick,
if it be perspicuous or to be seen through, whether thin or thick it is good,
because it is near to the natural. Troubled Urin portends no ill, if it come so
from the cold Air external, because that which is concocted is usually so. if
it be pissed so it is evil, except it be critical or a natural discharge; a
sediment in the Urin is good if it stay at the bottom, and together, not
dispersed, equal, white, and thickish, especially in a critical day. That Urin
which is otherwise is worse.

The pulse does declare chiefly the heat and strength, which the oftener and
quicker it beats, especially in the Diastole or dilatation shows greater Heat:
And as it is small or great declares the strength. An unequal, intermitting,
creeping Pulse signifies no good.

Difficult Breathing small and strained is not good.

Sweat which the Patient likes, and wetteth the whole body, and is hot, is
good. If it stink and come in due time, it is not hurtful. Cold sweat is ill
and a forerunner of Death.

Much Pissing is good, and in a good Critical day takes away the Fever.

Bleeding at the Nose and Courses coming unseasonably do not ease, but coming
critically cures the fever.

A Looseness, or Diarthaea following, except it help to take away some of the
cause, weakneth and is dangerous. And black stools show malignity.

If the sharpness of the fever be constant and the body burning continually, or
if it be daily, or twice or thrice in fevers called inordinate and quotidians,
it is dangerous.

Tossing of the body, restlessness, casting off clothes, and going to the feet,
as Hippocrates says shows the greatness of the fever and loss of strength. If
Sleep cause trouble it is an ill sign according to Hippocrates. When the
Temples fall, the Nostrils are sharp, the Tongue dry and black, the outward
parts cold, they are evil signs. And a sudden consumption of the body spoken of
in a melting Causon.

Long and often Swounding, Hiccupping, Sighing continuing, Convulsion and
Carus, are perverse and deadly accidents.

Though Nature cures continual putrid fevers, The Cure of continual putrid
Fevers.
which only does it sometimes, yet by the help of a Physician she does it
better and sooner. If any part of the cause which makes it, or increases it,
be evacuated, and the heat altered, and the strength be preserved to the state
and crisis: Let us take away symptoms, if they remain, and be violent which is
done by diverse means.

Things that Evacuate the Cause which produced, nourishes and increases
severs, comprehend by blood-letting, evacuation of Humors and Excrements by
stool Urin and Sweat.

Bloodletting (except hindered by fear of Swounding and weakness, which appears
in a swounding fever by the moving of the Choler in a Diarrhaea) is the the
chiefest means to abate the Cause and the Accident.

It will take away the cause, to open any apparent Vein in the Arm. This is a
principal Remedy, because the Cause lurketh in the Blood, and in the branches
of the hollow Vein, from whence the blood is drawn; for with the blood some
corruption is taken away, as we may plainly see at the first bleeding, for
nature throws some of the cause of the Fever into the great Veins in the skin,
which makes them swel where it is most: and perceiving this at the first
opening of the Vein. I ever thought it best to open the Vein which swelled
rather than another, because they all come in one place from the hollow Vein
against the Throat, and the Surgeons may use this observation rather than
those of the the signs in Heaven. Also hereby is the Heat abated.

The time for bleeding is the beginning of the fever, to hinder the increase of
the Discases, and to take away some of the Cause while there is strength. And
if it be neglected at first, it may be done in the increase. But in the state
and height, which is sometime sooner or later, we must avoid it lest we hinder
the motion of Nature: For as Hippocrates says, if any thing be to move, let it
be moved in the beginning, but when the Disease is at a stand, be quiet.

The quantity of blood must be taken according to the cause and the Disease. As
for the Cause, if the blood be foul let it run, if not, stop it sooner. And if
the foulness was not seen when it ran forth being hot, as it appears when cold
and congealed, at it again if need require, and again if there be no hinderance
and the strength permits. In respect of the Disease, measure the blood also: in
a putrid Synoch, or in a simple, which is in a Plethorick body loose much
blood, And in a Causon or burning Fever, by reason of great heat although they
condemn it, who suppose it to come from pure choler which we deny. In other
Fevers as the heat is more or less, bleed more or less observing the
constitution and strength.

The accidents removed by bleeding, are Headache and Doting, which are usual in
these Fevers, and the vulgar observe most. In which, because the matter is
carried to the Head after a general Blood-letting, bleed at the Feet, and
scarifie in the extreme parts, to make revulsion. And to derive the matter,
open the Vein of the Forehead, especially in a Delirium or under the Tongue,
especially when you fear Inflammation in the Neck, Jaws or Tongue: Also
Scarification is good in the Neck and Shoulders.

Sometimes we purge the Humors and Excrements to prepare and remove the cause
that nourishes increases and also produced the Fever.

The cause may be the retention of Excrements in the Guts and Stomach.

These may two ways hurt, first if they be many the Veins being empty by
bleeding, take filth from the Meseraicks which they drew from the Guts.
Therefore before blood-letting we loosen the Belly: Secondly, if we will purge
humors, and the Excrements of the Belly be not first cleansed, nor the body as
Hippocrates says made fluid, the Medicine will be hindered by them and take
less of the rest away. And therefore we give Laxatives before purges. But
thirdly and chiefly, in regard there are diverse putrid and chollerick
Excrements in the Belly, if they be long kept, by their stinking vapors they
will increase the heat of the Heart or the parts near, which they can reach
unto (for as we showed they cannot come to the Heart) and so make the Fever
and its Symptoms, especialy thirst and Headache greater. Therefore it is good
to prevent costiveness all the time of the Disease with giving Laxatives: Such
as may cleanse and not inflame; temperate and moist and cooling. In these
following forms.

Clysters work soonest, and are best, and therefore we give them before
bleeding, which must not be delayed. These by moisture wash the Guts, and
provoke not, nor inflame, as things given at the Mouth, and they bind not
after, as usually they do. And they may be given the whole time of the disease,
if there be costiveness by reason of heat, when we dare not stir up nature with
other things, as in the state of the Disease.

Make an easy loosning moistning, cleansing cooling Clysters thus: Take Barley
and Bran, each a pugil; Mallows, Violets, each two handfuls; Housleek three or
four leaves: boil them, and in a pint dissolve Honey two spoonfuls, Salt butter
three spoonfuls, juice of Beets one ounce: Make a Clyster.

The following is more pricking and cleansing. Take the four Emollients,
Blites, Spinach, Beets, Cole, Lettice, each an handful; Marsh-mallow roots one
ounce, Pellitory and Mercury, each half an handful; Prunes ten, Linseed half an
ounce, Gourd seeds half an ounce bruised: instead of Cold seed, which are
usually musty, boil them and in a pint dissolve red Sugar and Honey, each one
ounce; these cleanse and resist corruption, Oil of Violets three ounces, two
yolks of Eggs, Cassia or Diapruns simple one ounce, Turpentine of the lark
Tree, dissolved with the yolk of an Egg two drams, this is most pricking, with
a little Salt: Make a Clyster.

When you will cool more, as in a Causon: Take the Emollients Lettice,
Purslane, Housleek and Endive, each one handful; flowers of Violets,
Water Lillies and Barley, each a pugil; Gourd seeds half an ounce, Melon seeds
two drams, sweet Prunes ten; boil them and in a pint dissolve red Sugar one
ounce, Honey of Violets one ounce and an half. Cassia half an ounce, juice of
Lettice an ounce, with a little Salt make a Clyster.

If the party be phlegmatic or old and the Fever not violent, such as they
called a Quotidian continual, then choose more temperate things, and mix gently
hot things and more abstergents or clensers: Thus, Take Mallows, Pellitory,
Mercury Beets, each one handful; Barley and Bran a pugil, Raysons and Figs,
each twelve pair; Fennel and Carua seed, each one dram and an half; Cordial and
Chamomil flowers, each a pugil: boil them and in a pint dissolve Honey of Roses
and red Sugar, each two ounces, juice of Beets or Mercury one ounce, Oil of
Chamomil and Violets, each an ounce and an half, with a little Salt, make a
Clyster.

Suppositories may be instead of Clysters if they cannot be given, these will
provoke nature to thrust out the Excrements: the common is that of Honey and
Salt; or that of Figs or yolks of Eggs and Salt, or a Sugar Violet comfit for
Children.

Things are given to loosen before bleeding and purging. Thus,

In a Bolus: As, Take Cassia new drawn, pulp of Tamarinds, each half an ounce;
with Sugar or without it: make a Bolus.

Or: Take Diacatholicon, Diaprunes simple, each three drams; with Sugar: make a
Bolus.

In a Potion: Thus, for the Delicate ladies; Take Manna one ounce and an half:
give it in Pease broth.

Or: Take Damask Prunes ten, Raysons stoned half an ounce, Dates four, Cordial
flowers one pugil, Gourd seeds half an ounce, Melon seeds bruised two drams:
make a Decoction, dissolve Cassia, syrup of Roses solutive, each half an ounce:
make a potion.

In hot and choleric persons: Thus, Take syrup of Roses solutive and Violets,
each one ounce; Cassia new drawn one ounce; give it.

These may be repeated if the Belly be bound at any time.

Or this which I use: Take Syrup of Roses solutive and of Violets, each three
ounces, give it in boiled water like a Julep for constant drink: abstain from
it, if by rumbling of the Belly, or the like signs, you fear a Flux.

If crude Humors are in the Stomach, use the same gentle Medicines, especially
because then there is inclination to Vomit, and if Choler, great thirst and
bitterness of taste, and nature must be helped to cast out her enemy: by
tickling the Throat, or with gentle Vomits which loosen and cleanse and cool.

As this: Take a draught of warm Water, and a little Vinegar.

Or, Take warm Water or fat broth, with syrup of Vinegar or Oxymel one ounce
and an half, common Oylom ounce.

Although bleeding takes away the filth which is the conjunct cause of a
Fever, the best, yet because that Evacuation may be made from the Veins
thereby we may provoke stools, Urin and sweat also.

We use purges to cleanse the Guts and Stomach and also the first Veins which
causes corruption in the other: for nature by them provoked draws
preternatural Excrements from the secretest places to the sink. Therefore after
Laxatives and the next after bleeding when the disease is urgent and the matter
turgent, and needs no more preparation, we give purges: Sometimes after the
Fever has been some time, after a preparative: But we aovid strong purges
that are hot, or we qualify them that they stir not the Body too violently nor
inflame. And though practitioners use not diverse purging Medicines in
intermitting and continual Fevers, yet because in the well days when the
fever is absent we may use stronger then in a continual Fever. And we must
alter the purges according to the nature of the Fever, and moderate them in
continual Fevers.

In a Causon called a burning Fever, they must not be hot but qualified. As:
Take damask Prunes ten, Raisons stoned one ounce, Sebestens twelve, Tamarinds
one ounce, Dates four, Cordial flowers, each a pugil: the great Cold seeds,
each an ounce, of the lesser Cold seeds, each half a dram: boil them, add if
you please Endive and Lettice water to abate heat, and dissolve Manna (which
they say being thus mixed turns not so soon into Choler) Cassia each half an
ounce; (this somewhat sharp like Tamarinds and therefore excellent) syrup of
Violets one ounce, or of Roses and Violets, each half an ounce: make a Potion.

Or thus stronger: Take Cassia newly drawn and Tamarinds pulped, each half an
ounce; Electuary of juice of Roses two drams; make a Bolus: or dissolve it in
broth or Barley water.

Or: Take Diaprunis and Electuary of the juice of Roses, each one dram and an
half; syrup of Violets one ounce, with Barley or Endive: make a Potion.

After these Scammoniate Medicines, give an ounce and an half, of syrup of
Violets with Endive water to qualify them, or after the purging to hinder the
increase of heat.

Some deny Rhubarb because of its binding but that is not to be feared, if it
be infused.

Take Syrup of Violets one ounce and an half, of Roses solutive one ounce,
Rhubarb infused in Endive water and strained half a dram: make a Potion.

Or thus: Take Rhubarb four scruples, Spicknard one scruple, infuse them in
Endive water and Whey, dissolve therein Manna one ounce, Cassia six drams,
syrup of Violets one ounce: make a Potion.

In a putrid Synoch and a sanguine Constitution use the same. Or this: Take
Rhubarb, infused in Endive or Sorrel water four scruples, Citrine Myrohalans,
infused in Whey three drams, strain and add syrup of Roses Solutive two ounces,
for a draught.

In Tertians and Choleric bodies take of hot and strong purges for fear of a
Diarrhaea, therefore beware of Scammonials and use the aforesaid mentioned in a
Causon, which provoke Choler. As take the Decoction of loosning flowers and
fruits, as much as is fit thus made: Take Prunes ten, Tamarinds one ounce;
Sebestens and Jujubes, each ten; Raisons one ounce, Dates five, flowers of
Violets, Bugloss and Borage, each one pugil; Gourd seeds half an ounce: infuse
in this Decoction, Rheubarb four scruples, Citrin Myrobalans two drams, Spike
one scruple, strain it, and add Cassia half an ounce, Manna six drams: make a
Potion.

Or thus: Take syrup of Roses solutive, with the infusion of Rheubarb one ounce
and an half, dissolve it with Bugloss or Endive water.

Or: Take syrup Diasereos (which has many cooling and opening things) one
ounce and an half: dissolve it as before.

Or thus, to provoke Urin also: Take Succory, Grass and Asparagus roots, each
two drams: infuse them in sharp Wine: Endive, Burrage and Sorrel, each one
handful; Tamarinds one ounce, the three Cordial flowers, each one pugil; Senna
three drams: make a Decoction, dissolve in the straining syrup of Violets and
Roses solutive, of each one ounce.

Or thus: Take Diaprunis Lenitive, and Cassia, each half an ounce; Electuaries
of the juice of Roses two drams, with Sorrel, Bugloss and Violet water: make a
Potion.

To Cure quotidians we give things that purge phlegm, but in regard these
Fevers do weaken much you must purge warily, with the things abovesaid rather
then stronger: Yet in phlegmatic Constitutions: Take Agarick one dram,
Carthamus seeds skinned three drams: steep them in Oxymel, Endive, Violet, and
Maidenhatre water, add Catholicon one ounce: make a Potion.

Or thus: Take Aggregative Pills two scruples, with Endive water; make Pills.

In continual quartans, add things against Melancholy: As, Take Rhubarb four
seruples, Indy Myrobalans two drams, infuse them in Whey, and dissolve that
straining with a Decoction of Mercury one handful, Epithymum two drams, Senna
three drams, add syrup of sweet Apples one ounce.

Before the state of the disease, or when after an imperfect crisis, the Fever
is not gone, you must again purge, diligently observing: first whether nature
endeavor to evacuate by any other way, as Bleeding, Urin or Sweat, if she does
not before the seventh day, or show some signs thereof, purge again and open
obstructions.

Thus: Take Rhuharb four scruples, Myrobalans chebs and Indies, each one dram
and an half: infuse them in Endive, Wormwood water and a little white Wine,
then strain and add syrup Bizantinus, syrup of Roses solutive, of each one
ounce, or with the infusion of Senna half an ounce: make a Potion.

Or thus: Take Diaprunis lenitive six drams, Electuary of juice of Roses two
drams, syrup of Roses solutive one ounce, with the Waters abovesaid or the
common Decoction.

Or thus in stronger persons: Take Aggregative and Pills of Rhubarb, each one
scruple; Pill Aureae half a scruple, with Violet water: make Pills.

In the Declination of the disease purge often with the same.

In the begnning of the Disease prepare the Humors, after a Lenitive, or in the
progress if the Fever continue: made with cold things to abate heat, and thin
to make humors thick, and that resist putrefaction and that cleanse: adding
always openers that the Humors may pass Urin, Sweat or Stools. And these are
the better when they suppress heat and are prepared for the Heart and Liver
which two parts are most hot. These preparatives are given according to the
cause and constitution of the sick.

In a burning Fever called Causon, which is an acute Disease and grants not
long truce, we purge and alter with the coldest things.

In Synochus which is usually in sanguin persons, prepare the Humors thus: Take
syrup of Lemons or of the juice of Citrons, syrup of Vinegar and Violets, each
one ounce and an half; water of Sorrel, Endive, Purslane, Bugloss, each two
ounces: mix them, give it three days together.

Or thus: Take syrup of Pomegranats, Lemons and Sorrel, each an ounce; of water
Lillies half an ounce, Violet water, Lilly and Lettice water, each two ounces.

Or thus: Take syrup of juyces of Endive, Plantane and Purslane, each half an
ounce; Endive, Plantane and Purslane water, each two ounces; syrup of Currants
half an ounce.

In a Tertian, and in Choleric bodies, the same things are good, because they
allay Choler. Or thus, Take syrup of Sorrel, Vinegar and Violets, each an
ounce; water of Sorrel, Bugloss and Endive, of each two ounces; drink it two or
three days.

In Quotidians and Phlegmatic bodies and old folk, Take Honey of Roses,
Oxymel, syrup Bizantine, each an ounce; waters of Maidenhair, Succory and
Grass, each two ounces.

In quartans and Melancholic bodies: Take syrup of Violets, Bugloss, Borrage
and Fumitory, of each an ounce; Purslane, Fumitory, Bugloss and Borrage water,
each an ounce and an half: make a Julep for three draughts, all these may be
mixed with the Powder of Sanders, or you may give after every draught a Lozenge
of Trionsantalon, or Diarhodon.

Urin must be provoked and sweat, for when the matter is concocted and
prepared, nature does usually send it out those ways, these are done by
Aperitives which make thin; but you must observe whether nature moves by Urin
or Sweat most; if they piss more then they drink, or the Urin be thick: or if
they Sweat, you must provoke that way most to which nature inclines.

The Divreticks which open and attenuate, must not be not but moderated
howsoever with cooling things.

And sometimes purgers may be mixed therewith if the body be bound. It is done
by this Decoction: Take roots of Succory and Grass, each an ounce; Liquorish,
Fennel and Parsley, each half an ounce; Maidenhair and Endive, each an handful;
Polypody roots six drams, Senna half an ounce, Annis seeds a dram, of the great
and small Cold seeds, each half a dram; Cordial flowers a pugil, Parsley seeds
half a dram: boil them, dissolve in the Liquor the sryup of the opening Roots
two ounces, syrup of Roses one ounce: make a Potion for twice.

Things that only provoke Urin, may be given three or four times, and then the
purgers again. If nature provoke Urin, you may leave out the purgers, least you
hinder her intention.

The Decoction of Sparagus in broth, provokes Urin, and juice of Pomegranats.

And this Julep: Take syrup Bizantive, of Endive, each an ounce; water of
Endive, Maidenhair, Wormwood, each an ounce.

If you will open more: Take Honey of Roses, Oxymel, syrup of Maidenhair, each
seven drams; Water or Decoction of Grass roots, Sparagus, Succory, each an
ounce.

Make an Emulsion to provoke Urin thus: Take seeds of Gourds half an ounce,
Melon seeds two drams, Cowcumber, Pompion, Endive and Purslane seeds, each a
dram; beat them, and with Endive water, make an Emulsion with syrup of Sorrel
one ounce and an half. The simple Emulsion of the Cold seeds, is also good to
take away waterish Humors.

Pills for to provoke Urin, are made thus: Take the troches of Roses,
Eupatorium, each half a dram; of Cappars (in Melancholic persons) a scruple,
with Smalage water, make Pills: give them every other day, drinking after a
little Barley and Fennel water.

Fontanonus gives water of Maidenhair, with Barley and Fennel water only.

If nature incline to sweat, as she does about the decliuing of the disease,
she must be helped by art. The Diuretics aforesaid by opening and making thin
do help, and other Drinks and Juleps.

Stilled waters alone, being very thin are usually given as we showed in a
simple Synoch, to which the Chemists add spirits of Vitriol two or three drops,
or spirit of Niter or of Salt, which strongly resist putrefation.

Anointing of the Back and other parts, causes sweat: Thus, Take Oil of
Chamomil and Dill, each half an ounce: Oil of Violets and sweet Almonds, each
an ounce; wet your Hands first in Aqua vitae, and then use it.

Friction is good also to draw the matter outward.

Altering Medicines, are such as cool and moisten the heat of the fever, and
resist putrefaction; These strike at the Cause, and mend the symptoms that come
from heat, as Headache, Watching, Restlesness. Therefore use Coolers and
Moisteners, in all Fevers, especially Violent, when the blood is burnt and
putrid. Sharp things are best, for they cool and resist putrefaction also, if
you add things that open Obstructions. But there you must not cool suddenly as
in a simple Synoch, but by degrees, lest Concoction of humors be hindered, which
cannot be made with Coolers only, for the corrupt part ought to be concocted.
This is done by the means following.

For ordinary drink water is desired and is good to cool, moisten, and allay
thirst, it is given Crude, or Boiled, or prepared.

It may be given Crude if the Stomach be not weak; some will not give it til the
humors are prepared. Sometimes there is much given at a Draught, as in a
Causon, or Synoch, or Tertian, to quench the great heat, and some by sweating
thereupon have been presently cured. And lest it be overcome by the heat of the
stomach and turned into Choler (as they say) they give it often. And Averroes
says that he saved many times by giving four pints before Concoction. And if
there be any hurt perceived by it, Vomiting cures it, and laying hot cloths to
the belly.

Boiled Water is better than crude in a weak Stomach, because it is not so
windy.

Sometimes it is compounded with things that nourish and resist putrefaction,
and make it pierce, or otherwise correct it.

Barley is accounted the best of Nourishers and Coolers. Therefore we give
Barley-water, which nourishes very little, in a good quantity.

Bread beaten in Water til it be white makes it nourishing.

Saltpeter beaten with the white of an Egg in a Spring Water makes a cooling
Drink that resists putrefaction.

And so does a little Sugar used the same way.

Almonds made like Milk with Water in a Mortar is usual in Germany: But it
nourishes too much, and must not be given in great quantity, because little
nourishment is required, and it is better for Food than a Julep to quench
thirst; with cold seeds it makes good Emulsion.

Things that resist Putrefaction are usually sharp and sweet.

Sharp things also cool and are very delightful, Galen puts a little Vinegar in
Water, and juice of Pomegranates. Wine of Pomegranates or the like is also
commended.

Also sharp Syrups mixed with Waters as of Vinegar Sorrel, Lemmons, Citrons,
Currants, sour Grapes, Pomegranats, Apples and four Plums, and sharp Cherries
are good. Things very sharp may be given if there be a Flux as Syrup of
Barberries.

The Waters to make the Juleps are of Endive, Lettice, Succory, Sorrel, and
Roses if you will bind.

Some sweet things resist putrefaction, and Sugar more than Honey, which easily
turns into Choler, but because usually they hate sweet things, therefore add
Syrups that are sweet and sour. Also the Decoction of Currants is usual and good.

Sometimes we add Correctors of Crudities when they are weak, the heat of which
is overcome by the plenty of the Water. Cinnamon is most usual being sweet
either boiled or infused, or Coriander seed boiled, or Galangal, red Saunders
is good to cozen the Patients when they expect Wine, especially if there be a
little Pomegranate Wine to give it a scent,

There are diverse Potions and Juleps which alter and correct the distemper of
the humor and whole body, to be given all along, mentioned among the
Prepatatives.

And this Decoction. Take roots of Succory, Asparagus, each an ounce; Endive,
Lettice, Purslane, Liverwort, Ducks-meat, each one handful; Bugloss and Burrage
flowers, each a pugil; Barley a pugil, Gourd seeds half an ounce, Fleabane
seeds (which are very cold) a dram, boil them, add Sugar and Vinegar, boil them
to a middle consistence between a Water and a Syrup, give two or three ounees
alone or with others.

Or thus. Take Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Liverwort, each a handful: Barley a
pugil, make a Decoction, strain them, add Vinegar for the Poor, and Syrups for
the Rich.

Or thus. Take syrup of Sorrel two ounces, the Mucilage of Fleabane seeds half
an ounce, give three spoonful often.

Sick People refuse solid things to be eaten and had rather have Drinks for
their thirst. but for variety, they may take sometimes dried Confections as the
Tablets of Trionsantalon or the three Sanders.

Or these. Take powder of the three Sanders one dram, Diarrhodon one scruple,
the Troches of Camphire half a scruple, red Coral half a dram, Conserve of
Roses, Violets, Bugloss, each half a dram; with Sugar dissolved in Rose or
Endive water, make Tablets, give them morning and evening and Endive water
after them.

Soft Electuaries made of Conserves are given the day after purging to
strengthen and correct the heat caused by the medicine, and in the whole course
of the fever. Thus made. Take Conserve of Roses, Bugloss, Violets, each half a
dram; with Sugar or Rob of Ribes make a Bolus.

This is pleasanter. Take Conserve of Roses and Sorrel, each an ounce; of
candied Citrons, Lettice stalks, and Gourds, each half an ounce, with Syrup of
Ribes make an Electuary, give it often, and thereupon a little Endive, Sorrel
or Bugloss water.

Clysters when they are bound, are good to loosen and to bring the humors into
the Guts, and for to alter, but because they cannot be given cold, they are not
so good as other things to cool the Stomach and whole body, and quench thirst,
they are better to loosen than cool. They are mentioned among the Looseners.

This is best to cool. Take Lettice, Purslane, Violets, Mallows, Housleek, each
an handful: Barley a pugil and an half, Cordial flowers a pugil, Guoard seeds
half an ounce, boil them, add Oil of Violets three ounces, Honey of Violets two
ounces, Diaprunis or Cassia an ounce, make a Clyster.

Things may be given in the meat to nourish and cool, or for sauce, but the
Pacient must rather have them in drink, though the Vulgar love to be cramming
them.

Boil Lettice, Sorrel, Purslane, Burrage, Endive, in Broth, and Spinach or
Arrach, or Laxative herbs if need require it is pleasant and good, to take
Savory broth, made with Sorrel, Spinach and Arrach and with an Egg and a
little sharp Wine, or Vinegar and Water, beaten and boiled a little, pour it
upon Sippets of Bread.

Or boil these forms in Broth. Take Lettice and Sorrel seed, each adram; Melon
seed two drams, Trionsantalon half a dram, Coral a dram, Diamargariton frigidum
a dram and a half. make them as big as Fetches.

Make sawces of Orenges, Lemmons, Cherries, Pomegranats, Ribes, unripe Grapes,
Barberries, dried Prunes, a little boiled or stoned, sharp Apples and Lemmons,
with Sugar and Rose Water.

Also of the juice of Sorrel, Vinegar, and Sugar and pickled Purslane, with the
juice of Secalis in the Spring, with crumbs of bread, Vinegar, Cinnamon, and a
little Ginger is good sauce.

Outward things are to be regarded, as Air.

That must be very cold by nature or Art, for it is actually and potentially
cooling for the Lungs, which being near the heart, refreshes it much. It is
allowed for breathing but not to be naked in (as the Patients desire in the
extremity of heat) lest the sweat be struk in. Besides the body must not be
inflamed with too many clothes, especially Feathers or Furs, and therefore it
is good to change the Sheets, and Shirts, and Bed, and lay a Leather upon the
Pillow. And to keep away the Sun and company, especially at noon to keep out
the Air, and not let it in, but when cool. To sprinkle the Chamber with Water,
and Vinegar, Flowers, and cool herbs, Willow leaves, Vine leaves and Water
Lillies.

To the Heart, Liver, and Kidneys, apply coolers, and to the Brain in time of
Headache, and Doting by reason of heat, and to those parts which consent with
the Head, as the Stones. The Heart must be cooled at first in a burning Fever,
in others in the increase after the matter is evacuated, because all the parts
are inflamed from thence; adding always things that properly refresh this
noble part, and can carry the virtue to it. These are to be applied to the
Breast or Wrists in form of Epithems or Ointments, and to other parts where the
Arteries beat, They are thus made.

In a Causon apply an Epithem presently to the Heart, As, Take Rose water two
ounces, Violet, Bugloss, and Lettice water, each an ounce; Scabious water half
an ounce, Vinegar of Roses or Clove Gilliflowers, half an ounce, juice of
Lemmons or sour Apples two drams, Diamargariton frigidum a dram, mix them for
an Epithem, apply it with Scarlet if the heat be great, cold, or otherwise warm.

Another, Take Rose water two ounces, Sorrel, Bugloss, Violet and Water Lilly
water, each an ounce; Water of Scabious, Balm, Vinegar, White Wine each half an
ouncr; juice of Lemmons, or Orenges or Apples, two drams, Sanders one dram,
Ivory and Hartshorn, each half a dram; red Coral and precious Stones, each two
scruples, Pearl half a seruple, Crystal half a dram, Saffron half a scruple.
make an Epithem for the Heart and Pulses.

Or bind this Bag to the Wrists and Feet. Take Flowers of red Roses, Violets,
Bugloss, each half a dram; powder of Cloves half a dram, of Saunders and Wood
Aloes, each a scruple; Saffron five grains, Diamargariton frigidum half a dram,
bind them in two little bags, sprinkle them with Wine, Vinegar and Juyces, and
bind them to the Pulses.

An Ointment for the Heart and Pulses. Take Oil of Violets and Roses, each an
ounce; the Mucilage of Fleabane seeds half an ounce, Gallia Moschata a dram,
Camphire six grains, Saffron half a scruple, juice of Lemons two drams, mix
them.

Ointments for the Liver and Epithems to cool it, and strengthen and open it if
stopped, for the Liver is hot in Fevers and inflames other parts. Thus, Take
Lettice, Water-lilly and Nightshade Water, each one ounce and an half;
Rose Water an ounce, Endive and Succory water, each two ounces; Vinegar of
Roses an ounce, Camphire six grains: make an Epithem.

Another better against obstructions: Take Endive, Liver-wort and Succory
water, each two ounces; Rose water an ounce and an half, Lettice and Housleek
water, each an ounce; Wormwood water six drams, powder of the three Sanders,
Spike and red Rose leaves, each half a dram; Vinegar one ounce, Troches of
Camphire half a scruple.

If you add Saltpeter or Lapis Prunellae, these Epithems will cool more and
resist putrefation.

Also this Bag: Take flowers of red Roses, Violets and Succory, each a pugil;
all the Sanders half a dram, seeds of Sorrel, Endive and Purslane, each a dram;
Parsley seed half a dram, Spikenard a scruple, sow them in a red cloth being
bruised, steep it in Vinegar, Rose and Endive water, apply it warm to the Liver.

After anoint with Ointment of Sanders: or with Oil of Roses and Violets, with
Spike and Wax.

Because the heat of the Reins is great, which inflameth other parts; use
Galens cool Ointment.

Or thus: Take of Galens cool Ointment two ounces, Oil of Violets and Roses,
each an ounce; Vinegar half an ounce, Camphyre five grains: Mix them, and
anoint.

The Stones have a consent with the Reins and the whole Body, by reason of many
Vessels, therefore to cool them, abates Inflammation of the Body.

Thus: Take water of Plantane and water Lillies, each four ounces; Vinegar of
Roses an ounce, red Wine an ounce and an half, wet a clout therein and apply it
cold.

Cold washings of the outward parts by reason of the consent and the Vessels
under the Skin and the Nerves, do the same and cause sleep.

Thus: Take Lettice, Violet, Housleek, Purslane, Vineleaves, Willow, each one
handful; Poppy heads twelve, or the leaves, if sleep be wanting one handful,
Vinegar an ounce, white Wine half a pint, water as much as is sufficient, wash
the Hands, Arms, Legs and Feet, with the Decoction, warm at night.

It is good to hold cold things as Stones and Apples in the Hand.

It is good in Fevers to keep up the strength, if they are continual and
acute, which we must have an Eye at. For when it fails, the Physicians labors
in Vain, because it is natures work to conquour a Fever, and if she yield to
the disease, there can be no perfect Crisis, but it is either imperfect or the
Patient dies in the battle. Strength is preserved, by order in good Air, meat
and drink, and the like, and by Medicines.

Air does much refresh, if it be cool and pure, for then it refreshes and
alters.

Food as it is necessary for sick and sound to restore what is lost, while they
live; so it is required here, because the body is dissolved with heat, but
because it must be concocted by nature by which means she is hindered from
concocting the matter of the Disease, especially if any quantity be taken:
Therefore let so much serve as will just sustain and not put nature to too
much trouble to concoct it: Let it be thin as Hippocrates shows in acute
diseases, and that little nourishes, and given at certain times. Or extreme
thin; or indifferent thin: always observing custom which is another nature.

Hippocrates says that an extreme thin Diet is to be used in the vigor of the
disease, this the Patient endures best at that time. And it is the better
extreme to give too sparing a diet at that time then too much, by which the
common people think to strengthen nature to over come the disease.

This is the most sparing which is given, but once a day: or twice when of
little nourishment.

As Barley broth twice a day in the state only of the Fever.

Or a Ptisan which is stronger, this is the cream or juice of Barley hulled and
cleansed. And it is given thinner or thicker, as you please, as you desire it
should nourish. This allayes choler also.

And also the juice of Wheat called Starch, or Rice, well boiled does easier
digest and less swel.

The Germans use Hen or Chicken broth with alterers. And they are good.

Also cream of Almonds or Emulsions is given not as drink but meat.

That slender diet which is fuller a little then this which Hippocrates says
must be at the beginning and continue to the state, must be also used. But when
the exacerbation or fit comes, or a little before, the Patient must not eat,
not only to prevent the hindering of natures motion but to keep the heat from
increasing which it does after meat as we shall show in Hecticks.

The fuller but sparing Diet: is that which is given oft^er as twice or thrice
in a day, and has more nourishment.

As the beaten flesh of a Chicken well boiled first, and washed with its
broth, or strong broth of the same.

Eggs, because in choleric persons they quickly corrupt, are not to be given
rashly: nor Milk, for the same reason, which Hippocrates proclaims to be
naught in Fevers.

To this Diet belong sops in broth.

Prunes, Apples, Pears, not sharp but fresh or new gathered, or thoroughly
dried, (for then their juice is most excellent, and therefore the Germans keep
all sorts of fruits so preserved and dried) or boiled in their Liquor or syrup
wherein they are kept.

The other are made of Plants and are given for alteration rather then
nourishment, as sower fruits.

Wine is beyond all for refreshing, and is not allowed but in the declining of
the Fever, by reason of its heat, especially when they sweat, and also because
it causes Headache which is usual in a Fever. But in the declining it may be
given to provoke Urin and refresh, and also a fuller diet, often and of little
nourishment.

Sleep refreshes, yet of some it is denied all the time of the Fever while
the heat goes outward, least by sleep it should come inward. But it is in vain
to fear it, because heat by sleep goes outward rather then inward at which time
we see men are more hot and sweat, and also because it allayes thirst. Moreover
nature makes better concoction in time of sleep, and is active at that time in
overcoming the cause of the disease. Nevertheless in the exacerbation or fit of
the Fever it is better to abstain from sleep. And at othertimes to permit it
according to age custom, and as they are well or ill after it, that it be not
immoderate or unseasonable. And if the patient be long without sleep, to give
and apply things to provoke it.

Frictions instead of exercise, in regard they cannot perform more, do stir up
the strength, to expel the cause of the disease.

A resolute mind also, not too sad, especially confidence in God and his
Minister the Physician, with hope of safety in this, or the life to come, is a
great help to strength.

As for Medicines we have showed restorers among the alterers, which also hold
up the strength: besides which, we have declared many in our treatise of
Sowning, and in swoning Fevers.

When the strength is wholly dejected give this julep. Take Rose, Bugloss and
Scabious water, each one ounce and an half; Cinnamon water made with Wine (for
the heat thereof is not then to be feared) half an ounce, Species Diamargariton
frigid half a dram, strain them, and add Manus christi perled one ounce, juice
of Lemons one dram, give a spoonful at a time.

Or thus: Take Confectio Alkermes a dram, (if there be no looseness which will
be provoked by the Lapis Lazuli in it) syrup of Poppies half an ounce, Cinnamon
water two drams, with Bugloss water, give it sometimes with a little added.

The external things to be applied to the pulse and Heart, are mentioned in the
alterers.

As for the Symptoms, many of them are mentioned in the Cure of the cause and
the disease, though some require a peculiar cure, which shall be showed in the
practice, but here we shall show briefly how we are to proceed.

Headache and doting that follows presently after, which are the chief, are
amended with the things that are given against the cause and the disease;
because they suppress vapors and burning in the Head. Yet when they are strong
we open the Vein under the Tongue, and use Scarification, Cupping and Frictions
for revulsion. And apply to the Head topics at first to repel, then to assuage
pain, and afterward to discuss as we showed in the Treatise of Headache.

We hinder too much watching or waking with sleeping Medicines and Narcoticks
in time of necessity mixed with Cordials above mentioned, and coolers to
correct them because they would heat alone given, and increase Headache. If
they sleep too much we take it off with revelling means.

Thirst is quenched with cold drink and sharp, many give candied things which
cause it by sweetness; Also it is allayed as we showed by sleep, restlesness is
abated with cold things especially drink, and by changing the place which by
continuance in they make hot, and by taking cool Air.

We shall show hereafter the Cure of the Tongue, Mouth and Jaws inflamed, and
the quinsie which is in Fevers also of the dryness and clamminess of the Mouth
and blackness of the Tongue.

The pain of the Heart is cured by anointing of the Stomach; The Swoning, as we
showed before: The heat of the Hypochondria or sides by things applied to the
Liver and Reins as we showed.

For the shortness of breath we anoint the breast: in a Diarrhaea or Flux we
apply things to the belly and give inward things that bind without heat, as
syrup of quinces: when the body is bound we give Laxatives. If a Hectic is
suspected from the leanness of the body we apply to the Heart and Breast,
Epithems and moistning Ointments, and give often the mentioned Cordials, and
such as shall be explained in the Cure of the Hectic.

Intermitting putrid Fevers are Tertians or quartans simple, The Cure of
intermitting putrid Fevers.
whereof some have one well day others two: or double which come every other
day: and these are either equisite made of a simple Humor, or bastard from
mixed Humors of diverse kinds. We make no more kinds of these which others
mention are either comprehended under these, or not known; we shall speak of
Fevers Compounded of intermitting and continual by themselves.

The judgment of all these is more certain then of continual Fevers: for (as I
say) tertian are shorter, if exquisite and in Summer or Spring, but longer if
bastard and begin in harvest: quartanes are longest that begin in Autum, they
continue ordinarily six months, and sometimes but three, and by want of knowledge
are kept sometimes a whole year: All double Fevers keep their own nature.

These Fevers of themselves are not deadly, although the exquisite are very
sharp, because their cause lycth far from the Heart in the lower belly about
the Excrements as we showed, for whence also it may better be purged. Except it
be carried into the great Veins and cause a continual Fever, which is
dangerous. It hapens also often that if intermitting Fevers last long or come
often, that new diseases follow from hurt of the Liver, Spleen, Stomach and
Guts, and greater Symptoms, as the Colic, Jaundies, Dropsy and the like, by
error of the Patient or Physician.

We shall show the Cure of all, both Tertian and quartans. Because they are all
from the same cause that is choler and in the same place that is the
Meseraicks: although some have treated of them in respect of diversity of
Humors natural and preternatural, making bastard Tertians, from Citrin, yellow
Choler which is mixed with thin phlegm or from yolk-like Choler, which is
mixed with thick phlegm, calling both of them Tertians of greater fame, and call
the other a Tertian of less fame, which is mixed with Melancholic juice, and
prescribe a particular Cure for that which comes of green Choler like
verdigreese. And will have the diverse bastard quartans from, not only the burnt
dregs of blood, but from Choler and Phlegm burnt. And will have quotidians, not
only from simple phlegm but sweet, sower, salt, glassie, called Epiala and
Lipyria, and say they come from that phlegm mixed with Melancholy or Choler,
and teach a particular Cure for them all: as also of Syncopal or Swouning
Fevers as if they were diverse kinds. Hence come the many confused treaties of
Fevers and the diversity of purges according to the diversity of humors that
cause them as they suppose, which if any should follow, they may as soon Cure
their patient by leaving the whole work to nature, which often times does it
alone.

Therefore we shall speak of the Cure of all Agues, or intermitting fevers
together. First showing what is to be done, by Evacuations to remove the Cause,
and by Alterers, and Restorers or Stengtheners, and to be observed in Diet. And
last what is to be done to the Symptoms.

In respect of the Cause we must take it away, or abate it by Evacuations,
which we showed was putrid choleric blood in the Mesaraick Veins. And if thin
be not first taken away, they which go about by other means to hinder the fits
and stop their course, and the motion of Nature, by which she shakes off some
of the Cause, as most Empericks and unlearned Physicians do; bring greater
Diseases, as Colic, Jaundies, Cachexy, either with the Fever or after it.
Therefore first take away the Cause by Evacuations, by which means the heat of
the Disease and the symptoms will be abated, This is done as follows.

Taking of blood from the mesaraicks, is the chiefest Remedy (because the Cause
is in it) to Cure Agues, as opening the branches of the hollow Vein, is to Cure
continual Fevers. But none of the Mesaraicks come to the skin to be cut open,
as the branches of the hollow Vein do, nor is it safe to make them bleed by
corroding Medicines as has been done by the use of Coloquintida, whereby the
blood is sent into the Stomach and Guts, and so forth by Vomit and Stool, for
fear of Dysenteries or Bloody fluxes. Therefore we do it thus.

The Flux of the Haemorrhoids cures not only Quartans but Tertians of all
sorts, though of long continuance, when all means fail: And it is no marvail,
since these Veins are branches of the Mesaraicks, and evacuate, by bleeding,
the cause of the Disease. Therefore if the Haemorrhoids bleed naturally, as in
some, they must not be stopped, and if little, they must be provoked. But in
Quartans which last long, it is most proper, by reason the blood is thick and
best let out this way. especially if nature incline that way by some signs of
blood, or itching of the fundament, it must be helped. This is done by
beginning with Fomentations and applying of Leeches, which is the best way of
all, or rubbing with Fig leaves or the like, as we showed in the Hemmorrhoids.
Some open them by cutting, but this must be warily done, fot fear of a wound in
the Fundament, which I have known to cause grievous pain.

If the Courses be stopped in Women, although these come not as the Haemorthoids
from the Mesaraicks, but from the branches of the Vena Cava, and so seems to
take away none of the Cause of the Fever, yet because it is natural, and ought
to be at a set time, and though the whole body is made foul thereby, they must
be provoked. And so the body will be cleansed, and it will do as much as
blood-letting. Especially in regard nature uses to cleanse her self this way,
and it may be there is some passage from the Mesaraicks to it, by reason of
their near joining. These Veins although by reason of their smalness, they open
not wide, yet when they are full they are stretched as the rest. Therefore
provoke the terms if they flow not, or flow disorderly, diverse ways, first by
opening the Saphena, this will either provoke the terms or take away the matter,
and although a Vein was opened before for general Evacuation, yet the next day
you may open the Saphena by which means the fever either presently cease or
more easily removes with help of other medicines. Also Purges do not only void
the Excrements but open the Haemorrhoids and terms as we shall show.

Sometimes we allow, and sometimes disallow of opening a Vein in the skin. It is
to be omitted in exquisite tertians and others which have great heat by reason
of the burning Choler which causes them. Also in phlegmatic persons, and aged,
and the rest it is not to be done rashly, as the Vulgar do, who make it the
chief ^art of the Cure: for it can do no good, because it takes away none of
the conjunct cause of the fever. But often being done rashly, the matter is
snatched into the hollow Vein, and of an Ague it becomes a fever, or Continual,
of Intermitting. Or the pure blood being sent from the meseraicks to fill up the
emptiness of the branches of the hollow Vein, that which remains behind being
choleric and putrid, becomes more fierce for want of good blood to temper it.
Hence it is that I observed more hurt than good by opening Veins in Agues
(except it be when we fear some inflammation of some internal part. In
plethorick and cacochymick bodies we allow it, for these reasons; when the
plethory or fullness is great, which is known by the constitution, and red and
thick Urin, and when there is heat after a fever, it may be allowed upon the
well day. Although sometimes in the beginning of a Fit it hinders it, by
repressing the heat and Vapors that ascend, yet it cannot be good, because the
motion of nature is hindered, by which some of the cause of the Disease is
taken away. Therefore blood must be let in time of rest or intermission,
especially in double fevers, not in the beginning, but in the increase, or
state of the Disease, in Tertians, scarce before the third or fourth Fit which
uses tobe the greatest, foretelling the greatness of the following fi; lest
they think it comes from blood-letting choosing the common broad Vein in the
Arm, rather than the Liver or middle Vein, let the quantity be from five to
eight ounces. In quartans it is thought good to open the Vein in the left Arm
after they have bin a while for they must be gently ordered at the first, lest
they turn double or treble, or the strength do fail which ought be kept by
reason of the length of the Disease which it usually has. Or if you open the
Vein called Salvatella next to the little finger in the lest hand, they say it
is a special cure for a quartan. We allow a Vein to be opened in Cachecticks or
bodies of evil habit because the blood in the Mesaraicks is not only impure,
either before the fever begins (for impure bodies are easily taken with these
Agues) or in the time of the Ague, to take away some of the matter lest the
Fever increase, or a new one. And if the blood taken be foul, let it bleed
longer and in quartans if it be thick and black blood more, otherwise stop it:
and if need require, at it again another time. But lest the the Choler should
be more fierce after the blood is taken away, give a little cooling syrup of
Lernmons or Violets presently upon it, or a little good Broth.

In Agues or inte^mitting severs, we purge the thick humors by Vomit and
Purges, and the thin by Sweat and Urin.

First we give things to purge the Guts and cleanse them, both in the beginning,
and in the progress of the Disease.

And this is done before bleeding and other medicines, that the medicines
following may work better, and lest bleeding should draw the excrements into
the Veins.

Clysters do it soonest, as those mentioned in continual fevers, but we must
alter them according to the Disease and constitution.

In Tertians and very hot fevers they are thus made. Take roots of Marshmallows
one ounce, the four Emollients, each an handful; Barley a pugil, Gourd seeds
half an ounce, boil them, and add to a pint and an half, Cassia half an ounce,
Honey of Violets an ounce, Oil of Violets two ounces, with Salt, make a Clyster.

In quartans. Take of the four Emollients, Mecury and Beets, each a handful;
Bugloss roots two ounces, Prunes ten, the four great cold seeds, each two
drams; Epithymum two drams, Aniseeds, two drams, boil and dissolve in them
Diacatholicon and red Sugar, each an ounce; Oil of Violets two ounces,
Chamaemel one ounce, with Salt, make a Clyster.

In phlegmatic persons, when phlegm is much in the Guts, use this to cleanse
more. Take Liquorish two ounces, Mallows and Beets with the roots, Pellitory
and Betony each a handful; Barley and Bran each a pugil; Agarick two drams,
Figs ten, great cold seeds each two drams; Fennel seed three drams, after
boiling, ad Diaphenicon and Hiera Picra, each two drams; red Sugar and Honey of
Roses, each an ounce; Oil of Violets and Chamaemel, each an ounce and an half;
with a little Salt, make a Clyster.

Two or three Suppositories given in a day work sometimes better than Clysters.

If at the beginning the Stomach be disturbed with Crudities, Phlegm, or Choler,
as we may perceive by the Heart-burning which usually accompanies it, Loathing
and Vomiting, before bleeding or when it is not required when we give a
diminishing Medicine, or a Vomit.

Diminishing Medicines cleanse the Guts and Stomach from Crudities and thick
excrements: by these as Hippocrates says, we make the body fluid. These are
given in the day of rest, and are not to be choosen with that curiosity we use
in continual fevers when the heat is constant. These are of three sorrs as
Clysters are.

In exquisite Tertians when the heat is great. Take Cassia ten drams, powder of
Aniseed or Liquorish a scruple, with Sugar make a Bolus: give it alone or with
Endive or Succory water.

Or, Take Cassia and pulp of Tamarinds, each half an ounce, Aniseed and Sugar
as abovesaid.

Or, Take Cassia half an ounce, syrup of Roses solutive (or juice thereof) and
syrup of Violets, each an ounce; with Succory and Bugloss water make a Potion.

Or, Take Damask Prunes ten, Tamarinds twelve, boil them in Broth or Water,
strain and drink it.

This is stronger. Take Rhubarb four scruples, Spikenard one scruple, infuse
them in Endive water, and dissolve Cassia half an ounce, syrup of Roses
solutive an ounce, make a Potion.

In long melancholic quartans. Take Cassia one ounce, powder of Epithymum one
dram, with Sugar make a Bolus, or dissolve it with Bugloss water.

Or, Take Epithymum two drams, boil it in Broth, and add two ounces of Manna.

Or, Take Prunes ten, Dates two, Epithymum two drams Cordial flowers a pugil,
dissolve in the strained Liquor boiled, Catholicon six drams, syrup of Peach
flowers an ounce, make a Potion.

This is stronger. Take Confection Hameck one dram and an half, Catholicon half
an ounce, dissolve it in Bugloss and Fumitory water.

In phlegmatic persons give the same or stronger. Take Catholicon half an
ounce, Diaphaenicon two drams, with Sugar make a Bolus.

Or, Take Dates five, Prunes ten, Raisons ten pair, Figs four, Liquorish half
an ounce, boil them, and dissolve Diaphaenicon and Diacarthamum, each a dram.

If they will rather have Pills. Take Pills of Agarick, Rhubarh or Mastich, two
scruples.

Or these stronger. Take Aggregative Pills half a dram, with syrup of Roses make
Pills.

A Vomit often does good and is to be reckoned among these, for it takes away
the crudity and phlegm of the Stomach, and Choler, also if by the motion of the
Fever it get thither. but if the Body be bound, it must be first loosned, as
we shall show when we declare that the cause may be taken away by the same
Medicine, where we shall mention Vomits, we must begin with the weakest.

We must also purge to take away the putrid matter of the Fevers from the
Meseraicks. This does it by degrees, and cureh the Fever, but first we take
away the thick Excrements and then prepar the Humors, if it be at the
beginning, but afterward if the matter be much, it seeks away out of it self
and needs no preparation. And then natures motion must be helped, but if the
Fever abate not, we must come again to preparatives and purges, three or four
times in obstinate Agues.

At the first prepare and purge thus, for preparation is necessary in
intermitting and continual Fevers also, because the matter lies in the
Meseraicks, which is foul and needs more preparation and concoction, and we
must hinder putrefaction and open the passages, that the matter may come from
those Veins into the Guts by Medicines purging, which that they may work
better, some anoint the Hypochondria with Oil of Chamomil and white Wine. These
are diverse according to the Ague and the constitution.

In acute Tertians to allay heat, expel putrefaction and quench Choler. Take
syrup of Sorrel and Vinegar, each six drams, syrup of Endive and Violets, each
half an ounce, Endive and Sorrel water each three ounces; make a Julep to take
three days.

Or thus. Take syrup of Citrons or Lemmons an ounce, syrup of Endive and
Violets, each half an ounce; Endive and Lettice water each enough; give it
thrice.

For the Poor. Take Sugar two ounces, Wine-vinegar half an ounce, Decoction of
Barley and Endive a pint and an half, juice of Ribes or sharp Apples an ounce,
boil them, then give it three or four times.

Or this. Take roots of Succory and Dandelion the whole, each half a handful;
Endive, Lettice, Liverwort, Sorrel each a handful; flowers of Bugloss and
Violets, each a pugil; of the great cold seed, each a dram; boil them, and in a
pint and a half dissolve syrup of Sorrel and Vinegar, each two ounces; or
Pomegranate Wine four ounces, give it at four or five times.

In long Bastard Tertians with obstructions; Take Oxymel simple an ounce,
syrups of Endive and Succory, each half an ounce, Water of Maidenhair, Endive,
Succory, each an ounce; make a Syrup, repeat it three or four times.

Or, Take Oxymel and syrup of Succory compound, each an ounce; syrup of
Maidenhair half an ounce, Endive water and of Maidenhair, each two ounces: mix
and repeat them as before.

Or thus. Take roots of Succory, Grass, Asparagus, Plantane, each an ounce;
Fennel and Parsley roots, each half an ounce; Endive, Succory, Dandelion,
Maidenhair, and Liverwort, each a handful; Bettony half a handful, the four
cold seeds, each two drams; Endive and Purslane seeds, each a dram; Fennel,
Annise, and Parsley seed, each half a dram; Barley a pugil, Prunes six, Cordial
flowers, each a pugil; boil them, and dissolve Oxymel simple three ounces,
persume it with Sanders one dram, make a Julep for three or four Doses.

For the Poor. Take Honey, Water and Vinegar to make it sharp.

In quartans prepare thus in the beginning while the heat is great, for by
continuance the heat abateth. Take Oxymel simple, syrup Byzantine each one
ounce and an half; syrup of Fumitory an ounce, water of Bugloss, Borrage and
Hops, each three ounces; give it at thrice.

Or thus. Take syrup of Sorrel, Byzantine, Bugloss, each an ounce and an half,
Fumitory, Bugloss, Borrage and Endive water, each three ounces.

Or this Decoction. Take roots of Bugloss, Brambles, Sparagus, Succory, steept
in Wine, each an ounce; Fennel and Parsley roots each half an ounce; Liquorish
six drams, Tamarisk bark half an ounce, both Buglosses, the Capillaries,
Germander, Groundpine, Bettony, each a handful; Cordial and Broom flowers, each
a pugil; Raisons stoned two ounces, Prunes ten, great cold seeds, each two
drams; Dodder, Parsley and Endive seeds, each a dram; red Pease a pugil, boil
them, and add syrup Byzantine two ounces, Oxymel simple three ounces, with a
dram of Cinnamon, make an Apozem for three Doses.

Purge whether the humor be concocted or no, if it be much, and give an hour
after a washing Medicine, of Barley or other Broth, with Sugar of Roses: and
the day after, give a Strengthener.

In exquisite Tertians that are short and fiery, and in double Fevers, use mild
things. Take Rhubarb four scruples, Spike six grains, yellow Myrobalans rubbed
with Oil of bitter Almonds two drams, Infuse them in Endive water, but first
sprinkle them with Wine, after twelve hours strain them, add syrup of Roses two
ounces, syrup of Violets an ounce.

Another. Take Cassia half an ounce, Electuary of the juice of Roses two drams,
syrup of Roses and Peach flowers each an ounce, with Endive and Violet water:
Make a Potion.

The third: Take Barley a pugil, Prunes six, Jujubes and Sebestens, each ten;
Tamarinds half an ounce, Cordial flowers a pugil, Senna two drams: boil them,
add Manna an ounce, syrup of Diasereos or Roses, with Rhubarb an ounce. Make a
Potion.

In bastard Quartans and Tertians that are of long continuance, and in a
phlegmatic constitution: Take roots of Succory half an ounce, Liquorish an
ounce, Cordial flowers a pugil, Prunes ten, Polypody six drams, Carthamus seeds
half an ounce, Annis seeds one dram, Senna three drams: add Rhubarb infused in
white Wine and Endive water a dram, syrup of Diasereos an ounce.

Another: Take Rhubarb a dram, Spikenard a scruple, Agarick infused in white
Wine and Endive water a dram, with six grains of Ginger infused in Oxymel,
strain them, and add Manna two ounces.

The third: Take Catholicon half an ounce, Diaphenicon and Electuary of the
juice of Roses, of each two drams; with Bettony and Endive water: make a Potion.

Pills: Take Pills Aggregative a dram, made up with sweet Wine.

A Powder: Take Rhubarb a dram, Cinnamon half a s^^uple, Turbith two scruples,
Ginger a scruple, Senna a dram and an half: give it with Pease broth.

In Quartans give not strong Medicines while the heat is great: Take Rubarb a
dram, Indy Myrobalns prepared two drams, Spike, Cinnamon, each six grains;
Epithymum two drams, infuse them in Whey, add syrup of Peach flowers an ounce,
or that of Apples made by Rondeletius, which has Hellebor, an ounce.

Another: Take stowers of Borage, Bugloss and Violets, each a pugil; Ceterach a
handful, tops of Time and Epithymum, each two drams, Liquorish an ounce,
Raysons and Sebestens, each ten; Annis seeds two drams, Dodder seeds a dram,
Polipody six drams, Senna half an ounce, Tamarinds half an ounce, rindes of
Indy Myrobalans three drams: boil them, and add in four ounces, syrup of Peach
flowers or of Roses or Senna an ounce, or of sweet Apples.

The third: Take Catholicon half an ounce or six drams, or Diasenna as much,
(which is good in quartans) Confectio hamech two drams and an half, syrup of
Bugloss and Fumitory, each an ounce; with Bugloss water: make a Potion.

Vomits albeit they seem to take away only the matter from the Stomach, yet by
natures motion they take the conjunct cause from the Meseraicks, and either
abate or take away the Fever: and if the Fever be of long continuance, as
quartans, and will not be gone by purges, we give three or four Vomits to Cure
them. And it is usual by Vomiting abundance of Choler which is not very safe,
for the Choleric matter of the Fever in the Meseraicks, as it is taken from
the Veins of the Guts by purges, so it is taken from the Veins of the Stomach
by many and great Vomits.

Therefore Vomits are approved in all kinds of intermitting Fevers, especially
if there be loathing, custom, or Heart-ach; and when nothing forbids, as
binding of the belly; for if that be not open, except the Vomit by violence
open it, it will be worse: some disallow them while there is crudity in the
Belly as in quotidians, and will not give them before seven or eight days: And
say they are safer after signs of Concoction, and when Oxymel of squils or the
like are mixed therewith to cut the Phlegm, but that is little to the purpose
for phlegm is not the next cause of a Fever. We have known quartans more cured
by Vomits then any other: whence Avicen called Vomits the root of the Cure of
Fevers. The time of vomiting is sometimes the well day. And if they Vomit
easily, it must be given upon an empty Stomach, otherwise a full: And before
vomiting give broth of Pease, or Chickens, or fat Bacon (as in France:)
Radishes, Cole-worts, Saltfish to cleanse and sweet Wine, and after the Vomit
taken they provoke it. Also a Vomit given at first, or in time of the fit and
repeated is good and makes the Fever gentler and shorter, especially if it be
given a little a fore the fit, for then the feverish matter being moved is
easily expelled.

When the person is weak and the heat little, it is provoked by gentle things,
but in long Agues with strong, as quartans, and phlegmatic Stomachs, which can
endure strongest Medicines. Thus: If the Throat be tickled with the Finger or a
Feather or the like it is better that will serve alone sometimes when they are
accustomed to Vomit after a full Stomach. And if after the Vomit is taken it
works not in a quarter of an hour, give a little Chicken broth and tickle
the Throat:

The gentle Vomits are these: Take a large draught of Endive water, and put
your Finger in your Throat to provoke Vomiting.

Or: Take Oxymel simple an ounce, or an ounce and an half, or two, or three
ounces; and drink it with warm water.

Or: Take Oxymel simple two ounces, the Decoction of Honey and Radish seed in
water, six ounces.

Or: Three ounces of the distilled water of green Nuts.

Or: Take Chamomil flowers an ounce, Rosemary and Dill flowers, each half an
ounce: boil them in Radish water. Rondeletius says this has Cured many at the
first.

Some approve of the stinking Dock called Lapathum, Atriplex and Purslane, so
taken.

Or: Take Atriplex seeds, Dill and Radish seeds, each an ounce: boil them in
water, and if the phlegm be tough in the Stomach, add Oxymel simple or of Squils.

These are stronger: Take Rocket, Leek and Radish seed, each half an ounce;
Atriplex seed two drams, Asarum roots a dram: boil them, and dissolve two
ounces of Oxymel simple therein.

Rondeletius highly commends the seeds of Asarum and the roots, and Broom seeds
with Cinnamon and Mace, boiled in Wine, according to Dioscorides.

Or: Take roots of Palma christi one dram and an half, give it with Sack, in
Poudar.

Take Asarum with the roots half an ounce: boil them to drink, or give a dram,
or half a dram in Wine, or the like. I prepare them thus, I slice and cleanse
the roots and steep them two or three days in Sack, and dry them in the shade,
and keep the Powder. The Dose is half a dram, or a dram, to the strongest.

Or: Take Phaseoli a pugil, of Dill, Atriplex and Radish seeds, each three
drams; dried Calamints a dram and an half: boil them, and to four ounces add
Oxymel simple or of Squils, if phlegm be tough.

Many have been cured by Stibium and other strong Vomits, as white Hellebour:
and then they Vomit abundance of phlegm, with yellow and green Choler: and
there is a great Evacuation from the Meseraicks by nature most stirred up. But
because this is dangerous they must not be given rashly to any as Empericks do.

We repeat purges differing according to Fevers oftentimes.

If after purging, an exquisite Tertian double and Acute cease not, it is
sufficient afterward tokeep the Belly open with a Clyster, and to invite
nature to send out the humor from the Meseraicks, for which the Clyster above
mentioned must be often given or a stronger.

Or this, every other or third day. Take Barley, Pease, each a pugil; Mallows,
Violets, Beets, Atriplex, each a handful; Chamomil stowers a pugil, Annis seeds
a dram: make a Decoction, dissolve Honey of Violets, red Sugar, each an ounce
and an half; Oil of Violets three ounces, with the yolk of an Egg and a little
Salt: make a Clyster.

If the Fever cease not give a gentle purging Clyster as broth made of Orach,
Violets, Spinach, Mallows, or a Potion of Rheubarb or Cassia as abovesaid.

In bastard Fevers especially long lasting, you must purge a fresh and prepare
first, with those above mentioned used discrnetly and altered if need be,

These Medicines that prepare the way and matter and evacuate are commended, if
they are sometimes used and then a stronger given: In diverse Forms.

As this Apozem: Take roots of Succory, Asparagus, Grass, each an ounce and an
half; Dock and Sorrel roots, each an ounce; Parsley and Fennel roots, each half
an ounce; Liquorish six drams, Endive, Succory, round Sorrel, Maidenhair,
Bugloss, each a handful; Bettony, Burnet, each half a handful; four great
Cold-seeds, each two drams; Annis seed a dram and an half, Fennel seeds a dram,
Cordial flowers a gugil, Chamomil flowers half a pugil, Prunes and Sebestens,
each ten; Tamarinds six drams, Carthamus bruised an ounce and an half: Steep
the roots in sharp Wine and then boil them all in water, and while the strained
Liquor is hot Agarick half an ounce: boil a little, adding yellow Myrobalans
and Rhubarh, each half an ounce; with a dram of Cinnamon, a scruple of Spike,
and three drams of syrup of Roses Laxative, give it every other day a good
draught, and according as it works give more or less the next time.

You may boil the half of it with Sugar, to make it last. And use sometimes the
Apozem, and sometimes the syrup, or give it being all a syrup alone or with
convenient liquor, or Barley or Pease broth.

While this Syrup is preparing, you may give syrup Diasereos, or of Roses
solutive, with Rhubarb.

An infusion in Wine is good because many delight in Wormwood Wine, and
Wormwood does better allay the stink of Senna then anything, and amends the
hurt that purges do to the Stomach, and the Wine being opening, helps it by
piercing, and the heat can do no hurt being but a little.

Opening Wine is thus made: Take Succory roots an ounce and an half, Grass
roots an ounce, Parsley and Fennel roots half an ounce; Orris roots two drams,
Wormwood three drams, Germander, Ground Pine, Maiden hair, of each two drams;
Sorrel, Liver-wort, Maudlin, each two draws; Cordial flowers, each a dram;
Annis seeds a dram, Parsley seed half a dram, Senna one ounce and an half,
Rhubarb three drams, Spike half a dram, Agarick four drams, Ginger bound in a
cloute with the Spike a scruple: pour upon them all of strong Wine, dashed with
a little water, and of Endive water five pints (because some part will be drunk
up by the ingredients. Let them infuse a night, and boil in the morning, and
cool by degrees, use it as the Apozem. Before mentioned, after three or four
days heat it again, to keep it from corrupting.

You may make Electuaries for the same thus: Take Cassia new drawn two ounces,
Tamarinds pulped with Endive water an ounce and half, Manna an ounce,
Catholicon, Diaprunis and Lenitive Electuary half an ounce; Rhubarb infused in
white Wine til it be soft two drams, Spike a scruple, Senna a dram and an half,
(first sprinkled with Wine) Cinnamon and Annis seed, each half a dram, with
syrup of the five roots and Succory with Rhubarb: make an Electuary, take first
half an ounce to try and then increase the Dose by degrees, give it every other
day alone or with Liquor as he pleases.

These are the usual Pills: Take Agarick two drams, Turbith a dram, Ginger a
scruple, Rhubarb three drams, Spike half a scruple, Diagredium prepared with
juice of Roses a scruple, extract of Wormwood a dram, with syrup of Roses, make
a Mass, take half a dram in the morning fasting every other or third day,
drinking after a little syrup of Violets with Endive water.

If the Fever abate not with these, use stronger as this Potion: Take
Liquorish an ounce, Raysons an ounce and an half, Prunes six, Tamarinds six
drams, tops of Time a dram, Polypody, Senna, each half an ounce; Carthamus
seeds six drams, Annis and Fennel seed, each a dram: boil them, infuse Rhubarb
four scruples, Spike half a scruple, Agarick a dram and an half: strain and
dissolve Diaphaenicon a dram and an half.

Or: Take Electuary of juice of Roses, Diaphaenicon, Confectio hamech, each a
dram and an half; syrup of Roses, made with the infusion of Senna an ounce,
with Wormwood Wine and Endive water: make a Potion.

Or these Pills: Take Aggregative, of Myrobalans and sine Quibus, each a
scruple: make nine Pills, with white Wine.

In long Quartans you may sometimes rest a month and then prepare and purge
again. The humor being Choleric and thick, blood is thus prepared: Take syrup
of Fumitory and Epithymum, each an ounce; syrup of Violets and of Endive, each
half an ounce: waters of Fumitory, Bugloss and Endive, each an ounce and an
half: add yellow Sanders, and drink it five or six days.

In Spring when Herbs may be had, or Autumn: Thus, Take of both Buglosses,
Hops, Fumitory, each a handful; beat them with two ounces of Vinegar: strain
and add the juice of sweet Apples a pint, with Sugar, drink it often.

Afterward purge as formerly. Or thus: Take Damask prunes ten, Raysons,
Jusubes, Sebestens, each twelve; Cordial flowers a pugil, Annis seed a dram:
boil them in water and white Wine, add yellow and Indy Myrobalans rubbed with
Oil of sweet Almonds, each three drams; Rhubarb a dram, Spike six grains, Senna
half an ounce, Epithimum and tops of Time, each a dram and an half; strain and
add syrup of Roses solutive an ounce and an half; Catholican half an ounce,
Confectio hamech a dram: make a Potion.

Or with these Pills: Take Pills Aggregative, of Myrobalans and Turbith in
Powder, each a scruple: make Pills with five grains of Ginger and white Wine.

To prepare and purge together, make this Apozem, Take Sparagus and grass
roots, each an ounce and an half; Smallage and Parsley roots, each an onnce;
Tamarisk and Elder, of each an ounce: steep all in Wine, add Borage, Bugloss,
Maidenhair, Ceterach, each an handful; Germander, Ground pine and Bettony, each
half an handful; green Mercury a handful, Cordial, Rosemary and Broom flowers,
each a pugil; Annis and Parsley seeds, each two drams: Dodder and Fennel seed,
each a dram; four great Cool seeds, each two drams; Raysons two ounces, Prunes
ten: boil, strain, and infuse Carthamus seeds an ounce and an half, roots of
Polypody four ounces, Senna two ounces, Agarick three drams, Myrobalans, Indy
and Citron, each half an ounce; Epithymum and tops of Time, each three drams;
infuse them hot, then boil them a little, add a quart of the juice of sweet
Apples with Sugar and Cianamon two drams: make a syrup, give an ounce, or more
alone, or with Whey or Bugloss or Borrage water.

You may infuse the same in Wine, allaying it a little with Water, and adding
Wormwood, for bitter Wine is more pleasant than bitter Decoctions.

A gentler Infusion is made of dry things thus. Take Grass, Succory, Parsley
and Fennel roots, each an ounce; Wormwood, Germander, Groundpine and Bettony,
each a dram; Fumitory and Hearts-tongue, each two drams: Cordial flowers a
pugil, Epithymum and tops of Thyme, each two drams; Anise and Fennel seed each
half a dram; dried Polypody roots and Senna, each two ounces; Agarick three
drams; Ginger half a scruple, infuse them in Wine and Water, and boil as
formerly. It needs no sweetning, for the scent of the Wormwood must prevail.

An Electuary thus. Take Catholicon an ounce, Diasenna, Confectio Hameck, each
half an ounce; Carthamus seeds peeled and bruised six drams, Turbith two drams,
Ginger infused in Oxymel a scruple, Senna two drams and an half, Aniseed half a
dram, with syrup of Epythimum make an Electuary, give six drams alone or in
Whey.

Or these Pills. Take Indy and Citrine Myrobolans rubbed with Oil of sweet
Almods, each a dram; Rhubarb two drams, Turbith a dram and an half, Thyme and
Epithymum each a dram; Senna a dram and an half, Cream of Tartar a scruple,
Ginger and Spike, each six grains, with syrup of Epithymum make a Mass, give
two scruples or more as you see fit.

In quartans Pills of Agarick with Juice of Eupatorium are good.

And after the use of them they must be purged again every third day.

Also Clysters may be given all along to draw from the Mesaraicks, and to
loosen: for by long lying, and heat, and fasting, the belly is often bound: We
showed you Clysters of sharp and opening things.

In melancholic fevers use this often. Take emollients each a handful; Balm,
Fumitory, both Buglosses, each a handful and an half; Chamaemel, Melilot,
Broom, and Elder flowers, each a pugil; Carua seeds a dram, Faenugreek and Line
seed, each two ounces; Bran a pugil and an half, Senna an ounce, boil them, and
add Honey of Violets and Rosemary flowers, each half an ounce; Consectio Hamec
and Benedicta Laxativa, each two drams; Oil of Chamaemel and Violets, each an
ounce an half; with a little Salt, make a Clyster.

This Clyster is for Bastard fevers, and phlegmatic persons. Take Lilly and
Marshmallow roots, each an ounce and an half; emollient herbs, Atriplex,
Mercury, Baulm, Bettony, each a handful; Figs six pair, Dill and Fennel seeds,
each a dram; Carthamus seeds bruised six drams, Senna ten drams, Chamaemel,
Elder and Rosemary flowers, each a pugil; boil them and to a pint, ad
Catholicon and Diaphaenicon, each two drams; Hiera Galeni three drams, Honey
and red Sugar, each an ounce; Oil of Violets Lillies and Chamaemel, each an
ounce: with a little Salt, make a Clyster.

Fasting belongs to Evacuations, for by it the humor is kept from increasing,
and that which is in the Meseraicks is taken away by the Guts and Stomach, and
so the fever is cured. Thessalus cured fevers with his three days fast, and
Empericks in our time labor to do the same. But in regard the Choler rages by
fasting constantly, and hurts the parts that draw it to them, especially when
it fasteneth to them producing the Colic, as I showed, and brings worse
Diseases, we will not rashly presribe fasting against fevers, by which means
Sweat and Urin will be hindered.

The thin humors pass away by sweat, or insensible transpiration or Urin, and
cure the fever if the thick matter was first purged. This Nature does
ordinarily of her self, when she is fit for it. And therefore the Physician
being her servant ought to imitate her when signs of Concoction appear, in the
declining of the fever, to take away the remainder, with Purgers, by Urin,
Sweat, and insensible transpiration, aforementioned.

We mix things to purge Urin with Preparatives with an Eye to the fever, and
sometime we use them after purging in the declining.

In short and sharp Tertians we use the gentlest, that least inslame, as Melon
seeds and red Pease, and Parsley roots in broth.

Or Decoction of young Sparagus in Ale, or an Emulsion of the cold seeds with
Almond Milk.

Pomegranate Wine of the moderate taste provokes Urin.

In Bastard tertians and long feve^ use these, and stronger as Chicken broth,
with Parsley, Fennel roots, Borage, and Pease, and the like mentioned in the
Diet.

Or thus. Take red Pease a pugil, Barley half a pugil, Liquorish an ounce,
Raisons an ounce and an half; Fennel and Parsley roots, each two ounces; Melon
and Gourd seeds each two drams; boil them in lean Chickin broth, drink it in
the mornings.

Or thus. Take Barley water a pint, with Fennel roots boiled in it, and add
syrup of Maidenhair two ounces.

Make it stronger thus, if the heat of the Fever be not great. Take roots of
Brambles, Sparagus, each an ounce: Fennel, Smallage, and Parsley roots, each
half an ounce; Asarum roots a dram, Endive, Liverwort and Maidenhair, each half
a handful; Hysop a handful, Fennel seed two drams, the four cold great seeds,
each three drams; Pease a pugil, boil and add Sugar or Honey and Vinegar for
old Folk.

This Decoction is admired of some. Take tops of Wormwood two drams, red Pease
six drams, boil and give four ounces after the back is anointed as shall be
showed.

The Decoction of Dill with Rue, Honey-wine or Hysop do the same.

Water of Gentian, Centory, Wormwood, or of Grass, Asparagus, Smallage,
Parsley, Lovage, Valerian, may be used instead of the others.

These Pills provoke Urin. Take troches of Wormwood, Roses, and Eupatory, each a
dram; with Gentian water make Pills, give a dram every day, drinking after it
the Decoction of red Pease, Melon seeds and Parsley roots.

White thin Wine with water is prescribed for some in the declining time.

Or this Infusion. Take Fennel and Sparagus roots, each an ounce; Wormwood and
Hysop, each a dram and an half; Chamaemel and Dill flowers, each a dram; Fennel
seed a dram, infuse them in Wine and Water boiled or otherwise.

In long Quartans you may give the former and stronger, if the heat be
decreased. As, Take Liquorish, Raisons, each an ounce; Parsley roots an ounce
and an half, Asarum roots a dram, Maidenhair, Cetarach, Hysop, each half a
handful; Hops a pugil, Sparagus seeds three drams, Fennel seed a dram, Melon
seed two drams, red Pease a pugil, Chamaemel flowers a dram and an half, boil
them in six pints of Water, add Pomegranate Wine four ounces, and drink it
mornings with Sugar.

Wine and Water is good against quartans.

And this Infusion. Take the three capillary herbs, each a handful; Hysop half
a handful, Chamaemel flowers half a pugil, Fennel and Smallage roots, each an
ounce; Asarum roots two drams, Fennel seeds a dram, Dodder seed a dram and an
half, infuse them in Wine, give it as before.

Some give this distilled water every morning two or three ounces for an
excellent medicine. Take strong Vinegar three pints, hot crusts of new bread a
pound, Gunpowder two ounces, distill them in Balneo.

Or. Take Balm water half a pint, Aqua vitae a pint, the pith of Dwarf-elder
half a pound, distill them, and give two ounces every morning and evening.

Also these Pills. Take Troches of Wormwood, Eupatory, Rhubarb, each a dram;
with syrup Bizantine make Pills, take them as formerly with Pease broth in
which Roots are boiled.

Sweating is good if the critical Excretion tend that way, for it helps
Nature in the declining time to expel the residue. It is done by these
following, and the gentlest, if they cause not sweat, cause transpiration.

Frictions are good before the Fit two hours, and in the beginning of it when
the heat begins to disperse the vapors and heat, and if violent they cause heat.

If Sweat be wiped off often it causes more sweat.

And boiled Water with Wine and alone in great quantity causes Sweat.
Therefore they who deny Drink to fevers and almost Kill men with thirst, do ill,
for it hinders Sweat, and inflames the body, causing a Hectic.

Bugloss water taken in great quantity, causes much sweat, and is excellent in
quartans. And also Fumitory, Scabious, Carduus, and Hearts-tongue Water.

This following Decoction provokes Sweat and Urine. Take of Barley a pugil,
roots of Smallage, Parsley, Kneeholm, Sparagus, Nettles each an ounce; Orris
and Elicampane roots each half an ounce; Bayberries twelve, Chamaemel and Dil
flowers, each a pugil; Pennyroyal, Calamints, each half a handful, Cummin,
Anise, Fennel, and Citron seeds, each a dram; boil them in much Water, drink it
often.

Treacle is given for the same, and the like, which we shall declare among
things that hinder Fits.

Also anointing the back with loosning Oils does the same, and other things
there to be mentioned.

A Bath is good in long fevers, to provoke Sweat, and refresh, and moisten, of
sweet water; in which Barley and moistning herbs are sometimes boiled. This must
be used on the well day, or five hours before the fit, not too hot. And after
let the Patient take a dram of Mithridate or Diaboraginatum and sweat in his
bed. Thus many have been cured of quartanes.

Altering things resist the heat and dryness of the Disease, and are cold and
moist, and must be mixed with Resisters of putrefaction, things that open
obstructions, and strengthen, because these differ not much, we shall
distinguish them by Forms and not by Kinds of Fevers.

The best way is to give them in drink for they are refreshed thereby and
delight in it.

In the fit because they are then driest, give crude or boiled water as we
showed, or Barley water, but in the fit Barley is too nourishing, therefore
give little. that water is best, in which Sorrel and Grass roots are boiled,
with steel prepared and Cinnamon, nor must they be kept from drink after the
shaking Fit, for as Fernelius and Joubert us in his Paradoxes assirms that if
the Patient be not relieved with Drink in his great heat and thirst, there will
follow a melting of the solid parts, and will they not sweat. In this also there
is a moderation to be used, lest sudden cooling hurts the bowels, and cause a
Dropsy, as in quartans its usual, this is to be regarded when the stomach is
offended with cold drink, for then we give not much but corrected and qualified
water, with an Eye to custom.

Out of the fit if the body be little choleric, and not very hot; we give Wine
with Water or Bugloss water in quartans and thin, sharp Wine in Bastard Fevers
which rather cools than inflames. And it provokes Urin and strengthens.
Therefore some boil Hysop, and by Galens command Pepper or Cloves. Others give
Ale to provoke Urin.

Out of the fit, and in the fit, we give these cool and moistening Drinks
following. Take Endive, Sorrel, and Bugloss water, each four ounces;
Pomegranate Wine two ounces, with Sugar make a Julep, or sharp Syrup, as of
sour Apples, Ribes, Currants, Sorrel or Vinegar.

Or, Take one measure of boiled water, syrup of Lemmons or Citrons, two ounces,
syrup of Violets an ounce.

Or, Take Sassaphras three drams, red Sanders and Sortel roots, each two drams;
Cinnamon a dram, (with Sugar two ounces, if you will have it sweet) cut and
bruise them, tie them in a clout, boil them in water, to be given at any time.

Or this syrup. Take ten pints of Water, Vinegar four ounces, Sugar four
ounces, boil and drink.

The Alexandrine Julep of Sugar and Rose Water, and others metioned in Thirst,
the juice of Purslane is commended by Dioscorides.

There are also diverse Electuaries.

Give this the day after purging to strengthen. Take Conserve of Roses and
Violets, each a dram; Trionsantalon half a scruple, with Sugar make a Bolus.

In bastard quartans. Take Conserve of Borage flowers and Bugloss roots, each a
dram; Citron peels candied half a dram, Diamargariton frigidum half a scruple.

Or give a dram of Treacle with half a dram of Conserve of Bugloss.

In the Fit give we Electuaries to quench Thirst which must not be sweet. These
are to alter.

Take Conserve of Roses and Bugloss each an ounce; of candied Citrons pulp and
peel, each two drams; Rob of Ribes half an ounce, species Diamargariton half a
dram, with Sugar of Roses make a Mixture.

Or this, Take Conserve of Roses, Rob of Ribes, sharp Cherries and sharp Prunes
preserved, each an ounce; Conserve of Bugloss half an ounce, give it in time of
Thirst.

To alter and strengthen all the time of the disease Take species of the three
Sanders with a double quantity of Rhubarb a dram, Diarrhodon Abatis a scruple'
Diamargariton frigidum half a scruple, Conserve of Rose and Bugloss roots, each
a dram, with Sugar dissolved in Rose and Endive water, and a little Vinegar: if
the heat be great, make Lozenges to be eaten on the well days.

Sugar of Roses by it self or with other things, is much commended, and that
called Manus Christi, and Trionsantalon, and Diacorallium.

In quartans for Melancholy. Take species of Diarhodon, Trionsantalon, each
half a dram; Diamoschu half a scruple, Laetificans Galeni half a scruple, with
Sugar dissolved in Rose or Bugloss water, make Lozenges.

Soft Electuaries. Take Conserves of Cordial flowers, each an ounce; Conserve
of Hearts-tongue, Maydenhair and Ceterach, each half an ounce; candied Citron
peels two drams, species of Diarrhodon, Diatragacanth frigid, and Diamargariton
frigid, each a scruple; with the syrup of Citrons.

Or thus. Take Diabuglossati and Diaboraginati, each an ounce; Letitiae
Almasoris two drams, species de Gemis, Aromatici Rosati, each half an ounce,
with syrup of Apples.

Or for Melancholy: Take the four Cordial conserves, each an ounce; Species
Cordial for meat, fragments of precious, Stones and Pearls, each half a
scrnple; Gold leaves with syrup of Currants and Cherries or Sower Apples: make
an Electuary.

Cooling Pills: Take Troches of Camphire two scruples, with Vinegar: make
Pills, give half a scruple.

Mollifying Clysters all the time of the Disease do alter.

And also moist Diet.

Moist flesh, as of young beasts, Veal, Pigs, Kids, Chickens boiled, also brook
Fish, seasoned with Pepper. In quartans rare Eggs are good, but in Cholierck
stomachs, they soon corrupt.

Grapes are very refreshing, also Peaches and Pippins.

Give bread fopt in broth, and Cream of Barley.

Make broth with Lettice, Borrage, (and Bugloss in quartans) with Endive and
Sorrel, such as we prescribed for continual putrid Fevers, and give Bugloss
water in broaths.

Make sauce of sower Grapes and Vinegar, Capers and Olives well washed from the
Salt and our Compound called in High Dutch Sumpist.

Also Confections of sower fruits, and the same crude (except there be other
things that hinder) or dried and softened again are good.

Sallats also of Lettice and Vinegar and a little Oil and Succory roots boiled
and eaten with Oil and Vinegar.

Let the Air be cool by nature or art.

Apply Epithems to cool the Liver. Thus: Take water of Succory and Endive, each
four ounces; Wormwood water two ounces, yellow Sanders and Roses, each a
scruple, Spike half a scruple, Vinegar of Roses half an ounce.

Then anoint with the Cerot of Sanders, Oil of Violets washed with cold water,
each an ounce; Spike half a scruple.

For the Heart, this is a good Epithem: Take Rosewater two ounces, Borage and
Bugloss water, each an ounce; Balm water half an ounce, Vinegar of Roses six
drams, Cordial species or Diamargariton a dram, Saffron a scruple.

Then anoint the Heart and Pulses with this: Take Treacle two drams, Ointment
of water Lillies a dram, juice of Lemons half a dram, Saffron and Camphire each
five grains: make a Liniment.

If the Reins be hot: Take the mucilage of Flea bane seeds, made with Rose
water an ounce, Sanders two drams, Camphire half a scruple, Oil of Roses and
Violets, each an ounce; with Virgins Wax, make an Ointment.

A moist Bath of moystning things is good in quartans to alter, and is best out
of the fit, if the Ague has been long. Albeit the vulgar people fear to
moisten in intermitting Fevers, and if they walk but near a River they fear a
^elapse; And therefore by old Wives superstition forbid any that are recovered
to cross over a Bridge, or go by Sea, or in a Boat, or walk upon new broken up
or tilled ground, whereas that moisting of the body in long Fevers, when the
heat a little abateth, is good especially if there be a Consumption.

There must be a good course of Diet in respect of food, Air, Sleep, and
exercise, to keep up strength, if the Fever be sharp, least he fall, or to
hold him up, if it be long.

The Air must be pure and free and sometimes perfumed.

Meat and Drink must be thin in the beginning of all intermitting Fevers. In
which Avicen teaches that hunger and thirst endured the first week conduces
much to the Cure.

And if they be long and Chronical as bastard Agues and quartans, and they live
sparing the first three weeks, they are easily Cured. Afterward a fuller Diet
is allowed, and when the choler grows hotter in Tertians and quartans, and
they cannot endure fasting.

In the fit we give no food least nature should be hindered in concocting the
matter of the Disease, and least the food should be corrupted with
preternatural heat and the Fever increased, for we see that after meat it does
as in Hecticks. And then we deny nourishing drink, if but of Barley in any
quantity, and Almond Milk, especially when thick. But if the patient be
choleric and thin bodied, least choler should be enraged or an Hectic
follow, we allow even in the fit, a little food, as to Children in respect of
custom.

Out of the fit Choleric persons may eat in the declining of the Fever, and
before it comes two or three hours; But in long Agues, as quartans, it is good
to fast the whole day wherein they have their fit, and let food be given six or
seven hours before the fit, or so long time before as a Concoction may be
before it come. And this is to be observed in double Fevers that come every
day, always choosing that time of rest which is farthest from the fit, and
feeding presently after the fit, because the Disease returns soon. And let it
be easy of Digestion, as we showed in altering things and continual Fevers.

Wine is good in quartans and other bastard Agues, because it refreshes: but
give it out of the fit at meat and not immoderately, and if thirst be great,
give it with boiled water, white thin and new Wine is best especially in
choleric persons: old wine inflames; you may give red Wine if it be clear and
dashed with water.

Sleep refreshes, in the declining of the fit, as waking hurts: and sleeping
is hurtful in the beginning of the fit.

In quartans moderate exercise is good.

Passions of mind if sad and immoderte hurt, and pleasant and moderate do good.

We have showed what Medicines are fit to preserve and restore strength, in the
alterers.

The Symptoms abate and depart with the disease: and if any of them be
extraordinary, the Cure thereof shall be regarded; either by respecting all the
accidents together, by hindering the fit: or by respecting that in particular:
of which hereafter.

The Paroxysme or fit is when all the accidents from heat and cold appear; and
departt with the fit: which fit and accidents, if hindered there is a Cure in
part that is of the Symptom, not of the cause, but of the evaporation or
motion that inflames the Heart. Things that take away chilness which is the
first fit, do this; and then though heat follow the vulgar suppose the Ague to
be cured or abated. And sometimes it comes to pass that when shaking, by which
means the feverish matter passes through the Body, is hindered, then both the
hot and cold fit are prevented, and the whole fever is taken away by giving
that which prevents shaking. But this cannot be done safely before the matter
be prepared and purged; for if the cause remain, though the Fever cease, worse
Symptoms may follow: As Empericks find, who aiming at nothing more but the Cure
of the fit, bring Cholicks, Jaundies and Dropsies. And sometimes we do willingly
according to reason take away eth fit before the cause, if it be so great that
it destroythe strength, or at least abate it with extraordinary Medicines, yet
so, that we go on still Methodically to take away the cause. And it sometimes
hapens, that after the cause is removed there are fits which come from custom
or habit: to prevent these at the first when they stretch and yawn, we give
things against shaking which we mentioned, when we spoke of depraved Motion.
Those things do it, either by taking away the matter which getting by degrees
into the body, causes the shaking: or by stupifying the senses, or by heating
the body suddenly at first, before the fit comes. All these are to be done
warily, and not before preparation and purgation, and then you may give either
a specifical evacuation, or stupefactive or an alterer or a Medicine made of
all these together.

It comes to pass often, that by large eating before the fit, that nature
removes from the cause of the disease to the Concoction of meat and hinders the
fit. Hence the German Proverb Sie haben das feber abgessen.

The same thing is done by evacuations when nature is busy to send Excrements
upwards and downwards.

The fit is hindered by vomiting in the beginning of the fit, because by it a
revulsion is made of the matter from the Meseraicks to the stomach, and the
Fever is quite taken away, sometimes by throwing out the cause by the Stomach
and Guts.

Gentle purges prevent the fit, the same way (but strong purges are dangerous
to be given before it, because they will work in the time of the fit and
weaken) as Agarick, Senna, with some alterers. These are the best compositions
that follow. A Decoction: Take Epithimum and Time, Polypody and Senna, each a
dram; Borage flowers a pugil: boil and strain, and give a draught before the
fit, with a little Wine. This is best in a quartan.

Or a Powder: Take Senna three drams, Turbith a dram, Pepper a scruple, Ginger
half a scruple, Cinnamon, Myrrh, each half a dram; with Sugar as much as all:
make a Powder for three Doses, give one in white Wine before the fit.

Helidaeus gives a dram of Agarick with juice of Fumitory and Fennel.

Others mix a dram of Diagredium with three ounces of Syrup of Violets, and
give as much as a Chestnut an hour before the fit.

Some give strong bodies the Powder of Mercury, with strong Vinegar, Treacle
and Sugar. And the Chemists instead thereof give Mercurius dulcis, or Mercurius
vitae, or Panchymagogum Rubrum.

Stupefiers are given before the fit because they take away the sense of the
parts, and provoke sweat.

As Treacle a dram and an half, or more or less in Wine is highly commended; or
in wormwood Wine, Carduus, Mints or Rose water, some add Diatrionpiperion, that
of the three Peppers, others Mirth as Dioscorides.

Also Panchrestum Nicolai with Wine, or Methridate.

Dioscorides commends three or four leaves of Henbane, with a dram of the seed
thereof given in Sack at the beginning of the fit. If you repeat it twice or
thrice it is a sure remedy. Also syrup of Poppies given before the fit prevents
it.

Also diverse alterers do the same, inwardly and outwardly, and motion of the
Body.

Inwardly we give both hot and cold Medicines.

Hot because they presently inflame the body and drive away shaking, and then
the heat which uses to follow the motion of the cold fit either goes away or
is abated. And hot things do it by dispersing the matter especially when it is
thin. And they cause sweat. But vehement hot Medicines are not to be given
before a Concoction of the matter, least the thin be consumed and the thick
remain; and of a simple Fever, there prove a double, or treble Ague, or a
continual Fever. This must be observed in giving of Treacle and other hot
things, and Stupefiers above mentioned. Of hot things these by experience are
found best. Take Ginger half an ounce, Pepper a dram, Nut shells two drams: boil
them in two pints of astringent Wine, and to five ounces strained, add an ounce
of syrup of Violets, give it two or three hours before the fit and cover him to
sweat.

Or: Take Gentian roots an ounce, Centaury tops and Serpyllum, of each three
drams; boil them in Wine, and give a draught as abovesaid.

Or thus: Take juice of Calamints three drams or an ounce and an half of the
syrup, give it with Wine and Borage water.

Or this: Take Gentian, Centaury and Plantane water, each an ounce and an half;
drink it with a drop of Oil of Vitrial, or some drops of spirit of Salt or
Niter.

Or: Take Plantane a handful, Sorrel half a handful, Vinegar and Treacle, each
four ounces; Distill them, give three ounces of the water half an hour before the
fit.

Or give three ounces of the juice Plantane with an ounce of the juice of
Purslane half an hour before the fit.

Or this Powder commended in all Fevers though Pestilential: Take Sugar candy
three drams, Ginger two drams, Camphire a dram; make a Powder, give a dram in
hot water. This Crato commends.

Another: Take the Powder of Cray-fish, Man's skul and Ivory, each a scruple;
Cinnamon half a dram, Saffron a scruple, give a dram in Wine.

A third: Take Myrrh a scruple, Pepper six grains, Ginger half a scruple, Sugar
three drams, give a dram, or make Pills, with juice of Gentian.

An Electuary: Take the Troches Rubiae of Nicolas a dram: give it with white
Wine: or the Electuary of Asa, in Mesue, Trionphyllon Nicolai. Electuary of
Peter Arnold of Villanova.

Or: Take Cinnamon two drams, Pepper a dram, Saffron half a dram, Myrrh,
Storax, Serapine, each half a dram; Benzoin three drams, Gentian roots two
drams with Honey: make an Electuary, give half a dram or two scruples, two
hours before the fit.

Coolers do it sometimes and stop the fit, but they are better external, because
they must be very cool, which will suddenly hurt the Heart, given inwardly.

Cold water, drunk largely in the fit cures many: Hence the Proverb Das feber
abtrincken.

Two ounces of Pomegranate wine given in the fit, removes it, if you anoint the
Pulses with the Ointments following.

A famous Physician gives the Crystal mineral in a great quantity in Spring,
Plantane or Sorrel water in the fit.

Sometimes, External things do it, as exercise, Applications, Injections,
Amulets and Superstitious things.

Exercise does it by heating the body and provoking sweat before the fit. As
Running, Riding, etc. Instead of exercise in weak bodies, you may rub them and
cover them warm with cloths, or use Ointments before the cold fit.

Also Applications to the Wrists, Temples and Ankles are used. They are such as
either divert or revel the matter from the Heart, and are sharp: or such as
alter the distmper of the Heart, so that it will not easily be enflamed by the
vapor, and defend it, being sharp and temperate and cooling sometimes, mixed
with piercing things to reach the Heart.

A burning, blistering Medicine is made thus: Take leaves of Crow foot or Dove
foot bruised with Salt and Vinegar, or the leaves of Thlapsus bruised with Salt
and Vinegar, or of Shepherds purse, of Dentilaria Rondeletij, Rue, Savine,
Marigold, Angelica, Nettles.

As thus: Take Elder leaves, Rue, Marigold and Nettles, each a handful; bruise
them, with Salt and Vinegar, or apply Garlic and Onyons bruised, to the Wrists.

The more cool are: Take Plantan and Sowthistle, of each a handful; bruise
them, and with a little Soot of a Chimney, Salt and Vinegar, apply it.

Or this, which makes a black spot and a little corrodeth: Take the inward bark
of the Hazel Tree, steep them in Vinegar, and apply it. I have used this often
with good success.

Also bread steept in Vinegar and applied to the Pulses.

This Remedy is approved by many: Take a little Ointment of Poplar tree, and
mix it with clean Cobwebs: make great Pills, apply two to the Arms, two to the
Feet, and two to the Temples, with a Vine leave before the fit: Repeating them
after, if they Cure not at first.

Anoint the Pulses, Back and Body,

The Pulses, Thus: Take juice of Rue, Boys piss, each equal parts, wash the
Pulses before the fit.

Or: Take Oil of Chamomil and boil Spiders therein anoint the Pulses and
Backbone, or Oil of Toads.

For the Back to prevent shaking: Take Oil of Chamomil three ounces, Oil of
Bays one ounce, Oil of Castor half an ounce, Spiders and Earth worms, each ten;
Aqua vitae two ounces: boil them till the Aqua vitae be consumed and anoint.

Mathiolus says that anointing from Head to Foot with Oil in which the balls
made of Anthemis flowers are dissolved, cures Agues.

Some commend the Fume of Cats dung.

Others give Anthemis in Clysters.

There are diverse Amulets, these are accounted of many the most infalible, a
Spider hanged about the Neck in a Nut shel. Mouse-ear gathered in the decrease
of the Moon tied in a knot of cloth about the Neck, or to carry the Snail stone,
Jasper stone, or to hold a Mole in your Hand, in the time of the fit til it die.

We will omit superstitious Characters and Charms as trifles.

And although we have showed the Cure of Symptoms, yet we shall here speak of
them as they are in the time of the Fever.

If watchings and Headache by reason of Vapors do offend, we hinder the vapors
from rising and provoke sleep. If sleep be too much we look to that.

We use things mentioned among the alterers against thirst and dryness of
Tongue by heat and Vapors.

Evacuations restore Aperite, and when the disease declineth, we study to
hinder it least they eat too much.

In Swounding Fevers we look first to the Symptom, and if it come from choler
in the Mouth of the Stomach, the sharpness thereof must be allayed. And then we
give strengtheners.

If there be pain in the Stomach from yolky or Leek-like Choler, or from Wind
with rumbling, or from too much drink, they must be cured with things that
abate sharpness, strengthen, and discuss Winds.

A Looseness often comes from Choler, which must be cured, as we showed in pain
of the stomach, by Clysters, as that of Barley water, and red Sugar two ounces.

There is sometimes a Colic with the Ague, by reason of Choler in the Guts, and
sometimes after, when the cause is not removed, and it is cured as I showed in
the Colic. They say it comes from Glassey phlegm in the fever Leypira, but we
have showed that a fever cannot come from this most cold humor.

There is often also Cachexy or ill-habit, Dropsy, hardness of the
Hypochondria, Oedaeamatous tumors in the Legs, in long fevers by reason of the
hurt of the internal bowels, the cure of which is in their places.

In the declining there is a Leanness from Atrophy, or want of nourishment, or
from the beginning of an Hectic after a double and acute fevers.

In a quartan often, there is a Tumor behind the Ears.

And sometimes Worms are voided; to which we shall prescribe particular
Medicines.

A continual putrid malignant solitary Fever, The Cure of continual putrid
Fevers.
which is often epidemical, or simply malignant, called by Rondoletius
symptomatical, is cured as a putrid fever that is not malignant, and also a
semi-tertian which some account malignant.

As for the predictions, they must be made by the same signs showed in Putrid
Continual fevers. These signs being doubtful in putrid nor malignant, and their
Judgment uncertain, are more uncertain here where there is malignity, which so
insinuates it self into the heart, that when signs of concoction appears, the
Patient dies of a sudden, unexpectedly. Morover, Nature does not keep her
critical motions so orderly as in fevers not malignant, being more oppressed:
And therefore we must be more wary here of pronouncing our Judgment of Life or
Death from signs, among which the spots like Flea-bitings, or black, foretell
Death.

The Cure of malignant fevers is done, as in other simply putrid. And we take
away still some of the Cause, which is putrid and malignant, and we alter the
heat with things that cool and resist putrefaction, and hold up the strength,
and prevent other accidents.

We Evacuate both blood and Humors, as follows.

We prescribe bleeding by Lancet, or Scarification, as in continual putrid,
with respect to the strength.

We purge other Humors, as in other putrid fevers, with things added to resist
malignity, such as we showed in malignant fevers, that send out Smallpox and
Meazles.

We also provoke Urin and Sweat, as in others.

We also use Alterers, adding to Coolers, resisters of Corruption, and
Cordials, as sharp things, and external applications.

We keep up the strength by Diet and Cordials, and more in these malignant than
in other fevers, therefore allow a little sharp Wine sometimes to refesh.

We correct accidents as formerly showed.

The Pestilent Fever, or the Plague being a contagious Disease proceeding from
an external venomous quality, passing from body to body, by the touch, or by
the Air. We shall show how to preserve the sound, and cure the sick.

Preservation is made by declining the external Cause, The preventing and cure
of the Plague.
or correcting it, or preparing the body to prevent Infection. albeit the seeds
of the Plague are hidden and pierce into the body unknown to us.

We decline the Cause, by avoiding the place where the Plague is, as sar as our
calling, piety, and honesty will permit, and the Garments and clothes infected,
the Houses and Streets, and in regard we know not where it is, many carrying
the seeds of it with them, that are not infected, we avoid the concourse of
people in public meetings, Bathes, and Dancing-meetings. And because
infection may be conveyed by dead and living creatures, it is good to go
quickly far off, and return at leisure.

We amend the pestilent cause to keep it from infection, or to remove it, by
Ayring and washing of coaths infected; some will wash their money at such a
time, before they receive it.

Others that think the infection of the Air is the cause of the Plague, amend
that, which we approve, though we say the seeds of the Plague are in the bodies
and not in the Air: for some things that purify the Air purify the Body, and
the Air is often the conveigher of the Plague from one body to another. This is
done diversely, first we remove all putrid and corrupt things that may infect
the Air. Some persuade themselves, that the scent of and old Goat evening and
morning, prevents the Plague. And therefore they bring up Goats in the stable
among Horses, who use to have a kind of Plague, and the stink of the Goats
frights away Mice also from those places.

It is good to let in pure Air that is dry, and keep out ill. They say Sparrows
and other Birds kept in a Chamber, purge the Air, and that Birds will not stay
about infected places. Also good fire purges the Air by which Hippocrates stopped
it.

Also Fumes of any scents correct the Air, as Juniper, Savine that bears
berries, or Bays, Rosemary, or Agnus Castus. Or make fires of Oak, Vine,
Osiers, with Rue and Juniper.

Some burn Juniper berries upon Coals, Mastich, Frankincense, Amber, Cloves.

Or these troches. Take Benzoin and Storax, each half an ounce; Juniper or
Berry-bearing Savin a dram, Angelica roots a scruple, with Gum-traganth infused
in Rose Water and a little Musk, make Troches for a fume.

Or these Candles which smaok. Take Myrrh and Frankincense, each two drams;
Benzoin, Storax, each three drams; Labdanum a dram and an half, Amber half a
dram, Juniper berries two drams, dried Pomegranate peels a dram, Citron peels
and Sanders, each half a dram; Juniper a dram, Wood Aloes and Cloves, each a
scruple; Char-coals made of Willow or Tile tree as much again as all the rest,
with Infusion of Gum traganth and six grains of Musk make black Candles.

Perfumes not burnt are thus made. Smell to Rue, Citrons, Lemons, Orenges, or a
sponge or rag dipped in Vinegar and Rose or Rue water.

Or thus. Take bruised Rue a pugil, and with Vinegar take out the juice, add
Angelica roots half a dram, Camphire and Saffron, each half a scruple; with a
Sponge as before.

Or this Balsom, to anoint the Nostrils or Lip, made of Oil of the seeds or
roots of Angelica drawn with with Wax.

It is good to carry sweet Apples or Balls in the hand. Take roots of Angelica
and Myrrhis, each two drams; Zedoary half a dram, red Roses a dram, Lavender
half a dram, Angelica, Nigella, and Coriander seeds, each a scruple; seeds of
Basil half a scruple, dried Citron peels two scruples, Nutmeg and Cloves, each
half a dram; Cinnamon, Wood Aloes, Juniper and Storax, each half an ounce;
Benzoin two drams, Myrrh a dram, Camphire six grains, with the Infusion of Gum
traganth made in Rose or Angelica water, make a Ball, and add a little Oil of
Cloves or of Angelica seed, and roll it over with a little muskefied piece of
Silk or Cotton.

It is good to wash the Face, Hands, Armholes, Privities, with Vinegar of
Roses, or Rose-angelica, or Lavender water, with a little Camphire, or the
water of Citrangle flowers called Aqua Naffe.

Droetus drops perfumed distilled waters into the Ears And perfumes the
Garments, and advises perfumed Gloves or Bags in the bosom, of Ciprus and
Violets in Powder.

Or thus. Take roots of Angelica half an ounce, Orris roots two drams,
Coriander seeds, Juniper, each a dram; Benzoin and Storax, each two drams; with
Musk or Amber if you please, make a Powder.

We preserve the body by keeping the humors from violent motion and
inflammation, and by avoiding repletion and impurity, with Antidotes.

Let men take heed of inflammations at the time of the Plague, which will soon
receive a Fever or malignity.

Let them take heed of too hot Air, as Baths by which many have been infected.

And of violent motion by Running, Leaping, or Dancing, and of violent
passions as Anger, Joy, etc.

And of hot meats and Wines immoderately taken, but let them be corrected with
cold sharp things.

It is naught to stir the humors, for then they are sooner infected by external
causes. And Fear causes the Infection to seize upon men sooner than when the
mind is quiet. Also Venery is denied by reason of the imagination. Also much
unseasonable bleeding.

All Repletion is forbidden, for though every body is capable of the Plague,
yet plethorick and cacochymical are soonest infected: Therefore keep the body
clean, and cleanse it if it be foul.

Thus Blood-letting is good in men, if the body be plethorick, though it must
not be done rashly in young men who are subject to the Plague most, lest the
humors be disturbed.

If ill humors abound, give a Clyster every other day.

In Cacochymicks purge, but trouble not the humors too much, but use gentle
things, accustomed in Spring and Fall after preparation of the humors
abounding, adding things that resist the Plague and putresaction.

Pills are best that have Aloes called pestilential Pills of Ruffus the Author of
them. They are thus made right. Take Aloes, Ammoniacum, Myrrh, equal parts,
with sweet Wine make Pills.

Since, they make them thus. Take Aloes a dram, Myrrh and Saffron each half a
dram: with Wine or for hot natures with syrup of Lemmons make Pills, to which
you may add diverse Antidotes.

As these that are good to open obstructions in the Meseraicks. Take Extract of
Gentian a dram, the lesser Centory and Carduus, each half a dram; Rue,
Wormwood, each a scruple; Powder of lesser Centaury four scruples; Troches of
Myrrh a dram and an half, Troches of Eupatory and Capars, each a dram; Troches
of Wormwood half a dram, with Elixir of propriety make a Mass, give a dram
twice in a week.

These Purge more: Take Aloes two drams, Rhubarb, Myrrh, each a dram; Zedoary,
Saffron, each a scruple; with juice of Citrons, or Limons: make a Mass for
Pills.

Or: Take Aloes three drams, Rhubarb in powder and sprinkled with Cinnamon
water one dram and an half, Agarick in Troches a dram, of the best Myrrh and
Gum Ammoniack, dissolved in Vinegar, each two drams; Saffron half a dram,
Camphire a scruple, Oil of the roots of Masterwort two drops, with Vinegar:
make Pills.

These may be used twice or thrice in a Week half a dram or a scruple, made
into two Pills, the one at night and the other in the morning, they may be
given to Children, if they can swallow them.

These are stronger that follow to be given in foul bodies and seldomer: Take
the former mass, with Agarick or Rhubarb, add Aggregative pills a dram,
Diagridium a scruple, with syrup of Roses: make Pills.

The Ancients gave Pills of Turpentine instead of Ruffi, And we give Rosin of
the Larch tree, which purges very well: Thus, Take Turpentine Rosin, or Laricea
boiled, that it may be poudered, Rhubarb sprinkled with Cinnamon water, each
two drams; Turbith a dram, Ginger half a scruple, with powder of Liquorish,
make a Mass, give a dram or more, as you desire to Purge.

A dram of Turpentine, dissolved with the yolk of an Egg and Carduus water
purges well.

Diverse Potions also may be made for the same: As, Take Triphera Persica
(commended by Mesue) from half an ounce to six drams, with Scabious, Carduus
and Sorrel water, mix it, and give the same every fifth day.

You may give infants Manna in broth or Rhubarb, thus, Take the extract of
Rhubarb, with juice of Roses and Sugar and Sorrel water, make Lozenges. Droetus
makes candied Rhubarb for Children.

There are many Antidotes mixed with Rhubarb and Triphera.

In very foul bodies give strong purgers of Diagridium, Coloquintida, roots of
wild Cucumber, Armenian Earth, Stibium.

As this powder: Take the Troches of Alhandal, Diagrydium, Turbith, each a
dram; Euphorbium a scruple, Mastick half a dram, Saffron a scruple, Snake weed
roots, and Burnet, each half a scruple, make a Powder, take half a dram, in
convenient Liquor.

Or this Electuary: Take wild Cucumber roots, Smallage, Coriander and Housleek
with Honey and Pepper: make an Electuary, give as much as a small Nut. This is
highly commended of Honoratus Castellanus for preventing and curing the Plague.

As the true nature of venom of the plague is yet unfound, so is the true
Antidote, but experience has found out more then reason. Therefore we give
that which is good against poison in general: The chief and approved shall be
set down. Either as they are eaten, chewed or applied to the pulses or Heart,
or used as Amulets.

Of Antidotes taken in, they are either very hot, or less hot, or cold, rather
then temperate, given with regard to the constitution and Age, and the hottest
are not to be given rashly as Euphorbium and Aqua vitae which prooves water of
death sometimes to young people: some are given in a liquid form to drink, as
this Decoction. Take roots of Tormentil and Burnet, each an ounce; roots of
Valerian half an ounce, roots of Elicampane and Angelica, of each two drams; of
Galega leaves called Goats Rue, and Sanguisorba, each a handful: boil them in
Wine and Water, add a little Vinegar and Saffron.

Or this infusion in Wine, to take away ill taste. Take roots of Tormentil,
Dittany, Endive, Burnet, each an ounce and half, Valerian, Masterwort and
Angelica roots, each an ounce, Snake weed and Gentian roots each half an ounce;
leaves of Carduus and Cortander seeds each a dram, Cinnamon three drams, slice
and infuse them in sour Wine or white Wine and Vinegar, drink every morning
often hereof.

Sheeps Milk drunk fasting, is an Antidote commended.

Presbyter Vesantinus Ydeleyus, that often attended in Plague times, in his
book of the Plague, highly commends the drinking of a man's own Piss, in a
morning fasting; and instead thereof the Chemists have a Balsome of Urin more
pleasant.

In Sawces and Sallats use sour Herbs and Juyces, as Vinegar, Citron juice,
Ribes, green Grapes, Peaches, Cherries, Prunes, Apples.

Also the juice of Clove-gelli-flowers, or Vinegar thereof juice of Goats Rue,
with Treacle, according to Mathiolus, juice of Vervain, with Wine or Broth,
and juice of Onyons, are given diverse ways.

It is good to have things by, that will last in time of Plague, at hand.

As Inspissate juyces, called Rob by the Arabians, or extracts by us, as of
Carduus, Vervain, also the extract of Juniper is good and usual, Infants may
take it, it is so pleasant.

And Syrups with Sugar, thus. Take Vervain, Scabious, Goats Rue, each a
handful; Juniper berries a pugil: boil them in water and a little Vinegar and
with Sugar, make a Syrup.

Also Conserves, or Preserves, or dried and candied with Sugar, Honey, Vinegar
and Salt may be kept.

As Zedoary sliced and eaten in the morning or drunk with Wine.

Or CLoves steeped in Vinegar.

Citrons or Oranges candied,

Or Vervain eaten in the morning.

Roots of Tormentil with Hartshorn and Vinegar or candied with Sugar, and
Burnet.

Also Sorrel, Bugloss, Borage and roots of Moulin are so prepared.

Also roots of Butter-bur, steeped in Vinegar, and roots of Myrrhis and Juniper
berries steeped in Vinegar.

Or thus mixed: Take Rue, Sage, Plantane, Bay Berries, stamp them with Vinegar,
eat a spoonful every morning with a little Bole Armenick.

The Antidote of Nuts is thus made, for the whole Family. Take Nut kernels, Rue
leaves and juniper berries, stamp them with Vinegar.

Another commended made by Apolonius, or by Mithridates: Take four ounces of
Nut kernels, three ounces of Figs, dried Rue two drams, with Vinegar and Salt,
o^ Honey, if they have sweet things mix them.

A greater Composition thus. Add to the former, Tormentil and Burnet, each half
an ounce; Bole Ammonick prepared six drams, Saffron a scruple, with Vinegar,
Salt and Honey. You may add also some of the following Pouders, and Mirrh.

We make diverse confections of pouders and all the rest into Lozenges for
Antidotes. These are either temperate or more pleasant, or unpleasant, bitter
and stupifying.

The temperate confections are for Infants, Women with Child and dainty
Persons, they move not the body, and hurt not by long use.

As Diamargariton frigid, the cordial Electuary of Nuts and Angelica Confection
of Hyacinth made by Falcon against the plague. Also Bezoatrick pouders. The
Chemist extol the specifical Elixir pestilentiall of Crollius, also the Gold
spirit of Life made with Camphire. Thus made: Take of the best spirit of Wine a
pint, Camphire eight drams, if chosen in Summer, ten in Winter dissolve it in
the spirit of Wiue, and hang in it after Saffron half a scruple, give a
spoonful every morning.

This confection is also good against Worms: Take of Bole Armenick prepared,
with juice of Lemons two drams, shaving of Hearts horn half a dram, Citron seeds
peeled a scruple, Tormentil roots a dram, Diamargariton frigid half a dram,
Sugar dissolved in Sorrel and Purslane water, make Lozenges, or with Syrup or
Honey an Electuary.

Another Composition: Take Citron and Sorrel seeds, each a dram, Basil seed a
scruple, Tormentil roots a dram and an half, Angelica roots half a dram, Bole
prepared two drams, Coral half a dram, Pearl a scruple, shavings of Ivory a
scruple, Smaragds and Hyacinths, each half a scruple; Cinmon a dram, all the
Sanders half a dram, Sugar six drams: make a Powder, or dissolve the Sugar, and
make Lozenges, or an Electuary.

I made in the year 1593. in the Plague time a stronger Powder, thus: Take Bole
prepared half an ounce, Coral two drams, Amber a dram and an half, Ivory and
Hearts horn, each half a dram; Tormentil roots a dram and an half; roots of
Dittany, Carline, Burnet, Angelica, Master-wort, Myrrhis, each a dram; of round
Birth-wort, Zedoary, Limon peels, Cloves, each half a dram, Cinnamon two drams,
Sorrel seeds a dram, Carduus, Angelica, Bazil and Coriander seeds, each half a
dram; Citron seeds a scruple, Saffron half a scruple, red Roses, Vervain, Rue,
Scordium, Carduus, each half a dram; Goats Rue a dram, Species Diamargariton
frigid a dram, make a Powder, give a dram with an ounce of Sugar, in any form.
If you add of Camphire to these pouders, about a dram, they will be stronger,
but not so fit for Women with Child and Children.

Musk and Ambergris are Cordials and perfume the rest.

For Infants these simples troches: Take roots of Angelica half a dram, Bole
prepared with juice of Lemons half an ounce with Musk, Sugar and the infusion
of Gum-Traganth: make Troches.

A Compound Powder with Musk. Take roots of Angelica, Myrrhis, Master-wort,
each two drams; roots of Tormentil, Burnet, Dittany, Scorzonera, Vincetoxicon,
Cross wort, Devils bit, Elecampane, Zedoary, Galangal, each a dram, roots of
Birth-wort, Gentian, Cukowpints, or Dragons, each half a dram, all the Sanders
a dram, Cinnamon two drams, wood Aloes half a dram, Carduus, Scordium, Balm,
Sage, each a dram; Rue half a dram, Scabious, Vervaine, Sorrel, Lysimachia,
Cordial flowers, each a dram; seeds of Sorrel; Fennel, Carduus, Coriander, each
a dram; Citron and Basil seeds, each half a dram; Juniper and Bayberries, each
two drams; Nutmeg and Mace, each half a dram; Amber three drams, Ivory and
Hearts horn, of each a dram, Unicornes horn a scruple, precious Stones a dram,
Bezoard stone, Pearl, each a scruple; Bole prepared half an ounce, Coral half a
dram, Musk and Ambergris, of each half a scruple, Camphire (but it overcomes
the sent of the Musk) a scruple, make a Powder, and to a dram put an ounce of
Sugar, and give it in any form.

These are unpleasant but profitable, made of Mirth, Alloes and Castor, and
best in Pills.

This following powder is called the King of Spaines. Take Myrrh, Mastick,
Bole, sealed Earth, wood Aloes, Cloves, Mace, Saffron, each equal parts: make a
Powder take it every morning.

Another: Take Sorrel seeds two drams, Citron seeds a scruple, Tormentil roots
a dram and an half, Bole prepared three drams, Aloes washed, Myrrh, red Coral,
each a dram; dried Citron peels Cloves and Cinnamon, each half a dram; Saffron
half a scruple, species of Diamargariton frigid and Trionsantalon, each half a
dram; make a Powder.

Castor is sometimes added to great Compositions and in a small quantity by
reason of the scent.

Antidotes made of Opium are to be taken in small quantity.

As Treacle, Methridate, and Mathiolus his great Antidote.

Also the Electuary of the Egg, thus, better made to prevent burning of it.
Take the yolk of a hard Egg, add as much Saffron in weight, beat them together,
adding the powder of Tormentil and Dittany roots, of each half an ounce;
Angelica roots an ounce, roots of Vincetoxicum or Swallow-wort, Devils bit,
Zedoary, each two drams; Rocket seed a dram, Mirrh a scruple, with Treacle and
Mithridate, make a Mass, give a dram with Water, Wine, and Vinegar.

In the year 1582. this was our Electuary which was very successful. Take roots
of Angelica, Master-wort, of each two drams; of Tormental, Carline,
Swallow-wort, Burnet, Devils bit, Valerian, each a dram; Zedoary half a dram,
juniper berries two drams, Bay Berries a dram, Angelica, Sorrel, Carduus seeds,
of each a dram; Citron seeds half a dram, Rue, Carduus, each a dram; Saffron,
Pepper, Mace, each half a dram, Hearts horn and Ivory, each a dram; Bole
prepared with juice of Citrons half an ounce, Opium a scruple, Camphire half a
scruple, Nut kernels, Figs, each half an ounce; fine Sugar two ounces, Honey
twelve ounces; make an Electuary, or Lozenges, give a dram with an ounce and an
half of Sugar.

These aforesaid are taken alone or with other.

Of Mithridate these are usual Lozenges. Take Mithridate half an ounce, Sugar
and Sugar candy, each four ounces; with Spanish wine, make them up.

Or this Electuary: Take the best Treacle three ounces, Tormentil roots,
juniper berries, Carduus and Sorrel seed, of each two drams; Bole prepared half
an ounce, Ivory a dram, Coral a dram and an half, species Diamargarit frigid a
dram, with syrup of Citrons: make an Electuary, give it alone or with Wine or
fit Waters.

If Treacle be added these aforesaid are Opiats.

Stilled waters are Antidotes and expel and provoke sweat, In the Cure of the
Plague we shall declare those that preserve or Cure, or both.

Some things may be held in the Mouth to preserve, because its thought the
Plague is taken by the breath, when we go forth into suspected places.

As Angelica root which is well sented, and Zedoary, roots of Elicampane,
Galangal, Citron rind or Orange peels or seeds, or Fennel seed. We shall not
advise things without scent, as Vervain which is commended highly, five leaved
Grass, nor unpleasant things which cannot be long held in the Mouth.

For to be held in the mouth are Troches made; Thus, Take Angelica roots two
drams, Orris roots a dram, Zedoary half a dram, dried Citron peels, Coriander
seed, each half a dram; Cloves, Nutmeg, yellow Sanders, each a dram; Cinnamon
two scruples, Bole prepared with juice of Lemmons or Vinegar a dram and an
half, Sugar six drams: with the Infusion of Gum traganth in Rose Water and a
grain or two of Musk or Ambergris make Troches.

Others easier made and pleasant. Take Angelica roots one dram, Juniper half a
dram, Wood Aloes a scruple, Sugar half an ounce: with Infusion of Musk make
Troches.

The Angelical Balls of Percovius are made thus. Take red Coral and burnt
Hearts-horn prepared with juice of Scordium, each an ounce: Sugar dissolved in
Scordium water two pound, the distilled Oil of Angelica half a dram.

Some only chew Myrrh, troches of Musk are made only of Bole, and Sugar, and
Musk.

External Remedies are applied to diverse parts, especially to the Heart and
Pulses which are good before the Heart be smote, or in a Fever. Therefore it is
guarded with Cordials and Poisons also, as they say, one poison expels another.

Cordial Applications are best in a bagg, or Ointments for Epithems dry quickly.

Make a Bag thus. Take Cordial flowers, each a pugil; Rosemary flowers half a
pugil, Scordium, Marjoram, Balm, each a handful; Angelica roots, half an ounce,
dried Citron peels two drams, Orris roots a dram, Sorrel and Coriander seeds,
each two drams; Basil seed a dram, Citron seeds, yellow Sanders, Nutmegs, Mace,
Wood Aloes, each half a dram; Saffron a scruple: make a Powder, bast it with
Cotton in a sine cloth or silk for a Bag. add Musk or Ambergris.

Anoint or bathe the Heart, and Pulses, and Nostrils, with this. Take Angelica
roots half an ounce, cordial flowers and clove Gilliflowers, each a pugil;
citron peels six drams, Saffron, Camphire, each a dram; Balm and Cardiaca, each
a handful; Treacle two drams, add Rose Water and Vinegar.

Or with this Liniment. Take the best Treacle two drams, of the yellow Ointment
of Water Lillies three drams, Cordial species half a dram, with juice of
Lemmons.

Or with this sweet Balsom. Take distilled Oil of Cloves and seeds or roots of
Angelica five drops: with white Wax and a little Mosch, Anoint.

Or with this. Take juice of Cardiaca and Balm, each two drams; dissolved
Camphyre in Aqua vitae half a dram, Saffron a scruple: with Honey make a
Liniment for the Pulses.

Not only Empericks, but some learned men commend highly some poisons to be
applied to the Heart, to defend it from the Plague.

Mathiolus highly extols Oil of Scorpions, thus easily made. Take two drams of
right Oil of Scorpions, with Treacle a dram: apply them to the Pulses with a
clout.

Some add Rhubarb, as the Oil of Scorpions of Clemens.

Some commend this of Arsnic. Take white and red Arsnic, each equal parts: make
a Powder, add the white of an Egg or Mucilage of Traganth to make a hard Cake,
which must be carried about the Heart in a double Scarff.

Sometimes Arsnic is mixed with cordial Pouders thus. Take fragments of precious
stones, coral, Pearl, and Heartshorn, each a dram; Orris half an ounce, Saffron
a scruple, white Arsnic an ounce, Orpiment half an ounce: make a Powder for a
Bag with a little Ambergreece.

Some do mix with good success two ounces of the Powder of a Toad.

If the Liver be anointed with Ointments that cool and strengthen, some think
the body is safer from the plague.

Some hold it for a great secret to anoint the Emunctuaries, as the Arm-holes
and Groins with Benzoin, Storax, Labdanum and Litharge.

Also to keep open old Ulcers, is good in time of plague to preserve.

And an Issue in the Arm or Leg.

In the year 1564. a Monk at Leyden in time of the plague had a hole in his
Cod with an Hellebore root, kept open by which he preserved himself, and
persuaded others to use the same for safety.

Amulers are highly esteemed, a Nut-shel filled with Quicksilver, stopped and
^anged about the Neck. This is commended by Marsilius Ficinus by many examples,
and by others, some say it must touch the region of the Heart.

They think Saphires, Smarradgs, Hyacinths, Unicorns horn, and Ivory about the
Neck do the same.

Also Five-leav'd grass and Dittany roots, and Bettony with the roots held in
the hand.

The Cure of a pestilential fever is diverse according to the humor they suppose
it comes from, which they evacuate: But we say it came from a pestiferous
quality infecting the body, and therefore aim at the opposing and altering
that, considering the age of the Person.

First we give a prognostic because all Plagues are dangerous, and more die
than live, In which there is no hope, and the Physician labors in vain, except
in the space of twenty four hours Nature throws all or most part of the poison
from the Heart. Spots are deadly when they appear, because they are not
critical. Buboes and Carbuncles appearing give hopes of recovery. Sudden loss
of strength, especially Swounding and outward cold are evil signs. If a woman
with child having the Plague, miscarry, as she commonly does she dies
usually.

The Cure is by Nature and the Physicians help, for many do recover. Therefore
we strike at the Disease, keep up strength, and correct symptoms.

We said the Disease was a venomous quality fixed in the Heart, and so upon the
whole body in the similar parts, with a preternatural heat and fever. Therefore
we first labor to take away this quality from the Heart, and the humors which
increase the same. And to alter the venomous force thereof and abate the heat.

Things that evacuate this poison, and put it from the heart, and expel the
humors that increase the fever must be used in this order and manner.

Blood-letting was the first and usual means. And many persuaded themselves
that much poison was taken from the the heart thereby. But it is a general rule
that it must not be til ripe age. And in women with Child not so much as in the
Foot, for fear of miscarrying; for others, I cannot perceive how bleeding can
take the Venom from the heart or body when it is not contained in the blood:
but it rather is a cause of drawing the Plague more inwardly the Veins being
emptied. Besides, the motion of nature is hindered thereby, which at first
labors by Sweat, and Pustles, and swellings to expel it. And the strength which
should be kept to encounter with the Disease is lost. Neither does it bring so
much good as hurt, for taking away the cause or cooling the heat which is not
very great in the Plague, for the reasons aforesaid. Therefore they are all to
be blamed that observe not these circumstances, but let blood rashly, except in
Children, though Nature be laboring to sweat it forth, or cast out Botches: and
though they see many die after bleeding, they will go on their road of bleeding
presently and plentifully. But we are to bleed only when the Plague is in a
plethorick or cachectick body, which causes not a simple fever by plenty of
blood, but a putrid Synoch, and then the heat and symptoms will be abated. And
then it must be sparingly done to preserve strength, and not at all except the
repletion mentioned require it, if there be weakness. For we have often found
by experience that more people in years have escaped that were not blooded, than
that were. Some approve no bleeding, but such as is til the Patient faints,
and brag of many that have been cured thereby.

We think it safer to omit it, than rashly to use it: and if it does good, it
is more for the fever than the venomous quality, which is not in the blood, but
comes to the heart from without, and so cannot be expelled by bleeding. The time
if it must be, is at first, within twenty four hours, or not at all. And if
sweat appear as usualy it does, it must be deferred til it be past: and it must
not be stopped either by bleeding or nakedness, which is required when the Vein
is opened. But when sweat is past and the Patient is refreshed with meat or
medicine, it may be done if need require, or before sweat if it appear not: nor
must we stay to loosen the body first, as at other times before bleeding, for
there is no dallying. If pain be, take blood from the side, if not take the
common Vein. Open the Saphena or Vein in the Foot if there be a swelling in the
groyn. If it be above, open the Arm or Hand-vein on that side. If under the
Arm-holes, open the Basilick vein, if under the Ears the Head vein, if in the
Face, under the Tongue. Some clap on Cupping-glasses to the Carbuncles before
bleeding, that the venom sent thither may stay there, and be drawn inward by
bleeding, by which way we have known bleeding do much hurt. And I have observed
that Empericks have with very ill success raised blisters with Vesicatories
upon the Botches at first appearance. Some do draw the venom out at the
orifice, after bleeding apply Scordium or Jack of the hedge, which is of the
same nature, others apply living Oysters for the same.

In young people Cupping-glasses are instead of bleeding, and they are better
for old than bleeding with the Lancet, which weakens and draws in the venom, if
they are applied at first to help nature to drive out the venom, when she is in
motion with sweat; and in those places where nature expels, as when a pestilent
sign is above, to the Neck and Shoulders, when in the Groyns, to the Buttocks,
Thighs and Hands.

Scarification before Cupping in the same places, draws outward more
powerfully, and because the superficial blood is only taken away, thereby does
it weaken or hinder Natures motion.

Horsleeches may be instead thereof applied to the same parts.

A Vesicatory to the great Toe or Ring-singer made of Crowfoot or Flammula
deriveth the Venom, and the more if it be kept open with a Thread and Beet or
Colewort leaf, or anointed with Butter.

A quick Pidgeon cut in two, and bound to the soles of the feet, or a Tench, or
a bruised Radish, or Nettles with the roots, or Ground Ivy bruised does the
same.

Some commend a live Pigeon opened and laid hot to the Head.

In the year 1584. in plague-time, I observed that a Cock plucked at the Rump,
and his feet bound close together, and his mouth stopped with the hand of a man,
was applied to the Heart, with admirable success.

Evacuation made by sweat or insensible transpiration, draws the venom from the
Heart, or outwardly to the superficies, and is the chief way of Cure. This
Nature at first does endeavor for the most part. And the Physician must help
her motion, or provoke her to it.

This is done sometimes by things given inward, sometimes by Fumes or Frictions,
by sweating medicines, and by Blysters, and by things that experience teaches
us do resist poison. These are called expelling medicines, and are of diverse
forms.

These must be used at the first, and if possible before the Venom strike the
Heart and beat it down, which it does suddenly if not resisted and expelled
with the spirits and heat outwardly, the sooner the better, for it is the Key
of the work, and if it be not done in twenty four hours (in which time the
Plague sometimes kills) what is done after will signify nothing, and except
Nature of her self do it we shall labor in vain, after this opportunity is
neglected. Neither ought bleeding or purging (though required) hinder this;
although some persuade to sweat after bleeding, and if the Physician come after
it may be done, but not so well, and repeated the next day, and all the time of
the Disease if strength hold and Nature offer to discharge that way. The
Patient must not be forced much to sweat, except Nature tend that way; for the
Venom of the Plague may be carried away by insensible transpiration without
sweating.

They are in diverse forms, but the moist is best, as a Decoction, or Water, or
Infusion, or Potion, or you may give an Electuary.

A simple Decoction, or a common Decoction used in the small pox to drive them
out as is there mentioned may be given here.

For Children. Take Pease and Barley, each a pugil; Figs ten, Dates five,
Tormentil and Dittany roots, each a dram; boil them, add a little Wine, give it.

Or a Decoction of Tormentil, Dittany, Angelica, Burdock, Butter-bur or
Celondine roots.

Or of Sorrel, Plantane, Tansie, Vervain, Scordium, Rue in Water and Vinegar,
or Wine and distilled Water.

Or Garlic boiled in Honey'd water to two ounces which will cause sweat and
Urin.

Also this Decoction of Lignum vitae. Take Guajacum two ounces, Sarsaparilla an
ounce, Juniper and Bayberries, roots of Angelica and Elicampane, each two
drams; with a little Cinnamon.

Juyces are not given alone, but mixed with other things, yet Rondoletius says
that three ounces of the juice of Marygolds is excellent.

The best distilled Waters are, that of Orange flowers, and of juice or flowers
of Limons. Also Angelica water with Aqua vitae produces sweat violently to my
knowledge, or water of Citron leaves, and Aqua vitae, and to chew them is a
good Antidote. And 1534. I never used other when I visited my Patients of the
plague.

Also Distilled water of Oak leaves, wild Vetches, Sorrel, Burnet, Tormentil,
Dragons.

Also Celondine boiled in Wine and Vinegar.

Or this. Take Burdock roots a pound, of the inward bark of an Ash two handful,
distill them, give three ounces.

Also Water of green Nuts.

Or this. Take Sorrel, Scabious, Vervain, Rue, (not full ripe) each a handful;
Nightshade and Housleek, each half a handful; cut them small, distill them. And
if you add Vinegar before stilling, it will cause Vomit, but Sweat howsoever.

Or, Take Limons ten, cut them, add Borage and Sorrel, each two or three
handful; white Wine three pints, distill them, give two ounces.

The first choice Water: Take Angelica roots, Master-wort, Termentil, Valerian
and Dittany, Devils bit, Burnet and Snake weed roots, each an ounce; Vervaine
and Scabious, each a handful; distill them in Aqua vitae or strong Wine, give an
ounce.

The second: Take Rue, Marigolds, Sage, Vervain, Scabious, each a handful;
Burdock and Devils bit roots; each two ounces; distill them in white Wine, give
an ounce.

The third: Take Gua^acum half a pound, roots of Angelica, Master-wort,
Gentian, of each an ounce; Orris and Zedoary, each half an ounce; Carduus, Rue,
Scordium, each two handful; Basil a handful, Lemons sliced six: distill them
thrice, give half an ounce.

The fourth, which I have often used successfully: Take roots of Valerian, five
leaved Grass, white Dittany, Smallage, Burnet, Dragons, Tormentil, each an
ounce; Gentian half an ounce, Dane-wort, Birth-wort, Angelica roots, of each
two drams; Galangal six drams, Valerian, Smallage, and Celandine, each a
handful; Rue half a handful, Bay and juniper berries, each half an ounce; wood
Aloes two drams, Cinnamon six drams: cut and bruise them, distill them in Aqua
vitae, Borage, Bugloss, Sorrel and Scabious water, give two ounces.

The fifth: Take Tormentil, Burnet, Dittany, Swallow-wort, five leaved Grass,
Burdock, Butter-bur and Devils bit, of all the roots, each an ounce; roots of
Angelica, Master-wort, Elicampane, Mockchervil, Valerian, each half an ounce;
roots of Gentian, Birth-wort, each three drams; Zedoary, Galangal, Ginger, each
two drams; roots of Dragons, Cookowpints, Garlic, Onyons, of each two drams;
Laurel bark a dram, Scabious, Vervain, Marigold, Celandine, Willow herb,
Scordium, Rue, Tansey, Sage, Balm, Plantane, Paul's Bettony, Carduus, Wormwood,
each three drams; flowers of Rosemary, Bugloss, Borage, Water Lillies, Violets,
each a dram; Saffron half a dram, Coriander, Basil, Citron and Angelica seeds,
each a dram; Carduus and Sorrel seed, each two drams; Bay and Juniper Berries,
of each an ounce; Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, each a dram; Lemons sliced five,
Wall-nut kernels fifteen, Bole prepared an ounce, cut them small, and cover them
with Wine, add two ounces of Rosewater, and four ounces of Aqua vitae: distill
them, or infuse them in spirit of Wine.

Camphite is good if it be added to all these waters: dissolved first in Aqua
vitae.

And therefore we commend the golden spirit of Life with Camphire, above
mentioned, for the Cure of the plague.

Treacle also and Mithridate, and other Antidotes, as the Electuary of the Egg
may be added before you still and then they are Treacle waters.

Thus: Take the best Treacle five ounces, Mirrh an ounce and an half, Saffron
half an ounce, Aqua vitae ten ounces; distill them, give half an ounce, with a
drop of spirit of Vitriol.

The second Treacle water approved often: Take white Onyons sliced six, Garlic
picked three heads, Rue, Celandine, Plantane, each a handful, Treacle a dram and
an half, Aquae vitae two ounces, Vinegar an ounce, Wine two ounces: distill
them, give half an ounce.

The third made by me for the poor 1594. I used few others. and it cured many:
Take roots of Tormentil, Burdock, Valerian, Burnet, Devils bit, each four
ounces; roots of Master-wort, Angelica, Dittany, Gentian, Dragons all dry, each
an ounce; Onyons and Nuts not ripe, each six ounces; Rue, Sorrel, Carduus, each
two handfuls; Camphire a dram and an half, dissolved in an ounce of Aqua vitae,
Mithridate an ounce and an half, with white Wine, and two ounces of Rose
Vinegar, draw a Water, give two ounces; with syrup of Vinegar or Lemons, if you
please.

The fourth: Take Angelica roots two ounces, Zedoary half an ounce, roots of
Black-hellebor two drams, Devils bit, Tormentil, Dittany, Carline, Gentian,
each an ounce; Treacle four ounces, Green Nuts twenty, water of Paul's Bettony
three paints, Vinegar a pint and an half, distill them, give two ounces and an
half.

Infusions may be used instead of waters, and they are stronger, you may make
them of the things mentioned: Or thus, Take Camphire half an ounce, white
Ginger an ounce, Cloves an ounce and an half, Sugar candy an ounce, infuse them
in Aqua vitae, give two drams.

Another: Take Mithridate or Treacle two ounces or an ounce of each, Aqua vitae
ten ounces, syrup of Limons or Citrons five ounces, infuse them a month; or in
Balneo, give an ounce.

The third: Take spirit of Wine four times distilled a pint and an half, Sack
two ounces, syrup of Lemons or Citrons two ounces, Treacle or Mithridate ten
ounces, Angelica roots half an ounce, Zedoary two drams, Camphire a dram,
Saffion half a dram, species Diamargariton frigid a dram and an half, Cinnamon
two drams, Musk half a scruple, infufe them, give an ounce.

The fourth: Take roots of Angelica, Masterwort and Zedoary, each two drams,
wild Angelica, Burnet, Valerian, Swallow-wort, Tormentil, Personate, Carline
and Elicampane, each three drams: Juniper and Bayberries, each an ounce;
Angelica seeds a dram, Cinnamon a dram and an half, long Pepper half a scruple,
Saffron a scruple, Mirrh half a dram: make a Powder, add spirit of Wine, syrup
of Lemons, Citrons or Sorrel two ounces, set it in the Sun, or in Balneo, give
an ounce, with Treacle, Mithridate, or Mathiolus Antidote a dram, if the
Patient be young and hot give less, and dissolve it with Marigold water.

Other Pouders above mentioned may be so used.

Syrups also of the Decoctions or Juyces mentioned. Or thus: Take roots of
Angelica, Tormentil, Dittany, Burnet, Cross wort, each an ounce; roots of
Master-wort and Zedoary, each half an ounce; Carduus, Vervaine, Rue, Celandine,
Marigold, Sage all dry each three drams; Juniper Berries two ounces, Bayberries
an ounce and an half, boil them in Winc, and with Sugar, make a syrup: give an
ounce.

Extracts of Angelica, Vervain, Elicampane and Rob of Elder are commended.

Mathiolus gives a scruple of Oil of Vitriol with proper waters.

Pouders are mixed in potions, or Electuaries, or made into Lozenges for
Children.

These may be given to Women with Child: Take Angelica roots half a dram,
Tormentil and Dittany roots, each an ounce; Treacle half a dram, Diamargariton
frigid half a scruple, with Sugar, dissolved in Sorrel water, make Lozenges,
give two drams.

A powder for weak persons: Take Tormentil and Butter-bur roots, each half a
dram; Diamargariton frigid a scruple, give it with Sorrel water and syrup of
Lemons.

A second: Take Bole Armenick prepared two drams, Hearts horn a scruple, Pearl
half a scruple, juice of Lemons two drams: give it with Sorrel or Carduus water.

A third, that is bitter: Take roots of Tormentil Dittany, Gentian, leaves of
Carduus, each half a dram Bole and Coral prepared, each a dram; give it with
Sorrel water.

A fourth: Take white Amber and Coral, each half a dram, Pearl a scruple, Elkes
Hoof, Ivory, each half a scruple: make a Powder, give it in purslane or
Scabious water, or make Lozenges.

A fifth unpleasant: Take Diamargariton frigid two scruples, Hearts horn a
scruple, Basil seed half a scruple, Sorrel seed a scruple, Citron seeds six
grains, Mirrh half a scruple with Vinegar: make a Potion.

Pouders with Camphire are thought to cool: As, Take Troches of Camphire a
dram, syrup of Citrons an ounce, with Scabious and Sorrel water: make a Potion,

Another powder which cures all Fevers and is good against the Plague, made of
hot things, and Camphire. Take Camphire a dram, Ginger two drams, Sugar candy
three drams. give a dram with Carduus, Scabious or Marigold water.

This may be infused alone or with Treacle.

The Itallians commend Euphorbium, and make this Powder: Take Euphorpium and
Mastick, each half a scruple, Saffron five grains, Sugar candy a dram: make a
powder, give it with Sorrel water and Vinegar of Roses half an ounce.

Or thus: Take Euphorbium, Maflick and Gum Elemni each half a scruple; roots of
Tormentil and Angelica, of each half a dram; Camphire half a scruple: make a
powder, give it with Sorrel water and Rose Vinegar half an ounce.

The Chemists commend their Salts and Crato also. As Salt of Angelica,
Scabious, Scordium, Carduus, Zedoary, Ash, Guajacum, Wormwood ten or twelve
grains, with Conserve of Roses, or Citrons, or a dram of Salt of Polypody in
Wine, it does wonders.

Also Salt made of Vine boughs a scruple, given in Wine or proper water, if you
take three hours after a scruple or half a dram of Antidote-Colubrine, or the
like to provoke more sweat.

Crato says Diasulphur right made, is a strong expeller.

And the Chemists use Antimonium Diaphoreticum but not safely.

Hartman commends his Panacea or sulphur of Antimony fixed, which he teaches
in his Chemical practice.

There are diverse Electuaries made of the mentioned things, and may be given to
Cure, as well as to prevent. You may make them of the pouders with Honey or
Syrup.

The mixture among the preservatives made of roots of wild Cowcumbers with
Smallage and Housleek is commended by Honoratus and Crato for to Cure also.

Opiate Antidotes are good against all poisons and the plague.

Treacle and Mithridate are the old standers a dram at a time, or with
Philonium of Gesner. The later are Diascordium, Mathiolus Antidote, and the
Electuary made of an Egg, or Diacroceum.

Or thus first: Take Treacle or Mithridate, or Electuary of the Egg, or
Mathiolus Antidote a dram and an half; dissolve it with the Decoction of
Zedoary, add syrup of Vinegar an ounce.

The second: Take Treacle a dram, juice of Scabious, Carduus, each an ounce;
dissolved in Wine.

A third: Take Treacle or Mithridate a dram, Angelica roots, Sorrel seeds and
Hearts horn, each a scruple; give it with Angelica water.

A fourth: Take Treacle two scruples, Powder of Vervain a dram, Saffron seven
grains, water of green Nuts four ounces, drink it hot, it is from Helidaeus.

A fifth: Take Treacle a dram, prepared Bole half a dram, Species, Liberantis
and Diamarganton frigid, each a scruple; Sorrel, Carduus and Scabious water,
each an ounce with half an ounce of syrup of Limons.

A sixth: Take Treacle and Mithridate, each half an ounce; Electuary of the Egg
two drams, species liberantis a dram, Bole prepared half an ounce: with syrup
of Sorrel make an Electuary, give two drams.

A seventh. Take Treacle a dram, Vervain half a dram, Saffron and Camphire,
each half a scruple; with Nut water and Vinegar make a potion.

An eighth. Take Treacle three drams, Ginger, Gamphire, Sugar candy, each half
an ounce; give a dram.

The ninth: Take Tormeueil, Dittany and Angelica roots, each two drams; Zedoary
and Gentian, each a dram; Scordium two drams, Vervaine a dram, Ginger, Camphire
and Saffron, each half a dram; make a powder, add Treacle and Mithridate, each
two ounces; give a dram and an half,

The tenth: Take an onyon a little boiled, steep it in Vinegar, and strain it,
add Treacle a dram, syrup of Limons an ounce, you may add Garlic for strong
Bodies.

An eleventh: Take Castor half a scruple, roots of Birth-wort, Gentian and
Treacle, each half a dram, give it with strong Vinegar and Sorrel water.

A twelfth called Mountpelior Wolf: Take juyces of Rue, Sage, Burnet, Centaury,
Pennyroyal, Wormwood, Valerian, Mother-wort, green Wall-nuts, each equal parts,
Honey half as much as all: boil them to a syrup: Take an ounce thereof to
Treacle half an ounce, Bole and sealed Earth, of each two drams; with Vinegar
and Wine, if he be not hot, give it at the first lying down.

A thirteenth: flower of Brim-stone a s^ruple, Saffron half a scruple,
Frankincense half a dram, Treacle a dram, give it with convenient waters.

A fourteenth: Take Treacle a dram, Electuary of the Egg half a dram, Oil of
Vitriol seven drops, strong Vinegar an ounce, Sorrel and Borage water, each an
ounce.

A fifteenth very hot: Take Cookow pints or Dragon roots a dram, or each half a
dram; Angelica roots a dram, Rue and Vervam, each half a dram; Saffron a
scruple, Camphire half a scruple: make a powder, give a dram, with Treacle a
dram, dissolved in Vinegar and Scabious water.

A sixteenth of Laurel prepared in Vinegar: Take of the Saxon Antidote and
Treacle, each half a dram, dissolve it in Sorrel water with Vinegar of Roses
six drams, syrup of Limons half an ounce.

Some use this Fume to provoke sweat: Take Sorrel, Rue, Scabious, each a
handful, with Aloes, Mirrh, Mastick, Saffron, steeped in Water and Vinegar, and
sprinkled upon a hot Brick; make a Fume for the whole Body.

A certain physician to provoke sweat boiled Guajacum, Tormentil, Danewort and
Burdock roots and with a little Sublimate Mercury, dipped a sheet in it and wrapped
the patient hot therein.

Some sweat with the Fume of Cinnabar or Antimony, as in the pox.

Also Frictions draw forth and cause sweat, or make insensible transpiration.
It must be done before sweat appears, it is best with a hand dipped in warm water
or with sca^let, and let the body be well covered and quiet, also Friction is
good after spots appear to make them come forth.

Vomiting is also used, when Vomiting is a Symptom especially, and to expel the
venom by a violent motion and to cast out the Botch. Some give it at the first,
others after a Clyster, or after an Antidote, others give it presently after
bleeding, and brag of Miracles.

The gentlest are of loosners and cutters, as syrup of Vinegar, or two ounces
of juice of Erysimum with Scabious, Carduus, or Bugloss water. One says that
he Cured the plague miraculously with water of wood Sorrel, Vinegar and Oil of
Vitriol, others give Asarabacca and an Indian Nut.

The Empericks give the strongest Dro^tus writes that a Surgeon gave a Vomit
of Chalcanthum prepared presently after bleeding and did wonders.

Mathiolus gives five grains of Stibium with the Electuary Liberantis, and an
Emperick did imitate him here in 1564.

Mathiolus also gives praecipitate in Sugar of Roses.

Or we must give Clysters and purge.

Before bleeding give a Clyster or suppository and it makes an Antidote work
better, when no Vein is opened, but a Clyster given. And one bragged that he
cured the plague by only a Clyster, Bleeding and an Antidote. Therefore we
usually give Clysters, if the body be not very weak. Because they work speedily
and loose no time.

That which cleanses and loosneth is best. As the common Decoction, with
Cassia, Catholicon or Tryphera Crato gives a Decoction of paul's Bettony with
salt-Butter, others add Barley cream to temper the Humors.

Purging does little because it cannot expel the cause, except nature being at
first stirred up by a strong purge cast some of the Venom out, but that is
dangerous because it weakneth, and strength is required to go through it. And
because they are subject to a Flux of the Belly and it may carry them away: as
one was by stibium given by an Emperick, which he called a present Remedy, who
died upon the stool with violent evacuation. Therefore first consider whether
the body be clean or foul, if clean purge not rashly, for it will do hurt if
foul, from whnce a putrid Fever may arise, we may purge, not to expel the
venom, but the filth which will cause a Fever. But have a care of the
strength: and defer it to the declination when the state of the Disease is
best: if strength be at first, purging may do a little good, except the botch
comes forth and commands forbearance, nor must they hinder the chief Medicines
which expel, for they must be given first, and nature inclines to that at
first. After an hour or two sweating at the first, if strength be good, and we
perceive the putrid Fever to over top the venom, we give a gentle purge to
take away filth which will increase the Fever, that when that is gone, nature
may be stronger. Time permits not long preparatives, but all the time we may
give altering Medicines to allay the foul Humors and strengthen the Heart; And
when the venom is gone and a putrid Fever remains, we then begin to prepare
and purge as in putrid Fevers.

When need therefore requires, we may give these following, with respect to the
Age and constitution. Tryphera persica or Sarracenica a dram, with Sorrel,
Scabious or Bugloss water.

Or thus: Take Yellow and Chebs Myrobalans, each a dram and an half; Tamarinds
an ounce, Cordial and Scabious flowers, each a pugil; boil them, and add
Rhubarb a dram, Cinnamon half a dram, strain it, and add Tryphera persica two
drams, syrup of Roses laxative half an ounce.

It is good to give at first some Ruffi pills, after which I have presently
seen the botch appear.

Rhubarb resists venom, therefore we give the extract and Hartman says that
many have been preserved by canstant use thereof.

We spoke of Stibium and Praecipitate among Vomits.

And of Alterers which resist Venom, and drive it out. And of things against
putrid fevers. But here we shall choose such which abate heat, resist
corruption, and are Cordials, and keep up strength.

Some are given inwardly.

As cold Water in which Hartshorn, Ivory, or Gold is steept or boiled, or Gold
quenched in it, is good.

Or a Decoction of Sorrel roots or Tormentil in Water.

Crato commends a Decoction of Groundsel in Ale.

Boil Sorrel, Borage, Purslane, Scabious, Succory, and Endive in his Broaths.

And put juice of Limons, Citrons, Oranges, Pomegranats, Vinegar, green Grapes,
Barberries in Broth or Drink.

Also Sorrel, Rose and Scabious water.

And diverse sharp Syrups prescribed in continual severs.

For Juleps thus. Take syrup of Citrons or Limons, and Sorrel, each two ounces;
of Pomegranates an ounce, Sorrel and Bugloss water, each five ounces; make a
Julep.

A second. Take syrup of Ribes or Pomegranate Wine, two ounces, juice of sharp
Apples an ounce, Sorrel, Scabious, Balm and Bugloss water, each four ounces:
make a Julep.

A third. Take juice of Sorrel, Borage, sweet scented Apples, Scabious, each an
ounce and half; Rose-Vinegar half an ounce, water of Carduus, Roses, and
Scordium, each four ounces; add Sanders and five grains of Camphire, drink it
often.

A fourth. Take Rose, Sorrel, and Borage water, each two ounces; Cinnamon water
an ounce, white Wine half an ounce, syrup of Citrons or Limons an ounce and an
half, Manus Christi with pearls, half an ounce, Bole one dram, Hearts-horn half
a dram, boil and strain it.

A scruple or half a dram of Lapis prunellae is good to be added to these. Or
thus, Take roots of Tormentil an ounce, Angelica roots half an ounce, Zedoary a
dram; Cordial and Scabious flowers, each a pugil; Woodsorrel a handful,
Saunders a dram: boil, strain, and add syrup of Sorrel or Citrons or Limons an
ounce. They add Unicorns horn for great people.

Pouders, the first. Take Bole thrice washed in Rose water, and Coral each a
dram; Hearts-horn and Ivory each half a dram; Cinnamon half a dram, Manus
Christi an ounce; make a powder, take it in Broth or Wine.

A second, Take Confection of Alkermes (if there be no Looseness) a scruple,
species Diamargariton frigid, Ivory and Hearts-horn, each half a scruple; Bole
prepared a scruple, syrup of Limons half an ounce: with Sorrel and Carduus
Water make a Cordial potion.

A third. Take Consection de Hyacyntho (which is proper for the Plague) a
scruple, syrup of Limons an ounce: give it with convenient Waters.

A fourth. Take juice of scabious and Vervain, each an ounce; syrup of Limons
half an ounce, Diamargariton frigid, Electuary of Bole and Gems, each half a
scruple; with Rose, Bugloss and sorrel water make a Potion.

Distilled Waters are also good as, Take scabious Balm, sorrel, Vervain, each a
handful; Tormentil and Dittany roots, each an ounce; Rose, Violet, Bugloss and
scabious flowers, each a pugil; sorrel seeds two drams, Citron seeds half a
dram: boil them in Chicken broth, add Diamargariton frigid, Electuary of Bole,
Gems or Bezoar, each a dram; juice of Apples three ounces, Cinnamon half an
ounce, Sanders a dram, distill in Balneo, and give it in broth or otherwise.

Another: Take a Capon prepared, boil it, add half a pound of white bread, two
sliced Limons, Borage flowers a pugil, Citron seeds half a dram, Coriander seed
a dram, Hartshorn two drams, powder them, add Sack four ounces, Conserve of
Cordial flowers, each an ounce; distill them, give the water with Cinnamon
water, Julep of Roses or Vinegar and Sugar, or alone.

This restores more: Take a Capon dressed from the fat, beat his bones, and
add a piece of Veal, cut them, and a little Salt, a drain of Diam trgariton
frigid, conserve of Sorrel, Water Lillies and Bugloss each an ounce; Cinnamon
three drams, Rosewater an ounce, Wine an ounce: boil them to a Gelly.

Or thus. Take a Capon or Hen dressed from the fat, break and cut it with a
piece of Beef and Veal, with a little Salt, Ginger, and Pepper three corns, a
little Marjoram, juice of Limons, and Wine, each an ounce; boil them to a
Gelly, give it alone, or with other Broaths.

Conserve of Roses, Violets, both Buglosses, Water Lillies, Sorrel and clove
Gilli-slowers, Scabious, Balm, Rosemary flowers, Plantane, candied Citron
peels, sharp fruits preserved and Berries are good.

These are given alone or mixed in a Bolus, every third day we give Mithridate
or Treacle in some of those Conserves.

Or with Pouders and Syrups make an Electuary. As, Take the four cordial
Conserves, each an ounce; conserve of Scabious flowers an ounce and an half,
Citron peels candied an ounce, Bole prepared a dram, Coral half a dram, Ivory a
scruple, red Sanders half adram, Diamargariton frigid a scruple, bezoard
pou^ler half a scruple, with syrup of Limons: make an Electuary.

Another Cordial. Take the four cordial conserves of Sorrel, each an ounce and
an half; conserve of Balm helf an ounce, candied Citron peels an ounce, Bole
and Coral prepared, each a dram; Pearl prepared a scruple, Ivory, Unicorn or
Hartshorn, each a scruple, seeds of Citrons, Sorrel and Coriander, each half a
dram; fragments of precious stones a scruple, Bezoar half a scruple, leaves of
Gold ten, Camphire five grains: make an Electuary.

Also Lozenges of Diamargariton, Bezoar and Bole. And give for the Liver,
Diatrionsantalon and Diarrhodon.

Or these. Take red and white Saunders, and Citron seeds, each half a dram;
Cinnamon two scruples, Coral, Bole, each a dram; Pearl a scruple, red Coral a
scruple, Saphires, Smaragds, Rubies and Granates, each half a scruple, filings
of Gold a scruple, Ivory and Hartshorn, each half a scruple: with white Sugar
dissolved in the juice of Limons make Loxenges.

These are good to be put into Broths when they are almost boiled. Take Sorrel
seeds half an ounce, Melon seeds two drams, Citron seed half a dram, all the
Sanders two scruples, Coral a dram and an half, Diamargariton frigid half a
dram, make forms of them.

Pills of the Troches of Camphire, with syrup of Limons are Cordial and do
resist Poison: give two or three.

The Chemists highly commend Aurum Potabile, Salt and Magistery of Pearl, and
the Tincture of Coral.

Crato gives an ounce of Oil of Scorpions to the infected.

Diverse Applications may be made to the Heart, Liver, Pulses, Reins, Brain and
Stomach, and Testicles, and the Air amended.

After sweating lay Epithems to the Heart and Pulses. Thus Sorrel, Scabious,
Vervain, Balm, and Rose water, each two ounces; Rose-vinegar an ounce, juice of
Limons half an ounce, Sack an ounce, Sanders, red and white, a dram, Citron
peels a scruple, Troches of Camphire a scruple, Diamargariton frigid a dram,
make an Epithem.

An Ointment for the the Heart and Pulses, or to be applied twice a day with
Scarlet. Take Treacle half an ounce, juice of Limons half an ounce,
Rose-vinegar two drams, Camphire a scruple, Saffron half a scruple, Musk three
grains.

Or use Vinegar in which Angelica Roots are steeped.

Or this Emplaster. Take red Roses poudered; boil them well in Rose Water; with
Vinegar, juice of Apples, Citron peels, Sanders: make a Plaster for the Pulses.

Mathiolus anoynts the Pulses with Oil of Scorpions.

And the Balsom mentioned among the Antidotes is as good.

Or the Bag there mentioned.

Use to cool the Liver cold and strengthening means, as in the cure of putrid
Fevers, and to the Reins.

Rose-vinegar to the Head if it be hot.

And to the stomach strengthening Ointments if it be weak.

And because the Stones have great consent with the principal parts, apply this
to moderate the heat. Take Rose Water four ounces, Rose Vinegar half an ounce,
Sack an ounce, juice of Pomegranates half an ounce, wet clothes therein and
apply them.

It is good to change the Air and place, and remove the Patient from others
that are infected and change his shirts, sheets, bed, Pillows, and sprinkle the
chamber with Rose Vinegar, Lavender, Rose and Citron water; and in summer, to
strew Herbs and Fruit, and to perfume as we showed in the Antidotes.

To keep strength use this Diet.

Contrary to all other acute continual Fevers; Let meat be given ofen, but
little at a time, and they must be compelled to eat, if they refuse. Let it be
of good nourishment, that a little may serve.

As Broth or Chickens, Kid, wood Fowl, Partridg, Veal, and these make diverse
dishes and Gellies, avoid Eggs which easily corrupt, and fat things. and give
fruits, and things allowed in putrid Fevers. and let this meat be eaten with
Vinegar or shap Juyces.

Let the Drink be Juleps mentioned, or Capon Ale, or Broth, or of Veal and
Calves feet. Wine temperately taken is allowed.

This is a pleasant Water. Take the flesh of the Loyn of Veal half a pound, and
a Calves foot well cleansed, add Sugar two ounces, boil them in Water, add a dram
of gross Cinnamon, and strain it.

Let them not sleep while they sweat, some keep them from it twenty four hours
after the Botch appears. But in regard sleep refreshes and carries the heat
outward rather than inward, as I showed, it must not be hindered.

Let him rejoice and be in good hope either of Cure or eternal happiness.

The Botch and Carbuncle are the chief symptoms. their cure shall be showed
hereafter, and how the Venom shall be dawn out.

The first thing is to hold up the strength, as we showed. And if swouning or
Heart-beating come, give Cordials, and apply them outwardly. If swouning be
from the stomach, anoint and comfort that. and give a little Wine, or a sop in
juice of Pomegranates-Grapes and Wine, put the Hands and Feet in warm water,
and rub the Face and other parts.

Take away Doting and Watching with a puppy applied, or with Opiates, or
washing externally. If sleep be much, use Vinegar of Roses.

Assuage thirst with this Julep. Take water newly distilled of Sorrel and
Bread, each six ounces; Rose and Scabious water, each four ounces, Vervain and
Bugloss water, each two ounces: with Sugar make a Julep.

Or with this. Take conserve of Sorrel and Roses, each an ounce; Rob de Ribes
an ounce and an half, Diamargariton frigid a dram, with Sugar of Roses make a
Candy.

If a Diarhaea come it is dangerous, then give a Clyster of Barley water and
Sugar.

And, Take Tormentil roots half a dram, or Bole with red Wine, and anoint the
Belly with astringents.

Women with Child, do often miscarry, when they are infected, this is deadly,
and to be much regarded.

The other Symptoms, as of the Tongue and Jaws are cured, as in putrid Fevers.

The Fevers that come from the biting of venomous beasts, The Cure of venomous
Fevers.
inflaming the Heart: kill in a few hours, or in the first day, except prevented.

The Cure is by drawing the Poison forth at the Wound; and by an Antidote, as
we showed in Poisons.

If the Fever be great use Cordials inwardly and outwardly, as I showed to
cheer the spirits.

A simple Hectic, whether it follow continual Diary, The Cure of a Hectic
fever.
or putrid burning, or intermiting Fevers (not that which is melting and a
Symptom of a burning Fever) or free from that Fever which caused it: is to be
Cured, according as it is either in the beginning, or increase, or setlement.

In Children and Infants, because their Heart is easily altered in temper, it
may be sooner Cured, if not confirmed: but it is difficult in Men and Women.
And in old people uncurable.

The cause of this disease is the temperament of the Heart and the whole Body
made hotter and dryer, not nourished by a Humor or Excrement, when the Body is
freed from the Fever that caused it; Therefore purges are needless, except the
Excrements and Crudities increase by long continuance of the Disease, and then
gentle Clysters or Laxatives may be given. But we must chang the temper of the
Body, And hold up the strength that decaies, And amend the accidents, if any be.

At the first we must alter the dryness, with moistners of the Heart and Limbs,
and gentle coolers, because the heat is not violent and may be allayed by
temperate and moderate coolers. Some give Narcoticks or Medicines to cause
sleep to cool the Body, but we say they are not cold, and rather inflame the
Body, as I showed, and therefore give them not but when sleep is wanting. In
the progress when the Consumption is begun we refresh, with nourishers that are
moist, for they will disperse themselves sooner through the Body. This is done
by internal and external means.

We give them a moistning Diet that refreshes, boiled things, moisten most,
and roasted increase the radical moisture more.

Veal, Kid, and Porke, brains of Hogs and Calves are commended.

Also the stones of beasts that are not very Lecherous, as of Sheep, Calves,
and young Kids.

And Hens flesh, Capons or Pullets fed with Barley, or crammed with Dow, made
up into pills, with Crayfish, Frogs flesh, and Wheat flower or Barley flower.

Also Birds boiled, or moist roasted, for Galen says meat over roasted turns
easily into choler, but I rather lay the fault in the Dripping, the brains and
stones of these are best.

Also Brook fish, Cray fish, Turtles of the woods and water Frogs are good meat
in Hecticks, and Snailes, but some disallow of them, because they are so slymy.
The Carthusian Friars, make up the tails of Crayfish, with Barley, Almonds and
Sugar, which is excellent.

And yolks of Eggs boiled with Wine and Sugar called in Dutch Beinwarme, and
green Cheese.

Also a Panado of bread boiled in broth: Or this. Take crumbs of bread steept
in Milk, and add Almond Milk, Rose water and Sugar. Or Barley cream made with
broth.

Also Almonds, Pine nuts, Pistachas alone, or with Milk, or Sugar, are good.

In meat give Eryngus and Satyrion roots and purple flowr'd Goats beard,
Purslane, Bugloss, Mallows, Violets, Endive, Spinach, Betts, Colewort and moist
fruits.

In drink which they love best, because they must not endure thirst, give these.

Wine that is of a middle sort between sweet and sower is most refreshing, if
it be strong, dash it with water, Wine taken much inflames and must not be
given here or when there is a Phthisick or cough.

When the Consumption is manifest and there is no suspicion of any remainder of
the putrid Fever, give Milk, for a long time every day: rising from four
ounces to a pint. Woman's Milk that has been four months delivered is best:
the next is Asses, which cure, if it be curable. Then Goats milk, after the
butter is taken out, and if you fear it will corrupt, add sugar. If your fear a
looseness, infuse steel in it: the rest shall be showed in the Phthisiek.

Make Almond milk with pine Nuts, seeds of Melons and Gourds or Poppies into
Emulsions.

Or give Cock broth, strained from the sat continually, or a Decoction of
Capons flesh and Crayfish.

Or Barley in Chicken broth.

Or this Julep: Take Violet and Rose water, each four ounces, white Sugar half
a pound, Bugloss water two ounces; boil them to a Julep, give it with boiled
water or lean broth, or Barley water.

Or thus: Take juice of Purslane (highly commended in this cause) three ounces,
of Bugloss an ounce: boil them to a Julep with Sugar, give a good proportion
often.

Some commend, the juice Burnet and Turnips.

Another Syrup: Take Bugloss and Eryngus roots, each two ounces; Satyrion roots
an ounce, green Liquorish three ounces, Lettice, Purslane, each a handful;
Violets, Bugloss and Borage flowers, each a pugil; Jujubs and Sebestens, each
eight pair, Cold seeds bruised two drams, boil them, strain and infuse red
Sanders a dram; make a syrup with Sugar, to be taken alone or otherwise.

Give Children that hate Medicines, Purslane and Scabious water. Also waters
distilled from Snails, Cray fish and Man's blood, and from new milk.

Or these: Take Capon broth of his flesh, well boiled, add a pugil of Turtle,
Cray fish or Frogs flesh, conserve of Roses, Borage, Bugloss, Scabious,
Violets, each an ounce; Diamargariton frigid, Diatragacanth frigid, each a
dram; Cinnamon two drams, distill a wator from them.

Another very profitable: Take the Lungs and Heart of a Calf, the flesh of six
Cray fish or seven, Frogs four, cut them small, and add Diatragacanth frigid six
drams, Cordial temperate species two drams, Cold seeds hull'd and Purslane
seeds, each half an ounce; Henbane seeds, if there be a Cough, a dram, add
Purslane and Linden flower water, each three ounces; Lilly water four ounces,
distill them in Balneo: give this alone, or with Julep of Roses.

There are diverse restoring confections that are pleasant.

Marsh-pane, thus made: Take the past of which Marsh pane is made a pound, Cold
seeds cleansed an ounce, Pine nuts two ounces, steep them in Milk, and bruise
them, Diapenides and Diatraganth frigid, each a dram; Diamargariton frigid half
a dram, make Cakes.

Or thus: Take Capons flesh and Frogs, Hips and Crayfish tails, boiled in
Purslane and Rose water, each two ounces; beat them, add sweet Almonds blanched
two ounces Pine nuts and Pistachaes, steept in milk, each an ounce; Gourd seeds
cleansed half an ounce, white Starch two ounces, Sugar four ounces, Pearl half
a dram, sprincle them with Cinnamon water, and make a past with Milk and yolks
of two Eggs, make Cakes.

Or thus: Take flesh of Frogs Legs and Cray fish or Turtle flesh of the wood,
if you can get it, each four ounces; boil them in Barley and Purslane water,
add the four great cold seeds, each a dram; white Poppy seeds two drams,
Raysons stoned and Sebesten, each an ounce; then add the species of the
resumptive Electuary, Diatragacanth frigid, Diapenidies without species, each
half a dram, Penidies and Sugar Candy, each two ounces; Pine and Pistacha Nuts,
each half an ounce: make Cakes with Gum Traganth, dissolved in Rose water.

They must often take Sugar of Roses, or Sugar boiled in Violet or Purslane
water.

Or this mixture: Take conserve of Violets, Purslane, Bugloss, of each an
ounce; Conserve of Roses half an ounce, Diamargariton frigid a dram, Sugar:
make a mixture.

For outward means and cold Air is better then hot and dry.

Baths do good by moistning and cooling the body which is hot and dry, and by
loosning the parts that nourishment may come to them. The ancients used them
three ways: first they bathed in hot water to relax: secondly in warm water to
moisten: and thirdly in cold to keep in the moisture, by closing the Pores.

We use River or Rain water, which is thought best, so hot as may neither heat
the body too much or cause thirst or sweat which must not be. And he must not
be in above an hour, once or twice in a day, before meat. Some think it good
to let the Patient take in the Fume of the Bath by a Linen cloth before he
goes in.

An artificial Bath is made of roots of Marshmallows, Mallows, Violets,
Purssane, Bugloss with the roots, Chamomil flowers in tripe broth, Veal or
Mutton broth that is fat, And for the Rich we add milk, Oil or Butter.

I would allow of Sulphur baths, if they be near, used by degrees, because they
make the body Oily, as I have found by experience.

For this cause we anoint after bathing, or at other times, morning and
evening: the Back, Sides and Belly with loosning Oils.

Or thus: Take Mucilage of Fleabane and Quince seeds each half an ounce; Gum
Traganth infused in milk half a dram, fresh butter an ounce, white Hens and
Ducks grease, each an ounce; Oil of sweet Almonds and Violets, each two onnces;
with white Wax: make a Liniment.

Anoint the Breast and Heart thus: Take Oil of Violets, Gourd seeds and sweet
Almonds, of each half an ounce, Ducks grease an ounce, or use the resumptive
Ointment.

Some anoint the Liver with the same, but we omit it, because the Liver will
have little benefit thereby and the belly may be loosned therewith, which is
naught. Neither do we put flesh in Ointments, as some do.

We apply Epithems to the Breast, Heart and Pulses, because the Arteries are
hot: As, Take an Emulsion of sweet Almonds made with Decoction of Barley,
Purslane and Violets: add fresh Butter and Capons grease Dip cloths therein and
apply them warm.

A Cordial Epithem: Take Violet, Rose, Purslane, Scabious, Bugloss and Borage
water, each two ounces; juice of Apples an ounce, juice of Housleek or Lettice
half an ounce, white wine an ounce.

If bruised Purslane, be laid to the Stomach, it is thought to be good.

And gentle Frictions after bathing to draw the nourishment.

The nourishers prescribed, both strengthen and restore. It is a good rule for
Hecticks to eat often and little, and for all weak persons.

When meat is loathed and they are very weak, some give nourishing Clysters:
Thus, Take milk half a pint Capons broth two ounces, two yolks of Egg, give
it often and let it be kept long.

Take heed of things that weaken, as fasting, which they cannot endure. And of
strong motions of the Body, Mind. And of watching, for sleep is good. And all
Evacuations, especial Venery, are hurtful.

The chief accident is a looseness of the Belly, and it hastneth death if it
continue, we look to that with anointing the Belly, and the like.

Sometimes constant binding in the Belly is troubsom to them, which we prevent
by a gentle moistning Clyster. Thus: Take Chicken or Tripe broth, boil therein
Lettice and Mallows, add Cassia or Tamarinds an ounce, Oil of Violets and Water
Lillies, of each two ounces; Honey an ounce, give it.

Or this gentle Potion, Manna with Chicken broth, or Cassia, or syrup of Roses
solutive, or of Violets.

We call them Compound Fevers, The Cure of double or treble putrid fevers.
when diverse Fevers are at once, In these the Cure chiefly alters; For if
two putrid Fevers, or three or two continual Fevers, or double intermitting
or triple Fevers meet, being all of a kind and differing only in respect of the
cause, in this that it is putrified in diverse places, but in the same Vessels,
and the fits come not the same days. These are rather diverse then Compounded
Fevers, and the Cure must be, as if there were but one, as in putrid
intermitting and continual Fevers was said.

But if the Fevers be compounded of diverse, which may be two ways, as when a
putrid continual is joined with a putrid intermitting, or a putrid continual,
or intermiting with a Hectic; when the causes are diverse and meet together.
Then the Cure must be directed to both, and it differs from the Cure of simple
Fevers.

If a continual putrid be joined to an intermitting in a Semi-tertian, The Cure
of a Semi-tertian.
of what kind soever it be, because the cause is double and the filth is in the
hollow Vein and the Meseraicks also, and does not only constantly perplex the
Patient, but brings fits every other or third day, increasing the heat and
Symptoms, we say it is very dangerous. Especially if there be swounding when
the Fevers meet. Therefore a Semi-tertian uses to turn into a Hectic, or
leave a Dropsy behind it,

The Cure of a Semi-tertian, is as in other Fevers, first taking away the
Excrements, and Bleeding and Concoction of both matters, by purging and
provoking sweat and Urin, often: with things proper for the Humor, whether
Choler, Phlegm or Melancholy, which breed the Fever. All Physicians first give
remedies against the swounding, and Cordials which resist Poison and
Pestilence. And we apply them inwardly and outward first of all.

And for the Fever we direct evacuations, preparing and altering Medicines
agreeable to the constitution and the humor predominating, as the firs rise or
abate: as we showed in continual and intermitting severs; And if other
accidents besides swounding do happen, we correct them as was there declared.

If a Hectic be joined with the Fever that produced it, The Cure of a Hectic
joined with a putrid Fever.
it will not be a pure Synoch for that continues but three or four days, but a
putrid continual, which we know by the consumption of the body, or an
intermitting long Tertian, or Quartan, and then we perceive the Hectic, not
only by leanness, but by a feverish Pulse after the fit. This makes us regard
both. Thus,

When we concoct the matter and open obstructions we added somthings that
resist the Hectic: As, Take syrup of Endive and Violets, of each an ounce;
Endive and Purslane water, of each two ounces; with a little Diamargaritum
frigid: mix them.

Purge gently: Thus, Take Rhubarb a dram, infuse it in Endive and Purslane
water, strain it, add syrup of Roses solutive and Manna, each an ounce.

These praeperatives and purges, if the Fever require and the Hectic be not
hurt thereby, are to be repeated.

The altering means must moisten soundly, by reason of the great distemper in
the Heart, therefore we let them drink freely. We grant to milk, by reason of
the putrid Fever and Headache, as Hippocrates teaches, except out of the fit,
we allow a little for custom sake.

In Juleps and Conserves and the like, we put moistners mentioned in the
Hectic to open obstructions and resist corruption in the Fever that is joined
therewith.

At first before the Hectic comes when we fear it, we apply in the Fever more
moistning and cooling Epithems to the Heart and Pulses, then ordinarily.

And we begin to use Baths sooner, especially in Quartans.

Allo accompanied Fevers, with other Diseases joined, whether they go before
the Disease, or are Sympand follow after, have a different Cure. As they are
joined with Erysipelas, or Botches, or other hot Diseases, or Meazels, or small
Pox, or Phthysick, or Cachecy, or evil habit, or other accidents. And we shall
in order set down the cure of the six sorts of accompanied Fevers.

If a putrid Synoch or Ephemera be with an Erysipelas or Botch, The preventing
and curing of Synochs and Ephemeal Fevers that produce Botches and Erysipelas.
it ends in respect of the Fever as a single Fever does, nor is it more
dangerous than that, but in respect of the humor. But it is most troublesome
when it comes once a year with the Gout, as in old men which are most subject
to it.

For whose cause in regard worse accidents are feared, as internal
Inflammations, Pleurisies and Imposthumes in the Lungs, we shall show how to
prevent and eure if it be come.

We prevent this Synoch, if the blood abound, by hindering its increase; if it
be hot, by tempering it; if thin, by thickning it; if impure by purging and
clensing it.

In full bodies we let blood spring and fall, and at other times to prevent.

And use scarification every month, and after cupping in the shoulders.

And we purge before and after Winter, and oftener if there be a foul body: but
I have observed that violent purges have brought and not hinderd this Fever, by
moving of the matter,

Tops of Hops, Fumitory, Elder buds, Senna, Epithymum and Polypody boiled in
Whey is good to be drunk all the month of May in young and strong people.

Or with this Apozem. Take Polipody three ounces, Senna an ounce and an half,
Carthamus seeds an ounce, Thyme, Epithymum, each half an ounce; Tamarinds two
ounces, Dock roots an ounce, Liquorish an ounce and an half, Succory roots two
ounces, Violet, Endive, Lettice and Bugloss, each a handful; Prunes and
Sebestens, each twenty pair; Raisons ten pair, Anise half an ounce, Cordial
flowers a pugil, cold Seeds half an ounce: boil them in a pint of the strained
liquor, dissolve juice of Roses and Bugloss, each an ounce; juice of Apples
three ounces, with Sugar and a little Cinnamon, make a Syrup, give an ounce by
it self, or in Whey, or other Liquor.

Sharp waters drunk often for some weeks has preserved many.

Instead of Spaw waters you may make a Drink to cool a hot Liver, and the blood
and spirits.

It is good to sweat often in due season, for thereby the blood is purged from
excrements, especially such as are thin. This must be done by Exercise,
Stuphes, or Fomentations, and by things taken into the Stomach.

Let the Diet be moderate in quantity. And beware of all things which easily
inflame the Blood and Spirits.

The Cure is directed partly to the Fever, partly to the Disease that
accompanies it. As for the Fever, because Nature from the beginning does of
her own accord send forth the Vapors which rise from the Inflammation of the
blood by transpiration or sweat, we must do the same in helping her, that so
some part of the cause being taken away, little or none may be carried to the
emunctuaries or pores, or other places internal which are worst. Wherefore
since Nature in this Fever goes about first to expel by sweat, which she does
later in a Synoch, let us at the first give things that cause sweat (but not
very strong, least the body hot before be worse inflamed thereby) or that help,
and make them sweat more freely.

Let the Patient be quiet and covered, and not exposed to the cold Air, which
has been so dangerous to some, that many fear to apply a cold wet cloth
outwardly, or to an Erysipelas.

Some advise plenty of Barley water to be drunk, and to boil Lentiles therein,
to send forth the matter, and to sweat, as in the small Pox. And if Nape and
Citron seed be added, the Decoction will cause more sweat.

Also the Decoction of Sorrel roots with burnt Hartshorn and Lentiles husked,
and Nape seed with a little Cinnamon provokes sweat.

And diverse distilled waters, but here we make choice of the most temperate in
regard of the Fever, as that of the three colored Violet highly commended, also
of Fumitory, Carduus, Marygolds, Chervil, and such as are usually given in
other Fevers, which begin in the same manner.

To these Waters we add Rob, or syrup of Elder, or of Danewort, or syrup of
Ambrosia or Treacle. Also we refresh in the sweat, or after it especially; with
a little Bread tosted and dipped in Water and white Wine, with a little Cinnamon
and Sugar, and if you do so at first, they will sweat the better.

Blood-letting is not so requisite here as in solitary Fevers, except there be
fear of greater internal inflammation, and a Plethory; for the sending of blood
into the Emunctuaries, and the extremities is not so much to be feared, that it
should be stopped by letting blood.

The Belly must be loosned if bound, as in a solitary Synoch, and purged a
little, if there be ill humors with Cassia or Manna.

And the Alterers must be given in, and applied outwardly, if the heat be
great, as in a solitary.

And the Accidents corrected as there said.

As for the Botches, or Buboes, they sometimes vanish of themselves, without any
application, except in the Neck, where they are kept from the Air with a cloth
or a Fur. When they are ill ordered, they burn to an Imposthume, as we showed.

As for Erysipel as, that departs presently after the Fever, but if it be hot
and painful, assuage it, as shall be showed. When it is ill cured, it turns to
an Ulcer, and sometimes into a Gangrene. And therefore commonly they say, that
if any Ulcer, or Tumor, or scurf, come after, it was caused from the evil
curing or wetting of the Erysipelas.

If a Synoch be joined to a hot Disease or Inflammation, The Cure of Fevers
coming from external Inflammations.
and their Accidents, and there is an outward Inflammation with a tumor,
Contusion, Wound, or Gunshot, that causes a Fever, if it be small, little is
given, but such as may be mixed with the medicines against the Tumors: as
bleeding which is good for Revulsion. And loosning of the Belly, and other
altering Medicines used in other Fevers.

When there is internal Inflammations of the Lungs, The Cure of Fevers that
produce internal Inflammations.
or in a Pleurisy, or Peripneumony, or in the Liver, Spleen, or other parts,
we direct our Medicines to the Inflammation, rather then to the Fever, which
requires no such have, as the Inflammation, and goes away with the Disease,
except as I showed in the causes, it springs again: Yet we so order the
Inflammation that we increase not the Fever. And the Medicines are best, which
are contrary to both.

Blood-letting is excellent in both, for it is the chief remedy in a Synoch,
and it hinders Inflammation by drawing the blood from the Noble part. Therefore
it must not be neglected, but let out freely and sometimes repeated.

It is good also against both Fever and Inflammation to keep the Belly open
with gentle Laxatives or Clysters. Strong Purges are Enemies to both, because
they take away more of the cause, but inflame the body, and stir up the blood
to flow to the Inflammations and abate the strength which is here precious. And
they are to be feared least they bring a Diarrhaea which is here dangerous and
deadly. Therefore imitate not the Empericks in giving them.

Things that are given cold, though they are contrary both to the Fever and the
Inflammation, yet they must be given warily with regard to the part where the
Inflammation is, lest they hurt one, when they profit the other. Although much
cold water is good against a Synoch, yet it would hurt internal inflammations
by a sudden repercussion, Therefore we give it prepared for that part, and in
Diseases of the Breast we give Pectorals, and in Diseases of the Liver openers
of Obstructions mixed therewith. And therefore sharp waters though they may do
good in Fevers and many internal inflammations, yet we give them not in
diseases of the breast, especially if they bind and are very sour. This rule is
to be observed not only in ordinary Drink, but in Juleps, Syrups, and Conserves.

Remedies applied outwardly must be profitable for both, they must not increase
Inflammation as Epithems, though they are in all Fevers profitably applied to
the Heart, yet in Inflammations of the Lungs, they will do hurt.

The Diet which is thin for a Fever, is good in an Inflammation, also while the
matter slows, that while the hungry parts catch away blood for nourishment it
may less come to the part affected.

But we have showed at large in our Practice how to order internal
Inflammations with a Fever, whether it went before or followed them.

Fevers with Meazles or Small Pox which are Synochs, or putrid, The Cure of
Synochs putrid, malignant, or pestilential, which produce Meazles or small Pox.
malignant, or pestilenlial, are judged and cured according to their diverse
causes and the age of the Patient. These are less dangerous when they come not
from a malignant cause, and then they keep the same course with Synochs,
Solitary, Putrid, or not Putrid. But if there be a malignant cause not
pestilential, these Fevers alone hill not Infants, because Nature sends out the
putrid malignant cause in the blood, by many pustles, outwardly, but if not,
they are dangerous, especially if pustles be in the Jaws, Lungs, or Eyes. But
in people of age, whether the Fever send forth Pustles or Spots, because the
cause is always malignant, and has long lurked in the blood, never purged
out, or not having the small Pox in their Infancy, it is dangerons, and it
observe the course of malignant Fevers which are popular, or epidemical; though
this is seldom. We Prognosticate by the Pustles, for if they come forth when
signs of Concoction appear in the Urin, and the pulse is better, and the
accidents of the Fever abated, it is a good sign, if otherwise, it is ill. If a
pestilent Fever brings forth the Pustles rather than others, which is seldom
seen, it is deadly: And we have showed that many thousands of Infants have been
so taken away.

The Cure is, when the Fever is come, and we suspect the pustles will come
forth, because it is ordinary in that place, or because they appear; we must
help Natures motion to expel them, and the rather when the cause is malignant,
with the expulsive medicines mentioned, and order the Fever with Evacuations
and Alterations, look to the strength, and correct the accidents, Thus.

We give the expulsive medicines mentioned to expel from the Center to the
circumference at the first, with respect to the cause, whether putrid,
malignant, or pestilential, to young, weaker; old, stronger; beginning with the
weakest means thus.

Take Figs dried twelve, Barley and Lentiles, each a pugil; boil and drink them.

Or, Take Lentiles and Barley, each a pugil; dried Figs twelve, Jujubes
fifteen, Dates four, Raisons twenty pair, Liquorish half an ounce: boil them,
you may add Sugar and a little Saffron.

Or add to the same Fennel seed two drams, Quince seeds, Gum traganth and Gum
lac, each a dram; Saffron half a dram: boil them.

The Arabians make it thus. Take dried Figgs seven drams, Lentiles and Gum lac,
each three drams: Gum traganth and Fennel seeds each two drams: boil them to
the third part.

If there be Obstructious and a foul body. Thus, Take Grass and Asparagus and
Fennel roots, each an ounce; Liquorish an ounce and an half, Sorrel and
Maidenhair, each an handful; Cordial flowers a pugil, Figs twenty, Raysons
stoned twelve pair, Fennel seeds a dram; boil them, dissolve in a draught of it
syrup of Citrons or Limons half an ounce, Mithridate a scruple, with waters of
Sorrel and Marygold.

Also: Take Carduus seeds a dram, Nape seeds a scruple, Citron seeds half a
scruple, Sorrel seeds half a dram, bruise them, and add Carduus, Sorrel and
water of Pauls-Bettony, each an ounce and an half: make an Emulsion, add syrup
of Limons or Citrons an ounce, Hearts horn burnt a scruple, Pearl half a
scruple, Bole half a dram, Diamargariton frigid half a scruple: make a Potion.

Or: Take Barley and Lentil water, and a dram of Sorrel seed, Grains of
Paradise a scruple, Citron seeds half a dram: boil them, add sealed Earth a
scruple: give it.

Or give our Antidote in Powder, if the heat be not great mentioned in the Cure
of the Plague.

Or thus: Take roots of Mock chervil (which is never omitted, if it be to be
had) two ounces, roots of Tormentil, white Dittany, each two drams; Cordial
flowers a pugil, Sorrel a handful, Lentils half a handful, Earth of Lemnos a
dram: boil them in two pints of water, sweeten it with Sanders, and five ounces
of Sugar, drink often.

Or this which makes the Pustles come forth speedily, Take Monckes Rhubarb,
Tormentil, white Dittany and Grass roots, each an ounce; steep them in spring
water, boil them to the consuming of the third part, add Sugar four ounces,
Vinegar an ounce, or juice of Citrons an ounce, or an ounce and an half of the
syrup thereof: drink it two or three days.

If the Fever be great: This, Take syrup of Citron, Vinegar or Limons with
hoyled water or Sorrel water and Bole and Bezoar stone, drink it.

Anoint the Back, to fetch out the Pustles, as some do the whole Body. Thus:
Take Oil of sweet Almonds an ounce and an half, Oil of Chamomil half an ounce,
the resumptive Ointment an ounce.

Or use this Fomentation: Take Chamomil and Melilot flowers, of each a pugil;
Mallows a handful: boil them.

Let the Patient be in bed, and keep from the Air.

Also Scarifications, with Cupping-glasses upon the Shoulders, fetch out the
Pustles and Spots, when they appear.

And rubbing with a red cloth.

The vulgar think, the beholding red things, makes the Pustles red, and
therefore cover them with scarlet.

If the Fever be a Synoch it is good to bleed at the first to take out some of
the inflamed putrid or malignant Blood, and abate the Cause in Men and big
Children, not in Infants. The Spanish Physicians taught by the Jews, did
formerly and now also, with the French Physicians open Veins in Children in
this Disease, but not when the Spots or Pustles do appear least natures motion
be hindered.

If the Fever be very malignant, which brings forth these Pustles, or the
Patient in years, give the following.

Loosen the Belly at first, before Blood-letting (if it must be) least the
Excrements increase the heat, with a Clyster or Laxative.

Or give this Potion to Men and Children in a less quantity: Take Violets a
pugil, Sebestens and Jujubes, of each ten, Tamarinds three drams, boil them,
and add Manna an ounce, Cassia ten drams.

Some men must have stronger purges, but take heed of a Fluz or Dysentery, and
add always something to resist Malignity.

As thus: Take Rhubarb four scruples, Spike half a scruple, Scordium half a
dram, yellow Myrobalans a dram and an half, infuse them in Sorrel and Carduus
water: strain and dissolve syrup of Peach flowers and Roses with Senna, each an
ounce.

Or: Take Tryphera persica six drams, Manna an ounce and an half, syrup of
Limons an ounce, of Violets and Roses each an ounce; with Sorrel, Scabious and
Carduus water: make a Potion.

Or these Pills: Take Aloes two scruples, Rheubarb a scruple, Myrobalans half a
scruple, Agarick a scruple, with syrup of Sorrel: make Pills.

Or this Clyster: Take Mallows, Beets, Mercury, Sorrel, Bugloss, Borage, each a
handful; Balm half a handful, Cordial flowers, Bran and Barley, each a pugil;
boil and strain them, add Tryphera persica an ounce, Cassia six drams Honey an
ounce, Oil of Violets three ounces, with a little Salt make a Clyster.

Use alterers to cool, and resist corruption, as in a continual putrid Fever
and Malignant. It is not good to use cold things outwardly for fear of
Repercussion, or striking in the matter,

Restore strength as there, with Lentils and Barley and give no Wine till the
declination.

We have showed else where how to order the Pustles.

If there be a Diarrhea or Flux in the beginning, (for in the end it often
cures) by the venomous Humors in the Guts, you must mix the Troches of Spodium
or burnt Ivory with expulsives.

The Cholick is abated, with Clysters or Oil of sweet Almonds.

Vomiting is stopped with a crust of bread dipped in Vinegar, given and applied.

For the Syncope or Swouning: Take Pearl half a dram, Bole a dram, filings of
Gold and Unicorns horn, each a scruple; Citron feeds half a dram, fragments of
precious Stones, each a scruple; with Sugar, dissolved in Rose water: make
Lozenges.

If the sleep be great and cause astonishment, expel it with Rubbbing,
Ligatures or Binding and Cupping.

With other Pustles, The Cure of pure Synochs and of putrid Malignant fevers,
which produce the Botch or Carbuncle.
as a Carbuncle not Pestilential, if there be a Synoch pure, or a putrid, or
malignant, but not the Plague, we shall proceed in respect of the Fever, as
formerly. Using things to expel the cause, laying upon the Carbuncle things
that draw out venom, and then we open a Vein, loosen the Belly and strengthen
the Heart inwardly and outwardly with coolers and resisters of venom, hold up
the strength, and correct accidents, and Cure the Carbuncle, as was showed. A
lingering Symptomatical fever turned into a Hectic, The Cure of lingering or
Hectic Fevers which are joined with Phthisick and Cathexy.
as in the Phthysick is usual, must be as a solitary Hectic. But if it be
fixed and the Disease not gone that caused it, it is incurable. But if before
it is a Hectic it has little heat and small accidents and is little alone
regarded, but the whole cure is directed to the disease accompanying it, whose
Symptoms are more urgent, as shall be showed, having an Eye to the Fever in
other prescriptions for the Disease.

And we must take away no more not less blood, because there is a Fever.

But we purge in Cachecticks for the Fever with gentle things that inflame not.

If the altering Medicines must be hotter for the Disease, we must cool them
for the Fevers sake. And in a Consumption before the Hectic is confirmed, we
may use things that moisten rather then violently cool.

If there be a Fever from retention of the After birth, The Cure of lingering
Fevers rising from a dead Child, Afterbirth, or congealed Blood.
a dead Child or congealed Blood, it is gentle and Symptomatical and to be
cured as the other: except there be an Inflammation and then it is to be cured,
as a Fever with Inflammation above mentioned.

CHAP. III. Of Headache.
The Kinds.
THe internal pains of the Head, which reach not so outward, as to be increased
by the touch, as the internal, are either unusual, or accustoined, or solitary,
or accompanied: Hence arise all the Kinds of them.

We call them unusual, which are new from lome fresh Cause, Cephalalgia, or the
Headache called Soda by the Arabians.
and which the patient never had before. This is called Cephalalgia or Soda by
the Arabians. In this the Head either is pained in some distinct place, or here
and there.

The last pain is called an indistinct or wandering pain, over all the Head:
one while stretching it, as if it would tear it, which some think to abate by
binding or pressing, another while it beats only in the Temples, Heaviness of
the Head is a kind of Cephalalgia.
sometimes it pricks only in the Ears, sometimes it is a heavy pain like a weight
and this is called heaviness of the Head.

Sometimes the pain is distinctly in the fore part of the Head and Temples, or
the right or left side or both or in the Forehead or roots of the Eyes, as if
they would fall out, the Eyes are red and the Temples beat with pricking,
sometimes in the Ears, which are oftener in Cephalalgia: sometimes it is behind
like a weight, but oftener in Women then Men, Sometimes in the Crown.

They are usual pains which are old or return upon small occasions, they are on
both sides, or in one side only.

When pain is on both sides of the Head, or the greatest part, Cephalaea.
it is called Cephalaea. In this the pain is continual, which cease not, but
is sometimes gentler and stronger othertimes. or intermitting or coming by
fits: these are ordinate at certain days, or weeks, morning, or evening, or
inordinate returning from any light Cause.

If the pain be in one side of the Head as if it were cleaved it is called
Hemicrania; Hemicrania.
This begins from the beating of the Temples and goes to the Sagital or arrow
like suture, dividing the Head long ways, and comes every third or fourth day:
There is another sort which at a set hour every day for diverse weeks torments
the Patient with a pricking pain in some part of the Skul, with this I was
vexed some weeks about my right Eyebrow.

They are solitary Headaches that come alone no disease going before, as that
of wine and drunkness, which begins after sottishness and amazment therefrom is
past.

Those are called accompanied, which are joined with other diseases: which they
follow for the most part, and are Symptoms, as when the chief Symptom in a
Fever is the Headache, and those Headaches that accompany Melancholy and
Falling Sickness. Or those which come from a Catarrh, before or behind with
heaviness; Or that come in the Diseases of natural parts, accompanied with
diverse other accidents, as Cachexy and suppression of Terms. Or when in the
French Pox there is a Cephalaea that molesteth at night most, both inwardly and
outwardly.

The Causes.
Headache must needs be, The part affected.
within the Skul, or in the meninges, or filmes, or in the brain it self; It
may be in the meninges because they are sensible. And they being two, the one
thick the other thin, and close joined together and to the Vessels can carry
the pain from what side soever it begins. So that it is hard to distinguish
which of them is most affected, but by conjecture, as when the disease is in
the outward thick Membrane, the pain must be outward by reason of the
Pericranium joined unto it. But if the inward thin filme be afflicted, the pain
is deeper and in the Brain as it were. In both the pain may come to the roots
of the Eyes, because the Balls of the Eyes have tunicles from the Membranes of
the Brain. But in regard both the Tunicles are distinct with the Brain long
ways in the middle of the Skul, it comes to pass, that if the discase be only
on one side, only half the Head is pained, but if on both sides, the pain is on
both sides, now in one, then in the other, as the cause is more or less.

Many assirm that there can be no pain in the substance of the Brain, because
the substance of the brain is insensible: But we affirm that those parts of
the brain, to which the tender film, or Meninx grows, which produces the
sensitive Nerves cannot be without sense, and that they may give occasion of
pain with the meninges by consent, and yet without hurt to the mind, this pain
is stupefying rather then sensible. And in heaviness of Head I suppose that
that pain or sense of weight before and behind, comes from the brain offended
in the part from whence the Nerves and Marrow proceed.

The Disease which is in the meninges of the brain, or the sensible parts
thereof, where the Nerves begin, which causes Headache, is either manifest
when a hot distemper inflames the parts or cold, when it plucketh them or
solution of continuity, stretching or otherwise hurting: Or it is a hidden
quality which is offensive to these parts. The helping Cause is the disposition
of these parts to suffer. From which cause, if they be little, the Disease is
less; if great, or more causes meet the Disease is greater.

A hot distemper is often the cause of Headache, A hot diflemper of the Brain
causes Headache.
for the Head (as I shall show) easily is inflamed by reason of the plenty of
spiritful blood, and is pained by a preternatural heat: And the rather when
there is a matter which raises the heat to stretch and disturb it. Or if there
be an evil quality in them that offends the brain, as it is usually from a
hot vapor or humor from blood and choler.

The Head being uppermost easily receives Vapors, Vapors going to the Head
cause Headache.
especially thin. these heat and pull, and give occasion to Headaches by
consent. This comes from outward scents, but it is rather the return of an old
pain which was usual, than a new. And sometimes from things eaten, that with
their Vapors strike the Head. These may cause new Headaches if they fill the
Brain, as in Drunkards who are pained in their Heads, from the thin hot vapors
of the Wine, that heat and prick rather than stretch the Brain, by a force, as
I shall show, contrary to the Brain and Nerves. This pain comes after sleep from
the stupifying or Narcotick quality of the Wine, and the heat remaining and
continues till the Vapors are thrown out by Snorting. Vapors sent to the Head
from hot, choleric, and putrid humors in the Veins, cause the Headaches in
most Fevers; and out of Fevers they cause the fits of the Hemicrania or half
Headache: And Choler in the Stomach sending Vapors, causes Suffusions and
Vertigoes or Giddiness and also Headache by consent.

Much spiritful Blood contained in the large cavities and passages of the
Brain, Bloood in the Head causes Cephalalgia.
by stretching, or if it be hot by inflaming, it causes a Dotage, or by heat,
a Cephalalgia, or bloody Headache called Soda. This is Choleric, Melancholic,
or Phlegmatic, as the blood abounding is thick or thin. This Blood comes into
the Head, from a plethory in the Body, which is from diverse causes. Or it is
drawn thither by the heat of the Sun or Baths, Noise, Coughing, Strokes, Falls,
or great motion of the Body or Mind, and made hotter: Especially in hot
Diseases, this is a Symptom, especially in Fevers in which the blood inflamed
with the spirits in the Head, as it is also in the great Veins. hence comes
Headache in all Fevers, or from the Vapors, for in Fevers the Head is made
hotter as well as the body. We know when headache comes from blood, from things
foregoing, and from the beating pain, and redness of the Eyes, and other causes.

Also if such excrementitious Choler as comes pure from the Ears separate from
the water, go to the Brain and Meninges, it makes a pricking, but it can scarce
get thither without moisture, nor does it then cause pain, because in the
Jaundies, except other causes happen, there is no Headache.

A cold Distemper may cause headache, A cold distemper of the Brain causes
Headache.
as well as pain in the Nerves, by binding and biting, and by its adverse
contrary quality to every sensible part. This may come from phlegmatic
excrements of the Brain, cooling the membranes and not the Brain (for then
there would be sleep or astonishment) as in the Defluxion called Coryza, there
comes sometimes actually cold water from the Nose, and then the pain of the
Head cease. Also pain rises from some external actual Cold, either because
it astringeth, or is otherwise an Enemy to the Head; from the Air, or Wind, or
cold things applied to the Head, these cause Headache if they pierce inward.
And a little cold external in such as are used to have the Headache and to keep
their heads warm, if they stand bare will cause the Headache, therefore they
defend their Heads Caps and long Hair. And they who are offended easily with
heat, take off their Hair, and say, that if it be long they perceive the
headache to trouble them, as we have observed in old Men and bald-pated, who
use to be night and day bare-headed: Also by accident, external Cold by driving
the external heat inward (especially when from a cold place one suddenly
removes into a hot) may cause Headache, rather by heating than cooling the Head.

Solution of Continuity manifest by external causes, as a stroke, Distention
and Twitching in the Brain is the cause of Headache.
or Wound, that pierces to the Meninges, make an inward Headache with an
outward. But distension and twitching pains are caused by Vapors and hot
humors, and phlegmatic excrements abounding in the Brain, cause the same; not
so much by their plenty, as by their coldness and sharpness, which they have by
corruption or saltness. And this Headache is joined with a heat, and is before
or behind, as the humor producing it, is in the fore or hinder cavity; and it
is heavy like a weight, with stretching and twitching. And it is shorter when
the excrements stay not, and longer when they do. and sometimes a Giddiness or
Defluxion does go before or accompany it. And the plenty of these excrements
being waterish, thin, sharp, and hot (as we showed in Coryza with Headache)
flowing from the Eyes and Nose show the cause. And we have seen abundance of
these humors voided, not only at the Nose, but Ears, which have cured an old
Ach.

Any quality that is an Enemy to the Membranes of the Brain will cause pain in
them first, A quality which is an enemy to the brain causes Headache.
and then in the Head, either by a hidden force, or a manifest quality. As
Narcoticks afflict the Brain with their evil quality being taken, and also
cause pain of the Head when they which took them come to their senses, and it
continues. And Drunkards are not so much hurt by the heat and vapor of the
Wine, as by its evil quality. and after Beer we find Headaches caused from the
Hops, which are narcotick and stupefactive, by which quality we observe that
Hops are destructive unto Flies. And we have often observed that Headache
easily comes after the use of Opiates. And after the use of other things not
narcotick, but otherwise offensive, as of Saffron, Smallage seed, not only much
taken, but smelt to. Also Headache, as other diseases of the Head may come from
evil vapors or humors, as in melancholy and the like. And in infectious
Diseases it may come from the Contagion, as in the French Pox where the quality
does not only outwardly torment the Periostium and Pericranium, causing outward
pain, but the inward films or Meninges causing inward, which sometimes are both
together. And the Plague or venomous quality hereof, or of any other poison may
cause Headache by its enmity to the Brain as well as the Heart, and not by the
heat of the Fever only, though both may be causes of this Headache together, as
when a putrid Fever is joined with a malignant.

When the disposition or disposition of the Head is to be pained, Weakness of
the Brain or a disposition to suffer causes headache
it comes from very small occations, and this dispositionis the cause of
Cephalaea and Hemicrania. we call this a patible or suffering disposition; but
we know not how to explain it, unless we call it too much sensibility, or that
which comes from the Parents Hereditary. Or unless it comes from an evil custom
in such who have often been pained, or be a weakness which makes the Head more
ready to suffer such as is after long diseases of the head, wounds, or French
Pox, caused by long and continual gathering of excrements in the Head.

Evil shape, called Mala conformatio is sometimes cause of a continual Headache,
A fault in the Organ or part causes Headache.
as when the sutures or seams in the Skul (especally the Dart-like suture
called Sagittalis) is so closed or defective, that there can be no transpration
of vapors and sooty excreements. This may come from a preternatural rockey or
hard constitution of the Skul in the Crown, as I have felt and seen often.

The Cure.
A hot Cephalalgia comes from a hot, The Cure of Cephalalgia Cephalaea or
Hemicrania of what cause soever.
choleric, or sanguine vapor, whether pure or impure, which overheats,
strikes, and twitcheth the brain; and this comes from external or internal
causes, of themselves, or by consent, in hot diseases of the Stomach or other
parts as in Fevers especially. If it comes of it self by Blood flowing to the
Head, it must presently be drawn away, and driven down, and the heat raised
thereby allayed, and the pain assuaged, least it renew the flux, and the
residue discussed and consumed. If it come by consent from vapors sent up, the
Cure is to be directed to the Disease of which this Headache is but a Symptom,
and the cause of this symptom, especially the fuel from whence these vapors
arise must be purged, and the vapors are to be stopped, and drawn from the Head
and discussed. a cold Headache if it come from external cold, either of it self
departs, or is cured by moderate heat by degrees easily. A phlegmatic Headache
if new called Cephalalgia, Cephalaea, or old, called Hemicranaea, must be cured
as other diseases arising from the excrements of the Brain, by general and
particular evacuations of the Brain, and by altering and strengthening, and
discussing the humors gathered, and fetching them forth by secret or manifest
ways opened by Nature or Art. Headache from Narcoticks, especially Wine, or
other things that are offensive to the Btain, or from malignant vapors is cured
by evacuateing these causes and suppressing their strength. If it be from the
French Pox it is strong and not cured but by many and great Evacuations, as I
showed in those Diseases of which Headache is a symptom. But we shall show here
what is to be done chiefly against this symptom of pain by evacuations and
altering medicines, proper to the several Kinds and Causes of Headache.

Remedies to take away the Cause, are either to draw away the blood, and with
that, humors and vapors from the part affected; or the heat; or the humors
upward or downward by the Mouth or Nose, or by sweating, or particularly by the
Skin of the Head.

Blood-letting when plenty and heat causes Headache is appointed to repel, or
pull it from the place affected, and to derive and direct it. We make Revulsion
by opening the Veins remote from the Head, and this must be done at the first
while the blood flows to the part: And it will also prevent an unaccustomed
Headache in plethorick persons to bleed Spring and fall. either in the Arm, or
Foot, or pained side, opening the Vein most apparent, or that called Cephalic
or headvein in the Arm. or that in the great Toe proper against the Headache
called by the same name. In women open the Saphena, especially if the courses
be stopped. In all which you must observe the quantity, in a pure plethory you
must bleed more, in an impure less, with respect to the constitution of the
Body. And if the Disease will give leave, first loosen the Belly. we derive the
blood when much is flown to the part, by the Veins near the Head: First opening
a Vein for Revulsion, after the Flux is stopped, and a new not feared. This may
be done by opening the external jugular Veins in the Neck (as the Arabians
teach and others that speak of the Cure of old Headaches) but for the danger
of stopping them, by reason of their largeness, and swelling from strong
Ligature and Extension of Voice. And the rather, because when they bleed much,
they cause Sterility or Batrenness as Hippocrates says. Therefore it is
better, especially if the disease be in the Forehead to open the Branches of
the Veins in the Temples or Forehead; And because in the opening of them the
Throat must be bound to make the veins appear and drive blood into the Head, it
is better to open the Veins under the Tongue, which are branches of the
internal jugular in the Mouth. Or you may open other branches in the Nostrils.
Or apply Horsleeches to the tip of the Nose, or behind the Ears, or upon the
external jugulars.

Many commend the opening of an Artery when there is strong pulsation and heat,
especially if there be a giddiness called Vertigo, which is done as we showed
in the Forehead, Temples or behind the Ears.

Cupping-Glasses are used to supply the former, or after other bleeding to
advance, because they draw blood, and if scarification be made, evacuate it.
These are to be applied to the sides of the Neck, the Shoulders, Arms, Hips and
Buttocks, beginning above, and so going down, often the same day or the day
following. Scarrifying also afterward if we will make strong attraction. Also
it is good to scarifie between the Thumb and forefinger, especially in a
Vertigo. or in the Wrists. some use it to the Ears.

By Frictions we attract the heat, which are good not only to draw away blood
but humors and vapors which cause pain. These are made in the Arms, Back, and
Feet, beginning above. It is good to comb the Head often, if it be done gently
it causes dissolving of humors, if strongly, attraction of humors to the
superficies of the Head. This is best in old Headaches, or in the declining of
the other. Ligatures or binding of the extremities, revel more powerfully than
frictions or rubbing. Also washing of the body with a hot Decoction of Herbs
good for the Head, draws humors and Vapors from the Head, And asswageth pain as
we shall show.

Glysters are good, and usually before bleeding, because they supple the belly
and take away excrements. and after also, to draw down blood, spirits, and
vapors; if they be sharp, and well applied. And in constant heat they must be
given often, the belly being bound, for the Disease comes or is increased by
excrements retained, which send up vapors.

In a hot cause, especially Fevers, use this. Take Mallows, Violets,
Marshmallows, Beets, Mercury, red Coleworts (which besides their pricking
resist Vapors and Drunkenness) each a bandful; Bettony (proper for the Liver)
half a handful, Violets a pugil, Chamaemel flowers half a pugil, Barley, Bran,
each a pugil; cold seeds half an ounce, Fennel seed a dram: boil and add Honey
of Violets and red Sugar, each an ounce; Juice of Beets or Mercury an ounce and
an half, Cassia an ounce, Oil of Violets two ounces, Butter an ounce: with Salt
make a Clyster.

In other Causes, especially old pains; Take Lilly roots two ounces, the
Emollients, Beets or Mercury, red Coltworts, Pellitory of the Wall, Bettony,
Sage, Hysop, each a handful, flowers of Chamomil, Lavender or Staechas,
Rosemary and Bran, each a pugil; Figs ten, Annis and Fennel seeds, each a dram;
boil them, and add Hiera prica and Diaphaenicon, each two drams; red Sugar and
Honey of Rosemary, each an ounce and an half; juice of Mercury or Beets an
ounce, Oil of Chamomil and Lillies, of each an ounce and an half; with a little
Salt: make a Clyster.

If the pain come from Humors or Vapors from them or evil quality in them, or
if the uncleaness of the Body increase or nourish it, we give diverse purges
such as are for other Diseases of the Head, coming from the same cause,
differing in respect of the cause and constitution; when the cause or nature is
hot, we use gentle and moderate, but in others stronger and hotter, respecting
the Head in all: giving before them Clysters: or letting blood, preparing the
Humor first if need be. And we purge often, if the cause require, as in the
Headache from the French Pox. Thus,

In Choleric Body we prepare before purging: Thus, Take Syrup of Endive two
ounces, syrup of Violets and Sorrel, each an ounce; Succory and Bugloss water,
each four ounces; Vervaine water (which is proper for the Head) two ounces, and
Bettony water an ounce, give it at thrice, and a Tablet of Diarrhodon after
every draught.

In Melancholy, thus: Take syrup of both Bugloses, each an ounce and an half;
syrup of Hart's-tongue and Epithymum, of each an ounce; Bugloss, Vervain, Balm
and Bettony water, each two ounces: take it as the other.

In phlegmatic and old pains, where the heat is not great: Take Honey of Roses,
Oxymel simple and syrup of Maiden hair, each an ounce and an half; syrup of
Hysop and Staechas, each an ounce, Marjoram, Bettony, Vervain, Balm, Hysop and
Sage water, each as much as is fit, give it as the other with a Tablet of
Diamoschum after every draught.

Or this Decoction: Take Fennel roots two ounces, the true Acorus or Calamus an
ounce, Liquorish an ounce and an half, Bettony, Marjoram, Sage, Vervain, each
an handful; Lavender, Staechas and Rosemary flowers, each a pugil; Annis and
Fennel seeds, each a dram; Raysons stoned two ounces: boil them, and add Honey,
then cleanse it, and add Nut-meg and Sugar, give it three or four mornings.

As for purges, if the pain come from a hot humor, blood or choler, they are
as we showed in Fevers and other hot diseases that cause Headache.

Or thus: Take Cassia, Tamarinds, Prunes, of each half an ounce, take it with
Sugar or Whey.

Or thus: Take Cassia six drams, Electuary of juice of Roses two drams,
Diaprunis a dram, syrup of Roses an ounce and an half, with Bugloss and Rose
water: make a Potion.

Or give this Decoction: Take Beet roots green an ounce, Dock roots half an
ounce, Violets two drams, Bugloss flowers a dram, (if fresh two drams,) Cold
seeds, of each two drams; Annis seeds a dram, Prunes and Tamarinds, each six
pair; Polypody six drams, Senna half an ounce: boil them, and to one Dose, add
syrup of Roses an ounce, or six drams of the infusion of Rhubarb, this may be
repeated often.

Or this infusion: Take Rhubarb four scruples, yellow Myrobalans two drams,
Spike half a scruple, bruise them and sprinckle them with a little Wormwood
Wine till they are soft, then infuse them in Whey or Endive and Vervain water,
strain them, and add Diaprunis two drams, syrup of Violets an ounce: give it.

We use this Apozem often in Choleric persons, which tempereth the Humor. Take
roots of Succory, Bugloss, Beets, each an ounce; Endive, Succory, Borage, each
a handful; Mercury half a handful, Cordial flowers, each a pugil; four great
cold seeds, each two drams; Purslane, Lettice and Annis seeds, each a dram; red
Pease a pugil, Raysons stoned and Tamarinds, of each an ounce and an half;
Prunes twelve, Sebestens ten pair, Polypody two ounces, Senna an ounce and an
half, Carthamus seeds an ounce, boil them and add juice of Roses two ounces,
Manna an ounce, with Sugar and Cinnamon: make an Apozem for three mornings.

If he had rather have Pills use those of Assajereth, which are good for
Headache coming from the Stomach, or Aggregative, or sine Quibus, a dram of
either.

In Melancholic persons, when the cause is not so hot, purge as in other
Diseases of the Head caused by Melancholy. Or thus: Take Catholicon half an
ounce, Diaphaenicon two drams, Hamech a dram, take it with Sugar, or an ounce
of syrup Fumitory, or with Whey, or Cock broth.

Or use this Decoction: Take Bugloss roots an ounce, bark of Tamarisk half an
ounce, Bugloss and Scabious flowers, each a pugil; Staechas, french Lavender
half a pugil, Melon seeds a dram and an half, Raysons stoned an ounce, Prunes
ten, Dates five, Polypody six drams, Senna half an ounce, tops of Time two
drams, boil and infuse them, Indian and chebs Myrobalans, each a dram; strain
them, and add syrup of Roses and Peach flowers, each half an ounce with Sugar
and Nutmeg: make a Potion, repeat it if need be.

Mesues syrup of Apples made with black Hellebore, or that with white Hellebore
corrected by Rondeletius is good, an ounce and an half given alone or with
convenient Liquor.

Or this: Take the opening roots steeped in white Wine Vinegar, barks of Capars
and Tamarisk, each six drams; Liquorish an ounce, Bugloss with the roots,
Fumitory, tops of Hops, Eupatorium, by Mesues, called Ageratum, Maidenhair,
Cetrach, Germander, Ground Pine, each a handful; Balm and Elder, each half a
handful; Cordial flowers and Tamarisk, each a pugil; Staechas and Chamomil
flowers, each half a handful; Fennel and Annis seeds, each two drams; Parsley
and Dodder seed, each a dram; Raysons stoned an ounce and an half, Figs and
Prunes, each ten pair, Dates six, Polypody two ounces, Carthamus seeds an
ounce, Senna an ounce and an half, tops of Time and Epithymum, each half an
ounce; white Hellebore a dram or more, Schaenanth two drams: boil them, and add
of Myrobalans a dram and half, add to the straining, juice of sweet Apples half
a pint, with Sugar, make an Apozem for three or four Doses, or boil it to a
Syrup.

Or these Pills: Take Pill Indy two scruples, Aggregative half a dram, with
juice of Fumitory or Balm water, make Pills.

Or these: Take species Hiera without Saffron, a dram and an half, extract of
Polypody, and all the Myrobalanes, each two scruples; Hellebore and Scammony,
each a scruple; Lapis Lazuly prepared half a dram, Oil of Lavender flowers
three drops with syrup of Fumitory, make a Mass, give it from half a dram to a
dram.

If a Cephalalgia, or a long Cephalaea, or Hemicrania, come from phlegm or
waterish humors, they must be purged as other Diseases of the Head mentioned.

Give Pills of Hiera or Allephanginae often, which are good when vapors from
the Stomach offend the Head, or stronger, as Cochy, stinking Pills called
Faetidae, or more temperate, as of Sarcocol or Agarick.

Or these: Take species of Hiera picra two drams, Agarick, Turbith, each a
dram; Troches of Alhandal, Diagridium, Nut-meg, each half a dram; Ginger a
scruple, Sal gem half a scruple, Mastick half a dram, Oil of Cloves and
Lavender flowers, each two drops; with syrup of Staechas, make a Mass, give two
scruples, and repeat them in old Headaches, and add Pills Cochiaee, if they
work not enough.

Or this Powder: Take Turbith two scruples, Diagrydium three grains, Tartar of
white Wine, Gingar and Lavender flowers, of each a scruple; with Sugar give it
in broth.

Or this of Dr. Ruland called Pulvis Diatartar, it is very pleasant: Take Senna
six drams, Crystal of Tartar an ounce, Fennel and Annis seeds, each a dram;
Cinnamon half a dram, Sugar of Roses a dram and an half or two drams, make fine
Powder, give a spoonful or more at a time often.

Or give Tablets of Diacarthamum or Diaphaenicon.

Or this Potion: Take Liquorish six drams, Calamus Aromaticus half an ounce,
Hysop and Marjoram, each half an handful; Staechas and Rosemary flowers, each a
pugil; Figs five pair, Dates three, Annis and Fennel seeds, each a dram; Senna
two drams, Carthamus seeds three drams, boil them, and infuse Agarick a dram,
Ginger a scruple, strain them, and dissolve Diaphaenicon and Electuary Indy
each a dram, make a Potion.

Or this Apozem: Take Liquorish an ounce and an half, Parsley and Grass roots,
each an ounce; Acorus, Orris and Galangal, each half an ounce; Bettony, Sage,
Marjoram, Hysop, Vervam nnd Maiden hair, each a handful; Rosemary, Staechas,
Lavender, Bugloss flowers, each a pugil; Fennel and Annis seeds, of each two
drams; Parsley, Carua and Seseli seeds, each a dram; Piony seeds a dram and an
half, Raysons stoned twelve pair, Figs eight pair, Dates five pair, sweet
Prunes eight, Polypody two ounces, Senna and Carthamus seeds, each an ounce and
an half; Agarick half an ounce, Turbith three drams, boil them, and add Honey
as much as is fit, Cinnamon two drams, Ginger a dram, Cubebs and Nutmeg, each
two drams; make an Apozem for three or four Doses, or a syrup if you please.

There are things purge the Head by the Nose and Mouth, good when phlegm
abounds. And these are best when the Humor was wont to pass that way and is
stopped. Also they are good in Choler and Melancholy pains, but they must be
used after other Evacuations. Those that cause Neesing, cause heaviness of Head
sometimes: if the Headache be from vapors, they presently take it away, as it
does from drunkards, whom it comes upon and takes away Headache. They are thus
made, as in other Head diseases.

A Masticatory to chew: Take Mastick half an ounce, Angelica seeds and Nutmeg,
each a scruple: mix them with Wax or chew them in a clour.

A stronger: Take Mastick two drams, Staphisager and Pellitory roots, each a
dram; long Pepper, Cubebs and Nutmeg, each a scruple, make Powder, and with
Wax, make forms to be chewed.

A Gargarism: Take Orris, Capper and Pellitory roots, each half an ounce; roots
of masterwort two drams, Hysop, Organ, Sage, Time, each a handful, Staechas and
Rosemary flowers, each a pugil; Mustard seed half an ounce, Nettle seed an
ounce, Nutmeg two drams, boil them in Wine and Water, in a pint and half
strained, dissolve Oxymel of Squils two ounces.

An Errhine to snuff up: Take juice of Marjoram an ounce and an half, juice of
Brooklime, Beets and Vinegar of Squils, each an ounce; Manna half an ounce.

Or this Liniment for the Nostrils: Take Scammony a dram, Gith seeds, Pellitory
and Sowbread roots, each a scruple; Gall of any Fish five drops, Oxymel of
Squils: make an Ointment.

Or put in this Pessary to the Nose: Take the Medicine last aforesaid, add
Orobus flowers to thicken it, or bruised Marjoram, or a Beet root, the inward
being taken off, or if you will neese the inward part of Hellebore, like pith,
or the Powder of it.

It is most convenient to give a Vomit, when Headache comes from vapors, rising
from the Stomach, as in drunkness, for it presently takes away the Cause.
Therefore if nature does not of herself, give a vomit, as we showed in other
diseases of the Head, Giddiness and Drunkenness. But in other cases, when the
Head suffers from its self, it is not good to vomit rashly, while the Head
aches violently. Because by the strong motion and straining to vomit the Head
will be shaken and blood spirits and humors sent to it, which will increase the
pain. But a vomit may sometimes be allowed out of the fit to hinder increase of
Excrements.

Sweating is good when Headache comes from watery Excrements after general
purging, because the Excrements are drawn forth thereby, therefore in old
Cephalaeas and in those pains from the French Pox they are given, to Cure the
disease and Symptom, by way of Decoction with slender Diet, for some time, as
we shall show. But it is not good in a hot cause or Cephalalgia, because sweat
cannot be raised without great heat which will increase pain.

In the extremity of Headache, the last remedy is to Evacuate by the Skin of
the Head (for so the whole body may be cleansed) by applying things thereto,
that make great Evacuations, (those that purge only the remainder shall be
mentioned in the altering Medicines. But these are good in old disperate
Head-achs to draw the Excrements from the Membranes of the Brain and let them
out. These are very hot attracters of humors that consume them also. Lixivium
or Lie and Ointments: and Cupping-glasses or things that inflame, or make the
Head red, or burning Vesicatories that blister: or Cauteries that cause an
Eschar actually or potentially. They are applied behind in the Neck, such as we
mentioned in other diseases of the Head.

Cutting or Trepanning in the Head, that is, taking out a piece of the Skul, to
make way for the humor, is also a last remedy for old and desperate Headaches.

Medicines to alter are given, as in other diseases of the Head, according to
the humor predominating cold or hot, and strengthening, and that beat down
vapors if the pain come from the stomach, and allay Choler. These are given in
Diet as well as Medicine.

First take heed of things that by scent hurt the Head, as Wine, Mustard seed
and the like, which in a Phlegmatic case, would be good, and Wine also, which
cherishes the Head and Cures the hurt it caused, hence the drunkards take a
Hair with the old Dog, and till they drink Wine again are not well, or eat with
it to repress vapors. And Milk although being corrupted it causes Headache,
yet thus drunk it abates it.

We are sometimes urged to give Stupefactives in great pain of the Head,
especially if they cannot sleep and in a hot distemper. As syrup of Poppies or
other gentle Narcoticks, as Powder Diapapaveris. In other cases we give not
Narcoticks, or sleeping Medicines, because as we showed, when their strength is
spent, they leave a Headache behind them, except well corrected, as Treacle or
Mithtidate, or Diacodium, or Requies Galeni, but in a very small quantity; All
this may be also done by a large drinking of strong Wine which has also a
Narcotick quality.

The Remedies to be applied outwardly are of three sorts, Coolers, Anodynes or
Removers of Pain, or Healers. If it come from a hot cause, or Cephalalgia, give
Coolers, and at first Binders, when the flowing of blood is to the Head, or is
feared. and after mix moistening things therewith to abate the heat. Anodynes
which with moderate heat not too dry cherish the part, or by causing sleep or
astonishment, keep the pain from being felt; when the pain is great and at the
first, to hinder the Defluxion may be given, not so well alone, as with cold
mixture. Hot things which dry and discuss humors and thin vapors, may be given
in the declining of a hot Headache to take away the remainder, and fix the
weakened part, first mixed with the aforesaid, then alone. With these the Head
is washed from an high, or Stuphes, or Clouts, or Spunges are put therein, and
applied to the Forehead and Temples, or the parts anointed therewith, or they
are applied in Bags, or Caps, wet or dry, as follows.

When we will cool and repel together, we apply Vinegar of Roses thus. Take
Rose water four onnces, Rose-vinegar two ounces, Oil of Roses an ounce: mix
them, if you will astringe more, add more Vinegar.

It is better, Thus with Juyces. Take Rose water three ounces, Rose-vinegar an
ounce, juice of Osiers and Plantane, ^^ch an ounce; with the white of an Egg to
make the moisture stick longer. if it come from Drunkenness, add juice of Ivy.
apply it.

Or use this Decoction more repelling and cooling. Take Plantane and Osier
leaves, Vine and Nightshade, each a handful; boil them, to six ounces strained,
add juice of Plantane and Housleek each an ounce an half; Vinegar of Roses an
ounce: mix them.

Anoint the Forehead and Temples with repelling Ointments as the Cerote or
white Ointment of Galen or that of Roses.

Or, Take Oil of Roses, juice of Osiers, Vinegar of Roses, whites of Eggs, each
equal parts: beat them a good while and apply them.

Or this. Take Oil of Myrtles two ounces, of Roses one ounce, juice of sour
Pomegranates, Vinegar of Roses, each an ounce; Oil of Olives a dram, Myrtle,
Barberry and Coriander seed, each half a dram; with Turpentine of the Larch
tree: beat them, apply it as the other.

Or this Emplaster. Take juice of Willow and Vine leaves, or of Plantane in the
winter and Housleek each an an ounce and an half; Vinegar an ounce, with Line
seed flour, and the white of an Eg, make two Plasters for both the Temples.

Galen makes a Frontal or Plaster for the Forehead of red Roses steept in
Wine, which is red and astringent, or in Vinegar.

Fresh and green Vine leaves and Willows applied do the same, and better if
beaten or bruised or steept as the Roses.

If you will repel and ease pain also. Take Rose water three ounces, Plantane
water two ounces, juice of Willows, or Plantane an ounce and an half, Vinegar
and Poppy flowers, two ounces, Oil of Roses and Violets, each six drams; whites
of Eggs and Mucilage of Fleabane seed, each an ounce: beat them well.

Or use this Cap or Frontal. Take red Roses two drams Violets and
Water Lillies, each a dram; Coriander seed two drams, Myrrle seed a dram, rinds
of Mandrakes half a dram, red Sanders a dram and an half, red Coral a dram:
make a Powder.

To Cool and Moisten, we use this. Take Lettice, Water Lillies and Nightshade
water, each two ounces; Vinenegar of Roses (to pierce and repel) half an ounce:
apply it to the Head.

Apply Nightshade also and Purslane bruised.

If you intend to allay pain at the same time. Take Lettice and Nightshade
water, each two ounces; the mucilage of Marshmallows and Mallow seeds, each
half an ounce; Camphire half a scruple: mix them.

Or this Decoction. Take Marshmallow roots, Lettice and Nightshade, each a
handful; Housleek half a handful, Roses, Violets, and Water Lillies, each a
pugil; Barley half a pugil, Line seed half an ounce: boil them in Water.

Or this Epithem to assuage pain. Take Rose water two ounces, Henbane water an
ounce, Vinegar half an ounce, the Emulsion of fifteen Peach kernels made with
the Liquors mentioned, Oil of Roses half an ounce.

Or anoint with this Anodynd. Take Oil of Roses and Violets, each an ounce; Oil
of Poppy seeds, Lettice and Chamaemel, each half an ounce; Vinegar of Roses two
drams, Milk an ounce and an half, mix them with the white of an Egg.

This is stronger. Take Oil of Violets and Roses, each an ounce and an half;
Oil of Poppy seeds half an ounce, juice of Housleek and Nightshade, each an
ounce; Vinegar half an ounce: boil them till the juice is consumed, add white
and red Sanders rinds of Mandrakes, each half a dram; Lettice and Purslane
seed, each a dram; the Mucilage of Fleabane seed an ounce, Camphire dissolved
in a little Aqua vitae a scruple: with Wax make an Ointment.

Populeon is a good Ointment against pain.

Or this Cataplasm. Take Peach kernels and sweet Almonds, each two ounces; beat
them, add Starch an ounce, meal of Fleabane seed half an ounce, Henbane seeds
two drams, Oil of Roses and Violets, each an ounce; with Milk make a Cataplasm.

These following are only against pain.

An Anodine Epithem. Milk warm from the Cow, with white of an Egg and any
Mucilage, beat them well and apply.

Or this Decoction. Take the broth of a Sheep or Calves head, and boil in it
Mallows a handful, Chamaemel flowers a pugil, Lineseed an ounce and an half,
Fleabane and white Poppy seed, each half an ounce; boil and apply them.

Or these Liniments which may be also dropped into the Ears. Take Oil of Violets
and Willows, each half an ounce; Oil of Poppy seeds two drams, anoint the
Forehead and Temples.

Another. Take Oil of Apple-bearing Nightshade an ounce, mucilage of
Fleabaneseed, cream of Milk half an ounce, mix them.

Of Opium these. Take Aqua vitae an ounce, Opium a scruple, Saffron half a
scruple: make a Liniment for the Temples by gentle boiling.

Or thus. Take cream of Milk an ounce, Opium half a dram, Saffron six grains,
burnt Ivory and Starch each a dram; mix them, and anoint, or add Oil of Violets
or Water Lillies.

The leaves of Henbane, Mandrakes and Poppies applied to the Head, take away
pain by stupefaction, especially if first bruised. Some roast Henbane in the
Embers in a Clout and apply it. But Rondoletius says it will cause Madness.

If we will discuss, and add Coolers and Anodynes, use these. Take Marshmallow
roots an ounce, of Willow, Plantane, Bettony, each a handful; flowers of
Chamaemel, Elder and Dill, each half a pugil; Senna three drams, Dill seed two
drams: boil them in Wine and Water.

Or this Plaster that discusseth a little. Take Violets, and Water Lillies,
each half a pugil; white Poppy and Lettice seed a dram: powder them, and add
Barley meal an ounce, with Vinegar make a Plaster,

Some make Frontals of the Conserves of Violets and Water Lillies with other
things.

Or thus. Take Roses, Violets, Dill, Chamomel flowers, each a pugil; Juniper
berries half a pugil: boil them in Milk, beat them, add Bean flour an ounce,
flour of white Poppy seed two drams, Lettice seed a dram, Oil of Roses and
Chamomel, each an ounce and an half: make a Fronral.

Dill any ways applied to the Head discusseth, takes away pain, and causes
sleep.

This discusseth more. Take Oil of Dill an ounce, Oil of Lillies and
Wall-flowers, each half an ounce; juice of Vervain an ounce, the infusion of
Marygold flowers in Aqua vitae half an ounce; boil away the Juyces, add Capons
grease an ounce, and with a little Wax make a Liniment.

Chiefly the Ointment of Alablaster discusseth, and is good in all Headaches
without a Fever, whether they be of themselves or from some other part by
consent, Thus made. Take juice of sweet Chamomil four ounces, juice of Roses
and Marshmallow roots, each two ounces; juice of Rue and Bettony, each an ounce
and an half; Sallet Oil a pint and an half, the sinest sifted Alablaster three
ounces: steep, and then boil them, and with Wax make an Ointment: to which some
add Bramble berries, whites of Eggs, and Rue, and the juice of Vervain.

The Ointment of Dialthaea is also good.

And the Plaster of Frogs or of Vigo applied to the shaved head is good if
continued.

This Powder for a Cap does assuage pain and discuss. Take Coriander seed
prepared three drams, Dill seed two drams, Lettice seed, Couchineel, red Roses
and Dill, each a dram, all the Sanders half a dram, Nutmeg two scruples: make a
Powder.

Another that discusseth and strengthens. Take Coriander seeds prepared half
an ounce, Dill seed a dram and an half, Chamomel, Melilot, Dill, Lavendar
flowers, each a dram, Marjoram, Balm, Rosemary flowers, each half a dram,
yellow Sanders a dram, Cloves half a dram.

These Amulets to hang about the body are thought proper, as a wreath or
Garland of Vervain.

Or Ivy upon a Drunkards head, or a Snakes Skin, or the stone Ophites.

Some things are snuffed into the Nose to alter, as Sweets not too strong, as
Camphire dissolved in Vinegar and Rose water, and smell too.

Or thus. Take Camphire half a dram, Oil of Storax a dram and an half, which
Dioscorides commends, mix them: with a little Labdanum, make a Ball to smell
too.

Or thus. Take red Roses and Violets, each a dram; Dill and Chamomel flowers,
each half a dram, Coriander seeds prepared a dram, Lettice seed half a dram,
all the Sanders a scruple: with Camphire half a scruple, make a Powder, tie it
in a Clout, and dip it in Rose water and Vinegar to smell to.

Or take the Fume of this Decoction hot. Take Willows, Nightshade, Lettice,
each a handful; flowers of Roses, Violets, Dill, Water Lillies, Melilot, each a
pugil; Lettice seed two drams, Poppy seed a dram, Basil seed half a dram: boil
them, and add Vinegar and Water of Roses.

Or snuff up Vinegar and Rose water.

Or stupefie with this Ointment. Take Oil of Water Lillies an ounce, Opium and
Camphire each six grains.

This is good to be dropped into the Ears also, and the other cooling Anodine
(and hot Ointments mentioned when you will discuss) And you may mix a little Oil
of Safiron, and Oil of Dill, and drop it into the Ears.

Washing and stroaking downward, divert from the Head, cause sleep, and abate
pain, and if the Headache be hot, do cool it. It is made with leaves of
Willows' Lettice, Violets, Briony water, Lillies, with Mallows and Chamomel
flowers, with Head herbs, as Bettony, Calaminth, Southernwood, and sometimes
Narcoticks, as the heads of Poppies boiled in Water with a little Wine or
Capital Lee.

Also it is good to wash the Face with Rose water and Vinegar.

Headache coming from the ill shape of the Head, The cure of a pain coming from
the ill fashion of the Head.
as absence of a suture, as the Arrow-suture or rocky constitution of the Skull
about that suture or seam called Sagital is incurarable, and if you will
attempt by reason of the great pain, use the Trepan to take out a piece of the
Skul there.

CHAP. IV. Of Pain in the Eyes.
The Kinds,
WE comprehend under the name of Pain in the Eyes; all Diseases in the balls
and corners of the Eyes, and in the inside of the Eyelids, and we leave other
pains outwardly in the Eybrows to another place. When pain is in the said parts
it either has no other accident, or is with other accidents, as chiefly
Redness, Tumor, or Inflammation in the Eye or great corner, or there is a
bladder in the Eye, or unevenness in the Eyelids, or a corroding or
excoriation, or ulcer, or wound in the Eye or Eyelids. These kinds of pain are
according to their accidents.

Itching in sound people coming from Wind or Watching, Itching, Pricking, or
contraction of the Eye alone without other sign.
will cause redness if it be rubbed. Also Prickings are in the Eye alone without
any other hurt, or with a Headache called Cephalalgia, where the pain comes to
the roots of the Eyes. Also some have a twitching pain in their Eyes after
sleep, before their Eyes are well opened, which hinders the motion of the Eyes.

When the pain is with Redness and without Tumor or Inflammation, A false
Ophthalmy or pain in the Eye.
it is called a false Ophthalmy, and it is red all over, or in part, or in the
inside only of the Eylids Blood-shot, but the veins are not so swelled as in a
true Ophthalmy; nor is there so great burning, but a cutting pain, or itching
in the corners or the edges of the Eybrows, and it called Xenophthalmia.
Xenophthalmy is a kind of false Ophthalmy.
In this the Eyes are commonly moist, and the tears are first thin, and then
thick. If they flow many and cause another Disease, it is called Epiphora,
Epiphora is a kind of Pseudophthalmy. Taraxis or Bleardeyedness.
especially if pain be in the Eylids, or Taraxis or moist Blear-eyedness, in
which at length is thick matter, and the corners are foul, and the Eyelids
cling together, especially in sleep, and they cannot be opened til they are
cleansed. And there is sand in the corners, and it is called the Sclerophthalmy.
Sclerophthalmy a kind of Epiphora.
Sometimes the Eyelids swell outwardly, and fall and rise. When the Eyes are
red and dry it is called Xerophthalmy and is either new or of long continuance,
Xerophthalmy, is a kind of false Ophthalmy.
especially an Epiphory in which the Ey-lids are only red and wet and the Eye
little offended. This is usual in old men and drunkards, and scarce to be cured
in them, nor is it troublsome except it increase and bring another infirmity by
Itching and shooting, these are called Lippi or blear-eyed. If Eyes be red and
hotter only then ordinary, without pain, as when the body is hot it fall often
out we shall speak of that in Deformity, by reason of the ill-favored sight of
the Ey-lids turned out.

It is called a true Ophthalmy, when it is with a Tumor and redness, A true
Ophthalmy.
over all the white, and the Veins appear: when the Tumor is great it is called
Chymosis. I have known it as big as my fist. In a true Ophthalmy there is great
burning, Chymosis a sort of Ophthalmy.
so that the Eyes cannot be opened, but a true inflammation is seldom in the
Eyelids.

Agilops is in the great corner of the Eye with tumor and redness, Agilops.
and pain of the Head, Temples and parts adjacent, and beating in the Eye. In
this there is a red push in the middle, and a pricking pain, and I have seen
their Ey-lids and Cheek inflamed therewith.

When there is a bladder or blister in the white of the Eye, The blisters in
the Eyes.
it is red, and the part round about it. And if it be in the black of the Eye,
it is not painful, but clear and shining called Phlyctaena. And there are other
filmes and spots of that part that rather hinder the sight then cause pain.

Sometimes there is a sense of roughness in the side of the Ey-lids, Roughness
in the Eyes.
especially when they are moved, and then there is comcommonly somewhat in the
Eye, and though it be out again, yet the roughness remains.

Sometimes in the corners of the Eyes there is a cutting and itching pain with
Excoriation and sense of roughness. Scabs of the Eyes.
Dioscorides mentions it, it is often in the side of the Ey-lids, and there is
a scab and it is called Psorophthalmia, Dry Lippitude called Xerophthalmia.
but some call it a dry blearing, or Lippitude, or Xerophthalmia

There is often a pricking and itching pain in the great corner of the Eye,
Ulcers in the great corner of the Eyes.
after an Egilops turned into an impostum and broken. Hence comes a simple
Ulcer, A malignant Ulcer in the great corner of the Eye.
that has concocted matter, or a creeping and malignant called Phagedaenicum,
and the matter is sometimes Concocted and sometimes crude, sometimes it eats
through the lower Ey-lid, and makes a Tumor in the Skin, which being broken,
there is an Ulcer there also full of the same matter. And when it enlarged, it
is a Fistula called Lacrymalis or weeping. In this stinking matter flows
through the next Nostril, The weeping Fistula in the great corner of the Eye.
and tears are still in the Eyes. Sometimes the little flesh of that Eye being
consumed by the long malignity of the Ulcer, there is a little hole in the bone
that weeps perpetually, and I have seen some of that thin bone with stinking
matter fall forth. Of this we shall speak in deformity.

There is sometimes a pain in the bal of the Eye with an Ulcer, Ulcers in the
ball of the Eye.
either superficial blood red and inflamed, or deep following Inflammations,
that were Impostums, Epicauma and Condyloma, what.
this because it is filthy and mattery, is called Epicauma, and if the Lips be
hard it is called Condyloma. This healed leaves a scar, and when it gets into
the hollow of the Eye, it causes the humors to fall out sometimes, within four
days after the Inflammation, and we have seen the Crystalline humor upon a man's
beard.

If there be a prick or cut in the Eye there is pain, with redness, Worms in
the Eyes.
weeping and sometimes true Inflammation. And if the wound pierce through the
ball of the Eye, the humors of the Eye fall out and the Eye sinkes in. Also if
any sharp thing fall into the Eye, the inside of the Eylids may be wounded with
pain and redness, as we showed in Excoriation or rawness.

The Causes.
The Cause of all pain in any part of the Eye, is a disease in some sensible
part of the Eye. For the outward skin of the Eye, is very sensible under the
Ey-lids, and there are many thick Muscles about the Eye, besides which, the
ball of the Eye, made of the horney Tunicle and other Membranes and full of
humors, (as we observe in the pricking of a Cataract without pain) there is no
sense, except it be without in the Circumference, by reason of the Tunicle
called Adnata for whose cause pain, goes to the Ball of the Eye. The diseases
that cause pain in these parts, are either distemper or afflux of a bloody
waterish humor, or solution of continuity manifest, or hidden.

A simple hot distemper that yet has caused no flux, A hot cold or dry
distemper causes itching or pricking in the Eye.
causes rather heat and itching then pain in the Eyes, but when pain comes
there is a flux presently, as we may see in hot Diseases when they rub their
Eyes, their Nose falls a bleeding. Also a cold distemper from cold Wind,
especially, and the like causes itching of the Eyes by biting. Also too much
dryness makes itching and roughness in the Eyes, Dryness causes roughness of
of the Eye.
and therefore they who watch long either in or out of a disease, have itching
Eyes, which they rubb, except heaviness of Eyes, when sleep is at hand cause
this itching.

If there be a hot distemper in the Eyes and Lids with a Flux of bloody humor,
and redness, A hot distemper with a Flux of blood, is the cause of an Ophthalmy
not true.
in regard the Inflammation is not true, the Ophthalmy will be false and not so
strong as a true, and it will be moist from the tears, proceeding from the
sensibility of the part, or dry when they are wanting, from the dryness of the
brain, or it is called dry and hard, if the matter be slymy and produce some
thing which glueth the Ey-lids together.

But if in this Flux of blood if it flow not only into the Veins but Tunicles
and Ey-lids and cause a true Inflammation, the Ophthalmy is called true,
Inflammation of the Eye causes a true Ophthalmy.
with greater accidents and stronger pain, with Headache sometimes by reason of
the Connection and consent of the Pericranium with the adnate Tunicle: and the
pain is greater when the blood flows into the Muscles of the Eyes, as into the
horney Tunicle or under it. And the pain is greater, as the blood is hotter,
Inflammation of the great corner of the Eye is the cause of Agilopy.
more Chollerick or sharp. When this false into the great corner of the Eye
inflaming it, there follows an Egilops. The cause of this flux of blood into
the Eyes, is Plethory or abundance, or thinness, sharpness, or heat. When it is
from plenty, it is called an Ophthalmy, from plenitude. Moreover if the Veins
of the Eyes be disposed to receive this flux, by reason of their largness
having been formerly filled therewith, the disposition of the Eyes is the
helping cause. Also too much light which they cannot endure, who have an
Ophthalmy, they scarce open their Eyes and shut them soon. This is caused also
from hot Air, and cold wind that nips the Eyes, or Smoke, or things fallen into
them, for the Eyes cannot be safely touched by any thing, especially that is
rough or sharp, as Pouders dust or flies. And crooked hairs in the Ey-lids
cause the same. Also hot burning things, as Pepper, or sharp things, as Salt
getting into the Eyes. Oil and all unctious things burn, if they get into the
Eyes. Great hurts or wounds cause a true and false Ophthalmy. And weeping
either makes an Ophthalmy or increases it, if the tears be sharp and hot. All
these causes trouble in the Eyes, if they cause itching, and makes men rub,
this rubbing may cause a new Flux.

A simple waterish humor, or mixed with Flgem falling into the Eyes or Lids
causes no great pain, if it be near to the Nature of water, but continual flux
of tears and sometimes outward swelling of the Ey-lids, of this in the Chapter
of Tears overflowing. But if the humor be serous and partly salt it causes
some itching. A Flux of water to the Eye, causes itching and Epiphora.
If it be sharp and hot then there is an Epiphora, that is a pain redness,
itching and burning and weeping in one or both Eyes, (for one suffers often
with the other) This Epiphora, if it be very painful, causes a flux of blood
and an Ophthalmy. Abundance of this waterish humor in the heat within or
without the Skul, is the material cause of this defluxion, and many Excrements.
The efficient cause that moves the defluxion into this or that part, comes
from the things that provoke the Eye either to natural tears or preternatural
Tumors, of this we shall spoke in the causes of blood-shot and tears.

All these are helped by the disposition of the Eyes to receive them, when they
are made weak and loose by former Fluxes, hence it is that when this disease
has long continued and these causes met, they have always red and wet
Ey-lids, and sometimes ulcers and little pain but itching,

Some say pains of the Eyes may come from wind, but in regard wind can no way
get into the Eyes, nor stay there, and if it were there, it cannot dilate the
thick ball of the Eye, or cause pain being the part is insensible, I cannot
allow it. But without the ball of the Eye, if vapors get between the Muscles,
there is a looseness and a twinkling rather then pain, Vapors cause Convulsion,
or Contraction of the Eyes.
if they be not many, but if they be many, there may be a short twiching pain
before the Eyes are opened, after sleep. As we showed in the windy Cramp.

Solution of continuity causes diverse pains in the Eye. Twitching of the Eye
causes itching roughness Ophthalmy and Epiphora.
If it be hidden and only a twiching, not yet seperating any thing in the Eye
it causes itching and roughness, and if it continue and increase pain, it
causes Ophthalmy and Epiphora. If the solution be manifest and the adnate
Tunicle separated from the Eye, Solution of contituity, if manifest, (...) the
cause of bladders, roughness, Ulcers, Fistulaes and wounds in the Eyes.
it fills the part with water and causes a Bladder. If the Tunicle be divided
in the corners or the Ey-brows, there is Corrosion, Scabs or Ulcers. If it be
deep it causes a simple or a hollow Ulcer, or Fistula, or Wound. All these
have diverse causes. Sometimes they come from outward hurts. As strong and hot
rubbing, from itching causes the Phlyctaenae and Excoriations of the Eyes.
Things falling in, if they be rough, may not only exasperate the Eye, but take
of the Skin. Things that are sharp and burn also, do not only inflame, but take
of the Skin and cause Phlyctaenae and Erosions, as the juice of the wild
Cowcumber. It often comes from strong Medicines that are used to take away
spots, and all these Erosions may turn to true Ulcers. If things that prick or
cut fall into the Eye, they may both disturb and wound it, as we see in the
couching of a Cataract, there is Inflammation. Also Tears, and waterish humors
that wet and provoke the Ey, do at length corrode and cause Scabs in the
Ey-brows, and Ulcers, as also diseases that went before, cause solution of
continuity. As Phlyctaenae broaken leave excoriation behind them. A true
Ophthalmy turns into an Impostume, when the Inflammation will not discuss, but
supurate, which broken, there is sometimes a deep Ulcer. Also an Aegilops after
the flegmon breaks, turns to an Ulcer, either simple or Malignant, as the blood
is that caused the Inflammation, or hollow, if the matter be sharp and long
kept, before the Impostume opened, corroding within. And lastly if the Lips by
continuance of the Ulcer be hard, or grown over with a Skin, there is a Fistula
that descends into the Nose. And when the Caruncle, Rhyas, is the consuming of
the little bitt of flesh in the Eye.
or bit of flesh in the Eye is consumed by sharp matter or Medicines, which
they used to heal the Ulcer; the disease called Rhyas follows. And the thin
bone adjoining is eaten away and lost.

The Cure.
The Cure and Prognostic is according to the diverse Causes of these pains.

A Simple hot distemper without a Flux, Prognoflicks in all Eye sores.
that causes itching and sometimes pricking, if it come in a Cephalalgia, and
the pain of the Head reach to the roots of the Eyes, must be Cured as the
Headache. In these heat and redness and largness of Veins, in a critical day
foretell bleeding at the Nose. But if the Eyes itch or be red from any other
cause besides these diseases, as heat, violent motion, wind or watching, these
causes must be removed, and the Air amended, and they are easily the cured.

A heaviness of Eyes and Lids after sleep, such as wrings them, and suffers
them not to be easily opened foretells heaviness of head and abundance of
Vapors and Humors, these must be prevented.

If a false Ophthalmy come from a Flux of blood there is little danger, except
it turn true. But if Inflammation of the Eyes follow, the true Ophthalmy is
more dangerous, especially if a great Tumor cover the black of the Eye. That is
worst which suppura^^^ and turns into an Imposthume, and so into an Ulcer,
which if deep there is danger of loosing the Eye, also a not suppurated
Ophthalmy true or false if long of continuance, darkneth the Pupil, or leaves a
spot, and causes dimness or blindness: But the Inflammation made in the
outward corner of the Eye in an Aegilops, goes sometimes soon away, but
neglected suppurateth and proves a lasting and perverse Ulcer, which turns to
a Fistula and is scarce cured.

An Epiphora also is very stubborn from a waterish humor, and continues many
days or months, sometimes a whole Winter, and in old Persons all their lives.

I have known Phlyctaenae or Pearls coming of outward causes that were clear
and not red, to go away of themselves, and they which are red and painful, and
break, leave excoriation behind them.

Excoriations and Scabs by reason of the moistness of the part, are not soon
cured, and are worse if they ulcerate, if it turn mattery or callous, it is
stubborn, and sometimes incurable, piercing the Eye, and putting it out, or
covering it with a Callous or Scar.

When a Wound of the Eye pierces the Cornea or horney Tunicle the humors fall
out and the Eye sinks in and is blind. An outward or superficial wound turns to
an Ulcer, hard or easy to be cured. A puncture causes Inflammation if it be
not looked unto.

As for the Cure. when any of these Diseases will not away of themselves, All
kinds of Eye-sores as Itching, Puncture, Ophthalmy true or false, Aegilops,
Roughness, Scabs, Ulcers, Wounds, Fistulae's are cured by taking away the Cause.
then have at the Causes, which either are external as hard bodies that get
into the Eye, or hairs of the Eyebrows, or Air, or Light, which molesteth. Or
also from things taken in, or from motion extraordinary of mind or body. or
from filth or tears. If any of these Causes procure an Ophthalmy, or
exulceration, or the like, or increase them, they must be removed, or amended,
or prevented. But if an Ophthalmy come from a Defluxion of blood, or an
Epiphora from a Defluxion of flegm^ or if the Eyes formerly weak have new
Defluxions, then we must evacuate by opening a Vein or Artery, or cutting or
burning of holes, or by Cupping, by Leeches, Frictions, or the like, or by
Stool, Nose, Mouth, by Vomitting, Sweat, Urin, or derive the humor another way,
and so consume it by things given or applied, and stop the flux to the Eyes by
outward applications. But the cause of the Disease it self must be cured by
Topics to the Eye according to its condition. All which shall be done as
follows by the order declared being appropriated to the Causes and to the
Disease.

Things that get into the Eye, if they be thin, come out again of themselves,
if they be more solid, they get out by the motion of the Eyes and Lids and
tears that come from thence to wash them away. But if they stick, they must be
taken out by Art.

This is done easiest when they are in the corners of the Eyes, and may be seen
when the Eye is opened or the Eyelids lifted up, And then make a tent of Linen
and the like, and wipe them out.

But if they lie out of sight, or having been seen, return upon touching, or
the motion of the Eye, then they must be taken out with smooth and slippery
things put into the Eye, and by putting one Eyelid over the other, these are
best when pouderous, as little small Pibbles or precious stones, as the Swallow
stone which is made of Mamor, or the Jasperstone, or the Crayfish stones called
Crab's-eyes, which seem to be made for that very purpose, to be put into the
Eye, the one side being hollow or concave for the Ball of the Eye, the other
unequal for the Eyelid.

Rhasis says this may be better done with a little Pensil anointed with
Turpentine, drawn through the Eye under the lid, that they may stick unto it,
and so be brought forth, but this way will presently fail by the watering of the
Eye.

Sneesing or often blowing of the Nose are good to shake out, or at least to
remove things in the Eye, they appear to be strongly driven through the Nose,
by which the Eyes are moved, and the tears provoked to wash them out.

For which Washing other things are good that provoke tears, as of often motion
of the Eye, when the Eyelids are kept open, this drives things out.

When crooked hair in the Eyebrows prick the Eyes by reason of some fire that
singed or dried them, or the like, they must be cut off, and then they will
grow better, if the pores be not in fault, and then if they be, they must be
constantly cut, or pulled out, or the Eyebrows burnt, which being not to be done
without pain, and seeing it is not decent to want hair upon the Eyebrows, they
may be set right with the infusion of Gum traganth, Mastick, or the like, as
some do their Mustachoes to keep them out of their mouth, and which some take
for an Ornament.

Hot Air, because it is naught for red inflamed Eyes must be tempered, or
avoided, or changed, for cold Air which is good in this case: but very cold
Air, especially with Wind, is hurtful in all Diseases of the Eyes. And Smoaks,
especially of new quenched Lime which is sharp and pricks the Eyes, and very
strong scents as Oil of Spike, of stinking things or Jakes, all these are to be
avoided in sore Eyes.

Also Brightness from flame especially, which cannot be endured, or from light
at which the Patient is unwilling to look. And therefore they ought to have a
black Veil before the Eye if other things are not applied to keep away light.

Meats and Drinks must be avoided, that inflame the body and make the Face and
Eyes red, as strong Wine, Onyons, Mustard and Radishes. And it is good in an
Epiphora to keep a slender Diet, and abstain from Suppers.

Also it is hurtful to sore Eyes to move them much, to look too steadfast upon
any thing, or to read or write much, or to move the Head too much, or hang down
the Head: therefore let him stand upright, and sleep with his Face upward, on
the contrary side. Also it is naught to rub the Eye, from which they hardly
abstain.

Also to watch long, or lament, to cause crying and shedding tears; these all
must be abstained from.

And from things that are apt to get in, as dust flies. And take heed what
midicines are used, lest they be too sharp.

Also remove other Impediments as glewing of the the Eyelids together which is
painful when they are opened, the glue therefore slime or sand must be gently
taken off with the hand, and Rose water if need be, in which some Mucilage or
white of an Egg is.

Other filth that is in the Eyebrows before the Pupil especially to hinder the
sight, must be gently thrust to the corners, and there taken out.

When tears flow, the less you wipe your Eyes if they be sore, the less you will
offend them, but if you must dry your Eyes, do it gently by pressing not wiping.

Blood-letting is good against sore Eyes if the pain comes from flux of blood
thither, as in an Ophthalmy and Aegilops and in an Ulcer or Wound, when we fear
a new flux of blood by reason of pain, especially if there be Inflammation, and
Plethory or fullness, then they must bleed much, and often in the same or diverse
veins. the Shoulder-vein in the Arm is opened for Revulsion or that which
appears most, on the same side the Eye is sore while blood flows to the Eye
according to the Arabians. also in the Thumb or Foot; some open that between
the Shoulder-blades. When we intend to fetch the blood and derive it from the
part where it is, we open nearer veins, as in the Forehead, Temples, or under
the Tongue. Or some will in the fore part of head. And it is good to take blood
from the Nose any ways.

As we showed in Headache opening of an Artery is excellent against an Opthalmy
or great old pain of the Eyes, or an Epiphora which has continued long: for
when the serous humor descends by the outward Veins which causes weeping there
is a certain Cure.

Paracentesis or a Seton or opening of the skin of the Head at the root of the
hinder part, and so putting a skein of Silk or Hair through it to keep it open,
is the last Remedy in an Epiphora to divert the flux.

In a long flux whether Epiphora, or Ophthalmy, or the other, it is an
excellent way to burn or cut an Issue in the Neck opposite against the sore
Eye, or in the middle of the Nape, or in the coronal suture of the Head.

Cupping-Glasses are good in all fluxes, whether blood or water in the Eyes,
alone or with Scarification, especially if it be blood, they must be applied to
the sides of the Neck upon the Shoulders and Arms, and repeated often if need
require, for they revel and derive mightily. Some highly esteem of Scarifying
of the Ears on that side the Eye is sore,

I should like of better the making an Issue in that part of the Ear which the
Greeks call (...) the Latins Hircus or Goat, and the same is excellent in an
old Toothache.

Leeches applied in Headache are as good as other bleeding.

And Friction of the body to revell.

Also to loosen the Belly with Clysters or Suppositories to cleanse the Guts
before bleeding, or with Laxatives is good. These revell also if often given,
they may be made more mollifying or sharper as you please as we showed.

Also light purging to take away the binding of the Belly which hurts the
Eyes, and to take away the first excrements, must be given in all cases, as in
Inflammation lest stinking vapors should offend, but we must take heed of hot
things in them, without cool to temper them. These are also good in a false
Ophthalmy which has no inflammation but heat and redness, in which stronger
may be used, especially in the progress of the Disease when tears begin to
molest. Examples of these are in choleric Diseases and in Headache from a hot
cause, but add to them always things proper for the Eyes.

Prepare first thus. Take syrup of Violets an ounce, syrup of Water Lillies and
of red Roses dired, each half an ounce; with Vervain, Rose and Plantane water
make a Julep, drink it often.

Then purge thus. Take syrup of Roses an ounce and an hal, syrup of Violets an
ounce, Diagridium two or three grains: with Endive and Rose water drink it.

Or, Take syrup of Roses solutive with the Infusion of Senna (which is thought
proper for the Eyes) an ounce and an half: drink it with Whey.

Or, Take Cassia an ounce, Electuary of juice of Roses two drams: with Sugar
make a Bolus, or give it in Bugloss water.

Or, Take Rhubarb four scruples, yellow Myrobolans a dram: sprinkle them with
Wine to take out the strength, then infuse them in Rose and Violet water:
strain them and add syrup of Roses an ounce.

Or this Decoction. Take Fennel roots half an ounce, Cordial flowers a pugil,
Fennel seeds half a dram, Violet seeds a dram, Tamarinds an ounce, Prunes six,
yellow Myrobalans three drams, Senna two drams: boil and dissolve syrup of
Roses or Violets half an ounce.

The Pill Sine quibus (proper for the Eye) does the same in half a dram.

If water flow to the Eyes and tears fall, we use stronger purges, and hotter,
especially in Epiphora or Ophthalmy when the humor is not so hot, and in Ulcers
with Fluxes, as in the weeping Fistula: they are almost the same prescribed in
melancholic and slegmatick Headache.

A Preparative. Take Honey of Roses an ounce, syrup of Bettony and Maidenhair
each half an ounce, with Celondine, Bugloss, and Succory water, and a little
Sanders give it, and repeat it.

Or When a Flux is more than heat. Take syrup of Hysop an ounce, of Staechas
and Bettony each half an ounce; with Fennel, Vervain, and Eyebright water, make
a Potion.

Then purge with cooling Purges while redness and heat remain, but if Flux and
tears are most, use things to purge phlegm, and if the Disease be old, Epiphora
or Ophthalmy, or Ulcer, repeat them often.

These are the best Pills of Fumitory, Sine quibus or Lucis majores a dram of
either, with Eyebright, Vervain, or Fennel water, or syrup of Staechas. Or
Pilcochie or Aggregative may be given.

Or Diacarthamum, Diaphoenicon, or our Diacaryon and other purgers of phlegm and
water with proper waters for the Eyes.

Or this Decoction. Take Fennel roots an ounce and half, roots of Calamus and
Liquorish, each an ounce, green Fennel, Eyebright, Vervain, Celondine,
Fumitory, each a handful; Rue half a handful, flowers of Rosemary, Stoechas,
and Roses, each a pugil; Fennel seeds and Siler montane, each two drams; Senna
two ounces and an half; Carthamus seeds bruised two ounces: boil, and infuse in
it hot Agarick three drams, Rhuharb two drams (this is used in watery fluxes (
Spikenard half a scruple, strain them, and with Cinnamon and Sugar give it
three mornings.

If this purges not sufficiently, give Pills.

We have showed fit Purges for the Eyes in the Cure of slegmatick humors in the
Brain, producing weakness of sight.

And how the Head and Stomach is after to be strengthened.

In a hot Cause it is not good to purge by the mouth or Nose, for that will
inflame them, and cause bleeding and inflammation of the Eyes, nor sneesing
which makes the Eyes red and weeping. In other cases when Tears are without
Heat, or from Ulcers, things to chew called Masticatories, or Gargle called
Gargarisms, draw Humors to the Mouth, by the Nose, from the Eyes: And so the
Head is purged, and the Flux stopped, after other Purgings. These may be done
by Errhines, or things to snuff, but that by Sneesing, they disturb the Eyes,
for tears flow Naturally and preternaturally from the Eyes, through the Nose,
and it is good to help it.

Sore Eyes are not to be cleansed by Vomir, for by straining, the Blood flows to
the Eyes, and Tears are produced, and the Cause is increased or renewed, and
the Pain also.

Sweating is not good in hot Diseases of the Eyes, because the Eyes would be
inflamed more by it, But if there be Ulcers without heat, and tears then
Sweating is good to dry the body and consume Excrements, and it may be often
with sparing Diet.

In the declining of an Ophthalmy Baths are good to consume the relics, and
wine, though both are naught at first while the Eyes are hot.

It is good to provoke Urin to take away the cause and waterish humors.
Therefore in Fistulaes of the Eyes, we give drinks that dry and provoke Urin.

Thus: Tansey, red Coleworts, Agrimony, male Fearn, Dropwort, burnet, Ceterach,
each a handful, of Myrrh half a handful, roots of Lquorish an ounce, red Pease
two pugils, boil them, take it for five draughts, sweeten it with Sugar, give
it for the weeping Fistula of the Eye.

We use things to consume the humors in the Head, in an Epiphera and Ulcer in
the Eye. These dry and strengthen the Head inwardly and outwardly, such as we
prescribed in diseases of the Head. Some are good to be looked upon, and to be
carried about, as in an Ophthalmy it is good to look upon an Agate and to carey
a Dock root dig'd up in the Moon increasing, and to put the stone found in the
Gall of an Ox into the Nose, as some think.

We stop the humor flowing to the Eyes, whether it be blood or water by the
passages, and by coolers to strike them away, in an Ophthalmy or beginning of
an Aegilops and in an Epiphora, and in other causes when a Flux is feared. They
are applied near to, or upon the Eye, being first closed.

To the parts near which humors flow we apply these on that side the pain is,
over all from one Ear to another, if both Eyes suffer. Sometimes down upon the
Cheeks. They are good in an Ophthalmy to assuage the force of the blood,
applied upon the jugulars. And they are such as astring and dry and cool, and
they are safer near then upon the Eye.

Epithems made of a cloth strained, from convenient Liquor or a Sponge spueezed
that more get into the Eye are good in a true Ophthalmy, or in great heat. They
repercuss more, when they are actually cold; but very cold as Snow must not be
used, for it may hurt, and as I knew, make blind. They are mentioned in hot
diseases of the Head. Only leave out Oils and Vinegar which hurt the Eyes.
These may be applied to the Forehead or jugilares, and mixed with very cold
things.

An Epithem of juice of Plantane with the white of an Egg is good.

Emplasters, because they stick long and fall not into the Eye, may be applied
to the said places. And renewed every third day if need be. As in other
Defluxions.

Or thus: Take Mastick, Frankincense, Varnish, each two drams; Starch or finer
Flour a dram, with the white of an Egg and infusion of Gum Traganth: make a
Plaster.

Another: Take Pitch and Oil of Myrtles, Varnish, Frankincense: make a Plaster,
this is good to the nape also.

Or this Astringent: Take Bole half an ounce, Dragons blood, conserve of Sloes,
each two drams; Pomegranate peels and Galls, each a dram; make a Powder, and
with the white of an Egg and red Vinegar: make Emplasters for the Forehead and
Temples.

A better: Take Bole, burnt Chalk, Boodstone, each two drams; Vitriol half a
dram, Asphaltum, Frankincense, Mastick, Varnish, each a dram and an half;
Dragons blood, Conserve of Sloes, Acacia, Pitch, each a dram; flowers and peels
of Pomegranats, Galls, Cypres nuts, each half a dram; Powder them, and add
Starch half an ounce, with infusion of Gum Traganth, the yolk of an Egg and
Vinegar and Oil of Roses: make a mixture.

Or a Plaster of Mastick, or that for the Rupture.

Some stop Fluxes with a scruple of Opium in one Plaster, and if there be
Headache we allow it to help, and for Poppy seed instead of white Poppy seeds,
we mix syrup of Poppies.

The ordinary defensative is of Bole, Vinegar and whites of Eggs, this applied
behind the Ears, is good also in an Ophthalmy.

Of these with Oils, you may make Ointments to anoint about the Eye, especially
if it swel they must be thick, that they may stick and not fall into the Eye,
and used at nights when the Eyes are shut.

Such may be made of juyces without Pouders, least when the Ointments are dry
they fall into the Eyes: Take juice of Plantane two ounces, red Vinegar an
ounce, white Vitriol a scruple, Dragons blood, Acacia, Hypocistis or conserve
of Sloes, Labdanum, each half a dram; dissolve them, and add white of an Egg
and Oil of Roses and a little Turpentine.

Sometimes they are applied upon the closed Eye and Lids, for these are too
strong to be put into the Eyes, and Astringents which would make Eyes rough,
which ought to be smooth.

Or thus: Take fat Bole three drams, Barley flowers an ounce and an half,
infusion of Gum Traganth in Myrtle or Rose water an ounce, Camphire half a
dram, with Cream and juice of Plantane, to keep it moist, make an Emplaster,
apply it to the closed Eye.

Coolers do the same, as we shall show for stopping of blood at the first and
after in stopping of Tears.

Topics or Medicines applied to the Eye. Or put in to it, Topics in all kind
of sore Eyes.
are either Simple waters, or mixed with others, called Collyria are in form of
Troches to be at hand for use: and they may be dropped in, injected or put into
the great corner of the Eye or upon the Ey-lids. Some have a Silver and Bone
Pen, which they roll in wet Pouders and put into the Eye, then they close the
Ey-lids and draw it through leaving the Powder behind. Sometimes we blow very
fine Pouders into the Eye, ground upon a smooth stone, or a little Plaster upon
the great corner and the Nose. And others by way of Fomentation. these are
diverse in respect of the Cause and distemper, if from heat, cold, drouth, or in
respect of the Flux of blood in an Ophthalmy, or Aegilops, or of water, as in
an Epiphora, or in respect of wounds, as in a Phlyctaena, Excoriation, Ulcer,
Fistula.

A simply hot distemper without Flux that causes only itching, The Cure of
itching or pricking in the Eye.
is cured by preventing a Flux with Cold and astringent things.

If they itch, and wax red from cold, add sharp things. These shall be
mentioned in Ophthalmy and Epiphora.

If they itch, or are rough from dryness of the Ey-lids use Anodynes, and the
Vapors of hot water into the Eye.

If the Eyes be heavy after Sleep, The Cure of Contraction in the Eye.
or contracted, open them by degrees and rub with a warm hand.

If an Ophthalmy, true or false, The Cure of true and false Ophthalmy.
be with a Flux of blood, with or without Inflammation, then use Topics, first
to allay pain and stop Flux, then to dry and after to degest, and last of all
to discuss the relics. Thus,

You must take away pain at first, not only because it is troublesome, but
because it will bring a Flux, and also cool and stop and allay the heat; use
this or that as the pain or Flux most requires.

Thus: Apply the white of a new laid Egg, beat to a froath, to take away pain
by it self, or with others. Or that liquor that sweats out of a rosting Egg, or
the yolk alone or both together roasted. The white boiled hard and beaten with
Rose water, and applied like a Pultis does best take away pain and heat.

And all sorts of Milk, especialy Women's, are Anodyne.

Also Fresh Cheese, does the same.

Or Veal new washed and applied, is a brave Emperical Medicine.

Or the Papp of sweet Apples roasted, some think rotten Apples best. The
Mandrake Apples, or love Apples do the same against pain, but to strike back
the Flux use sharp Apples and Pears or Quinces, as the former.

Housleek, Purslane, Nightshade, Henban, Mandrakes green, and bruised or heated
in a cloth, take away pain, when applied. If you will bind, apply Plantane,
Bramble and Myrtle leaves beaten or boiled. It is good to add Barley meal or
bran to them, all to make them stick.

Rose water is in great use to cool, and if we will astringe, take the water of
the green cups of Roses or of Plantane, Self-heal or Myrtle, or if you will
abate pain use water of Purslane, Nightshade, or Strawberries, or the water of
hard whites of Eggs.

When we will take away pain and heat together.

First: Take the white of an Egg, with Rose water and Milk, beat them. And if
you use the Decoction of white Poppies, it is better.

The second: Take Fenugreek seeds half an ounce, white Poppy seeds two drams:
boil in Rose water, and add the white of an Egg.

The third: Take crumbs of Bread steept in Rose water or Milk; apply it or drop
the juice of it.

The fourth, Use sweet Apples, so boiled. Or Bread and Apples.

The Chirurgions apply a Pill of Elder steept in Rose water.

Another Anodyne: Take Mucilage of Fleabane, Quinces, Fenugreek, Gum Arabic,
or Traganth, dissolve it with Rose water and Milk.

If pain be great: Take Mucilage of Fleabane seed and Fenugreek, each an ounce;
infusion of Gum Traganth, made in Rose water, whites of Eggs, each half an
ounce; Camphire five grains, Opium two grains, Saffron a grain.

Or this Emplaster: Take crumbs of bread steept in Milk, Pap of sweet roasted
Apples and Barley meal, each an ounce and an half; Mucilage of seeds of
Fleabane and Fenugreek, each an ounce; two yolks of Eggs, Camphire half a dram,
Saffron three grains, Opium two grains, Oil of Roses, sweet Butter, or Cream
six drams, the Unctious things are to keep the Medicines from being dry) make a
Cataplasam and put to the closed Eye. Some apply it to the Forehead to ease
pain, or mix cooling juyces, as of Purslane, Nightshade, if heat be great.

Or this Anodyne of Dioscorides: Take the yolk of an Egg roasted and with a
little Saffron and Oil of Roses, apply it to allay pain.

Or this: Take juice of Chamomil and Melilot, each half an ounce; Woman's Milk
and whites of Eggs, each two ounces; Rose water an ounce, beat them, and wet a
clout for the eyes, two grains of Opium added, will allay pain.

Or this Decoction to foment: Take flowers of Mallows, Violets and Roses, each
a pugil; Chamomil and Melilot flowers, each half a pugil; Fenugreek seeed an
ounce, Linseed and Fleabane seed, each two drams; white Poppy seed a dram, boil
them.

An Anodyne Cataplasme: Take Chamomil and Melilot flowers, each a pugil;
Fenugreek seeds an ounce, boil them, and strain, add three ounces of crumbs of
Bread, two yolks of Eggs, and a scruple of Saffron with a little Milk; make a
Cataplasme:

When you desire rather to repel and astring then cool: Take Rose cup water two
ounces, juice of Plantane an ounce, whites of Eggs half an ounce, mix them, the
juice of Bramble berries added, does repel also, if dried.

An astringent Decoction: Take Plantane, dried red Roses, each a dram; flowers
of Pomegranats two drams, boil them in Rose and Plantane water.

When you will astring and also take away pain: Take Plantane, Purslane, (or
Housleek in Winter) Nightshade, each half a handful; Rose and Violets, each
half a pugil; Fleabane and white Poppy seed, each two drams; boil them in
Water, and two drams of Mandrake roots, will allay the pain sooner.

Or this Cataplasme: Take Pap of sower Apples or of Pares or Quinces, boiled in
Rose and Plantane water, or the astringent Decoction mentioned, or Wine as
Galen prescribes, make a Cataplasm.

Or this: Take the Pap of boiled Quinces, or the other two ounces, Barley
flowers an ounce, Sumach and Pomegranate peels, each a dram; with the juice of
Purslane, Housleek and Plantane: make a Cataplasm.

Sometimes ad dryers, to the said repellers and Anodynes to consume moisture,
and when the heat is decreased and the disease, increase the quantity, and add
digesters.

Eye-waters are madee of white Ceruss, thus: Take Ceruss washed with Rose water
two drams, Plantane (or Myrtle water, if you will repel, or Women's Milk, if you
will assuage pain) two ounces, whites of Eggs half an ounce, mix and apply them.

Or: Take washed Ceruss two drams, Mucilage of Fleabane and Quince seed, or
Line, or Fenugreek six drams with Rose water and Milk.

The white Troches of Ceruss to make eye waters, are thus made: Take Ceruss
washed half an ounce, Starch two drams, Gum Traganth, infused in Rose water half
a dram: make Troches. If pain be great, add half a scruple of Opium, dissolve
these in Water and Milk, when you have occasion.

Add Sarcocol when you will digest, as in the Troches of Rhasis: Take washed
Ceruss ten drams, Sarcocol steept in Woman's Milk three drams, Gum Traganth a
dram, with Rose water, make Troches, with a scruple of Opium, if you please.

Sometimes add Camphire: As, Take washed Ceruss two drams, Starch a dram,
Mucilage of Fleabane, Fenugreek or Lin seed, each half an ounce; Sarcocal
steept in Milk a dram, Camphire a scruple, Rose water two ounces, Milk and
whites of Eggs, of each half an ounce; add six grains of Opium, or Decoction of
Poppy, or Henbane, three or four grains of Saffron, in the increase of the
Disease. It Is counted a Correcter of Opium, and will make the water yellowish.

Tutty is proper for the eye, and makes a good water, it is burnt and washed for
that purpose: or thus, wash it in cold water, Powder it, and steep it in juice
of Quinces or in a Quince, and in a clout bake the Quince, and then infuse it
in white Wine Vinegar, then dry and Powder it, and put it into Rose water.
After Water, Make it to fine Powder for your use.

It is thus used. Take Tutty prepared half a dram, Rose water an ounce, whites
of Eggs beaten half an ounce.

With Camphire thus. Take Tutty prepared a dram, Camphire four grains,
Plantane, Rose and Fennel water, each an ounce: mix them. a scruple of Sumach
will make it stronger, half a dram of Sugar candy is good in the height of the
Disease.

Galen makes a white eye-water with Ceruss thus. Take Tutty washed four drams,
Ceruss a dram and an half; Starch and Gum Traganth, each a dram; with
Rainwater make an Eye-water; add a dram of Opium in pains.

Or thus. Take Tutty prepared a dram and an half, Ceruss water a dram, Starch
half a dram, mucilage of Faenugreek seeds half an ounce, Fennel water an ounce,
Rose water two ounces, with half a scruple of Camphire.

In great pain a yellow Eye-water is thus made. Take Tutty burnt and washed in
woman's milk half an ounce, Ceruss wa sht an ounce, Gum Traganth a dram, Saffron
two drams, Opium half a dram, with Rainwater mix them, use it with the white
of an Egg.

The Ointment of Tutty or Nihili are good for the Eyes also.

Or thus. Take Butter, or Hogs grease, or Oil of Roses, well washed, or new,
with white Wax or Ointment of Roses or of Alablaster an ounce, Tutty prepared a
dram and an half, Pompholyx half a dram, mix them, Camphire a scruple, Antimony
half a scruple.

When we will digest as in the beginning of the declination use these.

The yellow powder of Sarcocol of Rhasis. Take Sarcocol five drams, Aloes washed
in Rose water a dram, Tragacanth half a dram, Opium half a scruple, and Saffron
six grains.

Rose water, or Milk, or both having Frankincense quenched in them, is good for
the same.

Or this Eye-water. Take Frankincense half a dram, Sarcocol a dram and an half,
Aloes half a dram, Saffron half a scruple, Mucilage of Faenugreek seeds half an
ounce, Eyebright and Rose water, each an ounce and an half, with Fennel water
in the declining of the Disease.

The Eye-water of Rhasis digests also and ripens. Take Frankincense five drams,
Sarcocol and Ammoniacum, each two drams and an half; Saffron a dram, with juice
of Fennel apply it.

When we will dry more if there be pain, use this of Galen. Take Frankincense
and Tutty, each five drams; Ceruss ten drams, Gum Traganth and Opium, each a
dram and an half: make it with Rainwater, sometimes he ads Pompholyx.

To dry and digest. Take Sarcocol a dram and an half, Tutty prepared a dram,
Aloes a scruple, Myrrh a scruple, Mucilage of Foenugreek seed half an ounce,
Vervain water two ounces, Fennnel water an ounce.

If heat remain. Take Sarcocol four drams, Tutty prepared two drams, Aloes a
dram, Sugar candy a dram and an half, Camphire four grains, Saffron thrree
grains, Rose water four ounces: mix them and shake often.

In red Itching Eyes. Take Tutty prepared half a scruple, Aloes and Sugar, each
five drams, Camphire two grains, white Wine and Fennel water, each two ounces:
mix them.

To discuss the remainder in the declination use

This Fomentation. Take Eyebright and Pennyroyal, each a handful; Chamomel,
Melilot flowers, and red Roses, and Oat chaff, each a pugil: Foenugreek seed
two drams, Fennel seed a dram: boil them, add a little Wine, dip Clouts and
apply to the Eyes. The Fume of the Decoction is also good.

Or this Cataplasin. Take Southernwood a handful, Chamomel flowers a pugil,
Foenugreek seeds an ounce, mucilage of Foenugreek seeds an ounce, Fennel seeds
a dram, Cummin seeds half a dram: boil and bruise them, add Bean flower an
ounce, mucilage of Foenugreek and Line seeds each half a dram; Saffron a
scruple, with Milk make a Cataplasm.

To strengthen the Eye, use astringent Wine and Fennel water last of all.

A roasted Egg or Apple laid hot to the Eyes takes out the remaining redness.

If the Inflammation Imposthumeth it must be ripened with a Plaster upon the
Eye thus. Take Marshmallows a handful, Chamomel flowers a pugil: boil them in
Milk, beat and add Barley meal and Foenugreek seeds, each an ounce; with Oil of
Chamomel make a Cataplasm.

The Eye-water of Rhasis and Ointment of Tutty does the seem.

When the Imposthume is broken, cure the Wound as follows.

If an Aegilops come from choleric blood in the great corner of the Eye, The
Cure of an Aegilops.
you must apply things used in the Ophthalmy if there be an Inflammation that
repel and take away pain, and then discuss the Tumor with eyewaters there
mentioned which dry and digest, before it come to suppuration, which is sooner
when there is little or no inflammation, and the Tumor came by degrees.

A Discusser. Take Plantane, Mallows, Chamomel with the flowers: bruise them
and with kernels of old Walnuts, make a Cataplasm for the corner of the eye. if
you add a little Salt and Hen-dung it will be better.

The herb Aegilops bruised is good also according to Dioscorides.

Others use Emplaster Diapalma, Divinum, and Ceroniacum.

If the Tumor imposthumate it must be presently opened, lest the matter
retained corrode and cause a hollow Ulcer. Then Cure the Ulcer as we shall show
in Ulcers.

If there be an Epiphora from a waterish humor falling upon the eyelids
chiefly, The Cure of Epiphora.
with redness, Heat, and Itching and pain, we must at the first stop the flux,
and abate pain and itching with medicines mentioned in Ophthalmy, and with
those we must mix afterward things that dry up moisture, which is plentiful in
this case, and use eye-waters of Ceruss and Tutty there mentioned.

When Epiphora lasts long, and there is a weeping, itching and redness
without burning we must use stronger Dryers.

As against Itching. Take Ant^^ony prepared half a dram, Rose and Fennel water
each two ounces; use it strained.

A Powder. Take Lapis Calaminaris a scruple, Tutty prepared a dram, Coral and
rinds of Myrobalans torrefied or parched, each a scruple; make a Powder for the
Eye.

Or this. Take Antimony prepared half a dram, Tutty prepared a dram, Coral
three drams, Pearl two scruples, the crystal humor of the Eyes of boiled fishes
half a scruple: make a fine Powder.

An eye-water of Boodstone. Take Blood-stones, Antimony washed, each a dram;
Tutty prepared two drams, Lapis Calaminaris a scruple, Aloes a dram, Camphire a
scruple, burnt Stones of Myrobalans half a dram, Pomegranatewine two ounces,
Rose water four ounces.

To digest also. Take Antimony washed, Tutty prepared, each a dram; Myrrh,
Aloes, each a scruple; Saffron half a scruple: dissolve them in Fennel and
Eyebright water with a little Wine,

Use Fumes also of such things as dry without biting or sharpness, as of
Frankincense, Pitch, and the like, but be wary.

A Fume of boiled Salt, dries well, without any biting.

Then are stronger drying eye-waters of sharp Juyces to be used, when the
Epiphora is stubborn, and itcheth much, which is helped with sharp things which
exasperate pain in other Diseases.

As a little white Vitriol dissolved in Rose water, it is good in Itching, and
Redness, and Heat, the Germans call this Augstein, some apply a little of it in
Inflammations, the Chemists use a drop of Oil of Vitriol in Water, others the
Salt of white Vitriol in Water.

Another. Take white Vitriol half a scruple or twelve grains, Tutty prepared
half a dram, whites of Eggs hard four, in a Clout bruise them, adding by degrees
Rose water four ounces: make Philtration, use this Water cold to the eyes.

Another. Take white Vitriol half an ounce, whites of Eggs fifteen, water a
pint: mix and boil them, then in a Glass, add Camphire tied in a clout one dram.

Or thus. Take white Vitriol two grains, Camphire four grains, Tutty prepared
half a scruple, white Pompholyx six grains, Rose water an ounce, Fennel water
an ounce: make an Eye-water.

Or: Take white Vitriol two drams, Camphire half a dram, Tutty prepared one
ounce, Aloes a dram, Sugar candy two drams: make a Powder, mix it with Rose,
Fennel, Vervain, Celondine water, and a little Wine.

If you fear burning add Narcoticks: as, Take white Vitriol, Tutty each a dram;
Nutmeg half a dram, Sugar half an ounce, white Wine two ounces, Cel ondine
water a pint: boil, strain, and keep them for your use.

Or thus. Take white Vitriol half a dram, Camphire a dram, Tutty prepared two
drams, Ginger, Cloves, each half a dram; powder them, and add old white Wine in
which a Gad of Steel was quenched an ounce, Rose water, Fennel, and Celondine
water each two ounces: boil or steep, and then strain and keep them for your
use.

An Eye-pouder. Take white Vitriol half a scruple, Camphire a scruple, Tutty
two drams, Pompholix, Ceruss, Lapis Calaminaris, Coral, Mother of Pearl, rinds
of yellow Myrobalans each half a dram; Aloes, Myrrh, each a scruple; Sugar
candy a dram, Ginger, Cloves, each a scruple: make a Powder, and put a little
thereof into the Eye.

An experienced Ointment. Take Verdegrece twelve grains, Camphire a dram, Tutty
prepared half an ounce, fresh Butter with Rose water boiled a little, six
drams: mix them for an Ointment, put as much as a Pease in the corner of the
Eye. and anoint the Ey-lids. This is a singular experiment against Epiphora and
Itching.

A Verdegreece water very excellent. Take a Barbers Basin and anoint it with
Honey, and turn it with the mouth downward upon Sheeps Dung for fourteen days,
and keep ripe Bramble berries in a Glass close stopped in a Horse Dunghill, after
fourteen days wash the Basin with the Bramble berries, and strain the Berries,
and mix with the Liquor a little Camphire and white Vitriol.

Another. Take a Basin, put therein six ounces of Bramble berries, Salt two
ounces, one above the other in rows, keep them in a Celler three weeks, then
strain the Liquor from them, and let it settle til the Salt be at the bottom,
and pour it off, and do the same the second time til no Salt remain, put this
Water into a Tinn Vessel that it may be sweet kept for your use.

If the tunicle of the eye called Adnata separated from the Cornea raise a
Blister full of Water, The Cure of the Bladder in the Eye.
whence comes also pain and redness, the pain must be abated, the humor stopped,
and the Flux dried, as in Epiphora, and by the medicines mentioned in
Ophthalmy. If it break and leave a Corrosion, it must be cured as a Corrosion,
with medicines that dry without biting, mentioned in Ophthalmy and Epiphora,
and such as we shall show in Ulcers.

If after the tunicle of the Eye is taken off, The cure of roughness, and
taking off the Tunicle of the Eye.
there follow a roughness of the eyelids, and there be also redness, heat, and
pain, we use the same Remedies mentioned in Ophthalmy, then we dry strongly if
it cause no pain, with things mentioned in Ophthalmy increased, and shall be
mentioned in Ulcers. Or with these.

Tutty prepared with juice of Quinces and Vinegar and laid in Powder upon the
eyelids, cures the Scabs and Roughness.

Or this Powder. Take Tutty prepared a dram, Eggshels steept in Vinegar half a
dram; Cuttle bone a scruple: make a Powder.

A third Powder. Take Tutty prepared a dram, Pumice stone half a dram, Coral
burnt and washed a dram: make a Powder.

An Ointment. Take Tutty prepared, Acacia, each a dram; Boodstone and
Antimony, each half a dram; mix them with Gum Traganth, or Honey, or Pomatum:
anoint the Eyelids.

Another: Take Tutty prepared, Ceruss washed, Marchasites quenched in Vinegar,
each a dram; Hypocistis, Frankincense and Antimony, each half a dram; burnt
Ivory, Pumice stone and Cuttle bone, each a scruple; Powder them.

After, use sharp Medicines.

The Remedy of Dioscorides. Take Juice of Onions and burnt Ivory equal
proportions.

Another: Take the Gall of a Tench, or other Fish, and Cuttle-bone equal parts.

Dioscorides uses the Milk of Figs, but because it ulcerateth, Tutty and other
Driers must be added.

Use also the Medicines mentioned in Epiphora made of Vitriol and Verdegreece.

Sometimes the Scab is taken away with a Rag or rough Leaves til the blood
comes and then we use Driers afterward.

If a true Ulcer follows excoriation, The cure of an ulcer in the Eye.
or be left in an Ophthalmy after an Imposthume, then first cleanse, and after
dry, and make a Scar.

Use gentle Clensers, if the Ulcer be not foul, and stronger, as Causticks if
foul, or the Lips hard, such as as we showed in films of the eye and weakness
of Sight.

The gentle are such. Take Goats or Woman's milk an ounce, Sugar candy a dram
and an half, Myrrh a scruple.

Or: Take Honey water distilled an ounce, Sugar candy half a dram, Lizards dung
half a scruple.

Water distilled from Turpentine is good.

A strong Clenser and Healer. Take Turpentine half a dram, a yolk of an Egg,
beat them, and add Plantan and Rose water.

If you need stronger, use those mentioned in a Fistula of the Eye.

After all those use Driers mentioned in Epiphora, or the Ointments to the Eyes
and Eyelids.

A white drying Medicine. Take Ceruss washed in Plantane water a dram and an
half, Starch a dram, white Coral and Hearts horn burnt and washed, each half a
dram; the mucilage of Comphrey half an ounce, with the juice of the Grinding of
the Stone Galactides, with Rose water: mix them.

A red drying Ointment: Take juice of Hypociflis, Dragons blood, each half a
dram; Aloes a scruple, Myrrh half a scruple, bark of Frankincense half a dram,
infusion of Gum Traganth in Plantane water half an ounce, the juice of
Boodstone, ground with water of Horstaile, as much as is fitting.

A black drying Eye-water: Take the soot of burnt Pitch as much as a Hazel-nut,
and Oil as much, mix them with the yolk of an Egg. This Dioscorides approves
against corroding of the corners of the Eyes.

Or: Take soot of burnt Pitch and Turpentine as formerly and Acacia, each half
a dram; the white of an Egg beaten half an ounce, with syrup of dried Roses:
mix them.

Another Eyewater: Take Sarcocol, Frankincense, each half a dram; Mirrh, Aloes,
Lycium, each a scruple; Tutty prepared half a dram, Antimony a scruple, mix
them Poudered with Honey of Roses.

A stronger: Take Tutty prepared a dram, Antimony a scruple, Brass, Lead,
Coral, Hearts-horn, all burnt and washed with Horse-tail water, each half a
dram, Sugar two scruples, mix them, with the white of a hard Egg.

Rhasis his Eye water of Lead, good in suppuration after Inflammation and in an
Ulcer: Take burnt and washed Lead, Antimony, Pompholyx washed, burnt Brass, Gum
Arabic, Traganth, each three drams and an half; Opium half a scruple and six
grains, Powder them, and use them in Rain water.

Eleiser, or the Eye water of Rhasis, good when we fear the Pupil will come
forth, after an Inflammation and Ulcer: Take Antimony and Boodstone, each
five drams; Acacia a dram and an half, Aloes half a dram, mix them with juice
of Quinces.

Rhasis his Eye-water, called Polycrestum, that makes flesh in Ulcers, and
keeps the pupil from coming forth and cleanses scars: Take Tutty, Pompholyx,
Ceruss washed, Antimony, Frankincense, each a dram; Mirrh half a dram, Sarcocol
two scruples six grains, Cinnabar, Aloes, Opium, each half a dram.

An Ulcer after an Impostume in an Aegilops, The Cure of an ulcer in the corner
of the Eyes.
is to be cleansed and dried, as we showed in the Ulcers of the Eye, choosing
the strongest meaus, because the water and filth still gathers to the part.

This is done well by a Lixivium, to wash or squirt into it, though it come out
at the Nose, any Lixivium or Lie made of Ashes or burnt bones, will do it,
using stronger or weaker, as you may know by the sliminess of it.

Also use Urin used in the same manner.

A stronger Lixivium: Take Lixivium a pint and half, Rose-vinegar half an
ounce, Pomgranate flowers and Galls, each half an ounce; Rue half a handful,
boil and use them.

Another: Take Lixivium half a pint, Alum half a dram, white Vitriol a
scruple, these must be moderated, as you find occasion.

A drying cleansing Decoction: Take roots of Snakweed, Tormentil, Moulin dried,
each half an ounce; Agrimony a handful, Rue, Chamomil, each half a handful; an
old Nut kernel, Pomegranate flowers and Galls, each half an ounce, boil them in
red Wine, add a little red Vinegar.

A clensing Ointment: Take Aloes a dram, Myrrh half a dram, Honey a dram, Gall
and Saffron, each half a scruple; with Turpentine: make an Ointment.

Another: Take juice of Plantane and Agrimony, each an ounce; juice of Rue, red
Vinegar and Honey, each half an ounce; Oil of Roses an ounce, boil them thick,
and with a little Turpentine, make an Ointment.

An Ointment to heal, a cleansed Ulcer: Take Antimony, Lead, burnt and washed,
Tutty, Litharge, each a dram; burnt Alum two scruples, Verdugreece half a
scruple, Boodstone a dram, Dragons blood, Aloes, dissolved in Vinegar, each
half a dram; round Birthwort two scruples, burnt Ivory and Coral burnt, each a
scruple; with Honey and Turpentine: make an Ointment.

Or thus: Take filings of Iron a dram, and burnt Chalcities half a dram, burnt
Lead and Antimony, each two scruples; with Butter and white Wax: make an
Ointment.

A good Plaster to Cure the Ulcer: Take Bole a dram and an half, Dragons blood,
Mummy, Acacia, Hypocistu, Frankincense, Mastick, each half a dram; Acron cups,
round Birth-wort, Gall and Cypress nuts, each two scruples; with Ising-glass,
infused in Vinegar: make a Plaster: apply a little Plaster to the corner of the
Eye.

If there be a Fistula that weeps always, The Cure of the weeping Fistula.
then take of the Callus with that part of the bone that is foul, and then fill
up the Cavity with flesh, with as little scar as may be.

Aegyptiacum takes away a Callus, put in often with a Tent. Or other Ointments
of Verdigreece, or a little qualified Aqua fortis, or sublimate water boiled,
or sublimate it self put in, and the like, as hereafter.

I have used my Caustic, which causes no pain and it has caused an Eschar.
But an actual Cautery does it sooner, if the bone be foul. Which you may know
by opening the flesh with your Lancet. It must thus be burnt, first defend the
Eye with a Linen cloth dipped in whites of Eggs, and Rose water, and with a
silver spoon, and then conveigh a red hot Iron with a round head, through an
Iron quil, to the part, once or twice, til the Eschar falls off, use Mucilages
with yolks of Eggs and Butter.

Then increase Flesh: As, Take Birth-wort roots, Orris and Frankincense bark,
each a dram and an half; Myrrh, Mastick, Sarcocol, Aloes, Lapis Calammaris,
each a dram, with Honey and a little Verdigreece: make an Ointment.

I have seen in this Disease, being old and above a years continuance, that a
piece of the bone, with the stinking flesh has fallen off, of it self, into
the Nostrils and neither tears, nor matter, has often come forth at the Eye.
But through the Nose and the part has been healed up.

If the Eye be hurt from a stroke or wound, you must presently use things to
stop blood, dryers and healers. The blood of a Pidgeon, or Hen, or Turtle, put
into the Eye stops bleeding.

And this: The Cure of Wounds in the Eyes.
grind Brim-stone with Milk, put it into the Eye.

Or: Take the red juice of Boodstone ground with Milk an ounce, the white of
an Egg beaten half an ounce, juice of Hypericon a dram, Frankincense half a
dram, add a little Opium, if then pained.

Then: Take the white of an Egg beaten, the Mucilage of Comfrey roots, each
half an ounce, Ceruss and Tutty washed in Plantane water, each half a dram;
Antimony a scruple, water of St. John's Wort and Steeled water, of each an ounce.

Then Cure the Ulcer, as we showed in Ulcers.

CHAP. V. Of the Pain of the Ears.
The Kinds.
THe Kinds of inward pains in the Ears are from the diversity of the propriety,
as there is any thing in them or not, we speak not here of outward pains.

Sometimes there is only an itching in the Ear, Itching of the Ears.
such as the finger or an Ear picker can scarce allay.

Sometimes there is a pricking pain and beating, A pricking, beating, shooting
and burning in the Ears.
more or less, with burning, and pain on that side of the Head, and it is
either increased or not, with things put into the Ear.

In these pains there is a Disease sometimes apparent, as redness to the whole
Ear, or more inward to be seen by the light: or Exulceration. Often blood,
matter, flows out, of it self, or by pressing the lower part. We have seen
water come forth in abundance, as in a Girl after a fall, first blood, then
water with pain, and after blood and water, and then death followed, after a
few days sleep. Sometimes worms come forth. Sometimes pain is deep without these
signs.

The Causes.
The Membranes only are sensible, The place affected.
which are about the Cavities and the pain is from them, either from the
Membrane most outward, before the drum, or from that within, behind the drum,
being dilated by the Nerve; and then the pain is with noise. The Diseases that
cause this pain in the Membranes are cold or hot distemper or Malignant, a
stretching, or manifest hurt of the Membrane.

A hot distemper causes itching in the Ears, A hot distemper causes itching
in the Ears.
but an Inflammation causes pain, that is pricking, beating or shooting with
burning. This pain is as the blood that flows thither is hotter, or more
inflamed. And they have a little fever with shivering and with Headache. And
when the Inflammation turns to an impostume the pain increases, and when it
breaks the pain cease, and bloody matter comes first, then concocted or
discoulered: this matter retained causes itching and new pain, and corrupting
causes worms sometimes. We thought this matter had come from an Ulcer without
the canal of the Ear, because the Ear being pressed near thereto, it came
forth. The cause of this hot distemper is either pains from outward injuries,
that causes the defluxion into the part: or fullness and heat of blood in the
Veins, that flows upon the part, with a Fever and Headache going before.

A cold distemper from cold Air outwardly or wind disturbs the Membranes in the
outward Cavity of the Ear and causes pain, A cold distemper causes pain in
the Ears.
or cold water in the Ear: It is sometimes in the inward Chamber of the Ear from
the defluxion of a waterish humor, such as we see fall cold from the Nose,
which distempers the inward Membranes.

An evil quality that causes the pains in the Head and bony parts in the
french Pox and other diseases, A Malignant quality causes pain of the Ears.
may hurt these Membranes in the Cavities of the Ears, and cause a pricking
pain.

The itching in the outward part of the Ear or tickling comes often from
irritation, Provoking or rubbing causes itching of the Ears.
or provokling, as from hot blood, boiling in the Vessels of these Membranes,
or from matter, or chollerick filth in the Ear, or other things fallen into the
Ears, which chiefly offend the outward Membrane.

A stretching by which these Membranes seem to be as it were pulled from the
bones to which they are joined, causes a stretching pain in the Ears, this
same thing is from wind, from which there is rather a strange noise, then a
pain, as we showed in the hurt of hearing, Stretching in the Ears, causes pain.
except it sil the inward Chamber of hearing so that pressing the Membranes it
causes a kind of pain. Or being bred under the Membranes of both Cavities
internal and external (as wind, may bred in the whole body and is most
constrained between the Membranes) it cause a twiching and tearing pain, by
drawing the Membranes from the bones. I have known this distension in the Ears
with much pain by consent of the Membranes through the whole body, come from
straining much in going to the stool, and in pissing forth a stone from the
neck of the Bladder, and in great and loud Vociferation and whooping, and also
in difficult Child bearing, as in one who had no pain during her travil, but in
her ears. And she was dull of hearing all the time of her lying in and long
after.

A manifest hurt from outward injuries or things fallen in or thrust into the
ears, A wound or other hurt causes pain in the Ears.
which prick or cut the Membranes causes pain. And if there were violence and
blood comes forth, there is a manifest wound; And Inflammation come, the pain
is increased, and the more, if an Impostume follow, which being broken, matter
comes forth.

The Cure.
The Cure is diverse, in respect of the Disease, as it is a hot distemper
Inflammation or Ulcer, or a cold distemper Malignant, or other hurt.

If the Ears only inwardly itch from a hot distemper it goes of it self away,
The Cure of itch in the Ears from a distemper.
especially, if the Air be cool, or by cold Medicines, which I shall declare;
Or if hot blood remaining in the Vessels, cause the itching, it is cured by
revelling that, and purging and cooling it. The Cure of Inflammation in the
Ears.
But if Inflammation cause pain, you must persently draw back the Flux of blood
from the part, and stop it from returning, allay the heat, assuage the pain,
and discuss what remains. Or if it come to an Impostume and being broken,
leaves an Ulcer, you must proceed, as in that case. Thus,

We revel and derive the Flux of blood, by letting blood, by Scarifying and
Cupping and by Horsleeches, and by Friction, as in Opthalmy.

And we use the same Clysters and Purges if the body be bound as in Ophthalmy.

We give to drink things that cool and thicken to stop the course of the blood
when hot especially, and things that by propriety assuage pain in the Ears, as
they say the flesh of Dormice made up with Honey does.

We use the medicines mentioned in Ophthalmy to the jugular veins and temples
to hinder the Flux, and if there be Headache, we use Vinegar of Roses and other
things to oppose both pains.

Into the Ears we drop many Liquors, two or three drops, and if these fill the
Ear, after they wet the sides thereof, that they may not longer hinder the
Hearing, especially if strong, least they hurt the Drum, you must turn the Head
that they may fall out of the Ear again. Or you must apply outwardly hot
Cataplasms upon the Ear, so that they may fill the Cavity. or a Fomentation
with a Sponge. or a hot Fume. and we use Allayers of pain when it rises, and
things that repel or drive back at the first if there be a flux, and Coolers,
and in the progress and declination we use Digesters, and if it imposthumate,
we use Digesters thus.

To assuage pain, new warm Milk or the white of an Egg beaten to Liquor, Ducks
or Hens Grease, Oil of sweet Almonds and yolks of Eges, or Oil in which
Earthworms or Snails have been boiled, which have been first taken out of
their shells with the slime, or in which Hog-lice or Millipides have been
boiled, or Oil of Poppy, or Henbane seed, or the juice of Poppy or Henbane.

Or drop these Compositions into the Ears. Take Women's Milk two ounces, the
white of a an Egg beaten half an ounce; with Goose Grease two drams: mix them.

Another. Take mucilage of Fleabane and Faenugreek seeds, and whites of Eggs
beaten, each half an ounce; Goose grease two drams: mix them with Oil of
Almonds and Milk; add three or four grains of Opium to make it stronger.

A third. Take Oil of sweet Almonds two ounces, juice of Mallows half an ounce,
Myrrh half a dram, Saffron half a scruple, Opium three or four grains.

A fourth. Take Oil of white Henbane seed a dram, as much Saffron and Castor as
a Pease; mix them.

An anodyne Emplaster. Take crumbs of Bread a pound, boil them in Milk, add
flour of Line seed and Faenugreek each an ounce; Oil of Chamaemel an ounce and
an half, two yolks of Eggs: mix them, and if you add Opium it will be better.

Or: Take Marshmallow rootts an ounce, Mallows, Nighshade, St. John's wort, each
a handful; flowers Dill, Chamaemel, Roses, each a pugil; Line seed half an
ounce, Mallows, Marshamallows, and Poppy seeds, each two drams: make a
Decoction in Water or Milk for a Fomentation or Fume: If you add Leaves of
Poppy, or Henbane, or Mandrake roots, or Poppy heads when there is pain it will
be better.

O: Take the faeces of this Decoction, and beat them with Hogs grease, Calves
marrow, mucilage of Fleabane and Faenugreek, each an ounce; Oil of Chamaemel
and Violets, each an ounce; fresh Butter an ounce and an half, Saffron half a
dram: make a Cataplasm.

To drive back and to ease pain. Take Oil of Roses, and Violets, and sweet
Almonds, each equal parts, add Earthworms, Sows, Snails, and with a little
white Wine, boil and strain them.

Or: Take Oil of Roses two ounces, Vinegar an ounce, Saffron half a scruple,
Opium three or four grains, boil them til the Vinegar is consumed, or in stead
of Opium and Saffron, add Philonium Romanum two drams, boil them in Oil and
Vinegar.

To cool and drive back, put in Oil of Roses or Violets, juice of Plantane,
Nightshade, Willow, Venus navel, and the like.

Or this: Take Oil of Roses an ounce and an half, juyes of Pomegranates and
Plantane, each half an ounce; white Wine Vinegar two drams: boil them till the
Juyces are consumed.

Or this Fomentation. Take Plantane, Willow, Violets, Lettice, each an handful;
red Roses a pugil, Pomegranate flowers half a pugil, Pomegranate Pills half an
ounce, boil them in red Wine, and with a little Vinegar foment the Ear.

Or: Take the residence of this Decoction: add meal of Lentiles a pugil, oil of
Roses and Myrtles, each an ounce and an half; one raw Egg, make a Cataplasm for
to be laid upon the Ear.

To discuss the Inflammation, mix hot things, and in the decrease use them
alone, as Oil of Chamaemel, Melilot, Dill, Lillies, dropped into the Ears, and
other hot things inwardly and outwardly, such as shall be mentioned when it
proceeds from a cold cause.

If the Inflammation tends to maturation which is known by the beating and not
ceasing of pain use things to digest as Basilicon with Line seed Oil into the
Ears. The Cure of Imposthumes in the Ears after Inflammation.


Outwardly apply this Cataplasm which asswageth pain. Take a great Onyon and
white Lilly roots, roast them in the Embers, beat them, add Lineseed meal an
ounce, Butter an ounce and an half, oil of Chamomel and Line seed each half an
ounce, Saffron half a dram: make a Cataplasm.

The juice of an Onyon opens a ripe Imposthume with Leaven dissolved in it.

If an Ulcer follow the Imposthume opened first cleanse, The Cure of an Ulcer of
the Ear after an Imposthume.
then add Driers, and heal it with the same.

Use the same Clensers as were prescribed for Hearing hindered. And these,

Sugar, or Sugar candy, or Honey dissolved in Whey or Barley water.

These are stronger, Honey of Squils, juice of Smallage, Fennel, Beets, Onyons,
Leeks, Horehound, Wormwood, Centory, alone, or with Honey.

The Decoction of Lupines and Agarick do the same.

Wine cleanses well, and also Lixivinm or Lie.

Turpentine with Honey and Wine does the same.

Aegyptiacum is the strongest, for a sordid Ulcer, tempered with Honey if you
please.

To heal and dry. Take Plantane, Shepherds pouch, and Shepherds rod,
Scabious, Birthwort, Solomon's seal, Fleabane, and the thickened juyces of green
Grapes, Oil of Olive and Hypocistis alone or with Wine Vinegar and Honey.

Or the Decoction of Birthwort, Galls, Pomegranate peels, and other Driers in
Wine or steeled Water.

Rust of Iron in astringent Wine and a little Vinegar is excellent or the
Decoction of Litharge.

This is best. Take fine powder of Steel half an ounce, Vitriol a dram: boil
them in Wine and Vinegar, or Vinegar alone if you will have it stronger, and
strain it.

A good Liniment. Take Cinnabar and Litharge, of each equal parts, and with
Honey or syrup of dried Roses: make a Liniment, drop a little into the Ear, or
put it upon a Tent.

Or this to breed flesh. Take Ceruss, Tutty prepared, each a dram; roots of
Birthwort, Myrrh, Sarcocol, Aloes each half a dram; Orris a scruple, make a
fine Powder: mix them with Honey Or juice of green Grapes.

It is stronger with Verdegreece and filings of Iron quenched and ground with
Vinegar, especially when a Scar is to be raised.

You may use diverse Waters for the Eyes here, and the strongest, because the
Ear is less offended therewith than the Eye.

To Cure an Ulcer in the Ear, a Fume is excellent, because it gets through and
dries, as of Pitch, Turpentine, Frankincense, and other Gums burned, which are
Driers. Or the Pouders mentioned white a little Cinnabar which is very drying.

If Worms breed from the filth of the Ear and provoke, The Cure of worms in the
Ears.
you must draw them out or kill them, as was showed in the Defect of Hearing
from things fallen in.

Juice of Wormwood is the best to kill them, and of Centory, Arsmart, and Peach
Leaves, and of wild Cowcumber.

Or a Decoction of Lupins, Coloquintida, white Hellebore in Wine vinegar.

Or Beasts Galls.

Or bitter Oils, as of Peach kernels, and bitter Almonds.

Or thus. Take Coloquintida half a scruple, white Hellebore a scruple, Aloes
half a dram: with the juice of Peach leaves make a Liniment.

In the Worms of the Ear for killing and drawing forth, as in the Worms of the
Nose and Brain, the Ointment of Capons Grease, and Oil of Hazel, with a little
Mercury precipitate or sweet is good, if it be put into the Ears with Cotton.
And the Decoction of Hemp distilled.

If the pain come from a simple cold distemper, The Cure of pain in in the Ear
from a cold distemper and distension.
or with matter from Wind, then if the Humor or Wind be present, we use Cupping
or Friction to revell it, and Clysters and Purges which do the same, and
evacuate the humor. And we derive the matter by the Mouth and Nose, as is
showed in the Hurt of Hearing, from these causes, and we discuss with Baths and
other Sudoroficks. If it be only a distemper, we alter it with heat and hot
Diet, as with the flesh of Dormice as we showed, which has a propriety.

We use the same things inwardly and outwardly to the Ears, or these.

Take Oil of biter Almonds, of Peach kernels, Chamomil, Melilot, Dill, alone or
together.

When the pain is intolerable. Take Oil of Henbane seeds half a dram, Castor
half a scruple, Saffron six grains.

Or: Take a hollow Onyon and put into it Castor, Euphorbium, each half a
scruple; Opium six grains, fill it with Oil of bitter Almonds roasted in the
Embers: strain and use it.

Or: Take a piece of a Snakes skin, boil it in Oil of Worms, add Sows or
woodlice, and strain it, you may add a little Oil of Scorpions.

Or: Take juice of Pellitory, Horehound, each an ounce; Oil of Bays an ounce
and an half, Ox gall a scruple, Hens grease a little: boil them til the Juyces
are spent, anoint and drop into the Ear.

A little Sponge dipped in Vinegar with a little Salt is good to be applied close
to the Ears.

This Decoction or the Fume thereof is good for the Ear. Take Organ,
Pennyroyal, Rue, Baies, each a handful; Wormwood half a handful, Chamomel,
Melilot, and Dill flowers, each a pugil; Bay, Elder, or Ivy berries, each an
ounce; Faenugreek seeds two drams, Carua seeds a dram: boil them in Wine and
Water.

Make Bags of these Driers.

Or thus: Take Panicum a pugil, Organ, Marjoram, each a handful; Chamomel
flowers a pugil, Saffron half a dram: powder them for a Bag.

Or: Take roasted Onyons and Leeks, each three ounces; beat them, add meal of
Line seed and Foenugreek, each half an ounce; Peach kernels an ounce, boil in
Milk and stamp them, add Goose grease an ounce, Oil of Dill, or Earthworms, or
Butter two ounces, Saffron a scruple.

They say it is good against pain to rub the Ear with Garlic, because it
draws the matter outward: but the roots of Squils, Sowbread, Cuckow-pints,
or Dragons, are stronger.

Some apply green Tobacco leaves to the Ears, and then dry them, and apply them
again.

If an evil malignant quality as in a long Headache and French Pox produce
pricking in the Ears with noise; The Cure of pain in the Ear from malignity.
after long and strong evacuations by Sweat especially, it cease with the
Disease, and if any remain it is taken away by the Topics mentioned in a cold
cause and moist, in the Cure.

Provocations, Itchings, and other pains of the Ears, The Cure of pain of the
Ears and Itching from Irritation or Provocation.
if they come from filth in them, or that falls into them, we showed you how
they may be removed in the hinderence of Hearing.

The violent hurts which cause a Wound, The Cure of a pain of the Ear by a
wound.
are cured as other puncturs and wounds. First if Inflammation be feared, let
blood, and repel it with things put into the Ears. Then drop in things that
assuage pain, and stop the Flux, after use Driers and Healers, as we showed in
Ulcers.

CHAP. VI. Of Diseases or Griefs of the Nostrils.
The Kinds.
THe Kinds of Pains or Diseases in the Nostrils are diverse.

There is an often Itching, Itching or tickling in the Nose.
or Tickling, Sneesing follows it sometimes, and the Nose droppeth.

Sometimes it is Burning, Burning in the Nose.
and the Nostrils are hot, and red, and inflamed, with a tumor within, or
Inflammation that obstructeth the passage.

Sometimes there is a pain like an Ulcer and blood is blown out, An ulcerous
pain in the Nose.
or hard phlegm: Or Snot or stinking matter, and there is a stink in the Nose
which the people presently perceive more than the Patient in that called
Ozaena. And there is a deformity of the Nose therewith, which spoileth the whole
Face. The Voice is hoarse, and as coming from a hollow place, the Palate is
eaten through with a great hole, and the breathing is hindered, as we have seen
always in the Elephantiasis, often in the French Pox.

The Causes.
The Grief of the Nostrils, proceeds from a Disease, which is either Irritation
or Provocation, or a hot distemper or solution of continuity.

The Nostrils being very sensible are easily provoked, The Irritation of the
Nostrils, causes itching and tickling.
hence comes tickling or itching, and sometimes sneesing from the same Causes
that we showed, sneezing proceed, as externally from light and splender, strong
scents, things put into the Nose that are sharp, or intetnally from thin blood
in the Vessels, or from waterish and sharp blood, with tears that come from the
Head and twitch the Nostrils. And Choler which is usually purged at the Ears,
may be brought to the Nose and cause the same.

A great heat may cause burning in the Nose, A hot distemper and Inflammation
of the Nostrils, is the cause of burning pain.
to which is joined sometimes a true Inflammation with tumor and obstruction, as
may happen from an outward hurt or internal, when the cause is very pricking,
from whence the Nostrils are usually afflicted, as in Coryza, where the Nose is
outwardly red and inflamed, as woll as inwardly.

A Solution of continuity, within or Excoriation, Excoriation, wound or ulcer,
is the cause of ulcerous pain in the Nose.
or Wound, or Ulcer, reaches sometimes outwardly. These may be from picking, as
with the Nails, or burning Errhines or Nose Medicines, such as we use in Cure
of Polypus. Sometimes from a sharp defluxion that has long passed that way, the
Nose is ulcerated inwardly and outwardly, with the help of often blowing it.

There are in the spungy bones at the bottom of the Nose foul, stubborn and
long Ulcers, sometimes such as corrode and creep on, sometimes they pirce the
thick runicle of the palate and eat of the bridge of the Nose which causes it
to fall. Often also the bones which are near the upper Jaw are consumed and
leave a great space in the palate through which a stink has passed that anoyed
the whole room where we were. And it is manifest that worms have been bred of
this filth and come forth.

These may be from the causes mentioned, Worms in the Nose.
as if the Nose be deeply hurt, or the Ulcer neglected, or the remedies come
not to the part by reason of its moisture and cannot have operation. These
called Ozaenae come chiefly from the Flux of burning or malignant humors sent
by nature to the part and there are perverse and cancerous Ulcers and tumors.
But because this is not only in this part, but a malignant humor and quality in
other places, especially the Membranes, as in the Elephantiasis and French Pox,
then they of the Nose grow together with other putrid and Malignant Ulcers
which eat away the Nose and the bones, and produce other accidents.

The Cure.
If the itch of the Nose come from provocation, The Cure of itching of the Nose
from provocation.
remove the cause whether internal or external, and if it cease not, qualify
it. As we showed in neesing which often follows, and shall be showed in
defluxions and in Coryza.

If the Nose be hot or inflamed then there is redness heat and tumor external,
The Cure of heat and Inflammation of the Nose.
to be cured as we showed in the greifes that come from diseases in the
superficies of the body.

Ulcers of the Nose, The Cure of ulcers of the Nose.
internal and simple, without matter or stink, are cured with strong dryers,
because the part is very moist. But matter must be first cleansed, as it
abounds. Or is stinking, or as the flesh grows rank, which is hard to be cured.
Sometimes they are incurable and leave deformity. Before these topics purge
Excrements, if they produce these Ulcers or nourish them. If they come from
evil and Malignant humors, you must use diverse Evacuations of the whole body, as
in Elephantiasis, especially by sweat in the French Pox, as shall be declared.

These are put into the Nose, snuffings or ointments with Cotton, or
Suppositories, or Fumes, or Pouders blown up. And if you will not have them
fall into the mouth, through the Nostrils, hold cold water in the mouth, when
you take them.

Other gentle clensers are made of Whey with Honey, or red Sugar, or Wine and
Honey, or Oxymel.

Lixivium and Urin cleanse more, especially if you add a little Alum, or if
you keep them in a brass basin to gather Rust or Verdigreese.

The Decoction of Gujacum in a Lixivium, with Honey will cleanse more, but
astringent Wine will dry more, especially in the French Pox.

The juice of Ivy cleanses, fills in the Nose, and is approved by Dioscorides.

A clensing and drying Errhine: Take juice of Pomegranates and Plantane, each
two ounces; Honey and Wine, each an ounce; with Alum and Vitriol: mix them.

Another Ointment: Take juice of Ivy and Plantane, each two ounces;
Pomegranate, wine Vinegar and Honey of Roses, each an ounce; Oil of Roses and
Myrtles, of each an ounce and an half; boil them, add green Wax, made with
Verdugreese.

Aegyptiacum. if used in foul Ulcers alone, when you must cleanse much and when
the flesh is foul.

You may with wariness apply Aqua Fortis, or Sublimate, or Spirit of Vitriol,
with a quil to the Ulcer. Or water of Lime quenched in it.

Make a dry and heating Errhine: Thus, Take Plantane, Horse-tail, Agrimony,
Brambles, Solomans seal or Rupture wort, of each a handful; Pomegranate peels
an ounce, Galls, Comfrey roots, each half an ounce: boil them in Water and red
Wine, and a little Vinegar and Honey.

Or thus, when the Gristle of the Nose begins to be corroded and the Nose bend:
Take juice of Plantane, Agrimony, Mouse-ear, Burnet, Roses and Smallage, each
an ounce; Vinegar and Honey, of each an ounce; Alum two drams, Frankincense
and Myrrh, each a dram; Chalcitis a scruple: mix them, for an Errhine to be
snuft up.

An Ointment for the same: Take Litharge and Ceruss washed in Plantane water, of
each half an ounce; Tutty prepared and Lead burnt and washed, each two drams;
Myrrh and bark of Fraukincense, each a dram; round Birth-wort half a dram,
with juice of Plantane and Oil of Roses, mix them.

Or thus: Take roots of round Birth-wort, Pomgranate pecels or flowers, of each
two drams; bark of Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes, Labdanum, Dragons blood, Gum
Traganth a little parcht, of each a dram; Lime often slaked two drams, Alum
and Chalcitis, each half a dram; Oil half an ounce, Mucilage of Ising-glass,
infused in Plantane water an ounce with Oil of Roses, and red Wax, and Cinnabar
prepared, make a Liniment, or thick Ointment, or a Mass to put into the Nose.

A Powder: Take Tutty prepared, Coral burnt and washed, of each a dram; bark
of Frankincense, roots of Birthwort, each half a dram: make a Powder, and snuff.

Many Medicines mentioned in the Ulcers of Eyes and Ears are good in the Nose.

Smoke which comes best at an Ulcer, when profound or deep, does well to dry
and to burn, if they be vehement and Malignant hold the breath while they are
applied, and remove them, till breath be fetched.

Thus they are made: Take Frankincense, Mastick, Labdanum, each two drams:
Storax, Benzoin, Gum of Juniper, each a dram and an half; Sanders a dram, wood
Aloes half a dram: make a powder, sprinkle it upon live coals for to smoke.

In the worst Ulcers: Take the powder before said, add Myrrh a dram, Marcasites,
red Orpiment, Cinnabar (in the French pox) each half a dram; make powder for a
smoke or fume, make Balls of them with Turpentine or Gum.

The smoke of Cinnabar with which the whole body is fumed in the French pox,
coming to the Nose, does not only Cure this disease, but other diseases of the
Nose of the like sort, if the Head be a little held therein.

There is a Candle made of red Wax and Cinnaber, which if lighted and put out
will smoke to the Nose.

Or thus, Wax as much as a Nut, add some of the first or second mentioned
powder, make it with your hands into a Candle with a wick; use it as the former.

Another that makes much black smoke: Take Pitch and Rosin, each equal parts,
with a little Brim-stone, dissolve them at the fire, and with a wick make a
Candle, let it be lighted and the smoke pass through a funnel to the Nose, and
be presently removed.

If there be crusts in the Nose that stick fast to the Ulcer, take them of with
Butter or Mucilage.

If there be proud Flesh, Cure it as I showed in Polypus.

The wounds in the Nostrils are cured with the same means, The Cure of wounds
in the Nostrils.
as they in the Ears, with things put in that stop blood, then dry and heal, if
they ulcerate, Cure them as others Ulcers.

CHAP. VII. Of Griefs or Pain of the Mouth.
The Kinds,
THe Griefs of the fleshy parts of the Mouth, as the Tongue, Gums, Cheeks and
Palate, in any or all of them: come sometimes to the Jaws, of which we shall
speak hereafter: they are distinguished, as they have sense of roughness, or
heat, or burning, or pricking, or are ulcerated.

There is molestation in the mouth and tongue, Roughness of Mouth and Tongue.
only with sense of roughness, because the taste and Speech are offended, we
speak thereof in the hurt of Speech and Taste.

I have seen some that have had burning and pricking in the sides and tip of
the Tongue many years without any appearent disease. Pricking and burning of
the Tongue, when no Disease appears.
Sometimes in this part only, sometimes in the tips and other parts of the body,
as we shall show in pains of the habit of the body.

Sometimes the tongue is troubled only with heat, A heat alone or with Tumor and
burning and sometimes with clefts and pustles of the Tongue and parts of the
Mouth.
sometimes with burning also and a manifest disease. And then it is not exactly
red as other parts that are white, but yellow and swells and is inflamed, and is
sometimes also very dry and rough and is cleft, and has pimples sometimes, which
so molest the Patient that he cannot speak without pain and stammerring, and
the part near and the jaws are afflicted therewith, and there is a quinsie and
the patient is in danger of suffocation. These are most in fevers; but not
alone as I showed in Fevers continual and malignant, called in High Dutch
Breune. Also this Inflammation of the mouth, may come from the use of
quicksilver in the French Pox.

The Gums often swel and are hot, at the roots of the Teeth, with a tumor
appearing outward, as in the Toothache, and the pain is great, especially when
the inflammation Impostumateth, as shall be showed in pains of the Teeth.

Also the Checks and Palate by consent of the parts, and of themselves do swel
and are inflamed.

There is sometimes such a pain with swelling and Inflammation in the loose flesh
under the tongue, Frog under the Tongue.
in the disease called the Frog, which extends also to the parts adjoining,
and being suppurated it turns to an Impostum. The stone under the Tongue.
And I saw a long stone which came from thence after great pain. Concerning the
tumor, without pain I shall speak elsewhere.

There is also in diverse parts of the mouth a sharp pain, A pain in the Mouth
and Tongue with an ulcer, excoriation or clifts.
with burning or without: with Pustles in the tongue or Palate or cheeks or
Gums, often in Infants by means of the small Pox.

Sometimes it is with Excoriation after the Pustles are broken.

And with clefts in the tongue, long and cross, there is great pain, and that
with dryness and Inflammation of the tongue. And this pain is increased by hot
or sharp meats.

There is also pain with Ulceration, after Excoriarion, or Rawness, or Pustles
broken, or after an Inflammation impostumated, especially under the tongue, or
at the root of the Gums in the Toothache.

Little Ulcers are called Aphthae or Thrush, Aphtha or Thrush called Alcola by
the Arabians.
they are in the Cheeks, Sides of the tongue and root thereof, Gums or Palate,
in one, two, or more places. These are in Children usually, and in the French
Pox; they are at the first small, as Lentiles round and white in the middle, and
red about; inflamed and painful, they spread presently, if you prevent not, and
infect the parts adjoining.

From these neglected comes a malignant Ulcer in Children especially, A Cancer
in the Gums.
or from other causes, it is in the Gums with little or no pain, Rhasis calls it
the Cancer of the Gums. It is first white and mattery, then yellow, after
black, it creeps on, and is hollow, and eats up the Gums where it is, and the
Jaw Bone, and turns to a Sphacelus, And I have seen a piece of a rotten Jaw
with the Teeth taken out which deformed the Face. And in two Children of a
Merchant my Countryman, that bred teeth, I saw an Ulcer that eat up the upper
teeth before, and another after the drawing of the tooth, that eat up the lower
Jaw Bone, tongue, and palate, and at length after great torment caused their
Death.

The Tumor and Ulcer of the Gums in the usual Disease, The Scurvy or Scrobute.
in Northern Sea towns called the Scurvy may be referred to this: In which the
Gums swell and sweat blood, are rotten and so consumed that the roots of the
teeth are bare. We shall only speak here of this Scurvy as it is in the Mouth;
but in Diseases that foul the body, we shall speak fully of it as it infects the
Feet with Spots, and Swellings, and Ulcers.

Sometimes there is a pain with a Wound made by a Prick, a Cut, or a Bite with
Inflammation also. If this pierce the Cheek, it is in the number of outward
Wounds.

The Causes.
The Disease which causes these pains in the mouth is either in the Nerve, and
appears not, or in the sensible parts of the Mouth mentioned. And it is either
a hot Distemper alone, or with Inflammation or Solution of Continuity.

There is a burning often of the tongue when no hurt appears from the Nerve
afflicted, A Disease in the Nerves is the cause of pricking and burning of the
Tongue without an apparent Disease.

A hot Distemper causes heat only, but an Inflammation causes Swelling,
Burning, Clefts, and Pustles in the Tongue and other parts of the Mouth.


it is long and tedious. How this is caused we shall show in Diseases of the
habit of the body as we did in Astonishment and Palsy.

A hot Distemper alone causes only heat in the Tongue, if it be with
Inflammation, it causes heat and burning with swelling. And thence come
Pustles, and Excoriation or Rawness, if it come from outward things that burn
the Tongue. But these come commonly from an inward cause, as a hot Vapor in hot
Diseases and Burning malignant Fevers, which flies up and infecteth, and if the
inflammation of the, Tongue cause a flux of blood to the jaws with heat and
pain, there is a Squinsie. The same may be from a bloody humor pure or impure
that comes to these parts, and the Tongue and Gums may be inflamed chiefly.
This may happen in diverse Diseases, and in the French Pox.

If it flow to the loose flesh under the tongue it raises a tumor there with
Inflammation, and that suppurated turns to an Imposthume. This Flux to that
part is caused by a Stone bred there from a waterish humor which caused great
pain, often from pain of the Teeth, as shall be there mentioned, there is a
Defluxion upon the Gums causing an Inflammation and Swelling.

A Solution of continuity is the cause of an Ulcerous Pain, A Solution of
Continuity is the cause of ulcerous pain with excoriation, clefts, and ulcer in
the Mouth and Tongue.
with Excoriation, or Cefts, and ulcer in the Mouth and Tongue.

This comes from things put into the Mouth that wound it, but more usually from
a man's biting himself by the Tongue or Cheeks.

Burning things actually or potentially raise up the Skin, and cause bladders
and excoriation after they are broken. In a tender Mouth, as of an Infant,
sharp things may cause it, they say the Aphtha or Thrush is caused by sharp
milk or Bread guawn by Mice: If sharp things are also piercing they do it more,
whereof I have observed in my self and others that if young Children eat green
Nuts and Grapes together, their Tongues will be cleft and pained.

Also where the Tongue is too dry from Causes mentioned in the hurt of Tasting,
it is cleft.

These Pustles or Thrush and Ulcers, sometimes malignant. may come from hot
choleric melancholic sharp and salt Blood abounding, as in other parts of the
body in these moist and tender parts.

And if such matter be in the spittle it may come from thence, as we have
observed by the force of Quicksilver the Spittle has been so infected in
fluxing for the Pox that Inflammation and Ulcers have followed.

Also these Ulcers come from a Disease that went before, as from an Imposthume
after Inflammation. A Wound or simple rawness by reason of the moistness of the
part is easily turned into an Ulcer, and the Thrush neglected. In an
Elephantiasis or Leprosy and in the French Pox though they use no
Quicksilver, and in the Scurvy, by reason of their venomous quality (as shall
be showed) there are Ulcers in the Mouth and Jaws.

The Cure.
If Inflammation and preternatural heat of the parts of the mouth come from
other Diseases, The Cure of heat and Inflammation of the Tongue, Jaws, Cheeks,
and Palate.
as Fevers, they must be first cured, as we showed in Fevers, by letting blood
for the Fevers, and Sweating, and by cooling the Heart, Liver, and Reins,
restraining the corruption, and preserving the strength. But chiefly for the
Tongue when much afflicted, to prevent a Squinsie and Death by the Inflammation
going to the Jaws, open the Vein under the Tongue, although you have let blood
before for the Fever and use diversions, by Cupping, Scarifying, Rubbing often,
and things that heat and keep down foul vapors, and quench the great heat, not
only for the Fever, but for the tongues sake: Examples of which we showed in
Fevers. In other Causes, use diversions, as in Fevers by bleeding and the like,
as when the Gums are inflamed in the Toothach.

Lest the mouth be inflamed by the use of quicksilver, before you apply it,
wash the mouth often with Milk, fat Broth, Butter, or Oil of sweet Almonds,
and anoint the Tongue therewith.

If it be a simple heat, wash the mouth with cold things, and moisten it, if it
be dry, and if you fear Inflammation Astringe, and Repel, adding Clensers, by
reason of the slime in the Mouth, and sometimes Resisters of Venom, and then use
Digesters and Ripeners. if it tend to an Imposthume.

We showed in the hurt of Tasting what will allay the heat and dryness of the
tongue.

When in the beginning of an Inflammation, we will repel and cool, together use
these following.

Spring Water, and Rain water, astringe a little; and Wine Vinegar or Rose
Vinegar added to sharpen it.

Also waters of Violets, Water Lillies, Nightshade, Purslane, Lettice, and
these Astringents, Rose water, Plantane, Privet, Honey-suckle, and Myrtle
water; chiefly water of Self-heal, used with Vinegar or other waters, for it
cools not much of it self.

Thus: Take water of Prunella or Self-heal four ounces, Rose, Plantane,
Straw-berry and Purslane water, of each two ounces; Rose Vinegar and Honey of
Rose, each an ounce; with a little Alum, or a drop or two of Spirit of
Vitriol, and then it will bind more.

Also sharp Juyces, as of Mul-berries, Bay Berries, Grapes, Cherries, Oranges,
Limons, Citrons and Sorrel with Vinegar or alone, and the juice of Lettice is
counted best, these may be chewed or the juice taken often.

Or you may boil the Fruits, and wash the Mouth with the Decoction.

Or give the Juyces with Honey or alone.

Or the syrups made of them, chiefly that of Mulberries, may be mixed with
Mouth water, or licked. In the French Pox, syrup of Violets, with the Decoction
of Barley and Roses, cures the Inslammation.

The vulgar High Dutch use the distilled water of that Liquor, in which they
pickle Cabbages, called Sumpistbren, or the liquor it self, if it be shaken
together. To which you may add other juyces.

A cooling and repelling Decoction: Take Violet leaves, Lettice, Plantane,
Prunella or Self-heal, Willow, Sorrel, Vine, Straw-berry, each a handful; red
Roses, Antirrhinum the great, Mallows, Barley, each a pugil; Gourd seeds two
drams, Bar-berries a dram, sour Berries ten pair, sour Prunes six, boil them
in Water and sharp Wine, add a little Sugar and Honey of Roses, use ir so, or
with Juyces, or Syrups.

Another more astringent: Take Mouse-ear, Privet, Self-heal, Plantane,
Brambles, Myrtles, each a handful; red Roses, Water-lilly, Barley, Vetches,
each a pugil; Prunes or Cherries, Cornil berries or Cervises or Quinces some
few, Bar-berries dried an ounce, boil all in red Wine, add Honey three ounces,
syrup of Pomegranats two ounces, wash the Mouth therewith.

In the increase of the Inflammation, add Digesters, thus: Take Liquorish an
ounce, Self-heal two handfuls, Plantane a handful, Hysop half a handful, Mallow
flowers, red Roses, each a pugil; Sage and Rosemary flowers, of each half a
pugil; Beans and Lentiles, of each an ounce; Fenugreek and Linseed, each half
an ounce; Acron cups six drams, Figs ten, Raysons not stoned twenty pair, boil
all in Water, add a little Wine and two ounces of Honey, syrup of dried Roses
an ounce, syrup of Mul-berries half an ounce.

Or thus: Take Self-heal two handsuls, Ground-sil, Cross-wort, Honey-suckles,
Plantane, Hysop, Sage, Maidenhair, each a handful; red Roses a pugil, Myrrh two
drams, a little Saffron, and two ounces of Honey: boil them in Water, add a
little Alum.

Or thus: Take Water of Self-heal six ounces, Plantane, Rose, Sage and Hysop
water, each two ounces; Honey of Roses, and a little Alum.

I have done much in these Inflammations, with deep Ulcers, with Saltpeter
prepared, called Lapis prunellae, dissolved in Sage water, washing the Mouth
warm therewith.

In Inflammations ready to ulcerate. from the use of quicksilver, some anoint
with Treacle, Aqua vitae and Vinegar, or distill a water of them, and add Bole
or other dryers, by this they believe the Poison of the quicksilver, is taken
away, and they also wash with a Decoction of Lignum vitae.

When Inflammations tend to Maturation: Take Marsh-mallow roots an ounce and an
half, Figs twelve, Dates six, Tamarinds and Cassia with the seeds ten,
Fenugreek and Lineseed, each half an ounce; Mallows and Chamomil flowers, each
a pugil; boil them in Goats Milk, dissolve the white of an Egg and a little
Honey and Safron.

If the Inflammation be not only in the Tongue, but in other parts, you may
anoint under the Chin, at first with repelling Oils, as of Roses, after with
discussers, as Oil of Chamomil and Lillies.

If the Inflammation under the Tongue tend to suppuration, make Cataplasmes of
Marsh-mallow roots, Linseed, and other meats with Saffron, these assuage pain,
and ripen, or boil them in Milk and wash the Mouth. We shall show the forms of
these and such as open Impostums, in the treatise of Inflammations of the Jaws.
If a quinfie be joined with an Inflammation of the Tongue, or follow it, there
are Medicines.

In solutions of continuity, Pustles, The Cure of Pustles, Rawness, clefts and
^^^ers of the Mo^th and Tongue.
Rawness, Clefts and Ulcers, if they come from an internal cause that must
first be evacuated. If they come from other causes, yet if the body be foul or
Plethorick, the Cure will be sooner done after purging. If the cause be
malignant that must be first taken away, as in the French Pox, Leprosy and
Scorbute. If that cannot be taken away, the Ulcers that come from thence can
never be cured, these first done, apply Topics for Pustles, Fissures, Rawness
and Ulcers.

In Pustles, if there be an Inflammation, the Medicines there, are proper, if
they are without Inflammation, they break of themselves and leave an Ulcer,
which must be cured, as the Thrush. If they continue long and are troublesome,
apply Leaven to ripen, or Starch with Urine, and a little Wine.

If there be an Inflammation, with Clefts, you must look to that first. If it
be from dryness Cure it, as in Depraved tasting. If the Clefts are deep,
dividing the tongue and causing pain, Cure them with dryers, as other Ulcers;
adding some mollifying things, for the tongue which is naturally moist and
soft: Such as shall be described in the outward Clefts of the Lips and Skin.

To which add this: Take burnt Alum half a dram, true Bole two drams, with
Honey of Roses and Mucilage of Gum Traganth or Fleabane, make an Ointment to
anoint the Clefts of the tongue.

In other Excoriations or Ulcers in the tongue and cheeks, or palate, or
thrush, or ulcers of the Gums, creeping or other wise, corrupting, use strong
dryers, by reason the part is moist: adding clensers, if there be soulness, and
such as take down proud flesh. If there be Inflammation with the Ulcers, add
cold repellers, as in the Inflammation of the Mouth was showed: they bind and
dry: Also if there be malignity, add things against it.

These are diversely applied, the Mouth may be washed, or they may be chewed, or
used in smoke, or applied only to the Ulcers.

There are diverse Mouth waters to be kept long where the Ulcer is.

A drying and clensing Decoction of Plants, sharp binding and clensing: Of
Privet, Plantane, Mouseear, Agrimony, Horstayl, Sun-flowers, Blew-bottles,
Olive leaves, Daysies, Honey-suckles, Golden rod, Bramble, Yarrow, Herb Robert
or Crains bill, leaves of the wild Pear tree, Beech tree, Solomon's seal,
Rupture wort, Ceterach, Myrtle, Mastick tree, Hazel, roots and leaves of five
leaved Grass, wild Plumes, Comfrey, Barbery bark and Pomegranate peels, red
Roses, Pomegranate flowers, Acorn cups, Labrusca, Barberies, Barley, Lentils,
Cypress, Myrtle seeds, Coriander, Slows, Sumach, Mulberries, Seruises and Gals.
If the mouth be slymy and foul, add Sage, wild Time, or Gum, wild Mints, Bay
leaves and roots of Flowerde-luce, and in the Scorbute, Scurvey Grass,
Watercresses and Brook-lime, of these or some of these make a decoction with
water that has steel quenched in it, adding a little Wine, or Rose, Vinegar, or
Honey or Sugar of Roses, or syrup of Roses, Myrtles, Mulberries, or juice of
the Plants aforesaid, or of Pomegragranat, with Vinegar, Salt, or Alum, or
Vitriol to make it a little sharp, or Bole, or juice of Boodstone ground.

It is excellent to use juice of Oranges, Brook-lime, Watercresses in Ulcers
of the Gums.

Another Decoction to dry strongly: Take Bole an ounce, burnet, Plaster of
Paris half an ounce, Allam two drams, Vitriol a dram; boil them in white Wine.

Or make Mouth waters of Astringents, distilled waters of Roses, Privet,
Plantane, Honey-suckles, and the like, with things aforesaid dissolved in them,
increasing their quantity, because distilled waters dry less then Decoctions.

Or: Take unripe Grapes three pounds, Purslane and Plantane, of each two pound;
whites of Eggs six, Alum a pound, beat them and still them, wash Ulcers
therewith.

It will be stronger, if before the stilling, you add a pound of Pomegranate
peels, three ounces of Vitriol, and four ounces of Vinegar.

Or use this Alum water of Libathious: Take juice of Plantane, Purslane and
Alum, of each a pint; whites of Eggs twelve, stir them and distill them in
Balneo.

For Ulcers in the French Pox, use this water to repress Venom: Take Tracle
with Aqua vitae and Vinegar and distill a water from them. Or use this
Gargarisme: Take Rose and Plantane water, of each two ounces; Aqua vitae and
Vinegar, each half an ounce; syrup of Mulberries and Honey of Roses, each three
drams; Treacle, Bole or Earth of Lemnos, each half a dram.

Mouth waters of the juice of Fruits, are made more pleasant, then of Herbs,
and cleanse more, as Juice or Wine of Pomgranates, or Wine that is sharp and
red, or Rose Vinegar, or Vinegar of Squils alone, or mixed with other waters,
Ulcers washed with these will seem as it were boiled afterward; therefore to
make the dryers work better, we first wash with these. Also juice of Quinces,
is excellent.

Some things chewed, leave their strength in the Mouth and heal Ulcers, as
sharp Fruits, not ripe, as Mulberries, Cornil-berries, Quinces, Medlers and
leaves of Privet, though not so pleasant, these eaten Cure the Thrush. And
other Plants mentioned are good to be chewed.

Fumes are also good to dry, and those of Quicksilver, though it cause Ulcers,
when inwardly taken, yet the smoke taken in at the Mouth, does Cure them.

These following are also good. The Chirurgions use to anoint the Mouth with
Honey of Roses and burnt Alum to cleanse.

Or with the juyces of Herbs mentioned, mixed with Honey and boiled thick, the
juyces of Mulberries and green Grapes are the best, these heal, and when we
will cleanse, we add Alum or white Vitriol.

Pouders made of Plants dried are used, Honey, juice of Grapes or Mulberries,

A drying Powder: Take Myrrh seeds, Bay Leaves, burn Hartshorn or Ivory, of
each half a dram; burnt Coral a dram.

Another stronger: Take Galls, Pomegranate peels, each a dram; Dates stones and
Acron cups burnt, Cypress roots, each half a dram, red Roses a scruple.

This is strongest: Take Acacia, Hypocistis, of each a dram, white Vitriol half
a dram, Sal Gem a scruple, Angelica roots half a scruple: make a Powder.

A cleanser for the Gums ulcerated: Take Pumice stone two drams, Crab and Snail
shells burnt, each a dram; Tutty prepared Alum and Tarter, each half a dram;
Orris roots two scruples: make a powder.

The Powder of Briony for the Cancer of the Gums: Take Tutty prepared in rose
water two drams, Gum Traganth torrified a dram; Sarcocol, Morlick,
Frankincense, each half a dram; Orris roots and Calamints burnt, of each a
dram: make ponder and mix it with juice of Briony, dry it in the Sun then
powder it again, and add more juice of Briony, do thus five times, rub the Gums
with this Powder and Honey till they bleed.

Or use Aegyptiacum for fordid ulcers of the Mouth and Gums.

When the Gums begin to consume: Take roots of Comphory, Pomgranate peels, each
a dram; Frankincense, Myrrh, each half a dram; Chalcitis burnt a scruple, wh
ite Vitriol half a scruple: make a Powder.

Touch Ulcers with strong Liquors and after wash the Mouth with Wine.

As with Ink, made strong with Verdigreece.

Or with this green Water: Take Verdigreece a dram, Orpiment a dram and an
half, powder and boil them in white Wine two ounces, to half. When it is cold,
add Rose and Nightshade water an ounce and an half.

Or thus: Take Verdigreece, Orpiment, Niter, Alum, each a scruple, and Galls
as much: boil them in Rose and Plantane water.

A simple Decoction of sublimate, is made with a dram of Sublimate, boiled in
Rose or Plantane water, touch the Ulcer gently therewith, or make it milder
with an ounce or two of Nightshade water.

Or thus: Take Sublimate three drams, red Lead a dram and an half, Verdigreece,
Vitriol, each half a dram; burnt Alum an ounce, Bole two drams, white Wine ten
ounces, Rosewater two ounces; boil them.

These Ulcers and the thrush, and Ulcers of the Nose are cured, by being gently
touched with Aqua fortis.

Potential Cauteries, also of Lime and Wine Lees are good to touch Ulcers, if
by art you can keep them from the sound parts: but an actual Cautery is more
certain, if it be used suddenly, for an Eschar will be made and when that is
gone, the Ulcer will be cured.

CHAP. VIII. Of Toothache.
The Kinds.
THe Toothache is any pain in or about the Teeth, and it is either a true
Toothache, or such only as a little disturbeth.

A true Toothache, is in or about one tooth, Toothache.
only sometimes in more, seldom in the Fore-teeth, but in the sides, and
commonly but on one side, sometimes on both, sometimes in the upper, sometimes in
the lower jaw, seldom in both, This is the proper Toothache which is often and
grievous.

This pain is in Infants that breed their grinders, Toothache in Children which
breed Teeth.
which they declare by crying and restlessness, and it is known by the redness
and hear of the Cheek, and when the teeth appear out of the swollen and open
Gums, there is also a little Fever known by hear and other signs. Sometimes
convulsions, but not so dangerous, as when they come from other causes.

There is also a toothache which comes to people of all Ages, from which few
are free, especially such as have hollow or broken teeth. This is often violent
and lasts long or returns often, with stretching and beating, which they
suppose they feel in the tooth it self, which is pained. The Gums are then very
hot and red sometimes swollen with the Cheek, also which being swollen the
toothache abateth, sometimes there is an Impostum at the bottom of the tooth,
and when that breaks the toothache cease, and there comes fotth foul and
stinking matter. And the Ulcer sometime remains long after, or turns hollow,
peircing the lower Jaw and opening it self outwardly, sending forth waterish
and sometimes thick matter for a long time.

Sometimes when these appear not, there is a great pain in the teeth, such as we
use to feel at our Fingers ends in cold weather. In this the Patient spits
much, and if the teeth be hollow, he seems to feel a cold Air coming from them,
to his tongue, when he touches them there with.

There is a kind of toothache, when a tooth is drawn, Pain of the Teeth when a
Tooth is drawn.
sometimes greater, sometimes lesser: but usually it is gone after the tooth is
drawn, except by the violent motion of the part or hurt of the Instrument, or
when a little part is only drawn out, there be a pain after.

There is a Molestation, rather then pain in teeth at the time of eating,
Numness of the Teeth called Haemodia.
in the disease called Haemodia, this is a presfing of the teeth, when one is
longer then another.

The Causes.
It is certain that that part is affected in in the toothache which has the
sense of feeling and that most exquisitely, The part affected.
because the pain is great. But we have showed that the teeth want all senses,
because they are all the hardest of bones neither have they a Periostum or Skin
about them, as other bones have and there is no Nerve that goes into them.
Therefore not the tooth, but that part which is sensible and which is near the
tooth, must needs suffer, and the reason why the tooth is thought to ache, is
because the part affected is so near unto it. The part is commonly a membrane,
which compasses the holes in which the teeth are fixed, and which is next to
the roots of the teeth: to which the Fibers or small branches of the Nerves,
which go to both Cheeks, are so joined, that they cause an exact feeling, so
that the pain seems not to lie deep, but as it were in the very tooth.

Also the Gums, and the Periostia, or Membranes under the Jaws, if they be
hurt, seem to communicate pain to the teeth.

The Diseases, with which these parts affected cause a seeming pain in the
teeth, are either a hot or cold distempers, or Irritation, or Solution of
Continuity.

A hot distemper with Flux of blood and Inflammation also sometimes, afflicting
these Membranes, A hot distemper and Inflammation, causes Toothach.
causes the toothache so called, not only by heat and stretching, but by
swelling in a strait place, which causes the teeth being hard to press upon
them, this is a stretching and beating pain, which though the beating be in the
little Arteries, under the Membra^es, which beat upon the teeth, yet it is so
manifestly felt, that Galen thought this beating and Inflammation also was in
the tooth it self (which cannot be, because the tooth is a solid bone, having
neither Veins nor Arteries, and therefore can neither be inflamed, nor beat:)
though he wrote that he experienced this in himself. Moreover if there be a
Flux of blood upon the Gums or Periostium under them, as is usual in the
beginning or continuance of the pain which raises a new Flux, the pain is
increased, and the more if there be an Impostum, till it be broken and made an
Ulcer and send forth matter.

The cause of this Flux is as of other Fluxes: Namly fullness and heat of blood,
or pain that was before from another cause, which raises the Flux and doubleth
the pain: or other external causes.

A cold distemper by its enmity to the Nerves and Membranes, A cold distemper,
causes Toothache.
afflicting these parts, causes also pain, called also the toothache, from the
Vicinity or nearness. It is so bitter and often, that it is no wonder the
vulgar say that cold is an enemy to the teeth.

This comes from external causes, as Air, Meats or Drinks that are cold, that
suddenly cool the teeth and make the Membranes adjoining sensible thereof. And
it comes sooner when the tooth is hollow or broken, and the cold strikes
presently to the Membranes. Hence it is that bad teeth are soonest pained, and
the pain is thought to be in the teeth, though they are dead and not as
formerly, which no reasonable man will say can be sensible.

This comes also from a cold phlegmatic Defluxion not upon the tooth which
cannot receive it, but upon the Membranes underneath. And there is then a
toothache, without signs of heat, but of cold, as if cold wind come from the
hollow tooth, as I showed; Except the pain causes a Flux of blood, and then
heat, tumor and impostume may follow.

Also Irritation of this very sensible Membrane, Irritation or provocation, is
the cause of Tooth-^ch.
may cause this pain called the Toothach.

This comes to the Membrane from the proper tooth when it is broken, or
discovered from its place, or otherwise unuseful, then it hurts the Membrane
in chewing or keeps them from chewing on that side.

This also may come from pricking the hollow tooth or from hard meat gotten
into it, in chewing, because the Membrane cannot endure the touch of a strange
body.

And if the teeth be whole and yet there be a force to put them out of order,
especially when pained, or of any thing be gotten between them in chewing,
which sticks close, because then the teeth are thrust at one side and the
Membranes that grow to the roots of them are constrained there is also pain.
Therefore men are very busy to pick there teeth when any things get either
into the hollow of the teeth, or the spaces between them.

Moreover not only when the teeth are fowl or straight bound or forced aside
are these Membranes provoked: Roughness of Teeth, causes Haemodia, or an edge
upon the Teeth.
but when they are exasperated and loose their smoothness; and then the
Membranes feeling this roughness and unevenness are pained in chewing, as if
some strange body were fastened to them, as we showed in Haemodia, with a
numness (as we showed in the hurt of touching) from the coldness of those
things, that make the teeth rough infecting the Membranes, so that the teeth
seem to be number, by whom the Membrans are so affected (but this is but
imaginary, for they are insensible.) this exasperation and cold comes from
eating of some kind of fruit, or from some humor like such fruit or from some
humors like such fruit, or from vomiting and first the teeth and then the
Membranes, as when they are sower; by their binding and sharpness (which is an
enemy to the Nerves and bones) they pierce and afflict the teeth and their
Membranes. And the sooner when the teeth are soft and not grown hard with Age,
therefore is this more usual in young then old people.

Also the Toothache comes from a Defluxion of thin sharp, or salt slegm, which
provokes the Membranes rather than cools them, and usual to them that are
troubled with such Excrements, and to such as the Flux falls thither from a
looseness and weakness of the part through bad teeth, or the like. And to such
that spit much, and have much humor come from their Nostrils.

Solution of Continuity also causes the same same, Solution of continuity,
causes Toothache.
as when a Tooth is drawn from the Membrane under it, and the Gums that grow to
it, and it is the greater pain when the Root is deeper, as in the great Teeth.
And when it grows to the Jaw, so that some part of it comes away therewith,
which causes great accidents. As befell a Merchant my Countryman, of whom we
spoke in Pains of the Mouth, who had after the drawing of of a tooth an
Inflammation and Cancerous Ulcer which tormented and killed him. This is
thought to be easily done by the common Surgeons if the Dog or Eye-tooth be
drawn.

Also in Infants while the teeth grow and pierce through the Gums, if they be
great teeth especially this pain may be by stretching the Gums. And though this
pain comes only fromthe Gums, yet it is called the Toothache, as other pains
mentioned from solution of Continuity, in which the sensible parts mentioned do
rather suffer than the teeth.

The Cure.
The Cure is according to the diversity of the Cause as it comes either from a
Defluxion of blood or other excrements, or from a cold distemper or
provocation, from rotten teeth or other compulsion or exasperation, or from
solution of Continuity when the Gums are pierced, or the teeth drawn forth.

If toothache come from flux of Blood or Water, The cure of Toothache from a
hot distemper or cold, or from flux of blood or phlegm.
then take away the cause of the Defluxion by keeping the humor from falling
upon the part, and sending it another way, and consuming it, and correcting the
distemper which comes from thence, and in the mean while asswaging the pain, by
these means.

Blood-letting at first when it is from a bloody flux, and there is pain of the
Head, is good to revell or draw away from the part.

Also Sacrification and Cupping in the Neck and Shoulders is good in all
Defluxions: By these means at certain times used, the Vulgar prevent the
toothache. And to take it away, use Sacrification in the Wrist, or in the back
of the Hand, between the thumb and forefinger, on that side the pain is.

We divert these Defluxions also by Vesicatories and Cauteries as others. And
apply Vsicatories to the Wrists and back of the Hand: as a head of Garlic
stamped.

And we use Frictions and Ligatures, as in other Defluxions.

And Purgers by the Nose in a phlegmatic Defluxion to divert it from the part
affected. By blowing the Nose often, and using of Errhiens or sneesings to the
Nose, amongst whtch juice of Brooklime and Marygolds is accounted the most
proper for the toothach.

Also things that draw slegm from the Mouth which shall be after showed: But
this must be done after general purging, especially if humors abound, and are
flowing, lest evacuations by the Nose and Mouth draw the humor more to the
teeth.

We also purge by stool with diverse medicines, as in other Defluxions.

And apply things to the temples in all humors to keep them from the teeth,
using such things as were mentioned in Defluxtions of the Eyes, especially
Plasters in the hollow between the Forehead and the temples, upon the side
pained night and day, which sometimes retain the humor flowing, that the pain
cease, and comes to the temples.

If the Defluxion be hot, in the beginning we apply to the teeth astringents
that heat not, to repel it, but when it cease to flow, we apply to the teeth
things that discuss and consumes the humor. In a cold Defluxion, at first we
use hot things with Repellers, after very hot things alone. In all cases adding
things that allay pain. These are of diverse forms, sometimes to be held between
the teeth, or otherwise applied to them, or put into the hollow, or used as
Fumes or Smoke, they are made of the following ingredients.

When we astringe chiefly, and so stop the Flux, we make Decoctions to be held
hot in the Mouth, as the Decoctions of Tormentil which is best, and of Vervain
boiled in Wine, and of the inward bark of an Ash.

Or this compound Decoction. Take roots of Tormentil, Snakeweed, five-leav'd
Grass, Mullein, each half an ounce; Cypress roots two drams; bark of Box tree,
or Mulberry and Capars, each half an ounce; Ivy, Vervain, Plantane, each a
handful; Pomegranate flowers and red Roses, each a pugil: Cypress Nuts, Galls,
and Acorn cups, each two drams; Coriander soeds, Myrtles and red Sanders, each
a dram: boil them in red Wine, add Vinegar, if you will have it stronger.

Rose water is good to bind with Plantane water, red Wine and Vinegar.

Water of Mullein is counted excellent.

Or: Take filings of Iron a dram and an half, Vitriol a dram: boil them in Wine
and Vinegar.

After the Defluxion add some hot things thus: Take roots of five-leav'd grass
or Tormentil an ounce, roots of Pellitory half an aunce, Cypress roots two
drams, Leaves of Ivy, Sage, Hysop, each a handful; red Roses, L^ntiles, each a
pugil; white Poppy seeds two drams, long Pepper a dram: boil them in Wine.

Or thus: Take Sage, Hysop, Vervain, each a handful; boil them in a pint of
Wine: add two drams of Alum.

Or: Take Galls, Snakeweed roots, each two drams; Orris roots a dram, Hysop a
handful, Frankincense, Sandarach, each two drams; Juniper berries an ounce:
boil them in red Wine.

Or: Take Mastich an ounce, Sage, Hysop, each a handful: boil them in equal
parts in Wine and Vinegar.

Or this Powder: Take Snakeweed roots a dram, Alum and Pellitory, each a
scruple: make a Powder, apply it or rub therewith.

When we will heat chiefly, hold these Decoctions in the Mouth, so hot as may
be, and take it in again as fast as it cools.

The Vulgar use roots of Pellitory, or Pepper, or Ginger boiled in Wine.

Another: Take Calamints, Organ, Pennyroyal, Hysop, Sage, each a handful;
Marjoram, Bay leaves, each half a handful; Juniper berries half a pugil: boil
them in Wine.

Or this which has often profited: Take wild Time' Sage, Rosemary, each a
handful; Ginger a dram, Caraway seeds half an ounce, red Pease, Salt, each a
pugil: boil them in white Wine.

Or this: Take Pellitory roots half an ounce, Angelica roots, each two drams;
add Garlic and Radish, Hysop, Savory, Sage, Marjoram, Pennyroyal, wild Time,
Rosemary flowers, and red Roses, each a dram; or a handful if they be fresh,
long and black Pepper, Cubebs, grains of Paradise, Cloves, Mustard seed, Gith
and Stavesacre, each half a dram; Salt or Niter, each two drams: bruise and
boil them in Wine, or infuse them, and use the strained Liquor.

The Decoction of Coloquintida in Wine is bitter, but very profitable.

Sage and Rosemary distilled in Wine is also good.

Also Aqua vitae or Spirit of Wine or Juniper berries applied do work quickly
and strongly.

Or this: Take Pepper, Ginger, grains of Paradise, each a dram; Cloves two
drams, Cinnamon half on ounce: add white Wine, steep and distill them.

Or thus: Take Pellitory, long and black Pepper, each two drams; Mustardseed,
Watercresses and Gith seed, each a dram: powder them, and with Aqua vitae use
it as the other.

Or of the simples in the hot Decoction mentioned dried and poudered, make an
Infusion and Distillation.

The Oil of Juniper berries, or Spike, or Spices distilled, and dipped in Cotton,
and put into the tooth does well.

Sometimes we use Bags to the teeth to be bitten by the tooth affected thus
made: Take Sage leaves, and bruise them, and with a little Salt and Pepper,
make a Bagg.

Or thus: Take Pellitory, Pepper, Mustard seed, Salt, each equal parts; powder
them for a Bag, dip it in hot Vinegar and apply it to the teeth.

Or thus: Take Pellitory, long Pepper, Stavesacre, each equal parts: make a
powder, and apply it in a Bag sprinkled with Aqua vitae.

Sometimes we give things that inflame the Jaws, as bark of Laurel taking of the
outward rind that is hard, also the roots of Spurge and Crow-foot, according to
Dioscorides, these are put between the teeth, lest they should burn the Jaws by
touching them, but if you boil them in white Wine they they are milder.

This latter Decoction is so used, made of Solomon's seal roots, and white
Hellebore, and bark of Laurel in Wine and Vinegar.

The Anodynes following are always to be used, when the Defluxion cease
especially, because they work by propriety.

Hot Milk, Butter, and common Oil, or Oil of sweet Almonds are good to be held
in the mouth.

Also Bread chewed and applied as a Cataplasm between the teeth and Cheeks.

Also warm Broth and the Decoction of Marshmallow roots, Bread, and Lineseed
in Milk.

Another that draws forth water. Take rooots of Marshmallows and Liquorish,
each an ounce; Sage a handful, Figs twelve, Faenugreek seeds an ounce: boil
them in Water.

A Decoction of Guajacum and Salt is commended.

Or Leaven applied with Vinegar in the Decoction thereof held in the Cheeks.

Or this: Take Sandarach or Varnish half an ounce, Wine or Vinegar, or both
four ounces, or six: boil them to the consumption of the third part, and hold
it in the mouth, or dissolve Sandarach in Vinegar and apply it.

Gum Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Sagapenum, alone, or foftened with Aqua vitae and
Vinegar put into a hollow tooth, or spread and laid as a Plaster to the teeth,
cures the toothache.

Or this: Take Camphire half a dram, Aqua vitae an ounce: boil it til the
Camphire be consumed, and apply it: or with Wine and Vinegar.

Also Camphire and Oil of Cloves, or of sweet Almonds, or Oil of Camphire.

The powder of Camphire with the powder of Henbane root equal parts, suddenly
takes away the toothach, the seeds of Henbane may be used for the root, and
they will be stronger.

A Snakes Skin also boiled in Wine and Vinegar, or dried in an Oven, or burnt
to powder and mixed with Oil, to anoint the teeth is commended, or the Skin of a
Toad used the same way, is an excellent medicine.

Dioscorides writes that the prick in the tail of the Fish Pastinaca applied to
the tooth takes awy pain.

In great pain we use Stupefactives with caution that they be not swallowed.

As the Opiate Antidotes fresh made as Philonium Romanum, Treacle, Mithridate,
to rub the teeth, to a dram of which a scruple of Pellitory and Nigella or Gith
seed, and a grain of Opium may be added.

A small pil of Opium alone put into the tooth presently takes away the pain,
and it is good to add a little Wax that it may not fall out.

Or this: Take Opium and Henbane seed, each four grains Smallage seed two
grains, with Aqua vitae make Pills.

Or thus: Take Camphire a scruple, boil it in an ounce of Aqua vitae til it
dissolve, then add Opium three or four grains, dip a little Cotton therein and
thrust it into the tooth.

Or thus: Take of spirit of Wine two or three ounces, add Camphire two drams,
set it in the Sun til the Camphire dissolve, then distill it: apply this spirit
as the other.

Other Stupefactives are made of Henbane seeds, Pepper, roots of Pellitory and
burnt Alum equal parts made up with Aqua vitae into a Mass.

Or thus: Take Henbane seed half a dram, Pellitory and Ginger each two drams;
Smallage seeds a dram, Mastich three drams, Roses a pugil: boil them in Wine
and Vinegar to wash the Mouth.

Or: Take roots of Mandrake a dram, Henbane seed half a dragm Pepper, Cubebs
and Stavesacre, each a dragm, Pellitory two dragms, bark of the root of Mulbery
and Capars three dragms. Boil them in red Wine.

Or Take Henbane roots a dragm, white wine half a pint. boil them.

Or use fumes with a Funnel to the teeth, made of wormwood, Savory, and the
like hot herbs, in wine and water, and take the vapor hot, add leek seed to
make it stronger.

Also a fume of Sandarake cast upon live coals, or leek or onion seed mixed with
pitch and wax to make the fume thicker: the fume of burnt henbane seeds is
accounted best, but it is best when the seed is first mixed with virgins wax.

Somethings are to be applied to the cheek outwardly, to take away pain.

An Anodine emplaster. Take Crumbs of bread the pap of apples, each three
ounces: boil them in milk, add lineseed, oil of Roses or of Chamomile, each an
ounce, Saffron a scruple.

Or use Treacle or other opiats for a plaster.

Another approved, Take the white of an egg, beat it with Rose water and
spread it upon flax with a little powder of Pepper, and apply it all over the
cheek where the pain is.

Ot thus, Take the yolke of an egg with Aqua vitae and a little Saffron, with
some meal or flower: make a plaster to dissolve the tumor,

In a hot Cause. Take juice of Nightshade and Housleek each two ounces,
Rose Water and Milk, each an ounce and an half, Oil of Roses an ounce: stir
them and dip a clout therein, apply it to the Cheek.

In a cold cause thus. Take roasted Onyons three ounces, oil of Dill and
Chamomile each an ounce, flower of Foenigreek an ounce and an half: make a
Plaster.

Or thus, Take Lilly roots three ounces, Mallows an handful, flowers of
Chamomile, Melilot, Dill, each a pugil: Foenigreek and Lineseed, each half an
ounce: Cabbage seed two dragms, Peach kernels or bitter Almonds an ounce. boil
them in wine, foment the Cheek without, heat the residence of the Decoction,
and with oil of Chamoemel and Dill, made a Cataplasme.

Also apply baggs of Milliumor Panicum, Wormwood, Chamoemile flowers, Dill and
Salt.

Juice of Garlic, Rue, Ivy, Daffadil roots: dropped into the contrary ear,
Cures the toothach.

Also hot oils as of Rue, Bays, Costus, Earthwormes, with Castor boiled
therein the distilled oils are best.

Or five Ivy berries, boiled with oil of roses and pomegranate peels, and the
liquor dropped in does it according to Diascorides.

A Clove of Garlic peeled and put into the ear on that side the pain is,
cures.

Among Amulets the roots Lepidium hung about the neck, cures according to
Diascorides.

If a tumor arise on that side inwardly or outwardly, or on both sides, and the
pain abateth: then it goes away of it self, or with bags or hot oils, very
easily.

If pain increase with the tumor because then there is an Impostume, the
Anodyne Cataplasme will do well to ripen it.

Especialy Barley meal boiled in milk and Olibanum added in powder, and applied
ripens the Impostume.

Also hot milk held in the mouth in which roots of Marshmallows, Lineseed,
Housleek and Lillyes are well boiled.

The Impostume opened of it self inwardly, or by force turns to an ulcer,
which will cure of it self: or with the remedies mentioned in the ulcers of the
mouth, if it come outwardly it is easier cured as another ulcer: but if the
teeth are rotten and the ulcer reach them, it will hardly be cured til they are
drawn, and there is commonly a disfiguring scarr left after the cure.

If the toothach come from a cool distemper from the matter flowing thither,
The Cure of the Toothach from a simple cold distemper.
the cure is mentioned in a phlegmatic defluxion by hot means: which cures a
simple distemper: Then take heed of al actualy cold things, as Air meat and
Drink and medicines, because cool things are so averse to the teeth, that in a
hot cause, actualy cool things are not good though they give ease, but after
rather increase the pain.

If toothach come from rotten teeth, it will hardly be cured, and return
easily, and if a defluxion be, cure it as we showed in a defluxion.

If toothach be from hollow teeth: The Cure of toothach from Irritation, from
teeth rotten or bound.
Take heed that nothing gets in, and chew upon the sound side, or chew wax or
mastick before to fill the hollow, but experience teaches that that may cause as
much pain as the meat. And therefore that is better in stinking breath caused
by meat corrupting in the teeth as we shall show.

When rotten teeth bring such trouble and pain, upon every light occasion, and
infect their neighbors, especially if they be unuseful, they either must be
drawn by the arts mentioned in corrupt bones, or the place under them must be
made insensible: This is done by burning in the cavity with Aqua fortis or fig
milk, or Spurge or Sorry, as Diascorides, taken in with Wool or Cotton and stopped
in with Wax from falling out, this done often breaks the teeth out, or burn the
rotten teeth with a hot Iron, that the part under may loose sense, and the
tooth fall out.

If any trouble follows drawing, because the teeth will be bound by things that
get in between them, use a toothpicker of mastick wood or juniper, use it
gently in time of pain, for a little thing disturbs, as only the motion of the
tongue against them when pained, or picking with your fingers, and they who
think to abate pain by picking, are mistaken, and increase it rather.

If from the edg or roughness of the teeth you chew with difficulty, The Cure
of Haemodia or teeth on edge.
chew purslain til it be gone, it is a certain and sure remedy.

Crumbs of bread or tosted cheese or a yolk of a hard egg chewed hot, does, it
but not so quickly.

Or Almonds, or Nuts, or Wax and salt chewed.

If children feel pain when they breed teeth, The Cure of Toothache in children
that breed them.
from the peircing through their gums, then anoint the gums with the brains of
a Cony or Hare, boiled in Wine, or with sweet Butter and Honey, and other
gentle mollifying things, often.

Mathiolus says the stone found in the head of a Snail without a shel, will do
the same.

If the Gums are too hard, and hinder the teeth, which causes great symptoms,
as Convulsions, Fluxes, called Diarrhaeas and Death, then presently cut them
with a Lancet, this may be done safely without fear of inflammation, pain or
bleeding: By this means I saw a famous Surgeon cure many.

We shall show the cure of other accidents in their places.

The pain that is while the tooth is drawing goes away when it is out, The Cure
of pain from a tooth pulled out or drawn.
and that also that went before, for which cause the tooth was drawn. But if it
be only moved or broken, it is worse, and the Patient must suffer again at the
drawing of the stump. To stay bleeding is dangerous if it continue; and when an
Artery is broken, the Cure where of shall be mentioned in Haemorrhages or
Bleeding.

CHAP. IX Of Pain in the Jaws.
The Kinds.
THe Kinds of pains in the Jaws or Throat, either in the uper Jaw, which is the
receptacle into which the two Tonsils meet like an Isthmus, and in whose middle
there is a Caruncle or lump of flesh called Gargareon root, or Palate: or those
pains which are in the lower Jaw joined to the Neck, whether in one place or
more, or these pains which reach to the parts of the Mouth mentioned: are
distinguished first as they move diverse Senses, Sometimes there is a roughness
only or troublesome imitation, sometimes a true pain, which is either
stretching, or burning, or ulcerous.

Roughness of the Jaws is most hurtful to the Voice, Roughness of the jaws. An
irritation in the jaws.

Falling the Gargareon Uvula or Palate


and therefore declared in Hoarsness.

Sometimes there is felt an Irritation with endeavor to Swallow or Vomit. And
then either something itches in the Jaws, or the Gargareon or Uvula being grown
longer and thicker hangs upon the Jaws, and if it stop them any way, it causes
difficulty of breathing and speech. the enlarging of which is called Columella
or (...) in Greek, or the falling of the Uvula.

A stretching pain in the inside of the Jaws, A stretching pain in the jaws
with difficulty of Breathing.
when a Cavity appears in the Neck by reason of the Vertebra or bone thrust
out, hinders Breathing of which we spoke in the defect of breathing. This
from the likeness of a Squinzy, we called The sixth kind of Squinzy, which is
very seldom seen. There is often this stretching pain from a Desluxion (as we
shall show in the causes) without Burning or Inflammation, sometimes with
straitness of Breathing: sometimes with hinderance of Swallowing and Voice:
sometimes with, sometimes without a swelling in the Jaws, or outwardly in the
Neck. And this Disease is called A bastard Quinsie.

With the accidents whereof, the tonsils or Almonds sometimes swel in one or
both sides round like a Ball, Paristhmia what.
and appear open like a Sponge, This is called Paristhmia.

There is a Burning, Sharp, and Pricking pain, An inflaming pain in the Jaws
with difficulut Breathing. A true Quinsie or Cynanch.
also in the Jaws in the Disease called A true Quinsie with difficulty of
Breathing, which is small and often, and fetched with sighing, sometimes that
endangereth Suffocation, so that Breath cannot be fetched but by holding the
Neck upright, and men gape like tired or mad Dogs. This Disease is called
Cinanch. In this swallowing is hindered, and Drink comes forth at the Nose, or
it is swallowed with difficulty, and the endeavor increases pain. There is
often a Fever joined with it, and the accidents thereof, as Heat, Redness of
Face. Thirst seen also by the Pulse and Urin. There is sometimes a manifest
tumor, sometimes not, for which cause there are three sorts of Quinsies; for if
there be no tumor nor Inflammation within or without, it is the first time in
which are the worst accidents: But if a tumor appears in the straitness of the
Jaws, it is the second kind and has great symptoms, but if there be an outward
tumor in the Neck, it is the third kind, and the symptoms are least.

There is a tumor with Redness and Heat in in the tonsils or Almonds, Antiades
this is called Antiades. Sometimes this pain is in the roof, Uva or Uvula.
and is called Uva or Uvula when it swells or grows black with Inflammation. In
these the accidents are mild, as in the gentler Quinsie, except that meet with
it. If the Inflammations in these three places turn to Imposthumes, pain and
other accidents increase, and when it is broken they abate and an Ulcer
follows.

Sometimes there is an ulcerous pain in the Jaws, either in the upper part of
the throat, or in the Almonds or roof, with an Ulcer reaching to the Palate,
and sometimes the roof is consumed wholly in part, or this pain is felt below,
or deep, Consumption of the Roof.
and follows the Quinsie mentioned, and matter is spet forth. Or if it come
alone, the pain reaches downwards to the stomach with great burning,
especially when they swallow, which is hindered: But when it is in the upper
parts it hinders swallowing, breathing, and voice also.

The Causes.
The Cause of these Diseases, The part affected.
namely of Molestation with Irritation (we spoke of roughness of the Jaws
elsewhere) and of pains, with Distension, Inflammation and Ulcer, is either in
hidden parts, as in the muscles of the Jaws and parts adjacent, or in the lower
Glandules joining to the rough Artery, or in the passages through the inside of
the Neck, Oesaphagus or Gullet (for the Diseases of the rough Artery are
described in defect of Breathing) Or is in manifest places of the Jaws, as in
the tonsils roof or the tunicle by which it gets often to the Palate. The cause
of all these pains is either a Flux of Blood or excrements, or solution of
continuity. Of solution of Continuity, we spoke in Defect of Breathing, how it
comes from a Vertebra or Bone started in the Neck, which causes sixth kind of
Quinsie.

If Blood fall into the Muscles of the Jaws it causes a true Inflammation or
Quinsie, Inflommation of the Jaws, Tonsils, Roof, is the cause of a trum
Quinsie, the Antiades or Uvula.
which is gentler or worse, as the Flux is more inward or outward, for if it
fall upon the inward Muscles of the Larynx, Jaws, and bone called Hyodes which
serve for Breathing, Voice, and swallowing, because the pain is great, and as
it were suffocating, it causes the first and worse sort of quinzy. But if it
sal upon the outward muscles of the neck, it less hinders those offices, and
causes a gentler quinzy, which manifests it self with an external tumor,
which is the third sort. But if the Defluxion fall upon both inward and outward
muscles, it is between both, and causes the second sott of Quinzy, in which
the tumor is not so hidden as in the first, but may be seen in the inside of
the Jaws: Thus we better distinguish Quinsies, than as the Defluxion falls
upon this or that Muscle for they being hidden it cannot be discerned by us
upon which they fall) to call them Cynache, Paracynanche, Synanche,
Parasynanche. Moreover if the blood flow rather upon the Glandules on both
sides of the rough Artery, which are easily inflamed by reason of the veins
into which they are wrought, there is a kind of Quinsie (and rather because the
Muscles adjacent are also inflamed) better or worse as the Inflammation is
spread in those muscle. If the Defluxion falls upon the upper Glandules or
tonsils, or upon the Weasand, it causes the Inflammation of those parts called
Antiades and Uvula. these Inflammations spread to the parts adjacent, and are
more usual than a Quinsie, because the Blood will sooner flow to these lose
Glandules that have many great Veins than to other.

If it fall upon the Gullet or Oesaphagus, The Inflammation of the Gullet and
its Causes.
which is seldom, it causes a far greater pain, especially in swallowing, from
the beginning of the Gullet to the very Stomach, but not with such difficulty
of breathing, except it extend to the parts adjacent.

The Cause of this Flux of Blood and Inflammation that comes from thence is
the same with that of other Inflammations, namely plethory or fullness of Blood,
or Heat, or thinness of the same, which sends it self thither rather than to
another part by reason of the disposltion of the place: this comes often from a
Synoch Fever, when the Blood is first burnt in the Veins; and then a part
thereof is sent thither (as I showed in Fevers) hence Quinsies and Instammations
of other parts, as Gullet, Mouth, Tongue, are the symptoms of these Fevers;
that begin with them; or come presently after them. Also Blood carried thither
from other Causes may make Inflammations in the Throat, but a Fever is not
joined therewith, except it come from other Causes. But it may come from the
pain which these parts receive from other Diseases, or from Inflammation of the
Jaws, by actually or potentially hot things, as Pepper, Cuckowpints, Laurel,
given in jest sometimes. Or from very cold Drink while the body is hot, by
reason of the sudden repercussion, when the blood flies back and returns
again with force, because the blood is stirred up and sent out of the Veins;
except it come from a Synoch, as we said: Also I observed that this came from
too much straining in Childbearing, the blood being driven to the upper Veins
of the Neck in a Woman that died. And it is probable that it may come from
other strainings, roaring, or holding breath at going to stool.

A Humor falling from the Head, A defluxion into the Jaws, Tonsils, Palate, is
the cause of a Bastard Quinsie, falling of the Almonds, and Uvula.
under the tunicle of the Palate, if it be carried to the Muscles of the Throat
will cause a Bastard Quinsie: which is stronger or weaker, as the Flux is upon
the inward or outward muscles, as we showed in the Flux of Blood: and for that
Cause will cause a tumor more or less apparent, but if the Flux fall upon the
upper Glandules or Tonsils, or the Palate only, which being a loose and soft
piece of Flesh easily receive the humors, it will cause the Paristhmia and
Columella.

The natural and efficient cause is the same with that of all Defluxions, the
adjuvant or helping cause is a fitness of the parts to receive it, because they
are close under the Head, or because they are loose or weak: and they are
sooner hurt if they have formerly been oftended from other Causes.

The Solution of Continuity causes pain expressing the sense of an Ulcer. This
is an Ulcer, An Ulcer in the Jaws Tonsils, or Almonds, Palate, Gullet, is the
cause of an ulcerous pain and Consumpion of the Palate.
an Excoriation, or Rawness, or Wound in the Jaws from diverse causes. An Uulcer
comes often after the said Inflammations of the Jaws, Tonsils and and Palate
suppurated and turned to an Imposthume after breaking. or from a sharp
defluxion that first caused a tumor, or presently exulcerated, there comes an
Excoriation of the tunicle of the Jaws, Tonsils or Gullet, which infects the
Palate, and eats upon other parts adjacent. Also it may come from a malignant
matter which seizes upon the membranes so much in the Leprosy and French Pox,
hence come those stubborn Ulcers in the Palate, and Jaws, and Nostrils, that
eat up the Glandule and Uvula. Also the Gullet may be cleft and excoriated from
Vapors that are hot and sharp in malignant and sharp burning Fevers, from
whence they may feel pain a long time after in swallowing, down to the Stomach.
A Wound in the Jaws and Gullet, causes an ulcerous pain in them.
Also a pain in the Gullet may be from sharp and pricking things fallen by
chance into the Jaws and Gullet, that would them, and the greater if there be
an Inflammation. If these wounds come externally they shall be spoken of in
external wounds.

The Cure.
If these diseases come from a defluxion of humors upon the parts of the jaws,
Praediction or Foretelling.
and there is Inflammation in the first sort of a true Quinzy, it is very
violent and kills in eighteen hours space, the other is sharp and is judged the
second third or fourth day at farthest; The hope of Cure is more when the tumor
is outwardly, and admits of applications, and may be better cleansed when
broken. The third is less dangerous, because the tumor is outward. That which
is in the lower Glandule is more or less doubtful of Cure, as it is joined with
any kind of Quinzy. The safest is the Inflammation of the Tonsills and Palate
because they are more visible, or of the Gullet to which Remedies may be
swallowed, except the Inflammations bring greater danger by spreading to other
parts. But if a Defluxion of any other humor cause a bastard Quinzy, it is not
without danger if it obstruct inwardly, that is better which extends outwardly
and causes a tumor in the Neck. That humor that fills the Almonds and Palate
is casier cured.

As for the Cure, The Cure of a true and false Quinz^, Paristhmia, Uvula
Columella, or Gulet inflamed or swallow, by taking away the Cause.
it differs as the Defluxion is of blood, or an Inflammation of the Jaws, or
Almonds or Tonsill or Palate or Gulet the cure of which agrees in many things,
or as the Defluxion is of another humor upon the Jaws in a bastard Quinzy, or
upon the Tonsills or Uvula or Guler, then the cure differs from the former. In all we proceed as follows.

In every Inflammation of the Jaws, or any part of them a vein is to be opened
when it is great, or to prevent it from being great, especialy when the body is
plethorick, in a Quinzy especialy it must be quickly done, open a vein in the
arm first for revulsion, that that which is most visible or the cephalike or
head vein which is most usual, or that by the thumb, bleed foundly, and if need
be often, Hippocrates perscribes the vein under the breasts to be opened for
women, or that in the foot, if their courses be stopped. In women with child
bleed also but sparingly, after revulsion open that vein under the tongue for
derivation, the same day, or presently after, because the disease is acute.
Archigenes opens the forehead vein, others that in the neck. In a cold
Defluxion if there be pain or streightness, bleed also.

Cupping glasses to the shoulders neck and under the breasts, do the same,
especialy if they be placed in a Quinzy in the top of the neck upon the second
Vertebra, that they may breath and swollow better and they are better with
scarification, which is good also under the Chin and in the Cheeks, also
Horsleeches may be applied instead thereof, and in great necescity,
Vesicatories and Causticks, to the neck or head, this is done by way of
prevention to those that are subject to this disease, all these are good in
other Defluxions.

Also Frictions and Ligatures and washings are good in all Defluxions, to cause
revulsion.

We apply to the head things that stop fluxes, and strengthen it, after purging.

An Emplaster for the crown or hinder part of the head, Take Pitch two dragms,
Frankincense, Mastick, Labdanum each a dragm, with Gum Ammoniak dissolved in
Vinegar; Make a large round plaster.

A stronger drawer, Take Pigeons and Mouse Dung two dragms, seeds of Melanthium
infused in vinegar a dragm, Frankincense, Mastick, each a dram and half, with
Galbanum dissolved in vinegar and honey anacardine. Make a Plaster.

A Powder for the Head morning and evening, after rubbing and combing: Take
Mastick, Gum of Ivy each a dram and half, Citron peels, Galangal, red Roses,
Organ, Gith seeds, and Coriander prepared in vinegar, Bay berries, red
Saunders, each a dram, Nutmegs and Cloves each half a dram, grains of Kermes
two scruples, Salt a dram.

When other medicines cannot be swollowed, use Clysters, before bleeding, and
after if need be, to provoke stools and draw down humors.

If the Inflammation of the Jaws come from flux of blood, of what kind soever,
give emollient and cooling Clysters as in Fevers, as this: Take the common
Decoction, Cassia an ounce, course Sugar an ounce and an half, oil of Violets
three ounces, with a little Salt.

When you will provoke more and draw down, Take Mallows, Beets roots and all,
an handful, Bran a pugil, boil them; add Honey of Violets, an ounce and an
half, Electuary of the juice of roses half an ounce, Hiera picra two drams, oil
of Violets three ounces, with juice of Mercury or Beets an ounce, and a little
Salt, make a Clyster.

If a bastard Quinzy come from a waterish defluxtion, or swelling of the
tonsils, or falling down of the Uvula, use Clysters prescribed in those
Defluxions.

Or this, Take Mallows, Marshmallows, Arrach, roots and all, each an handful,
Orris roots an ounce, Sage and Marjoram, each half an handful, Chamoemel
Melilot and Lavender flowers and Bran each a pugil, Carna seeds two drams; boil
them, add Hiera Colocynthidos three drams, Honey of Roses two ounces, oil of
Chamoemile and of Nuts, each an ounce and an half, with Salt, make a Clyster.

we use Errhines to the nose to divert, Phlegm from the tonsils and Palate, or
masticatories that cut Phlegm, and fetch it from the Jaws.

Sometimes instead of Clysters we give if they can swallow liquid things, in
Inflammations of Cassia, Tamarinds, Manna dissolved in syrup of Roses, Violets
and the like; as in Fevers. In other Defluxions stronger Remedies are given, as
Hiera Picra commended in a Bastard Quinsie two scruples, in Pills, after a short
Supper, they say it cured many of the Quinsie in Rome when it was deadly. Also
a Decoction of a dram of Turbith with Liquorish, Manna, or Cassia is good if
often given.

Prepare the humors with thickners if it be hot, as syrup of Violets, Poppies,
an Emulsion of Cold seeds, Rose water, or Diacodium, and other things in a
Catarrh.

Or if the Defluxion be cold give things to correct it, as syrup of Maidenhair,
Bugloss, or Scabious water.

Or thus: Take Liquorish an ounce, Maidenhair, Bugloss, each a handful; Violets
and Scabious, each a pugil; Raysons stoned, Jujubes, Sebestens, each six pair,
Barley a pugil, the four cold seeds, each a dram and an half: boil them, and in
a pint and an half dissolve simple Oxymel and Honey of Roses each an ounce and
an half; Sugar an ounce: make a Julep for three or four Doses with a dram of
Diatragacanth frigid.

Also the Decoction and Water of Violets.

In a cold cause, give syrup of Hysop, Horehound, and Liquorish, with
Coltsfoot and Horehound Water.

Or thus: Take roots of Elicampane two drams, Liquorish six drams, Hysop a
handful, Figs ten, Dates five, Anise seeds two drams, Rosemary flowers a pugil:
boil them, and in a pint and an half dissolve Honey of Rosemary two ounces,
Sugar an ounce and an half; Sugar candy an ounce, make a Julep for some Doses
with a dram of species Diareos.

To the place affected we apply Topics inwardly and outwardly, The Topics for
a true and false Quinsie.
ininwardly Mouth-waters or things to lick, or Fumes, outwardly things to the
Neck, as the part is affected.

In a Quinsie from what Defluxion soever, you must use Repellers at the
beginning, while the matter flows, with Coolers if it be true; or without, if
it be a false Quinsie. after a Defluxion add Concocters and Resolvers, which we
use alone at last, always while there is pain and straitness, give Lenitives
to assuage pain and dilate the passages with other things, and things which
cleanse and cut tough phlegm which uses to stick there in a cold Defluxion. the
examples are as follows.

At the first give Repellers. the first Gargarism. Take Rose, Plantane,
Honey-suckle water, each four ounces; add Vinegar or Pomegranate Wine or the
juice of sour fruits, and two ounces of Diamoron or Honey of Roses.

Another: Take Plantane water four ounces, Rose water two ounces, Sugar of
Roses or Honey of Roses an ounce, Alum a dram: boil them a little or dissolve.

A third: Take Pomegranate peels, flowers of Pomegranates, Cypress nuts, each
an onnce; and Teazle, Galls half an ounce, Lentiles, red Roses, each a pugil;
Myrtle seeds half an ounce, Plantane seeds two drams: boil them in Water and
Honey and in ia pint dissolve Diamoron, sour Pomegranate Wine four ounces, add
a little Alum to make it stronger, Repelling Pouders are blown in, as of
Plantane leaves and red Roses and the like.

In progress of the Disease use Repellers and Dissolvers together: As, Take
water of Self-heal, Plantane, Willow, each three ounces, Cassia, Diamoron,
each an ounce.

Or: Take Liquorish an ounce, Cypress roots, peels of Pomegranates, each half
an ounce; Pomegranate leaves two drams, red Roses a pugil, Figs six, Dates
three, Raisons twelve pair, Jujubes and Sebestens, each six pair; Barley a
pugil, Faenugreek and Lineseed, each half an ounce: boil them, and in a pint,
dissolve Diamoron compounded with Saffron and Myrrh two ounces, Cassia and
Oxymel each an ounce.

The juice of Ivy drunk from three drams, to half an ounce, is good to repel
and digest. This Plant is so powerful in Diseases of the throat and Neck, that
the Vulgar think Spoons made of Ivy do good.

At length use Resolvers, and Concocters and Clensers.

Thus a Gargarism. Take water of Dwarf-Elder and Self-heal water, each an
ounce; Hysop and Rose water, each two ounces. Or this Decoction. Take Liquorish
an ounce, roots of Dwarf-Elder and Radish, and Oris, each half an ounce; red
Roses, Mallow;, Chamaemel and Elder flowers, each a pugil; Hysop half a
handful, Radish seed two drams, Faenugreek seed half an ounce, Figs ten, Dates
five, Bran a pugil: boil and in ten ounces dissolve Sapa, Honey of Roses, each
an ounce and an half; Swallows nest, two drams, Myrrh, Mummy, each a dram;
Saffron, Sal Armoniack, each half an ounce.

Or this: Take species of Diaireos a dram, Pepper half a dram, Saffron and
Myrrh, each a scruple; Juice of Liquorish a scruple, with syrup of Hysop two
ounces: make a Lenitive.

Or thus: Take Pepper half a dram, Saffron and Myrrh each half a scruple; Orris
roots a dram, Honey three ounces, mix them. Or use the Eclegma of Scribonius
Largus.

A white Dogs-turd called Album Grecum finely poudered and blown into the
Mouth, or mixed with these Eclegma's is excellent, or with syrups. A Goose-turd
dried does the same.

Also the powder of salted and dried Swallows a dram, with convenient Water is
good according to Dioscorides.

Or a dram of the powder of a Boars tusk with Linseed Oil.

Or the Smoke of Amber taken in with a Funnel.

Or these Lenitives and Dilators when there is pain and straitness.

As a Gargle of hot Milk, Goats is best.

Another. Take Milk half a pint, the white of an Egg well beat, the mucilage of
Fleabane, Quince or Line seed each an ounce, Penidies half an ounce.

Bran or Bread boiled in Water and strained or Almond milk does the same.

The common white Troches are good also to be held under the Tongue.

Or: Take species of Diapapaver or Diatragacanth frigid, each a scruple; with
pulp of Tamarinds, make Troches.

Or hold troches of Diapapaver or Diatragacanth frigid in the mouth.

Or this Eclegma. Take species of Diatragacanth and Diapapaver each a dram;
with syrup of Violets and Jujubes make a Loboch.

Lenitives that cleanse the slime are thus made. Take Liquorish two ounces, pulp
of Raisons two drams, juice of Liquorish half a dram, with Gum traganth infused
in Poppy water: make a Loboch.

Another in the progress of the Disease. Take species Diapenid and Diaireos,
each a dram; with syrup of Hysop make a Lohoch.

Apply outwardly to the Neck or under the Chin, or where a tumor appears at the
first, not things that repel, but that draw forth, as these relaxing.

As temperate Oils, of Olives, sweet Almonds, Violets: or moderate warm, as Oil
of Chamaemel, Lillies, Orris, Wall-slower, and the like: anoint the parts and
dip Wool therein and lay thereupon. Dioscorides commends Oil of Frogs, or of
Wood-lice, or Sows.

Also Ointment of Marshmallows, and that which restores called Resumptivum,
with those Oils and a little Saffron.

Menstrual Blood with Vinegar is good against all Inflammations of the Jaws and
parts adjacent. Also the leaves of Hors-radish.

Use Fomentations first before you anoint, made of flowers of Chamaemel,
Lillies, Melilot, Linseed and Faenugreek.

But when you desire not only to draw out the humors, but also to dry, Consume
and Digest, use the following.

Make a Pultis of a Swallows Nest cleansed and poudered, and boiled in Wine and
Water, and strain or mix the powder with the Oils and Ointments mentioned. if
you will Digest, apply it with Honey.

Swallows dung in Powder, or the Ashes of it burnt, mixed with the rest, or
applied with Honey, or a dried Dogs-turd, or Birds dung, chiefly of Hens and
Pigeons: For it is neither necessary nor decent to apply Man's dung when other
will serve.

Also use Sows or Wood-lice dried and poudered with Honey.

Other Digesters. Take Aloes two drams, Ox Gall a dram, Pepper half a dram,
Alum a dram, with Honey make a Liniment.

Another. Take juice of Danewort and wild Cowcumber, two ounces, Ox Gall half
an ounce: with Honey make an Ointment.

Rhasis uses Honey Anacardine.

Another. Take juice of Danewort two ounces, juice of Ouyons an ounce, juice of
wild Cowcumbers as much (if it may be had) Oil of Flower-de-luce and Lillies,
each an ounce and an half; boil them, add Swallows nest prepared half an ounce,
Litharge a dram and an half: with Wax make a Liniment, or with Wax and Pitch
make a Plaster.

Or this Cataplasm. Take Lillies and Onyons, of each three; roast them, ad half
as much of a rotten Apple and a handful of Wormwood, boil them in Wine and
Water beat them, and with Bean flower two ounces, Oil of Chamaemel and
Wall-flower, each an ounce and an half; Hens or Pigeous dung two ounces, make a
Cataplasm.

If an Imposthume come in a Quinsie, The Cure of an Imposthume in the Quinsie.
as we may know by the pain and other accidents increased, and the humor cannor
be Digested or Resolved by the Remedies internal or external mentioned, use
Maturatives or Ripeners inwardly and outwardly.

Inwardly we ripen with this Gargle. Take Lillies, Onyons, or Leeks, each two
ounces; Liquorish an ounce, Hysop, Scabious, each a handful; Figs six, Raisons
stoned an ounce, Faenugreek and Linseed, each half an ounce; Mallow and
Colewort seed, and Swallows nest, each two drams: boil them in Water and with
Honey make a Gargle.

Outwardly ripen with these.

Apply a Pultis of Line-seed meal with Goats Milk.

Or thus: Take meal of Faenugreek and Line-seed, each two ounces; crumbs of
Bread four ounces, with Hogs grease and Oil of sweet Almonds make a Pultis.

Or this Cataplasm. Take Marshmallow, Mallows roots and all, Henbit and
Pillitory of the Wall, each a handful: green roots of Lillies two ounces, green
Orris and Briony roots an ounce, Chamomel flowers and Violets, each a pugil;
Figs twelve, Dates five: boil and stamp them, add meal of Line-seed, Foenugreek
and Barley, each two ounces: with Butter and Hens grease, Oil of sweet Almonds
and Chamomel, mix them.

If the Imposthume in a Quinsie break hot, you must endeavor to open it before
it be perfectly ripe.

With this Gargle, hot used. Take juice of Onyons or Leeks and Lemons equal
parts, with Goats milk.

Or: Take of the Gargle mentioned a pint, add and boil therein Pellitory roots
and Mustard seed, each two drams; Myrrh half a dram, Saffron a scruple, Oxymel
simple an ounce.

This is stronger. Take of that Junket that is made of Mustard and Honey,
dissolve it in Honey and Water, and with a little Vinegar make a Gargle.

Or: Take Mustard seed two drams poudered, Oxymel an ounce, Vinegar of Squils
and Wine, each half an ounce: make a Gargle.

Vociferation or Roaring may do something to break it, but swallowing may do
more, if it be with great force, and of something that is hard as a crust of
Bread.

Or: Take a Sponge or a piece of salt Pork and tied to a thread fast, let it be
swallowed down and drawn forth again.

We open the Imposthume if it can be seen and reached, with an Instrument, or
with the Finger or Nayl, or a wax Candle, or other wooden or Iron Instrument
that will cut.

In the Inflammation of the tonsills and Uvnla, Remedies for the Tonsils or
Palate inflamed, or for the Antiades or Uvula.
we first use inward medicines as in the Quinzy, which are astringent, after
resolvers, and at lasT things only to be swallowed: always mixing things that
cleanse by reason of the slime that sticks there, and that mitigate pain if it
be great, so that many medicines mentioned in the Quinzie are here good, and
such as are mentioned in the Inflammations of the parts of the Mouth, or these.

An astringent and cooling Gargle, Take Rose and Honey-suckle water, Privet and
Plantane water, each two ounces; Juice of Barberyes, or Pomegranates, or sower
Cherries three ounces, juice of Quinces, Roses or Sorrel, each an ounce; syrup
of Mulberies, Vinegar of Roses or green Grapes half an ounce. mix them.

An astringent and cooling Gargle Take sower Prunes dry twelve, sharp Cherries
twelve pair, dried Pears five, Sorrel, Purslain each an ounce, red Roses a
pugil. boil them in a pint add juice of Currants and syrup of Mulberies each two
ounces, Vinegar of Roses as much as fit.

When you will bind more, Take roots of Mulberries an ounce and half, Acorn
cups, Pomegranate Peels, each an ounce; Bramble tous, Plantane, Agrimony,
Solomons-seal Shepherds purse, Hearts tongue, each a handful and half, red
Roses a pugil, Pomegranate flowers half an ounce, Galls two drams, make a
Decoction, in a pint thereof dissolve syrup of Quinces and red Roses dried,
Pomgranate wine each an ounce and half, with a little Alum. mix them.

Cardan comends this following remedy for all Inflammations of the Jaws, dryness
and Clefts of the tongue.

Take a good quantity of Housleek, and to half a pint of the juice, add Salt
Ammoniak two drams, put it in a moist place under the earth til the Salt be
dissolved, then distill it in Balneo and wash the mouth in all Inflammations of
the Jaws.

In the Inflammation of the Uvula, a Powder is made of the stone called Ageratum
by Galen or the bloodstone, this must be laid upon the Uvula, or blown in with
a quil.

When you will astring and cleanse also; Take Liquorish two ounces, Agrimony,
Vervain, Coleworts each an handful; red Roses and Mallows, each a pugil;
Barley, Lentils leaves bruised, each half a pugil: Figs six: boil them in red
Wine and Water, and in a pint, dissolve Oxymel simple three ounces, Dianucum
half an ounce, juice of Roses an ounce, syrup of Quinces an ounce.

You may make Lohochs to cleanse mentioned in the Q^insie, and Sugared or
Honeyed Biskets.

When you will Cleanse and consume the residue, or Digest. Take Liquorish two
ounces, Calamus and Gal^ngal half an ounce, Hysop, Pennyroyal, Savory, each a
handful; Rosemary flowers, Violets and Mallows, each a pugil: Barley a pugil,
Raisons stoned two ounces, Dates six, Figs twelve, Myrrh and Frankincenss, each
two drams; boil them in red Wine with steeled Water, and in a pint, dissolve
Honey of Roses threo ounces, syrup of Liquorish two ounces, syrup of Hysop an
ounce: make a Gargarism.

A Digesting powder in the increase of an Uvula inflamed. Take Orris half a
dram, Frankincense a dram, meal of Orobus half a dram, Saffron a scruple: make
a Powder.

In the Swelling of the Almonds from a phlegmatic Defluxion, Topical Remedies
for the Paristhmia or swelling of the Almonds.
the former Remedies are good: but you must use loss Coolers, and mix Clensers
and Digesters.

In the looseness of the Uvula from a cold Defluxion you must presently use
Astringents and Dryers to make it shorter, Topical Remedies for the falling
down of the Palate or Columella.
and bind it that it may not fall down, as those mentioned or these following.

A Gargle. Take rooes of Celondine an ounce, Agrimony, Hart's-tongue, Self-heal,
Golden Rod, Privet, each a handful; boil them in red Wine, red Roses and
Barley, each a pugil; Galls half an ounce, boil them in red Wine, add a little
Vinegar, and syrup of Mulberries an ounce.

Or: Take Pomegranate peels two ounces, flowers of Pomegranates half an ounce,
red Roses, Lentils, each a pugil; Myrtle seeds two drams: boil them as
formerly, in the increase of the Infirmity, add a little Pepper, and Pellitory
roots, and Chamomel flowers.

The Water of Phyllitis or Hart's-tongue is a good Gargle.

Or Vinegar and Water.

Also juice of Pomegranates and sour Grapes,

Troches to be held in the Mouth. Take Acacia Hypocistis, each a dram and an
half; the best Bole a dram Starch two drams, Snakeweed half a dram, with Gum
Tra ganth make Troches.

If you take fine powder that is astringent in a little Spoon, or upon a
Spatula, and depress the Tongue and touch the Uvula therewith, it will presently
be made shorter.

It is commonly made of Pepper, the long Pepper is best.

Or of Alum or Salt Armoniack burnt, or flour of Brass according to
Dioscorides.

Or: Take as much Salt as an Hazel Nut, burn it in an Iron spoon til it be red,
add long Pepper a dram, Ginger and Pellitory, each half a dram; make a Powder.

Also burnt Snails shells, Dill roots and all, and Nutshels burnt are good.

Or the Powder of Sandarach.

Or: Take Galls, or Pomegranate peels a dram, Bole, Mastick Myrrh, Acacia or
Hypocistis, each half a dram; Pellitory and Pepper, each a scruple: make a
Powder.

I have often found the Powder of Lapis prunellae is a special Remedy against
the falling of the Uvula, because it sequeezeth forth the Humors that fills it.

As for the Cutting we have already spoken thereof.

If the Defluxion be only upon the Tonsils or Almonds or Palate, we apply
outwardly first things under the lower Jaw, as relax not, as in the Quinsie:
for there is not such danger, that we need draw it suddenly forth; but such as
dry the humor and astringe or bind the part.

They are made of Consumers of the Humors and Digesters, with some Astringents
mentioned in the Quinsie.

Or thus: Take a Swallows nest prepared two ounces, dried white Dogs dung and
Cypress Nuts, each an ounce; round Birthwort half an ounce, red Roses a dram,
with Oxymel apply them.

Or: Take Swallow nest prepared an ounce, Litharge half an ounce, Aloes three
drams, Alum two drams, Salt a dram, with Honey of Roses or Oxymel.

In the increase of the Disease, use only Digesters or Emollients lest it turn
to a Scirrhus, as in the Scrophulus, and if the tumor does turn Scirrhus, then
use things to be mentioned in Scrophulus.

If the Inflammation or Uvula turn to an Imposthume of the Almonds, use
Ripeners as in the Quinsie.

And open the Imoposthume if ripe, which is easy, because you may come better
at the part.

This may be done in the Uvula, and also before the suppuration to prevent it,
by Scarification.

If the Uvula cannot be cured, but remains corrupt, and black, after the
Inflammation, take off the corrupt part. Or if it remain longer or greater by
reason of the Defluxion, take off the top of it, because it causes impediment.

This is done best by a sharp pair of Sizers, this done stop the blood with
cold and astringent Mouth-waters or Causticks, as we shall show in Haemorrhages
or bleeding.

The same is done by an actual cautery, through an Iron quil, if you allay the
pain after with Anodines, or Milk held in the mouth, but a potential cautery
cannot be used so well.

In the Inflammation of the Gullet, use Astringents at the first, then Digesters
inwardly as we showed, or these Lenitives.

Take Cream of Barley, Mucilages, the white and yolk of Eggs, Topical remedies
in the Inflammation and Imposthume of the Gulet.
and swallow them with Sugar.

Or Take Sebestens twelve pair, Quince seeds half an ounce, Fleabane and Poppy
seeds each two drams, Barley a pugil: boil them, and in the Mucilage dissolve
Penides.

It is good also though the Gulet ly deep, to apply outwardly things,
prescribed against Inflammation of the Jaws.

If there be an Imposthume after Inflammation in the Gullet, and break not,
things swallowed against the Quinzie are good, and the Imposthume may be opened
with an Instrument, such as we mentioned in the dissiculty of swallowing, for
drawing things out of the Gullet.

It is good in all Inflammations of the Jaws, and parts thereof, to put oil of
sweet Almonds hot into the cars.

Amulets are allowed as the head of a Viper hung about the neck.

Or if you strangle a Viper in a scarlet string, and after hang the string,
about your neck, it will do miracles, in this case, according to Galen.

Also hang Paeony roots about the neck.

Or Colewort roots for the diseases of the Uvula.

As for other accidents especially in a Quinzie, we allow a slender Diet; And
Drink to allay thirst, if they can swallow with Barley, Raisons and Sugar.

we allow but little Sleep, and let the Air be pure and cool.

For fear of Suffocation, let the Patient ly with his head high, and apply
other things to the cause of the disease, to preserve strength, and to take
away straitness of passage.

If there be an Ulcer after an Imposthume in the Quinzie, Topical remedies
against an Ulcer after an Imposthume, in a Quinsie.
known by the matter voided, take heed least it get to the Lungs, and swallow
it not but spit it out continualy.

Therefore cleanse the Ulcer diligently, with Gargles of Wine and Honey.

Or with Milk, or warm Whey and Sugar.

Or with Barley, Lentile, and Figg water, with Honey of Roses.

Then use driers as Steeled Milk, or Milk with Comfrey roots boiled in it, or
mixed with Bole, or other things to be mentioned in ulcers of the Jaws.

If the Ulcer come outward it must be cured as other external Ulcers.

If there be an Ulcer left after Suppuration of an Inflammation of the Almonds
and palate, The Topical remedies for the Ulcers of the Almonds and Palate.
or other external causes, presently apply topical means. But if it come from
evil humors in other diseases, cure that disease first as shall be showed.

As if it came from a Defluxion, first purge the body for that and make other
diversions as in other Defluxions, as we showed in other diseases of the Jaws
from Defluxions.

With the aforesaid topical Clensers and Driers being strong, as we showed in
Ulcers of the mouth, we may cure these profound or deep Ulcers, or with these
following proper for the Palate ulcerated or rotten.

As Goats milk, or Cows, or Sheeps milk, with Flints or Steel quenched therein,
it will cleanse and heal the Ulcer.

Comfry, Agrimony, Plantane, Nightshade, and Endive water are excellent.

Also juice of Agrimony, Coleworts, Vervain, Shepheards-purse and syrup of
Mulberries.

Or the Decoction of Dogs-tongue, and Herb Robert Danewort, and Burnet.

To which Waters, Juyces, or Decoctions, add Sugar or Honey of Roses to cleanse
more; and they will be stronger with Oxymel of Squils and Alum.

Also apply to the Uvula Honey of Roses and Alum.

Also to dry strongly. Take fine Bole two drams, Dragons blood a dram, Ceruss,
Tutty, each half a dram; burnt Hartshorn a scruple: with juice of
Shepheards-purse, make a Liniment.

Or boil Frankincense, Sarcocol, or Mirth in Wine and wash.

Or use Alum water prescribed in Ulcers of the Mouth.

Or this: Take Sugar half a pound, Alum two ounces, Salt an ounce: distill a
Water.

Or use Limewater, that is Water with Lime quenched in it.

Or Sublimate Water to touch the Palate warily with them.

A Powder. Take quick Sulphur two drams, Alum a dram, Mastick, Frankincense,
Myrrh, each half a dram; Pellitory roots, and burnt Hartshorn, each a scruple:
make a fine Powder, to which add four ounces of sublimated Wine.

If the Ulcer in the Uvula cannot be cured, cut it off speedily before it eat
off the Palate and other parts near or burn it as we showed.

If the Ulcer or rawness of the Gullet come from a sharp Defluxion, Topical
Remedies for the rawness or excoriation of the Gullet.
or a hot Vapor ascending, these must be first turned away if they continue,
the Flux must be stopped, and the Jaws lenified, and the sense of feeling a
little abated. Or if it be wounded from sharp things that still stick there,
take them out by the Art explained in dissicult swallowing.

Then Cure the Ulcer with Topics choosing such in a simple excoriation which
gently cleanse and dry and that may be swallowed down to the part affected
without trouble.

Such as we showed in Ulcers of the Jaws after a Quinsie, to Gargle with,
which swallowed will cure a sore Throat.

If the Ulcer lie deep and be foul, you must use stronger Clensers and Driers:
Also if it be wounded from things swallowed; use the Remedies prescribed in the
Ulcers of the Tonsils and Palate made of fat Earths, Bole or Lemnos Earth, and
drying fruits juyced, as Acacia, green Grapes, and Dragons blood. Or those that
are made of Gums, as of Frankincense, etc. and other Astringents and Driers
mentioned in the Inflammation of the Jaws.

Also use such Fumes as are in the Ulcers of the mouth mentioned to dry.

And the outward means mentioned in Quinsie.

CHAP. X. Of the Griefs or Pain of the Breast.
The Kinds.
THe inward Greefs or Pains of the Breast, are either Molestations only in
diverse strait passages of the Breast following diverse Diseases. Of these we
spoke in Breathing hindered, because the Breath is either hindered or depraved
thereby.

Of true pains in the Breast, some are alone, others mixed. A false Pleurisy.
A Pain alone, is when without other great accidents, there is a pricking in
either side, especially in breathing, in some certain place, or moving; hence
comes the false Frenzy, but not a true, because there is neither Cough nor
Fever, except there be some other accident. If this pricking be great the
breathing is little, and short, A pricking pain.
because if it be great, the pain is increased, and therefore the Party breaths
gently. Of this there are two sorts differing in the Cause, the one is from
Wind, the other from Phlegm If they come outward with tumor and pain, they
belong to external tumors to be mentioned in the habit of the body.

Of mixed pains, especially with a Cough or Fever, some are pricking, A true
Pleurisy.
called true Pleurisies, and are sometimes in one side sometimes on the other,
in a certain place, especially in breathing, which is also little and short,
and very hot. This pain is greater when they lie upon the sound side, then when
they lie upon the Back or the side affected.

Another pain in the Breast unaccompanied with the aforesaid accidents is
great, Peripneumonia.
contracting as it were the Breast and Back, and drawing aside the Clavicle,
with greater straitness than the other, with pricking of the Breast sometimes
before, or behind, or on both sides, this is called Peripneumonia, very like
the Pleurisy in all things, but in respect of pain. And the liker if there be
a pricking pain in the side, and then is a Pleurisy and Perpneumonia mixed
together.

There is a Cough in both kinds, more or less, which increases the pain,
especially if it be pricking; by which at the first sooner or later, there is
spit forth spittle mixed with matter or blood, sometimes which is rare, it is
without, afterward there is matter bloodish, and at length true matter white,
or yellow, or green, or black, concocted or not, sometimes clammy, sometimes
stinking, sometimes otherwise.

In both the Pleurisy and Peripneumonia there is a Fever with a pricking pain,
and both Diseases begin with horror and chilness, and a Fever following,
Respiration is increased and the pulse, and the Artery is hard and rough as a
Saw when the pulse is touched, though some think that in Peripneumony the pulse
is soft and wet. The Urin is high, and there is great thirst: and in a
Peripneumony the Cheeks are very red, and the Fever continues so long, with
exacerbations or fits in the night til the disease declineth or changes, as we
showed in Fevers.

There are other symptoms in both, from Diseases of the parts adjacent, as
Doting, Swouning, and the like, but then these Diseases are mixed with others.

Besides these there is a pricking pain with burning in the side, A Pleurisy
differing from the rest.
with a Fever and Cough, like a Pleurisy, only in that there is no bloody or
mattery spittle, but a foul and dry Cough, and in that the pain comes outward,
and makes the Breast sore when it is touched, and sometimes there is tumor and
redness. This being differrent from the other in respect of the part affected,
as shall be showed in the Causes, and we call it the Pleurisy of the Membrane.

The Causes.
These Diseases are in the inside of the Breast that cause these pains in the
Pleurisy and Peripneumony, The place affected.
and are either distension or Inflammation.

The Distension of the Membrane that girts in the inward parts of the Breast,
so great that the Membrane is lifted up and down as it were aside, if not torn
or rent from the Ribs and Muscles, causes that pricking pain in a false
Frenzy. This may be from Wind or Humor.

When Wind gets into the spaces, Distension from Wind.
between the flesh and the membranes, it causes the pain called windy. And in
the Breast when it gets between the Intercostal or Muscles between the Ribs, it
distendeth the Membrane and causes the pricking pain of the Windy Pleurisy.

This Wind as in other Diseases comes from eating of crude and windy things;
and it will be sooner in the Breast, if there be outward cold; or it is driven
to the Breast by straining, roaring, coughing, or the like, when the Muscles
are stretched: hence it is that we have seen that after the Breath has been
exposed to the Air, or after great motions there have been pricking pains
sudddenly, especially in bodies subject to wind; and they have abated by heat
and rest.

A Water or phlegmatic humor falling down into the spaces between the Muscles
of the Breast, A Defluxion of Rheum is the cause of a false Pleurisy called
Phlegmatic.
and stretching them with its plenty, as it causes external pricking in the
Breast (of which in external pains) so if it be carried to the inward Membrane
which is easy if it be thin, causes these inward pains, which are outward
also, not only in the Breast, but Shoulders, and that false Pleurisy which
they call phlegmatic.

Besides which there is no other (as some hold) which causes Inflammation and
yet comes from phlegm, for we shall show that all Inflammations comes from blood.

An Inflammation of the Lungs sometimes, Inflammation of the Lungs causes a
true Pleurisy and Peripneumony.
and in the Membranes and parts adjacent together or asunder, as it is in this
or that place causes a true or false Peripneumony or Pleurisy, or that which
is of the Membrane, either alone or mixed, how this is caused we shall declare.

It is the vulgar opinion that the Inflammation of the girding Tunicle causes
a true Plurisie and of the Lungs a Peripneumony: The Inflammation of the
Tunicle is the Cause of the girding Plurisie.
But we will prove not only from anotomies wherein we have seen the Lungs
inflamed after a Pleurisy, but by solid reasons, that the Lungs are inflamed
in a Pleurisy, as well as in a Peripneumony. Because the blood which they so
soon spit cannot be (especialy so quickly) carried through the Lungs and their
vessels, from the Tunicle inflamed, nor matter except the Lungs be ulcerated,
but rather if it come from thence, it should flow into the cavity of the
breast, and cause an Empyema. Therefore because Blood and Matter are quickly
and plentifully set forth in a Pleurisy and Peripneumony, they must come from
the Lungs, and from no other part, as also the other accidents in both
diseases, show that the Lungs must needs be afflicted. Only this is their
argument, that the Lungs are not only inslamed in a Pleurisy, because the
pricking pain which is manifest in the Pleurisy, is obscure in the
Peripneumony or none, and cannot be from the Lungs affected, but in a sensible
and membranous part, which the Lungs are not. But this is not enough, to evince
that though these prickings come from the membrane, yet the Lungs are not
inflamed in a Pleurisy, as well as a Peripneumony: But this is all that will
follow, that if the Lungs are only inflamed (as the truth is) the peripneumony
is in one side (because the Lungs are divided by the Mediastine or Midriffe)
and rather inwardly then outwardly, when there is no pain. But if the
Inflammation be in the outside of the Lungs, then the pricking pains are from
the Tunicle, but gentle, because the Lungs are not altogether insensible. But
if the Inflammation be extended outward so that the Lungs are stretched,
especialy in breathing (at which time pain is only felt) and the Fibers and
small veins and Arteries by which they are joined to the girding Membrane
streined, they pull the Membrane from the breast, though there be no
Inflammation, (as we showed in wind,) and then the pain is in the side, and it
is greater when the Membrane suffers by consent from the Lungs inflamed by
Swelling and Heat.

We deny not but it may be thus, and that the girding Tunicle may be also
inflamed, and also the Periostia or bone Tunicles near it, (but we will not
acknowledge that it can be inflamed alone to cause any other kind of Pleurisy,
as some write, because it sticks so close to the girding Membrane, where it is
covered with Ribbs) which being so, there will not be the true Pleurisy, which
is without the Inflammation of the Lungs, which has bloody and mattery
Spittle, because the girding Membrane cannot be disburdned thereof: But there
will be that kind of Plurisie, which we called peculiarly the Pleurisy of the
girding Membrane. In which if there be great Inflammation, there must be pain
increased from the pressing the breast, and it will extend it self outwarly,
because the Inflammation cannot be contained in the thin Membrane or Periostia
but must reach to the muscles joined thereunto, and so may be felt outwardly,
because the Breast is not so thick, (as we have known in the Inflammation of
the Peritonaeum. And in this kind; If the Inflammation suppurate, the Imposthume
will rather be outwaad then inward, and there open: But if it break inwardly,
the matter gets into the cavity of the Breast rather then into the Lungs,
because it cannot be carried so quickly unto them and pierce through them.

But as these Arguments prove, that this may be so, so it is probable that if
the girding Membrane be ininflamed together with the Lungs, and from them that
that Inflammation in the Membrane will be discussed rather then suppurated,
because the great quantity of Blood in the Lungs at that time, cannot easily be
in so thin a Membrane, or if it could be, it would rather be carried outward,
as we showed, and fill those muscles, and there come to suppuration. And hence
it is that after a true Pleurisy, though the girding Membrane be also inflamed
and nothing appear outward, yet an Empyema seldom follows.

And this is like to be also when the dividing or intercepting Membrane is
inflamed with the Lungs, in which as being a different disease, especially when
the Inflammation reaches to the Capsula of the Heart and Diaphragma, there are
grevious symptoms that seize upon the mind and endanger the life.

These Inflammations both in a Peripneumony and true Pleurisy, being in any
part of the Lungs, or elsewhere, come from Blood, with which the Lungs abounding
by reason of the many great vessels, and being hotter by reason of the Arteries
and the nearness of the Heart, it is easily inflamed: And the Inflammations of
the Lungs are more usual then of any other part. This Inflammation comes from
Blood, (as others,) when it is got into the substance of the Lungs, out of its
vessels which are the Arterial Veins, and Venal Artery, and not into the
branches of the rough Artery, (for otherwise there would be a spitting of
Blood) this Blood therefore fills the Lungs, and lifts them up, causes
Heaviness and Compression and streightness of the Breast, and inflames the
Heart more, that before commonly had a Fever; And by the Cough which it
causes, when it is sent into the branches of the rough Artery, it makes the
Spittle sometimes mattery and after bloody, at length this Blood being ripened
and concocted or suppurated, is coughed up, til it be all spent: The substance
of the Lungs being unhurt, for if they be ulcerated a Phthisis would follow. As
we have seen often Blood alone and other humors turned into Matter, the
substance of the part not being suppurated or ulcerated, both in the eyes and
other parts and in other Excretions made from the Lungs, by other means. Also
it may chance that from Inflammation of the Lungs, the Blood may fall upon the
near side upon the girding Membrane and inflame it, but not usualy, because the
Vessels are small and few, and the vein to which the fault is laid called Azygos
is only on the right side, and the Pleurisy is often on the left; As from the
Inflammation of the Lungs in a true Pleurisy when the sides are attracted and
the girding Membrane pulled aside, there may be a pricking. Hence it is that
Pleurisies are more usual then the peripneumonyes, because the inside only of
the Lungs are not so often inflamed, as it is in a peripneumony, but the
Inflammation reaches outward to the side adjacent, in which the pricking is
greater when they ly upon the sound side, and the Lungs hang down being
Inflamed, and with their weight draw the girding Membrane, then there is more
pain then when they ly on the sick side, and the pain is greater if the
Membrane be Inflamed. Upon which if so much Blood fall, from other causes and
inflame it, the Lungs being sound, there will be another Pleurisy differing
from the true as we showed, in which there is no such Spittle.

All these accidents in the diverse kinds of pleurisies, are also in a
peripneumony, which sometimes begins of it self and sometimes follows a
pleurisy when the Matter is gathered inwardly, and because the Heart is then
more inflamed they cause a more sharp Fever, by which the Blood being heated
also in the superior parts of the Body, there is a redness in the Face and
Cheeks. This is counted the peculiar sign of this disease, and it may be more
observed to be in Peripneumony then Pleurisy, and because this disease is more
usual in old people, if their Cheeks be red it is looked upon as a strange
thing.

According to the variety of the Blood, these inflammations of the Lungs are
diverse, for if it be pure, such as is in the veinous Artery it will be a simple
Phlegmon, in which Spittle is mixed with pure Blood; If the Blood be too thin
or hot, as in the arterial Vein, there will be a phlegmon with Erysepelas, in
which the Fever is greater, as it is if the Blood cause an Inflammation, which
is mixed with pure Choler, and then the Spittle is bloody and yellowish:
Because this is usual, it caused some to write that Peripneumony comes from an
Erysipelas of the Lungs. Also if melancholy be mixed with the Blood causing the
phlegmon, there is blackness with the bloody Spittle. And if Choler joined
with Blood, be the cause of this Inflammation, then there is a Pleurisy, or
tertian Fever, as I have often observed. Oftentimes also without these
Diseases, there is a discoloring of the Spittle, and it is not bloody, but
yellowish, greenish, blackish, from choleric humors; when the Blood is any
otherwise impure, and mixed with vicious humors it causes an impure phlegmon.
But if a phlegmon comes from a crude and waterish Blood, it will be an OEdema,
with gentler accidents, and the Spittle less discolored; as in the
Peripneumony, called therefore crude. Also from this diversity of Blood, If the
Inflammation be in the girding Membrane, the Symptoms will be greater or less.

Because no phlegmon comes from any other humor separated from the Blood, we
cannot make the Defluxion of Phlegm, or other humor upon the Lungs, or the
gathering of it there to be the cause of a true Pleurisy or Peripneumony, as
some do, and call it phlegmatic for if these humors are in the lungs, they will
cause other Diseases that hinder breathing, as we showed in defect of
breathing, and if they fall upon the Muscles of the breast or upon the girding
Membrane, they will cause a false Pleurisy as I showed,

The cause of this flux of Blood that causes a phlegmon, is often a Synoch
Fever which from the Blood inflamed in the Veins sends a portion into the
substance of the Lungs, which produces the Inflammation accompanied with a
Synoch from whence it came: And therefore the same causes of a Synoch (as we
showed in Fevers) are the causes of these Inflammations. As Surfeiting,
Drunkenness, because they cause Fullness and make the Blood too hot, are the
causes of Synochs in young and old men, that live deliciously. therefore they
are counted the chief caufes of peripneumony and pleurisy, and therefore they
prescribed Abstinence from Wine and sat Flesh and Fish as Eels: from whence
they say the peripneumony comes, because the Blood grows too fat, from
eating of fat Meats and therefore may be sooner inflamed, except these fish
have a peculiar force to inflame, as the Sea-Hare has to ulcerate the Lungs.
Hence it is that in Spring, and in the time when Synochs are rife, these
Inflammations are most usual, in these ages especialy which are subject to a
Synoch, not only with an outward Erysipelas, but that which produces a
peripneumony.

These Inflammations are sooner in the Lungs, then any other part, If with the
causes of a Synoch, there be also a disposition in the Lungs to receive them,
which disposition is the natural Heat and plenty of Blood, and thinness of
Substance in the Lungs, as also a weakness accquired from a disease, which has
caused a Cough.

To which are added other causes which make them come out of the Vessels and
flow to the Lungs, as a hot distemper, from Air, Anger or a hot Disease, as a
Fever, or an outward Cold by Air which pierces the Breast and Lungs: hence it
is that this may be when the Veins are astringed. Also vehement motion, or pain
about the Breast, or other things that draw blood to the breast. As in that
Woman which conceived with Child in old age when her breasts that were formerly
lank, grew great by the flowing of blood to them to breed milk, and fell into a
Pleurisy. And I have observed that diverse Women in the middle of their time of
breeding, especially in the Spring after a cold Winter, from a sudden cold and
moisture have fallen into Pleurisies by reason of much blood flowing to the
breasts to breed Milk.

These Causes, except there be a Synoch scarce produce an Inflammation alone,
but rather a spetting of blood. Or if they produce an Inflammation in the
Breast without a Synoch asoregoing there will be only a simple Pieurisie by
reason of the Muscles affected from the girding Membrane. Or if the Lungs be
also inflamed, in both, the Fever coming from thence will not be a Synoch which
is the next cause of a pleurisy and peripneumony, and begins with these
Inflammations or goes before them; but will be symptomatical, as we showed in
Fevers.

The Cure.
The Cure varieth as the Disease is diverse which produces these pricking pains
in the Breast. And it is eithere an Iuflammation of the Lungs in a true
Pleurisy and peripneumony, or of the Membrane in its pleurisy, or a
distension from Wind or tumor in the two kinds of false pleurisies called
Flatulent and Phlegmatic.

The Inflammation of the Lungs both in a Pleurisy and Peripneumony is
dangerous, The Prognesticks of a true Pleurisy and Peripneumony.
but most in a peripneumony by reason of the nearness of the Heart, both cause
Death, either in the fourth or fifth day, or in the fourteenth or twentieth.
When it tends to health it passes the second or third week, and first the
pricking cease, then the Fever, and last the Spitting of Matter, but if it
continue above the time mentioned, and the Fever cease not, but is lingering,
it is to be feared that it will turn to an Empyema or phthisis.

These following rules will declare how these Diseases will end. If from the
Lungs inflamed they presently spit mixed matter, it is good, especially if they
Cough and expel it easily; if otherwise, it is bad. This if it be blood or
matter such as comes from the part inflamed which is the Lungs, it is allowed.
But if from the beginning the blood flows plentifully, for some days, or cease
and return again, it snews great hurt of the Lungs. But the sooner they spit
matter white or concocted, and the more easily and plentifully it is voided,
the better it is; unless it be sent forth in such abundance (as I have seen in
a man that had a peripneumony und was ready to die) that it fill a Basin, this
is a sign that the Inflammation is great and that a suppuration follows and
also Death. Purulent matter though yellowish is not bad till it be Yellow, that
whch is green is worse, and black worst of all, that which is white, slimy, and
clear prolongs the Disease. That Inflammation that comes from pure blood, is
more gentle, that which comes from choleric or impure blood is worse and
shorter; but that which comes from phlegmatic blood is longer, but not so
shatp. And that which follows other long and acute Diseases is harder to be
cured. The peripneumony especially or the pleurisy in old people is deadly.

Great difficulcy of Breathing shows the greatness of the Inflammation, or a
great collection of the matter; which suddenly flowing to the branches of the
rough Artery, causes mote trouble, and they breath with snorting, and if they
do not presently spet and hawk it forth, it strangleth.

Cold of the outward parts, the Face sunk, and the pulse little, foreshew Death
as in other Diseases.

If the Fever be strong with Heat, Thirst, and Watching, the danger is more, if
gentle, less.

If there be a Delirium or Doting, which uses not to be in these Diseases, nor
from the Fever accompanying them, It is a mortal sign because it uses to come
upon the distemper of the Septum or Diaphragma.

Bleeding at the Nose cannot be had in the beginning, both in respect of the
Fever and also for Revulsion. But toward the end it weakneth, especially if
much.

Plentiful voiding of Urin and Sweat, if they come seasonably, cures the Fever:
and if they piss matter, they suppose the matter come from the Lungs, and the
Diseases to be sent out of the way. But if matter can be carried from the Lungs
by the hollow Vein which is more manifest rather than by the other obscure
veins in the Breast which join to the Emulgent (which some men so diligently
seek for, and bragg that they have found out) then in other Diseases there may
be such a passage: but this is very rare, because in those that have been
extremely phthisical and empyematous no such thing has been seen.

A Diarrhaea presageth Death, for, though some have thought otherwise, yet
little of the cause of the Disease can be purged by stool. But if the Diarrhaea
come at the first from other causes, and stay not long it may be harmless,
especially if it take away any filth which may increase the Fever. And I have
often seen Pleurisies after I have given Oil of sweet Almonds with powder of a
Bores tooth, to go away with a plentiful Diarrhaea.

The Method of Cure for both is, The Cure of a true Pleurisis and Peripneumony.
to divert the Blood that flows to this noble part, and so to prepare that
which is flown to the Lungs and inflames them, that it may be coughed and spet
forth, because, except Nature do it of her self, it is in vain to purge it by
Urin or Stool. Also still abate the pain in the Pleurisy which is very
pricking, and in both cases enlarge the Breast, and hold up the strength,
always having an eye to to the Fever, as we showed in Fevers; therefore
abstain from hot things, and use temperate things that incline rather to cold;
all which are done as follows.

The Defluxion of Blood to the part is diverted best by Blood-letting, and the
heat of the Fever abated, therefore neglect it not, though the Patient be very
young, for we observe that in other cases and bleedings by cuts and falls they
can loose much blood without danger; and in this Disease they will find much
ease by it: nor let it be omitted in women with Child, or old People: nor when
the Disease comes from impure and choleric blood, nor when the pain goes down
to the Hypochondria. But for these causes do it moderately rather than omit it.
Blood-letting must be suddenly while the matter is flowing, the first day, at
what time of day or night soever it be: or if it has been neglected do it the
next or the third day, taking much at a time, or six ounces at a time, often,
if the first bleeding do not abate the Disease, bleed then thrice a day, or two
or three days together: after the third or fourth day, except you fear the
increase of the Discase, or a Relapse from a new Flux of Blood (for which cause
after many days if there be strength you may bleed again) you must not bleed
rashly.

You must open a Vein in the Arm (because the Veins are larger and nearer the
part) either the middle Vein or that which most appears which is always
best. And what vein soever in the Arm is opened whether it be on the right or
left side the blood comes from the hollow Vein, from whose upper part above the
heart the veins of the Arm come; and therefore by consequence blood is drawn
from the right side of the Heart into which the hollow Vein is joined before it
ascends: and so also blood is drawn from the Lungs by the veiny Artery, by
which the blood flows from the right side of the Heart to the Lungs. Except,
because the hollow vein is more on the right side, and sends blood into the
right side of the Heart, and only sends out the vein without equal, or not
paired to the right side only, you desire to open the Vein in the right Arm for
a directer way of bleeding. which some think to be necessary in a Peripneumony
and Pleurisy. Yet in a Pleurisy it is thought better to open a vein on that
side that is pained, than on the contrary side (as the Arabians do who first
open the contrary Arm for Revulsion and then for Derivation) not only from the
right order and direct flowing of the Vessels on that side, because the same
may be good in a Pleurisy as well as a Peripneumony, the Lungs being (as I
showed) affected in both: but because in a Pleurisy, the veins on that side
where the pain is are more swollen with blood. Therefore if the pain be on the
right side, open the Vein in the right Arm if on the left, open the vein in the
left Arm by reason of the Defluxion of blood caused through pain. And if the
Vein in the Arm appear not, open that in the Hand on the same side: by which if
the blood come freely there will be a greater Revulsion, and if not, a less.
Also it is good to bleed in the Foot, or by the Fingers, after bleeding in the
Arm, especially in Women who have this disease from stopping of the terms.

Cupping-glasses to the Shoulders, Emunctuaries, and Groyns make Revulsion, and
the more if there be Scarification: these help the other bleeding, or supply
when the other cannot be.

Also Frictions and Ligatures of the outward parts cause Diversion: or a
Decoction to wash and rub the Hands and Feet, but it must be such as does not
heat.

Some adventure to use a Caustic to the sids, but it is neither safe nor
profitable, nor Cupping-glalsses to the Breast.

Clysters are given to loosen the Belly before bleeding, if it be bound, they
are to be cooling and gentle, such as are mentioned in Fevers, and other
internal Inflammations and Quninsie. And some advise clensing Clysters at the
end of the Disease if the matter tend from the Breast to the Guts, lest it
should hurt them, which they think to be possible.

Loosners are better than purgers, for it is not convenient in Inflammations of
the Breast to give purgers: both because the matter cannot be purged by stool
from thence, as also because they heat the body, and cause a Diarrhaea which
uses easily to come with much hurt to the patient. These Laxatives must be
good for the Breast, whereof Manna is the chief.

Next syrup of Violets three ounces, or Cassia, or simple Diaprunes two ounces,
alone or with pectoral Decoction.

Or thus. Take sweet prunes, Raisons stoned, each an ounce; Violets a pugil,
boil and dissolve Cassia half an ounce, Manna an ounce: make a potion.

After the seventh day the Ancients used stronger purges, the humor being first
prepared: but these are best in a false pleurisy as I showed; or if the true
pleurisy cease, they are good against accidents that remain, otherwise they
hurt more.

We give to drink things that cause easy Coughing and Spitting, because the
Humor being fastened to the Lungs and not to the Membranes, girding them
cancannot be sent a better way. This is done by Lenitives to the parts, and
such as first thicken the Matter to stop the Flux of Blood if it be thin, and
to make it more fit to be spit forth, and then by Concocters, Clensers and
Cutters, if it be too thick and slimy. Or by things to ripen and cause matter
to be spet forth lest it lying long there, the Lungs be corrupted by it, and a
phthisis caused. Or if Nature endeavors to throw it out by stool or Urin (which
is rare, and perhaps a mere Fancy) by such things as help Nature therein.
These are done as follows.

Lohochs to be swallowed by degrees, and so communicate their Virtue better to
the Lungs are the best.

As the usual tablets of Diatragacanth frigid and Dia penidies without the
species, held in the Mouth.

Or a Lohoch made of them with syrup of Jujubes or Violets to be licked.

Or this: Take the species of Diatragacanth frigid two drams, Penidies a dram,
with the Syrup aforsaid make a Lohoch, adding half an ounce of the Diacodium if
the Cough be great. others add Conesrve of Violets, but it is not so good to be
licked.

Or this: Take Penidies an ounce, Pinenuts and sweet Almonds blancht, each two
drams; the great cold seeds and white Poppy seed, each a dram; Starch half an
ounce; juice of Liquorish a dram, Gum Traganth and Arabic, each a dram;
infused in Violet water while they swell, pulp of Raisons half an ounce, mix
them for a Lohoch with syrup of Poppies, or a Diacodium half an ounce, and
Mallow and Cotton seeds a dram.

In the progress of the Disease when the Fever declineth, give tablets of
Diaireos simple, Diapenids without the species, Lohoch of Pine.

Or thus: Take Lohoch de pino half an ounce, species of Diatragacanth a dram,
species of Diaireos half a dram, penidies half an ounce, with syrup of
Maidenhair and Liquorish make a Lohoch.

Or thus: Take Sugar Candy, penidies, each half an ounce; pine-nuts two drams,
of great cold seeds, each a dram; Orris roots two scruples, Gum traganth
infused in water of Maidenhair and mucilage of Quince seed half a dram, pulp of
Figs or Dates, each half an ounce; juice of Liquorish a dram, or roots of
Briony and Nettle seed, each half a dram; with syrup of Hysop, make a Lohoch.

We use also stronger Expectoratives and cutting Medicines when they spet
matter, especially if it be crude and slymy, and when the Fever is gone, and
yet matter is voided. As Lohoch of Coleworts, of Coltssoot, Horehound,
Lochsanum, and other other medicines used in other diseases of the Lungs from
Phlegm and Matter.

Lohochs are made of fat things thus, to open the Breast, to mollify and help
spetting, as of Butter, Sugar, or Sugar candy, or Sugar of Violets, used like a
Lohoch, the German May Butter called Mehenmuf

The new drawn Oil of sweet Almonds or Lineseed are good with Sugar to be
licked and taken by degrees, or to be drunk in Broth, or any Decoction proper
to allay the pains of the pleurisy to which some add juice of Marshmallows.
Oil of Nuts also in the progress of the Disease concocts the matter and makes
it fit to be expelled.

Of which make this Lohoch. Take Oil of sweet Almonds or Line seeds, or both
Oxymel simple of Squils (if the matter be tough) each hvlf an ounce; with Sugar
candy make a Lohoch.

Also Decoctions though they stay not long in the passage are good in respect
of the Fever and Inflammation; give a draught once or twice a day, thus.

If you will thicken and lenifie use Barley water which allaies thirst, and
nourishes if you increase the quantity of Barley. If you will cleanse more make
it of whole Barley, with Raisons, Liquorish, and other sweet things as Sugar or
syrup of Violets, Jujubes, and Maidenhair.

At first if you will thicken and expectorate. Take roots of Marshmallows an
ounce, Violets and Bugloss flowers, each a pugil; Jujubes and Sebestens, each
six pair: Barley half a pugil, the four great cold seeds, each two drams: make
a Decoction to a pint, sweeten it with syrups or Sugarpenidies.

The Decoction of Corn-poppy made with Barley-water or Jujubes adding Sugar is
good at first to stop a Defluxion and Inflammation: give three ounces at a time
often, after boil them in Scabious and Burnetwater to Concoct, or use the water
of poppy instead of the Decoction, or give the dried flowers in powder with
Broth or Violet-water, or other Liquor. Neither ought we fear its coldness,
because the force it has to attenuate and digest, which Galen imputes to the
sharpness does show otherwise, as in the other Narcoticks which we showed in
other places are not cold.

When we will cleanse more, give Sugar and Water boiled twenty parts water and
half a part Sugar, and if you cleanse more yet, use more Sugar and a little
Cinnamon.

Another to cleanse and lenifie. Take Liquorish an ounce and an half, Violets,
Bugloss flowers, each a pugil; Figs six pair, Raisons ten pair, Jujubes six
pair, sweet prunes five, Barley half a pugil, Gourd and Melon seeds, each two
drams: boil them, add Sugar or Syrups.

When we will concoct and prepare thick matter at the end, give boiled Honey
with Wine, it is good in old people, or when the Disease is not very hot. Or
Honey and Water, which may be made as strong and hot as Sack.

Also the Decoction of Carduus or Leucacanth, or white-thorn roots, or Anthemis
flowers.

Another to concoct and prepare. Take Liquorish an ounce, Elicampane root two
drams, Maidenhair a handful, Hysop and Goats Organ (especially in a pleurisy)
each half a handful; Violets, Bugloss flowers, each a handful; flowers of
Anthemis half a handful, Raisons twelve pair, Figs ten, Dates five, Melon or
Gourd seeds three drams, Cotton seeds, Mallow and Foenugreek seed, each two
drams; Anise seeds a dram: boil them, and add Sugar, Honey or Syrups.

Syrups to thicken are of Violets and Jujubes, to cleanse, of Liquorish, and to
concoct withal, of Maidenhair and Oxymel if the matter be tough, two ounces at
a time may be given in a Decoction or Water of Violets, Bugloss, Maidenhair,
Scabious, Hysop, like Juleps, or give julep of Violets, or the Syrups alone to
be licked.

Also Spinach, Carduus, or Milk-thistle water, or of Anthemis flowers, or wild
Lentils in a peripneumony.

Or water of ground Ivy four ounces in a pleurisy four times a day, it is good
to purge the breast from matter, and to desend from Peripneumony or Phthisis.

Or the following potions. Take Bores tusk or jaw of a Pike, Crabs Eyes, Bulls
pizle, in powder, a dram or a dram and an half, with Broth or Wine, or Carduus
water, or Violet or Barley water, these are better known by good experience
than by reason.

The tusk of a Bore poudered and given with Oil of sweet Almonds or Line seed
is an excellent medicine in pleurisy or Quinzy.

Or Lapis prunellae given with Purslane water, or of Bramble berries, or of
Sorrel, with Coolers in a good quantity often, quickly makes men in pleurisies
to spit easily.

The Vulgar give the water wherein a Butchers Knife has been laid some hours
to cure the Pleurisy.

The roots of Daffodil or flowers, or of Dog-stones, Dockes, Goulden-hair,
Lungwort, In Peripneumony, and seeds of wild Parsnepps and Carduus, powder of
Almonds or Nutshells, each, a dram, or a dram and an half, with the Liquors
mentioned: are also good.

Also roots of Centaury, the great Birthwort, and Costus agallochus, Aethiopis,
and three leaved Daffadill leaves and seeds, Myrrh, Bdellium, Asla foetida, are
commended by Diascorides with wine and water. But he says not in what kind of
Pleurisy true or false.

It is known by experience, that these following are good and presently abate,
or take away the pain in a pleurisy: Take a scruple of Bores Tusk, or a dram,
with two or three or four onnces of Oil of sweet Almonds, or with Lineseed Oil,
as in a Quinsie.

Another experiment: Take Nut-shels, red Corral, each a dram, make a powder,
give it with white Wine.

This is highly approved, Take Roots of long Birthwort, Piony, Bay Berries,
each half a dram; Stones of Medlars, a dram; Ivory shavings, Myrrh, each dalf
a dram; make a powder, give it with Tamarisck water or Wine.

Yarrow also bruised and given in Vinegar.

Also Turpentine any ways taken alone, or with the Yoalk of an Egg, and
Violet water, or the like, or in pills with Sugar, and powder of Liquorish.

They say that pills made of melted Pitch open an Imposthume, and also
Watercresses and Mustard seed.

The Chemists give flower of Brimstone alone, or with Salt peter, and Salt of
polypody, or St Iohns-wore with Wine.

Instead of ordinaty Beer and Wine and Water to quench Thirst, give Barley
water, a little warmed as all Drink must be least Spitting be hindered, and the
Breast hurt. We allow Wine to refresh the weak, but not before the seventh day,
a little and mixed with Barley water, and Sugar to cleanse.

Give a thin Diet for two or four days, and such as helps expectoration as
Cream of Barley, and of Almonds, thicker or thinner as you please; or sweet
prunes or Raisons stewed with Sugar.

After use a fuller Diet, especially after the seventh day, or sooner if
strength fail, as boiled bread, or Marshpane, or that of Almonds or pine nuts,
and good Broaths and Jellies, as in the Hectic Feavor.

Or this. Take the Brawn of an old Cock or Hen, boil it adding Violet or
Bugloss water, or Scabious water, each two ounces; give the Broth with fresh
Butter, and a little Salt, and it is stronger if you bruise the Flesh and and
strain it with the Broth.

Or add to that Decoction three ounces of Crumbs of Bread, and to a pint of the
Broth add Conserve of Violets, Bugloss, Maidenhair, to each an ounce, species
of Diatragacanth frigid and Diaponides, each a dram; Diamargariton frigid, half
a dram; of the four great could seeds Cotton and Mallow seeds, each a dram;
penidies two ounces, distill a Liquor, it will restore.

To nourish more; Take a Capon prepared, and a piece of Veal, boil them to a
Jelly, give it alone, or with the former Liquoris. or give the juice of a
roasted Capon strained.

Also give according to Mathiolus, Snails in Barley water.

Also take of the top of a sweet Apple and hollow it, and fill it with Olibanum
poudered, lay on the head again to cover it, and tie it together and roast it,
give it to be eaten, this is thought good to cure and prevent a Pleurisy.

Or give an Apple roasted the same way, with Juice of Liquorish, Sugar, and
Starch.

Some give Diuretics at the end of the Disease, when Nature discharges it by
Urine to help her.

Also the Decoction of Fennel, Sparagus, Kneeholm, Liquorish, red pease,
Maidenhair, and the great cold seeeds. Such as we showed in Fevers when we
desire to carry away the matter by Urin.

Sometimes we give things to purge when Nature is willing that way to discharge
the matter (which is rare) as we said of Clysters which open and cleanse.

Also it is good to apply things outwardly to the Breast, whether the pain be
great as in a pleurisy, or little as in a peripneumony (although the Disease
be not in the Breast, but in the Lungs properly) because the strength of these
Remedies may reach thither. Notwitstanding we must not at the beginning, give
hot things to try if the Pleurisy be true or false, for they will inflame and
make it worse, for a true Pleurisy is discerned from a false by other ways
which are more safe. Nor must we use all those things which are commended
against Inflammations which they thought was in the girding Membrane, not in
the Lungs, or especially against the Imposthume which they thought was there
also, and therefore they apply things outwardly to suppurate and open: except
the Inflammation of the girding Membrane follow the Inflammation of the Lungs,
or come of it self without them as we shall show in the pleurisy of the
Membrane. But we must apply outwardly to the part pained, things that mitigate
it, and dilate or open the Breast that they may spit more freely, and such as
digest the matter in the Lungs. This is done by Anodynes that are temperate,
and but very little hot and loosning: or if there be no pain, as in a
peripneumony, you may use cooling things also against the Inflammation, and
after such as ripen and dissolve it. All these must be applied actually hot.

A Fomentation is chiefly good when there is pain, and if it be only of warm
water in a bladder, it will mitigate and relax.

But more if these following be boiled therein: As, Take Mallows and
Marshmallows with the roots, Pellitory of the Wall, each a handful; Violets,
Chamaemel, Melilot flowers, each a pugil; Lineseed an ounce, Bran a pugil, Figs
ten pair, Annise seeds two drams, boil them for a Fomentation.

You may add Branck-ursine and Colewort, each a handful; Foenugreek seed half
an ounce, Mallow seed two drams, and in the progress if heat be not violent
white Lilly roots an ounce and an half, and a little Wine to make it pierce.
When the pain is violent the Leaves, Heads, or Seeds of Poppies allay it.

Also a Bag of Bran boiled, strained, and applied abateth the pain. To which
you may add the things aforementioned.

Also there are Anodynes and ripening Cataplasms made of the residence of the
Decoction mentioned beaten with Barley meal, with Hogs grease and fresh Butter,
each an ounce; Oil of Violets two ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds, Chamaemel or
Dill each an ounce.

Or: Take Barley meal four ounces, Line seed and Foenugreek, each two ounces;
Ashes of green Coleworts two drams, Sagapen a dram, with Hogs and Goose grease,
make a Cataplasm.

Pellitory of the wall also beaten and fried with Oil or Butter is excellent.

Or Snails boiled and bruised.

An Epithem of lenifying and cooling things may be applied to the breast, but
hot, though there be no pain as in peripneumony.

Thus: Take a Decoction of Barley a pugil, Gourd and Lineseed, each an ounce;
Violets a pugil, or you may use any Epithem mentioned in the Hectic.

In the beginning anoint the side with Coolers and Loosners: As, Take Oil of
Violets and sweet Almonds, each an ounce; fresh Butter half an ounce, Mucilage
of Quince or Line seeds six drams, with a little Wax.

You may add Oil of Gourd and Line seed.

When the pain is great in a pleurisy. Take Oil of sweet Almonds, Chamaemel,
Melilot or Dill each an ounce; Duck or Goose, Hens or Capons grease, ca^h half
an ounce; mueilage of Foenugreek and Lineseed, each six drams; Galbanum,
Turpentine, each a dram; Saffron a scruple, with Wax make a Liniment.

The fat Caul of a Beasts Belly laid hot to the side takes away pain.

Also Unguents and Cataplasms as the Resumptive Ointment, made of Fats, the
Pectoral that of Marshmallows, or that of Zacharies son, or of Mesue.

It is good after anointing to apply a Colewort leaf warm or anointed.

Or to sprinkle the Ashes of burnt Coleworts upon the part anointed.

It is counted also a singular Remedy against a Pleurisy, to anoint with
Ointment of Marshmallows, and to sprinkle powder of Cumminseeds thereupon, or
of Orris roots.

Let the patient ly upon the side pained, for so the pain will be less, with his
Head and Breast a little high, that he may breaths omewhat easier: And let him
beware of all violent motions of Mind or Body.

For other Symptoms if there be watching, or want of Sleep, give things proper
for Disease also, as Almond Milk, with Emulsions of cold seeds and Saffron,
ormixing Syrup of Poppyes, or the like, as we showed in Watching.

If there be a Diarrhaea, because it is dangerous you must use Syrup of
Myrtles, with other Medicines, because it both expectorateth, and stops a
Looseness, And anoint the Belly and Reins, with binders, as we showed in too
much going to stool.

If there be an Inflammation in the girding Tunicle, The Cure of a Pleurisy,
or Peripneumony, and the Pleurisy of the girding Membrane when they meet
together.
(which then extends it self to the inward Muscles of the Breast, we
distinguish it from the true Pleurisy, mentioned by the name of a Pleurisy of
the girding Tunicle) and if it be with the Lungs also inflamed: Then we use the
same way of Cure, as of a true pleurisy, being they are both together, and by
reason of this Inflammation joined, we use such Topical external medicines as
are proper to the Inflammation, when alone.

But if the side be only inwardly inflamed and not the Lungs, The Cure of the
Pleurisy, which is only in the girding Membrane.
then we use revellers, and derivers, by bleeding, cupping, and scarrifying,
and the like, as in a true Pleurisy, and Clysters, and Laxatives.

For the things given to expectorate in the Inslammation of the Lungs, when the
Inslammation is in the girding Membrane, cannot reach the part affected, nor
can the matter from thence come to the Mouth, to be spet forth as I showed;
therefore they will do more hurt then good by causing a Cough, and moving the
pained Side, therefore let no things be given to cause Spitting, except other
Accidents happen, but such things as help in a true Pleurisy, by a propriety,
and such as are mentioned there against Thirst, and for Nourishment.

But the Topics which we declared in a true pleurisy, are good here, because
they assuage pain, loosen the breast, and concoct the Matter there fastened, and
the rather because being applied outwardly to the pained side, they come near
the part, and sooner and more directly spend their Virtue, then they can to the
Lungs; therefore Fomentations, Cataplasms, Ointments, and plasters, there
mentioned may be applied here, especially because by relaxing they draw the
Matter outward, as I showed in a Quinzy, and if the Inflammation be not great,
and without a Tumor, they discuss and dissolve it.

And as they are used in a Quinsie, to draw Matter, from the streightness of
the Jaws, so here to draw it from the breast, least it imposthumate there, and
leave after it is broken, an Empyema behind it. Therefore in both cases, we
abstain from the beginning from all repellers, not because these hinder
breathing, by astringing or binding the breast, as the Vulgar Opinion, which
cannot be great, and if there were an Inflammation only outward, this could not
hinder the use of them: but for the Cause mentioned that we may draw out the
Matter, rather then strike it in by Repellers. Also we sometimes apply
Cupping-Glasses to the breast, and other things that draw from within deeply,
as Pitch malaxed with hot Oil, with Rosin and a little Brimstone, or with black
Soap dissolved with Oils, these both resolve and concoct the matter attracted,
and presently after we use Relaxers or Loosners. If the Inflammation will not
cease by so doing, about the end of the Disease, we apply hotter Remedies to
discuss the matter, that it suppurate not. Or if this cannot be done thereby
but it does Imposthumate, we apply to the breast outwardly things that ripen
it, and that it may open rather outwardly than inwardly, as a tumor enlarged
uses to do, otherwise than we do in a true Pleurisy.

In the progress of an internal Inflammation of the breast after we have used
the Anodynes and Loosners mentioned in a pleurisy, and when the pain begins to
cease, but is not quite gone, we use these following to draw out and discuss
the Relics of the Inflammation.

We foment the pained side thus: Take Lilly roots four ounces, Mallows, Orris
roots green, two ounces, Mallows, Horehound, Calamints, each a handful;
Chamaemel and Elder flowers, each a pugil: Rosemary flowers half a pugil,
Foenugreek or Line seed six drams, Carua and Cummin seed, each a dram and an
half; Figs six pair, boil them in Wine and Water.

Make a Cataplasm of the Residents of the Decoction beat with Bean flower two
ounces, Ashes of burnt Coleworts two drams, Oil of Lillies two ounces, Honey an
ounce, with an ounce and an half of Doves dung it will draw more.

Or anoint the side with Oil of Lillies, Flower-de-luce or Wall-flower.

Or dip Wool therein and apply it, or a Cabbage leaf to draw: for which purpose
they use only a Clout dipped in Sulphur.

Or this Ointment which discusseth very well. Take Oil of Lillies two ounces,
Oil of Orris and Dill, each an ounce; juice of Dwarf-Elder or Onyons an ounce
and an half, Aqua vitae two drams, boil them till the Waters are consumed, add
Flower-de-luce root a dram and an half, Cummin seed a dram, Saffron half a
scruple, Galbanum and Sagapenum dissolved in Aqua vitae, each a dram;
Turpentine two drams, Hogs grease and Oesipus or grease of wool, each half an
ounce; with Wax make an Ointment. Goats or Pigeons dung and Brimstone, each a
dram, will make it stronger.

If you anoint with Ointment of Marshmallows, and sprinkle Cummin seed upon
the part, it is as good here as in a true Pleurisy.

Also the Plaster of Diachylon with Orris.

But if after the use of Anodynes the pain abate not but rather increase,
especially if the pain increase by being touched, and if a Tumor appear
outwardly, then because it tends to suppuration, apply things that may help it
forward, such as were mentioned for the Quinsie to be applied outwardly, or
these.

A Fomentation: Take Marsh-mallow roots three ounces, Roots of Lillies an
ounce, Mallows, Scabious, Glassweed, each a handful; Flowers of Melilot and
Dill, each a pugil; Figgs six pair, Lineseed an ounce, boil them in Water and
Milk.

Beat the Residents, and with Flower of Lineseed, Mucilage of Quinces, and
Marsh-mallow roots, each an ounce; Butter two ounces, make a Cataplasm.

This ripens better and opens the Imposthume. Take Onions and Lillies, roast
and stamp them, add six ounces of Marsh-mallow roots bruised an ounce, Pease
flower two ounces, Barley-leaven, or of French Wheat called Spelt an ounce and
half, Pulp of Figgs an ounce, with Butter and Hogs grease make a Cataplasm, if
you add Goat or Pigeons dung an ounce, and Mustard and Water-cress-seeds, each
a dram; it will sooner open it.

It may be broken by violent Motion of the breast, as Roaring, Neesing,
Vomiting, but not so safely.

If in a watery or windy pleurisy there be a stretching in the Membranes, The
cure of a false pleurisy of wind and water.
from a Humor or Water gotten thither, which causes pricking, you must use
things that stop the Humor, and turn it from the breast if it still flow, or if
it be wind, give things that hinder the breeding of it, and keep it from the
part. And in both cases apply to the part things that discuss, and digest, and
consume Wind and Water.

Diversions are made by cupping, Friction, and washing, and other things that
stop Defluxions and carry wind other ways: but you must not open a Vein but
when by reason of great pain you fear Inflammation, and only in plethorick
bodies.

Sharp Clysters revel also, with things to expel Wind, in which Hiera dissolved
is highly commended.

And purges with preparatives first, not only gentle to revell, but strong to
draw down and send forth wind and humors that produce it: these are better here
than in a pleurisy from Inflammation (which some do use in the pleurisy
called Phlegmatic which they dream comes from an Inflammation) Therefore we
rather use Rhubarb, Agarick or Scammony, or Coloquintida or Hellebore as the
Ancients, especially Hiera of Coloquintida commended so by Galen against a
pleurisy, here then in an Inflammation in which we can give no strong Purges
profitable, but with great hurt.

These Purges are mentioned in Diseases from Defluxions, here and there, and in
palpitation from wind and in Rheums falling upon the breast.

And there you may find Altering Remedies also.

It is in vain here to give expectorating medicines as in a true pleurisy,
except a Defluxion fall upon the Lungs. But some things there mentioned which
work by a hidden quality or by drying or digesting may be given here.

As the Carduus waters (which some think cures pricking pains because of the
prickles) as that of the Blessed Thistle called religiously the Carduus of
Mary, or their seeds, or an Emulsion made of them and of Hempseed.

The Vulgar Women keep a water for this made of Ice gathered in March.

There are also other Remedies that cure a pleurisy without causing Coughing,
as that of a Bores tusk, and the like, which are good here. and many better for
a false than a true pleurisy, for diverse of them are hot and dry which cannot
be good in Inflammations, but by a hidden quality, and those may work in this
Disease by a manifest as well as a secret virtue. Especially those there
mentioned of Dioscorides for pleuresies in general.

Also Oil of sweet Almonds and Line seed given to dilate the breast, are good
here taken in good quantities.

And Wine if nothing else forbid it, and other Meats and Drinks mentioned in
Defluxion and Diseases of wind.

Apply outwardly things to dissolve and discuss wind and humors, and to take
away pain.

As a great Cupping-glass to the part, with fire, which will draw out the Humor
and Wind, by an attractive Virtue, not by Heat, (as some think) for Heat is not
used to warm the breast, but to make the Glass stick.

Also actual Heat does the same, if it be gentle, it qualifyeth the pain, if
strong, it discusseth and consumes thin Humors and Wind, as the Heat of the Sun
does the Clouds. This may be done by any warm Cloths, or with warm Water, in a
bladder or brass vessels, to keep the heat longer, made on purpose; Olive Oil
in a bladder hot, take away pain, But in a true Pleurisy it must be but
lukewarm.

Also Fomentations of things actually and potentially hot, with a Sponge felt,
or Wool, squees'd a little that it may not wet too much, or in a bladder rather
then in brass, that the virtue may pierce sooner, and changed when cold.

They are made of Decoctions mentioned in Inflammation of the Membrane.

Or thus: Take Marsh-mallow roots an ounce, Orris, Galangal, each half an
ounce; Calamints, Wormwood, Organ, Thyme, each a handful; Chamomil, Melilot,
Rosemary and Stoechas flowers, each a pugil; Caraway, Cummin, and Fennel-seed,
each half an ounce; Foenngreek and Linseed an ounce, Bay Berries an ounce and
half, bruise and boil them in Wine and Water.

This is an excellent Experiment in all side-pains.

Take Spirits of Wine six ounces, Camphire a dram, boil them till the Camphire
is dissolved, add where it is hot Pouders of sweet Sanders a dram and half: wet
Clouts, therein, and apply them hot.

Also dry baggs hot. As, Take Bran, and the whole Seeds of Milium, or Grumwel,
or seeds of Panicum, and Oats, each two pugils; Salt an ounce, fry them, and
make baggs to be shifted as in Fomentations. They are better, if you sprinkle a
little Wine, or Aqua vitae, or white Winevinegar, to pierce.

This is stronger: Take Bay Berries a pugil, Juniperberries half a pugil,
Caraway and Cummin, each an ounce; Fennel-seed a dram, dried Hysop, Savory,
Thyme, Organ, Marjoram, each a dram; Rosemary and Chamomil-flowers, each a dram
and an half; Orris roots a dram, Salt half an ounce, make a Powder for a bag,
as before.

The residents of the Decoction mentioned, squeezed between two trenchers, is
also good.

Or Cataplasms made of them, as we showed in the Inflammation of the Membrane,
with Powder of Caraway and Cummin-seed, each six drams; Oil of Rue and Orris,
each an ounce; Pigeon or Goats dung half an ounce, with two Yolks of Eggs.

Also Oils or Ointments there mentioned, sprinkle the part after with powder of
Cummin-seed, which is excellent in all Pleurisies, to consume Humors and Wind.

Or this Cerot: Take Thyme a dram and half, Spike, Cloves, Sanders, each half a
dram; Storax a dram, red wax an ounce and half, with Hogs grease make a round
Cerot, and a dram of Orris powder.

Also the Emplaster of Bay Berries malaxed with Oil of Lillies, or mixed with
the Cerot.

Or this: Take Opopanax, Galbanum, Serapinum or Sagapenum, each two drams;
dissolve them in equal patts of Aqua vitae, and white Wine-vinegar, add powder
of Cummin-seed half an ounce, Caraway, Seseli, Lovage-seed, each a dram; dried
Rue half a dram, Brimstone a dram, with Oil of Rue, or Pennyroyal, and a
little Turpentine make a Plaster.

Another Plaster of Honey, and Oil of Wormwood boiled, is good also.

And many outward Remedies mentioned in outward pains, from Humors or Wind.

CHAP. XI. Of Pain of the Heart.
The Kinds.
THe pain of the Stomach is commonly called the Pain of the Heart, The pain of
the Heart, is the pain of the Stomach.
this is in the fore part of the Breast, in a soft and naked place, where the
Ribs are parted, which is called the Hearts lodge, and reaches to the left
side, as far as the Back. In this place above the rest, there are usual pains
and molestations, they differ in that they are either usual or not. The most
usual, are such as come new from a new Cause, or a Disease of which they are a
Symptom. Their kinds are as they are diversely manifest to sense.

A Compressing or stretching pain called Periodyna, A compressing or stretching
pain of the Heart.
is that in which there is felt a pressing or stretching in the lodge of the
Heart, more or less, with loss of Appetite almost, and loathing sometimes, and
with belching, and sometimes vomiting, or purging.

This kind comes from some new Cause very often, and either stays a while, or
comes after meat, and ends with concoction. Sometimes it is the Symptom of
diverse Diseases, so that there is scarce a person but has felt it in a
Disease, or at other times.

A knawing pain is called Heart-eating, A knawing pain of the Heart called
Cardiogmos.
in which there is felt a biting, with pricking in the said region of the
Heart, with Compression or Burning sometimes.

This is in many Diseases, and in sound men sometimes when fasting, especially
some called Picrocholi, from sharp Choler, have it when they want their Dinner,
and it is often with bitterness of mouth, and hindrance of sight.

Some have it chiefly before Supper, when they are given to writing, and lean
upon their Stomaches, by which they loose Appetite. They who fear, this prevent
it by sitting upright or standing, when they write.

Some have it in the morning before they rise, when they lie long waking, and
after they are up, and have been at stool, or broke wind, it is gone. In others
it comes as soon as they are up, and goes away with sneesing.

Also this Knawing with Compression is after meat, when it is bad, or too much.
Of which Bairus makes a private sort of Heart-ach, when they are cold after
meat, with sense of this Compression and difficulty of breathing; this is
called a turning of the Meat into Phlegm: Of which Galen speaks.

This may be at all times, Cordiaca Fainting.
and from other Causes, as it is before Vomiting, and from outward Injuries and
Cold, or from things swallowed that hurt the Stomach. And when any fainting
comes with this Disease called Cordiaca, as we showed in Fainting.

That pain which has such Heat that it seems to burn, Heart-burning.
is in sound people often, whether full or empty.

That is most usual, in which when they would belch they feel great burning,
the flame as it were, being shut up in the Gullet, and not able to get out,
especially after meat, or violent Exercise: the Germans call it Boiling,
Boiling of the stomach, or burning.
we call it a Burning boiling of the Stomach, of which we spoke in Difficulty
of Belching.

Also this Burning is the Symptom of diverse Diseases, of the great pain of the
Stomach, where it is burning, pricking, stretching and beating, and is
increased by touching of the part, and reaches to the Back, and girds the Body
like a Girdle, and seems to draw down the Shoulders, and there is labor and
pain to swallow and belch, and difficulty of breathing, being quick and little,
and there is sometimes a continual Fever, by which means the Pulse is quick,
and Urin high, with Spitting of Blood or Matter. This is called the Inflammation
or Phlegmon of the Stomach from the Cause of it. And the Imposthume of the
Stomach, though it is more properly so called, when it is turned to an
Imposthume.

Also a most burning pain, with vomiting, and other dangerous accidents, may
come from another Disease of the Stomach, called Erysipelas, as we shall show
in the Causes.

The usual pain in the lodge of the Heart is called Cardilaea, Cardilaea.
distinct from Cardialgia; this comes from a small Cause, and returns often.
There are two kinds of it according to the diversity of the Nature, in which
they are known by this some are of weaker, and others stronger Appetite.

Such Natures as have weak Appetites and other accidents from weakness of
Concoction, Weakness of the stomach is called a disturbance of the Heart.
are subject to usual pains of the Stomach, compressing or stretching, and
sometimes knawing, and are troubled from the least offending meat, and other
outward things, especially cold, from which they are forced always to defend
their stomaches. These pains come from Weakness of Stomach, and are there
described, and are called by the same name.

Those Natures that have strong appetites, A hot stomach is called a
disturbance of the Heart.
and eat greedily, and gorge themselves, have pains of the stomach, as shall be
showed in the Causes. They are from great excess, and also sharp, or salt
Meats: these pains are called a hot distemper, and are described in a hot
Constitution.

The Causes.
The place or part affected, is the region or lodge of the Heart, not the Heart
it self, for it is not under it, nor is it sensible, as I shall show, but the
Stomach which is in that region, or some parts of the Colon or Midriff, that
reach thither.

The Cause of this, is from the Stomach which is on the left side of this
Region, The cause of Heart-ach is in the stomach.
and is very sensible, especially at the mouth of it, which has very
remarkable Nerves, And this mouth of the Stomach is called Cardia, because it
is next under the Heart, and there goes through the Midriff, and joyneth to
the Ventricle, and therefore the pains thereof are felt, as if they were in the
Heart, and as it were communicated unto it, and cause a Swounding, if they be
great; as we showed in Cardiaca. All these pains in this region are called
pains of the Heart, or Cardialgiae. And the pains of the Stomach are diverse, by
reason of its exquisite Sense, and often injuries by things taken in, and
brought to it, and because it sticks out, and is so exposed to more danger.
These pains are either primarily in the stomach of it self, from some cause
afflicting it, as a Disease, which is either a hot or cold distemper,
stretching, heaviness, twitching, or irritation, especially when there is a
helping Cause, that is a Disposition of the Stomach, from a weak or hot
Constitution. Or they are by consent in the stomach, from the nerves that are
planted in it. These pains I have seen but seldom, but they were with much
grief and mourning, and sometimes a little doting, and they always ceased after
vomiting, they are chiefly in Semitertians. Of these in their order.

A hot Distemper alone without matter, does scarce cause pain, A hot distemper
of the stomach, is the cause of heartach.
because the stomach is delighted with hot things, and when it is very hot,
from things taken in, or hot Diseases, as in Fevers, Heat of the Liver, and
the like, there is thirst rather then pain, except another accident happen as
we shall show in the hot Constitution of the Stomach.

The Stomach is sometimes so inflamed, Inflammation of the stomach is the cause
of heart-burning
that from the Veins abounding there, Blood is sent into the substance thereof,
and then follows that burning pain, which we call an Inflammation. It is
sometimes pure, sometimes with an Erysipelas, when the blood that flows to it, is
very thin and hot, and then the heat is greater. An Inflmmation is seldom in
the stomach, because it feels any hurt, and presently rouleth up and down; or
never, except it be from great violence, as a contusion or stroke upon the
Stomach being full, or from taking of very hot things actually or potentially,
as Spanish-flies or Sublimate. Also it may be from heat of the blood in the
Meseraick Veins in Fevers or other Diseases sent to the Stomach, without any
outward Cause. And this Inflammation is turned sometimes into an Imposthume and
then the pain increases, and when it breaks, matis vomited.

A simple cold Distemper whether dry or moist (though some deny it) being an
enemy to the Nerves, A cold distemper of the stomach, causes knawing of the
Heart.
causes pain in the stomach, which is with knawing, and as it were Fainting.

This comes from exposing the naked stomach to the cold air, in lean people
especially, when they go not warm clothed, and are hot or sweat, and then open
their breasts: From whence I have known great complaints of Heart-ach, with
Fainting. This may come also from other cold things as Water, and the like.

The same may come from drinking cold Water or Wine, with Snow-water, or Milk,
especially when the Body is hot, as often people do. From whence many grievous
accidents have been to my knowledge.

The same may come from a cold Humor, suddenly falling upon the Stomach from
the Head, which causes Loathing and Compression, or from glassie four Phlegm
flowing to the Stomach, for that which breeds in it by degrees, moistneth and
loosneth it, and rather causes weakness then pain, except it cause Heaviness
by the quantity, as shall be showed.

When the Stomach is stretched, or burdned, A stretching, heaviness, or a
compression of the stomach, is the cause of a pressing and sometimes of a
knawing pain in the Heart.
or pressed inwardly or outwardly, it has a pressing pain, and sometimes
knawing, this may come from diverse following causes.

Meat rather then drink (which sooner goes through, and as Hippocrates says
sooner fills then meat) being taken abundantly, burdens the stomach and
stretches it: Especially after a supper, hence the old saying ut sit nox
Levis, sit tibi Caena brevis.

If you will have a good Night.
Let your Supper be Light.
For they who feed too freely, hinder the free motion of the Diaphragma
thereby, which causes difficulty of breathing, so that they are in danger of
Suffocation, as one whom I knew that eat bread for a wager, and a Virgin that
had crammed her self with Chestnuts, were, and an old woman that died with
eating of too much Meat and Eggs upon an Easterday. The same may be also when
any hard thing is taken into the Stomach as when it is filled with Cherry
stones, or other hard substance, as the Mountebancks, that eat flint stones for
Money.

Wind filling the stomach, causes a stretching pain, The inflation of the
Stomach and the cause thereof.
which is called the Inflation of the Stomach. This comes from crude, waterish
and windy meats and drinks, or a humor of that nature. Or from crudity of the
Stomach, or from want of Concoction, which being bred there stretches it, and
if it be much in quantity, makes it heavy. The same may come by a humor, that
comes out of the Guts into the Stomach, which is rare, and then the belching is
sower and as of roasted flesh.

If Air be taken into the stomach, as sometimes by greedy drinking, it does the
same if it be any quantity and remains there: but this is seldom, because after
meat taken in, it is forced up again by belching. But if Wind or Air be mixed
with meat, as we see in Puddings while they are filling, then it sooner
offends and stretches the stomach.

A crude phlegmatic excrementitious humor being in the stomach from crudity, or
from the Head by Defluxion, offends it by distemper, if it be cold, and by
compression also, if it be much, and turns into wind. This crudity comes from
weakness of the stomach, or want of Concoction. And if thereby crude phlegm be
produced, it causes the disease called the turning of meat into phlegm.

A hard preternatural tumor in the stomach, as a Call us after some hurt (such
as I have seen in the stomach of a Swine that was wounded formerly there, and
in the bladder of a Cow) or any other hardness or scirrhus that breeds therein,
does burden and molest it, and the more after meat.

Also the stomach may be afflicted by the parts adjacent, when too full or
obstructed, or swollen, or hard, they press upon it, or inflame it. As by the
Liver over it, or the spleen under it, or the Reins near to it, or the
Diaphragma inflamed, or by the colon Gut growing to it, when it is stretched.

Also from the bending inward of the sword bone, when it is so confirmed, the
stomach may be offended, when it is full and stretched and hits against it. And
it will be so, till the meat is digested, or the stomach falls off, by the
patients lying upon his Back. This I have known in many.

The same may be from outward, hard and heavy things lying thereupon, not for
guarding or keeping warm the stomach, but to make the body slender, which women
much delight in, and therefore use busks and straight bodies. These offend the
stomach, especially after meat, and they endure it patiently, for pride feels
no pain.

Twitching and also tickling of the Stomach, Twitching of the Stomach, is the
cause of the knawing of the Heart.
causing straining and vomiting, and turning of the stomach (as they call it)
produce the pain that goes before. This is greater and longer in those that
cannot vomit, or with much difficulty do it. This is caused by all things that
provoke loathing and vomiting, and is in all diseases that have the turning of
the Stomach. Also by worms rather moving then sucking the mouth of the stomach,
which is very sensible.

A strong provocation does more turn and offend it, A strong irritation of the
stomach is the cause of a knawing or burning pain of the Heart.
as when vomits are given of Hellebore, Sribium, precipitat, which burn, know
or prick the mouth of the stomach, or poison taken, which offends both Stomach
and Heart, and causes both Cardialgia and Cardiaca.

Or sharp Food, as Onyons, Leeks, rotten Cheese, or burning food, as
Watercresses, Water-Parsley or the like, after the eating of which, they
especially who have hot stomachs, feel burning and knawing. Also this pain may
come from meat, which is not of it self sharp, but turns so by corruption in
some Stomachs which easily corrupt. as from sweet, fat and stinking meats, and
moist; As Eggs, Milk, Cowcumbers, and other such fruits, these by corruption,
do not cause a cold matter (as they suppose) but that which is sharp and
choleric. The badness also, and corruption of meats in hot stomachs
especially, may cause the bovling of the stomach, as when the hot-burning juice
of the meat boyleth, in time of concoction, if there be a violent motion at
that time, which disturbeth the stomach, and confuseth the meat therein, it
sends forth a burning vapor like a flame, from the bubles that break. This
vapor laboring to come forth by belching (as we have showed in difficulty of
belching) gets into the sensible straight passages of the mouth of the stomach,
and then burns it, and when it is discussed the pain cease, and when a new
vapor arises (as we see in the boiling of Hasty pudding) the heat returns, and
so long till the concoction is finished, or some drink is taken to quench it,
or to allay the sharpness of the juice from whence the vapors arise.

The stomach is often provoked also from Choler yellow or green, or from
Melancholy, and if it stick fast it knaws and burns it.

This choler breeds in the stomach from things eaten, which have evil juice,
or breed choler, or is sent into it by the gut called Duodenum and causes
knawing and biting, especially when the stomach is empty, in those called
Picrocholi, or men of a sharp choleric constitution. If this choler get into
the substance of the stomach, the burning will be longer. As it may from the
gall touching it, for that part of the stomach that lies upon the gal and
close unto it, may be dyed yellow thereby, so that the stain may reach to the
inside of the stomach, as we have often observed in Anatomyes of such, who had
always burning stomachs. This is usual with them, who have much choler in
their Gall, which being washed, passes through the bag that holds it, and
infects all the parts near, inwardly and outwardly, as I have often seen. And
this is most in them, whose stomach is seldom empty, but always gorged. Or in
such who writing or the like bend their body, so that they violently press the
stomach upon the gall, and as it were squeeze it, at which time also the
burning is greater.

Also the pian must needs be great and burning and dangerous, The Erysipelas of
the Stomach.
when there is an Erysipelas of pure choler, in the substance of the stomach.
This is a sad disease with continual vomiting.

If the stomach be cut or pricked from swallowing of Thorns, Needles, or Grass,
(as drunkards have often done) there is not only a knawing, but pricking and
rearing pain.

The stomach is also pained from malignant and venomous humors, in other
diseases, and there is also fainting.

The weak constitution of the stomach called weakness of stomach, The weak
constitution of the Stomach causes the weakness thereof.
(which others call a distemper which weakneth, and causes not pain) because
it causes slow concoction and crudity from thence, produces diverse Symptoms,
as lost Appetite, loathing, belching, Cachexy and the like, mentioned
elsewhere, and pains by reason of Excrements that come thiether, and the
Cardilaea, or Imbecility of the stomach.

This weakness of stomach, is from want of natural heat, either at the first
birth, or by old Age; or from long diseases, by which the stomach has been
often weakened, or from great Evacuations and Venery, which have weakened the
whole body and the stomach also. Or from coldness and moistness, which makes the
stomach loose, or from dryness, by which it cannot fitly embrace the Food; This
distemper may come from external or external causes or diseases that change the
temper of the stomach to be cold, moist or dry, which causes imbecility.
Sometimes it comes from a fault in the Organ, or part it self. As when it is too
thin from too much distention through gluttony or drunkness. For the thicker
the stomach is, the better it concocteth (as we may see in birds, whose thick
stomach concocteth the hardest things.

If the stomach be naturally hot, or by use of hot things in youth, The hot
constitution of the stomach, causes the hot distemper.
sooner then they ought to use them, or made so by a disease, which has
shriveled it though it be not a disease of it self, if it be rightly ordered,
yet it is a cause why some meats sooner corrupt, and turn into choler and
sharp humors, and so by accident causes a Cardialgia, which comes from such
humors. This disposition of the stomach, is known chiefly by thirst and delight
in sour things, and distaste of sweet. So that hot, sharp and salt things and
wine they leave, and digest the hardest meat soonest, and the other easily
corrupts.

In almost all diseases, The cause of pain of the Stomach, is in the Nerves.
with great pain the stomach suffers by consent of the Nerves, of which the
mouth of the stomach is full. Hence it is that in the colic and stone and other
pains in parts distant, as of wounds and contusions, we see not only the
Appetite lost, but a pain in the stomach, so that if they receive a wound when
the stomach is full, they vomit.

Also the stomach being of most exquisit sense, does easily receive an injury,
though never so small, and is greatly offended at a great, by reason of the
Nerves. So that there is often a Syncope or swounding, moreover by reason of
this consent of the Nerves, in great passions of the mind, there is a Headache
from the stomach offended, and other hurts, as loss of Appetite and the like.

The pains of the Gut called Colon, which is at the bottom of the Stomach, The
cause of Heart-knawing, is in the Colon.
and joined unto it by the Caul, are referred unto Heart-pains also, because
they are in the region or lodge of the Heart. As if the Colon be stretched by
Wind and Excrements, it comes to pass that the pain seems as if it were in the
stomach, yet it stops not long, but runs to the sides downwards. And in other
pains of the Heart, we find that they go upwards, and are about the stomach; so
that some pains of the Colon seem to be pains of the stomach: Hence it is that
when they lie long a bed in the morning, and sleep not, because the Excrements
which they use to void presently, when they arise being retained in the upper
part of the Colon, not being able to go down while they are in bed, do pull and
twich the Colon, and provoke the Stomach by consent, and there is Loathing and
Heartpain, which cease when they are up, and the Excrements descend,
especially if they break Wind downward, or go to stool.

And hence it is that after a purging Medicine, when it begins to work, and the
evil Excrements pass through the upper part of the Colon, till they have a
stool, they feel a noise and Heart-ach often, so that they swound and vomit,
and the pain returns when they again to stool. All these things show that the
Cause is not in the Stomach, but the Colon: For if it were in the stomach it
would have begun at the first taking of the medicine, and while it was in the
stomach, and not a go long time after, when the Medicine was carried with the
Excrements into the Colon, and labored to get out.

When the Midriff is afflicted, which touches the stomach all over behind, The
cause of pressing-pain is in the midriff.
and grows to it; there are pains in the region of the Heart, because the
Midriff being molested with evil and many vapors, as in the nightmare, mother
and the like, it causes besides short breathing, a pain which girts the Body
like a Girdle: And if the stomach consent, that condoleth. As a difficulty of
breathing comes from a Disturbance of the Stomach by the Midriff.

The Cure.
The Cure is according to the Causes thus. First we must cure the Diseases of
the Stomach, from whence come diverse sorts of Heart-ach, hurt of Functions, and
Crudities. The Diseases are these; Inflammations of the Stomach, or coldness,
or stretching, or windiness, or heaviness, twiching, or irritation; or else the
weakness and hot constitution thereof: Or a Discase by consent from the Nerves,
and from the Colon and Midriff.

The Inflammation of the Stomach is seldom, The cure of inflammation of the
stomach.
and never but from a violent Cause, and is more dangerous, because it is in a
sensible and noble part, especially if it be great, for then there is a great
pain and also Convulsion. And it is better cured by dissolving then by
Suppuration; for so it will turn to an Ulcer, which is a new Disease, and as
dangerous as the former, hard to be cured, and which will leave a Callus or
Hardness in the Stomach.

If it be beginning, your aim must be to hinder the increase, and abate the
Heat, with respect to the Fever, and assuage the pain and fainting fits, which
are usual and to dissolve the matter that is there, and if that cannot be done
to bring it to Suppuration, and cure the Ulcer; thus.

At the first let blood in the Arm, for though the veins of the Stomach come
from the branches of the Gatevein, yet drawing blood from the branches of the
hollow Vein, is good against the Fever and for Revulsion.

Give also a cooling Clyster to revel and abate pain, for that will reach to
the Colon, and communicate its force to the Stomach, under which the Colon
lies.

You must not give strong Purges, for they going presently to the part
affected, will cause pain, and increase the Distemper by their Heat; but
loosning temperate Purges in the progress of the Disease can do no hurt: As
Cassia which also asswageth pain, and pulp of Prunes, and Tamarinds, and the
like.

Medicines to alter the Distemper must be cold, both actually and potentially,
and in the beginning while the Humor flows must be a little astringent, and
afterward moist, mixed with things that abate pain. Thus:

Those Sauces which are good in a hot constitution of the Stomach, and cooling,
as we shall show are good here.

Cabbage chiefly, and Rapes, and other Fruits, boiled and kept in pickle, are
good against heat.

And cold Spring Water, with Snow or Ice, is good drink in the opinion of some;
but I think it not safe, for a sudden Repercussion is dangerous. It is better
at first with a little Vinegar, and more pleasant with Sugar boiled like a
Julep.

Cold Milk is good, and allayes pain.

Or an Emulsion of the cold Seeds to ease pain, and heat with Poppey-seeds.

Dioscorides commends the Water of wild Vetches, also Plantane, and Rose Water,
and Vinegar, and Sorrel-water.

And the Julep of Roses and Violets.

Or, Take Rose Water three ounces, Plantane-water two ounces, juice of Sorrel
or Pomegranates an ounce and an half, Sugar of Roses an ounce; boil and strain
them, give two ounces at a time.

Or the Decoction of Barley, cold, with Violets.

Or thus: Take Barley a pugil, Cowcumber-seed half an ounce, Liquorish an
ounce; boil and drink them cold.

This is cordial also. Take Liquorish an ounce, Citron-peels two drams, cordial
Flowers, each a pugil; Flowers of Water Lillies half a pugil, Barley a pugil,
the four great cold Seeds two drams, Purslane-seed and white Poppey-seed, each
a dram; Citron-seeds half a dram: boil and sweeten them with Sugar, or these
Syrups.

In the beginning give Syrups with spring or distilled Waters, those that cool
and bind; as that of dried Roses, Quinces, green Grapes, Ribes, sour
Pomegranates, Bar-berries. In the progress that cool and moisten; as of
Violets, Purslane, Water Lillies. And if the Liver be also hot, as it is
commonly, and for the Fever give Syrup of Succory, and Endive. And against
Fainting, Syrup of Bugloss. And to assuage pain, Syrup of Poppies.

Or thus: Take Syrup of Violets, and Quinces, Syrup of Ribes, or Pomegranates,
or of Endive, each half an ounce; Syrup of Poppies three drams.

Also the candyed or preserved and conserved Fruits abovesaid and of Citrons,
Gourds, or Lettice, or Coleworts.

This is cooling and cordial: Take conserve of Roses an ounce, conserve of
Violets, Citrons and juice of Ribes, each half an ounce; species Diamargariton
frigid and Diarhodon and red Coral, each a scruple; with sugar of Roses, make a
mixture.

To resolve the residue of the Inflammation, or the Imposthume of the Stomach
use these at the end.

First, give Chamomil and Endive water, then six ounces of Chamomil water
alone, often

Or: Take Chamomil and Endive water, each an ounce and an half; Sack an ounce,
spirit of Wine a dram, with a drop or two of spirit of Vitriol.

Or this Julep: Take syrup of Endive and Wormwood, each an ounce; Mint and
Elicampane water, each an ounce and an half, with Triasantalon half a dram,
give it now and then.

Turpentine washed with Wormwood water, given twice or thrice, dissolves or
ripens the Imposthumes of the Stomach.

Apply outwardly coolers and anodynes, with strengtheners.

As this Ointment: Take Oil of Roses an ounce and an half, Oil of Violets, Rose
Vinegar and juice of Hawkeweed, each an ounce; boil them till the juyces are
consumed, add red Sanders, a dram, red Roses half a dram, Spike a scruple,
Camphire half a scruple, with white Wax, make an Ointment.

This Cataplasm is good for the beginning of the disease. Take Violet-leaves,
and Snakeweed, and Vine-leaves each a handful: Roses, Violets, and
Comfrey-flowers, each a pugil; stamp them, add Barley-meal, or Bran.

In great pain. Take Chamomil, and Melilot-flowers, Roses, and Violets, each a
handful; Wormwood half a handful; boil them in Milk, add Barley-meal six
ounces, Coriander-seeds and Sanders, each two drams; Oil of Chamomil and Dill,
each an ounce: make a Cataplasm.

Or this Fomentation against Inflammation. Take Rose and Plantane-water, each
three ounces; Wormwoodwater two ounces, Rose-vinegar an ounce, red Sanders two
drams.

Or this Epithem against an Erysipelas of the Stomach. Take Rose, Sorrel,
Nightshade, and Succory-water, each two ounces, Wormwood-water and white Wine,
each half an ounce; Rose-vinegar two drams, Diarrhodon a dram, Coral and Ivory,
each half a dram; apply it to the Stomach.

Use these to dissolve the Imposthume, as this with a Sponge. Take Wormwood,
Mints, and Snakeweed, each a handful; Chamomil and Dill-flowers, each a pugil;
Faenugreek and Bean-meal, each an ounce; Mastick two drams, Nutmeg a dram: boil
them in Wine for a Fomentation.

Then anoint with this: Take Oil of Wormwood and Chamomil, each an ounce and
half; Turpentine half an ounce, Mucilage of Marshmallows and Foenugreek-seed,
each two drams; Mastick a dram and half, Cloves a dram, with Wax make an
Ointment.

Or this Cataplasm. Take green Wormwood a handful, and Mints half a handful,
stamp them, add Bran and Linseed-flowers, each an ounce; Roses and
Chamomil-flowers in powder, each a dram; Mace half a dram, add Oil of Wormwood.

Or use Melilot-plaster dissolved with Oil of wormwood.

If the Inflammation do imposthume, The cure of an Imposthume of the stomach
after Inflammation.
ripen it with remedies in the Quinzie given at the mouth.

And with things there outwardly prescribed, only ad some things that may
respect the Stomach, being a more noble part.

As this Cataplasm. Take Orris and Lilly-roots, each two ounces; Wormwood and
Mallows, each a handful; Chamomil-flowers and Roses, each a pugil; boil them in
Wins and Water, stamp them, and add Wheat-flour four ounces, Lineseed poudered
an ounce, yellow Sanders a dram, Saffron half a dram, Oil of sweet Almons two
ounces: make a Cataplasm.

Or use the Emplaister of Diachylon with Orris and Oil of Mints.

To open the Impostume, use things mentioned in a Quinsie. Or this, Take Wheat
flower four ounces, Pigeons dung half an ounce, Oil of Wormwood an ounce, Honey
an ounce, make a Plaster.

Also Roaring, Neesing, Coughing and rubbing of the Stomach and Vomit, will
break the Imposthume.

If they vomit matter, give Barley water and Sugar to cleanse, with Honey of
Roses.

Then strengthen the Stomach, as in imbecility. The Cure of Cardialgia, from a
cold Stomach.


If coldness of stomach come from outward injuries or cold water drunk and
produce Cardialgia, give and apply hot things actually and potentially so. And
the pain will be abated.

Of which we shall speak in Imbecility of the stomach from cold.

And also of that cold that comes from a humor; for Imbecility, is the cause of
both.

But if the cold be so great that not only the stomach, but parts adjacent
suffer, and a Dropsy or Cachexy follow (which comes by drinking much cold
water, when they are very hot (we shall speak of the Cure of that, in the hurts
of the bowels.

As the cause is, so must Distention, The Cure of Cardialgia, from Destention,
Inflammation, and aggravation of the Stomach, by Wind, Meat, Humor, Tumor or
Bowels adjacent, or outward injuries.
Aggravation or Inflammation of the Stomach be cured.

If it come from Wind, which proceeds from Meat, Humor or weak Concoction, it
causes a stretching pain: because there must be good diet to hinder the
breeding of Wind and Evacuation, and hot remedies used to help concoction and
discuss wind inwardly and outwardly, we shall speak of it in weakness of
stomach, from crude humors.

If the Stomach be stretched by Air, taken in with drink, except it be belched
forth again, we shall Cure it, as in the Cure of wind.

If there be stretching and heaviness, from plenty of things eaten, and
compression after Concoction and Digestion, by exercise it will away.

But if it be great and will not yield by reason of the quantity or quality it
must be vomited up or purged and the stomach strengthened. All which are used
against those causes that weaken the stomach, and because there is also
weakness, we shall speak of it in Imbecility of the stomach.

As also if this stretching or heaviness, comes from a crude humor, we shall
speak of it there, because that is the cause of weakness, and this is the cause
of that.

If it come from a hard Tumor, after a wound, or a Scirrhus, although it be
difficult, and there will be always some heaviness after meat especially, and
weakness, let the Cure against weakness be sufficient: yet use Emollients, as
soon as you suspect it, and consume it, if you can.

The best way is to give Turpentine pills with Gum Ammoniack and Mastick often.

Or these: Take Gum Ammoniack, dissolved in juice of Orris, Mastick, each a
dram; Storax, Myrrh, Ladanum, each half a dram; with juice of Orris, make
pills, give half a dram often.

Or give a drop or two of Oil of Myrrh or Mastick with Sugar, or otherwise.

And apply outwardly things mentioned in the hardness of Liver and Spleen.

Or thus: Take Mallows or Wormwood, each a handful; Chamomil flowers a pugil,
Schaenanth two drams, Figs twelve, boil them in Wine, stamp them, and add Gum
Ammonick and Bdellium, dissolved in the Decoction, and Myrrh, of each two
drams; with Honey, make a Cataplasm.

If the stomach be oppessed, by the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Colon, Midrife being
stopped, stretched, swollen, hardened or inflamed, Cure it, as in these diseases,
for the heaviness will not away, till they be removed, nor the difficulty of
breathing, though they complain least of them.

If it come from the crookedness of the sword Gristle bent inwards and pressing
the Stomach, it is incurable, and no rest can be, till the patient lie upon his
Back, that the Stomach may remove from it: or till there is a complete
Concoction.

If it come from hard things, outwardly pressing, remove them, and if they have
done any hurt, mend it.

If the twitching of the stomach cause loathing, rather then pain, The Cure of
Cardialgia, from twitching and tickling of the stomach.
Cure it, as in loathing. If worms cause tickling, expel them, and any other
Disease that causes it

If there be Irritation or reaching with pain, knawing, The Cure of Cardialgia,
from Irritation, or provoking, or from things swallowed, or from Medicines, or
from poison bad Diet, or evil humors.
pricking or burning caused by things swallowed, that wound the Stomach; first
remove them, if possible, not by force, as vomiting (for so the stomach will be
closed and the things that hurt will stick faster) but by things that make way,
and wash, and make them descend, that they may not hurt the entrals for they do
not easily fix though sharp, but are cast down by the Stomach and Guts, as
other hard things, and stop not, till they come at the straight passage of the
Fundament. For we think it impossible (as some say) that they should pass
through the Veins, by the Meseraick and Gut out at the skin. Yet we have
observed, from a Famous Surgeon, from whose mouth I had it, with great
admiration of the hearers, that a Needle swallowed, which stayed long in the
body, came out at the Reins, by the right Kidney in an Ulcer. And I my self saw
and handled a piece of Glass, which came out by Urin, by a strong Diuretic,
after a great and sharp pain in the Uriters and fit of the stone.

These are washed away with great draughts, of fat things especialy, which
relax the passages, as of broth, Milk, Oil or Butter, which done, if by the
pain we suppose that a Needle or a thorn be fastened, then we prevent, or Cure
an Inflammation, as we showed in Inflammations. If by reason of great hurt they
vomit blood, we must stop it, as we showed in vomting of Blood. If matter come
forth, we must give clensers, as was showed in Ulcers of the Jaws and Gullet,
and then dryers to heal, as was there also showed. But this is hardly done in
this noble part ulcerated, and if it be done it leaves a Callus, which causes
weakness. Here we shall show how these two last are to be done.

Whether it be from things swallowed or Choler, or evil juice, vomiting is
good, and though it come of it self, yet nature is to be helped, if it be not
sufficient tocast out the offense.

The Vomits must be such, which wash the stomach, and make the vomiting easy.
as warm water, Broaths or Drink plentifully taken; with Oil, Butter or the
like, which turn the stomach and allay sharpness; or with Honey and Sugar,
which also cleanse. Also Barley water is good.

In a choleric sharp juice, give things to abate it, as water, or the like,
with Vinegar, syrup of Sorrel or Oxymel, and other Vomits mentioned in Fevers.

Also gentle Clysters to draw it out of the Stomach. And though the body be
loose (as it needs must be by the provoking of the expulsive faculty) yet
Clysters are good to take away pain in the Stomach and Guts, for they can get
into the Stomach by the Colon.

Also Suppositories revel and do some thing thereby, examples of all these are
in the Colic.

When there is choler, or sharp juice, or any violent thing swallowed, whether
Medicine, or Poison, or other things that hurts the stomach, it is good to
purge, because nature tends that way. And there are many purgers of choler
mentioned in choleric Fevers, good in this case, if they be so ordered that
they may not trouble the stomach: thus.

Take Cassia ten drams, or Catholicon ten drams, or three drams of the
Electuary of juice of Roses, or the like, as Diacydonites with Scammony alone,
or with Sugar, or with Wormwood water, or of Endive, when you will temper
choler; but when you will cleanse, with Barley or Pease broth. But when you
will loosen more, with a Decoction of Fruits and old Cocks broth. Rondeletius
commends Fish broth, or Whey, or Possets: or if bitter things will down, the
Decoction of Wormwood, which is clensing, and is good against both choler and
phlegm.

Or give three ounces of syrup of Roses, or an ounce and an half of syrup of
Roses with Rhubarb, or Senna, or that of succory with Rhubarh, or of Wormwood.

Or this Decoction: Take sweet Prunes and Tamarinds, each half an ounce; Endive
a handful, Violets a pugil, Barley a pugil, senna half an ounce, Polypody six
drams. Epithymum two drams, Annis seed a dram, boil them, with sugar, syrup of
Violets, or Roses: make a Potion.

Or this infusion: Take Rhubarb four scruples, Senna two drams, Wormwood a
dram, Spike half a scruple, bruise and sprinkle them with white wine, and add
Endive and wormwood water, infuse them, and add syrup of Roses an ounce, give
it. You may mix with it the Laxative before mentioned.

Another infusion in wine of wormwood, better for the stomach: Take Senna an
ounce, Rhubarb a dram and an half, yellow Myrobalans three drams, wormwood two
drams, Cordial flowers a dram, Spike a scruple, Fennel seed a dram, steep them,
(being bruised) in white wine that is small, twenty four hours. Give every day a
draught.

Pills for the same: Take Aloes (which is good to cleanse both choler and phlegm)
a scruple, Rhubarb half a dram, Spike three grains, Scammony two or three
grains, with juice or syrup of Roses: make a Dose of Pills.

Or give a dram of Pills of Rhubarb, or scammoniate Pills, if need require.

If the stomach be provoked by a bad Medicine, or poison, or burn, or be
corroded; give things to alter by moistures to abate the force, or by slyminess
to defend the stomach, and that will heal, and resist Poison.

As warm Milk, or Cream of Almonds, or Pinenuts, or of Cold seeds, or Barley
Cream.

Or the milky juice of Goats beard, Hawkweed, Sowthistle, Sycomore, in
Corrosions are good.

Or the Mucilage of Lineseed, Fleabane, apples Pears or Quinces.

The Decoction also of Lineseed heals the Stomach, when it is corroded by
taking of Spanish Flies.

Or: Take Marsh-mallow roots an ounce, Comfrey roots half an ounce, Line and
Quinceseed, each a dram; boil them in Water, and add Sugar, drink often thereof.

Or oil of sweet Almonds, in a good quantity, or the oil of Sesamum, commended
by Dioscorides.

If the stomach be poisoned, give Treacle and Mithridate and the like, which
are proper to take away the cause and the pain. But after a violent purge, they
do more by stupifying the expulsive faculty, then by the way of Antidote.

You may also give Antidotes, without Opium, which are contrary to poison, by a
peculiar quality, or general Antidotes; such as are prescribed against the
Plague, and biting, and stinging of venomous beasts.

If the stomach be burnt and reaches from choler or sharp juice, give things
that moisten, and are sharp and cool, and will hinder the reaching, and also
such as take the sensibility away, and assuage the pain.

As sour Fruits take away the burning of the stomach, Citrons, Limons, Orenges,
Pomegranats, Apples; Plums, Cherries, Grapes, and Strawberries, and chiefly
Currants and Berberries.

Also Lettice, Endive, Violets, Borrage, Sorrel, Wood Sorrel, Vine leaves and
Berberry leaves in sallets, or otherwwise.

Dioscorides commends simples against the burning of the stomach and some of
them are hot, as scordium, Pennyroyal, spicknard, smallage, flowers of Comfrey,
sweet rush, Piony seeds, and wild Laurel, and juice of Liquorish.

Also Flesh, or Barley broth, with cooling and moistning herbs, and Vinegar,
or other sour juyces, or the Decoction of Wormwood, or the juice of the Fruits
aforesaid, or sharp Herbs alone, or with sugar, or syrups, if they be two sharp.

In a choleric stomach, wormwood wine does quickly help, by clensing phlegm and
Choler.

Or a sharp syrup alone, or with waters, or Decoctions, as of sorrel, or
Vinegar, or Oxysacharum, or of Pomegranate juice, or of the syrup of them, or
of Apples, Plums, Limons, Citrons, unripe Grapes, of Currants, Berberies,
sorrel, or that of juice of Quinces boiled, or quidiney of Quinces with wine,
or Vinegar to make it sharper. And so you may mix other syrups, that are too
sweet, to beat down and suppress choler, which two sweet things will breed.
Also syrup of Violets, Roses, or Juleps thereof, also of Endive, succory and
Water Lillies, and the like, well mixed with waters, or Decoctions, for so they
suppress choler not only by cooling, but wetting, especially if they be sharp,
to all which, add syrup of wormwood to cleanse choler.

Also Conserves and Candites of the same Fruits and Herbs are good, (but
always be ware of sweet, they will heat choler) and Conserve of quinces,
Citrons, Gourds, Lettice, Colewort.

Also juice of sharp fruits without sugar, as the ancients did, or with
Vinegar, usually they are without sugar, as of Currants, Berberries, unripe
Grapes, or these.

Make Electuaries of these mixed, as that called Diacydonites of Quinces
without the Spices, which is made of the Pulp of Quinces, boiled with Honey and
Powder of Diacydonites.

Or thus: Take Conserve of Roses and Sorrel, and Citronpeels, each half an
ounce; Conserve of Currance an ounce, of Myrobalans candied one, the powder of
our Diacydonites, or Trionsantalon, or Diarrhodon a dram, with syrup of Sorrel
or unripe Grapes make an Electuary.

And this: Take Citron-peels, candied Quinces, and conserve of Quinces, each
two dramss juice of Currance without Sugar, all well dried half an ounce, the
Powder of our Diacydonites (which I shall after show) Cinnamon, each a dram;
with Rose Water and boiled Sugar make Lozenges.

Or give Crumbs of Bread steept in Juice of Pomegranates, Lemmons, or the like,
with Vinegar and Rose Water, to make it pleasant.

Or Barley-meal, with Capon-broath, and Juice of Pomegranates, which is
Hippocrates his remedy against the heat and reaching of the stomach.

Or Pine-nuts eaten, and Juice of Purslane drunk after, are good against
burning of the stomach.

The usual Pouders for Choler in the Stomach are Diatrionsantalon, which has
no other spice but cold seeds, Roses, Gums, Starch, Juice of Liquorish, burnt
Ivory, and Camphyre, and Rhubarb. Also Diarrhodon Abbatis which has all the
former Ingredients, and other cold, and Mastich, and some spices of hot Seeds
and Cordials.

The Powder of Diacydonites without the hot Spices is added to this Electuary,
when we will only cool, and is used after Meat, and Trionsantalon, Barbary, and
Sorrel-seeds, Roses, and burnt Ivory.

Instead of which; Take dried Quinces half an ounce, all the Sanders, each a
dram; red Roses two drams, Sorrel and Barberry-seeds, each a dram; the
Antispodium of Dioscorides made of Quinces half a dram, make a Powder, mix them
with Pouders after Meat, or Electuaries.

Also the Pouders of the Troches of burnt Ivory, Camphyre, Bar-berries, allay
the heat of Choler (they all have burnt Ivory) and Antispodium of Quinces also.

Instead of all these Pouders for hot Stomaches, use this. Take dried Quinces
half an ounce, Citron-peels a dram, red Sanders two drams, white Sanders a
dram, Liquorish two drams, red Roses two drams and half, cordial-flowers a
dram, great cold Seeds two drams, small cold Seeds half a dram, Sorrel,
Purslane, Barbery, Coriander-seeds, each a dram; white Poppy-seeds, Gum
Traganth, and Arabic, each half a dram; Coral a dram, Antispodium made of
Ivory, or Hartshorn half a dram, and to please the Stomach Cinnamon and
Aniseseed, each a dram; sweet Sanders half a dram, with Mastick make a Powder:
Give it with Sugar of Roses, or in Lozenges made with Sugar and the Waters
mentioned, and a little juice of a Lemmon or Vinegar.

A bitter Powder easy to be made against Choler in the Stomach. Take Wormwood
a dram, tops of Centaury, and Masterwort-roots, each half a dram; give a
spoonful with Wine.

A Powder against Burning of the Stomach. Take white Chalk half an ounce,
Nutmeg a dram, Sugar an ounce: Give a spoonful.

Or this: Take Crab's-eyes two drams, Bole half a dram, red Roses a dram, Sugar
of Roses half an ounce: Use it as the other.

In great Pains give things to abate Sense, as Antidotes to be mentioned in
Imbecility, which are good here if new made, though they have many hot things,
and opiate Electuaries; as Philonium Romanum two scruples, in Pills or
Electuaries of Juice of Roses to purge Choler, or requires Nicolai half a dram,
with Wine.

Or this Drink: Take Syrup of Poppies six drams, Syrup of Roses and Wormwood,
each an ounce; give it with convenient Water or Wine.

If you leave out the Syrup of Poppies, and boil in the other a grain of Opium
gently, and give it with Chicken-broath, it is excellent.

In time of danger, give Narcoticks and that often, I have often with good
success given my Nepenthe in a choleric Vomiting from anger, when there has
been great pain and heat of the Body.

Outwardly of what cause soever in heat or corruption, we use Astringents and
Coolers, as to keep the flux of Choler from the Liver, adding always some hot
things proper for the Stomach, because outwardly they cannot do hurt, but
strengthen, and cause piercing: they must all be used warm.

The usually cold Oils of Roses and Omphacine, that is of unripe Olives,
Quinces, Myrtles, Mastich, with hot; as of Mints and Spike, are used with
Vinegar to make them pierce, or Wine to strengthen, boiled in them till they be
consumed.

A cooling strengthening Ointment. Take Oil of Roses and Quinces, each an ounce;
Oil of Myrtles, or Mastick, Wormwood, or Mints, each half an ounce; Vinegar of
Roses six drams, boil them till the Vinegar be consumed, add when they cool
Powder of Citron-peels, Coriander-seeds, red Roses, Wormwood, each half a dram;
Coral a dram, Sanders red and white, each half a dram; Spike two scruples,
Camphyre a scruple (to pierce rather then cool) with Wax make a Liniment, or
with Labdanum two drams, Aloes a dram, and Turpentine make a Plaster.

Galens cold Ointment of Roses, and the Cerot of Sanders, are good in Burning
of the Stomach, and of other Bowels.

In a great Heat when you will cool more; Take Oil of Roses omphacine two
ounces, juice of Sowthistle, Solomons-seal, Vinegar, each half an ounce; Powder
of Alabaster half an ounce, with Turpentiine washed make an Ointment.

Or use the Ointment in the Inflammation of the Stomach mentioned.

Or a Cataplasm of Purslane, Nightshade, Solomonsseal, Vine, Sowthistle,
Hart's-tongue, Venus-navel, Water Lillies, wild Vine, Roses, with Wormwood, and
Mints, or Chamomil-slowers in pain, boiled in water, or Rose Water, or
Horstongue-water, well beaten to a Pultis, with the Oils aforesaid two ounces,
Mastick half an ounce, Alabaster three drams, Horstongue poudered two drams,
Sanders and Cloves, each a dram; make a Pultis.

If the pain be great, use an anodyne Cataplasm mentioned in the Inflammation
of the Stomach.

Or this: Take Toasts of Bread dipped in Vinegar of Roses half a pint, Pulp of
Quinces so steeped also three ounces, add a little red Wine, and juice of
Quinces, and powder of Mastick half an ounce, dried Wormwood two drams,
Chamomilflowers and Mace, each a dram; Oil of Roses and Chamomil, each an
ounce; mix and apply them.

Or the Fomentation mentioned in Inflammation, or of the Herbs mentioned, or of
the Oils, with Vinegar, and Juyces of Herbs.

If there be pain: Take Roses, wild Vine, Chamomil, Melilot or Dill, each a
pugil; Wormwood or Mints, each half a handful; Marsh-mallow roots six drams,
Corianderseeds and Myrtles, each half an ounce; Mastick two ounces, Cloves,
Sanders, each a dram; with Water and red Wine make a Fomentation.

Or use an Epithem of Rose Water and Vinegar, with a Linnen-clout, or a toast
of Bread.

Or, Take Rose Water two ounces, Hart's-tongue, and Wormwood-water, each an
ounce; all Sanders, or Diatrionsantalon two drams, Coriander-seeds,
Antispodium, each a dram; mix and apply them. Or use that mentioned in
Inflammation.

A Powder for a bag, or to be sprinkled after anointing in Burning of the
Stomach. Take Coriander-seeds prepared in Vinegar half an ounce, Myrtles, or
Barbery-seeds, red Roses, Sanders and Citron-peels, each a dram and half;
Wormwood, red Coral, each a dram; Sanders and Nutmeg, each half a dram; make a
powder.

If Choler rise from the Liver to the Stomach, apply Cupping-glasses to the
Liver to draw it back, and it will ease.

Weak Constitution of the Stomach that hinders the Functions, The cure of
weakness of the stomach from defect of Natural heat, distemper, cold, or moist
actual cold, stretching, inflammation, looseness, or other fault in the member.
and causes Excrements, and so Cardilaea or usual pain; If it come from want
of Natural heat by birth or age, or by a Disease, and be inhaerent in the
Stomach, because it cannot be cured, we must provide that by decent Diet and
Stomach-medicines, that bind gently and strengthen it, and heat, that it may be
strengthened, and the want of Natural heat supplied. If this Weakness come from
a cold or moist Distemper, and be fixed, it is difficult to be cured as the
other (called the Coldness of the Stomach) and we must only keep it from
growing worse as the former, and with hotter Medicines. The cold and moist
Distemper that is acquired, is taken away with hot Medicines after the
Excrements are removed. But when the Stomach is too loose and thin, though it
can scarce be mended, yet by use of Astringents and hot Remedies in cold and
moist Bodies, or of temperate in other Bodies, we must labor to bring it to its
former state. If it be too strait and dry, we use Moistners to loosen it.

The Method of curing of which, and other Diseases of the Stomach, as Coldness,
or Stretching, or Humor crude or cold; or Inflation from Wind, is as was
formerly showed. Except the dry Distemper of which we shall speak in the Cure
of Weakness, because it requires contrary Remedies. And the Medicines must be
fitted diverse waves, either by Diet, Vomits, Belchings, Clysters, Purges,
Alterers, inwardly and outwardly as shall be showed.

First in these Diseases of the Stomach keep a good Diet, Diet for the weakness
of the stomach
because Meats goes directly into it, and must be digested by it, and we must
have a care that it fail not therein, from whence most Diseases of the Stomach
come, or are increased. This is done by a decent quantity and quality of Food.

In a weak Stomach, these are to be chiefly observed in the quantity, that they
eat little at once, taking heed that they be not so filled to feel weight, or
compression after Meat; and that they breath not shorter then before Meat. In
the manner, take heed of eating too greedily, but a little at a time, that the
Stomach may cover it, not continuing so long at it till concoction be begun,
which will be offended by adding more Meat. To refresh them therefore that have
weak Natural heat, because they must eat little at a time, let them eat oftener
then they that have strong Stomaches. They who have very cold and foul
Stomaches, must eat most seldom, and not before the first Food is concocted,
and they have an Appetite; therefore one Meal a day is sufficient for a foul
stomach. And they whose stomach is pained for abundance of Food, must abstain
till it is digested. And in a sit time as in the morning, five or six hours
after sleep, and if they can eat twice or thrice a day, three hours before sleep
at night, after a Digestion and when there is an Appetite. And before they
sleep after Supper, let there be a kind of Concoction, that the Vapors which
arise at the first plentifully, may be partly discussed by waking, and may not
go too much to fill the Head, by sleeping presently. This rule is not so
strictly to be observed by old and weak persons, that sleep not the whole
night, but they may sleep presently after Meat at noon and night, as they
desire, which refreshes them, and does not hurt them, because the Vapors are
not so many as in Youth, wherein more is eaten.

For the quality of Meats observe the substance and the Juice. Let it be easy
of Digestion, least while it is long a concocting, the stomach be grieved, or
if it be not, or not sufficiently concocted, there be Crudities and Wind. As
the Flesh of young Creatures, or slender, soft, and juycie Food which is easily
concocted, when hard, dry, and tough, or slimy is hard, except it be
artificially prepared, by roasting, boiling, mincing, and other ways.: By
which means sometimes good Meat is spoiled, as by smoking, salting. Also it
must be of good Juice, that weak stomaches may be better, and sooner refreshed
thereby, and fewer Excrements bred, which is required in all weak stomachs.
This commendible Juice is in all Nourishment from Beasts or Plants that are
true, and have not a Medicinal virtue (which is distinguished by taste or scent)
except by mustiness, rottenness, and the like, they be corrupted, or made so
that they presently corrupt in the stomach, or breed Excrements or Wind by
their moist and crude Juice, which they have besides the good, or otherwise are
hard of Concoction, by reason of their tough substance. Meats that are easy of
Concoction and of good Juice, must have these qualities, and it would be too
tedious to mention all. The Meat for Nourishment must be temperate, a little
inclining to Heat in cold and windy Stomachs; as it may be made by sauces,
which we use for medicine as well as for custom.

As for other things, namely the Motion of the Body and the Mind, Exercise is
good before meat for a weak stomach, and if it be much, and can be endured, it
stirs up the Natural heat, and warms the Body, and makes it fit for other
Functions, and gets a stomach. After Meat use not strong Exercise to disturb
the meat in the stomach but walking or standing, that the meat may go to the
bottom of the stomach, and be better concocted. Also moderate rest refreshes
and helps the Stomachs actions. And it is better after meat then great
Exercise, which may cause corruption or hinder Concoction. Rest by sleep may
help Concoction by accident (not by the sleep but by the quietness of the Body
and Mind) because we see that when the Animal Functions are quiet, the Natural
are most exercised. For the Concentraction or meeting of Heat in the Center
which they say does concoct in the time of sleep, cannot be true, because Heat
comes outward more in that time, therefore they sooner sweat, and therefore if
sleep help Concoction, it is from some other Cause, for in the time of waking,
by reason of motion, as we showed the Concoction and Distribution of Meat is
sooner made. And if waking they find Crudities, it is from intemperance and
eating of what is not fit, which hinders sleep. Also there must be a Natural
voiding daily of the Excrements to ease the Stomach from them, but too much
Evacuation, especially by Venery, as it weakens the whole Body, so it does the
Stomach, and troubles of Mind, but recreation is good.

Vomiting is good in all fullness of the stomach, Romedies fit for to cleanse
the stomach.
for if it be pained by stretching it is presently eased thereby, if it can be
which is hard, when it is much dilated, when breath is difficult. Especially
vomiting is good, when there is heaviness from crude flegmack humors; And from
weakness, in which it is good every month; otherwise, if there be no
Excrements, it will do hurt, especially if they be unfit, or unacustomed to it.
And in wind, when there is no other Humor, vomiting is not to be used rashly.

It is caused by tickling the Throat and rubbing the Stomach, or by gentle
vomits, or such as cleanse and cure, if there be phlegm that is tough. As Oxymels
or syrup of Sorrel, with warm water, or Decoction of Radishes, Beets, Arach
seeds, Asarum, and Agarick, or stilled water of Nuts and Radishes. In weakness
we add hot and bitter things, and that Cut, As wormwood Wine before, or Syrup
thereof with waters, or Decoctions mentioned.

In all these Causes, belching is good, to take off the swelling and the Cause,
if nothing but wind.

It comes of it self after meat, by bending, we may willingly hold, but not
send out a bulch. For they which make such a noise like belching, do not break
wind forth, but Air, that they first sucked in, and which they send from the
Gullet, not the stomach.

And it is Caused by Fomentations and hot things actually and potentially, so
as follow.

Clysters do well, when the Stomach is burdned with Meat or Humors, or stretched
with wind to stir up nature and open the lower parts and empty the Guts. And in
weakness of the stomach, if the belly be bound, they may be sometimes given,
especially if they work but little and are not Compounded. Of strong things,
which are forbidden in weakness of the Stomach.

But we may use sharp Clysters to draw down, and such to expel wind, if it
come from them, such as shall be prescribed in the colic.

If the stomach be desturbed by crude humors, or phlegm, or wind from them, or
from weakness, it is good to purge often, but with gentle things, that we
offend not the stomach. Yet in necessity, we use strong purges, with correctors
for such things as offend the stomach; and strengthenres. The forms whereof, we
shall mention in relation only to those diseases of the stomach, which we have
declared. Because there are purgers in general for the stomach, in other
diseases mentioned here and there.

Pills are thought best for the stomach, by reason of the Aloes that is in
them, which is thought the best purger for the stomach (though it stinketh and
causes loathing) and by reason of its bitterness and unpleasantness, can be
very ill taken. This Aloes is a thick juice, as it is brought to us, and the
redder it is, the better it is, that is, if it be of a redlike yellow, and it
is called Aloes Cuccotrine, or rather Succocitrine, from its Citron color. And
when it is hollowed within like a Liver and Brittle, it is called Aloes
Hepatica. But it may be made better by praeparation, when it is poudered and
washed from its filth, by which means it is never the less operative in purging
(though it be commonly thought otherwise) But it is stronger when it is
poudered and infused in convenient liquor, and dissolved by steeping, and then
juice that swims at the top poured of from the residents, often, and then
brought into a Body: If this liquor be Wine or spirit thereof, or other spiced
Drink or Decoction, it will warm and strengthen the stomach the more: and if it
be done in wormwood Wine, the cleansing and losning virtue will be the greater.

I am very much pleased with Aloe rosate with Rhubarb, thus made: Take the
purest succotrine Aloes three ounces, washed it nine times in the juice of
Damask Roses, and dry it as often, then add the powder of red Roses three
drams, Rhubarb a dram, and of the extract of Rhubarb half an ounce, Spicknard a
scruple, with syrup of Wormwood: make a mass for Pills,

Also the essence of Aloes is thus make: Take Aloes succotrine three pound or
sour, powder it, and put it into a glass, with Sorrel water five fingers above
it, put it in Balneo two or three days, then pour off the Tincture, which is
reddish, and add again Sorrel water, but not so much, and put it in Balneo
again, and pour of the tincture, do this till the water will take no more
tincture, still all these tinctures in Balneo, till there remain in the bottom
a matter like Honey, shining and reddish, let this be mixed by degrees with
juice of Roses and dried so often, till three pints of the juice be consumed.
Keep this essence.

Of this preperation, we give a dram or half a dram, as often as we please,
when we will gently loosen, and not hurt, but help the concoction.

With other juyces, they are made stronger and better for the stomach. Let
Aloes be finely poudered and sprinkled with juice of Roses and dried, and then
poudered again, and so thrice ordered, it will less heat, this is called Aloes
rosata.

If it be done with juice of Wormwood, it is better for the stomach, instead of
which you may use thick juice of wormwood, which they call the extract with the
Aloes.

You may add other alterers to Aloes, to make it work to your purpose: as when
we will heat the stomach, spices: when we will strengthen, Mastick, Roses,
Spike? when we will cleanse more, Asarum and Myrrh: when we will concoct,
Saffron and the like: as in the Pills of Hiera simple and Alephanginae called
Aromatical, from the plenty of Aloes; which we use chiefly in a loose and weak
stomach, and are called stomach Pills, and the Pills called Asajereth, which
have Myrobalans in them.

And we may add to it other purgers, when the stomach is very foul, but they
must not be enemies to the stomach. Thus are the Pills to be taken before meat
made, with Rhubarb and Aloes, called Aggregative the lesser of Mesue, and Pills
of Rhubarb and Agrimony proper for the Liver, or those of Mastich, made with
Agarick, or those mixed of both called de Tribus and imperial, which have
Senna; or those which have Turbith called the Stomach pills of Turbith. These
Pills are used diverse ways, by themselves or mixed.

These we sharpen with stronger, when we will have them work more, and rather
with those that have Scammony, then that which is more offensive to the Stomach.

In immitation of all which we may make new stomach Pills thus, only to purge
the Stomach from Excrements, with Correcters, which help them, rather then
alterers, which may be given better without purging.

In a cold Cause, the most gentle, are these: Take Aloes prepared or extracted,
with Wine Simple or Compound, as we showed, half an ounce, Cloves, Nutmeg or
Mace, each half a dram; Pepper, or Ginger a scruple, if the Head-ake not, else
half a scruple, with syrup of Mints: make Pills, give a dram two hours before
Supper.

That they may work in half a dram, make them thus with Oils: Take Aloes
prepared, as was said, half an ounce, half a dram of Oil of Nutmegs, by
expression, of the distilled Oils of Marjoram, Mints or Cinnamon, each three or
four drops, with syrup, make Pills.

Or thus, to purge and strengthen: Take Aloes prepared with Wormwood juice half
an ounce, Mastick, Galangal, each half a dram; red Roses, Spike, each a
scruple; with syrup of Wormwood, make Pills.

When we will Purge more: Take Aloes prepared with juice of Roses half an
ounce, Myrrh, Asarum, of each half a dram; Ginger a scruple, with Honey of
Roses, make a Ma^s.

These are more purging; Take Aloes prepared half an ounce, Rhubarb and yellow
Myrobalans poudered and sprinkled with Wine, each a dram; Mastick half a dram,
Cloves, Spike, each a scruple; with the juice of Wormwood: make Pills, give a
dram or more.

They are yet stronger, thus: Take choice or prepared Aloes half an ounce,
Rhubarb and Agarick, each a dram; Myrobalons, Chebs and Indian prepared, as
abovesaid, each half a dram; Ginger and Cardamoms, each a scruple; Spike half a
scruple, with syrup of Roses, make Pills.

They will Purge more yet, if to any of the former receipts, vou add half a dram
of Scammony prepared with juice of Quinces, or otherwise that it may not hurt
the stomach, or two drams of Turbith rectified.

When we will purge the stomach, a Physic wine is convenient, because the Wine
makes the Medicines pleasant, which are generaly unsavory, and if Wormwood be
added, it will purge Choler and Phlegm the better and take away the scent, and
the stomach, will be less troubled, because wine is a strengthener: Especially
if we will purge strongly, Wine is better then Pills, in which we can not put
gentle things, by reason of the small quantity.

In cold humors and wind, thus we purge, Take Agarick or Mechoacan two or three
drams, Senna six drams, dried wormwood three drams, Marjoram two drams, Mints a
dram, Fennel seed a dram and an half, Ginger a dram, bruise and infuse them in
three pints of Sack, for three draughts.

In a loose and weak stomach, that is phlegmatic, thus: Take Rhubarb two drams,
Myrobalans, Citron and Chebs, each a dram and an half; Senna an ounce, dried
Citron peels three drams, Galangal two drams, wormwood three drams, red Roses a
pugil, Mastick two drams, Spike half a dram, beat and infuse them as formerly.

When you will cleanse and purge more: Take Senna an ounce and half, Turbith two
drams, Agarick three drams, Rhubarb two drams, Tartar an ounce, Asaram a dram,
wormwood half an ounce, Marjoram two drams, Mints a dram, Galangal and Calamus,
each a dram and an half; Fennel seed two drams, Ginger a dram, Spike half a
dram, bruise them for four pints of Wine for four Doses.

Of Electuaries that called Hiera of Galen, made only of Aloes that purges,
and called Picra, because of its bitterness, is chiefest, but ill to be taken:
because they must take an ounce to move the Belly, but Rhasis prepares it
without Saffron.

It may be thus made pleasanter: Take wormwood a handful, red Roses a pugil,
Schaenanth three drams, Cubebs, Carpobalsom, each two drams; Fennel seed and
Siler mountain, each a dram; infuse them in a quart of wine and water: boil
them a little, and strain them, then add Honey or sugar a pound, boil and scum
it, til be like a Syrup; then add six ounces, of fine Aloes, Mastick two drams,
Cinnamon half an ounce, Asarum roots two drams, Spike a dram, Saffron half a
dram, make an Electuary: you may give half an ounce, sometimes more and sometimes
less. And if you add two or three ounces of Senna, to the infusion, it will
purge more.

If there be obstructions, make it thus: Take Liquorish an ounce, Fumitory,
Hart's-tongue or Ceterach, each a handful; Agrimony half a handful, Cordial
stowers a pugil, Raysons four ounces, Polypody an ounce, Senna six drams, boil
them in Fennel and Annis seed water, and add to the straining Aloes five
ounces, strain and boil them to an Electuary, and add Mastick a dram,
Frankincense a dram and an half, or two or three ounces of senna, to make it
purge better.

Or if you add Hiera Galeni, whose correcter is Agarick or Rhubarb corrected by
Spike, it will be nimbler and work in a less quantity, which is very
acceptable, and the better with Scamony prepared. It is not good for the
stomach, to give Coloquintida.

There are other purging Electuaries, not so bitter, stronger or weaker, here
and there mentioned, that less hurt the Stomach, as the Lenitive Electuary,
Diacatholicon, Diaphaenicon, of the juice of Roses, and the like.

Diaspoliticum described by Galen, is an Electuary, made of Salt peter, to
purge the stomach from phlegm and wind and to cleanse.

A pleasant and powerful Conserve, is thus made: Take Agarick half an ounce,
Rhubarb an ounce and an half, Senna four ounces, Cinnamon half an ounce, Ginger
a dram, infuse them in four pints of wine and a pint of juice of Quinces, boil
them a little, then strain them adding pulp of Quinces and Sugar, each a
quarter of a pound, boil them to an Electuary, give two or three drams, if you
will have it stronger, that a less quantity may serve, add the extract of
Scammony, which will not hurt the Stomach.

A good Powder to purge the Stomach, though bitter: Take Agarick and Rhubarb,
each a dram and an half; Turbith four scruples, Tartar a dram, Ginger half a
dram, Spike a scruple, Gentian, Zedoary, each half a dram; wormwood a dram and
an half, tops of Centaury and Fennel seed, each a dram; make a Powder, give two
dragms with wine and a little Aloes, if the Patient will endure the bitterness.
If it be quickened with Diagredium, it will work better and in a less quantity.

You may with Sugar dissolved in Wormwood, or Mints, or Cinnamon Water make
Lozenges for the same.

A Stomach purging Potion. Take Rhubarb four scruples, Spike a scruple, infuse
them in Wine, strain and add syrup of Roses, with the Infusion of Senna an
ounce, syrup of Wormwood half an ounce, give it.

Or this Decoction: Take Galangal half an ounce, Asarum roots a dram, Wormwood
two drams, Mints a dram, Senna half an ounce, Fennel-seed a dram; boil and
infuse Rhubarb and Agarick as before.

There are other Purges for the Stomach, here and there mentioned in other
Diseases.

All remedies given to the Stomach must be accepted of it by propriety and
strengthen it, Altering remedies against the weakness of the stomach.
and be hot more or less, according to the diversity of the Cause, and fitted
against the Weakness of it through want of Natural heat, or its cold Distemper,
or against its Refrigeration, or for the preparation of Humors, altering or
expelling of Wind: And as the Stomach is moister or looser, they must astringe
more or less, and if the pain be great, abate it. This is done diverse ways.

Among Drinks, sweet Wine and old, as Muscadel. Sack, Malmsey, either at meat
or otherwise, when it is cold, if it be drunk warm.

Also they are good when they are spiced.

Or made of Herbs, by infusing or a little boiling, as that of Wormwood is most
usual, but unpleasant to some. It must be made of such quantity as may give it
bitterness and good scent; it is good in all Diseases of the Stomach from
Repletion.

And Mints and Marjoram make it pleasanter.

Or thus make it: Take Roots of Masterwort, Galangal, Zedoary, each three
drams; dried Citron-peels and Wormwood, each half an ounce; Mints, Marjoram,
Coriander-seed, each two drams; Cloves, Nutmeg, each a dram and half; Mastick
two drams, Wine four pints, steep them if there must be greater Cleansing, as
in a foul stomach and Obstructions, add tops of Centaury a dram and half. If
they hate bitter things, leave out the Wormwood and the Centaury.

For a windy stomach give Fennel, or Anise-seed, Wine and the like.

Or this: Take the bark of Fennel-roots, and Roots of Calamus, each half an
ounce; Mints, Marjoram, Spondilium, each a handful; Fennel, Caraway, and
Seseli-seed, each two drams; Juniper and Bay Berries, each an ounce; infuse
them in Wine, add a dram of Cummin-seed, if the scent be not disliked, if they
love bitter, ad Wormwood.

Dioscorides teaches that Melilot boiled, or infused in Wine, is good against
pains of the stomach.

Also Wine is made of Infusion of Spices for the stomach, which may be sweetened
and strained.

To make Hippocras sweetened. Take Cinnamon an ounce, Sugar a pound, wine four
or five or more or less pints, as you will have it more or less sweet, add
Pepper, Ginger and Cardamoms, each half a dram.

The Wine of Mountpelior called Pimentum, is thus sweetened. Take Cinnamon six
drams or more, Ginger five drams, Pepper two drams, Cardamoms the great,
Cloves, Nutmegs, each a dram; Honey five pints, Wine ten pints, steep and
strain them.

A Claret artificial for the stomach. Take Cinnamon an ounce and half, Ginger
half an ounce, both Cardamoms, round and long Pepper, each a dram; Nutmegs,
Mace, Galangal, Cloves, each a dram and half; Spike, Schaenanth, each half a
dram; Honey, or Sugar, or both a pound and half, Wine five quarts.

A spoonful or two of the Infusion of Spirit of Wine, is good. As, Take
Cinnamon an ounce, spirit of Wine a pint, Sugar four ounces, set it in the Sun,
and add Rosewater.

Or thus: Take Cinnamon an ounce, Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, each three drams;
infuse them in a pint of spirit of Wine, add a spoonful or two of this to, Wine
and Sugar, and it will be excellent against the Wind of the Stomach.

Another against Pains of the Stomach. Take Nutmegs two drams, of Wine two
ounces, with Honey of Roses sweeten it: If it must be presently used, boil it a
little, give two or three spoonfuls: some boil this till the spirit of Wine is
gone, and make a Mixture.

Or infuse Wormwood in Aqua vitae, and mix some drops with Wine.

Or other Stomach-herbs.

Dioscorides teaches that the Broth of an old Cock expels Wind.

Or make Broth with Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, or the like, with a
little Saffron.

Some boil the stones of Bay Berries in Broth, to make it pleasant, and
strong to expel Wind.

Or Herbs, as Marjoram, and other Pot Herbs, as Mints, Hysop, Savory-Broath;
with Wormwood, is commended if it be not distastful.

If the scent may be endured, it is also excellent to boil Chamomil and
Melilot-flowers in Chickenbroath.

In a weak and windy Stomach: Take Caraway-seed a dram, whole Pepper ten
grains, boil them in Broth, with a scruple of Mastick.

The only Decoction of Mastick strengthens the stomach.

Syrups to prepare before Purging, when we will cut. Take syrup of Mints, Hysop
or Stoechas, each an ounce; Honey of Rosemary-flowers half an ounce, with Mints
and sweet water make a Julep.

When we will cleanse also. Take syrup of Wormwood and Bettony, each an ounce;
Honey of Roses, and syrup of Vinegar, each half an ounce; with Wormwood-water.

When we desire most to strengthen. Take syrup of Citron-peels, or of Nutmegs,
or of Myrobalans an ounce, syrup of Mints, or Chamomil half an ounce: Give it
alone, or with Wine, or Wormwood, or Marjoram-water,

A Compound Syrup. Take Fennel-roots half an ounce, Roots of Masterwort,
Calamus, Zedoary, Citron-peels, each two drams; Mints, Savory, Hysop, Marjoram,
Bettony, Spondylium, Sage, Rosemary and Stoechas-flowers, each a dram; Fennel
and Anise-seed, each three drams; Carawayseed a dram, Schaenanth half a dram,
boil them in wine and water, add Nutmeg half a dram, and to the straining of
Sugar six ounces, boil it to a syrup, give an ounce and half alone, or in wine.

Or, Take syrup of Mints an ounce, syrup of Wormwood half an ounce, drink it
with Wine.

Or this to strengthen: Take juice of Mints half an ounce, juice of Wormwood
two drams, give it with wine.

Juice of Chamomil and Melilot, each half an ounce; given with wine takes away
pain presently.

Stilled Waters to strengthen and heat the Stomach, are of Wormwood, Mints,
Calamints, Marjoram alone, or with Wine, or with other Drinks, or after
Electuaries.

Cinnamon Water is refreshing and healing, if it be made of Wine, with Sugar.

Or some drops of spirits of Wine or Aqua vitae, presently do help a cold
phlegmatic and foul stomach, therefore it is so common, and if it be compounded
with spices it is the better. Or with hot Plants, and then distilled.

Some Natural Baths drunk to help the old Weakness of the stomach, when it
comes from too great moisture or foulness, especially those of Niter. Italians
commend the Porrectan-Spaws, and Germans have many as good.

Chemical Oils also of Plants and Spices are excellent, but not given alone,
but with distilled Waters, or Wine a drop or two.

As Oil of Cinnamon or Cloves, the rest are not so pleasant, and burn too much.

Or the Oil of Marjoram, or Mints, or of Anise-seed and Fennel-seed, proper
against Wind.

Also Oils by expression are good, as of Mace, and Nutmegs, and inflame less,
if taken with Broth.

Or Oil of Palma Christi, and bastard Saffron, expels Wind.

These are given in substance, Mints, Calamints, Greek Mints, Sage, wild Mints,
Spikenard, Lavender, Tansey, Goats-organ, Penny-royal-seed, and Root of Lovage.
Also Roots of wild Parsley, and sweet Cane to expel wind, according to
Dioscorides.

Also Roots of Masterwort, Zedoary, Galangal, Calamus, Ginger, are drunk in
pains of the stomach, and Rhapontick by Dioscorides. Or Bithwort against the
pains of stomach and guts.

Onyons eaten, take away the pain, and Pistacha's and Rocker, help Concoction.
Also Pears and Quinces.

Or Mints fried with Eggs. And Wormwood so fried, is used at great men's tables,
where I have been, they seem not so bitter to some whose stomachs delight
therein.

Also Anise-seed, Caraway and Fennel, expel wind, and help Concoction.

Or seven or nine corns of Pepper whole, that they may not burn the mouth given
with Wine, do quickly help a cold stomach, and also Ginger.

Or a dram of Pepper wrapped in a wafer wet in Wine, and three ounces of Wine
after it.

Galen gives Pepper with wine presently after Meat, if it turn to Phlegm, and
the Patient be cold, with short Breath and weak Pulse. This case Bairus
describes, and says it is rare, but it is all one with Cardiaca.

Nutmeg helps Concoction, and the Powder given with Chamomil-water takes away
pain of the stomach.

Also Cloves alone, or in Meats, with Cinnamon, and the like; Cubebs are highly
commended against wind, and Galangal chewed, breaks the wind, as they say.

Or Mastich swallowed whole, or in powder a dram, or some grains often taken to
strengthen.

And Gum of Ivy so taken, is excellent against pains of the stomach. And
Labdanum, and Castor, with Wine, and the polishing Stone.

There are diverse compound Pouders for the same called Species, to be given as
Meat or Medicine alone, or mixed.

When we will heat much, we choose the Burners, if pleasant, as the Peppers,
Ginger, Cardamoms, or the less pleasant, when there is much Phlegm, as Zedoary,
Cubebs, Pellitory-roots. When we will strengthen and bind, or astringe the
loose stomach, we give less sharp, but sweet things, as Nutmeg, Mace, Cloves,
Galangal, Calamus, Cypress; or sweet things, as cinnamon, cassia, or sweet
cane, wood-aloes, yellow Sanders, Spikenard, Schaenanth, with Saffron concoct.
Of hot seeds these help concoction, and chiesly expel wind; as the Anise-seeds,
Fennel, Caraway, Cummin, Smallage, Parsley, Ameos, sesely, or wild Parsleyseed.
Of Herbs, sweet and pleasant, Thyme, Calamints, Lovage, Mints, Marjoram,
Savory, with the Roots of Elicampane, and Citron-peels. And when we will
strengthen, they add red Roses often, seldom Mastich. And to these species,
Liquorish is added to cleanse, and Asarum that is sweet, but in a small
quantity, least it turn the stomach, and Galen mixeth Niter. In some compound
Pouders they put Musk and Ambergreese for the Heart, but some love not the
scent of it.

Of these diverse Pouders are made, some are for Meat and Broth to make them
pleasant, as Cooks do.

These following are sold ready prepared for the cooks in Germany. Take Ginger
two ounces and half, Pepper an ounce, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, each two drams; Saffron
three drams, this is called the Aromatical saffron powder.

Another more pleasant. Take Ginger four ounces, grains of Paradise half an
ounce, Pepper two drams, Nutmegs, Cloves, each half an ounce; Galangal two
drams, Cinnamon two ounces, make a Powder; this is used alone, or with six
drams of saffron.

A more pleasant powder is thus made. Take Cinnamon four ounces, Ginger an
ounce and half, Cloves an ounce, Pepper half an ounce, Saffron two drams.

A sweet powder for meat. Take Cinnamon two drams, Ginger three drams,
Cardamoms the greater, Pepper and Nutmeg, each a dram; Sugar two pound.

You may also mix the other species or pouders with sugar.

There is also a Salt compounded to season Meat for moist and loose stomachs.
Thus, Take salt parched an ounce, Galangal a dram, Cinnamon two drams, the
Ashes of Hens guts half a dram.

Salt and Caraway-seed with a rear Eg, helps concoction, and keeps the Eg from
corruption.

Pouders to heat and strengthen the stomach, and expel wind and crudities, and
cleanse phlegm and filth, are made af the aforeseid mixed, to be taken alone, or
with Broth, Wine, Waters, Juyces, Decoctions, with, or without sugar; sometimes
with eight times as much sugar if they be unpleasant, and Lozenges or
Electuaries. We shall show Examples of stomach-pouders.

Of Aromaticks alone to heat, we make pouders, the first; Take round Pepper a
dram, long Pepper half a dram, Ginger half an ounce, great Cardamoms, Nutmeg,
Mace, cloves and Galangal, each a dram; Cinnamon half an ounce.

The second is more compound by adding to the former, the lesser Cardamoms,
Zedoary, Wood-aloes, or yellow Sanders, Spike, each half a dram; Cubebs,
saffrom, each a scruple.

The third: Take Cinnamon an ounce, Ginger half an ounce, great cardamoms half
a dram, round Pepper a scruple, Nutmeg, Mace, Galangal, each two drams; cloves
three drams.

Of this Powder with sugar a pound, you may make Lozenges; some leave out the
Pepper a^^ cardamoms; some add cubebs, and alter proportions.

Or we may use the species Diacinamomi of Mesue, which has besides the other
Wood-aloes, Saffron, Elicampane, and Musk.

A fourth less healing and more strengthening. Take calamints, Mints, Marjoram,
Thyme, savory, each a dram; Liquorish a dram and half, Roots of Masterwort,
Elicampane, and Pellitory in phlegmatic persons, each half a dram;
Asarum-roots, dried Citron-peels, each a scruple; with red Roses two drams,
make a powder.

A fifth Powder of seeds to expel wind. Take coriander-seed, Anise-seed, each
half an ounce; caraway two drams, cummin, (if it be not offensive) Ameos,
sesely, filer-mountain, Lovage-seeds, each half a dram.

The sixth very hot: Take round and long Pepper, each half an ounce; Ginger a
dram, Fennel, and Anise-seeds, and tops of Thyme, each half a dram; make a
powder.

Or use Diatrionpipereon which is hotter, if it be Galens; or that of Mesue
which has also cassia-wood, Spike, Smallage and Ameos seeds, roots of Asarum
and Elicampane.

Or use the species of the Electuary of spices, made by Galen.

Or the Diaspoliticon of Galen, which cutteth phlegm best, it is made of Pepper,
Niter, Cummin and Rue.

The seventh, not so hot as the first: Take Calamints or Mints, Marjoram, Time,
Lovage seed and of siler montain, each a dram; Pepper and Ginger, each half a
dram; Cinnamon a dram and an half: make a Powder.

Diacalamintha of Galen or Mesue, does the same thing.

The eight Powder, which is also a strengthner of the Stomach: Take red Roses
an ounce, Cinnamon half an ounce, Cloves three drams, Nutmeg, Mace, each two
drams; Galangal a dram, long Pepper, great Cardamons and wood Aloes, each half
a darm, Zedoary and Spike, each a scruple; Liquorish two drams: make a Powder.

The Aromatical species of Gabriel, so much used is like this, it is prepared
with and without Musk, and the Aromaticum Rosatum of Mesue, to which is added
Cubebs, Troches of Diarrhodon and Gallia Moschata. And the species Rosata
Novella of Nicolas, which has Storax, and the species of the Electuary of
Citrons made by Mesue, and that of Musk.

The ninth Powder for the same: Take Galangal six drams, Calamus, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Mace, each two drams; Ginger, both Peppers, great Cardamoms, each
half a dram; Spike, wood Aloes, of each a scruple; Fennel, Carva, Annis seeds,
dried Mints and Marjoram, each two scruples: make a Powder.

Or instead thereof, use species Diagalangae of Mesue, which has Lovage and
Calamints also.

The tenth is stronger yet: Take Cummin prepared with Vinegar, or Annis seeds,
or both, an ounce; Fennel and Carua seeds, each two drams; Ameos, siler
mountain, Calamints or Mints, Marjoram, Savory, Time, Lovage, red Roses, of
each a dram; Citron peels dried, Masterwort or Zedoary roots and Pellitory,
each half a dram; Liquorish, Nutmeg, Mace, Cloves, Galangal, Cinnamon, each a
dram: Pepper, Ginger, great Cardamoms, Cubebs, Schaenanth, each half a dram;
Spike and Saffron, each a scruple; make a Powder.

Or instead thereof, give species Dianisi of Mesue, which has Mastick,
Diacumini of Nicholas, or the species of the Electuary of seeds.

There are also other species, as that Diazingiber of Nicholas, which have
spices and other seeds, Roses and Liquorish, also Rhubarb and Pistaches and
pine Nuts.

Also Diaxylaloes of Mesue, which is also cordial, and besides many spices,
has Roses, Mastick, Bean roots, Rawsilk, Pearl, Currants, Amber, Citron leaves,
Basil, Balm, Gallia-Moschata, Musk and Amber greese.

Also Pleres-Archonticon, is good for the stomach, like Diaxyloaloes and has
Camphire in it.

Also the species of the Electuarium Ducis of Nicolas, is good against
crudities and Excrements and wind that breeds from them: and is a proper
Medicine against the stone and colic.

The species called Diarhodon, is not given alone to cold stomachs, but mixed
with others.

There are besides these, bitter pouders to be taken, a spoonful at a time in
Wine, as that of Wormwood and centaury in a choleric cause.

Or this: Take roots of Masterwort, Birthwort, each a dram and an half;
Wormwood, Centaury, each a dram; cummin, caraway, Ginger, each a scruple;
saffron five grains, make a Powder; or add half a scruple of castor and make
Pills with syrup of Wormwood, give a dram.

Of proper astringents, we make Pouders to be taken after meat, that the
stomach may better embrace and concoct them, and to hinder the breeding of
wind, these are not too hot, least they digest too soon.

As: Take coriander seed prepared half an ounce, Fennel and Annis seed, each
two drams; caraway seed a dram, cinnamon two drams, calamus, Galangal, citron
peels dried, each a dram; red Roses half a dram, with sugar as much as all,
make a Powder to be taken after meat.

In the looseness and moistness of the stomach, we add greater astringents and
dryers: As, Take Cinnamon half an ounce, sweet cassia two drams, roots of
Galangal and cypress, each a dram and an half; dried citron peels half a dram,
dried Quinces, red Roses, each a dram; Antispodium of Ivory, burnt Harts-horne,
Hens guts burnt, of each half a dram, red Coral a dram, (or a dram of
Diacydonium without specis) with sugar of Roses as much as all the rest, make a
Po^der for after meat, to astringe the stomach. with F^^^kincense and Mastick
it is better.

Gross Pouders to be chewed are diverse, these are also given before meat: and to
astringe and help concoction after meat.

They are pleasant: As, Take Annis seeds an ounce, sweet Fennel seed an ounce,
Coriander seeds three drams, Caraway seed two drams, Liquorish three drams,
Cinnamon half an ounce, make a gross Powder.

It will be sweeter, with Nutmeg, Mace, cloves and Ginger, each half a dram.

There is a Compound Powder of this sort, called Priests Pasture, thus made:
Take Ginger half an ounce, Nutmeg, cinnamon, each three drams; Galangal,
calamus, cloves, of each two drams; great cardomoms a dram and an half,
coriander, Fennel and Annis seeds, each half an ounce; caraway seeds two drams,
Liquorish two ounces and an half, to these they add comfits of seeds and sugar,
or sugar.

Also Lozenges may be made of the ten Kinds of pouders mentioned, as of
Diacinamomum, Diatriongipereon, Diacalamintha, Aromaticum rosatum, Novella,
Diagalanga, Dianisum, Diacuminum, Diazingiber, Diaxylaloes, Pleres-Archonticon,
Electuarium Ducis.

Or you may make the Gross pouders, as that called Priests-pasture, into
Tablets, adding an ounce of sugar to a dram of the species, boiling the sugar
with a little Rose water.

Or thus, when we will heat much: Take of the first, second or third Powder, or
Diacinamomum, a dram; of the sixth or seventh Powder, or of Diatrionpipereon,
or Diacalamintha half a dram, Ginger candied a dram, Oil of Marjoram two drops
with sugar dissolved in calamints water: make Lozenges.

To strengthen the Stomach: Take of the eight Powder, or of Aromaticum rosatum
a dram. of the ninth Powder, or Diagalanga half a dram, candied Citron peels,
or conserve of Roses a dram, Oil of Cinnamon four drops with Sugar dissolved in
Mint water: make Lozenges.

In a windy stomach: Take of the tenth Powder, or Dianisum a dram, Diacuminum
half a dram, conserve of Mints, or of Marjoram a dram, with some drops of Oil
of Annis seeds and Fennel seeds and Sugar dissolved in Fennel water; make
Lozenges.

You may make also many sorts of Lozenges, of Spices or Plants with conserves
or Oils.

Also of some drops of Oil of Annis seeds, Fennel, Caraway, Marjoram, Cinnamon,
Cloves, with boiled Sugar, these are pleasant, if the Oil be not added to the
Sugar while it is hot, and so fly away.

Also there are conserves and candies, both dry and also moist, made of Sugar
and Honey. And these conserves are most usual: conserves of Rosemary flowers,
Mints, Marjoram, Staechas, and of Eryngus, according to Rondeletius and
Dioscorides says, that the conserve of Bettony made with Honey helps
concoction, or of Squils.

Also candied Ginger, or the Powder of Ginger, boiled with Honey two drops, or
Icikles. Also Calamus candyed, or Nutmegs, Myrobalans, Citron peels, or
Wallnuts with Spices prepared, as commonly they are.

Of these, some are given alone, or mixed with others, or in forms of
Electuaries or Tablets.

Also the confection of wisemen so called, is good, Take Calamus candied ten
ounces, sweet Almonds blanched and Pine-nuts nine ounces, Pistachoes three
ounces, candied Eryngus nine ounces, the three Peppers, each three drams;
Ginger, red Roses, Cardamoms, Mace, Nutmegs, Galangal, each six drams;
Aromaticum rosatum half an ounce, red Sanders an ounce, clarified Sugar twelve
pound, make a Confection.

Also dried candied simples with Sugar, as Cinnamon, Cloves, Ginger, Zedoary,
Galangal, Calamus, Citron peels, cut in pieces and hardened with Sugar, also
Roses and Marjoram, which by some are ingeniously confected with Sugar.
Especially seeds to discuss wind, before and after meat, as comfits of
Coriander, Annis seeds, Fennel and Caraway seeds, and candied Quinces with
these seeds sticking in them, are good.

You may make diverse Electuaries of the tenth Powder mentioned, or the usual
Species with Honey or Sugar, boiled to a syrup, or syrup of Mints, Quinces, or
of candied Ginger, or citron peels, or of pulp of Quinces.

Such did the ancients make up of Species or Pouders with Honey scummed into
soft Electuaties, rather then otherwise. And the spiced conserve of Quinces, by
Nicholas was made up with Pouders.

With Fruits and Roots, as Confection Diacydonites, which is made of Quinces,
conserved and Pouders.

The modern Authors use the Electuary of calamus, it is made of calamus,
boiled in wine with Honey and spices. The roots of Acorns do as well, for they
astringe.

There is also an Electuary called the Electuary of Sea Radish, made with honey
and spices of Horsradish and Gentian.

From the diverse mixtures of all these, you may make diverse Electuaries, and
add to them conserves and candyes, and the like.

As when you will heat: Take the Electuary of the three Peppers, or the
Lozenges thereof an ounce, or a dram of the species, conserve of Mints,
Marjoram, each an ounce; candyed Ginger half an ounce, with syrup of Staechas:
make a mixture.

When you will strengthen: Take the Electuary of Aromaticum rosatum, or
Diagalanga, or both, or the Tablets made of them an ounce, or the species of
them, or our pouders a dram, conserve of old Roses, Citron peels candyed,
Calamus candyed, each half an ounce; with syrup of Quinces: make an Electuary.

When you will chiefly expel wind: Take the Electuary Dianisum, or Diacuminum,
or Tables, or Species, or our Pouders of the same, in the weight mentioned, and
add conserve of Roses, Calamints, candyed Nutmegs, of each half an ounce; with
syrup of Mints.

In loose and moist Stomachs, give dryers and binders: As, Take Quinces candyed
an ounce and an half, citron peels candyed an ounce, candyed Ginger half an
ounce, one Emblick Myrobalan, of Diacydonites without the species made of burnt
Ivory and astringents half an ounce, Aromaticum rosatum, red Coral, each a
dram; Ashes of Hens guts, Antispodium of Quinces and Ivory, or shavings of
Ivory, each half a dram; with syrup of Quinces: make an Electuary, take after
meat as much as a Nut.

There are also dry mixtures: As, Take candyed Quinces half an ounce, conserve
of Roses three drams, conserve of Marjoram, Ginger candyed, each two drams;
Aromaticum rosatum a dram, Cinnamon two drams, Cloves, Nutmeg, each a dram;
with Sugar of Roses; make a mixture, give it in the mornings, or add Coriander,
Annis or Fennel seed Comfits.

After meat to astringe the stomach, we use these mixtures without the hot
Spices: thus, Take candyed Quinces three drams, conserve of Roses and Citron
peels candyed, each two drams; Cinnamon a dram and an half, the powder of
Diacydonium without species a dram, red Coral half a dram, Coriander seeds two
drams, Annis and Fennel seed, of each a dram; red Roses and Marjoram, each half
a dram; with Sugar or Seed Comfits: make a mixture.

Some Opiats take away pain of the Stomach from a cold cause, for Opium does
not cool, as some think, but rather heat by reason of many ingredients with the
Opium in Opiats, as we showed often.

Therefore in pain of the stomach, give Treacle, Mithridate, Asyncriton, or
Philonium from a dram to a dram and an half, alone or with other things, and
give Wine upon it to help the operation; or other Narcoticks with Spices.

Or this, Treacle with Citrons: Take candyed citron peels half a pound, old
Treacle or Mithridate, each six drams; Smaragds prepared half a scruple,
Electuary of Gems two scruples, sealed Earth a dram; with syrup of citrons,
make an Electuary.

Some mix purgers with them; as Philonium with Diaphaenicon, when the stomach
is pained from the Excrements.

Outwardly we anoint or foment or Plaster the stomach to heat it and expel
wind, when it is stretched, Remedies to be applied to alter the weakness of the
stomach.
or to astringe, when it is weak or loose, they must be proper and applied
actuually hot

You must anoint on the left side, where the lodge of the heart is before, but
behind right against stomach, upon the spondils of the Back toward the left
side, and spinkle the Powder following thereon.

When you will heat, use Oil of Mints, Spike, Jesamin, Elder, or that of
Nutmegs by expression, or of Mace which are pleasant, or the distiled Oil of
Spike, Mints, Cloves, and the like, when you will expel wind use Oil of Rue and
Bayberries, or the distilled Oil of Juniper berries in a small quantity with the
rest, or that of Fennel, Caraway, Cummin seed by drops with other; when you
will strengthen, use Oil of Mastich, of Wormwood: when you will astringe use
Oil of Mastich, Myrtles, Roses, Quinces, and that made of pressed Grape seeds.

When pain is to be abated, use Oil of Chamomil, Spike or Dill; which is good
after pain from glutony. Or use Oil of Herbs boiled.

To hear, expel wind, and strengthen: Take Mastick six drams, Calamus,
Galangal, cypress, each half an ounce; Nutmegs, cloves, each three drams;
Fennel and Angelica seeds, of each two drams: with two ounce of Sack and Oil,
put them in a hot place, or boil them a little.

When you will strengthen more: Take Wormwood, Mints, each two drams; Sage,
Rosemary, Lavender, of each an ounce and an half; red Roses three drams, cut
them small; add Mastick an ounce, red wine four ounces, Oil of Nuts three
fingers above them; boil and strain them.

This is best against wind: Take cummin, caraway, Lovage, Fennel seed, each two
drams; Bay and Juniper berries, each half an ounce; Rue, Lovage, Mints, Baies,
each three drams; beat them and add Aqua vitae two ounces and with Oil Olive or
of Nuts; boil as aforesaid.

Of the oils mentioned, you may make stomach Ointments with spices, or the
like: when you will chiefly heat: Take Oil of Mints, Spike, of each an ounce
and an half; Oil of Wormwood half an ounce, Oil of Spike, some drops of cloves,
Nutmegs or Mace, each a dram; of wood Aloes and Sanders, half a dram, dried
Mints, Marjoram, Rosemary or Schaenanth, each two scruples; with Wax, make an
Ointment.

The same is good against wind; with Oil of Rue or Bays half an ounce, or some
drops of distilled Oils, as that of juniper berries.

This is good in both cases: Take Oil of Nutmegs by expression, of Mace or both
two drams, Oil of Cloves three drops, of Anise-seeds six drops, Gallia moschata
half a dram, with Wax make an Ointment; we may add Musk, or Ambergrease, or Oil
of Cinnamon, or Hiera picra.

To dry and astringe a moist and dry Stomach. Take Oil of Myrtles, Mastick,
Quinces, each an ounce and half; Oil of Wormwood half an ounce, Galangal,
Snakeweed, Citron-peels, each a dram; Roses, wild Vine, Pomegranate-flowers,
each two scruples; Hypocistis, Labdanum, each half a dram; Mastick,
Frankincense, coral, each a dram; and Bole, and a little with wax make an
Ointment, adding Alum and Vinegar.

If there be pain; Take Ointment of Marshmallows an ounce, Mastick two drams,
Oil of Dill or Chamomil, each half an ounce; Seeds and Mints, each a dram; with
wax make an Ointment.

Cerots or Plasters made like a Scutchion are lasting, they are made of the
Ointments mentioned, with more Wax for a Cerot, and Rosin for a Plaster.

Galens Cerot for the Stomach is good, made of Roses, Wormwood, Spike, Mastich,
Oil of Roses and Wax.

Or this instead of it: Take long Birthwort, Calamus, each half an ounce;
mints, wormwood, red Roses, each three drams; Spike two drams, mastick six
drams, with Oil of Spike, and mastick and wax make a Cerot.

Or this Stomach-plaister: Take mastick an ounce and half, Frankincense and
Labdanum, each an ounce; Storax half an ounce, Aloes two drams (except there be
pain) Coral two drams, Galangal, mints, marjoram, wormwood, red Roses, each a
dram; Cloves, Spike, Sanders, each half a dram, with Oil of Spike, mints and
Rosin, and Pitch and Wax make a Plaster.

When the stomach is loose, use Emplaster of Mastich. This is best corrected.
Take Mastich two ounces, Frankincense an ounce, storax and half Labdanum, each
an ounce: Hypocistis, Acacia, each three drams; Gallia or Alipta moschata a
dram, cypress-roots and wormwood three drams, Mints, Marjoram, Rosemary,
Myrtles, each two drams; red Roses half an ounce, seeds of coriander, cummin,
Bar-berries, sumach, each three drams; cloves two drams, sanders, wood-aloes,
schaenanth, spike, each a dram; Bole, coral, each half an ounce; with Oil of
Mastich, and spike, Pitch, Rosin, wax and Turpentine make a Plaster.

If there be Wind, use Emplaster of Bay Berries, Mastich, Frankincense, Myrrh,
Cypress and Costus, with Honey.

Or this against wind, and to fix the stomach. Take Bay Berries an ounce and
half, Juniper Berries half an ounce, caraway, cummin and Ameos-seeds, each two
drams; Mints, Rue, each a dram; cypress, costus or Masterwort-roots, each half
an ounce; Zedoary two drams, Mastich, Frankincense, each six drams; Aloes,
Myrrh, each two drams; or two of Hiera picra, with Honey and Turpentine make a
plaster, with Nard-oyl, and chemical Oil of Seeds a little.

Hiera picra with Honey makes also a good Plaster for the weak stomach.

Cataplasms without Oil (which are unpleasant) are better, but sooner dry,
therefore must be repeated.

Wormwood, Mints, Sage beaten and heated are good to be applied also, or laid
upon a hot tyle, and sprinkled with wine, and then applied. Or if they be dry,
cut and poudered, and softened with wine.

Or thus: Take dried Mints, wormwood, red Roses and chamomil-flowers, each half
an ounce; toasted Bread two ounces, boil them in wine, and with Mastich, or
other Plasters, apply them.

Or, Take Mastich half an ounce, Frankincense, Labdanum, each two drams; red
Roses, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, each a dram; Barley-meal an ounce, with
juice of Mints, Wormwood or Marjoram, make a Paste, apply it watm to the
stomach.

The same may be mixed with Quinces or sour Apples roasted, or crumbs of Bread
in Wine boiled and beaten.

In Wine, Take crumbs of Bread and Caraway, Cummin Fennel and Bay Berries, each
half an ounce; with white Wine make Cakes, bake them, cut them in the middle,
and apply the round piece to the stomach, change it as it grows cold for the
other part, in this form use other Emplasters.

If these be wet with Stomach-oyls, they need not be so often changed being dry.

Dioscorides says that Mugwort beaten with Oil is good.

Also the Emplaster of a Crust of Bread of Oil of Mastich, Quinces,
Bread-crust, Barley-flower, Mastich, Mints, Coral, burnt Ivory. And that called
hot Diaphaenicum Emplaster of Mesue, made of Oils, Wax, pulp of Dates, Quinces,
Bread and Stomach-pouders.

Also Fomentations with Spunges, and the like in time of pain, or before
Ointments are good to prepare.

In pain: Thus, Take Wormwood, Mints, wild Time, each a handful; Marsh-mallow
roots six drams, Roots of long Birthwort half an ounce, Rosemary, Chamomil,
Mililot and Dill-flowers, each half a pugil; Foenugreek and Lineseed, each two
drams; Nutmeg and Mace, each a dram and half; boil them in wine and water.

In a cold Distemper of the Stomach; Take Mints, Marjoram, Balm, each a
handful; Galangal three drams, Cloves, Ginger, each two drams; long Pepper a
dram, boil them in Wine for a Fomentation.

The same is good against wind, and this; Take Pennyroyal, Organ, Calamints,
Mints, each a handful; Flowers of Chamomil, Elder, Storax or Lavender, each a
pugil; Coriander, Fennel, Caraway, Cummin or Ameos-seeds, each two drams;
Bay Berries half an ounce, Stoechas, Spike, each two drams; Mace a dram: boil
them.

To strengthen; Take Roots of Calamus, Masterwort, each half an ounce; dried
Citron-peels three drams, Wormwood, Mints, Marjoram, Balm, each a handful; red
Roses and Rosemary-flowers, each a pugil; Cloves, Nutmeg, Galangal, Zedoary,
each two drams; Spike, Schaenanth, woodaloes, each a dram; Mastick six drams,
boil them in red Wine for a Fomentation.

For a loose Stomach: Take Citron-peels half an ounce, Pomegranate-peels two
drams, Wormwood, Sumach or Myrtles, each a handful; red Roses three drams,
Pomegranateflowers two drams, wild Vine tops a dram, Myrtle and Coriander
seeds, each a dram and half; Galangal and Cypressroots, each two drams; boil
them in red wine.

Or of Oils against pains: Take common Oil with the fourth part of Sack, or the
tenth part of Aqua vitoe, and foment after it has boiled.

Use other Oils above mentioned, in the same manner, or mixed with Decoctions
of Juyces of Wormwood, Mints, Marjoram, with Sack, and the white of an Eg well
beaten.

Or use Pouders in baggs to the stomach, made of Scarlet-linnen quilted with
wool, apply them warmed with the vapor of Wine.

These may be made of things mentioned in the cold Distemper and Weakness,
because they rather heat then strengthen.

Or thus for both ends: Take Mints, Wormwood, each a handful; red Roses a
pugil, Nutmegs a dram and half, Cloves ad ram, Mastick two drams, with red
Coral make a powder.

Another; Take Mastick half an ounce, Cloves, Nutmeg, Mace, each a dram; long
Pepper or Ginger half a dram, Cinnamon a dram and half, Wood-aloes and Sanders,
each half a dram; with Musk if it offends not, and Ambergrease, or species of
Diomoschu, Diambra or Gallia moschata a scruple, make a Powder for a bag.

When you will astringe more, use the things mentioned against a loose Stomach.

Or this: Take Mastick half an ounce, Frankincense two drams, red Coral a dram
and half, Cypress-roots, Citronpeels, red Roses, Cypress-nuts and Pomegranate
flowers, each half a dram; the sponge of sweet Dogs-rose, which the French call
Eglenteria, Nutmeg, each a dram; make a Powder for a bag.

Of the Fomentation-Medicines for wind, you may make baggs.

Or thus: Take Galangal half an ounce, Mints, Pennyroyal, each two drams; Rue a
dram, Fennel, Caraway and Cummin, each a dram; Spike, Schaenanth, each half a
dram; with Spices make a bag.

You may make a Bag to ease pain of the anodyne Fomentations.

Or of this Powder: Take Chamomil, Melilot, Dill, Roses, and Rosemary flowers,
each a pugil; Wormood half a handful sew them in a bag.

Against wind and pain: Take Bran, Milium, each half a handful; fry them for to
make a bag with Salt or Mints.

You may also sprinkle Pouders upon the hot Bread wet in wine, as I showed.

As that of Mastich, with Cloves, Nutmeg and Roses.

Or sprinkle them after the use of Ointments, upon the part anointed; or mix
them with Ointments.

Also keep the Stomach warm, from the Air or other things by warm clothes.

And many sound people wear Stomachers to prevent Cold.

They are made of thick woollen dyed Scarlet, which is also cordial, or of
double Linen and Cotton basted in; or the Doublet is stuffed therewith.

Instead whereof, they who have weak Stomachs, or have caught Cold therein, use
Skins and Furrs, of Fox, Hares, young Wolf, Lynx, wild Cats, slinke Calfe, and
feathered Skins of Birds, especially Vulturs, to which they attribute singular
Virtue.

And instead of Skins they use Pillows, which have no Quilts but Down,
especially of Goose-feathers to the Stomach night and day, if it can endure
them, for to help their weak concoction.

And when they are first made, that they may work better upon the Patient, they
dip them in wine, or some proper Decoction or Juice, and strain them, and then
dry them before they are applied. Or they quilt into those Pillows, some
Stomach-pouders mentioned, but we rather use Baggs, as we showed in external
Applications.

Hollerius commends twice dyed Purple for a Stomacher, shaved or towed to rags
to stuff a Pillow instead of wool.

It is a good Remedy against a cold Stomach, to lay the stomach of a wife or
husband, or of a child unto it all night (which was David's remedy) or a warm
hand.

Or a Dog which is better then another Creature for his Familiarity.

It is good also after Evacuation, to roll the stomach by degrees to keep it
down.

Also to draw wind from the stomach, apply Cupping-glasses to the Navel.

If weakness come from dryness without heat (of which we spoke in the hot
Constitution thereof) when the Stomach is bound and hard, The cure of weakness
of stomach from dryness.
and cannot stretch, in regard this comes not but from some great Cause,
especially to old folk, when the whole Body is dried, or in a Hectic, in which
the whole Body is extenuated, or long fasting, as in a melancholy woman which
would take nothing for fear of being poisoned, because age cannot be cured, nor
Hecticks easily, so in these Dryness of Stomach is incurable; in others it is
hard, and there is no way but general moistning of the Body as in Hecticks: By
Meats, Drinks, Conserves, and other things prescribed in Hecticks, which
moisten and relax the Stomach. And that will cure if it come from long famine,
provided the Stomach be not too dry.

When the Natural Constitution of the Stomach is hot, The preserving of a hot
tomach by Nature, that it turn not to a Disease.
though it be not yet a Disease, yet because it is apt to turn so from hot
meats, which cause thirst and burning, and will easily be there corrupted and
turn into Choler, it must be prevented by good Diet.

They that are subject to this must abstain from meats that easily corrupt, as
Fats, especially of Fishes, and Milk, and Eggs, which turns into Choler, and
Spawn of Fishes, especially of Barbles, which the vulgar think do purge. And
from other Meats and Fruits, which though of easy concoction, yet are hurtful
in this Constitution: As other things are good which a weak Stomach cannot
concoct.

Spiced Meats must be avoided and poudered, and Meats long kept, which are
rancid, especially fat or moldy, as wild flesh, or Venison, or rotten, or
moldy Cheese. which are very pleasant to these Constitutions, by reason of
their great Appetites, so that they count stinking, moldy and worm-eaten
Cheese full of Mites, for a great Dainty, which is their great enemy, while
their Stomach is so burning hot. Also sweet Meats are too hot, and subject to
crruption, and easily turn into Choler, which are Naturally or Artificially so,
which are known by their Scent, as sweet wine and Fruits, Melons, Figgs, and
the like; and such as have evil Juice, and that will soon corrupt as
Cowcumbers. Also Herbs as Watercresses, wild Parsley, Onions, Leeks, Garlic
after the eating of which they belch, Hiccup, and are burned.

Things that are temperate inclining to cold are good for them, as Lettice,
Endive, Bugloss, Spinach and the like, and Fruits. Also cold water hurts not
them as others, alone or mixed with wine. Sour things are best, as sharp wine
and fruits, and such as were mentioned in choleric Stomachs, Thirst and
Fevers.

Also diverse medicines are good which are there mentioned, when the stomach
being hot, inclines to a dissease.

The use of sharp Spaw-waters changes often the Nature of such Stomachs and
succession of Age, but by the use of hot things they will be then hurt, though
not so much as in Youth.

If the Stomach suffer from the Nerves when other parts are pained, The cure of
Cardialgia from the Nerves.
you must apply the remedies to the original of the Evil, rather then to the
stomach.

If the stomach suffer from too exquisite sense, there must be more wariness,
least it be quickly disturbed: And if it be, we must stupefie the Sense by
Narcoticks.

And if the Heart suffer (as they say) which is of the stomach, from the Nerves
in a passion of the Mind, the Nerves must be refreshed, and then the Cardialgia
will cease.

When wind or Excrements are retained in the colon, The cure of a cardialgia,
from the colic.
and there is a Cardialgia in the said region of the Heart, when they come away
the pain cease. If they come not away use Clysters, as in the Colic, as that
of oil Honey and wine, when the pain comes from a purging Medicine lying long
in the colon.

If there be Heart-ach or pain in the said lodge of the Heart, The cure of
cardialgia, from the Midriff.
from the Midriff, because there is difficulty of breathing, which is most
troublesome, we showed in Dyspnaea or difficulty of breathing, what is to be
done.

CHAP. XII. Of the Pain of Hypochondria or Sides under the Ribs.
The Kinds.
WE call that the Hypochandriake pain, which is in the Sides of the Belly to
the Back, or on either side, not in the outside fleshy, or Musculous part, of
which we sake in Superficial pains, but deep under the Bastard or short Ribs,
and thence are called Hypochondriak. Of these Hippocrates often spoke. The
Empericks mention these pains in the Diseases of the bowels under the short
Ribs, and call it the pain of this or that Bowel. These differ first in respect
of heaviness or burning, pricking or tearing.

A dull pain which is heavy, A heavy dull pain in the Hypochondria.
which increases some times by stretching and pricking is in the right or left
side. And there is either no hardness or tumor to be felt or seen, or both
appear under the short Ribs, or between them. And the Ribs are bent outward
more then usually. And there is also a pressing pain of the stomach and
difficulty of breathing, and other Symptoms, as want of Complexion in the Face,
with palenese in a Cachexy, yellowness and blackness in the Jaundies: or a
tumor of the Belly and Feet in a Dropsy. These accidents are more terrible
then the pain, and therefore we shall here speak of them also.

Under the right and left Hypochondrion, by the Back bone, seldom on both
sides, there is a heavy pain in the space between the Loins, which grows
greater, this is called the stone in the Kidneys or Lithiasis. The stone in the
Kidneys is called Lithiasis.
This pain increases upon motion of the Body, especially when the Back is bent
with the body and at lying down, when the part is pressed: and there is a numness
of the Thigh on that side, to the Knee or sole of the Foot, with great pain, as
I have often seen: with stoppage of Urin or pissing of Blood, after violent
exercise, or riding. And the Sediment or bottom is black in the Urinal. This
at sometimes is white and muddy, like Whey at the first, and after settling, the
bottom is white as Chalk, and much sometimes. Sometimes it is gravely and white
or scaly. This pain is also increased by new accidents.

There is sometimes a burning pain in the top of the Hypochondria, A burning
pain of the Hypochondria, is from the Liver or Spleen.
before, on the right side, this is called the Inflammation of the Liver, which
is the cause of it, or Hepatitis. Or it is in the left side backwards, and is
called the Inflammation of the Spleen or Splenitis. Sometimes it is below in and
about the Hip, and behind about the Back on either side, and it is called the
Inflammation of the Kidneys, or Nephritis.

In all these kinds, there is a burning, stretching and heavy pain: also
beating, especially if it be the Inflammation of the Spleen, on the left side.
In which there is a tumor to be felt, and sometimes on the right, when the Liver
is inflamed, which appears more, when the patient bends to the right side,
but it is without redness, not as the inflamed Muscles are. In both these
Inflammations, the pain reaches to the Throat, and is increased by the lying
on the contrary side: and it is more burning in the Erysipelas of the Liver.

In all kinds, there is a small dry Cough and in the Inflammation of Liver or
Spleen, the Hiccup. And in that of the Liver, choler is vomited, and the Mouth
bitter, or voided by stool. Also from Inflammation of Liver or Spleen there is
a Jaundies, and from the Liver, or Bloody flux sometimes, and there is often
Pissing with heat, when the Reins are inflamed.

There is with all kinds a Synoch Fever going before, or following. With
restlesness, thirst and dryness of tongue. Quick and little breath, swift and
great Pulse. High Urin and sometimes matterish.

These ceasing, there is a heaviness in the part mentioned, and other accidents.

Sometimes there is a pricking pain in sound people suddenly on the left side
sometimes on the right, A pricking pain in the Hypochondria.

The pain of the Spleen, falsely so called.


which the Germans call Milkesteehen, pricking of the Spleen, falsely. It comes
chiefly after meat, upon riding exercise; with a Tumor like that of the Cramp
from wind, it is pricking and very tearing, when breath is fetched, and lying
upon the Belly abates it, and at length it goes away of it self.

In other Diseases of the right or left side, there is also a heavy pain, with
greater Symptoms among which I shall speak of that. Those pains that are
outward in the Hypochondria and about the Groyns in Ruptures, are referred to
the Diseases causing them.

There is a cutting and stretching pain in the Loins, A cutting and stretching
pain in the Hypochondria, is from pain of the Womb.
which is called the pain of the Womb, because it is caused, from thence, At
the time of the courses, or when they are stopped. Sometimes in great bellyed
Women, often after child bearing and with other Diseases of the Womb, where it
is described exactly.

There is often on one side, A twitching and grievous pain of the Hypochondria.

Nephritis or Stone in the Kidneys.


seldom on both, a twitching, tearing and pricking pain most grievous in the
Reyns, sometimes by fits, sometimes returning in a month or year, this is called
Nephritis from the cause, which is the Stone or Gravel, it sometimes is fixed
and sometimes goes to the Groyns and not the Belly, as the Colic. And the Leg
on that side is benumbed.

At the first there is vomiting of phlegm and choler and quick and little
breathing.

At the beginning the Urin is with difficulty crude like water, then thick and
after bloody, and there is red, yellow or white Gravel found at the bottom,
growing together sometimes. Sometimes they are so little, they stick in the
sediment and fat and fly up, or stick to the pott. All these last long, or the
pain goes to the bottom of the Belly, and then departs in a moment: or there is
some hurt in the part, as we showed in stoppage of Urin. And this either is
not, or cease presently, if one or more stones be pissed forth: the stone is
sometimes sandy and brittle, red or yellow or white, long or round, smooth or
uneven, greater or less: or hard and flinty and then white or dunne, sometimes
of a strange shape.

The Causes.
The Diseases of diverse parts in the Hypochondria under the short Ribs, cause
diverse pains. These parts are either the fleshy Bowels, as Liver, Spleen, two
Kidneys with the Ureters; or parts belonging to them, as part of the Porinaeum,
or Caul, Stomach and Colon; The diseases whereof reatch thither and are felt
under the Hypochondria.

Some diseases of the fleshy Bowels cause pains, these are manifest on that
side, where the Bowel lies. If from the Liver, it lies on the right side
foreward, the Spleen one the left side, under the Stomach, the Reyns one both
sides with the Ureters, under the other two Bowels. The pain of the right
Kidney, is known thus from the pain of the Liver, for when the Liver is
afflicted, the pain is more on the right side foreward, where the greatest part
of the Liver lies, or against the lodge of the Heart, where it lies, upon the
Stomach: but the pain of the right Kidney remains fixed backwards, a little
lower in the Back. But the pain of the left Kidney, is not so easily
distinguished from the pain of the Spleen, because it is higher then the right
Kidney. And contrary to the common opinion, the Spleen lies more backward,
next to the left Kidney. Not on the left side so forward, as is supposed.
Therefore the pains of these parts must not be distinguished by the Situation,
but by other signs.

The diseases that may happen to all these and cause pain, are Inflammation,
Weight, Obstruction or Distension, from a Humor or Tumor, or from the Stone.

When there is Inflammation in these bloody Bowels, Inflammation of the Liver,
Spleen, Reyns, is the cause of burning pain in the Hypochondria.
Liver, Spleen or Kidneys, it is from pure or fowl Blood, and causes a burning
where the Bowel lies, on that side. For these Bowels have but dull sense of
feeling, from the outward Tunicle, yet when the Inflammation reaches to the
parts adjacent, which are very sensible and Membranous, the pain is great, and
the Tumor more appearing, when the Inflammation is in the outward gibbous part
of the Liver, or when the Spleen, which lies lower under the Ribbs, is
swollen: and the beating is more, when the Spleen is afflicted, because it
abounds with Arteries; and there are other accidents, as were showed, When
those Bowels that lie upon the Diaphragma are inflamed, for then Breath is
hindered, and there is a Cough, and the stomach disturbed: And when the Liver
is inflamed, Choler is vomited, or there is a looseness or Jaundies; and the
Reins inflamed, make the Urin sharp. And if an Ulcer follow an Inflammation in
these parts (as appears by pissing of matter from the Kidneys, and we see in
Anatomies in the Liver and Spleen) or if there be a hardness left from the
Inflammation not well discussed, there will be accidents that will follow
accordingly.

A stroke or contusion, or the like, made outwardly upon the parts, may be the
cause of the Imflammation, as also very hot things taken in, may inflame the
Liver and Spleen, as well as the stomach which lies near them. The chief Cause
of Inflammation of the Liver is drinking much cold water in a great heat, which
makes a sudden repercussion. And the Cause of the Inflammation of the Kidneys
is the stone, which seeks a passage forth, and gets into the Vreters, and
causes great pain and flux of blood: This stone increases the Disease, by
being together with the Inflammation. All these Causes of Inflammation kindle a
symptomatical Fever. But when blood is hot in a Synoch Fever without these
Causes, as we showed in Fevers, and sent upon any of the Bowels aforesaid, it
may cause these Inflammations which follow a Fever as their cause. And it may
be also from plenty of blood, when a Fever goes not before but follows after,
which blood breaks out of the Vessels, and causes an Inflammation. If this
Blood, if it be in the Liver impure, and not well purged from Choler, causes
an erysipelated Phlegmon, and the great Heat that comes from thence, by which
the Bowels seem to burn, whence comes the burning Fever called Typhodes. And
the same things happen, if there be a true Erysipelas, from pure Choler spread
through the substance of the Liver from the Gall. And this may come also from
the Causes mentioned, that produce other Inflammations.

If the Liver or Spleen be obstructed by a Humor, The obstruction of the Liver,
Spleen, or Kidneys, causes a blunt and heavy pain in the Hypochondria.
so that they are more heavy, there is a weight in the sides. This is seldom
from a Humor in the Kidneys, but from a Stone or Gravel. This heaviness
increases as if a weight lay thereon, if there be a hard Tumor, Scirrhus or
Oedema in the Liver or Spleen. This may be in the Kidneys, from the same tumors
with great pain and heaviness. The Causes of all these shall be mentioned in
other great accidents: We shall not speak of Wind which some will have to be a
cause of pain in the Liver or Spleen, because it cannot be in such quantity
there, as to cause it by stretching, neither is the inside of those parts
sensible, neither do we see how it can be in the Kidneys.

From a Stone bred in the Liver or the Gall, or from sand or gravel, A stone
and sand in the Liver or Gall, is the cause of heavy and dull pain in the
Hypochondria.
gathered and returned, there is felt a Heaviness as from a Tumor. This may be,
as I have seen in Anatomies, and it has been observed that much red Gravel
like Blood has been voided in a Disease of the Liver; and by finding stones in
the Livers of Beasts: We may collect that the same may be in a man. These
happening, cause this pain and other Symptoms, such as come from a stopped Liver,
as we shall show, we cannot affirm that Stones may breed in the Spleen, but
from that general rule, that they may breed in any part of the Body, because we
never saw nor heard of any.

Stones of diverse sorts, The stone or sand in the kidneys, is the cause of
heaviness in the Hypochondria.
and gravel in the Kidneys and Vreters, cause the Nephritick pain, which is
either a Heaviness only in the Reins, gentle and dull, when the Gravel lies
still, or the Stones sticks to the kidney; but the pain is greater when much
Gravel is gathered there, or the Stones be great or many, with pricking and
cutting, and numness in the Leg on that side, from compression of the Nerves in
the Loins, or pissing of Blood from great motion, which makes the stone beat
upon the substance of the Kidneys, and sometimes of matter, and some part of the
stone. These accidents are greater and longer, when the stone is long detained,
and grows up in one place, and especially when it grows so that it fills the
Reins and swells them, as we have seen great branched stones in Anatomies: Or
when the substance of the Kidneys is worn away, and the stone is wrapped in the
Membrane only, as in a purse where the Kidney was. Hence must needs be great
pain; and I opened a Woman that in her life time complained for many years of
such a pain, and often miscarried and found it so. Also I opened a woman that
after a mischance pined away and died, in whom besides other accidents, I found
both Kidneys eaten away, and full of matter, and two great square stones in the
right Kidney, and two in the left, one like a cross, another like an almond,
with many other little ones. This is usual, for others have told me as much. I
saw also a stone in the outward Fat of the Kidney, that grew to the tunicle
which was great, but caused no pain, because it was hollow and light.

If the Stone get from the Kidneys into the Vreters, A Stone and Gravel in the
Vreters, is the cause of Nephritis
the pain is greater, and has the aforesaid Symptoms, first Vomiting from the
consent of the stomach, and because phlegm is vomited, they suppose that the
pain come from that, but that came from the stomach, because it could not so
suddenly come from the Kidneys. The Urin is then waterish and crude, because
the Choler is carried another way by vomiting and pain. That pain which is from
the Stone, getting into the entrance of the Vreters, when it returns to the
Kidneys again cease, or is less; but it increases when it descends through
the narrow passages of the Vreters, by stretching them, and so it lasts till
it gets into the Bladder, and then it cease suddenly. And this pain may come
from Gravel that passes slowly through the Vreters, especially in the strait
passages, which have been so enlarged in some that I have opened, that they
have pissed Stones and Gravel without pain.

The Cause that breeds Gravel and Stones is Phlegm, according to the vulgar
opinion, which is so dry by the heat of the Kidneys, that first it is Earth,
then a Stone. But in regard Mudd or Slime is rather bred of dried Phlegm, and it
cannot be further hardened by any Art or Nature, nor that that chalky matter
which is found in the Joints, comes from Phlegm; as we shall show in the
Diseases of the Joints, or if it come from it, it cannot be earthy. And if it
came from Phlegm, Stones should rather breed in the Stomach and Brain, and other
places where it abounds, than in the Kidneys to which that slimy Phlegm they
speak of, scarce comes, or if it comes, it cannot stay long, from these
reasons and others, we cannot be of their opinion.

We shall rather make an earthy substance to be the cause of this Earthiness,
which we have showed may be in Humors distinct from Phlegm, as in the serum or
whey, by these arguments. For as water flowing continually through the passages
of the Earth and Channels, and carrying a terrene or earthy Matter with it,
which it leaves upon dry places, causes Mudd and Sand, and the rather when it
is impure and full of clay, or when it is Naturally salt, nitrous or vitriol,
by which as we have observed in Spaw-waters, they have caused stones in the
Channels, through which they have flowed. In like manner the Serum receiving a
salt Juice and earthy Matter, which is bred daily of Salt in the first
Concoction which a man always uses, and other earthy things (as you may
observe in Beasts which love salt, so that they lick the walls as Goats, in
which when old, many stones are found) if the Serum have much thereof, it
sticks to the dry and strait parts, through which it passes and affords
matter for sand and stones. Especially in those parts where the Serum separated
from the Blood continually passes through the Kidneys, therefore there Sand is
first bred. These are red because they breed in the substance of the Kidneys,
and grow into the Stones, if they continue long, and there increase by addition
of new matter, or if they fall into the Bladder, and stay there, there they
increase. And the older they are, the less red they are, but paler and firmer.
And while the Serum is in the Blood, it may do the same in diverse parts fitted
for it: As was showed concerning the Liver. And if it be mixed with other
Excrements it does the same, and the rather when it takes sharpness and dryness
from the Choler. Hence it is that so often we find Stones in the Gall of the
color of Gold, or Silver, from the yellow Choler. And this is done in the Body
by the Serum, so when it falls out of the Body, by tears it causes Sand in the
Eyelidds: As was showed in the Diseases thereof. Also in the Serum which is
purged in the Bladder, namely the Urin, by which the stones that fall into the
bladder are increased, the same may be observed. But it is more plain from
Urine made in a Chamber Pot, for if the same Chamber Pot be used long and not
scoured, there will be a sandy and gravely matter growing unto it, and and if
it continue yet unscoured, it will turn to thick scales and stones. And as this
may be done in time from any Urine, especially the saltest and sharpest, so may
it be done speedily by Art, when the Urin is boiled. Therefore the Chemists
make Salt out of Piss and Lie that has earthy matter. From which as we showed
that Sand and Gravel may come, so may they increase into stones, from a salt,
sharp and sour Juice mixed with the Earthyness which is in the Serum or urin,
which fastneth and sends them (as the Stone-cutters use to make a hard Cement
like Iron of Filings of Iron, and Juice of Vitriol and Vinegar) this cannot be
from Phlegm as some say, which cannot so glue together the earthy Bodies, that
they may make a stone.

Neither can the heat of the Reins which they make the efficient cause of the
stone, so dry the Phlegm, and burn it, that it may be brought as it were to
ashes; in regard stones may breed in other cold membranous parts. And that it
should breed in certain places, the straitness of the part, to which the matter
may fix longer and better and the dryness thereof, where it may grow hard, is
required and ought to be the assisting Cause. Therefore they who Naturally have
dry reins as some Infants, which have in the Cradle stones in the Kidneys, with
great pain, and piss them forth, as I have observed, especially in one who had
a white clear Stone before it was a year old, which stuck in the Yard, and
stopped the Urin, and at length came forth with much Urin after it, and the
falling of the horrid shining Tumor in the Belly: Or they who have dry Reins
from age or other causes, are most subject to the Stone. And if it come from
the Parents, it is hereditary, and takes the children at the same years as it
did the Parents. Fernelius (not explaining the quality) calls this a sandy
Constitution of the Kidneys.

Some pains in Hypochondria come from the Perinaeum or cawl which is spread
under the Belly before or behind, The stretching of the Perinaeum by wind, is
the cause of a pricking pain in the Hypochondria, Oedema, which some falsely
call the pain of the spleen.
and is broadest under the Hypochondria, sides and back. And when that is
extremely stretched, and drawn by the parts to whose Tuuicles it grows, it is
as it were pulled asunder, and hence comes a pricking pain, if it be in one
part only, or a tearing and cutting pain, if the largest part of it be so
stretched.

The cause of this is often wind, which gets between the Cawle and the Muscles,
and stretches, and causes that pricking pain, which they which use Exercise
after meat, are subject to in the same manner, as there is a pricking pain in
the Breast in a false Pleurisy, from the Membrane or Tunicle succingent, or
which girdeth it. The strong attraction of the Muscles of the Belly by strong
motion presently after meat, does bring this, especially by riding when fitting
in the saddle, they bear strongly upon the stirrups, and by forcing with
retention of breath, constringe the Muscles of the Belly. Even as we showed in
the Cramp, how it might come from wind in other parts of the Body, by the same
kind of straining. For which cause, as in a windy Cramp the Muscles are lifted
in the part pained, and cause a swelling which sometimes appears to the Eye. And
if the sides be bound with a garter (as we showed in the Cramp) and the Muscles
drawn down by a contrary straining, as was exactly showed; the pain cease or
abateth. So here is a kind of windy Cramp, and it may be referred to the
Disease of the muscles and cawle plucked asunder (as we showed) This the vulgar
calls the pain of the Spleen, because it is more often in the left then right
side, which is by reason of the Stomach that lies on the left side, and
because more Wind is bred in the left side, as in Hypochondriack Melancholy,
yet it comes sometimes on the right side.

These pricking or cutting pains which come from other Causes under the sides,
The stretching of the Cawle from the Vessels and Bowels that are joined to it,
causes stretching or tearing pain in the Hypochondria.
when the Peritonaeum or Cawle is stretched, are caused from the affliction of
the Bowels, as Liver or Spleen, which are joined to the Cawle, or from the
Vessels of the womb which grow to the Back, and by the Cawle. Hence it is that
pains of the Womb reach thither; or from the stretching of the Peritonaeum in a
Tympany, or in Women with Child, there is a little pricking, or by continuance
a great pain, as in the Hernia or Rupture. The Causes of all these shall be
laid down in other great accidents which befall.

The Stomach being on the left side under the Hypochondrion, A Disease in the
stomach, causes a Hypochondriack pain.
is pained about the lodge of the Heart before, with a pain called Cardialgia,
on the left side; especially in the Hypochondriack Melancholy, when there is
rumbling and burning: As is showed in Melancholy.

The pain of the Colon which is placed under the Stomach, The Colic causes
the Hypochondriack pain.
from one side to the other, is also in the Hypochondrion, but stays not, but
runs about the Belly: As shall be showed in the Colic.

The Cure.
We shall mention only here the Cure of those Diseases with pain in the
Hypochondria. The cure of heavy, dull or stretching pain from the Liver, Spleen,
Reins or Cawle.
For the Cure of the Diseases of the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Cawle, which we
mention here only for the pain sake, because the pain in them is dull, shall be
showed in other Symptoms, as Cachexy, Jaundies, Dropsy, and the like, by which
they are more manifest then by the pain. The cure of pains from the stomach,
Colon, or Womb.
Also if there be pain in the Hypochondria from the Stomach, Womb or Colon,
reaching thither, because the pains of the stomach are more in the region of
the Heart, and of the Colon and Womb, more in the lower Belly where they lie,
we have showed the Cure of that in Pains of the Heart, and of those Pains in
the Belly. And here we shall only declare the Cure of the Pain, where it
chiefly shows it self, in respect of its cause, as it comes from the
Inflammation of the Liver, Spleen, or Kidneys called Hepatitis, Splenitis, or
Nephritis: Or from the Peritonaeum or Cawle, vulgarly called Spleneticus.

The Inflammations and Erysipelas of the Liver and Spleen, The cure of the
Inflammation of the Liver, Spleen and Kidneys.
are dangerous and often deadly, and if they imposthume, and leave an Ulcer, or
be ill cured, and a Hardness or Scirrhus follow, they cause a Dropsy, and
incurable Diseases. The Inflammations of the Kidneys are more easily cured,
they are worst, when the Stone is there also: If they leave an Ulcer, it is
also very stubborn, as shall be showed.

The Method in the cure of all these Inflammations is the same as in others,
that is while they are coming to divert the Blood another way from the part, or
by repelling and deriving it, and to allay the Heat and Burning, and to discuss
the remainder, or if that may not be to ripen it. And if, there be Hardness,
Scirrhus, or Imposthume, and after that is broken, an Ulcer, (which may be both
in Liver, Spleen and Kidneys) we shall show what is then to be done in other
Symptoms, that come from thence. Against Inflammation, use the following
Remedies.

Blood-letting diverts the Blood while it is flowing to the part another way,
especially in the Inflammation of the Liver or Kidneys which have great
Branches from the hollow Vein: And in the Phlegmon of the Spleen, also it must
not be neglected, though it has Veins only from the Gate Vein, for reasons
showed in Inflammation of the Stomach. Therefore in the Inflammation of all the
the three parts, except any thing prohibit, open suddenly that Vein which most
appears, on the same side, and bleed plentifully for Revulsion, and if there
be great Plethory or Fullness, open the same Vein again, or that in the Hand on
the same side, either against the Thumb, or little or middle Finger, according
to Rhasis. And in the Inflammation of the Kidneyes open the Vein in the Foot.

The Haemorrhoids being Branches of the Gate Vein if they be opened derive much
from the Inflammation of the Spleen, and revell from other Inflammations.

Cupping Glasses to the Hipps and Buttocks, or that side, do revell and derive
in the Inflammation of the Reins. The Ancients did use them the day after
bleeding, to the right Hypochondrion, when the Liver was Inflamed after
scarification, and applied them the next day again to the same place others
used them only at the Declination, to take away the residue without
Scarification.

Also Ligatures and Frictions of the extreme parts are good at the first, as in
other Inflammations, to revell.

And Clysters before Bleeding, and when the Body is bound, as it uses to be in
these Inflammations, or Suppositories are good.

And Clysters because they reach into the Colon, and come near to the part, and
cool, are best at the first, and are as altering Topics; such as are
prescribed in Fevers.

A loosning Clyster, that a little provokes. Take Mallows Roots and all,
Beets, and for the Kidneys Pellitory of the wall, each an handful; Violets,
Bran, each a pugil; Lineseed an ounce, Anniseed a dram, boil and strain them,
dissolve Honey, Butter and Oil, each an ounce and half; Pulpe of sweet Prunes,
or Cassia an ounce, with a little Salt, make a Clyster.

A cooling Clyster. Take the emollient Herbs and Roots, Purslane, Gourd leaves,
each an handful; Violets, Mallows, and Chamomile flowers, each a pugil;
Linseed, six drams, four great cold seeds an ounce, Barley a pugil, boil and
dissolve, Honey of Violets half an ounce, Cassia, an ounce, Oil of Violets,
and Water Lillies, each an ounce and half.

If they cannot take Clysters, give a Laxative, take heed of Purgers for fear
of more Flux and Inflammation, Cassia therefore is not very safe.

But we give things that loosen without heat and pricking, as Prunes and other
loosning fruits, and Spinach, Mallows, Violets boiled in Broaths, Whey, syrup
of Violets and Roses, and the like.

In the declination or after the fourth day when heat abates, to take away the
relics, when the Liver or Spleen are afflicted, we give a gentle Purge,
because they can discharge themselves by the Meseraicks into the Guts. And the
rather, when the Disease is in the hollow part of the Liver, into which the
Gate-vein branches it self, and if Choler boiling in the Gall or sent out,
causes an Erysipelas. In these cases we may give Cassia, or some gentle Purger.

Or this Decoction which cleanses and opens. Take Liquorish two ounces,
Grass and Kneeholm roots, each an ounce; red Pease a pugil, Senna an ounce,
Polypody an ounce and half, Cordial-flowers a pugil, Anise-seed three drams,
Fennel seed and Dodder, each a dram; boil them, strain and add syrup of Roses
an ounce and half, syrup of the two Roots an ounce, Cinnamon a dram, Schaenanth
half a dram, for three or four Draughts.

Or this Infusion: Take Rhubarb four scruples, Cinnamon, Spike, Schaenanth,
each a scruple; sprinkle them with white Wine, and steep them in Endive and
Maiden-hairwater, add syrup of Roses, with Senna an ounce, make a Potion.

If the Disease be in the Reins, because they have nothing to do with the
Meseraicks, these are not proper, except some other reason require it, for then
it is better to provoke Urin, or when it is in the unequal part of the Liver,
which has branches of the hollow Vein, then it is good in the declining to
take away the remainder.

In the beginning of Inflammations of Liver, Spleen or Kidneys, we give gentle
Astringers and Coolers, and which strengthen them, especially the liver and
spleen. Then we leave out the Astringents, and mix Cleansers with Coolers, and
then Openers, which take away the remainder by Urin or Stool. Such as were
prescribed for the Inflammation of the stomach.

Or these following at first to repel. Take syrup of dried Roses or Myrtles,
each an ounce; syrup of Currance, or Bar-berries, or of Succory, or of Plantane
for the Kidneys, each half an ounce; Endive, Rose and Plantane-water, each an
ounce and half; red Sanders half a dram: Drink itin the morning, and make it
again for the evening.

A cooling, cleansing and opening Julep in the progress. Take syrup of Violets
and Endive, or Sorrel or Bizantine, each an ounce; syrup of Purslane, and
Water Lillies in the Inflammation of the Reins chiefly half an ounce,
Straw-berry, Liverwort and Lettice-water, each an ounce and half.

Or this Decoction: Take Succory roots an ounce, Endive, Succory, Lettice,
Strawberry-leaves, each a handful; Violets, Comfrey, Succory-flowers, each a
pugil; Barley a pugil, the four great cold Seeds, each a dram; sharp Prunes
six, boil them, strain and add Sugar.

We cool also with ordinary Drink, made of Water, and Barley, and Violets, and
other four things, and with Conserves and Candyes, mentioned in Fevers and
Inflammation of the Stomach.

In the Declination, when we will cleanse, and open and purge by Urin; We take
syrup of Maidenhair, of Bizant, each an ounce; syrup of Endive, and of the two
Roots, each half an ounce; Water of Maidenhair, Agrimony, Fumitory, each an
ounce; Spike and Schaenanth, each a scruple.

Or this Decoction: Take Roots of Asparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Liquorish, each
an ounce; bark of Tamarinds for the Spleen half an ounce, Maidenhair for both
Liver and Spleen, Agrimony, Ceterach, each a handful; Cordial and Broom
flowers, each a pugil; Chamomil-flowers half a pugil, red Pease a pugil, the
four great cold Seeds half an ounce, Anise-seed two drams, Parsley-seed and
Agnus Castus, cach a dram; Raisons an ounce, boil them, and in the straining
dissolve syrup of the five or of the two Roots an ounce and half, with Cinnamon
make it for three or four draughts.

Pills to discuss the relics of the Inflammation. Take Turpentine two drams,
Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar a dram, Myrrh, Storax, each a scruple,
Schaenanth, Spike, Asarum, each half a scruple; with Sugar make Pills, take two
scruples, or a dram, with Barley, Pease or Parsley-water.

Outward Coolers must be applied at the first which astringe and repel; then
mix Dissolvers therewith, and in the Declination, use Discussers alone to
dissolve the remainder, or to ring it to Suppuration, if it will not be
discussed. To all these you must add Strengthners, when the principal parts are
inflamed. And these must all be applied, not actually cold, but temperate at
the first, and warm afterward.

A repelling Epithem to be used at the first. Take Rose Water four ounces,
Plantane-water two ounces, Vinegar of Roses an ounce, Sanders a dram, Camphire
a scruple (you may ad Juice of Plantane or Violet-leaves, or of Pears or
Quinces) Oil of Roses half an ounce, or Rose-vinegar.

Then use this; Take of Nightshade-water, Water of Lettice, Violets and
Water Lillies, each an ounce; Endive or Succory-water for the Liver two ounces,
juice of Nightshade, or Purslane, or of red Roses an ounce, Vinegar half an
ounce, Sanders a dram, with Oil of Violets make an Epithem.

Or dip Clouts in Juice only of Nightshade, or of Endive for the Liver, and
apply with a little Vinegar and Oil of Violets, Roses or Water Lillies.

An Ointment for the beginning of the Inflammation. Take Oil of Roses, Quinces
or My^ties, each two ounces; juice of Plantane and Vinegar, each an ounce; or
juice of Endive or Succory for the Liver or Spleen an ounce, boil them till the
Juyces are consumed, add Sanders, red Roses, each a dram; with Wax make an
Ointment.

At the first use the Cerot of Sanders for the Liver or Spleen, and the cooling
Ointment of Galen for the Reins. And Ointment of Roses for all Parts.

Or this Cataplasm when the noble Bowels are affected. Take Quinces four
ounces, Plantane and Horstongue, each an handful; red Roses a pugil,
Pomegranate-flowers half an ounce, boil and stamp them, ad Barley-meal three
ounces, Oil of Roses two ounces, red Sanders two drams, make a Cataplasm.

In the progress, to dissolve the Inflammation of Liver or Spleen. Take Oil of
Roses two ounces, Oil of Wormwood, or Spikenard an ounce, Oil of Chamomil, or
Melilot half an ounce, Sanders a dram, Spike half a dram, with Wax make a
Liniment.

An old Ointment for Inflammation of the Liver, made of Poppy tops, Rue,
Linseed and Schaenanth, is good at that time.

Or the Cataplasm of Galen, made of Quinces and Dates.

Or this Cataplasm: Take Figgs, Dates, Raisons not stoned, each three ounces;
Wormwood, Hart's-tongue, each a handful; red Roses a pugil, boil them in Wine
and Water, stamp and add Barley and Foenugreek-meal, or Lineseed, each two
ounces; Powder of Orris a dram, Oil of Chamomil and Lillies, each an ounce and
half; Saffron a scruple, Spike and Schaenanth, each half a dram.

In the Declination, the Emplaster of Melilot, Marshmallows, or Dyachylum,
with Orris, do the same, and also maturate.

In the Inflammation of the Kidneys, use relaxing and resolving Ovls, as that
of Oil of sweet Almonds, or in which Marsh-mallow-roots are boiled, Oil of
Chamomile, Lillies, or the like, and Grease or Fats.

Or Ointments of the same as that called Resumptive.

Also a Bath of Marshmallows, and Mallows, Lillies, Chamomile, Faenugreek and
Lineseed, and the like, or a Fomentation for the Reins.

A Pain in the Reins from Stone, or Gravel, The preventing, and curing of
Gravel in the Kidneys.
is not only to be cured when it comes, but to be prevented, by hindering the
breeding of Stones, when we fear it, by reason our Parents had it, or are
otherwise disposed to it. Especially in those who piss Sand, we must take heed
least it cleave to the Kidneys, and breed a Stone. And if we suspect that there
is a Stone from former pains, and present Heaviness in the part, we must
prevent pain, hinder its growth, and labor to expel it. This is by taking
them of from things that breed the Stone, and heat and dry the Kidneys, and by
giving cleansers to keep the Stones from growing to the Kidneys, and to break
them and bring them down. But in curing of the pain of the Stone, which
sticks in the Passages, we must relax the passages, break the Stone, and
labor to get it forth, all which shall be now related, as also the Diet and
Exercise, and Purgers, and Clysters, and alterers and outward remedies.

There must be moderation and choice in meats and Drink, which must be of good
juice, because the stone takes its Original from them, Meat must be Temperate,
and very little salted, very salt and dry things must be forborne, for from
these comes the chief earthly Matter. Also very sharp and hot things that dry
and heat the Kidneys, as Sawsages, and Spices, rather then crude glutiners, and
things they thought, breed Phlegm, for these cause a thick juice, which makes
Obstructions but not the earthly Matter, except there be some other cause, for
that is laid aside in the serum, in which they are washed, as we showed in the
Causes Therefore Cheese which they forbid so earnestly, as the great Cause of
the Stone, cannot do it but by its saltness, and sharpness; but fresh Cheese,
Milk, and milkie meats, and other fresh meats though they be glutinous, cannot
breed the Stone.

Modetate Exercise before meat is good to remove the Stone, which fixes by
Idleness. Therefore they void Stones more after exercise, then after Sleep, and
the Urine made at that time, is best to judge by. Therefore when the Stone is
little and sticks in the Kidneys, Moderate Exercise is good, but when great, it
causes pain by moving it, and in an old disease, strong and violent motion of
the Loins, tears the flesh from the Stone, and causes pissing of Blood, and an
Ulcer. Neither do some allow exercise presently after meat, least it be
distributed before concoction, and carried to the Kidneys, to breed matter for
the Stone, but this Crudity will rather breed Obstructions and other Diseases
then the Stone, as we showed. Immoderate Venery dries and weakens the Reins,
and disposes them for the stone, and if there be a stone, it stirs it, and
causes pain. Therefore they who have lived long, without the use of Women,
when they marry are subject to the Stone, which they never formerly perceived,
being old men, as we have observed often. Also looseness of Body in orderly
going to stool hinders the increase of Excrements. And not holding of the Urin
when it urges, prevents the fixing of the Gravel.

If the Body be foul, purge Spring and Fall, and oftener to prevent, not only
Phlegm, which some think is the cause of the stone, but all humors. And to take
away the cause of the stone, use gentle things that carry the salt and wheyish
Matter from the Reins, and cleanse the Blood, as they say; such as shall be
mentioned for the Cure.

For when the fit of the stone is, we use Laxatives or Clysters to take away
Excrements and Wind, then Purges, but not violent, that they may not meddle
with the cause which is rather to be looked at in the time of prevention, then
of cure. But such as may gently move the stone drawn, mixed with things that
break it, as we shall show.

Cassia is excellent to prevent, and in the fit also an ounce or more, with
syrup of Violets or Sugar candy, or with the Decoction of Liquorish, or
Sebestens, or convenient Waters, or seeds of Winter-cherries, or Gromwel, or a
dram of Powder of Turpentine, with Oil of sweet Almonds to abate pain.

Also Turpentine two drams, with the yolk of an Eg, convenient Liquor, Sugar or
Honey, or with Cassia.

Or with Benedicta laxativa, or two drams of the powder thereof, with Sugar.

A loosning and cleansing Decoction. Take Liquorish an ounce and half, Raisons
stoned an ounce, Sebestens ten pair, Prunes five pair, Pease a pugil, the four
great cold seeds half an ounce, Anise-seeds three drams, Senna and Polypody,
each an ounce; Violets a pugil, boil them, and add Sugar, syrup of Violets or
Roses for two draughts.

It is better to add Fennel and Parsley-roots, each an ounce; Saxifrage and
Marsh-mallow roots, each half an ounce; Mallows, Maidenhair, each an handful:
Dill-flowers a pugil, Alkekengi-berries two drams, and make the quantity of
Senna an ounce and half, and to add Rbubarb and Agarick.

A purging Wine: Take Senna an ounce, Carthamusseeds a dram, Agarick or Rhubarb
two drams, Liquorish an ounce, opening Roots half an ounce, Violets and
Mallows, each two drams; Berries of Alkekengi, Anise and Lovage-seed, each a
dram; Currance four ounces, add Wine three pints, drink this to prevent the
stone, and when it begins to purge.

A preventing Electuary, and to be taken in the fit. Take Cassia two ounces and
half, Prunes and Sebestens, each an ounce; juice of Liquorish two drams, with
syrup of Violets make an Electuary, give an ounce with things against the
stone, and some scammoniate Electuary, as that of Juice of Roses, Diaphaenicon,
Elescoph, and Benedicta laxativa a dram and half.

Or give the gentle Electuaries with Rhubarb and Senna, as Catholicon and
Lenitive, and the like, alone or with the Decoction mentioned.

Or gentle Pills, with things that break the stone.

Or these: Take species, Hiera and Benedicta laxativa half a dram, with
Turpentine make Pills: Or a dram of Benedicta.

Or this Powder: Take Senna an ounce and half, Rhubarb two drams, Turbith three
drams, Ginger a dram, Cinnamon two drams, Polypody three drams, Gromwel and
Burdock-seeds, each a dram; Broom-seeds half a dram, Orris a dram, the four
great cold seeds, each a scruple; make a powder, give two drams,

Clysters suddenly take away pain, by taking out the Excrements and Wind, which
would increase it, by pressing upon the Ureters and Reins: And also by coming
to the part being anodyne, and if they be narcotick especially, and which break
the stone. Then do they help in a threefold respect.

As this against the Stone. Take the emollient herbs, roots and all, Pellitory,
Bettony, Groundsel, Beets or Mercury, each a handful; Chamomil, Melilot and
Dill-flowers, each a pugil; Liquorish two ounces, red Pease, Bran, each a
pugil; Figs ten, Bay Berries three drams, Alkekengi-berries two drams, Gourd,
Foenugreek and Linseed, each half an ounce; Fennel and Caraway seeds, each a
dram and half; boil them in Water and Wine, or Broth, strain and add Honey or
sugar an ounce and half, Cassia an ounce, Benedicta or Hiera two drams, Oil of
sweet Almonds, Nuts, Olives or Butter, each an ounce; Turpentine two drams,
with Salt make a Clyster. If the Pain be great, add two drams of Philonium
Romanum.

Or you may use the anodyne Clysters for the Colic, adding things proper for
the stone. Or thus: Take Oil of Chamomil, Dill, Lillies, sweet Almonds, each an
ounce and half; Oil of scorpions, Goose grease and sweet Butter, each two
ounces; Turpentine dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg an ounce and half, Saffron
a dram, with Milk make a Clyster, add Opium half a scruple, if there be need.

Or this: Take Turpentine two ounces, dissolve it in white Wine half a pint,
with the Yolk of an Eg, Oil of Butter, Almonds two ounces, Oil of scorpions an
ounce, Goosegrease two ounces.

Or this to help the stone to pass foreward. Take Lilly roots two ounces,
Lapidium, Smallage, Purslane, Roots and all, each an ounce; Pellitory,
Coleworts, Groundsel, saxifrage-roots and all, Bettony, St. John's Wort,
Water-parsley, Crateva, Fennel, Dovefoot, Columbines, Beets, each half a
handful or a handful; Lillies, Broom, Elder, Lavender and Stoechas flowers,
each a pugil; Juniper Berries an ounce, Alkekengi-berries two drams, Gromwel,
saxifrage, Parsley, smallage, Cummin, Hally-berries and seeds, each a dram;
boil them in Wine and Water, strain and add juice of Pellitory, St. John's Wort,
Fennel or Parsley, each an ounce; Benedicta laxativa or Indum majus three
drams, Oil of Dill, bitter Almonds, Peach-kernels, scorpions, each an ounce;
Turpentine dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg two drams, with salt make a
Clyster. Add the Electuary called Justinum or Lithontridon.

Alterers are given also to cleanse away Gravel, that it stick not to the
Reins, nor grow to the stone, they are good to prevent and cure, they open the
straight passages where the stone is lodged, and make them slippery And break
the stone if it be crumbling or fastened to the Reins, but if it be old or
flinty, it cannot be. Some do it by a cutting quality, and sharpness, or by
cleansing which takes the Gravel from the Kidneys, and somewhat always from
the stone; and the rather, when they are drying and earthy, which they do not
by their hardness, as one stone wears another as they suppose. for they are not
given whole but finely poudered, but by the clensing quality which is in these
dry bodies; and by a propriety known more by custom then reason, as in other
things, which do it by their similitude of which hereafter.

Good broth of red pease is approved, with Butter, Sugar, and Honey, or a
little Salt, this is used to prevent, adding parsley roots, and Coleworts and
topps of Sparagus, with Beans and Fitches.

Or Take; Red Pease a pugil, Parsley roots two ounces, Fennel, and Rest-Harrow
roots and Liquorish, each an ounce; Colewort or Malowes, a few Melon seeds two
drams, Aniseed a dram. boil them in Cock Broth, til there be two messes of it
streined, give it Morning and Evening.

Or the Decoction of Alisma, Chamomile, Marshmallows, and of Corn Poppy,
according to Diascorides, is good for such as make thick sandy Urine. Or the
Decoctiof white Saxifrage.

To this Decoction of white Saxifrage, Orris, Primrose roots, Mallows, Venus
Navel, and Holly, are added, also roots of Valerian, Musk; and wild flax may be
boiled with Wine.

Some say that the Decoction of Lignum Vitae is good against the stone, by its
cleansing and cutting quality. And therefore they give it in the fit, and to
prevent also, as ordinary drink for a long time together, with other clensers
sometimes, as Liquorish roots, Rest harrow, and the wood of the Thorn Tree,
with Sugar, or Honey.

Of these and others make this gentle and pleasant Decoction. Take Liquorish an
ounce and half, red Pease a pugil, Raisons ten pair, Figgs five pair, the four
great cold Seeds, Anise and Mallow-seeds, each a dram; Violets and
Mallow-flowers, each a pugil; boil and strain them, add Sugar or Honey a
sufficient quantity for two or three draughts.

This is stronger; Take Marsh-mallow roots, Liquorish, each an ounce;
Mallow-flowers two handfuls, red Coleworts, Chervil, Bettony, each a handful;
Melon seeds two drams, Foenugreek or Linseed a dram and half, seeds of Parsley,
Alkekengi and Gromwel, each a dram; Chamomil and Broom-flowers, each a pugil;
boil and sweeten it, and use it as the former.

Or thus: Take Roots of Asparagus, Restharrow, low Bramble, each an ounce;
Pellitory, Bettony, Poli-montain, each a handful; black Vetches a pugil, boil
them in Rainwater, add Vinegar of squills an ounce, Goats blood prepared half a
dram, Lapis Iudaicus a dram.

Or this Syrup: Take the five opening Roots, each half an ounce; Liquorish,
Marshmallows, Dropwort, Burnet, saxifrage, Restharrow, Ground-bramble,
Horseradish, each an ounce; Roots of Valerian, Dittany, Madder, Nettle, Bays,
Orris, Elicampane, Birthwort, Piony, Vervain, each half an ounce; Roots of
Asarabacca, Cypress, each two drams; Seaonyon a dram, Roots of white Saxifrage,
inner Rind of Hazel and Elder, each half an ounce; Mallows, Pellitory, Chervil,
Lovage roots and all, Saxifrage of Dioscorides (which Dodon takes to be wild
Time) Bettony, Paul's Bettony, Maidenhair, Ceterach, Rupturewort, Bupleurus,
Ground Ivy, ^red Coleworts, wild Parsley, Sea-fennel, Celticknard, each a
handful; Flowers of Chamomil, Lillies, Broom, Walflowers, St. John's Wort, each
a pugil; red Pease a pugil, Peach and Cherry-kernels, each an ounce; Juniper,
Winter-cherry and Ivy-berries, each half an ounce; the four great cold seeds
and of Mallows and Marshmallows, each a dram; the four great and small hot
seeds, each half a dram; Foenugreek and Linseed, each a dram; Raisons stoned
two drams, Jujubes and Sebestens, each five pair; make a Decoction, add to the
straining Sugar or Honey six ounces, with a little Cinnamon make a Syrup: Take
two or three ounces alone, or with convenient Water or Wine. Some boil Lapis
Judiacus and Lyncis in it, but in my Judgment to no purpose.

Or the opening and cleansing Syrups, which are seldom given alone but with
Powders and Electuaries that expel the Stone, as, Oxymel Hydromel, Syrup of
Liquorish, Radish, or Byzantine.

There is also an Infusion made of Wine to expel the stone, as winter Cherries,
bruised and steept in Wine.

Or bruised Radishes, or Hors-Radishes steept twelve hours in Wine, which is
very good.

Dioscorides commends Wormwood-Wine against the Stone.

And this is better; Take Liquorish, Rest-harrow, Burnet, Saxifrage, Lovage,
Fenel, Radish, each an ounce and half; Bettony, and Paul's Bettony,
Rupture-wort, Bupleur, Maidenhair, Ground-jvy, all dried, each three drams;
Violets, Dillflowers, each a dram; Winter Cherries, Ivy berries, each two
drams; Parsley, Carua, Gromwell, and Broomseed, each a dram; bruise them, and
infuse them in two quarts of Wine.

Groundjvie infused in Aqua Vitae, is a singular experiment against the Stone.

Or diverse Aqua Vitae's made of Herbs, and other things proper against the
stone.

Or a Lixivium, or Lie, made of ashes of the same is good in four ounces at a
time.

As of Vine ashes, or Bean stalk ashes, when Water or Wine is poured through
them, so often til it be sharp.

Another strong enough in half an ounce. It is made of the Ashes of
Bean-stalks, Pease, Coleworts, Vervain, Wormwood, Garlic, Ivy, Juniper, Bays,
and Paliurus, if it may be had. Taking as much of them as you can hold in your
hand, and letting a pint of Wine, and four ounces of Aqua-Vitae pass nine times
through them.

Some Juices break the Stone. (as Hannibal did the Alps with Vinegar) as thin
white Wine, and Vinegar, and Water.

A certain man was drunk with white Wine, and held his Water forceably, and
then voided abundance of stones and Gravel. And another of our Citizens of a
good family, by drinking the diuretic Wine in the Blasine-street, voided often
stones of half a dram in weight, and has showed to me many of them which came
forth with a little pain.

Hollerius teaches us that the same may be done by much cold water, when the
body is hot and dry from the pain, and it is better with Vinegar, also the
spawWaters that are sharp, are drank many days together against the stone.

Or an ounce of juice of Limons alone or with Sugar, or with three ounces of
Wine, also juice of Oranges, and the like.

Or the juice of winter Cherries, and Yarrow, or the Water of a Beet stalk,
taken often in the same quantity, according to Mathiolus.

Or Take Juice of Fennel and Purslane, each half an ounce; white Wine an ounce.
Drink it with sugar, or make a syrup thereof.

Or this Potion; Take Juice of Pellitory clarified, an ounce and half, of
Chamomile, Bettony, Honey, or Sugar each an ounce, drink it with Pease Broth
or the like, or make a syrup thereof.

Another, Take; a Horse-Raddish, bruise it add the best Wine to make it three
ounces, or four, strain it and add Blood of a Goat prepared a dram. this is
highly commended, to which other Juyces and Pouders may be added.

The Urine of a Goat of four years old, or of a rock-Goat, is highly commended.

Also distilled waters which pierce to the Reins, in a good quantity as
Pellitory water a pint, or Mallow, or Marsh-Mallow water, or of Broomflowers,
or Bean flowers, Rest-Harrow, Asparagus, Saxifrage, Parsley, Fenel, Osyris, or
that of wild Parsley, sea Fennel, Raddish, Ivy berries, or winter Cherries, or
that of Flixweed called Osyris, or of Oak leaves, and Leaves and Roots of
Brambles, and of Dogs tongue, also of ceterach, Vervaine, Chamomile, or that of
Peach kernells or that of Turpentine which is oily. Mathiolus commends the
Water of Man's Dung or Pigeons Dung. The spirit of Wine which is thin, breaks
the Stone.

These all may be given alone, or with sugar, or with other Pouders, or
distilled of diverse simples mixed together.

Or thus; Take the Roots, Herbs, Seeds, of which we make the Wine by Infusion,
all dried and bruised, and so much Wine, as it may be like a Pultes, and four
ounces of Turpertine, draw a water by distillation from it: give it as the
other.

Or add to the dried simples that will keep their Virtue, Roots of Spargus,
Smallage, Parsley, each half an ounce; roots of Asarum, Maddir, Valerian, each
two drams; Pellitory of the wall, St. Iohns-wort, Chamomile, and Broom flowers,
each two drams; Smallage, Lovage, Sparagus, and Raddish seeds, each a dram;
distill a water with Turpentine as before.

All these are better distilled in Aqua vitae.

Or Thus; Take Peach or Cherry kernells, two ounces, Berries of Brambles,
Strawberries, Winter Cherries, Ivy, each an ounce; Hors-Raddish three ounces,
green Beans with the shales, Pellitory, each an handful, wild Parsley, Sea
Fennel, each a pugil. bruise and distill them.

Or this; Take of Peach kernells, four ounces, Sebesten, and Jujubes, each five
pair, four great coldseeds, six drams, Winter Cherries, half an ounce, Gith,
and Smallage seed each two drams, Hors-Raddish, half a pound, bruise them, add
Turpentine and Honey each a pound, distill a Water, give three ounces alone, or
with other Breakstone-Medicines.

Or, distill this Water of Juyces; Take Juice of Raddishes, Lovage, each six
ounces, Juice of Winter Cherries two ounces, white Wine Vinegar two ounces,
distill them give half an ounce.

This is an admirable Water: Take juice of Radishes a pint and half, of
Restharrow and wild Tansey, Saxifrage, Winter-cherries, Pellitory, Burnet,
Bettony, Marshmallows, Gromwel, each half a pint, Roots of Fennel, Parsley,
Eryngus, Restharrow, Orris, Elicampane, each two ounces; Basil, Gromwel,
Burdock and Parsley-seeds, each half an ounce; Juniper berries bruised half a
pound; infuse them, and stir them often two days, add a pound of Honey, and a
pound and half of Turpentine, white Vinegar two ounces, distill them in Balneo,
give two ounces, or two and an half, with as much syrup of Violets.

It is good to drink Oils, for we may see them swim after upon the Urin, and
therefore know that they pass through, and supple the Ureters.

Therefore in great Pains, when the stone is stopped in the passages, give
Sallet-oyl, or Oil of sweet Almonds, or Linseed new drawn or well washed, alone,
or in Broaths or Cream.

Some commend an ounce of Sallet-oyl with Wine, wherein Flints have been often
quenched.

But some Oils are proper for the stone, alone given, or with other remedies,
as Oil of Peach, or Cherry-kernels, or of bitter Almonds, or of Scorpions; or
that of Citron-seeds, or Dock-seeds; or of chemical Oils given by drops with
others, as that of Turpentine, or the fat Liquors of Calcanthium, or Vitriol
called Spirit of Vitriol.

Or this compounded: Take Juniper Berries four ounces, bark of the Roots of Ash
three ounces, beat them, add Turpentine two ounces, Honey an ounce, steep them
and ad Water, and so distill an Oil: Give six or seven drops with any convenient
Liquor.

Some Simples are good taken in substance, Raddish and Salt in Sallets,
Horse-raddish beaten with sweet Almonds, Roots of Lovage boiled or raw eaten in
a good quantity before bathing. Roots of Fennel, Parsley, tops of Sparagus,
Hops, Coleworts, Purslane, wild Parsley and Watercresses in Sallets,
Sea-fennel pickled called Samphire; also Lemmons, Raisons, Figs or kernels of
Peaches, bitter Almonds, Cherries eaten with sugar, or made into Comfits. Also
the Fruit of sweet Briar called Hepps, Hares flesh, especially the kidneys, or
Sparrows or Wag-tayls roasted, or Goats blood boiled or five or six ounces of
Fox blood, with wine and sugar which is highly commended.

Some Simples of a Rosin quality pierce and cleanse the Reins, and make the
Urin sweet as a Violet, and expel the stone and gravel in time of the fit, by
provoking Urin, as the best Turpentine alone not washed two drams and half in a
Wafer, or with Liquorish, Powder or Sugar; and it is better dissolved with the
Yolk of an Eg, and given with convenient Liquor; or boiled till it may be
poudered, two drams.

There are many other Simples for the same given in Powder, in Wine, or the
Waters mentioned, as Dittany-roots, Bays, Knotgrass, Rupturewort, Buphleurus
called the Hares-ears, the seeds of Paliurus, Gromwel, Broom, Xanthium,
Winter-cherries and Ivy-berries.

And powder of Goats blood thus prepared. Take the blood of a young Goat fed
with Herbs good against the stone, neither that which comes first or last, but
in the middle of the bleeding, preserve it from putrefaction by a gentle fire,
or by the sun, and give a dram in powder with Wine. The blood of a Hare is as
good.

Or the ashes of a whole Hare-skin, and all a spoonful in Wine

Or the ashes of a Wag-tayl.

Or these stronger Pouders of scorpions, sows or hoglice, powder of Earthworms
or ashes, which are very strong, and must be given warily, and in a small
quantity; or of Grass-hoppers, Beetles, powder or rather ashes of
Spanish-flies, or of those Hog-lice or sows called Onisci, which Hartman so
commends in his Practice of Chemistry.

Or the fine powder of Lapis Judaicus, or half a dram of Lapis prunellae, with
the thin water of Vitriol, given twice a week in the morning. This is a great
secret among some.

Besides these, there are many Pouders and Electuaries and Pills, made of Roots
of white Saxifrage, Burnet, Saxifrage, Dropwort, Restharrow, Valerian,
Horse-raddish, Madder, Nettles, Lovage, Fennel, Parsley, Grass, Kneeholm,
Sparagus, Bramble, Asarabacca, sea-onyons, Orris, Elicampane, Birthwort, Piony,
Dancasonium, Horse-dock, Acorn-shells, middle Rinds of Hazel, the saxifrage of
Dioscorides (called Serpillum by Dodon) the Capillars, Celticknard, Bay and
Colewort-leaves, Feaverfew, Ground Ivy, Pennyroyal, Organ, Polymontain,
Calamints, Hysop, Southernwood, Germander, Bettony, Pauls-bettony, Groundpine,
Leaves of Oak and Willow, Scordium and Empetrum, the Flowers of Royal Comphrey,
Chamomil, seeds of Fennel, Anise, Caraway, Cummin, Smallage, Dill, Carrot,
Sesely, Parsley, Lovage, siler-mountain, Amcos, Parsley-pert, Coriander,
Asparagus, Kneeholm, Basil, Raddish, St. Johs-wort, white Thorn, Nettle,
Ash-keyes, Gith, Watercresses, Burnet, Saxifrage, Lupins, Vetches, Bay and
Juniper Berries, Medlar-stones, Peach and Cherry-kernels, sweet Almonds, red
Pease, the sponge in the sweet Bryar, Cherry-tree and Plum-tree, Gum, Gum of
the Walnut-tree, Vine, Gum Arabic Traganth, Elemi, Olibanum, Bdellium and
Amber. Also the ashes an an Hedghog, Swallow, Asses-liver, Doves-feathers, and
pouders of a Hares-kidneys, Mans-skull, Horsehoof, Astragalus or Hare, Ivory,
Picks or pickerel Jaws of Crayfish and Snails shells; or of Eg shells hatched;
or of stones in Cray-fish, Crabs, spunges; or of stones taken from men,
commended by Paracelsus, and Oil of them taught by Hartman: Also powder of
Mouse dung. And of Lynx stone, Ocher the third Alcyon of Dioscorides, and ashes
of Glass. To which we add things to enlarge the passages, as Liquorish,
Marshmallows, Venus-navel, Violets, seeds of Mallows, Cotton, Marshmallows,
Foenugreek, Linseed, the four great cold Seeds, sweet Almonds, Pistakes ashes
of Nuts and Gourds. And things that help concoction, and expel wind and
obstructions, and spices that expel the stone, and make the Medicines pleasant;
as Ginger, Galangal, Calamus, cypress, cinnamon, Wood-cassia, Wood-aloes, red
Sanders, Nutmeg, Mace, cloves, Pepper, carpobalsom, cubebs, spike, schaenanth,
saffron.

Give of these mixed a dram or two, with Wine, Water, Lie, Decoctions or
Infusions; or with sugar make gross Pouders or Lozenges, with Gum Traganth, or
with Honey or Syrup make Electuaries, with other conserves or candyes, given
from two to three drams. Or if they be unpleasant make Pills with Turpentine,
and give a dram, and after them give a convenient Draught of proper Liquor to
help their working. Examples of Pouders, Pills and Electuaries, are these.

The first powder: Take dried Coleworts a dram, Oakleaves dried and Acorn
peels, each half a dram; Pepper and Ginger, each a scruple; make a powder, give
a dram or a dram and half.

A second: Take Peach kernels parched half an ounce, Melon seeds two drams,
Fennel seed a dram: Give it with Parsley-broath.

A third: Take Gromwel seed and Winter-cherries, each a dram; Parsley seed half
a dram: Give it in five ounces of Lemmon-water.

A fourth: Take Broom seeds half a dram, Amber two scruples, Sugar candy a
dram: Give it with Wine.

A fifth powder: Take stones of Medlars a dram, Pickrel-jaws half a dram,
Lovage seed a scruple: Give it as the other.

The sixth: Take Crab's-eyes and Astragalus, each half a dram; Broom and Basil
seed, each a scruple: Give it at once.

A seventh: Take of the stones that have been voided by the same Patient or
others, and Lapis judaicus equal parts, make a fine powder: Give it with
Hydromel or Water of Sea-fennel.

The eighth: Take the ashes of a Wag-taile or Hare a dram, Eg-shels hatched two
scruples, with Sugar and Cinnamon, make a Powder.

The ninth: Take boiled Turpentine half a dram, Powder of Earth worms a
scruple, burnt Hearts horn two scruples, Lapis Iudaicus a scruple, Gum Traganth
half a scruple.

The tenth: Take Goats blood prepared a dram, Jews stone half a dram, Ashes of
Earth worms a scruple give it as the other.

The eleventh: Take Goats blood prepared or ashes of a Hare two drams, or of
each a dram; the Sponge stone and Jews stone, each a dram and an half; Fennel,
Parsley, Annis seeds, Gromwel seeds, Medlar stones, each a dram; watercress
seeds half a dram, Mellon seeds a dram, Liquorish half an ounce, Roots of
Burnet, Saxifrage half a dram, Cinnamon a scruple, sugar two ounces make a
powder, give a spoonful or two; drink after it some convenient Liquor.

The twelfth: Take Liquorish three drams, Rest-harrow, Dittany, Bays,
Hors-radish, Burnet, Saxifrage and white Saxifrage, of each two drams: Asarum,
Orris roots, each a dram; Dodons, Saxifrage called Serpillum, Maidenhair,
Bupleurus, Rupturewort, Pennyroyal, each a dram and an half; Fennel, Seseli,
Parsley, Lovege seed, Sea fennel, Radish Basil seed, of each two drams;
Watercress and Gith seed, each a dram; Medlarstones a dram and an half: Peach
kernels two drams, Plum tree Gum two drams, Crabs Eyes, Pickrel jaws,
Egg-shels, Wolves Liver prepared, each a dram; Jews stone and Sponge stone,
each a dram and an half; Oker and burnt Glass, of each half a dram: give it as
the former.

A thirteenth excellent Powder: Take Mouse dung five or seven, Olibanum a
scruple, Fennel seed half a dram, Cinnamon a scruple.

A fourteenth stronger: Take one Grass hopper of half a scruple, Crabs eyes two
scruple, Cinnamon a scruple, give it with the Decoction of Juniper berries.

The fifteenth yet stronger: Take dried Spanish flies four, Spung stone two
scruples, Melon seeds a dram and an half, Sugar candy a dram, give it with the
Decoction of Lineseed or Whey.

The great Electuaries of Nicolas, Lithontribon, Ducis or Justinus: are made of
these, and that of Arnoldus de Villa Nova; and that called Nephrocathartike and
Philanthropos, and the Diuretic of Baptista and Montagnaria.

There is also an Electuary called the Queens Electuary, which has Senna and
Turbith in it.

And a red Powder make thus: Take red Sanders and Cinnamon, each an ounce;
Annis, Fennel, Parsley, Gronwel, Creta of the Sea, Winter-cherries, Melon
seeds, of each two drams; Sponge and Jews stone and Lynx stone, each a dram;
blood of a Goat prepared half a dram.

The Electuary of Ashes, by Avicen is prepared for the stone. Thus: Ashes of
Glass, Sponge and Jews stone, Scorpions, Hare, Egg-shels, Powder of Goats
blood, Ashes of Coleworts, Calamus, Pennyroyal, Parsley seed, Carrot,
Marsh-mallow seeds, Pepper, Wallnut tree, Gum and Gum Arabic made into Powder
and with Honey into an Electuary.

This has been often used by me with good success: Take Liquorish, Bay roots,
of each two drams; Rest harrow roots a dram, Winter-cherries, Paliurus seeds,
Gromwell, of each two drams; Smallage, Parsley and Fennel seed, each a dram;
Watercresses half a dram, Gum of Cherry or Plum tree and Amber, each a dram;
make a Powder, with Cinnamon and a little Sanders: and to mitigate pain,
Henbane seeds a dram and an half, give a dram with sugar or make Lozenges, or
an Electuary, or Pills, with syrup that is proper, with Peach kernels and juice
of Liquorish, instead of Liquorish.

With Conserves, you may mix them thus: Take Conserve of smallage roots or
Orris an ounce, Conserve of Broom flowers and Maidenbair, each half an ounce.
The tenth, twelfth or thirteenth Powder. Or the Electuary Ducis, Justinus or
Lithantribon a dram and an half. Or if you will have it stronger, the
fourteenth Powder and juice of Liquorish, each a dram; with syrups aforesaid:
make an Electuary.

Agarick is sometimes added: Take Agarick a dram, Pellitory of Spain two drams,
roots of Dropwort a dram, Gromwel seeds half a dram, Madder half an ounce,
conserve of Maiden hair half an ounce, with Honey of Violets: make an Electuary.

Convenient Pills: Take seeds of Paliurus, Gromwell, Winter Cherries, each a
dram; Saxifrage seed and Sea fennel, each half a dram; Mallow seeds two
scruples, juice of Liquorish a scruple, Gum of Cherry and Plum tree, each half
a dram; Bdellium a scruple, Goats blood prepared a dram, ashes of Scorpions, or
Mouse heads, Earthworms, Hog lice or Sows, each half a dram; with Turpentine,
make Pills, give a dram.

F^^ pain, give Anodynes with the former.

An Emulsion: Take Peach kernels four ounces, Melon or Gourd seeds half an
ounce, white Poppy seeds two drams, beat them, and with half a pint of
Pellitory or Mallow water, make an Emulsion with Sugar or Honey, give four
ounces.

A powder again pain: Take white Poppy tops two drams, Henbane seeds a dram and
an half, the four great cold seeds and Mallow seeds, each a dram; Gromwel seeds
and Winter Cherries and Broom seeds, each half a dram; Liquorish two drams,
Restharrow roots a dram, sugar two ounces.

It is good in pains to add white poppy seeds or Henbane seeds, as I showed in
my powder.

Or to give Opiats, as Asyncriton, Philonium, Romanum, with pouders against the
stone, or others mentioned in the Colic.

And Narcoticks may be given with purgers: As, Take Asyncriton or Philonium
Romanum two scruples or a dram, Diaphaenicon a dram and a half or species
Benedicta a dram and an half or six grains of Diagredium with sugar make a
Bolus.

Or thus: Take senna half an ounce, Carthamus seeds two drams, Liquorish,
parsley roots, each half an ounce; white poppy seeds two drams, Mallows and
Lineseed, each a dram; boil them and dissolve Asyncriton or philonium a dram,
Mithridate two drams, or half an ounce of syrup of poppies.

Or these pills: Take species Laxativum two scruples, Opium prepared and
dissolved in sack two grains, Storax, saffron, Castor, each three grains; Oil
of sweet fennel seeds a drop with Turpentine, make pills.

We give Anodynes in Clysters also, as in the Colic.

And outward things to remove the stone, by dilating the passages.

Sitting in a moist and hot Bath takes away pain, if up to the Armeholes, in a
Vessel made on purpose called Lumbrorium.

In time of necessity, hot water alone will do well and better then potential
heat, to take away pain, though things potentially hot, may be added to help
the Decoction, and which loosen, expel wind, open and move the stone, such as
Clysters were made of.

Or these, a Decoction of Mallows and parsley and Chamomil flowers in a
straight Vessel, the less will serve.

Or adding Lilly roots pellitory and Violets.

Or a Decoction of Coleworts, Spinach, Arrage or Turnips, or Parsneps, or
Scirroots, and Horseradish, which is best.

Or of Marsh-mallowroots, opening Roots, and all three pugils, Foenugreek and
Linseed a pugil, Smallage, Parsley and Caraway seed an ounce.

We add to the former some stronger things to expel the stone, which are
mentioned in Remedies taken inward, and may be used outwardly, to remove it as
some think.

Chiefly Madder roots, and sea-fennel, or Sisymbrium, Columbines, Dropwort,
Dovefoot, Bupleur, southernwood, Mugwort, Broom flowers, and of Verbascum,
Gromwel seeds and Winter-cherries, and the like.

For rich people we add Milk, Oil, Butter to loosen more, and Wine to make it
penetrate.

We make Fomentations (when baths cannot be used) of the Decoctions aforesaid,
with a sponge, stuphes or bags, with Wine and Oils.

Some use Embrochations or Infusions upon the pecten if the stone lodge there,
to remove it; they are made of the aforesaid Decoctions.

Also to bath in, and to drink of sharp Waters, is good against the stone, as
those of Sulphur.

After Bathing or Fomentation anoint the Reins, Privities and Perinaeum, to
take away pain, and open the passages warm, stroaking the Hand downward.

If there be heat of the Kidneys, this Ointment will open and cool. Take Oil of
Violets and Water Lillies, boil Marshmallows therem, fresh Butter, or Cream
and Goose grease, each half an ounce; with white wax make a Liniment.

A stronger Anodyne: Take Oil of sweet Almonds an ounce and half, Oil of
Chamomil, or Melilot, Dill and wallflowers, each half an ounce; Conies grease
six drams, Mucilage of Linseed or Fleabane an ounce, Saffron a scruple, with
wax make a Liniment.

Or anoint with the Ointment of Marshmallows, or that called Resumptive.

When we will drive along the stone: Take Oil of bitter Almonds an ounce, Oil
of Peach kernels half an ounce, Oil of Scorpions and Goose grease, each half an
ounce; Turpentine a dram, with wax make a Liniment.

With Juyces thus: Take juice of Pellitory and Marshmallows, each an ounce and
half; wine an ounce, white winevinegar half an ounce, Oil of wall-flowers and
Earthworms, each an ounce; Oil of Scorpions half an ounce, boil them to the
consumption of the Juyces, ad Goats grease six drams, and with wax make an
Ointment, or with Turpentine.

Another stronger: Take Oil of Lillies and bitter Almonds, each an ounce and
half; juice of sea-fennel, Horseraddish and white wine, each an ounce; boil
them and ad Grass-hoppers, or quick wood-lice, spanish-flies, scorpions dried
twelve, or more.

Or thus: Take Oil of bitter Almonds, of Peach, or Cherry-kernels two ounces,
Oil of scorpions, or burnt Grasshoppers half an ounce, with wax make an
Ointment.

A more compound Ointment. Take Oil of Chamomil, Dill, Lillies, each an ounce;
Oil of bitter Almonds an ounce and half, of scorpions an ounce, Goat and
Badgersgrease, each half an ounce; Mucilage of Foenugreeck seed an ounce,
Madder and Asarum roots, each a dram; watercresses, Raddish and Lovage seeds,
each half a dram; Myrrh a dram, ashes of Grass-hoppers, or Beetles two
scruples, ashes of Beech mast a dram, saffron half a scruple, Oil of Amber half
a scruple, with wax make an Ointment.

Trallianus commends the blood of a Goat newly killed to anoint.

This Cataplasm is good to the pained part. Take roasted Lilly roots half a
pound, of Pellitory of the wall heated upon the Tiles and bruised two handfuls,
and of Groundpine so prepared three drams, Marsh-mallow roots bruised two
ounces, Chamomil flowers and Dill tops, each a pugil; Flower of Foenugreek and
Linseed, each an ounce; boil them in milk, add fresh Butter two ounces, Oil of
Lillies and scorpions, each an ounce; saffron a scruple, make a Pultis.

Also the actual Heat of Bags made of dried simples, or Chaff of Milium is good
here, as in other pains.

Also Pillows, and Skins, or Furrs, Coney-wool, and Hares skins are the best.

Also some Stones tied about the Waist prevent the stone. Great folks by a
greenish stone like the Galactites. It is called the Nephritical Stone, because
it expels stones from the Kidneys, and also strengthens the Stomach.

It is good to apply a Cupping-glass, not upon the Kidneys, least it stir the
stone, and cause pain which is not great, till the stone gets into the Ureters,
and then apply the Cupping-glass still a little below the stone, and so remove
it downwards, beneath the place of the pain, till you have brought the stone
into the Bladder.

The same may be done by chasing with the Hand or with Clothes, and hot Oils
that loosen. Especially after so doing you use a Cupping-glass, always taking
heed that we go not too high with these things to the part pained, which will
increase pain.

Some rub the Legs in time of bathing.

Moderate motion also keeps the sand from stopping in the passages; and it is
good to stand upright, or to exercise a little to move it.

And if a stone from the Kidneys stick in the entrance of the Ureters, and
cause pain, it is good to lay the leg so high that the stone may get back by a
little motion, into the hollow of the Kidneys, this will soon take away pain.

Vomiting by its force in straining, does help to remove the stone, therefore
at the first if it come not Naturally provoke it, or provoke Neesing.

It is good in great pain, when the Patient is plethorick, to open a Vein in
the Foot on the same side, least it run to the Kidneys by reason of the pain,
and cause Inflammation, or when there is Inflammation.

The pricking pain which is vulgarly called the Spleen, The cure of the
pricking pain, called the spleen but falsely.
though it be sharp, yet because it comes from a cause that lasts not long,
as attraction of the Muscles and Wind, it goes away of it self, otherwise it
must be cured.

If it come often or from little motion, rest preventeth it, and gentle Motion,
and good Diet, not windy, but such as expels wind, and by keeping the side
very warm. And if the Party must exercise or ride, let him not do it upon a
full stomach, and then bind himself about the waist with a Swathband.

When this pricking pain comes, also it is good to bind, with a Rouler as in a
windy Cramp, of which this is a sort, and by so doing the Muscles will be drawn
into their place, and the pain removed by expelling the wind.

If after rest and binding, or rouling, the pain yet remain, you must use the
same way of cure; as was showed in the Cure of a windy Pleurisy.

First, use outward things that are hot actually and potentially that expel
wind, and take away pain, as Fomentations, Bags, Ointments, Plasters and Baths
dry and sweating, such as are described in the windy Pleurisy, and other
outward Diseases from wind.

If for all these the pain abare not, you must use diverters and Derivers, as
Clysters and Cupping-glasses. And (as is there showed) if the Body be foul, you
must purge, provoke Sweat, and give Alterers, which by a hidden quality take
away pricking-pain.

CHAP. XIII. Of Pain of the Belly.
The Kinds.
WE call that the Pain of the Belly which is before, where it is soft and
covered with no bones; for we shall speak of other Pains in the parts adjacent,
that are in Pissing and going to Stool, hereafter. These in the Belly are first
distinguished by their Seats, for some are in the Abdomen or Panch about the
Navel; others below the Navel, or above the Pecten, or reach to the Hips and
Loins.

There are pains often about the Navel. Colic and Iliack-pain.
These are distinguished by Physicians according to the Gut affected, as we
shall show in the Causes, and one is called the Colic, another the
Iliack-pain. These are the Symptoms.

The great pains are called Torments they are sometimes about the Navel,
Torments.
above or below, or on each side; sometimes they move with heat burning, and
sometimes cold; sometimes they are fixed under the Navel chiefly, and do as it
were bore a hole through, but not in the Back, Groins as the Nephritick pains
of the stone, or in the Hips, as those of the Womb.

There is also Rumbling of the Guts to and fro to be heard and felt.

Also the belly is bound, and sometimes there is an endeavor to belch or fart,
but in vain. And if not, or a Looseness follow, the Disease is cured. Sometimes
there follows a purging of matter but not of blood, as in a Dysentery. In one
sort of this Disease the urin is stopped.

There is also Loathing and Heart-ach called Cardialgia, and Vomiting of Phlegm
or Choler, sometimes of the Excrements which is grievous. this Disease is called
Iliacus from the Gut Ilion, Miserere mei, is a sort of Iliackpain.
or from the Greek Eleos or Eleenos, because it deserves pity, and therefore
called in Latin miserere mei.

There is sometimes also a Fever going before or coming after, or joined with
it.

Sometimes Convulsions and Palsies follow unknown to the Ancients. They are
general or in some particular parts, as we showed in the Hindrance of Motion.

Also there is a vehement pain below about the Pecten. A straining pain about
the Bladder.
Sometimes stretching with stoppage of Urin; of which we there spoke. Sometimes
burning with pricking and tearing, A hot pain about the Bladder.
with redness and tumor outwardly, this is called the Inflammation of the
Bladder; and then the belly is bound, and Urin stopped, and a Fever with its
accidents, and Dotage also sometimes. After which follows pissing of matter, or
hardness of the part.

There is another pain below that reaches to the Hips and Loins, Pain of the
womb.
mentioned in the Hypochondriack pain, called the Pain of the Womb; and it is
twofold. Either it is stretching in the Belly and Sides, usually in Women
before their Courses break, or when they are stopped: And it is like the
Colic, so that many times it is taken for it at the first. And it has many
sad accidents that follow in women, as we showed in Suffocation of the Womb.

There is also a pain of the womb in women with child chiefly in the Groyns,
like that of the Hips, only it is felt before and not behind, when the Leg is
moved.

There is another pain of the womb in women not in travel, The pain after
Childbearing is a kind of womb-pain.
but after childbearing, not in the Privities, but in the bottom of the Belly,
stretching it some hours or days, this is called the after birth-pain.

There is another burning, pricking, A pain after Child-pain, with Inflammation.
stretching, beating and tearing pain, called the Inflammation of the Womb
before and after Childbearing, it is like that of the Bladder inflamed, only
it extends larger, with outward redness and tumor, binding of the Belly, and
stoppage of Urin, and a Fever, which leaves behind it a sharp pricking pain,
with voiding of matter by the neck of the womb; and hardness sometimes, and
Fainting, and other Hysterical accidents: As we showed in other places.

The Causes.
The Diseases of the Nervous bowels in the Cavity of the Abdomen, cause these
pains, that is of the Guts, Bladder and Womb in Women.

The Guts fill almost the whole Belly, The cause of the pain of the Belly from
the Guts.
and they being very sensible, the pain is great. They are thick or thin Guts,
and the pain is distinguished according to the Gut. That which is in the thick
Guts which come from the Colon, is called the Colic, that in the Skin is
called Iliack. And because the thin Guts are most about the Navel, the Iliack
pain is more there. But because the thick Guts are placed about them, and reach
from the right side to the left, as high as the Hearts lodge, down to the
Fundament, the Colic is chiefly in them. The Diseases of the Guts that cause
these pains are stretching or cold, or flegmon Tumor, or burning, or disorder
of the Guts, from their place.

Too much stretching of the Guts, Stretching of the Guts causes pain of the
belly.
especially with irritation, causes pain; this comes from excrements and wind,
when they fill too much, or stop, and cannot pass.

Sometimes excrements and wind are in great measure carried to the Guts, which
fill and stretch, Plenty of Excrements and wind in the Guts, causes pain.
and cause pain; but if the passages are open it lasts not, but goes away
with rumbling, farting, belching or purging. This pain follows eating of raw
Fruits, Crudities and taking of a Purge before it works. And it is worse when
there is Choler, or other sharp Humors; as we shall show in Diarrhaea.

Sometimes the excrements and wind stop in the guts, and cause pain, which is
fixed sometimes in the part stopped. Or else wandereth and is most where the
Excrements and wind are most.

This pain is often in the thick Guts, Excrements and wind stopping in the
windings of the Colon, cause the Colic.
which are full of thick Excrements and wind, as in the great winding of the
Colon on the left side in the beginning of the straight Gut, when the Excrements
stay in the crooked passage, and when they labor to get out the part seems to
be bored or peirced, and there is a Tumor to be felt and the pain decreaseth
when the Excrements go back, and increases when they return. This stoppage is
from Excrements, which suddenly stop this crooked passage: or from dryness,
hardness or toughness or slyminess of the same; which will not let them rise
up, as we showed in the causes of binding of the Belly.

Also in the Cells or hollows on the sides of the Colon that swel forth like a
half circle, Excrements retained inthe cells of the Colon cause the Colic.
when the Excrements are hardened and dried therein, they cause pain not only by
weight and stretching, but by stopping and hindering the others from coming
forth; Especially if they have lien long. Also other hard bodies may do the
same, if they get in, as stones of fruit or Chestnuts eaten (which have caused
the Colic to my knowledge) with other hard meats, and binding of the Belly
also. Also little bones taken from Hens Feet boiled, in one that eat many for a
Diet, stuck long in the Guts of a Woman and caused the Colic, and after a
Clyster, she voided abundance of them and was cured. Also I knew one that had
the Colic from eating much Cheese, and voided it by Clysters, and also Mites
or Cheese worms by Urin. Also Fernelius says that he has found by dissection,
that the colon has been almost closed up with phlegm (if it were not some other
Excrescens) and caused the Colic. And he writes that in a certain Ambassador
there was a hard body bored through, in the passage of the Colon under the
stomach, as appeared by the Tumor, which caused the Colic, which after six
years he voided, being a foot long, and then was cured. This may come also from
stones that breed in the Guts, which the same Fernelius says he has seen as
big as Wall-Nuts or Chestnuts, and voided by stool. I once saw one Lump like a
stone, so voided.

When the passage of the Excrements is stopped in the small Guts, The Cause of
the Iliack passion, is the stoppage of the small Guts.
it causes the Iliack pain, and this is rather in the straight passage over
against the right Kidney, where they join to the thick Guts then any where
else. Then there is that grievous pain called the Colic vulgarly, both in the
right side, from the stoppage, and in the small Guts about the Navel, from the
Excrements, and there is Costiveness, till Medicines take it away, and it so
continues till the obstruction is quite removed. And if the Excrements
retained are Choleric, or Evil, or Corrupt by long tarrying, and grown sharp,
or malignant, the Guts will be twiched and the pain the greater. And although
they somewhat provoke nature to void them by their sharpness, yet because they
cannot be carried to the thick Guts, while the obstruction lasts, the Belly
continues bound, but if the obstruction did not hinder them they being many,
would cause a Diarrhaea or the Disease of Choler, or by sticking to the Guts a
Dysentery rather then that Iliake passion, with costiveness. This they cannot
do in the small Guts, being shut up there, but they cause cruel pains, till the
obstruction is removed. And from this choler long detained, come other great
accidents as Jaundies, Fevers, and sometimes a Convulsion, from consent of the
Nerves and the like (as we showed) It hapens also from the total stoppage of
the straight passage of the Gut, or from neglect, or from its stubbornness that
will not yield to Medicines, that the Excrements are so gathered, that they
return back to the stomach, and are vomited up with much detestation. Hence is
the Disease called Ileus or Misereremei.

The cause of this obstruction, whether it be easy or hard to be opened, may
be hard tough Excrements; And a natural narrowness of the passage or a
continual use of hot things, which dry the Guts and make them narrow there: Or
hard meats, or hard bodies that breed there, as we showed. As Fernelius shows
that a Maid that had taken a Medicine of Quinces was stopped found in the small
Guts that they break.

If the small Guts are rolled together in any other passages, Rolling together
or tangling of the Guts causes Convolvulus.
so that the passage is stopped, then the Excrements stop and the Wind, and
heaped together do stretch the Guts, and cause the Iliack pain called
Convolvulus, in which when it is not far from the Duodenum, they vomit their
Excrements, and there is a wandering pain with rumbling about the Navil. The
cause of this is Inflammation or wind when alone, or with other Excrements it
fills the small Guts, so that they are like puddings stretched and twisted, as we
have seen. This can scarce be from wind alone, except there be obstructions
from the causes mentioned, which hinder its passage, whereby the Guts are
filled and twisted. Also the rolling or tying of the Guts, especially the small
from over exercise or from a fall upon the Belly, when the Stomach and Guts are
full of Meat and Excrements, if it be not carefully cured, will cause a deadly
Convolvulus: as it did in a Cousin of mine, who leaping over a Ditch, fell with
his Belly against the further bank, and the second day after vomited his
Excrements and dyed. In whose Body I sound the small Guts tied in knots, and
stretched with wind upwards, but empty beneath, when the Guts were put into
their places, the wind broak forth by great farts. Another twisting may be from
the failing of the small Guts out the Cavity of the Peritoneum into the Cods in
a Rupture, when they stay long there and cannot be put up. The same Symptoms
follow, only the pain is then in the Groyn, where the Peritonaeum or Caul is
broken As shall be showed in Ruptures.

Great cold in the Guts causes torments, as in the Stomach. Refrigeration of
the Guts causes pain.
Either from outward cold, or from things taken in actually too cold, for the
Stomach and Guts joining to it, and colon that is adjacent. Also Clysters too
cold, actually or potentionally, may cause the same. The same may come from
cold wind that comes from cold drink or crudities, which may cause pain by
stretching, also if they be many. Also from a cold and crude humor, from sharp
meats or fruits.

Although phlegm be counted the chief cause of pain, yet it must be only that
which is cold, as that called Glassie phlegm, which being bred in the Guts, is
very cold pierces and knaws, other kinds of phlegm can cause no great pain,
either with their quantity or quality.

Inflammation of the Ileon, Inflammation of the Colon causes the Colic.
or in the small Guts, causes the Iliake pain, in the Colic or straight Gut
the Colic. And there is a fixed, inflamed, stretching, beating pain, inwardly
in the part with a Fever and other accidents of Inflammation, with
Costiveness, though when the thick Guts are afflicted, The Inflammation of the
thin Guts causes Convolvulus.
there is a vain Needing If the small Guts are inflamed and the tumor is great,
then by reason of their rolling together, because nothing can pass, the
Excrements are vomited, this is the usual cause of Convolvulus, in which Tumor
I have observed a little blewness. And if the Inflammation, Imposthume and
break, matter is voided.

The cause of this Inflammation is blood sent from the Meseraicks into the
substance of the Guts, by reason of its plenty or thinness, or by reason of
great pain or other hurt, wound or bruise.

Besides the flegmon or Inflammaon of the Guts, A burning from choler in the
Guts, causes the Iliack passion.
there may be a burning in the small Guts causing the Iliack rather then Colic
(though it be commonly so called) which is violent long and has bad Symptoms,
when the choler is not in the space within, but in substance of the Guts, as I
know by long observation and certain signs. And it infects them and corrodeth
and burns, as we showed might be in the stomach and have found upon
dissection, by a yellow spot after death both in the Stomach and Guts. This is
the cause that the choler stays so long and so fast, and brings such lasting
pains, that return, when they are abated and they are worse, when the choler
is worse, and is so hot and so much that it causes Erysipelas. Hence come
grievous accidents, because the Guts are very sensible, being Nervous, and the
other Nerves suffer therewith, especially when the choler gets to the Backbone
and Marrow, where the Guts grow to it by the Mesenterie (as Fernelius says he
found it also Convulsions and Palsies, that may come from Choler and evil
Humors in the Guts obstructed. From whence, as we may gather, that Choler is
the cause, so may we conclude it from other signs of choler in the Urin and the
like. And this Choler sticking fast to the Guts, cannot so soon get down, as
that which is there from obstruction, and causes a looseness, as it does when
it gets into the lower parts. Therefore in this case, and in the former from
obstruction, though it come from Choler, the Body is not open, as in other
Diseases, but bound.

This Choler sometimes coming from the Gall, as it may offend the substance of
the Stomach, as I shewtd, so it may also offend the neighbor Guts, to which it
is naturally carried. It comes often from evil chyle or two much juice, and is
mixed with the blood in the Meseraicks, being not sufficiently purged in the
Gall, by reason of the great quantity and obstructions: when it is carried with
the blood to the Guts, through the Meseraicks and Guts into the substance of
them, as an Erysipelas. This being gathered and retained in the Meseraicks,
causes diverse diseases, and especially fevers (as we showed) and being sent
by nature to the Guts, except it be carried away by a Looseness or Diarrhaea
through the mouths of the Vessels (which is usual) or by the bleeding of the
Haemorrhoids; causes great pains by infecting of the Guts. These pains are
joined with other Diseases, when the Choler is in the Veins; as Iliake passions
and other Diseases of Choler and Fevers; as I showed, in intermitting Fevers.

The Bladder lying in the lower part of the Belly before, causes pain there,
The cause of the pain of the Belly, about the Bladder, is from the Bladder.
especially when it is full and stretched forth. We shall speak of the Diseases
of the Neck of the bladder elsewhere, For they cause pain in pissing. The
Diseases that cause pain in the Bladder, are either distention that is
stretching or Inflammation of the same.

The Urin is the chief cause of stretching of the Bladder, The cause of the
destending pain of the Bladder is the stretching thereof.
which when it is in great quantity retained, causes a pain in the lower part
of the Belly, with a swelling and stoppage of Urin, of which we speak in
suppression of Urin. This cannot come from wind, because it cannot get into the
Bladder, though it may be bred there by the crudity of Urin long retained and
cause a greater stretching. This Wind and Urin is seldom separated, for the
frothing of Urin, when it is rendered or made, comes rather from the external
Air, then any internal wind. This stretching cannot be from the stone, because
it cannot grow so big, neither does a stone cause pain in the Bladder, till it
gets into the Neck thereof. And then because it hinders pissing, we shall
speak thereof in the Chapter of painful pissing.

If the Bladder be inflamed in the substance of it, The Inflammation of the
Bladder, is the cause of the burning pain thereof.
it causes a pain in the Privities, with redness and tumor, also when the
Bladder is wrapped in the Caul, and the tumor is greater, when the Excrements
and Urin want passage. This Inflammation sometimes turns to an Imposthume, and
then for the time, the pain is yet greater, and when that is broken there is an
Ulcer, and painful pissing of matter. Also this Inflammation may leave a
Scirrhus, such a one as I saw gtowing very large, in the Bladder of a Cow, that
was broken by accident, and cured again. Also this Inflammation, if it be not
well cured, turns to a Gangraene. And I once saw a Bladder black within, when I
opened a dead Friar.

Some external accident, may cause this Inflammation of the Bladder, or pain
from the stone, or an Ulcer to which Diseases an Inflammation is sometimes
joined of the Bladder and Kidneys also, when the body is Plethorick and fit to
receive it.

Because the Womb is in the same lower part of the Belly, The cause of pain in
the Womb and the Vessels thereof.
and lies under the Bladder, and the bottom thereof, especially being
stretched, reaches into the Belly, the pains are alike in both. And because
the Ligaments of the Womb, by which it hangs, reach to the Hips and Loins,
they are pained also; and of them we shall here speak, but we have treated of
the pains of the Neck of the Womb in its place. But all the pains of the Womb
(in the bottom or Body or Ligaments thereof, some whereof reach to the Neck, as
in the Bladder) come from stretching or from Inflammation.

The stretching pain in the bottom of the womb, The stretching of the bottom of
the womb, causes the pain after Childbearing.
comes chiefly from outward Cold taken in after Childbearing, while the inward
Orifice of the womb is large and open, for want of keeping warm, by which means
the Air gets in, and fills and stretches and weakneth it, and by cooling
causes pain. This is called the pain after Childbearing. At another time this
pain cannot come from taking in of Air, because before Conception, the womb is
small and thick, and the cavity which is to be filled with Seed in time of
Conception is very straight, and after conception also, when it grows bigger
with the Child, the inward Orifice is close shut, and the womb full. Nor from
wind bred in the Body, because if it get into the straight cavity of the womb
or breed there, it cannot so stretch the womb to cause pain, because it is very
thick. Neither can water cause pain for the same reasons. Though some suppose
that the womb may be like a bladder enlarged, and have an Inflammation from
wind and water, as they call it. For though the womb be larger in some women by
Nature, or by much moisture which loosneth it, yet it cannot be so filled and
stretched that pain may follow. And if the repletion be great, there will be
rather a weight and heaviness then a pain, as it is when the Child is great,
but the weight of the Child by stretching the Ligaments may cause a kind of
pain, but it is in the Groins, and not in the Loins as we showed. So then there
is no other stretching pain of the womb but what is after Childbearing, The
stretching of the vessels, is the usual cause of pain in the womb.
caused either from the substance of it, or from the Membranes and Vessels, by
which it hangs, but from Humors retained, and then it may reach to the sides
(as we showed in Hypochondriack pains) as when the courses are stopped, or
disordered or foul. This foulness comes from foul blood and humors in women of
evil habit, that want their Courses; which do so fill, stretch or provoke the
part they that cause pain, especially when they are hot, and send up Vapors,
and produce other Accidents, especially the suffocation of the womb, as we
there showed.

The Inflammation of the bottom of the womb and neck also, The Inflammation of
the bottom of the womb, causes the burning pain thereof.
causes pain with diverse accidents, as we showed: This as that of the Bladder
may leave an Imposthume, Ulcer, Scirrhus or Gangraen. And the cause external
may be a Stroke or Bruise, or internal, abundance of blood about the womb, upon
stoppage of the Terms, when they flow not into the neck, but into the substance
of the womb, and cause Inflammation according to the diversity of the blood.
The Cancer of the womb.
And if the quality thereof be malignant it may cause a Cancer, which shall be
mentioned in Diseases of the Neck of the Womb, because it is commonly in that
part. The womb is chiefly inflamed from difficulty of Deliverance, The
Inflammation of the womb after Childbearing causes the second sort of pain
after childbearing.
great pain and straining, either while the child or after birth remain, or
after they are gone, which causes a Fever. And this Inflammation is rather
the cause of many women's death, then the retention of the after-burden, and the
pain they have, comes from the Inflammation as well as from the Air that gets
into it, and is then greater and more dangerous.

The Cure.
The Cure is different according to the part affected, and the variety of
Causes, as the Bowels are stretched, cooled or inflamed by Blood or Choler. And
is to be applied to the stretching or Inflammation of the bladder or womb.

The stretching of the Bowels from what cause soever, The cure of the Colic
and pain of the womb and Convolvulus, from stretching or cold.
if it cause the Coeliack and Iliack pain, must be cured the same way, as also
when it comes of Cold. And if it come from the abundance of excrements and
wind, with pain and rumbling; if they come forth as they use to do, by Fasting,
Belching or a Flux, you must take the same course as in Diarrhaea.

If these Excrements cause a stoppage in the thick Guts, and so by stretching
the Colic, it is easier cured then in the small Guts, especially when they are
evil, and increase continually, for then Iliack passion which is so deadly, and
hard to be cured, will return and cause Convulsions and Palsies, and the like,
which though the pain cease, destroy the Patient. And if the stoppage be so
hard that it cannot be opened, but the thin Guts are so full of Excrements,
that they are sent back into the Duodenum, then follows the deadly convolvulus,
or Spewing up of Excrements; or Iliack, or knots or tanglings of the Guts.

In all which cases (except when the Guts are knotted, or an Iliack pain from a
Rupture, for then you must rather look to the putting up the Gut, then to the
Iliack Passion) the cure is by softning the Excrements, cleansing and bringing
them forth, by loosning and expelling wind out of the belly, and by abating of
the pain. And if Humors be choleric, sharp or evil, they must be purged and
allayed, not with cold and sharp, but with temperate Medicines: And the pain
chiefly respected, with Narcoticks to prevent convulsions, and the like. If the
pain come from glassie Phlegm that cools the Guts, it must be purged and cut,
and the cooled parts warmed; which will cure a simple Distemper. These things
are done by the following means.

Clysters are the best in this case, because they go straight to the Guts, for
if the cause be in the thick guts, they go to them; and if in the thin, their
virtue reaches thither by continuation and vicinity. They are made of
Emollients to supple the hard Excrements, which cause pain by binding and
holding in of the wind, and purgers that cleanse strongly, when there is great
stoppage by glassie Phlegm in the Guts; also of warm things that expel wind, and
comfort the Guts. And when there is great pain, they are made of Anodynes, and
at length of Narcoticks. The quantity of these Clysters must be from a pint to
a pint and half, beginning with less at the first, while the Guts are small,
and so enlarging by degrees the Examples, whereof are these.

An emollient Clyster of a pint of Sallet-oyl and a little Butter or Grease,
may presently be made.

Or this which provokes a little. Take fat Broth of Tripes, or the like, and
boil therein Caraway seed, Bay or Juniper Berries a pugil, Butter or Oil three
ounces, Honey two ounces, with a little Salt make a Clyster.

Or thus; Take Mallows, Marsh-mallow roots and all, Spinach, Arach and
Brank-ursine, each a handful; Lilly-roots two ounces, Chamomil and Melilot
flowers, each a pugil^ boil them in fat Breath, add Butter or Oil three ounces,
Hogs grease an ounce, Honey two ounces, and a little Salt.

A stronger to expel wind also. Take Mallows, red Coleworts, Mercury, Beets,
Pellitory, each two handfuls; Pennyroyal or Organ a handful and half, Beet
roots two ounces, Liquorish an ounce, Chamomil and Elder flowers, each a pugil;
Bran a pugil, Foenugreek and Linseed, each an ounce; Caraway seeds half an
ounce, Cummin seeds two drams, Figs ten; boil them in Wine and Water, strain
and add Honey and brown Sugar, each an ounce; juice of Mercury or Beets an
ounce and half, Oil of Nuts three ounces, Turpentine dissolved with the Yolk of
an Eg half an ounce, with a little Salt make a Clyster.

It is stronger in Cock broth, with Senna and Carthamus seeds, each six drams;
Polypody two ounces, or Mechoacan, or Briony, or Sowbread roots six drams, with
Cummin-seed two drams, an ounce of Hiera piera, or Diacatholicon, or Benedicta,
or Diaphaenicon, Jndum majus, Elescoph half an ounce, or an ounce of the juice
of Sowbread.

When the Obstruction or Binding is great, or when the Phlegm is glassie and
tough, stronger may be used, but not otherwise, least they increase pain; as
three drams of Turbith or Agarick, and sometimes half a dram of Coloquintida in
a clout, warily, least it burn the Guts, or three drams of Hiera Colocynthidos,
Logadij, Rufi Hermetis.

The best cleansing Clysters against Phlegm, are made of Turpentine two ounces,
with the Yolk of an Egg, Honey and Wine, or Oil alone.

Or thus against wind: Take Boys urin six ounces, juice of Pellitory four
ounces, thick boiled Wine three ounces, Oil of Rue two ounces, with two Yolks
of Eggs and a little Salt, make a Clyster.

Some make Clysters of Spaw-waters to cleanse.

Strong Wine heals, expels wind and pain, as Hippocras and Claret a pint. If
you fear the Hear, you may allay it. And if you will make it hotter, add two
ounces of the Spirit of Wine.

Or thus to cleanse and abate pain. Take three quarters of a pint of the best
Wine, Oil of Chamomil, Dill or Butter four ounces, Honey two ounces. This
Clyster will set any purging Medicine a working; as we showed in Cardialgia.

Or give true Hydromel, with Wine boiled and Sugar, or Mead, which will heat
less, and cleanse more.

Or make a Clyster of Onion broth, and Oil.

Or this hot Clyster to expel wind. Take Lilly and Marsh-mallow roots, each two
ounces; Elicampane half an ounce, Bettony, Southernwood, Wormwood, Calamints,
Horehound, Rue, Organ, Pennyroyal, Balm and Hedg-mustard three handfuls,
Chamomil, Melilot, Rosemary, Lavender, Stoechas flowers, each two drams,
Foenugreek and Linseed, each an ounce; boil them in Wine and Water, add Honey
of Rosemary two ounces, Oil of Lillies and Sallet-oyl, each an ounce an half;
Hiera picra and Electuary of Bay Berries, each three drams; with Salt make a
Clyster.

In glassie Phlegm it will heat more, if you add Roots of Pellitory, Calamus or
Orris six drams, Centaury flowers a pugil, Gith seeds two drams, and an ounce
of Honey of Squills, with two ounces of Wine, and a dram of Castor which is
very comfortable to the Guts, or half a dram of Euphorhium, or Galbanum, or
Opopanax, but Musk, Ambergrease or Civet, will not change the stink of the
Excrements, and therefore are superfluous.

A special Clyster against wind. Take Organ, Rue, each a handful; tops of
Rosemary, Stoechas, Lavender, each a pugil; Chamomil flowers two pugils, Bay
and Juniper Berries, each an ounce; Caraway and Cummin seed, each half an
ounce; Fennel seed two drams, Ameos, Parsley, Sesely, Carot or Rue seed, each a
dram; boil them in wine and water, add three drams of the Electuary of
bay berries, Hiera picra two drams, Honey of Rosemary an ounce, Oil of Dill and
Nuts, each an ounce and half; with Salt, make a Clyster.

A pint of Oil of Rue, with two ounces of Sack is good.

An Anodyne mollifying Clyster: Take roots of Lillies and Marshmallows, each
two ounces; Mallow, Bettony, each a handful; Chamomil and Melilot flowers, each
a pugil; Faenugreek and Lineseed, each an ounce; Crumbs of Bread four ounces,
Caraway seed two drams, Aniseed a dram, boil them in Tripe broth or Milk, add
Butter two ounces, Oil of Dill an ounce and half, Goose grease an ounce, with
two Yolks of Eggs make a Clyster. Some say that Wolfes dung is good in Clysters
six drams.

Or Oil of Olives, Walnuts, Acorns, Almonds, Linseed, Jesamnie, or of Chamomil
or Dill, are good Anodynes in a good quantity, with the Mucilage of Foenugreek
and Linseed two ounces, two Eggs, and half a dram of Saffron.

To cleanse and abate pain: Take Honey, Sugar, boiled Wine two or three ounces
with Oil.

Or thus: Take Oil of Chamomil, or Dill and Barleycream, each half a pint;
Sugar or Honey, or boiled Wine two ounces.

Narcoticks are given safest by Clysters; as Henbane or Mandrake leaves, or two
drams of Philonium Romanum, or Requies Galeni, or Treacle and Mithridate, each
half an ounce. And as you give Narcoticks at the mouth with Purgers, so you may
add Philonium here to benedicta, and other purging Electuaries.

Six grains of Opium dissolved in Wine or Aqua vitae, is excellent in a Clyster
to take away pain.

Or half a scruple of Opium, half a dram of Castor, and a pint of Oil of Rue or
Dill.

Suppositories are good to provoke, alter and abate pain. Some give them to
expel wind, which they can hardly do.

The common are of Honey and Salt, adding Hiera, Mouse-dung, Coloquintida.

They say that a Snakes skin rubbed upon a brass Basin and burnt, is good to be
put into the Fundament against the colic.

And to anoint inwardly, with Juice of Lettice and Opium; or with an ounce of
Oil of Dill, a scruple and half Castor, and a scruple of Opium, put in with
wool, or any Suppository of Opium.

Purgers are useful, when Clysters are refused to remove the cause, and open
the Belly, when the cause is high, but beware of strong, which will increase
pain; they are good before clysters, to draw the Matter down, as I do in colicks.

Purging Wines are best for the Guts, when clysters are refused, for they fetch
the Excrements out of secret places, better then clysters. And I had rather use
them for the Wines sake, that corrects the Purgers, that they offend not the
Stomach and Guts: we give Examples of them in the pain of the Heart.

This is best for the Guts: Take Grass roots and Fennel roots, each six drams;
Roots of Calamus, Elicampane, Masterwort, each half an ounce; dried Citron
peels and wormwood, each three drams; Marjoram, Calamints, Pennyroyal,
Groundpine, Rosemary flowers, red Roses, Chamomil flowers, each two drams;
Bay Berries three drams, Caraway and Smallage seed, each two drams; Fennel seed
three drams, Senna two ounces, Agarick half an ounce, Turbith two drams (these
are corrected by the wine) bruise and slice them for four pints of wine or
more, give a Draught when the Belly is bound, of the Infusion or gentle
Decoction thereof.

This wine is good against Choler or sharp Humors. Take Succory roots an ounce,
wormwood half an ounce, Violets and bugloss flowers, each a pugil; Aniseeds and
Violetseeds, each two drams; Polypody an ounce and half, Senna an ounce,
Rhubarb two drams, Spike half a dram: Use it as the former.

Or make a Decoction or Syrup of the same.

The Broth of an old Cock with coleworts loosneth the Belly, with a little
caraway or Fennel seed against the wind.

Or thus: Take an old Cock after sighting, unbowel and stuff him with Mints,
Marjoram, Time, Savory, each two handfuls; Chamomil and Rosemary flowers a
pugil, Annis, Fennel and Caraway seeds, each half an ounce; Galangal or Calamus
three drams, Polypody, Mock-saffron, Senna, each an ounce; Tarter half an
ounce, with Sal Gem or common Salt, boil them in water to Halfes, as I showed
in Asthma, drink a good draught.

Or give Turpentine half an ounce, as in the stone, with Hiera Benedicta, or
the like.

Or Cassia with Annis, Fennel or Caraway seeds, to loosen.

Also these Electuaries, Catholicon, Diaphaenicon, Indum, Majus, Elescoph,
Hiera picra, or of eight or of fifteen things, Benedicta or the like, with a
Decoction of hot plants, with spiced wine.

Or gentle Pills of Hiera, of eight things, of Spices with half a scruple of
Castor or stronger, if the binding be great, bewaring of coloquintida or
Agarick or Turbith for they twitch the Guts, when given in substance.

Two scruples or three of Tartar cleanses phlegm, or cream of Tartar often
washed and dried again, as I use it, in the purging Decoctions of Senna, Bryony
roots, black Hellebor, or the like.

Or that purging Powder for the stone.

A Plaster of Sea sponge, seeds hulled and beaten with Wax, and laid to the
Belly loosneth it.

To prevent; the Humors must be prepared before purging and to cure also.

They must be such as cut phlegm, when it is cold and tough, as that with
Glasses, as we showed in Heart-ach, by Syrups, Waters, Decoctions.

Sometimes a Vomit prevents the Colic, and is good at the first, and in the
Iliake, Choler-Vomiting, must not be stopped.

Oil of Palma Christi drunk, does the same and takes away pain.

Let the Diet be thin and sparing in the fit and before, bewaring of crude,
windy, hard or binding meat, and in the fit when the cause is cold, give hot
cutting and discussing Spices; and strong wine without water or at least Spiced
water with Cinnamon and Pepper, as in Cardialgia and weakness of Stomach. These
hot Spices are not good, when there is Choleric Excrements. And wine must be
given moderately, because it hurts the Nerves, and a Convulsion is feared; nor
may sower things be allowed, though they temper choler, because they cause
pain. If the Excrements are still hard, give moist fat Meats and Oils and
Butter.

When you fear the Convolvulus, give brown bread poyled and the water cast off,
and made into a Pudding with Hogs grease or Butter.

Or a Lark roasted and eaten with Cock broth. Or the broth of an old Cock or
of Snails.

Or Decoctions of Calamus grass, Elder, Calamints, Rue, Chamomil, Dill, Melilot
or Rocket flowers, in Water or Cock broth, with Wine, Honey or Sugar. Some
commend the Decoction of Southernwood, others Pellitory in Wine with sugar or
Wormwood with Cummin seeds or Horseradish, Wine and Sugar, and Seeds and
Spices, as Calamus, Galangal, Nutmeg, Cloves infused or boiled gently in Wine
with a little Saffron and Sugar, or those for a weak Stomach mentioned.

Also the juice of Sulphurwort with an Egg.

Or blood of an Eele.

Or water wherein a Dears Pizle was washed.

Or four ounces of distilled water of Herb Trinity, Dogs tongue; Elder or Broom
flowers or flowers of Chamomil, Bean shales, or of Tizil, or of Cow dung, or a
spoonful or two of Cinnamon water.

A Compound water: Take Ginger half a pound, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmeg, Zedoary,
Galangal, each two ounces; Mastick half an ounce, bruise and infuse them in
Wine, distill them and give two or three spoonfuls against wind, add two drams
of Mints, Fennel and Anniseed, each half an ounce.

The Compound Aqua vitae mentioned in Heart-ach, from a cold cause, is good.

Oils do good also by slipperyness and mollifying the Excrements, as Sallet Oil
well washed, if it be old and rancid six ounces to assuage pain, or Oil of
sweet Almonds, Nuts or Lineseed taken alone in a good quantity, or with broth,
to which Oils you may add Sugar and Sack the third part, or two drams of Aqua
vita, or other distilled waters.

An excellent Remedy: Take Oil of sweet Almonds, or Salet Oil for Poor people
four ounces, of the best Sack an ounce and an half, syrup of Poppy half an
ounce.

Oil of bitter Almonds, and of Peach kernels are good against the Colic and
Iliake, as well against the Stone to be drunk, also Oil of Bays, with some
drops of the Chemical Oils of Cinnamon, Cloves or Mace.

Some commend the Oil of Turpentine or Vitriol, above the rest.

And six drops of the Sky colored Oil of chamomil flowers newly drawn, which
is better, when made of Roman chamomil.

There are also good pouders mentioned in cardialgia from a cold cause, or from
wind, or weakness of the Stomach, which are good in this Disease.

Dioscorides and others use a dram of these following in Powder with wine,
broth or otherwise, as of calamus, Orris, Masterwort, Sallowwort, Squils, with
Dittany, Birthwort, Eryngus, Piony, wild parsley, Rosmary roots, wild Mints,
garden Mints, wild Bettony, Groundpine, herb trenity, wild Laurel, Sea
purslane, Spiderwort, cudweed, Wintercresses, Fleabane, Rosemary, pennyroyal,
Laurel; also of the flowers of petty Mulline, also powder of the seeds of
Ameos, parsley, caraway, cummin, carrots, Annis, Fennel, Seseli, Lovage,
Fennel-Gyant, Basil, water Mints, coleworts, Momordica, Almonds, peach kernels,
Bay and Juniper berries and the pouders of all Spices and Saffron.

Also powder of Orange peels, black Ivy seed and ripe Rose seeds and Sagapenum,
or Wax given in broth, which is the experiment of Dioscorides and others. Also
powder of Amber and Jet.

Also the stomach of a hedg-Hog or Hens Gizard, or Cocks for men, the inward
Skin, Wolfs guts, Hearts Pizle, Colt stones, and young Hartshorn, bones of Hogs
feet burnt, white Hen dung, white Dogs dung, or Wolfs dung in powder, with a
little Cinnamon or Angelica root for the scent.

There are also Compound Pouders, besides those in Cardialgia or Heart-ach,
made of the things mentioned, with a little Pepper, Cummin seed. and Myrrh.

Also the Roots and Herbs mentioned are good in Conserves and Candies.

Also Horse radish candyed and given with Mulberry leaves, and the stones of
Medlars.

Or two drams of the Electuary of Bayberries against wind, its made of Rue,
Mints, Organ, Bayberries, Ameos, Cumen, Lovage, Caraway, Carot seeds, bitter
Almonds, Pepper long and black, Castor, Sagapenum, Opoponax and Honey.

But the Castor and Rue, make that unpleasant, there fore give this: Take Bay
berries an ounce, Mints, Marjoram, Rosemary tops, each two drams; Rue, Organ,
each a dram and an half; Fennel, Caraway, Ameos, Lovage seed, each a dram;
Cummin seed half a dram, Pepper and Ginger, each a scruple; Sagapenum dissolved
in Wine a dram, Castor half a dram, with a pound of Honey or Sugar, make an
Electuary.

Also Diacuminum, Dianisum, Diagalanga, Diacalaminthes, Diatrionpipereon, and
the rest mentioned in Heart-ach, are good here in Electuaries or Lozenges.

In great pain of the Guts, we give Narcoticks, that presently give ease, when
all things else fail, and we repeat them as the pain returns. These
ingeniously used do no hurt but good, by abating pain, causing sleep, and
preserving strength, by which the Physician is credited, moreover by provoking
sweat (as I showed) they take away much of the cause of the Disease.

Also we give Antidotes called Opiates for the same, which do good in two
respects, when the Humor is evil and venomous, as Treacle and Mithridate and
Triphera Magna, and the like; the quantity of two drams, that the Opium may
work: or we give a dram with a grain or two of Opium.

The Antidote of Philo the Physician of Tarsus mentioned by Galen, is the best,
made of Opium, Henbaneseeds, with hot things, and correcters of Opium, as
Castor (instead whereof Galen uses Euphorbium) also with Musk, Pepper,
Pellitory root, Spike, Saffron and Honey. To this composition, some add other
hot things, to expel Wind and leave out the Musk; as Wood-cassia, Cinnamon,
Zedoary, Costus, Doronicum, Smallage, Fennel, Carot and Alisander seed; this is
called the great Roman Philonium. The Arabians as Hamech and Rhasis, add other
things to expel wind, as Rue, Mints, Bay Berries, Ameos seed, Gith and cummin
seed, and Mandraks. We use this Anodine of Philo when there is great pain to be
allayed, but Philonium Romanum, or of Rhasis when there is need of more heat to
discuss wind; we give from two scruples to a dram, as we have the strength
thereof by Experience. There is another Antidote to allay pain, called Requies.
These work better with wine taken with them, or presently after them, which is
Narcotick (as I showed) and we mix them with other Cordials.

Many other Narcoticks are made with Opium, some are unpleasant with castor.
The chemists commend their Laudanum: In making of which new, (because opium
hurts not by cold, as some without reason suppose, but by a hidden quality, and
by the great quantity by which the Brain and Nerves are stupefied) you must see
that it be diligently mixed through the whole body of the Medicine, that one
dose have not more Opium in it then another. And make trial at first with a
small dose. In this you must be more accurate then in the correction, by hot
things (except the stomach be cold or windy) for if Opium stupefie by cold,
those things will hinder its operation. Therefore, if leaving out those hot
things, you only add to Opium those that correct its evil scent and bitter
rast, and so give it in a small quantity, it is safe, as I have often
experienced with good success. How this may be done, I shall give you some
presidents.

Narcotick Pills instead of Philonimm: Take Opium a scruple, white Henbane
seeds two scruples, Pepper two drams, Castor half a dram, Saffron a scruple,
dissolve the Opium in Sack, and make a Mass; dry it, and then powder it, and
make a Mass of it, with syrup of Poppies. First give half a scruple, and try
it, then advance if you think fit, or decline in quantity.

An opiate Electuary for the Heart and Stomach also. Take species Diambrae, or
Diamoschi, or Aromatici moschati two drams, Cinnamon a dram and half, red
Sanders half a dram, Sugar four ounces, Opium dissolved in Wine two drams, Oil
of Cloves, or of Cinnamon some drops, with syrup of Quinces or Citrons make an
Electuary: Give half a dram at first to try it.

You may make Troches of the same with Gum traganth, and give the same quantity.

Or thus more pleasant: Take Opium two drams, infuse it in three ounces of
Wine, after it is dissolved and often stirred, and settled again, pour off the
clear Liquor, and filter it, then add Sugar two ounces, Cinnamon two drams,
Musk half a scruple, with Gum Traganth make Troches: Give half a scruple for a
trial.

Many other Narcoticks are good here also, as Syrup of Poppies, only we here
speak of such as properly help the Guts.

We often mix Narcoticks with purging Medicines in this Disease, as in the
Stone and Heart-ach, to loosen the Belly, and take away pain also, because one
does not hinder the operation of the other; as I have often experienced. Nor
does Treacle, (though Galen think otherwise) stop the purging of Medicines.
Therefore Rhasis when he desired to purge and take away pain together, mixed
Diagredium with his Philonium.

Dioscorides bids the Belly be washed with Seawater in fits of the Colic; or
with any salt water.

Or apply Aqua vitae with a clout to the Belly.

Or Oil of chamomil, Dill or Nard, with a Felt.

Or sit in Oil, or Oil and Milk.

Or thus; Take warm Oil and Butter half a pound, Turpentine dissolved with two
Yolks of Eggs two ounces, Saffron a dram, with Stuphes or Clouts, apply it to
the Belly.

Or in a Decoction of Anodynes and Expellers of wind, as we showed in the
Stone. As of Mallows, Marshmallows, Pennyroyal, Organ, Calamints, Mints,
Wormwood, Southernwood, Rue, Sage, Bays, Chamomil, Melilot flowers, Dill,
Elder, Rosemary, Stoechas, Lavender flowers, Foenugreek, Linseed, caraway,
cummin, Fennel seed, Bay and Juniper Berries, more or less; with Orris root,
citron peels, Mugwort and Rue seed, Gith, Seseli, Smallage, with cloves,
Schaenanth, Spike, with Sulphur vivum and Saltpeter. Boil all in water and
wine, with a little Vinegar to make it pierce, or Oil to allay pain. Sometimes
boil it in water and oil, or in Bath or Spaw-waters, if you have them.

Anoint with Anodyne, hot Oils, as of Olives, Nuts, Almonds, Bays, chamomil,
Dill, Rue, Spike, Lillies, Wall flowers, Elicampane; or with Oil of Lillies of
the Valleys, which is chiefly provided against pains in children, adding
sometimes these hotter, as oil of castor, Euphorbium, Pepper, Petroleum, Spike.

Or anoint with the Grease of Mountain or Field Mice.

Or thus; Take Oil of Chamomil and Rue, each an ounce; Oil of Spike half a
dram, Galbanum dissolved in Aqua vitae six drams: make an Ointment.

Or thus: Take Oil of Chamomil and Dill, each an ounce and half; Narde-oyl and
of Rue, each an ounce; Oil of Spike half a dram, Sack or juice of Mints two
ounces, Hens grease and Butter, each an ounce; Powder of Galangal two drams,
Cloves, Nutmeg, each a dram; Spike, Gith seed, each half a dram; with wax make
an Ointment. You may add other Spices, also Turpentine and Mastich, or apply
Species to the stomach, as Diagalanga.

Or, Take Oil of Nutmeg or Mace by expression, and mix it with Oil of Cloves,
or the like. Or for the rich with Civet, Musk, Ambergrease, or the Algalea of
Hollerius dissolved in Oil de Been, or of sweet Almonds.

Or the Ointment of Agrippa or Dialthaea.

Also the cawle of a Kid or Lamb or Calf or Heifer, broyled till it melt, and
applied to the Belly hot; this is excellent for children: It is better fried
with Oil of Rue, or the like, and sprinkled with cummin seed or cloves.

Some apply Leaven to the Belly.

Or Goats or Ox dung sprinked with wine, cummin, Bay Berries, and a little
Honey.

Or an Emplaster of Soap, Butter, or Oil and Salt.

Or the Plaster of Bay Berries made of Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, Bay
berries, cypress berries, costus and Honey.

Or Wheat flower, or Barley, or Orobus, Foenugreek or Linseed, with Grease,
Butter, or Oil and Honey.

Or Pellitory, Celandine, the great Mints, Rue bruised with Honey and Wine, or
boiled; and oil and meal added for a Pultis, with Cummin seed.

Or Juice of Henbane or Tobacco mixed with meals mentioned, or the Herb bruised
or fried.

Or burnt Nuts shells, and all added to the former.

Or apply bags hot and dry, or wet with wine or Aqua vitae. made of Milium
parched, Bran and Salt, with Caraway seeds, Chamomil flowers, Bay leaves or
barberries.

If from the great pain you fear Inflammation, open a Vein in full bodies,
otherwise it is not good in this case, because nothing can be taken out of the
Meseraiks thereby.

A great Cupping-glass that will compass the Navel, is good against wind, if
applied with Heat to the belly, especially if it be first laid in hot wine, or
anointed with juice of Garlic.

And in other cases, it is good to apply it a little below the pained part.

Wind also may be drawn out by a clyster syringe, and a clyster set on work by
drawing it.

The Amulets are a Girdle to the naked belly, made of the guts of a wolf, or
skin of a wolf girt with the hair next to the belly; or a Navel-stringe dried
and kept for this purpose.

Or apply a young wolves skin, or the dung of a wolf.

Or a Nut-shell filled with Quicksilver, and hanged a-about the Neck to the
belly, is good to prevent, or which is thought rare, the little bone of the
outmost joint of the right wing of an old Crow; killed in the time of his
kawing.

Or Wolfes dung in a Nut-shell, and they say it is better when the string that
it is tied about the Neck which is made of buff, or a thread of sheeps wool,
but this sheep must be first killed by a wolf forsooth. There are many more
which we wilfully omit.

If the Iliack or Colic come from Inflammation, The Cure of the Colic or
Iliack from Inflammation, Burning or Erysipelas.
Heat or Erysipelas of the Guts, or be in the small guts from blood, so that
the Excrements are vomited up. It is deadly in old men, and in the thick Guts
it is dangerous, when the Urin is stopped.

If the substance of the Guts be hot from choler or Erysipelas, the Iliack is
dangerous, and causes convulsions sooner, and worse then when the choler is in
the cavities of the Guts obstructed. In these cases when blood or choler is
carried to the substance of the Guts, proceed thus.

Let blood in the Inflammation especially if there be a Fever in the Arm, but
if the Inflammation be below and the Urin stopped, bleed in the Foot. And in an
Erysipelas when the pain is great, a little bleeding can do no hurt.

A cooling Clyster also is to be given in great Inflammations. As, Take
Marsh-mallow roots two ounces, Violets, Mallows, each a handful; Flowers of
Chamomil half a pugil, water lillies a pugil, Roses a pugil, Linseed and
Fleabane seed, each two drams; cold Seeds half an ounce, Aniseed two drams, add
Cream and Butter an ounce and half, Goats grease an ounce, Oil of Roses at
first, or Violets after, two ounces Oil of sweet Almonds against the pain an
ounce, Honey of Roses an ounce and half, Manna or Cassia an ounce. Some boil
sour Apples therein, and in the Declination, they add Oil of Chamomil, Dill,
Lillies.

In choler thus: Take of the Emollients, each a handful; Barley and Bran, each
a pugil; Figs and Prunes, each ten; Chamomil and Melilot flowers, each a pugil,
Linseed and Foenugreek seed, each half an ounce; Fleabane and Quince seeds,
each two drams; Mallow seeds a dram, boil and add Goose or Hens grease an
ounce, Butter or Oil an ounce and half, Oil of Water Lillies and Violets, each
an ounce; of Lillies half an ounce, Honey or Sugar of Violets an ounce and
half: make a Clyster.

If you will have it purge, add Polypody an ounce and half, or Senna half an
ounce, the Electuary of the juice of Roses half an ounce, or Diacatholicon an
ounce.

In both cases, use Astringents, as Plantane, Sumach, Roses, when you fear an
Ulcer which follows an Inflammation or Erysipelas, the cure of this ulcer is
mentioned in Dysentery.

A Clyster of the Broth of an old cock, with the emollient Herbs is good.

And of new Milk with Sugar, with the white of an Eg, and Mucilage of Fleabane
an ounce.

Or of Milk, or an Emulsion of Almonds, or Barleycream, with sweet Butter,
Sugar and Honey.

Or of Anodynes when the pain is great, such as were mentioned, being
temperately hot.

Give only gentle Loosners, if Clysters may not be given; as Syrup of Violets,
Roses, the Decoction of Fruits, Raisons, Prunes, Sebestens, Violets, with
Rhubarb or Cassia; and other Loosners not too hot.

Let the Diet be such as in Inflammations internal, and in choleric Diseases,
and give no Wine, for fear of a convulsion.

Let it be of things that properly help the Guts, which are not too hot; and
Anodyne, and also Narcotick at last, mixed with Purgers.

In both cases anoint with Oil of Violets, sweet Almonds, chamomil, Dill, with
Butter and Mucilage of Seeds of Foenugreek and Line, Quinces, and with Fats.

Also use a sweet Bath and a Fomentation made of the clyster and Ingredients.

And a cataplasm of the residents of the clysters, and of Barley-meal, Lime and
Foenugreek seed, with Butter, Fats and Oils.

It is good in the Iliack, to apply cupping-glasses with Scarification, in an
Inflammation to the Groins.

And Amulets mentioned.

If from tumbling or leaping, The cure of the Iliack from Knots coming in the
Guts.
or a Fall upon the Belly the Guts be knotted, and the Excrements stopped, so
that they begin to be vomited up, you must cut open the belly by way of
Longitude, where the pain or tumor is, and so skilfully place the the Guts in
order again. This is the last and only Remedy.

If stretching of the Bladder and Womb cause pain, The cure of the stretching
pain of the Bladder and urin: and of pains after birth.
we spoke of that in the Bladder in the stoppage of Urin, if the stone cause
it: we spoke thereof in painful Pissing.

If the Womb be stretched by wind or cold external after birth, let the woman
be kept very warm, and bound with a rouler below.

If it continue, use Medicines for the womb that are hot.

But if the pains of the womb come from evil humors about the Vessels and
Ligaments, such as go before, or follow the stoppage of the Terms; or such as
is after, they cease by reason of age and foulness: Then first purge away the
filth, and make the courses come, as we showed. The remedies are the same for
pains in the womb as for the Guts, when we desire to heat and expel wind. These
hot remedies that expel wind and are anodyne, are mentioned in the Pains of the
Guts, and are proper for pains in the womb, when they come after Birth, from
cold Air, and continue long, or be joined with other cold Distempers of the
Womb. And because that the Womb and Guts are refreshed with hot things the
things that provoke the Courses are to be allowed. Hence it is, that because
they observed that hot remedies agreed with both the Womb and Guts, they
supposed that these pains of the womb came from Cold, but they agree with the
womb for other causes mentioned, and the rather, when those remedies which heat
the Guts, and discuss wind, and assuage pain, are mixed with things proper for
the Womb, otherwise the Womb-medicines differ little from those of the Bowels;
but use them as follows, and they will better help the pain of the womb.
Hence it is that they called the Pains of the Guts, the Pains of the Womb in
both Sexes, Men and Women: And gave things that they observed good for the
Guts, for the Womb. These remedies being hot, and expellers of wind, and
Anodynes, are chiefly good against pains of the Womb, when they come after
Childbearing, from cold Air, and are joined with other Diseases.

Bleeding will do little good, except in the Foot to provoke the Courses, or
for other Evacuations in another part.

The same Purges prescribed for pains of the Guts, are good here. And because
Turbith does trouble the Guts, and cause pain, it must be given for the Womb,
from a dram to four scruples in powder, with a scruple of Ginger, and a little
Cinnamon and Sugar, in Nutmeg-water.

Also the Clysters against Pains in the Guts are good here, whether emollient,
pricking, heating or expellers of wind, because they go to the straight Gut,
and there heat the Womb, which is joined unto it, especially if you add some
Womb-herbs thereunto.

As thus: Take Mugwort, Calamints, Pennyroyal, each a handful; Chamomil and
Melilot flowers, and Dill tops, each a pugil; Aniseed six drams, Foenugreek and
Linseed half an ounce, Bran a pugil, boil and add Honey of Rosemary an ounce,
Oil of Wall flowers three ounces, Benedicta laxativa and Hiera simplex, each
half an ounce; red Sugar an ounce, with a little Salt make a Clyster.

Another; Take Oil of bitter Almonds six ounces, Goose grease two ounces,
Turpentine dissolved with two Yolks of Eggs half an ounce, give it in Chicken
broth.

Mugwort-water is as good for the womb as the guts. And Oil of bitter Almonds
drunk in a good quantity. Some give Oil of Scorpions. And the juice of Horse
dung alone, or with Wine.

Decoctions to be drunk hot alone, or with Sugar, or Honey and Cinnamon.

The first: Take Schaenanth two drams, boil it in Mugwort-water, give it hot at
twice, or a Decoction of Spike, or two drams of both, for four times.

Another: Take Motherwort half an ounce, Nutmeg two drams, boil them in white
Wine: Give it at twice.

A third: Take Juniper Berries two drams, Anise and Caraway seed, each a dram;
boil it in Wine, give it.

A fourth: Take Motherwort six drams, Roots of Devils bit half an ounce,
Juniper Berries two drams, Aniseed half an ounce, Caraway and Carot seed, each
a dram; Nutmeg half an ounce, Schaenanth and Spike, each a dram; boil them in
Wine, strain it, sweeten it, for three or four doses.

The Infusions mentioned for weak Stomachs, and others in Wine and Aqua vitae,
are here good.

And the things given in substance, as follow.

Mints, or great Balm called Greek Mints, is good in Broth or Drink, or Cakes,
and Juniper Berries.

Also Powder of the Roots of Masterwort, Zedoary, Gentian a dram, or a dram and
half with Wine.

Another Compound Powder: Take Roots of Motherwort half an ounce, of Masterwort
and Devils bit, each two drams; of white Dittany, Zedoary, Gentian, each a
dram; Juniper Berries a dram and half, Aniseed two drams, Carot, Ameos, Cummin
seed, each a dram; Schaenanth two drams, Mace, Spike, each a dram; Ginger,
Pepper, each half a dram, Saffron half a scruple: make a Powder, give a dram in
Wine, or add a double quantity of Sugar, or make Lozenges, or an Electuary with
Honey.

Diacyminum is good in pains of the Womb, and Diamargaritum calidum, when there
is Weakness.

A pleasant but good Powder: Take Cummin seed infused in Aqua vitae and dried a
dram, Ameos and Ginger, each half a dram; Castor a scruple, give a dram with
wine.

Or a dram of the Jaws of a Trout poudered in Water of Chamomil, is excellent
when the pain is before the Courses.

Rondeletius says that the Powder of a dried Secundine or Afterbirth, cures
the pains after Childbirth. And because other Beasts eat them, they have no
such pains; and he says that he took it from his Bitch after she had whelped,
and she presently had pains.

Pills; Take Opopanax, Sagapenum, each a dram; Castor, Gentian, each half a
dram, Spike a scruple, Saffron half a scruple, with syrup of Mugwort make
Pills: Give half a dram, or a dram.

In great Pains, give Opiats as in the Colic, especially Triphera magna,
proper for the Womb, a dram and half with Wine, or Mugwort-water, with Mace a
scruple, and Saffron half a scruple in powder.

Or give Treacle, and a little Castor therewith.

Foment, make Baths for the Feet, proper for the Womb, with Decoctions of
Herbs, Seeds and Spices; as chiefly for the Womb, Mugwort, Motherwort, Bays,
Balm, Nip, Costmary, Grapes, Savin, great Celandine, Swallow-wort roots,
Wall-flowers, Misleto of the Oak, Carot seed, and the like.

Or bags mentioned in Pain of the Guts.

Anoint also with Oils, as that of Bays, Wall flowers, Orris, Lillies,
Water Lillies, Nard, Elder.

Or use Ointments, with Oils and Juyces of Herbs and Gums, or Plasters, as
that of Bay Berries.

Or Cataplasms of the Plants mentioned, and Lillies and Onyons boiled, mixing
Oils: or that of Cow dung, and Cummin seed, with Honey and Wine, or with
Henbane, if the pain be great.

Use also Injections made of Decoctions and Juyces of Plants, but they reach
but to the neck of the womb, and therefore cannot take away pain, nor
Pessaries, except it be by provoking the Terms.

But Fumes or Smoaks go into the Womb, therefore they are better then
Injections, if they be taken into the Body, from a Decoction.

Also sweet things of Musk and Ambergrease, put into the womb, refresh it.

And rubbing of the Feet from the Thighs downwards: Cupping-glasses applied to
the Hips cause diversion.

The Inflammations of the Womb and Bladder, The cure of the inflammation of the
bladder and womb.
if they cause pains in the lower part of the Belly, by reason of the joining
together of these parts are cured alike, as we shall here show.

Inflammations are very dangerous in parts so exquisitely sensible, especially
in the womb, when it is inflamed from hard travail, which causes many Women to
die in Childbearing. Also if an Inflammation be in the Bladder from an Ulcer
or Stone, it endangers the Patient. In both, if there be an Ulcer or Scirrhus
caused by it, the case is, difficult, and if a Gangraene follow, death is at
the door.

The cure of both Inflammations is as of others, by revelling or drawing by the
matter when it first flows to the part, by repelling or driving back, and by
abating the Heat, and presently (after the Flux is ceased) by consuming and
discussing it. And if these Inflammations produce other Diseases, as is usual
in the Neck of the Bladder and Womb; they shall be spoken of in their places:
But you must do as follows against the Inflammations.

First open a Vein in the Arm to revel, and then in the Foot to derive, in both
cases, except there be any hinderance, as a Flux in Women in Travail, in or
after a mischance.

Use Scarification and Cupping to the Thighs and Buttocks. But in the
Inflammation of the Womb, if the Terms flow too much, scarifie and cup the
parts above.

Give Clysters to open the Belly, cool, and abate pain; and they are good at
the first. For being given in at the straight Gut, they communicate their
virtue to to the womb and bladder, to which they are closely seated.

They must be such Clysters as are mentioned for the Inflammation of the
Kidneys and Guts: And such as abate pain, being made of Milk, to which when we
will cool to some purpose, we add Juice of Nightshade, Violets, Mallows, and the
like.

Apply outwardly Remedies before and behind, first Coolers and Repellers, but
not strong Astringents, as in other Inflammations, least Hardness follow:
Afterward in the increase, we add Dissolvers, which we use at the conclusion
alone: And if it tend to Suppuration, we use Ripeners.

A cooling and somewhat repelling Cataplasm. Take Roots of Marshmallows, two
ounces, Plantane, Shepheardspurse, Teazel, Vine leaves, and Violet leaves two
handfuls; boil and stamp them, add Meal of Barley and Lentils three ounces,
Fleabane seed half an ounce, Oil of Roses two ounces, make a Cataplasm.

Or eight ounces of the Decoction distilled Water or Juice of the said Plants,
with an ounce and half of Vinegar, is a good Epithem for the same: And it will
be stronger with half an ounce of Bole, or Sanguis Draconis.

An Ointment: Take Oil of Violets an ounce and half, Oil of Roses, or Myrtles,
each an ounce; add two ounces of juice of Nightshade, or of the Plants
mentioned, and an ounce of Vinegar, and boil them in the Oils, or make them up
with Turpentine. You may add Bole also to make it more astringent.

A Cataplasm to be used in the increase of the disease. Take Marsh-mallow roots
three ounces, Lilly roots an ounce, Housleek, Plantane, Nightshade and Endive
two handfuls, Chamomil, Melilot flowers, each a pugil; Figs and Dates, each six
pair; boil and stamp them, add Bean flower, and of Paenugreek and Linseed, each
two ounces; Oil of Roses two ounces, Oil of Lillies an ounce, Saffron a dram.

The Cerot of Galen made of Housleek, is good.

Or this Ointment in the progress of the Disease. Take Oil of Chamomil an ounce
and half, Oil of Lillies and Rosemary and Linseed, each half an ounce; juice of
Housleek and Sowthistle, each an ounce; Mucilage of Foenugreek an ounce and
half, Conies grease an ounce, Saffron half a dram, with Wax make an Ointment.

You may use Fomentations also when there is pain, with the Decoction of
Henbane, and other Herbs mentioned.

An anodyne Cataplasm: Take Crumbs of Bread half a pound, boil them in Milk,
add two or three Eggs beaten, Mucilage of Linseed and Fleabane, each an ounce;
Butter or Oil of sweet Almonds three ounces, Saffron half a dram.

In the declination of the Disease, use digesting Plasters, as of Melilot,
Marshmallows, Diachylon, with Orris, and the like.

Or this: Take Bdellium, Galbanum, Opopanax, each half an ounce; Storax two
drams, dissolve them in juice of Motherwort and Chamomil, with a little Aqua
vitae, and make a Cataplasm.

A Bath in the Declination to take away the residue, is made of Mallows,
Marshmallows, Lillies, Flowers of Chamomil, Melilot, Elder, Rosemary, Seeds of
Line and Foenugreek. And if the Womb be troubled, of Marjoram, Motherwort,
Mugwort, Pennyroyal, Wall-flowers, Agnus castus, Spike or Schaenanth.

If it will not be digested, bring it to maturation with this cataplasm. Take
Wheat flower four ounce; Meal of Barley and Linseed, each two ounces; Figgs six
pair, boil them in Milk, and bruise them, add three Yolks of Eggs, and Hens
grease two ounces.

Or use Ripeners mentioned against other Diseases.

Injections, because they come not easily to the bladder in men, and cannot be
without pain to both Sexes in the use of the catheter, cannot be in the time of
Inflammation, but when the Urin is stopped, to open the passages of which we
spoke.

And because the body of the womb, by reason of the straight orifice, will not
admit Injections; they are not profitable, except but by what they do outwardly
to the neck or bottom of the womb, being inflamed.

And then use the Decoction of the Herbs mentioned for a cataplasm, or the
waters, or Juyces of them, to repel at first, and in the progress, use the
Decoction of the cataplasm, which we prescribed to be used in the increase.

Or make a Pessary for women, of the Herbs beaten up with Meal.

Pain chiefly requires Injections, as of Milk, and whites of Eggs beaten with
Oil of Henbane, or a little Opium, or of a Decoction of Poppy or Henbane seed,
or Marsh-mallow seed, or the Juice of it, or other narcoticks mentioned in Pain
of the Belly.

Or Triphera Saracenica.

In the Declination make Injections of things that take away the residue, and
soften to prevent Scirrhus, as of Galbanum a dram and half, dissolved in Oil of
Lillies, or Wall flowers an ounce, Storax a dram Marjoram water four ounces.

Or: Take the Decoction of wild Time four ounces, and add the ashes of Man's
bones, and two ounces of Balm-water: make an Injection.

Or this Pessary: Take Galbanum, Storax, each a dram; Labdanum half an ounce,
Coney, Goose or Ducks grease enough, make a Paste, and put it in a silk bag.

Also a Fume of Sagapenum, Storax, Benjamin, will consume the refidue.

Give Lenitives in both Inflammations, as Prunes cassia, Syrup of Violets,
Roses, Whey; and no stronger till the Declination.

Give coolers in Diet, as cool Herbs and Water, and Syrups, Waters and
conserves that cool, mentioned in Fevers.

And things to provoke urin by a cleansing moisture, as Emulsions of the cold
Seeds, Decoction of Pease or Whey.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Pain of the Privities.
The Kinds.
THe pain of the Privities is diverse, in respect of the Sex (we have spoken of
the outward pains in their place.)

The pains inwardly in the Yard, being in the passage to the Bladder, The pain
of the Yard.
which is for the Piss and Seed, and chiefly in the time of pissing, with
discharge of Matter, with great straining, shall be spoken of in things sent
forth. And the pain in the Codds or Inflammation, because it appears outwardly,
shall be spoken of in the Externals, as if there be a pain and tumor from a
Rupture in Ruptures.

The pains in the Privities of Women, The pain of the Privities in Women.
are either where the two passages of the Bladder, and neck of the womb appear,
or deeper, and are diverse, either with Heat or Ulcer.

This pain is either with Inflammation only, The Inflammation of the womb.
or with a Tumor, and that which is in the bottom of the womb is most usual, of
which we spoke in pains of the Belly. This Inflammation is apparent, and turns
sometimes into an Imposthume, Scirrhus, or Gangraen.

There is another pain with heat and tumor, The Cancer of the neck of the womb.
in the Cancer of the womb, more usual and apparent, then that in the Body of
the womb. In which there is a tumor at the first as in other Causes, with a
little pricking only, and then increasing by degrees, it grows heavy and
troublesome with burning; and at length it ulcerateth, and turns to a Carcinoma,
and then there is a venomous Humor and Blood flowing from the womb, with other
great accidents.

The third Pain is called Condyloma, Condyloma in the Privities of women.
and is with heat and swelling, or excrescens within the womb: It is worse when
there is an Inflammation. This is sometimes both in the Privities and Fundament,
and in the Fundaments of Men, of which in its place.

A tearing or pricking pain is called the Ulcer of the womb, The ulcerous pain
of the Womb.
and it is either inwardly, or more outwardly, and may be touched, and
increased by Medicines, or Copulation. And then blood, or thin matter comes
forth: Or thick white concocted, not stinking, or it is crude, and waterish, or
green, yellow, or black, and the same matter is sometimes pissed forth. And we
have known it come forth of the Fundament, and Excrements come forth of the
womb: and some have observed it is in the Bladder or Panch. What kind of Ulcer
it is, whether Excoriation only, or a profound deep Ulcer, whether creeping,
or with swollen Lips, hard, or turned in; it may be seen or felt, or else if
deep, seen by an Instrument. With this are diverse other Symptoms. And if the
Ulcer comes to the Orifice of the Bladder, there will be burning, and often
pissing. If it be malignant, the Vital Functions are weakened, or if joined with
other Diseases, as the French Pox, there are many Symptoms.

The Causes.
The pains in the Privities of Women, come from Diseases of the neck of the
womb or Privities, and they are either Inflammation, or Cancer, or Condyloma,
or Ulcer.

Inflammation being chiefly in the neck of the womb, or in the womb,
Inflammation is the cause of burning pain in the womb.
causes pains with heat, burning or tumor, as it is greater or less, pure, or
impure, or Erysipelas, where the heat is greater, and no tumor. The internal
Cause of this Inflammation is Defluxion of Blood, to the menstruous veins in
the substance of the womb: Or difficulty of travail may cause it, because the
neck of the womb is very sensible, and the Orifice narrow. And sometimes there
is an Inflammation of these parts from the Orifice, which is shut in Virgins
with the Hymen or Membrane, when they are much pained at the loss of their
Virginity, or at other times, when the woman is straight, and the man large.
And it may come also from Pessaries, or corroding Medicines.

A Cancer in the hollow of the womb causes pain, with burning, and pricking,
and swelling, which sometimes turns to an Ulcer. And this is caused by a
malignant Humor sent to the Neck of the Bladder. The kinds and causes of which
shall be showed in an external Cancer.

A Condyloma in the womb, causes the pain above mentioned, and is in the
Fundament: Also by reason of the same Causes to be mentioned.

An Ulcer in the Cavity of the womb, An Ulcer in the womb is the cause of an
ulcerous Pain.
or the Privities, causes ulcerous pains, and other accidents that are more,
as the pain is greater. For if it be a simple Excoriation with the skin off,
there will the pain be small, by reason of the exquisite Sense of the part. If
there be a great hurt or wound, the pain will be greater, and the blood come. If
a simple Ulcer, the pain will be less, but with a Flux of Matter, if it be
foul, the Ulcers be eating called Nomae, or when they are deeper Phagadaenica,
the pain is longer, because there will be a Flux of Matter. If the Ulcer reach
the Neck of the Bladder, there will be painful Pissing. If it eat through the
womb and the strait Gut, there will be Matter by stool, and the Excrements that
should have passed through the Fundament, come through the womb. Or if the
Ulcer reach to the Neck of the Bladder, or the Abdomen, the matter will come
forth there, and if it continue long, it eats away the neck of the bladder: As
we have known in some Women, who have lost all the womb. And if the Ulcer be
cancerous, there will be a Carcinoma, and more pain then in a Cancer not
ulcerated, and the Lips will be swollen, and turned in, and the matter will flow,
and sometimes blood, and that much at the time of the terms, in so much that
some have been in danger of death thereby.

These Ulcers come from Hurts, as Inflammations, as in hard Travail, the first
Copulation, or other that is violent, by which a Vein is broken, as when they
loose their Maiden-heads, some bleed from the Terms, by rubbing of the Veins or
the neck of the womb, or from hurt of the orifice, which causes an Ulcer. Some
think it comes from the breaking of the Membrane Hymen, and take it for a sign
of Virginity, though it happen not always to Virgins at the first Copulation,
but to such only whose Veins are easily opened, being tender, and are nigh
their Courses at the time of Marriage, and then no Ulcer follows. This may come
also from outward Hurts, or use of sharp Medicines which corrode the neck of
the womb, as we knew in a woman that lived long after the loss of the neck of
her womb. Also Inflammations turn to Imposthumes, and they into Ulcers, and
some are very foul, and there is a sharp flux of the womb that causes Ulcers.
Also malignant Humors in the Terms in soul Bodies, and other Diseases, as in
the Pox, and running of the Reins, may cause the same. And sometimes the Seed of
a man that is foul long kept in the womb, may do the like. And in Women that
have a dead Child, the womb may be corrupted, as I knew in two, who had the
Child cut out with the Membranes and Perinaeum, or Cawle corrupted, and one
lived long after.

The Cure.
The Cure is diverse, as the Diseases that cause these Pains, which are
Inflammation, Cancer, Ulcer. The cure of Condyloma shall be mentioned in
Diseases of the Fundament.

When the Inflammation is inward and outward, The Cure of Inflammation of the
Womb.
also it must be cured as other Inflammations, with respect to the part, which
is very sensible, to prevent pain.

Inflammations in the Womb only must be cured as other inward Inflammations
mentioned, taking heed that it turn not to an Imposthume and Ulcer, or
Hardness, or Scirrhus, or Gangraen, and corrupt the part. Outward things are
best, as in the inflammations of the bottom of the womb as Baths, and
Injections, and other things that come directly to the womb. Revulsion, and
Derivation, and things taken inwardly are also good; and we must prevent a
Scirrhus when it tends to an Imposthume, and if a Scirrhus be, it must be cured
as scirrhous Tumors, without pain. If it gangrene, it is incurable, and must be
ordered as shall be showed in Gangraenes.

A Cancer of the Neck of the Womb, The Cure of a Cancer in the womb.
because at first it causes little pain or hinderance, or is not known, or
regarded, when it grows up, proves often incurable: Nor can it well or
conveniently be cut in that secret part, therefore it ulcerates, and causes
death. But to prevent, you must use a palliative Cure, by which the Patient may
live longer: Such as are mentioned in the external Cancer. As by Revulsions and
Derivations, by Bleeding, especially in the Ankle, and Purging, and
strengthening, and by drying Topics, and things that digest, as was there
declared.

The Carcinoma, or Cancers of the neck of the womb must be palliated also, The
Cure of a Carcinoma in the womb.
with respect to the part, and the medicines must be put in with the finger, or
by Pessaries, or injected, or by Fumes, as in external Cancers.

All Ulcers in the Womb are bad, by reason of the tenderness and moistness of
the part, The Cure of Ulcers in the womb.
of that a little skin off will require a great Cure. The eating ulcers are
worse, which if long lasting, and rooted, and large, are almost incurable, as
Carcinoma, which destroy the whole womb, as I showed: Venereal Ulcers are not
cured, except the Pox be cured in general. The Cure differs, in that some are
to be applied as to cancerous and venomous Ulcers: Others generally as to all
Ulcers.

The end in curing of all, except Carcinoma and Pox, is to cleanse the Body
when foul, for Humors will flow to the womb, and moisten it, and make the
Ulcers worse, especially if they be mlaignant, and then they must be corrected
by sparing moderate Diet, and Bleeding, and Purging, and Sweating, which does
not only take Humors from the whole Body, but from the part affected: As we
showed in other Ulcers. And if the Ulcers bleed, the Blood must be revelled, as
we showed in the Menstrual Flux. And if in a deep Ulcer, the Matter fall into
the Bladder or strait Gut, it must be cleansed as in Ulcers of the Bladder and
Fundament.

These things first observed, for the Cure of the Ulcer, if it be only the skin
off, or a simple Wound, or Ulcer, it must be only dried with glutinating means,
and the blood stopped with astringents, and the pain abated with Lenitives and
Narcoticks, if need be. If the Ulcer be foul and deep, it must first be
cleansed, then dried and healed up, and if there be Corruption, use stronger,
as follows.

We give inwardly such as we give other internal ulcers of the bladder or
reins, and such as we give in outward ulcers, with respect to the part: As
shall be showed.

Or this Decoction to heal old Ulcers. Take Comfreyroots an ounce, Plantane,
Yarrow, Bays, each a handful; Agnus Castus seeds a dram, white Wine a quart,
Honey a pint: boil and skum it, till half be confumed, give to drink often, and
apply it to the parts, as I shall show.

Dioscorides says the Roots of Rhapontick, and small Centaury drunk, cure the
Pains and Corrosions of the Womb.

Or Turpentine washed in Mugwort-water, or the like, as in Plantane-water, or
Rose Water, for an Ulcer, or taken with Honey or Sugar: Some add Powder of
Hysop.

New Milk and Sugar, or Honey drunk, does the same.

Or a dram of Pills of Bdellium of Mesue, or a scruple every other day, cures
the Ulcer of the Womb, and stops the Bleeding.

Or thus: Take Bdellium three drams, Myrrh, Frankincense, each a dram;
Sarcocol, Storax, Amber, Chebs Myrobalans, each half a dram; red Coral two
scruples, with Syrup of Poppies, and a little Opium, (if the pain be great,)
make Pills: Give a scruple every other day.

For pain, the Troches of Alkekengi, with Opium, are good.

Or this Powder to stop Blood, and heal. Take Acacia, Hypocistis, each a dram;
Sanguis Draconis, Starch, Plantane, round Birthwort, each half a dram; Earth of
Armenia or Lemnos a dram, Mastick, or Sarcocol, each half a dram: make a
Pounder, give a dram with Milk, Shepheards-purse, Plantane, Rose, or steeled
Water.

Use warm Injections to cleanse, and dry after, and heal.

As, three ounces of Barley boyledin two pints of water or Whey, with Sugar or
Honey, or of Hydromel alone, Honey and Wine, which is strongest.

Or a Decoction of Barley, Lentils, Beans, Smallage, Pellitory, Plantane, with
Honey.

Against Foulness. Take Hydromel half a pint, Juice of Smallage two ounces,
Myrrh a dram.

Or use a Decoction of Orris, Birthwort, and Sowbread, Lupins, Orobus,
Horehound, Wormwood, and Centanry.

To cleanse, add Lie, Urin, and Wine, or a little Alum.

The Juice of a Nettle, and Urin of a Boy, cures the Ulcers of the Womb.

Also the Gall of an Ox, Goat, Carp, with Honey, and Goats Milk.

Or Unguentum Apostolorum, or Aegyptiacum.

Or the like Cleansers used in outward Ulcers, and Dryers.

A drying healing Decoction is made of Comfrey, Snakweed, Plantane, Agrimony,
Shepheards-purse, Horstayl, Sanicle, Mousear, Pyrola, Yarrow, Knotgrass, wild
Tansey, Bramble, Myrrh, Olive, Ceterach, Shrub, Sumach, Rose of Jerusalem,
Wall-sage, Swallow-wort, Rock Comfrey, Roses, three handfuls or four, Grape,
Plantane, and Myrrh feeds an ounce: boil them in steeled Water for an Injection.

Or add Galls, Cypress-nuts, Acorn-cupps, Peels and Flowers of Pomegranates an
ounce, which are good to stanch Blood, or red Wine, or Syrup of red Roses, or
Honey to cleanse.

You may use the Decoction mentioned for an Injection.

Or Juice of the Plants mentioned, with Honey.

Or half an ounce of the powder of the Plants mentioned, with the Ashes of
Reeds, Gourds, or Sponge, or of Eg-shells.

When we desire to dry exceedingly use Litharge, Tutty, Ceruss, Bloodstone,
Calaminaris, Bole two drams, and Sanguis Draconis, Acacia, Hypocistis a dram,
for once injecting.

Or this incarnative Powder. Take Orris roots, Birthwort, and Comfrey, each a
dram; Myrrh two drams, Aloes a dram, or a dram of Frankincense, Sarcocol,
Mummy, put into the Injection.

Or add to this Powder two drams of Turpentine, with Plantane-water washed, and
dissolved with Honey, and the Yolk of an Eg.

Or use Unguent of Pompholigos, Ceruss, or Lead, six drams for one dose in an
Injection.

To allay pain, and heal also. Use,

All sorts of Milk to cleanse, heal, and abate pain. And they will dry also, if
you quench Flints therein, and abate pain more, if you add Mucilage of
Fleabane, Line seed, Quinces, and Infusion of Gum Traganth, and Arabic, and
Whites of Eggs, and Yolks sometimes: And in great pain a little Opium. And if
you will cleanse also, Honey or Sugar.

A Decoction to allay tearing and burning pain. Take Barley a pugil, Foenugreek
and Line-seed an ounce, Fleabane, and Poppey seed, each half an ounce; the four
great cold Seeds six drams, Roots of Marshmallows and Mallows, each a handful;
Dill a pugil: boil them in Milk and Water, adding Honey and Sugar,

If you add Purslane an handful, Water Lillies a pugil: the Heat will be better
abated, and the Pain less, if you ad half an ounce of Mandrake roots, and
Henbane seeds two drams to be boiled therein.

Also Juice of Purslane, Lettice, Nightshade, Plantane in Milk, or their
distilled Waters.

Or the white Troches of Rhasis, with Opium dissolved in Milk, or the Decoction
mentioned, take away pain, and heal.

Add Oils if need be, as of Roses, Poppies, Henbaneseed; or of Lovage to
astringe.

Also Fomentations and Baths are good, for their strength reaches to the
inward parts, and heals the Ulcers. They are made as the Injections, by
choosing things proper to cleanse, dry, and take away pain as you please. And
for drying, we add Metals, as Filings of Iron, and the like.

Also drying Baths of Alum, and Sulphur in old ulcers, and we send the
desperate Women in this case to the Spawes.

Also we make Pessaries, and thrust them with the finger into the hollow of the
Womb to cure Ulcers.

Or an Anodine of Goose grease, or Hens grease, or Hogs, or Dears suet, or Wool
grease, with white Wax, and the Yolk of an Eg, and Mucilages, and Saffron, and
Oil of Opium.

Dioscorides puts into Pessaries, Leaves of Vervain, cream of Henbane seeds,
and Juice of Mandraks.

To cleanse; Take Turpentine washed with Juice of Smallage half an ounce, Myrrh
a dram, Birthwort roots two drams, Sugar half an ounce, make a Pessary, with
Gall of a Beast, or Alium, it will more cleanse.

You may use Anodine Ointments also.

Or Dryers mentioned, with Pouders, or Juyces, and with Mucilages, and Wax.

Or Fumes that pierce into the womb, and dry Ulcers, as in the Nose, for which
are Fumes mentioned, and they which are strongest, and of worst Scent, may be
best used here.

If these Ulcers come from the French Pox, they cannot be cured without a
general Cure of the Pox. And then the Fume of Cinnabar does all together. And
the Ointment of Quicksilver is good to be put into the part. All which shall
be declared in the Cure of the French Pox.

CHAP. XV. Of Diseases in the Fundament.
The Kinds.
THe Diseases or in inward Pains of the Fundament, are such as are in it when
closed in the end of the strait Gut and Muscles about it, we mean not the
Clefts in the outward part, which shall be mentioned in external Cures with
those of the Lips. The kinds of the Pains are from the Sense of the pain and
swelling.

There is sometimes a pain there, A burning and hot pain in the Fundament.
with Burning alone, or with a Tumor. And this is called the Inflammation of the
Fundament, when it is inwardly hot, swelled, and red, and outwardly sometimes.
This pain is increased by touching, sitting, going to stool, especially with
straining. The Belly also and Urin are stopped, by the tumor and heat. And this
Inflammation leaves sometimes an Imposthume, or the like in the Veins, which
coming from other Causes, have an Inflammation. As also the Falling out of the
Fundament has; which also I observed in a Child of a year old, turned to a
Gangraene, and caused death. All these may be known by touching and sight, when
the Gut is turned out.

The pain in the Fundament with a swelling, The blind Haemorrhoides.
and no Inflammation but what is from pain, is called the Haemorrhoides,
because it comes from the Veins so called, and it is called blind, when they
bleed not, but it may better be called closed or painful. In this upon
straining there is a tumor appears; or else it lies deep, and is only felt by
the Patient, This pain is sometimes great, from the Excrements going forth,
with an Inflammation sometimes, which produces bleeding, or open Haemorrhoids,
which are dangerous from their great Flux sometimes. As I have known in two
Professors, which from a sedentary life, had the Haemorrhoids, and died of
their great Flux and Inflammation.

A Pain in the Fundament with an uneven Swelling, The Tumor called Condyloma in
the Fundament.
like an Excretion that comes by degrees not suddenly as the Haemorrhoids, is
called Condyloma, because it is like the Joint of the Finger, this we showed
may be in a Woman's Privities also, and the Fundament in both Sexes. It is more
painful when there is Inflammation. If this Tumor appears outwardly, is called
Ficus, being like a Fig, or Verruca, or a Wart, which hanging down is called
Thymus: Sometimes it is like a Grape or Mulberries. I have seen it rough and
hard, like a Cocks Comb. And it is either alone, or joined with the French Pox.

A Pain with sense of an Ulcer in the Fundament is within, An ulcerous Pain in
the Fundament.
and differs from that which produces a Tenesmus or Needing, because there is
not so much straining. In this being soul, there is Matter voided alone, or in
the first Excrement at stool. Sometimes it is hollow, and a Fistula, as goes
either to the Womb and Bladder, out of which parts it after flows, and
sometimes it is pissed forth. And when the Patient farteth, it comes forth of
the womb, if the Ulcer be there. Also Ulcers of the womb, and neck of the
bladder, as was there showed, have gone sometimes before, and ended in an Ulcer
in at the Fundament. Hither are also wounds to be referred, which first bleed,
and after turning to Ulcers, send forth Matter.

The Causes.
Diseases that Cause pains in the Fundament are either Inflammation, or
Haemorrhoids, or Condyloma, or Ulcer.

Inflammation causes burning pain with swelling or without, Inflammation is
the cause of burning in the Fundament.
and it is grievous, because the part is very sensible. And it may come from
the same Causes, as a Tenesinus or needing when the straight Gut is ulcerated,
and from other outward hurts, as a wound or stroke or from wiping the Arse with
a paper that has had Pepper in it, as I knew, or with the Hand that had Ginny
pepper, as I knew in one that complained from thence of the fire of Hell, as he
said.

The blind or painful Haemorrhoids, from the Veins in the Arse, which bleed in
some, as the Veins of Women's Privities at certain times, is with a swelling,
not that the Vein it self is pained so much, being not very sensible, but
because the parts adjacent are stretched and pained which are very sensible:
this is greater with inflammation when the part is extended. Therefore when
blood is brought to the end of the Veins to be purged by the Haemorrhoids, if
the mouths of the Veins be not open from whence the Haemorrhoids are called
blind, or when they open with difficulty, the blood being stopped and increased
and laboring to get forth, forces and teareth the Veins more or less as it is
in quantity And they feel most pain when the Hemorrhoids first break forth.
Because the Vessels were never opened before. And when the blood would get
forth at some external Vein in the Fundament, It is hard to be opened, because
the Mouth of the Vein is made hard by the hard Excrements. But it gets easier
forth when it opens a Vein in the broad part of the straight Gut, where they
are softer. But these mouths of Veins may be hurt also by hard Excrements or
other straining, as we see in Women in travil, who have the Haemorrioids. This
pain from the causes aforesaid is greater, when the blood stopped, is sharp or
Malignant. And also the swelling Haemorrhoids have diverse forms, according to
the diversity of the mouths of the Veins and Flesh and Blood thereabouts.

Candyloma causes pain in the Arse Privities of Women also, An evil Humor is
the cause of Condy loma in the Arse and Privities of Women.
for the parts are alike Nervous. And we know the Humor to be Malignant, when
there are Ulcers in the Privities and Groyns, and also Candylomas in the
Privities and Arse. This Humor being venomous is infectious and breeds Figgs or
Warts or other Excrescences. And how this comes to pass we shall show in the
French Pox, Bubo and Cancer.

An Ulcer of the Arse is sometimes the cause of pain and matter voided, An Ulcer
or Wound in the Arse, causes an Vlcerous pain.
this comes from an Inflammation turned to an Impostum that brake, and ulcerated
and when it is deep it is foul also: or from a foul Ulcer in a Tenesmus, or
from the causes that produce Inflammation and Ulcer there mentioned. Or from an
Ulcer of the Neck of the Womb or Bladder that eats thither. Or from a wound
by external or internal means.

The Cure.
The Cure is in order according to the Disease, the Haemorrhoids, Condyloma,
Inflammation and Ulcer are cured diverse ways.

The blind Haemorrhoids (by which we mean a swolen Vein in the Arse that is
stopped and full of pain) if it be not well ordered, The Cure of the blind
Hemorrhoids.
will be inflamed and cause an Ulcer and other diseases.

This may be prevented when it comes with ease and is not hindered at its usual
time but furthered, as we showed in stoppage of Haemorrhoids.

It is cured by turning away the blood which is the cause and nourisher of it,
and allaying the pain to prevent Inflammation, and then by drying and
discussing the Tumor. And if it Ulcerate, it must be cured, as other Ulcers.

We must revel the blood that it may not flow to that part to stretch or
inflame it, especially if there be then an Inflammation by opening a Vein in
the Arm, and then derive it by opening a Vein in the Foot, Ankle, or Ham.

Or by Cupping the sides, to revel; and the Hips to derive.

Or by Leeches to the Fundament, if pain or Inflammation forbid not.

The Belly must be kept loose that the Excrements may not hurt being hard, and
by straining; With fruits and herbs in meat and broaths, or with Cassia, Manna,
or the like. Or with Clysters, if they can endure the Pipe.

Or with the Decoction of Restharrow, consume them according to Dioscorides.

Or give the Powder of Moulin with Milk, to abate the swelling alone, or with
Barley meal as much, or fried with Eggs and Butter for some days, which is a
secret.

Or the juice of Moulin alone, or with Penidies, or in a syrup, or with
Liquorish Powder, make an Electuary thereof.

Also Bdellium and Galbanum sostned with syrup of Plantane or Mullein and made
Pills give a dram.

Or Narcoticks in great pain.

Topickes are applied with a Tent, or if liquid by a Syringe, or by sprinkling,
or blowing them in.

Anodynes abate pain and heat also, with Stupefactives, many whereof consume
the Piles.

Boil yellow Quinces, or Herb True-love in Oil. Or make Oil of Gourd seed,
Poppy, Henbane, or yolks of Eggs, or Indian Nuts, or De-been, or Jesamin.

Or use this Liniment of Oil of Roses, Violet water Lillies, Willows, or
Lineseed, or sweet Almonds, with other Anodynes, or fresh butter, the yolk of
an Egg raw or roasted.

You may add Goose grease, or Hens, or Hops, or the grease of Goats, or Dears
kidneys, or Marrow of a Veal bone, Pomatum, or Aesypus, or white Wax washed to
make an Ointment.

Mucilage of Fenugreek, Linseed, or white of an Egg.

Powder of the rinds of Mandrake, Henbane and Poppy seed, and if pain be great
to four ounces of the Ointment a dram of Opium and half a dram of Saffron.

Or use Populeon with Opium, when there is heat, or Saffron.

Fomentations and injections, are made of Mallows, Marshmallows, Mulleine
leaves and flowers, Chamomil, Melilot, Dill, Elder flowers, VVater-lillies, and
Violets, and Faenugreek and Linseed boiled in water or fat broth or with Oils.

And you may make Cataplasms of the residents boiled in Milk.

Thus: Take crumbs of Bread and Barley, or Spelt, boil them in Milk and with Oil
of Roses, Violets or Butter and yolks of Eggs, make a Pultis, you may add Papp
of Apples and Mucilages of Time, Fleabane and Althaea and Saffron.

Or fry Purslane, Nightshade, Poppy and Henbane in Oil.

The Juice of Veal is a good Anodine.

Give Digesters to consume them, and if they prevail not, then Dryers, that
bite not, if there be pain.

Or make Cataplasms of Mullein, Clowns-All-heal, Plantane, black Hawkweed,
Scabious, Crownwort, Yarrow, Shepherds rod, Dogs-tongue, Horehound, Leeks,
Coleworts bruised or roasted in the Embers, and mixed with Butter or Oil.
Matthiolus commends the Ointment of Scrophularia.

Or this: Take Lillies two ounces, Orris an ounce, Moullin, Scrophularia, each
three handfuls, Flowers of Chamomil, Melilot Dill, St. John's Wort, each a
pugil; Dates ter, with Snails, without shells: boil them in steeled Water,
stamp, and add Foenugreek and Line-seed, each an ounce; Butter two ounces,
Myrrh, Frankincense, each two drams; Sassron a dram, yolks of Eggs four, make a
Cataplasin.

Or apply roasted Onions, or Leeks, with Oil of Roses or the like; or with
Dragons, or Cuckoo pintles, and Oil, least they burn, or alone, if they may be
endured. All these may be mixed with the former Cataplasms.

You may foment with a Sponge, or a Bag, with the decoction of the aforesaid,
with Dates, and Snails, to nourish, and with such as consume and dry, as
Sumach; Bramble, Pomegranate peels and flowers, Galls, Roses, Myrtle berries,
and the like mentioned in Ulcers of the Neck of the Womb, with steeled water,
and red wine.

Or anoint with Oil of Chamomil, Melilot, Dill, St. John's Wort, Lillies, Olive,
in which are boiled Raddishseed, Spurge seeds, or Earthworms, or Hog-lice, or
Sows, or Wood-lice, or Horsleeches, or red Snails without shells, or with Oil of
Bricks.

Or make a Liniment of the Plants mentioned, with Smallage, or Parsley, or
Yarrow, Juyces. Or beat them with Turpentine in a leaden Mortar, and wax.

Some fill a hollow Onion with Oil, and Verdigrease, and roast it, and anoint
with the Juice.

An Ointment. Take Frankincense, Mastick or Myrrh, each two drams; Bdellium,
Lycium, or Juice of Sumach, or Hypocistis a dram, Saffren a scruple, Mucilage
of Fleabane, and Gum Traganth, each half an ounce; a Yolk of an Eg, with Oil of
Roses, make a Liniment. If there be pain, ad a dram of Opium, or Oil of Henbane
seed, which also consumes them.

To dry more, add Ceruss, washed Lead, Litharge, Tutty three drams, the Arabian
Stone according to Dioscorides. And in a leaden Mortar, with Mucilage, and
white Wax, make an Ointment.

It will be stronger with Vitriol, burnt Alum a dram, Verdigrease, or Rust of
Iron a scruple, Camphire half a scruple.

Give a Suppository, or Suet, the Yolk of an Eg, white wax, and a little Opium.

Or make a Fume of the Decoction hot, or take in only the Fume of Moulin
boiled, to ease the pain.

Or sprinkle the Powder of Darnel, Moulin, Scrophularia upon Coals, or hot
Bricks, or Iron, and take the Fume to dry. It is better with Brimstone, or with
Honey anacardine.

Some say it is good to sit upon a Stool, made of Pinetree, and anointed with
Oil.

When a Condyloma comes from unclean Copulation without the Pox, The Cure of
Condy loma in the Funda meant and Privities.
then after purging, and bleeding, and sweating, apply Topics, as in other
malignant Humors. If it be in the Pox, then cure it as the Pox, by purging and
sweating, and if they remain, the Disease is not wholly cured, and then use
Topics in the Cure, mixing things that are proper against the pox.

Use the same Topics to digest and dry, as in the swollen Haemorrhoids,
especially the strongest, because these are harder, and the pain less, adding
stronger Ingredients.

Also the Cataplasms and Fomentations there mentioned, as Scrophularia, Moulin,
Plantane, Bramble, Pellitory, Mercury, Winter-cresses, Savine, Horehound,
Maidenhair, Rosemary, Time, Savory, Rue, green and bruised, or boiled with red
Wine, or steeled Water, or water and Vinegar, or Lie, and applied with a
Sponge, or Bag^ or ad Roots of five leaved Grass, round Birthwort, and
Bay Berries, and other Dryers, as Salt, or Peeter, raw Quinces may be added
according to Dioscorides.

Sheeps dung, or Hens dung, with the Gall of a Goat, Soap, and Vinegar mixed,
are good.

Or dissolve Tarr, and Ammoniacum in strong Vinegar.

Or use the Ointments for the Piles.

To which add this: Take Juice of Winter-cresses, Smallage, or Parsley, each an
ounce and half; Oil of Brick two ounces, Bole a dram, with Turpentine make an
Ointment.

Or, Take Oil of Tartar half an ounce, Lapis Calaminaris, Bloodstone, or red
Lead two drams.

Or, Take Vine ashes, and Dill ashes, each a dram and an half; Gum Ammoniack
dissolved in Vinegar a dram, Alum two drams, Bloodstone, or Minium a dram,
Galls half a dram, Saffron a scruple, a Yolk of an Eg roasted, Turpentine a
dram, with Oil of Roses and Wax make an Ointment.

This is stronger. Take Quicksilver two drams, Turpentine an ounce, Oil of
Nuts two ounces, red Lead two drams, Alum, Vitriol, each a dram; Verdigrease
half a dram, with Wax make a Liniment, add a little Sublimate.

A Powder to dry and consume it. Take round Birthwort a dram, dried Savine two
drams, Ashes of Hermodacts, and Myrobalans, each a dram and half; Alum a dram,
red Vitriol half a dram, red Orpiment a scruple, with Opium, and Mandrake roots
make a Powder.

Or use Sublimate boiled in Water, or Oil of Vitriol, or of Antimony.

A caustic Oil to consume the Condyloma, Fistula, Scrophulus, and any
Excrescens of Flesh without pain. Take Oil of Bricks, Mastick, and Gum Arabic
the best, and Turpentine, each three ounces; distill them in a Glass Alembick,
and mix the first Water with Ashes of Ivy, and still it again, keep the Water.

Fumes taken in, do dry up a Condyloma, such as we mentioned for the Ulcers of
the Nose. Chiefly of Cinnabar, as in the French Pox.

Sometimes they are cut off, when they are hard, as warts, or if they be long,
they are tied with Hair or Thread to rot.

Inflammation in the Fundament alone, or with Piles, or Condyloma, The Cure of
Inflammation of the Arse-hole.
is cured as other Inflammations in Women's privities, and if it turn to an
Ulcer, as an Ulcer.

Therefore we let blood in the Ham, to derive and cup to revel and derive, when
we fear a Flux to the part.

We loosen the Belly that the Excrements may not hurt. Clysters are not easily
given.

We alter with cold and moist Diet and Medicine. Dioscorides commends the Water
of Lens palustris to be drunk.

We use Anodines at the first, because the part is very sensible of pain, and
we cool without binding much, least the part should be exasperated, with things
against piles mentioned, that ease pain, and slupesie, and cool, as Ointments,
Baths, Fomentations, Cataplasms.

A cool Ointment. Take Juice of Purslane, Plantanc, Groundsoyl, each three
ounces, Mucilage of Fleabane an ounce, the Yolk of an Eg roasted, with Oil of
Roses, and Violets,

A Pultis: Take Comfrey roots, Althaea roots, each an ounce; Plantane, Moulin,
Groundsoyl, Sowthistle, each a handful; Melilot flowers, and Roses, each a
pugil; Faenugreek and Line-seed, each half an ounce; boil and stamp them, add
Flower of Lentils a pugil, Oil of Willows, Roses, and Violets, each an ounce;
Saffron a dram.

In the end, use Discussers, and if Hardness appear, Softners, and consume the
reliquies as in other Inflammations.

An Ulcer or other Solution of Continuity in the Arse-hole, The Cure of ulcers
and wounds in the Fundament.
being a sensible part, is very troublesome, and will scarce be cured in so
strait and moist a part: If it first ulcerate, it is worse, and worse yet, if
it cancerate. If it be a wound, cure it as a wound. If the Ulcer come from a
wound or Inflammation alone, or with the piles, after purging, by which alone
Ulcers are fitter to heal; Do thus,

Drink Milk often and much, or such things as are good against wounds, when
there is a wound, as vulnerary Herbs. Bettony is highly commended in this case,
and Mullein any ways taken, is good in all Diseases of the Arsehole, and other
things mentioned in the Ulcers of the Womb, as pills of Bdellium. And if Blood
flow from the wound, use the powder there mentioned.

Topics may be used as in Ulcers of women's privities, because the part is very
sensible and tender, as they, and will not admit of other Cleansers and Dryers,
then are there mentioned, except such Dryers as are mentioned for swollen
Haemorrhoids: And if there be a pain in the ulcer or Inflammation feared, use
the things against pain, prescribed in Ulcers of the womb and Haemorrhoids, as
pessaries and Fumes.

Besides which, the Roots of Carduus boiled in wine, cures the Ulcers in the
Fundament: And Raisons beaten up with Rue, if they be foul and cancer'd.

Or Ointment of Minium, Litharge, or Chalcitis called Diapalma.

And if there be a Flux of Blood, use such things as are mentioned for stopping
of Blood in other Fluxes.

CHAP. XVI. Of Pain in the Habit of the Body.
The Kinds.
WE call those Pains in the Habit of the Body which are within the Skin,
either in the soft or fleshy, or hard, or bony parts. They are of diverse sorts,
some are greater, and others less then their accidents.

We shall mention only by the way those pains whose accidents are greater, Of
Pains in the Habit of the Body which have prevailing accidents that are greater
then themselves.
because we spoke of them in their places. As in Hurt of the Functions, when
there is pain joined, as pain of weakened Motion, mentioned in Laziness,
voluntary, and after labor; this pain is ulcerated, inflamed, stretching, or
beating. Besides, there are sometimes in some kinds of unmoveableness, as in
that kind of palsy, where the Sense of Feeling remains, with a pricking, or
vehement pain. Also there are diverse pains in the Cramp, especially when it is
from wind: As we showed concerning a moving pain in the Cramp of many years
continuance. Also there is pain in Fractures and Dislocations of Bones. All
these are spoken of in impotent Motion. And in Depravation of Feeling, there is
a pain in diverse parts from a false Sense of Cold or Heat. And we showed in
Fevers, that there might be pains, as if the Limbs were bruised or broken.
Also pains inwardly may come forth as in the Headache, the pain may reach to
the Eyes, and and other pains may come to the Neck, Breast, and Belly, as we
showed. And we shall show how some superficial pains go over the whole Body. And
others are from evil Conformity or shape.

Those pains which are in the Habit of the Body greater then their Accidents,
Of painsin the Habit of the Body which are greater then their accidents.
are chiefly distinguished as they are in the Flesh, Joints, or Bones.

The Germans call the pains in the fleshy parts of the Habit of the Body, die
Fluze, Of Pains in fleshy Parts.
from the cause that is Defluxion, Distillations, or Catarrhs. Of which we
shall declare diverse kinds, in parts not fleshy, from the Joints.

These Pains or Defluxions are sometimes in the Cheeks, Chapps, Of Defluxions
or Distillations in the Habit of the Body.
or about the Ears, with Swelling, or without.

Or in the sides, or behind the Neck, with difficult turning of the Neck, or a
Creek, and Swelling of the Glandles. And if there be difficulty of swallowing,
it is a bastard Quinzy.

Also there is a pain from Defluxion in the fleshy sides of the Breast, heavy,
and tearing, that increases with touching, or Motion of the Arms, and
hinders breathing. And if it be pricking, it is a bastard Pleurisy, if the
breath be much stopped, it is to be referred to Dyspnaea, or difficulty of
breathing.

These pains from Defluxions, are also on both fleshy sides of the Back, either
above, toward the Neck, or below toward the Loins. And are increased by
Motion of the Backbone, or by lying down, or pressing, but if they endure
touching; they are spoken of in internal Pains.

These pains from Defluxion, are also in the fleshy parts of the Joints, in the
Arms, or Feet, and in the Nervous parts, if they are about the Shoulder blads,
or fleshy parts of the Hipps, they are referred to pains in the Joints.

A pain in the Joints is called Arthritis. And it is either more general in
many Joints, as in the Feet, Arms, Hands, Hips, Pains in the Joints, Arthritis,
or Joynt-gout.
Shoulders, reaching to the Back, and Neck, and sometimes to the Cheeck-bones,
and Joints. Or it is more particular in some small or great Joints, The
Sciatica, or Hip-gout.
as in the Hip called the Sciatica. That in the Shoulder is called the pain of
the Homoplate; when it is in the small Joints, in the Toes, or Foot, Pain of
the Homoplate, Podagra, Gonagra, Chiragra.
or Ancles, it is called Podagra; when in the Knee, Gonagra; when in the
Fingers, Thumb, or Wrists, Chiragra. This Disease seldom is constant in the
Shoulder alone, as in the Knee; and if it be there, it is called Arthritis,
when other Joints suffer also. Some of these kinds of Gouts have the same
accidents.

Sometimes there is a great pain fixed in one or more Joints. That which is in
the Hip is first fixed, then moves from the Thigh into the Foot, and that in
the Shoulder, inthe Arm. In all kinds, the pain is increased by Motion of the
Joint, and touching, except in the Hip and Shoulder, and then when the pain
comes outward. These pains come suddenly unto some.

There is usually a Tumor with Redness, Heat, and beating, in the Podagra, and
Chiragra, first or last; and sometimes in the Gonagra, or Arthritis, especially
in the Joints without Flesh. Sometimes it is an Oedema without Redness. But in
the pain of the Shoulder and Hip in the fleshy parts there is no such
appearance or tumor.

In continuance of time in the Podagra, and Chiragra, there will be knots in
the Joints of the Fingers and Toes. And when they are opened, there comes forth
a thin or tough white Matter, or like Chalk. And sometimes they turn to hard
uneven stones, which hinder the Motion of the Joint. And I have seen sometimes
such knots from the bending of the Arm to the Wrists, growing as it were
together, and when they have been broken, there has come forth a white Pultis,
and in one troubled with the Gout, it was in his Ear. And another Merchant long
and greivously troubled with the Gout. The same kind of chalkie Matter was all
over his Body, and the very Eyebrows also, and it turned to knots, and then
came forth.

As we showed in Fevers, there is a Synoch in every general Gout, and often in
the Podagra, Chiragra, and Gonagra, and sometimes in the Hip and Shoulder-gout.
It begins first with Chilness, and there is Thirst and Restlesness, the Pulse
is high, and the Urin red.

There are sometimes other accidents in Arthritis. And we have known a Cramp to
follow the Joynt-gout which has been worse then it self.

The pain about the great Bones (besides that which is in parts without flesh,
Pains about the Bones.
of which we spoke in the Pain of the Joints, and that without the Skull of
which in Headache) is of two sorts. The one is chiefly about the Head bones,
the other is about many other Bones.

There is a kind of pain about the Head or Forehead, An external Cephalaea.
which is lasting, which is called an external Cephalaea, or Headache,
differing from the internal mentioned. This is about the Bone, and is augmented
by being touched. It sometimes springs from an internal Headache, or is joined
with it, or is alone outwardly on both sides, or on the right or left, as a
Haemicrania. Sometimes it is like a Nail driven into one part, Clavus.
and called Clavus. Sometimes it makes Nodes in the Forehead, like that in the
French Pox, and in other Bones.

There is another kind of outward pain in the Head, Outward Heaviness of the
Head.
which goes before other pains from Defluxion, into the Joints and fleshy
parts. In which something seems to lie heavy upon the Head, and there is
outward, as if the skin were flead off, and increases with touching of the
Hair especially. And oftentimes there is a Swelling soft and oedematous, broad,
and dispersed about the Neck, and hinder-part of the Head, and other accidents,
as in the Heaviness of the Head, coming within the Skull, especially when they
meet together.

There is another kind of pain about many Bones from a Disease not known by the
Ancients that was brought from the Indiies, The French Pox or Neopolitane.
first called the Neopolitane, then the French Disease: The contagious French
Pox.
And because it comes by Copulation, the Venereal Pox. Of which there are
diverse kinds, as I shall show, and this pain about the Bones is one, and is
called the contagious Pain or Pox.

This pain being near about the Bones, is chiefly in the middle Seat without
the Flesh, either in Latitude or Longitude, as in the naked inside of the Leg,
and about the Shoulders, Homoplate, and Arms, and before, in the Breast, which
bony part can scarce suffer from another internal Cause. And therefore the Pox
is known only by this sign sometimes. Also there is pain without in the Head,
especially in the Forehead to the Eye brows, and about the Temples, sixed like
an outward Cephalaea.

This pain is violent and implacable, pulling as it were the skin from the
bones, and not to be touched. It increases toward night, and is not abated as
other pains, but augmenteth by heat. And therefore in bed they are worse, and
it comes by degrees, not suddenly as Arthritis.

Sometimes there are hard Tumors or Nodes in the Forehead, Skins, and insides of
the Hands, which are unequal and increase.

And other accidents, as Falling of the Hair, Spots, Pustles, and Ulcers, as we
shall show,

The Causes.
It is necessary that in all Pains of the Habit of the Body mentioned, that the
sensible parts be affected as the Muscles, Membranes, and Nerves, from whence
come stretching pains, or pains from compression, solution of continuity,
simple distemper, congestion of Humors, Influxion, or evil Quality.

Vehement Stretching of the parts causes this pain, Distention or Stretching,
is the cause of pain, where other Symptoms are greater.
by immoderate Motion in Exercise and Labor: Hence comes the stretching lazy
pain mentioned. And violent motion, when the Muscles are contracted with the
Cramp: As we showed in Spasmus. Also it comes from Extension of the Muscles by
straining, which cause Bleeding, such as is in inflamed or ulcerated Laziness,
or such as increases by touching and motion. This pain is sometimes in the
broad Muscle of the Breast, which moves the Arm, coming from strong holding of
the bridle in riding; sometimes in the Feet and Knees, from riding in short
Stirrups.

Or in the Back, from stretching of the Membranes and Ligaments, by the great
Bowels, lying upon them; or by a Tumor, as in diverse Diseases of the Liver,
Spleen, Guts, Mesentery, and Womb, and in women with child, as we showed.

Or it is from wind that is bred by moisture or weak heat, or coming from other
parts, which lifts up and stretches the muscles, as we showed in windy
Cramp. And if it be between the membranes, it is a pain like that from
Defluxion, but not so fixed, but wandering, and stretching, and not long
lasting. And if it come to the skin, the pain is with palpitation or beating,
as we showed.

Also Compression of the parts may cause pain without breaking of the skin
which if it is, A Compression is the Cause of pain in which the Symptoms are
greater.
belongs to Diseases of the skin. As from long lying in a great Disease, when
there is a pain in the Back, and in other sensible parts; and from external
violence, as when from pressing of the Elbow, there is a numness and pricking
of the two Fingers.

Or when the Bones are out of their places, and lie upon the Muscles,
Membranes, or Nerves, there is pain, which is greater and longer, when there is
Swelling or Heat, as when there is a great pricking pain, from a violent motion
of the Back or Neck, or from Bones out of Joint, while they lie upon these
parts, and hinder motion: As we showed in want of Motion from a Dislocation.

The same pain may be from broken Bones out of their place, which tear the
parts, and hinder motion, as we showed in want of Motion from a Fracture. Or
from the Spondils of the Back broken out, which cause Pain, Swelling, and
Ulcers, before they come forth; as I knew in a Child of seven years old, who
was born crook-baked, and had a Tumor in his left Shoulder, out of which came
many small bones of his Back, with much matter.

Solution of Continuity internal in a sensible part, causes pain, Rupture is
the cause of pain in the Hernia.
as when the Membrane about the Belly is broken: Especially when the guts come
forth, and there is an Hernia. As for other sensible parts, as Muscles and
Nerves, they can scarce be broken without an external force. Of these we shall
speak in the Diseases of the Skin.

Also Distemper causes pain, Distemper causes pain, with other Symptoms
joined.
whether cold or hot. If it be outward, it is to be referred to Diseases of the
skin; if inward, it comes from Defluxion, or congestion of Humors: as shall be
showed. And in the Fits of Agues, the pain felt in the Back and Members, comes
first from Cold, and then from heat, because the Cause lies in the great
Vessels which are near the Back, and inflame the Nervous parts.

An Humor heaped, which is corrupt from evil Nourishment or Weakness of
Concoction or crude, Congestion of Humors causes an external Headache.
causes pain in the bloodless parts, about the Bones, Periostium, and
Membranes; where by reason of Cold, they are more easily heaped up, and more
slowly discussed. This is often in the Head, between the skul and skin, by
reason of the plenty of Veins, which afford Excrements, which cannot easily be
discussed, by reason of the thickness of the skin: Hence comes Cephalaea or
Heach-ach external. This may be in other places upon bare Bones, like that in
the French Pox, with Swelling, and Nodes, when the Nourishment of the part
abounds, and turns to a Callus: as shall be showed in external Tumors.

Also when these Humors are heaped without the Skull, Congestion of Humors,
causes outward Heaviness. Congestion of Humors causes the Joynt-gout.
there comes a pain external, which goes before Defluxions, and Joynt-gouts.

The same Excrements about the bloodless Region of the Joints, not flowing from
other parts, may cause a kind of Joynt-gout. This comes by degrees, not
suddenly, as that which comes from a Defluxion, nor does it cause great pain,
and the tumor is only oedematous. This Arthritis or Joynt-gout seldom comes
first, but follows the other, which comes from Defluxion, when the part is
weakened, from which Defluxions and new Excrements are gathered. Hence they are
free from the Gout, but there is some sign of it, either from Defluxion or
Congestion of Humors. Or if there be another kind of Arthritis from both, as a
Sciatica: It lasts long, and has great changes.

A Defluxion of Humors causes sudden pains, A Defluxion of Humors, causes the
Joynt-gout and other pains.
and they are either simple Defluxions, or Arthritical. The Humors either flow
from within the Vessels, or otherwise.

Humors congested without the Vessels that cause these two sorts of pain, are
supposed either phlegmatic or waterish, but a waterish Humor, or pure Whey
flowing to these parts, causes resolution or tumor without pain, rather then
with great pam. And therefore it must be mixed with other Excrements, and then
as it is more choleric, sharp, or salt, or evil, it stretches and tearing the
part more or less, and causes pain accordingly.

The Original of this serous Humor comes from the Head, and flows downwards.
And it is sometimes congested in the inward part thereof, within the Skull from
the Blood which is plentiful in the Head, when it is crude or impure. And when
any part thereof is unfit for Nourishment, and will not be concocted, there are
Excrements in the Brain, which fall down, and cause pain. Before which there
was a Heaviness in the Head, from the Matter heaped up, and other accidents.
Also excrementitious blood sent to the Brain, comes from the weakness of the
first or second Concoction, or from its Crudity, and the rather if the Brain be
weak. Hence it is that though good blood be bred in the first Concoction, yet
because it cannot be assimilated, or brought into substance in the third, there
are many Excrements, and more when it is not at first well concocted, or mixed
with Excrements. This cause of the weakness of the Brain, is either from the
Parents, or from age and Disease, especially from Wine and Venery, the one
stupefying, and the other spending the Spirits, and both weakening the Nerves
and Brain, and taking away strength: Of the excess of which the Gout is the
punishment. The plenty of this humor in the brain causes it to flow down, or
external cold wind, or moistness that pierces the Brain, and straineth and
squeeseth it, or heat of the Sun or Baths causes Defluxions, rather by opening
the passages, and stirring up the Faculty to expel, then by melting the Phlegm,
as they call it. Also great motion that shakes the Head, by Neesing, Coughing,
or the like, causes the abounding Humor to slow down.

And we have showed that the same humor may be without the Skull, and flow
down, and cause pain, before which was Headache, or Heaviness, and Swelling of
the skin. And also we showed the Cause why Humors are easily gathered there.
And the same Causes that made the Humor flow which was internal, may move the
external, as cold and heat; and sooner, as we ordinarily may perceive.

The Defluxion of this Humor, which is both within and without the Skull, is
diverse. For if that flow, which is in the Skull, it causes Diseases in the
Habit of the Body, and others also, as it falls into the bottom of the skull
into the three cavities. For if it fall into the upper chamber next the
Forehead, then it is strained through the holes of the straining Bone, and
comes like clear water out of the Nose, and is called Coriza. If it fall into
the middle Cell or Chamber, which goes to the Palate with many holes, it
either passes thin presently, or continues, and turns thick into Snot, and
so is blown out at the Nose, or hawked out. Or if it flow toward the Eyes, it
is turned to Tears: as we shall show in things sent forth. But if it follow the
passage of the Nerves, in the middle cell, or fall into the hinder Cavity of
the Skull, which is lower and larger, through the great hole behind, which
contains the the narrow, from whence come the pain of Nerves, it falls into the
Habit of the Body, into fleshy parts or Joints, and causes the Gout. Also when
the Humor gathered without the Skull, flows down under the skin, it causes
pains according to the parts, as we shall show.

If it flow upon the fleshy parts, either inwardly or outwardly, then it gets
between the Muscles and nervous Membranes, or between the Flesh and Skin, and
Glandles, and causes Heaviness, when it is much, or stretching, or pricking,
when it is of evil Quality, or a Tumor occult or manisest, like an Oedema, and
if the pain be great, and cause a Flux of Blood, it causes Inflammation, which
sometimes is known by heat and beating pain. And if it be outward, there is
apparent Tumor and Redness. These pains from Defluxions are usually in the Back
and Neck, and Face, and Breast sometimes, and Joints, as we showed. And when
these parts have been used to Defluxions, they are weaker and loofer, and more
apt to receive them.

If this Humor from within the Skull, flows by the ways of the Nerves into the
Joints, or from without under the skin, as Fernelius says it may, then as it
is about the Lips, Shoulders, Knees, Arms, Feet, or Finger-joynts, Back, or
Cheeks, in one or more places, it causes diverse kinds of Gouts. In which they
suppose the Joint to be the part affected, and some think the inward part
chiefly, because the pain is felt there, or increased by motion. But in regard
the moving Joint is compounded inwardly, of two Bones, which have no Periostium
in that part, but only a hard Gristle, and there is no Nerve there, and
therefore they are all infensible, the pain cannot be within. Nor in the Joint
of the Thigh, where there is an insensible Ligament. Moreover in regard the
Bones are so exactly joined in the Joints, that there is no space between, and
outwardly are closed with Ligaments, so that nothing can get in, how can any
humor get in to breed the Gout, when there is no passage nor Vein. Moreover the
Ligaments without that bind the Joint, are infensible, or if they have any
feeling, it is from the Periostium to which they grow, and that is very little.
How then can there be so great pain in the Gout, if it be there? Neither can it
be from the Tendons, which have little or no feeling. Besides, the Tumor
without, which is at a distance from the Joint, and the pain which is remote,
shows that the pain is not in the Joint. Also the chalky Matter, and the Nodes
in the Gout, are not always found in the Joints, but in the parts adjacent.
And though they grow in the Joint sometimes, yet is not the pain therefore in
the Joints, or in the insensible parts whereof they are made. For they are from
other Causes, and cannot cause pain, except it be by hurting the part adjacent,
nor other inconvenience, but Deformity and Hindrance of Motion. For no pain can
be but from a sensible part, which is not in the Joints. Therefore the
Gout-pain is not from the Joints, but the parts adjacent, as the Nerves,
Muscles, and Membranes. And the reason why the pain is so near the Joint, is
the meeting of the Nerves there about, where they are comprehended in a little
room, and bound about with Membranes, and Ligaments, and solded together to
move the Joint, when in other places they are free, and go straight along the
Body. Hence it is that when any matter falls into these narrow and crooked
places, it easily stays there, and afflicts the Nerves causing pain. Which
pain, if there be a Humor, is fixed in the strait passages, through which the
Nerves run; as in the Sciatica, where the pain is above the Joint, almost in
the Loins, where the fourth Nerve goes to the Leg, and is bent outwardly, from
the Cavity of the Hip, while the Humor sixeth, and when it removes, the pain
removes to the Knee, to which the Nerve goes, or to the Foot; the pain is the
same in the Shoulder. And when the Matter is much the pain is in diverse parts,
where it is fixed, and in those narrow passages, where the Nerves pass through
the holes of the Bone, as in the Backbone, where it easily stays, and causes
pain, and chiefly where the net work of the Nerves goes from the Neck to the
Arms, and from the Loins to the Thighs.

The Disease that causes this pain, is either stretching from much Humor, such
as when it falls in a fleshy part, differing only in that the humor in this
flows to the Muscles next the Joints, and causes not so great pain, as when
the Nerves are afflicted, and there is an Oedema in in the part. And if the
humor be evil and infect the Nerves, the pain will be worse, and heat and
redness will come from the Flux of Blood, and lastly a Swelling: as we shall
show in the Gout, from a Flux of Blood. Al these cease when the Excrements are
consumed, and return upon a new Defluxion. And after many Defluxions, some
reliquies remain not discussed, which if they be glutinous, turn by degrees
into Chalk. And if they are earthy, as serous humors use to be, as I showed in
the Stone, they turn to Stones. This is chiefly in the Hands, and FeetJoynts,
because the humor can fall no further.

The Disposition of the part receiving, is a cause also why the humor goes
hither or thither, as when the passages of the Nerves, and the places about the
Joints, are too loose. Or when there is haereditary Weakness in the Nerves or
Brain, or when there has been a Disease, or is a Defluxion constantly
stretching the passages. Hence it is that the humor, though it be not in great
plenty in these passages so stretched, and made loose, as it is usually, when
it causes pain, yet it easily goes thither. And because it uses to go to the
extremities by its thinness and the openness of the passages, rather then stop
by the way; and not only loosen the place, but separate the parts one from
another. Hence it is that the Podagra, of Foot-gout, and Chiragra, or
Hand-gout, are more usual then the other Gouts. And why after once, they come
again monthy and yearly, and cannot be quite driven away. And the Sciatica, and
other Gouts above, though the Matter stop in them, yet it is more seldom,
because the matter descends, and the pain will not be so loosned as in the
Hands and Feet, except there be a continual Defluxion. And a general Arthritis
or running Gout, is not so usual as the other kinds, because the humor that
causes it, must be a great quantity, to go into almost all the Joints. And
because the seldom coming thereof weakens the parts but little, and also
because (as I shall show) it comes often from another Cause then a Defluxion
from the Head.

When Blood in the Veins falls about the Joints, it begets a hot Gout, with a
Fever, and Inflammation, and the like: as it does Distention and Heat in any
other part.

This is from the abundance of it, or when it is too hot, and causes a Synoch
Fever, which usually presently follows the hot Gout, and attends it. And as an
Erysipelas comes in a Synoch Fever, from the Blood sent to the skin, so does
the Gout from the same sent to the Joints, and they who are subject to the
Gout, are subject to a Synoch, with Erysipelas. And the Patient hopes sometimes
it will be but an Erysipelas, when he is subject to have both. Also the Blood
being made more impure and thin by excrementitious Whey, may cause an
Arthritis, with a smaller Fever. And when the Gout is more general in many
parts, and comes oftener, it is from Blood, which easily goes through the Body,
and not from a Defluxion from the Head, which is seldom the cause, but when it
is in great quantity. Although a particular Gout, as the Feet and Hip, may be
often from blood, with a Fever. In these Gouts from blood, if it be very hot,
and inflame the Nerves, the pain and burning is greater, with redness and
tumor, (except it lie low, as in Sciatica) and with an erysipelated Phelgmon.
But if the blood be waterish, the tumor will be spread like an Oedema, and the
pain less, and not very troublesome, but because it is in diverse parts.

The cause of the heat and foulness of the Blood is mentioned in Synochs, as
the use of strong wine excessively which weakens the brain by astonishment,
and makes the blood increase, grow hot and thin, which is easily therefore
inflamed, to produce a Fever, by which a part of it is sent to the Joints.
This is the cause and punishment of the Gout. Hence it is the rich man's
Disease, who uses excess in wine, and spiced meats, that inflame the blood.
And sometimes the poor man's from other causes, as is the Fever with Erysipelas.
It comes to all by the Disposition of the Part through weakness, and by
looseness of the passages; as we showed in Arthritis from Defluxion, especially
if the Flux has been often, which causes greater weakness.

Also Blood sent to other parts that are fleshy in Synochs, as into the
Emunctuaries of the Kernels there, may cause pain, with a Tumor and Fever: as
we showed in Fevers. Or disturb by its plenty and thinness, when it goes to
any part of its own accord, or by labor or pain.

An occult malignant Quality, as appears by the effect, being external, An evil
quality causes the French Pox.
causes the pain about the Bones, which is called the fourth sort of French
Pox. This Quality comes from the Body of another infected, whether totally or
in part: Therefore Whores infected, though they walk abroad, and have not great
accidents, may infect others. And sometimes a Whore takes it, and gives it to
the next Customer, and clears her self. This Quality insecteth by touch,
especially of the naked tender Privities in Copulation, and so it passes from
one Instrument of Generation to another, and so to the whole Body. Hence it is
that it came from the Indies to us. And it may come by insected Excrements
other ways, as Sweat in Hankerchers or Shirts, or from Spittle, even as the
poison of venomous Breasts is communicated by biting; therefore beware of
Spoons and Cups, wherein they drink, and Kisses by which Nurses infect
Children. For in my Fathers time in our honest Family, my Mother was infected
with her Child that she gave suck to, by that means, through a Harlot that was
infected, and her servant. And my Father with the help of a Chyrurgion, cured
them both by ordinary means. It may come also from the touching of mattery
Clouts. And a Midwise of sixty years old in Paris, delivering a woman that had
a venereal Ulcer, had an Ulcer in her Hand, by which means she infected many
honest Women, when she touched their Privities, as Lewisa Burgesia, the famous
Midwife to the Queen of France, recorded in her Book. Few Bodies are thus
infected, but Infants and very tender People often touched. Nor can it come by
breath, for then more would be infected; although many to smoother their
unlawful Lechery, pretend it.

This Quality is in a Vapor or Humor, and goes from the Body to Body, and
infects the Part it first touches, and seldom stays there, but goes like
poison through the body, especially into the membranous parts; and if it be
outward, it is like an Elephantiasis, and causes loss of Hair, Pustles, and
Ulcers: As that shall be showed in diseases of the Skin from the Pox. If it be
deep in the solid parts, then it gets into the Periostium and Membranes, and
causes pain about the Bones, especially when there is no Flesh, and where many
Membranes and Nerves meet in the Heart, Breast, Skins, and the like. These
pains are increased with heat, and produce Nodes, after the Periostium is eaten
away; as we showed in Cephalaea, from congestion of humors. And few other
inconveniences, but no great change in the Spirits and Humors, nor does any
thing appear of that Nature in the Urin, Excrements, and Hurt of the Functions,
except accidents do arise from great pain, and long continuance, or violent
medicines, which we must rather study to cure then the Pox.

There is also inwardly a secret Malignity, An evil malignant quality causes
external malignant Head ach.
which being an enemy to some parts, causes pain in the Habit of the Body,
like this, such as we showed might come from the Pox, taken from without, or a
Headache external without the Pox, when besides the distemper causes pain,
there is also Malignity, by which it lasts longer. And some pains of the
Joints that come from Defluxion, A malignant Quality causes a malignant gout.
when the Humor is malignant, may produce something malignant, and unknown,
formerly in diverse Diseases, which is often and lasting, and has its proper
accidents, and can scarce be cured. And we may very well conceive that the pain
in the Cramp, A malignant quality is the cause of the running pain in the Cramp.
which runeth through the Body, comes from a perverse quality that is offensive
to the Nerves, by the wonderful and strange accidents it produces for a long
time, by the Nerves, through the whole Body, to the extremity of them, where
the pain is greatest. A malignant quality is the cause of pain in depraved
Touching.
And those Diseases which are called Colds and Heats, come from Malignity, as
appears by their prodigious Symptoms.

The Cure.
When accidents are joined with pains in the Habit of the Body, The Cure of
pains in the Habit of the Body, when other accidents are greater.
and are greater we showed the Cure thereof to be in the accidents that are
most urgent. As when pain comes from Distention, and from too much motion, it
becomes a stretching pain with Laziness, or a violent with the Cramp: The Cure
of one is showed in the Cramp, and of the other in Laziness. And if the pain
increase from too much motion, and a Flux of blood be joined, you must use the
same Cure. And if the pain be chiefly in the Back from inward Diseases, it must
be cured as the Symptom of these Diseases. If Wind cause stretching pain, cure
it as Spasmus, or Cramp, or Palpitation. If the Members are weary, and broken
by long lying and Compression, restore them as in Laziness. If any part is
pained from Compression, the cause being taken away, it cease, except
Inflammation follow, which requires a Cure by it self. If pain come from broken
or dislocated Bones appointed for motion that press the parts: The Cure is
showed in Immobility. If it be in other Fractures, that cause no loss of
motion, because other internal and external accidents follow with Tumors, cure
it as in Tumors. If pain come from a Rupture, see Ruptures and Tumors from
thence. The Cure of Headache from Humors,
If there be evil Feeling from a hot or cold Distemper external upon the part,
see the Diseases of the Skin. If from Fevers, see Fevers. If external
Headache come from Humors, see Headache. If in a Palsy there be pain from a
malignant Defluxion, see the Palsy.

We shall distinguish the Cause of Pains in the Habit of the Body, The Cure of
Pains in the Habit of the Body which are greater then the accidents.
which are greater then their accidents; as the three kinds, either such as are
about the Joints, or Flesh, or Bones, and cure them in respect of their Causes.
But if the pain be from Flux of Blood, or Water called the pains of the Joints:
The Cure of Arthritis from Congestion of Humors.
We shall cure it the same way. As if it be arthritis from the congestion of
Humors, because it come from a Defluxion first. The Cure of external heaviness
of the Head from congestion of humors.
And the same way of cure shall show how a heaviness of the Head from
congestion of Humors, that goes before an Arthritis and Defluxion may be cured,
and they prevented. The Cure of Pain in the Habit of the Body from wind.
And if pain like that from Defluxion, come of wind, because the same things
that dissolve a flowing Humor expel wind: We shall use the same way to cure and
prevent the breeding thereof. But pains from a malignant quality, will have a
particular Cure, as from the Pox, and the like, of which, when we have spoken
of the Cure of Defluxions and Joints.

Defluxions that fall generally into the Habit of the Body, Prognostics in
Defluxions in general, and in the Gout.
though they are usual, and upon diverse parts, molesting more or less, and
coming from light Causes and returning, except they fall upon the inward
parts, especially the Midriff, are not so dangerous, and are easier cured then
the Joints. And pain from wind, is more easy to be cured. All Joyntpains are
perverse and last long, and easily return. Among which, though the general Gout
be the greatest pain, and sometimes dangerous, with other accidents, yet because
the cause must be great, that must send it to so many places, it is not so
usual, and it comes slower, and seldomer then the rest, and sometimes never
returns. Podagra and Chiragra are most usual, and return monthly or yearly, and
are hard to be cured when sixed, but kill not but by other accidents, for many
have lived long with the Gout, and others by the Gout have been freed from
greater Diseases, which the Defluxion using to fall before, upon more noble
parts would have caused. The Sciatica and Shoulder-gout, are less usual then
the Podagra, and more then the Arthritis, they return seldomer then the
Podagra, and sooner then Arthritis, and sometimes are away some years, and
return again, and last as long as an Arthritis, for some months, but with less
danger. These things observed, we must make our Praedictions accordingly,
especially in the Podagra fixed or haereditary, and not promise rashly to cure.
But we must try if we can make it less, or come seldomer, and bring it to pass
if possible, and comfort the Patient that age abateth the pain.

The Method of curing in Defluxions, The preventing and curing of Defluxions,
and Arthritis, and its Kinds.
and Joynt-pains, is to prevent, and take away the pain: We must prevent so
that they may return less and seldomer. By hindering the increase of blood or
water in the Head, or the whole Body, by Diet and Evacuations, and Correcters
of Distemper and Weakness. We divert the Flux from the Joints and other parts,
with things that stop, or by derivation of the Humor. And we confirm and
strengthen the parts, to which they use to flow, when they are loose and weak,
that they may not receive the humors, and amend the distemper.

After the Defluxion is fallen, and in the time of pain, we cure by stopping at
the Fountain, or straintning the passages, through which the Humor flows, and
by Revulsion from the part, and Derivation and Repercussion, and we allay the
pain, and prevent a new Defluxion, proceeding by degrees, especially after the
Humor is fallen down to things that digest it, if it be Blood, and discuss, as
in other Inflammations. If it be another Humor, let the means be stronger, and
if it lie deep, more attractive, and consuming or opening. And in the
Declination, we strengthen the part, and consume the residue. These are done
diverse ways, as the Defluxion is upon the Joints, and Members, or Back,
Breast, or Neck, or Face (of which in Toothache) or as it is a general
Arthritis, or a Podagra, Chiragra, Gonagra, Sciatica, or Shoulder-gout, called
Pain of the Homoplate, by Diet, or Medicine, by Evacuations, by Stool, Vomit,
Spitting, Sweating, Pissing, Cutting, Burning: Also by Alterers inwardly taken,
and outwarly applied, as follows.

The Diet must be to prevent Excrements and Humors, A Diet to cure the
Arthritis, and Defluxions.
or keep them from flowing. Let the Air be temperate and dry, for cold, windy,
cloudy, and moist Weather and hot, provokes Defluxions, and the more when it
suddenly alters from cold to hot. Let not the Patient wash his Hands or Feet in
Water, for it is hurtful, whether cold or hot. And Wine is better, as we shall
show in strengthening the Joints. Let the Diet be convenient in quantity and
quality, with Exercise, Sleep, and other Motions of Mind and Body: As we showed
at large in Weakness of the Stomach, to prevent Excrements. If it comes from
Blood, we must diet as in Fevers, especially in Gouts, that easily return, as
the Podagra, and good order of Diet-wine, and Women will prevent, or abate the
Gout: As when there is a simple exquisite Diet, only eating once a day,
abstaining from wine, or drinking it sparingly, or with water. Instead whereof
they may have Drinks made fit, or Mead. As for Venery, they must either give
it over, or use it seldom, and not standing. And this may be the reason why
Hippocrates says that Women have not the Gout, before they have used Venery,
and Eunuchs seldom have the Gout.

When the pain is begun, let the Diet be thin, and let them fast as much as
they can; and use Medicines proper in their Diet, according to the accidents.
In the Arthritis forbid wine. And if they be hot or feverish, give steeled
water, Juleps, and sharp Syrups, if the Defluxion be in its Course. If they be
not hot, give the Decoction of Coriander, with Syrups, or Hydromel, and rub the
whole parts, and the opposite to derive the Humor instead of Exercise.

To prevent Defluxions and Joyntpains, open the Belly, The Cure of prevention
of Defluxions, and arthritis by Evacuations.
and purge Spring and Fall, and at other times, if the Body be foul, as the
Humor is waterish, which requires stronger means, or bloody, which requires
less, with Praeparatives if need be: as we showed. If a Podagra comes from
Blood, we showed the cure in a Synoch, with Erysipelas. If Defluxions and
Arthritis come from water, there are Purges mentioned in Diseases of the Brain
and Nerves. If the Humor now flow, they must be used warily, least the
Defluxion increase thereby, chiefly in the Joynt-pains; not only from Blood, in
which it is enough to keep the Belly open, but if from other Defluxions,
because they are thin, and easily stirred, use gentle Purgers, with Binders,
and divert the Matter rather then move it with strong Medicines. This must be
observed at the beginning, in the Cure of Arthritis, in the Pains of the
Joints, it is best to avoid strong Purging, not only for the reasons showed,
but to hinder pain by violent motion, use Laxatives first and after strong
Purgers.

Thus, give Clysters to prevent and cure, for they open the Belly, and draw
from the Joints and other parts. Especially in the Sciatica, and pain of the
Back and Loins, from Defluxions, because they come near to the parts affected,
and abate the pain, and if they be strong, draw the Humor away: Let them be
such as were mentioned in the like case.

Or if the pain come from blood, make a cooling and pricking Clyster of the
Decoction of Polypody, Mallows, Marshmallows, Violets, Beets, Mercury, Bran,
and cold Seeds, with Sugar, Honey, Oil, Butter, Cassia, Yolks of Eggs, and the
like.

In other cases of Defluxions and Arthritis, especially in the Hip and Parts
adjacent, use this common loosning, pricking, and anodyne Clyster. Take Althaea
roots two ounces, Orris an ounce, Mallows, Blues, Beets, Coleworts, Mercury,
Bettony, Calamints, Pennyroyal, each a handful; Chamomil, Melilot, Dilt,
Stoechas, and Lavender flowers, each a pugil; Foenugreek, and Lineseed; each
half an ounce; Caraway seeds, and Rue, each a dram; Bran a pugil, boil and
strain, add Honey two ounces, red Sugar an ounce, Turpentine, dissolved with
the York of an Eg, a dram and an half, Hiera, Catholicon, or Electuary Indi
half an ounce, Oil of Lillies, and Chamomil, each an ounce and half; Sal Gem
half a dram: make a Clyster.

Another that heats and discusseth. Take Orris roots an ounce, Calamus,
Elicampane, each half an ounce; Hedgmustard, Groundpine, Calamints, or Balm,
Time, Marjoram, Bettony, each three handsuls; Flowers of St. John's Wort,
Staechas, Lavender, and Rosemary, each a pugil; Bay Berries half an ounce,
Cummin, and Sasely seed, each two drams; boil them in Wine, and Water, add
Honey of Rosemary an ounce and an half; Juice of Rue an ounce, Sack two ounces,
Benedicta Laxativa an ounce, Castor a scruple, Oil of Rue three ounces, with a
little Salt make a Clyster, if you add half a dram of Oil of Spike, or a little
Oil of Time, Rosemary, Calamints, it will be stronger.

In the pain about the Loins, give Oil of Rue alone.

A sharp diverting and purging Clyster. Take Brionyroots, and Hermodacts, each
six drams, Agarick, Asarum, each two drams; Hedg-mustard, Pennyroyal,
Wormwood, each a handful; Tops of Centaury a pugil, Rue, and Hedgmustard seed,
each two drams; boil, strain, and add Honey an ounce and an half, Vrin of a Boy
two ounces, Hiera Logadij, Rufi, or Colocynthidos three drams, Juice of Water
cresses an ounce, Oil of bitter Almonds three ounces, with a little Salt make a
Clyster. If you add a dram of Coloquintida, it will be better.

Also Decoctions mixed with the Pickle of Fishes, and urin alone, makes good
Clysters. Some add Chemical Oils

And others give Sorry in Wine, which corrodes, and the Pickle of the Fish
Silurus.

Suppositories also that are sharp, stir up Nature, and derive from the part.
As, Take boiled Honey, and add a dram of Hiera, Esula half a dram, Sal Gem. a
scruple, with Mouse dung make a Suppository.

All these Purges composed against the Gout and other Defluxions; if it come
from Blood, give gentle things, as Syrup of Roses, Cassia, Manna, Catholicon,
Diaprunis, Tryphera Persica, and Broth of an old Cock, Dioscorides.

Or this: Take Rhubarb four scruples, Spike half a scruple, infuse them in
Water of Iva, or the like, strain, and dissolve some of the forementioned
therein. Or if you will have it stronger, two drams of Electuary of Juice of
Roses.

To cleanse the Blood. Take Hops and Fumitory, each a handful; Cordial Flowers
a pugil, Sebestens six pair, Tamarinds half an ounce, Liquorish three drams,
Polypody half an ounce, Thyme, and Epithymum, each a dram; Senna two drams,
boil, strain, and infuse therein Rhubarb a drams Spike a scruple, Citrine
Myrobalans a dram and half, strain them ad Syrup of Roses an ounce, or half an
ounce of Catholicon, or Triphera: make a Potion.

Or this Decoction. Take the Broth of an old Cock, Capon, or Veal, boil
therein Bark of Lignum vitae, or the Wood two ounces, and insuse in the hot
strained Liquor, Senna two ounces, let it cool by degrees twenty four hours,
add Syrup of Roses four ounces. Give it four mornings, with a little
Cinnamon Water, this draws Water from the part. And some add an ounce of the
Water of Bears Ear to every Dose.

Or this Syrup. Take Myrobalans, Chebs, yellow and indy, each an ounce;
Polypody an ounce and half, Raisons stoned twenty pair, Cordial Flowers two
drams, Spike half a dram, infuse them in Wormwood-water, boil, and strain, and
add Juice of Roses six ounces, Manna four ounces, Sugar two ounces, give three
ounces at a time.

If it come from a wheyish Humor, give Hiera, Alephangina, Assaieret, or Pills
of Rhubarb and Agarick.

An Electuary: Take Catholicon an ounce and half, Senna six drams, Tartar half
an ounce, Anise-seed two drams, Rue seed half a dram, Roots of five leaved
Grass a dram, Ginger half a dram, Cinnamon a dram, with Syrup of Roses make an
Electuary: Give a bolus every week.

A Potion: Take Chips of Guaicum half a pound, Roots of Dwarse elder,
Elicumpane, Hermodacts, each half an ounce; Senna four ounces, Agarick half an
ounce, Ginger half a dram, with Honey, Wine, and Water, make a Decoction for
six doses, every other third day, or twice a week.

A Potion: Take Agarick two drams, Rhubarb a dram and half, Myrobalans, Chebs,
and Citrine, each half a dram; Aloes a dram, Roots of five leaved Grass, of
Birthwort, Spike, Mastick, Myrrh, Amber, Cubebs, Ginger, each a scruple; with
Turpentine make Pills: Give half a dram twice or thrice in a week, add
Diagredium, if you will have it stronger.

Or these: Take Rhubarb, Agarick, each half an ounce; Myrobalans, Chebs, and
Citrine, each a dram; Aloes two drams, Sarcocol, Rdellium, Sagapenum, each half
a dram; Roots of Birthwort, Valerian, Meum, Gentian, Herb Iva, Germander, Tops
of Centaury, St. John's Wort, Parsley seed, each a scruple; Spike, Zedoary,
Ginger, Mace, Sal Gem. each half a scruple; with Syrup of Coleworts make a Mass.

Pills of Hermodacts good in the Joints, may be used to prevent. The Arabians
make them of Hermodacts, Cummin, and Ginger, with Honey; the Greeks add
Carthamus seeds, Euphorbium, Myrrh, Mastick, Anise, Pepper. The strongest are
these called the lesser, made of Scammony, Hermodacts, Myrobalans, Aloes, and
Roses, and are good in a hot Cause. Those called the greater, work strongest,
and are best in a cold Cause, made of Hermodacts, Coloquintida, Turbith,
Myrobalans, Aloes, Bdellium, Sagapenum, Opopanax, Sarcocol, Euphorbium, Castor,
Rue seed, Agrimony, Smallage, and Saffron, with Juice of Coleworts. Arthritical
or Joynt-pills, are made of Hermodacts, Turbith, Agarick, Scammony, Aloes, Sal
Gem. with Spices, Gums, and Seeds that break the Stone.

Or make Pills of Hermodacts, choosing always the white, smooth, and easy to
be beaten, that have a white Powder, take heed of the Colchick poison, whose
heads are wrinkled, and are black within, and without, or dark red. Thus, Take
true Hermodacts half an ounce, Aloes, Turbith, Agarick, each a dram and half;
Rhubarb, Myrobalans, Citrine, and Chebs, each a dram; Mastick two scruples,
Euphorbium a scruple, Ginger, and Cummin seeds, each half a dram; Saffron half
a scruple, with Honey, or Syrup of Roses make a Mass, give a dram, add if you
will make them stronger, Diagredium a dram, or Troches of Alhandal two
scruples, and to two scruples, add a scruple of Rhubarb, and with the Juice of
Iva, Coleworts, or Roses make Pills.

Or thus: Take Aloes six drams, Citrine Myrobalans a dram and half, Turbith,
Hermodacts, each half a dram; Rhubarb a dram, Sal Gem. Ginger, each half a
scruple; Diagredium; Troches, of Alhandal, each three scruples and an half;
with Syrup of Roses make Pills.

In Defluxions for to purge strongly, give an Electuary of Citrons, Juice of
Roses, Elescoph (Amoron of the French King, is commended in the Sciatica) and
sine quibus Pills, of Myrobalans, and Aggregative. We use also things to purge
Phlegm from the Head and Nerves, as Diaphaenicon, Diacarthamum, Indy majus,
Pills of Cochiae Aureae, Foetidae, and of Sagapenum.

An Electuary commended by Galen, and others to take away pain of the Joints
presently. Take Hermodacts, and Diagredium, each two drams; Ginger, Cloves,
Cummin, and bitter Costus, each an ounce, with Honey boiled in white Wine three
ounces, make an Electuary; give two or four drams in a Wafer dipped in Wine, or
drink it in Wine.

Or this: Take Hermodacts, and Turbith, each two drams and an half; Agarick a
dram, Aloes, Scammony, each two drams; Lilly roots, and Squills roasted each a
dram and half; Tops of Centaury six drams, Olibanum, Galbanum, Ammoniacum, each
a dram; Mastick a dram, Anise, Fennel, Parsley seed, each three drams; Cloves
six drams, Cinnamon half an ounce, Cubebs, Spike, each two drams; Carpobalsom,
and Wood-balsom, each a dram; three Peppers, each half a dram; Saffron a
scruple, Castor half a scruple, make a Powder, and with Honey an Electuary,
give it as the other.

Or the Electuary of Zeno.

Tablets for the same. Take Hermodacts two drams, Turbith a dram and an half,
Diagredium a dram, Rhubarb two drams, Spike a dram, Calamus, Cubebs, long
Pepper, each half a dram; Sugar four ounces, dissolved in Rose Water, make
Lozenges, give two drams.

Or thus: Take Turbith, and Rhubarb, each two drams; Carthamus seeds three
drams, Diagredium a dram, Cinnamon, yellow Sanders, and red Roses, each a dram;
with two ounces of Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, make Tablets.

Much may be done by Vomit to prevent, because it cleanses and deriveth, if
they who are used to it, vomit once or twice in a month, or more two days
together, especially presently after Meat, which if it were fat, and strong,
and much, and the Belly rubbed, the Vomiting will be easier. In all Defluxions,
and kinds of Gouts, Vomits, and Clysters, are better then Purges to divert. And
in the Sciatica, it is good to vomit two or three days together.

Asarum and Broom are chiefly commended for Vomits in the Gout; as the
Decoction of the Seeds or Roots of Asarum boiled in Water or Whey, or the
Decoction of Broom flowers, and the Seeds of Ricinus in Broth.

Also the Decoction of Raddish seed, Atriplex, Dill, Watercresses, Rocket,
Dwarse-elder, in the broth of an old Cock, with Oil of Olive, of Chamomil, or
Oxymel, or Honey, and Water, and the like.

By much Spitting we draw Phlegm from the Head, as the Fountain to prevent
Defluxions, especially when by the heaviness of the Head, we suppose the Humor
is gathered there; and when Nature does not purge that way, we help her with
Masticatories and Errhines.

Also Sweating is good to prevent serous humors, breeding the Gout, and they
cannot be better sent from the whole Habit of the Body. And because the blood is
thereby purged from water, it is good when the Gout comes from blood, to make
it thicker.

They are continued a long time for four or five weeks, by a sweating Potion,
in the Morning, and before Supper, made of the Decoction of Guaicum, Sarsa, or
China, with Water of Iva arthritica, with a sparing Diet, with the Decoction of
the same for Drink. And you may make Wine of the same; as we showed in the
French Pox. Also use Baths for a month, this will strengthen the Joints.

Also it is good once a week, after Purging to sweat, to take away the
Defluxion, by a dry bath, morning, and before supper, or in bed, with Treacle,
Mithridate, or Rob of Elder a dram, Syrup of St. Ambrose six drams. And with
the Decoction of Rupture-wort. Or half an ounce of Dwarfe-elder roots, or four
scruples of the Seeds infused a night in white Wine, is good in the Gout.

Also you may sweat by Fumes.

It is not amiss to discuss the Matter, by sweating; as I at large showed in
impotent Motion.; In a Tub that has had strong Water, and Jumper burnt in it,
or in a Cradle made on purpose, with an Alembick under it with proper things.

Also after Purging it is good to sweat, especially if Nature move that way,
when the Defluxion is but in the beginning of an Arthitis force it not, least
the Humor being thin, flow the faster; but if Nature tend that way, give some
gentle Helpers mentioned.

By pissing plentifully, the serous humors are carried from the Veins and whole
Body, and it is good to prevent Gouts. And sometimes we provoke Urin in the Fit
to derive, with the Decoction of Pease, opening Roots, Asparagus, Melon seeds,
and the like in the morning.

We prevent Defluxions and Gouts, by opening a Vein in full and foul bodies,
The preventing and curing of defluxions, and Gouts by cutting and burning.
in Spring and Fall, especially when the Gout is from blood. And Galen says
that he prevented the Gout by purging, and bleeding, and temperate Diet. Open
the Arm-vein for general Evacuation; or that in the Foot, for particular, which
is good in Women, when the Terms are stopped. And it is acknowledged a singular
Remedy to prevent the Podagra to let blood twice a year in the Foot. And it
deriveth and preventeth, if it be done in the sound Foot. And some open the
Vein in the Loins by the Buttocks, to prevent the Sciatica.

For Cure of Defluxions and Gouts from Blood, it is good to bleed at first, for
Revulsion in the part distant, as in the arm or hand, to draw from the feet, or
to derive by the part, near where it is found. In the Sciatica from blood, open
a vein in the arm to revel; Hippocrates opens them behind the Ears; and the
Arabians opened the Veins by the little Finger. This done, open the Vein in the
Ham or Ankle within, to derive, or without, if it appear most, which is called
the Sciatica-vein, for its great benefit: This alone cures sometimes. This is
done on the same side the Sciatica is, although we have known by experience,
that bleeding on the sound side has cured. This bleeding in the Foot is good
when the pain is not from blood, but then bleed not in the arm before.
Otherwise you must not bleed rashly in particular Gouts from water, least you
move the humors, except from the great pain, you fear a new Flux of blood, and
then you may do it for Revulsion.

We use also Cupping and Scarification to prevent. of what cause soever it
come, in the inside of the Legs or Ankles: It is good in Podagra and Sciatica.
It is chiefly good every new Moon, to scarifie in the sole of the foot, under
the great Toe, to prevent a Podagra. And in the beginning of Defluxions and
Joynt-pains; it is good for turning the Matter another way, in the opposite
sound part, as in the Sciatica in the Buttocks and Legs, and in the
Shoulder-pain in the Scapulae. And to bleed by Leeches, in the Haemorrhoids
especially, where there has been a custom.

Some teach that they can stop the Flux to the part, by opening and tying the
Vein. And some have drawn yellow Water from the Hands and Feet, by cutting,
which Hippocrates allows. But when no certain Matter appears, the way is
doubtful and dangerous. And a light Incision is good when the Nodes or Knots
strive to get out, and the skin is there.

Also the Flux of Humors is diverted by burning and blistering, this is the
best to prevent, and to cure by drawing forth the matter; and is to be used
chiefly when the matter lies deep, and will not be discussed by Medicines. as
in the Sciatica, and Shoulder-gout, or other kind, or defluxion upon the
Members, when the Cause of the Disease sticks stoutly: This is the last Remedy
to take it out.

The gentlest way is to apply things that make the skin red, only in the Hip,
Shoulder, and other fleshy parts, upon the pain. As Sinapisms made of Mustard
seed, and Vinegar one part, and Figgs, or Leaven two or three parts, with
Pigeons dung.

Stronger things blister and burn, called Vesicatories and Cauteries, these are
applied behind the Neck to prevent, or to the arms to cure, to stop the Flux a
little above the part, or when it is flown below it, as in the Joynt-pains,
below in the Joint, in the Sciatica, in the Instep, or to the Buttocks, in the
Gonagra to the Ham, or upon the part.

These Vesicatories are Flamula, Crowfoot, Spargrass, Daphnoides, Capsicum,
Dragons bruised, or Nettles, or Milk of Figgs, with Bran, and Vinegar.

Or apply a potential Cautery of Spanish Flies, and Leaven, and things that
take away pain, mentioned in opening Imposthumes.

This is done sooner and better, with a hot Iron, and they will not feel so
much pain, if you clap first a Plate of cold Iron upon the part, to be burnt,
which has a hole in it, through which the Cautery Iron may pass, for by the
Coldness of it, and pressing, and stupefying of the skin, the pain is not felt.

We give to prevent the Gout that returns so often, The preventing and the Cure
of the Gout, and Defluxion, by things taken in.
when it comes of blood things to cool and thicken it. Such as we showed in
Synochs, with Erysipelas, as sharp Waters and Spaws, by use whereof many have
been kept free from the Gout. I knew a man that was troubled with the Gout, and
lived many years after, by the use of a Drink made of Bar-berries, Prunes,
Plumbs Apples, and four Pears, with a few Juniper Berries; and some have been
cured by drinking of ashes, Milk; others with Vinegar, for diverse days.
Dioscorides commends Vinegar, and Honey; others Vinegar of Squills.

If the pain come from a watery Defluxion, then give things to consume it, and
to strengthen the brain and Nerves, by which the Gout is prevented, if
constantly used. And the Podagra from blood, is so prevented by temperate
things that consume the Serum, and make the blood purer and thicker, These are
mentioned in a Palsy from Phlegm, and Weakness of Stomach, and other Diseases
from Defluxions.

Among which the Water of Groundpine, or Iva arthritica, is best, or the
Decoction thereof, in Hydromel, Oinomel, or Honey, and Wine, Water, or Vinegar,
called Oxymel, if often drunk; or a syrup of the juice of it; or a Conserve, or
a Powder of the same; or of Primrose, or Cowslips. Also Bettony, Sage, and
Stoechas.

These following taken many weeks together, dry up Defluxions, and are
excellent.

As Decoction of Althaea roots, Grass roots, Asparagus, five leaved Grass,
white Thorn, Echium, Corn-poppey, and Aethiop leaves, are approved of
Dioscorides against the Sciatica, in wine, or wine and water, with Honey and
Sugar.

An Electuary. Take Conserve of Groundpine two ounces, of Primrose, Lilly of
the Valleys, Broom, and Bettony flowers each an ounce and half, Conserve of
Roses an ounce, Cinnamon a dram, Cloves, Galangal, Nutmeg, each half a dram;
Ginger a scruple, Spike half a scruple, Coral a dram, Hearts horn, and Ivory,
each half a dram; with Syrup of Bettony, or Groundpine, make an Electuary: Give
as much as a Nutmeg, and drink Bettony water upon it.

Another: Take Seeds of St. John's Wort, Leaves of Germander, each two ounces;
Groundpine an ounce and an half, Bettony half an ounce, round Birthwort roots
an ounce and half, Sarsa an ounce, Angelica six drams, Sassaphras half an
ounce, Asphodel roots, if they can be had two drams, Ivory, Hearts horn, Amber,
each a dram; red Coral a dram and half, Cinnamon two drams, Cloves a dram,
Saffron half a dram, add to them poudered being an ounce, two ounces of Honey,
give four scruples or a dram. If you would have Pills, mix the Pouders with
Turpentine, and some proper syrup, and give half a dram.

Another to be used daily. Take Sarsa four ounces, St. John's Wort seeds, Leaves
of Groundpine, and Germander, each eight ounces; round Birthwort roots six
ounces, Angelica three ounces, Cinnamon two drams, Cloves four scruples,
Saffron two scruples, with Honey boiled in white Wine, make an Electuary.

Or these Pills: Take Roots of round Birthwort, and Angelica, each two drams;
Leaves of Groundpine three drams, Rupturewort a dram, Spike half a dram,
Saffron a scruple, Ashes of dead men's Skuls a dram and half, with Turpentine,
and syrup of Bettony, make Pills: Give a dram.

Sciatica pills: Take Powder of Groundpine six drams, Gum Ammoniacum, and
Opopanax, each a dram; Myrrh half a dram, Castor a scruple, Enphorbium half a
scruple, with Turpentine make Pills.

A Sciatica Electuary: Take Groundpine, and Germander, and Ivy, each half an
ounce; Rue, Sage, Mugwort, Savine, Bettony, Thyme, each a dram; Seeds of St.
Johnswort, or Ascyri, or Androsaemum three drams, wild Rue, and Southernwood
seeds, each a dram; Madder, and Monks-Rhubarb roots, each a dram and half;
Pepper, and Cardamoms, each half a dram; make a powder, and with a pound of
Honey an Electuary, give a dram.

Or, Take the Powder last mentioned an ounce and half, Roots of Xyris,
Polemonium, and white Poplar barks, each a dram and half; of Heliochrys,
Arctium, Chamaecyssus, called Ground Ivy, Dasy flowers, and Comfrey, each a
dram; Cappar, and Ocimastrum seeds, or wild Basil, each half a dram; with Honey
make an Electuary: Give it as the former.

An excellent Syrup against all sorts of Gouts. Take Sarsa two ounces, Calamus,
and Roots of five leaved Grass, and Birthwort, each an ounce; Angelica half an
ounce, Asarum two drams, Groundpine, Rupturewort, and Bettony, and Germander,
each a handful; Sage, Thyme, Mints, Marjoram, each half a handful; Primrose,
and Comfroy flowers, each a pugil; Rosemary, Staechas, and Lavender flowers,
each half a handful; Aniseseeds half an ounce, St. John's Wort seeds two drams,
Basil, Seseli, and Rue seed, each a dram; boil them in Water, and the third
part Wine, strain, and add Honey a pint, make a Syrup, with Cinnamon two drams,
Cloves a dram: Give an ounce to prevent, alone, or with Water of Groundpine, or
Bettony.

A Powder of ashes to dry up Water. Take Ashes of a dead man's Skull an ounce,
of a Bulls pizzle, or Castor half an ounce, of Swallows, Cuckoo, or Kites two
drams, of Hartshorn, and burnt Ivory, each a dram; of Amber half a dram, Pearl
half a scruple, Cinnamon two drams, Diagalangal and Diamoschum, each half a
dram; Sugar of Roses, and Sugar Candy, as much as all the rest: Give a dram and
half, and drink wine with proper distilled water thereupon, or make Tablets
with Sugar dissolved in Bettony or Groundpine water.

In the Cure, give things to stop the Humor, when it falls. If it be blood, let
it be cooled and thickened, with syrup of Violets, Water Lillies, Endive dried,
red Roses, Myrtles, Julep of Roses and Violets, with Water of Sorrel, Plantane,
Lettice, Roses, and the like. Or with a Decoction of Prunes, Sebestens,
Jujubes, and the things mentioned in Synochs. To stop the Humor, use things
mentioned in Defluxions and Catarrhs.

Sometimes give Narcotick Opiats in both cases, they are not dangerous, for they
abate pain, and stop the Flux, as Treacle and Mithridate; and if the Defluxion
be waterish, ad a little Bole. Also Philonium Asyncritum, and things mentioned
in Colicks that heat, if there be pain and watching.

Adding as follows, to stop Defluxions. Take Mastick, Frankincense, each a
dram; Storax half a dram, fine Bole a dram and half, Ivory and Bedeguar, each
half a dram; Spike half a dram, Saffron half a scruple, Opium five grains, with
Syrup of Poppies make Pills: Give two mornings and evening.

We apply Remedies to the head and other parts, some at first, The outward cure
of Defluxions, and Gouts and Prevention.
others in the declination.

In a Defluxion or Gout, from Rhewm from the Head, after decent purging, we
apply dryers and strengthners to the head out of the fit after the Defluxion,
and in the fit, when we fear not the Return of the Defluxion; as we showed in
Diseases from Phlegm.

As Lotions for the Head, of Sage, Marjoram, Bettony, Groundpine, Stoechas,
Lavender, Rosemary, Agarick, and the like boiled in Lie of Vine ashes, with
other drying things proper for the Head.

After washing, that it may not raise a Defluxion presently, dry the Head with
a fumed Cloth, with Amber, Mastick, or Sandarach, and then comb it well.

Also Pouders in Caps are good, or for the Hair, made of Head-herbs, and
dryers; as Nigella, Mastick.

We apply to the parts receiving the Defluxion to prevent it, things to
strengthen, and to consume the residue, and to confirm the Cure.

The Hand or Foot is to be often washed with a Lie of steeled water, and ashes
of Beech, Oak, Juniper, Vine, Horse bones, and Dears bones, and the like,
Rosemary, Bays, Hermodacts.

To this Lixivium we add Wine, or Urin, or Salt, or Alum, to make it stronger,
sometimes Tartar, and Brimstone.

Salt Water whether natural or artificial, does the same thing, alone, or
poured through ashes, to which Mirth added, makes a good Fomentation.

Or the decoction of Juniper, or Salt, or of Rapes, or a Fox inbowel'd.

Or thus, when there is a loose Tumor in the declination of a Disease. Take
Roots of Dwarse-elder a pound, Groundpine a handful, red Roses, Chamomil, and
Melilot flowers, each a pugil; Pomegranate flowers, and Myrtle seeds, each a
dram; Earth worms many, boil them in four parts of Lixivium, two parts of Wine,
and one of Water.

Or this: Take Dwarse-elder roots, and Hemp two ounces, Sage, Wormwood, Bays,
Organ, Penny royal, Calamints, Mints, Thyme, Groundpine, Bettony, Hysop,
Plantane three handfuls, Moulin, Rosemary flowers, and red Roses three pugils,
Juniper and Bay Berries a pugil, Myrtle berries half an ounce, Cypress nuts an
ounce, Pomegranate peels and flowers half an ounce; make a Decoction in Water,
and the fourth part Wine, add Salt an ounce, Alum half an ounce, wash therein
to astringe more, add Galls, Acacia, Hypocistis an ounce, and for the poor,
Stones, Pears, Services, Medlars.

Ointments to strengthen the weak loose parts, are. Oil of Grape stones, with
Oil of Salt, and Oil of Hazle-nuts, Cherries, de Been, Citrinum Ointment, and
that of Orange flowers.

A strengthening Ointment. Take Oil of Myrtles two ounces, Salt two drams,
Myrrh a dram.

It is said that the ashes of a Kites head or bones, with Oil, is proper.

Another: Take Oil of Worms, and Froggs, each an ounce and an half; Oil of
Roses, and Goose grease dropped into Vinegar each an ounce; Acacia, and
Pomegranate flowers, each a dram, Cow dung dried two drams, Salt a dram, burnt
Alum half a dram, with Wax make an Ointment.

Or this: Take Bramble tops, Sumach, and Housleek, boil them in red Wine, add
of Barley flower not ripe and parched, called Alphitum as much, with the sixth
part of Powder of Pomegranate peels make a Cataplasm.

This is an excellent Remedy to strengthen and ease pain in the Gout. Take an
old Boar Cat that is fat and black if it may be had, gut him, and flea him, cut
off his Head and Feet, and put him into the paste following. Take Goose grease,
that is the dripping of a Goose, which fell when it is roasted into a
Dripping-pan half full of Wine and Vinegar four ounces or six, Pitch, Turpentine
two ounces, Badgers grease, Dears sue^, each two ounces; Virgins wax four
ounces, Ointment of Agrippa an ounce, Frankincense, and Mastick, each half an
ounce; make a Paste, stuff the Cat therewith, and roast it, keep the dripping
for an Ointment.

It is good to strengthen weak Hands and Feet, to put them into the Wine Press,
where there are black Grapes.

They say Sextus Pompeius was cured with Sweating in a Heap of warm Wheat.

Also Baths of Sulphur, Salt, or Niter, both sweat and strengthen. And
bucketing of the Head therewith, as the Custom is, cures the Disease at the
Fountain. And the Mud or bottom of such Waters, applied to the parts
strengthens.

Or artificial Baths of strengthening Herbs mentioned, and the skin of a Dog
are proper.

In the time of using all these, least the humors be stirred up by heat and
moisture, and sent to the part which is weak, and apt to receive them, use the
defensive Plasters mentioned.

For Cure, at the first grudging, apply outwardly things to stay the Flux. In
the Arthritis, especially apply them to the Joint within, and bind them if you
can, and roll them.

Make them of Bole, the white of an Eg, and Vinegar, and apply it with Cotton
or Linen.

Or, Take Bole two ounces, Dragons blood half an ounce, Snakeweed roots, Acorn
cupps, each a dram and an half; powder them, and with Vinegar, and whites of
Eggs, apply them, you may add Pomegranate flowers, Sponge, Roses, Grapeseeds,
and the like.

Or make it of Litharge, Bole, Vinegar, whites of Eggs, and Mucilage of
Fleabane seed.

Add a little Oil to keep it from drying too soon.

Or, Take Pulp of green Pears, Quinces, Services, Cornilberries, Medlars,
Dates, Olives, boil them in red Vinegar, with Crumbs of Bread, and make a
Cataplasm.

Or use the Plasters against Rhewms in the Eyes, mentioned in Ophthalmy.

Bind the part affected very hard: and the Thighs that the Humor fall not down.

Upon the part also lay (according to the time of the Disease, as it is in the
beginning or progress, or as the Flux is flowing or flowed to the part)
Repellers, or Anodynes, or Narcoticks, or Dissolvers.

At the first while the Cause flows, use astringents and repellers, that bind
and are cold, when it comes from blood, and there is Heat in the part. But in
the Sciatica and other fleshy parts, where the humor lies deep, they profit
little. These we use with anodynes sometimes and gentle dissolvers; Thus,

Hippocrates bids us use cold Water to repel and cool, or Snow, or cold
Vinegar, applied with a Clout often.

Or three parts Water, and one Vinegar, or red Wine two parts, with Bran, and
Lineseed boiled therein, or Lupins, when the disease is in the increase.

Or boil Vinegar and Water in the same proportion, with Wheat, or Barley-meal,
and Lineseed, to a Cataplasm.

Or use Plantane, Lysimachia, Housleek, Violets, Purslane, Endive,
Solomons-seal, Fleabane, Nightshade, Pellitory, and Poplar leaves, of Gourds,
Water Lillies, Lens palustris, or wild Lentils, with Oil of Grease, first
incorporated with Meals and Vinegar.

Or Coleworts, with Fleabane seed, or Foenugreek, and Vinegar, or roasted
Quinces, and Barley meal.

Or Plantane leaves bruised with Barley meal, and Crumbs of bread, and Oil of
Roses.

Or boil Bran and Barley meal in steeled Water, with Roses, add Oil of Roses,
and at first Vinegar, and in the increase, Flowers or Oil of Chamomil.

Or mix the Juvces of the Herbs with barley flower, Oil of Roses or Violets,
with the Yolk of an Eg, and Turpentine and Vinegar.

Or thus; Take Oil of Roses four ounces, Juice of Lettice, or the like, two
ounces, Vinegar an ounce, with two Yolks of Eggs, and Barley-meal, make a Paste.

Or, Take Oil of Roses, and Vinegar, each two ounces; Bole two drams, red
Sanders a dram.

Or a little Ceruss, with Waters, or Juyces, and Vinegar, or Oil of Roses, or
Violets, with distilled Waters.

Or the Decoction of the Herbs mentioned, with Vinegar, for an Epithem.

Or use Galens cool Ointment, the Countesses, or Ointment of Poplar. These are
also good when there is a hot Defluxion upon the Loins.

Or a great pain, use Anodynes, such as by gentle heat, do rarifie and cherish,
mixed with Repellers in the beginning, while the Humor flows; and after, when
the Matter is flowed or fallen; things that dissolve more: Thus,

Pour warm Milk thereon, or apply it with a Clout. And at first quench Steel in
it, and to allay pain, boil in it Foenugreek, or Lineseed, Hermodacts, or the
like.

Or add an ounce of Sulphur, or Litharge, to a pint of Milk, it will discuss
what is gathered to the part.

Or, Take an Eg, and beat it with Oil of Roses, or Chamomil, and Crumbs of
Bread, and apply it with a little Saffron.

Or hard Eggs beaten with the fourth part of Myrrh, and Chamomil flowers, and
Saffron.

Or foment with Oil of Roses and Wool, or of Violets, in which Earthworms are
boiled, and after in the progress, with Oil of Chamomil, and Foxes, Oil of Eggs
allayes pain.

Or, Take Lineseed oil, Oil of Earthworms, and Elder, each half an ounce;
Saffron three grains, Camphire two grains, anoint the part, and roll it up
with a Rouler dipped in Boys urin,

Or make a Pultis of sweet Apples boiled, and Oil of Roses, or Froggs, or
Chamomil.

Or apply Cassia, with Barley-meal, and Fleabane seed, with Oils of Roses, or
Chamomil, Rose, Nightshade, or Plantane-water.

Or steep or boil brown Bread Crumbs in Milk, and add to a pint three Yolks of
Eggs, and six ounces of Oil of Roses, or Chamomil. When you will cool and
repel, leave out the Oils, and add Juice of Nightshade, Plantane four ounces,
Vinegar two ounces, or boil the Herbs first in Milk.

Or use Fleabane, and Lineseed bruised and boiled in Water to a Slime, with
Water of Roses, Nightshade, and Housleek, and an Egg, while it is hot, add
Mucilage of Lineseed, Wax, Oil of Roses, or Chamomil, and Vinegar.

Or apply Foenugreek bruised and boiled in Oxymel, or Vinegar, and Honey, or
with Juice of Coleworts, and the fourth parts Vinegar, or boiled in Wine, with
the Powder of Chamomil, and Melilot flowers, and Hermodacts, adding Turpentine,
Oils, and Mucilages.

Or add to the aforesaid, Bean, Lentils, or Barley flower, Oil of Roses, and
Juyces of Herbs mentioned.

Or thus: Take Bean and Faenugreek-meal, each an ounce; Barley and Lineseed,
each an ounce; Marsh-mallow roots, Chamomil and Melilot flowers, each half an
ounce; Cumminseed three drams, boil them in Wine, Vinegar, and Honey equal
parts, add Hens grease two ounces, Oil of Dill an ounce; make a Cataplasm.

Or, Take Althaea roots two ounces, Turnips four ounces, Mallows, Coleworts,
Henbane, each a handful; Pompion two ounces, Flowers of Violets, Chamomil,
Melilot, and Moulin, each a pugil, boil them in Water and Wine, add Fleabane,
Foenugreek, and Lineseed four ounces, Yolks of Eggs four, Hoggs grease three
ounces, Oil of Dill and Froggs, each two ounces; make a Cataplasm.

Narcoticks stupifie the part, and take away pain, and by their heat (as I
proved) dissolve the humor, and are not dangerous. Alone, or with Anodynes, and
other resolvers: Thus,

The green Leaves of Henbane, Mandrakes, and Poppies bruised or boiled, or Oils
thereof, or their juyces, with Rose and Water-lilly water to foment.

Or Mandrake Roots, and Henbane seed mixed with Bran, or Oil for a Cataplasm,
or with Grease for an Ointment.

Or thus: Take Henbane leaves two handfuls, Nightshade, Housleek, each an
handful; Poppy tops a pugil, Mandrake roots an ounce, Chamomil flowers and
Violets, each a pugil; Fleabane seed half an ounce, Henbane seed two drams,
boil them in Milk and Water, and foment, stamp the residents, with Lineseed an
ounce an half, Barley-meal two ounces, Duck and Hens grease, and Oil of
Chamomil, each an ounce; make a Cataplasm.

Another excellent against pain in the Foot-gout. Take dried Elder flowers a
handful, Leaves of Henbane wrapped in Coleworts and baked, four ounces, bruise
and boil them in Goats milk, or to a Pultis, ad Saffron a scruple, Yolks of
Eggs two or three: make a Cataplasm.

Or use Opium and Saffron, with Milk, two ounces of Milk to half a dram of
Opium, or two drams with the Plaster of Bread, or the like. Or with Ointments,
but it is of lesser force. With Fats, it is best a dram of Opium, with four
ounces of Aqua vitae, a little Saffron, and a scruple of Camphire, and safe.

Or apply Mithridate or Treacle, or Philonium.

Or the Skin of a Torpedo, or the Oil of it causes Stupefaction.

Use Resolvers to consume the Humor in the progress, when the Defluxion is
stopped: Such as are gently hot, and rarefying, and discuss the Matter, if it
be Blood, and hotter if it be Water to consume it, that it turn not to Nodes.
And if it be deep, as in the Hip, use stronger Drawers and Consumers, adding
things proper for the Joints, Membranes, and Nerves, and that are approved.
These are as follow, and are proper for other Defluxions.

As Oil of Moulin flowers, mixed with Wine, and made in the Sun.

Or of Elder, or Dwarse-elder Flowers, or the Juice or Oil of Dwarfe-elder
seeds thus made. Beat them being cleansed to a paste, boil it in Water, and take
of the skum, put it in a long Glass, and set it three days in the Sun, till
the Oil which is green be at the bottom. Also that of the Seeds strained is
good, or of Raddish seed, Indian roots, Nuts, and Acorns.

Or Oil of Cyprian, Ligusticum, or Privet, or of Alkanna, or of wild
Cowcumbers, in which Flammula was boiled.

Or Oil of Froggs, and Worms, and Foxes; or Oil in which a Weezle has been
boiled, or a young Stork, or Swan, or the Livers of the fish Galeus, or Sows or
Hoglice, called Aselli or Millepedes.

Or Oil of Man's bones; or Horse-jawes, when they are beaten, and burnt, and
mixed with Oil, and then an Oil drawn by a retort, or the like. Some commend
the Oil of Deers blood.

And other hot Oils mixed with them, as Oil of Bays, Costus, Elder, Nard, Rue,
Orris, Wall-flowers, Lillies, St. John's Wort, Euphorbium, Castor, Bricks,
Turpentine, Petroleum. Some add distilled Oils to them, as of Spike,
Juniper Berries a dram, to an ounce of the other. Oil of Guaicum, and Sulphur,
and Tartar, are also good. The Chemists use Oil of Salt, made with red hot
Bricks, and Oil of Danwort berries. Others boil Salt in Oil, and anoint.

Or an Oil made of the Marrow of Veal bone, and as much old Oil, and Oil of
Worms, Groundpine, and Saffron gently boiled.

Another: Take Sallat-oyl, and of Bays, and Turpentine, each equal parts; add
Mastick, Myrrh, Frankincense, one part, draw an Oil.

Or thus: Take Oil of Turpentine a pound, Sage an handful, boil them in Balneo,
take out the Sage, when it is cold, and add new three or four times, and add at
last powder of Sage, Opopanax, and Ammoniacum, each four ounces; boil and
preserve it.

After you have anointed the Part therewith, lay on a Plaster of Tachamhaca.

An excellent Oil against Sciatica. Take Oil of Nuts six ounces, wild
Cowcumbers, Flammula, or Iberis, or Sowbread roots bruised, or three ounces of
the Juyces sliced, Earthworms twenty, Sagapenum, Ammoniacum dissolved an
ounce, Sack two ounces, Aqua vitae an ounce, boil them till the Juyces be
consumed, and strain it.

Or, Take Pellitory roots, and white Hellebore, each half an ounce; Hermodacts,
Turbith Rue, Wormwood, each two drams; Coloquintida, and Euphorbium, each a
dram; Salt a dram and half, infuse them in old Oil, and add Wine, and Aqua
vitae an ounce, set it in the Sun, and boil it.

Or use Mathiolus his Balsom.

Unguents, as of Greases of Men, Goats, Sheep, Hogs, Calves, Geese, Hens,
Ducks, Foxes, Bears, Cats, Serpents; also Oesypus, or Grease of Wool, and
Marrows of Horses, Dear, Calves with Wine, and Aqua vitae, are also good.

Prepare Goose grease thus, and it is excellent. Gut a Goose, and fill her with
flesh of a Fox or a Cat, and Groundpine, Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Bettony
roasted, receive the dripping into Water and Vinegar, or stuff a fat Goose with
Pitch, and the dripping is rate against the Sciatica.

Another, take Dears suet, and Ox marrow, and add as much Aqua vitae, set it in
a glass, in a Horse dung till fifteen days.

Or dissolve Sagapenum and Galbanum in Oil.

Or thus: Take Juice of Dwarfe-elder, Oil of Rue, each two ounces, Gum
Ammoniack dissolved in Aqua vitae hal, an ounce; Mastick, Frankincense, each a
dram; Castor hal dram, with Turpentine make an Ointment.

Or, Take Juice of Danewort, and old Oil, each an ounce; boil them, add Mummy
half an ounce, Camphire a dram.

Or thus: Take Oil of Roses, Lineseed, Lillies, Chamomil, each an ounce; Juice
of Smallage an ounce an half, Mucilage of Lineseed, and Goats grease, each an
ounce; boil them, and with Wax, and a little Saffron make a Liniment.

Or use the four hot Ointments, of which Dialthaea is the mildest, Martiatum,
Agrippa, and Aregon are strongest. Or use those proper for the Joints, as
Ebulinum, Divinum, Nervinum, Vigonis.

Or these: Take Roots of Orris and Birthwort, each three drams; Pellitory,
Turbith, Hermodacts, each two drams; Bay Berries a dram and half, Coloquintida
a dram, Pepper, Nutmeg, each half a dram; Saffron a scruple, Storax half a
dram, Frankincense two drams, Bdellium a dram, Euphorbium and Castor, each half
a dram, powder them, and add Oil of Bays, and Goose grease, and an ounce of
Turpentine, Oil of Spike half a dram, and Cow dung; make a Paste.

Another against the Stiatica. Take Oil of Lillies two ounces an half, Wall
flowers, Worms, Fox grease or Goose, each an ounce an half; Juice of Elicampane
three ounces, Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Aqua vitae an ounce, Sowbread roots a
dram and half, Pellitory, Orris, Mustard seed, each a dram; Hermodacts, Castor,
Euphorbium, each half a dram; with Turpentine make a thick Ointment.

Or this Plaster: Take roots of Elicampane, Costus, Orris, each half an ounce;
Sowbread and Cookowpints, of each two drams; Hermodacts, Piony and Misletoe of
the Oak, each a dram; Mustard, Rocket and Rue seed, each a dram and an half;
Cummin seed and Bay Berries, each a dram; Pepper, Mace and Cloves, of each half
a dram; Saffron a scruple, Myrrh, Frankincense, Storax, each a dram; Niter and
Vitriol, each a dram and an half; Euphorbium, Castor, each half a dram: make a
powder, add Ammoniacum an ounce, Bdellium, Galbanum, Opopanax, Sagaponum, each
an ounce; dissolved in Vinegar and Aqua vitae, add Storax liquid a dram,
Labdanum, Laserpitium, each a dram and an half; with Oil of Lillies and of Rue,
Turpentine, pitch, Rosin and wax, make a plaster and wrap it in a sheeps Skin.

Another: Take black pure and shining pitch, Rosin, each half a pound; Sheeps
sewet, Goose grease, each four ounces; Olibanum half a pound, add to it cold
Cummin seed two ounces, Pepper half an ounce, Oil of Spike half a dram, make a
plaster.

Or: Take the Marrow of Veal, Oil of Roses, of each two ounces, burnt Salt a
dram and an half, anoint the feet, add dried Ox lungs two drams, and it will be
better.

Or thus: Take Oil of Nuts, Goose and Fox grease and Calves marrow, of each two
ounces; Frogs ten, Earthworms washed in wine two ounces, Hog lice thirty, Salt
half an ounce, Sack three ounces, juice of Danewort, Elder, Ivy or Groundpine
two ounces; boil them, and add Turpentine and Wax, for an Ointment.

Or use, Diachylon, to a pound add Sulphur an ounce, Chalcitis half an ounce.

Or this: Take old Oil a pint, Litharge three ounces, Brimstone a dram,
Chalcitis half an ounce, boil them, and add Mucilage of Linseed and Hogs
grease, each two ounces; make plaster, or Ointments.

Or use Apostolor.

Or: Take Oil of Bays two ounces, of Worms and Bricks, each an ounce; Soape an
ounce and an half, Calves marrow an ounce, Turpentine half an ounce,
Ammoniacum, Opopanax, Galbanum, all dissolved in Vinegar, each a dram and an
half; Myrrh, Frankincense, Mastick, of each a dram; Birthwort roots half a
dram, Litharge, Sulphur, each a dram; Verdigreese and burnt Salt, of each half
a dram; with Wax: make an Ointment.

Or thus: Take Oil of privet, Elder or Dane wort two ounces, Oil of Turpentine
and Ox grease, each an ounce; Glue dissolved in Wine, an ounce, Frankincense a
dram, Niter and Lime, each half a dram; some add the stone Asius.

Or use plaster of Frogs by Vigo: in strong Defluxions and Sciatica pains, with
more Quicksilver and Euphorbium; of which we shall speak in the French pox.

For the Sciatita wash with Sage, Lavender, Balm water, and the like, with as
much Aqua vitae.

Or dissolve black Soap in Aqua vitae and anoint: it is a good remedy in all
cold Defluxions.

Or boil urin of a boy till it be as thick as Honey. Or anoint with Women's
terms, as Dioscorides prescribes.

Or with Ashes of a Weezle, Beans, Cole-worts, with Vinegar or Grease.

Or with juice of Nettles, Rue, Sage and Coloquintida or Indian Nuts.

Or use pouders of Snayles shells burnt, or of rust of Iron Jet, with juyces
prescribed.

Or make remedies of other plants, as of Moulin, Nettles, Rue, Mugwort,
Smallage, Sun-flower, Scordium, Wall-flowers, Mouse-ear, Comfrey, Moss, Sesami
seeds and roots, Hemp, Birthwort, Dittany, wild Cowcumber, Daffodil with Honey
and Vinegar, or boiled in water and wine, or their juyces with meal.

In the Sciatica bruised Iberis and warmed is good, or Cardamine, Watercresses.

Or Elicampane bruised or boiled in wine.

Or wild masterwort, like Danewort, which is called Goutwort, for its virtue.

Dioscorides applies Balm and salt.

Or to the Sciatica, Sage, Rue, Juniper berries with wine and Boys urin.

Or Linseed and Chamomil flowers, boiled in a bagg in wine.

Or hot bread made of Secaly and Carway seeds.

Or Bran boiled with Sapa and Salt in the Knee Gout.

Or use Bean, Barley and Lentil meal boiled with Oxymel.

Or Bran flower boiled in wine, adding Aqua vitae and Butter.

Or Raysons stoned, with Opopanax.

Or Sea moss, or Pulmo, or Fucus marinus green, or Androsace.

Or Agarick beaten with Goats Milk and Barley meal.

Or Dwarf-Elder, or Elder bruised, or fried in Butter, or Hogs grease with
Plantane roots.

Or Rue and Bettony with Hogs grease and Salt.

Or Motherwort with grease and Vingar against a Defluxion.

Or Briony roots beaten with Aqua vitae and Hogs grease, or Briony and
Cookowpints, or Dragons, or Fig leaves with Cowdung and Honey.

Or: Take Nettles bruised a pound, Oil of Bays two ounces, Petroleum half an
ounce.

Or Coleworts bruised with Marjoram and Bdellium, dissolved in Aqua vitae, or
Vinegar and Coloquintida.

Or: Take Turnips roasted a little, and then boiled a pound, Fenugreek meal two
ounces, juice of Dane-wort two ounces with Honey.

Or Powder of hermodacts Barley and two yolks of Eggs, and Honey.

Or: Take Fenugreek and Lupine meal a pound, Powder of Darnel, Althaea roots,
Chamomil and Melilot flowers three ounces, Cummin seed an ounce, boil them in
Honey and Wine: make a pultis.

Or: Take roots of Althaea, Lillies, Briony, Dwarf-Elder each two ounces, Sage,
Ground Pine, Wormwood, Marjoram, each a handful; Chamomi^, Melilot flowers and
bran, each a pugil; boil them in Ale, bruise and add Barley, Lime, and
Fenugreek meal two ounces, Mastick an ounce, Oil of Bricks three ounces,
Saffron a scruple.

Or thus: Take dried Pennyroyal, Sage, Savin, Bay Berries, Hermodacts, of each
a dram; Mastick half an ounce, Storax two drams, Turpentine three drams, with
Honey, make a plaster.

Or: Take powder of young Nettles a pound, of Sage half a pound, bay Salt a
pound, pickled Hering-Rows half a pound, spirit of wine a pint with Benjamin
three or four ounces dissolved therein, make a pultis and repeat it if it ease
pain, if not, take four ounces of Rose water instead of spirit of wine, with an
ounce of Fleabane seeds and with Acacia and Ointment of Litharge: make a
Cataplasine.

Against the Sciatica: Take leaves of Iberis, Watercresses, or Elicampane,
each two handfuls; Calamints a handful, bruise them, or boil them in wine, add
Lupine meal three ounces, Honey two ounces, or Grease and Oils, or Vingar, or
Aqua vitae to make it pierce.

Or: Take roots of wild Cowcumbers and Bryony, Orris and Elicampane a pound,
boil them in wine and Honey, bruise and add Lupine meal two ouncer, Cummin-seed
an ounce, Goats dung three ounees, make a pultis.

Another: Take roots of Althaea, Briony, wild Cowcumber, each two ounces; of
Orris and Elicampane, each an ounce and an half; Pellitory, Hermodacts, each an
ounce; Ibery, Lepidium, or Flammula, Calamints, Rue, Pennyroyal, Time, Balm,
each a handful; Sage, Rosemary, Staechas, Lavander, Chamomil flowers, of each a
pugil; boil them in wine add Honey, Faenugreek, Lupine four ounces, Bay Berries
two ounces, Rue seeds an ounce, Goose grease two ounces, Oil of worms three
ounces, Sulphur an ounce, make a Cataplasme.

Or thus: Take Orris, Pellitory roots, of each two drams; Dwarf-Elder and
Dragons, each an ounce; Bay Berries an ounce, Cummin seed an ounce, Sulphur
six drams, Niter two drams, make powder, add Barley meal two ounces, with
Vinegar, Honey and Turpentine: make a plaster.

Dioscorides commends Scammony boiled in Vinegar and mixed with Barley meal,
against the Sciatica.

Or: Take Pitch two parts, Sulphur one part, powder them and lay them upon a
paper dipped in Aqua vita, lay it on after bathing especially, let it stick while
it fall off of it self.

Or: Take Tar half a pound, white Hellebore and Sulphur vive, each an ounce and
an half; Euphorbinm half an ounce, Aqua vitae an ounce, incorporate them with
the Aqua vitae last, and stirring continually, apply it warm.

Or apply Frogs spawn, or boil it in a covered Pipkin and apply the fat that
swims.

Or apply Snailes, bruised with their shells.

Also put whole live Snails shells and all, into a strainer, a handful, and a
handful of salt, and thereupon a handful of Danewort seeds, and then snailes
again, and after that salt and seed, four or five lays on upon the other, and
hang the strainer in a Cellar and take the Liquor that drops out which is
glutinous, and put it in a glass to the sun for four days and then anoint the
part.

Or apply the flesh of Cray-fish, boiled and beaten with Briony roots, and Aqua
vitae.

Or boil beaten Hearts horn, with white Wine, till it be thick, and apply it.

Or a pickled Herring.

Or Wolfes Flesh, or Veal half roasted.

Or the Skin of a Dog.

Or hot Cow dung, it will presently ease pain, to which add Oil of Roses at the
first, and in the declination, Oil of Chamomil, or Honey.

If there be a Tumor. Take Cow dung a pound, Sapa an ounce, Bean and Foenugreek
flower, each two ounces; Cummin an ounce, with Oxymel.

Or thus: Take Goats dung and Bean flower, each equal parts; make a Cataplasm,
with Wine and Oil, add Salt when the pain is abated.

Or white Dogs turd, and Pellitory boiled in strong Vinegar.

Also apply Stuphes, or Spunges, or Baths in the Sciatica and Knee Gout and
other Defluxions made of Calamus Elicampane roots centaury and to strengthen,
of Cypres Nuts, Calamints, Ground pine, Germander Wormwood, fouthern-wood,
Bettony, Prim-rose, sage, Marjoram, Rose-mary, Pennyroyal, Mints, Chamomil,
Melilot flowers and of Dill, Staechas, Lavender, boiled in water, adding wine,
lie or urin. When you will dry more, add an ounce of Sulphur vive and of sal
Niter, and sal Gem, each half an ounce.

Or with a Decoction of Turnips and Sowbread, Foment.

Or with distilled water of Moulin and red wine, or Ox Galls, or Soap distilled.

Or: Take Sage, Rue, Groundpine, Wormwood, and others mentioned in Sciatica for
Fomentations, four handfuls; Sulphur, Salt, each two drams; Wine two measures,
distill a Water and Foment.

Another: Take green and white Vitriol, each an ounce; Camphire two drams, Aqua
vitae and white wine, each a pint; Foment with clouts dipped therein.

Or with Salt and Vinegar, Sulphur and Vinegar, water and Niter.

Or quench Lime in urin and soment, or in Vinegar.

Or: Take Lime and sulphur, each three ounces; and with Oil made of Bole and
wild Cowbumbers, make an Ointment, use it hot.

Or has the feet in a Lie made of Hemp.

Or make bags of the dry Herbs mentioned.

Or of Milium and Bran and salt and Chamomil flowers.

Or roll the Knee with scarlet spread with salt.

Fumes are good also again the Defluxion and pain and to strengthen, out of the
fit, and to dry up the humor, especially in the declination.

Made of a Decoction of proper Plants, as of white Dittany, Pennyroyal,
Wormwood, Rosemary, staechas, Chammomil flowers: boiled in Water, Wine or Lie.
In the Sciatica, put green Sage in a hollow Tile red hot and stir it that it
burn not, and sprinkle it with Vinegar and and apply the Tile, so that the
vapor may come to the Hip.

Or use these drying Fumes with Cotton wool or clouts as of Mastick,
Frankincense, Myrrh and Amber, Labdanum, Benjamin, Storax, Gallia, and dried
Herbs, as Rosemary, and the like, with two ounces of Cinnabar, and half a dram
of Orpiment, made into Troches, with Turpen^ne, in the Sciatica.

If the fourth sort of French Pox, The Cure of the French Pox.
which is with pain about the bones, come from an evil quality, because the
Cure is as the other by diverse great evacuations and alterations, as in the Pox
with Ulcers, and the like, therefore we shall refer the Cure of it thither.

If there be pains about the bones, The Cure of an outward Headache from a
malignant quality.
from an evil quality, or external Headache as in the Pox, you must cure it as
an old Headache, and if that will not do, use strong Evacuations and Topics,
as in the French Pox, as those of Quicksilver, which cure this malignant pain,
when all things fail.

If the humor falling down and causing Arthritis has perversity in it, The
Cure of a sort of malignant joint Gout.
it will not be cured, but with strong things and topics, that have
Quicksilver, as Emplaister of Vigo.

As for the malignity, The Cure of pain coming from malignity when feeling is
depraved.
which depraveth the sense of feeling, in regard it is in the humor that is
fallen down, such as causes numness and palsy, it must be cured as they are,
with strong means. And therefore we shall not here lay down any new Method of
curing the same.

CHAP. XVII. Of Pains in the Superficies of the Body.
The Kinds.
WE call those Pains in the Superficies of the Body, which are in the skin and
part adjacent and near it: of which there are diverse kinds: differing in this
respect, that some are alone and others have other appearent diseases with them.

Among the solitary pains of the superficies of the Body, A tickling in the
superficies of the body without any other dis^ases apparent.
without any other diseases, the first is tickling, which though it seems
pleasant, yet if it be much it is very troublsom, as in the soles of the seet,
under the Arms in the pits, or in the sides, and the like.

Hereunto belongs the Itch in the skin, Itch.
without other manifest sign: such as goes before the skab and as is in the
parts with Hair, as the Head, Privities, from diverse causes, which shall be
declared, so troublesome that it causes scrubbing and tearing the skin with
the Nails. By which means they are so refreshed and pleased that they feel not
the pain or hurt.

There are other pains in the superficies of the body without other manifest
disease, Pain from heat.
that come from outward causes, as from heat and exercise, without
Inflammation of the skin, but with heat pricking and itching: to which the heat
in the palms of the Hands and soales of the Feet, may be referred.

Also there is a tearing and biting pain from cold in the superficies, Pain
from cold.
especially at the fingers end.

To this may be referred the Molestation that comes from touching an uneven and
rough body: Pains from touching of rough bodies. Pain from compression and
destention.
Which is felt without any manifest hurt, while the skin is pressed and
streatched for a time.

There is sometimes great pain from a bruise by a Fall or Stroke, Pain from
Contusion or bruise.
without apparent hurt that pricks and tears; but because usually there is a
Tumor or Wound with this pain, we shall speak of them together.

Other Pains that have other Diseases joined, are distinguished by Redness,
Swelling, Pustles, Ulcers, or Corruptions.

Redness and pain without swelling, is called Erysipelas. Erysipelas.
This comes to many by fits. In this the superficies of the skin, in the Shins
sometimes, or Face, or Neck, or other parts has a broad Redness, which being
pressed with the singer, flies away, and presently returns, and then turns
yellow after some time, and after pale, and so vanishes. It is with burning
also, therefore it is called holy Fire. And because it is pricking, Holy Fire.
Avicen calls it the Thorn. After all these Itching use to be and the skin is
cleft either of it self, or by rubbing; besides, there are in the parts near,
for the most part Glandules or Kernels that swell, and are pained, as in the
Groyne and Neck. And as I showed in Fevers, there is a Synoch therewith, that
begins with shivering, and turns hot for a day or two. And sometimes it is
without it, or but very little.

Besides this simple Erysipelas, there are two compound kinds thereof. An
Erysipelas with a Phlegmon
One is like the simple, only there is a little rising that is dispersed, and
not collected into a true tumor, this is called Erysipelas Phlegmonodes. This
ends as the other, but is longer. An ulcerated Erysipelas.
Sometimes there are Pustles in Erysipelas, and Blysters about, blew or black,
which breaking, produce matter, and the part is ulcerated, this is called
Erysipelas ulcerate. And it ends often in a preverse spreading Ulcer, that
Gangraens if not well tended.

There is another kind that is less hot and red, An oedematous Erysipelas.
but higher and broader, called Erysipelas Oedematodes, with Blisters sometimes
also, that are whitish, which breaking, send forth water or matter. In this
kind, though the Eryfipelas cease, yet the Oedema remains long, and falls into
the Legs in some.

Also if there be Erysipelas in the Legs that were formerly oedematous from an
evil Humor, Erysipelas in the legs of them which have the Dropsy Ascites.
especially from the Dropsy Ascites, which is easy, then it turns into a true
Inflammation, which will gangraene, except it be carefully tended.

We have seen sinall Erisipelases in the skin, Small Erysipelas.
with broad, red, burning Spots, not filled up.

Diseases with Tumor in the Superficies of the Body, The Humors in the
Superficies of the Body.
are some more usual, and come of themselves, and are in diverse parts without
difference: or in certain distinct parts external: And are called Tumors in
general: Or imposthumes, because they follow Tumors. Others are unusual, and
come seldom and are called Cancers of which in order.

There are painful Tumors indifferently in any part of the Body, Phlogoses.
that arise of themselves without any manifest Cause, that are raised and deep,
and red, with heat, burning, stretching, and beating, called Phlogoses.

One kind hereof is spread as an Erysipelas, Phlegmon or Inflammation.
but more swollen, and lifted up, collected, extended, and deep fixed, and is
called Phlegmon or Inflammation in general. In this after the redness and pain,
the skin is yellow, blew, with Sugillations or Marks, till the tumor quite
vanish. Sometimes with increase of pain, it turns to a greater Tumor or
Imposthume, and that broken into an Ulcer, and leaves a Scirrhus or Gangrane,
as shall be showed.

Besides this simple Phlegmon, there are two Compound kinds, Phlegmon
erysipelated.
the one with a larger tumor, but else in all things like an Erysipelas called
Phlegmon Erysipelatodes. The other with a larger tumor, but less hot, red, and
burning, called Phlegmon oedematodes.

This Phlegmon whether simple or erysipelated or oedematous, Phlegmon
oedematous.
may be in any part of the Body. If in the Face, it dissigures the Look: If in
the Neck or Jaws, it hinders breathing, and makes an outward kind of Quinzie.
If in the Breast, and be deep, it is a kind of false Pleurisy; if in the
Belly, and deep, it hinders going to stool: If in the Hands or Feet, it pains
and trouble them.

There is another sort of Phlegmon more collected, Tuberculut or Pustle.
and acute, or pointed, like an Inflammation in other things in any part, which
because it is less then other Inflammations is called Tuberculum, rather then a
Tumor. One kind most usual, which is like a Wall^ut, which ends usually in an
Ulcer These are in diverse parts alone, or many together, swelling and red, with
tearing and burning pain, which pain increasing, they end in an Imposthume,
which opens, and is an Ulcer which has either white or bloody matter. And if
instead of matter there be a lump of flesh, Furunc^lus, Clavus, or little
Canter.
they call it Furunculus or a Nail, because it is fixed in the flesh, and the
German Chirurgions call it Crebstin, or a little Cancer.

Contusions are referred to Tumors in the Body, Tumor from Contusion.
and are so called from the Cause, which is a stroke or fall, in which there
is either a gathered or spread Tumor, lifted up more or less, with, or without
Inflammation of the same color; and sometimes blew, and yellow, with marks,
vanishing, or turning to an Imposthume, and so into an Ulcer. If this Contusion
has a Wound, it belongs to Wounds. And if there be pain in Contusion without
Tumor or external appearance, it shall be spoken of in Pains in the Superficies
of the Body.

There are often Tumors in the Glanduls that are the in Emunctuaries, Tumors in
the Glanduls or Kernels.
especially immediately under the skin, which sometimes are lifted up with the
skin, with pain and heat, and sometimes Inflammation. And if this be, and
dissolve not, it imposthumes, and then ulcerates. This Tumor what soever it is,
if there be Inflammation is called Phygethlon and Panus, Phygethlon. Panus.
Phym^. Parotis.
and if it be less, and plainer, or evener, and not so red and painful, it is
called Phyma, which sooner increases, and imposthumeth. There is the like
tumor sometimes behind the Ears called Parotis, that grows sometimes very great.
Sometimes it is in the lower Jaw, and is called Panus, it comes often in Synoch
Fevers, and it is called in high Dutch Kervunkel, though it be not always
red, when it is under in the Armpits, it does not so easily imposthume, it is
called Panus also and Bubo: And so it is called in the Groynes. Bubo venereal
and pestilential.
Some of these are simple Buboes: Others are from the Cause called Venereal:
Others malignant from the Fever and pestilential, they are small at the first,
and then grow great, and have often an Anthra^ or Carbo with them.

Also in the glandulous parts of the Superficies as the Papps and Stones,
Tumors in the Papps and Stones.
are outward Tumors as in the Glanduls mentioned, when they are inflamed,
swollen, hot, red, and pained. This is called Inflammation of the Papps and
stones which turns often to a scirrhus. Or sometimes these pars swel, without a
manifest Instammation and are stretched and pained as the breasts with milk and
the stones in the colic.

Also these kinds of Inflammations are in other spungy parts of the body,
Tumors with Inflammation of diverse parts.
as in the heels when they swel, are rough and hot and then ulcerate and are
often lost, or in the Glans or head of the yard; whose Inflammation sometimes
makes a great tumor so that the praeputium or foreskin straight binds it at the
root. This is likewise in the prepuce and in women's Privities and in the
Fundament. And in the Mouth and Lips and Eyebrows with great pain, by reason of
exquisite sense; and it often turns to perverse ulcers and Gangrens.

Also in the gristly parts in the superficies, as in the Nostrils and Ears
there is Inflammation, and the gristles are made foul thereby, when it
increases and the Nose faleth.

But Inflammation in the joints is with greater pain and hurt: as in the Arms
and Legs. And this is often in the joints of the fingers and toes about the
roots of the Nails, Paronychia Pannaritium
and this Inflammation is called Paronychia and Pannaritium, which a Sphacelus
often follows, and corruption of the outward bone and sometimes of the inward
bone of the finger, whereby it laid bare or lost and the Nerves and Tendons
hurt, this is called the worm: because pain seems to creep while it is inflamed
and turns to an impostume. There is another Inflammation between the Thumb and
forefinger with a tumor called by the Germans Grippelen or fork, because it is
between the fingers. Fork or Grippelen.


An Impostume, Apostume or Impostume.
is a tumor which follows other humors in the superficies, it is called
Abscessus, because the skin comes from the flesh: This may come from all sorts
of Inflammations except they be insensibly dissolved; as from a flegmon in
general, or from Tuberculum whose Impostum is called Furunculus. And from
Phygethlon whether it be a Bubo or Parotis, and soonest from a Phyma. Also it
may come from swelling of the paps and stone and other spungy parts, or
gristly, inflamed. And from the joints inflamed, which are very troublesome;
and that from the Paronychia or Inflammation in the finger, if it Impostumate,
is perverse and deep and corrupts the Nerves and bones. All these Impostumes
coming from diverse Inflammations, are diverse. If the Inflammation be only
superficial the humor greater or lefs shining and hard at first, and after
grows soft and pointed, which is called the Eye, out of which the matter labors
to get forth, which you may perceive by the motion of it being touched, it is
of one sort. And it is of another sort when it comes from an Inflammation that
lies deeper for then it is not so eminent, sometimes it is almost wholly
hidden, till by a pustle breaking, which the Chirurgions call Exitura, or
outlet, it appears. This is of the same color with the skin and makes a doubt
whether there be an Impostume or not, Exitura or outlet of the Chirurgions.
we conclude that there is matter, because pain is still felt there and because
it is wet like dew, and being pressed with the finger the matter seems to go
back and there is a hollow. When an Inflammation turns to an Impostume the pain
does not abate, but increase rather, and creaseth not till it be opened and it
itcheth when the matter labors to come forth. Nor does a Fever with
Inflammation cease, but increases with the pain while the Impostume or matter
breeds according to Hippocrates. The matter in an Impostume is diverse as pus,
or sanies or flesh, which comes from the ulcer.

A Cancer is a tumor which comes of it self in the superficies of the body
that has more malignity then pain, Canter.
for which cause the Chirurgions call other perverse Tumors and Pustles, as a
Furuncle and Carbuncle by the name of Cancer, as that under the Eye, and the
Polypus in the Nose and the Gangreen of the Gums, and Ulcers of the prepuce.
And they call an Elephantiasis, with Tumors and Ulcers, in diverse parts, a
Cancer also, as we showed. From these a true Cancer called Carcinos differs
much. Wolf or Noli me tangere.
Which is called also Lupus or Wolf, because it devours the flesh and Noli me
tangere or touch me not, because it will not endure sharp Medicines. This may
be in any part, Hips, Legs, Knees, Arms, Neck, Face and Breasts often, and in
the privities, and in the Mouth and Lips. It begins at first with a little
tumor scarce to be seen, then it is as big as a pease, then as an Hazel-nut,
then as a great Apple, hence it is called Cancer from creeping on and
resembling a crab; not the Astacus, or Crayfish, to whose Legs the Veins are
compared, but the true sea Crab called Gallus marinus, which is round as this
tumor is, uneven and with tubercles or little swellings and full of Veins
swollen about blew and black, hard also and with a crust like a crabs shell,
and sticking close to the part; And Archigenes says it is so called, because
it holds whatsoever it catches. The pain is little or none at the first, which
causes the neglect, but it is known by the pricking of the skin like a needle,
which increases with the tumor.

At length this tumor is laid naked, by the opening of the skin, A Cancer
ulcerated.
and then it is called Carcinoma or a Cancer ulcerated: out of this comes
filthy Sanies, or thin matter, stinking, yellow, green first and then black.
Carcinoma.
The flesh is uneven and corrupt and grows out like Icesickles, with hard and
inverted Lips, which are sometimes so big, that they have covered a great part
of the face, and made the Ear seem to grow thereto, as I have seen. When this
Carcinoma or Cancer ulcerated, is naked, it bleeds, by which through want of
strength, with a gentle fever comes death, which I observed in a Dyer in
little Basil in 1552. whose right Cheek was swollen to the great corner of his
Eye, with Ulcers, with Lips turned in and stinking in the hollow all over,
which bled often very much and after great misery with a gentle fever brought
his much desired Death.

The chief kinds of Pustles are scabs, Papulae and Carbuncles, Pustles in the
superficies of the body.
which have diverse kinds under them, these are less then Tubercula, yet they
itch with burning and Inflammation and sometimes without, with pain and knawing
or ulceration of the flesh.

Scabies or Scabrities is so called, because it makes the skin rough and with a
crust, and is moist or dry. The common moist itch and scab.
The moist is with Pustles that have sanies and Pus, one is called vulgar, in
which many Pustles called Ephelides do arise, from which broken sanies or thin
matter comes; if they be a little inflamed and red, they impostume and are
covered with a dry crust made of the dried matter, which is blew or black or
otherwise Colored. The itch goes before this scab, which causes pustles by
scratching, which break when the skin is broak, there is after a cutting pain,
and if the pustles be inflamed, there is burning pain. This scab or itch is so
frequent, that scarce one is freed, but in his life time has it.

There is Another moist scab less usual then the former, The Cruel scab called
Agria or Fera, in Dutch Herbrolen.
but worse with little pustles out of which comes a rough humor like Honey
always moist and covering the parts, with a thick white, green or black scab.
Some call this Fera or Agria. The Germans call it den Herbroten, or Harbroten,
when the part affected is like a toast covered with hairs. This is often in
Infants heads, seldom in aged, sometimes it is in the Eyebrows, Cheeks and
Face, very noisome, and in other parts.

There is another kind of scab, peculiar in the Head, Running Ulcers of the
Head called Tinea, Achores or scald.
which with many sinal holes peircing to the Skul, out of which come glutinous
matter, that being dried causes a crust or scab: therefore they are called
sordid running Ulcers, by the Greeks Achores, and because the skin looks like
Moath-eaten cloth, it is called Tinea a Moth. And the English call it the
running scab of the Head and the scald. And if the holes be large and the
matter like Honey, Favus.
it is called Favus from the likeness it has to a Honey comb. This is perverse
and usual in children spoiling the roots of the hairs, which are white and
thick, when the hair is pulled off, and after it is cured, it leaves many bear
places in the Head, which is ill favored to be seen.

There are other pustles, which may be referred to the moist scab which have a
dryness at the top and sweat and moisture. Some whereof are with greater
Imflammation and Ulceration, as those called Terminthi, because they are as big
as Lupines or Pease. Terminthus
The Germans call them Huntsblatern, they are black round and red and inflamed
about, very burning and quickly dry: and when the scurfe is taken off, or
lifted up matters comes forth. They are most usually in the feet and many
together, Galen desicribes them to be most common in Women, and some say they
are a kind of Phyma. Epinychtis is not unlike this, it is as big as a
Terminthus, Epinychtis.
blew and very red round about and burns very much at night, and turns to an
Ulcer and sends forth s^ymy matter.

Also there are waterish pustles called Phlyctaenae that being broken have a
scurse and are painful: Phlyctaenae.
they are small as bubles or greater like bladders, which broaken send forth
clear water, with pain, and a crust: they may be in any part. There is another
kind that has yellow transparent bladders, Herpes Phlyctanodes.
which being whole, itch and burn, and being open yellow water comes forth with
great burning and Inflammation and a running Ulcer: it is called Herpes
Phlyctanodes.

The dry scab or Scabrities is so called in distinction from the moist, The dry
scab.
which has dry pustles without matter and makes the skin rough and itcheth
much. It is of two sorts, one is in the extremity of the skin with little
pustles dry red and corroding, more or less sweating moisture forth, with
intolerable itch called Prurigo or in Greek Cnismos of some Impetigo and Psora
or Scab, And Rubrica, it is about the Emunctuaries in the Groyns and Armpits,
Prurigo or Cnismos.
and bending of the Knees and Arms, and most usual in the Neek.

The other kind of dry scab is worse, The foul scab.
called foul, and in high Dutch Mager, because it makes the body lean and dry
by degrees: it comes of it self or from a Herpes not cured. And is at first
greater then Prurigo, making the skin rough and dry: the Greeks call it Lichen,
it is chiefly in the Legs and Arms: sometimes if the scabs creep and make the
skin more rough, hard and swollen, with chous, and being rubbed bran falls off,
and then the Greeks call it Psora. It is not only in the Feet and Arms, but in
other parts, especially the Neck and Face and Head, in the Hair like a scurfe
of Clay or Chalk, from which a dry scale falls and it is horrible to behold. If
it last long it corrods and makes clefts in the skin, and there falls thick
scales yellow or blew, this is the Greek Leprosy, not the Elephantiasis of the
Arabians, Greek Leprosy.
though they are taken one for the other, but this is more incurable, and
returns again, and is as horrible as Elephantiasis, especially if it eat off
the Nose. We call this the worst Scab.

Papula or Herpes comes forth with little Pustles, Papula or Herpes of the
Greeks.
first with itching, and then burning, but with Inflammation or Fever; and
though the Pustles dry, new come about them, as if they were begotten of the
former. Some are like Millium seed called Herpes miliaris, which creeps but
sooner stays. Herpes miliaris.


Others are dry little Pustles, and are deeper in the skin, and break into
Ulcers with one Matter, and when cured, returns with new dry Ulcers, broad and
high. This is called Estheomenus, or in high Dutch Den worm, from its creeping
and corroding; if it last long it turns to Impetigo, and then into a Psora, and
after into the Greek Leprosy, but not into Elephantiasis. When it ulcerates,
it is like Erysipelas ulcerated, and called the holy fire or wild fire but
Erysipelas comes suddenly with Inflammation, Redness, Holy or wild Fire.
and Fever, and being ulcerated has greater Pustles or Bladders, and after
them a moist Ulcer, which is not so in Herpes, but dry and without matter.

The Carbuncle or Anthrax in Greek has many Pustles, Carbuncle, Anthrax in
Greek or Persian Fire.
small like burnings very hot, called thence Persian Fire, with a black Crust
like a Cole, and thence called Carbo or live Cole, because of the redness round
about, under which after suppuration there is no matter but a blak Lump of
Flesh fastened to the Roots, with a Fever and great weakness. Like this is the
Anthrax of the back between the shoulders, with many Pustles together red,
which broken, there comes matter forth, as from a sponge which turns to a
hollow Ulcer, over all the upper part of the Back, with lumps: This I saw in
the year 1530.

There is another Anthrax or Carbuncle pestilential, The pestilential Anthrax.
as we showed in pestilential Fevers, with one or more Pustles like
Phlyctaenae or Clavus red round about, afterward blew, green, or black, ending
in a black Crust, and a lump like flesh like the former. The pain is not in
this so great as in the former, at first there is itching and a little burning,
and after corruption, the skin and flesh mortify as I have often observed, and
there is no feeling, and at length it falls from the sound flesh, and leaves a
hollow Ulcer. There is sometimes a Bubo with it, near to the part, as we showed
in pestilential Fevers, where we showed also that a Pustle came at the
beginning of the Carbuncle, without a Fever from the Contagion, and presently
vanishes.

The Diseases with Ulceration by which with Hippocrates, Ulcers in the
Superficies of the Body.
we understand all Solution of Continuity, are so in the Superficies, dividing
and hurting the skin, as a Cleft, Excoriation, or Burning; others are deep in
the flesh, as a Wound or Ulcers: Of which in order.

A Cleft or Fissure or Chinke in the skin, is more or less gaping, Clefts and
Fisures called Rhagae.
according to the deepness thereof. They are chiefly in the Palms of the Hands,
and Fingers, and Soles of the Feet: And if they be in the thick skin, the Lips
are hard and swollen, they are also in the Mouth, Fundament, and Women's
Privities, and Nipples, and in the Praepuce, and Eyebrows, and in the Tongue:
As we showed in the inward Diseases of the Mouth.

There is another kind of Chapps or Clefts which are high, Pernio or Chimetlon.
by reason of the thick skin, with hard Lips, and end in perverse Ulcers, it is
called Pernio or Chimetlon, it comes from great Cold in the thick skin of the
Soles of the Feet, especially in the Heel; sometimes in the Palms of the Hands,
and Nostrils, and Ears, as shall be showed in the Causes.

Excoriation, Abrasion, or Attrition, is called Intertrigo, Excoriation or
Intertrigo.
when the supreficial part of the skin is separated from the quick, with pain
when it is touched. It differs from a Wound, because that is deeper, it is from
diverse internal and external Causes, especially from Riding, when men are
galled; or from long keeping in bed; and in Children from piss, and the mattery
Pustles in the Privities, are Excoriations which itch so grievously.

When the scarf skin only comes off, and the true skin is not bare, it causes
no pain, but falls off like Bran, and is called Furfur or Scales, as in the
Palm of the Hand.

Ustion or Burning is when the scarf skin, or skin, Burning.
or flesh also is hurt by actual or potential Heat. And it differs chiefly, in
that some is more superficial; others deeper, raising a Blyster, and then there
is pain, or burning the true skin, and making a Crust or Eschar, after which is
an Ulcer: Or the skin and flesh also are burned and consumed. And then the pain
is greater with Inflammation sometimes and Suppuration, leaving a great Ulcer.

A Wound is the Solution of continuity in the Body, Wounds in the Superficies
of the Body.
from an outward Cause, it is simple or Compound.

A simple Wound not accompanied or changed into another, Plaga or Cut.
is by a Cut, it is greater or less, even or uneven, Puncture.
or deeper. A wound by a stab is a Puncture or prick, it is with a great or
little Orifice. Gunshot.
Gunshot is of a sudden, with great or small Orifice, deep, dividing, unequal,
bruising and breaking the parts, and sometimes taking off.

All these may be in diverse parts, and wound the Skin, Flesh, Membranes,
Nerves, Vessels, and Bones, making lame, and reaching inward to the Brain,
Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Guts, Bladder, Liver, Spleen, etc. and cause diverse
Accidents following.

In all three kinds of Wounds there is bleeing first, large if it be great, or
where the Veins are large, or in the Arte^ies, but little when small, or in the
little Vessels, or a narrow prick, through which sometimes, little or no Blood
can come. And when the Puncture is large, it may also come to pass that no
blood may come forth, because it all falls inward.

When bleeding is stopped, there is Sanies, or Blood, and Matter, and then it
grows foul after, like an Ulcer, into which it turns, as we shall show.

Sometimes other Matter comes forth of a Wound, as Meat and Drink, when the
stomach is hurt, and Excrements, when the Guts are wounded, or Urin, when the
Bladder is wounded, or some part of the Body comes forth, as the Brain, Lungs,
Liver, Spleen, Guts.

There is pain in all more or less, and the greater as the part is more
sensible.

The part sometimes swells without Inflammation, or withers, or is otherwise
deformed or lame.

And the Functions are hurt, as when there are Convulsions, Resolutions,
Cramps, and Contractions, from Wounds, and when the inward parts are hurt, they
are worse.

A Contusion is from a stroke or fall, not only with a Tumor, A comused Wound.
but without, and with pain only, as we showed in Tumors, and is with a wound,
in which the skin and subject parts are more or less unequal, bruised, and cut,
with little or no bleeding, and a tumor round about, and colored as a
Contusion with a Tumor only, and it is more easily suppurated, and turned to an
Ulcer.

There are also Wounds partly bruised, partly cut and pricked; these are when
the edge is blunt, or from a bite when the wounds are many and deep, according
to the length of the Teeth, and the flesh bruised by the broad Teeth: These are
easily inflamed, and turn to perverse Ulcers.

There are also uneven wounds with Saws and Instruments, Uneven Cuts.
which cause perverse, and sometimes incurable Ulcers.

There are also Compound wounds, as when there is an Inflammation with a wound,
A Wound with a Phlegmon.
then it is called a Wound with a Phlegmon: This is oftnest from a Puncture or
Gunshot. And there is then a Tumor with an Ulcer and new pain, and it may
gangraene.

When a Wound grows foul with matter or humors, A Wound vlcerating.
it changes its Nature, and is an Ulcer.

And the Ulcer is Compound when the wound is is with a broken bone. A Wound
with a Fracture or bone-hurt.


Others are venomous from a poisoned Sword or Bullet, Poisoned wounds.
or from biting of Beasts, as a mad Dog or Serpents, and then there are great
accidents and dangerous. Also men fasting, especially if they be choleric, or
come from fury, are venomous, if they bite.

To these may be referred the stinging of Bees, Wasps, and Spiders, Stinging.
in which though there is no wound, yet there is pain, redness, and swelling,
especially if the Breast be venomous, as the Phanlangius Scorpion.

An Ulcer is the foul solution of continuity, Ulcers in the Superficies of the
body.
that divides the skin and flesh also, this comes not at first as a wound from
an external Cause, but from a Pustle, or Tumor, or a Wound, or of it self. We
spoke of Ulcers, with Tumors or Pustles, in Cancer, Carbuncle, Herpes, and
Scab. Here we shall speak of Ulcers after Inflammation and Imposthumes, broken
with matter or flesh, or after an Erysipelas, when the Blysters are broken: Or
of such as come from foul Wounds or Humors. They are all simple or Compound.

A simple Ulcer is when there is only foulness, when it is not hollow, Simple
sordid Ulcers plain and cavous.
it is called a plain Ulcer, when there is hollowness from lost Flesh, as when
it follows an Imposthume, and is round, it is called a cavous Ulcer. If it be
long, or like a Borough or Channel coming forth, it is called sinuous; and if
the passage go strait, a fistulated Ulcer. All have filthy matter, but the
hollow most; A sinuous Ulcer.
it is white of a mean consistance, called concocted, sweet, and equal: Or
discolored, waterish, or crude, unequal, or stinking. There are also thick
slimy Matter about Ulcers and Wetness. The pain is not so great in them as in
Inflammations or Imposthumes breeding, only it is lancing and increased with
touching or tenting. And if Ulcers be in the parts ordained for motion or go to
the Bowels, they hurt the Functions.

Compound Ulcers are diverse, especially that with proud Flesh which would be
ill cured, Compound ulcers.
if before it be removed.

Other Ulcers are sinuous and girt about with a Tunicle within, Growing ulcers
without flesh.
fending forth no humor from the flesh which is not naked, and cannot be cured
till the Cavity be filled with flesh. Fistula.
They are called Fistulaes, especially if they be large and strait; as I have
seen one that began at the neck and went down the Back to the Hip, voiding much
matter. And I have seen many little Fistulaes in the Perinaeum that when to the
Bladder, through which the Urin always dropped. And I saw in my Fathers days in
a Palatinate Beggar a horrid Fistula in the lower Belly, with many holes that
sent forth matter like seed. And 1652. I saw a Woman with a Fistula in her
Privities and strait gut, with a Tumor and many Holes, who went to a simple
bragging Surgeon who by Causticks caused Inflammation and Death.

There are also Ulcers with hard Lips called Callous, Callous ulcers.
and cannot be cicatrized or healed, these are called Dysepulota. And they
which are malignant shall be spoken of hereafter.

There are other to be cured called Cacoethe, Ulcers of evil Habit.
not of themselves, but by reason of the part to which they cannot be fixed as
a corrupt or rotten Bone, as we shall show there.

They are worse when there is Inflammation or Erysipelas, Phlegmonous Ulcers.
with Redness, Tumor and Pain, if the tumor be an Oedema, it swells with less
pain, but is harder to be cured.

The corrupt Ulcers whose flesh is white like Bacon are worst, Erysipelated
oedematous Ulcers.
and when it is soft and swollen, and when clear water comes forth. These
Ulcers come from wounds in the Joints, Corrupt Ulcers with water.
where it is membranous and nervous without Flesh. The German Chirugions call
them Glidwasser or water of the Joints, and fear least it gangraene, by reason
of the pain, Contraction, and Corruption. Of this sort is Paranychia or the
Inflammation in the Fingers end that corrupts the Joint, Paronychia ulcerated.
as we showed in Inflammations.

To these are referred Ulcers with stinking Flesh, Foul ulcers.
and such as corrode when the Flesh is yellow, A verminous ulcer.
green, or black, with stinking Matter, and Worms, called Verminous; these
sometimes gangraene.

Besides these, Perverse ulcers. Eating Ulcers. Nomae.
there are Ulcers from malignant Humors or other Ulcers, or from Erysipelas
ulcerated; these eat and are hollow called Nomae, and when they eat the skin
only Phagedaenica, and because they spread Serpentia or creeping, when they are
hard to cure, Phagadaenica
they are called Cacoethe.

These are in diverse parts, but especially in the Legs, Perverse Ulcers in the
Legs.
which are apt to receive Humors and Erysipelas, above the Ankle, they use to
be broad there, and to eat the flesh away. This may be lasting for many years
in old men full of Humors, which wets men's clouts, and bleeds upon the least
occasion, and is full of pain, with Heat, Redness, and Tumor round about, and
sometimes with an oedematous Swelling. Sometimes the Vein upon the Ulcer is
swollen and blew, A varicous Ulcer.
which comes thither, with many windings in the Legs, and feeds it: this is
called a varicous Ulcer from Varix, a Vein dilated.

Eating Ulcers that are malignant from the French Pox, A malignant pockie
Ulcer. A Cancer in the Yard.
besides those in the Jaws, Nostrils, and Privities of Women, are in the
Praepuce and Glans of Men's Privities also, which destroy the Yard: this is
called Cancer. And that is a leprous Ulcer, Leprous Ulcers.
which is in Elephantiasis, in the Jaws, Nose, Soles of the Feet, and Palm of
the Hand and Armpits, and other parts of the Arms and Feet, which are
Phagadaenous that is devouring, and have swollen hard Lips without pain, as we
shall show in Elephantiasis.

Corruption in the Superficies is either in the Flesh or in the Bone.
Corruption in the supersicies of the body


Corruption in the Skin, Flesh, Membranes, Nerves, and Compound Vessels is
called a Gangraen, Gangraene.
usually it follows Inflammations, sometimes it comes from other causes. In this
the part begins to lose its natural color and wax blew suddenly, or by degrees
and then black, with swelling of the part and pain very great before a total
corruption from which poison constantly flows, that wets the skin and flesh and
makes it softer, which being corrupted, either opens of its self and ulcerates,
or with Scarification, by which we labor to cure. The wounds lie deep and swell
with lips, and at last, if it be not prevented, the part is destitute of all
natural heat, pulse and sense, and is very stinking and hollow. Sphacelus,
Syderation.
And then it is called Sphacelus and Syderation.

If there be foulness of bones, they are either corroded in parts and made
rough and uneven, Corrupt bones Caries.
or corruption is so manifest that the part is black and comes from the sound
and quick part, or corrupts the whole bone, as in Paronychia, the joints of the
Fingers and mortifyeth, and is called the Caries of the bone. This corruption
of the bones is with an Ulcer in the skin and flesh, from which it comes for
the most part and through which it is to be seen, being deep and to the bone.
And therefore though of it self, a corrupt bone feel no pain, yet the Ulcer
joined thereto and which cannot be cured whiles the bone is foul, may be
painful. Of which as the shape is diverse, we shall speak in Deformity.

The Causes.
The Causes of all pains in the superficies of the Body. (as tickling, itching
pains of cold or heat, compressions, roughness, contusion, all without an
appearent Character also of redness or Erysipelum, Tumors, Inflammations,
Impostumes, Cancers, Pustles, Scabs, Clefts, Corrosions, Wounds and Ulcers, in
which there are signs, which are the disease it self) are cold, or hot, or dry
distemper of blood, or other Humor gathered in those parts, or Solution of
continuity.

When the parts are not used to be touched, as the soals of the Feet, sides,
Want of usual touching causes tickling.
Arm-holes and Privities, they are subject to ticklishness, or when any thing
touches the Face gently, or creeps, there is tickling, or titillation.

A cold distemper, Cold causes pain.
causes the cold pain in the superficies of the Body, from Air, Wind, or
Water, or Snow, or Ice, and not solution of continuity, by freesing that
presses forth, the thin moisture. This pain is greater, when the part is
Nervous, or not used to cold, or Air. Therefore the Face, because it is not
covered, though it be very sensible, yet it is not so sensible of cold as other
parts, that are usualy covered. Also cold is very grievous to Ulcers or wounds
that have the skin off. And this pain is greatest, when there is a sudden
change from very hot to very cold. If this happen to the Hands as it is usual,
there is that great pain in the the Fingers ends, called in high Dutch Kuneglen.

A hot distemper causes a hot pain, from the Air, Heat causes pain.
made hot by the Sun or otherwise, or from water, or the like, when there is
burning in the body and not Inflammation. Also this hot pain may come from too
many cloths, which disturb and cause sweat. Also the body is inflamed with
exercise. And there may be preternatural heat in the Hands and Feet, from
internal causes, which some attribute to the heat of the Liver. Also in hot
diseases, especially Fevers, there is a perplexing heat internal and external.

Dryness of the skin causes that roughness, which offends the touch, Dryness
is the cause of pain from touching of rough things.
in tender people especially. This roughness may also come from external Air
that is dry, or from the touching of dry and astringent things. When the skin
is made hard by labor, it rather diminishes the sense of touching, Dryness is
the cause of clefts.
then depraveth it. Sometimes the skin is extraordinarily cleft; as in the
Hands, Feet, Lips, Fundament, etc. This dryness may come from the causes
mentioned, or from cold or heat, as in Fevers we find the skin cleft and the
Lips, from the heat of breath. And there may be clefts in the Hands and Feet,
from cold Air and water. And in extraordinary cold that is long, when it beats
upon a part where the skin is thick, there may be great clefts, which turn to
Ulcers, they are called Perniones. As in the soals of the Feet and Palms of the
Hands and in the Ears and Nostrils, because they want flesh to defend them.
This the cold does by astringing, drying and wrinkling the Skin. And if it
extinguish the heat, it is most dangerous.

Blood flowing to any superficial parts, as to the Skin, Flesh and Glandules,
causes diverse diseases; When it does not only moisten the parts, which is
natural for nourishment, but fill and inflame them. And if blood flow to the
skin, except the scarf skin which admits no blood, it causes Erysipelas, in
which there is redness from the blood, shining through the scarce ski^: Blood
flowing to the skin is the cause of Erysipelas and its kinds.
and before it is sixed or swollen, the part being pressed the redness flies
away and returns again, as we see in other parts, it comes to pass from the
blood coming and going in the Cheeks. But if the blood be hot, the burning is
the worst pain, and it is as the blood is. For if it be thin and hot, there is
a simple Erysipelas which comes and goes sooner. If it be thick, there is a
great Erysipelas Phlegmon, if waterish, there is Erysipelas oedematous: this is
gentler but longer. If the blood be Choleric, the Erysipelas turns yellow, and
burns more, and eats off the scarf skin. If the choler be green or black it is
seen by the color and ends in perverse Ulcers, or malignant if it be infectious.

If the blood be gathered in the flesh and skin, Flux of blood to the skin and
flesh, causes Tnmors and Inflammations.
it causes swelling and Inflammation with redness and pain from distention and
heat, and when the blood is discussed the Tumor is gone. If it suppurate or
grow ripe, Suppuration, causes Impostumes.
it is an Impostume, which breaking makes an Ulcer, and the matter is more,
when the blood is much and the substance of the part corrupted. And if the
Inflammation increase and the humor be perverse, and corruption follow,
especially a wound in the Nerves, Slidwasser, from a corrupt wound.

Corruption of the part, causes Gangren.

Natural heat extinct, causes a Sphacel.


that pernicious Ulcer, called in high Dutch Slidwasser, which gleets with
Water is begotten, and the Nerves being corrupted, there is less of motion. But
if the Inflammation increase and there comes no suppuration, but corruption of
the natural heat be extinct, a Sphatel.

If blood flow upon the flesh rather then the skin, as upon the Muscles outward
in the belly, breast, neck or back there are Inflammations, but not red or
manifestly swollen, as in other, as in the Pleurisy and Quinsies. If the blood
flow to diverse places there will be pustles, as I showed. And if it be in the
pores, there will be many little scabs.

These Inflammations are diverse in respect of the blood, if it be pure, the
Inflammation is simple. If thin and not only gathered, but dispersed partly
upon the skin, it causes a Phlegmon with Erysipelas, if thick the Inflammation
will be blewer called a Scirrhus, which rather follows, then accompanyeth an
Inflammation. If the blood be waterish, the Phlegmon will be Aedematous, in
which the Serum sent further into the skin, makes an Aedematous tumor about: as
we see blood does, when sprinkled upon linen. If other humors, as choler,
yellow, green or black, or sharp and malignant, be in the blood, the
Inflammation is worse, and the heat of the blood, when the Inflammation lies
deep, will make the rotten flesh part from the sound, in a Coat which will be
in the tumor, when opened, as in furunculus,

If Blood flow upon other parts distinct from the flesh and skin, Flux of blood
upon the glandules, causes the Bubo, Parotis, Phygthlon, Phyma.
and gathers together, it causes a hot tumor and inflammation: as when it
falls upon the kernels or glandules in the Emunctuaries. This is usual because
nature sooner discharges her self in ignoble parts, especially being spungy
and placed by the divisions of the great veins. Hence comes the pain and hot
tumor in Bubo and Parotis behind the Ear, and Inflammation and suppuration in
Phygethlon or Panus: as we showed. These differ as the blood is pure or impure,
thin or thick, crude, simple, or mixed, with other crude humor or waterish,
from whence come Phyma, or with pernicious and infectious humors, from whence
comes the Pestilent and Pocky Bubo.

If Blood flow into other parts, Flux of blood into other parts, causes Tumor
and inflammaoions in them.
as into the breasts or stones, into which it easily flows, by reason of the
plenty of Veins, or into the spungy parts, as the Privities, Fundament and
Mouth, or into parts that have gristles, as the Nose and Ears, or into the
joints: it causes hot tumors and Inflammations in them, which differ as the
blood is pure or impure, and as the parts are more tender, nervous and sensible.

The efficient cause of blood thus flowing into the superficial parts, is the
expulsive faculty, when it is troubled with it, either offending in quantity or
quality. The helping cause, is the disposition of the blood being apt to flow,
and the readiness of the parts to receive it. These causes whether one or more
come from these following.

As Plethory or abundance of blood, which is burdensome to nature, and
therefore sent by her, both to inward and to outward parts. Sometimes it flows
of it self and sometimes from some light cause. Therefore young people that
grow, have swollen or waxing kernels, from abundance of blood; and by handling,
they break into Buboes. Or when the blood is too hot or thin, it is apt to
flow, and being much it stirs up the expulsive faculty to send it forth, and
then it causes Erysipelas or diverse Inflammations, according to its nature. So
in a Synoch Fevers, Erysipelas, as comes from hot blood sent from the Veins
into the skin.

Also another humor or quality offensive to nature, may provoke her to send out
blood, while she expels the humor: and thence tumors may be. So when the cause
of the disease is sent from the Veins with the blood in the Crisis of a Fever:
there is a tumor in the declination of the disease. And when the Pestilent
quality is sent to the Emunctuaries with the blood in a Pestilent Fever, there
is a Bubo Pestilent: and when the poison of the Pox is sent to the Groyn, there
is a Venereal Bubo: as we showed.

Pain causes Tumors and Inflammation, (not by attraction, Pain is the cause of
diverse Tumors and Inflammations.
as it is usually thought) but by stirring up nature to expel the cause, by
which means the blood flows: this is in the outward parts, when they are
pressed, struck or b^uised, by which is pain. Or if pain come from any disease,
and if the Inflammation be increased a new by the pain, if there be Impostume,
Pustle, Wound, burn Ulcer or Inflammation therewith, or with any other disease
causing this pain. Also Pustles inflamed from scratching come from pain which
follows, though at the first it seems pleasant. Also it often comes to pass,
that not only the part pained swells, but the adjacent parts if they be apt
to receive Defluxions, as the Kernels in the Groins, Armpits, and behind the
Ears, when there is any pain from the Causes or Diseases montioned. And a
troublesome Scab in these parts, has commonly a Bubo accompanying it. And the
pestilential Bubo comes as I showed, not so much from the Plague, as from the
burning and pain of the Carbuncle near it.

Also these Pains are longer and worse, when the blood easily and constantly
flows thither, and the part is continually pained. As when there are swelled
Legs in a Dropsy, if the skin be open, there is a constant Flux of water
which by its corruption through long abiding in the Body, is pernicious and
corroding; And also of blood being thin, which causes the perverse and
ulcerated Erysipelas which so easily gangraenes.

When outward heat does long or much afflict the skin, External Heat causes
Erysipelas, or Phlegmon, and their kinds.
it does not only make it thin, but inflames it, and the blood near to it, and
makes it flow, causing Erysipelas or Inflammations, especially in tender and
sanguine Constitutions, and such as are subject thereto. As when they sit too
long by the sire and burn their Shins, or inflame themselves by long suning. As
I did by riding in a hot day when I was young, my Boots were so hot that they
made my Legs burn, and look red two days after. This I have had often, and it
came at first with red Spots, which turned first blew, after yellow, and then
vanished. They may also come from hot water, and after bathing, as the pustles
called in high Dutch Eyssen, when in the time of the Bodies being hot, they use
cold water, which causes a sudden repercussion, so that the Blood flies back
suddenly and returns with pain. Also other moderate heat may cause Itch, and
that scratching, and so pustles. Also Inflammation of particular parts may
cause them, as of the Roots of the Nails. Then they are called Paronychiae, as
when Maids by washing their Hands in foul hot water often, do cause their Nails
to be crooked, and the Roots inflamed.

Also other excrementitious and preternatural Humors thrown to the skin, Flux
of Humors causes pustles.
and there fixed cause pustles, as blood dispersed into diverse parts, and these
may grow greater, and turn into Ulcers, small or great, or corroding, or
venomous, as the quality is.

Humors that have an occult quality that is malignant, produce a little
swelling or pustle, according to their Venom.

A venomous Humor so infecteth the parts, A pernicious and venomous quality,
causes the Cancer.
that sometimes at first there is a little Tumor which only causes a little
pricking, but is most dangerous, in that it will not away; because while it is
nourished with the other parts of the Body, it makes the Nourishment like unto
it self, and converts it into Venom, and so increases by degrees, and grows
broader and deeper, and at length becomes a Cancer, consisting of a fleshy
substance full of Veins, with no Inflammation or Tumor, but Blood in the Veins,
which itcheth and pricketh, which shows its malignity by its constant increase,
till there is an Ulcer, and then it goes no further but with its Claws that
come from the Body it creeps on, we know the whole to be malignant, because if
it be not taken out by the Root, it cannot be cured, and the least portion
remaining will grow again.

It is a hard thing to know whence this Matter and Poison first comes, or to
describe the Nature of it but by the effect. But that it came by Touch and
Infection, because the Elephantiasis whose Cause is the same with that of the
Cancer, and therefore is called the general Cancer comes from Contagion, but
the Cancer is worst, because the Humors are all in one place. And as there are
few that have Cancers, so are there sew Lepers, for the Venom lies lurking in
the Veins, and comes to the part infected with the Blood, and when the Cancer
increases, it weakneth the Body by degrees. And this may be an argument, that
there is a Contagion in the breeding of a Cancer, because I knew two Women that
attended upon two other that had Cancers a long time in their Breasts, that
consumed them which were themselves infected with Cancers, and perished thereby
after long torment, the one being near of kin to her Mistress. But we cannot
yield that it comes from Melancholy, for these reasons: For if it comes from
Natural Melancholy, which they say is the Dreggs of the Blood, there would some
signs thereof appear, and such blood would be there gathered out of the
Vessels, if there should be a Tumor or Inflammation, which are not. And if it
come from preternatural Melancholy, there would be at the first coming a
burning, corroding, and blackness, as in the Carbuncle which is not so, but a
Cancer is like Flesh, and not very painful.

A pestilent Pustle comes from poison of another Nature, A pestilent Poison
causes Carbuncle and pestilent Bubo.
which we call a Carbuncle, with venomous force, and with little burning, but
with itching and pricking, only as I said of a Cancer; sometimes with
Inflammation round about, and a Bubo hard by, which corrupts the part, and
mollifieth till it falls out back from the sound.

This poison comes from that pestilent Poison that got into the Body, and
caused a pestilent Fever by its destructive quality and heat, as I showed when
it gets outward. And we showed in pestilential Fevers, that I and others have
been infected with pestilent Pustles taken outwardly.

Some Humors cause Scabs, Itch, and Carbuncles, Choleric, salt, and sharp
Humors cause the Scab, and creeping Itch, Carbuncles, and Phlyctenae
by a manifest quality that corrodes and burns, and Pustles with Ulcers; these
are either preternatural, yellow, and green, and black Choler, or salt, sharp,
or malignant, and go the Superficies of the Body, with the blood and serum, and
cause pustles and inflammations, if they come with blood or pain; or they come
without this Flux from the Veins by sweat, according to the diversity of these
Humors, are different Scabs, Itch, and Carbuncles, as we shall show.

If in the common moist Scab, there be Itch and corroding without great
burning, the Humor is not so hot but salt, and gentle Choler, or tempered with
water, is fallen from the Veins upon the skin, when there is no redness or
Inflammation: But if there be, they show it come with blood moved by scratching
or pain, as also may appear by the suppuration that follows. When those things
are as in the worst Scab, with yellow or green Matter, it comes from thicker
and worse Choler, as the color shows, as in Terminthis and Epinyctis, the
pustles are very burning, with Inflammation and Suppuration following.
Especially in a Carbuncle are the pustles very burning, which shows that they
come from very hot Choler, and the Fever shows they come from Blood, and their
sudden appearing shows that they come from Defluxion. And we cannot gather that
black Choler was the Cause, by their blackness, because others are black when
they are dry. But from the great Heat that burns and corrupts the skin, and
makes it black, and will not let them suppurate, we may conclude that either
black Choler or green was the cause.

This ^^ews that the pustles in Herpes come not from a Flux of Humors, but from
a Collection made there, because they come by degrees without Inflammation. And
if the Herpes be called Miliaris, there is great Heat and Pustles dry, and
therefore the Choler was yellow, milder, and thinner, and went to the
Superficies of the skin. If it be Herpes Esihiomenus the Choler is worse and
green, and it is deeper in the Flesh. The malignity appears by its corroding
and creeping on, and when it creepethno farther, it causes Impetigo.

In that kind of dry Scab which is called the Itch, because no moisture
appears, we conclude that the Choler is pure, but thinner then in Herpes
miliaris: Or that the Humor is salt and dried, the skin shows which grows red
by scratching. And the like Humor is in Impetigo, deeper and broader. This by
continuance turns worse, and causes Psora, which comes from salt water that
is infectious and corroding, as appears by the constant sweat, which vaporing
away, wet not but rather dry the skin. This Venom may come from a long
continuing Scab, which infecteth the skin when it turns the Nourishment into
corrupt Humors; this is the worse sort of Scab called the Greek Leprosy or
Arabian Leprosy, which cannot be cured by reason of the fault in assimulation
or nourishment.

As for Phlyctaenae, it is plain that they come from water carried under the
scarce skin, which divides it from the true skin and makes Blysters, because
water comes forth when they break. If this water be pure, there is no pain
while they are whole but when they break, and the true skin is hurt.

But if the water be salt as appears by itching, or mixed with Choler, as
appears by the yellowness, when they open, the heat is greater; and if this
Humor sweat forth long, they creep, and then it is called Herpes phlyctaenodes.

These salt, sharp, choleric Humors which cause the Herpes and Carbuncles,
come from Diet when it is apt to breed such or turn into Choler, as we showed
in Fevers. For if in the first or second Concoction they are not separated
from the Blood, but lie long in the Meseraicks, they grow worse, and either get
into the hollow Vein, with the Blood and Serum, and ^o to the Superficies of
the Body, or there they are heaped up. Therefore intemperate Livers, and such
as use bad Diet, and are Chacochymical, are subject to these. Also the same
Excrements may be gathered from Distemper of the Bowels, or be derived from the
Parents: And some think they come from the menstrual blood. And they go to the
skin by Natures benefit, which expels them when they are bound, and by other
Causes, as heat and motion. As we showed speaking of Tumors from Blood.

Solution of Continuity causes diverse kinds of pains in the Superficies of the
Body, with Ulcers, as Excoriations, and Wounds, and Clefts, or without Ulcers;
as the cause was internal or external.

The external Causes of Solution of Continuity, Compression, Distention, and
Coniusion cause pain.
are Compression, Distension, or Contusion, with outward hurt, but inward
separation of the small Veins which causes pain, which we call Distention or
stretching, as from a stroke or weight or pulling the Hair: Hence comes the
Rhagades or Clefts in the Fundament from hard Excrements.

When the skin is scratched off there is Intertrigo or Rawness, Friction is the
cause of Scabs.
this comes after riding as galling, or long Diseases and lying, and from
scratching with the Nails. And the moist Itch is when the skin is most
scratching, and Humors that are salt or choleric come forth, and it is worse
when there are little Tumors from rubbing and they break. Intertrigo or Pustles
of the Privities come so, from choleric sweat which putrefieth in these parts
easily, and causes itching.

Cuts, Pricks, Strokes, cause Wounds, all these when they suppurate are ulcers.
Outward Cuts, Pricks, Contusions, cause Wounds.

Of poisoned Wounds.


These are with a sharp or blunt Tool. If the Instrument be infected with
poison, the Wounds will be venomous, or rusty, or if the weapon be touched with
Garlic, or a bullet dipped in grease, or if a sword or tool be otherwise
poisoned, the wound will be venomous.

Taking off the skin by Medicines or the like, ulcerateth and inflameth,
Corrosion of the skin.
and also sharp Urin does the same in Childrens Hips.

Burning separates the scarce skin from the true skin, Of Burning.
and causes a bladder or blyster, which breaks and leaves the skin bare;
when it is deeper it causes an Ulcer or Eschar. This may be from heat of the
Sun, which blysters the naked Body, or from hot or sclading Oil and Water which
takes off the skin, inflames and brings perverse Ulcers; or from Fire which
makes Blysters and Ulcers; or from burning Medicines, Vesicatories and
Cauteries, among which some mortify, and cause an Eschar without pain. Also a
Nettle sends in fire with its prickles, which causes first Heat, then Blysters.

Biting of beasts causes uneven and deep wounds, Biting or stinging of
venomous beasts.
which suppurate and turn to ulcers; and these are worse when the spittle is
venomous, as in some beasts. And it is known that the biting of a man has
caused dangerous wounds by his spittle, especially when he has been fasting
and angry, because the spittle is most choleric, as appears by the same. I
knew a Fisher-mans Wife that was bitten by her angry Husband in her right hand,
and dyed of a venomous Ulcer caused thereby with a Fever. And I knew two more
that lay long sick, and were with great difficulty recovered of Fevers, by
bites given by their fellow-drunkards in their fingers. There is from biting of
a mad Dog or other Beast, not only a venomous wound, but other horrid symptoms:
As we showed in Hydrophos. Also if the bite be very small, if the Venom of the
spittle get in, as of a Weezle or Mouse, there may be a perverse wound, or of a
Viper or Serpent, or the like, the whole Body is poisoned.

When beasts by their stings or otherwise make wounds, The stinging of beasts
causes venomous wounds.
though solution of Continuity scarce appear, yet because there is a burning or
evil quality sent into the part, there is a great pain, inflammation, and
tumor; as we see in stinging of Bees or Waspes, when they leave their horny
stinges in the wounds: If they come from worse Creatures, as from the crooked
stinge of a Scorpion, then the poison infects the whole Body. And as Nicander
and Dioscorides show the same may be from diverse other venomous beasts, whereby
the Body being only pricked in one part, may suffer in diverse. These we shall
not speak of, because they are not troublesome in our Countries: As also we shall
not speak of the Harms, stinging of Flies, Gnats, and Fleas, which are only
itching, with a red spot.

The internal Causes of these Solutions of Continuity, The Humors which cause
ulcers that follow Imposthumes, and are joined with pustles.
are Humors which while they cause tumors and pustles, do also corrode and
ulcerate: Or those Tumors ulcerate, and cause it as we showed. Namely how
matter bred of Inflammations suppurated, produces Imposthumes and then Ulcers,
which with other Humors coming to them, grow worse, as by blood inflamed, or by
other malignant Humors, malignant. And also how from this pernicious Matter
breeding a Cancer, it may be ulcerated, and how a hollow Ulcer may follow the
burnt and corrupt Flesh, that falls out of the pestilential Carbuncle. And how
from choleric Serum and sharp Humors that produce Carbuncles, Herpes, and
Scabs of all sorts, there may arise malignant Ulcers, as in Carbuncle, and
corroding as in Herpes, and foul with Matter as in the moist Scab, and dry with
Clefts, as in the dry Scab: And also how the skin comes off from the Serum that
causes Phlyctenae.

Also without Pustles or Tumors going before, Humors cause Fissures or Clefts
the skin may be cleft by a sharp, salt, drying Humor, when the part is tender
or spungie as the Lips, Fundament and Privites. Hence come the Rhagades or
clefts, which by reason of the exquisite sense of those parts are very painful
and burning.

When a thick Salt humor is gathered between the thick skin of the Head and the
Skul, Humors that cause Tinea Favus or scald Head.
and there long kept till it putrefie about the roots of the Hairs, and eats
through the skin in diverse places, there is a Tinea, Favus or scald Head. And
the Humor is Malignant, because it is infectious in Children.

Corroding Phagadaenical Ulcers breed and are nourished with sharp and
malignant waterish Humors. Humors that cause Corroding and Varicous Ulcers.
Which are chiefly in the Legs, by falling down of the Humors. Also these
Humors carried with the blood to some Vein near to an Ulcer and enlarging and
washing the Ulcer; keep it from healing, as we showed in a Varicous Ulcer. The
Original of these Humors, is as of those that cause Herpes and Scabs.

When the Privities are infected by Malignant Humors, Malignant humors, cause
Malignant Ulcers.
from unclean Copulation, there are Ulcers, as in the Glans and Praepuce. And
the Ulcers in the French Pox and Leprosy are alike. But the nature of these
humors are known only by the effect, being infectious.

The Cure.
The Cure of solitary pains which have no Character external but themselves, as
itch and tickling, ho^ and cold pains, or roughness of Skin, because they are
not great, nor last long, but depart with the cause removed, is not hard. As
thus.

If tickling come of it self it is not long, but if it be by outward force it
is a torment intolerable and it weakneth and causes convulsions, Cure of
tickling.
which must be cured.

A light Itch will cease of it self, Cure of itching.
if you be patient and forbear scratching. If it be great, it is cured by a
pleasant scrubbing. If it continue or return and the cause be external, as Lice
etc. It shall be cured as in them. If it be internal from a humor, because it
has with it commonly scabs or pustles, it shall be spoken of in them. But if
it be without other manifest disease in diverse parts and continue, use
Evacuations, Baths, as in the scab. If it be in Women's Privities, you must put
Ointments or the like into them.

If pain come from cold Air, Wind, Water or Snow, The Cure of pain from cold.
and cease not when they are gone, you must by degrees bring the body to a
natural heat, least the sudden change, from extreme cold to extreme heat, bring
inconveniences, or that called in high Dutch Runeglen or pain in the Hand. It
is good to come into a temperate room, or to exercise violently if the feet be
cold from riding, or beat the Arms like Watermen, or to apply skins, furrs or
feathers, or put the Hands into the Hair, or wash them in warm water before you
come to the fire. If after these the native heat be weakened, use Fomentations,
Baths and hot Ointments, as in astonishment and Palsy, as Oil of Euphorbium
and Peppers: Or take Pellitory of Spain, Pepper, each two drams; Euphorbium a
dram, Oil of Wallflowers and Wax and Oil of Spike and Spices with Musk, Amber
and Civet.

Oil of Nettles, or wherein Nettles are boiled, is a singular remedy: and to
preserve the Hands against cold, and also Goose grease.

If a hot pain come from heat of the Sun, or motion, The Cure of pain from heat.
or baths and cease not, the cause being removed, you must not sudenly cool
which is dangerous, as we have known some who in violent heats have stayed long
in Cellars under ground and caught Fevers and dangerous Defluxions and
Apoplexies. Therefore it is best to go first into some temperate place or
Arbor. If the heat continue to Inflammation or Synoch, Cure that. If it be in
the palms of the Hands or soals of the Feet, because it comes from internal
causes and foresheweth or accompanyeth diseases, Cure them.

If there be roughness or hardness of the Skin, The Cure of pain from touching
of rough things.
which hinders and troubles touching in dainty people, use moistners, as in
Deformity. If there be clefts see Ulcers.

If there be pain from pressing or stretching without manifest solution of
continuity, it cease with it, The Cure of pain from compression and
distention.
but if you fear Tumor or Inflammation, we show you how to prevent them in a
Phlegmon.

The Cure of pains in the superficies, that have manifest diseases, is as
Erysipelas, Phlegmon and Tumors from contusion or glandules, or as Impostumes
from Inflammation, or as a Cancer, or as Pustles, as Carbuncles, Herpes, Scab,
or as Ulcers, or corruption of parts, as Gangreen, or foul bones.

If an Erysipelass be without a Fever from an external cause, The Cure of
Erysipelas and its kinds.
or if the Fever be little, only Cure the Erysipelas. If a Synoch follow look
first to the Fever, as in Fevers first you must be sure to prevent the
Carbuncle, if it be customary, as in old people. And after you must regard the
Fever, if it be not prevented, by sweating, bleeding, purging, altering heat,
and other accidents.

But as to Erysipelas as alone, when it burns not much, it must not be over
much cooled, but kept warm to disperse it with gentle means, by wrapping it in
Linen that is soft and a little unctious, as some think.

Or wrap it in a Saffron clout: Take Saffron a dram, Plantane, Privet,
Nightshade, Roses, each an ounce; Rose vinegar half an ounce: let them stand
warm till the water is dried, then dip a clout in it, apply it wet at first and
warm. Or apply scarlet, which does dissolve and strengthen the part.

Or Fume the part with Mastick, Frankincense, Amber, or Juniper or Sanders
burnt.

These gentle remedies are most usual, because the patient fears strong and
moist means.

When an Erysipelas with a Phlegmon or alone, is very burning, or has Pustles
or Blisters. Take heed of an Ulcer, which is dangerous, at first stop the Flux
of blood from the part allay heat and abate pain, and then by degrees consume
and digest the matter.

At first to repel and allay heat, use coolers with a little astringents, by
Fomentations. This is approved of others, but ours will not wet the part and
think that wet, causes all accidents. They are deceived from hence, because
they hear that a Gangreen comes from a cooled Erysipelas, that suppose it is
from moisture. But the Refrigeration in a Gangreen, is rather a Mortification
and Extinction of the native heat, from two great Inflammation, then from the
introducing of a cold quality.

Therefore cold water with the third part Vinegar, may be used as in Arthritis
from blood, with a clout or wool. Dioscorides bids use Vinegar alone with the
white of an Egg to allay pain, or Juyces, or distilled waters of Plants, or
Vinegar of Roses.

Apply these Herbs green, bruised, or heated, or boiled, or with Bran and
Vinegar, as Plantane, Nightshade, Shep-heard purse, Knot-grass, Purslane,
Sorrel, Housleek, Vine leaves, Endive, Lettice, Grundsill or Lens-Palustris,
Cotyledon, Liver-wort, Lonchytis, Willow Ieaves, Alder, Reeds, Privet, Cypress,
Myrtle, Bramble, Sumach, Fleabane, flowers of Roses, Violets, Water Lillies,
the great Antirrhinum and of Ras-berries.

Or use the juyces with Plantane and Rose water, as an Epitheme or Vinegar and
red Wine, the white of an Egg, Camphire and red Sanders.

Or the Decoction of the five-leaved-Grass, Plantane, Housleek, Purslane, Vine
leaves, Privet, Myrtles with Barley* and in the increase, Chamomil, Melilot
slowers, Roses, Fenugreek, Ointment of Roses, with Camphire and Galens cool
Ointment, or that of Housleek, Oil of Violets, Goosegrease and Saffron.

Or: Take Oil of Roses two ounces, of Water Lillies or Violets an ounce, juice
of Plantane and Nightshade, each an ounce and an half; Vinegar of Roses an
ounce, Camphire a dram with the white of an Egg, or Mucilage of Fleabane an
ounce and an half, and Turpentine.

Plates of Lead are good to repel.

When you fear an Ulcer, add dryers to your coolers, as Ointment of Ceruss,
Album made of Ceruss, white Wax and Oil of Roses with the white of an Egg and
Camphire, or with Ceruse and Oil boiled, and Lytharge.

Or: Take Litharge an ounce and half, Ceruss two drams, juice of Plantane or
Nightshade two ounces, Vinegar of Roses half an ounce, Oil of Roses two ounces,
mix them well in a Leaden Mortar, dip clouts and apply them, or with white Wax,
make an Ointment.

Or thus: Take the white Troches of Rhasis two drams, Sarcocol a dram, Lytharge
burnt and washed Lead, each a dram and an half; Oil of Roses two ounces, juice
of Plantane an ounce, white of an Egg and Mucilage of Quince seeds an ounce,
add half a dram of Opium to abate pain.

Or to allay pain use Cowcumbers, Anguria, deadly Nightshade, Herb true-love
cut and bruised, or pulp of Cassia.

Or Henbane leaves or Tobacco, crude or roasted; Poppy heads, roots of
Mandrakes with Bran and Vinegar to repel. Dioscorides uses juice of Hemlock,
we use juice of Henbane.

Half a dram of Opium with half as much Saffron, may be added to the former.
And this is the cause why the Chirurgions use Treacle in Ointments.

Populeon cools and eases.

Or thus: Take Populcon an ounce and an half, Oil of Henbane, Mandrakes or
Poppy seeds half an ounce, Mucilage of Fleabane seeds an ounce, Saffron a
scruple, and a little Opium.

Or this Epithem: Take Milk three ounces, Oil of Roses an ounce and an half,
white of an Egg or Mucilage of Fleabane seed an ounce, Vinegar half an ounce,
Opium half a dram, Saffron a scruple.

In the progress when the heat abates, to dissolve, when the part looks not so
red and is yellowish, or at first if the heat be little: Use Coleworts,
Pellitory of the wall, Mallows, white Lillies, Mulleine, also leaves of
Ricinus, Stratiotes, Acinos, Fetherfew or Parthenium, roots of Alkanet and
Lychopsis, and of Clowns-Allheal with the square stalk, which is so highly
commended: bruise and apply them.

Or dip clouts in Oil of Roses and Wine, and squeeze and apply them to ease
pain and discuss.

Or boil Oil and red wine: thus, Take of them equal parts, cover them in a
close Vessel, boil them gently till they make no noise.

It is good to discuss, to anoint with hot blood, especially menstrual, as
says Dioscorides.

Or with Urin to stop itching and to dry. Dioscorides uses the Sediments, or
fetling thereof, adding Vinegar and Eggs.

Dioscorides also commends Goats or Sheeps dung boiled in Wine or Vinegar.

Others commend Ink, but it is too sharp without cold waters or juyces. And I
knew an Impostor that concealed a Gangreen thereby. Dioscorides uses rust of
Iron and burnt Vitriol, or Chalcitis, or Salt and Vinegar.

These strong Medioines are best in ignoble parts, not in the Face and Nerves:
when there is need of great drying.

Dissolve the residents with Fomentations and Ointments, and strengthen the
part as we showed in Arth^itis, as with Lies of diverse sorts, and Spaw waters
to p^event.

Wash the Feet with water wherein Vitriol, or Oak, or Ivy leaves, or red Roses,
or Sloes, or Grapes are steeped.

Or put them into the Wine press, or into Grapes stamped with Iron water and
Vinegar.

If there be Erysipelas in the Face, wash it often with red Wine, Rose,
Plantane and Nightshade water, and Vinegar.

If the Legs have an Oedema after the Erysipelas, use things as in Oedema, if
it ulcerate or grangreen. See them.

Phlegmon or Inflammation is of diverse kinds, The Cure of diverse sor^s of
Inflammation.
but we shall speak only of them, which differ not much. Such as are in the
skin, as Phlegmon with Erysipelas or Oedema. Or with little Tumors, or Pustles
that ulcerate and turn to scabs. Also of Inflammations in spungy parts, as
Privities, Paps, Fundament, Mouth, and in the Gristles of the Nose and Ears.
And of those in the joints and ends of the Fingers called Paronychia,
prescribing to all their particular remedies. Of the Tumors and Inflammations
of the Glandules, we shall speak hereafter, and of the Impostume that comes
from all Tumors.

Of these phlegmons the greatest and fullest of pain are the worst, and they
which are in noble parts, or near to them, as in the Face, Organs of sense, or
in very sensible parts, as in the Fundament, Yard, or Womb, or in the joints,
or Fingers. Many of these Impestumate, and then ulcerate, and hurt the noble
part, other gangreen and cause loss of parts or deaths. Others turn into a
Scirrhus, which hinders the bending of the joints.

Blood-letting, is the chief remedy against all, if there be plethory, both to
prevent and cure. Also it revels and derives from the part, and helps the
Fever if it be there.

Also we revel and derive with Scarifications, Cupping, Ligatures and Friction.
And it is good in plethory, when the Terms or Haemmorrhoids bleed, and to
divert.

If the body be foul, loosen the Belly and purge to prevent, especially when
people are subject to Inflammation. And the Cure will be the easier when the
body is clean. Also some Laxatives do revel the blood slowing to the part, they
must not be strong to stir or inflame the Body.

Also use alterers against the phlegmon and Fever in meats and Medicines that
cool the blood.

Topics are to be used in all, first they must repel the blood flowing to the
part, and abate heat and pain, and then dissolve the matter; and if it tend to
suppuration, they must Cure the Impostume and Ulcer. And they must be chosen
according to the Inflammation, as it is great or little and according to the
part.

We repel the humor flowing with astringents and coolers, choosing the
strongest when the heat is great, especially in Furunculus; And if the Flux be
great and the Inflammation also, and in the Face, or Joints and noble parts. In
the other we use more gentle repellers. Especially if the Inflammation be about
the Jaws or Breast, least it cause a Quinsie or pleurisy. To these repellers,
when the Defluxion abateth, we add gentle resolvers and anodynes, if there be
pain: Thus,

Actual coolers are vulgarly used, if we sear Inflammation, from a stroke, or
bruise, to prevent swelling, as a cold Stone, Iron, Lead, or Ice: Or cold
water. This must not be done, but at the first, least the blood congeal and
will not after be discussed.

Some commend the putting the Finger presently in cold water, in Paronychia or
Fellon: or in hot Vinegar, but boiling water is best.

Make repellers of green Herbs, that are both potentially and actually cold, as
of Plantane, Nightshade, Housleek, knot Grass. With Vinegar, Oil of Roses,
Myrtles, Quinces and Barley meal.

Apply Acrons bruised and Sloes.

Or Bran fried in Vinegar, or Rice, and Water often.

Or red Rose Cakes, with red Wine and Vinegar, or Roses.

Or: Take the Juyces of the Herbs mentioned six ounces, Rose vinegar and red
Wine three ounces, Oil of Roses, Myrtles, or Privet an ounce and an half, with
powder of Bistort roots and Pomegranate peels, each a dram; Mrytle or Barberry
seeds, Bole three drams, after you have stirred them in a Leaden Mortar, make an
Ointment, or with Vinegar and whites of Eggs and Barley meal, a Pultis.

The usual defensative against Inflammations, is of Bole Vinegar and whites of
Eggs and Oil of Roses. You may add Sanguis Draconis, Boodstone, and rust of
Iron and sealed Earth, Coral and Camphire.

When there is pain, repel thus, add the fourth part of red Wine Vinegar to
Milk, Bole, and the white of an Eg.

Or wash with Vinegar and Water.

Three or four pound of Quicksilver allayeth heat and pain, being in a Bladder
and applied.

So does Juice, Decoction and distilled water of Herbs, with pouders aforesaid.

Or foment with Oil of Roses, or Violets, and roll the part.

In Paronychia or Fellon, make a Bath for the Finger of five leaved Grass,
Wormwood, Agrimony, Straw-berry leaves, Myrtle-berries with Wine.

A repelling Ointment: Take juice of Plantane, Housleek two ounces, Vinegar an
ounce, Oil of Roses two ounces and an half, Vinegar an ounce, Bole half an
ounce, with the white of an Egg, and a little Turpentine, afterward to digest,
add Ceruss, Cadmia and Litharge.

Or: Take juice of sower Pomegranate^ two ounces, of Nightshade and Rose water,
each an ounce and an half; Camphire a dram, anoint; add Barley flower to make
it stick. This is approved in Inflammation of the Nose.

As in Etysipelas, so here you may use Ointments of Roses, Poplar, and Ceruss,
and plates of Lead also.

In great Inflammations, and when they are parts exquisitely sensible, use
chiefly things to assuage pain. As Anodynes that cherish with their temperate
heat. Or Narcoticks that dull the sense. These are not to be used alone, when
we sear suppuration, but in case of necessity, because they digest, but at the
first, add repellers and in the progress resolvers. But when you desire to
digest, you may use Narcoticks alone, safely.

The same Narcoticks and Anodynes may be used, as in Erysipelas and these
following: As Snayles not beaten, with the shells, least they be too rough; but
taken out may be applied

And leaves of Henbane and Mandrakes baked in the Embers with Hogs grease and a
little Saffron.

Or use this Cataplasm: Take white Bread or Flower a pound, boil it in spring
Water and Proper stilled Water and Milk with Mucilage of Fleabane two ounces,
three Eggs, Oil of Rose three ounces, Hogs grease an ounce, Saffron a dram.

This is proper against a Paronychia or Fellon: boil crumbs of Bread in Milk
with the white of an Egg and a little Turpentine, and to ease pain, add
Mucilage of Fleabane seed, with Barley meal, Opium and Camphire, and after to
heal, add Powder of Galls

Or this Cataplasm against any Phlegmon: Take the Emollient herbs two handfuls,
Althaea two ounces, flowers of Chammomil, Melilote, Roses, Bran, each a pugil:
boil and bruise them, add Oil, Butter, Grease and Saffron.

Or bruise Fleabane, or its seed, with Oil of Roses and a little Vinegar, and
apply it, or boil it with Milk and Althaea roots and add fats.

Or use the Mucilage of Fleabane with the white of an Egg, Juyces and sats.

The Plaster of Diachylon the less by Mesue made of Mucilages of Fleabane and
Henbane eases pain and digesteth.

Oil of the Apples of Strychnodendron, and of the fruit of the Balsamine tree
called Momordica, is an approved remedy, and so is Oil of Henbane seed.

The Chirurgions ease pain with an Egg raw beaten with Oil of Roses and Bole to
repel.

And to digest also they use Oil of Roses, yolks of Eggs and Ceruss.

There is an Ointment called Anodynum, made of Oil of Lillies, Dill, Chamomil,
Ducks and Hens grease to take away pain.

Or this; Take Juice of Henbane, Tobacco, Hemlock, or Poppies, Mallows, or
Marshmallows, each two ounces; Oil of sweet Almonds, and Roses, each two
ounces; boil them, add Mucilage of Althaea, or the like two ounces, or of
Mucilage of Henbane seed, which is best, Butter an ounce, make an Ointment.

The Water of Frog spawn is highly commended, and Juice of Hemlock applied with
a Clout, also raw Craysish.

Also we must dissolve or discuss the Humor which is flown to the part, least
by continuance it turn to Matter, and stink; which though Nature does of her
self, if it be thin, yet if she be slow in her work, she must be helped with
dissolvers, which in the beginning of the increase of the disease mixed with
Repellers, does it rather by dryness then heat; and after they must be used
alone, and the rather if the Phlggmon be o^dematous, especially toward the
Declination, when the heat cease, adding Emollients to gentle Healers, that
may discuss the Relics, and prevent a Scirrhus.

This is done by Herbs mentioned against Erysipelas, as Pellitory, Mallows,
Marshmallows, Orage, Coleworts, Henbit, Coltsfoot, Vervain, Moulin, Scarlea,
Bindweed, Elder, Dan-wort, Pennyroyal, Feaversew, Achillea, Wormwood, Sesamum,
Nettles, Lilly roots, Orris, Briony, wild Cowcumber, Asphodel, Lyris, Docks,
Rhapontick, wild Hemp, Chamomil, Melilot, Dill, Elder flowers, and
Water Lillies, Foenugreek, Lineseed, Barley, Wheat, Lupins, Orobus, and Flower
of Millium Panicum.

You may apply one or more of them bruised or boiled, as Pellitory and
Scabious; or lay the whole Leaves thereon, without the Stalks.

Or make an Anodyne Ointment of Dwarf-elder to anoint the part inflamed. Thus,
Take Dwarfe-elder cut small, put it in a Glass phial, roll it in Dough and
bake it, then take out the glass, and you shall ffnd a thick redish Oil, anoint
therewith.

The Herb called Paronychia is good against a Felon from whence it had its
Name, the Felon is an Inflammation at the Root of the Nails; as also five
leaved Grass, or the skin of an Eg shell, or Dandelion, milkie Stalks, roll
about the Finger.

Phlegmons may be washed with Juyces, Decoctions, or stilled Waters of Herbs;
as that of Moulin which is best, with Rose Water.

Aqua vitae does so dissolve, that it takes away Tumor and Inflammation
presently, allaies pain: when Laborers hurt themselves, they use it.

Dioscorides commends the Lies of Wine in all Inflammations, it is good to
dissolve and to assuage pain.

Also use Oil of Chamomil, Lillies, Orris, sweet Almonds, or Roses, or Fats, as
Oesipus of Wool or Propolis.

Or bruise or boil the Plants mentioned, with Vinegar at first, then Wine,
Honey, Oil, Fats, Turpentine, and Brans, or Meals.

Or apply Raisons as in Furunculus, with Salt, etc.

Or chew Wheat or its Flower, with Water and Honey, or with Leaven.

Or Rose cakes boiled in Lie to dissolve, adding Oil of Chamomil, or Dill.

Or Smallage, and Henbit beaten with Tartar, and Oil of Chamomil.

Or this Cataplasm. Take Roots of Althaea, Docks four ounces, Lillies two
ounces, Pellitory, Vervain, Coltsfoot, each an handful; Feaversew, Wormwood
half an handful, Chamomil flowers and Roses, each a pugil; Barley meal, and
Foenugreek four ounces, Figgs five pair, boil them in Water, bruise and add Oil
of Roses, Chamomil, each two ounces; Hens grease an ounce and half.

Or make it of Bran or Wheat flower a pound, Pease, or Lupine flower two
ounces, boil them in Water and Honey, ad powder of Orris, red Roses, each two
drams; Myrtle seeds a dram, Saffron half a dram, Oil of Roses and Chamomil,
each an ounce and half.

A Cataplasm to digest more, and to be used in the Declination: Take Lilly
roots three ounces, Orris, and Briony roots two ounces, Mallows, Moulin,
Bindweed, Dane-wort, each a handful; Chamomil, Melilot, Elder and Rosemary
flowers, each half a handful; Meal of Lupins, or Orobus and Foenugreek, each
two ounces; Dates six, boil them in Honey, and Water, add Oil of Lillies and
Orris, each an ounce and an half; of Roses an ounce, Hogs grease an ounce and
half, Oesipus an ounce, with Saffron half a dram, make a Cataplasm.

Or this of Juyces. Take Juice of Pellitory, Coltsfoot, Plantane, each two
ounces; Mucilage of Mallows, Foenugreek, or of whites of Eggs three ounces,
Honey an ounce, Oil of Roses two ounces, anoint and add Brans, Litharge,
Ceruss, Saffron, or apply the Ashes of Box tree, with Honey.

Or, Take Cow dung half a pound, Juice of Housleek, or Nightshade two ounces,
Oil of Chamomil and Roses, each an ounce; Bole half an ounce, anoint or apply
it with Meals or Bran.

Or apply Olibanum, with Foenugreek, Meal, Rosin, and Honey.

In Furunculus, especially anoint with Scammony, Honey and Oil, or with Juice
of Thapsia, or of Mulberryroots.

Or with Sandarack, and Grease, or Earth Cimonia, and Vinegar, or make
Plasters of the Stone Asius, with Pitch and Rosin, according to Dioscorides.

Who commends Earth Cimolia, Samia, Burning Stone, Ostracites, Alabaster, and
get also the powder of a Whetstone, when it comes off by whetting Iron alone,
or with Honey.

Dioscorides commends powder of Ivory for a Felon.

And Hartman commends Balsom of Sulphur, with a Clout to be used before and
after Suppuration, and opening for the same.

You may also add Urin, Lie, and white of Eggs, to the Juyces mentioned.

Or use a Decoction of Litharge in Vinegar, with whites of Eggs added, and
Ceruss.

Or the Ointments of Ceruss and Litharge mentioned in Erysipelas.

Or Diachylon magnum, or Ireatum, or Diapalma, or Colcother, or Plaster of
Calcitis of Avicen to digest, or Triapharmacum, of Litharge by Mesue.

Dioscorides says that the Root of Lions foot is a good Amulet against
Furunculus.

If there be a little Tumor from a Contusion, The Cure of a Contusion with
Inflammation, or with Tumor not inflamed.
without a manifest or great wound, (for of wounds with contusion and inward
Fractures we spoke elsewhere) it goes of it self away, or by discussers, and
the blewness vanishes. If it be great, and an Inflammation seared, or come
first, use Repellers, then Discussers, not as in Phlegmon, but with respect to
the bruised Flesh and congealed Blood. And if it will not be discussed but
suppurate, then use Ripeners as in Imposthumes, and after cure it as an Ulcer.

To hinder the Flux of Blood at the first after Blood-letting and other
Revulsions mentioned in Phlegmon; If you will use Repellers (when the flesh is
bruised and has much Blood, you must not cool as in a Phlegmon, and bind) but
apply them to the circumference of the part con, used, not upon itt least the
blood by them by congealed and stopped.

Therefore apply Repellers and Discussers also, such as are prescribed for an
Inflammation in the progress; as Oil of Roses and Myrtles, with whites of Eggs,
or Mucilage of Fleabane, with astringent Pouders of Myrtles, Roses, Pomegranate
flowers, Snakeweed roots, Tormentil, Dragons blood, Bole, Mastick.

Or thus: Take Lentils two ounces, Myrtle seeds, and Pomegranate flowers, each
two drams; Roses, Sumach and Tamarisk, each a dram; Acacia, Mastick, each two
drams; Frankincense, Aloes, Dragons blood, each a dram; with Oil of Roses,
Turpentine, and Wax, make a Plaster or Liniment.

If there be no fear of Inflammation, discuss the congealed Blood, though no
Tumor appears but pain only, for then to be sure the matter lies deep. And
give internal Potions if you fear any part to be broken, or blood to flow into
the Cavities or part contused, and there to congeal. These internal Potions do
cure alone very often in that case, when there is pain, and little or no tumor.
These shall be spoken of with vulnerary Potions, but these following are the
external Remedies.

Cataplasms and Emplasters of Wormwood, Chamomil, Melilot flowers, or Roses
boiled in Oil and Wine, adding Bean flower, or Mummy, Sanguis Draconis, each a
dram to a pound.

If the Head be bruised, add Bettony, and Head herbs, but not too hot, if you
fear Inflammations from the pain.

Or use powder of Wormwood, with the white of an Eg.

Or Bran boiled with powder of wormwood, and Vinegar, adding Oil of Roses or
Chamomil.

Or Lilly, Dragon roots, with Honey, and Goats dung.

Or Bean flower, with Oxymel and Tar, if the Nerves be bruised, or Orobus meal.

Or Snails bruised, with Foenugreek or Bean flower.

Or Cow dung, and Oil of Roses.

An excellent Cataplasm to take away blewness in contusions. Take powder of
Comfrey roots, boil them in water and Honey to a pound, add Juice of Rue and
Wormwood, each an ounce and an half; Cummin seed two drams.

Or, Take Comfrey roots in powder a pound, Powder of Chamomil, Melilot flowers
and Wormwood, each an ounce; Bean and Faenugreek meal, each three ounces;
Butter and the Oils mentioned two ounces, Saffron half a dram, make a
Cataplasm, add Juyces and Cummin seeds. This dissolves the contused mortified
Flesh.

Anoint with hot Oils, as of Chamomil, Dill, Lillies, Elder, Dane-wort; or add
Repellers, as Oil of Myrtles.

Or, Take Capons grease and Turpentine dissolved in Honey and Aqua vitae.

Or use the Ointment made of a Goose in Podagra mentioned, with a little Cummin
and Wormwood in powder.

Or use Dialthaea, with Oil of Violets, Earthworms, Rue, Chamomil, Goose
grease, Butter and Mummy; and it is best when after anointing, you sprinkle
upon the part powder of Cummin seed.

Or Ointment of Alabaster, Agrippa, Ceruss, or Oxycroceum.

Or a Lixivium of Vine ashes, with Vinegar, Salt and Honey.

Or the Asnes of Vines applied with Vinegar.

Or wash with Urin or Aqua vitae, applied with a clout hot, and quickly after
will hinder the swelling, and discuss the blood.

At the conclusion to dissolve the matter, foment with the Decoction of
Dwarf-elder roots, Osmond, Sanamunda, wormwood, Pennyroyal, Mousewort,
Chamomil, Melilot, Elder flowers, and Roses.

Or wrap the part in a hot Sheeps skin new flead off, or in an Ox skin, or put
the part into a hot Dunghill.

In the conclusion of the Ears, Dioscorides anoints with Sulphur, Honey, and
wine, and applies Onions and Bran.

If the Glanduls swell or be inflamed, or the Stones, you are instructed what
to do in the Tumors of the Glanduls.

The Swelling of the Glanduls with pain, The Cure of Bubo and Parotis, with
Inflammation which is called Panus and Phyma.
chiefly in the Groyns and Armpits, or behind the Ears called Parotis. If it be
without Inflammation with pain, as in young people that are growing, or when
they swell from scabs and pains in the part adjacent, they are not much to be
regarded. But we must prevent the Flux, and keep them from being handled, as
Children do, and use revellers and derivers, if need be.

If the Tumor and pain be great or the Inflammation is begun or in being. And
comes from pure blood, it is called Phygethlon or Panus when great, if it be
less and from impure blood it is called Phyma, Bubo or Parotis. And these
either come alone, or with long acute and malignant Diseases, or in the French
Pox or Plague, with, or without, Inflammation. And then first of all we
evacuate, revel and derive by Blood-letting and purging, in respect of the
Disease accompanying the Tumor, by which means alone, the body being handsomely
purged, Veneral Buboes are cured sometimes.

As for Topics at first, if there be great Inflammation by reason of the pain,
you must use Narcoticks and Anodynes. But you must not use repellers, as in
other Inflammations, except there be an Inflammation in the Adenes, from an
external cause, because the venomous humor, which causes the Diseases, is
commonly purged forth by these Emunctuaries. Therefore this motion of nature is
rather to be helped and the tumors to be drawn forth with loosners to make it
flow, and gentle heaters that abate pain. And you must use strong and very hot
drawers, when the Bubo, or Parotis are Pestilential; these things being applied
at the first, you must then mix things to resolve the Humor gathered, or to
ripen it, mixing in Pestilential causes things that attract poison and abate
its force and work by a certain propriety. Also in the pestilence to draw
poison out of the Body, we use Scarifications and burning. And when there is an
impostum, you must cure it, being broken, as an Ulcer.

As for the remedies, if the pain be first to be cured, use the Anodynes
mentioned in phlegmon and the Narcoticks which also dissolve, as I showed, as
Herbs Narcotick, Aqua vitae and Lees of Wine.

As for other remedies to Relax, Attract, Dissolve, Ripen, Open, and Correct,
and Resist malignity by potential or actual propriety: They are as follows.

The greasy wool of Sheep, that has Oesypus, may be applied to the Bubo,
Parotis, behind the Ears, which repels by its filth, and so not only abateth
pain in Inflammations, but repels and relaxeth, especially if it be first dipped
in relaxing Oils.

A common relaxing Oil to ease pain: Take common Oil, or Oil of sweet Almonds
and fresh Butter two ounces, Hons or Hogs grease an ounce, mucilage of
Fleabane, Lineseed or Althaea half an ounce, with the yolk of an Egg.

Another to digest, also is made of Oil of Chamomil, Melilot, Dill, Elder,
Wall-flowers, Lillies, Orris, Jesamin, bitter Almonds, with Hens, Duck or Goose
grease, with Mucilage of Fenugrek and Saffron.

Or make a Relaxing, Attracting, Digesting, Fomentation of the Decoction of
Mallows, Lillies, Camomil flowers, and Melilot, as the Inflammation of the
Papps and Stones. Also you may apply often a hot Sponge boiled in Wine and
Water.

Or Althaea, Mallows, Pellitory, Lillies, Chamomil, Melilot, to relax and
dissolve the Bubo and Parotis; or the Roots of Daffodil, Swordgrass, Rue,
Bulbus, and Personata, or Aster Atticus, which is called Bubonium, or
Inguinalis, because it is proper for Buboes. Or Scabious, which is siugular in
the pestilential Bubo. Or Moulin roots and and all Maidenhair, Plantane, Arage,
Brooklime, Elder, Yarrow, Haresfoot, Sclarea, Southernwood, Galiopsis, Acinos,
Isatis or Wood, Coriander, Onobrychis, Conyza, Pycnocomum leaves, of wild
Olive, or the Flowers of Panax asclepias. And when you will dissolve and
attract more, Rocket and yellow Crowfoot, and Leaves of Consiligo, Nut-tree
bark, and black Briony, bruised and boiled in Water or Wine, or Oil and Water,
with Vinegar, Honey, or Oil of Roses, Chamomil or Fats. Dioscorides applies it
beaten with Salt; or with Treacle or Mithridate, when the Bubo is pestilential.

Or with Meal of Barley, Pease, Lineseed, Foenugreek, Lupins, Darnel made to a
Cataplasin.

Or the Brans alone, with the Liquors mentioned, with Oils and Honey often
applied warm.

Or make Cataplasms of Onions, Lillies, Althaea, and Briony roots, and Orris,
with Butter, Grease, or Oil, and with Figgs, Foenugreek and Lineseed.

Or in the Plague with Treacle, Mithridate, and other Antidotes; or cut the top
off from an Onion, and fill it therewith, then cover it, and roaste it, and
bruise it, and lay it on, with Vinegar, Juice of Citrons, or Pomegranates, Oil
of Scorpions, St. John's Wort and Saffron.

Raddish is good in the plague, if it be sliced and laid on after, with a hole
in the middle, to let out the Venom.

Or apply green Crab-apples in the plague.

Or a Pomegranate sliced and boiled in Vinegar, adding Juice of Scabious, or
Sorrel, or the distilled Waters thereof.

The Yolk of an Eg and Salt, draws and dissolves the Juice of Scabious. And if
the Bubo be pestilent, with Antidotes, or salt Bacon.

Or black Soap, with Lie and Ammoniack, dissolved in Vinegar, to discuss a
Phyma.

In the venereal Bubo drink and wash with Water of Celandine.

A Cataplasm to attract, dissolve, and ripen. Take Lillies, Onions, Althaea
roots, Raddish, all peeled and cleansed four ounces, Mallows and Scabious, each
a handful and an half; Chamomil and Melilot flowers, each a pugil; Figgs five
pair, boil and stamp them, add Foenugreek meal two ounces, Gum Ammoniack and
Galbanum, each six drams; dissolve them in Wine, and with Oil of Lillies and
Grease make a Cataplasm.

It will be stronger, if you add Mustard seed, pigeons dung.

This is an admirable Cataplasm in the plague. Take a great Onion, and make it
hollow, and fill it with Treacle, roast it in the Embers, take off the outward
Skins, and bruise it with Meal of Secalis, Honey, Yolk of an Eg, Goose dung,
and a little Turpentine, apply it hot.

Emplasters to attract, and then dissolve, that must be cut in the middle to
let out the Vapors, are Diachylon magnum, and Ireatum, or Melilot, or Althaea,
with Rosin, Galbanum and Ammoniack.

Or apply Galbanum alone to the Groyns, when the pockey Bubo appears, and then
vanishes, to draw the Venom to the part.

Or, Take Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Opopanax dissolved in Vinegar of
Squills, or Aqua vitae, and with Oil of Lillies, and half an ounce of powder of
Orris to four ounces thereof, and two drams of Scabious, or a dram of
Euphorbium or Cantharides, if you will have it stronger.

Or Treacle, with spirit of Sulphur, and Oil of Juniper is good to draw out
Venom.

Another proper for a Phyma: Take Labdanum, Bdellium, Ammoniacum, dissolved in
old Oil with an ounce of Proplis, or other dissolver, Turpentine half an ounce,
Honey and Hogs grease, of each an ounce; with Pitch and wax, make a Plaster.

At the first in the Plague, especially use these to draw out venom.

A Cock, Hen, or Cicken, or a Puppy, or a Frog, or Toad, which is best divided,
or Sheeps lungs hot and bloody, often applied.

The Chemists in the plague, take Toads and make a hole in their Heads and hang
them in the Air to dry, and keep the dry being beaten flat. These they lay upon
the Bubo to suck out the venom, for they will swel, being laid on, as if they
would break. See Paracelsus in his Book of the plague.

Or take a Cock, Hen, or Pidgeon, make the rump bare and cast Salt thereon, and
hold the bill fast, that as the vulgar suppose they may suck the poison in
backwards.

A Cupping-glass with great slame, is good also to attract poison, applied upon
the part, or about it.

Or Housleeks to suck out venomous blood.

Sometimes we scarifie or cut a pestilent Bubo, to make way for the poison, or
use an actual or potential Cautery.

Some cut it clean off. These are dangerous remedies to be used with
deliberation, for they draw not much out of the body, and endanger the patient,
especially if there be Inflammation.

If Tumors be in the Breasts and Stones without a true inflammation, The Cure
of Inflammation of the Paps and Stones.
from abundance of Milk, there is rather a distention with pain in the Breasts,
this is to be referred to magnitude increased, or when the Stones swel without
Inflammation, as in the Colic, it cease with the Colic.

But if there be a Tumor in them from other Causes and Inflammation be feared
or begun. Which causes perverse Ulcers, often in the Breasts, and hardness or
Scirrhus in the Stones. The Cure of them shall be showed, as in the
Inflammation of them.

If blood flow much to them, presently open a Vein, if the paps be inflamed in
the Arm, and then in the Foot, especially if Terms be stopped. If the Stones be
inflamed, first open a Vein in the foot, then in the Arm to revel and derive,
and apply Cupping-glasses to the Arms and Hips with Scarification and Repellers
to the part, and Anodynes. Then dissolve that which is flowed to the part,
least it turn to matter and cause an Ulcer, which in those parts is not easily
cured.

Use the repellers mentioned in Phlegmon and the digesters also, such as have
meals in them.

Or thus: Take Plantane, Groundsoyl, mallows, each a handful; boil them, and
add at the end water of Nightshade and Roses, stamp, and add Barley, Rise, Bean
and Pease meal, each three ounces; Oil of Roses two ounces, Oil of Chamomil an
ounce, make a Cataplasm with Bdellium, dissolved in Vinegar half an ounce.

Also take remedies prescribed in Phlegmon against pain such as are Narcotick
and digest rather then Anodynes, which will cause Suppuration, which must here
be prevented.

And use dissolvers as in Phlegmon adding the roots of Coriander and Dasies.

Or apply Coriander, Raysons and Honey beaten.

Meal of pease and Beans is best here, if boiled in Wine or dissolving Oils
mentioned in Phlegmon with Honey, Vinegar and Cummin seed.

Or mix Mucilage of Althaea, Foenugreek, Linseed with Farines or Meals and Oil.

Dioscorides commends Wallnuts, with Rue and Honey.

And you may use Raysons stoned, or Figs and Dates, boiled in Wine, or the pulp
thereof a pound with pease and Bean. Meal, each two ounces; Faenugreek half an
ounce, with digesting Oils, Orris powder half an ounce, and seeds of Irion a
dram, Honey two ounces, to discuss Better.

Dioscorides applies Vine leaves and Salt.

And Leaven with Organ and Salt.

Also dried Cow dung, boiled with Honey and Wine, is good.

Or Treacle with Saffron, Honey and Oil.

Or Foment, as in Flegmon, with Althaea, Mallows, Wormwood, Orris roots, wild
Cowcumbers, Melilote, Chamomil, Rosemary, Elder, Staechas flower, Roses,
Foenugreek, Linseed, common Figs boiled in Wine, adding Honey and Vinegar.

Or dip Wool in digesting Oils, and apply it.

Or this Ointment: Take Oil of Chamomil and Lillies, each an ounce and an half;
Galbanum and Labdanum, dissolved in Vinegar, each half an ounce; Cummin seed a
dram, dried Cow dung two drams, Saffron half a scruple, with Wax.

Live Crabs, or unboyled Cray-fish, bruised and applied are highly commended.

If the Inflammation of the Paps, or Stones tend to Suppuration, Cure it as
impostums.

Imposthums coming after Inflammations, are a like Cured in all parts. The Cure
of Impostums.
By ripning, and opening, and curing the Ulcer.

An Impostume must be ripned as soon as it comes, as when the matter flowed in
the Phlegmon, cannot be dissolved, that so it may be turned to Pus or Quittor
and voided by an Ulcer. Such an Ulcer is not very difficult, if well looked to,
but when we know and perceive that an Inflammtion tends to an Impostume, we
must help nature, and the more, when it is apt to suppurate presently, as most
little Pustles do. And we must be more diligent, if the suppuration be
difficult and long, as in Furunculus, in which instead of matter there is a
lump of flesh that is long fixed, and especially in parts of most concernment,
or noble, where the matter may prejudice by being long kept in, as about the
joints and in Paronychia or Fellons except the matter be presently concocted,
and get forth the bones in that place, and the Nerves grow foul. This
Maturation or Suppuration, is commonly done by the benefit of Nature only,
which concocts the Humor, and therewith some part of the part afflicted, in
which the blood is without any putrefaction, only it turns to a white matter.
Which stinks not, for putrefaction differs much from Suppuration, and follows
it when nature cease to Maturate or ripen, or does it slowly or
imperperfectly, as in Furunculus, therefore to help her, the Physician applies
Suppuratives or ripeners, which are temperate or gently hot, and Emplastick,
which by nourishing the natural heat, makes Maturation. This is done by
Anodynes, which after the same manner, as I showed, cause Maturation. And many
Suppurative Medicines, would be Anodyne, if the breeding of matter did not
cause new pains.

Also many dissolving Medicines, being not too hot or dry, but gently hot, when
they cannot dissolve matter, by reason of its incapacity and unsitness, help
Suppuration, when nature tends that way, or at least hinder, if not. All these
maturating or ripning remedies, being actually warm and gently hot, does
thereby hasten Suppuration.

Also concocting remedies ripening or Suppurating are applied, that they may
better operate in forms of Cataplasms or plasters, as Triapharmacum Galeni,
made of Wheat flower, Oil and Water boiled to a pultis, and colored with
Saffron to make it concoct the better.

Or instead thereof, use this: Take wheat flour, or of Zea, or Maizi; (which
are outlandish grain privately commended) or crumbs of Bread, boil them in water,
or fat broth not salted, or milk if there be pain, and to a pound, add Oil or
^utter, or Hogs grease, of each an ounce and an half; two yolks of Eggs and
mucilages, if you please.

Or make it of crumbs of bread or flower, with Lilly roots, Onyons and Milk,
adding Butter, Oil or Grease. You may boil also Mallows, Althaea roots,
Ground-sill Figs.

Or: Take Marshmallow roots and Lilly roots, each two ounces; Bryony roots an
ounce, Emollient herbs, Groundsoyl, Coleworts, Eryngus three handfuls Violets a
pugil, Figs six pair Raysons stoned ten pair, wheat flower or Bread three
ounces, ponder of Faenugreek or Linseed two ounces, boil and bruise them, add
of the fat mentioned two ounces, Oil of Lillies, Violets sweet Almonds an ounce
and an half, Saffron half a dram, make a Cataplasm.

Or: Take a white Onyon (which because it is not so sharp as the other sort,
does more maturate or ripen and digest) and Figs sliced, boil them, mix them
with Butter or Oil and flower, yolks of Eggs and Turpentine.

Or: Take Figs two ounces, Labdanum, Frankincense, each a dram, Storax Liquid
and Turpentine, each half a dram, with Flower, Oil and Hogs grease, make a
pultis.

Or roast Henbane leaves in the Embers, and apply it with sats and digesters,
for the sats being temperate, will moderate their Heat.

The roots of Dogs Tongue bruised, is good against the Plague, and suppurates
well.

Some apply Bird-lime, others liquid Vernish.

Dioscorides applies Birdlime, Wax and Rosin, equal parts.

Or Bird-lime with Mallows, Wormwood, Linseed, Honey and Oil boiled,

Or sweet Butter and Wax.

Or Pitch, or Wax, or both with Oil, Turpentine and Frankincense.

Others apply yolks of Eggs or with the whites, with Oil or Butter, or Suet, or
Marrow and Turpentine, with Frankincense and Saffron.

Or Mucilage of Althaea roots, Faenugreek and Linseed with Oil of Butter or
Grease, and yolks of Eggs.

The usual Maturating plasters, are Tetrapharmacum Galeni made of Pitch, Rosin,
Wax and Cows grease, or Oil, if there be pain, and then it is called the little
Basilicon of Mesue. Also common Diachylon: or the little Diachylon in pain. Or
the great, which digesteth most, and if it will not be digested, it will help
maturation, if there be much Oil, and you use other mollifiers, as Ointments of
Althaea resumptive and Aureum. Aetius uses Unguentum Macedonicum, to ripen the
Furunculus.

Or soment with Water and Oil, or Oil alone, or apply it with wool, before you
use other application.

The juice of Colewort, or the mucilage of its seeds, is good.

Or Flesh, or Fishes, or Cravfish, cause Suppuration, or a warm hand often
applied. Therefore we prohibit handling of any Tumors, when we will not have
them Supperate.

When the Impostume is ripe, it must be opened, that is when there is matter,
which you may know by its softness and point, as we showed.

Sometimes it must be opened, before perfect maturation when it is about the
joints, or noble parts, least the matter retained should hurt them. And when
the Bubo is from a pestilent or mailgnant humor.

Nature or things that ripen do open, when the Skin, Flesh and Blood are
concocted, and made more tender and soft by boiling as it were.

Or we open by violence and cutting or breaking the skin, with potential or
actual openers.

They which potentially open, are some milder, which ripen and open, also these
we use when we defire to open by degrees, others are stronger and suddenly
corrode, burn or pierce the Skin.

Leaven added to the above mentioned maturatives, or ripners, or yolks of hard
Eggs and meal, or Grease and Ouions, will mature and help to open.

Scabious, Coleworts, Daffodil roots, Bugloss, onyon do the same.

Also rotten Nuts, and Watercresses, and Smallage, which are sharp, bruised and
applied with Figs, Meal and oil.

Or Danewort bruised with Hogs grease, is good, if often applied in the
Impostums of the breast.

Or rotten Apples, ripe Bramble berries, or ripe berries of Herb-true-love open
impostums, or an Onyon, or Garlic.

Or ashes of Colewort roots, Figtree with Vinegar open strongly, but gently
with grease.

All dungs are approved to ripen and open impostums, as Ox dung, especially
fodder. or Goats dung for the parotis, Goose dung is highly esteemed in the
Fellon, or Paronychia, being new and hot, for it presently breaks it. In other
Impostumes, use ^ow dung, Hogs Goats and Dogs dung. And when you will open
quickly and forceably apply Pigeons and Hens dung. All these may be applied
alone, or boiled in Wine, adding Vinegar or dissolved in Oil and mixed with
meal.

The Cataplasms made of the things mentioned, will be stronger. If you add to
the Plants bruised or boiled, as much Leaven and the part of Doves dung with
strong Vinegar, which will boil the skin, and make it open. And they will be
stronger yet, if you add Mustard half an ounce, or Niter and Sulpher vive, each
two drams.

A Plaster that presently breaks all Impostums though venomous and
pestilential: Take Lodestone half an ounce, Turpentine and Oil of Scorpions,
of each an ounce; Mastick, Amber, Myrrh, Sarcocol, Ammoniacum, Cantharides
prepared, each two drams; Rosin four ounces, wax half a pound: make a Plaster,
spread it upon Leather, or new cloth, and apply it hot.

Or mix Honey Anacardine, with Pitch and apply it.

Or Euphorbium boiled a little in oil, because it burns, add dungs and a little
Ammoniacum.

Or use Sal Armoniack with Leaven and yolk of an Eg, Saffron and a little opium.

Or quick Lime with Soap Honey or fasting spittle.

Potential cauteries open the skin sooner by burning, with pain, but without
when they mortify and black the skin. And though the escar stays long, yet
round about where it seperates presently from the same skins there is passage
for the humor, till it fall off. These are applied in that part of the
Impostum, where it is softest, or pointed in a plaster having a hole in the
middle, where they are placed, least they should spread and inflame, and if
there be pain it must be after assuaged, and the part must be defended round
about with the defensive ointment mentioned in phlegmon

Galen prescribes many as Caustic balls of Polydas, Andro, Musa, Dytinus, made
of Calcanthum and Alum and the like. Also the two caustic ointments of
Andromachus.

The Arabians have many. Falopius and Paraeus mention the chief, which work
quickly without pain and without Opium, which is used but to little purpose, as
I observe.

Among which that is wholly without pain, which is made of Capital Lie boiled
by degrees to a stone. This Lie is made of three parts of unsleaked Lime, and
two parts of Wine Lees burnt, with water poured on, and often strained or
boiled, and it is stronger, if instead of water, you use a Lie of Bean stalks
or Oak.

And it will burn the skin sooner, if you add the fourth part of sal Armoniack
or Alum, or Calcanthum to the Lime and Lees of Wine, but then it is more
painful and therefore they add Opium.

You may boil up a Caustic stone also of Soap, Lie with Chalcanthum, sal
Armoniack or Alum.

Sublimate made into a past with Populeon to abate pain, and Boodstone to
allay Inflammation, does the same.

Or Cantharides, with Leaven and Vinegar, and Verdigreese, or Chalcanthum, or a
little Orpiment; which will work sooner, and the pain will be less.

Some wet the part with Aqua sortis, and six parts Water.

A caustic Water: Take Vitriol and Arsnick, each two ounces, Sublimate half an
ounce, Juice of Briony six ounces, powder of Cantharides two drams, distill
them, and apply one drop to the place to be opened.

Or a drop or two of Oil of Vitriol: This is the way of Nicolas Massa.

Actual opening is quickest, with a Knife or Lancet in the place that is soft
and pointed, where we feel the matter thrusting it in til they come forth, and
let the Orifice be large enough. If it be about the bendings, observe the
wrinkles, that you may cut according to the lines of them.

When the Imposthume is deep, especially about the Joints or other parts, where
the matter remaining may do hurt, you must open it presently before the parts
be corrupted, before the matter is concocted, or the Imposthume appear
manifestly. Therefore in Paronychia or Felon if there be great pain, though
Suppuration appear not, yet cut it open from the fingers end on the side of the
Nail, to the Bone, down to the Joint, for so shall it prevent the corruption of
the bone from the matter.

A ripe Imposthume is sometimes opened with a hot Iron either burning through
the skin, or making only an Eschar as a potential Caustic does, but sooner.
Also in a Felon we burn the corrupt bone, as shall be showed in Ulcers.

A Cancer being a Tumor differing from a Phlegmon, The Cure of a Cancer.
growing by degrees without Inflammation, and of a fleshy substance deeply
fixed; and when it is ulcerated differing from other Ulcers by its fixed lump
of Flesh, and the claws and turning in of the Lips, hurting by its venomous
quality rather then by pain and heat, has a different Cure from other Tumors
and Ulcers.

First you must prognosticate, for if it be newly begun and be little, it is
not to be known but by skilful Physicians, and it is usually neglected: And
therefore you must declare that the growth thereof is hard to be hindered. And
if it be grown, it is worse, and if it be at the height, it can never be cured;
and if it be ulcerated, it is deadly, except it can be taken out by the Roots.

Therefore at the first beginning there is hope, when it is confirmed, there is
less or none, especially if it be ulcerated, therefore palliate it thus.

And in regard we have no certain known Antidote against the malignant quality
and matter that produces and nourishes a Cancer, we cannot resist it: For if
that were known, we could cure it as other tumors, but it will not be
discussed. And if we should go about to soften and suppurate it, as unlearned
Chirurgions do, we should make it worse, and sooner ulcerate. Therefore let us
endeavor by all means to hinder its growth, while it is growing, and after to
keep it from an Ulcer, and if it be ulcerated, to keep it from corruption while
it may be, or let us at first while there is strength, utterly root it out, or
after when it is desperate. In the mean space all the time, let us keep the
Body clean, and preserve the strength, and oppose Symptoms.

To hinder its growth while there is strength in the beginning, and when the
Body is plethorick, let blood scarifie, and cup in the parts distant, or near
to revel and derive. Against this also the Flux of Haemorrhoids and Terms, is a
good help.

We purge also from the beginning, to take away the plenty of Humors, and
hinder the growth of the Cancer, than to abate Melancholy, which is thought to
be the cause of the Cancer; for purging cannot take away the venomous quality
thereof, as of others, as in the French Pox, wherein we purge strongly to cure
it, therefore in a Cancer the Body being weak, it is not safe, nor profitable.
Forms for Purges are described in other Diseases, therefore we shall not here
repeat them.

The Patient must be refreshed with very good Diet as in Hectic Fevers,
chiefly with Meats made of Cray-fish or Broth thereof, which has a propriety
as they suppose, from the Name rather then thing, for it is nothing like a
Cray-fish in the shape. They must forbear salt and sharp meats, that it may not
ulcerate: wine is good for them. And they must have Cordials inwardly given and
outwardly applied, as in Hecticks. Especially such as resist Venom mentioned in
pestilent Fevers, and such as shall be mentioned in venomous Ulcers, they are
better then vulnerary Potions, which are ordinarily given in this case of a
Cancer ulcerated. And they highly commend that of Pyrola and ground Ivy, boiled
in Wine against Cancers in Women's Breasts,

As for Topics while the Cancer is whole, we labor to hinder the growth and
ulceration thereby, by Dryers and Astringents, which have a propriety to fix
and harden it.

This is done by many Repercussives mentioned in Erysipelas and Phlegmon, made
of Plants and their Juyces, besides the Anodynes and unctious Medicines.

Polytrichum is the best Herb in this case, and Herb Robert which is called
divine, and Cancer-healers. Also Ceterach, Coriander, Agrimony, Polygonum. And
Moulin, Plantane, Endive, Nightshade, Shepherds purse, Comfrey, Sanguisorba,
Dock, Galiopsis, Housleek, Moonwort.

These are to be bruised and applied, with Vinegar, or Juice of green Grapes.

Or thus: Take Roots of Moulin and Docks, each two ounces; Polytrichum two
handfuls, stamp them with Vinegar, add powder of burnt Cray-fish half an ounce,
make a Cataplasm.

Another: Take Meal of Lentils, or Pease a pugil, Kernels of rotten Nuts, or
parched, bruised six, boil them in Vinegar,

The Flesh of Sea-crabs which are more like a Cancer, or Cray-fish, or Snails,
or Froggs, is good boiled and applied.

You may apply the Juyces of the Herbs mentioned, with Vinegar.

Or thus: Take Juice of Plantane, Nightshade, Endive, Housleek, and of the rest
two ounces, Rose-vinegar an ounce, Oil of Roses, or Myrtles two ounces,
Turpentine half an ounce, stir them in a leaden Mortar, add Pomegranate and
Citron peels, each a dram; Bole two drams, burnt and washed Lead a dram,
Camphire half a dram, anoint often therewith.

A Plate of Lead is good to keep down a Cancer.

In an ulcerated Cancer we dry and astringe more, The Cure of a Cancer
ulcerated.
to abate the stink and putrefaction, and constant gleeting of blood which
bring death. And if any part be corrupt, we must endeavor to take it off with
Medicines, and to root out the Cancer by manual Operation.

The Plants mentioned are good to dry, and now in an Ulcer, add Nettles, Rue,
St. John's Wort, Danewort, Scabious, Knotgrass bruised.

Or use the Juyces or Pouders, with Oil of Roses.

Pouders also, or Ashes of Cray-fish, or Crabs, Snails, Froggs, Weezles brains,
Man's dung dried in an Oven, and other Dryers, as Stones of Myrobalans, or
Olives, or Shoo-soles; or of the Herbs mentioned, or of old Willow Psithia,
Pomegranate flowers, Seeds of Irion, Galiopsis, powder of Hearts horn; also of
Lead burnt and washed, of Ceruss, crude Antimony, Tutty, Pompholix, Litharge:
Also of Bole, Millstone, Gypsum burnt, and the rubbing of Whetstones. These may
be mixed with Juyces, or stamped Herbs, and applied.

Or apply stamped Raisons, and Rue, and Coleworts boiled in Milk, with Sugar to
drive away the stink, or lay on Bay leaves.

A good Ointment. Take Juice of Moulin, Herb Robert, or Polytrichum an ounce,
Honey three ounces, powder of burnt Stones of Myrobalans two drams, Ashes of
burnt Crabs a dram, make an Ointment.

This is better: Take Juice of Plantane, Shepherds purse, Agrimony, and Vinegar
five ounces, Oil of Roses, or Myrtles four ounces, Turpentine an ounce, stir
them in a leaden Mortar, add Litharge half an ounce, Lead burnt and washed,
Bloodstone, each two drams; crude Antimony a dram, Coral burnt and washed two
scraples, ^earl a scruple, Camphire a scruple, Ashes of rabs a dram, make an
Ointment, to which you may add the pouders above mentioned, especially that of
Man's dung.

Also use Oil of Eggs stirred in a leaden Mortar.

Or Diapompholygos or plasters of Lead, to dry a cancer ulcerated.

Keep it clean washed with Vinegar and Juyces of Herbs, or with strong Lie of
Fig Tree ashes, or Willow, or Juniper, or with Urin: They will be stronger if
you add Vitriol.

The distilled Water of Man's dung and Coriander, is highly commended.

This following powder preserved an old Man many years in a Cancer, from
putrefaction, stink and bleeding, it was all over his Cheek and Neck. Take
Galls and Pomegranate peels, each an ounce; Gypsum burnt two ounces; Bole an
ounce. Litharge and Cademia, each half an ounce; round Birthwort three drams,
burnt Lead two drams, powder of Crab shells a dram, make a sine powder, or a
plaster of them, with Honey and Turpentine.

We use Sal Gem or Alum, to take away corrupt Flesh, with an equal part of
powder of Earth worms.

Or mix therewith Juice of Briony, or Dragons.

Or Aegyptiacum to resist putrefaction.

These are stronger, Orpiment and Tartar, equal parts, steep them in Vinegar,
and make a powder.

Or, Take Crystal, Arsnick two drams, Cookowpint roots, an ounce, make a powder.

Or, Take Orpiment a dram, Verdigreese two drams, white Wine a pint, infuse
them, pour of the clear, and boil it till the third part remain, use it with a
little Rose Water.

Or, Take Sublimate a dram, Rose, Plantane, and Nightshade water four ounces
boil it a little.

The last Remedy is cutting it forth by the roots, if strength will permit. It
is in vain to try when it is deep, and grows to the Flesh, Membranes, and
Veins; for if a portion remain, it will grow again. And if it be great, and
near great Veins. there is danger of great bleeding, which is dangerous, if it
be not presently stopped. But sometimes it may be wholly cut out, with a part of
the sound flesh: As when it is in the Thigh or Arm. And if you cut a great
space above the Cancer, and take it away, it will grow again; as I observed in
a Maid who had a cancer cut from her Knee. The Cancer in the Breast is taken
away with cutting the breast clean off: But if any Root remain in the Ribs, it
will return.

Give me leave to relate the Cure of a Cancer, which was told me by a Friend.
Take white Arsnick ^inely poudered one part, Roots of Cookowpints poudered four
parts, Chimney soot as much as will make it gray or ash colored, keep this
powder for your use, the older the better, it will last five years. Sprinkle
this powder as thick as the back of a knife upon an ulcerated Cancer, taking
heed that it touch not the sound flesh, lay it thickest in the middle, because
the middle Root of the Cancer is commonly biggest, then lay thereon a pledget
wet with spittle, that it may stick with the powder, otherwise it will not
work. The Patient must be dressed thus after meat, and touch not the the
cancer, but with wooden Instruments. There are some cautions to be used in the
application of this powder, by reason of its diverse operations; for in some it
causes pain, in other; not it pierces to the Veins or Roots of the cancer,
and there it sticks fast, so that it cannot be taken away without breaking of
them. It must therefore be used but once, because its force remains till it
takes all away with it. And no other medicines must be applied but round about
in the circum^erance as broad as two ^ingers, you must lay De^ensives or
Repellers to hinder Inflammation. As, Take Bole, Arsnick, Oil of Roses, and
Vinegar. Also there is a great flux of blood sometimes from the piercing force
of the medicine which breaks the Veins, with yellow and sharp matter, apply
then nothing but dry double clouts, as often as they are wet, for it will be
but a day or two, and will take away all pain. This done, expect the Cancer to
fall from the sound flesh of its own accord, within eighteen or twenty days;
for if the least Root be broken by force, before that time the cure is
dangerous to be begun again. The separation being made of the cancer from sound
flesh, use this powder to the Ulcer. Take fine Olibanum, Mummy, Mastick Myrrh,
Aloes, Sarcocol, each a dram; Opopanax half a dram, wash them in Plantane, and
Rose Water, and make a fine powder, you may increase the quantity of Mastick,
Olibanum, Myrrh, and Sarcocol to make it sharper. After you have laid this
powder thick upon the Ulcer, use this Ointment upon a pledget. Take Litharge of
Gold two ounces, Mummy an ounce, Oil of Roses an ounce and half, with a little
Rose-vinegar, stir them in a leaden mortar, and make it a soft Ointment, with
Oil of Roses. It is sufficient to cure the Ulcer, if you apply these two once a
day, at first there will come forth a slimy, white, thick matter, which must be
daily wipt away till the Cure is by Gods assistance complete.

A Carbuncle or Anthrax if it be not pestilent, The Cure of a simple Anthrax or
Carbuncle pestilent.
weakneth and is difficult and dangerous, when it is near the Heart, when it is
dry or sends out venom and not matter, with great Inflammation. A pestilent
Carbuncle destroys by the pestilent Fever which goes with it, and hurts the
Joints, and destroys if it be in the noble Parts.

For cure of both, cleanse the whole Body, and use alterers when it is
pestilent, look to the Fever rather then the Carbuncle, and let blood
according to the part it is in: As we showed in pestilent Fevers. In other
Carbuncles bleed and purge in respect of the Plethory, and Cacochymy, and
Inflammation to revel and derive. Use coolers agreeable to the Fever; and
Cordials inwardly and outwardly, and a refreshing Diet, and cause sleep if it
be wanting, though in a carbuncle it is forbidden, least thereby venom should
be drawn to the Heart; but by heat external and sweat in time of sleep, we see
the contrary that the heat goes outward: Therefore keep them not from sleep, as
is usual.

When a Carbuncle is not pestilent, we use Topics to repress the Inflammation;
when it is we attract the Venom, we open and ripen it in both cases, and then
cure it as an Ulcer.

In an Anthrax not pestilent we only lay Repellers round about where the
Inflammation is, and that at first; such as are in Phlegmon mentioned, as the
Defensive of Bole, and that of Juyces or the Ointments, as that of Ceruss.

Or we use the Emplaster of Arnogloss to cool and concoct at first, or all a
long the Cure, it is made of Plantane, Meal of Lentils, or brown Bread, adding
Galls at first to repel more, and to concoct more, Meal of Orobus, and Beans,
and Honey.

In a pestilent Carbuncle at first we attract poison, as in a Bubo pestilent as
we there showed; with a Cock cut in two, or a Pigeon, or Frog, or Toad, or with
the Rump of a Cock or Pigeon; after the part is scarified, or with
Cupping-glasses, or Horsleeches, or with the mouth of a desperate Fellow to
suck it, or with the Instrument by which Women's breasts are drawn.

We open both sorts of Carbuncles to let out the venom or humor at first, by
scarifying and in the progress, especially when it waxes black with deep cuts,
least they gangraene, which will cause death, and wash them with salt Water.

We also use Causticks to attract the venom, in both. And when it begins to
corrupt, we use an actual Cautery with Gold, or Steel: or potential, as in
Impostums, as the part of Galen, or Cantharides. It is usual to lay Sublimate
or Arsenick upon it, in the middle of a plaster with a little hole in it; Or
take four grains of it with a spoonful of the white of an Egg well beaten, and
so touch the Carbuncle therewith.

We Maturate or concoct it both, as soon as the flesh where it is, begins to
corrupt, so that a part of it being turned to matter, where it is joined to the
sound flesh, the rest may come forth whole, or by piece meal. You must choose
things for this, that are proper against poison or malignity.

As Scabious and Comfrey of both sorts, which are chiefly commended: After them
Mullein, Dogs tongue, Mous-ear, Yarrow, Horstayl, Shep-herds purse, Goats rue,
Coleworts, Althaea roots and Lillies. And according to Dioscorides Motherwort,
Savin, Cypres, Privet, Hercules, Panax stamped and applied with Salt, or their
juyces,

Also Garlic, Leeks, Lilly roots and Radishes, Rocket, Water-cress, Nettles
with Salt and Pepper.

Also Pomegranates sliced, and boiled in Vinegar, and bruised, do take off
putrefaction and malignity from a Carbuncle.

Or the ripe berries of Herb-true-love, cut or bruised, are good in the plague,
and ripe olives dried are good in both.

Or dried Figs, or Raysons, or kernels of Wallnuts, or sinal Nuts, which are
rotten with Salt and Leaven.

Dioscorides commends Raysons and Rue, with Honey and Pitch, to take away the
Carbuncle round about.

The yolk of an Egg with a dram of Salt, does the same, to which you may add
Honey, Figs, Meal, and juice of Scabious: or dissolve the yolk well salted in
Vinegar and other proper juyces.

A convenient plaster: Take two cloves of Garlic, Rue, a pugil, Figs four,
Leaven half an ounce, Salt a dram and an half, Pepper half a scruple, stamp
them.

Or thus: Take roots of wild Cowcumbers or Bryony two ounces, sal Niter a dram,
the Gall of a Hog a little dried half an ounce, meal of Lupines a dram, with
Turpentine.

Another: Take Mustard seed half an ounce, meal of Lupines, or Orobus two
drams, Figs an ounce, Gum Amoniack dissolved in Vinegar three drams, with
Turpentine.

Also the dung of Hens, Pigeons, Sparrows, Sheep, Oxen, are good to ripen
alone, or with Honey, Vinegar, meal or yolks of Eggs, or Leaven: Sometimes we
mix Soap, Dung and Vinegar. If you will use man's dung, which is so highly
commended, let it be dried and mixed with the rest.

Also soot of the Chimney, Leaven, yolks of Eggs and Salt are good, or Charcole
of oak. Or this ointment: Take Alum two drams, sal Gem half a dram with Honey.

Or use Niter and Turpentine.

Or juice of plants mentioned, as Scabious, Comfrey, Mullein with meal, or
yolks of Eggs.

Or oil of Nuts, or Roses with Salt, Honey and Vinegar.

Or Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar with oil of Lillies and Wax, dissolves a
Carbuncle and draws out his poison.

Or you may use Treacle or Methridate alone, or in a roasted Onyon, or with
other herbs, to draw out poison in the Plague, or to ripen in both.

Some affirm that the Sapphire stone bound upon the Carbuncle, does good.

They say also that if you bind Scabious bruised to a sound part, and lay
Athanasia upon the Carbuncle, it will remove where the Scabious is.

The Ulcer left after a Carbuncle, shall be cured as other Ulcers.

Herpes miliar is sometimes goes away of it self, by drying up, or with little
help, The Cure of Herpes miliaris and Esthiomenos.
as fasting spettle, as also Phlyctenodes. Esthiomenos is more hard to be
cured, and through neglect turns to Impetigo or Psora.

The cure of these coming from a Choleric, Salt and sharp humor, is much a
like, As for Evacuations they must be such as purge those humors that cause
them. First gentle to drive out the Excrements, and then stronger to purge the
blood of its filth. These are to be given by way of prevention to them that are
subject to these Diseases. The forms of them are mentioned in Choleric
diseases and Fevers, and we shall speak more of them in the scab. As for
Blood-letting it will not be necessary, except other Circumstances invite.

We correct the heat and sharpness of humors, by alterers mentioned in Fevers
and with good Diet, and we use Topics in both sorts of Herpes, from the
beginning, which are very dry, and cool the sharp humors. By which a miliaris
is easily cured, and some times Esthiomenos, but if it creep on, we use
stronger dryers and things that cleanse the foul flesh, or eat it off from the
sound, that it may no further corrupt it,

To dry and abate sharpness, use Plantane, Polygonum, Agrimony, Shep-herds
purse, Bramble leaves, Privet, Vine leaves, Nightshade, wild Lentils bruised.

Or thus: Take Agrimony, Plantane, or Myrtle, or Olive leaves two handfuls,
stamp them, add Sumach and Pomegranate peels, of each an ounce and an half;
Barley or Lentil meal two ounces, boil them in sharp Wine, or Wine and Vinegar,
bruise them for a Cataplasm.

Or use the Emplaster of Arnogloss, or Lambs tongue mentioned in Carbuncle with
Galls, Pomegranate peels, round Birthwort in ^^erpes Miliaris, or them of the
three Pomegranats,

Or use the juyces of the plants mentioned, or of pomegranats alone, or with
the fourth part Vinegar, or the distilled waters of them, with Rose water and
Vinegar, with two drams of Camphire, to half a pint.

Acacia and Hypocistis, dissolved in Juyces or Vinegar, do dry and astringe
excellently, and hinder creeping.

Or the liquor that comes from green wood while it burns, as from Vine or Oak,
to which you may add other dryers.

These following dry more: Take juice of Plantane, Polygonum four ounces,
Vinegar an ounce, with Barley meal, make an Ointment.

These dry better, if instead of meal you add the powder of Galls or
Pomegranate flowers two drams, Bole half a dram.

Or thus: Take juice of the herbs mentioned with Vinegar, Oil of Roses and
Myrtles, of each four ounces; let them boil till the juyces be consumed, then
add the pouders mentioned, or of Pomeganate peels, or Acron cups, of each two
drams; Birthwort a dram, and with Wax make an ointment.

In Esthiomenos to dry more and keep it from creeping, use this: Take the
juyces mentioned with Oils, boiled or not, for juyces are strongest then, add
Litharge half an ounce, Tutty burnt and washed, Lead, Antimony, Bloodstone,
Cadmia, each two drams; burnt brass, or rust of Iron and Aloes, each a dram;
Coral and Spodium, that is burnt Ivory, stir them in a Leaden mortar with the
juyces and Oils, and a little Turpentine, or if they be boiled, add a little
wax for an ointment.

A strong clenser: Take juice of wormwood, Celandine the great, or Pellitory,
or Elicampane, or of Rue three ounces, Myrrh two drams, Frankincense half an
ounce, Salt a dram, with meal of Lentils, make an ointment; or with meal of
Lentils, Beans, or Barley, or an ounce of Oil Omphacine, to take away
putrefaction more powerfully.

Or thus: Take Letharge two drams, Sulphur two drams, Niter or sal Gem a dram,
Verdigreese half a dram, with Honey, make an ointment.

Or make an ointment of Alum and Wine Lees.

Or use Ink to dry, because of the Alum, Vitriol and Galls.

Or Pompholygos, white ointment of Rhasis, with dryers, as Alum, Niter.

Or wild Goats dung, as Dioscorides prescribes, or Cow dung with Wine and
Vinegar.

Or powder of the heads of salt-fish, as Herrings, or wool and Leather, and
pine tree bark burnt to a powder dry well, when they are sprinkled upon a
Herpes or Teter or mixed with oil.

Or: Take two drams of those burnt pouders, roots of round Birthwort,
Pomegranate flowers, Myrrh, each a dram; Olibanum a dram and an half, sprinckle
it upon the Teter, first rubbing it, and anointing with Oil of Ash tree.
Dioscorides commends the powder of Snayl shells.

A good somentation for both sorts of Herpes or Teter is a distilled water of
Dock roots sliced and steeped in Vinegar a day or two, or of Citron peels with
Alum.

Or thus: Take of plants mentioned three handfuls, with myrtle leaves or Olive,
Dock roots or Birthwort, each an ounce, Pomegranate peels and Galls, each six
drams; Lupine seeds an ounce, myrtle seeds half an ounce, Acacia, Hypocistis,
each six drams; boil them in Forge water with a little sharp wine. to wash the
Herpes Esthiomenus, add Frankincense and myrrh, to cleanse more, half an ounce.

Or wash with Lie and old Wine, wherein the things mentioned have been boiled.

Or with Vitriol dissolved in Vinegar and Water.

Or: Take Sublimate a dram and an half, Lytharge two drams, Borax half a dram,
Camphire a scruple; boil them in two ounces of proper water and wash the Teter:
or we stop the eating thereof with things that shall be mentioned in corroding
Ulcers.

Or: Take Dock roots three drams, great Celandine a handful, Alum, Sulphur,
each an ounce; Salt a pugil with Wine and Vinegar, boil them and let the vapor
be received, so that it touch the Tetter.

Or apply plates of Lead after the Tetter is anointed and steep them first in
Vinegar, Salt, or Alum water.

In the Tetter called Esthiomenus, it is good to rub it til it bleed. And then
the clensers appled, will work the better.

Or burn of the corrupt flesh, with an actual or potential Cautery, as in
Carbuncles.

The Scab is of many sorts, as the moist Scab, The Cure of the common Scab,
Itch, Scald, Terminthus, Epinyctis, Impetigo, Prurigo Psora and Greek Leprosy.
which is either ordinary, or feirce, spreading, as Tinea or Scald, Terminthus,
Epinyctis: or the dry Scab, as the Itch called Prurigo, Impetigo, or Psora, or
Greek Leprosy, we shall speak of the Cure of all together, in the Cure of the
Itch. The Phlyctaenae are blisters, when the scarf Skin is separated from the
true, and are cured as the corrosions of the Skin.

Of moist Scabs the vulgar is most gentle and easy to be cured, but when it
often returns it is stubborn, and if not cured will turn to a worse sort. The
next called Fera is worse, but curable, and if neglected, it turns to a worse
sort. That which is worst is called Manans, or spreading, it is difficult to be
cured, and is insectious in Children, and deformeth the Hair by eating it off.
The Terminthus and Epinytis are easily cured. Among the dry Itches Prurigo is
easiest to be cured, and Impetigo more hard, and Psora is most difficult, and
they are turned from one into another if neglected, and easily return in Spring
and Fall. And at length they turn to the Greek Leprosy, which is incurable,
though it cease, it will return with an ugly crust consuming the patient and
itching. And it is taken for the Elephantiasis, by them that cannot distinguish.

Also those may be cured alike, as for general helps, Evacuations and Alterers,
because they come from Choleric, salt, sharp and malignant humors (as in the
Causes) they must be purged, and let blood, and the alterers must be greater or
less, according to the disease, with respect to the constitution, and the
Excrements abounding, as follows.

In the moist Itch you must let blood, if Age or other things forbid not,
because the Anticedent cause is salt serum, which is choleric and sharp in the
blood, and this will partly come forth by bleeding. Which must be rather done,
when there is Plethory or fullness, which causes pustles. The Vein opened must
be for general or particular Evacuation of that Member, which is most infected.
In the dry Itch, though there be not such moist pustles, yet because the blood
is very unclean, you must bleed also, especially if the skin be red, as in
Prurigo, which shows heat. This must be done before purging often, and every
month you must Cup and Scarifie, or apply Horsleeches. And the Terms and
Haemorrhoids must be provoked, in them that are used to them, as we showed in
the want of them.

In all kinds of moist or dry Itches, you must purge often, when the body is
foul, and in Psora, which is worst, if every day, or every other day, for a
long time, especially Spring and Fall. And this must be by fit Medicines, that
purge choleric, salt and sharp humors, from the Guts and Meseraicks and so
from the Mass of blood, adding always things that resist sharpness of humors.
And choosing such as inflame not the body too much.

These purges are to be found in other diseases of choler and melancholy
stronger or weaker. Especially in intermitting fevers and continual putrid. As
well such as are prescribed before bleeding to cleanse the Excrements in the
belly, as strong purges, and the preparatives to be taken before them. As that
Apozem mentioned in a Synoch with Erysipelas, and the purges prescribed against
Melancholy: or these.

Let them drink whey morning and evening, especially of Goats Milk, so much as
may purge, this is pleasant for Children.

Or dissolve some pleasant things therein, as Manna or syrup of Roses, or
Violets, or of Peach flowers; with a little Diagredium, if need be. Or give
some other purging syrup therein, that may be taken.

Or give of Roses, Fumitory, Hops, and of Bugloss, Docks and Apples.

Or make a little at a time, because it will soon decay, as of whey or old Cock
broth two pints with Mercury, Beets, Fumitory, Hops, Elder flowers or Danewort
buds, Senna, Polypody, Epithymum, Damask Roses, with a little Sugar or Honey.

Or give usual syrups to purge unclean blood, as the gentle syrup of Roses,
Violets, Peach flowers, made of their infusions or juyces with Sugar or Honey.
Juice of Fumitory, or Hops, or Mercury, or Rhamnus solutive, or the juice of
its berries. Thus: Take the grains, or seeds of the drying thorn called Merla,
through ripe, bruise them, and keep them in an Earthen vessel eight days warm:
take a pint of the juice and as much fine Sugar, make a syrup with Cinnamon and
Ginger, of each six drams; Cloves two drams. This syrup, is not good only for
Scabby people, but Gouty, and such as have phlegmatic and serous humors.

Or give syrup of Roses with Rhubarb, of Eupatorium with Rhubarb, of Apples by
King Sabor, of the juice and Senna, or that of Fumitory, Epithymum, Polypody,
Myrobalans, Tamarinds, Cassia of Epithymum compound: or that of Fumitory,
Myrobalans, Tamorinds and Agarick, of Succory with Rhubarb: of Diasereos, and
the like.

Or that of Apples and Hellebore. Thus made: Take Bugloss and Borage roots and
all, each two handfuls; Fumitory, Eupatory, Chamaepytis, or Groundpine,
Germander, Madenhair, each a handful: Bugloss, Borage and Staechus flowers,
each apugil; Raysons stoned an ounce, tops of Time and Epithymum, each half an
ounce; Senna an ounce and an half, Polypody two ounces, black Hellebore steept
in white wine three drams, Schaenanth two drams, boil them, and add to the
straining Juice of sweet Apples twelve ounces, Sugar two pounds make a syrup.

Another by Montanus made of Senna, Rhubarb, Myrobalans, Epithymum, Polypody,
bark of black Hellebore six drams, with an ounce of Cloves, and four ounces of
Liquorish boiled to five pints.

Or this purging Decoction for five or six doses. Take Dock roots three ounces,
Grass, Asparagus, Kneeholm, Elicampane, Liquorish, each an ounce and half;
Fumitory and Mercury two ounces, Polypody four ounces, Succory, Dandelion,
Sowthistle, Bugloss, roots and all Scabious, Fumitory, Hops, Mercury,
Maidenhair, Eupatorium, Endive, Liverwort, Sorrel, Violets, Lettice, Balm five
or six handfuls, Cordial flowwers, Water Lillies, Moulin flowers four pugils,
Budds of Hops tops, of Thyme and Epithymum, each a pugil; Aniseseed two drams,
Seeds of Dodder, Melons and Sorrel, each a dram; Carthamus bruised three
ounces, Raisons stoned two ounces, Prunes six pair, Sebestens or Jujubes eight
pair, Tamarinds an ounce and half, infuse the Seeds and Roots in a pint of
white Wine, then add as much Water with a little of the Decoction of Lignum
vitae, or Wormwood-water, boil and strain, ad sugar and Cinnamon, give it often
as Ishewed

If you will have it work more, infuse three ounces of Senna or four, or make
it into a syrup, with half a pound of Sugar, give it as you find it works, or
mix it with Water of Bugloss, Fumitory, Maidenhair or the like, or with Pulp of
Cassia or Tamarinds make an Electuary, you may add also Diagredium to make it
stronger.

You may also boil Soldanella, with the Decoction of Senna or for the stronger
people, three or four drams of black Hellebore, and add an ounce of Myrobalans
at the conclusion, rubbed with Oil of Rhubarb, or Agarick, or Mechoacan, with
their Correctors, and after straining, add Sugar to make an Apozem or Syrup,
and it will be better.

Or add to the Decoction Syrup of Fumitory, Docks, Hops, Apples, Bugloss,
Roses; or take a good quantity of the Juyces of them, and infuse therein Senna,
Rhubarb, Agarick, or make a Syrup.

Or, Take Juice of sweet Apples four ounces, Juice of Roses three ounces, Juice
of Fumitory and Plopps, each two ounces; Juice of Dock roots and Beets, each an
ounce and an half; Juice of Mercury, Borage, Bugloss, Sorrel, each an ounce;
boil them with as much Sugar and with Cinnamon make a syrup: You may if you
please add Senna and Rhubarb.

A purging Wine for five doses. Take Dock roots, or Monks-Rhubarb two ounces,
bark of the Roots of Tamarisk, or Ash and Danewort, each an ounce; Fumitory,
budds of Hops, Mercury, Agrimony, Maidenhair, Wormwood, each two drams; Peach,
and Cordial flowers, each a dram; Aniseseeds two drams, Senna two ounces,
Thyme, and Epithymum an ounce, Mechoacan, or Briony roots half an ounce, Ginger
a dram, bruise them for five or six pints of Wine, and steep them therein, you
may ad Sodanella and a little black Hellebore, which is safest in Wine.

Or, Take eight measures of new Wine, add twelve ounces of Senna, Mechoacan,
Sarsa, Sassaphras, each three ounces; Wormwood two handfuls.

Another Decoction for other Diseases, and the Scab to be taken thirty days,
it prevents and cures. Take Guaicum an ounce, Sarsa six drams, Roots of Succory
and Liquorish, each half an ounce; boil and strain them, and for one dose
infuse Senna half an ounce, Mechoacan a dram, Ginger half a dram, strain and
add Syrup or Juice of Roses half an ounce, Balm water an ounce: Give it at once.

An Infusion or Decoction of Hellebore is good as in other stubborn Diseases,
made of the small Roots of Hellebore, that which is called black Astrintia, or
that with a green or purple Flower, which are greater then the white Hellebore,
though this may be used in strong Bodies, take off the Bark and cast away the
Pith, which may be softened in Wine, if it will not come off. Take a dram or
four scruples of this bark, two drams of Senna, infuse them in wine or Oxymel,
if it be white Hellebore or Aniseseed water, add Cloves, Cinnamon, Ginger, boil
gently, and strain them, add the Decoction, or Raisons, and Prunes, or Syrup of
Polypody, or of Roses. Or you may make an Extract of black Hellebore by often
Infusion, and give a little thereof.

A certain Emperick cured all Scabs and other stubborn Diseases, with the
Decoction of Stibium calcined and Sarsaparilla.

You may also use Potions and Electuaries, as of Tamarinds, Cassia, Manna,
Lenitive, Diacassia, Diaprunis, Diacatholicon, or stronger with Scammony, as
Diaprunis solutive, Diasebesten, of Juice of Roses, Diaphaenicon, Troches of
Violets, or Electuary of Lapis Lazuli, Confectio Hamech, Diasenna, Pills of
Fumitory, Agrimony, Rhubarb, and Pills of Lapis Lazuli, or of the five
Myrobalans.

After Purging sweat to send out the sharp Humors in both moist and dry Itch,
for though it dries the Body more, yet it takes away the cause. For Nature in
Impetigo and Psora tends that way, as we may observe.

Therefore use not only hot Houses often, but when the Itch is stubborn and
returns, continue them a month, with Decoctions of Guaicum and Sarsa as in the
Pox, but not with such slender Diet, least by drying the Body within, you
sharpen the Humors, always Purging every third day, by which we have often
cured them.

Use Alterers to amend the Constitution, and a sparing Diet, but not so as to
exasperate the Humors. Let the Diet be of good Nourishment, temperate and moist
rather then dry, and cold rather then hot. Take heed of salt, sharp, and spiced
Meats, and Wine that inflames the Body too much. Let the Air be good, the sleep
temperate, and let them exercise often to breath out the Excrements by
insensible Transpiration.

Medicines must be given to alter the sharpness of the humors that are cold and
moist, to correct the Distemper of the Liver, and open Obstructions: As
Conserves, Candyes, Syrups, Waters of Bugloss, Violets, Roses, Succory,
Water Lillies, Maidenhair, Citrons, Powder of Trionsantalon, and Diarrhodon:
And others mentioned in hot and melancholy Diseases. Also give sharp Spaw-water
for many days; or Troches of Vipers, with Conserves in Psora and
Elephantiasis, and a dram of Gum Lac, with three ounces of the Decoction of
Myrtles, is good to preserve against Impetigo.

Many in Psora and other stubborn Scabs, use Chickenbroath, and Vipers flesh
boiled therein, and made into balls, with Crumbs of Bread, and gilded with Gold.

Let the topical Remedies be such as draw out the Humors fastened in the skin,
and abate their sharpness, and dissolve them, and that purge the skin from
matter, crust, scurfe and scalds; and heal it, and take away the Inflammation.
They must be drying, and cleansing, and healing, mixed with cold and sharp
things, in both moist and dry Itch, to abate choleric and sharp Humors, and
Itching and Inflammation; as in the vulgar Itch, or that which is called Fera,
or Cruel, or Terminthus, or Epinyctis. Also add Emollients to take away the
Scabs in the wet Itch, and the scurfe and scalds in the dry. Thus scratching is
delightful, till the skin be torn to let out the itching Humor, but it ends in
tearing pain; and though it so hurts, and is the first cause of the scab
breaking out, yet because it allayeth the Itch, and brings out the Humors, it
is not amiss, if it be with distinction of the parts, and not so much in some
places as in others.

Baths are much used against the Itch, both natural and artificial, dry and
moist; and if it be in a particular part, they must be used to that alone.

Among Natural Baths it is good to swim in fresh water, which allayes the Itch
by its coldness, and mollisies the scurfe by its moistness, and by its earthy
quality, which I showed in the Causes of the Stone, to be in all Waters, it
dries. And the rather if the Water be muddy, or have any chalk-like substance
in it when it is boiled. Such are in diverse places, although they are sweet and
seem pure and clear, and are good against other Diseases as well as the Itch.
Hot Water does all things better, if the Patient continue long in it, and go in
often, for thereby the Humors are better drawn forth and purged; and by the use
of it not only the small Itch but the stubborn Scab, has been often cured.

Sulphur-waters or such as are salt or sharp, which by the bitumen swiming at
the top, and by their scent declare they are from Minerals, are the best baths.
That of Sulphur which is hot upon which Bitumen swims like grease, is best
against all sorts of Scabs, because it dries, cleanses, and digests, and
mollifies by its fat, therefore it is good against dry scabs as the last
remedy. Salt Waters hot or cold are best for the moist scab, for they dry
strongly. And all other Mineral Waters are good.

Or Artificial Baths, such as are called dry or hot Houses to sweat in, by
which the humors that cause the scab sweat out with the serum, which takes away
the scab by its moistness, and the heat dries up the Excoriation. These do it
alone sometimes, but moist baths or other applications when the Pores are
opened, do better being joined therewith.

You may make moist Baths to sit in, to cleanse, dry, mollify and cause sweat
of Herbs, Roots, and all, as of Docks, Scabious, Elicampane, five leaved Grass,
Snakeweed, Tormentil, Plantane, Fumitory, Moulin, Fern, Dwarf-elder, Mugwort,
Dill, Oak leaves, Ivy, and Willow tops: tops of Briony, Dragons, or
Cookowpints, wild Cowcumbers, and to dry more, of Sorrel, Soapwort, Pellitory,
Beets, Mallows, Borrage, Marshmallows, Lillies, Organ, Sage, Chamomil, and
Rosemary flowers, Beans, Pease, Vetches, Lupins, Barley, Bran, Foenugreek,
Gourd and Lineseed, and the like. Boiled in fresh Water, or Salt, or mineral
Water, adding Lie, or Smiths Forge-water, or Sulphur, Salt, Alum, Vitriol,
Tartar burnt, Gypsum, Bole, and the like.

Thus: Take Lapathium, and Briony roots a pound, Elicampane four ounces,
Dragons, or Cookowpints two ounces, Scabious, Plantane, Fumitory, Pellitory,
Mallows six handfuls, Bean and Lentil meal four pugils, burnt Gypsum a pound,
Sulphur half a pound, Salt four ounces, with Water to fill the Vessel, boil it
and add Lie.

In a dry Itch when by use of Ointments the skin is dry. Take Mallows, Violets,
Docks, Beets, roots and all, Pellitory, Scabious six handfuls, Line,
Faenugreek, Bran, Pompion seeds an ounce or more, Chamomil flowers three
pugils, Brimstone a pound, boil them.

Another for the same. Take Sulphur two pounds, Salt a pound powder them and
mix them with two pints of Oil, boil them gently, put them into a hot Water for
a has, let him sit and sweat there, and after that sweat in his bed, do thus
three days, and be cured.

It is good once or twice a day to rub and anoint before and after bathing, the
Pores being open.

Rub the Body with Dock roots boiled in Vinegar, in both Itches; or bruise Dock
roots, with Salt and Vinegar, and rub in the bath therewith, that he may be
washed after this is a common remedy.

In Impetigo use Briony and Gentian roots, after the same manner, with Dragons
and Cookowpints.

Or stamp these Plants, Roots and all, with Vinegar, Salt and Brimstone, as
Elicampane, five leaved Grass, Snakweed, Tormentil, Alkanet, wild Cowcumbers,
Daffodil, Coleworts, Bugloss, black Charlin, Crowfoots, black Hellebore,
Plantane, Scabious, Fumitory, Agrimony, Elmleaves, lesser Celandine, and
against Itching, use Potamogetum and Mercury.

Add Meal of Lupins, Darnel, Pease, Barley, Juniper, and Bay Berries; or wild
three leaved Grass, and Watercresses, with Honey according to Dioscorides. or
Coriander, Wormwood, Rue, Cowcumber leaves, and Leeks, Rhus, Coleworts and
Plantane, with Bran, Raisons, Honey, against the Epinyctis.

Or an Apple called Adams-apple cut in two, sprinkled with sulphur within, and
then roasted in brown Paper under the Embers, is good to rub with, or an Orange.

Mustard Seed, Turnep, Rocket, Nigella, Staphisager, Briony, Tamarisk, with
Vinegar and Oil, or Glans unguentaria, with Urin or seeds of sunflower, are
used by Dioscorides against Epinyctis.

You may rub the Plants mentioned, adding Grease, as with Dock or Gentian
roots, bruised or boiled with bitter Grease, Oil of Bays, and Ginger.

Or, Take Roots of Docks, Elicampane or the like, two ounces, Dragons, or
Cookowpints two drams, slice and boil them in Vinegar, bruise and add Hogs
grease, or Butter three ounces, with Salt and Brimstone. If you add a little
Quicksilver or Sublimate, it is excellent in Impetigo and Psora.

Or, Take Roots of black Chamaeleon two ounces and half, bruise them with fine
Hogs grease, or Oil three ounces, add Sulphur half an ounce, Alum two drams,
Vitriol a dram.

Or boil a pugil of Juniper Berries, and a spoonful of salt bruised in fine
Hogs grease or Oil, and strain them for an Ointment.

Or use Juyces of Herbs mentioned, or of Mercury Xyris, Agrimony, Southernwood,
with salt, sulphur and Vinegar; or Juice of Oranges, Lemmons, Citrons, Oil
omphacine and Acacia, or Juice of Sowbread, Thapsia, Fig milk is used by
Dioscorides. Juice of Henbane takes away Itching.

Or Vinegar made of the Infusion of Oleander, Oliveleaves.

Aloes dissolved in Vinegar is good against Impetigo.

Storax with Vinegar and Oil of Roses, cures the scab.

Or Turpentine, or Gum Arabic, of Plum-tree, Almonds, Vines, with Vinegar and
Oil.

Dioscorides applies Bird-lime, with a pledget to the Epinyctis.

Or the Water that comes out of burnt Olive, or Cotnil-tree, or the Tears of
Vines, when they are cut off, or pruned.

Or sheeps or Goats dung with Vinegar, cures the Epinyctis according to
Dioscorides.

Or the Gall of an Ox, or Blood of a Goose, takes away itching.

Or fasting Spittle, the Herpes and Impetigo.

Or Oil of Yolks of Eggs, or Wheat or Nightshadeberries, or Oil in which live
Coals have been quenched. Dioscorides commends Oil of Cedar, or wild Olives,
and Ovl of Rocket, Tamarisk, Ash, Juniper, or Oil of Henbane seed, Populeon
ointment. Some use Petroleum in the Scab Terminthus, or Oil of Tartar, with a
little Oil of Vitriol.

A Liniment usual against the Itch. Take fresh Butter, or Oil of Roses four
ounces, Turpentine dissolved with Yolks of Eggs two ounces or three, Salt six
drams, mix them well, you may add Sulphur, or which stinks less, six drams of
Ceruss, or an ounce of Juice of Oranges or Lemmons.

Or, Take Oil of Roses, Violets, Nuts, Lineseed, Lillies, Bays four ounces,
Juice of Docks, Scabious, Plantane, Fumitory, Oringes, Lemmons, with a little
Vinegar four ounces, Turpentine three ounces, Salt six drams: Or boil the Oils
and Juyces till the Juyces be consumed, and with Turpentine and Wax make an
Ointment, but the first is better.

Or make an Ointment of Sulphur and Litharge, Oil and Juyces aforesaid; or with
Juyces and Vinegar without Oils.

Or use the common Ointment of Litharge or Ceruss, made of Oil and Vinegar, or
without Vinegar; or use Unguent of Roses, or white Ointment, with Camphire,
adding Litharge and Sulphur.

You may quickly make an Ointment of Gun-pouder which consists of sulphur,
Niter and Charcole, with Oil or Grease: This is the soldiers Ointment against
the Itch.

Or: Take Litharge, Sulphtr, of each six drams; roots of Dragons or Cookowpints
two drams: mix them with the former Ointment, And half an ounce of Storax.

Or: Take Ceruss, Tutty or Pompholyx, or Cadmia, Litharge, Bole or Chalk, each
two drams; Sulphur three drams, Tartar a dram and an half, Gum Sandrack or
Sarcocol or Mastick, each a dram; make a powder with burnt Lead and Antimony
and mix it with the ointments mentioned.

In a stubborn Itch, add Chalcitis or wine Lees burnt half an ounce, or a dram
of Oil of Tartar, a scruple of Oil of Vitriol, or half an ounce of
Quicksilver, dissolved with Turpentine with is excellent, or as much Sublimate.

Ointments for Rich and dainty people, are made of Unguentum Citrinum, which
makes the skin fair, and it is best in the face: and Lac Virginis.

Or: Take Ceruss half an ounce, Borax two drams, Tartar a dram and an half,
Gersa Serpentaria a dram, Frankincense, Niter, each half a dram; with juice of
Limons, make an ointment.

For the worst Itch: Take Calcanthum, or Misie, or Chaleitis each half an
ounce, scales of Brass two drams, or Verdigreese half a dram, Alum three
drams, Sulphur an ounce, Aloes, Frankincense, Myrrh, each a dram and an half;
Acacia a dram, with infusion of Gum Arabic in Vinegar. Galens adds Amurca or
Lees of Oil and Rosin.

In Tinea, which is the spreading scab or scald: Take Tartar, Niter and Alum,
each half an ounce; Litharge an ounce, Sulphur vive six drams, both Hellebors
three drams, Orpiment two drams, powder them, and with Soap and juice of Docks
or Sowbread, make an Ointment.

Or: Take Litharge an ounce, Alum, Niter or sal Gem, Tartar and Sulphur, each
half an ounce; ashes of Nuts with the shells and Garlic burnt, each three
drams; Soot whose blackness does no hurt to the Hair, two drams, both
Hellebores and Staphsagre, of each a dram; make a powder, and with Honey,
strong Vinegar, and three heads of Garlic and two drams of Ivy or juniper
berries: make an Ointment.

Or with Oil of Nuts, Juniper or Bays, and if you boil the Oils with juice of
Garlic, Centaury, Docks, Oranges and Vinegar, to the consumption of the
juyces, it will be stronger.

This Ointment for a scald Head will be stronger, with half an ounce of
Quicksilver, dissolved in Turpentine or with Cinnabar, or red Lead, or with
red Chalcanthum, or Chalcitis, or yellow, which is called Misy, or three drams
of Verdigreese, or a dram of Orpiment, or Sublimate, and if they be mixed with
the Ointment made of Honey and Vinegar without Oil, it will be stronger,
because unctious things abate the force.

Many scald Heads have been cured with this: Take the Ointment that Carters
grease their wheels with, called in Dutch Rarensalve, a pound, leaves of dried
savin an ounce and an half, Bay berries half an ounce, white Hellebore two
drams, sulphur an ounce, Quicksilver half an ounce, dissolve it with
Turpentine, and make an Ointment.

Add the ashes of a Hedghog, or Hippocampus, or ashes of Juniper and Ash,
powder of Earth Cimolia, Adarces and Cardamom and Camphire, they abate the
Itching.

To take away the stink of the Brimstone and the rest, add Storax liquid, or
Oil of Spike, or Juniper, or powder of Orris.

Or let it be made with flower of Brimstone and besides Storax, add flower of
Belzoin, which are sweet and cleanse and dry.

A Cataplasine for a scald Head: Take three ounces of Garlic, Rue, Savin, Ivy,
Nettles; each a handful; rotten Nuts five, Juniper berries an ounce and an
half, Pigeons dung an ounce: boil them in strong Vinegar.

Or mix meal of Faenugreek with Pumice stone and juice of Garlic and milk of
Figs.

I have known poor people cure the scald, with the fat Earth that lies about
spaw waters, laid all over the Head.

Or use pouders aster you have anointed the Head with Honey and Oil aforesaid.

Dioscorides sprinkles on Niter and Frankincense.

Or: Take Pumex stone three drams, Borax two drams, Salt, Alum, Chalcitis
burnt, of each a dram; Frankincense and Myrobalans each half a dram; Galls,
Cypress, Nuts burnt a dram and an half: make a powder.

You may take of the scab and the Ointments with Decoction of
five-leaved-Grass, Docks, Scabious and Meal of Lupines.

Or with the Decoction of Hens Dung, sheeps or Goats dung, adding Docks,
Plantane, Agrimony, Mallows, Bettony.

Or dissolve burnt Gypsum in Forge water, it cures all scabs, for besides
drying it mollifies, and the Hands will not be rough when they are washed
therewith, but soft as we see when work men use it, for making Plaster.

Common Salt, or Alum, Niter, or Gem, or Armoniack, dissolved in Vinegar
allaies itching, or Tartar, or burnt Alum, you may if it be too strong add
water of Myrtles, Roses, Docks, or the white of an Egg, and Oils.

Or thus: Take burnt Gypsum a good quantity, Bole poudered three ounces, Salt
two ounces, Alum an ounce, vitriol a dram with vinegar and Wine, make them as
a Lie, or boil them, wash the mangie parts.

Lac Virginis made of Litharge and Vinegar and Salt or Alum water with juice
of Limons, Oil of Tartar does the same in the Face best.

For a Scald wash the Head with Lie or Forge water, wherein are boiled Mallows,
Beets, Pellitory, Southernwood, Wormwood, Horehound, Centory, Bettany,
Maidenhair, Savin, Bramble leaves, Pease, Vetches, Beans, Lentiles, Lupines,
Faenugreek, Juniper and Ivy berries, Mustard seeds, Cypress Nuts and both
Hellebors, adding Vinegar.

In a stubborn scab and Impetigo: Take Litharge of Gold half a pound, Alum an
ounce, juice of Plantane, Docks and Limons, of each an ounce; Vinegar a pint
and an half: boil and filter it off, it is stronger with three drams of
Quicksilver, or half an ounce of Chalcitis.

Or boil Litharge, sublimate, Ceruss, Vitriol, equal parts; in Plantane, Dock
or spring water.

Or dissolve sublimate in Aqua fortis and mix a spoonful thereof with Rose or
plantane water, try the strength first upon some part and then use it.

Or use the distilled water of Docks mentioned in the Tetter.

Or: Take juice of Docks four ounces, of Plantane two ounces, of Limons an
ounce, Rose water an ounce and an half, powder of Sulphur and Salt, each an
ounce; Litharge half an ounce, Ceruss two drams, Sublimate a dram.

Or: Take Dock roots three ounces, Bryonie, Elicampane, Gentian roott, each an
ounce; Sulphur an ounce and an half, Quicksilver half an ounce, Vinegar eight
ounces,, distill a water.

A Lixivium cures the scab, if it be used in time of bathing with soap, this is
best in the scald, to get the scabs from the Hair and other filth. It is best
made of vine and colewort ashes and of Bean stalk, juniper ash with unsleaked
Lime, adding Forge water, Urin, vinegar or pickle, salt, Alum, sulphur,
Calcanthum.

Or wash with stale Urin, that has stood long in a brass pot or that which is
red and is made by a choleric person.

Some commend that Water found in the cavities of Oaks.

Or use Medicines mentioned in the Elephantiasis.

Or use a Dropax, that is a plaster of pitch laid on, and forceably drawn off,
to pluck out the Hair by the roots which hinder the cure of a scald Head this
is the last Remedy: make it of Pitch, Rosin and oil dissolved, one Plaster over
the whole Head is better than many.

Excoriation, Clefts, Wounds, and Ulcers are cured alike, The Cure of Ulcers in
general.
when the skin, flesh, and other parts divided grow again together: this is
Natures only work, and the Physician does only remove the impediments by actual
or potential means: and because Driers are chiefly used they say all Ulcers are
cured thereby; but they vary according to the sorts of Ulcers, as we shall show,
first we shall speak of the cure of superficial abrasions, and Fissures, or
Clefts, then of Burnings, then of deeper Wounds and Ulcers.

Abrasions called Intertrigines or Galls by Riding, The cure of Abrasions of
the Skin, Chaps, or Gall called Intertrigo, and of Fissures or Clefts, or
Perniones, Kibes or Chiblanes.
long lying, Pissing in Infants and Pose or Coryza in the Nose, or from
Phlyctenae, or Bladders broken, also Fissures or Clefts, or Chinks, or chaps
called Rhagades in the Hands, Feet, Lips, Fundament, Paps, Privities, Prepuce
of Men, Eyebrows, Nostrils, Ears, come from Heat or Cold, or Dryness, or salt
and sharp Humors, as Perniones or Kibs and Chilblanes use to be in the Heels in
time of great Cold. they are cured alike, and when Kibes turn to Ulcers, they
are cured as Ulcers.

First take away that which caused them, or hinders the Cure of them, as by
removing outward Causes, and clensing inward, as salt and sharp Humors, and
preventing their Increase, as we showed in the Scab, if the cause cannot be well
taken away let it be abated, if it come by riding, mend the Saddle, if by long
lying, lay soft things under, and if Children be galled by Urine, defend the
part.

As for the rest of the Cure, although Nature by Nourishment will make new skin,
and glue up Clefts or Chaps, yet because the torn skin grows rough round about
where it presently dries, especially where it is thicker then ordinary, and
moisture falls thereon, which hinders action, you must apply Topics to mollify
the hard and dry Circumference, and things that dry gently without biting, and
moisten and so dry as it is rough or wet more or less, Thus.

All Suets lenifie and heat, the chief are Dears, Kids and Goats. You must
anoint a Clout and apply it.

Candle droppings are good against galling by riding, and they are better when
they are dropped into Water, or white Wine, this ointment is called
Candle-droppatum, it is easy to be had for Travelers.

When you will Lenifie more, use Goose, Duck, Hens Grease, or Oesypus which is
Grease of Wool, or use Bears Grease, against Kibes or Chilblanes.

Or oil of Roses, Myrtles, Quinces, bitter Almonds, or yolks of Eggs, for chapt
Lips or Nipples, or oil of a burnt Nutshel, or of Wheat, the oil of a roasted
Turnep cures the Chilblanes.

Or the oil of Sowbread or Daffadil roots made hollow, and then roasted, or oil
of Nettle seeds, or of Nettles, boiled in oil with Salt.

Or Mucilage of Gum Tragacanth in Rose Water, or of Quince seeds, or the white
of an Egg, Glue, or Size, made of Leather shreds boiled, cures the Chaps of
the Nipples and the Grease thereof also.

The Valesians use the Gum, that comes from the Bark of the Larch tree called
Drambech in Dutch, or Turpentine.

Pomatum made of Kids Suet is Good for all Chaps, and it is sweet for the Lips
and Nipples.

You may of those sewets, and oils, and white Wax, make an ointment with
Mucilage, and a little Turpentine.

Or make ointment of hard yolks of Eggs, with Goats sewet, oil of Roses, and
Grease that is sweet.

Or for the Chaps of the Lips, use Honey, or Syrup of Roses, or Sugar pellets,
or Sugar of Roses, or Diatragacanth frigid made into a Liniment.

To dry more use juice of Plantane and Turpentine, with the oils mentioned well
mixed together.

Or with Starch and Infusion of Gum Tragacanth, with other driers.

or juice of sweet Pomegranates, with Starch, and Butter; when there are Chaps
in the nostrils, from Coryza or Pose, or Use the Emulsion, of the four great
cold seeds.

Or Use the juices of Comfrey, Cotyledon, Elder, Rue, made as the rest into an
oynument; or juice of Goose-Grass, against the Chaps of the Nipples, or Acacia
against Kibes or Chilblanes.

Or Juice of Briony with Salt, is good against Clefts.

Or leaves of Beech, or Briony, applied to chapt Lips cures them.

Or a roasted Leek, or Onion, with honey and oil, or a Squil or Sea onyon, with
oil or Rosin, against Chilblanes.

Or add Starch to the Mucilages, or to ointments, of Sewet, or of Yolks of Eggs.

Or Powder of Galls, or Turpentine, and Honey.

In Chaps and Kibes, add Ashes of Bran, Squils, Figgs Asses Hoof, Horse-tayl,
Cray fish, to Honey of Roses, suets, or oils.

Or burnt Shoe soals, or Paper with suet, or Tallow, is good, or to be added to
Candle droppatum, for Galls by Riding, being at hand.

Mastich, Frankincense or Pitch poudered and mixed with oil of Roses or Grease
and Wax make a good ointment.

Or thus. Take Sorrel, Sarcocol, Mastich, each a dram; Gum parched half an
ounce: powder them, and with Ointment of yolks of Eggs mentioned two ounces, or
with that of Mucilages for chapt Lips make an Ointment.

Sulphur and oil mixed cure the Chaps of the Hands, or if you tie Sulphur in a
Clout, or the flour of it, and boil it in common oil, or oil of St. John's wort
or Moulin.

Or Litharge with the white of an Egg, or Mucilage, or oil, or Grease stirred
long in a Leaden Mortar, cures the Excoriations by Piss and other chaps.

Or mixed with the ointments made of Juice of Plantane: also Ceruss, Tutty,
Starch, and oil of Yolks of Eggs.

Or thus. Take Litharge, Myrrh, Frankincense, each ^ dram; Galls or round
Birthwort half a dram, Camphire a scruple, Ointment of Suet two ounces.

Or use the usual ointment of Litharge, Ceruss, Pompholyx, with Alum or
Unguentum Citrinum.

When the chaps are stubborn, use stronger Driers. Take Litharge, Ceruss, each
a dram; Alum, red Lead, each half a dram; Sublimate four grains, with white of
an Egg make a Liniment.

A Water for the same. Take Tartar three drams, Alum half a dram, Sublimate
four grains, ^eruss, Litharge, each a dram; Frankincense, Mastich, each half a
dram; Pomegranate flowers two scruples: boil them, mix them in twelve ounces of
Rose, Plantane, Limon, or Mouse-ear water till a third part be consumed, wash
therewith.

Or wash before anointing with Decoction of Lillies, Mallows, Henbane, Poppy,
Violets, Purslane, Groundsil, Housleek, Chamaemel, Melilot flowers, meal of
Foenugreek and Line seed with Sheeps suet, let it be of Milk or Water.

It is good to wash chapt hands in their own Urin.

For Kibes and Chilblains foment with a Decoction in Wine and Water of sharp
Herbs, as Dragons, Sowbread, Crowfoot; or Clensers, as Turnips, Beets, Orrobus
seed: or Astringents, as Myrtle, Verbascum the less, Arction and Pomegranate
peels. Also Alum water is good against Kibes and Chilblains.

Or: Take Melilot a handful, red Roses a pugil, pulp of Quinces two ounces:
boil and stamp them, add meal of Lentils an ounce, Pomegranates peels half an
ounce; with Oil of Roses, Frankincense and Ashes, make a Cataplasm.

I have seen the thick lips in a kib'd Heel stitched togeher, that it may heal
the better.

You may cure chaps in the Hands and Feet with ordinary Glue spread upon a
Clout.

You may use against Burning, things against Blisters and Excoriations from
them, being broken.

Burning, whether it be from any thing red hot, or from flame, or from
Gunpowder (for a Bullet cannot so quickly grow hot as to burn as some suppose)
or from scalding water and the like, or from potential Causticks or Nettles the
narrower and shallower it is, the sooner and easier it is cured; if otherwise,
it is difficult, and leaves an ugly scar, and I have seen Gunpowder stick in
the skin after the Cure. That Burning that is in or about noble parts or the
Face, or which is very large from falling into the Fire is dangerous and often
deadly.

If the skin be burnt by a Cautery, we labor to keep it open, by cutting the
Blyster and taking off the Eschar, and use nothing but things mentioned in
Flegmon against pain and Inflammation, and they may be used against other
Burnings with Blood letting.

As for the place burned that is hurt and pained, first we take out the Fire,
which is thought to be done by hot things, and therefore the Vulgar hold the
part to the Fire, but they are most agreeable which have moderate heat and are
therefore called Anodynes, and dry without Biting, and digest without great
heat, and which hinder the Blisters from breaking. this done at the first, we
must use stronger Driers, and such as heal Excoriation and Ulceration. such as
are against the skin flead off, and mentioned in the Itch. But if it turn to a
deep Ulcer by suppuration, it must be cured as an Ulcer. and if the Weapon or
Instrument made a Wound also you must first use things against Burning. and
then cure the Ulcer. against Burning use these.

Plants bruised or boiled in Water, Wine-vinegar, or Oil, or Hogs Grease are
good, as Leeks, Onions, Daffadil, Hemerocallis, Lillies, Danewort roots, Hemp,
Alkanet, Thorn roots, or leaves of St. John's wort, Androsaemus, Pellitory,
Althaea, Mallows, Ivy, wild Verbascum, Mulberry, Myrtles, Poppies,
Hounds-tongue, wild Rue, Sesamus flowers, of Spear-grass, Ivy, Cistus, Typha,
or apply Beets roots and all.

Or anoint with the Juyces especially of leaves and Berries of Ivy, Onyons,
Turnips, Nightshade, wild Lettice which has a milky juice according to
Dioscorides. with Alum or yolks of Eggs, Mucilage or Gum Traganth or Cream.

Or: Take the juyces mentioned three ounces, Oil of Roses, fresh Butter, Hogs
grease, each an ounce; slaked Lime half an ounce, mucilage of Quinces an ounce:
with Turpentine make an Ointment. or boil away the Juyces and put Wax to it.

The Vulgar apply Elder leaves, but the middle rind is better.

Or: Take the middle rind of Elder an ounce and an half, the juice of Elder
buds an ounce, Lineseed Oil two ounces, Oil of Roses and Hogs grease, each an
ounce; Wax an ounce and an half, Frankincense an ounce,: boil them in Water a
little and when it is cold, take of the Oil at the top. Mathiolus uses liquid
Varnish: but we Line seed Oil.

Or apply the root of Fennel stamped with Cream, but first take off the black
skin or coat.

Or the middle bark of the Tile tree, which in Rose water makes a Mucilage
which is excellent in Burnings.

Or use Oils by Infusion of the fruits of Momordica or Nightshade, Apples, or
of red Poppy leaves. or by Decoction the Oil in the hollow roots of Daffodil,
or Ivy boiled in Oil and Wine til the Wine be consumed. also Oil of Elder,
Quinces. or by expression, as Oil of Gourd seeds of Nuts or yolks of Eggs.

Or Oil of Whelps and Worms which is approved against Gunshot fire.

Or Hogs Grease well cleansed and dropped into Water, with the application of a hot
Iron. others stick Straws into Bacon and set them on fire to make it drop: but
it is better to wrap them in a double paper that is larger and set on fire, and
so let it drop into water, thus they season roast meat instead of Larding it.
Bacon alone so prepared cures Burnings, and eases pain with Cream or Yolks of
Eggs.

Against Gunpowder fire, use Butter or Hogs Grease dropped into Frog-spawn
water, or of Cray-fish, or Earthworms boiled.

When there is an Ulcer, use pouders, or otherwise anointing first the part
that they may stick, with Oil, Mucilage or Milk. as Ashes of Gourds, Coleworts,
Barley, Shoe soals, shells of Frogs, or as Dioscorides, powder of Cinabar and
Cimolian Earth.

The Vulgar wet the part and apply meal to take out the fire.

To abate pain use whites of Eggs and Oil of Roses with Lint. or with white Wax
make an Ointment, adding mucilage of Quinces and Hogs Grease or Barley meal,
and in an Ulcer Bole and Frankincense.

Or: Take Leeks or Onions roasted, stamp them with yolks of Eggs or Elder Deers
or Goats Suet and Turpentine: make a Plaster.

Or use the Ointment of Quick Lime, steep Lime in water til it dissolve, pour
off the water and add fresh, seven, ten, or twelve times: keep the Lime in the
bottom dry, or use it presently.

This washed Lime with Oils of Roses, or fresh Butter and white Wax makes an
Ointment. or with whites of Eggs, mucilage of Quinces or Fleabane, Ceruss with
Milk and a little Camphire. or Citrine ointment, Pomatum or Populeum, for the
Face.

Or mix this washed Lime with Hogs Grease, with Oil or Lineseed and Barley meal
for a Linunent.

Oil of St. John's wort with washed Lime is excellent especially in Gunshot.

Or it is good to mix the water of washed Lime with Oil of Roses; and apply it.

Or use this Lime water against Gunpowder fire. Take Flints burnt to Lime,
pour Water upon them in a wooden Vessel, and there will be Fat swimming at the
top. use this upper Water with Oil of Roses and a Clout hot.

Some use Soap against Burnings.

Dioscorides says that Glue dissolved in hot Water hinders Blysters.

You may make Ointments of the Ashes, Pouders, Oils, Hogs Grease, whites of
Eggs, and Mucilages aforesaid. adding seeds of wild Rue, St. John's wort, Acacia,
fine powder of Glass, Phrygian Stone according to Dioscorides, who applies
also Stimmi with fresh Grease.

Or Ashes of Myrtles and yolks of Eggs, as also Salt peter and Oil of Roses,
hinder Blysters from rising.

Or Ceruss and oil of Roses washed with Rose water, the white of an Eg and
Camphire. or the white ointment of Rhasis, or of Ceruss.

Or Sheeps Dung, Hen or Pigeon Dung, with Oil of Roses or Line seed. the Vulgar
take out Fire with Cow dung.

Dioscorides says that Salt and Oil prevent Pustles. others uss Niter and Oil
of Eggs.

Dioscorides uses Milk and Water.

Or Foment with Coleworts or Cabbage Broth, or with that of Turnips. or use
the distilled Water, lay Colewort leaves on to hinder the Inflammation and
discuss.

Or use the Decoction of Ivy, Privet, Plantane, Henbane seeds to cure Itching.

Or distilled Water of Flowers of Verbascum, Plantane and Henbane seed to
hinder Pustles from rising with red Sanders and Camphire.

Aqua vitae is good against Bruises, and also Burnings.

And cold Water hinders Blysters from rising.

And so does Juice of Fennel and white Wine.

You must not forcibly pull off an Eschar from a Burning, for the pain and
bleeding will increase and the hurt will be larger: but with Lenifiers and
Ripners applied, let it fall off of it self. we can scarce get it off in eight
days, and then we take it off with Forceps with little cutting.

Butter spread upon a Colewort or Mallow leaf makes the Eschar fall off.

Or the yolk of an Egg, and Butter or Oil of Roses, or Hogs or Hens Grease. you
may add Althaea roots, or Colewort leaves stamped, or other Emollients.

Or: Take Colewort leaves, and Althaea roots and other Emollients crude or
boiled.

Also Triapharmacum Galeni, and Tetrapharmacum are good to make an Eschar fall
off.

A Wound is larg, or narrow, or both, The Cure of Wounds in diverse parts, made
by Cutts, Blows, or Gunshot.
or venomous, of these kinds we shall show diverse Cures. We shall speak hereafter
of a Wound compounded with a Phlegmon, which may happen to an Ulcer: First then
of the large Wound, whither by a Cut, or Prick called a Puncture, or by
Gunshot, or the like or by Contusion, we shall speak together.

Among which, that which is broad and dividing the part perforating, and
laming, the more superficial and aequal it is, and has less hurt the part, the
sooner it is cured. that which is otherwise is more difficult, especially a
Contusion, for in that the flesh bruised, and Blood flowing thither presently
suppurateth and ulcerateth. and a wound in the Membrane, and Nerves, about the
Joints, and when the Nerves, or Great Veins, or Arteries are divided, these are
dangerous by reason of Bleeding, Resolving, or Contraction. They are commonly
deadly with pain, through the Scull, and to the Brain, and Membranes, or
through the Breast or Belly, to the Bowels, yet we have cured Wounds in the
Lungs, and Guts, and Bladder, and Womb, leaving it open below, for Dung and
Urine to pass out, and some say they have cured Wounds in the Brain, and other
noble parts.

For the Cure; Let the Diet be such, as may keep the Body clean, the Belly be
kept open, and a Vein opened if need require, and the Strength preserved, and
the accidents removed, as Bleeding, in large Wounds, and loss of Parts, or
Inflammation from Gunshot, or Bruise, or great pain. this is don by Blood
letting, and other Revulsions, and things mentioned in Wounds with
Inflammations, and by binding Plasters, and Blood stanchers. And in respect of
a wound, if there be any thing within that hurts it, it must be removed first
of all, and then if the lips of the Wound be far distant, they must be united,
and lastly you must labor to make them grow together, Thus;

If any part or piece of a Sword, or other Instrument, or Bullet, which often
falls deep* or piece of Glass or Splinter, it must be taken out with Forceps
with Teeth, or a Cranes bill, and if you cannot lay hold of it as being a
Bullet, open the wound to come at it, so you must also do by broken Bones that
are loose. And if any part be so cut away that it cannot be united to grow
together, it must be cut off, afterward if the wound be in a hairy part, it
must be shaved off, that it fall not into the wound, and all dust or Filth must
be wiped or washed away with a clean Sponge dipped in red Wine, which will repel
and glutinate, you may for a shift use hot water.

When parts cannot grow together, we join them togethet, nor in small wounds,
when the Lips are not far asunder, and when the Skin grows to the parts
beneath, though it be cut; Therefore in Head wounds there needs no stitching,
nor in long Cutts, as when a Stone is taken out of the Bladder: In other parts
the remote lips of the Skin that is divided, also the Muscles and Tendons, and
whatsoever is at distance, must be joined together, and so kept some days:
This is the first business for a Chyturgeon, in dressing of Wounds.

Sometimes by Ligatures alone, sometimes by Plasters also, we join and keep the
lips of wounds together by a Rowler made of old soft Linen, not so straight as
to cause Pain and Imflammation, which sometimes Gangreens, nor so loose, that
the Lips may not exactly meet together, according to the Longitude, and
Latitude of the Wound. The Chyrurgeons make a threesold Ligature, the first is
called retentive, which is made in those parts, where we must not bind hard, as
in the Neck and Breast, or in Wounds that are so full of pain, that they cannot
abide it. This is done by a single Rowler, which is laid at the end upon the
Wound, and sewed on the otherside. Another Ligature is called glutinating, or
incarnative, with a double rowler beginning at the part against the Wound about
the middle. where it must be be streighter, and sowing it, rather then tying a
knot. The third Ligature, is called expulsive, this belongs to hollow Ulcers,
and shall be mentioned in them.

The Lips may be joined together for a time, with little Buckles or Hooks, but
they sall of too easily, and therefore cannot be sufficient for the glutinating
of the Wound, which requires some time.

When Wounds are long, and their lips far divided, they must be joined, for
otherwise it cannot grow well together, without an ugly Scarr and Desormity,
and if then the Tendons can be stitched together, the motion will be less
hindered. And if the great Veins can be stitched, there will be less danger of
Bleeding, and want of Nourishment to the part, this is done in the skin as
other stitches, by drawing a needle through both Lips of the Wound, and
drawing a Thread through, and tying it, in distant stitches and knots: The Silk
must be slender, but strong and even without knots, and the Needle sharp, long,
and three square, with a stitching quil, but when Veins and Arteries are
stitched, or the Guts, or other internal membranous parts: then you must make
the Glovers stitch, bringing the silk often about the lips of the Wound.

Sometimes we join the lips of wounds with Needles, by passing them through
and fastening them about.

You may cure wounds also by Conglutination, and the Scarr will be less then by
stitches, this is for the face. and there are two sorts of Conglutination, the
one is by two Plasters on both sides of the wound, stitching them together when
they stick fast, they are made of Glue, Gum Tragacanth, whites of Eggs, and
Chalk or Pitch.

The other is by joining the lips together, and laying upon it a sticking
Plaster, that will not fall of till they grow together. they are made of
Blood-stanchers, and Glutinaters, and you may stitch the skin withal, at the
first while it bleeds, These plasters are made of fine pouders, whites of
Eggs, and Gum Traganth or arabic, or Izinglass dissolved in Wine, adding the
Furr of a Hare cut small, or the down of a Willow or Reed flowers, or of
Grunsel, or dried Mushrooms, or Spiders webs, apply them with Linen and a
Boulster.

The Powder of which this Plaster is made, is of Bole three parts, Frankincense
or Sarcocol, or Varnish, one part, with half a part of Dragons blood, and
Hares, as I showed.

Or of Quicklime, and sine Flower with the rest.

Or of Lime alone, and the white of an Egg, and Mastick, to keep it from
burning, or of ^arpenters Glue, over all the wound, or a plaster of Pitch.

Other Plasters that are more proper for Ulcers, shall be mentioned there.

Though nature attempts the Consolidation of Wounds by bringing nourishment to
the part, and glutinating small Wounds her selse, yet because though there be no
Ulcer, there is in many a continual Moisture, which hinders Glutination, we
must use things to suck it up and help Nature by removing her obstacles (which
a Dog does only by licking) and applying glutinating Medicines. These besides
their drying qualities, mult astriuge and make the lips of the Wound grow
together by sticking, they are for this called Glutinaters though other ways
they cannot do it. And the demonstration that Comfrey boiled in a pot with
pieces of flesh gleweth them together, cannot prove it to be otherwise.

These also stop bleeding, so that we need no other except the wound be in
great vessels. by the use of these glutinaters, flesh and skin also will grow
in Wounds, so that nothing will seem to be lost, except they ulcerate, nor need
we use any other Medicines to breed flesh, or make a Scarr, as in hollow Ulers.
Moreover those Medicines cause a Glutination of the Callus, which Nature makes
a nutriment of Bones, when any thing is lost by Wounds or Contusions. These
Glutinaters are outwardly and inwardly applied in small great and deep Ulcers,
in these forms.

Some are Plasters such as we mentioned to hold the lips together, or of
Pouders following with whites of Eggs and Hares Furr and Downs, at the first.

As: Take Frankincense, Myrrh, each equal parts, Aloes twice or thrice as much,
with Sarcocol.

Or thus: Take burnt Bones washed with Rose water, to two ounces add Pomegranate
peels and Hors-tail powder, each two drams; Alum and burnt Vitriol, each a
dram: make a Powder.

Or: Take Galls, roots of Birthwort, Comfry, Pine barks, or roots of
five-leav'd Grass, each two ounces; Sideritis, Goose-grass, Sumach, Myrtle
berries or Grape stones, each two drams; burnt Sponge or wool a dram, make a
Powder for an Emplaster. you may add powder of stones of Myrobalans, red
Kermes, Molochit is stone or Millstone.

Or: Take Colophony, Mummy, Dragons blood, each half an ounce; Ceruss, Litharge
or Tutty, each two drams; Lead two drams, Blatta byzantinc, Moloch stone or
Galactites, each a dram; fine flower an ounce, with white of an Eg make a
Plaster.

In moist Wounds, use Emplasters of Mastich, Mummy, Aloes, and some of the
aforesaid with Turpentine.

Or this usual. Take Birthwort roots half an ounce, Sanguis Draconis an ounce,
Gum Elemy two ounces, Rosin three ounces, with Turpentine make a Plaster.

Or: Take Bitumen, Colophony, Frankincense, each an ounce; red Lead, Sulphur,
Ceruss, each half an ounce; burnt Alum two drams, Coral a dram, Barley flour
an ounce, with Gum Traganth or Izing-glass in water of Hors-tail, or Plantane
and a little Vinegar: make a Plaster.

Also Ointments: As, Take Mastich, Sarcocol, Frankincense, Aloes, each two
drams; Saffron a dram, Turpentine six ounces, Rosin two ounces, Wax three
ounces.

Or use Vngentum Aureum made of Frankincense, Mastich, Colophony, Turpentine,
Saffron, Oil and Wax.

Or: Take Bole an ounce, Sanguis Draconis, Comfrey roots, each half an ounce;
Mastich, Frankincense, Gum Arabic, each two drams; Mummy three drams, with Oil
of Roses and Rosin make a Plaster.

Or: Take Aloes, Sarcocol, Sagapen, Ammoniack, Galbanum, Bdellium, Mastich,
Frankincense, Pitch, Bole, Sanguie Draconis equal parts; with Turpentine and
Oil and Blood of a red haird man, boil them to an Ointment.

This is a great Drier. Take Turpentine and Wax, each half a pound; Oil of
Juniper and Bays, each an ounce; Oil of yolks of Eggs an ounce, Frankincense
two ounces, Mastich an ounce, Lead stone and Calaminaris, each half an ounce;
Vitriol and Alum, each six drams, Ceruss and Litharge, each half an ounce:
with Rosin make a Plaster or Ointment.

Oppodaldoch. Take Litharge a pound, Cadmia three ounces, Colophony four
ounces, Wax a pound, Oil a pint and an half, boil them, and add Ammoniack,
Galbanum, Edellium, Sagapen, Opopanax dissolved in Vinegar an ounce and half,
Oil of Bays and St John's wort, or Worms, an ounce, Tupentine half a pound:
boil and stir them, when they are taken off from the Fire, add Mastich,
Frankincense, Myrrh, Mummmy and Asphaltum each an ounce; with Oils, Crocue
Martis and flour of Antimony, each half an ounce; Amber and Lead stone to draw
out things fixed an ounce, make a Plaster.

Or: Take both Comfreys roots and all, five-leav'd Grass, Plantane, Shepherds
purse, Mous-ear, Burnet, Yarrow, Vervain, Dogs-tongue, Bettony, in all six
handfuls; Earthworms thirty: cut and bruise them, add red Wine a pint, Aqua
vitae an ounce: boil them to the consumption of the Wine, strain and add Gum
Elemi, Frankincense, Mastich, Sarcocol, each an ounce and an half; Izing-Glass,
Sanguis Draconis, each an ounce; Myrrh half an ounce, Turpentine two ounces,
with Pitch and Wax make a Plaster.

Or thus: Take Birthwort roots, Comfrey, five-leav'd Grass three ounces,
Hors-tail, Cypress Nuts, Myrtle berries, Galls, Pomegranate flowers, red Roses,
St John's wort flowers each two ounces, Gum Elemi, Sarcocol, Pine, Galbanum,
Ammoniack, Mummy, Opopanax each three ounces, Colophony, Sanguis Draconis,
dried Goats blood, each an ounce; Oylof Roses omphacine, Olive or Myrtles,
Grease of a Badger each an ounce, with Rosin, Pitch, and Wax, make a Plaster.

Ointment of Tobacco. Take green Tobacco Leaves eight ounces, Plantane four
ounces, fresh Butter six ounces: Insuse herbs bruised, in red Wine all night,
in the morning boil them with Butter at a gentle Fire till the Wine and Juyces
be consumed, add powder of Gentian half an ounce, with Wax make a Saffron
colored Ointment.

Another good in Nervous parts: Take Comfrey roots two ounces,, Birthwort roots
an ounce, Sulphur-wort roots half an ounce, Plantane, Bugloss, Vervain, Burnet,
Yarrow, Dogstongue, Anagall is with the red flower, Agrimony Hors-tail, each a
handful; cut, and bruise, and boil them in Sack till it be thick, stamp them
and heat them again, adding Wax, Rosin, Pitch a pound, stir them til they
dissolve, boil them, and when they are off the Fire, add Mastich an ounce and
an half, Galbanum dissolved in vinegar an ounce, Turpentine a pound: stir them
til they be like a Plaster.

The Plaster made of Worms. Take six handful of the herbs mentioned roots and
all, Earthworms half a pound, boil them in Wine and Oil, strain them, and add
Gum Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Opopanax, each an ounce and an half; Pitch and
Asphaltum, each two ounces; Turpentine half an ounce, Stags Suet eight ounces,
boil them again to an Emplaster add Mastich and Frankincense each half an ounce.

Against the Tendons cut. Take roots of Daffodil an ounce, roots of Calamus
half an ounce, Costus two drams, flowers of Chamoemel, Roses, Lavendar,
Stoechas, St. John's wort, Sage, each a pugil; Earthworms, thirty, boil them in
Wine and Oil, adding Oil of Indian Nuts, strain them, and add Labdanum an
ounce, red Storax and Calamita, each an ounce: with Wax make an Ointment.

Powder of Earthworms and Honey is good in wounded Nerves.

And powder of burnt Bones, especially of Men, with powder of burnt Lead is
good also to be sprinkled on, or with Honey.

Or Snayls stamped with Frankincense and Myrrh.

These following are good in wounds of the Head.

Emplaster of Bettony, or Cerot of Nicolas made of Bettony, Mastich,
Frankincense, Mummy, Rosin, Turpentine, Wax.

Or the same composition, except Mummy, with Burnet, Agrimony, Sage,
Pennyroyal, Yarrow, Comfrey, Gallitricum, Orris roots, Birthwort, Gum Elemi,
Oil of Fir tree and Vine.

Or an Emplaster of the juice of Bettony, Wax, Rosin and Turpentine.

Or de Janua Mesues made of Juice of Bettony, Plantane, Smallage, Rosin,
Turpentine, Pitch, Wax.

Or Gratia Dei, or Cerot of Nicolas called Divine good for all wounds, made of
Bettony, Vervain, Burnet, Mastich and Wax.

Or that of Peter de Argelata, that besides the last has Comfrey, Centaury,
St. John's wort, Hedg-hysop, Olibanum, Myrrh, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Birthwort.

Or Catagmaticum of Andromachus by Galen is good against broken Bone in the
Head, or the Emplaster of Squils by Crito.

They know if the Skull be broken, by laying a Plaster of Frankincense,
Labdanum and Wax, after the Head is shaven upon the Contusion, if it be dried
in any part, there is the fracture.

These are the usual Plasters for wounds in the Nerves.

Nervinum of Vigo made of roots of Madder, Bettony, Rosemary, Hors-tail,
Centaury leaves and seeds, of St. John's wort, Earthworms, Litharge, red Lead,
Mastich, Gum Elemi, Sagapenum, Galbanum, Amoniacum, Pitch, Rosin, Turpentine,
Calves Suet, and Goats; Oil of Chamaemel, Roses, Mastich, Turpentine, Linseed,
Vinegar and Wine.

Galen mentions also Aegyptiacum of Andromachus and that of Philogonus.

And the green Plaster of Dinus, and that of Machaeron. And Avicens Plaster of
Flax, and that of Minium by Vigo and Massa.

If the Bones be hurt any ways, Oxycroceum is good, as that of Nicolas made of
Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Myrrh, Frankincense, Mastich, Colophony, Rosin, Pitch,
Wax, Vinegar, Saffron.

Or the Oxycroceum of Leyden that has besides the former, Litharge, Bole,
Alum, Storax, red and liquid.

Vigoes Oxycroceum is made of Litharge, Minium, Bole, sealed Earth, Myrrh,
Frankincense, Mastich, Rosin, Suet, astringent Oils and Juyces, Ash, Myrtle,
Comsrey.

Or the Sparadrap of the Surgeons for hurt Bones, which is Linen dipped in
Oil and Wax, Ceruss and Labdanum, Litharge and Myrrh, Alum and Camphire, or
Sanguis Draconis, Mummy, Minium, Mastich.

Or Natural Balsom, or that which is like it, which is of excellent virtue to
heal wounds.

Or Artificial Oils with Lint or Tents to keep the wounds open called Balsoms
by the Surgeons.

Oil of Nut, being greasy will rather hurt than heal used alone: except it be
old, and mixed with Wine and Salt Also Oil of yolks of Eggs is good, or Oil of
Myrrh and Rosins which are good alone.

In great wounds, use Oils with these drying Glutinaters, as Oil of St. John's
wort, Adders tongue, Moulin, Sanicle, Lemmons, Paul's Bettony, Pyrola, wild
Sage, Fruit of Monordia, Olive, Lineseed, Roses omphacine, Myrtles, Mastich
boiled and mixed with Turpentine and Wax.

Or make this Balsom of Pouders of Herbs. Take Comfrey roots, bark of the root
of Elm, each three ounces; tops of St. John's wort and Centaury the less with
the flowers, each two handfuls; Self-heal, Bettony, Yarrow, each a handful; red
Roses a pugil, Earthworms ten, Sack four ounces, Turpentine two ounces: let
them Infuse hot, or boil and strain out the Oil, or still out a Liquor.

Or add Hors-tail, Celondine, leaves of Arbutum and Elm flowers, of Chamaemel
and Verbascum, and in Headwounds Sage, Rosemary a handful, Nutmeg half an
ounce: with more Wine and Turpentine and Oil: boil or distill them.

Or: Take flowers of St. John's wort in Oil and Wine: put them in the Sun, then
in a Horse Dunghill fourteen days, add Turpentine, Myrrh, Mastich: let them
boil, strain out the Oil: this is Balsom of St. John's wort so excellent in
Wounds.

Or take the Ingredients of the first or second Balsom, and mix them with the
following, and make an Oil by boiling or distilling.

Or thus: Take Frankincense, Myrrh, Galbanum or Bdellium, Gum Elemi or Ivy,
Myrrh, Aloes poudered, each half an ounce; Oil a pint, Turpentine two ounces,
Aqua vitae an ounce and an half, boil them gently, and strain off the Oil, if
at the conclusion of boiling, you do add half an ounce of Verdigreese, it will
be green and beter.

Or: Take the pouders above mentioned, and with as much Rosin of Turpentine,
distill a Water first, then an Oil.

Or: Take the pouders aforesaid three ounces, add Mummy, Gum Arabic,
Sagapenum, Sarcocol, Sanguis Draconis, Opopanax, each half an ounce; Labdanum,
Benjamin, Storax Calamita, each two drams; Amber six drams, Spike three drams,
Storax liquid two drams, Turpentine as much as all: distill them. This Balsom
will be better with Verdigreese.

Some add Spices, that Balsomes may be good in cold Diseases, and pleasant, as
Nutmeg, Cloves, Cinnamon, Galangal, Cubebs, Wood Aloes, Zedoary, which do
little for wounds: also Musk, and Ambergreese, others ad Castor and Euphorbium,
for cold Causes.

So make a Balsom of Rhubarb, oil of Roses, or Worms with Frankincense,
Mastick, Opoponax, Camphire by boiling and straining. Or Take: old Oil a pint,
Wine half a pint, juice of Daffadil, and Sideritis, each three ounces;
Turpentine two ounces, Gum Elemi, Frankincense, Mastick, each an ounce and
half; Sanguis Draconis, Aloes, each an ounce; Roots of Comfrey, and Birthwort,
each six drams; flowers of St Johnswort, half an ounce, boil them gently, and
strain out the oil.

Or, Take Common Oil, or of Linsced, eight ounces, Oil of Bays two ounces, Oil
of Turpentine an ounce, Oil of Juniper berries distilled, or of Spike, or
Petroleum, half an ounce, Turpentine, two ounces, Colophony, Mastick, each an
ounce; Aloes, three drams, burnt Brass two drams, white Calacanthum, a a dram:
Set them hot in a brass Vessel stirring them till they are green, strain it, or
boil it and add Verdigreace three drams, add Oil of Cloves.

Another Balsome that cures presently, Take Liquid Storax, Myrrh, Sanguis
Draconis, Carpobalsome, Gum Arabic, Sarcocol, Bdellium, Opopanax, Aloes
Hepatick, each a dram; Oil of Mastick two drams, Venice, Turpentine, as much as
all, digest them eight days in a hot place, then distill them.

The Chemists Balsamum: Take flowers of Sulphur thrice calcinated, two ounces,
Camphire, a dram and half, powder them, add Oil of Turpentine, four ounces,
distill an Oil.

Liquid Varnish is added such as Joyners use; A Balsome, Take, Oil of Linseed a
pint, Gum of Varnish, Mastich, each an ounce and half; Frankincense half an
ounce, Litharge an ounce, Crystal poudered or burnt Bones, half an ounce,
white Calcanthum, three drams, boil them gently, add Turpentine, oil of Spike
or Petroleum, each half an ounce; and strain it adding Verdigrease two drams,
this is our Balsome and it is excellent.

Turpentine with Yolks of Eggs, and Honey, cures small Wounds.

Or use Juyces of Herbs, with Honey, Yolks of Eggs, and Turpentine, with
drying Pouders mentioned.

Or, Take Juice of Roses, Plantane, each two ounces; Vinegar an ounce, Oil of
Roses Omphacin, three ounces, Oil of Yolks of Eggs and Turpentine, each an
ounce; boil them to the Consumption of the Juyces, add Litharge, Ceruse, Tutty,
each two drams, Alum, a dram, Omphacium, three drams, and a little Wax.

Or use Juice of Tobacco, with oil, and Turpentine, Pitch, and wax boiled, this
is in great request.

Juice of Nettles and Urine cures wounds wonderfully.

For Head wounds, Take, Juice of Bettony six ounces, Oil of Roses, Turpentine,
Wax, each two ounces, Woman's Milk, or Butter, Wine, or Vinegar, each an ounce
and half; boil them to an ointment, or with Rossin make a Plaster.

Another for the Head, Take Topps of small Centaury, Leaves of woodbine, dried
Bettony poundered, each two ounces and an half; Steep them in Wine, boil them,
and add Honey two ounces, Milk an ounce, Turpentine and Wax, each six ounces,
boil them till the juices are gone, add Frankincense, Mastick, Gum Arabic or
Elemi, each an ounce, and with Turpentine, make a Plaster.

If the Skull be broken, Take Juice of Vervain, Bettony, Burnet, Periwinkle,
Celandine, Smallage, each an ounce; Turpentine, four ounces, wax two ounces,
boil them til the Juyces be consumed; add Comfrey roots, and round Birthwort,
each half an ounce, Orris roots, two drams, Sarcocol, Myrrh, Mumy, Amber, each
a dram and half, make a Plaster,

Or Take, Honey of Roses two parts, Oil of Roses or of Eggs, one part,
Turpentine half a part, mix and dip a Scarlet Silk therein, and put it into the
Fracture, the Chemists use Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Myrrh.

Some use the inward bark of the Tile Tree, to roll the Wound, or Paper wet in
Wine.

Or Sponge.

Or Spiders Webs to glue small Wounds, and stanch Bood.

Or Puffoyst which dries, and glutinateth.

Or boil, or steep a Rowler in Alum water.

Or Bruise Herbs with Meal.

Or thus, Take, Comfrey roots and Alkanet, Celandine, Centaury, Acrons, beat
them with Oil of Roses, and Grease.

Fomentatations are made or Injections of Comfrey, Bugle, Selfeheal, or
Saracens consound, Rock Comfrey, Sideritis, St John's Wort, Pyrola, Adders
tongue, Crowfoot, Yarrow, Achillea, Mousear, Dogs tongue, Burnet, Agrimony,
Horstaile, Vervain, Strawberry leaves, Paul's Bettony, Hedg-Hyssop, Scordium,
Woad, five leaved Grass, Centaury the less, Eupatorium, Lysimachia, Groundpine,
great Celandine, Tobacco, also of Birthwort, Tormentile, Snake-weed, Smyrnus,
Lycopsis, Centaury the great, Poterium, Daffadil roots, bark of Elm, Tile
Tree, Pine; Leaves of Cypress, Myrtles, Oaks, Elm, Medlars, Cornil, pear tree,
Sumach, Cistus, Helianthemum, Verbascum, Shepherds purse, Plantane, Lonchitis,
Moonwort, Vitex, Polyenemus, wild Coleworts, Anagallis, Solomans seals,
Polygonum, Goosgrass, Clymenus, Argemone, great white Bottles, Herb Trinity,
Balsam, Conyza, Erigerus, Goats beard, Bettony, Sage, Polymontane, Rosemary,
and Roses, Flowers of Labrusca, Myrtle seeds, Juniper Berries, Acrons, Dates.
Boil them in Water or Wine, adding Vinegar, and drying Pouders and Alum.

Or wash Wounds with the distilled water of them.

Or distill this, Take, Juice of Plantane, Agrimony, St Iohns-wort, twelve
ounces, white Wine, three ounces, Alum, three ounces, Mastich, Frankincense,
each half an ounce, Orpiment a dram, whites of two Eggs, Destill a water.

Or you may still a water with a strong Fire out of powder of Bricks, and Wax
washed often in Wine.

Some use the water that is in the Leaves of Elm.

You may make fine Pouders with Alum, to sprinkle upon Wounds of the
Ingredients, for the Plaster.

Or for the Head, especially if the Skul be broken, of Orris, Birthwort, Flower
of Orobus, and Frankincense, Myrrh, and Sarcocol, or Aloes and Sanguis
Draconis, or of bark of Pitch tree, and of All-heal roots, and Capers, and
Cypress roots, and when there are scales of Bones, in the wound, use scales of
Brass, Pumice stone, and Crocus Martis in powder, and for the Head, grains of
Kermes, Saunders, Cypress nuts and Myrtles, and when you will dry more, Tutty
and Antimony.

If the Brain appear, Sprinkle Aloes alone.

Man's Blood, or Goats dried, is a good Powder to glutinate wounds.

Or the red Liquor of the Boodstone, rubbed upon a whet-stone, or the white
Liquor of the Galactitis dried.

There are also Potions to cure wounds, called Vulnerary, good not only when
they pierce to the Stomach, and parts whither they can reach, but for wounds in
the Breast, and other parts; and some say these Potions are of that sorce that
they will sweat out at the wound, and they will be under the Skin, til it is
opened to let them out, if they be given to men not wounded, this mistake came
from some Humor, that they saw like the Potion about the Wound, but experience
teaches us, that they are of great force to heal wounds, but how we doubt. but
it is probable they do it by a drying quality, which though it comes more
easily to inward wounds, may come also to outward.

These Decoctions are made of experienced Plants, boiled in white Wine, and
taken Morning and Evening, or as much of the Powder as you can take up with
three fingers, in white Wine boiled to the third or fourth part, or in Ale,
Honey is usually added, and they may be made into Syrup.

The Decoction of Pyrola alone is the best, or with Sanicle, or Saracons
consound, or Ladies-mantle.

Or of wild Angelica in Wine used inwardly and outwardly, which is good against
Ulcers.

Or: Take Saracens consound, Sanicle, Mugwort and Burnet: boil them.

Or Saracens consound Beets, wild Angelica stalks Sanicle, Ladies-mantle,
Pyrola.

Or: Take Comfrey, Tormentil and Madder roots, Pyrola, Ladies-mantle, Srawberry
leaves, Agrimony, Yarrow, Horstail, Dogs-tongue, Avens, Bettony, Periwinckle,
Burnet, Mous-ear, Golden-rod: boil them.

Or add to them Consolida the less, Adders-tongue, Knot-grass, Solomons-seal,
Herb-trinity, Birthwort, Snakeweed, white Dittany, roots of Costus, Sun flower,
Valerian, Sowbread, Balsamina, Lungwort, wild Tanfie, Solsequium, Bears-ear,
Moonwort, Sion Craterae or wild Parsley, Moutain-sage, Nep, Hysop, Pennyroyal,
the lesser Centaury and Gentian, some boil Cray-fish therewith.

Or: Take Pyrola, Saracens eonsound, Beets, wild Angelica, Carduus, Agrimony,
Bettony, sprigs of Savin: take a spoonful of these in Powder, boil it in Wine,
drink two ounces thrice a day fasting. this will drive away any thing out of a
Wound, and cures Ulcers.

This is approved by the Italians. Take Comfrey, Plantane roots, Dove foot,
Dogs-tongue, each a handful; Burnet, Mous-ear, Avens, red Coleworts, Agrimony,
each half a handful: boil them in red Wine, add Honey, strain and drink thereof
every morning.

Or thus: Take red Coleworts, Madder, Herb Robert, Plantane, Hemp,
Southernwood, Tansie, Rocket seed, Smallage, Parsley and Fennel seed: bruise
and cut them: boil them in Wine, add Honey; give it morning and evening.

Another: Take the stalks of red Mugwort, leaves of white Daisies, Sanicle,
Pyrola, Ladies-mantle, Bettony, Sage, Lavender, Mummy half an ounce: boil them,
some add Castor with great success.

A ra^e secret experienced in Gunshot. Take Bayberries, roots of round
Birthwort, each a dram; Cray-fish drieed in an Oven a dram and an half,
Self-heal dried half an ounce: make a Powder, boil it in three pints of white
Wine, to the consumption of one pint, drink an ounce thrice a day, and wash or
inject into the Wound.

Another against Gunshot when the bones are broken: Take Comfrey roots an
ounce and an half, Birthwort an ounce, Sowbread and Serpentaria roots, each
half an ounce; Selfheal and Herb Robert, each a handful; Savin half a handful,
Mummy two drams, Crabs Eyes half an ounce, Galangal two drams: boil them in
white Wine.

In Head-wounds use the the Decoction of Bettony, Lilly of the Valleys, Paul's
Bettony, Celandine, Persicaria, Periwinkle, Centaury the less, Nutmeg, Mace and
Galangal.

For wounds in the Breast, boil five-leav'd Grass, Avens, Comfrey, Madder,
Paul's Bettony, Burnet, Mugwort, Pellitory of the wall, Hemp, Cressio, red
Coleworts, Chamaemel flowers, Violets, purple Aramanthus or Marjoram, Raisons.

In wounds of the Stomach, give things to stop blood and heal, as Bole,
Comfrey, Galangal in red Wine.

In Wounds of the Intestines, give Hors-tail roots and all, and Ground Ivy,
boil them in Water according to Dioscorides.

Mathiolus gives Heifers dung, and the hair under the belly of an Hare boiled
with Honey the quantity of a Bean, often.

You may give the Juyces of Herbs mentioned, or steep them in Wine or Water, as
Comfrey roots and the like, adding Honey.

Or stamp red Coleworts and Hemp in Wine and drink the straining.

Stilled Waters are not so strong but they do something especially a draught of
Water of St. John's wort, or Saracens consound, morning and evening.

Or six ounces of the water of Horf-tail or Sowbread with Sugar for wounds in
the Intestines according to Mathiolus.

You may put pouders into the Decoctions mentioned, as of Hedg-hysop a dram,
Crabs Eyes half an ounce, Spermacaeti six drams, Nux Vomiea a dram and an half,
with Zedoary Macs and Galangal.

In Breast wounds give powder of Egshels, and Crabs Eyes with Poppy water.

When the Entrals are wounded, give a spoonful of powder of Momordica.

You may give also every morning half a dram of these Plants conferved with
Honey.

Or Oil of Juniper in Drink to cure inward wounds.

Or Oil of Crocus Martis and Essence of Coral, each a scruple; with water of
Frog-spawn is given by Quercetan to stanch inward bleeding.

This red Oynrment is excellent to be drunk in internal wounds. Take Sanicle,
Pyrola, Agrimony, Horehound, each two handfuls; Tormentil roots two ounces,
Comfrey roots, Castor, each an ounce; Alkanet roots half a pound, fresh Butter
six pound, red Wine twenty two ounces: boil them according to Art, and add
Sperma caeti two ounces: make an Ointment.

Here we may speak of Drinks against Bruises, by Strokes or Falls, which are to
dissolve congealed blood, and to begin at the first, when there is a wound, or
only a tumor from the Contusion, or a pain without any appearance, as we showed
in Tumors and Contusions. They are made of the following ingredients.

Ashes of Tile tree with Mummy, or mummy alone.

Or: Take Mummy two drams, Rheubarb a dram and an half, or Monks Rheubarb or
Centaury rinds, of citrine Morobalans, Madder roots an ounce: make a Powder,
give two drams with the Broth of a black Chicken boiled with the Feathers on
after, it is gutted.

When we suspect clotted Blood to be about the mesaraicks, Stomach or Guts,
then we give a dram of the Pouor four scruples with Cassia, Diaprunis solutive
an ounce, some add Agarick.

In fear of a Fracture and Bleeding to five drams of this we put a dram of
Bole, Sanguis Draconis or sealed Earth, with half a dram of Sperma caeti. or
powder of Snakeweed, Tormentil, flowers of St. John's wort, great Cyanus or
White-bottle, Crabs Eyes a dram, with a Decoction of Wine, and Nutmeg, Fennel
seed and Sugar.

Decoctions also of Comfrey roots, Birthwort, Madder, Vincetox, Snakeweed,
Tormentil, Baccharus or Ladies-Glove.

Or Yarrow, Self-heal, Sanicle, Bears-ear, Cyamus major or White-bottles,
Mousear, Shepheards-rod, wild Tansie, Ladies-mantle, Ophris, Moonwort, Plantane.

The powder of Vinca pervinca or Periwincle and Mugwort are approved with
Angelica and Coleworts if a Rib be broken.

Some boil wound herbs in fresh Butter and a little Wine, and give a dram of it
strained, in hot Broth or Ale, and anoint the part pained with the same.

And Waters of Plantane, Sowbread, Comfrey and Bettony.

Discorides gives a dram of the Juice of Gentian.

A small wound with a little orifice is a puncture, The Cure of small Punctures
in diverse parts, and in the Nerves.
and must be cured as a Wound, if it be only in the skin and flesh it is less
difficult, but if it be in the Nervs or Membranes, or any nervous part very
sensible, it is worse, because it easily causes Convulsion, and hurt of
motion. If a Nerve be pricked it is seldom because it is little and round and
gives way, except the Puncture be in the back parts, where the Nervs are
larger, as in the Arms, and Legs, therefore Chyrurgeons say that wounds behind
are harder to be cured then before: But if a Puncture be in the great Muscles,
or the Heads thereof, Punctures may be oftener then in the Nervs alone, but
these are called Punctures of Nervs also. When Punctures reach into the Belly
or Breast, they are dangerous or deadly, if they hurt the Entrails as we showed
in large wounds, and not only so, but by reason of the blood falling into the
Caviites of the body, and congeals and putrisies and therefore the Chyrurgeons
say it is an evil Sign to bleed inwardly.

For Cure you must use Evacuations, and Revulsions, by bleeding, if need be as
in large vvounds, and keep the body clean by a good Diet.

The Method of curing a Puncture, is if any thing stick there to take it
carefully away presently, or by degrees, or to draw it out by applications, and
if they be deep in, they will not come forth til there is suppuration, and then
they will come forth with the matter. Then you must not close the Orifice, as
in large wounds, but rather enlarge it, and keep it open, least the blood that
flows thither being in a straight place, should cause Inflammation, or the
moisture or Excrements retained, should hinder the Cure, and cause Accidents,
and that whatsoever remains, may come forth more easily: Thirdly you must
consolidate with driers that consume the moist humors, and so help nature,
which will as I showed cure all wounds alone, if Impediments be removed; these
are called Glutmaters, neither need you use such strait Ligatures as in large
wounds, let the Medicines be Emplastick and Unctious, to keep open the Orifice,
til it be cured; For if they be bad dry and binding, they would too soon close
the Orifice, and hinder the cure: And with these Remedies, we may mix things
that draw things out, they are as follows,

We pull out things by Mannual operation, and Instruments, as Thorns and Darts,
and the broken pieces that stick in the body, by pricking the skin and forcing
them out with some of the flesh, and then suck the wound: by this means the
Vulgar cure all small ordinary Punctures.

And if the things stick fast and deep, and cause great pain and fear of
Inflammation, and other mischief, we cut the Orifice larger.

If the wound will endure it without pain, keep the Orifice open with a small
Tent armed with Medicines.

Punctures are commonly cured with Plasters alone, which Mollify the swollen
Lips, and Orifice, and dry it by degrees, and keep it open til it fall away of
it self, after the wound is healed: These plasters must not dry so much as in
great and foul wounds, but keep their strength and not be so often changed, but
one may serve many days, and I have known that same plaster to cure a second
wound, and if the Puncture pass through the member, a Plaster must be before
and behind.

There are Emplasters a purpose for Punctures which dry and draw out things
that stick in them, the Germans call them stitch plasters. we shall tell you
the best and easiest way to be made, Take, Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh,
Colophony, Mummy, each an ounce, Camphire two drams, Saffron a dram, Thymalus
grease an ounce, Wax four ounces, Pitch an ounce, melt the three last, and add
the rest, and make a Plaster.

Or, Take Litharge a pound, Cadmia four ounces, Oil Olive, a pint, Oil of Bays
four ounces, boil them to a thickness add Gum Galbanum, Ammoniak and Bdellium,
each two ounces boiled in Vinegar til it be consumed, Wax and Turpentine, each
half a pound; fat of the fish Thymalus an ounce: stir them hot, and add by
degrees Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, each an ounce; make a Plaster.

Or: Take Wax, Pitch, Rosin, Turpentine, Oil, each four ounces; Oil of Bays or
worms or Eggs, fat of Thymalus, each an ounce and an half; melt them, and while
they are hot, add Galbanum and Opopanax dissolved in Aqua vitae, powder of
Colophony, Bitumen, Mummy, Mastick, Frankincense, Myrrh, each an ounce;
Litharge, Ceruss, each six drams; Lapis Calaminaris, Lodestone, Boodstone,
Coral or mother of pearl, Bole or sealed Earth, Chalcanthum, Camphire, each
half an ounce; roots of Birthwort, Comfrey and powder of Earthworms, each two
drams; Saffron a dram, moisten them with fat of Thymalus: make a Plaster.

Another to draw out splinters that are fixed: Take Litharge Sulphur each an
ounce; Minium and scales of Brass, each six drams; Alum, Chalcitis, half an
ounce; Lodestone, red Coral, each two drams; sealed Earth a dram and an half,
roots of Birthwort, Dragons, Sowbread, Juniper berries and Nettle seed, each a
dram; Galbanum dislolved in Vinegar an ounce, Amber six drams, Frankincense,
mastich, myrrh, mummy, Opopanax, each half an ounce; Propolis an ounce and an
half: with Turpentine, Pitch, and old wax make a Plaster, if you add Oil of
Turpentine, Myrrh, Sulphur, Amber, it will be better.

The Plaster of Andromachus draws out things, as Avicen with other things has
the head of a Lizard, milk of the Mulberry tree, and Berries found in the
Palmtree.

Half an ounce of Verdigreese makes these Plasters stronger, or two drams of
Oil of Juniper, Spike, or Cloves.

The black Plaster for the same is made of Olibanum, Myrrh, Mummy, Sanguis
Draconis, Corals, Lodestone, Ceruss, Roman and white Vitriol, Earthworms,
Camphire, Oil of Roses and of Eggs, of Spike, Juniper, grease of a Hen or
Thymalus, Colophony, Turpentine, Pitch, Wax.

Against Punctures in the Nerves and Nervous parts at first: Take Bean flower
or of Lentils, powder of Althaea roots each three ounces; Daffodils, two or
three roots, Lilly one root, boil them in Wine and stamp them with Turpentine
dissolved with the Yolk of an Eg half an ounce, Honey two drams, Saffron half a
dram, Oil of St. John's wort and wax, make a Plaster.

Or: Take St. John's wort and Centaury the less, each two handfuls; Bettony,
Rosemary, Self-heal, Plantane, mous-ear, each a handful; Chamaemel and Dil
flowers, each a pugil; Daffodil, Comfrey and madder roots, each an ounce: slice
them, Earthworms washed in Wine twenty, Oil of Sack, each a pint and an half:
boil them, strain off the Oil, add three ounces of Deers, Goats, or Sheeps
Suet, Turpentine three ounces, mastich two ounces, Gum Ammoniack, Galbanum,
Sagapenum dissolved in Aqua vitae, each an ounce; Litharge an ounce and an
half, with wax make an Ointment, or with Pitch an Emplaster.

Or use Guido's Plaster of Worms or Diarrhaea.

Or Oils and Punctures of the Nerves.

If the pain be great, pour in hot sallet Oil, or of Chamaemel, Dil, Rue.

Or drop or lay on with a pledget Oil of St. Jhons wort, Turpentine, Worms,
Mastich or Savin, or if the pain be great, Oil of yolks of Eggs, or the fruit
of Momordica.

Or Oil of Lovage with Grease of a Lion and Wax makes a rare Ointment.

Or Oil with Turpentine, Rosin, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Euphorbium or Sulphur
vivum dissolved in it.

Or other Balsoms mentioned in Wounds.

Or apply Turpentine with the yolk of an Egg and Saffron.

Or Leaves of Groundsil, with Frankincense, according to Dioscorides and leaves
of the lesser Dracunculus with Coutchineel.

When the puncture is by a Thorn or Needle, make a Pultis of Hemp leaves with
the white of an Egg and Vinegar.

To draw things fastened in a puncture, use the Plaster of Garlic by Aetius
made of Garlic, Niter, Pitch, marrow of a Deer, Wax and Oil.

Or Leaven and Propolis with Honey and wax.

Or Snails taken out of their shells, and Earthworms bruised or boiled in wine,
and mixed with meal.

Ordinary Flies bruised and applied draw out splinters.

When a Thorn is drawn out, wash with the Decoction of red Pease, or with old
white Wine when the vein is pricked.

Or apply powder of Crabs Eyes, Hartshorn and Earthworms, with Honey and
Turpentine.

Or give the Wound-drink mentioned, for they work so strongly that they will not
only expel from inward but outward parts.

If a puncture suppurate, cure it as an Ulcer.

If there be Inflammation, cure it as a wound with Inflammation. If a
Convulsion or Palsy, or Contraction follow, cure it as is showed in them.

Wounds or Punctures poisoned from a Sword, weapon, Dart, The Cure of venomous
and poisoned wounds Strokes and Bites.
or Bullet poisoned with evil juices, or otherwise: or from biting of Serpents,
weasels, mad Dogs, of which in Hydrophobia or fear of water, or from Scorpions,
Spiders, are according to the Venom better or worse: As when it is from a
Scorpion, it is most dangerous, or when the wound is great which cause great
Accidents, and leave stubborn Ulcers, some have only Heat, and a little Pain,
and are not so bad except that cause inflammation, and so a stubborn Ulcer,
such come from our Snakes and Spiders, which are not so dangerous as these from
Vipers and Phalangies; And the stinging of Bees is such, in all which, though
the Hurt be small, the pain is great.

If the Venom be great you must labor to draw it out, and then cure the
wound; Thus.

Give Antidotes suddenly, to resist poison, and proper, as Treacle,
Mithridate, Antidote of Esdras: Also that of Skinkey, Bloods, Earth of Lemnos,
mentioned by Galen. The Electuary of Asa by Mesue, and others mentioned by
Dioscorides and Nicander.

Or that of Mathiolus, and that so much commended made of Laurel called the
Saxon Antidote, and others mentioned in the Plague and in Madness. And in a
poisoned wound, if you use Bole, earth of Lemnos, and Mummy, they both resist
Poison, and heal.

Or this Decoction that heals and tesists poison, made of Roots of swallow
wort, Valerian, Tormentil, wild Angelica steept in Vinegar, and Leaves of
Scabious, Nettles, small Valerian, Flowers of Conval Lillies, and Perwincle;
boiled in wine.

Or Juice of Dittany, Scorzonera, and Gentian.

Some say that Cocks or Hens dung boiled, expels poison.

That rare Oil of Scorpions of Mathiolus to anoint the pulses and Arteries,
resists all poisons as he says.

Diverse things are applied outward to draw forth poison, as we showed in
pestilent Carbuncles, and when we spoke of the biting of mad Dogs, and against
stinging of Scorpions and Spiders, Burning, Cutting, and Cupping are good.

And things applied that resist Venom.

As this plaster. Take Pigeon or Hens dung an ounce, powder of Dittany two
drams, Niter a dram, with Hares grease Oil of bitter Almonds, and Wax make a
Plaster.

Or this: Take juice of Scaboius, Rue, Onyons roasted, each two ounces; juice
of Anagallis with the purple Flower, Sowbread, each two drams; great Spurge
seeds a dram, Galbanum dissolved in Vinegar six drams, Oil of Amber, Sulphur,
each half an ounce; Oil of Saffron a scruple: with Treacle, Mithridate and
Turpentine make a Plaster.

Galen mentions diverse plasters for venomous wounds and punctures called
Icosij, their Ingredients are to cure wounds.

But this plaster called Diadictamnum is more proper to draw out splints and
poison, and so is Vnguentum Macedonium.

You may find in Dioscorides and Nicander specifical medicines against
particular Venoms, as a bruised Scorpion or the Oil thereof against the sting
of a Scorpion. of biting of mad Dogs we have spoken.

In other Bites or stingings which cause burning rather than, Venom with tumor
and dolor, you must use things accordingly. for stinging of Bees, use Potters
Earth and herbs that abate tumor mentioned in phlegmon, and things mentioned in
Burnings are good against stinging.

For Biting of Fleas and Gnats they cause but a little itching, and a spot and
small tumor, therefore we shall omit them.

In wounds with Saws or rugged weapons the torn flesh must be cut away
presently or taken away with an actual or potential Cautery, The Cure of
wounds unequally divided.
and the wounds made even and cured as others.

If an Ulcer come frm a wound or an Imposthume which we call sordid, The Cure
of plain, hollow, filthy, lousie, eating, spreading and malignant Ulcers.
whether it be plain, hollow or sinewous, and not covered over, or putrid,
lousie, or that sweats out water, or follows a paronychia or Felon; or comes of
foul Juice and nourished therewith which is eating, or spreading, or malignant,
as in the French pox and Elephantiasis, they must be cured alike because in
many things they agree. afterward we shall show the cure of Ulcers that have a
Callus or covering, or flesh, or preternatural tumor.

We showed the cure of Ulcers with Cancer, Carbuncle, Ring-worm and Scabs in
the Cure of Tumors and pustles.

Those Ulcers which come from wounds or Imposthumes the less hollow they are
the sooner they are cured. Foul and lousie Ulcers are hardest especially in
Nervous parts that gleet water, because they make the joints unmovable or
Gangraeene, or the Fellon-ulcer that eats off the Joints of the Fingers when
they are nourished with evil Jnyce, they are worst; as Eating, corroding or
spreading Ulcers, these last long, and are sometimes incurable, especially if
they be in a part depending, as in the Foot so that the humor descends
continually to them, and when they are nourished with a vein adjoining, they
either must not be cured, lest the humor being stopped cause worse accidents, or
cannot. And such as take off the skin, as rotten bark of a tree, are dangerous
by reason of the Bones or Gristles which they foul, as in the Nose and Ears
which destroy the parts. Also malignant Ulcers in Women's privities or Men's
yards are long a curing, and sometimes consume the part. They which from the
French pox are not cured til the Pox is cured, Ulcers in Elephantiasis
continue, increase, and are desperate, as the Disease is.

For Cure of all these you must thus proceed, first with general helps, as
Evacuations when the body is full or foul, by bleeding or purging. then you
must look at the Cause, whether it be a salt, choleric, or waterish humor, and
give things particular for that. as particular Purges often in stubborn Ulcers,
as in the Scab and other Diseases from evil juice. sweating is good to through
out the humors, and cures the French pox and the Ulcers also. And a spare Diet
as shall be showed in the Pox. If a Vein dilated called Varix do nourish an
Ulcer it must be opened to bleed. or the Vein cut off which is more necessary,
as we shall show. In all sorts of Ulcers keep a good Diet and the body, clean
that it may cure the better.

Topics are to be used to remove impediments, for Nature alone must cure as in
other excoriations and wounds. these Impediments are either moisture or filthy
humors, these removed, Nature nourishes the part and heals it up. some
medicines that remove Impediments are Clensers or Driers up of humors more or
less, the gentle Driers breed flesh, the strongest make an Escar. we shall speak
first of them that breed flesh, next of them that make the skin grow.

Medicines that breed flesh are Clensers and Driers that purge the matter that
fouls the Ulcers or eats it away.

The next are dryers, which suck up the moisture which remains in Ulcers after
they are cleansed, these put it into a condition fit to be cured, and breed
flesh, these are called breeders of flesh, as if they did it, as we showed in
wounds; for the Impediments removed, Nature makes flesh of the same
Nourishment, which fills up the Ulcer.

Others are stronger dryers, which destroy the evil Humors that corrupt the
Ulcers, and make them spread; these are seldom used alone, but with clensers,
that also kill Worms if there be any, so that we shall not mention a private
Cure for Worms.

To these Cleansers we add Dryers, which are so moderate that they take away
that Gleeting which remains in Ulcers, after they are cleansed, and make it fit
to produce new flesh. these are called incarnatives, as if they did of their
own force breed it, when Nature did it by being freed from the Impediment of
Moisture, and making a Glue of the Nourishment of the part which is hurt in a
Wound, and flesh in a hollow Ulcer, that grows to the sound part and so fills
it up by degrees, and unites that which was divided. These Incarnatives must
not dry so much as to dry up the Nourishment with the moisture, that is the
Impediment, as when they are to consume a foul Humor, or make a Scarr, nor must
they cleanse nor bind as in wounds, for Ulcers must be filled up with flesh, and
not united as wounds, but of some that cleanse not much nor bind but dry,
Incarnatives may be compounded and one and the same Medicine may cleanse and
heal, more or less, as we shall show.

Unguents or plasters which are applied or put into Ulcers cleanse or dry,
strongly or moderately, and are as follows.

The ointment of the five Meals is the chief cleanser for Ulcers, that is of
Lupines, Orobus, Beans, Wheat, Barley, with Honey, or Sugar, and Vinegar, if
you will cleanse more.

Or this of Smallage, Take Juice of Smallage one part, Honey of Roses two or
three parts, with Turpentine dissolved in the Yolks of Eggs: make an Ointment.

Or boil the Juice with Honey and Beanflower, to an Ointment.

Of Milky Juyces, as of Endive, Succory, Dandelion, Sowthistle, with Juice of
Smallage, Beets, Plantane, Roses, Pellitory, Avens, you may also make cleansing
Ointments.

Or this of bitter Juyces, as Horehound, Wormwood, Centaury, or sharp as
Arsmart, Celandiue, Orris, Onyons, or Squills, with as much Honey of Squills,
Turpentine, and Meal.

To these three you may add Myrrh and Frankincense, to cleanse more, and when
it begins, to be clean; Sarcoocol, or when you will cleanse more, Alum, or
Calcanthum, or burnt Virriol.

Or of the Juyces mentioned, you may make Ointments with Oil as much, with
Honey and Vinegar, boiling them with other Clensers, til the Juices are
consumed, and adding Powder of Gentian, Birthwort, Myrrh.

Aloes with Beasts Gall, and Honey, is a great Clenser in corrupt Ulcers and
lousy.

You may make clensing Ointments of Plants thus: Take Radishes, Onyons, each an
ounce and an half; Gentian and the green bark of Dwarf-Elder, each an ounce;
bark of Capars and Hermodacts, each half an ounce; Wormwood, Horehound,
Celandine, Smallage, each a handful; escape and bruise them, boil them in white
Wine then bruise them again and boil them in a pound of Butter or Oil with the
fourth part Honey to an Ointment.

Or: Take green Orris roots, Colewort leaves and Rue: bruise them, add
Faemigreek meal, Salt, and Honey, and Vinegar.

Or boil Colewort leaves with Bean flowrs for Ulcers in the Breasts, or apply
the roots of Asclepias or Swallowwort, or Clensers bruised.

Or Herb Robert roots and all, in powder boiled in Wine and Oil to a Cataplasm
is good in watery Ulcers. or Rose-cake, or Hors-dung.

Of the Astringent pouders following and Honey you make Ointments with Vinegar
and Oil, or wax and Oil of Roses.

Or when you will cleanse more: Take roots of, Orris, Briony, Sowbread, Dragons,
and use them as before.

Or use Ointment of Agrippa made of Briony, wild Cowcumbers, Squill, Orris,
Fern, Dwarf-Elder.

Or this: Take the powder of the roots mentioned half an ounce, meal of Lupins,
Frankincnese, Aloes, Myrrh, each a dram and an half; Oil omphacine two drams,
Honey of Squils an ounce, Oil of Mastich an ounce and an half, Oil of
Turpentine half an ounce: with Wax make an Ointment, add to make it stronger,
Tartar and Verdigreese.

Or thus: Take Briony roots three drams, Cuckowpint or Dragon roots a dram and
an half, Galls, Savine or Pine bark burnt, a dram, Verdigrease half a dram,
with Honey make an Ointment.

Or this green plaster. Take Verdigreese three drams Myrrh, Frankincense, each
half an ounce; Wax, Rosin, Turpentine, each four drams; make a Plaster, or with
Oil or Suet an Ointment.

Or boil Tartar with Honey.

Or Verdigrease with Honey and Vinegar. or use Aegyptiacum which is best in
filthy Ulcers.

Or Oil of Antimony to cleanse, which because it cures wounds almost incurable,
is called the Wound-oyl, it is thus made. Take Aqua vitae rectified three or
four ounces, Glass of Antimony, Mastich, Frankincense, Aloes, Myrrh, each an
ounce: powder them and let them stand in a warm place in a close vessel, til
they putrify them, distill them by an Alembick increasing the fire by degrees.
first you will have a stinking spirit, then a sweet, keep them close stopped.

Or mix burnt Sal Armoniack with Tartar, Verdigreese and Honey.

There are Ointments called Incarnatives which heal Ulcers when they are
cleansed, Sarcocol and Honey is the chief, to produce flesh by drying.

Or you may make five sorts of Ointments of the five incarnative pouders
mentioned, and of other greater Driers, with Honey of Roses and Turpentine, or
Oil of Mastich, Myrtles or Roses, with wax and Rosin.

To these you may add Colophony, Pitch, Bitumen and Opopanax as much as any of
the rest.

Or you may mix the flesh of Snails with the second and sixth powder, to cloth
the bare Bones with flesh again.

Or use that of Nicodemus by Mesue it is made of the first and second powder of
Aloes, Myrrh, Sarcocol, and Honey and Wine, or the great Basilicon of Mesue;
made of Frankincense, Myrrh, Pitch, Turpentine, Rosin, Wax. That called Aureum
of Mesue is so called made with Colophony and Saffron, and that called
Unguentum Fuscum of Nicolas is like them, which has Galbanum and Sagapenum,
and the Tripharmacum of Mesue, and Tetrapharmacum of Galen with Myrrh,
Sarcocol, and Orris added, or you may use Ceroneum made of many of the same
ingredients and of Litharge and Alum.

You may use other Plasters and Ointments which glutinate wounds by drying,
choosing the least astringent or those that hinder fluxes of humors which make
the Ulcers ill habited.

As, Take Galls, Pomegranate flowers, each half an ounce; Frankincense, Aloes,
each two drams with Honey.

If Ulcers are well cleansed you may cure them with Plants.

Thus: Take Daffodil and Comfrey roots, each two ounces; Vervain, Burnet,
Mous-ear, St. John's wort, and small Centaury, each a handful: or other
Wound-herbs, boil them in Wine; then take of the thinnest part after they are
well stamped six ounces: add Honey and Turpentine, each two ounces; of the
first, second or third Powder an ounce and half; make an Ointment.

Or thus: Take Burnet, Bettony, Vervain, each a handful; cut and boil them in
Wine to the consumption of two parts, strain it, add Rosin half an ounce, Goats
suet two drams, Wax five ounces, boil them thick. when they are cold, ad powder
of Mastich two ounces and an half, Aloes half an ounce: make a Plaster.

Or thus: Take juice of Agrimony Vervain, Plantane and Daffodil roots four
ounces, Wine two ounces, Oil of Mastich two ounces, Oil of Roses an ounce,
Honey an ounce and an half, Turpentins an ounce: boil them a little, add the
second or third Incarnative powder half an ounce, Gum Elemi a dram: make an
Ointment.

There are others that cleanse and dry more or less, which alone cure not only
small, but foul and malignant Ulcers. As,

These following dry more than cleanse. the gentlest is made of Litharge and
Ceruss with Oil of Roses or Myrtles, stird in a Leaden Mortar, with a little
Camphire and Gum Traganth infused, if there be pain.

Or of Litharge a pound, Oil and Vinegar two pints boiled to a Plaster, or an
Ointment, this is called Galen's Oxeleum. If you take Wine instead of Vinegar,
it is called Oinelaeum, if Water, Hydreleum.

This dries more. Take Litharge and Oil, each a pound; Cadmia an ounce: boil
them, add Gum Ammoniack and Bdellium, each an ounce; Galbanum and Opopanax,
each half an ounce; dissolve in Vinegar, Wax half a pound at last, add roots of
Comphrey, round Birthwort, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, each an ounce: make a
Plaster.

Or: Take Litharge an ounce and an half: boil them til they are a little black,
add Galbanum, Ammoniack, Bdellium, Opopanax dissolved in Vinegar, each half an
ounce; Colophony Myrrh, Mastich, Erankincense, each two drams; Tartar a dram,
with Wax make a Plaster.

Or use the Plaster of Lapis Calaminaris made of Cadmia, Litharge, Tutty,
Ceruss, Frankincense, Mastich, Myrrh, Camphire, Turpentine, Suet.

Or the Ointment called Vnguentum Rubrum, thus: Take red Lead three drams,
Litharge two drams, Ceruss a dram and an half, of both Cadmias, each a dram;
Oil of Roses three ounces, Turpentine half an ounce, Camphire a scruple.

Another of Dogs Dung: Take white Dogs dung two ounces, Litharge, Ceruss each
an ounce; Bole six drams, Frankincense, Mastich, each two drams; Bean meal an
ounce, with Honey, Goats Suet and Vinegar make a Plaster.

Or: Take Tutty prepared two drams, Litharge, burnt Lead, Boodstone, each a
dram; Aloes a dram and an half, Sanguis Draconis, Sarcocol, Galbanum, each a
dram; with Oil of Roses and Wax make an Ointment.

Or: Take Litharge, Cadmia, or Tutty, Ceruss, burnt and washed Lead or Antimony,
each a dram; Pumice stone two drams, Sarcocol, Myrrh, Colophony, each three
drams: with Honey or Suet make an Ointment.

Or the Ointment of Lead made of burnt Lead, Antimony, Litharge, Ceruss, Oil of
Roses; is good in malignant Ulcers.

For a venomous Fellon: Take Antimony a dram, burnt Lead, and washed Ceruss,
each half a dram; Tutty prepared half an ounce, Oil of Mastich, and Omphacine,
each two ounces; white Wax and Rosin, each an ounce: make a soft Plaster.

These Plasters will dry more with two drams of burnt Brass, Verdigreese a dram,
or burnt Vitriol.

These cleanse more than dry. Take Litharge boiled in Vinegar two ounces, burnt
Brass a dram, Bole two drams, Rosin, Wax, each two ounces; with Hogs grease
four ounces, make an Ointment.

Or: Take Oil of Roses an ounce and an half, Oil Omphacine half an ounce,
Cadmia and Tutty, each a dram and half; rust of Brass and Vitriol, each a dram;
with Rosin.

Or: Take Cadmia, Litharge, Ceruss, Mastich, Frankincense, mother of Pearl,
Coral, Vitriol, each alike; to four ounces, add five ounces of Wax, Colophony,
or Turpentine four ounces: make a Plaster.

Or: Take Oil of Antimony, Wax, Myrrh, digest them in Balneo fifteen days, it
is a good Balsom against malignant and perverse Ulcers.

A Brain-drying Ointment. Take Oil, May-butter, Deers suet, marrow of Ox bones,
Turpentine, each two ounces; Litharge, Cadmia, each an ounce and half;
Antimony, burnt Lead and burnt Brass, each an ounce; Lodestone, Mastich,
Frankincense, Myrrh, each three drams; powder of Earthworms two drams, or other
drying powder, add wax if need be.

Or: Take of the pouders mentioned a dram, Pomgranate peels, flowers of
Labrusca, Fennel seed, Aloes, Myrrh, Acacia, each a half dram; Bole, Cadmia,
burnt Brass, each a dram; Oesypus or grease of wool, Infusion of Gum Traganth
in Plantane water, each half an ounce with Oil of Roses, Wax, and a scruple of
Saffron make an Ointment.

Or of Plants thus: Take roots of Orris, Birthwort, Turmerick, each two drams;
Pomegranate peels, or flowers, and Galls, each a dram and an half; flowers of
Labrusca, Rose seeds, each a dram; Gourd peels, Savin and Earthworms burnt,
each a dram; Sanguis Draconis and Bitumen, each two drams; rust of Iron three
drams, burns Alum and Chalcitis burnt, each a dram and an half; burnt Coral
two drams, Oil and Suet, each six ounces; Rosin three ounces, with wax make a
Plaster.

Or: Take the Wound Herbs mentioned, Roots, Leaves, and Flowers: boil them in
Wine and Oil: take six ounces strained; add Honey and Rosin: and boil them
again a little, when it is thick, add Powders mentioned, Litharge six drams,
burnt Brass or Rust of Iron two drams: with Wax make an Ointment.

Quicksilver makes these Ointments better against any Malignity, especially
the French Pox. Or: Take Quicksilver an ounce, Turpentine an ounce and half,
Hogs Grease three ounces: stir them well, then add Cadmia, burnt Brass, each
two drams; Sulphur vive three drams, rust of Iron half an ounce.

Another excellent Plaster with which I have often cured perverse Ulcers in the
Legs. Take Litharge, Cadmia, Ceruss, each two drams; Frankincense, Mastch, each
a dram and an half; Birthwort roots a dram, rust of Brass, Sublimate, each half
a dram; Quicksilver three drams: with Turpentine an ounce and an half, Honey
half an ounce, Oil of Roses and juice of Plantane, each two ounces: make a
Plaster.

When an Ulcer is cleansed, heal it with Quicksilver, Turpentine, Sarcocol and
Honey.

Apostolorum of Avicen is the ordinary Clenser and Dryer, and it is better
mixed with Aegyptiacum, or with a little Alum or Vitriol when the Ulcer is
very soul, it is made of Verdigrece, Litharge, Birthwort, Gum Ammoniack,
Bdellium, Galbanum, Opopanax, Myrrh, Frankincense, Rosin, Oil and Wax.

Apostolicon Mesue is the same with Aloes and Sarcocol added.

Apostolicon Nicolai is of the same Ingredients with burnt Brass and Scales,
Lapis Calaminaris, Dittany, Sarcocol, Mastich, Mummy, Colophony, Propolis,
Birdlime, this will draw any thing forth of an Ulcer.

The Emplastrum called Gratia Dei or Divine made by Nicolas is like these to
draw out things fastened, it is made of Litharge, Verdigreece, Birthwort,
Boodstone, Olibanum, Myrrh, Bdellium, Mastich, Oil.

Some add Galbanum, Ammoniacum, Opopanax, and Lodestone.

Diapalma also cleanses, it is made of Chalcitis, Litharge Oil and Grease.

There are more Clensers and Driers made of Scales of Brass, Ashes,
Verdigreece, Alum, Vitriol, by Galen; as the red Greek Plaster, or the black
Egyptian Isis, or Plaster of Asclaupius, Melium of Serapio, Diabotonon of
Critonis, the Plaster of Terentinus, the Green Plaster of Andromachus or
Panacea Hiroe and other Arabian Plasters, and the Ointment of Guido against
corroding Ulcers: They must be looked for in Dispensatories.

There are also strong, drying and clensing Oils, as that of the wild Olive, of
Wheat, Acorus, Spurge seeds, Radishes by Dioscorides. and others for wounds
which will cure cleansed Ulcers, they are called Balsamelaea. that of Mant dung
is commended by some, and that which comes from a Linen Rag dipped in Oil and
burnt.

The stronger are Oil of Myrrh and Sulphur, or a Plaster of Myrrh, Colophony,
and Wax mixed with them.

Or Oil of Tartar by deliquium or melting is a great Clenser, and against
eating Ulcers, Oil of Vitriol Antimony and Talcum.

Or this: Take crude Antimony two ounces, unslaked Lime a pugil, Tartar an
ounce, boil them in Lie, then add Vinegar and the Oil will swim, this is good
in foul Ulcers.

Balsom of Sulphur is a mighty Drier and Clenser thus made, Take Brimstone a
pound and an half, boil it in spirit of Wine, digest it some days in a
Limbeck, take it from the Fire and put it in a strong vessel, add Vitriol in
powder an ounce and an half, Tartar an ounce, it makes a red Balsom. Ruland
makes Balsom of Sulphur thus. Take Oil omphacine a pint, spirit of Turpentine
two ounces, Sulphur six drams, digest it in hot Embers til it be Red, strain
and keep it.

There are also Washes, Injections, Fomentations, and Bathes to cleanse and dry
Ulcers.

Old Wine is a good Clenser.

Or Vinegar and Water and Wine is a gentle Clenser.

So is Whey wherein Barley is boiled, with Honey or Sugar.

Posset Curd applied warm is good against the weeping Ulcer, called in Dutch
Slidwasser.

Water of distilled Honey or Turpentine cleanses, and more if they be stilled
together with Vitriol.

Or a Lie of many Ashes, as of Vine stalks, or Fig Tree or Savin, adding Lime
before you strain, or boil the Lie with Wine and Honey.

The Lie of Soap cleanses more, called Soap-water thus made, of Vine Ashes
three parts, unslaked Lime one part, boil them to a consistence for an
Ointment, use a little, and let it lie til the Ulcer be clean, and then heal it
with other things.

This Soap-Lye is made stronger with Sal Armoniack.

Water wherein Quicksilver has been often quenched, taken clean from the
Lime, wonderfully cleanses filthy Ulcers, especially that which is made of
burnt Flints, of which we spoke in Burnings.

A pound of Vitriol and a good quantity of Water is a good Fomentation in the
weeping Ulcer, called in Dutch Slidwasser.

Or Urin, especially if old and stinking.

Or distilled water of Urin, with Alum and Tartar dissolved therein.

Also all salt Waters, with salt Armoniack especially, also Brine or Pickle.

Or Alum water and Camphire, which is good against Ulcers in the Privities.

The Water found in the cavities of old Oaks is thought to cure Ulcers.

There are diverse Decoctions of Plants for Fomentations or Baths to cleanse and
dry Ulcers. such as are mentioned for wounds, some are applied green, and
bruised or boiled. The chief Decoctions is of Agrimony, Yarrow, Ivy, Avens,
Ladies-mantle, Hors-tail, Strawberry leaves, Burnet, Bears-ears, Pyrola, Paul's
Bettony, Sun-flower, wild Tansie, Vervain, Carduus, Spondylium, Solomon's seal,
Woad, Personatum, Anagallis, Butterbur, Housleek, Carrots, Colymbades, Hemlock,
Plantane, Shepheards-purse, Scabious, Gallitricum, Dogs tongue, Celandine,
Wormwood, Centaury, Horehound, Smallage, Polymountain, Mugwort, Nettles,
Cypress, Savin, Oak leaves, wild Olive, Mastich tree, Rhamnus, Barberries,
Sumach, Ceterach, Coriander, Roses, Maudlin, Costus, Aesculapius his Allheal,
Pomegranate flowers, Comfrey roots, Birthwort, Orris, black Chamaelion roots,
Allheal, Sulphurwort, wild Parsneps, Astragalus, Fern, Anemone, Thalictrum,
Alkanet, Daffodil, Pomegranate peels, Ash leaves and Beets: Also Guajacum,
which is proper in pocky Ulcers. also bark of the Palm tree, also Galls, Acron
cups, Cypress Nuts, Myrobalans, Lentils, Barley, Myrtles, Roses, Barberries,
Plantane, Coleworts boiled in Wine and Water, and water with Vinegar in soul
Ulcers, to Dry and cleanse, with Acacia and Hypocystis to dry more.

To these Decoctions when you will cleanse more. Take Smallage, Plantane,
Agrimony, each a handful; Wormwood, Centaury, each half a handful; boil and
dissolve in a pint thereof Honey of Roses four ounces, or in hollow foul
Fistulaes and Ulcers, add Orris, Hellebore, or Cuckowpint roots boiled in Lie
or Vrin for to inject or wash.

Or this Injection. Take Gentian roots an ounce, Hermodacts six drams,
Hellebore three drams, Wormwood and Centaury, each a handful; boil them in two
pints strained, dissolve Honey of Roses three ounces, Aegyptiacum an ounce: add
powder of Orris and Birthwort, each half an ounce; Agarick, Myrrh, each two
drams.

Or: Take Smallage, Sage (which allaies Itching in Ulcers) Bettony, Horehound,
each a handful; Radishes an ounce and an half, Onyons an ounce: boil them, and
to two pints add Alum half an ounce or Salt of Tartar two drams, Honey of
Roses three ounces.

To dry and heal. Take Comfrey, Plantane, Shepheardspurse, Horstail, Ceterach,
Jews herb, each a handful; Agrimody and five-leav'd Grass, each half a handful;
Galls, Cypress Nuts, Pomegranate flowers, each an ounce; red Roses, Barley,
each a pugil; boil them, and to two pints of the straining, add Frankincense,
Mastich, Sarcocol, each two drams; Honey of Roses three ounces.

Or: Take Litharge a pound, boil it in Vinegar and dip Clouts therein for
Ulcers of the Legs.

Or: Take Cadmia or Litharge two ounces, Mastich, Frankincense, each half an
ounce, Camphire half a dram, Saffron a scruple: boil them in Vinegar.

Or, boil Alum, Tartar and Mastich in Vinegar, or Tartar and Aloes in Vinegar.

Take white Vitriol, Alum, Bole a pound, Camphire an ounce, boil them in an
Earthen vessel, keep the third part of the Water, boil the rest til it may be
poudered, to an ounce of which, add a pint of water, strain it, use the Water.

In Ulcers of the Leg. Take Chalcanthum, Vitriol, Alum, Ceruss, eaqual parts,
boil them in Vinegar til they are hard, dissolve a little in Water or Lie and
Wine and wash the Ulcer.

Take Alum half an ounce, Tartar two drams, Camphire a dram, Verdigreece, half
a dram: beat them, and dissolve them with Aqua vitae eight ounces, and three
Yolks of hard Eggs, strain them, this is good in Ulcers of the Privities.

Take Pease, Wheat, Salt, each a pugil; Wine a good quantity: let them stand in
a brass Kettle, and stir them some days, add Verdigreese an ounce, white
Vitriol, Aloes, each half an ounce; stir them some days, and then strain off
the Liquor.

Or: Take Litharge, Lapis Calaminaris, each half an ounce; Salt, Alum,
Vitriol, each an ounce; boil them in Water, Wine, or Lie: add Sulphur, Ceruss,
Sanguis Draconis and an ounce of Verdigreece.

You may use distilled waters to dry Ulcers, or the Juyces of Plants with Alum
and whites of Eggs, before it is distilled.

That of Docks and Vinegar mentioned in Tetters or Herpes cures Ulcers after an
Erysipelas.

This is better in pocky Ulcers, if the Dock roots are oyled in Guajacum water.

Powder for hollow Ulcers which cause flesh by drying, and are therefore called
Incarnatives, or stronger Driers when the Ulcer is very foul and eating.

The Incarnative pouders are first: Take Frankincense, Myrrh, Aloes, to glue as
in the first Wound-plaster.

A second: Take Sarcocol and Myrrh.

A third: Take one of the former pouders, add as much Sanguis Draconis, Orris,
and Birthwort.

A fourth: Take of the first or second powder one part, add meal of Orobus, or
Lupines roots, of Sulphur-wort, All-heal, Centaury the less as much.

A fifth: as much Litharge, Cadmia, filings of Iron, and Pumcie stone to the
first or second powder.

The sixth that will cloth naked bones with flesh again is made of Orris,
Daffodil, Sulphur wort, All heal roots, Frankincense and Myrh.

There are other glutinating Incarnatives.

When you will dry more in moist Ulcers, use pouders of drying Plants, as of
Savin, Cypress, Horehound, Vervain, Groundpine, Germander, Juniper berries,
Pomegranate peels, Cypress Nuts, Bediguar, Goose-grass, Parsneps, Securidaca,
Coriander, Rosemary, Sage, Myrtle leaves, or powder of Coral, Crystal, Bole,
sealed Earth-Eretria, washed Lime, of the stone Aesius, Earthworms, and
Hoglice, rotten Posts, and other Driers.

Or Ashes of burnt Southernwood, Dill, Cypress, Savin, Tamarisk, Hemp, Gourd
peels, Olives, also of Shoe soals, Paper, Silk, Purple, shells of Oysters,
Hedghogs, Snakes, Snails, Corals.

To all these pouders, add Frankincense, Mastich, Pitch Gum of Nu^ tree,
Almonds, etc.

The white troches of Rhasis with Camphire, Aloes and Myrh cures Ulcers in the
Yard.

Or this experienced. The powder of Barba sylvatica, with half a part of
Mastich and Frankincense, and a fourth part of Cuttle Bone.

When you will dry more use powder of Capar roots, Restharrow, Fern, Birthwort,
Gentian, Hermodacts, Or-Cuckowpints or Dragons, Briony, Celondine, Hellebore,
Agarick, Dogs dung, these cleanse Fistulaes also, especially if you add
Chalcitis or Verdigreese.

The powder of Snails is good against the gleeting Ulcer called in Dutch
Slidwasser.

Or this to dry and cleanse. Take flowers of Pomegranate or peels half a dram,
burnt Bones or Cural a dram, Aloes a scruple, Salt or Alum a dram and an half,
make a Powder.

Or mix silings of Iron or Brass with fat clay washed with Alum water, and burn
it to powder.

Salt of pickled Fish, or flower of Salt is good against moist Ulcers.

Or Tartar, or Borax, with Crab's-eyes.

Or burnt Alum, or parched Salt, or burnt Brass.

In a Fellon called Paronychia when the flesh is foul: Take Sal Armoniack half
an ounce, Verdigreese two drams, make a Powder, add Aqua fortis, dip Cotton in
it, and dry it, and apply it to the root of the Nail.

Dry Lint is good in moist Ulcers often changed.

Or Sparadrap, which is good also in the French Pox in the Privities, thus
made. Take Guajacum powder four ounces, roots of Gentian, Birthwort,
Masterwort, each an ounce; Rhubarb half an ounce, Centaury tops, Scordium,
Bettony, each a handful; Rosemary flowers and Roses, each a pugil; Bay and
Juniper berries, each half an ounce; Myrtle berries and Fennel seed, each two
drams; Alum three drams: boil them in red Wine, strain them, and to a pint and
an half, add Mythridate an ounce, dissolve it in three ounces of Aqua vitae,
dip a Pledget in it often and dry it again, apply a bit of it.

Sometimes we open the Ulcer that the matter better come forth in the lower
part, and rouling it above, and wounds also, when we fear the Bones will be
infected, and in the Fellon we open the Imposthume at the first before the bone
is foul.

Or we take away rotten flesh with an actual Cautery, or a potential,
especially in that malignant gleeting Ulcer called Slidwasser in Dutch, a
Corrosive must presently be applied to that.

You must use the expulsive Ligature to hollow Ulcers to retain things put in,
and let the matter come forth notwithstanding.

Remedies to heal up and make a scar are in wounds with loss of flesh and skin.

And the last of all when the Ulcers are filled with flesh, and the Superficies
only bare they cure them.

And though Nature does breed this skin of nourishment that feeds the skin, as
it does breed flesh in hotter Ulcers, yet because a preternatural flux of
moisture hinders her, we must use Driers that Nature may do her work and make
skin. This Scarf-skin differs from the true, because it is neither sensible nor
porous, not made of seed as before, but of nutriment that sweats from the true
skin and grows to the flesh, and then it is not called a true skin but Callus,
and Cicatrice or Scar, and the medicines that cause it are called Epuloticks.

These must be stronger driers than Incarnatives to make the superficies better
turn into a skin or Scar, and they must be more, and therefore are to be used
in a dry form rather than a moist and unctious.

Therefore Incarnatives which astringe not so much must not be used when the
Ulcer is healed but changed, lest they make proud flesh, for skin they cannot
make, nor Glutinaters except some of the chiefest Driers and Binders, which
when they have glewed the lips of a wound heal with a small scar without any
more ado, as Cicatrizers called Epuloticks do glutinate small wounds.

Pouders are best for such strong drying, if very fine and sprinkled upon the
superficies, and better when burnt and not washed, for things that corrode lose
their force by being burnt if they be after washed. The pouders follow.

The first: Take Galls, Pomgranate peels and Birthwoort, burn them and they are
stronger.

The second: Take one part of the first powder with as much Cypress Nuts or
Acorn Cups, Roses, Hors-tail, Contaury, burnt Spurge.

The third: Take one part of the first powder: add as much Tormentil roots, or
of Snakeweed, or of Pine bark, or Elm, or Oak, or Sumach, or burnt Paper,
Clouts or Leather, Bones or Eg-shels.

The fourth: Take one part of either powder, add as much of bark of
Frankincense and Sanguis Draconis.

The fifth: Take any of the former with as much Litharge, Cadmia or Lapis
Calaminaris burnt, with Bole or Chalk.

The sixth stronger. Take Litharge, Tutty, burnt Lead or Ceruss, each half an
ounce; burnt Alum a dram, half an ounce of the first powder, and a dram of
burnt Pumice stone.

The seventh which is strongest. Take Brass burnt and washed two drams,
Chalcitis burnt and washed a dram and an half, an ounce of any of the pouders
aforesaid.

Or use the following alone, or with the former, as Powder of burnt Rosemary,
or drying plants, bark of Goards, Plantane roots, Caper barks, Cypress, Oak,
Pear Tree, Myrtle, Fruits of the Egyptian Thorn, or powder of burnt shells,
Coral, Ivory, sealed Armenian, or Cimolian earth, Bloodstone, Jews stone,
Loadstone, and Asius.

Or Use Crocus Martis, which is a strong dryer.

Machiolus comends Tartar burnt, with the powder of Plantane roots, others
Sulphur vive.

Of these pouders you may make Ointments with astringent Wine or Honey, or oil
of Roses, Myrtles, or Sewet, but they will dry less, except you use the sixth
or seventh Powder.

Or Thus. Take six drams of the sixth Powder, add Antimony, Scales and Flowers
of Brass all burnt and washed, each two drams; Chalcitis or Borax, and Vitriol,
each a dram, with Honey make an Ointment, or with Oils, if you will have it
gentler.

Dioscorides uses Verdigrease with Oil and Wax.

Or use this of Juices. Take Juice of Plantane, Vervain, Agrimony, Pears, or
Quinces, four ounces, add red Vinegar, two ounces, Acacia, half an ounce, Aloes
two drams, Litharge an ounce and half, Honey an ounce: boil them to a thin
Ointment.

Oil of Vitriol in Water makes a Scarr, by strong drying.

The usual Epulotike Ointments and Plasters, are nutritum, or triapharmacum,
or that black of Avicen made of Litharge, Oil of Vinegar, or Litharge and
Ceruse, of the ointment of Quicklime, often washed, as we showed in burnings,
or the white Ointment with Ceruse, and Litharge, or the Citrine Ointment, that
of Tutty, or of red lead, or that of Lead, or the plaster of Lapis Calaminaris,
mentioned in Glutinaters, or Emplastrum Diacadmiae, of Gallen.

Before you use these Epuloticks, wash the wounds or Ulcers with Wine by Urine
or Alum water, or Decoction of Sumach, or Currants, Rhus which thickens their
Leather, and dryes, and thickens the Skin.

You may further the Cure of Ulcers, as well as Wounds by Wound Drinks, for
they cleanse and dry, they are mentioned in Wounds.

These following are best in hollow Ulcers, or in Fistulaes, which be most
dried, therefore they are good in all foul Ulcers: Thus made.

Give Agrimony boiled in Wine, with Solomons-seal, Feather-wood, Burnet,
Spatula foetida: to drink some days.

Or Wine of red Coleworts, with the Seeds and Madder.

A Water called the Mother of Balsom, for hollow Ulcers. Take; distilled water
of Rosemary and Sage, steeped in white wine one pint. give it with Sugar.

Or add Turpentine two ounces, Gum of Ivy, Frankicense, Mastike, Myrrh, Aloes,
each half an ounce; Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Cabebs, Galangal, each two
drams; Saffron, a dram. give the distilled water to drink.

An excellent water made of Pyrola roots and all and and ground Ivy, cut small
and steept in old Ale, two days, with as much Album Graecum as an Egg, distill
a water, and add it to the dreggs, and still it over again, give three
spoonful a morning, before Supper, and at bedtime.

In hollow ulcers, in the Perinaeum under the stones, when they pierce to the
bladder. Take Comfrey roots, Fennel, Liquorish, each an ounce and half,
Birthwortt, half an ounce, Sanicle, perfoliata, or through wax, Saracens
Consound, ground Ivy, Betony, each a handful; Hyssop half a handful, winter
Cherries half a pugil. boil them in wine and water each a pint, give it with
Sugar.

A Fistulated Ulcer whose inward circumference grows together, The Cure of a
Fistula.
by a skin or tunicle, with Hollowness called a Fistula, is thus cured. it must
be filled again with flesh, and therefore the tunicle must be taken away, and
then you must use the means mentioned to beget flesh, and a Scarr, or Skin; and
give things mentioned in Ulcers, to keep the body clean, that the Cure may be
the easier.

Therefore for taking away of the Tunicle, use cleansers which may take it
away, with the thick Excrements while it is soft and slimy. but when it is
grown hard, it cannot be taken away, but with strong cleansers, all the kinds
of which were mentioned in Ulcers. If the Tunicle be hard and confirmed, eat it
away with things that consume proud flesh as in Ulcers, applied with Tents
which will keep it open.

These are the chief takers away of Skin in Fistulaes.

Of Juyces, that of Orris is sharp and burning, and that of Dragons
Cookowpints, and Spurge, and Juice of milky Figgs, they may be corrected with
milder Juyces, or mixed with Vinegar or Honey.

Oil Omphacine cleanses, and more with Juice of Spurge, or the like.

Paracelsus his balsom for Fistulaes. Take Oil of Bricks two ounces, Oil of
Turpentine six ounces, Oil of Cloves half an ounce, infuse Mastik, Myrrh,
Frankinceose, each two ounces; Mummy three ounces, distill them, pour it in
twice a day.

The Chemists commend in Fistulaes, Oil and Sugar of Lead, or Oil or Water of
Mercury.

As strong Vinegar consumes Egg-shels if they be laid therein, So does it
Fistulaes, mixed with Oil omphacine, and Labdanum, as Dioscorides, and with
other Ointments to avoid corruption.

Or use Aegyptiacum dissolved in lie with a Tent.

Or this Infusion: Take Verdigrease three drams, Alum an ounce and half, Sugar
half a pound, with Wine, boil and use it.

Or Take Orpiment a dram, Verdigrease half a dram, boil them in half a pint of
wine, and four ounces of Plantane water, Or use the green Water mentioned
against Ulcers of the mouth.

It is excellent to dissolve a little Orpiment, in Plantane Rose, or Nightshade
water.

Or to use a little Sublimate with Populeon, to abate its force, or Orpiment
and Honey.

A Fistula-water to take away and cure. Take Frankincense, Mastike each half an
ounce; Verdigrease, Orpiment, each to drams; Alum two ounces, Honey and
Turpentine, each an ounce an half; wine a pint and half. distill a Water.

Or distill a water of Euphorbium dissolved in Juice of Plantane, with Myrrh,
and Frankincense.

Or use the distilled water of man's Dung.

An Oil to eat away Fistulaes. Take Antimony two ounces, Sublimate an ounce,
Honey four ounces, distill an Oil by a retort.

Orpiment alone thus prepared cures all Fistulaes. Take yellow Orpiment, an
ounce, calcined Tartar two ounces, powder and calcine them in a crucible twenty
four hours, powder it upon a Tile, and boil them in water, till it is
evaporated, there will be a white Chalk in the bottom, which is Orpiment
prepared, the powder of it does cure Fistulaes to a miracle.

This white Orpiment so prepared, and put into a Glass, and set in a moist
Cellar, turns to an oily Liquor, which put into Fistulaes, is excellent.

An Hellebore root put into a Fistula, takes away the Tunicle.

We put a dried Sponge tied or waxed into Fistulaes, or a root of Gentian or
Birthwort, as a Tent to enlarge the Orfice rather then to cleanse, and the
stretching makes the Callus thinner and sooner come of.

If you burn a Fistula with an actual or potentiall Cautery, there will be an
Eschar, and that falling off, the Tunicle is gone.

If after this, quick flesh appears in a Fistula, it must be cured as other
Ulcers, by Incarnatives injected, and then by Cicatrizers.

They say that Fistulaes are cured by Drinks mentioned in Ulcers, but they mean
hollow Ulcers not yet covered with a tunicle, for when there is a skin grown in
a Fistula they cannot send their virtue so far as to eat off except at the
first while it is warm, or work upon the Fistula when the skin is off.

Paracelsus commends this Drink against fistulated Ulcers. Take Sowbread two
handfuls, Sanicle a handful, Sophia Chirurgorum half a handful, boil them in
Wine, to the strained Liquor cold, add Oil of Cloves distilled an ounce and an
half, give it thrice a day shaking it first that the Oil of Cloves may be in
evey draught three or four ounces at a time.

A Callus Ulcer with hard Lips must be mollified and cleansed. The cure of a
Callus ^lcer.


This Cataplasm does both, made of Dock and Comfrey roots boiled in Water,
bruised after and mixed with Butter.

Or use a plaster of Ammoniacum with strong Vinegar.

Or this Ointment. Take Gum Ammoniack, Bdollium or Galbanum dissolved in strong
Vinegar two ounces, Turpentine half an ounce: dissolve it with Oil of Roses,
add two drams of Verdigreese, and three drams of Alum.

Or use other strong Clensers or Eaters mentioned if the Callus be hard.

Dioscorides says that Spurge boiled in Honey or pieces of Sphondilium laid
upon the Callus take it away.

Cut with a Knife or Lancet, and it will more easily heal.

An excrescent Ulcer is when the flesh which filled the Ulcer grows out for want
of soon making a Scar or Skin, The Cure of an excrescent Ulcer.
hanging forth and deforming, this must be made even.

By taking away Plethory if that be the cause, by spare Diet and bleeding, and
using of medicines outward that cause a scar as soon as the flesh rises. these
by drying cause a skin and hinder flesh from growing, but if the flesh is grown
out, you must not use them, left it cause deformity, because they will not
consume it. but then use stronger Dtiers and Clensers, or things that take away
flesh, called Cathereticks, such as we mentioned for Fistulaes, and these are
good in Fistulaes.

Pouders are carried in Borax pipes for the same, as powder of black Hellebore
and Hermodacts, of Birthwort, Galls, Ashes of Date stones, Wool, Sponge, Salt
Fish, Smaris and Sea-Hedghog, Purple shells, and Shails burnt.

Or sprinkle small cut Hemp thereon.

Or the yellow powder of dregs remaining after the distillation of Honey.

Or powder of Borax.

Or of Pumice Stone, Okar, Aetius Stone, Diphryges.

Or of Alum, Chalcitis burnt, or not mixed with other weaker.

As, Take Alum burnt three drams, with Pomegranate flowers and Bole as much.

Or, Take Vitriol half an ounce, Alum two drams, Pomegranate peels and Galls,
each two drams; Myrrh, Birthwort burnt, each a dram; make Troches for your use.

Or you may add burnt Tartar to other pouders.

A Corrosive powder. Take Vitriol four ounces, Alum and Verdigreese, each half
an ounce, Vinegar six ounces, calcine them in a luted Vessel.

Or make it of red Arsnick, Alum and Galls boiled in Vinegar strained and pour
upon as much quick Lime, dry the Lime with the residence of the Decoction till
it may be poudered.

Or make quick Lime into Troches with Honey, and then burn them.

To make Precipitate or Sublimate to consume flesh without great pain, Take one
part of Quicksilver, two parts of Aqua fortis, let it be stirred in a great
Alembick with a great Receiver and hot Fire under, till the Water is gone, and
the Alembick broken, leave that which is white and yellow, and take it in the
neck of a Glass, powder it, and se^ it upon the fire till all the fume be gone.

The Troches mentioned in Cauteries to open Imposthumes, and many things that
burn the skin, are good here.

And Troches of Vigo made of crumbs of Bread, Sublimate, red Lead, and Rose
water.

Aegyptiacum is the best Ointment to take away flesh.

Or this, Take Hermodacts or Agarick, black Hellebore, burnt Sponge and Pumice
stone, each two drams; burnt Brass and Alum, each a dram and an half;
Verdigreese and Chalcitis, each a dram; with Honey and Oil of Tartar an ounce,
make an Ointment.

Or thus: Take Antimony and filings of Iron, each two ounces; Alum, Sal
Armaeniack, Sulphur vive and Chalcanthum, each an ounce and an half;
Verdigreese and Orpiment, and Quicksilver, each an ounce; strong Vinegar, and
Lie of Barbars, with Lime each two ounces: calcine them in a Potters vessel,
and keep the Powder close stopped in a Glass.

Anacardine Honey anointed does the same.

Or Oil of Sulphur, Tartar, Vitriol, with Liquor or upon a Plaster.

If nothing will help, cut or burn away the flesh.

My Caustic does it well and quickly.

We have mentioned compound Ulcers with tumors and Pustles, we shall speak now
of such tumors as do presently follow both Wounds and Ulcers when the tumor is
red, as Phlegmonous erysipelated and Oedamatous Ulcers.

Phlegmonous or erysipelated Ulcers or Wounds which are so from flux of Blood
caused by pain or the like, The Cure of phlegmonous and erysipelated Ulcers.
must be so ordered that blood be first revelled as we showed in a Phlegmon.

Then use repelling Defensatsives about the Ulcers and after Digesters as in a
Phlegmon.

The Driers that are put into Wounds or Ulcers must first cool, also as in the
Repellers in Phlegmon such as have Litharge, Cadmia, Ceruss.

Or thus against Inflammation and Ulcer. Take Juice of Dogstongue, Plantane,
Willow, Night shade, or Housleeke, four ounces, Juice of Pomegranates, an
ounce, Vinegar, half an ounce, Oil of roses or Myrrtles, three ounces, Ceruse
half an ounce, Lead burnt and washed, two drams, Camphire half a dram, with
Turpentine make an ointment.

You may use dryers only when the Inflammation is gone.

The black Cerot of Vigo. Take Litharge, red Lead earths, Rossin, Camphire,
Oils, and Greases, with Poplar ointments, wine of Pomegranates, Decoction of
Myrtles, Barley, Plantane, Nightshade, wood-lime.

In Gunshot, this Plaster is good at the first. Take Bole two ounces, Sanguis
Draconis, an ounce, Ceruse, or Litharge, half an ounce, Barley meal an ounce
and half, powder of Earthwormes, half an ounce (especially if the Nerves be
hurt) dried Centaury two drams, Sewet dissolved in oil of Roses an ounce, with
Turpentins, make a plaster, you may add white Diachylon to it.

Or this, Take Juice of Plantane, Nightshade, Housleek, tach an ounce, Vinegar
half an ounce, Oil of Violets, Roses, Water Lillies, and Turpentine, each an
ounce; boil them till the Juices be consumed, add the Pouders of the Plaster
before mentioned.

Against a Prick with a Thorn. Take Juice of Plantane, Shepherds-purse,
Nightshade, Oil of Roses, each four ounces; boil them till the Juices be
consumed; add Litharge, Ceruse, Cadmia, of both sorts, each half an ounce; Lead
burnt and washed, Scales of Brass, each two drams; with Turpentine six ounces
and an half.

In an Inflammation of the Puncture of a Nerve, use this Plaster. Take Barley
and Lentil Meal, each two ounces; Bean or Lupine, or Orobus flower, each an
ounce, boil them in wine Vinegar and Honey, or Oxymel to a plaster. Then add
things against pain, and proper for a Punctures as was there showed.

For Ulcers of the Legs with Erysipelas, use Unguent of Roses, Turpentine, and
yolks of Eggs, with Ointment of Line.

Against Pain in Ulcers or Wounds, from Inflammation, or Medicines, you must
use Anodynes round about, as in Inflammations, as that of Cow Dung, and
Narcoticks if need be. In the Puncture of a Nerve, we showed what was to be
done against pain from thence.

If there be fear from the Puncture of a Nerve of a Convulsion, as often there
is, it is good, to prevent Death, to cut in the place pricked or a little above.

If a wound or Ulcer be Oedematous, we must labor to dry up the Moisture
about them which causes tumor, The Cure of Oedematous Ulcers.
with the strongest driers, and then apply about things, against the Oedema.

A Gangreen is the Beginning of the Corruption of a Member: The Cure of a
Gangreen.
and is hardly cured. Sphacelus is a perfect mortification so that the part is
dead, and must be cut of, least it insect the quick, and cause death.

While there is any hope, and there is Pain and Sense scarrifie quickly, with
many and deep Scarrifications.

Or use Horsleeches, or apply them after Scarification.

Let the part scarified be fomented with hot water thrice a day.

Or with strong lie of Barbers of Decoction of Lupines, or Lie of Fig Tree
ashes.

Or with Sea, or other Salt water.

The Chyrurgeons use sudden Fomentations before or after Scarification, as
follows. Take roots of Briony, Raddish, each two ounces; Leaves of Galeopsis,
and ground Ivy, each a handful; Juniper topps a pugil, boil them in Wine, add
Vinegar for a Fomentation with Syrups.

In a Gangreen in the Privities, foment with Decoction of Mugwort, Wormwood,
Violets, Strawberries, Althaea, in Wine, it has made the Corrupt Part fall
from the Sound.

Or Take ground Ivy, and Juniper topps, boiled in Milk it is a rare experiment.

Dioscorides uses boiled Coleworts, with Honey or Lettice beaten with Meal of
Darnel.

Old Wallnutts, or the green Rinds, are also good.

Or Galeopsis and Briony roots and all.

Or Agrymony and Roses beaten with Vinegar, of Raddishes and Salt.

Or flower of Orobus, Darnell Pease, Barley, with Honey and Salt.

Or this Cataplasine. Take Meal of Lupines, Lentils, Beans, six ounces,
Pomegranate peels two drams, dried Roses a dram, Bole, Myrrh, each half an
ounce; Salt an ounce, Juice of Wormwood, or Nettles, ground Ivy, or
Pomegranates three ounces, Vinegar an ounce, with Honey and Turpentine, and
three Yolks of Eggs, and Oil of Nutts, or Roses, that it dry not to soon.

Or add to the residence of the Decoction, for a Fomentation, Old Wallnutts
kernells an ounce and half, Meal of Orobus and Pease, each two ounces, Honey an
ounce and half, Salt half an ounce; make a Pultis.

Unctious things as Oils and Ointments are not so good, for they cause
putrefaction, except it be a little to digest and keep the Pultis moist. An
experienced Plaster is made of Savin powder, with Leaven, oil of Lineseed, Nuts
or Yolks of Eggs, or of Tartar.

After washing, lay on Aegyptiacum with Alum.

Use Causticks as Milk of spurge, if putrefaction continue.

Or mix Arsenick, with the Powder of Man's Bones and Mandrake roots are added,
to prevent Pain, I suppose others add roots of five leaved Grass.

After the foul flesh is gone from the sound, cure it as a wound.

You may use strong cleansers, and that take of flesh mentioned in excrescent
Ulcers.

When the Bones are corroded Careous or black, The Cure of Caries or foulness
of Bones
there is Cares or rottenness of them in evil deep and hollow Ulcers that reach
to the Bones and defile them, and it hinders cure of the Ulcer and hurts the
member if it continue. To take it away at first you must thrust medicines to
the bottom of the Ulcer, opening it first, if it be strait by a dry tent, which
when it is moistened from the wound will swel and dilate it, as with a Gentian
root, which also cleanses, or with a sponge bound hard, first take a
Suppository or the like, or open it by cutting.

This done put in Clensing medicines and Cathereticks or Eaters that will take
away corruption from bones as well as corrupt flesh.

The chief Scaler of a Bone is Oil of Vitriol and Antimony, Aqua fortis and
Aqua Regia, all these I have used with happy success in foul bones and venomous
Ulcers with foulness of bones, and in the French Pox.

But if this cannot be taken off, as when there is roughness upon the bone, we
lay the bone bare and make it even with a sharp Instrument for that purpose, or
we cut off that which is above til the bone be smooth and clean again.

Sometimes we burn the foul bone with actual Cauterys and then the burnt part
fall off, from the sound of it self. This is done in diverse parts where the
bone is foul, and also in the end of the Fingers where the bones use suddenly
to be corrupted by Paronychia or Fellon, it must be done presently that the
foul joint being taken away the next may be preserved.

This done, and the Bone made clean, you may cure the Ulcer with its proper
Remedies, as the nature thereof requires.

FINIS.
THE THIRD TOME IN TWO BOOKS; Which are the FOURTH and FIFTH OF THE Whole Work.
A TREATISE OF HUMANE INFIRMITIES.
THE FIRST BOOK Containing the Infirmities, or Diseases of the Body.
THe Infirmities of the Body are called Organical, Symptomatical, or such as
cause Diseases; and many of them are to be seen and felt. Some destroy the
shape and fashion of the Body: Others change the color thereof, and are known
either by the enlarging and increasing, or by Pollution and Infection, or by
the decrease and Consumption of the Body.

The Diseases which destroy the shape comprehend all Organical Diseases, which
are called either Diseases that abound in respect of number, as when the Parts
are too many, or the Body is double, or any Part is doubled or trebled; as when
there are six Fingers, too many Teeth, etc.

Or they are called Diseases where number is wanting, as when any Part, Tooth,
Hair, or Nails are wanting, when there is Baldness, or the like.

Or they are called Diseases in respect of magnitude increased and augmented,
as when Nails, Hair, or the whole Body, or any part thereof is over large, the
Orifices too wide, or the Flesh, as Breasts, and the like, grown too large.

Or they are called Diseases in respect of Magnitude diminished, as when the
Orifices are too little, or the Body, or any Parts thereof decreased and grown
less.

Or they are called Diseases in Respect of unseemly Figure and Proportion, as
when any Member is deformed.

Or they are called Diseases in respect of the Division of Parts, as a
Hare-Lip, broken Teeth, falling of the Nails, Clifts or Fissures in the Hands,
etc.

Or they are called Diseases in respect of the Separation of Parts to be
united, as when the Gums are separated from the Teeth.

Or in respect of Concretion when an Orifice is closed, or when parts which
should be asunder grow together, or are joined together, as matted Hair.

Or in respect of the evil Situation or Position of Parts, as when crook
backed, or the Eyes stand too far out, the Teeth or Nails, loose, etc.

All these Diseases shall be explained in the Chapter of Deformity, which is
the first Chapter, Page 501.

Secondly, Diseases which change the color comprehend under them, Cachexy or
evil Habit, Jaundies, Redness, Paleness, Blackness; Spots, Discolorings, and
all sorts of Blemishes, and among these are the rosy Drop called Gutta
rosacea; Itch, Inflammation, or Erysipelas, small Pox, spotted Fevers, blew
Eyes, spotted Nails, diverse colored Hair. These shall be spoken of in the
second Chapter, which treats of Discoloring, Page 513.

Those Diseases which come from the increase and augmentation of the Body,
comprehend under them, the Dropsy, Swelling with Wind, the Ascites, Tympany,
the Swelling of the Belly by a Mole, or Retention of the Terms, Wens, proud
Flesh, Ruptures, Polypus, Swelling of the Yard, Condyloma, or Tumor in the
Anus, Gums swollen, Epulis, Encanthis, Oedema, Physodeis or windy Tumors,
swelled Feet, by Wind or Water, Codds swollen, Head swollen with Water,
Swellings in the Groins, Hydromphalon, Bronchoceten, or in the Throat,
Phlyctaenas, Hydroas, Breasts swollen, Warts, Cirsocolen, Aneurism or Swelling
of a Nerve, Glanduls, Scrophula's, Struma's, both Swellings in the Throat,
Buboes in the Emunctuaries, Parotis in the Ears, Stones, Hardness, external and
internal Hardness of the Liver, Spleen, Womb, Steatoma, Atheroma, Meliceris,
these three sorts of Tumors which shall after be described: the Frog under the
Tongue, the Testudo, Garglio or Wen, Mole of the Head, called Talpa, Nodes in
the Bones, Joints, Callosity of Bones, Nails, Skin, Scars, Extension of the
Navel, Warts, Moles, Corns, Hordeoli like Barley Corns in the Eye, Grando, or
like a Hail-stone in the Eye-brow, Ruptures and Herniae. Of all these we shall
speak particularly in the third Chapter of Diseases in Extuberance or Swelling
by Accresion, Page 540.

In the fourth Chapter of Defoedation, Page 580. Or Diseases that come by
Infection, when many Distempers or Infirmities come together. We shall speak of
Elephantiasis, which is a kind of Leprosy so called; the Pox, and the like
Infections.

The Diseases which manifest themselves by a decrease or decaying of the Body,
are Leanness, Consumption, Tysick, Marasmus, Colliquation or Melting of the
Body, Atrophy or want of Nourishment general, or particular, in any Member,
shall be treated of in the fifth Chapter of Consumption, Page 598.

CHAP. I. Of Deformity.
The Kinds of Deformity.
BY Deformity we here mean, the Destruction or Perversion of the Natural Form
of the Parts of the Body; and this comes to pass, when the Parts of the Body
are divided either in respect of Quantity, as number and magnitude, or of
quality and uncomly Figure, and so become deformed by these organick Diseases.
As to discoloring we shall speak of that in the Chapter of discoloration. But
if the parts swell any other way, or any thing grows unto them, or if they be
consumed, these shall be described in the proper Chapter of Extuberance and
Consumption; but if these be within the Body, as Galen writes of a double Porus
cholidocus, others of one Kidney, of the want of a Liver or Spleen, or the like
Diseases in Number Magnitude or Figure, by which the Body is over large or
decayed, if they be within the Body, and not be seen they shall not be spoken
of, in this Chapter of Deformities, but in the Chapter of Actions hurt, and
though external Deformities do often hinder these Functions, yet because they
appear more to the Eye we shall speak of them in this Chapter only.

Many Deformities are in the Body from number abounding, A double Body.
some come from the Birth which if they are great are called monstrous, as when
two bodies are borne knit together in diverse parts. I have seen a Man which
carried with him another of the same bigness complete in all his Members,
except the Head which was as it were grafted to the Neck into his Breast, and
he lived so from his birth a long time in very good health. The like unto which
Stumpifius in his Helvetian Histtory says he saw. I also upon the fourteenth
of August Anno 1645. saw naked in mine own house, another, who had his Brother
hanging a little below his left Pap, fastened unto him by his breast, he had a
great Head, with much curled Hair, his Eyebrows moved, but never opened, his
Mouth was open and always full of stinking slimy Phlegm, his hinder part of his
Head fell down to his. Brothers belly, his Face being upwards his Breast was
crooked and the Ribbs plain to be seen, and bent like the Keele of a Ship
outward, his Shouders were very deformed, both his Arms trembled and were bent
backwards his left Hand had the three last Fingers; his right, a great Thumb
and two Fingers, that next to the Thumb was least and grew thereto, from his
left side his left Thigh hung downwards bowed, with a short crooked Foot, and
only four Toes, his Heel being turned outward, you might plainly have
perceived his right Foot to be enclosed in his Brothers left Thigh, as if he
had two thigh bones, between the Thighs were the Buttocks and a cleft but not
open, his brother clothed him with a shirt doublet Breeches and Stockings.
This Monstrous man, was very active, of good Habit of body, well colored,
witty, long winded, he told me he was Son to a noble Merchant of Genua, his
Fathers Name was Baptista Collaredo and Mothers Belerina Fraginetta, of the
Family of the Forum Julianum; and because his Parents and the Priests saw that
he was a double Man, he was baptized by the Name of Lazarus and John Baptist he
was then twenty eight years of Age, when I heard from him and saw these things.

Histories also witness that some are born with double Members, Heads, Arms,
Double and treble Parts.
and Feet and other lesser parts, it is usual to see six Fingers upon a Hand,
Six Fingers.
two Thumbs one lesser growing to the greater; sometimes six Toes upon one Foot
and seven upon another, some have three Stones one Cod, Three Stones.
(these are called Triorcheis) and this is very probable to be as well as in
other parts of the body: but this I have found by Experience, to be a hard
excrescens growing to the semenaries being insensible, but like a stone.

The Teeth do not always keep the same number, some have two ranks of Teeth
beneath which does not deform or hinder.

Hairs because numberless, are disorderly when they are in places improper for
them and so are a Disease in number increased; but when they abound they are a
Disease in magnitude increased, where we shall treat of them, be cause then
hairs do not grow anew, but they which were before in the Pores, (for there is
no Pore but has a hair in it) hidden and concealed, do then grow manifest.

The greatest and most usual Desormities are in the deficiency of number, The
Want of Parts.
as when some Instruments are wanting in the birth: as we have seen some
monsters wanting both Arms, who have written and done other things with their
Feet instead thereof, as I saw Anno 1652. Nov. 29. a Woman born without Arms,
which gave her Child such and car-, ried it like a Nurse, making also diverse
things with her Feet and with more dexterity then many could do with their
hands. Her Name was Maudlin Rudolphs of Thuinbut, in the chief City of
Sweedland being above sorty years of age, and the year after February 20. I saw
one that way a crooked Dwarf born without Arms, that exercised all things with
his feet which were to be done with hands with dexterity to the admiration of
the Beholders, his Name was Theodorick Stieb of Vienna an Austrian. These are
rare, but the number of the parts is more usually by chance then by birth, as
by imputation which happens to parts that are most extended, as have Feet,
Fingers, Nose, and Ears, or when the Eyes are put out or flesh is lost from
them, which is called Rhyas. Hither may be referred gelding, Rhyat.
which though it be not in an apparent part and brings no Desormity apparent,
yet because when both Stones are cut out, other Deformities follow, especially
if it be done in Youth, which will declare them to be Eunuchs, as a womanlike
voice, want of a beard, so it causes Deformity apparent.

The Teeth are often defective in number, not only in age which is common to
all, Want of Teeth.
but many loose their fore teeth, which is an uncomely sight when the Mouth is
open, but this is no defect in Children for they will have others succeed. The
grinding teeth are also often taken out for Rottenness by which their number is
fewer.

We have observed that the whole Nails both of Toes and Fingers have fallen off
of their own accord, Fall of Nails.
and sometimes others have grown up and sometimes not, these are difficultly
taken of by force.

The loss of Hair is usual, especially in the Head, Want of Hair.
where being longest they cause the greatest Deformity being wanting, as when
there is Baldness all over, this is ordinary to old and sometimes it befalls
young People.

The Disease called Alopecia, is a falling of the hair from some long and
violent disease aforegoing, Alopceia.
leaving the head bald in diverse parts or equally about the hinder part of the
Head and the Temples when it comes from the Pox, Ophiasis.
or when two bald places reach on both sides from the hinder part of the head
to the forehead as in Ophiasis.

The same happens to the Beard, the hair falls off inordinately and leave it
thin or the Chin bare, and this is when the hair of the Head falls most usual,
and it is so with the Eyebrows and Eyelids: and especially in an
Elephantiasis or Leprosy, the same sometimes befalls all other hairy Parts.

The Deformity which is from magnitude increased has two kinds, The over
largness of the whole Body.
first the increase of parts beyond their prescribed bounds which is commonly
original and this sometimes happens to the whole body, not when one Man is
bigger then any in that Country with Proportion and strength agreeable without
impediment, this is not I say preternaturall, but when the body is so excessive
long or big as the party is burdened therewith and cannot exercise his
functions, deforming rather than setting forth the structure. Such monsters are
sometimes seen and I saw a wench in Durner in Basil, not five years old bigger
then any ordinary fat Woman.

The parts also of the Body are often bigger then ordinary and so bring
Deformity and hinder action; Over great parts and over large Orifices.
some are born with too big a Head, some whereof we find to be fools, some have
Necks, Feet, Fingers disproportionable, a long Nose, broad Ears, great Eyes,
long and large Teeth, especially when one Tooth grows into the cavity of the
opposite Tooth whith is lost, hitherto belong the over large Orifices a wide
Mouth, Nostrils, and other parts too large, these are Deformities but not
Diseases except they hinder actions, as when the Tongue is so big they cannot
speak, and Nails so thick that they cannot take up small things; besides which
fault if they grow too long they are inserviceable, this is rather from neglect
of cutting then any other thing. The like may be said of Hair if it grow too
long for want of trimming, The too great increase of Nails and Hair.
either in parts where it usually or not usually grows, as when it covers the
Forehead which is vulgarly counted more comely when bare; especially it is
counted very unseemly for a Woman to have a beard, in which places if the hair
be shaved yet the roots remaining it will grow again and show the Deformity,
sometimes one are more hairs growing in a Wart, deform the Face, if they grow
where hair should not be, as upon a woman's Chin resembling a beard.

The other kind of Deformity from magnitude increased, Too much Flesh.
eomprehends Carnosity and Fatness, and this is when from the abundance of
flesh or fat, the Body or any parts thereof are so increased, that it looks
not only unseemly but is slow, heavy and unwildy to perform duties, these are
for the most part idle sloathfull and drowsy, and if they be so when young they
live not to be old, as Hippocrates says fleshy Men are shorter lived then
lean: this may be in some parts so that a Deformity and an impediment may
arise, as when the belly is so fat that it extends it self without measure,
Great Breasts.
or when the Papps are too large, and cover the whole Breast and would go
farther if not restrained, and hinder breathing by their weight: such are those
fat Men who have great breasts; and which is more preternaturall, those which
have breasts grow very large as well as Toats being men not grown or other wise
dispto portioned.

Hitherto may be referred the Sarcomata which are not other but the same Flesh
over grown as rank Gums, the Caruncles of the Eyes too large which is called
Encanthis. But because these are like the other Sarcomata, they are described
in the Chapter of Extuberances.

A Deformity arising from magnitude diminished has two kinds, as that of
magnitude increased. The first whereof if when the wholl body is little from
the birth and they continue all their lives like pigmyes, are maintained in
Princes Courts for admiration being unfit for any employment by reason of the
weakness of body.

The second is when the parts are diminished as when the Head is too little as
is seen in fools often: Smalness of Bedy and its pens with narrow Orifices.
when the breast is too straight, by which means they are short winded; and
other parts which from their original have not a due proportion with the rest,
if they bring any Deformity or impediment.

Hitherto is referred the straightness of Orifices, Phimosit
as of the Womb the Skin of the Yard (in that Disease which is called Phimosis)
when it is too straight so that the Glans cannot be uncovered by reason of the
straightness of the praepuce or foreskin.

The greatness of parts is often made less, when some is taken off, Lent Parts.
and the Members are partly lamed, which brings the more Deformity, by how much
it is more visible as in the Nose and Ears; and the action is most hindered
when it happens in a necessary part as the Fingers, which being quite taken off
there is a hurt which belongs to those that are in number defective.

Hitherto belongs the want of Papps in Women's breasts, which is not only
unseemly, Breasts consumed.
but hinders their giving suck.

The consuming of the Gums is under this Head, when the Teeth are bare at the
Root, Gums rotten.
causing them to be loose and fall out.

Hitherto may be referred those Teeth which are shorter then the rest in the
same rank, Short Teeth and Hair.
and Nails when shorter then the flesh, for then they cannot take up small
things.

Hairs also when they are so thin and short, Woollike Hair.
as happens when they grow again after fallen off; so that they look rather
like wool then Hair. Beard long growing.
Or if in those parts where they ought to be thicker and longer in due time, as
the chin where man's beard should grow hair come forth slowly and make them who
are men seem still Children, this is a kind of Deformity: Want of beard in
Eunuchs.
especially if by reason of Gelding before the beard grew, it never come forth;
and they remain beardless, it is uncomely and makes them wrinkled in the face
as years increase, and as the Comaedian says look like old Women.

The second kind of diminished magnitude is Slenderness, Slenderness of Body.
which is opposite to Fatness and Fleshiness, and this is seen in those parts
which should be fleshy and are not; and it happens some times to the whole Body,
not when it decays of which we shall speak in the Chapter of Consumption nor
when it is naturally small, for then it is not out of order since lean folks as
we showed from Hippocrates are longest lived: but when it is so lean, that it
is ugly to be beheld, and causes weakness, especially when the Thighs and Arms
are withered, Senderness of Limbs.
the Cheeks fallen, the Shouders blades stick out, and the Belly shrunk in.
Hitherro is referred the thinness of Women's breasts which is a Dosormity, not
when they are little, Soft and lank Breasts.
for that is accounted an ornament, but when they are lank and hang down this
in young Women especially is accounted unseemly.

That Deformity which comes from the undecent figure and proportion of parts is
manifold. The first is when the Figure is altered in number and magnitude,
chiefly from inequality: sometimes from the Birth sometimes by accident. As
when the Head is too sharp pointed or otherwise deformed, The indecent Figure
and shape of Parts.
the Forehead wrinkled, the Nose crooked the Mouth and Lips awry, or any other
part is disproportioned. To describe all these punctually would be very
superfluous, and ask much labor.

Hitherto may be referred the over curling of Hair like black Moors, Hairs too
curled.
which if a little curled is an ornament, and hair hanging straight down is
unseemly; also Nails if wrinkled and standing forth are ugly. Nails uneven.


The second kind of the Figure of parts deformed, is when that continuity by
which they ought to be united is divided, Division of parts which ought to be
^nited.
or the connection dissolved. This we spoke of concerning wounds and ulcers, but
if after Cure the same Division and separation remain which spoils the Figure
and Proportion, that may be referred to this Head.

As also the which comes from the birth. The division of the upper Lip or hair
lip by nature.
Among which is the hair Lip when the upper Lip is divided originally called in
dutch Hasenscharten from the hare, whose Lip seems naturally divided as if cut,
this deformeth the Mouth by making the Teeth always appear.

Hitherto may be referred the inequality of Teeth when they are broken and
rotten, The Rotienness and breaking of Teeth.
by which Women seem uncomely. To this the Poet alludes in his Remedy against
love.

If Teeth she want then cause her often to laugh.

This is worst when the teeth are black, and when there are only stumps
remaining.

The Nails having continuity divided bring Desormity, The Rottenness,
roughness clifes and dividing of Nails.
especially in the hands because most visible, and this is worst if it go not
away as the Nails grow and are cast off; Roughness and corrosion is worst when
the Nails are black and blew or too thick; to this head may be referred, the
cleaving or clifts of the Nails when they are divided long ways or
transverse, these are the signs of Elephantiafis French Pox and the like.

Also the fissure or cleaving of hair in the head or beard is uncomely,
Fissures of the Hair.
because it causes inequality and folding, especially if many be so cloven.

To these are added those deformities which proceed from the scarce Skin
separated from the Skin, Dandrough.
not as they cause pain but uncomliness, of which we speak concerning
excoriation and galling: they are called Furfures because they fall off as
dandrow from the Head scratched or combed. This if usual, and falling thick
upon the clothes, is a Deformity especially if it fall from the beard or
Eyebrows, or from other places where hair grows not.

Hitherto, is referred the Disease in French called Pelatella, The Scalos in
the palm of the hand called in French Paelatalla.
as when the skin is unequally divided in the Palm of the Hand, and full of
Scales, which though it itch not they are always picking which is noisome.

Those Deformities which come from the dissolved connection of The separation of
the Jaws from the Teeth.
parts, if thereby the part be wholly taken off, they belong to the Diseases of
number deficient: but if they still stick to the Body, they belong to this
kind, as when the Teeth are loose and bare at the Root and will not be sastned
to the Gums.

The third kind in which the Figure and proportion of parts deformed, The
continuation or growing together of parts that should be divided.
is when parts that should be divided, continue and grow together as comes to
pass by birth as well as by accidents diverse ways, by which the Functions are
hindered, as when any Orifices are closed as the Nostrils, Lips, Eyebrows,
Fundament. Womb, the hole of the prepuce, when either by birth or other
accident, breathing, eating, seeing, evacuation or generation is hindered. As
also the glewing together of some parts, though it be not hurtful, it is ugly,
as when two Toes grow together, which often is from the birth, but it is less
offensive then the growing together of the Fingers.

To this preternatural continuation of parts, An indecent and firm conjunction
of parts.
may be referred that by which the parts are conjoined, so that they cannot be
separated. As when from a Convulsion the Mouth continues closed, which because
it rather hinders and takes away action then deformeth, shall be mentioned in
hurt Action. Hitherto belongs the mutual and close intrication of hair which
cannot be separated, but is like a love-lock which the Germans call Scherletin
Sopf because it is supposed to be done by the fayries and the incubi.

The fourth kind of Deformity in Figure, The Deformity of scituaation from
luxations and fractures.
is when the situation of a part is perverted or transmuted, and one part
inclined or translated into an other, by which the continued Figure of the
Member is destroyed.

Such is that which happens to the Feet, Vari crooked Legs.
when they bend inward or outward. And that in the Toes, which are continually
used to straight Shoes, and so in time are bent awry, and sometimes laid upon
the Foot. As also abreviation, elongation and crookedness of Members from
luxations and breaking of Bones in diverse parts belong hereunto: these spoil
the Figure of the part as well as hinder the Functions.

But chiefly Crookedness of back which destroys not only the shape of breast
and back, Gib bout or crooked Backs.
but makes the whole body short, crooked and unhansome, brings Deformity to
Mankind.

Hitherto may be referred the Rupture or Falling of Entrals into the Cod, or
other parts, causing Deformity. But because then the tumor and falling forth
is rather to be thought upon then the desormity, it shall be spoken of in
Diseases of Excretion, in Extuberances, Tumors, or things thrust forth of the
Body.

Also to this Deformity which comes from the perversion or altering of the
situation of parts; belongs, Eyes sticking forth, Gogle Eyes.
or prominency so called, when the Eyes are too much outward; and yet without
offense or hurt, but yet uncomely whether it be from birth or accident. Also
here we may comprehend the looseness of Teeth especially those before. Loose
Teeth.
We have seen some who could bend the whole row of Teeth before, foreward.

Also Teeth hanging forth, though fixed, are unseemly, Teeth hanging forth.
and when they are not placed even, and Nails also when out of place or
moveable, though they presently fall not, yet are a Deformity. Loose Nails.


The Causes of Deformity.
All the immediate Causes of the Deformities mentioned, depend either upon
adherent, as adventitious causes; those are inherent which come from the birth,
as we have declared and they consist either in number or magnitude abounding,
or deficient; or in uncomly shape, when parts are not rightly proportioned or
divided, or when they are continued or grown together.

And this comes chiefly from the seed of the Parents, The indisposition, plenty
or want, commission or permutation of the parents seed is the cause of Diseases
natural in number, magnitude and figure, in the Body or members as in the
Teeth Nails, Hair.
of which all parts are made, and Children sometimes resemble the Father
sometimes the mother in likeness and sex; and if the seed be unclean, not only
the external members of flesh and skin receive the same, but also the hair and
the Nails; because as I have showed in my Anatomy, they are cartilagenous
parts, neither do they come from Excrements, as is the vulgar Opinion of hair:
but from that seed in the first procreation, as is to be seen in Infants or
Embryons. But after what manner the Father or Mothers seed should propagate
these Deformities to their Children, is a hard Question, nor otherwise to be
defined, but from some indecent indisposition of the Seed, which coming from
all parts, it receives from the corrupt; and as they offend in figure,
magnitude or number, so does it impress the same in the Child's formation, in
the same parts, producing either the like in part of the same Deformities. But
this does not always happen, that when any parts exceed or are defective in
number or magnitude, the Child should have the same, for often children have
their Members complete, which the Parents have wanted by birth or by
amputation; though in some they are weaker. But in the hair of the Head and
beard, we see often that they are more or fewer, thinner or thicker, and of
diverse colors like their Parents in the Children, as we shall show in the
Chapter of discoloration. And it is plain that it comes from the Seed, and is
hereditary because black Moors have black and curled hair all by Nature, and
the cause is the Seed which produces an obliquity in the Pores of the Skin, so
that the hairs which comes through those Pores not directly but obliquely, are
curled, so does the Seed cause these matted locks which some have by the
formation of the Pores, when many oblique Pores are joined together in the
skin, from whence grow more hairs in a little place, being curled and wound
together, and they are born so.

It may also come from the plenty of Seed, that more and greater parts then are
needful be produced as the contrary from the defect thereof which as it may be
in any part, so in the Teeth and Hair that they may be more or fewer. Also the
Child may have an unnatural shape from some other transmutation and commixion
of Seed, as by the commixion of two seeds conceived, and their mutual
concretion in certain places, (except they be separated) it may chance that two
Children may be brought forth of diverse figures: which permutation and
commixion of seed, as it may come from diverse causes, so from some impression
which the Mother conceives either in time of conception, or when she was great
with child, from fear or other affection, or from strong meditation or
imagination. As she which being great with child and longs for some kind of
meat which is not fit, produces a Child which deformity either in number,
magnitude, or figure. By which means sometimes it has as it were new parts
resembling others, or something resembling the thing described; adhering to the
body from the birth. And among others, we have seen a child have hairs like
those of a Mouse upon the Thighs, because the mother being great, struck upon
that part with her hand when she drove away a mouse. Many monstrous births have
been by these means, which happened from imagination diverse ways, so that
Children are many times unlike their Parents, because in the time of
conception, and when the Woman is great, they have thought upon other people.

This diffimilitude or unlikeness is more incident to be from mankind then any
other creature, because it is subject to more intent and strong meditation and
fancy, other creatures only exercise their senses or things before their Eyes
in the time of copulation, and so cause a resemblance in shape and color: as
we shall show in the Chapter of discoloration.

Some original Deformities may arise from the Mothers blood because the child
is there with nourished while it is in the womb; The Mothers Blood is the cause
of some Diseases natural in magnitude increased or diminished or indecem
Figure.
not such as are in number of parts increased or diminished; (because every
part proceeds from the seed,) but such as are in magnitude exceeding or
defective, or in uncomely figure or shape. These Deformities come from the
Mothers blood either being too much or too little, or from the change or
commixion of the same, as we shall declare when we speak of internal causes.

Diverse kinds of deformities come from external causes as when any hurt or
wound divides the continuity of parts and so spoils the shape, if it be in a
sensible part and causes pain: we have spoken to them in the discourse of
pains. Also an unseemly figure may come from an outward force which dislocateth
the parts, or breaks them in regard that there is then a loss of motion in
the part, we have spoken thereof in the Chapter of immobility where we spoke of
Luxations and Fractures.

Other deformities of this kind which are in number magnitude and figure come
from diverse causes either internal or external.

The distempers and faults of the parts which produce deformity from external
causes come after diverse manners: A wound or an Ulcer is cause of the lameness
or taking off of a part, or separation or division.
as when by a wound they are cut off or lamed, either by chance, or by
chyrurgery through necessity for preserving life, as when the parts are
consumed by an Ulcer, by exulceration, or often rubbing or when the dead part
is cut off in a Gangren; or when in a Rupture the Stones are cut off as
sometimes they are, or when the continuity is dissolved by wound, and the wound
healed there remains a separation of the parts, or when by external force, the
Teeth either through pain, Force external causes falling out of Teeth, or
looseness or treating of them, the fall of hair, and gogle Eyes.
or other affliction are pulled out. The hair falls either by accident
external or by industry, or by Disease called Tinea. The Eyes by violent
passion, sometimes thrust forth themselves. Or when by mastichation and biting
of hard things, especially if of long continuance, the Jaws are separated from
the Teeth; by which the Roots of the teeth being made bare, they are less firm
then before; and sometimes fall forth, especially the Foreteeth, having but one
Root, when others will scarce fall out except there be an attenuation of the
Roots, as we see in dead men's Skulls the Teeth firm and unmovable when all the
flesh is gone. The teeth also are broken by strong biting of Bones cracking of
Nuts, etc. It often falls out that they which pick their Teeth with a Kinves
point from a foolish custom, very often, do not only take away their
smoothness, and make them rough, but wear away their substance by continual
scraping.

As the other cause was violent, An outward vehement heat is the cause of loose
Teeth, or falling off them out, or breaking of them.
so may often use of very hot Meats, so burn the teeth that they may be dried
up at the Roots and be no longer firm, but very loose in their places, and then
they offend in situation, or in number if they fall out from that cause. Or,
if by the same Heat of meats the hard substance of the teeth be over dried, and
at length burnt they fall out, or some part crumbles of, and the rest remains
broken and weak, or they become hollow.

And this is the usual cause that young people have so many hollow and unsound
teeth, especially when they eat very hot meats and broaths, which least they
should burn their mouths they commonly blow upon first. This is the chief cause
why our Germans which love hot broaths so much, have sooner bad Teeth then
other people: which is imputed through ignorance to defluxions of Rheum when as
we showed in the pain of the teeth, defluxions cannot fall upon the substance
of the teeth. The swallowing of hot meats and presently drinking cold Drink
thereupon while the teeth are hot which many have used from their Infancy,
causes teeth to rot and fall out, before they are old, or at least by the
sudden change of heat into cold to turn back.

From the like Heat the Roots of Hair being dried and extenuated, Great heat
the cause of falling of Hair.
the hair can no longer stay in its Pores, but fall out by the least combing;
this is caused by hot water or fire coming to near, therefore when they have
killed a Swine they use hot Water to take off the hair, and to take off the
Feathers from Poultery, by which means the Roots of the Quills are so dried
that the Feathers fall off; and some loose their Hair after the same manner,
provided that there be not such a heat as to stop the Pores and astring the
Skin so that they must come both off together; as it often befalls them that
dress Hogs with too hot water, this mistake is called in dutch Berbruen, these
are the causes, neither can hair fall by moistning the Skin and opening the
Pores only, except the water be very hot, though it be long used with a
moderate heat it will not do the like, and after the other way the teeth will
also come forth.

Also Nails and beasts Hooses with greater heat will come off.

The tender parts may be consumed by knawing and rotting Medicines as the Jaws
and flesh in the Eyes etc. Corroding and putrefying Medicines are the cause of
consuming of the parts and fall of Hair.
and there are things called Psilothra or Depilatoryes which take away hair by
Art; these do it rather by consuming the Roots of the hairs then by opening the
Pores.

Some of the Deformities mentioned come from internal causes namely, from
diverse Humors and Diseases or by one part forcing another, as I have showed, as
by Blood, since the parts are not only nourished and augmented by it so long as
a Man grows, but after whatsoever is consumed is restored by the same. And
this consuming of parts comes from the Blood diverse ways, either in respect of
its Quantity and the Fatness of the parts; if the Blood abound in quantity it
makes the parts too fleshy by too much Nourishment, and this is not only when
Bodies are growing but afterward, Plenty of Blood is the cause of much Flesh.
and then they grow exceeding fleshy, and if this come not hereditary from the
seed and blood of the Parents it must needs come from Blood. Hence it is that
plethorick Bodies are so carnous or fleshy, of which Plethory or Fullness as
there are diverse causes, so often and plentiful feeding is not the least. This
Appetite is stirred up by exercise of body, because by that Meat is quickly
distributed; therefore Men that exercise moderately grow fleshy and gross, as
it was with the wrestlers in old time. Rest also which is the contrary may
cause the same, for they which are idle and sedentary, and given to much
eating, seeing they spend little of the substance of their Bodies, and still
are devouring grow very big and gross. This grossness may also come from the
suppression of Natural Evacuation of blood. Hence Women at that time when
their courses leave them, although formerly when they had them constantly and
nourished their Children they were lean and slender, grow very corpulent and
gross. From these causes you may gather that as from the abundance of Blood
flesh is produced so by the want hereof there is Leanness and Slenderness. The
want of blood cause of leanness.


But as the blood causes flesh to be more or less so it makes some parts to
be greater or lesser, as when the Juice made thereof, is more proper or less
agreeable to such a part. This is so in that time wherein people grow as then
both soft and hard parts as bones increase, but after only those parts increase
which are decreased by external injuries, The abundance or want of
nourishment is the cause why some parts are bigger then others as Nails, Hair
which grow thick and long or fall.
as in the teeth Nails and Hair, but after a diverse manner, for in the Teeth
if one be not worn away by another which is opposite, in chawing, then the
nourishing juice abounding makes the tooth that has no opposite to grow longer
then the rest; but in the Nails and Hair if they have too much Nourishment,
they grow not only soon longer but thicker. The cause of Nails growing so, is
strong motion about the Roots thereof, when the Hands are often violently
exercised and there is an extraordinary attraction of Juice, hence is it that
laboring Men have thickest Nails. This also may come by often paring,
especially if before they be bathed in warm water, for then the juice attracted
makes them by degrees more thick. The same is in hair which when it first comes
forth like down upon the Chin if it be often shaved grows apparently thicker
and longer. It may also happen that from the defect of that juice which
nourishes Nails and Hair, that that which grows after cutting is thinner
then the former. But it is more usual that they should fall from the dryness
of the Roots for want of Nourishment, especially hair, wherefore when Medicines
are made for growing of hair they attract juice by their heat, as we shall show
in the Treatise thereof, by which the Root is mantained, for the want of juice
is the cause of baldness; for though hair grows upon the Skin of the head and
continue some time there, yet after some long before aged, some at the aproach
of old Age grow bald, because the Head grows less fleshy and is made up of
bones, skin and membranes, therefore that part is soonest dry, and so becomes
bald. This may come also from external injuries which dry the body, as from
internal Cares, from which Histories mention that Men have not only become
gray suddenly by drying the hair, but also bald by drying up the Moisture. In
other parts of the Body, as the Nails if from the same juice which nourishes
other extuberances arise, in regard they are tumors we shall speak of them in
their order.

There is also another Fault in the figure of parts from the abundance of
Nourishment, The nourishing juice sweating forth is the cause of uniting the
parts.
for by the nourishing juice, some parts that ought to be disjoined are united;
for if the Skin be taken off, and parts by Nature separated be laid together,
the juice which comes forth from both will unite them: for this like Glue,
conjoyneth wounds and bones.

If the Blood be fat the body is sat, Fatness in blood is the cause of fatness
in body and the contrary.
if lean it is lean, for seeing all blood consists of a fat matter, as Milk of
a buttery matter, and that by sweating from the Veins in the membranous parts
and not by congealing through cold as it was supposed, in regard the Body is
always actually hot inwardly, but of its own Nature grows together, being
separated from the Blood, and so joins to the Members as Glue increasing the
substance of the Body; as there is more or less of it in the Blood so there is
more or less of it gathered together for the increase of the Body, from which
cause rather than from Flesh are bodies greater or less: but this happens not
to the whole Body but to those places in which Naturally fat is used to be more
then in others, as in the Belly and breasts of Women etc. The reason why there
is more or less fat in Blood is from the quantity of blood, for in much blood
there must be much Fat, and hence Bodies grow more fat and fleshy, or more lean
and thin. But if Blood, not only in regard of its abundance has much Fat in
it, but also of its own Nature, though it abound naturally in quantity, be over
fat, which appears by that which swims at the top after it is taken out, which
the vulgar Chyrurgions call Phlegm, then those Bodies are more fat than fleshy,
which Fatness comes not only from the constitution which is inclinable
thereunto, but from eating fat Meats with which some are much affected.

Also diverse kinds of Deformities proceed from Humors and Diseases, Evil ulcers
are causes of consumtion of parts.
as Diseases of number deficient, if not from external causes, as in Ulcers
some parts are consumed by suppuration and corruption; The Gravel of the Teeth
makes the Gums separate.
which as in other parts, so in the Eyes and Nose, and Gums, which usually are
separated from the teeth by the gravel that grows underneath upon them, and by
which they are hindered from uniting together. The cause of loose Teeth is a
defluxion into the places where they are set.
Also the Looseness and Falling of teeth, comes from a Defluxion into the the
holes where they are set, which moistneth and loosneth the Fibers and Membranes
by which they are knit. And also when any corrupt Humor is in the places where
they are set, it causes them to fall out by corroding of their Roots. As we
have observed in great Diseases, Also a corrupt Humor about the Roots of the
Teeth causes their looseness and falling out.
that the Teeth have afterward fallen out. And in the Pox by the use of
Quicksilver after a Flux of spitting, the teeth have been loose and sometimes
fallen out.

Also the Falling of hair come from Diseases and evil Humors, A Fever causes
Hair to fall off.
when the roots are dried or made less and consumed thereby. This comes from
burning Fevers, which do not only dry the Body, but the Roots of the Hairs
which are soft, and so they are attenuated and consumed, as we may observe in
the declination of Fevers; In the Alopecia and Ophiasis, when evil Humors are
gathered about the Pores of the Skin, An evil humor about the roots of the Hair
causes it to fall off.
they eat and consume the Roots of the hair, and make them fall: this they do by
their sharpness and maglignity; and not by loosning them with their moistness
as some suppose, because such Humors as are only moist and not malignant and
sharp, do never cause Falling of Hair. Which Humors as they may come from
diverse causes so especially they be sent thither by an acute Disease, and by
Heat the Root of the hairs may be dried, which may cause the Falling of hair.
And it is manifest that this comes from malignant Humors, because in those
Diseases which are venomous and fix more upon the Skin then upon other parts,
and produce diverse Deformities thereon, as in the Elephantiasis and French Pox,
the hair chiefly falls away in those places whereunto the Humors have most
resorted.

In the Nayls also, as we have said since they are of the same cartilaginous
Substance with the hairs, The heat of a Fever is the cause of impression upon
the Nayls and of their loosnese.
and stick only to the Skin as they do, the same thing may happen: and may
suffer from the same causes, with the hair, and fall wholl off from the
Fingers, but more seldom, because they are Naturally more firm: yet sometimes
from the heat of a Fever they grow dry about the Roots, or partly consume: and
after when the Fever is gone they grow again with an Impression upon them and
a kind of separation.

Also from an evil quality such as takes away hair in the Elephantiasis and
French Pox, An evil Humor is the cause of the corrosion and filthiness of the
Nayls.
the Roots of the Nayls may be infected, and receive such a blemish, by which
though they fall not off always, as hair does, or be consumed, yet they may
have such a filth that they may appear ugly and deformed thereby.

Also the number of parts is diminished by another part thrusting off the
former; as in the teeth, The teeth and nails throw themselves or by new.
which in young people grow up by degrees till they throw out the old. This is
also but seldom in Nayls, a new growing will cast off that which is above, and
this is from abundance of Moisture.

The Cure.
That Deformity which arises from number abounding if it come from the Birth,
The abounding of some parts.
either in the body or any Member and cause no impediment, in regard it cannot
be cured but by cutting off, must not be attempted, except it may be taken off
without danger of life or lameness, But if it hinder not much and may be taken
off without danger, then you may adventure; as when there is a Tooth too many,
which hinders chewing, which is seldom, you may pull it out. A sixth finger
being yet small and weak may be taken off with a Raysor or Pincers, which done,
The taking off of the sixth Finger.
as we said in wounds, you must presently stanch the blood, and cure it
accordingly.

If any parts be wanting either from Birth or chance, The cure of the want of
some parts as of the Stones.
as when the Stones are cut out, they can no ways be restored, neither in Man
or Beast, as they may in Plants whose branches being cut off grow again, Nature
does this but not Art. Therefore here is no need of a Physician but for the
preventing of the perishing of a limb by keeping off external injuries, and
diverting of other Causes.

Yet there are some who rectify Deformities, The artificial reparation of
parts lost as a Foot, a Hand, an Arm, a Nose, an Eye.
by artificial Instrument, to supply parts that are lost; make new Feet, Arms,
Hands artificial, which are sometimes so flexible by Joints that they afford
some use for going and holding. That horrid deformity of a lost Nose, is
repaired by a painted one: and I have seen an Eye so artificially made of
Ivory, to be taken out and put in again without pain, and constantly to be worn
so that none could imagine it to be other then a true Eye, only it moved, not
and the place was moister.

The teeth falling by chance or otherwise, in Infants, while the Roots remain,
The Cure of Teeth lost.
or by Reason of new Teeth which thrust out the first which are without Root
fastened in the holes, but held by only a membranous Substance, in Children
about six or seven years of Age, and in Horses and other Creatures, about
three, four or five years of age by which we know their Age, is repaired by
Nature and others come in their Rooms: but if this chance to people in years,
when the Roots are fixed, which are also carried away when the tooth falls or
is drawn out, or if any stump remain it is unprofitable, and they cannot grow
again. I knew one who is now alive, who is as a rare Example, being a Man, that
had two new grinders in the place of teeth that were before plucked out. And
although while they are sound, the teeth grow as they are worn away: yet when
they are rotten and taken out, they will not grow again. Yet this defect, when
one or two teeth are wanting, which causes Deformity if from before, may be
supplied with artificial teeth made of bone, which I have known some
constantly to wear; and they have not been discoverable from true.

The want of Hair, being a Disease in number deficient, The Cure of Nayls
fallen off.
when the Roots are gone cannot be repaired, because it is impossible to
restore any part of the Body being quite taken away. Also when the Pores of the
Hairs grow together, that defect cannot be cured. Wherefore in a true Baldness,
and Scar in the Skin, or when the Pores any ways unite, or in an Alopecia,
when the hairs are gone at that Root, to labor to restore them is to wash a
black More white.

But in the want of hair, when they are so fallen that none appear, The Cure of
the Beard fallen off.
yet if the Roots and Seeds remain, then they may be restored by Art, or grow
again of themselves. But if this defect be in magnitude wanting, as we said,
when the hair grows no more, as in Eunuchs, or slowly the Pores being little,
as in some, this cannot be cured by Art; in others it is difficult to be
attempted, though diverse things are used, yet the success is slow and not
before Nature attempts it of her own accord.

In the Cure of these defects, a prognostic being always presupposed, leaving
that which is desparate we must begin the Cure of the rest at the cause which
is first to be removed, whether external or internal if it come from evil
Excrements which must be evacuated by purging, or by the habit of the Body;
then we must proceed to topicall Medicines to the part fit for the Generation
of hair.

If it come from evil Juice the cause must be purged away, and that which is
in the Blood must be cleansed, and the evil Concoctions amended, and good Blood
be produced for nourishing the wholl Body, and also for the Hair; which purges
if they be often and strong, by drawing from the Habit of the body, the cause
that corrupts the hair, and the malignant quality in the French Pox, will cure
both the falling of Hair and the Disease that causes it.

Purges are to be administered according to the Excrements that abound: and
because these sharp and salt Humors are carried with blood and water by the
Veins to the Pores of the Skin, where they destroy the Roots of the hair, let
the Purge be proper for these Humors: such as is given against Scabs, Itch, and
the ring Worms, in treating whereof we have showed diverse Forms; as when an
evil quality in the French Disease, hurts the hair, you must use the same
Purge which is good against that. Evacuation by the Habit of the body, does
more directly throw off that filth which lies at the Roots of the hair; and
sweating or breathing by insensible transpiration does it: but first purge,
then sweat, principally in the falling of Hair in the Po^ which comes from
Venom, you must cure it by the habit of the Body, and so you will cure the Pox
also as we shall show hereafter, where we shall prescribe diverse Sudorificks by
things taken in, we can hardly produce Hair, although it may be done by some
things which throw the Excrements to the Skin and this is the judgment of
those who think the hair proceeds from Excrements: and therefore they prescribe
such things which may effect that. As Figs which by a proper Faculty do send
Excrements to the Skin; they conclude them so from the vulgar Opinion that Figs
beget Lice which they say come from filth in the Skin caused by Excrements
driven thither by the Figs, when the filth that produces Lice, comes rather
from external things cleaving to the Skin. The cause of this opinion was;
because the seeds of Figs in shape and multitude resemble Lice, and they also
crack in the teeth and between the Nayls; others for the driving of Excrements
to the Skin to produce hairs give Treacle, by reason of the troches of Vipers
which is in it: supposing that Vipers flesh taken into the body, can cast off,
as Vipers do their Skins and throw the Excrements to the skin for producing of
hair.

It is certain that Treacle by causing sweat, does rather throw out the
Excrements that are about the Skin than bring them thither. And if Vipers flesh
can throw off a skin, it will rather drive Excrements from the Body, then lodge
them there, as we have showed in the Cure of Elephantiasis. Lastly, since it is
certain as we have showed at large, that Hair is not nourished of Excrements or
Vapors unknown, much less are they made of the same; but they rather fall away
by Excrements when they come to the Roots, and they as other cartilaginous
Bodies and Nayls are nourished from the Blood with a Juice proper for them, we
cannot persuade our selves that Excrements being driven to the Skin can produce
Hair, but contrariwise you may produce Hair better by removing of Excrements
and throwing them out of the Body. The chief end in curing fallen hair by the
French Disease, is to expel that Venom outwardly by sweat, and so you must do
if you will cure any kind of Baldness which comes by congestion of Excrements.

The hair of the Head, Beard, Eyebrows is to be restored by things outwardly
applied to the part; such which increase hair by an occult quality as are many
things fetched from living Creatures and known by Experience; or such as be
drying and astringent, as most are which are used for this purpose; and the
reason is because they dry and make thicker the Juice that is brought to the
Roots of the Hair which makes it a more fit Nourishment for them. Or by such as
raise Blisters by drawing the juice to the Superficies, and apply to the Roots
of the hair to nourish the same; of which either single or mixed you may make
Medicines for growing of hair.

In the beginning of hairs to fall, to prevent it, and preserve what remains if
it be far gone we must mix very strong astringents with the other that the
Pores may be closed. And we add stronger dryers and digesters to these, when
evil Humors lie about the Roots to destroy the Hairs; some teach that the hair
may be preserved from falling in a venomous Disease as the French Pox by using
Lenitives as Milk which tempereth the Venenosity. All these Medicines of what
kind soever, whether they bring hair again or produce and preserve it, are
applied diverse ways, or they are used as washes and Fomentations many made of
Plants are diversely applied, as the Root of Water lilly, Leaves of Beets, and
Coleworts, with Salt, the Daffodill Root, with Vinegar, the Dogs tongue leaves
with Swins Grease or the like: and when you will bring Nourishment to the Hair,
mix Onions, Garlic Squills and Raddishes, or the Root or Leaves of Crowfoot,
or Watercresses, or wild Mustard and the like.

The Pouders of diverse Plants are mixed with Honey and Oils grease, Pitch and
Rosin: sometimes to be anointed and sometimes applied Plaisterwise: as the Bark
of Reeds, or Roots of Maiden hair, leaves of Godlylocks, Southernwood, Mirtles,
Wormwood, berries of Myrtles, Juniper, and Myrobalans; and to draw them out,
the powder of the Roots of Asarabacca, Hellebore, Thapsia, Rue, the seeds of
Mustard, Staphsager, Watercresses, Rocket, Rue, Henbane seeds, with Oil, of
Flower-de-luce, are said to bring hairs on the eyebrows and Chin. Also the
ashes of some of the aforesaid Plants calsined do the same being made into the
Form of a Liniment, as the ashes of Hazel Nut shells, also of Southrenwood,
Maidenhair, Goldilocks, Reeds barks or Roots: the Barks of Pine Tree, Roots of
Daffodill, Sowbread, Garlic, leaves of Myrtle, Wormwood, Misceltoe,
Cypress-Nuts, Date-stones and Line-seed, burnt with Straw, also Barley.

The juyces of Plants either are used alone or mixed as when you will attract,
of Onions, Garlic, Squills, Raddish, Thapsia or of Sowbread. When you will
dry. The juice of Reeds, Southrenwood, Docks, Myrtle or Willow-leaves: and of
other Plants aforesaid.

Also Aloes dissolved in Wine is very good. Also the Liquor that comes from the
stock of a Lenden-tree being cut, is very good: the Milk of Gumsuccory will
fetch hair upon the Eyebrows says Dioscorides.

The water of Honey distilled, sepecially that which is made of the comb with
the Bees in it, adding, Ants and Hog Lice that are sound among stones, is good
as also Aqua vitae. The Mucilage which is expressed or strained from the Roots
of an Elm which are first boiled is good also: Honey they say also will bring
hair especially honey Anacardinum.

Diverse Oils are for the same use, as that which pressed out of Nuts, Almonds,
Peaches, or Nut-kernells, or let Nut. kernels be bruised and applied; also old
Oil Olive or lamp Oil, or rap Oil, or that which is distilled of
Juniper Berries or Spike; or Oil of Myrtles Roses in which Southernwood or
Coloquintida, have been boiled, and also sort of hot Oils are used by
practitioners, To make hairs longer some have privately used Oil in which the
Roots of Osiers and Embick Myrobalans have been boiled of Gums Labdanum is the
best dissolved with Honey, or when hair is to be fastened, with oil of Myrtles
or of Roses or with old Wine and juice of Myrtles to which sometimes Myrrh is
added; also Frankincense, Mastich, Sandarach is and other Gums with Rosin, and
when we will attract, we add Euphorbium.

Diverse things taken from living Creatures are used to bring hair, as Bees with
their combs stamped, or the powder of them or of Waspes; the little
Cantharides, which are red and have black spots, and are black bellied which
the French call Gellines de nostre Dame, and are found upon the stocks of
Trees, being dried, poudered, and mixed with Oil of Spike are very efficacious.
The powder of the Cantharides in the Shops are attractive but you must mix them
with Oil of Violets or Almonds, least they ulcerate.

Use the Powder of Lizards their head and tail taken off, with Oil of Yolks of
Eggs. The dung of a Mouse with Vinegar, and also other dungs are very
attractive. The filth that comes from Be Hives and the powder of Bees half or
wholly burnt are good with Honey and Oil of Spike, Juniper or Myrtles or the
like; or with Grease of a Bear or the like, or with Pitch and Wax, or with Wine
and Vinegar; also ashes of Waspes, Cantharides, Grasshoppers, Flies, Hog-lice,
of Moles, or of their skins of Mice or their heads, of Hares head of Lizards,
Froggs, Horse-leeches, of a Seahorse, or Sea-vrchin, the Hoofes of a Mule, of
Goats, of Bears skins, of a Fox, of a Hedghog, of Snaks skins, of Man's hair, of
Bears or Hogs bristles, of Mouse or Goats dung.

Grease is commended especially of a Bear, then of a Mole, of a Spike fish, of
a Duck, Goose, Hen, Goat, Hog, Coney, Dioscorides Anoynts, with Oesypus or
Grease of Wool. They say that Oil of Worms increases hair, also Oil of Eggs, or
that in which Lizards have been boiled. The Mucilage which come, from Snails
bruised with some Bees and Waspes: and that Water which runs out when Snails
are pricked brings hair upon the Eyebrows. The blood of a Sea-turtle a little
dried is commended, also the Galls of Hogs, Goats and Bulls: of earthly things.
The Froath of the Sea made hard with the Sun, mixed with Vinegar, or the ashes
of it; also salt Peter, quick Brimstone, Oyster shell, the powder of a
Grindstone mixed with some sharp Juyces. The Armenian stone or Lapis Lazuli
beaten applied with some Liquor fit, brings hair upon the Eyebrows, Lead filed
and Antimony mixed into powder and applied with Grease is good to bring hair
upon the Eyebrows, if not, it does by blackness keep the want of it from
being seen, others commend burnt Stibium of compound Applications, to bring
hair or to cause a Beard these following are the best: a good Liniment. Take
Oil of Myrtles, and sweet Almonds, of each one ounce and an half, or the barks
of the Roots of Canes or Reeds or of Colwort stocks burnt, of Maiden hair or
Goldilocks, and of Southernwood burnt each two drams, of the heads of Mice
burnt and Bees burnt with their Combs one dram and a half, of Labdanum two
drams, of Honey one ounce: make a Liniment.

Or take of Oil wherein Southernwood has boiled two ounces, of Honey one
ounce, of the ashes of Mole skins and Hedghoge one dram, of the ashes of Bees
and Waspes half a dram, ashes of Nut shells two scruples, Mice dung one
scruple, of Bears Grease one ounce, of Labdanum three drams: mix them for a
Liniment. To which add Gallia moschata for the sent, or Musk or Oil of Cloves.
Or,

Take of Oil of Nuts and Bays each one ounce and an half, Oil of
Juniper Berries ot Spike half a dram, the juice of Docks and Southerwood or of
Myrtles leaves each one ounce: boil them a little add one ounce and an half of
Honey, powder of Bees half a dram, of Labdanum half an ounce, of liquid Storax
a little: it will attract more strongly if you add the ashes of red
Cantharides, with black spots half a dram, of the powder of Cantharides of the
shops one scruple. To draw Nourishment to the hair you may make it thus. Take
of the Juice of Raddish one ounce, Juice of Onions half an ounce, of Honey one
ounce and an half, Labdanum two drams, Myrrh one dram, Euphorbium half a dram,
of the Sea Foame one dram, or instead thereof one dram, of Samon salt or of
salt Peeter, of Pitch or To sin be dissolved in Wine six drams: mix them for a
Liniment.

When the Eyebrows or Beard salleth this is experienced to restore the hair.
Take of Henbane seeds two drams, of Mouse dung one dram, of the powder of
Goldilocks and Nigella seeds each half a dram, of Spikenard half a scruple, of
Oil of Juniper as much as will make an Ointment: you may make many Ointments of
the aforesaid Simples for the same use.

To preserve the Hair from falling when you are afraid thereof use this. Take
of Oil of Myrtles or of Mastich two ounces. of Labdanum and Hypocizstis or
Acacia dissolved in sharp Wine or Vinegar two drams, of Alum or Salt two
drams, of Wax as much as will serve to make an Ointments, or; Take of Oil of
Roses and Quinces each one ounce, of Labdanum dissolved in Verjuyce two ounces,
of Mastich one dram and an half, of the powder of Galls, Cyprus Nuts and
Myrobalans each one dram: mix them for an Unguent to these you may add, the
ashes of Filbirds, Nuts, and Bees and other dryers above mentioned. If you
desire hair to grow again or to come forth, we may use Fomentations, with
Liniments before and after or alone; and they are made of the Decoction of
Southernwood, Maidenhair, Goldilocks, Horehound, Vervain, Myrtle leaves, sour
Docks, Rosemary flowers-Chamaepyts or Groundpine, Rosemary topps, and Sage: if
the Head be to be washed, Take the Roots of Reeds or bark of an Elm, the herb
Ferula if you can get it, Linseed, torrefied and Spikenard according to
Dioscorides. And if the Hair sall by reason of bad Humors, we must add those
things which cleanse them away, as Senna, Guiacum, roots of Briony, Wildgourd,
Snakeweed, Spinach, Lupins, Beans, Bran, boiling them to a Lixivium, or make a
Lixivium or Lie of the ashes of Juniper, Southerwood, Horehound, Nuts, Almonds,
Snails, sometimes adding other ashes as before, and boiling other things
aforementioned in the same; sometimes Fomentations are made of stilled Waters,
as of Southernwood, maidenhair, Goldenlocks, with distilled Honey, which you
may use with ashes of Labdanum. Also a Water of Lard and Honey with other
proper Plants is good. There is another of boys urine, Wine and Milk, distilled
in equal parts, to which add Southernwood, and other proper herbs, and
sometimes Mustard seed to make it stronger. The ashes of Tobacco boiled first
in Boys urine do cause hair to grow, and kill Lice wonderfully. The urine of a
Cow or Mare in which Faenugreek seed has been boiled is also used. To prevent
the Falling of hair, make more astringent Decoctions in sharp Wine or Lie, or
ironed Water, leaves of Myrtles, and berries of the same, Elm barks, red
Roses, Galls, Cypress Nuts, with other things.

The Falling of hair from the French Pox is cured by a Fomentation of Milk, as
we showed, adding Butter, the Oil of sweet Almonds and the like Lenients, to
attemper the acrimony of the Humor; besides these external Medicines. That
soote which comes from Pine Tree burnt or Frankincense or other Gums especially
Storax, which sends a sweet sent, does cause the growing of hair in the
Eyebrows often and hard rubbing of the part while it grows red with the Figg
leaves or rough clothes, helps to cause hair by drawing forth the moisture:
or rubbing with sharp Juyces as of Raddishes, Onions, Garlic, Squills and the
like. If the down be first shaved off or the thin hairs very often, it helps
much to make them thicker and longer. This will cause the nourishing moisture
to come to the part, and the hairs come forth better, this is the best way to
produce a Beard, and when hair falls it will grow stronger; the smoothness of
the Eyebrows is amended if with blacking or Soote, with Oil of Nuts and
vernish you make a paint.

When the Body or parts thereof grow too big, The Cure of the over largeness of
the body of magnitude of parts increased, of overlarge Orifices.
or the Orifices too large, if they be original from the Birth, they cannot be
cured: nor can we cut off any thing from a part too large or sew up large
Orifices, or conglutinate them, for then they would loose their use, which is
of more concernment then Deformity. Yet for to astring some Orifices if they be
not too wide by Nature, but caused by Force without Rupture, Women have some
Medicines for the external Orifice of the womb, The Cure of the mouth of the
Womb being too large.
to make them conceive the better, and to conceal the loss of Virginity, by
often applying astringents which make the parts straighter. A Fomentation or
Incession is used for this purpose made of the Decoction of Galls, and
Pomegranate peels in Rain or Smiths Water, with red Wine, Vinegar, and Alum:
sometimes they add Comfrey roots, leaves of Sumach, Plantane, Oak, Cypress
Nuts, Pine barks and other astringents and sweet sented as Cypress, writing
Ink applied with clouts does strongly astring or this following. Take of
Pomegranate flowers half an ounce, Mastich or Frankincense and Dragons blood
each two drams, of Asphaltum or Mummy Arabic in red Wine and Juice of unripe
Pears or Sloes make a past and apply it, or sprinkle on the powder of Bole,
Galls and Mastich, to which add Antimony and Scales of Iron. To strengthen the
Privities, and help Conception this water is most proper: Take of the great
Comfroy roots, Galbanum, Roman Vitrioll, Pine-gum, Ammoniacum, sweet Almonds,
Cypress Nists, grains of Sumach, Terra sigillata each equal parts,: powder
them and mix them with Sloe-water, boil them a little, and with water being
warm foment the Privities with a linen cloth. This following is of the same
if not greater Virtue. Take of the leaves of Myrtles, Swine-cresses each four
handfulls, of green Medlars, Sloes and Pears each two pugils and an half, of
Hens Gizards thirty, distill them in Balneo mariae, and let the Water be put
into the Privities with a lock of Wool often. If the Nayls grow continually
thick it cannot be cured, The Cure of Nayls that are too thick or too long
for if you shave some from them the next will be as thick.

But when the Nails are too long, although it be Natural, in regard they bring
Deformity and hinder, they must be cut to the quick, so that they be even with
the flesh for to cure long hair. This is done by trimming according to the
custom of the Country: but when they grow too long in a place they should not
as in the Forehead, The Cure of hair growing too long.
or in the upper Lip of a Woman which is usual or upon her Chin which is
monstrous; or when they are too many in the Privities, then they must be taken
and prevented from returning which is most difficult; but it is to be done by
outward applications a preparative going before; either by pulling forth, or
cutting them off or burning the skin, when there is a Plethory you must prepare
by letting blood, if you intend to burn them off, to prevent Inflammation and
pain: you must also purge. Some use sweating before either in a dry Bath or
with hot Water, that the Pores being opened the Medicines applied may have the
better Operation. But this is not so necessary because it will be done without;
but they do well after to cleanse the skin from the Liniments and filth
especially when they stick fast in the Privities: Topiks are diverse, to make
the skin clean from hair called Psilothra; this they do by a caustic Power by
burning, and if they burn strong as we said of hot water the Roots will be
taken off and a Scar will be in the Skin, so that they never will grow again.
This is to be done warily and if the place be burnt, cured as a burn. Some
Medicines work otherwise then by caustic or burning, by a secret propriety;
which are mixed with causticks to keep hairs from returning: besides these
there are some which have an astringent Faculty by which they hinder hair which
do drive back the Nourishment. And chiefly to keep hair from growing again,
they use Narcoticks or Stupefactives, supposing that they repel them by their
great coldness, but they being not cold must do it by another way of Digestion,
which we have showed to be their property, or they are used to take away the
pain by Causticks, so they were used, mixed with other things at first, and
after they were supposed to be applied for the hindering of that grows of
hair. These Medicines which take of Hair or hinder it from growing, either by
way of Ointment or Powder are made of the Simples following. First from Plants,
as the Roots of Osmund-royall, of Cypress, take off hair according to
Dioscorides: the Meal of Lupins with Oil and Vinegar: the red Berries of Briony
take away hair, hence the Plant is called a Psilothron, to which you must add
Vinegar when they are bruised, least they cause Ulceration. The juice of Spurge
does it excellently, but it inflameth easily, therefore it must be mixed with
the white of an Egg or Oil: the Juice of the wild Cowcumber does the like:
other Juyces keep them from growing as of Fumitory, Coleworts, especially
Narcoticks, as of Henbane, Hemlock and Poppies. The distilled Water of the same
does the like, as also the Water of Stonecrop and Housleek: the water that
drops from a Vine that is burnt is good also: also Gum of Ivy dissolved in any
proper Water is much commended.

From living Creatures these are good the sea Hare and the Urtica, beaten and
laid on says Dioscorides. Also Ants beaten together with their Eggs are
commended if applied. Also Ants Eggs with the Milk of a Bitch or meal of Lupins
with strong Vinegar, Moles, green Froggs and Horsleeches poudered, or burned,
and applied with Oil or Grease are also good: also Salamanders and Glowworms
mixed and beat together with Ants Eggs are of much force: also Swallows Dung
and Vinegar: also Batts blood, Ftogs blood, Snails with Vinegar, Moles with
Vitrioll, Bitchs Milk, Ox Gall, black Chickens and Dogs piss. The Decoction of
a Mole with salt Water, till the water be almost gone, takes away hair but
brings white in their stead.

Dioscorides commends the Oil wherein a Salamander of the Sea has been boiled.
They say Salt often thrown upon the Head takes away hair; and the crocus of
Iron with Oil. Of Compounds this following is the best. Take of quick Lime one
ounce, of Orpment one dram or one dram and an half, add a little of the white
of an Egg and Barbers Sudds anoint the place with your Finger, and a quarter of
an hour after wash it with the Sudds, if they go not off, increase the quantity
of Orpment, and so continue till you have done it; some mix these with French
Soape. The Turks have a thing called Rusma, it comes out of the Earth and is
like skales of Iron, but lighter, black and as it were burnt, which is best of
all, and the Women use it much as Belloniuc says, because it makes the parts
smooth without burning, leaving no sign of hair; they take the half of this
Powder and half of the Powder of quick Lime, and steep them in Water and wash
therewith, and afterward in the Bath they wipe the part and the Hairs comes
off. This Rusma is a kind of Shoemakers black or vitrioll called Sorry or
Melanteria, it is like it by Description: other things to take off hair are
made thus. Take of unsleked Lime one ounce, of Orpiment half a dram: powder
them and boil them in water or Lie, then use it: others use the ashes of
Hartshorn with as much Orpimens boiled in Rainwater: the Powder of Orpiment
mined with juice of Henbane takes off hair and they will not grow again, and
the Juice is to prevent pain. Another; Take of Orpiment one dram, of Gum, of
Ivy five drams, of Ants Eggs bruised one spoonefull and mix them with Vinegar;
you may add the blood of a Bat or of Froggs, or Juice of Henbane, least they
should grow again; some use the Decoction of Spurge in Vinegar with Quicklime,
and least they should excorias they boil Mallows therewith or add Milk. This
water takes off Hair and keeps it from growing again; Take of salt Peeter eight
ounces, of Allnm six ounces: beat them together and distill a water with which
wash the part, and when it is dry wash it again. A Lie in which Nettle roots
have been boiled, and a rusty Horse-shoe steeped does the same, if after the
part be shaved you wash the place there with thrice every day. To hinder their
growing again this is the chief Medicine. Take of the Juice of the Narcotick
herb before mentioned two ounces, of the blood of a Bat half an ounce and add
thereto Gum of Ivy, or half an ounce of the Mucilage, of Fleabane, or of powder
of Ceruse and burnt Lead each one dram. or; Take of Opium half an ounce, of
Sanguis Draconis one ounce and an half: boil them in Vinegar, adding the Juice
of Henbane, a distilled Water of Henbane, Poppy, Hemlock, Housleek, and
Stonecrop with the bloods before mentioned and Alum and Vinegar is approved.
Hair cannot be pulled off, otherwise many together would cause pain, and one by
one require much time; therefore a very sticking Plaster laid some time upon
the part, and drawn off, will do it; for this purpose. Take of the Rosin of the
Fir Tree or of the Larix-tree four spoonefulls, of Mastich poudered as much as
a small Nut; dissolve and boil them a little, always stirring them, and then
power them into cold water and make a Plaster.

It is otherwise made with Colophony and a little Gum Ammoniack or Galbanum,
for so the Skin being mollified and enlarged the hairs come forth more easily.

If you add something which will pull hairs forth it will work both actually
and potentially as Gum of Ivy or thus,

Take of Pitch half an ounce, of Mastich or Gum of Ivy three drams, of Orpiment
one dram and an half: with Rosin make a Plaster.

You may take hairs off with Scissors, but better with a Raysor, first washing
with warm Sudds, but then the Roots will appear, and arise suddenly again, and
the oftener you shave, the thicker they will grow; therefore shaving will but
palliate and not take away this Deformity.

The skin must be a little seared, not to take away the hairs, because they may
better be cut away, but to hinder their growth, for so the Roots will be
consumed, and the Pores stopped: which as we may do it with Medicines so may we
with an actual Cautery; and this is done with a Plate of Gold burning hot
suddenly clapped on, for so though there be a burn, yet after the healing thereof
no Scar will remain.

It is better to prevent then take away grosness of Body which is burdensome,
The Cure of the carnosity and fatness of the Body and parts thereof.
because a Body that has been great when made less will be wrinkled, uneven
and deformed; as the Breasts when fallen are lank and flaggy, so the Cheeks,
Calfes of the Legs and Belly, if formerly distended, will wrinkle when they
are fallen.

But to prevert this burdensome flesh, or to stop it that it proceed no
further, we must hinder the increase of that fat which is Natural in the
Blood: first by a more spare Diet, or such as nourish little. But if a more
sparing Diet only be used then formerly and it be of good Juice, there will be
rather an increase of better Blood, then a less quantity, which will little
avail for abating of flesh. And though a sparing Diet does abate, in regard men
will not long endure it, we shall do little by that means. But if we prescribe
a Diet of little Nourishment of Herbs rather then flesh, and water instead of
Wine or very thin Wine or other Drink, they shall so grow lean, and this is the
best way: great and constant Labor takes down the flesh and Fat of the Body
in time, especially if the Diet before mentioned be used; but ordnary Exercise
makes a better Concoction, and rather increases then diminishes the Flesh.

Great and often Evacuations by which the Blood and nourishing Juice is taken
away from the parts and their increase or grows hindered, as great Sweats by
strong Exercise, or Baths or the like are very proper as Bloodletting and
Cupping which Scarification and often Purging; which as they are prescribed
with good advise, so by chance when there is a Flux of blood, or of Seed by
much Venery, or of the Belly, or an acute Disease, corpulency is taken away and
the Body made lean. And this will be so also by old Age.

It may also be done by altering Medicines which keep the Body hot and dry
constantly, this way will prevent and diminish Corpulency, and the constitution
may be thus altered by Diet as well as Medicines, Decoctions are chiefly
commended for abating corpulency, as of the Husks of Filberds boiled in Wine,
Roots of Polypody, Avens, wild Chervill: Rosemary with a little Ginger.

Or the distilled Water of these often drunk.

Also Vinegar often drunk does the same thing.

Pouders made of these things following and taken in Wine are said to do the
same, as the seeds of Ash, Hil-wort or Pol-montane, Parsley.

Also Tartar or Wine-leaves often taken, or Gum Sandarath half a dram, with
Oxymel, also the Salt of Vipers.

It is said that Pepper often used will cause Leanness.

Pills of bitter things taken every morning half a scruple are good, as of
Birthwort Roots, Gentian each one dram, of Madder roots, and tops of the lesser
Centaury each half a dram, of Alum one scruple, with Juice of Polypody or
Avens make a mass.

Women which desire to be handsome labor much to hinder their Breasts from
being over large, The Cure of too great Breasts.
they affect to have them little for Ornament, and fear they will be unhandsome
when they are big.

This is done not only by using such means as extenuate the whole Body (which we
have declared) but by outward Applications: which by repelling, cooling and
binding, or consuming the Nourishment by a digesting and drying Quality, keep
the breasts comely.

The same Medicines which we spoke of in the Chapter of Milk over flowing,
which hinder the coming of it to the breasts, or dissolve that which is there,
being applied to the breasts will also make them less.

A Fomentation often repeated with a Sponge or Linen clout, and left at the
Breasts till dry will do it. This is made of red Wine, Vinegar, Ladies mantle,
Horstail, Myrtles, Plantane, Roses, Balm, Mints, Galls, and other astringents.

Or make it of Sal ammoniack and Alum boiled in Wine.

Stilled Water from the foresaid may be also used with Alum; also a Water
distilled of green Pine-nuts: also that which is made by Distillation of Eggs,
Alum, and Powder of Chalk.

Quinces, Apples, green Pears, Medlars, Service-berries, Sloes beaten together
with Vinegar, or boiled in it do the same; or boiled with Oil of green Olives
and Galls.

Hemlock fresh gathered beaten by it self or with Vinegar, Henbane leaves,
Mints and Balm do the same.

This Plaster following is also good. Take of Mastick and Frankincense each
half an ounce, of Galls and Cypress nuts each two drams, of Bole or Fullers
Earth or red Okar three drams: powder them and mix them with the white of an
Egg and Vinegar or Honey and so apply them. or,

Take of Pomegranate peels three drams, of Acacia hypocistis or Conserve of
Sloes half an ounce: mix them with Vinegar and the Mucilage of Fleabane seed.

Or this Ointment. Take of Ceruss three drams, of Alabaster or white Wax two
drams, of Camphir one dram, of Borax half a dram, of the Infusion of Gum
dragant half an ounce, of Oil of Mrytles as much as will make an Ointment.

They commend the Powder of two Whetstones rubbed together mixed with Vinegar,
Dioscorides says that the Cypruss Whetstone called Naxia, keeps Breasts from
growing a Squate or skale Fish laid to the breasts does the same by astriction.

When the Body or any part is too small by Nature, it cannot be cured, nor a
Member restored by an artificial Instrument, or by making the like, this is a
Disease in number deficient; but that which is deficient in magnitude may be
supplied in some.

When any part of a Member is lost, The Cure of a small Body or small Limbs, and
of such parts are lame.
instead thereof new flesh may be added, which may be fashioned like unto the
former; which diverse ingenious Chirurgions say they can do when part of the
Nose is taken off: first they take away the skin in the extreme part of the
Nose, then they make a wound in the musculous part of the Arm of the Patient,
into which they place the remaining part of his Nose having the skin cut off as
aforesaid: first putting a Tent in each Nostril, then they bind his Head to his
Arm, and so let it remain till the flesh grows to the Nose, this done they
cut off as much of the Arm as is fit to make a Nose, and fashion it like the
former and then take the Tents out of the Nostril, and after heal it up. If
this may be done by a Nose, why not by other Members, and though this new flesh
should serve for no use, yet it would take away Deformity.

To make new Breasts and Papps so that the Child may suck: The Cure of breasts
consumed.
women use to apply an Acorn cup or half a Nut shell filled with Rosin of the
Larix tree: to the place where the Niple is wanting and let it stay on some
time.

The Gums being naked as it were without a thick Skin, The Cure of Gums
consumed.
being worn away may be restored. This is done first by taking away any thing
that is rotten about them, then rubbing them often with Vinegar of Squils, or
Oil and Honey which is stronger, with the powder of Dragon roots and Honey or
with Aegyptiacum and Wine, and the like clensers and resisters of putrefaction
mentioned in the Ulcers of the Mouth.

Afterward let them often rub the Gums with drying things that breed flesh and
glue the same to the Teeth, as with this Powder. Take of Orris Root one dram,
of the Meal of Oroby two drams, of Frankincense or mastich one dram, of
Sarcocol half a dram, of burnt Alum one scruple, of Angelica Roots for to give
a Sent or Cipress roots as Dioscorides will have or Cloves, or of Mosch or
Ambergreese a little, so make a Powder.

Birthwort roots may well be added, but they are bitter, and Mirrhe but it is
unpleasant, therefore instead thereof: Take Benzoin or Storax, Sanguis Draconis
is good to be mixed therewith and also Blood stone.

The ashes of Pennyroyal are good according to Dioscorides, burnt Hearts horn or
Ivory and things aforesaid which six Teeth, especially when they are loose by
reason of the consuming of the Gums: there are also things to rub the teeth
mentioned in the Rottenness of teeth, that are good.

Calcine Frankincense and Mastich, and mix them with Honey, a little powder of
Coral with Salt and Alum, and rub therewith.

The Troches made of Orobus and Honey are used.

The Ponders may be made up with Honey or Oxymel of Squills into Troches, and
so dried and kept for use.

The straigtness of Orifices as of the Womb and Praepuce or Foreskin if it be
such, The Cure of straight Orifices.
as does not only bring Deformity; but hinder Action, is to be dilated by
incision. This may be done safely in a Phimosis by cutting off the Foreskin
which is usual in Circumcision.

When the womb is too narrow, a division made by Infection has been often
practiced, The Cure of Phimosis.
though it be more painful and difficult then the other.

Therefore first you must begin with the safer way of practice, by somenting
the part with things that loosen moisten and mollify, as Fomentations and
Baths, Ointments or Pessaries such as are prescribed in the hardness of the
womb; which while you use you must put in a Tent somewhat large made of a dry
Gentian root or a Sponge tied close together, that as it swells it may enlarge
the Orifice, by often use.

That Leanness which is not by a Consumption but Natural; The Cure of the
Leanness of the Body and its parts.
is seldom altered. Otherwise flesh or fat may be caused by things that
increase blood and nourishing Juice; as good Diet and rest, Natural
Evacuations, Motions of Body and Mind; these will bring a better Habit to the
Body.

When Breasts are lank and hang down, they are unseemly, The Cure of lank and
loose Breasts.
and women that love to be neat, desire their Cure; this is done by applying
things that make them harder and firmer, such astringent and drying things
which we said would hinder the growth of Breasts.

When parts are disproportioned and cause Deformity, The Cure of the uncomely
Figure of parts.
besides what is from number or magnitude, of which we have spoken, as a Head,
Nose or Mouth imshapen, if they be so Naturally, they are incurable as also the
Teeth and Nayls.

If the Hair be too curling and much, we cut it off, The Cure of over curling
Hair.
if little pluck it out; but this being not very unseemly is not to be tampered
with, except it be troublesome, as when in the Eyebrows and from thence they
bend into the Eyes.

These hairs are to be rectified by often touching them with the slime of a
Snaile, or with Glue.

They say they will grow again when pulled out if the Pores be anointed with
Oil in which a Lizard has been boiled; or with Frogs blood, especially if it
be mixed with the powder of Laurel root or the ashes of Organ.

Some desire their Hair may curle, Things that cause Hair to curle.
and this is done by the use of strong astringents such as were mentioned among
those which black the hair, as the Decoction of Galls, Pomegranate peels,
Cypress Nuts, Pomegranate flowers and the like made into a Lixinium, to which
they ad things that cause curling as Daffodill roots, and Dwarf Elder roots
and Leaves with the seed of Henbane.

Also Ointments made of the same are used, as: Take of Oil of Myrtles and
Mastich two ounces, Oil of Henbane half an ounce, Juice of Myrtles and Vinegar
each one ounce: boil them, then add the ashes of Chestnuts, Hedghog and Pine
nuts each half a dram, the shavings of Pams horns, Gum Arabic and Draganth
each one dram, Myrrh half a dram, Honey at much as will make an Ointment.

They say Mucilages boiled in Water or Lie will do the same, if made of
Marshmallows roots, Linseed, Foenugreek and Fleabane seed, and Gum Arabic,
this they believe will so soften the hair that they will be fitter to curle or
the Pores being loosned thereby and made larger, the hairs will come forth more
crooked. Others add Fern-roots, Beets and Lythargy, and when the hairs are dry
anoint with Oil of Myrtles. Some anoint with the Roots of Dwarf Elder mixed
with Oil. Women do more certainly with crisping Irons; and when they go to Bed,
they twist them, and with great pains put them under their Head gear, and in
the morning being combed out, they continue curled the whole day.

If there be a Division of any part which should be united whether after the
Cure of some wound, The Cure of the separation of parts which should be united
at of the hare Lip.
or Natural, if it be in a fleshy part it may be united; as that of the upper
Lip which Children are born with called a hare Lip in Dutch Hasenschart, it
will be united if it be cut on both sides, and after the Lips be joined
together with Needles wrap about with Silk or with sowing and a Plaster laid
over till it be cured; this you may try in any other part where there is
Deformity or Hindrance, and in fleshy parts it will be done, but scarsely in
other parts. Also these may be artificially united, if you first take of the
skin upon each side, and apply sticking Plasters to the sides with double or
treble Clouts and Buttons, with which and good Ligature, the parts divided will
be drawn together and united.

If the Gums be separated from the Teeth by biting hard things, The Cure of
Gums separated from the Teeth.
you must chew upon the sound side; if from gravel upon the Teeth called Tophi,
they must first be taken off, otherwise flesh will not grow but being taken off
the flesh will grow at the Roots of the teeth, and so be united unto them.
Therefore the Remedies are such as cleanse, of which we spoke in the Foulness of
teeth, and of things that breed flesh in the consumption of the Gums, for it is
done by clensing, breeding flesh and drying which causes Glutination.

Mouth waters which dry and astring are good as: Take of Comfrey roots, five
leaved Grass, Orris each one ounce, of Birthwort and Alheal each half an ounce,
of Angelica and Cypress roots each two drams, of Burnet, Vervain, St.
Johnswort, Pennyroyall each one handful, of red Roses one pugil, Pomegranate
flowers two drams, yellow Myrobalans three drams, Oroby seeds two drams,
Mastich and Frankincense each one ounce: boil them in Wine and Honey adding a
little Vinegar of Squills and Cinnamon, let him wash his Mouth often therewith,
you may also add a little Alum.

When teeth are broken or divided or hollow and rotten, The Cure of broken
hollow and rotten Teeth.
they cannot be repaired, and therefore if they offend must be pulled out; but
if they be useful in regard the next Teeth are gone you may keep them provided
that you prevent farther Corruption.

This is done by washing the Mouth often with the Decoction of Capar leaves,
the leaved Grass, Birthwort, Cypress, Leaves of Mints, Galls, Nigella seeds,
Bay berries, made in Wine and Vinegar, or with Smiths water.

The Decoction of Spurge root in Vinegar is the best, and if Alum be added it
is the stronger.

Or let him wash his Mouth with Sage or Rosemary Water mixed with Salt and
Wine.

Or with Vinegar of Squills if it be not strong enough.

Rub the corrupt Teeth with the things mentioned, for clensing in that Chapter,
which by drying take away Corruption or this Powder. Take of Cuttle-bone two
drams, burnt Coral and Hearts horn each one dram, Mastich and Alum each half a
dram: make a Powder.

Or with the ashes of Organ, Rosemary and Pellitory of the wall mixed with
Honey and Salt.

We put into a hollow Tooth the powder of Galls roots, of Sulphur-wort,
Staphisager, Penny-royall and sometimes Borax.

To take away Teeth when unserviceable, the Cyhrurgions use Paces and the like
Instruments among which that like a Goats hoof is best: some are so active that
the standers by, think they do it without Labor, and they are wondered at, and
go about deceiving the people with expectation of far greater things which they
profess; some cannot be drawn out as easy as those that are loose, especially
when they are broken or rotten.

This may be done by Burning for so the Roots become dry, or the Teeth broken,
so that they may easily be taken out. And this is done by an actual Cautery or
potential, or Aqua fortis or Milk of Spurge, Sorry, as in the pain of the Teeth
is mentioned: Dioscorides says that the Root of Ranunculus, or Juice of
Sowbread does the same.

And other things though they are not caustic as the Root of the black
Chamaeleon, the Juice of Celandine, the Lies of Oil, the Liquor of that comes
out of the Cedar, and the prickie of a Forkefiish.

They suppose that a Tooth will fall out, if you put Gum of Ivy into it, the
fat of a green Frog or of a Cookow, or with the blood of a Lizard.

If you deffend the other teeth with Leaven or wax and apply to the nollow
Tooth, the powder of the root of a Mulbery tree which has been first infused
in Vinegar it will full out.

Also the Root and Leaves of black Henbane, laid hot to the Teeth.

Also wild Coloquintida infused in Vinegar then poudered and boiled with Honey.
or,

Take the grease of Froggs, Juice of Celandine, and Aqua vitae in equal parts,
and apply it.

Or the Juice of Celandine and Mugwort with Vinegar.

The Colewort worm applied does the same, and the water of Sal Ammoniack.

The teeth will fall out if rubbed with the powder of Nettle seed and Galbanum
equal portions.

Though the ruggedness and clefts of the Nayls cannot be made even and smooth,
The Roughness and clefts of the Nayls.
yet as they grow they may vanish, which that it may be better done, and the
like not succeed, first use gentle means.

As Pitch, Wax, Rosin melted and applied, also Mastick, Colophony, and
Turpentine dissolved, adding sometimes Sulphur or Brimstone.

Also Raisons by themselves or with Opoponax.

Dioscorides commends Dock roots in Vinegar, and the lesser Celandine and
Cypress.

Also Watercresses and Linseed are approved.

To which add Cummin, Costus roots, with Honey and the Pulp of Raisons or
Grease, sometimes Alum and Salt.

The stronger Medicines are the Roots of Crowfoot.

Arsnick with Bird-lime, or Gum Serapine, or Wax or Sue; or Oil.

Or Cantharides with Oil of Roses, or the like.

If the hair be not all cleft it is usually neglected, but to cure, The
cleaving of the Hair.
you must pluck away that thin part and anoint the ends of the remaining Hairs
with the Gall of a Beast: and then use a Decoction to cause Hair, of
Southernwood, Capill^^ herbs and Cane roots, and others aforementioned.

They spend time in vain who join them together with Mucilage, or Bird-lime or
Glue.

When the Dandrough falls not but with Rubbing it is neglected, The Cure of
Dandrough.
or it falls away with only combing, rubbing and washing with Soap; But when it
abounds and falls continually upon the clothes, as when it is to be seen in the
Beard then it must be cured; first by purging, if it comes from Excrements, or
the Disease cured that causes it.

The Topic Medicines are to be such as consume and cleanse filth which causes
it, and they must be strong or weak as it is fixed, always mixed with
Lenitives, least they exasparate the Skin too much.

Washings are diverse, first common Lie or Barbars Sudds with Soap and Rubbing.

Or Sudds with Juice of Beets and a little Vinegar; also Honey and a little
Gall of a Beast.

Or Urine, or salt Water, or Wine alone, or with the things mentioned.

Washing with hot water, will assuage the smarting of the Skin after the use of
clensers; if afterward you wash with water in which Mallows and Foenugreek
have been boiled.

The Decoction of Willow leaves, and bark is commended.

Or the Decoction of white Spinach, Coleworts and Roots or of Mallows,
Pellitory of the wall, Sopewort, Lupines, Beans, Foenugreek, Melons, and
berries of the Spindle tree, also Roots of wild Cowcumbers and Squills.

Diverse Ointments are used, as this. Take of the Oil of bitter Almonds or Nuts
two ounces, of Oil of Violets, Flowerde-luce or Wall flower each one ounce, the
juice of Spinach two ounces and an half, Vinegar half an ounce: boil them a
little and add the gal of an Ox three drams, Brimflone two drams, Vitriol one
dram, Niter half a dram, make a Liniment, which will be stronger with half a
dram of Coloquintida. or,

Take Almonds and Nuts roasted at a fire each one ounce and an half: beat them
into a past, or the Meal of Lupines and Foenugreek with half an ounce of the
Powder of Brimstone, of Bole or other fat Earth two drams, of Dreggs of Wine
one dram, Ox gall one ounce, as much common Honey, or Honey of Squills as will
make a Liniment: you may add one dram of Mustard seed or Stafesacre.

The ashes of Lilly-roots or of Garlic with Honey.

The Powder of yellow Myrobalans, with Juice of Spinach and Vinegar.

The white and yolk of an Egg powedup on the Head after washed, does qualify
well after the use of sharp clensing things.

Pomatum keeps the skin from chopping.

A good Water is made of the Tops of St. John's Wort, Groundpine, Pellitory, or
Soap-wort each one handful and an half, the Meal of Lupines and Foenugreek
each one ounce, Brimstone, six drams, Tartar three drams, Niter one dram, red
Wine one pint, Vinegar two ounces, Rose Water one ounce.

Rub the Head with Salt, Niter or the Meal of Lupines.

By combing Dandrough will fall.

The Scales in the Palms of the Hands called Palatella, The cure of the scales
in the Hands.
in French, is cured as Dandrough with Clensers and Emollients.

The growing together of parts which should be assunder or of Orifices which
should be open coming by Birth or chance, The Cure of parts to be divided and
Orifices that are closed when they should be open.
cannot be but by force. Therefore if they hinder not actions, let them alone
with a little Deformity: but if they hinder the Functions as closing of the
Anus, womb, and the like, then Section must be used or Cautery, by reason of
the Necessity: and this is easier done, if there be only a concression by a
Membrane interposed or Flesh not thick.

A shutting only of the Orifices without growing together of them as of the
Mouth in a Convulsion of the Mouth, which hinders actions, we have showed how
it should be opened formerly.

Another Conjunction is less seemly and that is in the folding of the Hair is
cured with combing: The Cure of matted hair.
if they bring only Deformity, and no impediment ought to be omitted, because
it is not easily discerned, and if cut off, they will come so again: and they
who have such matted hair, take little pains therewith, but think them an
Ornament and Sign of Manhood.

The Deformity which is in perverting of the Situation or position of the
Body, The Cure of Situation of parts disordered.
if it hinder the Function or be painful as in Luxations, Fractures and
Ruptures. We spoke of their cure before, as also of Crookedness, which
deformeth most of all.

When the Toes are awry, since it comes from the shoes as we have showed,
first they must not be too straight, and that will prevent that Deformity which
can after scarce be cured.

The starting forth of the Eyes too far if from the Birth is incurable: The
Cure of Gogle Eyes.
but when it comes from a strain, when that cease they return, so that they
need no astringents; for if they should be astringed gently they could not be
put back; if strongly they would more hurt the Eyes by wrinkling them. And
since neither wind nor any Moisture by filling the inward parts of the Eyes can
thrust them forth, we shall in vain apply Topics as some do to consume wind
and water.

To cure the position of the Teeth altered by motion, The cure of loose Teeth.
and fix them again in their places, and to prevent their falling forth, we
must use Dryers and Astringents; such as do not black the teeth as some do, and
add things that have a grateful scent.

Washes for the Mouth in this case, are made of Roots of five Leaved grass,
Snakeweed, Capars, Moulin, Myrtle leaves and Mastich tree and Olive leaves,
Bindweed, wild Tansie, Strawberry leaves, Medlars, Cornil tree Service, and
Rose leaves, Pomegranate flowers, Galls, these black the Teeth, Elm barks,
Acorn cupps, Sponge, Mary Thistle, Moss growing upon trees boiled in Rain
water, Iron water, red Wine and Vinegar.

If Alum be added the Decoction will be stronger.

To take away the Moisture which is common there, you may boil with the rest
the Roots of Pellitory of Spain, and make a good sent, Angelica roots, Topps of
Rosemary and Sage and some Spices. Some boil Gums therein from whence there is
but little astriction, as Mastick and the like.

Other washings are made of Alum, Vinegar and Honey.

Dioscorides commends the Pickle of Olives, and Sorry.

Also Waters of Roses, Horse tail and Vinegar are good to wash the Mouth.

Some things being chewed do the same as Elicampane, and Berries of bloody Red,
and Barberries also Mastich chewed.

Dioscorides teaches that the Oil of the wild Olive tree kept in the Mouth
fixes the Teeth.

Pouders are made to rub the Teeth and Gums, for the same purpose, as of Coral
and other dryers, which we described in the whiting of teeth, adding Salt or
Alum, which being burnt does more astring, sometimes they add the ashes of
burnt Rosemary, Sage, Myrtles, Mastich tree, Olivetree, also of Dates stones
and Cray fish or other astringent Pouders as of Cypress roots, Nuts, Sponge,
Mary Thistle, Roses, Hypocistis acacia, or of Sloes and Mastick, Bole or any
fat earth also Spices as Cinnamon, Cloves and Lignum, Aloes.

When loose Nayls cannot be fastened, the Deformity from thence is cured as if
they were quite fallen off; The Cure of loose Nayls.
especially when other grow under: For if they be not and those places be not
lest bare, a worse Deformity a rises. That therefore loose Nayls may fall from
the skin -- there is no other Art to be used, because they will fall off,
Dioscorides teaches to apply a raison thereunto.

CHAP. II. Of Discoloration.
WE call that the discoloring of the Body, when it has another Color in the
Skin, Eyes and Teeth, Hairs and Nayls.

The discoloring of the Skin, which appears only where it is naked and
hairless, is either general of the whole body, or particular of some places
only.

A general Discoloring of the skin is, when it has all over, and not in one
place only, a different Color from the Native, when it is more or less red or
white; as when it loses its stesh Color, and contracteth another or becomes
uncomely in an evil Habit, Jaundies, Palness, Redness and Blackness.

An evil Habit is a Discolouration in which the flourishing Color of the Skin
being lost, Cachexy or evil Habit.
the decent Habit of the body called Euexia is changed into an evil Habit
called Cachexia: in this the skin is too white and pale, or turns from white
to bluish, inclining to the lead Color, and the superficies of the body
appears full and more swollen. This Disease is accompanied with a shortness of
breathing, which troubles them when they exercise or go up any steep place,
with beating of the Arteries about the Throat and sides of the Neck, beating of
the Heart and Faintness, especially in the Feet, and first there is a pricking
pain at the Heart, of which they complain much. This Disease though it be
incident to all, yet is it most common to Virgins, especially at that time when
their terms should begin, and it begings then and continues after many Months
and sometimes years, while the Terms are stopped, or if they who have their
terms, have also this Disease, they are stopped. Also a lingering Fever as we
said in Fevers is joined herewith, sometimes other Diseases come upon it, as
of the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and the Urine except changed by some other
Disease accompanying it, is white, waterish and crude. And if it last long, the
Body will grow bigger and a Leucophlegmatia will follow, as shall be declared.

There is another kind of Cachexy, which with Palness of Body and other
accidents mentioned, An evil Habit is the beginning of a Dropsy.
has swelling of Feet, which if it continue long, the belly also swells and is
extended; and this goes before the Dropsy Ascites, and is the beginning
thereof, as shall be showed in the Dropsy.

There is a third Kind in which the Palness of the Body is not simple, Evil
Nourishment, or Cachochymia is a kind of Cachexy.
but inclines to an evil Color as yellow, green, black, yet is not full
colored in the Jaundies, it shows it self with a pressing Pain at the Heart,
and beating of the Arteries, and other Symptoms as before. This they call
Cacochymia or evil Nourishment, from the cause. This is turned into a Jaundies
or some kind of Dropsy.

One of these Kinds is when there are not only uncomely Colors and other
Symptoms, Cachexy with a Dropsy or want of Nourishment.
but the Habit of body rather decreaseth than increases, and the Body grows
lean and thin, and therefore it is called evil habited, if this continue long
and the body consume, it is turned to an Atrophy, which is so called from the
Cause, as shall be showed in the Diseases of the Body diminished.

The Jaundies is a Discolouration in which the skin is dyed of another Color;
Jaundies.
this Name comes from the Bird Icterus, by the look of which this Disease was
thought to be cured, it is otherwise called Arcuatus, because the Color of the
Rain bow is in the Eyes, Arcuatus.
and the kingly Disease, either because it is usually with great Men, by reason
of their Intermperance, or because it was cured with Meade, which was in time
past the Kingly Drink.

This Disease is diverse according to the diversity of Colors, sometimes it is
yellow and called the yellow Jau^dies, by the Germans Geibsucht, sometimes it
is more Saffron like and full colored, sometimes it shines and then it is
called Aurigo from the color of Gold: some time it is greenish, Aurigo.
sometimes black, which prevails over the yellow, and then it is called the
black Jaundies. These colors appear first in the Eyes, then in the Face,
sometimes they are over most parts of the Body, or over all, sometimes the
Urine is of the same Color, and they seem sometimes Saffron colored sometimes
black, so that they will discolor a linen cloth, in the mean time their
Excrements which ought to be colored, are white or ash colored, and therefore
do not provoke the Patient to void them. This Disease sometimes begins of its
self, and the color first grows bright or shining, with pressing pain about
the Heart, this commonly goes before the Jaundies, and is its forerunner, and
this Pain before any Yellowness appears is called in Dutch Selbsucht, because
it follows so easily; sometimes worse diseases accompany the Jaundies with
their accidents, or follow as a Dropsy, sometimes the Jaundies follows sa
Fever and other diseases as the Colic, as it has been declared.

Redness is a Discolouration very sudden, in those that are angry, Redness.
or shamfac'd or blush, it ^on inues longer in those that are hot, or have hot
Diseases especially Fevers: and this Redness appears most in the Face.

P^leness is a Discolouration in which the skin loses its flourishing Color,
Paleness.
and becomes less colored then is beseeming. This is usual in those that are
very cold, or sorrowful and greived, and it comes quickly to those that are
affrighted, and to those that faint or swone, in whom the Image of Death is
seen till they come to themselves. Sometimes a constant Paleness is the
forerunner of a Disease, and often the Companion of Diseases, and continues
some time after recovery: which Paleness appears in the whole body, but chiefly
in the Face, and in those places which formerly were most red, as in the Lips
and Cheeks there is Blewness: also Paleness will be in the Nayls and Yard, when
it needs not or cannot, blush, or be red,

Blackness is a Discolouration in which the skin appears black: The Blackness
of Moors.
and it is either perfect, such as some have been at their birth, as the
Aethiopians; or it is when the skin is not white but tawny, which they call
black: which although Natural to some, yet because uncomely in their Eyes,
Tawny Skin.
which esteem that nearest color to white the best, they count it a
Discoloration and Labor to cure it.

Hitherto may be referred the evil Color of a wrinkled skin in old Age: for
that which comes from a Disease and Leanness, continues not long.

A particular Discolouration is only in some parts of the Skin: by reason of
spots or defilements.

They which are from external Causes, make Impression of a strange color, or
are superficial.

As that blackness which is from the Sun burning in the Face, and Hands and
Breast, in those places where they are used to be naked.

There is also an evil Color from filth in unclean Persons which sticks to
the skin and spoils the color.

Some are dyed in the skin by external Colors and Paints, The coloring of
the Skin.
this is usual with them that trade in such Commodities; and those that touch
them.

Hence the skin is sometimes black, red, yellow, green, etc. which sometimes
suddenly vanish, othertimes stay longer and are more fixed and cannot easily be
washed out, in regard of the Cause which we shall all at large declare.

The skin is discoulored with diverse spots, which sometimes are distinguished
only by their color, sometimes by their bigness and bunching forth; some come
with, and some without Diseases.

They which arise of themselves without a Disease accompanying them, are
original spots, as Freckles, Pimples, Fleabites, Erysipelas or Anthonyes fire,
blood spots, Gutta Rosacea, Ring-worms, Morphew, black and Blewness.

Original Spots are such as we bring into the World, as Moles, Original spots
as Moles.
these are called Signs and Marks, and are diverse and are of diverse Colors and
Shapes, as like Strawberries or Cherries, some are depressed broad or little,
and are manifest only by the Color, and they are in the Face sometimes and
sometimes in other parts of the Body.

Freckles are dark spots as big as small or great Lentiles, Freckles.
and of the same color only they bunch not out, therefore are they called
Lentigines from Lentiles: these are sometimes more abundant sometimes fewer,
without pain or trouble, only discoloring the body especially the Face,
sometimes the Hands and the open Breast being ^^posed always to the Air:
sometimes they are in the Arms and Feet, and the more manifest when the body is
more white, sometimes they appear in Summer, and are gone in Winter, they are
constant.

Of the same Color are some dark Spots as broad as the Hand in diverse parts,
The broad dark Spot.
and they come and (...) at certain times

They are called Fleebitts which because they resemble such, Fleebitts.
for they are little and round, and are about the Pores, and they only itch a
little.

Erysipelata or Anthonies fire, Spots like Anthonyes fire.
are little spots like the great Anthonies fire, but without Heat and only itch
a little; they are larger sometimes with a redness over all the Legs, and
differ from the true Anthonies fire, in regard there is no Inflammation or
Burning but only itching. As I often found being a Youth, by Experience, that
when I rid forth, that Leg which was next the Sun was so burnt throw my Boot,
that it was very red and itching, yet it was gone in the space of two days.

These blood Spots are very like in the Face, Blood Spots.
Neck and Breast, large and small sometimes, depressed sometimes elevated,
continue long, but trouble not but by itching.

The rose Spot is when the Face or at least the Forehead, The rose Spot.
Cheeks or Nose are sprinkled as it were with red Drops, the French call this
Coupe Rose which signifies Copporas or Vitriol, though it be nothing like it;
sometimes the Face is swollen with them and full of Pustles, and the Nose very
large and full of Rubies.

Ring-worms or Teters are red about the Edges and the Skin is rough, Ring-worms
called Impetigines.
like that of the Chin, which is scabby called Lichen, only they itch not so
much, but are as broad and as many, continuing long in the Face, Hands or other
parts without Molestation: The Germans call them Zittermahl or Estecht, and the
French Darters.

Vitiligo or Morphew or Alphi are so called because they change the Color of
the skin, Morphew or Vitiligo.
these are whiter then the spots called Leucae, the Arabians call them Albaras;
others are blackish called Malae, both are ordinarily called Malum mortuum, or
the dead Evil: others call one white the other the black Morphew. These are
not together but dispersed like Drops through the Skin, changing their place
and creeping, yet not rough nor scaby or ulcerated, and without Sense, and if
they be rubbed they are but reddish, or if you prick them being deep in the
skin, yet they cause no pain, nor does blood come from them but only Water;
when they are where Hair grows they cause it to fall, and other white thin
down comes up instead thereof.

Sugillations are blew spots after contusion, Sugillations, Ecchymoses,
Vibices, Stigmata, Peliomata.
which when they are nourished by a Humor, are called Ecchymoses; if they come
from a stroke Vibices in Dutch Senatthen, and Stigmata in Greek, and by reason
of their blewness, Peliomata, and because they are Skie-coloured, the Germans
call them Blawmahfer, sometimes they grow blackish, and are yellow about. They
are uneven, narrow and large, with a Tumor at first, and pain when they come
from a stroke, and continue long after the Tumor is gone.

In Diseases there are diverse spots which are either plain or like Pustles, as
in Fevers, Pox and the like.

In Fevers called Synochi, there is often a red spot broad and spreading
called Erysipelas, Erysipelas.
sometimes in the Face and Hands, this is described in those pains which it
causes by burning.

In Fevers, especially in Children, there are diverse red spots in the Face,
The Measles or Exanthemala.
Breast and all over in the Pores, about the bigness of Lentiles which they
call Exanthemata.

There are other spots like the former in Fevers, Ecthymata or small Pox.
as big as half Pease or Lentils upon Children that grow up to Pustles, or fall
in again or grow blew and itching and turn to matter, and then to a black Scab,
by which being innumerable, either standing together or a part, the body is so
defiled, that it is ugly to behold. And when these are cured, the face is all
their life after filled as it were a Honey comb with the impressions thereof;
they call them Ecthymata, because they break forth with violence, also Variolae
or little Pustles, Morbili, or Papulae that is Pushes, Wheales or Blisters: The
Germans, because Children have them usually call them Kindsblattern, of which
we spoke in Fevers which produce them. These are not only in the Skin, but
Eyes, Nostrils, Mouth: as we showed in the Diseases of those parts.

In malignant Fevers that are venomous and infectious, The spots of
pestilential Fevers.
we have not only those spots mentioned but others called Petechiae, sometimes
red like Fleabitts, sometimes like Violets, dark and blackish as we showed in
Fevers.

In the Elephantiasis there are red and blew Spots in the Face and other parts;
The spots of the Elephantiasis Pox, Scurvy.
and in the French Pox there are the like of another kind: in the Scurvy called
Stomacace or evil of the Mouth, there are spots of diverse colors in the Legs,
and sometimes in other parts, all which are exactly described in the Chapter of
Infection.

We have showed in the Treatise of the Convulsion, Of the yellow Spot in the
Convulsion.
that one who had the Spasmus or Convulsion, had a yellow Spot that quickly
grew up and quickly vanished from his singer.

The Eyes are sometimes discolored, when from the natural Color they decline
by Redness or Yellowness.

The Natural color is in that called Iris or the Rainebow, black in the Center
bigger or less round about, gray or brown, and without the Circle all white;
also when they are spotted or otherwise ill colored.

Sound Men have often red Eyes by outward heat, or too great Motion, Redness of
Eyes.
or the Eyes are red from hot Diseases of the Head, or of the Eyes themselves,
as in an Opthalmy, or Inflammation or Epiphora a Rheum, in which the Eye brows
rather then the Eyes are redder then usual. In the Elephantiasis besides other
Deformities, there is Redness of Eyes: as we showed in Diseases which cause red
Eyes.

In the Jaundies the Eyes are yellow, as was showed in that Treatise, Yellow
Eyes.
and more in the white part of the Eyes, then in any part of the skin, because
no part of the skin is so white, as the thick Tunicle of the Eye, and therefore
the yellow will not appear so soon in other parts, as in this most white subject.

Diverse spots discolor the Eyes, as those that are red or blew in Sugillation,
Blew Eyes.
or Hyposphagma called blood shot: these are not only in the white but in the
Rainbow of the Eye, and they appear more bloody then in the Skin.

Exanthemata and Ecthymata, Pox and Measles in the Eyes.
that is Measles and Pox, as they insect the whole body, so sometimes the Eyes
and hurt the sight; and if many Pustles be within the adnate and horny Tunicle
called Cornea, they cause blindness.

The Cornea or horn Tunicle of the Eye is hurt with white spots; The white
spots in the Eyes.
if these be right before the Pupilla or sight they cause blindness, but if in
the white of the Eye, they neither change color nor hinder sight, as was
showed in the Pin and Web Scar, and Suffusion or filme in the Treatise of sight
depraved or hurt.

The common people think the Eyes uncomely if too gray, Gray and black Eyes.
because the clear part about the Pupilla, which uses to change color, is
gray: and the blacker it is by consent from the Pupilla, which is always
black, the more comely are the Eyes. Although Ancients commended gray Eyes and
called Minerva Glaucopis from thence, yet our age allows them not for the
best, and would change them if it could.

Also the Teeth, being Naturally white, are easily infectly, and discolored:
Yellow and black teeth.
as when they are yellow with filth sticking to them; or when they grow black
from their own Corruption, or from Vapors in great Diseases.

The Nayls are discolored and spotted by erosion; The spots of the Nails.
sometimes they are too black and blew, sometimes too red, which Color is not
in the Nails, but shines from the flesh beneath through the Nails, as if it
were in the Nails; as bruises being under them, are seen through, and blackness
in the topps from filth: but in young people especially, there are small white
spots in many places of the Nails, which first rising from the Root, grow with
the Nails and are pared off, and others grow in their Room. The vulgar think
that these are a sign of long life in men and women.

The hair is counted discolored only when it is turned exactly white from a
Disease, White downy hair.
which took off the former. Or when young people grow gray too soon, it is
Natural and honorable for an old man to be so, hence the Poet said: Baldness.
In old time gray Hairs were of much esteem. This Greyness comes soonest in the
beard, though that come forth long after the hair of the head: very red and
black hairs are not counted discolored, Red, black and yellow hair.
although they are by Common People accounted less comely; on the contrary,
they that have yellow or gold colored hair are counted comely, because they
are according to Nature, and black also except curled and like the Moors.

The Causes.
All the Causes of Discolouration whether it be general or particular in the
Skin, Eyes, Teeth, Nails and Hair, come either from Humors, as Seed, Blood;
nourishing Juice, Choler, or from evil Humors or Filth or other defilments: or
from Heat, Cold, or Dryness, as shall be in order explained.

As we showed in Deformity, that it came in respect of Number in Deformity, The
Parents seed is the Cause of Discolouration. and spots original in the Skin,
Eyes and Hair.
that it came in respect of Number of Parts, Magnitude and Figure from the
Parents seed many times; so from the same comes Discolouration, and hereditary
Spots; which also as the Diseases in form and figure, come from the seed; and
the Natural color of the skin is derived from Parents to Children, as that
blackness which is counted uncomely, comes Naturally from Parents of the same
color: and Children are gray or black eyed like their Parents, and haired,
black, yellow or red like their Parents. And as in men often so always in
Beasts, they produce their like in color. This has been observed to be true
also in Birds especially Pigeons, of which if one or two only be black or
different in color, all the rest being white, there shall be so many and no
more of that color: and if the Eyes of the Pigeon be black, yellow or
crystalline, the young will have the like. They that study Pigeons, are so
observant therein, that they remove those whose color they like not, least the
young should prove of the same.

As this similitude of Natural colors, comes from seed rightly and Naturally
ordered and disposed, so if it be otherwise, diverse colors and strange spots,
may come as we said concerning Deformity; namely by transmutation or permistion
and diverse Causes, amongst imagination can do so much, as that if a woman in
the time of Conception or after when with Child, apprehended any thing strongly
by sight or imagination, the same shall have impression upon the Child: as
Histories report a Woman to have brought forth a black More, by beholding the
Picture of a black More in the time of Copulation; also other spots come from
hence, as of Mulberries, Cherries, and the color of a Peacocks Neck and other
representations, which we have observed to be Natural (from Parents
imaginations) in their Children; some have taught that Beasts have the same
imagination to produce the like to what they fancy. As the Scripture
witnesses of Jacob, who that he might get Cattle from his Father Laban, used
an Art, by barking and peeling Rods, that they might be of diverse colors, to
cause the sheep which looked upon them at the time of Copulation, to produce
party colored young. Pliny says that Pigeons will produce Pigeons of diverse
colors, if the Dove-house be painted with diverse colors.

From the Blood which is over the skin and the flesh, Blood in the supersicies
of the Body is cause of Redness.
(which in the Description of a Phlegmon I showed to be Natural, in regard it
is not only gathered in the small Veins of the skin, but the substance of flesh
and skin covered therewith) as I say, there arises from the blood, a proper
color of the Skin inclining to Rendess, to be seen through the Cuticula or
scarf Skin; or as there is a perfect Redness in some parts, as the Lips and
Yard by reason of their spungy flesh containing more blood, and in the Yard by
reason of Arterial blood, and in the Cheeks, in which the blood is more
frequent then in other parts (especially in some constitutions): so, if this
blood should be carried more to the Superficies or outside then ordinary, there
will be a redder color but chiefly in the Face, which by reason of its
tenderness and looseness receives blood more easily. As we see, when the blood
is drawn outward with the spirits by external heat, the Body begins to be red,
and the Face to blush, and the very white of the Eyes to be dyed therewith: or
by the passions of the Mind, in which the blood with the spirits being raised
is thrown outward; as from anger the Face will be inflamed and from shame
blush, which yet when the blood returns, do all vanish away; in some sooner in
some later. For I have observed in some, that redness coming from anger and
shame, has continued a long time after burning in the Cheeks.

As these things come by Blood in the Superficies of the body, Want of blood in
the superficies of the body is cause of Paleness.
so when it is there wanting, the flourishing color is gone, and Paleness
follows, which turns blew in those parts which ought to be red by Nature as in
the Face, Cheeks, Lips and Yard as also the Nails, which when by reason of the
red flesh beneath shineing through them they are red, if blood fails are seen
to be blew.

These parts are destitute of Blood, through Hunger, Sadness, Bleeding, and
Diseases; or if the blood fly from them, they are pale till it return, as the
Yard is pale when there is no occasion for blood. And as it is when external
cold repells it, the skin is not so well colored as when hot.

And in them whose Cheeks being red, the Blood being congealed with cold, seems
to be of a livid and lyad color, lastly, the same thing happneth when the blood
with the Spirits is suddenly down in, as in Fear, Terror and other Passions or
in swoundings and faintings, which cause Paleness till the blood and spirits
return.

Also diverse sorts of spots proceed from Blood, either as it is in the true
Skin, or in the Pores, or as it is under the scarf Skin.

In the Fever synochus hot and burnt blood spread into the true Skin, The
blood spread into the true skin, is cause of Erysipelas, Meazles, Pox, and
blood spots, the Rose drop and Teter.
causes that Redness which joined with heat is called Erisipelas, sometimes
Meazles and small Pox, how this was done was explained formerly.

And if blood throw it self to the skin by any other causes internal or
external, which expel it or draw it forth, it caufeth other red spots; as those
Erysipelata which are in one place, and that Redness of Legs which comes from
the heat of the Sun, which we formerly spoke of.

Also through plenty of Blood, Thinness and Heat, and sometimes Impurity of the
same, those blood spots do come into the Face and other parts into which Nature
sends it.

And first the Redness of face called Gutta rosacea, as it may proceed from the
aforesaid causes, so from often and immoderate use of Wine, it is usual with
Drunkards, because by Drunkenness the parts ordained for sanguifying or making
of Blood, and the blood it self being both too hot: that blood being sent in
great Quantity and often, into those parts which are ordained by Nature to
receive it, does at length by often supply, cause this continual redness and
Pustles. This Infirmity is of long continuance, for Blood not falling from its
Natural part is not suppurated, nor is it easily discussed other ways; also it
anoys the Face chiefly, because that seems more to abound with blood then other
parts, and Redness is more Naturally there, especially in the Cheeks, which in
some are red Naturally, or speedily grow red by blushing, and this shows that
Blood can easily go to the Face, and return, if Nature be not hindered: but
this is seldom done when it either offending in Quantity or Quality is often
sent thither, but being there fixed it begets this permanent and lasting
Disease.

It happens also that if any Portion of blood which is sharp come to the Skin,
it causes those red and uneven spots by exasperation and corrosion, which we
call Ringworms, and the Germans Zittermahl.

The blood being carried to the Pores of the skin, The blood which is about the
Pores, is the cause of red, little, and bloody spots.
and spreading it self a little space about them, sometimes produces small
spots. Also in sweating, the Blood being carried to the Pores with the water,
and there fixing such spots remain: and we may perceive the same to be done by
stinging of Creatures and biting of Flees, such spots are left, which are soon
discussed because small.

If Blood get out of the true skin, in which we showed that it Naturally is
under the scarce skin, Blood under the scarf Skin, the cause of black and
blewness.
then being out of its place and not able to return, there it lies and shineing
through the scars skin, causes those spots of the color of blood out of the
place, and left by Nature and therefore black and cloddy, such as are in a
bruise, and they are little broad, or long according as the stroke was, and
these will last long, if the blood corrupt not as it often happens when it is
enclosed; sometimes when the blood is thin and spreads abroad, they are yellow
and broad and when it is discussed they vanish, sometimes the blood corrupts
and eats through the scarf Skin.

The cause of Blood thus breaking through the skin is usually a contusion made
in the Veins or true skin, by which its continuity being divided within, the
blood is carried from thence to the scarf skin, for which reason, there are
diverse sorts of Marks, as from a whip or rod, they are long according to the
strokes. And the Eyes are black from a stroke, because the blood by that gets
out of the Veins of the adnate Tunicle, or into the horn Tunicle. After
blood-letting you may sometimes see such spots, when the Vein is pricked
through, the blood does not all come forth but some remains under the scarf
skin: there are none but these violent causes which divide continuity, which
bring the blood under the searfe skin.

Yet from great heat inwardly or outwardly in Diseases, when the skin is
thereby dilated and the Blood dispersed, we have seen bloody spots under the
skin.

And this also may come from thinness of blood, if when it is come to the Pores
it sweat not forth, but stays there by drops; and this is rarely seen as also
sweating blood although we showed in the Treatise of Excrements that has
sometimes been so.

A general Discolouration and diverse spots come from the nourishing Juice,
which is made of blood turned into the parts by assimulation, according as it
is conveyed (when changed) either into the whole body or to some parts.

When crude and unconcocted Juice, If the juice which nourishes the whole body
be crude, it causes evil habit, if bad it causes ill Digestion, or Cacochymia.
goes through the Body to nourish it, the flourishing color thereof is
destroyed, and another acquired as is showed in Cachexia or evil Habit, of
which there are diverse sorts, as the Juice is only crude, or also serous and
filthy; for if it be crude such as is Naturally in the mass of Blood, and makes
the part which is called Phlegm, and that nourishes, being carried with the
blood through the Body for the same purpose, if this abound in the blood, or if
the greatest part of the Blood be such because not perfectly made red, and yet
not so corrupted but it is fit to nourish the Body; then this being joined to
the substance of the Body for to nourish it, still it makes the flesh and skin
of the same color pale and white; and the color is as far from the true
Complexion as the blood is, being so, or when mixed with evil Juice or water
from evil Concoction. In Women, especially Virgins, when that thick Blood flows
not so plentifully to the Veins of the womb, nor Nature, which allots the
purest blood for nourishing of the Child, and for monthly Evacuation, does not
continue her course to carry it thither, and send out the crude and evil Blood;
there will be an evil Habit, and want of Terms (as we showed,) the defect or
want of the Terms, not being the cause of that evil Habit, but the evil Habit
the cause of the want of Terms.

But if with the evil Habit, Cachexy and Cacochymy, there be also evil Humors
about the Spleen which are carried from hence to the meseraick Arteries; there
will also be as I showed, a Palpitation of the Heart and other Symptoms, by
reason of the Cacochyma and Diseases of other parts.

But if this Juice be crude, and plentiful, and long before it nourish the
Body, so that it swell therewith, the cachexy is turned into a Leucophlegmacy
or white Phlegm; and if there be much water, the Leucophlegmacy will be serous:
or if the water abound in a Cachexy, there will be tumor of the Feet, and of the
Belly and Body growing less, and the Dropsy called Ascites will follow the
cachexy or evil Habit.

Or if this Juice, which ought to nourish the body, be so bad, that it will not
nourish, or be very little in Quantity, there will be a decay of the Body, and
the Cachexy will be turned into an Atrophy. As we shall see in the Dropsy
Ascites and Atrophy how they follow a cachexy.

This crudity of Blood, if there be serosity or waterishness, or cacochymy or
suspicion of a Dropsy: comes often from the Nourishment, if such things be
taken which produce crude Juice or Water: as we said in the Imbecility of the
Stomach, as Summer fruicts that will not last, which if they be taken
immoderately by young People, make them subject to a Cachexy, especially by
Virgins being weak and using Exercise.

This crude Blood which causes a Cachexy, and evil Juice which causes a
cacochymy, or water which causes a Dropsy comes from the Distemper of those
parts which are ordained for Sanguification or making of Blood and Chyle; as
from the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and the Vessels and Membranes thereto annexed.
And if the concoction be made imperfect, by the Distemper, Weakness or other
fault of the Stomach; the Chylus be crude and imperfect, or foul and watery,
which after in the second concoction produces the like Blood, because it
cannot be sufficiently boiled, and the rather if the parts ordained for the
second concoction are also infirm. We have showed treating of the pain of the
Heart what kind of Diseases are from the Stomach, and cause pain.

Blood that is crude, unconcocted, foul and watery, is made by the Infirmities
of the Liver, Spleen and Veins, because these parts are ordained for the
Generation of blood. The Liver is the Instrument of Sanguification. And that
Sanguification may be hindered by the Diseases of the Spleen, (many former
Arguments being omitted, by which we showed that the Spleen also is the
Instrument of sanguifying, and that it may be hindered by the Distemper of the
spleen) we can prove, because as appears by Anatomies, when the Liver is sound,
and the Spleen rotten, there have appeared those faults of Sanguification which
have been mentioned, and have caused a Dropsy, so that we need not make the
consent between the Liver and the Spleen, to be the cause. Moreover from the
Distemper of the Veins, (seeing they help to make Blood, whether principally,
as some think, or make it better after it has been wrought by the Liver, which
all confess,) the Blood is less concocted and more crude. And this chiefly
caused by the Distemper of the meseraik Veins, that come from the Liver and
Spleen, because the first change of the Chyle and preparation of it for Blood
is by them, for they snatch it and retain it first; the Diseases which befall
the Liver, Spleen or Veins, by which the sanguification being diminished, the
blood becomes crude, and thence comes the Cachexy, either alone with Cacochymy,
or Weakness, Distemper, Obstruction, Hardness or the like.

Weakness of the Liver, Spleen and Veins (which by consent with the Bowels unto
which they are joined, suffer with them) is properly that which comes from want
of Natural heat, if it hinder the Functions, so that the blood be not
sufficiently wrought, and therefore too crude. Thus it is the cause of a
Cachexy, in which the Native color of the body is lost, and it grows bigger,
there is a shortness of breathing by reason of the Distemper of those parts,
and a pressing pain of the belly, the Urin by reason of crudity is waterish,
especially if through the plenty of Water they cannot be tinctured with
Choler; if this Weakness last long it turns the cachexy into a Leucophlegmacy
by abundance of crudity, which if it come from other causes also will make a
Leucophlegmacy serous or watery. Also if from the weakness of the attractive
faculty of the Liver, there be abundance of Water not sufficiently attracted
by the meseraik Veins, the Dropsy Ascites, as we showed in the Treatise of the
Dropsy, will follow; but if their weakness be such, that the Blood be not only
crude, but not enough to nourish the Body, it will produce a cachexy, in which
the Body is rather less then bigger: or if by this weakness the sanguification
is lost, an Atrophy will follow. A cachexy is known to come from this weakness,
if there be no other accidents or Diseases in the Bowels, it appears by the
evil color of the whole Body that they are weakened, and the Patients so
affected, are called Hepatick or Splenetick.

This weakness comes from this dispersing of the Natural heat, which is from
inward Causes from Birth or through Age: or from external causes, and remains
after diverse Distempers of the Bowels, or other long and acute diseases. Among
which are Fevers, after which the Bowels being weakened by too much heat, or
cold Drink which is usual, there follows a Cachexy which by continuance caused
the Feet, Belly or whole body to swell. Moreover great loss of blood, especially
of the Menstrual causes a cachexy, not only by the loss of Spirits, but
because the Veins want refreshment by their emptiness, and want of heat with
which they were nourished: not only by reason of that crude Juice which is
then produced, but because the Body being exhausted loses its flourishing
color. And if the loss of blood were great the body would rather grow less
then swell. Also other Evacuations by which the Spirits are consumed do the
same; among which too much Venery in Man especially.

The Distemper of the parts and Vessels ordained for sanguification, may
produce a Cachexy, either simple or mixed with Leucophlegmacy, or the Dropsy
Ascites; by causing the weakness which we mentioned to continue, and by
hindering the Actions of the parts. The first is a cold Distemper which chiefly
hinders the Functions, and proceeds by over much and long use of cold things:
from external cold to which the Body has been exposed; from which the
constitution is known to be such and in regard there is no Thrist, and the body
appears colder with all signs of a cold cause.

But although the hot Distemper of these parts, especially of the Liver, does
not at the first, nor by long continuance produce this cachexy or evil Habit,
Paleness or swarthy color, but it appears rather in a fresh color, (as we see
in the faces of Drunkards) and brings no great hurt as yet, but only a constant
Thirst by which this hot and dry Distemper of the Bowels is discerned: yet in
continuance of time, in some sooner, some later; by weakening the bowels, and
making them unfit for action (the Sanguisication being so hindered) the body is
thereby discolored and of evil Habit which is a cachexy. And this is turned
into a Dropsy (which appears first by swelling of the Feat and shortness of
Breath, after by other signs) because by continual heat the bowels grow hard,
dry and cloven; as we showed in the Dropsy Ascites, whose causes are chiefly
constant use of hot Wines and Meats or hot Diseases.

The stoppage of the Liver especially of the porta and hollow Veins, may be the
cause of a Cachexy or cacochymy, because it gives occasion to the production of
evil and choleric Humors especially; which we declared (in the causes of
Fevers) to be mixed with the blood in the meseraick Veins, by reason the exact
separation of them from the blood by the second concoction is hindered; if
impure blood be sent into the body, there is rather a foul then a white color,
and it is brown, swart, green or yellow, yet not so yellow as when the Pores
that conveigh the choler are obstructed, and the choler is not separated from
the blood as we shall show in the causes of the Jaundies, by which means the
Urine in that is not so watery as in a cachexy, but it is somewhat high
colored. But if this chollerick filthiness retained by the same Obstruction,
and sent back into the Meseraiks, be not much dispersed through the body, there
is rather a strange Paleness then a color in the cachexy, also the Urine is
more crude and waterish, and by reason of the plenty of choler in the
Meseraiks, there is a looseness rather than binding of the Belly, and the
Excrements will seem rather chollerick then white, contrary to the Jaundies.
And if from the Obstruction mentioned, there follow a weakness of the Liver, as
it may be from thence, or other causes; then because the working of the Blood
is less, there will be a cachexy of crude blood; in which crude Juice nourishing
the Body makes it swell. But if the Obstruction be so great, that by reason
thereof, the distribution of the blood, whether crude or concocted cannot be
made into the hollow Vein, or such foul blood is produced that it cannot
sufficiently nourish the Body, it will decrease: as we shall show how an
Atrophy comes either when the distribution of Blood is hindered by a great
Obstruction, or when the blood is unfit for to nourish.

The cause of this Obstruction in the Liver, is either thick or vicid Chyle,
made of the like the food when it is fastened to the passages, and grows more
condensed and stops the parts; or, as some say, crude chyle, by reason of heat
raised through violent motion or baths used after Meat, which gets too soon
into the Veins, and is there retained til it stop them. And this may come also
from dried and burnt Blood, as we have observed by looking into the Liver of
beasts which has produced such Obstructions by being hindered, and burnt into
the ashes in the Vessels. The same Observations in Man and Beast, have taught
us that Obstructions of the Liver may come from a serous or watery Humor. For
we have found, in them that formerly by urine have voided Gravel, the same red
Gravel to be in the Vessels of the Liver, sometimes turned to a brittle stone,
which being dispersed through the Vessels are like white Coral or Ice-sickles.
And these came from the Earthiness of the Serum which fixes it self in the
small passages, as we have showed in the Treatise of the Stone in the Kidneys.
It is generally concluded that these Obstructions come chiefly from Phlegm,
which if it be not bred as other Excrements in the Liver of crude chyle and
blood, and there laid up; it comes from the Stomach and Gutts, where it is
usually abounding, being brought thither by the meseraik Veins with the chylus,
and there continuing it causes these Obstructions, and the sooner if it be
slimy, or thin and waterish, which will more easily get into the Mouths of the
Meseraiks, if by long continuance in the Veins, it grows thick by the heat of
the Liver, and so become viscous or slimy.

Also an a Obstruction in the Spleen may cause a Cachexy and such ^s is
cacochymical, which declares it self by a filthy color, in which if the evil
Juice get into the Arteries, there will be beating of Heart and Arteries; and
the reason is, because when the Spleen is stopped, Sanguification is hindered,
and evil Humors are heaped up in the branches of the Spleen and gate Vein,
which may from the left side thereof go to the right, and so into the Liver and
then be distributed with the Blood.

A crude or cacochymical Cachexy, as from other Obstructions, so it may rise
from the Hardness of these parts or Scirrhus which grows in the substance
thereof, or other hard Tumor which turns to an Imposthume, for then the
passages are either partly or totally stopped. And this turns to the Dropsy
Ascites, if from the Distemper or Hardness the parts be not only stopped but
left open. And because it is usual so, we shall show the causes of the dropsy
Ascites more at large hereafter. And in an Atrophy how it comes, as also those
hard Tumors of the Liver and Spleen, what are the causes of them, and in what
manner they are, how they come either from too much drowth of the Bowels, or
too thick Juice which nourishes them.

They write that besides these Tumors, the spleen may swell from wind; but I
perceive not how wind can be there to blow it up when it is not hollow. It may
be when the wind is gathered into the left side, and stretches either the
stomach which is most on the left side is swolen with wind, or the colon which
reaches to that part, and this they think to be in the spleen.

The nourishing Juice being communicated to diverse parts, causes diverse spots,
as it insinuates either into the Pores of the skin or some division.

When the Juice which should nourish the Hair, The Juice which nourishes the
hair, being dispersed into the Pores is the cause of spots or freckles.
comes to the Pores of the skin where they grow, it produces these spots which
are like Lentils viz. Freckles called Lentigines; for being like them in
color, it spreads about the Pores, it produces spots: dark colored or like
the Hair. This spreading of the Juice in the Pores comes from the Heat too much
attracting it, and dilating the Pores: if then the juice which nourish the
Hair, is not only fastened to the Roots of it, but spread further, and there
stays to produce spots browner or lighter according to the color of the hair.
And these appear most in a white skin, especially in those Men that have red
hair; on their Head, Eyebrows, Face, Breast, and especially Hands because
these are openest to the Heat of the Sun. And these depart not while the
weather is warm.

The too much openess of the Pores may cause this also, by which means the
Juice does not only nourish the hair, but infect that part of the skin which is
about them, which is hardly taken off, by reason of the continual coming of the
same Juice to nourish the part, and being juice that is so fit for Nourishment,
it will neither be suppurated nor corrupted. This openess of the Pores being
most where the skin is tender, is the cause that, Freakles grow there and are
most conspicuous: and we see that they are more in the back of the Hands then
in the Palm.

Also the spots may grow from the abundant Juice, which is sent to nourish
those Hairs which are plucked up by the Roots of those parts which are most
often washed or rubbed, as Face and Hands:

If the Juice be evil which nourishes the hair and goes into the Pores then it
produces the Morphew, Juice nourishing the hair if evil, it gets into the
Pores causes Morphew.
when brought to the Pores, it is unfit to nourish or produce hair, but spreads
it self upon the skin: as we showed concerning sreakles. So this juice as it is
qualified, produces sometimes white sometimes blackisn Morphew which causes
the hair there to fall for want of Nourishment and if they grow again, there
are imperfect from the fault of the Juice, thin and like down, and otherwise
colored then formerly, and the skin being corrupt and insensible, thereby
sends forth being pricked not blood but matter, and these break forth sometimes
in one place, sometimes another, wheresoever Nature sends this juice to the
Pores.

And this evil Juice by the depraved assimulation of the part where these spots
are, by which assimulation that Blood which is brought thither for Nourishment,
is changed not into convenient Juice, but into evil juice like the part
corrupted, of which it is nourished, as in the Elephantiasis, which we showed
to be large in many places of the skin, but this is in a narrow space and fewer
places. And as in that by a peculiar Insection of the skin other diseases come,
so do these spots come from others yet not so different from that of an
Elephantiasis, because Morphew often foreruns an Elephantiasis. A certain
venomous force is cause of this depraved assimilation as of an Elephantiasis
either like it, or unlike it coming from the seed, or lying hid in the Blood
and other Humors or by Contagion of the body; for by no other means, can either
Phlegm or Melancholy which they say produces these spots cause them by their
qualities; nor can they be produced of crude Blood, as some say, for in a
Cachexy which comes from thence, there is no such spots, and if they should
come from thence, as the whole Body grows great with crude blood, so would it be
all over spotted.

Choler being high colored, Choler sent to the superficies of the Body, is
the cause of Jaundies.
if it be sent to the superflcies of the Body, it will stain it, and cause the
Jaundies. And it appears more the whiter the place is, as in the white of the
Eye, and a clear Skin, as in the Palms of the Hands and under the Nails.

This is not done by that Natural choler which is in the Veins, and is the
thinner part of the blood, and is not yellow but red, but by that which is
called Excrementitial, which being in the Mesoraiks, is separated from thence
into its proper bladder; and it is yellow, or is preternatural, and is green or
black. This kind of choler if it be carried from the meseraik Veins by the
Serum, which is the Vehiculum of all Humors, and therewith carried with the
blood into the hollow Vein, and from thence by the benefit of the same Serum,
carried with the blood by the Veins to the exterior parts of the body, and be
there spread upon the skin and other Membranes, as the Tunicle of the Eye, not
by points, as when it produces spots and Pustles, but all abroad; then
insinuating it self gives it a color, not being mixed with Serum or Whey does
it burn, as it does when it breeds Pustles of it self, only it causes
sometimes itching in places very sensible: also part of this choler carried
with the serous part to the Reins and so to the bladder, makes the Urine of the
same color and thick.

There are diverse causes, why when this choler is carried from the Meseraiks
to the branches of the hollow vein, and thence is fixed in the skin and outward
parts, that it is not dispersed by sweat. The chief causes are Segregation and
Excretion.

The Segregation of choler in the Meseraik Veins when it is done in the Liver
and from thence by the gate Veins carried to the branches of the chollerick
Pore, and the Bladder adjoining if it be hindered by any Disease of the Liver,
or cannot be perfected by reason of the great quantity, being retained in the
branches of the gate Vein, at length as we said it breaks into the branches of
the Vena cava or hollow Vein.

This comes often from the Obstruction of the passages of the Choler in the
Liver, for then although it be separated from the Blood in the Veins of the
Liver, yet by reason of the Obstruction of the Pores, it cannot be refined in
the Gall, and therefore being sent with the Serum and Blood into the hollow
Vein, and distributed though the whole body, it gives it a tincture of its own
color. This Obstruction we have declared to come from the causes of other
Obstructions in other Vessels which cause a Cachexy; from Chylus, Blood, Whey
or Phlegm, if these while the choler does distribute it self into the Pores, go
in with it, and being there detained grow thick, or turn to sand, as we have
seen in Anatomies. The same Obstruction may come from thick slimy Choler,
which sticks long in the narrow Pores, especially if it grow as hard, as it
does sometimes in the Ears, whereby they are stopped while it is drawn out, and
this may be either from the clamminess of the Choler, or from the heat of the
Liver which burns it: and also it may be in the Gall and in the Pore that
reaches to the Guts, and sometimes be turned into a stone, if there be an
Obstruction as we shall after declare.

Also Tumors and Scirrhus of the Liver, as they shut up the Vessels of the
Liver, and a Cachexy so when they stop the Passages of choler they cause a
Jaundies, which foreruns a Dropsy: as shall be showed.

And if any Imposthume or Filth happen in this part, it may be then, that the
humors not being separated but confused, there may follow both a Dropsy and
Jaundies.

Also an Inflammation of the Liver, by making the passages in like manner
straighter, and by inflaming the choler, and driving it into the hollow Vein,
does couple a Jaundies with its Symptoms.

Sometimes it falls out by the plenty of choler and its abundance in the
Meseraiks, that when all cannot be separed into the Gall, and it cannot receive
it, although it be sometimes very large, then some of it carried into the
hollow Vein, and thence carried outward, being yellow, if it keep the Nature of
excrementitious Choler, or otherwise green or black, does infect the Skin with
the same color, and cause either a black or yellow Jaundies. And this it does
sometimes before it cause another Disease, when it is plentiful there, and
breaks into the Veins, it produces a jaundies a forerunner of other chollerick
Diseases. Otherwise when it lies and putrifieth and produces intermitting
Fevers, because in the fits thereof there is some part thereof always sent
into the Veins, it is dispersed by Sweat, and if this be not enough it joins a
jaundies to the Fever: or if all the matter of the Fever be sent by a crisis
from the Meseraiks to the skin, it produces a Jaundize that cures the Fever.
And this may be in other Diseases that come from corruption or abounding of
Choler in these Veins, and so a Jaundize may either accompany or follow them,
as we said it was often in a cholick pain from Choler, if it partly be carried
to the Gutts, and partly remain it joins a jaundize with the cholick, or when
the Cholick cease being not sufficiently purged by Nature or Medicines, it
leaves a jaundize behind which is easily cured, as is mentioned in the Treatise
of these Diseases. For often by Nature help which will not endure that which is
hurtful being stirred up by a sharp Humor, which while it is in the Veins is
tempered with Blood, and so may lie longer concocted, it is carried into the
great Veins if not to the Guts in which the Meseraiks end, as is usual by
purging.

And this may be the cause why a jauudize may come after Poison taken, Nature
so disturbing and moving the Humors, except it does it by some other occult or
hidden Quality, by which in Poison it attempteth diverse Operations especially
in those who are very chollerick.

From which cause as diverse kinds of jaundies do proceed, as aforesaid, so it
will be sooner produced if any disease of the Liver aforementioned do hinder
the separation of choler.

Some have taught that this separation may be hindered in the Spleen, by its
Diseases, as by Obstruction and hardness as in the Liver; and then black
choler which they suppose to be lodged in the Spleen will run into the veins,
and cause the black jaundies. But since we can perceive no such choler in the
Spleen, nor any place to receive it, it cannot be so, nor if it were there
could it be carried into the hollow Vein which touches not the Spleen with any
branch thereof; and if it should be carried into other Vessels, it should be
into the branches of the Artery which are annexed to the Spleen: and then
greater accidents would follow then a jaundize. Therefore it is not necessary
to seek for this black choler in the Spleen, since it is contained in the
branches of the gate Vein, the right whereof is carried to the Liver, the left
to the Spleen, (by which we do not deny but some Portion is carried to the
Spleen) if it be preternatnral, as is said, and be yellow, green and black, nor
can it be by any way either on the right side or the left, sent into the hollow
Vein but by the Liver. And except this be, the Disease only of the Spleen will
never cause the jaundies: we have showed that the causes of this black choler,
or green or yellow abounding in intermitting Fevers, which come from thence
are (as a quartan) from Choler, and not from that choler which is in the
Spleen.

If there be not a voiding of Choler by the Porus cholidochus into the Guts,
then it will rise from the Gall, and ascend by the top of it into the Liver and
its Veins, and is not separated, but goes into the hollow Vein and causes a
jaundize, and then the Excrements of the Belly being not died with Choler, are
not colored, nor do they provoke the Belly to discharge them.

And this may be done by the same causes, by which the separation is hindered
through Obstruction of the Vessels, as Humors, when they fall into the Pores
and obstruct them; or Tumors if they press upon the Neck of the gallor the Pore
that descends: or by the proper Disease of the Gall, or its Inflammation or
Tumor; or stones thereinwhich are sometimes found of a Gold or Silver color,
as also when the Choler is made more sticking and thicker, as that in the
Ears, the like whereunto we have found in the Gall being dissected; and these
if they get into the narrow parts of the Gall, and stick in the Pore, will
hinder (as I said) the descending and purging of choler.

But the Jaundies is not only from the coming forth of the choler, after this
manner, but being thrown from the hollow Vein to the skin, which may be
evacuated by the Pores by which Sweat with the Serum, as is usual, but if not,
it will stay there and discolor the skin, and the less if any be spent by
sweat, and not at all, if all be drawn forth by sweat. This suppression of
sweat, comes from the binding or closing of the Pores of the skin, from diverse
causes otherwhere mentioned. Hence is it that in a chollerick sweat, where it
is abounding and when it has been caused by heat and Baths, if they suddenly
go into the the cold, they have often their skin yellow, which with sweating
again will be gone. I had lately a Patient which was often all over of a
Saffron color, and this went away as often as he did sweat, and returned again
presently after.

The spots of which we here speak are not of pure choler, nor the Freakles,
which we have showed to proceed from Nutriment; as other spots and Pustles,
which rather trouble with heat and pain then discolor, as Anthonies fire; of
which we spoke concerning pain.

Diverse spots rise from evil humors in malignant Diseases, as in pure, Evil
Humors in malignant Diseases, are the cause of evil spots in infectious Fevers
and the Pox.
putrid, malignant, pestilential and venomous Fevers and in the small Pox,
Elephantiasis, Scurvey and the like: as we showed. Which Humors or Poisons by
what force they do it in those Diseases which they cause, as well as spots, we
have showed as much as we could find out in such hidden Causes.

The color of the Skin is poluted by filth adhering, Filth is the cause of an
evil Color in the Skin, under the Nails, and of the Yellowness and Blackness
of the Teeth.
as we shall show when we speak thereof in things cast off.

Also the dirt that gets in between the Nail and the Skin, where they are
divided, shining through the Nails make them look black and filthy,

The teeth are very subject to pollution, and either yellow, or blew or black,
and when they are most white it appears soonest, the causes whereof we shall
show hereafter in things rejected.

The Skin, External colors are the causes of Discoloration of skin, Nails and
Teeth.
Teeth, and Nails, and Hair may have diverse Colors from diverse fouling things,
or that discolor. So the skin of the Hands is made black by touching of
Walnuts, and so continues for some days: sometimes it is made yellow, red,
blew, or the like by herbs and Paints. And the Americans do paint themselves
being naked, that they may be comely. And wanton Boys with us, scarifying the
skin and rubbing in Gun powder, do make certain Marks and Characters thereupon
very artificially. Also the Teeth are so colored, among which astringent
things do chiefly black the Teeth. The Nails are discolored, and made black,
in Curriers by often touching Lime and Lie or Lixivium and it lasts long.

Heat, as we showed, by attracting the Blood makes a lively red Color, Heat
which enlarges the skin, is the cause of a red and lively color. Cold which
thickneth the skin is the cause of a dull Color.
and cold by repressing the Blood makes Paleness, also Heat by dilating the
skin makes the red color shine forth better, and cold by astringing makes it
less clear, and this is the cause that they which are hot have a fresher
Color; and they which are cold are more swarthy.

Also over dryness of the skin changes the Color and makes it more obscure,
The dryness of the skin is the cause of a worse Color, as black.
because by Dryness the skin is made thicker, and by astringency or binding it
wrinkled; because thickness makes it black, and Wrinkles making a shadow
render it more obscure: as we see the skin being burnt and dried by the heat of
the Sun becomes blacker, and being withered by age it is more dusty and black.
The same comes to pass, if the skin be made by a Disease or looser by the
Consumption of the flesh under it becomes wrinkled, which before was stretched
out; or if over moistened with bathing it will wrinkle.

In the Eyes there are white Spots or Scars, by reason of the horny Tunicle
dried and made hard.

And by reason of the drying of the watery Humor this white spot or suffusion,
The dryness of the Membranes of the Eye is the cause of the white spots therein.
appears through the seat of the horny tunicle that is night against it, when
the prespicuity with which the Tunicle and Humor ought to be adorned is lost,
and that Whiteness follows it. And we see the raw white of an Egg is clear and
bright, but being boiled or roasted it becomes exactly white, and loses its
prespicuity. We have sufficiently declared in the defects of the sight, which
come from spots what is the dryness and hardness in the bright parts of the
Eye, and from what causes it comes.

There are also white spots in the Nails, The dryness of the Nails is the cause
of the white spots in them.
where their transparency is lost in a point from the like causes; and this
comes from the Nourishment, if there be in it the least portion differing from
that which should repair and preserve the clear substance of the Nails though
it be sit to nourish otherwise, being different from the thick Nourishment of
the Bones, and mixed with this more bright Nourishment of the Nails, the Nail
makes that portion which is contrary unto it obscure, white, and not clear
white as the rest is. And this is most usual in young People, because while
their Bodies grow, their bones grow also, and it is then more plentiful because
they abound with Nourishment, and there may easily cause these spots; as we
have declared, diverse hard Tumors to grow from the confusion of nourishing
juice.

Moreover, we have observed that the Nails have not been only streaked with
white spots in some parts, but that in some old people they have been all thick
white, they being so dried by age and hardened, that they have totally lost
their cleaness and transparency; from this reason we may observe that Horns,
Bones, and Quills, being burnt grow white.

The same is in hair, The dryness of Hair is the cause of Baldness.
they grow white and gray after they have lost their clearness (which the hair
has as well as the Nails and the horny Tunicle although by reason of their
smaleness it is not so apparent, but it may be known by the splendour and
shining) through dryness and hardness. And this happens often to them as to the
rest more often, because they are very dry: and therefore in age they grow
dryer as other parts, and they are dried first about the Roots, and so grow
altogether gray, and some sooner, some later, as they grow dry sooner or later,
and they are gray either in the beginning or progress, or end of their age.
This is not done by other causes, because the hair is not easily altered,
albeit it is supposed by the vulgar that care and griese will make them gray,
which can scarce be done but by their hastening of age: although it be recorded
that some have suddenly turned gray. That hair is white in diverse places
distinct, in some and not in others, the uneven Disposition of the hair and the
skin wherein they grow, may be the cause. And this is to be observed, that the
thicker the hair is the sooner it turns gray, and black sooner then red,
because when gray hairs appear they are sooner discerned. And this is the Cause
that the Beard being younger then the hair of the Head, yet is sooner gray.

The Cure.
The Cure is diverse, as the Discoloration is either in the Eye or skin, Teeth,
Hair or Nails.

The convenient Cure of Discolourations of the skin is applied first to
generals and particulars.

The Cure of Generals is directed at the cause whether it be the nourishing
Juice, Choler, Blood or Seed.

That Cachexy which comes from crude and imperfect juice, The Cure of Cachexy
or evil Habit of body.
in which flourishing Color is lost, and Paleness is brought in, or the like,
if there be a Cacochymy or evil digestion there with, and it come from the
weakness of the Liver or spleen not yet confirmed, or from Obstructions; from
Humors not yet fixed, is easier cured. But if this weakness of the Bowels in
Sanguification, or Obstruction is fixed, then it is easily turned into
Leucophlegmacy or white Dropsy, or into the Dropsy Ascites; of which two
sorts of Dropsies the first is easiest cured, except some other Distemper be
joined therewith.

A Cachexy is most difficult and can scarce be cured if there be exceeding
weakness of the Bowels or great Obstruction, coming from a hard fixed gravelly
Matter, as also if there be Hardness, Scirrhus or any Tumor in these parts
which causes the Dropsy Ascites it is incurable.

A Cachexy must be cured according to the cause, which we said is the weakness
of the Liver, Spleen, Meseraiks, a cold or hot Distemper, an Obstruction, and
hardness or Tumors in the same: which if they have been brought by any external
or internal cause that must first be removed, as evil Diet: great loss of
Blood, too much Venery and the like which we know have been the Original of
these Distempers, and do still nourish the same. Then the Filthiness which is
brought thereby must be purged: and in the mean time if it come from Weakness
we must strengthen, if from a cold or hot Distemper, we must alter that; if
from an Obstruction we must open, if from a Hardness or hard Tumor we must
endeavor to mollify and dissolve it by Medicines internal and external, using
those things especially which are proper for these parts affected: and are
therefore called Hepatical or Splenetical Medicines or at least you must mix
them with others, and add those things which strengthen the Stomach if it be
weak. All these Medicines we shall reduce to two Heads, because one Medicine if
compounded of diverse things, may be applied to diverse Causes. And under one
Head, we shall lay down those things which are proper to one or more of the
Causes, in Imbecility or Weakness, in a cold Distemper, Obstruction, Hardness
or hard Tumor: under the other Head we shall propound those Medicines which are
fit for the cure of a Cachexy coming of a hot Distemper, because this requires
a cure by it self something different from the other. We shall begin with that
cure which is to be done with the Medicines under the first Head, by this way
following.

In these kinds of cachexies, sometimes you may open a Vein, if the Liver be
stopped and full; by which the blood being moved, the evil Humors in the
Vessels of the Liver may with the Blood be a little abated, especially if there
be a cochymy in the Blood, it will be convenient to draw it forth: and this is
done in the right Arm, where the lowest Vein is most convenient, and therefore
is called the Liver vein, which also may be opened in the Hand; or in the Foot
if there be Suppression of the Terms; in the like Diseases of the Spleen, if
there be a cacochymy also in the Veins, you must open the Vein in the left Arm,
or the Salvatella which is proper when the Spleen is distempered.

The opening of the Haemorrhoids is very profitable by drawing from the
Meseraiks in the stoppage of the Liver, Spleen or Meseraiks, and also by
letting forth the cacochymy or evil Juice.

Vomiting in the Obstructions of the Liver or Spleen, is good, not only by
taking away crudities, but by stirring up Nature to send them forth, and this
is best and easiest after Meat.

Clysters which mollify, provoke, and open Obstructions are to be injected,
and are made of the common Decoction with the opening Roots, red Vetches, the
four great cold seeds, and dissolve therein some purging Electuaries and
sometimes a quarter of a Pint of Urine, and half an ounce of the sharpest
Leaven, besides common Oils or of Cappars and flower-de-luce.

Or you may use the Glysters mentioned in Leucophlegmacy.

Purges are appointed in Obstructions, so Nature being moved may always thrust
some of the stoppinges forth; also they are good in weakness of the parts,
Distemper or Hardness because many Excrements are gathered. And they are made
of such as purge choler or Phlegm, and Melancholy in the Distemper of the
Spleen, because it is thought Melancholy Juice does abound there, and you must
add such things as respect the Stomach and discuss wind, if it tend to a
Leucophlegmacy or white Dropsy, or things that expel Water if it tend to the
Dropsy Ascites, as is mentioned, but here these following are good for a
cachexy. A Decoction proper in the Obstruction of the Liver.

Take of Liquoris Roots one ounce and an half, of Succory and Flower-de-luce
Roots each one onnce, of Smalage Roots half an ounce, of Asarabacca Roots two
drams, of Chamaepytis or Ground pine, Germander, Agrimony, Maidenhair each one
handsul, of Fennel seeds two drams, of Parsley and Rocket seed each one dram,
of Elder-flowers one pugil, Raisons two ounces, Senna one ounce and an half, of
Carthamus seeds bruised and Pelypody of the Oak each one ounce: make a
Decoction in Water and the third part Wine, and infuse in the strained Liquor
of Rhubarb half an ounce, Agarick three drams, Ginger one dram, Spikenard half
a scruple. strain it and add as much Sugar as is sufficient, and aromatize it
with Cinnamon and Cloves for three doses.

Of the same things dry a Wine may be made by infusion in four or five pints
which will work better, and it will be stronger if you add Wormwood two drams,
Topps of Centaury one dram, Birthworth Roots and Squills prepared two drams.

Another Decoction for the Spleen.

Take of the bark Cappar Roots and Tamarisk each one ounce, macerate them in
Water and the third part of Vinegar, Germander, Ceterach each one handful, of
both the Bugloss-flowers and Broom flowers, each one pugil, of Fennel seeds two
drams, of Park leave seeds one dram, of Raisons stoned six drams, of Polypody
one ounce and an half, Senna one ounce: make a Decoction, for three doses,
aromatized with Cinnamon, and sweetened with Sugar or syrup of Maidenhair, or
the like.

Or thus, Take of Capar bark one ounce, Pot Mercury, Fumitory, Time, Epithimum
each one handful, Broom flowers, Tamarisk, Rosemary, Borrage, and Bugloss
flowers each one pugil, of Raisons ten pair, Sebestens five pair, Senna one
ounce, Polypody one ounce and an half: make a Decoction in the strained Liquor
insuse Myrobalans, Chebs or others half an ounce, Rhubarb two drams, strain it
and add as much Sugar as is sufficient for three doses, if the barks of the
Roots of black Hellebore be added it is the better.

A plainer Decoction for the Obstructions of the Spleen is made of Mercury and
Fumitory new gathered, in Whey, or Broth of an old Cock to which you may add
others, you may also give the Decoction and Wine, described in the
Leucophlegmacy, especially if you perceive that it tends to that.

A Potion of four scruples of Rhubarb made with Wormwood wine or opening water
is good, or the powder drunk with those Liquors or with Plantane water, if the
Terms flow and cause a cachexy, to which you may add two ounces Syrup of Roses
solutive. Or give the Potion prescribed in Leucophlegmacy.

Other Potions made of altering Decoctions after to be mentioned are given, by
infusing Rhubarb, Agarick and the like, and dissolving purging Electuaries for
choler in the Liver and Melancholy in the Spleen.

Pills often taken being bitter and Gummy are excellent in a cachexy.

These are convenient in Obstructions and Hardness.

Take of Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in the juice of a Flower-de-luce and powder
of Rhubarb each half a dram, with Oxymcl make Pills for one dose, you may add
Agarick and they will work the better.

Or these; Take Aloes two drams, Rhubarb, Aagarick and Mechoacan each one dram
and an half, Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar of Squills half a dram, Mastick
one scruple, Gentian and Birthwort roots, or Madder topps of Centaury two
scruples, Asarum roots, Smalage seed each one scruple, Ginger and Spike each
half a scruple, with the Extract or inspissat, Juice of Wormwood, or
Flower-de-luce, or Syrup Byzantine, or Turpentine: make a Mass, you may quicken
it with Diagridium if you will have it purge more.

Or thus, Take Turbith one dram and and half, Rhubarb one dram, of Gum Lack,
Bdellium or Sagapen, and Mastick each one scruple, of Asarum roots, and Agnus
Castus seeds each one scruple, of Schaenanth, Spikenard and Saffron each half a
scrnple: mix them as the former into a Mass, and you may make them work better
with Diagridium.

Or thus; Take of the best Aloes two drams, of Rhubarb and Agarick each one
dram, of Scammony half a dram, of the Troches of Eupatorium or Rhubarb, or any
other opening powder each one scruple, Spikenard half a scruple, Mastick one
scruple, Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar half a dram, with syrup of Vinegar
make a mass.

The Pills of Maudlin prescribed by Me ue are usually good, they are made of
Rhubarb, Myrobalanss, Aloes, Mastich, Saffron, Juice of Maudlin, Wormwood and
Endive.

Or the Pills of Rhubarb made like those of Rhubarb, Myrobalans, and instead of
Aloes, of Hiera Picra, and Mastick, and seeds of Smalage, Fennel, Troches of
Diarhodon, Juice of Wormwood, Liquoris and Fennel water.

Also in phlegmatic Men the Pills of Agarick, as in the stoppage of the Terms,
which have Agarick, Turbith, Hiera picra, Coloquintida, Myrrh, Sarcocol, or
Mastich, Orrisroot and Horehound.

Or Pills made of stronger things to all which you must add Gum Ammoniack
dissolved in Vinegar, if there be a Hardness; and they may be made up with the
Juice of Orris or Wormwood, they use stronger in the Spleen, of the five kinds
of Myrobalans, and other things to purge Melancholy.

In great Obstructions these following are very efficacious. Take of
Coloquintida four ounces, Extract of Tincture with spirit of Wine, to which
after add the powder of Aloes, Myrrh and black Hellebore each one ounce, let
them stand in the Sun till they are as thick as Honey, then add Saffron,
Cinnamon and Brimstone each one ounce, then set them again in the Sun till they
are dry, then powder them, and with Honey make a Mass, the Dose is from a half
a scruple to one scruple, and to half a dram in the strongest Bodies.

These Pills are best, when the Terms also are stopped.

Take of Aloes one dram and an half, of Mirrh, Madder or Birthwort each half a
dram, of Agarick and Turbith each one dram, of Gum ammoniaek dissolved in the
Juice of Flower-de-luce half a dram, with syrup of the five Roots: make a Mass,
let her take them often.

If the Terms of Haemorrhoids flow too fast, make Pills thus. Take of yellow
Myrobalans one dram, Rhubarb one dram and an half, of the Powder of Diarrhodon
and of the three Jaundies each half a dram, with the Juice of red Roses, make a
mass, give half a dram or more sometimes.

An Electuary in Obstructions. Take of Mechoacan three drams, Turbith one dram,
Rhubarb two drams, Cinnamon one dram and an half, Ginger one dram, Spike one
scruple, of the powder of the three Sanders or the like one dram, the Pulp of
Raisons boiled with Sugar as much as will make an Electuary, Diagridium may
also be added.

Rhubarb alone four scruples in powder with the Pulp of Raisons made into a
Bole is excellent for the Liver, and it is called the Soul of the Liver: some
eat it.

Tablets for the same. Take of Rhubarb one dram and an half, Mechoacan one
dram, Gentian one scruple, Mastich and Gum ammoniak dissolved in Wine each half
a dram, Sugar dissolved in the best Wine, and Juice of Flower de-luce one
ounce, boil them to Lozenges, if Turbith or Diagredium be added they will purge
the more

These altering Medicines which are in the cause of weakness of the Liver, must
be such as repair the Native heat which is lost: and such as are proper for the
parts, rather temperate then hot, or cold. In Obstructions we use openers and
abstergents or cleansers the strongest in the Spleen, adding always some
things which gently bind both for the Liver and the Spleen to strengthen them,
or that can open Obstructions by propriety, as Endive and Succory which open
and cool, the opening Quality appears by the bitterness. To these add things
against the stone if there be a suspicion of the stone in the Bladder.

For Hardness and Tumors we use Emollients, mixing also those things which
dissolve and consume what is mollified, or using them by turns: which
Emollients, if a hard Tumor which may be converted into an Imposthume be in the
parts will be also good when it is ripe. Besides these in Diseases of the
Spleen, we usually mix things that discuss wind, because the spleen is easily
disturbed with wind, and sometimes swollen therewith. And this Opinion was
because the wind was in the Hypochondria, Stomach or Neck as I showed,
therefore if the Liver or Spleen be stopped or hard, and there be wind in those
parts you may mix the aforefaid. But these are given in diverse forms, sometimes
simple or folide, sometimes mixed.

Among the liquid things which are drunk are diverse Decoctions, which are so
taken or boiled into syrups and so kept for use.

We boil in Broaths the Roots and Herbs of Parsley, and Fennel, Spriggs or
roots of Asparagus, Grass, Vetches, Melonseede and in the Spleen Purslain.

Physical Decoctions which may be taken before for preparatives to Purges, or
after, which open the Obstructions of the Bowels are diverse as follow.

The usual Decoction which is kept in form of a syrup is of the two Roots so
called, of Parsley roots and Fennel roots with Sugar.

Of the five opening Roots you may make it thus. Take of Smallage roots, or
Marsh, Smallage of the Chops of Parsley roots or true Smallage, of the Chopps
of Fennel roots steeped in Wine each two ounces, of Grass roots, Asparagus and
Butchers Broom each one ounce: make a Decoction with Sugar or Syrup.

Also thus, Take of the five opening Roots each one ounce, or Orris, Liquoris,
Calamus, Elicampane each half an ounce, of Endive, Succory with the roots,
Dandelion with the roots, Maudlin, Germander, Groundpine, Veronica each one
handful, of Elder-flowers one pugil, of the four cold greas seeds three drams,
of Endive and Purslain seed each one dram and an half, Asparags seed one dram,
of Anise-seed two drams, of Fennel, Smallage and Parsley seeds one dram, of
Raisons stoned one ounce and an half, of red or black Vetches one pugil: boil
them in Water with the third part of Wine, especially if the Roots were not
steeped in Wine, and in the strained Liquor add Sugar as much as will sweeten,
for some doses, and aromatize it with Cinnamon one dram, Spike and Shaenanth,
each half a dram: make an Apozem, or boil it to a syrup with more sugar and
keep it for use.

This will be better for the spleen, if you add to some or all the aforesaid;
Barks of Cappars, Tamarisk, or Ash, scraped from the outside each one ounce, of
Asarum and Madder roots half an ounce, of Maidenhair or Goldylocks, Ceterach,
Dodder, both Buglosses, Fumitory, Hops each one handful, the Flowers of both
Buglosses, Tamarisk, Broom each one pugil, of Agnus Caslus seed or Rue, one
dram: mix them with the rest for a Decoction when we will open more violently
we use bitter things, as Birthwort roots, Squills prepared, Wormwood,
Horehound, Topps of Centaury.

If the stomach be also weak, or windy, you may add the roots of Masterwort,
Calaminth, Mints, Marjoram, Rosemary, Polymountain, Canuaseeds, Cummin,
Bay Berries, also Mastich.

The Decoction of the roots of Fern, Rhapontick, Eryngus, Valcrian, Chamaelion,
Carduus, Osiers, five leave Grass, Wildsage, Alkanet, Lovage, Water Lillies,
also the herbs of St. John's Wort, Scordium, Mousear, Burnet, Dropwort, with the
roots, Pine leaves, Capar seeds, Woodhine, Spurgewort, square Parsley, Rocket,
of which one or more may be boiled or mixed with the former Decoctions.

If there be fear of a Dropsy, add Ivy-berries, Gum Lac and things that purge
water, as shall be showed in the Dropsy.

In Hardness and Scirrhus the same things are good adding some sostners, as
Althea roots, Mallows, Violets, Figs, Chamomel and Melitot flowers and the like.

Some syrups are made of the Juyces of Plants, as of sharp Juyces, when there
is heat, and Drought, syrups of Sorrel, and Vinegar, made of Vinegar water and
sugar.

The simple Oxymel is made of Vinegar, Honey and Water, the Oxymel of Squills
of vinegar of Squills, Oxysaccharum is made of Pomegranate Juice, Vinegar and
Sugar.

These Syrups are in use which are compounded of the Decoctions and Juyces
which are sharp.

That of the five roots of Mesue. Take of the Decoction of the five opening
roots, Sugar and Vinegar.

Oxymel simple is made of Vinegar, Honey and Water, and compound of the
Decoction of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Butchers broom, Asparagus roots, of
Smallage, Fennel and Parsley seeds.

The Oxymel that provokes Urine. Take besides the Vinegar, Honey, the Decoction
of the roots of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Raddish, Asarum, Lovage, Broom
flowers, seeds of Fennel, Parsley, Asparagus, Butchers broom, Coriander,
Cummin.

The Compound Oxysaccharum of Nicolas is made of the juice of Pomegranates, in
which are infused roots of Fennel, Asparagus, Butchers broom, Grass,
Maidenhair, Hearts Tongue, Golden locks, Ceterach, Liver-wort, Violets.

Compound acetosus or syrup of Vinegar is, Take Vinegar-water and sugar, which
is the simple, and besides these roots of Fennel, Smallage, Endive, Anise
seeds, Fennel-seeds, Smallage and Endive, some add the Juice of Endive,
Smallage, Liquoris, Roses and Spike.

The Byzantine syrup Compound of Mesue is, Take of the aforesaid syrup of
Vinegar with Anise seed, Fennel and Smallage seed, Juice of Endive, Smallage,
Liquoris, Roses, Spike and Juice of Hops and Bugloss.

The usual syrups are made of bitter Juyces of Endive, and Juice thereof boiled
with sugar.

Of Fumitory simple, with the Juice thereof and sugar, of Hops, of the juice of
them, of Fumitory and sugar.

Byzantine simple of Mesue, is made with the juice of Endive, Smallage, Hops,
Bugloss and sugar.

In like manner other Syrups may be made of Juyces and named from them, as of
the Juice of Smallage, Parsley, Fennel, Maudlin, and other openers proper for
the Bowels.

The syrup of the juice of Water cresses, and Brook-lime aromatized with
Saffron and Cinnamon and made sharp with a little Rose-vinegar, is excellent to
open Obstructions.

Simples Compound of Juyces and Decoctions are these in use, the three first
for the Obstructions of the Liver, the three last for the spleen, the two last
purge.

The Compound syrup of Endive is made of the Decoction of wild and garden
Endive, Liver-wort, Bugloss, Lettice, Maudlin, Balm, Cordial flowers, great
cold seeds, white and red Sanders, the juice of Endive, Pomegranates and sugar.

The syrup of Succory with Rhubarb and its Correctives, of Spikenard, of
Nicholas is made of the Decoction of wild and garden Endive, Succory,
Dandelion, Sow Thistle, Liver-wort, Lettice, Fumitory, Hops, Maidenhair,
Alkekengi or winter Cherry, Ceterach, Fennel, Smallage and Asparagus roots,
Barley and sugar.

The syrup of Eupatorium Mesue with Rhubarb is thus made. Take of the Roots of
Smallage, Fennel, Endive, Liquoris, white Thorn, Rhubarb, Asarum, Dodder,
Wormwood, Maidenhair, Eupatorium or Maudlin, Flowers of Roses, Bugloss, seeds
of Annise, Fennel, Schaenanth, Spike, Mace, Mastich, juice of Smallage and
Endive.

Syrup of Hearts Tongue is made of the Decoction of Hart's-tongue, both Endives,
Liverwort, Dodder, Wormwood, Maidenhair, Flowers of both Buglosses, Roots of
Fennel, Parsley, Butchers broom, the great cold seeds, Mace, Spike, Cassia
Lignea, Gum Lac and sugar.

The Compound syrup of Fumitory is made of the Juice of Fumitory, the Decoction
of Myrobolans, and sugar, Dodder, Wormwood, Violets, this is called the lesser
syrup. To the greater they add purging things, Epithimum, Polypody, Tamarinds,
Prunes, Raisons, Liquoris, Flowers of both Buglosses, Roses, and pulp of Cassia,

The syrup of Epithimum of Mesue is made of the same things with Fumitory, the
greater, except Cassia, adding Agarick, Time, Calamints, French Lavender, Anise
seed, Fennel seeds and Sapa, or boiled Wine.

Some Juyces may be strained and drunk crude, but they are better in syrups.

Wine also if clear and thin, easily makes way and opens Obstructions.

These are very good Physical Wines by infusion or maceration of some things
with a little boiling in a double Vessel, as of Wormwood, some steep it in a
little Aqua vitae to take away the Bitterness, or burn the Aqua vitae so
steeped and quench it again before the strength is gone.

Tinctures of spirit of Wine and Aqua vitae are made also of Zed^a^y,
Masterwort, and Saffron, which altogether or alone are given with good success,
or make this.

Take of Succory, Smallage, Orris each one ounce, of Wormwood two drams, of
Groundpine, Germander, Maudlin, Marjoram each one dram, of Fennel seed one dram
and an half, of Parsley seed one dram, to these being dried and cut add five
pints of Wine.

And if you will have it for the spleen; Take the barks of Capar Roots, the
Middle Rind of Tamarisk, Ash, and Elder each six drams, of Ceterach, Broom
flowers, and Elder flowers, and Agnus Castus seeds each one dram: they may be
steept in Vinegar before they are put to the rest, or you may add Vinegar to
the Wine in the Decoction.

It will be better though very bitter, if you add of the tops of the lesser
Centaury one dram, or of Gentian or Birthworth Roots two drams, of Asarum Roots
one dram, or as much of Squills prepared.

You may also add other things mentioned in the Decoctions, as Roots of
Rhapontick, Fern, Valerian, the bark of an Ash, Madder, Calamus, and the like;
which being dry keep their Virtue, or you may make Wine of these only.

Wine of Raysons is said by a Propriety to help the Liver, and strengthen it
being weak, and this does resemble in part the Color and Taste of sweet Wine.
Take of the smaler Raysons five pound, of Cinnamon bruised two ounces, put them
into a Vessel and pour upon them ten measures of boiling hot Water, stop it up
till it work, to this you may add the opening Roots that are not unpleasant in
taste.

Like to this is made an excellent Drink to open Obstructions of
Juniper Berries, and Juniper Chipps, to which if Currance be added it will be
better.

Wine of Steel in which steel was quenched, is of the like Virtue, and is
chiefly for the spleen, or which is best. Take half an ounce of Steel prepared
with Vinegar, infuse it in three or four pints of Wine: or if the Powder of
steel be added to the aforesaid Physic Wines.

It is thought that if you drink Wine that has been infused sometimes in a cup
made of Tamarisk or of Ash, it will open Obstructions, especially of the spleen.

Distilled waters of Smallage, Wormwood, Centaury the less, Gentian Roots, and
of other the like are good either of themselves, or to drink after an Electuary.

The Chemists say, that a water distilled from Vitriol and Tartar and a double
quantity of Flints calcined to Powder, and burried in a cave till they are
dissolved, if it be thrice cast upon the Ingredients and distilled, a spoonful
will open Obstructions in the Dropsy to admiration.

Spirit of Tartar and of Salt is highly commended for old Obstructions.

Oil of sweet Almonds if drunk does mollify the Hardness of the Bowels, and of
bitter Almonds (which also opens Obstructions) also Oil of Olives, Lineseed,
Sesamine, bastard Saffron.

Other Liquors drunk which are made by infusion as Lies or Lixivia, such as are
mentioned in the Dropsy Ascites, by piercing and clensing take away
Obstructions.

The Urine of a Man drunk by clensing and piercing, opens Obstructions, as we
said Lies do.

Also water wherein steel or Iron is quenched as we said of steel wine.

Sharp Vitriol waters which are Natural, if drunk cure old cachexyes, and this
is usual, and is the reason why people flocks so much unto them; drinking them
fasting Morning and Evening to twenty or thirty days, rising every day a pint
till they have drunk a Gallon at once if possible; by the use of which either
they purge much black Matter; or if they exercise presently after they sweat
much: which sweats not only that water drunk causes cure, it frees from
Obstructions, being piercing by its sharpness and gets into the Meseraiks and
the Vessels of the Bowels, and carries the Filth thereof by stool, the thinner
part by Urin and sweat.

Of Meats and Sauces, that bread is best which is made with Parsley seeds and
Eggs, or Rosemary, or Fennel seed, herbs, made into Sallets of the same being
boiled, with Butter and Vinegar, among the which Beets with Mustard and Vinegar
is chiefly commended, Water, Parsley and Fennel Roots, the Spriggs of
Asparagus, and the smalest Crops of the black Vine boiled and eaten are the
like.

Pickled Cappars are used most for the Spleen.

And bitter Almonds often eaten: boiled Orobut and Lupines with Rue and Pepper,
as Dioscorides.

The often use of Raysons are so proper for the Liver, that they are said to
make people fat, by increasing of Blood; albeit other sweet things are hurtful
to the Liver, and make it swell.

The Liver of a Wolf, Hare, Goose and Snails are also commended.

These Conserves are commended of Succory, of Flowers and Roots of Smallage, of
Flower-de-luce Roots, the Roots and Flowers of Capilar Herbs, of Wormwood,
Iringus Roots, of Valerian, Sea Wormwood Leaves, the Roots of Elicampane,
Broom, Elder, Dwarf-elder, and Flowers of Tamarisk.

The Juice of Elder, Dwarf-elder, and of Juniper Berries in the form of a thick
Juice, are given either alone, or with Electuaries, they are made by Decoction
of the Juice from diverse Plants, as of Wormwood, Juice of Flower-de-luce, and
the like of Rhapontick, and juice of Sowbread, these are good when the Bowels
are hard.

There are diverse Pouders, some whereof which are strongest, are taken alone
with Wine or other Liquor, are put into other Compositions, and are sometimes
made into Troches; of the simple Plants as of Fern Roots, Cappar Roots,
Rhapontick, Birthwort, Ceterach, Dodder, Topps of Centaury, Wormwood.

Some sorts of Plants are good, as of Wormwood, Tamarisk, Broom, Agrimony and
the like.

Pouders made of the parts of Beasts, are thought to be good to strengthen the
Liver and Spleen, as the Entralls of Cocks and Wolves, first washed in wine,
and dried in an Oven, till fit to be poudered; or burnt to powder, and made
into an Antispodium, and given in wine or water or any convenient Liquor, or
with Cinnamon or other Spices, or with Diamber, Diamoscu, and Sugar of Roses,
or let them be given with Conserves. The inward skin of Hens Gizards so
poudered is excellent, mixed with the ashes of Crabs.

The Liver of a Wolf poudered is accounted a proper Medicine for the Liver; and
of a Hare.

The Milt of a Horse and of a Wolf, is the same.

The ashes of Cockles are good for the Spleen, with the Powder of Linseed and
Nettle seed, Goose Dung, Peacocks Dung, dried, to which they put other things
that they may not be known.

The Powder of Steel infused in Vinegar or Wine, and Vinegar, with Sugar and
Cinnamon, is excellent in Obstructions especially of the Spleen; with Sugar,
Cinnamon and Gooss dung, also the Powder of steel from a Grindstone is
excellent because it is finer: or if it be washed with Aqua fortis and brought
into very fine, yellow Powder called Crocus Martis, but it must be often washed
to take away the force of the Aqua fortis.

If the Steel powder be steeped in strong Vinegar, or Juice of Lemmons, till it
be turned to rust, this is the best; or those seals which fall from a Gad of
steel quenched in Vinegar.

Mathiolus commends the Quintessence of Iron.

Dioscorides commends the Cyprus whetstone and the Foam of the Sea hardened,
also Coral.

The usual Compound Pouders of which Troches are made or Electuaries; are the
Pouders of the Troches of roses of Mesue or Galen. Also Nicolas his powder of
Saffron, of Wormwood of Mesue, of Rhubarb of Actuarius, of Agrimony of Mesue
and Actuarius, of Capars of Mesue and of Hart's-tongue and Lacca; and these
Species for Electuaries, as Dialacca, the greater, of Mesue, and the lesser,
and both Diacurcumas.

Of these Pouders are made by taking those which are most for the purpose, and
are given either with Liquor or made into Lozenges, to be kept with Sack, Juice
of Agrimony, Wormwood or Fennel, or Endive or Syrups, or with Sugar or Honey
made into Electuaries, these Pouders are made as follows.

The first. Take of red Roses, two drams, of Wormwood one dram, of Cinnamon or
Cassia Lignea two scruples, of Spike and Schaenanth each one scruple, of
Mastich half a dram.

Instead of this you may give the Troches of Roses according to Mesue, they
have the same things and are made up with syrup of Agrimony.

It will be better with one scruple of Myrrh, and half a scruple of Saffron,
of which Galen makes his Troches of Roses and Schaenanth. And Nicholas makes
his Troches of Saffron after this manner.

The second is; Take of Rhubarb two drams, of Asarum Roots and Madder each half
a dram, of sea Wormwood, or common Wormwood one dram, of red Roses two
scruples, Annise seed one dram, Smallage seed half a dram, Spikenard one
scruple: make a Powder.

Of these are made that Troches of Rhubarb, of Mesue, with bitter Almonds, and
Juice of Wormwood or Fennel, or Dodder water, or the Troches of Wormwood
according to Mesue which are like the Troches of Rhubarb, only they want Dodder
Roots, and have Mastich, and Mace, and are made up with the Juice of Endive, or
the Troches of Agrimony, which have Rhubarb, Asarum, Roses and Annis seeds as
the former, and have besides burnt Ivory, or Spodium and Manna, made up with
the syrup of Agrimony.

The third is; Take of Gum Lac one dram and an half, Mastich, Bdellium or
Myrrh, each half a dram, Rhubarb one dram, Madder roots, and Asarum roots each
half a dram, and Birthwort and Gentian each one scruple, of Annise seed and
Fennel each one dram, of Smallage and Annise seed each half a dram, of Saffron
one scruple, of Cinnamon or Cassia Lignea half a dram, of Spike and Schaenanth
each half a scruple: make a Powder.

The Composition of Dialacca major Mesue has the same things and besides
Costus, Savin, Hysop, bitter Almonds, Pepper, Ginger, and may be used instead
of the other. And they are made into an Electuary with Juice of Wormwood or
Agrimony, and Honey. There is a less Dialacea made only of Lac, Myrrh,
Bdellium, Rhubarb, Costus, Madder, Birthwort, Liquorish, Saffron, Schaenanth or
sweet Rush, Pepper and Honey, and the Troches of Lacca by Mesue are made of Lac
and Rhubarb, and a few other Ingredients. And we use these lesser Compositions
safer then the great, because it is too hot by reason of the species; yet it is
good in Dropsies.

There is also another Composition good in a Dropsy called Diacurcuma Mesues
or Diacrocuma, because it has great store of Saffron, that it may be better
against the Obstructions of the Liver, especially of the Gall in the Jaundies,
which Saffron does open. This is very proper which has somthings like
Dialacca, as Saffron, Rhubarb, Asarum, Costus, Madder, Anise, and Smallage
seed, Spike, Schaenanth, Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon, Myrrh, and besides Spignel,
Valerian, Calaminth, Scordium, Ceterach, Parsley seed, Carrot seed,
Juniper Berries, Carpobalsamum, Traganth, Opopanax, Juice of Liquorish,
Wormwood and Agrimony, made into an Electuary.

The lesser Diacurcuma is made only of Saffron, Myrrh, Costus, schaenanth,
Cassia, Cinnamon and Honey.

The fourth Powder, most proper for the spleen is this. Take of Capar roots
three drams, of round Birthwort one dram, of Gentian half a dram, Ceterach one
dram and an half, of Broom stowers, half a dram, Agnus Castus seeds one dram,
Rue seed half a dram, of Gum Ammaniack one dram; which infused in Vinegar will
make them into Troches.

Instead of this use Troches de scolopendrio that is of Hart's-tongue, which
have the same, or the Troches of Capars according to Mesue which have also
Acorus, Cummin, Calaminth, Nigella seeds, and of Watercresses, bitter Almonds,
Juice of Agrimony.

Of these and other Pouders for the Liver and spleen, you may make others by
adding of other Ingredients as, Take of some of the former for your turn, one
dram and an half of the species of the three Saunders or Diarhoden one dram, or
instead of it of the three saunders half a dram, of the four less cold seeds
one scruple, of Ivy berries two scruples, of the ashes of the Guts of a Cock or
of a Wolf one scruple, Cinnamon half a dram: make a Powder, give it alone or
with Sugar; or in Lozenges, with Sugar dissolved in Wormwood water, or Dodder
water.

I cannot pass by my cachectick Powder by reason of the happy success it has
had in the evil Habit of Infants accompanied with a gentle Fever, it is usual
given by the shops: it is'as follows.

Take of the Roots, and cleansed seeds of Piony, one dram, of red Roses half a
dram, of Nutmeg a little torrified two scruples, of Bay Berries a little dried
by the fire half a dram, of Spike and Schaenanth, and Saffron each one scruple,
of the skins of Hens Gizards prepared one dram, of opening Crocus martis one
dram and an half, of the best Cinnamon one scruple: make a fine Powder.

The Troches of Myrrh open Obstructions and provoke the Terms, they are given
alone or with other Pouders.

To these, when the stomach is distempered you may add the species of
Diagalangal, Diacalaminth, and to strengthen it, Diambra.

Of these, Liquors, and Pouders and the like are made Potions, Electuaries and
Pills.

Potions are made like Juleps by mixing syrups with waters, baths to prepare
before purging and to alter, as of Succory, Endive, Liver-wort, Agrimony,
Dodder, Hops, Fumitory, both Buglosses, Tamarisk in the spleen.

If there be any heat and thirst give this Julep.

Take of spring Water three pints, to these add stilled waters and one quarter
of a pint of Pomegranate wine, of white wine vinegar two ounces, of Sugar or
Honey three quarters of a pound clarify it for use: and you may boil them a
little.

Or make this Julep. Take some Juyces of the aforesaid Herbs one ounce and an
half, of the distilled water of the same twice as much add Sugar to clarify
and Cinnamon to aromatize it, and you may put sharp Wine thereto.

The milk like Potion made of Turpentine, or Rosin of the Larix-tree, or
Fir Tree one or two drams dissolved in white wine, and the Yolk of an Egg, does
not only cleanse the Reins, but opens the Liver and Spleen, and purges the
Belly.

There are Diverse Electuaries for the same as,

In the Obstruction and Weakness of the Liver; Take of the Conserve of Succory
flowers, and the candied Roots of the same each one ounce and an half, of the
Conserve of candied Roots of Smallage one ounce, of the pulp of Raisons, boiled
a little, two ounces of the species of the three Saunders one scruple: make an
Electuary.

If you fear a Dropsy; Take of the conserve of Succory flowers one ounce and
an half, Conserve of Smallage roots, one ounce, Conserve of Broom flowers half
an ounce, the boiled juice of Danwort or Elder one ounce, of bitter Almonds six
drams, of Melon seeds cleansed one dram, of the pulp of Raisons one ounce and
an half, of Ivory, and Hartshorn shavings half a dram, Asarum roots two
scruples, of Spike, and of the ashes of the intestines of a Cock, or Wolf or of
Earth worms each one scruple, of syrup of Wormwood six drams: mix them for an
Electuary.

In the Distemper of the spleen.

Take Conserve of Maidenhair, Ceterach, and of flowers of Tamarisk each one
ounce and an half, conserve of Broom flowers one ounce, the Bark of Capar Roots
one dram, Purslain, and Agnus castus seeds each half a dram, with the syrup of
the five opening Roots, make an Electuary; you may add half a dram of the
Powder of steel, and after let some water be drunk that is good against the
spleen.

There is another called the Cyphoides of Androchus proper against the Weakness
of the Liver, it may be called the Electuary of Raisons made of Raisons,
Bdellium, Myrrh, Turpentine, Honey, Wine, Calamus, aspalaton, Cassia, Cinnamon,
Schaenanth, Spike, Saffron, and some by adding seeds of Henbane, and Opium,
make an Opiate thereof.

We make an Electuary of Raisons like it, thus; Take a quarter of a pound of
stoned Raisons, boil them in wine adding three ounces of Honey, then beat them
to a Pulp, and add the powder of Calamus, Cinnamon, Cassia each one dram and an
half, Spike and Schaenanth each half a dram, of Saffron one scruple: make an
Electuary.

The Confection of Raved seen of Mesue, is good against Obstructions; it is
made of Rhubarb, Juice of Wormwood, Agrimony, bitter Almonds, Fumitory, Anise
seed, Smallage seed, Spike, Saffron, Cassia Lignea, Schaenanth, Myrrh and Honey.

Also this Decoction of Mesue made of Costus, Birthwort, Rhubarb, Asarum,
Cassia Ligna, Cinnamon, Smallage and Anise seed, Schaenanth, Myrrh, Saffron and
sugar.

The Electuary of Powder of steel by Rhasis is good in the spleen of
Myrobalans, and prepared steel, Fankincense, Spike, Schaenanth, Ammi, Honey,
Ginger Pepper.

Pills may be made of the Pouders that are unpleasant and so swallowed or a in
^olus.

Or thus, Take of the Liver of a Wolf prepared one dram, of the ashes of the
Guts of a Wolf, or Cock half a scruple, of dried Goose, or Pigeons Dung one
scruple, with the Juice of wormwood: make a Mass.

Let him take it often, you may add the Powder of steel.

You may make Extracts of bitter Juice and so swallow them, or roll them in
Pouders if too soft, thus, Take of the Extract or inspissate Juice of Gentian
roots, or of the Topps of Centaury the less, and of Wormwood: mix them with the
Pouders of Asarum roots, half a dram, of Smallage and Parsley seeds each one
dram, of Spike and Schaenanth each one scruple.

When there is Hardness of the Bowels or an Obstruction half a dram of
Ammoniacum or two scruples dissolved in Oxymel, or Vinegar of Squills, or Juice
of Flower-de luce, or Briony, is an excellent Bolus.

You may mix other things therewith as, Take of Gum Ammoniack dissolved in
Juice of Flower-de-luce one dram, of the Powder of Fern root half a dram, of
Leaves of Ceterach and Agnus Castus seed, each one scruple, of steel prepared
half a dram, of a Wolfes Liver prepared one scruple, with Oxymel or the Gall of
a Bear, (which does excellently dissolve Hardness) make a Mass of Pills, give
two scruples at a time.

Other Gums given as the former do the same thing as Galbanum, Bdellium,
Sagapen, and Pine Gum, also Lacca when the Cachexy tends to a Dropsy, taken
with Opopanax.

In Obstructions of the Spleen, Take of Pine Gum half a dram, of Misletoe of
the Oak one scruple, with wax make Pills.

Mastich, Myrrh, Storax are given also with other things also Asphaltum or true
Bitumen, and Get.

Or these Pills may be used rather then the bitter Electuary. Take of Myrrh and
Bdellium each two drams, Saffron half a dram, Spike and Schaenanth each one
scruple, with Turpentine make Pills.

Outwardly, if the Cachexy comes from the weakness of Liver or Spleen, or from
their Hardness, you must apply Medicines to the Hypochondria under the sides,
if the Liver be worst to the right side, if the Spleen to the left, more
backward because the Spleen lies under the stomach and more upward because the
left kidney lies under the spleen; sometimes to the whole Belly if the stoppage
be in the Meseraiks, or if the Glanduls of the Mesentery be hardened, they must
be such things that will dissolve Obstructions by attenuating and cutting, or
if there be Hardness you must first mollify, then discuss, choosing the
strongest if the spleen be distempered, because the substance of it is more
compact; adding something proper to strengthen, by gentle astriction: and if
there be wind, which is most usual in the left side, from the stomach rather
then the spleen whose substance cannot be filled with wind, you must use things
that discuss it, and strengthen the weak stomach, for which there are diverse
usual Remedies.

There are diverse Ointments especially in the Obstructions of the Liver. Take
Oil of bitter Almonds, and of Spike, each one ounce and an half, Oil of
Wall-flowers one ounce Oil of Roses or Mastich half an ounce, Juice of
Smallage, Parsley and Vinegar each half an ounce: boil them till the Juice be
consumed, add Asarum Roots, Smallage or Parsley seeds each one dram, of all the
Sanders half a dram, of Spike and Schaenanth each a scruple: you may add Powder
of Cypress Roots, or red Roses, and as much Wax as will make ^n Ointment.

The Oil in which the Liver of a Wolf fliced has been hoiled, used to the
Liver side does strengthen it, and help its Sanguification, and an Oil made of
the Liver of thorn black or scale Fish does the same.

In the Obstruction of the spleen make it thus, Take of Oil of Capars two
ounces, of Wormwood and bitter Almonds or Peach kernels, Juice of Danwort and
strong Vinegar each one ounce, of the Powder of Birthwort Roots, Asarum and
Agnus Castus seeds each half a dram, of both Spikes each one scruple, of Wax as
much as will make an Ointment.

Or boil them in two parts of common Oil and one part of Wine, and half a part
of Vinegar, the flowers or leaves of Tamarick, Capar Roots, Gentian, and
Ceterach, and make an Ointment.

In the Scirrhus especially in the Liver, Take of Oil of Lillies,
Flower-de-luce each two ounces, Oil of sweet Almonds, Chamomil, Dill or of
Melilot each one ounce and an half, of Hens or Ducks Grease, the Marrow of a
Calf or Deers shank each one ounce, of the Juice of Flower de luce two ounces,
of the Juice of Smallage, or Parsley one ounce, of Gum Ammoniack dissolved in
Vinegar six drams, boil them till the Juice he consumed, and add the Powder of
Sowbread and Briony Roots each one dram, of Asarum Roots, half a dram, of Spike
one scruple, of Wax as much as will make a Liniment.

That Oil wherein the Roots of wild Cowcumbers, Briony, Sowbread, Lillies have
boiled with a little Wine and Vinegar is excellent.

If the Spleen be hard, Take Oil of Flower-de-luce three ounces, of Capars one
ounce and an half, Juice of Mercury, Danwort, or Elder and Vinegar each one
ounce, of Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Aqua vitae, Bdellium and Galbanum each six
drams, of Opopanax half an ounce: boil them till the Juyces be consumed, add
the Powder of wild Cowcumber Roots, of Sowbread Roots, each one dram, of Asarum
Roots half a dram, of Wax as much as will make an Unguent.

Or, Take of Sowbread Roots one ounce, of Briony Roots half an ounce, of Capar
Roots two drams, of Asarum Roots one dram, of Spike half a dram, of Bay Berries
two drams: bruise and boil them in equal parts of Wine and Vinegar, Take of
this Oil four ounces, of the Mucilage of Line seed and Faenugreek seed each one
ounce, of Gum Ammoniacum dissolved in Aqua vitae one ounce, of Liquid Storax
one dram, of Hens Grease one ounce, of Wax as much as will make an Unguent.

The Emplaster of Ammoniacum with other Gums, dissolved in strong Vinegar, and
applied hot to the Spleen, does mollify the Hardness of it, and with a little
Oil of Spike it pierces better.

The usual Ointments for hard Bowels, and Emplasters are the Ointment of
Marshmallows, the Emplasters of Melilot, these will be stronger if the
aforesaid Gums be added. also the Emplaster Diachylon with the Flower-de-luce,
Oil and Gums, Ceronium, and Polyarchon, Galeni.

Cataplasmes are used chiefly for the Hardness of the Spleen, which when we
will have them soften exceedingly; we make of Lilly Roots, Onions, Garlic,
Squills, Briony, Sowbread, dragons, Flower-de-luce, Raddish, Line-seed,
Foenugreek, Colewort leaves, Ivy, Wormwood, Centaury, Elder flowers, Melilot,
Chamomil, Figs, Raisons, boiled in Wine, Vinegar and Oil, with Meal of Vetches
and Lupines, and for the spleen, Capar Roots, Ceterach, Tamarisk; and when we
discuss, Wood, Arsmart, wild Germander, Dogs Tongue, Nettles, Pennyroyal: boil
them all in Vinegar and Oil, and beat them up with the Meal of Lupines.

The Root of Mandrake boiled in Oil of Line-seed, and of sweet Almonds and
Vinegar is an excellent Remedy, and Hemlock, and Henbane so applied, also Lilly
Roots so boiled and beaten, to which you may put proper Gums, Oils and Pouders.

The Spleen of a Fox or Goat applied to the Spleen either whole or bruised, is
thought good. The Blood which comes from the Vein behind the Ears does cure the
spleen, say the Ancients.

The Grindstone or Fire stone or other hard flinty stone red hot, and quenched
in sharp Vinegar, and wrapped in clothes, if applied often to the spleen will
mollify it; or if the vapor that rises from the same being sprinkled with
Vinegar be taken into the clothes and applied to the side, it will do the like.

The stone called Asius or eat-flesh mixed with Quicklime and Vinegar is
commended by Dioscorides to be apto the spleen for stoppage of the Liver: we
make Fomentations thus, Take Wormwood, Agrimony, Topps of Centaury each one
handful, of Asarum Roots half an ounce, of all Sanders thirteen drams, of
Spikenard and Schaenanth, each one dram, of Small age seed and Dodder, each one
dram and an half, make a Decoction in equal parts of wine and water for a
Fomentation.

For the spleen stopped, we make Decoctions of Water, Wine and Vinegar, of
Capar Roots, Ash Bark and Tamarisk, Elder, Wormwood, Ceterach, Dodder, Chamomel
and Broom flowers, Tamarisk and Elder flowers, Purslain seeds, Agnus Castus,
Fennel and Small age seeds, adding a little Cypress root, Spike and Schaenanth,
and the Juice of Smallage.

For Hardness and Schirrus we make Decoctions in wine, water and Vinegar, or
Tripe Broth, of these Plants, Marsh-mallow roots, Lillies, Briony, Flower
de-luce, Alheale, Elm, Mallows, Marshmallows, Herb Robert, Horehound,
Wormwood, Chamomil and Melilot flowers, Dill, Elder, Violets Linseed and
Foenugreek, Figs and Raisons, with Roots of Asarum and Spike, and if you must
mollify more the Roots of wild Cowcumber, Sowbread, Mandrakes, if discuss
more, Calaminth, Pennyroyal, Organ, Balm, Time, Staechas or French-Lavender
flowers, or Lavender, if it be in the spleen, you must mix some of the former
Fomentation, which is better, with Juice of Briony, or Flower-de-luce.

Fomentations made for the spleen to soften it of the juice of Sowbread, wild
Cowcumber, Smallage and Oyt of bitter Almonds, or of Capars, with wine and
Vinegar, either very sharp or of Squills.

Or if you quench Marcasites in Vinegar and wet in a cloth or piece of a hat
therein and apply it to the spleen it is excellent.

Epithems are good for the stoppage and hardness of the Liver and spleen thus,
Take of Endive and of Succory water three ounces, of Smallage water two ounces,
of Wormwood water, Topps of Centaury or Gentian roots each one ounce, Vinegar
of Rose two ounces, all the Sanders one dram, Asarum roots half a dram, Spike,
Schaenanth each one scruple.

You may make baggs of the same and so soment.

They must keep a good Diet, beware of Pease, hard, and crude Meats, summer
Fruits too much cold Water, especially if the Cachexy came from thence, and
also from variety of Meats; their Meat must be seasoned with things that help
concoction, prescribed in the weakness of the stomach, in regard the second
Concoction does not mend the faults of the first, and the Meat must be boiled
and stuffed with things that open and cleanse, mentioned in the Cachexy, among
which sugar is good not only for sweetness, but cleansing, and to be commended
for one singular propriety which few observe, that is the resisting of
Putrefaction. If it arise from a hot which will cause a dry Distemper in the
Liver or spleen, which will easily turn to the Dropsy Ascites, you must
prevent it by strengthening the Liver, and use Remedies inwardly and outwardly
to open Obstructions, with things that by cooling do strengthen, especially the
Liver, least they be hurt with too cold things therefore things that are hot
and a sittle astringent and do preserve the strength of the Bowels as Spike,
Wormwood are to be mixed with the cold, and if there be Obstructions we use
opening and ceansing means. But if now the Bowels being hard and cleft, and the
Dropsy is fixed then you must proceed to cure it as we showed in the Hydrops
Ascites, but before you must cure the Cachexy thus,

If there be abundance of Excrements you must purge Choler especially with
Rhubarb and things that inflame not the Liver choosing those things which are
mentioned in the first causes of a Cachexy.

For Alteration they boil in Broth, Endive, Devils bit, Succory, Lettice, sow
thistle, or let them be eaten boiled in salets, let them eat sharp Fruits
boiled, or season them in Meat with the Juice, as Juice of Pomegranates which
after working is called Pomegranate wine, or the Juice of currance, Barberries,
Grapes, Lemmons, Citrons etc.

Let the ordinary Drink be thin, white Wine dashed with boiled water, or if
there be great thirst let them drink water, in which Vinegar or sharp Juice is
mixed. The Decoction of Succory roots, is used instead of Drink, either alone
or mixed with wine: as also the Decoction of the Roots of sorrel, Fern, and
Grass, by themselves or with wine, which if they are made sharp with a little
spirit of Vitriol or salt, will be more pleasant and effectual,

This Julep is to be taken sometimes, Take of sharp Juyces one or more one
quarter of a pint, Juice of Endive two ounces, Vinegar one ounce, Rose Water
two ounces, sugar as much as is sufficient boil it into the form of a Julep,
some add a little Camphire, which does good rather by penetration then
refrigeration.

A Physical Decoction is thus made. Take of Endive one handful, of sorrel,
Lettice, Maidenhair, each half an handful, Tamarinds one ounce, of sharp
Prunes twelve, of the seeds of Purslan, Endive, and Dodder each one dram, of
the four great cold seeds two drams, of Barbery seeds one dram and an half, of
Roses and Violets each one pugil: boil them in water, adding two ounces of Rose
Vinegar, and when it is strained put to it some syrup of the aforesaid Herbs,
and as much sugar as is sufficient, and when you will make the Body loose, put
Manna or Rhubarb thereunto.

The usual syrups are of Endive and succory simple and compound, and sharp
syrups of Vinegar, which were prescribed in the Cure of the former cachexy, to
which for cooling, you may add the syrup of the Juice of Citrons, of Lemmons,
Pomegranates and the like, as the Violets, Purslain, Waterlillies, and other of
the Juice of Currance, Barberries and other sharp Juyces.

Waters must be mixed with the syrups, as of Endive, succory, Liver-wort,
Dodder, with which to strengthen the bowels we mix water of Agrimony and
Wormwood.

Pouders of species, which are given by themselves, or in Troches, Lozenges,
Electuaries, Pills may be used as follows, of which this is excellent to open
Obstructions. Take of red and white sanders, each one dram, of yellow sanders
half a dram, of red Rose leaves two drams, of Violets half a dram, of the four
great cold seeds one dram and an half, of Purslain and Endive seed each half a
dram, of Antispodium, of Ivoryshavings two drams: make a powder and with Gum
Traganth dissolved in Rose Water or Juice of Barberries make Troches,

If you add Rhubarb and Camphire it will be like Diatriansantalon Nicolai;
which has besides the things herein, Juice of Liquorish, Gum Arabich and
starch, and sometimes the Rhubarb is double in quantity: and this usual
composition may be used for the former.

There is another Composition of more Virtue, called Diarhodon Abbatis Nicolai
used against Obstructions, which is less hot, it has in it sanders, Roses,
Violets, the four great and little cold seeds, burnt Ivory, Gum arabic and
Traganth, Juice of Liquorish, Rhubarb and Camphire, as Diatriansantalon, and
besides Asarum, Bar-berries, Anise seeds, Fennel, Basil seeds, Poppy-seeds,
Mastich, Saffron, Spike, Cardamoms, Lignum Aloes, Cloves, Cinnamon, Musk,
Pearl, the Bone in in the Heart of a Heart or stag.

The Troches of Diarhodon Nicolai, of Roses, sanders, burnt Ivory, saffron and
Camphire, are not so large as the former.

And the Troches of the sanders which are more binding, they have sanders,
Roses, the great cold seeds, Purslain seeds, Bar-berries, burnt Ivory,
Camphire, and Bole Armenick.

Or other astringents as the Troches of Bar-berries, instead of which we may
use these less binding, Take of the three sanders, add Roses each one dram, of
Rhubarb one dram and an half, of spodium, of Ivory one dram, of Endive,
Purslain, and sorrel each half a dram, of Melon seeds one dram and an half,
Camphire one scruple, Sugar and Manna two drams: Make a Powder with the
infusion of Gum Traganth in Endive waters; Make Troches.

The Powder of the leaves of Endive and Succory taken often in Wine, with the
feed of Hatch-vetch and a little Cinnamon to make it pleasant, is approved.

Also Lozenges made of these ordinary pouders Diatrionsantalon and Diarhodon,
and of other things with the conserve of Succory flowers.

We make of the Juice of Bar-berries pleasant Lozenges which allay the Heat as,
Take of the Juice of ripe Bar-berries, three ounces, of Sugar one pound, as
much water of Endive, or Roses as will boil them into a consistence for
Lozenges.

Thus are made the Lozenges of the Juice of currance, Pomegranates, Lemmons,
citrons, and they are as good as the former.

Of these conserves, and Pouders may diverse Electuaries be made as, Take of the
Conserve of Succory flowers, and the candied roots of Succory each one ounce
and an half, of Conserve of Violets, Maidenhair and Bugloss each half an
ounce, of Melon seeds one dram and an half, of Trionsantalon one dram, with
syrup of Sorrel, make a moist Electuary, or make it thicker with sugar of Roses.

Some give Opiats to cool the Liver but to no purpose being hot things are
therein, as Philonium.

Vitriol waters drunk for some weeks as we showed in the cure of the former
cachexy, besides other benefits there mentioned, do cool the Liver, if they be
taken in time before the Dropsy be great, and while the water is only in the
Belly and Feet, but when it gets out of the Veins it will increase it,
especially (as is usually) if they make little Urine, and Drink much; therefore
it is better for those Drinkers who by their continual thirst show the heat of
their Liver, before the cachexy grow great, to mix their wine with water.

The heat of the Bowels and especially of the Liver, and the dryness also is
cured by outward things that cool and moisten; adding always those things that
are astringent as these following.

A cooling and moistning Ointment. Take Oil of Violets, Lillies, Guords, or of
Osiers, washed in Vinegar or Juice of Endive, two ounces, Oil of Quinces,
Roses, Myrtles, or Mastich, each one ounce; of the lesser cold seeds, and of
Sorrel and Rose leaves each half a dram, of all the sanders one dram, of spike
one scruple, camphire half a scruple, Wax as much as will make an Unguent.

These are more proper for the Liver. Take of Oil of Roses and Violets, each
one ounce and an half, of Oils of Water Lillies and Wormwood, each one ounce,
of the juice of Endive one ounce and an half, of the Juice of Agrimony, one
ounce, of Vinegar of Roses six drams: boil them till the Juyces be consumed,
and add red and white sanders each one dram, of Endive, Purslaine each half a
dram, of spike one scruple, of Wax as much as will make an ointment: to these
add camphire, or Troches of camphire.

The Ointment of sanders is usual against the Distemper of the Liver, which is
made of the three sanders, Roses, spodium, Bole Armenick, camphire, Oil of
Roses and Wax.

Also Oil of Roses made of Roses and their Juice and Oil of sweet Almonds: to
which some add Opium which because as we often showed that it does not cool,
will do no good in that respect, but if there be hardness it will mollify, as
we have showed stupefactive things do.

You may also use Refrigerans Galeni with spike, you may also apply an Epitheme
to the Liver, made thus, Take of Endive, fuccory and Liver wort water each
three ounces, of Violet-water, or Lettice or Nightshade, and Roses each two
ounces, of Wormwood water, one ounce, of Rose Vinegar, of sour Wine, one ounce
and an half, of all the sanders each half a dram, of spike one scruple, of
camphire half a scruple: mix them. Juyces of Endive and succory may be added,
also Waters of sorrel, smallage, and Dodder, powder of Purslain seed, Endive,
Smallage, and red Roses seeds, burnt Ivory, and Mastich, of because the
stomachs being so near to the Liver.

A Fomentation may be made with the Decoction of ordinary or stilled proper
Water, and Rose Vinegar or wine, with Endive, Succory, Wormwood, the four great
and small cold seeds, with Cypress, Spike, and Schaenanth, and other Pouders
mentioned.

Or these mentioned, boiled in a bag and strained, and applied. Also these
Pouders of cold seeds, Violets, Roses, Water Lillies, Spodium, and Sp^ke tied
in a clout, and sprinkled with proper waters and Vinegar.

Purslain new gathered and beaten with Rose Water, and Vinegar, with Camphire
is fitly applied.

Or a Cataplasm of Barley meal, or of Lentils made thick with Juice of Endive,
or Purslain, and Oil of Roses.

In their Diet let them take heed of strong wine, sharp Meat, spiced, or salt,
let them eat moistning Broaths rather and flesh such as were prescribed in the
Treatise of Hectic Fevers, to correct the dryness of the Liver, which is
difficult when fixed.

That Jaundies which comes from Choler, The Cure of the Jaundies.
in which the whole Body is dyed; if it come from much Choler without any other
Infirmity joined, in regard Nature does disburden her self by an inconvenient
way you must bring the Choler back into the Guts; and this must be done when
there is a Fever also adjoined. But if it follow a Fever, and cures the
Fever by sweating, you must help this Motion of Nature rather than hinder it.
In other Diseases joined with the Jaundies, you must consider these Diseases
chiefly, always purging the Choler forth by proper ways, and drawing it back
by stool and Urine, but if the separation be hindered by reason of the
Obstructions of the Liver, Hardness, Scirrhus, Rottennss, from whence comes a
Dropsy, or if there be Inflammation, you must cure it with consideration of
these; if the Excretion or voiding of Excrements be by reason of the
Obstruction of the Porus Cholidochus, we apply the same things which we use in
the Obstruction of the Liver, and if there be Inflammation the same.

If the Jaundies proceed from Poison taken, this must presently be voided by
Vomit, Glisters, if from a stroke or bite of a Beast, you must use things that
draw the venom out, as Cupping-glasses and the like, and give things that
resist venom, Antidotes and the like, of Hartshorn and Ivory, which also cure
the Jaundies; and if the Color which is but a symptom remain after the cause
is removed, we take it away with Topic Medicines.

Blood-letting is good if there be much Choler in the branches of the Vena
cava, and nothing else hinder, because it takes away part of it; which when the
blood is cold, will be seen by its yellow water.

Some to little purpose open the Veins of the Forehead, and under the Tongue
to take yellowness from the Eyes and Face.

Otherwise, when there is not much Choler in the veins, Blood-letting is of
little profit in the Jaundies, except there be some other Disease that requires
it, for when the Vena cava is emptied, the meseraik Veins send blood and
Choler the easier up into it. And this is to be understood in the provoking of
Terms; for these come from the Vena cava, and if they be stopped in the
jaundies as in a Cachexy, they will not be provoked by Blood-letting, except
the jaundies be first cured, because the stoppage of them comes from the
jaundies, not the jaundies from them, as we showed.

The Haemorrhoids, because they purge both Choler and Melancholy from the
Meseraiks, if they bleed of themselves, or by constraint, are profitable.

Glysters are excellent when the Choler comes not to the Guts to provoke
stools, nor discoloureth the Excrements: for by forcing they do not only fetch
out the Excrements, but by stirring up Nature, and opening, they fetch Choler
from the Meseraiks and the Porus Cholidochus.

Therefore first give emollient Glysters, then sharp, and such as purge
Choler, (mentioned in the Colic and in Fevers) adding things that open, as
Roots and opening Herbs: after use the strongest, if the other prevail not,
vomiting is good sometimes, especially if it come from Poison.

General Purges for carrying Choler out of the Meseraik Veins where it is first
gathered together, and sent to the other Veins from thence, are good; these may
be only such as: purge Choler, if choler alone can be purged by them, but in
regard things that purge Phlegm do the same as Experience teaches, we must not
stand much upon that, so long as Obstructions are opened which are the cause,
many such Purges are prescribed in the Cachexy that comes from the Liver, and
may here be used, and to which these may be added.

Very bitter things are used to cure the Jaundies which come from Obstructions,
because they do not only open obstructions, but also they open the Mouths of
the meseraik Veins, that the choler which cannot go to the Guts by its usual
passages, may go that way back again and so may not be brought too much into
the hollow Vein; therefore they give Aloes, both in form of Pills, as Pills of
Hiera with the same quantity of Rhubarb, and Agarick, that they may purge the
better, or mix stronger with them, as Pills of Rhubarb, and Aggregative.

Or give these like then approved by Galen. Take of Aloes half a dram, of
Epithymum, or Senna, or Polypody one scruple, of Euphorbium, and Brimstone each
half a scruple, with wine or water make Pills.

Hiera picra is given for the same end in a Potion, and it is best in the
Jaundies, and to kill Worms, which sometimes by reason of the want of choler in
the Excrements, being they are then less bitter, grow there.

Take of Hiera picra simple, (in which is Saffron which is thought to be proper
against the jaundies.) one dram and an half, of Rhubarb, and Senna each one
dram, of Mechoacan half a dram, of shavings of Ivory, and of Hartshorn, each
one scruple: make a powder, give one dram with Whey or Wine, and if you add one
scruple of Diagridium, it will work the better.

Hiera Coloquintidos given instead of the other, by reason of the double
Bitterness of Aloes and Coloquintida will open the passages more violently, and
stir up Nature; and therefore they give Wine infused in the Apple of
coloquintida made hollow, or the like.

The Extract of Aloes Rosate with Rhubarb is chiefly given in a jaundze as a
purge, the preparation whereof we showed in the pain of the Heart, from
weakness of the Stomach, or this, Take of the essence of Aloes prescribed in
the Chapter mentioned three ounces, of the powder of Rhub^rb sprinkled with
Cinnamon water one ounce, of the Extract of the same six drams, and with Syrup
of Wormwood make a Mass for Pills.

Potions are made of catholicon, Diaphaenicon, of the Electuary of the juice of
Roses, Diaprunis, Diapsyllium, dissolved in Wormwood water, or the like, adding
proper Syrups.

The Electuary of Sowbread purges and sweateth.

Potions are made of the infusion of Rhubarb, with spike, and cinnamon in wine
or water, of Troches of Agarick in Honey with water, Syrups and Electuaries
aforementioned, with purge.

Or of a preparing Apozeme, with Polypody, carthamus and Senna, in the
Decoction, and then with Rhubarb, Myrobalans, and Agarick infused make a
purging Apozeme for some days.

Or the Aggregative pills, or pil aure^e alone or mixed with Pills of Rhubarb.

Sweating does send the choler with the Serum or Water from the branches of the
gate Vein, and also takes away that which was in the skin by the Pores, which
maybe good after that Choler which was in the Meseraiks Veins, and caused the
Jaundies, first is purged away, least it be by sweating carried into the Veins;
and it is done by Baths and other things mentioned.

It is good also to provoke Urine, to bring Choler out that way, which
otherwise used to color the Urin, and is often plentifully so voided: which is
done by things that open obstructions, and better if Diuretics are added
thereunto, Thus,

Take of red Vetches, one pugil; of Melon seeds one ounce and an half, of
Fennel seed two drams, of Dodder seed, one dram, of red Sanders one dram and an
half, of Spike, and Asarum roots each one dram, boil them in convenient stilled
water, till there remain one pint and an half, Take of the strained liquor
aromatize it with cinnamon, and yellow Sanders and sweeten it with Sugar, for
some Doses.

You may use things that alter before and purging to prepare and open
Obstructions, and to dissolve Tumors, if such be in the Jaundies, many of them
are described in the Cachexy, and they that are good for the Liver in the like
case may be here used in the jaundies, the causes being observed; choosing such
things as heat not over much and breed choler; besides which these following
are proper for the jaundies.

Decoctions made in Water or water and wine, and Vinegar are made diverse ways
to be drunk three or more Mornings together: as thus of many things, which may
be also made of few.

Take of the five opening Roots, of Dock-roots each half an ounce, of Orris
roots, and round Birth-wort, and Asarum each two drams, of Tamarisk barks an
ounce, of Succory, five leaved Grass, Dropwort, with the Roots, Groundpine,
Germander, and the Capillary Herbs, of Endive, Liver-wort, Agrimony, and
Dodder, each one handful, of the Topps of Wormwood, Rosemary, Horebound, and
the greater Celandine, each half an handful, of Elder flowers, and Broom
flowers each one pugil, of red or black Vetches one pugil, of the four great
cold seeds, each one dram, Anise seeds half an ounce, of Caraway seeds three
drams, of Parsley, and Turnep seed each one dram, of Prunes and Figs each five
pair: boil them in water and wine, in the Liquor strained being one pint and an
half, dissolve Sugar as much as fit, and aromatize it with Cinnamon, cassia
lignea, Spike, or Sanders for an Apozeme for four or five Doses.

Besides these the Decoction of wild Flax, St. John's wort, Samphire,
Pennyroyal, Organ, Polymountane, wild Mints, wild Marjoram, Ground Ivy,
Chamomil, Fleabane and its flowers, and the Roots of Alkanet, Hog Fennel, and
Perewinkle, or Swallow-wort, Eringus, Carduus, and Ash barks.

Also the Decoction of Celandine Roots, with Elicampane, Oak Moss, and Saffron.

If these simples be steeped in Wine, and then the Wine given at several times
it will work more strongly.

Or make this wine, of Succory, Fennel, and Asparagus Roots each six drams, of
Asarum Roots three drams, of Horehound, Wormwood, and the lesser Centaury dried
each two drams, of the Tops of Rosemary one pugil, of Lavender flowers half a
pugil, of Indian, and Celick Spikenard, and Schaenanth each half a dram: slice
them and put thereto three pints of white Wine, add two drams of Rhubarb to
make it purge, and if you add two drams of steel it will be admirable.

A simple Wine in which half an ounce of Asarum roots, or steel has been
infused is good, Dioscorides commends Squill wine; some steep the fore Teeth of
a Beaver in wine and drink it.

Another is made thus; Take of Sarsa two ounces, of Fennel, Parsley, Burnet,
Orris, and Rhapontick roots each half an ounce, of Elicampane two drams, of
Gemian, and Asarum roots, and Pellitory of Spain each one dram, of Agrimony,
Wormwood, Dodder, Horehound, Germander, Groundpine each half an handful, of
Tops of the lesser Centaury one pugil, of Arise, Fennel, and Smalage, Senna
each one dram, of Cinnamon and Galangal each one dram and an half, infuse them
in eight pints of white wine, if you add Turbith two drams, Rhubarb, and
Agarick each three drams, of Ginger half a dram, it will also purge.

These also may be boiled in water and wine, with or without the purges, and so
taken some commend a distilled water of the same taken two ounces and an half
at a time.

The juyces alone drunk from one ounce and an half to two ounces, with sugar
and wine is good, especially the juyces of five leaved Grass, Dock-roots, dead
Nettle, Horehound, Lemmons, Sowbread, Succory with the Roots, or you may make
them of such Plants as are good by Decoction; Mathiolus gives the juice of
Cowcumbers, Raddish water is highly commended in the Jaundies.

Other Potions are made of diverse things, as of pouders with wine, and water,
syrups and Decoctions; the more simple are the powder of Orange peels, Ivory
shavings, steel, Earthworms, the stones in the Gall of an Ox, and Brimstone
which Dioscorides gives in the Yolk of an Egg.

A Powder may be made of many things thus,

Take of the Roots of the greater Celandine, and Swallow-wort, and Madder each
two drams; Roots of Gentian, Birth-wort, and Asarum each one dram; of Wormwood,
Horehound, Vervain, and Maidenhair, of Broom flowers, carthamus, Rosemary, of
carva seeds, Endive, Germander, and columbine seeds each half a dram; of
shavings of Ivory, and Hearts horn each one dram, of steel prepared with Vinegar
one dram and an half, of dried Earthworms one dram, of cinnamon, Nutmeg, Mace,
Spikenard, each half a dram, of Myrrh. Mastich, and Frankincense each one
scruple, of Saffron half a scruple: make a Powder, give one dram or more, with
sugar, or without, with wine or other convenient Liquor.

This Powder is bitter but excellent. Take of Gentian Roots one dram, of the
Tops of the lesser centaury, Orange peels, Ivory, and Hearts horn, shavings of
Cinnamon, each half a dram: make a powder, give one dram in wine or other
Liquor.

These Troches are good in a jaundize that tends to a Dropsy, Take of Rhubarb
two scruples, of Asarum roots, Gum Lac each half a dram, of cinnamon,
Spikenard, schaenanth, cassia lignea each one scruple: make them in Troches
with juice of Wormwood, or Agrimony, or Triphera Saracenica, give it in wine or
water.

The usual Pouders to open Obstructions, are of the troches of Rhubarb,
Agrimony, Wormwood, also Trionsantalon, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diacarcuma,
Dialacca, in which sometimes Rhubarb is doubled in quantity, they are given
alone or mixed with wine.

That Powder which some commend so highly in the Jaundies which they divide
into three parts, and give at three Mornings together, in the Decoction of
Vetches is this,

Take of columbine seeds, Hearts horn, and eastern Saffron each one dram: make a
fine powder for three Doses.

There are Potions made of cray fish beaten with celandine and water, and then
strained, five ounces of the urine of a Boy drunk often does it by Experience,
with sugar or Honey to sweeten it.

Others boil Goose dung in water or wine, and strain it, and give it to be
drunk.

Cummin seed eaten presently after bathing is approved. And this the German
Women use still, and believe it to be of great force; Dioscorides gives
May-weed after barhing, its yellow flowers, I suppose.

The Leaves of Sage often drunk have cured some, and the Leaves of wild Rocket
often eaten.

Others believe that eleven Lice drunk down will cure the jaundies.

This Electuary is convenient. Take of the conserve of the flowers or Roots of
Succory, of Maidenhair each one ounce, of the conserve of Smallage Roots,
Orris, Orange peels each half an ounce; of shavings of Ivory, and Hartshorn
each one dram and an ha^, of the usual Pouders one dram: make them into an
Electuary with some of the aforementioned syrups, let him take a Bolus and
drink the Phisical Wine or water after it.

It will be of more force if you add to this Electuary two drams of Bitter
Almonds, one dram, of the great cold seeds, of Rhubarb one dram, of Steel
prepared two drams, of Powder of Earthworms half a dram, of Saffron one
scruple and an half, Cinnamon; and Nutmeg each half a dram, and with Oxymel of
Squills make an Electuary.

The Pills of simples which are hard to be taken by Reason of their evil sent
and taste in pouders, are made thus, Take of Gentian roots, Birthwort, Madder,
and Rhubarb, and Myrrh, each half a dram, of steel prepared one dram, of Hogs
dung dried one scruple, of Saffron half a scruple: mix them with juice or syrup
of Wormwood, or of Horehound, and make pills. The Dose is one dram.

And the usual Pouders may be so made into Pills.

Outwardly Medicines are applied to the Liver, if that cause the jaundies,
either by Obstruction or Hardness such as are mentioned in the Cachexy, also
Ointments, Emplasters and Fomentations, which need not be repeated being there
mentioned.

To other parts of the Body which are discolored Remedies may be used, as
Baths, for taking away Choler that remains over the Body after the cause is
removed, and will not breath it self forth, as at other times. And they must be
dry when we intend to sweat: with Flax aired with Elder and Jun^per burnt, also
they must take an inward Sudorifick before bathing.

Moist Baths are made by boiling these following to cleanse and discuss, as
Pellitory of the Wall, Beets, Mallows, Marshmallows, Soapwort, Centaury,
Wormwood, Horehound, Fumitory, Chamomel, Sorrel, Elicampane, Melilot, Rosemary,
Organ, Misleto of the Oak, the greater Celandine, golden Flowers, which three
last having yellow juice, are thought to be proper against Choler, with Beans,
Lupines, Bran and Barley.

Waters to wash with are used at the coming forth of the Bath: made of
cleansing Herbs.

For the face which is most visible, to recover its color, it must be washed
in the Bath, and after with this Decoction or the like, with Wine, Vinegar,
Water of Roses, Beans or Sorrel, or with the Juice of Pomegranates, Lemmons,
Citrons, or Syrup of Sorrel, Vinegar dissolved in waters or Decoctions.

To take away the yellowness of the Eyes, waters must be dropped into them,
with the Juice of Pomegranates, or wine and water, or Juice of Coriander.

You may put into the Nose things that by neesing disperse choler, from the
Face and Eyes, anointing the Nostrils within with Scammony, which because it
attracteth Choler is made choice of, but we use it because by Experience we
find that it provokes Neesing, mixed with Honey, but Elaterium mixed with Milk
does it more violently, other Errhines do it more mildly, as the Juice of
Horehound, white Beets, and Gith seeds, and the Decoction thereof.

Also the Sent of Nigella or Gith when it is eaten, and of Vinegar do the same.

Rubbings after bathing and otherwise are good to take away the Relics of
choler from the skin.

Applications made to the soles of the Feet, have been cried up by the vulgar,
as the greater Celandine and Misleto of the Oak, whole, or bruised with
Horehound sometimes wine and Vinegar, and salt, and these applied to the wrists
work more speedily.

One told me for a certain truth, that many have been cured of the jaundies by
pissing upon new made Horse dung while it is hot.

Let the Diet be proper: let the Drink be thin, white wine mixed with the
Decoction of Roots of Grass, and Asparagus, or other openers, and let other
things be answerable.

That Redness which comes from Blood, The Cure of Redness
which is chiefly in the Face, if it be either from Bashfulness or Anger, as it
quickly comes so it goes away with the passion. And that which continues long,
which either comes from external Heat, or a Disease, has no cure but by
abating the Heat.

Paleness if it be from want of blood, The Cure of Paleness.
by the loss of the flowrishing color only, and from cold, it will continue
only while the Body grows hot, as that which comes by fainting returns
afterward; and that which comes from a Disease, will cease with the Disease,
and there is no peculiar Direction for it.

That Blackness which is Natural and comes from the seed, if it be like a
Blackmore, Blackness.
to go about to cure it is to make a black More white according to the Proverb,
Blackmores.
which is impossible.

There is another vulgar Swarthyness, Ordinary Swarthiness, the Cure of it.
when the skin is darkish and dusty Naturally, is nothing set by, of them who
think true Beauty does not consist in whiteness, and therefore they think a Man
is not discoulored thereby, and will not require cure.

But such as love to be neat, and think themselves less fair, and acceptable to
others thereby; desire to mend it if they cannot cure it.

When the skin is black by wrinkles that shadow it, and make it dark, when the
wrinkles are not confirmed, as when they come from an external cause or Disease
that has made the skin loose, when the causes are removed they will cease and
the skin will be stretched and its wrinkles and return to its former
Complexion; but if the skin be dried and straightned especially by Age as in
old people, though they seem impossible to be taken away, and the Physician
that permiseth to do it seems to be mad, as the Poet says, He Is worthy of a
filthy aged Queen,
That wrinkles from her body takes clean.


Yet for the taking away if not diminishing of the same, there are Remedies,
which old Men desiring to seem young do much affect.

These are done by a two sold Art, Medicines by the beautifying Art.
by one called comptorian Art which is for Neatness, making an artificial
white, but instable and fading over the black which is Natural, so deceiving
the Spectators, Fucus.
and this is called a Fucus; the other is called the cosmetick art, and does
not add another color nor deceives, Medicines made by the Cosmetick Art.
but only amends this dull color of the skin, making it more neat, bright, and
constant in color, taking away or mending the wrinkles, and correcting the
dark complexion. Afterward that there may be more Beauty, with red color
applied to certain parts called then Fuci, by the comptorian Art, they make the
Body of better color. We shall show how this is done by Remedies that whiten,
cleanse, take away wrinkles and make red.

The white Medicines called Fucuses, with which women that affect to be
beautiful (and which would be unseemly in Men,) do paint their Face, Hands, and
other places that are naked and seen, are made of white stuff, and that is
chosen for the most part which is cleansing and digesting, or such things are
mixed therewith: for so they make fair not only by whiting which is but of small
continuance, and little Ornament, but makes a new color in the skin, by
sucking continually forth that Moisture which makes it black: and it
attenuateth the skin by clensing, and so makes it more clear and neat. And
therefore when the skin is thicker and harder then usual, sosteners are mixed,
not only to procure a decent color, but to mollify the Hands and Face which
is commendable, for which cause that the Face may always shine, which is
accounted comely, they add some fat things.

These paints being thus made in form of a Liquor white as Milk or of an
Unguent must be applied and suffered to dry on. And if they be discolored by
their thickness which women of the honest sort do fear exceedingly, before they
go forth do usually wash with some comely decoction, which is no paint, as
shall be declared, so gently that some of the white still remain with, and that
when the paint seems to be quite gone will restore it, and it will continue
long, and therefore they wash often after it, before they go forth into view.

The matter of these is taken from diverse white things as follow, of Ceruss,
which being very white, and sticks well by reason of its fineness and Fatness,
is proper, if first it be poudered and seifted, washed often, and dried; or
boiled in water till it may be made into Troches, one whereof being taken in
the palm of the Hand with a little convenient Liquor, will serve to paint the
Face.

Of the white Dragon Roots there are made Troches as the former, like Ceruss
and white Starch, called Gersa, which besides the whiteness it makes, does
cleanse very much, and it is made of the Juice of Dragon Roots, dried gently by
the fire or Sun, and so brought into Balls or Troches.

Or take the Roots aforesaid, and after they are cleansed beat them, and then
with warm water or other convenient Liquor dissolve it, and strain it and so
let it stand till there be a white cream at the bottom; from which pour of the
water at the top, and pour on fresh, which after a little time you must also
pour off from the residence at the bottom as before, and this being three or
four times done, let that which remains be dried, and made up for your use into
small Troches.

The common way of preparing this Gersa is of the dried Roots of Dragons, which
being first peeled from their external black coat, must be beaten into powder,
and then dissolved in water, and gently dried again, and then again poudered,
and washed after this manner three or four times, and made into Balls or
Troches, and kept for use.

The same way may be made as well of the great Aron, or Cookow pintle Roots, in
defect of the other, as white and as forcible, or of both together.

Of the white Brittle root, of the wild Cowcumber you may also make the same.

You may make other forms of Dragon Roots and Ceruss thus: Take of Dragon,
Gersa prepared as before one ounce, of Ceruss prepared, of Borax two drams, and
if you please of Camphire half a dram, with the Infusion of Gum Traganth made
in Rose water, make Troches for your use; you may mix some things that are in
Unguantum Citrinum therewith.

Sometimes you may mix prepared Ceruss and Dragons with Oil of sweet Almonds or
de Been, and a little white, if you please to make it into an Ointment.

Of sublimate Mercury there are excellent washes made, which cleanse and make
white, which are diverse ways prepared least they should exulcerate, mixing
things which work the same effect more gently; and least any part of it should
touch the Teeth and make them black, as is usual, she must keep water in her
Mouth while she uses it.

A water like Milk is made thereof, which is more plain and profitable, thus:
Take of finely poudered Sublimate half an ounce, two or three whites of Eggs
well beaten, of the Emulsion of white Poppy seeds made of one pound of the seed
and ten pints of water, stir them very well in a stone Mortar, first putting in
the whites of an Egg by degrees, then the Emulsion, as is sufficient which is
known by a Pin, or put therein for when it is not discolored after some
continuance there it is right, but if it be then pour on more Emulsion.

To this we add two ounces of Borax, or of Sugar Candy.

Another white wash is thus made: Take of the whitest Barley flower, or Starch
made into a past with Goats Milk, bake it gently in an Oven and when it begins
to be hard take it out, and mix it with so much Goats Milk, as will make it all
like thick Milk, take five pints of this, and two drams of Sublimate, mix them
well together, more or less, till by the proof above mentioned with a pin you
find it right, then use it, adding sometimes Ceruss one dram, Borax two drams,
of sea Snails calcined half an ounce, with a little Camphir.

A dry past made of Sublimate, like Chalk or Starch is often used; a portion
whereof being tempered in the hand with a little wine out of your Mouth, or
Rose Water, may anoint the Face: or mingled with Pomatum, Oil of Gourds seeds,
or sweet Almonds, it is made thus,

Take of Sublimate poudered one ounce, of Quicksilver two or three drams, of
Juice of Lemmons, or Vinegar a little, stir them till they wax white, and then
stir them well fasting, spittle of one that cheweth Sugar Candy, then with
whites of Eggs stir them into the form of a past or Liniment. Then wash it with
a good quantity of Spring water, and let them boil together a little, and then
stand to settle, and let the clear water at the top be poured off by degrees,
and fresh water be poured on, and then after boiling and settling be poured of
as formerly. Do it thrice, but the last time with Rose Water, or Bean-water or
of Myrtles, and boil it till it be almost consumed and let the bottom or
residence be set in the Sun or in an Oven till it be dry: sometimes this
infusion is made without boiling only by long steeping, and changing the water
sometimes, and then drying the residence.

Sometimes a dram of Camphire is added to the sublimate and Quicksilver, the
quantity of a dram, and to make it more dear, rather then for profit, as much
of the powder of Pearls, or sea Snails calcined, with some Leaves of gold and
silver, to repress the malignity of Quicksilver, and of sublimate.

There is the like made by the women of Monpelier, which is, Take of the best
sublimate four ounces, of Quicksilver mixed with the fasting spittle of one
that chewed Sugar Candy half an ounce: beat them well in a stone Mortar, with a
wooden Pestil, till it be white; then tie it in a white silk Clout, and put it
into a new glassed earthen pot full of water, and set it upon the Embers, and
after the water is grown hot, pour it off, and add fresh, and do so the second
time, and let your Mercury be sweetened with so doing nine times, and let the
Body that remains in the silk Rag be dried and made into forms as big as
Vetches, dry them in the shade and keep them for use. The way is to take one
piece and dissolve it in Oil of sweet Almonds for a Liniment for the Face.

There is a white wash made of Litharge, by steeping or boiling it, which they
call Virgins Milk, this gives the Face a good Color, but because it does take
Redness away too much, we shall speak of it hereafter, in Redness.

Washes may be made also of Borax, which the Goldsmiths use, and is made of
water, being finely poudered and mixed with Oil of Guord seeds or other Oil.

Or with the Infusion of Gum Traganth, to anoint, and you may mix Ceruss with
Borax.

Of stones as white Marble, Alabaster, Amiantum, specular stone, Loadstone,
which is called Talcum, Crystal; white Coral, and diverse Seafish shells either
crude or first calcined, made up with Oil, Liquor or Pomatum, are made also
Ointments, and these Washes, as: Take of some of the aforesaid half an ounce,
Ceruss two drams, Borax one dram, white Frankincense, and Camphire, each half a
dram, of Juice of Lemmons one ounce, of Oil of sweet Almonds or other Oil as
much as will make a Liniment.

Or let her use instead of these the Vnguentum citrinum which is made of the
stones aforesaid, Alabaster, the speculiar stone, or Talcum, Crystal, Coral,
and shells, the Navel shell Fish, the purple Fish, the Trumpet Fish, Ceruss,
Borax, white Frankincense, Camphire, and Gersa of Dragons, Niter,
Starch-Traganth, Hogs Grease, and Hens Grease, and the Juice of Citrons, from
whence this Ointment is named Citrinum.

The Face or Hands being rubbed with the fine Powder of Talcum, it makes them
wonderful white, so that if it continue any time, it will not easily be taken
off.

Eggs shells calcined and poudered finely, make an ointment with the things
mentioned, also very excellent. Also a good Ointment is made of Starch
incorporated as before, and you may add the white flower of dried Melon and
Pepon-seeds.

Also an Emulsion of Melon-seeds and Almonds with their water, does beautify
the Face.

Some Women use it thus. They take one or two bitter Almonds and put them in a
Clout and chew them fasting, and so anoint the Face with the Spittle mixed with
the white Emulsion.

Those cleansing Remedies external, which differ from a Fucus only in that they
paint not white, are made as the other, and are as follow, with which the Face
is to be washed or anointed.

Stilled Waters are most usual, as of these Simples, Solomon's Seal,
Bean-flowers, Roots of Dragons, or Cuckow-pintles, Sowbread, Raddish, Gentian,
Mallows, Lillies, Mullein, Water Lillies, Melons, Kidney Beans, Pine-nuts, with
sweet Waters, as of Roses with Musk, or Camphire, of Orange flowers, Orris
Roots etc.

The Waters of Lillies, and Rosin of the Fir Tree, does make a thick Skin thin.

Many Compounds are for the same use, thus made, of Guords, Melons being ripe
and divided, distilled with Goats Milk, and Eggs beaten together.

Or of Lemmons, Oranges, Citrons, distilled as the former.

Another is made of Bread thus: Take of common white Bread, or of Barley, or
Bran, the Crust taken off two pounds, of Goats Milk three pints, of Eggs beaten
ten, distill a Water of them.

You may add three ounces of Sugar, and so distill it.

Or half a pint of Wine, and one or two Lemmons, or one ounce and an half of
the Juice, and one dram of Camphire.

Or, Take the aforesaid, and add of Bean or Pease Meal, or of Rice three
ounces, of bitter Almonds, two ounces, of the four great cold seeds one ounce,
distill them.

That it may cleanse more, add of Dragon Roots, and Solomon's seal each one
ounce and an half, of Orris Roots one ounce, and of Mastich half on ounce,
Borax two drams.

Also the Water of Rice macerated or steeped in Lemmon or Bean water till it
swell, distilled to a pint, ad half an ounce of the powder of Mastich.

And the white of Eggs mixed with the Juice of Lemmons make a good Water
distilled; to which before the stilling you may add Borax, Alum and Salt.

The Venetian Paint is not to be omitted which is thus made. Take of the
whitest Lard that is sweet and cut it small, as much as you please, of the
white Flowers of Bindwood, of the Juice of crude Citrons strained, each as much
as is sufficient, still them with a gentle fire in Balneo Mariae, keep the
water for your Use.

The water also of Snails, distilled with Goats Milk, and Hops, or Goats
Grease, and a little Camphire.

There is also an excellent Water made of Urine mixed with Salt, especially
Salt Gem. with Cloves, Cinnamon, and Rose Water, to take away the Sent thereof.

Also a Water distilled of white Tartar, dissolved in Wine, with Bean flowers,
and Rosemary.

Or, Take of Tartar one ounce, Alum half an ounce, Borax two drams, Camphire
one dram, of Water that is proper two pints, distill them.

Or, Take of Tartar calcined one pound, of Mastich one ounce, with whites of
Eggs make a Past out of which draw a Water.

You may make a water of Sublimate not to whiten, but to cleanse, either by
dissolving it being steeped or boiled in the waters above mentioned Simple or
Compound, especially in that of Bread, with the Juice of Lemmons, you must take
no less then three pints of water to one dram of Sublimate, and you must try by
Coppar put into it if there be enough: to which you may add Ceruss, and
Camphire, and mix it with Goats Milk, whites of Eggs, or Mucilages least it
should hurt.

Of more or fewer of those things may a water be distilled; as, Take of Lilly
and Orris Roots green, each four ounces, of Dragon Roots, or Cowkow pintles,
and Solomon's Seal; each two ounces, of Bean flower four ounces, of Rice flower
two ounces, of the four great cold Seeds one ounce, of bitter Almonds five
ounces, of Quince seeds half an ounce: beat them all and add one pint of Goats
Milk, of Calfes Feet, and Snail broth, three quarters of a pint; of Bean
flower, Water and Rose Water, each one quarter of a pint; the white of twelve
Eggs beaten, Turpentine dissolved in the Yolks of Eggs half an ounce; of Honey
ooe ounce, of common Sugar, or Sugar Candy, two ounces, of wine and Vinegar,
each one ounce, of poudered Mastich half an ounce, of Alum, and Borax each two
drams, of Camphire one dram, mix and distill them.

To these may be added Briony, wild Cowcumber, Sowbread, Guaicum, Lemmons,
Oranges, Melons, Muskmelons, Guords, or their Juyces. Also Primrose flowers,
Bean flowers, Lillies Elder flowers, Pease, Lupins, Starch, Pine-nuts, Fleabane
seeds, and the Gums of Traganth, or the Infusion thereof, Frankincense, Myrrh,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Musk, Boys urine, Ox gall Litharge, Tartar, Ceruss, Soap,
Goats Suet, or fresh Butter, to which you may add shells and earths, from which
little comes by distilling, as Coral and Shel-fish, and sometimes a little
Chalk.

To take away the Spots of the Face, and whiten it, this is an excellent Water:
Take of Bean flowers, Turpentine washed in Goats milk, each one pound, whites
of Eggs seven in number: mix them and put them in Balne^ Mariae, keep the
distilled water for your Use, then Take a white Capon plucked, and washed and cut
in pieces, and put that also in Balneo, and mix the water that is distilled
from it with the former, adding two drams of Borax, half a dram of Camphire,
put them all in a long necked Glass, and set it by Night in the Moonshine, and
by Day in the shadow, wash the Face with this water warm.

This water following which was used by Mary of Medices, the Queen Mother is of
most Virtue above all others, she used it to make her Face fair: it is made
thus, Take three white Capons presently after they are killed, and mince them
small taking out their Grease, two new green Cheeses made of Goats Milk, the
pulp of six Lemmons, the peels taken off, the whites of eight Eggs with the
shells, of Borax, and Powder of Brimstone, each half an ounce, of Camphire one
pound, of Bean flower, and Water-lilly-water, each one pint, put them in Balneo
Mariae, and some Grains of Musk in the Neck of the Still, keep the water that
comes forth for your Use, wash the Face therewith every Night.

This water is good with Sublimate: Take of Dragon or Cuckoo pintles Roots,
Sowbread, and Solomon's Seal, each one pound, of Crumbs of Bread half a pound,
of fresh Lard one ounce and an half, of Juice of Lemmons two ounces, in which
Sea Snails have been dissolved, of Alum two ounces, Sublimate half an ounce,
or less, distill a Water.

A Decoction is used to wash the Face to make it clear, and to wash off what
has been formerly laid on, especially of Beans, Pears, Rice and Lupines, and
the like abstergents or cleansers. In a full fat Face the Decoction of Guaicum
is approved.

Some Liquors are used, as of Melons thus made, let a Melon sliced be put in a
Pipkin, and at the top of it unripe Grapes, Mallow-flowers, and some Eggs
shells, let these be kept well stopped in an Oven so long as the Bread is baking,
this done, strain forth the Liquor for your Use.

Some use Snail water made of Snails and Salt so baked in an Oven as the former.

Some mix Snails and Melons together.

Maids being fasting use to spit into their Hands and rub the Hair of their
Forehead backwards and make it shine, which will whiten more, if they chew
bitter Almonds before.

Moreover the Face is anointed with fat Liniments, which bring Splendour, and it
is to be done carefully least the Paint appear.

Pomatums do this.

And chiefly the Marrow of a sheeps bone which is taken from them, being well
cleansed broken and boiled, swimming at the top.

Oil of Talcum to whiten and make clear the Face and Hands is of most use among
great ones, and is of great price because it makes them also soft.

Of Mucilages, the Infusion of Gum Traganth as also the white of an Egg, is
best to make the Face shine.

Some things may be used to the Hands to cleanse them and make them white and
soft, Remedies that make the face and hands soft and white.
which are not so proper for the Face.

For this there is a paste with which they rub their Hands as with Soap, made
diverse ways.

The most plain paste is made of Crumbs of Bread, boiled Bran, or Barley
flower, Rice, Pease, Lupines, which we use alone or with water, or with soft
Soap, or hard a little dissolved, and Honey we make a paste.

Of Nuts there is another Paste, as of bitter or sweet Almonds, of Peach
Kernels of Hazel and of Pine-nuts, Beans bruised, or first steeps in Milk, or
mixed with Soap or Honey.

Also it is made of other seeds especially of Guords and white Poppies.

The Compound Paste is thus made. Take of the aforesaid Simples one, especially
that of Almonds, or of two or three the quantity of one pound, adding powder of
Mustard seed two ounces or more, of Orris Roots half an ounce, this will
sweeten it, and of Honey as much as will make a paste, to this add sometimes
the pulp of Figgs, and Rocket seed, instead of Mustard seed; some add the Gall
of an Ox, but this leaves such a bitterness that it is not commendable, we may
also make it sweet sented with Sanders, Wood Aloes, Angelica Root, Lavender
flowers, Rose Water, or Musk etc.

Others may be added, as this for the Hands, Take of Ceruss half an ounce, of
Starch three drams, of Borax, and Camphire each two drams, of Egg shells
calcined half a dram, to them being poudered add of Lilly, and Water lilly, and
Rosewater six pints, of Lilly Roots two ounces, of Bread Crumbs half a pound:
boil them well, then add twelve Yolks of Eggs beaten, strain them and keep
them for your use.

Or make an Infusion of Gum Traganth in Milk, and juice of Lemmons, adding
Ceruss, Starch, and the like, and so anoint the Hands.

Also there is a paste of the Roots Daffodils boiled and beaten, adding Tartar,
and beaten Eggs.

Where you will more mollify when the Hands are very hard, anoint with the Oil
of Guord seeds, or of sweet or bitter Almouds, dissolved with white Wax, also
you may add the pulp of white Lillies, and Oil of Tartar to cleanse.

The pulp of Melons rubbed does make the Hands soft and clean.

To diminish or take away wrinkles if possible, Remedies against wrinkles.
in the Face especially, and sometimes in the hands, that the skin may seem
less cloudy, and folded and uneven, there have been proper Remedies declared,
albeit there are some cleansing Paints, as aforesaid, proper for the same;
these that follow are proper, and such as by a cleansing Quality or by
mollifying do enlarge the skin that was bound.

The seeds of wild Caraway bruised applied with a Cerot are commended by
Dioscorides.

Also Briony Roots with Orobus, Faenugreek, and Chalk, or Earth of Chios.

Others approve the Water of Pine-apples that are green, the Flowers of
Mullein, also the Roots of Asaron, and Solomon's Seal.

The Water of the Flowers and Roots of Lillies with May dew is admirable.

The Juice of Lemmons, Primrose, Cuckow-pintle Roots, and of stinking Gladon,
do lift up the skin, and make it break and a new one come under it.

The Decoction Jesamine seeds, also of Figgs with Briony Roots.

Oil of Myrrh, Jesamins, Acorns, Tartar, bitter Almonds, Pine-nuts, and
Ivy-berryes.

An Emplaster. Take of pure Wax one ounce, dissolve it with Asses Milk, stir
them and when they are cold, take them off and add an ounce of Oil of sweet
Almonds, Alum, and Sperma Caeti each half an ounce, dissolve and spread them
and apply it to a wrinkled Forehead or the like.

Let the Meal of Lupines be rubbed on with Goats Gall.

Or, Take of Hens Grease two ounces, of white Wax one dram, of Rose Water one
ounce, dissolve them, add of Ceruss, two drams, of white Coral one dram, of
Camphire half a dram: make an Ointment.

Pomatum is in great Use.

The Fume of Myrrh cast upon coals, and received on the Face, is said to be
good.

They also study to take away Wrinkles from other parts of the Body, as those
which are left after Childbearing upon the Belly.

This is done with this Ointment made of the Suet of a Kid, or Ram, in
Rose Water, or Pomatum with a little Butter, and the white of an Egg, with the
the powder of Mastich, and Frankincense.

Or, Take of Mastich, and Frankineense each half an ounce, of Myrrh two drams,
of burnt Hartshorn, one dram, of Amiantum two drams, of Salt Ammoniack one
dram, of Barley Meal, two drams, of Nigella one dram, of roasted Squills half a
dram, with Honey make an Ointment.

Medicines that make red are used by Women that study Ornament, Medicines that
make the Lips and Cheeks red.
to their Cheeks and Lips, and so they take away the Paleness and ill Color by
painting with these that follow.

The Roots of great Madder rubbed upon the Cheeks makes them red, and also if
these be mixed with Oil anointed.

The Powder of Briony Roots mixed with Water or Honey, if the Cheeks be washed
with the infusion, or anointed therewith, it will make them red.

They write that the Sea Onion and Dill seed anointed with Honey and Wine will
do the like.

That Red which Painters make of Sanders, and shavings of Brasil steept or
boiled in Water, Wine or Vinegar, with Alum will paint the Cheeks, and Lips
red.

The Spanish Women do color the inside of their dishes with Cuchynelle, and
call it Vermillion of Spain, and so keep it, and when they will use it they
spit upon it and paint their Cheeks.

The cheeks being rubbed with Scarlet or Silk dyed with Cuchineile, or Crimson
dipped in a little Aqua vitae, turn red.

Some Women rub their cheeks with red Leather to make them red.

I have observed that if one rub her cheek with ripe Mulberries and then after
with a green, and wash with Water thereupon there will remain a flourishing
color long after.

That Cure which belongs to particular Discolorations, is either for
Commaculations or Spots.

The Cure of commaculations is according to the cause which is external,
either, Air, Filth, or other things that discolor the Skin.

They who by Labor and Travail are Sunburned, The Cure of Sun-burning.
think it no dishonor but a commendation, and therefore care not for the cure,
because in the Winter it usually decreaseth. But if this Blackness displease,
we must prevent it, and destroy it.

Thus we prevent Sun-burning.

A broad brim Hat or the like, or Gloves for the Hands prevent sun-burning.

Or defend them with anointing with whites of Eggs, or the Mucilage of
Fleabane, or of Quinces, Extracted with Rosewater, or with the Infusion of Gum
Traganth made therein. To these are added Butter or Suet, or Pomatum, or Oil of
sweet Almonds, or Cream of Milk, in a small Quantity least the Face being
anointed with those fat things, or without those by the use of dryers should
appear extended.

The pulp of the Juice of Melons does the same, and of Guords adding some of
the unctious things mentioned.

Or anoint with this before you go into the Sun. Take of Pomatum two ounces, of
Ceruss dissolved in Rose Water one dram, of Frankincense, and Mastick each half
a dram, of Mucilage, of Quinces one ounce: make a Liniment.

This blackness by Sun-burning is sometimes cured by Nature; which supplyeth
continually the Burning which is new and little, with a fresh skin, if they
keep out of the Sun, except it pierce to the true skin, and then it will scarce
go away of its own accord. And then it must be cured by paints and cosmetick
Remedies, as the Natural blackness which have been already described, and
therefore shall not be repeated.

Moreover, we cure this by taking away the burnt skin from the Face and Hands
except the Impression be too deep as we have said. This is done by lifting, and
raising the scarf skin to make it fall off by this following Remedy. Take of
the Roots of white Lillies one quarter of a pound, reast them in the Embers,
then beat them with one ounce of sugar candy, lay it upon the Face, and repeat
it often, always anointing with Honey when it is taken off.

This will be done sooner if you add fresh Butter, or Hogs grease washed in
Rose water three ounces, Turpentine half an ounce, Lime five times quenched two
drams, and so apply it.

Or add Lilly Roots so roasted two ounces, the Roots of Reeds, and Dragons, and
Beans two drams, Melon seeds one dram, the Mucilage of Fleabane, or the
Infusion of Gum Traganth one ounce, of the Citron Ointment half an ounce: make
an Ointment according to Art.

If you add a little Water of Sublimate boiled, it will sooner raise the Skin.

An Onion, or Squill, or a Lilly Root often rubbed upon the part does so raise
the skin, that it will easily come off.

An evil Color from Filth, sticking to the skin, The Cure of the Pollution of
the Skin by Filth.
is taken away with the filth as we shall show in the Treatise of filth: those
which keep the hands and Face clean have been declared.

A black, yellow, or green Color, or the like, The Cure of the discoloring of
the skin from external causes.
with which the skin is infected, is taken away as other filth of the skin, and
it is done sooner or later as it has taken Root.

First, that which comes to the Hands from handling green Wall-nuts, is a
blackness which sticks fast, but at length vanishes of it self, and will by
use of cleansers, aforementioned be sooner gone, if rubbed with the Juice of a
Lemmon, or Vinegar, and a little Colophony.

The Redness that comes upon the Hands by gathering Mul-berries, though it stay
otherwise long, is quickly taken away if you rub the parts with green
Mul-berries, and after wash with Water.

The Cure of Spots is according to the Diversity of the cause, which is
internal, as Blood, nourishing Juice, or Seed, or a Disease.

Black, and blew Spots do appear after Contusions and Strokes, The Cure of
blackness from Strokes.
by reason of the Blood breaking through, under the scarf skin, these, if they
require cure, are to be cured as contusions whereof we spoke formerly. But if
the contusion be cured and yet the spots remain, then we must chiefly have
regard to them. They use to go away of their own accord, because the Blood
cannot grow thick putrified in the place as it does in a large space, but is
made waterish and thin, and so may pass through the Pores by insensible
transpiration. But if by reason of the plenty of it, and thickness, this will
not be, but it continues, and there is fear that being thick and putrified it
may ulcerate, you must apply Medicines that discuss and dry, to which if we
come at the first while the Blood flows we may add astringents, but after we
use only Discussers and Dryers, and they are thus made.

Herbs fresh gathered may be bruised and applied, or a little boiled, as
Wormwood, Hysop, Calamints, Organ, Hemp, Rocket, Devils bit, Arsmart,
Sneeswort, Mallows, Amcos, or they are mixed with Honey, and Bran, and Cummin
seed.

A Raddish Root sliced does the same.

A Decoction of the Plants aforementioned in Wine, and Honey, with Vinegar at
the first, makes a Fomentation, a Fomentation of warm water, especially if
Salt, if often used will do it also.

Also the Juyces of the Plants mentioned, especially of Wormwood, boiled with
Honey, and Aloes, and with the powder of Cumminseed, and also the Juice of
Raddish and Coriander.

Diverse Ointments and Applications are made of other things, and chiefly of Nut
Kernels beaten with Honey and salt.

Or Salt, Wine, and Honey mixed in equal parts, Cummin seed also poudered with
the Yolk of an Egg, and Wax, or Honey, to this you may add a little Camphire.

Or, Take Bean flower, and Foenugreek, of each two ounces, Cummin one ounce,
powder of Wormwood two drams, boil them in Wine, and Honey, adding half a dram
of Saffron: make an Emplaster.

Or, Take of both Comphrey Roots, of Flower-de-luce roots, each half an ounce,
of Raddish one ounce, of Mallows, and Wormwood each one handful, of Chamomel,
and Melilot flowers each one pugil: boil them in wine and water, then stamp
them, and add two ounces of the powder of Foenugreek or the like, Cummen half
an ounce, of Mustard, or Rocket seed, two drams, of Frankincense, Myrrh, or
Lac, each one dram, of Goats Dung, half an ounce, Salt two drams, Ox gall one
dram, Honey one ounce, Oil of Dill two ounces: make a Cataplasm.

This is most excellent, Take Orpiment half a dram, of the Meals
aforementioned, two ounces: boil them in Wine for a Cataplasm.

Anoint the part with the blood that comes forth of a quill new drawn.

Or with the Gall of a Goat, or Ox, with Honey, or the Yolk of an Egg.

Or apply Goats Dung or Ox Dung with Cummin.

The Lungs of a sheep hot applied do discuss spots.

Oil in which Briony Roots have been boiled or the like, or of Roses, Olive,
Chamomel, with Salt.

Or Ointment of Alabaster.

Scarification does make way for the Blood under the skin to come forth, which
may be used if it be much, and stay long; least it putrify and infect the
quick part and make a Gangrene, in the suspicion of which you must scarifie
deep.

But if by putrefaction an Imposthume, or Ulcer be bred, you must cure it as an
Imposthume or Ulcer. If a Gangrene be as it happens from a great Contusion
sometimes, then it must be cured as a contusion and Gangrene, of which we spoke
formerly.

Spots that come from the dispersing of the Blood through the skin, The Cure of
all kinds of red spots, Fleabits or Freckles, Erysipelas, Tetter, Rosydrop.
if they be small, and red and little as Freckles, like Fleabites, they
sometimes go away by insensible Transpiration or by sweat, as also the broad
Anthonies fire; yet if they continue long they require cure, as Tetters and
those bloody Spots that are so red in the face and other parts, which are hard
to be cured. And that which is called the Rosy drop is very difficult, if the
face be also full of Pustles, and the Nose much swollen.

If then you desire to cure these, which some despair of, and therefore
neglect, you must begin thus. First purge the Body in respect of the abundance
of humors, and you must let blood in the Arm for Revulsion, or in the Fore
head. for the Face, or under the Tongue for Derivation, or by scarification in
the sides of the Neck and Shoulders, and by Cupping-glasses, to draw from the
Face, often repeating them, either with or without scarification. And this may
be done by Horsleeches to the Face, Nose, or there about the Nostrils, or
cheeks, or chin, or behind the Ears. Then use things that alter, which allay
the Heat, and cool the Blood, and keep it from running so violently into the
part, either by way of Diet or Physic; As has been declared in Diseases of
Blood.

The Topical Medicines which are applied to the part must in these red spots be
such as cool and astringe the blood, and such as consume the abundant Juice by
a drying and digesting Quality, if the spots turn to Pustles, and these must be
strong, if the swelling be hard by adding if other things fail, such as corrode
and burn.

These are applied in Liquors, Waters and Ointments, with which you must
anoint, or wash the red Pustles; or if you apply strong things, you must only
touch the Pustles: they are diverse.

First, they are made of Plants, as Water of Straw-berries, Ash, and Mullein
flowers, with Camphire, and wine of strawberries.

Another usual which is very good: Take in the Spring one pint of
Straw-berries, or in Winter one pint of sour Grapes, of Goats milk two pints,
twelve whites of Eggs, and the Mueilage, of Fleabane, and Quinces, of Gum
Traganth, made in Rose or Plantane water, four ounces, of Camphire two drams,
distill them. You may add Vinegar, Juice of Lemmons, or the Plants following,
also Alum, and Sulphur.

Or use this following. Take of Spear, Dock-roots three ounces, of Plantane,
Nightshade, Sorrel, Mallows, Fumitory, each one handful, of Roses, Violets,
Water Lillies, Honey suckles, Willow, each one pugil, of Lemmons, Oranges, or
sharp Apples, seven or nine, of green Mulberries, Strawberries, or grapes half
a pound, of Alum half an ounce, of Camphire one dram: distill them, Brimstone
added makes it better, but it will sweat so, well.

You may add Water Lillies, great Penny-wort, Housleek, bastard Dittany,
Pomegranate flowers, green or dry.

Or thus; Take Goats milk four pints, of ordinary meal, as much as is
sufficient, and make Bread thereof, half bake it, and take of the Crust, and
break it in pieces, and dissolve it with four pints more of Goats milk, adding
Lemmons peeled and sliced twelve, Raddish, and Spear-Dock Roots, each two
ounces, whites of Eggs beaten twelve, Alum half an ounce, Tartar, and Sugar,
each three drams, white Coral, two drams, Egg shells calcined, and Camphire
each on dram: mix them well, and distill a water from them by a Lembeck.

Alum water, so called, of Plantane, and Purslain water, Oil, Alum, and
whites of Eggs is good also.

This following Vitriol water is good against a red Face. Take of the water of
Froggs-Spaun, Mullein, Fern, each two pints and an half, of the Urine of a
young Boy three pints, to these mixed, add of the Treacle of Andromaehus two
ounces and an half, of Vitriol, Salt, Alum each four ounces, draw a water by
the Embers, or Balneum Maris, till the residents are dry. To which water add
Camphire, and Saffron, each one ounce: keep it for Use.

The powder of Spear-Dock roots, and the ashes of Daffodils, with Oils, make a
laudable Ointment.

The hot blood of a Hare, or other Creatures is good to take away Redness.

Of quick Brimstone Applications are especially good to take away Redness.

If it be mixed with cooling or astringent Juyces, as the Juice of Housleek,
Nightshade, or Plantane, or some sweet water, as of Roses.

Or, Take of quick Brimstone one ounce, of white Frankincense half an ounce, of
Camphire two drams, dissolve them in one pint of Strawberry, or Rose Water, and
you may add the Juice of a Lemmon, or sour Pomegranates. And it will be better
if you add common Salt, Salt Ammoniak, or of Alum two ounces, or Lithargie
boiled in Vinegar, or Ceruss.

Or, Take of live Brimstone half an ounce, of Lytharge, made white by Decoction
in Vinegar two drams, of Frankincense one dram, of Camphire half a dram, of
Grains of Paradise, or Ginger one scruple, of Citron Ointment, or white with
Camphire, two ounces: make a Liniment, and if you add half a dram of Orpiment,
it will be better.

They make a white Water of Lytharge called Virgins milk, which takes away all
evil Colors from the Face especially Redness. It is made thus, Take of
Lytharge poudered two ounces, of white Wine Vinegar six ounces, more or less as
it is in strength, steep them, often shaking them, or boil them a little.

This done let the thick part settle, and pour off the clear and strain it.
Then Take of Alum, or Salt or both two ounces, dissolve them in Spring Water,
or other distilled water good for the Face, as of Beans, Lillies, and
Rose Water for the sent sake, six ounces, one dram or two of Borax, and a
little Camphire when we will use these two Waters, we take equal Proportions,
and though they were clear before, (being mixed) they turn as white as Milk,
with this wash the face; and if it be too sharp, you may add more water. Also
by mixing the Ingredients of both Liquors, steeping or boiling them, this Milk
is made; if you will cleanse more you may ad a little Oil of Tartar or the like.

Another Water excellent in a red swollen Face, and when there are scales and
Hardness. Take of Lithargy one ounce, of Alum one dram, of Borax three drams,
of Ceruss half an ounce, of Vinegar two ounces, or Rose, Plantane water, or the
like, four ounces: boil them to the Consumption of the third part, strain them,
add a little Juice of Lemmons.

There is also a distilled water of the Virgins Milk mentioned which is good.
Or this, Take of powder of Litharge one pound, of Vinegar two pints: steep and
boil them, then add of Bean-water or the like one pint, draw a water adding
sometimes other things, as Alum, Camphire, Borax, Oil of Tartar before it be
distilled.

Or use this Ointment: Take of Litharge prepared white (which is by infusing it
thrice in Vinegar, and drying it) two ounces, add Vinegar, and Oil of Guord
seeds, as much as will make a Liniment, with Camphire dissolved in Rose Water
half a dram.

A profitable and convenient Water is made of Tartar thus. Take of calcined
Tartar half a pound, of burnt Alum one ounce and an half, of Borax one ounce,
of Sugar candy two ounces, of Camphire two ounces, of whites of Eggs beaten
twenty, of the Mucilage of Fleabane seed one ounce and an half, of the Juice of
Lemmons, or of Vinegar two ounces: draw a water.

There is a powerful Ointment made of Camphire, Take of unsleaked Lime two
ounces, quick Brimstone half an ounce: powder them, and boil them in Vinegar to
an Ointment.

An excellent Medicine of Quicksilver. Take of Peach Kernels, or bitter
Almonds, chew them a little, and being brought to a Paste, take out the milky
Juice with a linen strained, and put thereto as much as a Nut of burnt Alum
then take as much Quicksilver as a Pease, and rub it in your Hands so long
with spittle till it grows black, then mix it well with the aforesaid milkie
Juice, anoint the Face at bed time therewith, and in the morning, for the space
of a Week; this done, before you go abroad wash it thus: make a paste of Bean
meal, and Rice, with whites of Eggs beaten, keep this in balls, and soften one
of them in water for a Night, and then rub the Face therewith upon a Towel.

Another is made thus, Take of Quicksilver one dram, of Fir Tree Rosin washed,
one ounce: mix them well, then add half an ounce of Borax, one ounce of Sugar
candy, of Cuttlebone two drams, of Soap two ounces, of Oil of Tartar two drams
or more, with as much Oil of sweet Almonds, or of Roses, as will make a
Liniment, you may add the Juice of Sorrel, Spear, Docks, or Lemmons, and
Litharge.

Excellent Medicines and strong are made of Sublimate, to be only touched
lightly, with which the Pustles being touched till the Skin be taken off, they
fall away and dry or consume; thus they are made: Take of Sublimate one dram,
of Juice of Lemmons, or Vinegar one ounce, of some convenient Water four
ounces, of whites of Eggs six in number: let them be steeped together close
stopped.

Or thus, Take of Sublimate half a dram, of Litharge half an ounce, of white
Wine Vinegar four ounces: boil them till the third part be consumed, to the
strained Liquor ad milk, the Juice of Lemmons, or Oranges, and a little Oil of
Tartar.

The Emulsion of Variola to take away Redness of the Face, which is most rare
is thus made, Take of Spring Water, in a glass ten pints, let it stand twenty
four hours before to cleanse it, to this put in a thin rag of linen one pound
of white Poppy seeds bruised with two whites of Eggs, and two drams of
Sublimate sweetened and well poudered, shake them in a well stopped glass for an
hour: to these add about the Conclusion of shaking of white Sugar, and Borax
burnt a little upon a hot Fire-shovel each six ounces. With this emulsion wash
the face, morning and evening. You may use other Medicines that are made of
Sublimate, and Arsenick that corrode and burn, mentioned in venomous Pustles,
if they be very hard to be taken off.

A Fume of Brimstone, and Frankincense cast upon coals, taken upon the Face,
cures the Redness thereof, as we see red Roses fumed with Brimstone presently
wax white; but you must do it warily, and keep your breath, and shut your Eyes.

The Cure which belongs to these spots which come by Nature, The Cure of diverse
Spots, Scurfe, Tetters and moates that are Natural.
from the nourishing Juice in the Pores, is chiefly against things which come
of evil Juice, that when they are hurtful, and threaten Danger, these Spots may
be taken away, as the Morphew, and Scurse and the like. Those which come not by
Nature, and evil Juice as Freckles, although many, because they are usual to
some and go away at Winter, or are less after hot weather are not meddled with
commonly. But because some think they deform, and desire to have them taken
away: I shall teach the Cure of them.

The same is observed by Moles, that are Natural, and therefore not thought
evil, and not regarded except they deform.

But in the Cure of all these spots, the internal cause must first be removed,
as in Morphew and the like; but in others since the cause is not hurtful, as in
Moles and Freckles it is not needful, except the body be other way foul, and we
determine to make the Topic Medicines work the better, to cleanse the Body.

In foul Spots we first evacuate, and with those things which we use to cleanse
the body in the like filth, as the Scab and Itch, and we take heed by good Diet
and altering Medicines, that they return not again.

As for Topics that are used to take away spots which are so evil as Morphew
etc. they must be of a drying and cleansing Quality, by which they consume them
insensibly, and if weak things will not, use stronger, which eat off the same.
And if that will not do, use Caustiks and Corroders, which will plainly burn or
dry them up, or else take them off by manual operation: thus we can do in
Moles. In Lentigines, or Freckles, we may do it with easier Medicines, because
they are many, and it is not safe to use strong Medicines to all, except in one
place we desire to take off many. The Remedies mentioned for evil spots by
vicious Blood, as Tetters, Pustles of the face, and the like, are good here,
and they all do it either by cleansing only, or by corroding, or burning or by
pricking, or shaving off.

The cleansing Medicines that do not corrode, both weak and strong which are
proper for these, are diverse, as those called Comptica and Cosmetica, by which
the blackness is corrected, as we showed, and especially in taking away the
lentils and in other spots they can do it by constant use.

To these are the cleansers following applied, to which if the skin be thick,
we add Emollients and they are rubed upon them, and if we will have them work
sooner and better by the fire or Sun, they are taken from diverse things from
Roots and Herbs, these bruised or cut are rubbed or applied, as the Roots of
Dragons, Sowbread, wild Gourd, Briony, Flower-de-luce, Raddish, Onions heads,
Daffodills, Leeks, also white Hellebore, Solomon's Seal, Spear-Dock, Madder,
Alkanet, Capars, black Chameleon, Water Lillies, Asphodel, Gum Succory, wild
Lettice, Beets, Coleworts, Pennyroyal, Agnus castus, wild Purslain, also the
Stones of wild Vines, and Fruit of the wild Guord.

If you rub fresh Soap-wort bruised, it will froath like Soap, whence it has
its Name, and will cleanse well.

These bruised or a little torrisied if hard, you may add the Meal of Lupines,
Orobus, and the like, and to make them stronger, Vinegar and Honey.

With these Decoctions of Plants made in water or wine, or with Lie thereof
being hot, the spots are rubbed or bathed especially if there be many, as
Lentigines, or Freckles, with other astringents, as Roots of Danewort,
Elicampane, Lillies, Leaves of Pellitory, Mercury, Mallows, Marshmallows,
brank Ursine, Bugloss, scabious, Fumitory, Hops, Succory, Sorrel, Violets,
Cranes bill, Yarrow, Wormwood, the less Centaury, Watercresses, and Senna,
with bran and bean-flower, stilled Waters also of stronger Plants, and of
Rosins, of Fir and Larke-tree.

Anoint them with the Juice of Plants, as of the Roots of Dragons, wild
Cowoumber, or Elaterium, Flower-de-luce, Gentian, Dock, Capars, Thapsia etc.
and chiefly with Juice of capars, Leeks, Squills, Daffodil, Scabiose, Cole
worts, Lemmons.

Oil of Plants are used especially in the Morphew, as of Mustard seed, and
Spurge, also Oil wherein Laurel, and spurge have boiled, or Rose Laurel, the
Juice of Elm leaves, and of a Beet stalk, take away any spots.

The Pouders of Plants, with Vinegar, or Juice of a Lemmon, or Honey, or Oil of
Grease, or the Yolks of Eggs, as of both Dragons, Solomon's Seal, wild
Cowcumber, Briony, white Hellebore, also the meal of Lupines, Orobus, Beans,
Oatts, also Mustard seed, Raddish seed, and Rape seed in powder, and Rocket,
Cabbage, Nettle, Nigella, Hatchet vetch, Ricinum, and Peach kernels torrified
and poudered with Agarick, the ashes of Garlic, Lillies. and birthwort Roots,

The Grease which is taken from living Creatures, as of the Fish Thymallus
takes away Freckles.

The Blood of an Hare hot, takes away spots, also the gall of Beasts, and
Fishes.

Pigeons Dung, or sheeps Dung, with Vinegar, Oil in which quick Lizards were
boiled, with Wine till it be consumed is good against Morphew.

Also red Ants tied in a clout and pressed till the Juice is taken forth.

Of earthly salt Juyces, common Salt, or Salt Gem, or Ammoniacum, or Niter, or
Borax made of it, Alum, Halyonia, or sea Froath, with vinegar, and Juice of
Lemmons.

The Pyrites, or Fire-stone, or Lazule with strong Vinegar.

Tartar by it self, or calcined, is also good especially the Oil thereof, this
does excellently.

And thus may it be made: Take of Tartar of white Wine, with Vinegar made into
a ball, put it in clouts under the Embers, let it be burnt a little, then use
it with Honey or it self, for it will dissolve, if you quench Gold often in
sack and ad a little white Tartar thereto, it takes away Freckles.

The Compounds are these, made of Plants, whose Decoction is good, with salt,
common or Ammoniaok, Niter, or Alum.

The Waters are thus made, Take of Docks, and Roots, four pounds, flice them,
add Vinegar four ounces, Tartar two drams, Sal Niter half an ounce, distill a
water for use.

Another, Take of Raddish Roots one pound, of Orris, and Dock roots, and
Lillies, each half a pound, of wild Cowcumber, or Solomon's seal, of unripe
Grapes, each one quarter of a pound, of Pellitorry, water Parsley, Centaury the
less, each one handful, of cold seeds, Rape, or Rocket seed each an ounce, of
Barley bread, or Bean flower, one quarter of a pound, Turpentine one ounce; of
Urin two ounces: distill them, you may add Myrrh, Frankincense, each half an
ounce, of liquid Storax one dram.

Or this. Take of bitter Almonds, Peach Kernels, and Apricock Kernels, two
pugils, of the Meal of Pease, Rice, Beans, each one pugil, of the four cold
seeds the greater, each one pugil and an half: sprinkle them with the Decoction
of sharp Dock-roots, and Lemmons, or of Oranges, and Citrons, and with Ceruss,
two ounces, Tartar one ounce, of common Salt, or Niter, or Borax, half an
ounce, of Camphire, one dram: make a water of this paste.

An excellent Water: Take of Tartar calcined, one pound, Frankincense, or
Mastich, each half an ounce, of Camphire four drams, some whites of Eggs,
distill them. Instead of Tartar, you may use the same weight of Soap.

Virgins Milk is good also, Take of Litharge one ounce, of Alum, Borax,
Ceruss, each half an ounce, of Camphire two drams, of Tartar half an ounce, of
white Wine Vinegar, one pint, of Lilly-water, and Bean flower water, each four
ounces, of Rose water one ounce: boil and strain them by a philter, add the
Juice of Lemmons, water of Docks each three ounces, Borax, Camphire, of Sugar
candy each five drams: boil them again gently, and strain them for use.

Liniments are made of the Juyces mentioned with Salt and Niter, and Borax, and
Camphire.

Another Ointment. Take of the Juice of Dragon roots, and other Herbs mentioned
of Moulein, three ounces, of meal of Lupines two drams, of Orris roots one
dram, of Pigeons Dung one dram and an half, of Oil of bitter Almonds, or of
Eggs one one ounce and an half, of Oil of Myrrh half an ounce, of Turpentine as
much as is sufficient.

There are other Ointments. Take of the powder of the aforesaid Plants half an
ounce, of Ammoniacum, or Niter, or Borax, or Alum, one dram, of Myrrh half a
dram, Camphire one scruple, with the Juice of Oranges, or with Honey or Soap
mix them.

For the Freckles: Take of Dragons the great or less, or the middle bark of an
Elm, half an ounce, of Cuttle bone two drams, of Frankincense one dram, of
Liquid Storax half a dram: make them up as before.

In the Morphew: Take of Raddish seed, Nigella each two drams, of white
Hellebore, Alum, or Sal Ammoniak each one dram, of burnt Galls one dram: with
Honey, and Vinegar, make a Liniment.

A stronger, thus made: Take Borax, or Niter, Alum each half an ounce, of
Tartar calcined two drams, of the meal of Lupines, or Orobus half an ounce,
the Roots of both Hellebores each half a dram, of Mustard seed one dram; of
soft Soap or hard four ounces, of the Juice of Dock roots, and Elicampane, each
one ounce, of the Rosin of the Fir Tree a little, stir them well.

Verdegreece makes stronger Ointments, if half a dram, be mixed with half an
ounce of the rest, sometimes Capars alone, or with Verdegreece with Oil of
Tartar.

Or, Take of Aegyptiacum two drams, of burnt Alum one dram, of Oil of Tartar
half an ounce: mix them. If it be sharp, add a little Oil of Roses.

Or thus, Take of white Hellebore, and Dragon Roots, each one dram and an half,
Staphsager, Raddish seeds each one dram, of Savin half a dram, of Pepper one
scruple, of Sal Ammoniack one dram, of Verdegreece one scruple, of Sulphur one
dram, with Vinegar make Troches, which you may dissolve with Vinegar or Juice
of Lemmons when you use them.

Corroding and caustic Medicines which consume spots and Pustles, some with
pain, some without, as in the Morphew which is insensible, which are to be used
warily least they hurt the part adjacent, and must only touch the parts
affected are,

Of Sublimate, and Arfenick especially mixed with the aforesaid Ointments.

Also a little Sublimate with the white or Yolk of an Egg, or any Mucilage, or
Oil, or Grease, may with caution, be applied.

Or the Pustles may be touched with a water made of the Decoction of the same,
which is this: Take of sublimate half an ounce, of some convenient Water, to
which add Rose Water six ounces: boil them to the Consumption of the third
part, if this be too sharp, it may be made weaker, also you may mix Oil of
Tartar.

That Water which remains as the preparation of sublimate, or the Aqua fortis
of Goldsmiths does the same.

Or use this following: Take of sublimate one dram, of Cantharides two drams,
of Arsenick one scruple, of Willow, Arcoale one dram: powder them, boil them in
Water-lilly water, or Plantane four ounces, till they grow thick, add some
Drops of Aqua fortis, dip a little Cotton therein, and touch the spots morning
and evening, till they blister which you shall anoint with Vuguentum Citrinum.

Or make this sollowing Paste, and apply a bit of it dissolved in any water:
Take of sublimate, and Alum each as much as a Pease, Borax two drams: burn
them upon a hot Iron, and powder them, with Mastich, Sarcocol, and Sugar candy,
each half a dram: mix them well, in a Mortar with soft Soap, adding a little Ox
gall, and after some Bean flower, and powder of Nuts, let them be well dried
and made into a paste, and dried for Use.

Besides these there are other Vesicatories, as the Leaves and Roots of
Crow-foot beaten, and the Leaves of Laurel, and the Milk of spurge, and the
like mentioned formerly.

Also Cantharides and unslaked Lime, with Vinegar.

Also they may be taken away with an actual or pontential Cautery, especially
such as cause no pain made of lime and wine-Lees, or with the water made of
Cauteries.

To prick many Holes is good in the Morphew, by which if the Blood flow, there
is hope of Recovery.

Also it is good to shave them often.

The Cure of spots that come from a Disease was explained in the Cure of those
Diseases whence they arise; The Cure of the spots in Fevers Erysipelas, small
Pox, Meazles and the like, malignant spots, or of the Pox, or Leprosy, or
Scurvy.
as of an Erisipelas in Fevers synochus, also we have declared the cure of the
Pustles in the French Pox, Leprosy, Scurvy, which do indeed constitute the
Diseases it self, as it is in the skin, and produces them, in the Treatise of
those Diseases others require no other cure but of the Disease, as those in
Fevers, which vanish with the Fever the chief cure is to keep them from
external cold least they be thereby stricken in.

Also there are other red; violet colored, and black spots in malignant
Fevers, and when the Fevers cease they vanish, or they end always with
Death, which they presage.

But those spots which turn to Pustles which are called Ecthymata or Variolae,
Of Pustles in the small Pox.
although they often require no other cure but that of the Disease; in which we
rather provoke there coming forth, then hinder them, and take no more thought
of them, because they commonly vanish of themselves or dry up, or turn to
little Ulcers, and so are cured of themselves: yet if these come on slowly,
some things may be given which may make them sooner dry and come to maturity.

To dry them, they must be wet with this Decoction with a quill or feather, or
a clout. Take of Lentils half an ounce, of the inner bark of a Tamarisk three
drams, of Myrtle-berries one dram, of Broom flowers half a dram: boil them in
water, adding at the Conclusion a little Rosewater.

For private Use you may put into the Decoction two drams of red Sanders, or
half a dram of saffron, and they will discolor it.

It will dry better if you season it with Salt: and Alum.

The Juice of Pomegranates that is between sharp and sweet, will soonest dry
them and others of that Kind.

That they may be sooner ripe, anoint them with Hogs grease, or rub them with
the insides of Figgs, or with the Yolk of an Egg, or the like.

When they are ripe they open of themselves usually. And if not, or if it be
long a doing in regard then the flesh will be eaten with the Matter contained,
there will be a hollow Utcer, and there will be left a Scar, with a pit.
Therefore to avoid this great Deformity of the Face, they must soon be opened
with a Needle or sharp Instrument. (which if made of Gold is supposed to leave
the less scar.) It often happens that when they are ripe, the Matter
endeavoring to get forth, causes itching, which causes scratching which
leaves them open. And this women are very sollicitous to keep their Children
from, supposing that it causes the pitting, but falsely, for it comes from
their want of opening and the long continuing of the Matter. After they are
open, because they are covered with a scab which is made of the dry matter,
because it will fall of it self, you need not use any means.

But if any remain long, rub them with a fat piece of skin that is salted, or
other Emollient and they will quickly fall off. And in regard they are small
Ulcers, if you cleanse them often from filth, they will heal of their own
accord with Application of any thing: but if there remain any Scars in the
face, they must be cured as is said concerning Ulcers.

If the Pox do not only annoy the skin, but the Nostrils within, and there turn
Ulcers, we showed the Cure of them in the Ulcers of the Nostrils: as also in
the Treatise of the Lungs and Jaws, if they be there. Among other things
sharp Vinegar smelt unto often, keeps the Pox from entering into the Nostrils.

The Cure of the discoloring of the Eyes, which comes from Diseases, The Cure
of strokes and white spots of the Eyes and of the Pox, or Meazles therein.
was explained in the Diseases of the same; as Redness, in the Inflammation of
the Eyes true or false, or in the Treatise of Rheums. The red or blew spots,
are declared in the strokes, and the white spots, in the spots, suffusions and
scars of the Eyes.

But if the Pox or Meazles get into the Eyes, you must labor to prevent them.
Therefore anoint the Eyes being shut with these following, if any of it shall
get into the eyes by chance it will rather do good then hurt.

As Rose, Plantane, Myrtle and Coriander Waters.

The common Water is that of Roses well colored with Saffron,

Or the Decoction or the Infusion of Sumach leaves, in the said water.

Or drop in the Juice of the Flowers and Fruit of sweet Pomegranates, mixed
with the Juice of Henbane.

Or the powder of Henbane flowers, with sharpe'wine, is to anoint the Eye-lidds.

A good Eye-water. Take of the powder of Sumach flowers one dram, of Coriander
seed or Myrtles prepared half a dram, of Saffron one scruple, of Camphire half
a scruple, of the waters aforesaid, eight ounces: mix them well.

It will be stronger if you ad a little Juice of Pomegranates.

Some think that if you compass the Eyes about with saphyrs of Gold they will
keep out the Pox.

When they are in the outside of the Eyebrows, you may also use the
aforementioned water dropping it also into the Eyes, adding of Tutty prepared,
or the white Troches of Rhasis half a dram. And if they turn to an Ulcer by
suppuration, there is Danger of loosing the sight, and then they must be cured,
as the Ulcers of the Eyes mentioned, and be sprinkled with the fine powder of
Beans, and Sugar candy, and other things mentioned in scars, to prevent and
take away the scar.

Some use this Art to make gray Eyes black, Things that make black Eyes.
which they take to be the most beautiful: they put into the Eye, the fine
powder of Nuts with water.

We have seen gray Eyes turn black of their own accord, in time: and I saw a
Man some few years since, in the House of my Father now deceased, that had one
gray Eye, and another black, which was ridiculous. And when he put his hand
between his Eyes, he seemed still another Man.

When the Teeth are discolored, and by reason of filth and scales black or
yellow, The Cure of the discoloring of the teeth
they are diverse ways whitened, as was showed.

The discoloring of the Nails require not a peculiar Cure, The Cure of Nails
discolored.
unlese there be other faults as clefts, corrosions etc. of which we spoke in
Deformities.

For if they begin to wax black, by reason of Paleness of Body, or to have
black spots underneath, by reason of some stroke or bruise, in regard the
Color is not in the Nails but in the Flesh underneath, and is seen through
them being transparent, they must be cured no otherwise then was mentioned in
Paleness and Bruises; and if Blackness under the Nails be from filth, we shall
declare the Cure in the Treatise of Filth in General.

As for the white specks which are in the Nails by reason of thick Juice, in
regard they are not evil, but signs of long life especially if they be many, as
in young Men, or if few in old Men they have hope of long life: therefore are
they commendable,

That Discolouration is chiefly observed in Hair which is exactly white, The
Cure of discoloring of the Hair.
as in old age, because it is venerable, it is not meddled with: but young
people study to change. Some disdain the red Hair, and others highly esteem it.
To change them into other Colors is impossible, because in gray hairs, there
is such dryness which takes away their perspicuity, as we showed, that they
cannot be changed: and in red and the like, the Juice that nourishes will
always produce the like by assimulation; as we see, when hair is plucked off,
the like grows again, and in Birds if one feather be plucked off, although all
there about are of another color, yet there will be another of the same Color
with that plucked off, as I have often tried in Pigeons.

Some old men desire to be black or the like, and to seem young. The cure of
gray Hairs.
And young men if they have any gray Hairs in Head or Beard, as often is seen,
they desire to have them like the rest, or to make red hairs black; and this is
done by the Comptorian Art mentioned, by which another Color is made that will
not continue. By adding chiefly astringents which may make them black or at
least obscure them; Things that make white Hairs black.
but that they which grow after may be of the like color, it cannot be done
and therefore we cannot prevent the appearing of gray hairs, except we use them
constantly, which is not only troublesome but hurtful for the Head; but to make
the Head or Beard black, you may wash or anoint them with these following.

A Decoction, made in Lie, or Rainwater, or Iron water, wherein Iron is
quenched, or of Galls, green Wal-nuts, Beech mast, Cypress, Myrtles-berries,
Willow-roots, Mastich-tree leaves, Myrtles, Sumach, Mulberries, black Berries,
Cypress, Roses: and it will be stronger, if you add Litharge, filing of Iron,
or Rust and Vinegar, or other astringent Juice.

The Decoction of Myrobalans is approved, and also, of Capar roots, or Leaves
of Ophris like jagged Coleworts, or black Vine.

And if the head be to be washed you must ad such things as respect the Head;
chiefly Sage, and Bay Leaves, and the like.

They say if you wash hairs with Wine in which a Horseleech has been drowned
it will make them black.

Stilled Waters of the strongest Plants mentioned, may do something, especially
if before you still them, you add Sal Niter, Sal Gem, and Vitriol.

Also a Water drawn from Ink may be good, which if used by it self would black
the Body too much.

Some approve the water of Danwort, with Gum Arabic.

Oil also wherein a Lizard has been boiled, or in which the shells of Nuts,
and Alum has been boiled.

Or that Oil which is put into the hollow of a Coloquintida Apple, with a
little Orpiment and roasted in the Embers, and then strained out, some add
thereto the Seed of Henbane.

Or, Take of common Oil, or of Myrtles, or of Mastich, half a pint, of Juice of
green Nuts, four ounces, Vinegar two ounces, Acacia, or Hypocistis, one ounce,
of Galls half an ounce, of Alum two drams, Vitriol one dram: boil and strain
them. You may also boil therein other aftringents, as Myrtle berries,
Cypress-nuts, Myrobalans, Acorn cupps, Sumach etc. also Labdanum.

There are other Ointments, as of Galls, or Pomegranate peels, and Alum,
boiled in Vinegar, or Oil

Or, of the Juice of green Wall-nut shells, or of Acacia, Hypocistis, Labdanum,
and Alum, and Sal Gem or Niter, dissolved in Oil of Myrtles, or Juice of Beets.

Or of Litharge boiled in Lie to half a pint, whereof if you add four ounces of
burnt Brass, it will be better, and half an ounce, of Oil of Tartar, after it
is boiled.

Another Ointment. Take of Litharge, and burnt brass, the quantity before
mentioned, unslaked Lime, ten ounces: and boil them in water to the Form of a
Liniment

We make hair black by Degrees with a Comb, if we anoint the Teeth thereof with
the aforesaid Remedies; or with the filings of Iron, or Rust or of Lead boiled
in Vinegar.

It will be of better Operation, if two drams of filings of Iron be dissolved
in Aqua fortis, with a little powder of Orpiment, and therewith anoint the
inside of the Teeth of the Comb, not at the ends, least they touch the skin,
and cause Ulceration.

To comb the Head and Beard with a leaden Comb often, is thought a good way to
make Hair black.

In blacking of hair, you must note that these Medicines are so to be ordered
that they completely make black, least the same happen to them that use them as
did to an old Man, not long since, who marrying a young Wench, desirous to make
his gray hairs black, to please his Spouse with a sophisticated Youth: made his
hair of his Head, Beard and Eye brows green, to the great Laughter of the
Beholders.

Moreover, if the Hair be very black, and have no yellow or inclination to
brown: they that are studious of gotting Beauty, do diminish the blackness a
little.

And that they may not seem so extreme black, The Remedies that make hair less
black.
which they count uncomely, or white which the high Dutch call Steis and the
French blond, they use these following.

They first wash them with Lie, and while they are wet, they fume them with
melted Brimstone, and when they are dry they anoint with the poplar Ointment,
and the fume of burnt Brimstone will do it better.

The Lie of Vine ashes does the same, or in which the the Roots of Elicampane,
the greater Centaury, Raddish, the barks of the Roots of Capars have been
boiled, you may add Alum and Sulphur.

Or make this Wash. Take of Sulphur two drams, of Frankincense one dram, Alum
half a dram, Swallows Dung, two drams, of Raddish seed poudered, and the barks
of Capar roots, and of Elicampane, each one dram, of Ox gall half an ounce.
With Vinegar or Glue dissolved in water: make a Liniment, you may add the ashes
of the white flowers of Moulein

To make hair yellow, which the Venetian ladies do extremely labor for;
Medicines to make Hair yellow.
they are first to be prepared, that they may better take the Color, with
water in which Alum, Salt, or Niter or Tartar have been dissolved or boiled:
or wash them first with the plain Lie aforementioned.

A water to prepare is made also of Agrimony, Dragons, Cuckow-pintle, with
Vinegar, and the fourth part Niter, and of Honey, with Gum Arabic.

A Lie to wash hair is made of the ashes of Vines, and Oat chaff, with ashes of
Ivy wood, of Cabbage, and Bean flowers; and powder of Herbs: all these are laid
upon Oat, or Barley straw, and the water is strained through them for to make a
Lie.

A Decoction to wash hair also is made of water and common Lie of Vine ashes or
the like, in which you boil things that have yellow Juice, as shavings of Box,
Barbery bark, Orange or Citron bark, the middle bark of Elder, Roots of
Celandine, Liquorish, Turmerick, the yellow flowers of French Lavender, of
Mullin, Broom, Dyers flower, sometimes with Rhubarb, and Saffron, and other
Plants which do the same, as Nettle Roots, Agrimony, the Capilar Herbs, Barley,
and Oat chaff, Lupines, Cummin, Foenugreek, also Ivory shavings, adding
sometimes Myrrh, and Tartar, or Salt, or Niter.

Anoint with Oil in which shavings of Box, Celandineroots, Saffron, and the
like have been boiled, or Myrrh.

An Ointment. Take of Myrrh two drams, of Tartar one dram and an half, of Salt
one dram, of Saffron half a dram, with Oil in which some of the aforesaid have
been boiled: make a Liniment, some add burnt Bees.

To make Hair red, Medicines to to make red Hairs.
which is thought most beautiful in some Countries, you must wash them with the
Decoction of Madder roots, Radish, Lote-tree rasped, Lupines, and Wormwood made
in Water, or Lie, also the Juice of Raddish, Bucks-Thorn, or Raddish water, or
the Oil of wild Cowcumbers, with calcined Tartar.

Alcanna, or Hanna in Barbery, (some sticks whereof are brought from the
Barbery Coasts says Lobel, being yellow within, which Dodonaeus takes to be
the Cypress of Dioscorides, different from privet, which they took for it) is
the best to make hair yellow; and usual to my Knowledge, among the Turks which
admire red hair in Women and Children, and it is so strong that it dies the
Nails also and other parts when they please. The Leaves thereof bruised are
rubbed on, either by themselves, or moistened first in the Juice of the Root as
Dioscorides. In defect whereof, I believe if we boil those sticks which are
brought over they will do the same: or Oil of Cypress which is made thereof and
is counted excellent for the same.

To make the Head and Beard sweet, Things that make Hair sweet.
you must mix sweet Herbs, as sweet Marjoram, Lavender flowers, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Musk, Ambergreece and the like, in Decoctions and Liniments.

And there is a sweet Soap which is made diverse ways for that purpose.

CHAP. III. Of Extuberances or Swellings.
The Kinds of Swellings.
WE call it an Extuberancy, when the Body is not over great in General, but
swells in some part; when it has not a part too many, but a Swelling or
Excrescence in some cettain place growing in it, or upon it. Which when it is
without the Superficies of the Body, and is without pain in its self, or if it
have pain or bring trouble to the part affected, yet the Swelling is most
regarded, is that we here speak of. As for internal Swellings that lie hid in
the Body, we spoke of them in the hinderance of Functions. But these external
Extuberances, when they are of diverse Kinds, we bring them chiefly to these
two, some are General, some particular.

General Extuberances are the Swellings spoken of, which possess a large part
of the Body, when either the whole body or half, or the Belly only swells: as
shall be showed in particulars.

The whole Body swells especially the Face, The white Dropsy.
Hands, and Feet and other parts in the Disease called Leucophegmatia from the
white Color and Moistness thereof, which causes it: Anasarca or Hyposarca.
and they call it Anafarca or Hyposarca which is a kind of Dropsy, because the
water is gathered under the skin and flesh. This Disease commonly follows a
Cachexy or evil Habit, which declared it self before by Paleness; and it is by
degrees made of that into a soft Condition: and in both the Urin continues
pale. There is Faintness of the whole Body, and there is sometimes withal a
lingering Fever, and other diseases, and there is Symptoms, as we said of
Cachexy.

There is another Kind of white Dropsy which they call waterish from the
cause, Serosa Leucophlegmatia, or white water Dropsy.
in which the Swelling is more loose and soft then the former, especially in
the Feet, and not much differing from that of the Ascites, because they will
easily pit with the impression of the Finger, and it will remain long: yet this
is distinguished from the Dropsy Ascites, in regard it is general and the
belly is not larger then other parts, and there other signs in Ascites. There
is also a third kind of Leucophlegmacy, in which the Body rises into a fuller
and softer Tumor, and is like both in tumor and splendor in the Feet, and Legs
to the Ascites, and they swell most, and this kind sometimes comes upon a Man
by degrees and sometimes suddenly.

I lately had a Virgin marrigeable, my Patient, which had a Fever with an
Erysipelas, and exposing her self to the cold with washing Linen, fell into a
difficulty of breathing suddenly with a watery Tumor, over the whole Body
beginning first at the Feet, which water fell in her Thigh and broke
notwithstanding the Tumor of the whole body remained and increased daily: she
lay a few months and then died.

Besides these, we have observed another Swelling of the Body, Face, and
Joints, that rises suddenly sometimes, not so soft, but stretched out and yet
will not pit, as if the skin were blown up and this we call the Inflation of
the Body.

In the Dropsy Ascites, the body swells from the top of the belly to the feet,
The blowing up the whole Body or Swelling thereof.
and it is so called because the belly resembles a Bottle of water. In this
the Tumor begins at the Feet and the lowest part of them, and then it rises to
the ankles, and so by degrees to the knees, and to the lower part of the
Thighs, and grows daily higher as the Patient sits or walks more or less, it
decreaseth something at Night when he lies down, and pits keeping the print of
the singer some time, and when it is stretched out it seems shining and
transparent. The belly begins to swell with the Feet, and at length it is
stretched from the fides to the Privities, and the ends of the Ribs are thrust
outward: being moved it makes a noise, and if the Patient turn upon his side,
it falls forcibly down. In the skin also under the Navel, and in the black
swollen, if you press it with your finger there will remain a pit as in the
Feet. The Cods are swollen as the belly and are transparent, as in the
Hydrocele, or water Rupture, but greater, sometimes as big as the Head. The Yard
swelling is four times as big, and transparent, and is crooked like a great
Pudding. So also the lower parts grows greater and the upper parts consume.

The Patient in this Dropsy is very short winded, especially when he goes up
hill, or lies down, and it is the chief Symptom he complains of; which also
foretells a Dropsy before a tumor appear, and when it comes it increases,
and from the beginning about Midnight after Concoction, there is a pressing
pain at the Heart, and then short breathing, and they are in Danger of
choking, by which they are constrained to sit up like men in an orthopnaea
Breathing with their Neck stretched out. And when they lie on the one side,
either right or left, they cannot lie long for shortness of wind, on either
side, but are forced to lie upon their Backs. At last the Disease increasing,
they cannot lie down at all, because they are straight tormented thereby, and
they continue Day and and Night strait up, and their Head bowed to their Breast
for better breathing, sitting long they spend the remnant of their days
miserably. There strength decaies for want of lying down, there Appetite is
lost: there is constant Thirst: little Urin made: the Urine is sometimes high,
red, or Gold colored, and thick sometimes crude and watery, sometimes not
changed.

There is another kind of Dropsy Ascites, A Tympany joined with an Ascites.
in which the belly is far more extended, and sounds like a Drum being
beaten, in which you may hear a Noise upon motion, with other accidents like
the former, only the Feet swell not always as in other kinds: and this is a
Tympany with an Ascites.

In the Dropsy Tympanites only the belly swells, A Tympany alone.
and is stretched like a Drum from whence it is so called. In which the
stretching is so great, that being struck it sounds like a Drum and being
compressed it presently rises, nor will it keep an impression long as an
Ascites does. These breath freer then they in the Ascites, nor do they find any
difficulty of breathing by lying down, neither do their Legs or other parts
swell, besides there are Noises heard in the Belly, and they have pain
sometimes, and are weak.

There is another Kind of Tympany in which with the aforesaid accidents, The
Tympany of the Guts.
there is a stoppage, Pain and Vomiting, with the Symptoms of the Disease of
the Ilion Gut and Colon.

The Belly also grows great Naturally as after Conception, and sometimes besides
Nature in a false Conception, when there is a Mole with Conception or without,
so that a Woman seems great with Child thereby: of which three kinds of tumors
of the Belly we shall treat here showing what they are, and by what signs they
are known.

That growing of the Belly which is in Women great with Child, The growing of
the Belly in a Woman with Child.
albeit being Natural it concerns not us here, yet that we may distinguish it
from unnatural, and show that it comes not from any Disease, which women do
pretend which have been irregular, and would conceal their bleeding; and that
we may pronounce some certainety or probability of Conception, and that we may
not mistake in this prediction which is easy, in regard the women that have
conceived are at the beginning, especially very doubtful, and do exceedingly
desire to know, and therefore do ask Physicians advise and send their waters,
we shall show by signs, accidents, and Experiments how you may know that a
woman has conceived.

The Constitution of a woman fit to conceive, does with other signs make
somewhat for the Knowledge of Conception. This (as they write,) is when besides
the soundness of Body and Temperature, (which is thought to be best when
contrary to the Man's) she has broad Loyness a large belly not too fat
especially about the Privities. But since we see those that are not such, do
conceive, of what temper soever, fleshy, or lean, nay the very least like
Pigmyes, we can gather great Matter from thence. We hold her sit for
Conception, who is between fourteen and forty five, and has Parents that are
fruitful. Also if she have formerly conceived, there is a strong presumption,
if there be a doubt, that she has conceived.

It is necessary that before Conception she have Knowledge of a Man, to enquire
this of married people is in vain, in others Necessary, which when they will
not confess it must be discovered by diverse Arts, among which this is one, when
there is great Suspicion, if the Physician by the water shall affirm that she
is defiled, because the vulgar people think a Physician can tell any thing by
the water; or else the Parents and Magistrates shall force confession by
threats. Also if a woman shall perceive after the Use of a Man, that she kept
the Seed, and that it went not out again, although through Modesty she will not
declare it, it is a great sign of Conception, especially if at that time she
perceived any contraction of the Womb or sucking with great pleasure, and that
her Seed met with the Man's at that time.

If the Terms stop which kept formerly, their course it is a great and chief
sign of Conception: by which women presently judge themselves with Child, and
casting their account from the first Month after Copulation they collect the
time of their lying in. And if they doubt their Conception, they will freely
tell a Physician when they stopped; both they which are honest, and others also
though they which pretend other causes of their stopping. And although in women
with Child, there is sometimes some evacuation of Blood from the Womb at some
times, yet is it be small and keep no order as the terms did it is not a sign
of not conceiving: and if the woman at the time she conceived, gave suck and
wanted her terms, as it is usual, and afterward though not presently the terms
wholly stop it is probable she has conceived, and for this cause when Mothers
perceive it, they wean their Children.

If the belly grow bigger by degrees, no accidents of a Disease being present
it is a main sign of Conception, especially if the tumor be most under the
Navel, and if it be hard and gathered together, not pitting after impression as
in the Ascites, and not stretched out as in a Tympany: and keeps the same
Magnitude only except its gradual increase, and grows not bigger when the Body
is upright as in the Ascites, and less when she lies down; nor has a tumor as
in the Ascites, suddenly fallen down when she turns upon one side; when it is
thus, if it be not a false Conception, or other Tumor joined with a true, as we
have feen, for then the belly swelling violently, the Women are in Danger of
Suffocation through shortness of Breath by which sometimes they die, except by
Abortion or by lying, if they can attain to it, they are freed pouring forth
much water together with the Child.

The growing of the Breasts, if other things be alike, is a sign of Conception,
because in Diseases they rather decrease, if they have Milk it is not to be
doubted, which we conjecture is made before it come from the swelling blew
Veins of the breasts: also the increase of the Nipple the itching of the same,
and when the circle about it is more black.

When the Child begins to move which is in the middle time of Childbearing,
sometimes sooner, sometimes later, it declares its self and the Mother. This
Motion is not with a Noise or pain of the Belly, but by stricking one side of
the belly, and as it were thrusting it which the Mother perceives.

There is a Loathing of some Meats sooner or later in them that have
conceived; some abhor wine; some vomit contrary to custom; others desire much
those Meats which they formerly loathed, albeit they are not sometimes Meats,
but other abominable things, this Disease is called Pica: as we said in the
depraved Appetite.

There are also some peculiar accidents to Women with child: as fainting or
weakness, when they are constrained to sit long in a place, as at Banquets,
Churches, so that they find a straightness of Heart, and presently arise and
take Air, and they must open their breasts that they may breath freely. In
others that are Plethorick or evil habited, there are other accidents, as
Swelling of Legs, crooked Veins in the Legs and the like.

As for the Judgment of the Urine, it is uncertain and deceitful, yet the
vulgar attribute so much unto it, that they suppose a Physician can tell
certainly by only looking thereupon, and if they confess there is nothing
certain therein he is taken for a Fool, and if he pronounce any Judgment he is
easily mistaken, and exposed to derision, as it is with many, to whom false
Urins, or Urins of Cattle. Physicians ought to be wise and circumspect, in this
least they be branded for ignorance. Therefore when they cast the water, let
them ask many things of the diverse signs of conception, to get from the party,
and determine nothing rashly; but answer circumspectly and dubiously. First if
he sees a Urin like that of a sound Body, and from thence know that the courses
are stopped, which they will easily confess, he may gather that it comes not
from Diseases in which commonly the Urin is crude or otherwise changed, but
rather from Conception, and so by some Judgment in regard of the Urin
declaring soundness of Body rather then from other signs, he shall perceive the
woman to be with Child, and then he was more freely pronounce something for
finding out of other signs. As to other signs of conception in Urins, as the
things contained, things flying therein like Locks of Wool, or rather as I have
observed sometimes in women newly married after conception, that they have made
Urin like Pus or Matter, for some days, without having any hurt in the Reins
or Bladder; since these are altogether uncertain, of these alone there can be
no solid Judgment but by all put together there may.

There is also a stoppage and dropping of Urin, in some women, when they are
first married, which is a sign of conception: also pains about the Navel, or a
little beneath presently after Copulation, and sometimes a good while after, are
certain signs of Conception.

As for Experiments, by which you may know whether a Woman be with Child or no
they are diverse: the most usual are these, Hippocrates says that if Meade be
given a woman with Aqua caelestis, when she goes to sleep, and it cause pain,
she is with Child. Make a Pessary of Garlic and put it into the Body of the
woman, and if she smell it or smell of it, she is with Child. But in my
Judgment, it might be proved by this Argument that she is not with Child,
because in Women with child the Womb is closed so that the Vapor of the Garlic
cannot so well ascend that ways, but in women not with Child the womb is open,
and therefore they may more easily receive the Sent thorough that part.
Moreover, if the Urin be lik Bean broth mingled with white Wine, they say she
is with child.

Not only common people, but many excellent Physicians suppose they can tell
whether a woman be with Child of a Boy or a Girl, but since I perceived these
to be uncertain and erroneous, I willingly omit them, least I should seem to be
a Patron of Errors.

If from a false Conception, The Swelling of the Belly from a Mole.
not a Child but a Mole, in the womb causes an ill favored Tumor, as we
showed; it will have many signs and accidents like unto a true conception,
therefore it is hard especially at the first to know this preternatural
conception, and to distinguish it from a Natural.

First a woman of a good Complexion, fit for conception, that lives with her
Husband, may be subject to this, though seldom. And there is a great Suspicion
of a Mole if a woman has formerly had the same: and greater if often before,
as we have observed some who have had them every year, some every month, and in
the mean time have not been ill, but fresh and lusty.

Otherwise as in true conception so in this, the Terms stop, and the Breasts
and Belly increase by degrees, afterward if the Mole stays, the belly
continues in the same state, and increases no more as in a true conception, or
if it increase, there is not felt the motion, which is when women are with
Child, neither is it straight but loose and burdensome, so that when the woman
turns upon her fide it rowleth that way. From these they presume or suspect
that there is a false conception.

As for other accidents, the Appetite is diminished and depraved, as in a true
conception and other accidents are alike, and in regard this is preternatural
they are more and worse, as the extenuation of the whole Body besides the
belly, and the discoloring of the same, pricking of the belly, and long want
of Apperite; by which we cannot pronounce certainties, nor by the inspection of
Urine, to which the vulgar ascribe much in this case, and Physicians to seem
more skillful do connive thereat. Therefore it is very difficult to know a true
from a false conception; until either by Abortion, as is usual sometimes in a
few months or by bringing forth it be discovered. And a woman is past her
time, being certain by the aforesaid signs of Conception, if she brings not
forth, nor have endeavors nor throws, nor other signs that show she has a
dead child, unless this be when there is no conception, as shall be showed, it
is certain that she has not a child but a Mole: such I have known to be kept a
long time, the belly being swollen, the Courses stopped, and other accidents, add
many months or years after they have cast them forth with Danger of life, and
large effusion of blood, or kept them till Death.

Sometimes the belly swells without conception, The Swelling of the Belly in
women as if they were with child.
as in women with Child, so that they, (and others that have born Children
think the same) do suppose themselves with Child. There is the same Suspicion
of Virgins if this happen to them, when the belly swells and the courses stopped,
because they have no other Disease or accidents which use to accompany the
stoppage of the Terms, nor a Dropsy, nor other Symptoms: from want of which
signs, we easily distinguish this Tumor from that in Diseases. For this is
distinguished by us from that Swelling of the belly that comes from either
(...) or false conception, if the Woman be past the years (...) ^^^ception, or
is not come to them being too young, and (...) we may be deceived except they
be very young or very old, but not, if she be a Virgin, and too that is
difficult if she please to conceal her having had copulation with a Man.

In the mean time, because this Tumor is not so gathered together, hard and
equal, as it is in Women with Child and they that have Moles, and because their
Breasts do not increase, nor do they perceive any Motion of the child: and in
regard there are signs of Plethory or Fullness of a bad constitution, by
faintness, paleness, a pressing pain about the Stomach, and beating of the
Heart, and a change of Urin into worse: and in regard other accidents happening
the belly swells larger and rumbleth: by these signs we may gather that this
Tumor of Belly comes not from conception, and the woman is not with child.

Also the Symptoms in this case being greater then in a Mole, show it is no
Mole, as when the time of bringing forth is past there is suspicion: and
chiefly when after a large Flux of blood, the belly either suddenly or by
degrees falls down, without any Mole which sometimes is voided before that
time of conception, sometimes after. And if the Effussion of blood be very
great, it weakneth the Party, and leaves mischief behind, or else kills her.

Particular Extuberances are such as are in some places only, in the
Superficies here and there, and in the open cavities as the Eyes, Mouth,
Privities. And they are many and of diverse sorts, and sometimes gathered
together, or spread abroad. And they are distinguished first: thus some coming
forth in the places mentioned do there remain: of these we shall speak first,
others go in again, and of those we will speak last.

Those Tumors which continue in their places, as Tumors spread abroad which
cannot return, as is said, are diverse, some are softer, others harder.

Soft Tumors which yield more or less to the touch, as they are more or less
extended, and being pressed they either rise presently up again, or else have
an impression remaining, are divided into Tumors of the flesh, and Tumors of
the Skin.

A carnous Tumor or Tumor of the flesh, which resembles new made flesh covered
with skin and full of Veins, A Sarcoma or carnous Tumors.
is called Sarcoma Sarcites, or rather Sarcosis hyposarcosis or excrescency of
flesh; this stretches or hangs from the body more or less, the Tumor being
greater or less round or long or otherwise; and it is sometimes burdensome by
its weight, and hinders Action. This may grow in any external part of the Body,
having skin as the whole body has of diverse forms, of which we have seen a
baker carry one many years to the end of his life, round as big as his Head,
hanging at his Neck with a narrow Root. Also not long since, there was a Child
brought to me, who had a great round Carnosity with red Veins and a narrow
Root, upon his Loins in the middle of the back Bone.

After wounds or ulcers are cured, there may remain proud flesh where they
were. Proud Flesh.


In the Codds there is also such a fleshy Tumor which grows to the Stones
called Sarcocele, Sarcole, or fleshy Rupture.
all Tumors in the Codds are called (...), that is Ruptures, and the Germans
call this Carnstel from Caro flesh. This is easily distinguished from the
Rupture or falling down of the guts called Enterocele, though they be both in
the Codds, because it will not yield to a compression nor will it be put up
into the Belly, but growing by degrees (not suddenly falling down, as in the
Rupture of Guts falling called Enterocele) it will be fixed, and remains united
to the Stone, sometimes including, or covering it all over. This tumor som^^^^^
grows very great, and hangs down filling the (...) stretching them, and is very
troublesome with (...) ^et not painful nor discolored.

(...) an old Tumor very great, full of Gristies beside^ (...) glandulous or
spungy flesh, cut off by a great Surgeon, and after divided into diverse parts
by my Father of pious Memory.

Inwardly there are fleshy Tumors in diverse parts, of diverse shapes, The
Sarcoma or fleshy Tumor of the Nose.
covered with a Membrane; and often in the Nose there is a little rising of
flesh called Sarcoma, which if it increase and grow forth of the Nostrils, or
hang by the Jaws, is called Polypus because it is round and long like the fish
so called, Polypus
and sticks to the Nostrils by a Nerve root, and by Veins, which is red also
like the inward Skin of the nostrils but without pain, by which and by its
softness it differs from a canker; for if this be in the Nose, as we see
sometimes it is hard and pricking, and grows often very big and ends in a
Carcinoma. But a Polypus, besides the filthiness of it, does only hinder the
voice and breathing by stopping the Nose, and is seldom bred without some hurt
before going in the Nose, contrary to that of a cancer. This they say
increases and decreaseth with the Moon.

Sometimes there grows a carnosity in Women's Privities; The fleshy Tumors of
women's Privities.
and we have seen one called Clitoris, between the Lips of the Matrix, so great
that it was as long and as thick as a Goose neck, and hung down like a great
pudding, which she had all her life time, which is the cause as I suppose that
many are taken for Hermaphordites, because it looks like a Man's Yard. And this
Excrescency is often in the Anus of men and women, Condyloma.
with pain and other accidents called a Condyloma: as we showed in pains.

In the mouth and cheeks especially in the Gums, there is also proud flesh, The
proud flesh of the Teeth when out grows them.
such as covers the Teeth especially the Grinders, and it is called
superincarnation of the Teeth; there is also in some parts of the Gums about
the roots of the Teeth, a little Caruncle or piece of flesh which is called
Epulis. Epulis.
I had of them at the farther end of the rank of my Teeth, which was soft, red,
lank, and thick, which had but a small root, which sometimes was bigger,
sometimes less, and so it continues still, bringing no impediment.

In the Eyes that little flesh which is Naturally there, in the comer grows
sometimes larger, like a push, which besides its Molestation itcheth, which is
called Encanthis, as the Caruncle of Natural flesh is called.

The Tumors cutaneous or of the skin which are not hard, are so called, because
they are chiefly in the skin, and lift it up with a soft tumor. These are in
diverse parts of the Body, as the Feet, Codds, Neck, and they stretch the part.
Others are only in the scarf skin: others stretch the Veins and Arteries.

Among those rumors which are in diverse parts of the Body, Oedema.
that is most ordinary called Oedema, which word though it signify any tumor,
yet it is properly used for that which is gathered, soft and yields to
impression, and is without pain not discolored, and often it is very great.

There is another Oedema more spreading, The oedematous Tumor of the Feet, Arms
and Hands.
not so contracted which they call an Oedematous Tumor; sometimes swelling the
whole Feet, and from the Knee to the Anckles, and making them twice or thrice
as big as they were, like the former in other things. This we have known diverse
to have had without other Infirmity all their life time, differing from the
Dropsy Ascites, or Leucophlegmacy, not only in the Feet, but in the Belly and
other parts, of which we spoke, but this is only in the Feet, and goes no
farther and is firmer, and will not pit. The Germans call these Delchenkfel,
that is oily Legs, because they seem as anointed: sometimes the hands, and
Fingers, and the Arms, have been so swollen, and have continued so long, if not
always. And it may be so in other parts.

There are some tumors which will rise in diverse parts, Physodes or windy Tumor.
in which the skin is more extended, and will not pit, called Physodeis from
the wind that causes them: or if they are between both, they are called windy
Oedemas, and windy Phyctaenae.

Some tumors are only in the Feet; one whereof like an Oedema, The Swelling of
the Feet.
is al over the feet, yet softer then that, and like the Dropsy. And this
either comes from an inward cause, or in some Diseases of the feet, as the
Scab, Anthonies fire, or Oedematous Erysipelas, breeds with them, and remains
after they are gone. It coms also sometimes after Diseases especially Fevers,
and especially about the Ankle, and the Foot, showing it self most at Night, or
after watching; and when the Patient is perfectly recovered of the Disease it
vanishes.

We have seen the like in the Legs, in the length extended, The Swelling of the
Legs.
and going no farther, at a certain time, coming with itching heat and
pricking yet without pain and not discoloring, in which no pit would remain
after impression; this as it come so it went away quickly, but some have been
troubled with it many years at times.

These tumors also use to be in the Codds besides those which are mentioned in
the Ruptures called Enterocele, Hydrocele or water Rupture.
and the tumor Sarcocele: of which one is more usual, which swells the Codds
and makes them heavy, as in the Dropsy Ascites, which in regard it comes of
water filling the Codds, as in a Dropsy is called Hydrocele, and this we call
also the watery tumor of the Codds, or the ascites thereof. This is
distinguished from Enterocele, because it yield not but is firm; from
Sarcocele, because it is not from flesh but water, which is known by the touch,
and you may perceive by a candle. This is not only in men but children.

There is another tumor by which the Codds are blown up like a Bladder,
Pneumacele, or windy Rupture.
so that they are transparent, if you hold a candle by them; which coming from
wind, and swelling the codds is called Pneumatecele, which we may call the
windy tumor of the codds, or their tympany, because they are stretched, and
being struck sound like a Drum.

Besides these there is another tumor of the codds, The blowing of the Codds.
usually in great Colicks, which being sent downwards, make both codds swell,
in which both Stones are tormented: also this happens after strong and long
Exercise. This comes often, and quickly vanishes, of which we have spoken in
the colic.

In Women's Groins there is sometimes a watery tumor, The watery Tumor in women's
Groins.
which is like the Hydrocele in Men, as that is in the cod, this is in the
Groine.

There is also a tumor about the Navel which being watery, Hydronphalos.
raises the skin called Hydromphalon: this is seldom but in the Ascites, and
then the Navel is like a Bladder filled with Water.

In the Head there is a watery Tumor especially in Children, Hydrocephalon.
and it lifts up the thick hairy scalp which is called Hydrocephalon.

There is a tumor in the Eyebrows like a spreading Oedema, The Swelling of the
Eyebrows.
so as they seem blown up, round about, in the Diseases of the Eyes, and when
they are sound, which continues sometimes long and sometimes quickly
vanishes. This some call the Oedema of the Eyes, which may better be called
the Swelling of the Eyebrows.

The Neck has sometimes a great Swelling in the Throat, very large, The Hernia
of the Throat.
and stretched out, and will sound when stroke upon, and being pressed, it
yields like a blown Bladder, and rises again easily distinguished from a
struma, because not so moveable. This tumor because in the throat, upon the
rough Artery, because both are called Bronchi; and because it has the same
cause that Hernia or Rupture has, is called Broncocele or throat Rupture. And
besides the Deformity it makes the voice hoarse, and breath short, and
sometimes threatens Suffocation.

Sometimes there are Bladders or Bubbles which are watery and transparent in
the scarf skin in diverse parts, especially Hands, and Feet, Phlyctenae
and sometimes in the Ball of the Eye, called Phylectaenae, which are insensible
of themselves, but being broken especially in tender parts, or being whole if
the Humor contained be sharp, cause pain: of which we spoke in the pains of the
Eye. There are also many such called Hydroa, in the Hands and else where which
foreruns or accompany the Itch; which the Germans call Shren, from the itching,
which they scratch or open with Needles, to let out the water. We have seen a
clear thin Bladder rise in the Eye by the Juice of a wild Cowcumber squirting
in by chance, The bladder in the ball of the Eye.
that has gone away the next day without hurt.

Sometimes there is a tumor in the veins which bring Milk, The Swelling of the
breasts with milk.
in the Breasts which makes them swell or stretch, or gathers and is hard:
sometimes with pain, sometimes with Redness about which is turned into an
Inflammation when the pain is gone.

Also a tumor may be in the Veins that carry the blood, Varix.
called Varix Cirsos in Dutch Krampffader, by which the Vein is extended and
swollen, as broad as a finger, blew or black, and knotted and unequal, having
Swellings in diverse places, sometimes paining by the extension being ready to
break, otherwhiles itching, An Ulcer from Varix in the Feet.
it is often in the feet in many places, with an Ulcer near it, nourished by
it, and therefore called Vlcus varicosum: as we said in Ulcers. And without
this Ulcer, there are the same in the Feet, which as in Women with Child,
return after Childbirth, or continue without hurt.

In other places they are as in the codd, external, and then the Veins that
hold it, swell and are crooked and black; or inward, and then the internal
Spermatick Vessels swell, and are hoisted; and are hard to touch, in so much as
they who know not the Disease suspect it to be a fleshy Rupture, or a third
Stone, hence such are called triorches, or men with three Stones. This they
call Circoselen: Aetius writes that there are crooked Veins in the wing of
Women's Secrets; also these will be in the Eyebrows, and will somewhat hinder
their Motion.

It also happens in a tender skin and white Body, the Veins swelling, The Veins
lying bare in the skin.
are manifest to the sight, and do rather deform by color then tumor without
any other inconvenience. And this is often in the Hipps and other places.

There is a tumor in the Arteries called Aneurisma, Aneurisma.
either when the Artery is dilated, or the Mouth thereof, as shall be said in
the Causes; and this tumor beats like an Artery, but the Pulsation is great
and troublesome. When this is pressed, it partly flies back, and returns back
forcibly again, as big as a fist, sometimes less, it is often in the Feet and
Hands, sometimes about the Throat and Breast, witness Fernelius. When this is
inward, then it produces other Symptoms, as Palpitation of the Heart, which is
mentioned before in Cachexy.

Hard tumors which will scarce yield to the touch, are known chiefly by their
places: some grow in glandulous parts: some in fleshy; some in parts without
flesh, some in the skin chiefly, as shall be showed.

In the Glandulous parts there are glandels or Kernels under the skin, Kernels.
which grow hard, with an external tumor, or they may be felt, if they lie
deep. These may be moved any way, otherwise then a Scirrhus, and they grow by
degrees.

These are in diverse parts, as the Natural Glandules from whence they are
named, among great Glandles they appear more, in other less: and they either
come forth in many places together, or in some only.

These being enlarged and grown hard, do discover themselves in diverse parts of
the body at once. The Tumor scorfula.
As in the Neck under the chin, where there are often many together; and they
are called Scrophulaes or Choirades, because Hogs have them often in that part.
They are also behind the Ears, under the Arms pits, in the Groins, and bending
of the Joints, and sometimes in the Breast and Papps of Women, and other parts
swelling and hard, to be seen, or if they lie deep, to be felt. Those in other
parts are usually called Scorphulaes, as well as those in the Neck, yet not so
deep, in regard Hogs called Scrofi, have them only in the Neck, and other
Pustles which are found in the Neck and Flesh of a Hog, which they suppose is
the Leprosy, called the Meazles, are not hard Glandules but Pustles newly
grown; except they be called Scrofulaes, because many come together at a time,
because the Swine brings forth many at a litter. This Disease is sometimes
haereditary, and usual in some Countries; in which the Glandules either remain
hard like a Scirrhus, or they break and turn into a creeping Ulcer. The first
is called Scirrodes, the second Nomodes, or they end in a Carcinoma, and are
called Carcinodes, and bring great hurt to the Body.

Sometimes these kernels break forth only in certain places, Struma.
as in the Throat, where there is sometimes one, sometimes two or three, like a
bunch of Grapes, growing very great, sometimes hanging down. These they call
Strumae, and when they are in the Neck Scrofulaes, or if they be little, they
are called Strumules; yet in regard these differ from the other, being not so
many in number, and greater, neither have Hogs the like, we thus distinguish
them: these we call Strumae, the other Scrofulae. These Strumae besides their
nastiness and hinderance, if they lie deep in the Throat, cause Hoarsness, and
difficulty of breathing. In some Countries they are so common, that they are
not accounted uncomely; we have observed that one of them choked an Infant
lying deep and invisible, and the cause was not known till after dissection.
Under the Armpits, and in the Groins are also Glanduls, either hard, or swelled
and hard; and these are called Buboes, if these be behind the Ears, Bubo
without pain. Parotis.
upon the Glanduls, it is called Parotis, and both are cold and without pain,
contrary to those of which we spoke, in pains: for in these of one color and
without pain, there is no Inflammation or Heat, except they come to an
imposthume, out of which, as we showed concerning a cold Imposthume in a fleshy
part, there comes no Pus, but other matter, as we showed: out of which kind of
hard Parotis, ending in an Imposthume, and after in an Ulcer we have seen
Stones come forth.

To these hard Glandules we refer the stones grown hard: The hardness of the
Stones.
which sometimes grow so big that the Codds hang like a bag filled and
stretched out. This they call the Scirrhus of the Stones by reason of its
hardness; but we rather refer it to a glandulous tumor: as we showed that some
Glanduls were called Schirrodes.

There is a hard tumor in diverse fleshy parts of the body that shines, and is
so firm, Scirrhus.
that it will not be moved from the place, sometimes more large and extended,
and sometimes lying deeper of one Color and without pain, called a Scirrhus,
and sometimes it is in the beginning, and sometimes confirmed. This often sollows
Inflammations, sometimes it begins of it self, and grows by degrees: sometimes
it may be turned into a cancer, but we suppose that they have mistaken a Cancer
not yet ulcerated for a Scirrhus, being like in hardness and shape, and so they
were deceived, supposing that when it brake, a Scirrhus broke and ulcerated.

We have seen hard tumors about the belly, sometimes many have been together,
The scirrhus and glandulous Tumors of the belly.
making the Belly rise like a Dropsy, or in women as if they were with Child,
from which it is discerned easily by its inequality; and the continuance of it
at length will show that it was none of them; some have been so all their
lives, and without any great inconvenience. These we reser to the Scirrhus,
except they be Glanduls in the cawle, which stretch out the Belly.

There are also other tumors in the Belly, which come from Tumors of the Bowels.

In the right or left Hypochondrion, The hardness of the Liver, or Spleen makes
a distention of the Hypochondria.
or side, there is distention of the Ribbs rather then a tumor, when the short
Ribbs are thrust out by a Scirrhus or hard tumor of the Liver or Spleen. In the
middle seat called that of the Heart, where the Ribbs divide, these tumors
mentioned, (if in the Liver, in regard it reaches so far on the right side)
may be felt: otherwise we can neither feel nor see them, except by other
Diseases that accompany them; in the Description whereof we have mentioned
these Tumors, these are a stretching and heavy pain about the Hypochondria or
short Ribbs, the compressive pain of the Heart, the Jaundies, Cachexy, Dropsy,
which if they swel the whole Belly, hinder distinction.

In the lowest part of the Belly under the Navel, The hardness of the Womb
causes a tumor in the lower part of the belly.
there is sometimes a hard Tumor, that comes from a Scirrhus in the bottom of
the Womb: of which we spoke in the Inflammation of the womb, from whence it
comes.

The tumors of the Belly which cause pain, have been spoken of by us concerning
Pain; as that which is above the Navel, between the Ribbs and comes from the
Inflation of the Stomach, and other in other parts of the belly, coming from
the distension of the Guts, as that of the Colic, when there is a Swelling on
the left side against the Navel: as we showed in the Colic and pains of the
Stomach.

Sometimes a tumor like a Scirrhus is in some fleshy part of the Body, yet not
so hard, but growing old, it turns to an Imposthume, not that which causes
pain and follows Inflammations, but which is without pain and continues long,
and is open, sending not forth Pus or quittour, but other matter, which if like
Tallow is called Steatoma; if like Frumenty, Steatoma, Athcroma, Melliceris
what they are.
Atheroma, if like Honey Meliceris. There are also other tumors out of which
come matter like curdled milk, or like a Glandule, or a Nail, a Bone, or Hair,
or like other things without the Body, as like Clay, a sandy stone, or hard
stone, like a coal, the shells of fruit, pieces of wood, which the People
think came in by witchcraft* these tumors and imposthumes have no proper and
peculiar Names, and all of them, as they may be in many places, so sometimes
under the Tongue; like that Tumor called Rana a Frog, but without pain, from
which being turned into an Imposthume, The Rana under the Tongue with
Inflammation.
as from that which is with Inflammation, of which we spoke in pains of the
Mouth, sometimes a stone has come forth. These tumors usually rise in the Head,
where the skin is hairy, especially such as have soft Matter, as in other
Creatures which are all hairy. These from their diverse forms are called Testudo
and Talpa, Testudo and Talpa tumors in the Head. Ganglion.
that is a Snail or a Mole.

Outwardly in the Habit of the Body where flesh is wanting there are tumors in
diverse parts, both in and out of the Joints, there where the Bones have nothing
but skin to cover them. In the Joints where the Tendons, Ligaments and Nerves
do meet, about the Knee, Elbow, or other Joints, there rises a tumor sometimes
called a Gangleon, which tumor growing in these parts, being uneven sometimes
larger, sometimes over the whole Joint: is not so hard, yet will not yield;
neither is it without sense, but being strongly pressed is sensible of pain,
neither is it so fastened but it may be moved, hindering the free motion of the
Joint, and sometimes knitting the Joint, that it neither can move, or if it do,
the motion is in perfect: and if it be in the Knee, on either side, or in the
Hand, where this Ganglion does often grow, covering all the Joint, the Patient
can neither stand nor go well, or without a staff, because his Feet will not
reach the Ground.

There are other tumors of the Joints called Nodes or Knots: The Knots upon the
Joints of men in the Gout.
which continue a long time in the Fingers, and Toes; from whence the hand
Gout, and foot Gout are called Nodi; some of which are hard like stones, other
soft, and these spread beyond the Joint sometimes, and are in other parts, as we
showed in the Joint Gout, and how they bring pain, and hinder motion.

There are also very hard tumors upon the Bones, Hard Knots upon the Bones.
which cannot be moved from them, as if there were a new Bone grown to the
former. These the Germans call Vberbian, that is bone upon bone, being they are
as hard as the bone. These grow about the Forehead, Temples, and Shinns; in
the Wrist, and small of the Leg and the like. These although without pain, yet
if they press upon the parts adjacent, cause pain and trouble, if they are in
the Joints, they hinder Motion. And these are either such as grow of
themselves, or accompany a Disease, The Nodes in the French Pox, and Headache.
as the French Pox, Headache. In which through pain they breed, and of which we
spoke formerly.

To these a Callus may be referred, The Collosity or Hardness.
such as comes after Bones are broken and set again, which buncheth out above
the bone, and if it reach to the Joints, it hinders Motion.

There is also a hard Swelling upon the Nails, The hard Swellings of the Nails.
by which they grow thick, (as we showed in Magnitude increased) and also
uneven, and are like young Nails, as I have seen.

There are also hard tumors in the skin called cutaneous. The first kind
whereof is a hard and thick skin, called Callus and Tilloma. Sometimes larger,
sometimes less, spread abroad less or more, or lifted up, blacker then the other
skin, because thicker, being without sense or pain. This is often in the Palm
of the Hands, and soles of the Feet, and between the Fingers and Toes, and is
exceeding hard, I knew a Smith whose Hands were so hard that he could touch hot
Iron, and hold it some time, without harm to his Hands, by reason of the Callus.

There is also another Callus which is like a skin upon the skin, called a
Scar, A Scar.
insensible and whiter then the other skin, and more firm, without Pores or
Hairs, sometimes bigger, sometimes less, sometimes above the true skin, sometimes
lying deep, sometimes like a white Spot. These come after wounds and ulcers
cured.

To these may be added the unevenness of Face, which is left after the small
Pox, Pock-holes.
with pits like a Honeycomb, by reason of the Scars that lie low: these are
not Extuberances, or Risings or even with the skin as others, yet are fit here
to be mentioned.

Also that hole of the Navel lest after the closing thereof at the Birth, The
Navel pit.
if it lie too deep by reason of the Callus, by which it grew together, lying
too deep: is here to be mentioned.

And also the Swelling of the Navel, not that which is in dropsy and ruptures,
The stretching forth of the Navel.
but that which comes from an increase of the Callus.

There is a little tumor called a Wart, Warts.
as big as a Pease, above the skin, hard without sense, and narrow, about the
Root, by which as a stalk it grows to the skin. And if it hang far out, it is
called Acrochordon, or a Wart that hangs by a sinew so called, Acrochordon.
rather because it may be tied with a string or cord, then because it hangs
like a cord, If this be discolored like Time, or the Herb Thyme, and uneven,
it is called Thymium. These are in diverse parts often in the Hands and Feet,
and many together yet at some distance and and sometimes united. Thymium.
These being unseemly and the worse in the Face, from whence Cicero had his
Name, because his Wart there was as big as a Pease called Cicer, do also molest
sometimes and hinder.

A fixed Wart, is called Verruca sessilis, Verruca sesstlis.
because it sits fast, and comes less forth then the other, like a Lupine
having a broad Root fast to the skin, otherwise like the former, only when it
is hard thrust upon, it feels a pricking. In this oftentimes, especially in the
Face, grows a hair or two.

Like to these is a corn in the Feet or Toes called Clavus, Clavus.
both because it has a head like a Nail, and also because being pressed, it
pricks like a Nail. It is very troublesome, and hinders going, the Germans call
it Egerstenany. because it is like a Magpyes Eye.

There are besides tumors in the Head especially called Vari or Jonthi. Vari or
Jonthi warts in the Face so called.
They are hard and callous, moist at the top, and in the Face sometimes, and
Beard, and then called Psydracia.

There are other hard tumors in the Eyebrows, like Warts, one whereof grows
upon the Eyelid, Hordeolum, because like a Barley corn, without sense, itching
or red. Another grows to the upper Eye-brow, and is hard called Grando, because
like a Hail-stone. Grando.


That tumor which comes and goes is called Cele, which word is applied to other
tumors, called Ruptures from the Cause; it is in Groins often both of Men and
Women. It is at first small, of the Color with the other flesh, sometimes soft,
sometimes hard and uneven, being pressed it goes back, and returns, and may be
thrust forth by straining and holding the Breath: this is called Epiplocele,
when the Cawle is broken, and Bubonocele from its likeness to a Bubo or Bubo
herniosus, or Hernia inguinalis that is a Rupture in the Groyne.

If it come from the Guts falling down it is called Enterocele, though this
tumor does not rest in the Groyne, but falls into the Codds of Men, the Color
of the skin not being altered, sometimes wrinkled. This tumor if it be pressed,
or the party laid upon his Back, vanishes; and after returns again, and the
sooner if it be forced by holding the Breath and straining.

Women have sometimes the same in the Groyne, as Men have in the Codd, and it
will fall downwards into a great Tumor, and it will go and come again as that
of Men.

There are the like also in the Belly and other parts, The Hernia or Rupture of
the belly, or Omphalocele.
and especially about the Navel, which is called Omphalocele, when the Navel
sticks out sometimes as big as a nut, sometimes as an Apple: and sometimes there
is a Tumor in the part that hangs down like a bagg, all these tumors go in by
pressing and lying down, but they will return, except they be prevented. In
these Tumors mentioned, sometimes there is no pain, nor impediment besides the
tumor, sometimes there is great pain at the beginning especially in the Groyne,
when it falls from thence into the Codd, then there is a tearing and pricking
pain. They are commonly bound in the belly that have them, and if the tumors be
long out, they will vomit up their Dung, as we showed in the Convolvulus
speaking of Vomiting.

To these tumors that come and go may be referred those that come from the
windy Cramp in the Calves of the Legs, and other fleshy parts with great pain,
rising and falling again: of which we spoke in Convulsions.

The Causes.
The immediate Causes of all Extuberances, or general Swellings, are from the
Humors, Seed, Milk, or Blood, or Water, or Wine either single or mixed: the
Cause of some tumors is the Dislocation of some part, as we shall show.

As the Seed is the Cause of Deformity, The Parents seed is the Cause of fleshy
Tumors, Strumaes, Scrophulaes and hereditarywarts
and Discolouration that comes Naturally (as we showed before) so is it the
cause of diverse Tumors, which are hereditary, as Sarcomata or fleshy tumors,
Tubercula or Pustles, soft or hard, and chiefly of Strumas, or Scrophulas which
are kernels hardened in the neck. These we rather suppose to have come from the
Parents, then from evil diet. Also those Glandules of kernels which are in
diverse parts of the Body, and end in cancerous Ulcers, come often from the
Parents Seed; and it appears, in that where these are frequent in diverse
Countries, they will never marry til they know certainly that neither party is
infected therewith. And as all small tumors may come from the Parents, so may
Warts and Moles like Pease, such as Tully had in his Nose, and thence he was
called Cicero, and this is from the Infection of Parents Seed: as we showed
concerning Deformities.

As when the Seed is perfect there is a Child, Imperfect Seed is the Cause of
the Tumor of the belly called Mola.
so when it is imperfect there is a Mole or the like, and this will grow and
swell the Belly preternaturally. This defect in the Seed is hard to be
discovered, but if there be a production of flesh with Vessels or with
Membranes, the fault is in the Man, except there be also a Distemper in the
Womb. And seeing there is a Navel-vein, this ill shaped Lump must increase, and
the Mother must find it Nourishment by her Courses, and she must have Milk in
her Breasts: as when she is with Child.

It is not probable that a Mole should come from other Causes as only the
Mothers Seed, or Terms, or from the Blood that nourishes the Womb, because
nothing can be gotten without the commixion of both Seeds; neither can it be
from the terms, which though they may nourish, yet can they not be get either
Child or Mole; and if that blood which nourishes the womb produce any thing it
must be a Sarcoma, or fleshy tumor, which grows to the womb, rather then a Mole
which is loose and only hangs by Veins, as we showed in the Causes of Sarcoma.

That no Mole comes from wind, is manifest, for if wind be enclosed in the
womb, it will rather puff it up: and we have showed that the womb cannot be so
blown up in the pains of the womb.

That nourishing Juice which is made of Blood dispersed into the parts, The
Juice that nourishes the parts of the body is the Cause of some kinds of
Tumors.
and resembling them and does nourish them, as when it is good and laudable, by
nourishing the substance it keeps it in a good temper, so when it offends in
quantity or quality, it produces general or particular tumors accordingly: and
that two ways, either by producing another substance in the part, or by
increasing the part.

This Juice that nourishes the parts, produces diverse tumors, by getting as
it were new and superfluous substance in the parts which grows in them or to
them; And this is when it offends more in quantity, and then besides its
nourishing of the parts, it produces something superfluous not unlike the part,
softer and harder: or when the Juice is too thick for the Nourishment of the
part, then it produces a harder tumor: the reason whereof shall be declared.

The juice that nourishes the fleshy parts produces fleshy Tumors, either by
the plenty or by the thickness thereof.

The Juice which sweateth out of the flesh, The nourishing Juice sweating
through the flesh is the cause of ^arcomata or fleshy tumors, and proud flesh,
in the Nose, Gums, and elsewhere.
for want of tunicles by which it is confined, and by which the Mouths or the
Veins that bring are stopped, if it grow to the flesh, it produces Sarcomata
or fleshy tumors; as in Ulcers full of flesh and not skinned over, there is an
excrescence by reason of the abundance of Juice; or if the skin of the Nostrils
be eaten off with Ulcers, there will be a Polypus, and if the Gums be seen there
will be Epulis. Fleshy tumors called Sarcomata, are produced inwardly, when the
tunicles of fleshy parts are divided, and the Juice is diffused out of them: as
from a Contusion, by which the Mouths or the Veins are a little opened, though
there follow no other hurt or Ulcer, yet there will sometimes arise little tumors
from a Contusion of the Spermatick vessels, in the cod, when the juice being
out of the vessels, causes sometimes a sarcocele or fleshy rupture.

The more plenty of Juice there is, the sooner is a Sarcoma produced. And this
is occasioned by Plethory or attraction of Blood to some part, friction though
the part be not hurt, or by uneasy sitting or riding may cause a Sarcocele,
the Blood being continually attracted to the part; also from moderate Venery,
the Vessels being dilated there will be a flux of Blood: And if the part be
disposed to receive it, as being loose, it is caused sooner. Hence it is that
the Gums grow so rank, and the little Caruncle in the corner of the Eye,
especially when the Gums chew much and the Eye is rubbed for itching.

Sometimes harder tumors then Sarcomata come from thick Juice, Thick Juice it
the Cause of Scirrhus, Atheroma, and Steatoma, and Meliceris.
simple or Compound, as that called Scirrhus, daily growing harder and fixed:
hence are they many in the Belly, if not glandulous. And other hard Tumors
which are not so fixed but at length turn to Imposthumes, in which the Matter
is diverse according to the diversity of the Cause, yet will they not break as
those coming of blood, or suppurate, but as we showed turn into a solid
substance joined to the flesh, or it turns to a Humor included in its proper
compass, and goes away by Maturation.

And this thickness of nourishing Juice, that produces these tumors, comes
either from the blood, or from the Juice. And so a Scirrhus may come, of an
Inflammation, not because the blood grows hard for want of Suppuration as some
think, or by the Application of cold things, for then it would rather putrify
and corrupt; but because the blood being discussed by a violent Heat, the Juice
of the part inflamed is made thick and hard: besides this Cause which is
thickness of Juice, there is another which is when the Nourishment of some
other part which requires that which is thick, is carried to a fleshy part. And
this is prooved, in that in Imposthumes coming of those Tumors you shall find
something like the substance of other parts, a hair or a Nail, or like a Bone,
or a Kernel, which could not be but from the Juice which nourishes the parts;
as when it resembles fat, you may suppose that some Juice that was to have
nourished the fat parts miscarried thither: or when it is like Furmenty, or
Honey it shows that the fleshy juice is not turned into Matter, as in hot
Imposthumes, but into a more thick Humor, and if it be more burnt, and grow
more earthy, it will resemble coats and stones. If these be included in their
proper Membrane, and that be included in membranous Juice, they will grow alike
as has been said: which as they may be from a Tumor turned into an Imposthume,
so that the juice which belongs to another part which is more hard, may cause a
Schirrhus. And if it turns to a Cancer, there was some Venom in the juice. And
we think these more probable Causes then Phlegm or Melancholy, which most
affirm; for if a tumor should arise of them, it would not be so constant, but
subject to Corruption: as we shall show in other Tumors which they suppose to
come from those Humors.

Also the internal Tumors which are hard, The nourishing Juice being too thick,
causes hardness, or Scirrhus of the Liver, Spleen, and Womb.
and in the Liver, and Spleen, and Scirrhus, which you may see, or feel under
the Ribbs, and that in the womb as we said of the external parts come from
Inflammation aforegoing or thick juice, as we showed in the cause of Ascites,
Cachexy, and Jaundies, coming from these tumors, and Scirrhus, and in the
Inflammation of the womb, we mentioned the Scirrhus thereof, which grows
sometimes; as the womb being small, grows larger after Conception.

In Kernels, the nourishing juice being mixed with other Humors, The thickness
of nourishing Juice, is the cause of glanduls under the Ears, and bubos,
Strumas, and Scrophulas.
or by its plenty or thickness, being alone, produces Hardness, and Tumors,
some whereof turn to Impostumes and ulcerate, as Parotides and Bubones, being
hard, or such as are turned into a cold tumor, and Strumas in the Neck, which
commonly continue hard, and Scrofulas which turn into a Scirrhus, or malignant
Ulcer.

The cause of this abundance and thickness of Juice, is the same with that of a
Scirrhus, and other hard tumor, which being thicker, nourish Glanduls rather
then fleshy parts, makes them sooner swell and harden, or if it be taken from
other parts, it causes hardness where it should not be; and if the Matter be
included in a Membrane or Coat, it is of the same Juice. We deny not but Phlegm
and other humors may be mixed therewith: but we cannot affirm that Phlegm, or
Melancholy alone can produce these tumors. But if Rheum flow from the Head; or
Blood come to the part, there may be a Swelling but not a Hardness: and if it
be mixed with this Juice, we say it causes the tumor sooner to imposthumate.
But if water be mixed with thick juice while this grow thicker, and the earthy
part of the water dryer, it may produce stones, as we showed in the knots of
the Gout, and in the stones which we said we found in tumors behind the Ears.
And if any malignant Humor be mixed, the Kernels will be worse, and easily
ulcerate; as Scrophulas, which are in many parts of the Body. In which if the
Matter be corroding, the ulcers are called Nomodea, if malignant Cacoethea, and
if there be Venom, they are Cancers. The Original of evil Humors is the same
with that of malignant Ulcers whereof we spoke. Wherefore some people are
swollen in their Necks with Strumas, in those places, especially where they
drink Snowwater; as the Inhabitants of the Alps. And this is not likely,
because it is in some places only of that Country, as in the lower parts of
Valesia. But it is rather to be imputed to the natural disposition of men's
Bodies in those parts, which is the cause that they are so common there Parents
Seed being so infected, rather than water drinking: as we showed in the cause
of the Seed.

When the thick Juice nourishing the Tendons, Nerves, Membranes, The Juice that
nourishes the Membranes is the cause of a Gangleon.
and Ligaments abounds, it begets a hard tumor in the fleshless parts of the
Joints called a Ganglion; when it is glewed to these parts that are exercised,
and produces a like substance, especially in the Joints, as in the Ham by
reason of the violent motion of the Knee. And it may come at the curing of a
Wound in any other part, when the juice abounds. And it cannot be from Phlegm,
Excrementitious as they call it, being it is such a Nervous, firm and solid
substance, no more then a Callus or a Node, or a Broncocele, or Tumor in the
Throat, which they say comes from Phlegm. This is of diverse kinds, and comes
from diverse Causes: as we showed in the windy Cause.

When the nourishing Juice abounds in the skin, The Juice which nourishes
the skin is the Cause of a hard skin.
it causes the hardness called Callus; as when by labor it is worn although
not quite taken off, yet somewhat always is taken away, and it is made thin;
and then the nourishing juice being drawn thither more by the chafing of the
part, dorh require and make new skin, till there comes a Callus as in the Hands
and Feet. Mechanic men have sooner hard Hands from the Instruments they use,
which causes Blisters at first by separating the scarf skin from the true,
and attracteth the nourishing Humor, which joins to the skin and makes it hard.

The Juice that nourishes the skin gleweth together the Division which is made
by a Wound or Ulcer, The Juice that nourishes the skin is the cause of a Scar.
and fills up the place, and makes a Callus instead of a true skin called a
Scar, which differs from the skin, because it is insensible, and more hard, not
porous, nor hairy. And it is larger or less as the wound was. And if the Juice
abound it grows higher then the skin if not even; And if the Ulcer were hollow
and have a Scar to heal it up before it be filled with flesh, it is like a pit
in one or in many places as in the small Pox.

As it is in the Navel, if the hole thereof which sent out a Cord in the Womb,
which is taken away after Birth, grow sound and skin over below, there will be
a pit; but if it grow up there will be a Callus even with the skin, or if it
grow too high, the Navel will be thrust out.

If that Juice which is ordained to nourish harder parts get into the Pores,
Nourishing juice in the Pores is the cause of Warts and Corns.
and makes Warts and Corns; which Juice may come from that which nourishes
the skin, for as it causes there Hardness, ^allus, and Scars, so getting into
the Pores it may take root and grow forth as a Wart which hangs down, or is
fixed, and as a Corn in the Feet, where being pressed with going, while it
grows, can go no farther, and there is pain, by the compression when the flesh
underneath is pricked. The largness of the Pores, is the cause of this, when
they should be so straight that they should receive nothing but vapors for
sweat. This comes in diverse places, especially in the Feet, where the skin is
much pressed in one place, and so the Po^es made more large, which causes a
Corn, which has a hard skin for the same cause. And Warts come in the Hands
from external Injuries, and hard tumors in the Eyebrows, called Hordeola and
Grandines, from the rubbing of the Eyes. The like may be from the Juice which
nourishes the Hair, if it be too thick, the Pores, and this Juice may cause a
Hair in the Wart make it grow longer; it is not likely that any such should
come from Phlegm, which may resemble the substance of the parts of the Body,
where they are much less, can so small a thing as causes a Corn or Wart come
from a Defluxion? Neither could they come from Phlegm, if they were Infectious,
as Rondoletius thinks in regard the juice may have malignity: as we shall show.
And if they were hereditary, they rather come from the Seed then any
preterna^ural Humor.

From this thick Juice which is for nourishing other parts when it gets into
the Pores, The nourishing Juice in the Pores, is the cause of Freckles.
there arise hard Pustles called Freckles, or Pimples, as Warts; which when in
the Head or Beard are called Psydracia. For the skin being thicker, and harder
there, is nourished with thicker Juice, which coming into the Pores in great
quantity, causes Pimples, and if it be spread in the Face, it causes the same
there, by Reason of the Looseness of the part. These are fixed if they come only
from this juice, but if any Excrementitious Humor or Matter be mixed, then the
Pustles will run, and turn to little ulcers.

Aso in the Bones the juice that nourishes them causes Nodes, The juice that
nourishes the Bones, is the cause of Nodes and Callus.
which as it happens also in the Flesh being laid bare, so here in the Bone,
when the Periostium or skin thereon is eaten away; and the juice of the Bones
which the skin uses to confine within its self to the Bone, growing forth
causes Nodes like to the Bones. And as these may come by external violence, as
in Horses Feet, so in Men also, and by other Causes sometimes, which are
malignant, as the French Pox: as we shall declare when we treat of that
disease. Also this juice may produce a tumor; for when the Bones are broken,
which will cause abundance of juice, there will a Callus grow to glue them
together, and it will grow out from the Bone and be like a Node.

In the Roots of the Nails there is Juice which gives them Nourishment, The
Juice which nourishes the Nails being too thick or too much causes the
callosity of the Nails.
and if it be too much in quantity, it does not only make them too thick which
is unseemly; but if it be thick withal, it causes uneven Swellings. Now the
cause of this abundant juice, among the rest is this, when it is drawn thither
by a violent Exercise of the Hands or by hurt: as we showed. And if this juice
be too thick, or be mixed with the Juice that belongs to the Bones adjacent, it
makes the Nails to be too hard and thick. And if it be mixed with other juice
which is evil: it procures other inconveniences besides hardness, as shall be
showed.

The Juice which nourishes the Body, Crude juice nourishing the body, is the
cause of Leucophlegmacy.
causes enlargment by increasing the substance thereof; and if it be crude and
unconcocted, which long nourishes the body instead of that which is concocted,
it makes the body soft and faint and swollen, and is the cause of
Leucophlegmacy so called, because it is made of waterish juice or phlegm, which
is water congealed.

And the Cause which breeds this crude juice is the same with that of a
Cachexy, which comes from the same juice: as we showed, when we told you, that
it came from crude Blood which produces such Juice. And that it came either
from the Foot, or from some Distemper of the Bowels, as the Stomach which
leaves the Chylus imperfect in the first Concoction, or from the weakness of
the Liver and Spleen, from Distemper or other Diseases; as Obstruction and
Hardness, by which means the blood is not sufficiently wrought in the second
Concoction. Hence is this evil juice so plentiful in the Veins, which
nourishing the Habit of the Body, first breeds a Cachexy, which uses to go
before a Leucophlegmacy, and produces it certainly if the matter increase. And
we have showed how the serous or watery Humor mixed with the crude produces
the same.

Crude juice gathered in some parts causes the Tumor Oedema, The crude,
nourishing juice, either alone or mixed with water is the cause of the tumor
called Oedema.
which is spread abroad, and in which the substance of the parts where it is,
seems rather to be enlarged soft and swollen, then filled with Excrementitious
Phlegm, which they say is the Cause, and therefore is harder to be cured. Also
when Water is mixed with the juice, it produces tumors that are more soft and
watery, which we call serous Oedema's, these are especially in the Thighs,
which make them look like a Dropsy.

We have showed the Causes of these last in the Treatise of the serous Humor;
but for the cause of those which come only of crude juice, sometimes it is the
same with that of a Cachexy and Leucophlegmacy; if it come to the part through
the weakness thereof; sometimes only the evil constitution of the part, by which
it does not so perfectly turn the blood brought thither into its self, but
leaves it crude and imperfect, may be the Cause; if the part be cold, weak,
looser or fainter, from Diseases or hurts received.

Abundance of Milk in the Breasts causes a Tumor which distendeth the whole
Breast, Plenty of milk is tho cause of the Swelling of the breasts.
or some part thereof wherein it is gathered. The plenty of Blood is the cause
of this plenty of Milk; but chiefly the retention and collection of Milk
already made in the breast, commonly after Childbearing which is the time of
giving suck, in which if Women give not suck, as some do not, they are subject
to swollen breasts, sometimes though the Infant do suck, yet in regard it cannot
suck them clean by reason of the continual increase of Milk, the same may
happen. Women when they have weaned their Children, are troubled with this some
sew days after. And they seldom have it before they are delivered, albeit they
have Milk, and their Breasts grow bigger. Some say that not only the abundance
of milk but the curdling thereof is the cause of this Tumor of the Breasts,
which if so, the Tumor would be rather gathered and hard, as sometimes it is, in
that place wherein it curdleth, rather then a general Swelling, and this would
be so because the Milk is out of its proper Vessels, and then in regard curdled
milk as clodred Blood cannot be long in a part without corruption or
Suppuration, nor can they easily be discussed; this tumor would quickly be an
Imposthume.

We showed in pains, Blood filling the Veins is the cause of crooked Veins
called Varicae.
how Blood carried out of the Vessels caused hot Tumors with pain. And sometimes
when it is in the Vessels it causes tumors, as it is in the Veins or Arteries;
if in the Veins, they are swollen and crooked, by too much filling and
dilatation, and sometimes they are in some places more swollen like baggs or
Nodes stretched forth, made clear and transparent through dilatation, and the
Color of the Blood is seen through, and they appear blew and black, straight
or crooked, and if they be so stretched, that they press the adjacent Nerves,
or if the Matter contained in them do offend the Nerves there is pain. And the
blood will do this sooner in those parts which are dependant, and from whence
it cannot so easily ascend as in the Legs, where these Varices are most usual
and large: as from the same Cause, there is the tumor called Cirsocele, in the
inward Vessels of the Codds, but this is seldom, because the Blood will not
come so violently into such narrow Passages, but by some extraordinary
occasion. Moreover, Blood sent into other Veins of the skin gets Varices,
especially where there are many Veins as in the Scrotum, or Cod, and the
Eyebrows and the like. But these are different as the Blood, for if that be
temperate and pure they are less, and only are offensive by their being
stretched forth: but if the Blood be hot or foul, or mixed with Choler, they
burn, and are more troublesome, and sometimes have an Ulcer at the bottom, where
the Blood setleth, as in the Legs is usual if the matter be sharp and it will
be a creeping, corroding Ulcer, which many suppose comes from a Melancholic
Humor, as all other Varices, because they look black, when pure Blood seen
through the skin may seem so, and the rather when it is foul.

Now the reason why the Blood is carried so fast to that part, is from the
part, and from the blood it self: as when there is too much Blood as in a
Plethora, and Women with Child, by reason of the Terms stopped in the Veins of
the Womb, and being more then will nourish the Child, hence it is that they
have these crooked Veins in their Legs, because their blood being stopped is
carried thither, that is into the Legs, which Veins consent with the womb, as
appears by letting Blood in the Foot to provoke the Terms; and after they are
delivered, the blood being purged by the Womb as is usual, these veins fall
down, except they be too much dilated. Also blood sent by the Veins into the
extreme parts by reason of its evil Juice, produces Varices or crooked Veins,
and sometimes ulcers let the Blood be what it will, it produces Varices by its
violent motion, therefore they are chiefly in the Feet, by reason of much
Exercise But hard travail and long and great throws in Childbed, are the chief
cause of Blood flowing into the Feet, which produces these Swellings of the
Veins. Also immoderate Venery, because it forces Blood violently into the
Spermatick Vessels (which has been sometimes known to come forth instead of
Seed) and dilateth them, may be the cause of the Swelling called Cirsocele,
which is of the Veins in the Codds. And those Swellings come the more when the
part is weakened, and fit by its looseness to receive a Defluxion: and when the
part has more and larger Veins then others, or when it is dependant and lowest
as was said.

There is another tumor rising from Blood gathered about the womb in the Veins
thereof, Blood in the veins of the Womb causes the belly to swell as if the
woman were with Child.
and stretching them out: which causes that Swelling in women which we showed,
made them look as if with Child before Conception. And this comes from Blood,
because the Courses have long stopped, and it will not be dissolved but by a
Flux of Blood. And it appears that this blood does not cause this tumor by
getting into the Cavity of the Womb, and by filling it till it stretch, because
the womb is fleshy and Nervous, cannot be enlarged by any Humor, as a Membrane,
and it cannot be enlarged but by the growth of a Child or Mole: as we have
showed. And if it were filled with blood, it could not be kept there long, and
would be corrupt and putrified, which it does not, because always it comes
afterward forth, thin: and though some Clodds come therewith, it shows that
they grew so by stoppage at the first, and caused this Swelling. Now from hence
we conclude that this Swelling of the Womb came. Because blood being a long
time retained in the Veins of the Womb, does not only enlarge them externally
in the outside of the Womb, and make them crooked and swollen; but these Veins
in the substance of the Womb, which at other times are small and scarce
apparent, being now filled and dilated by degrees, do lift up the substance of
the womb, and make it larger: and so the Swelling of it, and the stretching of
the veins external, causes this Swelling of the Belly, which when the Courses
flow, and the veins grow empty, is assuaged except some other Disease happen,
as Cachexy, or beginning of a dropsy, when the Belly is so swelled with wind
or water, (as we have known it in Women with Child) and then the tumor is
altered, and will not be gone with bleeding.

I have observed in two full bodied Women, this gathering and stopping of Blood
in the Veins of the Womb, which caused a Swelling of the Belly with distension,
and puffing up, or inflation of the Breasts, (as in Women with Child) whom at
first I judged to be with Child, which was their Hope, but not long after, the
Courses flowing plentifully, they were freed both from Swelling of Breasts and
Belly.

Blood in the Arteries causes that beating Tumor called an Aneurism; Blood
getting out of the Arteries under the skin is the cause of the tumor called
Aneurism.
which they suppose to be from the dilatation of an Artery, as the other was
from the Vein. And it was formerly declared, that this only may be in the
inward Arteries, and that from an internal Aneurism, Pulsation of the Heart and
Arteries may proceed, when we spoke of that Disease. But since the Branches of
the Arteries do not spread themselves to the skin, nor are they fastened unto
it, as the branches of the Veins are, this Swelling cannot be like that of the
Veins, except by chance an Artery do so swell in some part near to the skin,
that it appear external and cause Pulsation. And if this be so, it must come
from the same Cause from which we told you in the Palpitation of the Heart, the
inrernal Aneurism did proceed.

But an Aneurism does not come only from the Dilation of the Artery, while it
continues sound and whole, but often, though not always, if it be external,
it comes from some manifest apertion of the same: For then the thin Blood which
comes out of the Artery, gets under the skin and makes it swell, and there
makes a Hollowness into which the Artery disburdens its self, as it is wont to
do in the Brain Naturally, so here preternaturally, by throwing forth the Blood
with the Spirits in its Diastole or Dilatation, and drawing it again in the
Systole or Contraction of it self, and this causes the Pulsation in this Tumor.

Now the opening of the Mouth of the Artery, is the Cause of this Bleeding,
when being dilated by the Causes mentioned, it does not only swell, but makes
way under the skin for the Blood to get forth, by opening the mouth through the
Distension.

Or if the Artery from the force of that spirital Blood be so compelled, that
it is stretched forth and opened; or be hurt by any external sorce, so that it
be broken externally, it may send blood under the skin: as we have declared.

But it is apparent that this happens not from an Artery broken, or by
stretching opened internal, but external; in that the Mouths of the Arteries
which end and shut up the same, have their termination in the extremities of
the Body, where the Arteries end: and if an Artery inwardly hurt or opened
should bleed, the Blood would fall into the Cavities of the Body, neither would
it produce a Tumor, such as many times is inward, also when the Artery is only
stretched.

Moreover that an external Aneurism comes often from the effusion of this
Arterial blood by the Causes aforesaid, under the skin, and not from the
dilatation only, it appears in that the Tumor is round rather than long, like
the Artery dilated, and not wrinkled or twisted like a Varix.

But it appears chiefly by an incision made in the skin swollen, that the blood
was lodged there, because it leaps out suddenly, and often in such abundance,
that, (as it has been observed) it could no ways be stopped, but the Patient
has bled to Death; and that this Aneurism came by the breaking of the Artery
appeared by the leaping, and in regard the Pulsation was such, and it had long
continued and was grown very big. We also saw a woman loose a great deal of
Blood with great Pulsation from the opening of a Vein, which could scarce be
stopped, although many Remedies were applied: having a beating Tumor after the
wound was healed, which declared it to be an Aneurism. And this came, either
because the Artery was cut by chance, in the fleshless bending of the Arm,
where the Tumor was, by reason of the blood ebbing and flowing under the skin,
after the wound was healed in the skin, and not in the Artery: Or because the
Mouth of the Artery was fresh dilated, before the incision was made, and that
caused that when the skin was cut there was a Flux, which caused a Tumor after
the cut was healed. Neither can an Aneurism not be from the Arterial blood,
when it is under the skin and corrupted, although this may be when blood is
sent from the Veins into the empty spaces: yet when Blood leaping from the
Artery thus opened, returns again, and the skin is instead of an Artery, it may
be without concretion, as when it is in the Artery. And because this cannot be
in the Veins, an Aneurism cannot be from venal Blood.

A watery, serous Humor, produces in diverse places both general and particular
Tumors, because it is contained in diverse parts of the body, as in the veins
which are dispersed all over, and Bowels into which they are sent, or in other
Vessels being separated from the blood: from which places, sometimes simple
Water, otherwhiles mixed with other Humors coming forth, produces diverse
kinds of Tumors; differing exceedingly, as they are in the cavity of the
Abdomen, or Belly, Codds, Groyns, or in the superficies of the Body, either in
the inferior parts only or al over: as shall be showed in particulars.

A serous Humor like Water, getting into the Cavity of the Belly, Water sent
into the Cavity of the Abdomen is the cause of the dropsy Ascites.
or Abdomen causes the Dropsy Ascites: and then the belly swells more or less
according to the quantity of the Water, and is sometimes so full that it grows
very large, in which by tapping we have seen taken from the Living, and found
sometimes in the Dead, threescore pound weight and above of water, when much had
formerly run out at the Feet; which water does not only burden with its weight,
but by pressing lying and hindering the free Motion of the Diaphragma or
Midriff, causes difficulty of breathing, of which they so complain, and
especially when the water goes more to the Midriff and oppresses it; hence it
is that they breath better when they are standing, for then the water goes
downwards. And if the same water weaken the Bowels, Liver, Spleen, Veins,
Stomach, and Guts, by making them too moist, or by its saltness or sharpness,
from mixture with other Humors, or by its Corruption through long continuance,
till it stink, make them too dry; the Mesentery Cawle and Reins will be dried
and drawn up, and the Fat clodded as we have seen. Or if this water corrode the
exulcerate in any part, or putrify the same, we have seen the Cawle yellow,
and stinking in many, as well as contracted, and the Midriff has been found
the same in and opening of Hydropical People; if this happen, or if any other
Bowels be hurt by this Water, it will produce worse Symptoms in the hurt
Functions of natural parts, as want of Appetite, Thirst, Cachexy, Atrophy and
Diarrhaea and the like, as by Corruption and Gangren of the Stomach, by the
water long contained therein, a Vomiting with Heat and vehement Inflammation of
the Oesophagus or Wezand, which I saw in an Hydropical Woman, which a liltle
before her Death, vomited often abundance of black, stinking Water, with great
Inflammation of the Throat.

The cause of this water in the capacity of the Belly, is from the parts of the
lower belly, which contains the Water, or from the Bowels that are ordained for
Sanguification, as the Liver, Spleen, Reins, or from the Veins which go through
those parts and the rest, or from the Bladder that holds the water; from which,
if they be divided or the continuity dissolved by Diapedesis, by which it is
strained, or Anastomasis by which the Mouths are open, this water falls: as
shall be showed in particulars.

Fernelius witnesses, that there is no Dropsy but it is caused by the
solution of the continuity, or Division, of the Parenchyma or substance of the
Liver. And this by Anatomy we have often known; And that chiefly when the
substance of the Liver is cleft and gapeth, from whence the water passing by it
from the Vessels of the hollow and gate Vein, and sweating under the Coats,
being there constrained, fills them with water, and makes them like bladders by
separating the Tunicles from the parts under them, which being broken, the
water runs into the Belly: we have often seen these Bladders very large and
clear, growing to the Liver and Spleen, in Men dead of the Dropsies, and in an
Ape, and Butchers find the same in Cattle. And when these coats are corroded,
the water falls directly into the belly. The great Dryness of the substance of
the Liver which makes it grow less, is the cause of these clifts in the Liver.
And this came rather by a hot then cold Distemper, as appears by the great
Thirst of Hydropical People, and the high Color of their Urin, and other signs
of heat rather then cold: and in regard they have it that time most deliciously
with spiced meats, and drink the strongest wine, and so continue, being young,
or aged, at which time they fall into a Dropsy, by reason of the Dryness of
their bowels, and they jestingly complain that they are troubled with water,
though they never drank it in their lives. And this we have observed to have
been the chief cause of dropsies in our Country, and we perceive that a
perpetual thirst in Drunkards, which they long have had from the hot Distemper
of their bowels, which makes them ever drinking, is a most sure forerunner of
a Dropsy, if another Disease does not prevent it by Death.

This also may come by heating of the Bowels immoderately with hot Medicines
with which Women labor to warm the Stomach and Womb: or when they have other
cold Diseases.

These bowels may also be dried and cleft by hot, sharp and constant Diseases,
as Fevers, and Jaundies, and therefore the Dropsy which shows rather the
signs of heat then cold, follows these Diseases.

From a hard Tumor of these Bowels either all over them or in any part in the
concave or unequal part of the Liver, or in the Spleen, may these Clefts come,
from a Scirrhus of the Liver or Spleen, or any other Tumor which will turn to
an Imposthume; Or there may be such openings by which the water may fall into
the Abdomen, because from this Hardness the Tunicle quickly cleaves; and if it
imposthume and ulcerate, then there is way made for the water: as shall be said
in Ulcers. Which is the cause why that Hardness, or Scirrhus or hard Tumor that
turns to an Imposthume in the Liver or Spleen brings a Dropsy, because if
there be Hardness without fissures or clifts, that would rather cause the
Jaundies, Cachexy, or Atrophy by stoppage, then a Dropsy, which follows the
hurting or clefts of the Bowels, which comes from those stoppages: and hence it
is that other obstructions of the bowels, when they do not divide the substance
of them externally are not alone, the cause of the Dropsy Ascites, as they are
of the Diseases mentioned, and sometimes of the Anasarca Dropsy: as we said.

The cause of this Hardness or Scirrhus, is the Dryness of the bowels which
cleaves them, if it be so active that it dry them hard, and this dependes upon
hot meats, drinks, Medicines and Diseases. Or that which is the cause of these
Tumors, as of a Scirrhus, or that hard tumor which imposthumateth, outwardly in
the fleshy parts of the body, may also be the causes of these in the Bowels. As
the too thick juice with which the bowels are nourished, which comes from the
Chylus and Blood from whence it is made or from the mixture of some other
juice, which belongs to another part; and that which turns into an Imposthume
has Diversity of matter in it, as has been often found. Nor can the substance
of the Bowels, but the Vessels only be so hardened from choler and phlegm: as
we showed in Obstructions. But an Inflammation of these parts, if it cause a
Scirrhus, does harden them rather by thickning the Juice that nourishes them,
then any other ways: as we showed in an external Scirrhus.

When the substance of these bowels is hurt about the superficies, the water
may be sent into the belly; as in an Hydropick Maid, we saw the Liver on the
one side with a sungous Tumor growing thereunto, in which there was somewhat
congealed, from which a serous Humor might distill. Especially if the Liver and
Spleen be ulcerated, so that the Ulcer pierce to the Superficies, the water
which sweateth out, as in other Ulcers which are always moist, may cause a
Dropsy. Which Ulcers coming after Inflammations suppurated, or Tumors
aforesaid ending in Imposthumes, and sending forth Matter, do cause a Dropsy
at length. Other Hurts do follow such as come from external Injuries by
contusion; And we knew two men thrown from a Horse upon their right side,
having first some Symptoms of a hurt Liver, who died of Dropsies. The same may
be come by an external Wound reaching to the bowels, except Death prevent it,
by leaving an Ulcer. Also corruption of the bowels totally or in part, as we
have often seen, is the cause of a Dropsy, which follows Tumors or corrosions,
or ulcerations, or other hurts of the bowels, from the causes aforesaid. Also
if the Tunicle of these bowels be corroded by water putrefying in the belly, or
the substance of them hurt, there will be an increase of water in the belly
from the Serum, or Whey, which comes from thence. We have also observed that
when the Tumcles of the Liver and Spleen, and the Peritonaeum or filme of the
belly, where they lie have been corroded by this water, they have so grown
together, that we could neither separate Liver nor Spleen from the Diaphragma
to which they grew, with tearing of the Tunicles, from whence the Serum or
water might flow into the cavity.

In the Body of the Reins which consists of a bloody substance like the rest,
if continuity be dissolved as is said, the same may be, and the Dropsy Ascites
may come from thence, and we affirm this by Reason and Experience. For seeing
Whey or Serum is carried to them continually not only with the Blood by the
emulgent Vessels, but is also continually by them there laid up, if the
substanee of the Reins be open or divided, the water which drayneth from them
as from other parts, and making Bladders, or presently piercing, may sooner
flow and in more plenty from thence, then from other Bowels into the belly, and
may make a Dropsy Ascites which may last long, because the hurt of the Kidneys
especially if but of one does not presently kill a man, but cause a long
Disease, and when one is gone, as we said, the other may serve a long time. In
which case, besides other Accidents which come from the collection of water in
the Belly, we find sometimes some matter if there be an Ulcer, and they piss
less, especially if both Kidneys be hurt, because much of the Urine is carried
continually into the belly, and comes not to the bladder as it ought. The
Causes of these hurts in the Kidneys may be the same with those of the other
Bowels, as over Dryness of the same, as may be, which also may cause the stone,
as we showed, and this may be not only by age, hot Diseases, but by hot Urins
through the use of hot Meats, and especially Wines.

Moreover Ulcers in the Reins internal and external being more or fewer, may
cause the Dropsy which springs from the defect in the Reins: as also the
corruption of the Kidneys when they are so consumed that they hang as we have
seen like a Purse. Also other hurts internally and externally caused: as
contusions and wounds.

Moreover we are more bold to affirm this, not only from what has been said,
but because we have often seen it; for when a certain Noble Man that had the
Dropsy ascites seven months, was opened after Death, and we had searched all
the Bowels of the lower belly very deligently, and had found no other fault,
but that the water long contained in the Belly, had by stinking brought to the
Peritonaeum, Midriff, and Cawle; we found that both Kidneys were deeply
fistulated, with many Ulcers, so large that we could turn a finger therein,
with Bladders full of water upon them, which fell down when they brake, and the
external coat of the Kidneys was eaten every where through. We gathered that
this came from great drinking, because from his Youth he used it, and was very
stout at it, and seldom made water. To which did much conduce, his use of
spiced and hot Meats continually, which do dry and burn the Kidneys as other
Bowels, especially since they were corroded by Retention of Urine.

From the branches of the Veins of the inferior Belly, especially from the Vena
Porta, which come from the Guts and the Stomach by the Membranes of the
Mesentery and Cawle, and gathered into two stocks, and fastened by the right to
the Liver, and the left to the Spleen, by a Diapedesis, when the Coats are made
thin. or by Anastomasis, when the Mouths are open, especially of the Veins
which are dispersed from the great stocks into the Omentum or Mesentery and
there ending, being laid open: if water flow plentifully and more then serves
from the Natural moistning of the parts least they wither, and be gathered in
the belly; The Dropsy Ascites may also be produced. And that this may be, and
that the water may flow from the Veins mentioned by the blind Pores and Mouths
without solution of continuity, and that without mixture of Blood, or Tincture
thereof, appear thus, because as into other parts it breaks forth suddenly and
in great plenty, both internally by diverse Defluctions, as also externally by
Sweats, Tears, Snot and by the Womb fluxes; so also in the Meseraiks, there may
not only be some Natural breathing of Moisture into the Belly, as we may
perceive a constant Moisture, but it may preternaturally fill the Belly, and
the easier, because in those Veins the Whey which is made of Meat and drink,
and continually brought with the Chylus, does more abound then in other parts.
And as in ordinary Fluxes called Diaerrhaea; or in such as are caused by
purging: This water or whey, returns back without Blood by the Mouths of those
Veins by which it entered, even so by the internal Mouths by which the branches
are closed about the ends, being laid open it may flow into the Belly without
any Tincture of Blood.

By the same reason does the Serum or Whey separated by the Kidneys from the
Blood flow into the Bladder, from all which we gather that the Dropsy Ascites
may come though others think it impossible. Also in opening of men that died of
Dropsies, when we have seen no manifest solution of Continuity, but abundance
of water in the belly and Veins, conjecturing that it came that way into the
Belly, we were bolder to affirm it, because in a Hydrocelae or watery Rupture,
the water may from the same Cause flow into the belly, and thence into the Cod,
as we showed

The Cause of this Anastomosis and Diapedesis or opening of the Vessels in the
Meseraick Veins, is too much Serum or Whey therein, which opens them by
stretching; or tenuity or thin waterishness which easily pierces, For then, it
being in the Meseraick Vessels, except it go back by the same ways by which it
entered into the Guts, and so be purged forth by stool, it breaks through these
Vessels and falls into the Abdomen or Belly. This abundance of water is the
cause, when its passage from the Meseraicks by the Liver into the hollow Vein
is hindered. This happens especially when the attractive Faculty of the Liver
is weakened, so that it cannot attract the Serum, and send it to the hollow
Vein, which is mixed with the Chylus, and is also a Portion of the blood, and
sometimes separated from it, for Reasons mentioned in the Cachexy, which comes
from the weakness of the Liver. They have also conceived that the passage may
also be hindered by the Obstruction of the Liver with a Humor, or Hardness or
Scirrhus; which if so great as that it stop the Serum from coming to it, the
blood shall be hindered also, and then there would be an Atrophy sooner then a
Dropfie; but without that, the same may happen, if the Serum which is in the
hollow Vein, and cannot get its Natural Passage by Urine, is so much in
quantity, that it being not able to subsist there, it is sent by Nature by its
branches into the Liver, and the branches of the Gate-vein: Or fly otherwise
back and so be gathered together.

The cause of this may be the weakness of the attractive Faculty of the
Kidneys: Or an Obstruction so great, especially in both Ureters, that the Serum
cannot get into the Bladder. The cause of which we have declared in other
Symptoms of Pissing.

It has been thought that the same may come from stoppage of wonted Sweat, but
this cannot alone be the cause, or without another, because at that time the
serum may be evacuated by Urine. Also the superfluous Generation of Serum: the
cause whereof we shall show in the Causes of Leucophlegmacy, if it be joined
with the rest, will sooner produce a Dropsy, and being then a greater quantity
of water, it will sooner pass the ways showed into the Abdomen. And as this
comes from Moisture taken in, so the Dropsy Ascites comes by continual
Drinking, not only through the hurt of the Bowels caused by much Drink, but
because there is plenty of water thereby, in those usually who piss not
according to the proportion of the Drink received, but the Serum abounds in the
Veins, by which they are heavy, and they complain of Heavyness and Extension of
the, belly before they have a Dropsy.

It may be declared by probable Arguments, and certain Demonstrations, that the
water falling into the Belly may Cause a Dropsy, by the dividing of the
Meseraick Veins which contain the Omentum and Mesentery. For sometimes by an
external chance, when any Vein is by violence broken, many have had a Dropsy.
For first Blood and Water have flowed from thence into the Belly, and when the
Wound has been turned into an Ulcer, or to corruption of the Bowels, which
have been found after Death; a Dropsy has followed by the continual
Distillation of water from thence; and commonly bloody stools and vomits have
gone before, afterward mattery and filthy. Which Ulceration or Corruption, by
which the Serum falls down, may come by a Corrosion in the Omentum or
Mesentery, where the Veins are: when sharp and malignant Humors, retained in
these Veins, which use to be full of Excrements, eats them through, and so may
cause a Dropsy: As also if this corruption in the Membranes and Vessels, come
from the long retension of stinking water, as we showed, we perceive in all
Dissections of Dropsies, that the Omentum and Mesentery are by this means
infected; which being so, though it be not the chief cause of the gathering of
the water, seeing it came from other parts: yet because it then distilleth from
thence, it causes the water to increase, and the more when other Bowels are so
infected with this water, that they are also broken.

It is credible that water may fall into the Belly and cause a Dropsy, from
other veins that press inward, as the Vena cava or hollow Vein, and its
branches dispersed to the Reins, the Womb, and other parts, as Muscles, and
Membranes, by Anastomosis or Diapedesis, which are when they are opened; and
especially in a Cachexy or the like, wherein there is much water, and more
especially in women, who used to have Evacuation of this water, by their
courses or after them by the whites, which being stopped causes the water to
find out another way out of the veins. In these Veins it cannot so easily come
by solution of continuity, because if it be in the greater Veins, there will be
a bloody Flux which will prevent a Dropsy by Death, and the lesser veins lying
deep, are not so subject to Jnjuries as those called Meseraicks, which are in
the Omentum.

We have found in the Anatomy of Hydropical Persons much water in the
Navel-vein, where it is joined to the liver and Peritonaeum being dilated,
which in People of age resembles rather a Ligament, then an hollow Vessel.

Sometimes we have found it not only there retained, but carried to the Navel by
the vessel that ends there, and gathered under the skin, and to produce a
tumor like a bladder of water, and from thence to flow into the Belly, and to
break out of the Body so plentifully that the whole belly was emptied.

We saw one that had his Belly swollen before he died, from the breaking of his
Bladder, and his urin dispersed into his belly; in regard another had leaped
upon his belly, when he lay upon the ground drunk, which brake his bladder
being stretched out with Drink. And it is probable that the same may happen
from the breaking, or otherwise opening of the Ureters when the water flows
out, and that a Dropsy may come from thence, because they may live long after.
This I have observed in a Child, which new born, lying in his Cradle, after a
long suppression of Urine, voided a little stone and much Urine therewith, and
growing older, died miserably of a Dropsy with shortness of breathing, having
first had great pain in his right Groyne, when his Urine was stopped for a
time, till his Ureters broke which caused the Dropsy.

If water fall into the cavity of the Cod it will either cause that Tumor which
is in the Dropsy Ascites with Swelling of the Belly, Water fallen into the
Codds is the cause of Hydrocele, or water Rupture.
or the Hydrocele, which is without a Dropsy. And this tumor being waterish
comes from no other part, then the belly in both cases, into which it first
fell, and from thence fell into the Codds. And that two ways, the one by
Aanastomosis or Diapedesis, which is when the water goes under the skin from
the belly into the Codds: as in the Dropsy Ascites, where it falls the same
way, into the Feet also. The other way is by the Peritonaeum, which brings the
seminary Vessels to the Codds, if it be so enlarged that the water gathered in
the Belly, may fall by it into the Codds, for albeit the relaxation be not so
large, as that is by which the Guts fall into the codds, yet if it be small,
the water may distill by drops. And this relaxation may come from the water only
which moistneth that part of the Belly, where these passages are, without other
force, but if such be, there is a greater Dilatation and Rupture, the way being
enlarged; and the Codds are sooner filled: as we showed in the Dropsie-rupture.
But if Moistness be the cause, only it will come with much water, as in the
Dropsy: but in the watery Rupture, it will come slower, because there is but
little water, and falls by degrees into the belly, and so into the codds.

And we have showed that not only solution of continuity in the Bowels and
Vessels, but also Anastomosis and Diapedesis of the Meseraick Veins, may be the
cause of gathering water into the belly in a Dropsy. And this seems to prove
that in a Hydrocele, the water does sweat through or drop from the Mouths of
the Vessels, because that in this case, they have no other Disease but Swelling
of the Codds, and it is long a growing, and the water is by Degrees carried
through the Tunicles of the Veins or Mouths thereof. And we have showed that
this may come from the same Causes, from which the Dropsy sometimes proceeds,
but less, and such as bring less Damage, in regard the water Naturally sweating
forth, and bedewing the inward parts of the Belly, although it abound not much;
yet may it without a preternatural Cause be gathered into the Codds, the ways
being laid open by Moisture, or the like causes, and so the relaxation of the
Passages may be the only cause of Hydrocele, or Water-rupture.

When a serous Humor falls into the Groynes of women, When the water gets into
the Groins, it causes those watery Tumors in Women.
it makes a Tumor like the water Rupture. And that by reason of the looseness of
a Passage by which a certain Vessel coming from the womb is carried without
the Peritonaeum into the Privities, not unlike that of men which serve the
seminary Vessels. Which relaxation may come from the same causes with
Hydrocele, by reason of its moistning the parts, and becauseit was first in the
Belly. Among which Causes strong throws in Child-beaing, or Ruptures in this
part, may occasion the Dilatation, and the Tumor following thereupon.

Sometimes in Dropsies the Humor which is gathered in the Belly, In the Dropsy
Ascites there is a Collection of water in the Cavity of the breast.
is carried to the cavity of the Breast, which is perceived after Death upon
Dissection, though before it appeared by no tumor, except as we said in an
Empyema or matter in the side, there be so much of it gathered together, that
it cause a Swelling in the spaces between the Ribbs. Besides, we may gather
from shortness and difficulty of breathing, which then troubles Hydropical
Persons more, though they stand upon their Feet, that there is water in the
Breast; because as when it is in the Belly, by washing the Midriff below, so
when in the breast by oppressing it above, it causes weight, and hindering its
motion two ways, causes difficulty of breathing, and the rather because it
somewhat hinders the motion of the Lungs. But how it is carried from the belly
to the breast, we cannot find another way then by the Midriff, because that
separates the parts, and by which as by the Peritonaeum or inward Rimme, and
the Muscles thereto adhaering, we have showed, that it may sweat into the
Belly, or be carried by the Mouths of the Vessels, so also may it here pass
through the Midriff; except some corrosion, as we shall show may be by water
long retained, or other perforation, do make it way. For which Reason, if water
coming not from the belly in a Dropsy, but another part into the breast, as
in other Discases, passing through the Midriff fall into the lower belly: it
may cause a Tumor there, or if it go farther, a Tumor in the Feet. And this we
suppose to be the cause why short breathed or Asthmatical People are
Hydropical, except the Causes of both Diseases do meet: and at length though
not presently, the Feet in the Diseases of the Breast will swell, except the
water find another way under the Skin from the Breast downwards.

Water getting into the hollow of the womb, A Flux of water by the womb in the
Dropsy Ascites.
and enlarging it causes the belly to swell, and this is called the
Womb-Dropsie. But we showed in the Diseases of the womb, that the capacity of
it was not so large to hold so much water, nor can it be so dilated except
there be a Child growing therein, yet it may happen, that water gathered in the
Belly may be voided externally by the womb, either all or it in part which may
cause the asswaging of the Tumor, which caused men to think that was gathered
in the womb. But when this is so, it is poured forth by the Veins which are in
the Neck of the womb, which sends forth the Menstrual Blood or Whites, by an
Anastomosis when Nature labors to disburden her self by this way which is
ordained for the same; so that there is no need to determine that the water was
in the bottom of the Womb, which caused the Belly to swell. It may also
sometimes happen, that before the Belly is full of water, it may find out a
Passage by the Veins of the Neck of the womb, in a Cachexy, or evil Habit, or
the Leucophlegmacy, and so prevent a Dropsy: as long since I observed in a
Woman of an evil Habit of Body, which is yet alive, which often has her Terms
abundantly, and when they cease, she avoideth abundance of water by the Neck of
the womb.

When water is carried downwards in the Dropsy Ascites it causes a tumor in
the Feet with that of the Belly, because the humor being thin still goes
downwards, and when it is fixed in the lowest parts, it causes first an
appearance, and when the Flux continues and fills the Feet, it tends
upwards by the Legs and Thighs to the Loins and Belly, and there it being under
the skin, is more manifest in which places it does not only list up but
softens the skin, so that if you press with your Finger, it will pit and
continue so sometime. And when this watery Humor, gathered under the skin
moves, it happens that if the Legs are downwards as commonly, they grow bigger
by water coming thither, and the Belly somewhat less, and if by lying down or
other ways they are lifted up, the water coming back swells the Belly, and
the Legs are less.

This watery Humor in the Dropsy Ascites sweating into the Feet, Legs, Belly
and Loins, from the branches of the hollow Vein, or flowing by Anastomosis, is
referred to that kind of Dropsy which comes from plenty of water in the Veins,
because the water does not only flow from the branches of the hollow vein into
the belly, but also outwardly as in a Leucophlegmacy, and we shall show that
the Legs swell by that way. In all other Causes of the Dropsy Ascites which
depend upon the Diseases of things contained in the Guts, and of the Meseraick
Veins, it seems to be evident that the water is carried to the outward parts,
and so to the Feet, from the cavity of the belly, into which it first came, not
only in regard that when the water falls downward into the Legs, the tumor of
the belly abateth; but because the breathing is freer, and when the water comes
back, these return. And this certainly confirms it, because when the scarce
skin either breaks or is opened in the Legs that are swollen, the Tumor of the
belly is abated by the water that drops out by degrees; or if it flow violently
or long, it quite goes away; and many measures of water flow this way forth,
which could not be contained any where but in the belly, because the Feet while
they do swel, and when they are abated, send forth much water, which could not
come but from the belly. And it is to be prooved, in that when water gets into
the belly from the hurt of the Bowels, which we said was the usual Cause of a
Dropsy, and when there is no Fountain of water but from thence, the Feet will
swell before you shall perceive a Tumor in the belly, this shows that it came
from the belly, because it was no where else.

But as these are plain, so how this serous Matter can fall without the cavity
of the Peritonoeum, (in regard there is no apparent Passage through the
Membrane) it is not manifest. Wherefore we gather that this is done by a
Diapedesis, and that the Serum or Whey does sweat through the Membrane under
the skin which is distended by Swelling, and moistened with Humors; and falls by
degrees (between it, and the parts beneath, unto which it is joined) downwards,
as in other Defluxions. And we conceive that it may return the same way upward,
because in other parts it does so, that is, pierced through the Membranes, and
pass through the Veins. Or that it comes by an Anastomosis in the mouths of the
Veins dispersed into the skin from the Peritonaeum, when the Whey gets in, and
flows that way into the parts beneath, and returns again by the same. Or
because some part of the Peritonaeum is so corroded by a sharp and stinking
water, that water may pass through it under the skin. As by Anatomies we have
seen, that the Membrane has not been eaten through in one, but diverse places;
and sometimes in that place where it encompasseth the Midriff, upon which the
Liver and Spleen do lie. And if the Tunicles of those vessels be also
eatenthrough, the parts touching will grow together: as we have showed formerly.

But in the case of him that had a Dropsy with a Rupture, whose Guts with
water had filled the Codds, and were grown to the Peritonaeum, as we showed;
this growing together came from the corroding of the water, by which the
Tunicle of the Gut and its Membrane were eaten through. And this, as other
Glutinations proves, that parts cannot grow together except their Tunicles or
Skins be taken off: as we see in Fistulaes. Moreover; since we have observed in
men alive, that this water in the Navel which came from the cavity of the
belly, not by the Navel-vein which is rooted in the Liver, and if opened would
send water from the Liver, and not from the belly and in less quantity: but by
the Peritonaeum to the Superficies of the skin; which it raised into a bladder
being gathered under the scarf skin, which being cut, all the matter in the
whole belly flowed forcibly forth: Hence we conjecture, that nature can find out
diverse Passages for the water to pass under the skin, through the Peritonaeum.
Perhaps by Bladders inwardly growing as outwardly, or by solution of continuity
some other way: and if after Death there were more Anatomies made of such as
dyed of Dropsies, there would be many such things discovered which are yet
unknown.

When a watery Humor gets into the Habit of the whole body, When water gets
into the whole body, it is the cause of Leucophlegmacy.
it causes that General Swelling which is in Leucophlegmacy; which comes not
only from crude Nourishment, as we showed, but of a serous Humor, less or
equal, or more in quantity; in which not only the substance of the parts is too
much increased, but being watered with the Serum it is made softer, takes
Impression sooner, and longer retains it. And these appear most in the Feet
(because water being thin always goes downward) and they are very like then to
the Legs of Hydropical Persons. And this may be called the water between the
skin, or Aqua intercutis.

Now this serous Humor comes not in this mentioned Leucophlegmacy from the
capacity of the Belly, but from the Veins distributed into the Habit of the
body, by which it passes with crude blood to the nourishing of the Parts, and
as the blood nourishes them with crude Juice, so this waters them. And the
Cause of the mixture of this serous Humor with the crude, is the abundance of
it in the Veins. When there are Causes which produce these serous Humors joined
with the weakness of the Bowels that do sanguifie or make blood, so that they
cannot sufficiently complete it, as we showed in the Leucophlegmacy. Among
which this was chief, the immoderate increase thereof, which most say is in the
Liver, and is Naturally produced at the second Concoction, so that if the Liver
be weakened or cooled, because it cannot make the Chylus into Blood, they say,
it turns it into Whey. But these Arguments may prove that Whey and Serum is
not made in the Liver, but in the first Concoction, and it takes its form
presently from thence, because being partly made in the Stomach with the Chyle,
of the best Juice, some part thereof is thinner as Whey in Milk, and is of the
same use with the Chylus, of which it is a part, and coming partly from the
Humors abounding through eating and drinking and made thinner, it has the form
of Whey, and being sent into the Guts with other Excrements, it is carried from
the Mescraick Veins into the hollow Vein with the Chylus, and without it, as we
see some who piss out Drink too much taken, presently, being suddenly snatched
to the Liver.

Hence it is that we must attribute the abundance of Serum to too much
drinking, and use of moist things, which administer matter unto it, rather then
to the fault of the Liver: except we will (as some do) call that crude Juice
which is made by defect in the Liver, a serous Humor, or because the separation
of the Whey imperfect at the making of the Blood, cannot be handsome, but there
is more Whey in the Blood then is needful, and is not separated as in other
places, makes it more watery, for this cause we may pronounce that the Serum or
Whey is not only made by the Liver, but also gathered into the Veins more
plentifully: And so to determine the Leucophlegmacy comes from the weakness of
the Liver. And this is chiefly, when there is not a sufficient Evacuation by
Urin, the attractive Faculty of the Kidneys being weakened, or when usual
sweating is stopped, which may be the only Cause, without the Distemper of the
Liver of water in the Veins. And this is sooner when the Diet is such as breeds
water; These causes meeting, make a Leucophlegmacy in which the whey or water
called Serum, is more then the crude Juice, or such as comes from only Serum,
when the Imbecility of the Liver is absent. As we have seen some who have
swollen only by drinking a great Draught without fetching breath, when they
were very hot, by reason of the Heat which carried the Humor suddenly into the
Veins, and thence into the Habit of the Body, and the same has been when a
body hot and sweating was exposed to the Air, through the strikeing in of the
water. And it sometimes happens that the water being carried from the Meseraick
Veins into the Belly (from the Causes aforesaid,) and so into the Habit of the
Body, that the Dropsy Ascites is produced with that called Anasarca, and so
they both are united.

Water falling into some parts and there gathered, Water in the Feet may cause
a swelling without a Dropsy.
causes Swellings, as when it is in the Feet: of which we spoke without the
Dropsy Ascites, it causes a Tumor like that of a Dropsy being soft, such as
we described formerly. And this is when together with the crude Nourishment
which causes Oaedematous Tumors, it falls from the inferior parts into the
Feet. Or when in Diseases of the Feet, as the Erysipelas Oedematous or the
like, these Excrements are carried with other Humors into the Feet, and cause
these Diseases, and when the other are discussed, the Tumor remains. Or when
by a Defluxion into the Eyes, there is an Epiphora, or Moistness and weeping,
which makes the Eye-lidds swel which was spoken of in the Eyes. Or when in the
Declination of other acute Diseases, Nature disburdning the remainder of the
Excrements with the water into the lower parts, the Feet do swell; and the
sooner, because having long kept the bed and their Feet up, when they begin to
walk, the Humors flow downward. This tumor of the Feet, in men that are in
Health, is counted a good sign because the relics are so carried away. And
because such thin Humors are quickly discussed, it continues not long, unless
it be such as showed it self at first in the Feet, which a Dropsy followed,
this deceives many, and it may be discovered by other accidents which
accompany a Dropsy.

We have formerly showed that there has been a Tumor in the skin, Water in the
Legs, the cause of particular tumors there.
upon the Longitude thereof only from a serous humor, and because it came
suddenly it was a sign that it twould go suddenly away, though it pitted with
strong Impression.

And this was sent by Nature, by reason of the plenty of it, as appeared by the
Parties continual Sweating, and by reason of the thinness, and sharpness, which
caused Itching. And there was also a Looseness of the Feet and a contraction.

If water be sent under the skin into any outward part, Water gathered under
the skin of the Head, the cause of Hydrocele
if it separate the skin from the part, and fill the space between it, causes
a Tumor, as under thick skins of the Head in the Tumor called Hydrocelephale,
coming from plenty of water there breeding, and gathered together.

And when water is under the skin of the Navel, Water in the Navel is the cause
of Hydronphalon.
the Tumor called Hydromphalon is raised being carried thither by the
Navel-vein enlarged, or by reason of the plenty thereof, or from other causes,
while the Passage is not dried: as we showed in a Dropsy may be.

When water is in the Eyebrows there is a swelling, Water in the Eyebrows,
Cause of their Swelling.
and the sooner with tears and rubbing, because they will often Itch. Sometimes
there is a sudden Defluxion of Blood into the Eye with water, with Swelling and
Redness, as if there had been a stroke (coming and going) about the ball of
the Eye. These have I seen, in two Children of evil Habit of Body, having pain
in the Limbs, and the running Gout.

Also when water is under the scarf Skin, Water under the skin of the Eye, the
Cause of Phlyctana.
if it be separated from the parts beneath, and the Mouths of the Veins that
end there, and stop them, causes the Bladder called Phlyctaena. And this will
be so in other parts. The cause is the abundance of whey brought thither, and
hindered from passing through the Pores by Sweat, and therefore it gets
under the skin and lifts it up. And if this be salt or sharp, provoking
Nature, and in diverse parts. It causes those watery Pustles in the Itch,
called Hydroae. Also another external force may cause the same, when the scarf
skin is raised; as also by rubbing or burning, as we showed.

Wind begets some of the Tumors aforesaid, differing according to their parts,
as in the Belly, Codds, Stomach, and Guts or the like.

Wind gathered and kept in the cavity of the Belly, Wind coming from other
parts into the hollow of the Belly, or bred there, is the cause of the simple
Tympany, or if with water, of the Ascites.
is the chief Cause of the Dropsy called Tympany; and it is seldom without
water: And it must be in the cavity of the belly and stretch it forth very
large, and we may know there is wind by the sound thereof when it is beaten.
And sometimes there is a pricking pain by reason of the Distension of the
Membranes. These winds getting into the belly, because no parts beneath in
which it may be retained, so plentifully must needs come from the Stomach and
the Guts. But the doubt is which way, for it seems impossible that they should
come through the blind Passages of the Stomach and Guts' because they are
easily held in with the smallest Membrane, and a thin Humor will with more ease
sweat out then wind break forth. And it is plain that they come not from
solution of Continuity in the bowels, because then the Chyle of other
Excrements would also come forth. Therefore it is probable, that if wind be
carried from the Stomach and Guts into the Belly, it first gets into the little
mouths of the Meseraick Veins, and from them, as we showed the water does, into
the cavity of the Belly. And this appears, in that the water may come the same
way, which is commonly mixed with the wind, except, as some say, the wind
passing by the inward Tunicle of the Guts into the outward and piercing through
the mesentery, where it is joined unto them get in, and being contained between
two Tunicles, at length gets through them into the Belly; and whether it come
this way or that, it is rare, as also the Tympany, and not but from abundance
of wind, by which the Guts are so distended, that they are so thin, that wind
may pass through. And this cannot be except it be so enclosed in the Guts, that
it can find no other way upward or downward.

This abundance of wind is continually made in the Guts and Stomach, from great
weakness therein, turning that by its weak Heat into wind, which should have
been concocted; from whence also may come the Dropsy called the Tympany, from
wind and water, if the Liver be weakened also, and water be mixed. Now the great
Obstruction and gathering together of the Guts, causes that it cannot go forth
downwards, by its Natural Passage, and therefore the pain of the Colic comes
first with the binding of the Belly: as we showed in those Diseases, and from
what Causes they came. And if they continue, and the wind be carried into the
Belly as we said, the Belly will begin to swell, and the pain of the Cholick
remains as at first, with the binding or costiveness of the Body, till by
continual dilatation or Enlargement, a way is made, that the wind which was in
the Guts, may have a free Passage, and cause no more pain, and if this wind
break away, yet that which is without the Guts does not, but the belly is
swollen, and the pain of the Cholick is turned to a Tympany. If dropsy Bodies
were often anatomized, it would be found out, that wind in a Tympany does
sometimes get into the space or vacuity of the Belly, by reason of some
manifest Solution of continuity in the Stomach or Guts, which were before
stretched exceedingly thereby, or by some other ways; and this may hence be
collected, because it is the worst of all Dropsies, therefore the hurt ought to
be great, and if it were so in an Ascites, it would be incurable, And if the
Solution of continuity be so great, that the Chyle and the Excrements also get
into the belly, it will sooner kill; but if only water and wind, without thick
Matter (as it may be) the life will be prolonged.

Besides this Cause of the Tympany which comes from the wind of the Guts,
getting into the belly: there is another, which comes from wind bred in the
cavity of the belly. And this is when the watery Humor with which the belly is
always moistened, sweateth too plentifully from the Meseraick Veins, or comes
too fast from the Mouths of them, and turns into wind, which retained for want
of passage, causes a Tympany. And if the whole Humor turn into wind, which is
seldom, it will be a simple Tympany, but if mixed with water a Compound, which
is most usual. In which kinds, if water abound not over much, and falls not
into the Feet or other parts from the cavity of the Belly, nor causes Swelling
any where else, neither can it be discovered in the belly. But if there be so
much by the continual Increase thereof, that the Tumor of the Belly not only
extends it, but causes a Noise of Water falling into one side, when the
Patient turns, and the water falls into the Feet, there is an Ascites with the
Tympany. Now the Cause of this wind turning into water, (in regard we have
showed in Ascites the cause that brings it into the belly) may be the Heat of
the inward Bowels, which makes the water turn into a Vapor or thick Wind: as
it may do in in any part of the body, where there is space and Humidity.

As we have showed, that in the Ascites, when water is carried from the cavity
of the belly into the Codds, it makes the Tumor called Hydrocele or
Water-rupture: so when wind comes from the same part into the Codd, and puffs
it up, it causes the Pneumatocele or windy Rupture, Which we never saw in a
Tympany, and it is seldom alone, and when it is, there is commoly water with
it. But by wind brought thither that Swelling in the Codds which comes with the
pains of the Cholick and vanishes presently, may be produced, Nevertheless,
the cause of both is the dilating of the Passages of the Peritonaeum, and it is
less when wind only with a little Moisture, gets by degrees into the Codds.
This Dilatation or stretching in P^eumatocele or Wind-rupture, may come from
diverse Causes mentioned in Hernia, especially in young, tender Bodies, which
are subject to these as well as other ruptures by crying; and the easier if
there be wind in the belly, as it uses to be, without a Dropsy, in those that
are sound, otherwise being made of water turned into wind, as in all vacuities
of the body it may be, and we showed a Tympany comes the same way; and though
the wind be not much, and disperseth it self, yet if there be a Passage to the
Scrotum open, it will get thither: For which reason, this puffed Swelling in
the Codd which stays long, comes from the straining, which dilates the Passage
by wind that breaks through, by which Passage after the force is over, the wind
comes back into the belly and the Codd cease to swell, neither does it return
without a new force be raised.

Winds detained in the Guts and belly which are not gotten into the cavity, do
not only produce the Cholick, Wind kept in the Guts and stomach is the cause of
the Tympany of the Gut^.
but if they be so enclosed, that for want of Passage they swell the belly,
they may produce a kind of Tympany, more easily then when the wind breaks into
the belly, as we have found in those whom we took to have the Tympany, and had
no wind in the cavity of the belly, after they were dead, nor did the belly
assuage. But the Guts, especially the thin, were so stretched with wind, that
when they were forth, we could not get them in again, and we wondered how they
could be contained in the belly, before it was opened. And in one, we found
them made so thin by stretching, that they were not only shining and clear like
a blown bladder, but when they were broken, they sent the Excrements violently
forth with the wind. And the Cause of this Tympany, is the same with the other,
that is wind and gathering of the guts or great Obstruction: as we showed, and
hence it is that in this kind of Tympany, they neither break wind, nor go to
stool for a long time.

When wind is gathered in the Stomach, it makes it swell visibly, Wind
contained in the stomach, is the cause of the swelling of the stomach, wind in
the Guts, is cause of the Cholick and Tumor thereof.
and this is the Inflation of the stomach mentioned, whose cause we showed in
the Diseases in the Stomach; and when wind lying in the turning of the Guts,
causes little Tumors in those parts: we have showed the Cause thereof in the
Cholick.

When wind gets into other parts and spaces of the body, Wind under all the
Skin, is the cause of a general Tumor.
either alone or with water, it causes Tumors. As when it is every where under
the skin, it causes the general Swelling of the body, which comes suddenly and
lifts the skin from the body,; as they who make a hole through the skin, and
blow therein that they may the more easily take the Feathers off from the
Quils. And though this Swelling comes seldom, and it is difficult to be, yet
sometimes Nature, either by the abundance of wind dispersed in the body,
especially if there be water joined therewi^^, being offended, violently throws
it to the extreme parts under the skin. And this may be when Nature stirred up
by Poison taken in or by the sting of a venomous beast, or by poisonous Humors
labors to expel the same.

Also this general Tumor of the whole body with difficulty of breathing, coming
from the stretchingof the Muscles between the Ribbs or the like, may be as I
have showed, by the suppression of Sweat, which comes by violent exercise,
through the Coldness and Moistness of the Air: and this after purging, is
easier cured with sweating.

Also in certain parts there are peculiar Tumors from wind under the skin,
VVind creeping under certain places of the skin, is the cause of the Tumors
called Physodes, and windy Oedema.
and if they be simple they are called Physodes, and windy blisters: but if the
wind be joined with a crude and serous Humor, they are called Oedemata or windy
Tumors: which as they may come of their own accord from an internal Cause in
diverse parts of the body, so may they come from without, as when the Hair is
pulled hard, we find the skin blown up with wind which got in upon the Pulling
of it up; and we see the Hands and Feet swell with cold which binds the skin,
lifts it up, and straineth out the thin Moisture.

If wind be under the scarf skin, and blister it, VVind under the scarf skin
is the cause of Phlyctaenae or wind Blisters, wind between the Muscles, is the
cause of the Cramp.
the Blistes called Phlyctaenae, do come from thence, such as are mixed with
wind and water.

If wind between the Muscles, it causes Tumor and Cramp of which we spoke.

If it get under any external Membranes, or the Periostium which is the skin
upon the bone, and cause a Tumor, because it is with pain, we spoke of it in
the Causes of windy pains, when it gets into other internal cavities, as of the
Breast, Head, Womb, because it produces other accidents besides manifest
Tumors, of which we only here spoke, we refer you to them.

That wind getting under the skin and and Membranes under it in the fore part
of the Neck, VVind under the Skin and Membranes of the Neck, the cause of
Bronchocele.
causes the Tumor called Broncocele, appears in that the skin in that part of
the Neck, seems extended and lifted up, and when it is beaten it sounds as if
the air only were underneath. The Cause of which Air there gathered is nothing
but looseness of the skin plucked up, (when the Membrane which is above the
Neck, is more red and thick from the rough Artery, and the Muscles of the Neck
before which lie under it) making a space underneath, into which the Air or
Wind got under to avoid vacuity, not only filling it, and making the skin and
membrane swell, but in by stretching, causing it to increase. Hence it is that
we do not only make the wind to be the Cause of this Tumor, but the separation
of parts which were joined by small Fibers, which being torn a sunder or
broken, cause this Disease to be called a Rupture, or breaking of the Throat or
about it. Albeit some think this Tumor comes from Rheum falling from the Head,
but this cannot be, because of the not pitting thereof with the Impression of
the finger, nor from water: and if these two Humors should produce this
Disease, and they should be contained there long, they would produce other
putrid Infirmities, which they perceive not. And that shortness of breath and
Hoarsness comes not from any humor, but from a stretching by which the free
motion of the Throat is hindered. Nor do we deny that Defluctions may be
carried thither in this Dsease, as well as into other spaces, and that other
excrements may be there collected; but that these will not cause this Tumor, in
regard when they are discussed, the Tumor remains. But the chief cause of
this separation of the Membranes, is violent straining in Childbirth, when the
breath is held in the time of Delivery, or when they blow strongly with the
Mouth, and this appears by the Swelling of the jugular Veins of the Neck, from
which the Membranes are divided, and when the Spirits are driven into the Neck
by the Veins and Arteries, the wind carried thither, also may cause this
Divulsion and Separation of the Membranes.

Any part falling from its Seat, outward causes the Hernious or Rupture,
Tumors called Cele, and this is either a Gut or the Cawle, which cause this
when they fall from the cavity of the Peritonaeum, under the skin or into the
Codd. The Cause of the falling out whereof, shall be mentioned with those of
the Womb and Anus.

The Cure.
We shall first distinguish the Cure of diverse sorts of swellings in respect of
the causes, nemely, as they come from Phlegm, which we call crude Juice, or
water or wind; or from the nourishing Juice, either mixed with some or more of
them? or as they come from Milk, Blood or Seed. As for the Tumors that come
from some part fallen called Caelae, because they come from another place: we
shall speak of them in things cast off, and in things cast forth.

The Cure of Tumors that comes from crude Juice, if first in regard of the
Swelling of the whole Body, and Leucophlegmacy from thence: and then in regard
of particular Parts, as Oedema.

If Leucophlegmacy be simple, The Cure of Leucophlegmacy, or white Swelling of
the whole Body.
although the whole Body be swollen, and in Ascites the Belly and the Feet are
only swollen, yet is it easier cured then the Ascites, because the hurt of the
bowels is less, and the weakness which gets this crude blood may be amended:
with more difficulty, if it tend to an Ascites, and not at all, if it be joined
with it. In old men it is hardly cured, although it be long lingered.

You must begin the Cure as in a Cachexy, because it is the Original of it, and
they depend upon the same cause long continuing: you must correct the Distemper
and Weakness of the Liver and Spleen, by removing first the cause, if it come
from too great a Flux of the Terms, Pills, or other bleeding, then you must
strengthen them, if there be Obstruction you must open it with moderate
Aperitives and Cleansers, least they provoke the Flux if there be any, and with
stronger Apertives if there be no Flux, which may also move the Terms if they
be stopped, all both by inward and outward means. Always evacuate the crude
watery Humors which are in the Stomach, Guts, and Veins, or the Habit of the
body, by Purges, Sweats and Urin.

Also by Topical external Medicines to the parts most swelling, which may take
away the Matter by discussing and consuming it. But in a Leucophlegmacy, where
there is also much Whey, or that which is with an Ascites, there must be the
same Cure with Ascites, by drawing out and and consuming the water, with
Remedies according to the cause. The Remedies used for Anasarca, or a Dropsy
so called are as follows.

You must purge the Stomach from crudities, and open Obstructions with
cleansers, such as were prescribed in a cachexy, with things that purge water,
if it be serous or watery.

As, Take of the four or five opening Roots each one ounce, of Orris and
Elicampane, each half an ounce, of Asarum two drams, of the Barks of Cappar
roots, Ash, and Tamarisk barks each six drams, of Liquorish one ounce and an
half, Succory with the Root, of Endive, Groundpine, Maidenhair, Maudlin,
Fumitory, Hops, each one handful, of Wormwood, and Thyme each half an handful,
of Elder flowers, Broom, and Tamarisk flowers each one pugil, of Raisons stoned
ten pair, of Anise, and Fennel seed, each one dram and an half, of Endive, and
Dodder seed each one dram, of the four cold great Seeds two drams, of Polypody,
one ounce, and an half, of Senna two ounces, of Epithymum, half an ounce. make
a Decoction, and in the straining infuse three drams of the Troches of Agarick,
of Rhubarb half an ounce, strain it and add two ounces of Syrup of Roses
solutive, or of juice of Roses, one ounce, of Sugar as much as will make an
Apozeme for five or six doses, make it sweet with Cinnamon, Spike, Schaenanth,
and Sanders, and if you must use more, increase the quantity of Sugar, and make
a Syrup half or fully boiled.

To this in a watery Leucophlegmacy, you may add Soldanella, or pot Mercury, or
Carthamus seed, etc.

A Wine: Take of Succory roots one ounce and an half, of Fennel and Orris
roots, each one ounce, of Elicampane half an ounce, of Asarum two drams, of
Tamarisk bark one ounce, of Wormwood, Groundpine, Agrimony, Thyme, and
Epithimum, each two drams, of the Topps of the lesser Centaury, Cordial
flowers, Smallage seed, or Parsley, and Fennel seed, each one dram, of Senna
one ounce and an half: to these you may add Soldanella one dram, Agarick in
Troches, and Rhubarb, each three drams, of Spikenard one scruple: infuse them
in as much Wine as is sufficient, for five doses.

An ordinary Drink. Take of Rhubarb four scruples, of Troches, of Agarick, one
dram, of Spikenard six grains: steep them in white Wine, and after pour
Wormwood, or Centaury, water thereon, and strain them adding Syrup of Roses
solutives, or some Physical Decoction, of pot Mercury and Soldanella, if there
be more water: make a Potion.

These Pills Electuaries and Lozenges which we mentioned in a Cachexy, are good
here, adding things that purge Water.

Glysters which cleanse and expel wind, are here useful As, Take of the
Emollient Herbs, three handfuls, Mercury or Beets, Pennyroyal, Calaminths,
each one handful, of Chamomil, Elder, and the lesser Contaury flowers, each one
pugil, of Orris, Elicampane, and Asarum roots, each one ounce, of Fennel,
Caraway and Cummin seed each two drams: make a Decoction in water with Barley,
or Pease, and dissolve benedicta Laxativa, or Hiera, half an ounce, of Oil, of
Rue, and Dill, each one ounce and an half with a little Salt, make a Glyster.

You may ad the Decoction, of Wormwood, Marjoram, Chamaepyts, or Groundpine,
Rosemary flowers, Staechas, Lavender, and Broom flowers, also Agarick, with
Brine, Urine, or Led, and other Laxatives and Oils.

An abstergent Glyster not so strong: Take of the Urine of a Boy one pint, to
which add Lie, Oil of Chamomil, or Lilly two ounces, make a Glyster.

Vomiting is good to cleanse the Stomach, where the beginning of Crudity is;
this is done by things mentioned in Diseases of the Stomach.

Bleeding may be in the Feet, to provoke the Terms, if they be wanting. And
they who are used to bleed and are full of crude Blood, may loose a little,
because some crudity is there by evacuated, as appears when it is settled, at
least it can do no hurt, if it cool not the bowels too much.

Sweating because it consumes much of the Humor, both out of the Habit of the
Body and the Veins, is good, because thereby the tumor decreaseth, and must be
every day if they may be endured with Exercise, and Rubbing, and these alone do
discuss the Matter.

Or they are provoked with Guaicum and Sassaphras boiled, or with other
Softners that are not violent.

Or with this Decoction: Take of Milium seeds peeled, two ounces, of
Spring Water two pints: boil them to four or five ounces to the straining add
as much white wine, let him drink it hot, it wonderfully provokes Sweat.

Syrup of St. Ambrose made after the like manner, does the same thing, and it
is pleasant to give to Children in the Dropsy.

Another Sweat: Take Treacle one ounce and an half, of Calamus Aromaticus, a
quarter of a pound: boil them well stopped in a measure and an half of red wine
till the third part be consumed: let him take a Draught every Night at Bedtime
hot as much in the morning, to sweat.

Some drink Treacle-water.

The Rob or Juice boiled thick of Elder, or Dwarfe-elder, dissolved with
convenient water, with the Decoction of Milium, or Flower de-luce-water, or of
Carduus benedictus, may also be taken.

Attractives to strengthen the Bowels, take away Obstructions, and provoke
Urin, to take away Hardness if there be any, as in the Ascites are also good,
as we showed in a cachexy, where you may take your choice, of Decoctions,
Syrups, Juyces, Wines, stilled Waters, Oils, Lies, Urins, Natural waters. As
drinking of Vitriol waters, with good caution, and to be forbidden, if the
Stomach or Liver be weak or cold, also conserves, Pouders, Potions,
Electuaries, Pills, which you may there choose.

To which these may be added, good for to strengthen and help the Concoction of
the Stomach, and to avoid crudity.

A good Decoction: Take of opening Roots one ounce and an half, of Drop-wort
one ounce, of Agrimony, Maiden hair, Germander, Groundpine, Dodder, Marjoram,
each one handful, of Hysop half a handful, of Anise seed, and Fennel seed, each
one dram, of Elder flowers one pugil: make a Decoction with a little wine and
water, adding a little Cinnamon, Spike, Schaenanth, and Sugar for an Apozeme;
For doses, if you will purge, add a little Carthamus and Polypody.

You may make wine of the Infusion of these things.

Or this Decoction experienced: Take of Juniper Berries half a pound, of
Elicampane, and Briony roots, each half an ounce, of Thyme, Marjoram, Rosemary,
Topps of Rue, Mugwort, each half an handful: boil them in four pints of water,
sweeten, and perfume it, let him drink it some times.

Another: Take of Rhapontick two ounces, of Wormwood, Horehound, Ceterach, each
one handful: boil them wine and water, to the consuming of the third part.

Or boil thus the Roots of Acorus, Pennyroyal, and Ivy.

The Syrup of Wormwood is good against Crudity, and of Bettony, made of its
Juice with Sugar.

Also wormwood, and Bettony-water mixed with other Openers, as with Enula,
Marjoram, Mints boiled etc,

Also mix Pouders for the Stomach with Openers, as Diacalaminth, Diagalanga,
Aromaticum rosatum, and Cordials when they are weak, made of the Gems.

Also Pouders after Meat for Concoction.

Also conserve and candied Bettony, Acorus, Ginger, Marjoram, Staechas,
Rosemary, Citron barks, of both Buglosses, for concoction and strength.

Or this: Take of the Conserve of Succory flowers, of Smallage roots, each one
ounce, of the Conserve of Orris roots, of Marjoram, of Bettony and Bugloss
flowers, each half an ounce, of Gum Lack two scruples, Coral half a dram, of
Cinnamon one dram, of Galangal, and Fennel seed, each half a dram of Spikenard
half a scruple, of the ashes of Hens guts, and Gizard skins one scruple, with
the Syrup of the five Roots, or the like: make an Electuary: Let him drink
water after it, made of proper things, and the Liver of a Wolf added, will make
it better.

Or: Take the aforesaid Conserves adding of the species of Triasantalon, or
Diarrhodon, half a dram, of Diagalanga and Dialacca, each one scruple, of the
ashes of Hens Gizard, skins and Guts, half a scruple: mix them for an
Electuary, it will be better to mix any cachectick Powder mentioned in
Discolouration.

This Electuary is good: Take of Orris roots two drams, of bitter Almonds one
ounce and an half, of Anise, and Fennel seeds each one dram, of Sugar the
weight of all.

These Pills are good, and also provoke the Terms, and Urin, and mollify
Tumors.

Take of Rhubarb one dram and an half, of Gentian, and Birthwort roots, Madder,
bitter Costus, each one dram, of Smallage seed, Ammeos, Juniper Berries, each
half a dram, of Sehaenanth, Spike, each one scruple, of Gum, Lack one dram, and
an half, Mastich half a dram, with Juice of Orris, or Agrimony: make Pills, or
with bitter Almonds, Troches, Pills of Gentian better then the other. Take of
the extract of Gentian one dram, of Centaury the less, and Carduus each half a
dram, of Rue, and Wormwood each one scruple, of the Powder of the lesser
Centaury, four scruples, of the Troches of Myrrh, one dram and an half, of the
Troches of Agrimony and Capars, each one dram, of Wormwood half a dram, with
the Elixir proprietatis, make a Mass of Pills, the dose is from two scruples to
a dram stronger are these.

Take of Rhubarb, Madder roots, Valeria, Asarum, each one dram, of Savine,
Marjoram, Smallage seeds, each half a dram, of Spike half a scruple, twelve
Spanish Flies, the small wings taken off of Ammoniack dissolved in strong
Vinegar, one dram, with the Syrup of the five Roots, make a Mass, give from
half a dram to two, drinking upon it the Decoction of Pease and Parsley.

Or, Take of the aforesaid Powder with the Gum dissolved, and bitter Almonds
blanched, one ounce and an half, of Melon seeds two drams, with syrup of
Maudlin, or of Orris: make an Electuary, a dram is the dose, drinking after the
Decoction of Melons or Pease.

External Medicines mentioned in the Diseases of the Liver or Spleen are good,
Ointments, and Emplasters, Fomentations and the like, choosing the fittest for
the Cause, to which you may add these following fit for the Stomach.

An Epithem for the Liver: Take of Smallage roots, one ounce and an half, of
Asarum half an ounce, of Wormwood one handful, of Bugloss, Borage, and Elder
flowers, each one pugil, of Dodder seeds two drams, of Endive, and Sorrel seed,
each one dram, of all the Sanders each one dram and an half, of Spike, Cassia
Lignea, or Schaenanth, each half a dram: boil them in wine and water to foment
the Liver, you may also anoint the Liver with the cerot of Sanders.

Anoint the Stomach to expel Crudities thus: Take of the Oil of Wormwood, and
Mints, each one ounce, Oil of Mastich, Quinces, and Spike, each half an ounce,
of Mastich two drams, of Sanders, and Cypress each one dram, Cloves half a
dram, wood Aloes one scruple, Wax as much as will make an Ointment.

Or anoint with Nerve-Oyl Compound.

An Emplaster is made of the same with Powder of Wormwood, Mints, Mastich, with
more wax, and Gallia moschata, or the Emplaster for the Stomach.

For swollen places, to allay them sometimes, apply Discussives, and if water
abound, Consumers, and many things mentioned in Ascites, as these.

Sweat is caused by dry Baths or moist, or Stuphes, and so the matter is
consumed, and the Swellings, and sooner in this then Ascites, made of the
things there mentioned.

If you cover the Body, except the Head, in sand or ashesas in Ascites, it is
here better.

Foment the parts with Lie as there entioned, roll the parts about sometimes
with Rowlers dipped in Lie.

Cataplasmes of Dungs as there mentioned, also baggs applied to the parts with
hot Discutients.

As for Diet, let the Air be convenient, then temperate, not moist, hot rather
dry.

Let the Meat be of good Juice and Concoction, seasoned with hot Dryers, good
for the Stomach.

They say that the flesh of a Hedg-hog, is good against Leucophlegmacy.

Watchings are thought to do good by drying, but they hurt by weakening.

The Tumors called Oedemata, which are especially about the Knees and
Shoulders, The Cure of Oedema.
and also about the Feet, and other parts being broad, coming from crude Juice
are difficulty cured, because they are the substance of the flesh increased:
therefore they carry them to the Grave often.

The Cure of them is the general Medicines to the whole Body, and particular to
the parts.

The general must be according to the cause to hinder crudity, and if it come
from the want of concoction in the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, then because there
is a Cachexy, which begets particular Tumors, that must be first cured, by good
Diet, fit Evacuations by stool and sweat, and you must strengthen the Bowels,
and oppose other Diseases, before you meddle with the particular Tumors. But if
crude juice cause an Oedema from the evil Habit of the part, then with respect
to the Constitution to get good Blood and cleanse the body, for the better
proceeding, the general Cure must pacceed the particular.

The particular Cure of Oedema, is in the beginning and in the increase done by
things which astringe, and repels by pressing the Juice, which makes the part
bigger, and when it is at the height you must use things that dry and digest it
mixed with strengtheners, or drawing Medicines, or if it imposthumate, (as
seldom,) such as ripen, and open, and at length heat the Ulcer, as follow.

Fomentations and Baths are used if if be large.

And at the beginning foment with a Sponge, to repel a new sponge is best,
because its thought more binding, with Vinegar and Wine, or with strong
Vinegar, and ironed water or the like.

After foment with Vinegar and Lie, or salt water.

Afterward when the Tumor is big, use salt water alone or Nitrous Baths.

Or make them of Lie strained from common Ashes, Vine branches or Oak, Beech,
Willow, Fig Tree, or burnt Bones.

It is stronger with Alum, Salt, and Vinegar.

And if you add the Plants, they will digest and strengthen, as Dane-wort
roots, Acorus, Docks, Sage, Rosemary, Marjoram, Bettony, Bays, Calaminth,
Organ, Juniper topps, Rue, Savine, Mug-wort, Lavender, Chamomil, Lupines,
Beans, Jupiner-berries, or the like hot things that are good for the Joints.

Anoint after Fomentation in the beginning with this repeller: Take of Bole
half an ounce, Aloes three drams, Acacia, Sanguis Draconis, each two drams, of
Cypress roots one dram, of Saffron half a dram, Vinegar one ounce and an half,
Oil of Roses three ounces, Turpentine, as much as will make an Ointment, or Wax
for a Cerote.

Another in the increase of a Tumor: Take of Quickbrimstone three drams, of Sal
Gem. two drams, of Ashes common, or of Plants, one dram, Bean flower two
ounces, strong Vinegar one ounce, Oil of Nutmegs, and Turpentine, as much as
will make an Unguent, you may add also the Juice of Coleworts.

An Emplaster for the whole tumor: Take of Labdamum one ounce and an half, of
Frankincense one ounce, of Storax half an ounce, of Quick-brimstone six drams,
of Alum, and Sal Niter each two drams, of Oak moss poudered, Wood, common woad
Ashes, each one dram, of Acorus roots, and Lavender, each half a dram, of
Saffron one scruple, of Cow Dung dried, two drams: mix them poudered, with
Vinegar, and when they are dried again, add Turpentine, the Dreggs of the Oil
of Rue, or of Lillies, and make a Plaster.

The usual Plasters for this are Diachylon, Ireatum, Ceroneum, Diachalcitcos.

A digesting Cataplasm: Take of Lilly, or Marsh mallow roots, and Briony roots,
each three ounces, the Roots of wild Cowcumber, two ounces, Dwarfe-elder, and
Dock roots, each one ounce, of Sage, Rue, Tamarisk, or Savine, each one
handful: boil them in equal parts of Rainwater and wine, adding in the
Conclusion Vinegar three ounces: beat them, and ad Bean, or Orobus meal, two
ounces, Lupine meal one ounce, the Ashes mentioned for a Lixivium half an
ounce, of dried Cows dung, six drams, Salt half an ounce, Leaven one ounce and
an half, Hogs grease four ounces, Oil of Chamomil, and Wall flowers, each three
ounces: make a Cataplasm.

You may add to them, Snails, and the Juyces of Dwarfeelder, and Docks, instead
of the Plants, or Fennel.

Clay made with Bone ashes, especially Man's bones, with bole and Saffron,
Plantane, and Nightshade water, like a Cataplasm, hot applied, is of great
force.

Also baggs filled with discussing Pouders, or Pouders sprinkled upon dry
Spunges or wet, and so bound to the Tumor.

They are made of Sage, Ros^mary, Bettony, Caraway, Carrot and Fennel seeds
etc. with Maiden hair to hinder the breeding of the Oedema.

If it tend to an Imposthume, you must use such things to bring it to
Maturation as are mentioned in curing Imposthumes.

To roll an Oedema well down with Bolsters, is good to hinder its grows.

Also rubbing does discuss, and the more if it be done with Vinegar, and Roses,
and Salt.

To scarifie or burn with an Iron, it is good to abate an Oedema, if it be done
in many parts of it: or to apply a Vesicatory of Ca^^arides.

When the Eyebrows are swollen with a Tumor, The Cure of the Oedema of the
Eyebrows
it is cured as the rest, by general Medicines, if the Body be very moist, and
by Topic to the place, so ordered that they hurt not the Eye, wherefore we use
thick Ointments, least they should run into the Eye, or sticking Plasters,
which first repel and then digest, or if we will use a Fomentation, (we must
leave out all sharp, sour, and salt things) and use that which is prescribed in
the Weakness of the sight: or anoint the Eyebrows with the Ointment there.

To which this following may be annexed: Take of galls, or Cypress-nuts, two
drams, Cummin seed one dram, Aloes, Myrrh, each two drams, Saffron one scruple,
of Honey as much as will make an Ointment or Emplaster, to be laid upon the
Eyebrows, the Eye being shut.

Also Feaverfew, and Chickweed beaten with Barley meal and applied.

The Cure of Tumors that come from a watery Humor shall be set down, first that
which is general, as the dropsy ascites, then of the particular Tumor of the
Feet and in the Groine, which falls into the Codd called Hydrocele; then of the
Belly, as that of Women like Hydrocele of water, and that against the Navel
called Hydromphalon, and in the Head called Hydrocephalon, and the Swelling of
the Eye brows: Last of all we shall treat of the small Pustles in the Eyes
called Phlyctaenae.

If the Dropsy Ascites come from the dividing of the substance of the Liver or
Spleen, The Cure of the Dropsy Ascites.
by Dryness, Hardness, or Scirrhus, or other Tumor or Ulcer, or total
Corruption, or Stroke or Wound of the same, it is almost incurable; as when it
comes from Hurt of the Kidneys, or breaking of the Bladder, or Ureters; or from
the breaking of the Meseraick Veins with the Cawle of the Mesentery, or from
Ulceration or Corruption of the same, it is incurable. But if it come from too
much water, in the Passages of the gate and hollow Vein, and sweating from
thence into the Belly, or distilling by Anastomosis or opening of the Vessels,
it may be cured, so there be not caused a weakness of the Liver or Reins, or
both Ureters be not so stopped that they cannot be opened, which is seldom
seen. Or if the water in the Belly long contained, have notinfected the Bowels
and Caul, and Mesentery, as is usual. These things observed, if you know the
cause, you may better foretell, but if you know it not, or doubt of it, you
must speak less boldly of the Cure. But if the Urine be very red, it is
dangerous, if white and crude, there is more Hope.

In the Cure of this, first consider the cause, if it come from the weakness of
the Liver or Spleen, Coldness, Stoppage, Hardness, Scirrhus or any Tumor
thereof, the cure is chiefly as the Cachexy, partly as the Jaundies, which come
from the same cause, and go before the Dropsy,: of which we have spoken so
largely, that we shall not need to speak more. As also if it come from Heat and
Dryness of the Bowels, we laid down the cure in Cachexy, which uses to go
before it. But if it come rather from the weakness of the Kidney, or stoppage
of the Ureters, you may cure it with Remedies mentioned in the Suppression of
urine. After this consider action, let us bend our whole Force to get the water
out of the Belly, before it corrupt the Bowels, by purging by Urine, and by
Sweat, and if these will not do, we must use outward Applications and Openings.
And this must be done in the Feet also, to take away their Swelling, and that
when the water flows out, that which is in the Belly may come in its place: and
if the Codds be swollen, you must apply things that may allay and consume the
Swelling.

But in other causes which are hard or impossible to be removed, as when the
Bowels are broken or cracked, by Heat and Dryness, we must use rather cold and
moist then hot and dry Remedies, which in all other Dropsies are used, as we
showed in cachexy that comes of the same cause; Also in Hardness of the Bowels
or Swelling of the same, you must soften them with Medicines there mentioned:
these are better to prevent a Dropsy then to cure it, in that cause, or when
the Bowels or Vessels are hurt or corrupted. In these desparate cases,
notwithstanding we must labor to abate the Symptoms, and take the water of
the Feet and Belly, to hinder the shortness of breathing, and least the water
continuing by its stinking and hurting the Bowels, should produce worse
accidents, or breaking into the Feet by force, or by opening it should cause
Inflammation and Gangraen, which causes a miserable Death: all this is done by
the following Remedies.

In this Dropsy, purging is good both to open Obstructions, and to carry away
the water; of which they which are used to open Obstructions, especially in the
Bowels, which cause a Cachexy and Jaundies, if these be with the Dropsy, are
best: And in other Causes they are better then Hydragoga or water Purgers,
because they provoke Nature to avoid it, and they are mixed with things proper
for the Bowels. For the other that is Hydragoga, must violently provoke the
expulsive Faculty if there be much water, and therefore they easily inflame the
body by sharpness and burning, and except warily given, and well prepared, they
know and burn up the Stomach and Bowels. Therefore use these as the last
Remedies when all fail, yet if by chance Nature being moved thereby, may not
only send forth the water which is in the Veins, near and fa^ off by the
mouths of the Meseraick Vessels to the Guts again, which is easily done; but
also that she might purge forth that which is in the belly, by the same way it
came, as she does often wonderfully: All these are done by these following
Remedies.

The common Medicines which are good to open the obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, are mentioned in the Jaundies, and Cachexy and Leucophlegmacy, and
these may be used here in the beginning to purge water, before we come to
stronger Medicines. As Potions chiefly of Rhubarb, which is thought to be such
a Friend to these parts, and other Purgers, also solutive Electuaries,
Catholicon, Diaphaenicon, of the Juice of Roses, and especially those made of
Hiera simple and compound, solutive Syrups of Roses, Fumitory, Epithymum,
Polypody, and Pills of Hiera de tribus, of Rhubarb, Agarick, and Agregative,
the Forms of which may be found elsewhere.

But those Purges which are proper for the Ascites made of Water-purgers alone
mixed, are as follow.

A Decoction to purge Water proper for the Liver and Spleen: Take of the five
opening Roots, two ounces, of Orris, Valerian, and five leaved grass Roots,
each one ounce, of Asarum, half an ounce, of the bark of Tamarisk, Capars,
Elder and Dwarfe-elder, each one ounce and an half, of Succory with the Roots,
and Dandelion with the Roots, Endive, Sow-tkistle, Liver-wort, Agrimony,
Germander, Groundpine, Fumitory, of the five Capillars, each one handful,
Flowers of Broom, Tamarisk, Elder, and Dwarfe-elder, of the four Cordial
flowers, each one pugil, Flowers of the lesser Centaury, half a pugil, of the
four great cold Seeds, half an ounce, of Anise, Fennel, and Parsley seeds, each
two drams, of Dodder seed one dram, Ivy-berries three drams, Prunes five pair,
Tamarinds one ounce and an half, Raisons stoned two ounces, of Senna, Polypody,
and Carthamus seeds, each one ounce and an half, Epithymum two drams: boil them
in water with one quart of white Wine, and when it is strained, infuse Agarick,
Troches, half an ounce, Rhubarb three drams, Spike one scruple, strain them and
add as much Sugar or Honey as is sufficient to make an Apozeme, aromatize it
with Cinnamon for four doses.

And if you add one handful of Soldanella, or Sea bind weed, or of pot Mercury,
or one dram of prepared Esula or half a handful of Spurge, and if you take
more, you may leave out Rhubarb, and Agarick, some add Smallage roots. And when
it is thus strong, you must give the less quantity at first, that you may know
their strength, and this is to be observed in other Medicines, always keeping
good Order, and using Baths after if, need be.

Another more simple: Water-purger: Take of Soldanella two ounces, Ivy-berries
half an ounce, of Asarum root, two drams, Anise-seeds three drams: boil them in
water and wine, or a Decoction of the Simples mentioned for a Draught.

Or thus: Take Liquorish one ounce, Elicampane half an ounce, Roots of Sowbread
one ounce, Soldanella one handful, of Spurge or Laurel half an handful, of
Raisons stoned two ounces, Ivy-berries three drams, Fennel seed two drams: boil
them in the Broth of gray Pease, add to the strained Liquor, Sugar and Honey
of Roses, as much as is sufficient, let them boil a little, and add two ounces
of Wine and an half, Cinnamon, Schaenanth, or Spike, let him drink a little,
and according to the Operation of that, let the rest be given after. Medicines
steeped in Wine or boiled therein, do work safer and better, and if a Dropsy
can be cured, they will do it, we know this by Experience. Take of
Flower-de-luce roots one ounce and an half, of Succory, and Fennel roots, each
one ounce, of Elicampane, or Master-wort, half an ounce, the bark of the Roots
of Elder, and Dwarfe-elder, each one ounce, Wormwood three drams, of Germander,
and Groundpine, each two drams, of Rosemary Topps one pugil, of Flowers of
Centaury one dram, Fennel seed two drams, Caraway, Coriander, and Parsley seed,
each one dram, Senna one ounce and an half, Agarick, or Briony roots prepared,
or Mechoacan, half an ounce, Rhubarb two drams, and if you will have it
stronger, Turbith two drams, slice them, and beat them all being dry, and
infuse them in five or six pints of Wine, and let him drink of it only steeped
or boiled in a double Vessel, one Draught, and as that works, let the rest be
after proportioned.

Or add to the aforesaid Gentian roots, and Birthwort, each half an ounce,
Asarum two drams, the Bark of Bitter-sweet six drams, Thyme one dram, Broom
flowers one pugil, Ivy-berries, half an ounce, Smallage seed, one dram.

And to make it purge water more, we ad to these wines, Soldanella, or Sowbread
roots, half an ounce, and if we will have it stronger, in want of the Flowers
of Spurge, we take the prepared Bark of Spurge roots, or of black Hellebore,
from one dram to one dram and an half, or half a dram of Coloquintida: These
given in wine are safer, with Spike, and Schaenanth, each half a dram.

If they be steeped in new Wine, or boiled with a little Wormwood for the
stomach sake, Barks of the Roots of Elder, or Dwarfe-elder, or the inward
bark of Elders, or of Bitter-sweet, or the seeds of spurge, they are better.

Stronger are, the Roots of wild Cowcumber, or Briony in Wine, or spurge Leaves
alone, or with the seeds and flowers.

Other Potions by Infusion or Decoction in Wine, with Juyces, are thus made:
Take of Rhubarb, and Soldanella, each one dram, or four scruples, infuse them
in wine, and give it being strained, with syrup of Roses solutive.

Or, Take Rhubarb one dram, or four scruples, sprinkle it with the Juice of
Flower-de luce, from half an ounce to six drams or add the Juice of Elder
roots, and after sufficient steeping put to it as much Wormwood-wine as will
serve, strain it hard, and give it, or with Syrups.

It is stronger if you steep Rhubarb, in the Juice of Sowbread, one dram and an
half, or Juice of Palmachristi, half an ounce.

Or, Take Agarick one dram, Ginger two scruples, Sal Gem. one scruple, sprinkle
them with the Juyces aforesaid, and with wine strain them, and give it.

A Potion made of Cock broth thus, is approved: Take of Polypody of the Oak,
two ounces, of Carthamus seeds bruised, one ounce, of green Flower-de-luce
roots, one ounce and an half: boil them in Whey of Goats milk, or old Cock
Broth, or stuff the Cock with these, give a Draught with the Powder, or Orris,
and Cinnamon, each one scruple, use it often, you may ad more of the former to
make it stronger.

The Juice of Flower-de-luce from two drams to six, provokes Urine and stool,
it alone has often cured a Dropsy, and you may let it settle. Because it
inflames the jaws, you may give it with Wine, broth or Milk, or with Honey,
or Sugar, with other things to make it taste well, and such as are good for the
Liver.

Or you may make a Syrup of it, putting as much Sugar to the Juice, and so
keeping it, or boiling it to a body if it must be kept long: but then you must
give a double quantity or more, as you perceive its Operation.

Or, Take of Rhubarb infused in Wormwood-wine, and strained, three drams, of
the Juice or Orris roots four ounces, of Cinnamon water half an ounce, of Sugar
four ounces: boil them into a syrup give it from one ounce to one ounce and an
half.

The Juice of Sowbread may be given the same way, crude or other Juyces, as of
Elder, Dwarfe-elder, Briony, or with the Infusion of Rhubarb, or Agarick, made
into syrups, as the Juice of Flower-de-luce.

There are Faeculae or Dreggs made of Briony roots, both the Dragons and
Flower-de-luce, to be given in this case, the Juice is taken out of the Roots,
and set in a cold place, till it have a branny settling, that which is thick and
white, is poured from the Sediment or Settling. This is dried after it has been
sprinkled with Rose or Balm-water, and stirred often in diverse broad Vessels in
the shadow, till it be like Meal, this is to be kept in a dry place.

Or make the Juice up thus, which is an approved Remedy: Take of the middle
Bark of green Elder, or of Bittersweet which is in the middst, two handfuls, of
green Briony roots one ounce: beat them well with Wine and Vinegar, strain out
the Juice, give it twice or thrice.

The best of all is the Juice of wild Cowcumber prepared, called Elaterium,
which is made of the Pulpy Juice of them unripe, strained through a sieve, to
which add after the Decoction of the parings of the Cowcumbers strained; These
stirred together are placed in the Sun or at the fire, covered with a Cloth,
and when they have stood a while, you must pour off the water, and make that
which remains into little Balls; It is made sooner and better, if the Liquor be
poured upon a Linnen-cloath, pressed down in the middle being three times
doubled and laid upon the ashes, and what remains in the cloth be dried into
Balls.

Thus it may be made sooner: Take the Juice of the wild Cowcumber, and boil it
with four times as much Sugar to a Syrup or Electuary, mixing other things
proper: Of all which you must give a little at first till you know the force of
them.

The Extract of Juice of spurge, made thick, and of Roots of Cuckow-pintles,
black Hellebore, Euphorbium are all to be warily given, and the dose is rather
to be found out by Experience then prescribed here.

The Extract of Esula or Spurge, will do much in purging water, which is
commended by Ruland in his Emperial Observations, and it may thus be prepared
safer.

Take of the lesser spurge four parts, of both the Sow-thistles green, red
Roses, and Coriander seed prepared, each one part: boil them with water at a
gentle fire, skumming them always till no more appears, and after pour it off
by inclination, and put in more water, and boil it as before; This water being
altogether or this whole Decoction, let it be evaporated, till it comes to the
thickness of Honey; After pour on as much Spirit of Wine rectified, as will be
the breadth of a Finger above it, let it stand in a close stopped vessel a while
in a warm place, stirring it sometimes, and then draw the Spirit of Wine in
Balneo Mariae by Evaporation, keep this Extract, the Dose is from one scruple
to half a dram, and more in strong Bodies.

A Conserve of the Leaves of Spurge, and Laurel, first steeped in Vinegar, then
bruised and mixed with a double quantity of Honey, is given with Milk or Whey.

An Electuary of the dried Leaves of the same Herbs poudered and boiled with
Honey, is given the same way.

Or this: Take of Soldancella, Mezereon, or Widdow-waile steept in Vinegar, and
dried, and poudered, of Senna three drams, of the Kernels of Carthamus seeds
two drams, of Turbith three drams, of the Powder of Orris roots one dram,
Mastick, Lack, each one dram and an half, with syrup of Roses: make an
Electuary.

This is more safe; Take of the Juice of Flower-de-luce one ounce and an half,
Honey one ounce,: boil them gently, and add at the end, the powder of
Soldanella, six drams, powder of Orris one dram, Cinnamon one dram and an half,
make an Electuary, let him begin with two drams.

Another highly commended Electuary: Take of the juice of wild Cowcumber, out
of the Fruit and Roots, the Juice of laurel Leaves, of the Juice of the purple
Flower-de-luce roots, of the Juice of Wormwood, and Agrimony each one ounce and
an half let them setle, and pour off the clear top by Inclination and with the
thickest, mix of Rhubarb, and Agarick each two drams; of Endive, Succory, and
Purslain seeds, Mastick, Lack, Traganth, Sal Gem. Spikenard each half an ounce;
of pure Honey two drams, set them in the Sun or a Furnace, and stir them often,
till they grow to a thick consistance, give one dram for a dose.

Like this you may make it more excellent: Take of the Juyces aforesaid one
ounce and an half, of Vinegar of Roses one ounce, of the Infusion of Rhubarb
three drams, of Agarick two drams, Sal Gem. one dram, white Wine six ounces,
Cinnamon half an ounce, steep and strain them, and add Sugar and Honey of Roses
each four ounces; Pulp of Quinces four ounces, Gum Traganth infused in
Rose Water two ounces, boil them to an Electuary, and add Mastick, or the like,
or leave out the Pulp, and with half a pound of Honey or Sugar, boil them to a
Syrup.

The usual Electuary to purge Water, is that of Mezercon or Widdow-waile made
of the Leaves thereof, with Oil, Honey, Agarick, Manna, Sugar, Quinces, and
Whey, Thus: Take Agarick half an ounce, Rhubarb three drams, infuse them in
Whey, and strain it, and dissolve therein ten drams of Manna, of Sugar, Pulp of
Quinces, boiled a little with Vinegar, two ounces and an half, Oil of sweet
Almonds three drams: boil them to an Electuary, mixing at the end two drams and
an half of Mezereon poudered, or of Laurel, or Esula first infused in Vinegar.

There is another Electuary of Esula or spurge called Alscebram in Arabic,
made of Esula and Myrobalans, with juice of Fennel, by Insolation dried into a
Body, which may be made as that of Mezereon with Esula.

There is also an Electuary of Mesue called Diaphysalidon made of the Leaves of
Mezereon steeped and prepared with Oil of Mezereon, Scammony, Turbith, Agarick,
Myrobalans, Manna, Cassia, Tamarinds, Raisons, Penidyes, Orris, Smallage and
Fennel seeds, Wormwood, Rhubarb, with the Juice of Endive, Smallage, Agrimony,
Wormwood, Oil of Jesamine.

Benedicta Laxativa which has Esula in it, or Hiera Hermetis with Mezereon,
are counted Water-purgers.

Some Water purging Pouders are given with Wine, Milk, Chicken broth, or Cock
broth, or some other Decoction, with Sugar, Honey of Roses, and Cinnamon and
the like, and being often used they work better, and if they be unpleasant they
may be made into Pills.

The Powder of Soldanella given often from a dram and an half, to two drams,
and Mechoacan or Briony root poudered in the same quantity.

The Roots of Dwarfe-elder, or Elder, to three drams of Asarum with new Wine.

The Powder of the Bark of the Root of wild Cowcumber to one scruple given in
new Wine, five seeds or more of Palma Christi in powder, also the Grana Regia
of Mesue, from seven to ten or twelve, their shells taken off, beaten and given
in a rear Egg to avoid Vomiting, or in Figgs or Dates.

These are better if you mix them with powder of Rhubarb, Spike, Cinnamon, or
Mastick.

Or thus; Take the Leaves of Soldanella one dram and an half, Senna two drams,
Rhubarb one scruple, Sugar one dram: make a Powder for one dose.

Or, Take Soldanella one dram and an half, Turbith one dram, Rhubarb half a
dram, Ginger one scruple, Sugar one dram make a Powder, give it as the former,
and if you put to it a little Esula prepared it will be stronger.

This is excellent. Take Soldanella half a dram, Powder of Grass-hoppers one
scruple give it with Broth.

Gum sagapenum with Myrobalans or Rhubarb is given by some, very excellently if
it be dissolved in Vinegar and given with Aloes and Troches of Alhandal, or
Scammony in form of a Pill often.

Water purging Pills, are made with the Pills of Rhubarb or Agarick or
Agregative, or of Euphorbium, or Sagapenum or the like, with Juice of
Flower-de-luce, or Sowbread, or of Palma Christi.

The Pills of Rhasis made of Rhubarb purge water, and are these. Take of
Rhubarb one dram, and Agarick one dram and two scruples, Endive seeds one dram:
make them up with Juice of Endive, or Agrimony.

Thus made they are safer: Take of Rhubarb and Agarick each one dram and an
half; of Spike half a scruple, with Juice of Flower-de-luce, in which Spurge
and Laurel and Euphorbium have been steeped, make them up.

The Pills of Mezereon are in use made of the Leaves of Mezereon five drams,
steeped three days in Vinegar, and one ounce of Myrobalans, with Manna, pulp
of Tamarinds, and Endive water.

If you take only half the quantity of Myrobalans, and two drams of Rhubarb and
make them with the Infusion of Traganth they will be safer.

There are usual Pills also of Elaterium made of three drams of Elaterium,
Aloes two drams, Mastick one dram, with Juice of Elder or Dwarf ^^der.

Or, half a scruple of Elaterium with half a dram of Mastick Pills or two
scruples, or de Tribus, the Pills of Rhubarb, or Aggregative, or mix the
Elaterium with Troches of Rhubarb, or of Lack.

There are Pills of Philonius called Hydrogogae made of Laurel steeped in
Vinegar, Diagredium, Rhubarb, Myrobalans, Orris roots, Costus, Wormwood, Anise
and Fennel seeds, wood Aloes, Lack, burnt Brass, and Juice of Fennel.

Clysters do also purge water, by the Meseraicks, is brought again into the
Belly, which they do by cleansing and stirring up Nature, and by opening the
Mouths of the Veins, thus made, and they also take down the Belly by expelling
wind.

A gentle Clyster is thus made: Take of Beets, Mercury, Pellitory, Cranes bill,
or Dove foot, and Rue each three or four handfuls, Flowers of Elder, Broom, St.
John's Wort, Chamomil, Dill, white Lillies each three pugils or four, Caraway
seeds half an ounce, Smallage seed, or the great or less hot seeds half an
ounce, Senna one ounce and an half, of Carthamus seeds one ounce: boil them in
Water, and dissolve Hiera benedicta, or Leaven half an ounce, Honey one ounce,
Oil of Bayse one ounce and an half, with a little salt, make a Clyster.

It will be stronger with more Purgers, as Agarick, or Turbith half an ounce,
Asarum three drams, or with only a dram of Coloquintida, leaving out the
purging Electuaries.

It will purge water strongly by adding a handful of Soldanella or spurge to
the Decoction, or one ounce and an half of the Roots of wild Cowcumbers and as
much of Sowbread, and Smallage roots.

Another: Take the Urine of a sound, choleric Man, or Lixivium which is not
too strong, and dissolve in it one ounce of stale Leaven, and one ounce and an
half of Oil of Rue, and it will be stronger if you add half an ounce of the
Juice of Flower-de-luce root, which may be added also to the former.

For other Evacuations, especially Sweats which bring the Water into the Feet
and other parts, they are good, but not to be forced too much, for so they are
hurtful, because the sick being in Bed and taking hot things is inward and
outward in danger of Suffocation for want of Breath, therefore except they come
freely, and in the declining of the Disease: for taking Swelling from the Feet,
you must not sweat. But if the Party by inclined thereto and can sweat
standing, use such as we showed in Leucophlegmacy, which if they move not,
Sweat yet will purge by Urin.

Evacuation by Vomit, because it shakes the Belly too much, and increases the
shortness of breathing, it is hurtful to some; yet in some if there be a
Revulsion made by Vomits from the Meseraick Veins to the Stomach and Guts, or
to take away something that causes the water, if they be easy to vomit it may
do well; as also if then thirsty they drink much water, to vomit it up again,
Rhasis advises to provoke Sneezing, to send the water to the Kidneys.

We can do little good by Blood-letting in a Dropsy, because except there be
another Disease joined, as an Inflammation, it cannot help the Bowels, and it
brings none of the water from the Belly, or Habit of the Body, nor out of the
Meseraicks, nor much of that which is in the branches of the hollow Vein, for
we find that in Dropsies they bleed clear, thick and black Blood, by
Experience. Yet if the Haemorrhoid Veins use to bleed or do open themselves,
the water in the Meseraicks may be sent forth in great quantity thereby.

Water is often taken from the belly by cutting, burning, or pricking it, as
also from the Codds and Feet.

And that which is done by tapping or pricking of the belly called Paracentesis
is the best, for by it all the water may be taken out of the belly, sooner then
by any other way. Therefore it is most usual, and ought to be betimes before
the water by long continuance defile the bowels, and the strength decrease,
because this wound being made only slightly through the Skin, Muscles, and
Peritonaeum brings no danger as the People suppose, nor can the Guts be thereby
so made any ways hurt, because the Superficies of the Belly being stretched
with water, is at such a distance from them, and they lie, as is proved by
discection, far separated from the parts divided. Besides it is impossible that
the Patient should escape, in regard the water can get out no other way by
stool or urine, it is therefore better in a desperate Condition, to try this
Remedy as the last, then to leave the Patient, because except the Greatness of
the Cause do hinder, they may thus sometimes be cured, or if they die, in
regard they could not otherwise be cured, the Physician by foretelling this,
may keep his credit and his Conscience clear. And the Patient shall get this
benefit at least, that when the water is let forth, he shall be freed from his
great shortness of Breathing, and other internal Griefs, and so die in a more
easy posture.

But for the doing this handsomely, you must choose a place three fingers below
the Navel, on the side, and there where the Muscles of the lower Belly are
oblique and transverse, and lie upon the flesh, because you may better make a
wound there, then in the middle under the Navel, where the nervous parts are of
the Muscles which make the white line which is Nervous. Therefore with an
Incision knife, or some other fit Instrument make a wound through the Skin,
Muscles and Peritonaeum gently, least you hurt the Guts, and receive the water
in a Basin, which usually gusheth forth violently.

And you must presently shut the Orifice again, least it flow all forth at a
time, and so take away the strength, so that the water may be taken out by
Degrees, daily twice or thrice a little at a time, by closing the Orifice
without loss of strength, which must in the same time be restored with proper
Remedies. In which we must have a special Care that we commit not an Error, and
that we may stop the water when we please; which is done by putting in a hollow
top which may shut the Orifice, so that we may open it and shut it as we
please; or if, before we make the Orifice, we draw down the skin, and cut it
transverse as far as the Muscles, and after cut within with an Incision knife:
For then the lower Orifice of the wound made first in the skin rising when the
skin is loose, the inward Orifice will be hid and stopped, and when the skin is
drawn down again, it will be opened, and so we may keep and let out the water
as we please, and prevent its flowing out at other times.

Moreover we must consider when the water flow's forth whether it be clear and
without evil Sent, for then it is a good sign, because we suppose from thence
that the bowels are not yet putrified, but if it stink or be bloody, it is to
be supposed evil.

A Puncture made in the Codd, as we shall show in Hydrocele, does not only
give vent and let out the water there, but if it be long kept open, it will
take it from the Belly by degrees and by the same way that it first sell into
the Cod; for which Cause, if the Puncture be not made in the belly, it may
safely be made in the Codd: And this is the only way to cure any dropsy
curable though it be neglected. Also we may take water from under the skin by
Scarification. Which being make in the Feet, does not only evacuate that which
is there abouts; but because other water comes always in the room of that
which is let out, it setcheth it so from the upper parts and hollow of the
Belly, that by long and plentiful Evacuation, it takes it from the Belly also,
and it cease to swell. And this Scarification being usual, is not refused by
the sick; although it may seem strange, because the water flowing may cause an
Inflammation, and sometimes a Gangraen, and this may be thought to be from the
Scarification which may be a reproach to the Physician. That he may avoid this,
he must foretell that this may come from the malignity of the water, when it
begins to flow either by Incision or of it self. Moreover the Scarification
must be rightly made, and good Government used. And this is done by making it
in the fleshy parts of the Feet about the Ancle, or first trying in the Thigh,
only cutting the scarf skin which will drop, and then piercing the true skin
gently, making Wounds broad and at a distance with a large incision Knife; and
let the water that comes away be gently wiped off with a Linnen-cloath, without
rubbing, and after let the Inflammation be taken away with white Ointment and
Juyces convenient, as of Nightshade, Plantane, Henbane, or with the Leaves laid
on: And let us chiefly take heed least the Roulers or Bolsters be always wet
by changing them continually, or by anointing them with Goats suet, or Dears
suet to keep them from taking water.

Some commend the Scarification of the whole Belly to the Nervous parts of the
Muscles, which cover the straight Muscles, to draw out water.

Also you may let out water by raising Blisters in the feet and breaking them,
and by keeping them open. And these use to come by the force of the water
within the skin-being sharp and burning: Otherwise they are made by art, by
light burning of the skin, by an actual Cautery: By these means one in a
Dropsy was cured with a warming that burnt his Feet, being in the Bed at that
time. Or this may be done by Vesicatories, foretelling always the Danger of
Inflammation and Gangraen, and by using gentle things, because if you apply
very hot things to raise Blisters, you will cause Inflammation sooner then by
Scarification.

Moreover Water does not only flow by blistering the Feet, out of the whole
Belly, but we sometimes find the Navel enlarged with a clear Bladder full of
water, by which being opened with no pain, the water has all come forth with
great force. And this way of Cure being so easy, might be by often applying
Cupping glasses to the Navel to raise it.

Water also may be let out by an Issue in the Feet, which would quickly cause
Inflammation, if made with an actual Cautery; Therefore it is better to use a
Potential cautery, which opens the skin by Mortification without pain (in the
Feet if nothing hinder,) with such Cautions as are before mentioned. And this
may be done without Danger in the Cod, but not in the Belly, because it is too
thick.

Also if the Dropsy come from weakness of the Bowels, and fullness of Humors,
from Obstructions or Hardness, you may use altering Medicines such as are
mentioned in a Cachexy: And these are chief which are so compounded, that they
dry up water and provoke Urin, as these following.

A Decoction. Take of the five opening Roots, Succory, Flower-de luce each one
ounce and an half; of Dandelion, five leaved Grass, Dropwort, Valcrian and
Eryngus each one ounce; of Asarum roots, half an ounce, of inner Bark of
Tamarisk, Ash, Elder, C^par roots each six drams; of Endive Agrimony,
Horehound, Germander, Groundpine the Capilar Herbs, Burnet; Mouseare, Wormwood,
and Carduus us each one handful; of the Flowers of Elder, Broom, Tamarisk, St.
John's Wort, Bugloss, Borage, each one pugil; of the four great cold Seeds half
an ounce, of the less cold Seeds three drams, Pease one pugil, of Smallage,
Fennel, and Parsley seeds each two drams, of Raisons stoned two ounces, of
Liquorish one ounce and an half, make a Decoction in water, and the fourth part
wine, with as much Sugar as is sufficient, you may add the Juice of
Flower-de-luce, and a little Cinnamon, Schaenanth, Spike, or Cassia Lignea, or
Diarrhodon or Trionsantalon, etc.

To these may be added the Roots of white Carduus, Polypody, Fern, Docks, the
great Celandine, Ash bark, Misleto of the Oak, Cleavers, Plantane, Devils bit,
Hops, Mints, Hysop, Poly mountane, Bettony, Pennyroyal, Organ, Rue, Marjoram.

Another Decoction: Take of the Roots of Fennel, and Parsley each one ounce, of
Rhapontick two drams, of Wormwood Ceterach, Agrimony, each two drams, of the
four great cold seeds each one dram; of Schaenanth, and Spike each one dram:
boil them in chicken broth, or infuse them in Wine without the cold Seeds.

Rhasis has a Potion much esteemed, of Wormwood, Dodder, Winter-cherries,
Fumitory, the four great cold Seeds, Schaenanth, and Spike in Whey.

Of simple Decoctions, that of Lignum vitae is best, to provoke Urine, also a
decoction of Garlic and Madder with Honey, of the broad Plantane by it self,
or with Lentils, as Dioscorides, who approves the Decoction of Organ with Figs,
and of Pease with Rosemary, and of sweet cane, with Smallage seed.

A pound of Misleto of the Oak sliced in three pints of water boiled to half,
is good if morning and evening four ounces be given, for a long time, you may
sweeten it with Sugar, and a little Cinnamon.

A Decoction also of Earthworms with things that provoke Urine, as Smallage
roots, Orris, or Asarum, or the Bark of Elder roots, of Danewort, Ivy-berries.

Also Wormwood wine, for weak stomaches made with Sack, provokes Urine
wonderfully: Also wine of Horehound and Squils.

Compound wines are made of many of the aforesaid mixed together, as; Take
Roots of Smallage, Fennel, and Flowerde-luce each one ounce and an half;
Valerian, Acorus each one ounce; of Master-wort and Gentian, each half an
ounce; Asarum and Squils, each two drams; of the Bark of the Root of Elder, or
of Danwort, and Sassaphras each one ounce; of dried Wormwood, Horehound,
Agrimony, Maiden hair, Germander, Carduus each two drams; the Tops of the
lesser Centaury, Broom, and Tamarisk flowers each one dram; of dried
Elder-berries two drams, of Parsley, and Fennel seeds each one dram and an
half; of Ameos, and Dill seed each one dram; of Cinnamon two drams, of Spike
half a dram: bruise them for two or three quarts of ^ine.

A Lie made of Bean stalks, or Juniper ashes dried in a Furnace, often strained
or long steeped in water, drunk sometimes, has often done good; And some have
been recorered by drinking nothing else, but it has been small: Al^o that is
good which is made of Broom ashes: Also that of Ivy, Bitter-sweet, and of Hedge
Hysop, and if wine be used instead of water or mixed therewith, it will pierce
the more; Or if you bind the Ashes aforesaid in a knot of Linen, and steep it
in wine, it will cure, especially if the Ashes are made of Plants not thoroughly
burnt, but dried to ashes in an oven

I did much for one in a Dropsy with this Lie, when his Codds and Yard were
swollen Take of the Ashes of Vine and Bean stalks, and of Bitter-sweet, and
Holly bark, and Juniper, all burnt in an Oven without flame each one handful;
pour a pottle of water thereon, and let it run through, till it grow a Lie, and
then boil it with Sugar, and skum it, and when it is cold, give it a relish
with one ounce of Cinnamon water, let him drink thereof in the morning, and one
hour before or after Supper three or four ounces.

The Chemists like the Salts made from thence better, as of Wormwood, Juniper,
Hedge Hysop, and Dwarse-elder. If one drink their own Urin, or that of a young
Boy it will provoke urine. Dioscorides commends the urine of a Goat drunk every
day with Spikenard, distilled waters penetrat, much, if drunk often four ounces
with wine.

Simple waters are of Elder, or Dwarse-elder roots, and Flowers or Berries, of
Orris roots and flowers, and of great Celandine: also of white Lillies, of
Raddish, French beans and Dodder: and of other opening and diuretic Herbs, and
Roots, among which the water of Sea Fennel is best: some commend a water
distilled of Man's dung, and Tobacco water.

The Compound waters are made of the aforesaid, with Juice of Flower-de luce,
some add Cantharides, cinnamon, Spike, and Schaenanth.

The Chemist make some stronger waters, which they give by spoonfulls, adding
to the aforesaid, as celandine, Elder, etc. Tartar and Vitriol calcined, and a
little Spirit of wine, or of Tartar and Vitriol alone with Flints burnt and
poudered, they make a water which they after distill and account a secret.

Dioscorides gives the Juice of Lazerpitium or Benjamin, with Figs, the Juice
of Brooklime with wine, some commend the Juice of Tobacco, some the Extract of
Juniper.

The Oil of bastard Saffron, and the Oils of the Salts aforesaid, are mixed
with the former by the Chemists.

Those Compositions mentioned in a cachexy from weakness of Bowels,
Obstructions and Hardness, are good because they provoke Urine.

Also Juleps, and the milky Potion made of Turpentine.

Also Electuaries, especially that we mentioned in a cachexy, when a Dropsy is
feared, as that made of the Juice of Elder, and Dwarse-elder and Dialacca, and
Diacurcuma.

Of the Compounds we may give the two last best, and of Simples the Powder of
the Tops of the lesser centaury, and of Sea wormwood.

Also Powder of Dill with Wormwood or Horehoundwine.

Also the Powder of a Wolfes Liver or Guts, or the Powder or Ashes of Hens
Guts, the Liver of a Cuckoo, and Spleen of an Ass, or of a Colt, when the
Spleen is affected, the Flesh of an Hedghog, the Body of a Bat with the Head
taken off, Earthworms, all dried and poudered, or burnt to ashes given alone,
or with other Pouders in wine, syrup or water convenient, are thought proper
for these Bowels distempered.

Spanish Flies also, or Grass-hoppers, or Crickets baked to a Powder, and one
scruple given with water or convenient Syrup or Milk provokes Urine
powerfully, also you may add cherry-tree, or Plum-tree Gum, to hinder their
ulcerating.

Some commend burnt Brass, and Powder of Lodestone.

Also the Pills mentioned in a cachexy, are good against the Dropsy that comes
from thence. And these following are most powerful to provoke Urine. Take of
Cantharides without the thin wings half a scruple, Mastick six grains, Rhubarb
half a dram, powder them finely, and make them up with Turpentine, or Fir Tree,
Rosin two drams, adding the Infusion of Gum Traganth made in Violet water, and
fresh Butter each half a dram; make them up with Sugar candy into Pills, give
one dram at the first to try the strength of them.

Also we endeavor to consume water in the Belly and the parts below with
outward Applications, such as draw it forth and digest or dry it into a Vapor.

You may make Fomentations and Baths for the belly and swollen Legs, and Codds,
of Seawater, or salted water, or Suphur, nitrous or bituminous Waters,
Artificial or Natural.

Or of a strong Lie, especially for the Feet, by straining water or wine
through the ashes of Vines, Oak, Beech Beans, Cole-worts, Bones or the like,
with Alum and Salt if you will have it stronger, with which you may wet clout,
and lay them upon the Legs.

Or you may make Fomentations and Baths of a Decoction of Wine, Bean water, or
the like: chiefly of the roots and Leaves of Dwarse-elder, also of Orris,
Nettle, Celandine, Sowbread, the Bark of the Root of an Elm, and Fern,
Centaury, Mezereon or Mountain-peper, Rue, Calaminth, Organ red Coleworts,
chamomil flowers, Elder and the other Dryers, with Brimstone, Salt or Alum,
sometimes Scales of Iron, and three drams of the Powder of Grass-Hoppers, or
cantharides to provoke Urin also.

Or make this Fomentation: Take of common Lie ten pints, Vinegar one pint, Salt
or Alum three ounces: boil them with drying Plants, and foment the parts with
a Sponge.

A Stove or dry Bath does more dry and draw out the humors by sweat, from the
inferior parts, and the more violently, if you quench Flints in the bath to
raise the fume: some have with good success used Laurel boiled therein.

Also a Fume raised by Iron, Flints or Marchasits quenched in Vinegar, or by
Vinegar powered upon them, or upon a Mil-stone is good, and the rather if
Dwarse-elder be boiled first in the Vinegar.

Or jet quenched in Vinegar.

Cover the lower parts of the body with hot Sand, the Sea-sand is best by
reason of the salt which is drying, therefore Dioscorides bid it be done at the
Sea shore, other sand will do the same with salt and ashes.

This may be done also with ashes alone, which are best when made of drying
Herbs and Woods.

The same may be done in a heap of Corn, Malt, Bran, or trodden Grapes being
hot.

Fill baggs with warm Sand, ashes, and parched Salt, and apply them to the
Belly and Feet; to which you may add drying Herbs, and the great or less hot
Seeds.

In the Dropsy Ascites, sweat provoked with Dane-wort as follows, takes down
the Tumor. Take a good quantity of Dane-wort fried without Water, and not
burnt, lay it upon a Quilt or Blanket, upon which let the Patient lie and sweat
while he is able, refreshing himself with Cordials that he may continue the
longer in it.

There are also diverse Plasters, Cataplasms and Ointments for swollen Bellies,
and Feet and Codds, when full with water, to consume it, with things proper for
the bowels thus.

Of Simples, Raddish roots, or Acorus, Pepper-wort bruised raw, or boiled in
strong Vinegar, which with Watercresses, and Mustard seed, they are stronger.

Also Onions beaten with Honey and Pepper, and applied, as Dioscorides commends
the Lies of Oil or Greass in an untan'd skin to rub upon the part.

The Root of a wild Cowcumber bruised and steeped twenty four hours in Vinegar
of Squills, with twice as much Honey, is an excellent Medicine if boiled with a
little Powder of cummin.

Goats dung and Cow dung also applied to the belly, and Pigeons, and Hens dung
alone, or mixed or boiled with the urin of a Boy, or Goat, or with Lie or with
Wine, Vinegar or Oxymel simple or made of Squills, adding Sulphur, Niter or
Salt.

Or, Take of dried Goats dung, or Cow dung, the Plaster of Bay Berries each
half a pound; the Ashes of Snails or shellfish half an ounce, of Vinegar and
Honey as much as will make a Plaster.

Another more excellent.

Take of Pigeons dung, and Wine of the best each one pound; Vinegar three
ounces, of Juice of Dane-wort and Flower-deluce each two ounces; Honey three
ounces, Quick brimstone one ounce, Salt or Niter half an ounce, of Flower of
Beans or Lupines one ounce and an half: boil them to thickness, adding at the
end Bay berries one ounce, Cummin seed half an ounce, Water-cresse seed,
Cypress roots, Elicampane each two drams; of Chamomil and Dill flowers each one
pugil; of Turpentine as much as will make a Cataplasm.

Another is thus made: Take of Goats dung or dried Cow dung four ounces, of
Frankincense, Mastich, and Myrrh each one ounce; Cypress roots and Costus each
half an ounce; Cummin two drams, Brimstone, Salt each three drams; as much
Honey and Vinegar of Squills as will make a Plaster.

Or, Take of the aforesaid Dungs two ounces, of Dove foot Rue, Pellitory,
Dwarse elder each three handfuls, boil them in Urin or Lie with Salt, Water and
Wine; beat them adding Meal of Lupines, Bay berries each three ounces; Oil of
Rue two ounces, make a Cataplasm.

Snails bruised and applied are very good, Dioscorides bids you use the shells
also, therefore they must be dried and poudered, also the slime of Snails is
good if you add as much Goats or Cow dung to the Snails, the Plaster will be
better, to which for the Bowels, you may add Mastich, Spikenard, Schaenanth and
Asarum.

Or thus, Take Bay berries half an ounce, Cummin or Caraway seeds two drams,
Water cress seeds, Agnus Castus and staphsacre each one dram; Orris roots three
drams, Asarum one dram, Mastick and Myrrh each two drams; Mummy one dram, Spike
and Schaenanth each half a dram; Brimstone three drams, burnt Salt two drams,
the Ashes of a Vine or Oak or of Sanils, one dram, make a fine Powder, sprinkle
it with strong Vinegar, and with so much Goat or Cow dung or Snails flesh, make
a Cataplasm.

If the belly be anointed with some Juyces or Plasters made of them, water may
be drawn forth, the Juice of sowbread, dragons or Cuckow-pintles, wild
Cowcumbers, Mezereon, Spurge, Laurel and Soldanella are best, then of
Dwarfe-elder, Elder, Flower-de-luce, Birth-wort, Asarum, Mercury, mix them with
Bean or Lupine Meal or Orobus, adding sometimes Spike, Asarum, Schaenanth, and
apply it like a Pultis very large about the Navel, or make them into an
Ointment.

Thus; Take of the Juice of wild Cowcumbers three ounces, Juice of Sowbread or
Dragons two ounces, Juice of Spurge or Laurel one ounce, Juice of Dwarfe-elder,
and of Flower-deluce each one ounce and an half, of Ox gall half an ounce, Oil
of Nuts, Squills and Butter each four ounces; make a Decoction til the Juyces
be partly consumed, adding afterward one dram and an half of the powder of
Scammony, Coloquintida one dram, Euphorbium, two drams, of the Powder of the
Root of Sowbread, if the Juice be not in, three drams, Wax as much as will make
an Ointment.

If you boil a little of it with Honey, it will be very strong.

Or you may use the following Liquor to the parts swollen: Take of the juice of
wild Cowcumbers one ounce and an half, the juice of Dwarfe-elder and
Flower-de-luce two ounces, the Leaves of Laurel, or Spurge one handful, of
Turpentine twelve ounces, Myrrh half an ounce, Frankincense, and Mastick each
two drams; Nutmeg half an ounce, mix them and distill them.

Or anoint with the Oil following; Take of Oil of Nuts or Line seed one pound
and an half, Wine and Vinegar of squils three ounces, boil in them the Fruit or
Leaves of wild Cowcumbers, also Mezereon or Laurel bruised three handfuls, of
the Roots of Squills and Euphorbium each half an ounce: strain them for Use.

To these you may add Wormwood water to strengthen the Bowels, and if the Liver
be hurt, the Juice of the Roots of comfrey, and boil them with Oxymel, adding
Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar of Squils, and mix Sanders, Spike, Dialacca,
or Diacurcuma, and apply it to the whole Belly.

Other Applications are thus made: Take of Sowbread roots one dram and an half,
the Roots of Asarum one dram, Birth-worth and Pellitory of Spain each half a
dram; of Smallage, Rue, and Mustard seed each two scruples, of Spike and
Schaenanth each half a dram, of Ashes of Grass hoppers, and Spanish Flies one
scruple, of Oil of Wormwood, Bays or Rue each two ounces, of Oil of Scorpions
one ounce, with Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar and Wax make a Liniment; or with
Orobus, Lupine, or Bean flower, a Pultis, or leaving out the Oils mix the
pouders and meals with juice of wild Cowcumbers, Laurel, Sowbread or Dragons,
and make an Ointment or Cataplasm which with Honey will stick better, or a
Plaster with Pitch and Wax.

Or, Take burnt Brass two drams, Alum or Salt half an ounce, Orris three
drams, Orobus meal one ounce, mix them as the other with Oil of Squills or
Juyces.

The usual Ointment to anoint the Belly is that of Artenita or Sowbread is
best, it is Mesuas and is made of Juice of Sowbread, wild Cowcumbers, Vinegar,
Ox gall, Aloes, Scammony, Coloquintida, Turbith, Mezereon, Euphorbium,
Sagapenum, Myrrh, Polypody, Chamomil, Pepper, Ginger, Sal Gem. Oil of
Flower-de-luce, Butter and Wax.

There is another Ointment of Sowbread which is good against a hard spleen made
of the Juice of Sowbread, Dwarse-elder, Vinegar, Tamarisk, Polypody, Gum
Ammoniack, Bdellium, capar Roots, Spikenard, and Oil of Flower-de-luce.

Ointment of Aregon is good in a Dropsy to anoint the Belly, it is made of
Dragon Roots, wild cowcumbers, Pellitory, Briony, Laurel, Sage, Savine,
Fleabane, Rosemary, Marjoram, wild Time, Rue, Bays, calaminths, Mastick,
Olibanum, Euphorbium, with Ginger, Pepper, Oil of Musk, Bayse, Petrolium, Bears
grease, butter and wax.

The Ointment called Agrippa's of Nicolas is used for the same, it is made of
Briony roots, wild Cowcumbers, Squills, Orris, Dwarf elder Water, caltrop, Oil
and Wax.

Applications to the bladder do provoke urin, which are described in the
suppression of Urine, as that Fomentation of the Decoction of Garlic, Juice of
Dove-foot and boys Urine, also anointing with the Oil of Scorpions and the like.

Some fume the Anus with such things as they do the belly and Feet, and anoint
it with Aqua vitae, and Oil of Euphorbium, or castorium, and Juice of
Flower-de-luce, adding if they inflame, butter and oil, cataplasmes will do the
same, such as are used to the belly, the virtue of which will come from the
Podex to the belly.

They report that the stone in a water-snakes belly which she vomiteth into the
water, when she is tied by a string to her Tail, is of such force to consume
water, that it presently consumes the water into which it falls, and if it be
laid to the belly, consumes the water there also.

You must have regard to the Liver and Spleen, if distempered, with such
Remedies as are prescribed in these Diseases, especially in a cachexy and
Obstructions.

The Air must be dry, which is better then moist; Exercise, if they can bear
it, does discuss, Frictions or Rubbings do it more, especially if the Hands be
anointed with Salt and Oil, or Oil and Water, and then if you rub till the skin
be red.

Also Mustard seed and Urine rubbed upon the belly to make it red and discuss.

Cupping-glasses applied to the whole belly are good to discuss.

Watchings although they dry more then sleep does, yet because they weaken and
are troublesome to difficult breathers, you must not allow them much.

The Diet must be moderate, of good Juice and easy concoction, abstaining from
moist things, and roast is better then boiled, they must abstain from salt,
spiced and hot things which provoke Thirst: they may use Diuretics, or such as
provoke Urine, as Parsley, Fennel, Rocket, and Cole-worts, Livers of Wolves,
Foxes, Hens, and Larks are counted proper.

They must not forget Sallads which provoke urine and loosen the belly, made of
young Elder budds, and of Dwarfeelder, first boiled a little, with much Oil and
a little Vinegar, and Sugar if they please.

Let them drink little, for it is hard wholly to forbear, yet when some have
done it many days, they have been cured, being their bowels were not hurt.
Water drinking, especially much, is hurtful, with a little Vinegar, it will
quench the Thirst better; thin sharp wine is good to provoke Urine, Vinegar is
good sauce not only for the Spleen, but Liver and to quench Thirst.

The spreading Tumor of the Feet differs from Oedema, The Cure of swollen Feet.
it is softer and comes of crude and serous Juice, and sometimes it is in one
Foot, sometimes in an other, very large, sometimes in a certain place below or
about the Ankles, or, as we have observed, upon the skin, which if it come
after this or that manner without another Disease continues long, and if it
cease, it returns at certain times, it is harder to be cured in some that are
accustomed to it, and it is hard to prevent from returning, except the body be
very well purged from those Excrements and Humidities which Nature constantly
sends to these inferior parts, and the return of them prevented. And this is
done by a moderate and sparing Diet, and often purging, by sweating, sometimes
for a week or two together, or for a month continually or by Urine, with other
particular Evacuations, and altering Medicines, that consume these Humors, and
such as strengthen the bowels, the weakness of which was the cause of them.
These kinds of Medicines have been declared in Defluxions, and in the
Joynt-gout which come from such watery Humors, and the like, and may be applied
to this Disease.

As for outward Medicines you must at first repel those Humors which make the
Feet swell, applying such things as we said would strike back Oedematous Tumors
spread abroad; then they are to be dried up and consumed, with such things as
were propounded in the same case in the Dropsy Ascites, with Fomentations,
Ointments, and Plasters. Roulers do excellently in this, to keep the Humors
from returning, if daily with a long Rouler a Hands breadth, beginning at the
soal of the Foot, you roll to the Knee in the morning before the Feet begin to
swell, as they do in the day; and so let them be till they go to bed, or keep
them so night and day which may be done with a soft Boot, or laced Stockin or
other Arts.

Other Tumors that fall into the Feet after sickness by excrementitious
Moisture that falls down, are taken for a good sign, The Cure of swollen feet
after sickness.
and therefore neglected: For they either go away of their own accord, or after
a little purging or sweating. But if these come from any hurt in the Bowels
left by a Disease, then because it is the beginning of a dropsy, you must
proceed as we have taught therein.

If Hydrocele be joined with Ascites and the Codds are filled with water as the
belly, they are both dangerous; The Cure of a Hydrocele or Water-rupture.
for the cure, it must be as the Ascites which must chiefly be regarded, for if
the belly fall, the Codds will also cease swelling; And if not, then apply the
outward Medicines mentioned in Ascites, as Fomentations, Fumes, Plasters, etc:
To the codds, as we showed: let out the water by a Prick, and that which is in
the belly will follow.

But if Hydrocele come of it self without any other Disease, and the codds
alone be swollen, because it brings no great hinderance it is usually neglected
at the first, but it must be cured by those Remedies mentioned in Ascites to
let out the water. Among which the cataplasmes made of Goat and Cow dung, and
the flesh of Snails only are the best, leaving out the things which are
prescribed for the bowels.

Or make this Pultis: Take Goat or Cow dung one pound, of Snails boiled in Lie
and cut small twelve, mix them with the dung, then boil them all with the
remainder of the Lie, then add Bean flowers three ounces, Cummin seed half an
ounce, Mustard seed one dram, Brimstone one ounce, the Ashes of Snail shells
and Cabbage roots and stalks burnt, half an ounce: mix them.

In the mean while soment the part with Lie to which there is added Salt and
Brimstone.

Besides these you may use by turns things that consume water and astringe, and
shut up the Passage by which water falls into the Codd, and also dry up the
water.

Such as this is made of the dung aforesaid with the third part of Bole and
Vinegar or Oxymel.

Or this, Take Bran one pound, Bean flower four ounces, Cummin seeds two drams,
Galls six drams, Hypocistis or Conserve of Sloes half an ounce, Alum two
drams; boil them in Oxymel to a Pultis.

If the Tumor yet abate not, you must prick it, which is easily done without
great pain in the lowest part of the cod, with an incision Knife thrust into
the skin which is stretched out, and so let out the water, and press it forth
till all be out, and then keep the wound some time open with a Tent, or with a
seton or skein of Silk drawn through by another Orifice.

Besides this, if the Party be so subject to this Tumor that it returns again,
you must thus prevent it, by hindering the increase of water in the Belly with
good Diet, and such things as consume Water, as we showed in the weakness of
the Stomach; And if there be any fault perceived in the Bowels ordained for
Sanguification or making of blood, you must use things mentioned in a Cachexy.

And if we perceive by the return of it again speedily, that this Swelling
comes from the falling down of the Peritonaeum, you must keep it up with such
Remedies as were mentioned in fleshy Ruptures called Epiplocele and Enterocole;
and if they prevail not, you must use a Truss or Ligature to keep it up, first
making incision in the Groin, as in other Relaxations and Ruptures. And because
this is dangerous for loss of life or one stone, it must not be done but upon
great Necessity, especially in a Hydrocele which is less troublesome, and may be
cured by a Puncture.

The watery Tumor int he Groin, The Cure of the watery Tumor in the Groin.
in Women being like the Hydrocele in men, is cured the same way, applying
things that consume water.

The Cure of the Swelling about the Navel called Hydromphalus, The Cure of
Hydromphalus of the Navel.
is by external Applications and manual Operation.

The Hydrocephalus being a tumor of the Head, The Cure of Hydrocephalus.
is hardly cured with outward Applications, because the skin is there so thick,
that the matter cannot de digested, but when you have tried the best Medicines
mentioned in Oedema and the Dropsy without success; you may easily cure it by
cutting or burning, and the safer, because there is no danger of great loss of
blood.

If the Eyebrows be swollen, either they fall by actual Heat, The Cure of
swolen Eye-lidds.
or by Fomentations, (the Eyes being shut) or discussing ointments mentioned in
the watery Oedema.

Phlyctaenae or little Bladders full of water either depart of themselves, The
Cure of Phlyctaenae.
or by pricking or cutting to let out the water, and then the cut may be cured.

Hydroata or water Pustles are little and many, The Cure of Hydroata.
called Saren in high Dutch. If these vex by itching, because they argue much
salt or choleric Water, he must be purged, with things mentioned in the Itch,
and they must be opened to let out the water, to which the itching calls the
Nails, or they must be pricked with a Needle, and afterward the Scabs are to
be cured, as we showed.

The Cure of Bladders in the Eyes was showed when we speak of their pains, you
must cure all windy Tumors as a Tympany of the belly, or as the puffing up of
the whole body is cured, at first. And after it be in the Codd called
Pneumatocele, or in the Throat called Bronchocele, or a Physodes you must look
to Particulars.

There are three sorts of Tympanies, from diverse causes, two are more usual,
the first comes from wind only in the Guts, the other from wind and water in
the cavity of the belly; the third is very seldom which comes from wind only
shut up in the cavity of the belly: we will declare what is to be done in all
three.

The first kind of Tympany which comes from wind not gathered into the cavity
of the Belly, The Cure of the Tympany of the Guts.
but in the Stomach and Guts, which so stretches them, that the belly
swells, if it come from rouling together of the Guts, or from some old
Obstruction, and if the Guts be made exceeding thin thereby, so that they
cannot again come to their former condition, or be broken as we have known,
with a little force: It is for the most part desparate; but if this stretching
or stoppage has not been so old, so that it seems rather like a Cholick from
wind, then a true Tympany, then there is Hope of cure.

And it is thus begun, by opening again the Passages of the Guts, and that
speedily and chiefly with Glysters which by softning and pricking do loosen the
Belly. and discuss the wind, or by purges such as are mentioned in the cholick,
and in the binding of the belly; where we have been so large that we need not
repeat them again.

But in the other kind of Tympany, The Cure of the Tympany joined with ascites.
when wind and water in the cavity of the belly, cause it to swell, which is
most treated of, because most usual, because the Tympany and Ascites meet being
both dangerous the case is worse.

The Cure of this differs not much from that of Ascites, only you must respect
the weakness of the Stomach which causes wind, and whether the wind come from
the Stomach, or from water turned into wind, you must regard both

And first you must purge with such Purgers as were mentioned in Cachexy and
Leucophlegmacy, for to cleanse the belly and Stomach of Excrements, and then
purge water, and wind.

You may use these following,

Take of Liqucrish one ounce and an half, opening Roots each one ounce;
Valerian, Orris, and Elicampane each half an ounce; Asarum two drams, Mints,
Bettony, Horehound, Maidenhair, Germander each one handful; Cordial flowers,
Broom, Rosemary, and Lavender flowers each one pugil; Anise and Fennel seeds
each two drams; Parsley, Sesili, Endive, Dodder seed each one dram; Melon seeds
two drams, Raisons stoned one ounce, Senna and Carthamus seeds each one ounce
and an half; Epithimum three drams, and if you please two drams of Soldanella:
boil them in water, and the third part wine, infuse Rhubarb, Agarick and
Mechoacan each half an ounce; Cinnamon, Ginger, and Sanders each one dram,
Spike and Schaenanth each half a dram; Sugar as much as is sufficient for an
Apozeme, for three or four doses.

Or make this wine. Take of Succory roots, and Fennel roots each one ounce, of
Orris and Elicampane each half an ounce of Gentian and Valerian each two drams;
Wormwood, Mints, Groundpine, Ceterach each one handful; Topps of Centaury and
Rosemary each one pugil; Fennel seed half an ounce, Caraway seed two drams,
Senna one ounce and an half, Agarick, Rhubarb each half an ounce; Spike,
Schaenanth each half a dram; infuse them in a sufficient quantity of wine, for
four or five doses.

Also the Clysters mentioned in Anasarca and Ascites, or this for expelling
Wind.

Take Orris and Briony roots each one ounce and an half; Gentian half an ounce,
Asarum two drams, Bark of Elder roots one ounce, Rue, Mother-wort, Horehound
each one handful; Flowers of Centaury, Chamomil, Dill, Melilot, Elder,
Lavender, and Rosemary each one pugil; Juniper and Bayberries six drams,
Cummin, Caraway, or Fennel seeds half an ounce, Parsley seed two drams,
Foenugreek three drams, Carthamus seeds half an ounce, Agarick three drams,
Soldanella or Roots of wild Cowcumbers two drams, (or leaving out the Purgers,
we add a little Coloquintida) boil them in water and the third part wine or
weak Lie, and in as much of the strained Liquor as is sufficient, dissolve two
drams of leaven, two ounces of Honey, three ounces of Oil of Rue, and a little
Salt: make a Clyster.

You may leave out the Purgers in the Decoction, and dissolve Hiera or
benedicta Laxativa half an ounce, Juice of Mercury and Flower-de-luce one ounce
and an half.

Here also you may use altering Medicines which we said were good in Dropsies
in diverse forms, choosing those that expel wind most or adding them.

You may make this Powder. Take of Valerian roots one dram, Orrice roots,
Germander, Mints, each half a dram, Cummin seed prepared in Vinegar, Fennel and
Caraway each one dram, the ashes of the Guts of Hens or Wolves or of
Earthworms, half a dram; make a powder.

Or this Electuary. Take of the Conserve of the roots of Succory and Valerian
each one ounce; Conserve of Marjoram and candid Ginger each half an ounce;
Powder of Diacyminum and Diacurcuma each one dram; of the ashes of Hens or
Wolves gutts, half a dram, with the syrup of the opening roots make an
Electuary.

You may apply outwardly things mentioned in Ascites to the Belly, because they
discuss Wind as well as Water, choosing those that are most proper against Wind,
or mixing such things.

Emplasters of Dungs mentioned are the best if they have many things in them
that expel wind.

The Emplaster of Bay Berries is excellent, alone or with others, against the
Ascites, and expels wind, made as I showed in the weakness of the Stomach.

The Diet must be the same with that of Ascites, and they must avoid all things
that breed wind.

In the third kind of Tympany which comes from wind that gets out of the
Stomach and Guts into the Cavity of the Belly and swells it, The Cure of a
simple Tympany.
which is seldom; there is more danger than in the rest and is thought the
worst kind of Dropsy, because it comes from the same cause which the first
kind of Tympany, a total obstruction and convolution of the Guts and a thinness
of the same extenuation and stretching and also because wind can hardly be
discussed out of the Belly. And the Disease will be greater, and incurable, if
the Stomach be very weak and cause these winds because new will breed from
thence continually, as also if there be a solution in the Guts which makes way
for wind into the Belly, and cannot be cured.

If this come from Costiveness of the Belly, it must be cured, as is mentioned
in the first kind of Tympany, if it come from great weakness of the stomach,
you must chiefly regard that and the expelling of wind, for which we have writ
medicines at large in the weakness of the Stomach.

And give Purges of crude humors which are gathered by reason of the weakness
of the Stomach, and are the cause of Wind, and expellers of Wind, such were
prescribed in the cure of a weak Stomach.

We may use this following Decoction. Take of Fennel and Parsley roots each one
ounce; of Orrice and Elecampane roots each half an ounce: Wormwood two drams,
Mints, Marporam, each one dram; Rosemary, Lavender flowers, each one pugil;
Aunise and Fennel seeds each three drams; Caraway seed two drams: Carthamus
seed bruised and Senna of each six drams; boil them in Water and Wine adding in
the end Rhubarb and Agarick each three drams; Cinnamon one dram, Spike one
scruple, dissolve Sugar when it is strained and let it be for diverse doses: or
let all these be infused in Wine and let it be sometimes taken.

Another Potion. Take Rhubarb four scruples, Spiknard one scruple, Agarick two
scruples, Ginger one scruple, steep them in white Wine end Fennel water, strain
it, and add Diacarthamum and Diaphaenicon one dram.

The Clysters mentioned in weakness of the Stomach and in the Colic, to
expel wind, are good here also.

Or this made for the purpose, Take of Rue two handfuls, Chamomel flowers two
pugils, Juniper or Bay berries one pugil, Cummin or Caraway seed six drams,
Fennel seed half an ounce, boil them in water and wine, dissolve Honey, Oil of
Nuts, each two ounces; Oil of Spike six drops,

Or, Take six ounces of Spanish wine, water of Chamomel flowers four ounces.

Or Take Rue water distilled as much as is fit with half an ^^ee of the spirit
of wine make an Injection.

Or, Take Juniper berry water, or of Caraway seeds, Cummin, Fennel or Anise
seeds, it is very excellent to expel wind.

To these Wines and Waters for Glysters you may add Juice of Rue, Oil of Rue,
chamomil, Dillor Lillies, two or three ounces, with Honey.

Or make this of Oil only: Take Oil of Rue four ounces, Oil of Chamomil, Dill,
Lillies each two ounces; Oil of Spike Caraway or Cummin distilled six or seven
drops.

Altering Medicines to help the first concoction, and to hinder breeding of
wind, and if bred to discuss, it such as were mentioned in the weakness of the
Stomach, are here also good; of which the chief is Fennel or Anise seed wine,
or of the barks of Fennel roots, broth made with Bay Berries, or with caraway
seeds, castor drunk with wine: among the compound Pouders the fifth and the
tenth, and that for after Meat made of Seeds: Lozenges made with Oil of Anise
seeds and Fennel seeds.

That Electuary which is chiefly for wind, and the like there set down.

A Powder for the same, Cummin seed infused in wine, and dried again two drams,
Fennel seed one dram, Mints and dried Marjoram each half a dram; Ginger one
scruple, give one dram for a dose, and if one scruple of Castor be added, it
will be excellent.

Or this Electuary: Take Conserve of Mints and Marjoram each one ounce;
Conserve of Rosemary, Lavender and candied Ginger each half an ounce; of Anise
and Fennel seeds each one dram; Caraway and Cummin seeds each half a dram, or
instead of the seeds, the species Dianisi or Diacumini three daams, Cinnamon
one dram, with syrup of Wormwood make an Electuary.

You must apply things to strengthen the Stomach, and especially to the Belly
to expel wind, such as are mentioned in the weakness of the Stomach; as the
simple and compound Oils, and the Ointment prescribed against the Swelling of
the Belly, cataplasmes of Bread and Seeds, Fomentations of Pennyroyal and
Organ etc. baggs to expel wind of Galangal and Mints, of Bran and Milium.

To these may be added this Ointment.

Take Oil of Rue two ounces, Oil of Lillies, Mints, or Marjoram each one ounce;
Juice of Rue, Fennel and Aqua vitae each one ounce and an half; boil them to
the consumption of the Juyces, and add the Powder of Cummin and Bay Berries
each two drams; Wax as much as will make an Ointment. It will be excellent if
you leave out the Pouders, and put in one scruple of the Oil of Cummin, Caraway
or Spike, and better with half a dram of Castor dissolved in Aqua vitae.

Make a Cataplasme of cow or Goats dung, boiled in strong Wine, Urin and Lie,
with Powder of Cummin, caraway, Smallage seed, Bay Berries, Bean flowers, and
Rue, and Salt and the like.

Or, Take Rue, Hysop, Wormwood and Figgs: boil them in Wine or Vrin and
Vinegar, beat them adding Bean flowers and Bay Berries one pugil, and with a
little Niter make a cataplasm.

It is good to foment the belly with these things following boiled in wine, as
Orris roots, Elicampane, Rue, Mints, Marjoram, Rosemary, chamomil flowers,
Dill, Bay Berries and Juniper berries, the hot Seeds and the like.

Or let the Fume of these be sent to the belly under the clothes in the Bed.

Make a bag for to lay upon the belly of these; Take of Millium seeds two
pugils, Cummin seeds and Caraway each half a pugil, Bay Berries and Bran each
one pugil, Melilot, Chamomil, Dill, Centaury and Rosemary flowers each one
pugil; of burnt Salt half a pugil; fry them in a Pan, sprinkling wine and
Vinegar and make a bag, you may add Rue seeds, Nigella, Sesili and Spices with
Brimstone.

Great Cupping-glasses that draw forth wind, and are thence called Ventoses,
applied to the Navel do powerfully draw wind forth, or apply many about the
belly.

There must be a good Diet to prevent crudities and wind, for quantity and
quality, and the motions of the Body and Mind must be ordered, as we showed in
the weakness of the Stomach.

When the whole Body is swelled with wind which is seldom, The Cure of the
general Swelling of the whole Body.
as that called Anasarca, which comes of crude Juice, in regard it comes of a
violent cause, or great Disease, it must be regarded; and if the cause be taken
away, as when it is from poison by Antidotes, the Swelling will cease. Or if it
be a deadly Disease, which appears by the Tumor, it ends in Death with the
Disease.

But to remove it if it continue, the cause must be taken away by Evacuations
made by sweat, and insensible Transpiration, and the wind expelled, with
Treacle and other Opiates; if it come from poison, which resist it, and provoke
sweat; also you may discuss wind, and take away Swelling with Stoves and hot
Fumes, such as were mentioned in the Tympany.

If Pneumatocele come from wind and water in the Codds, The Cure of
Pneumatocele, or windy Rupture.
first there must be a general way to hinder the coming of wind and water, and
then outward Medicines must be applied, such as were mentioned in the Tympany
joined with Ascites, and those mentioned in the Water-rupture called Hydrocele,
for that which consumes water, does also discuss wind, or if need be, you may
open the part with a Lancet, and let out both wind and water.

But in a simple windy Rupture, the general Medicines to prevent wind, and
discuss, and particulars applied to the Codds, mentioned in the Tympany may be
good, and the Emplaster of Dungs is most excellent with half an ounce of
Brimstone.

Or this; Take Bean flower half a pound, Bay-berry flower three ounces, Cummin
seeds one ounce, powder of Rue two drams, Niter one dram, Brimstone three
drams: boil them in strong Wine, with Aqua vitae one ounce, make a Cataplasm.

Fomentations, Bags, Fumes, and Ointments prescribed in the Tympany are good
here to the Codds.

Or this Ointment; Take Oil of Rue three ounces, Oil of Castor and Pepper, each
one ounce; Oil of Spike one scruple, Soap six drams, Aqua vitae one ounce and
an half, Gentian, Hermodactyls, of each one dram and an half; Pellitory and
Sowbread roots, each one dram; Seeds of Cummin and Staphsagre, each half a
dram; powder of Earthworms one scruple, Turpentine as much as will make an
Unguent.

Or make a Plaster thereof with Mastick and Frankincense.

In all the kinds of Ruptures as in this, if that Herb of Gesners called
Numularia or Money-wort green or dried, be steept in Spirit of Wine with a
little Horse-tayl, and clouts dipped therein and applied, it is excellent.

Some commend highly Water Bettony, or the Clowns Wound-wort beaten with Roots,
and boiled and applied in this, and in the beginning of other Ruptures, and if
used as the Former, it will be of more force.

In other Swellings from the Colic or Strains, The Cure of the Inflammation
of the Codds.
when both Codds are distempered, in regard they quickly go away, there is no
other care to be taken but to prevent them hereafter, which is by taking away
the cause, least it being often repeated, it brings a windy Rupture, therefore
at the first appearance apply external Medicines, such as we have declared for
the cure of a windy Rupture, and hindering wind from coming into the Codds.

Bronchocele which is a Swelling of the Throat, The Cure of Bronchocele or
Throat rupture.
if not quickly taken in hand before it comes to the full growth, can scarce be
cured, but continues all the life with hindrance and Deformity, bringing
hoarsness and shortness of wind very dangerous.

The cure although it for the most part consists in purging of crude Humors,
which are thought to be brought thither from the Head, and taking them from the
swollen part; yet we, because we say it comes from wind which is gotten in by
the relaxing or tearing of a Membrane with the skin from the parts underneath,
suppose that the chief care is to be taken in expelling wind, and what moisture
is there gathered, and to restore the relaxation and separation; which is hard
to be done, as we showed in other Ruptures, besides astringent things which
should do this being applied to the Throat, and stopping the Passages,
especially if before there be difficulty of breathing, will hinder breathing.
Therefore this is harder to be cured then other Ruptures, in the Codds and
Groins, because also if we should cut which is the last refuge we cannot make
so good a Ligature.

Nevertheless, at the first before the Tumor is grown to the extremity, and
before there is shortness of breathing, you may apply some astringents,
stronger or weaker, with such things as consume wind and moisture.

Therefore we may use the Emplaster for Ruptures that is ordinary, or that of
our prescription with as much of the Emplaster of Bay Berries, or other Seeds
that discuss wind, as cummin and the like.

Or cataplasmes prescribed in Hydrocele to astringe and discuss, as that of
Dung and Bole, and the other of Bran and Galls, for the same end and to unite
the separation of the membranes, if possible you may use some of those which
were prescribed in Ruptures.

And it is found by Experience, that the Powder of burnt Alum often given,
has done good by binding and drying, it may be given alone with wine half a
dram in weight at a time, or with other discussing and drying Pouders.

Or thus: Take of Orris roots and Galangal, each one dram and an half; of
Pennyroyal, Savory, Rupture-wort, each half a dram; of Fennel and Anise seeds,
each one dram; of Parsley seed half a dram, of long Pepper, Spikenard, Nutmeg
and Cinnamon, each two drams; Myrrh half a dram, burnt Alum half an ounce,
Sugar of Roses as much as all the rest, give one dram and an half in Wine.

When this Tumor is confirmed, we must only mind the expelling of wind and
water, and there are diverse external Medicines in Hydrocele and Pneumatocele
prescribed for the same.

If they prevail not, you must use the strongest, as: Take of Briony roots, and
Orris three ounces, of Roots of wild Cowcumbers, and Squills one ounce and an
half, stice them, and boil them in Wine, with Bean meal, and Orobus, each two
ounces, bitter Almonds, and Peach kernels one ounce and an half, of Cummin
seeds two drams, Pepper one dram: beat them with Oil of Lillies, and
Flower-de-luce three ounces for a Cataplasm.

Or this Plaster: Take of Gum Ammoniack, Galbanum, and Bdellium dissolved in
strong Vinegar, each two ounces; of Pulp of Coloquintida two scruples, Saffron
one scruple, Sal Gem. and Alum, each one dram, with Pitch one ounce and an
half; Pine or Fir Tree, Rosin two ounces: dissolve in the oldest oil of Nuts
for an Emplaster, to these add for more strength and sweetness Oil of Spike or
Caraway half a scruple, Ointments of Oil of Peppers or Castor, must be used
with the hands first dipped in Aqua vitae, or make Unguents with the same, and
the Pouders aforementioned.

Also Fomentations mentioned in Hydrocele and Tympany may be used here,
especially let the tumor be often fomented with a Linnen-clout dipped in Aqua
vitae.

The tumors called Physodes, or those which come of wind and water, The cure of
the Tumors Physodes.
which they call windy Oedemas, if they come of wind alone or thin water, fall
again speedily: but if the tumor be much and thick, they last longer.

In the cure of these, first take away the cause, if it be internal and feed
the Distemper, and labor also to hinder wind from coming to the part, as also
crudities and Humors, and if they be many, let them be evacuated, and dispersed
by external Remedies.

The general and particular Medicines for that, are mentioned in the third kind
of Tympany, and in the windy Rupture and in the Throat-rupture.

But if they come from an external cause, and the Tumor arise from the
attraction of the skin, or the Hands or Feet swell with cold, then when the
cause is gone, they also vanish or they are dissolved by actual or potential
Heat by Fomentations and Ointments, as other Diseases and Pains coming from
cold.

To these are referred Phlyctaene or Blysters of wind, The cure of windy
blisters called Phlyctaenae.
which must be cured as watery Blysters, because when the scarf skin is taken
off, there is water underneath.

The cure is diverse in tumors that come from the Juice which nourishes the
Parts, either abounding or being too thick; either as they are in glandulous
Parts, or in fleshy Parts, as they are harder and softer, or as they are in
Parts without Flesh.

The cure of tumors in Glandulous Parts coming from the nourishing juice, The
cure of Kernels.
is first of general Glanduls growing together in many parts then of
particular, as of those in the Throat as Strumaes, and then of those behind the
Ears called Parotides, and of those under the Arm holes and Groins, called
Bubos, and last, of the Stones thus hardened.

The general Kernels in many places together, The cure of Scrophula.
are either Scrophulas in the Neck to the Chin, called also Strumae, and are
sometimes in other Parts; in regard they are usual, and haereditary and common
to some People, they require the chiefest care for cure; and this is not done
without Labor and long time; sometimes it is incurable, when the Glanduls or
Kernels are grown Scirrhous or hard, and will not yield, or have great Venom as
Cancers, then they turn into incurable Ulcers; sometimes though cure be done yet
is not absolute, yet though they be taken away, yet they leave behind them
great disturbances, as filthy and unequal Scars, and hindrances of the use of
some parts, where they grew.

For the Cure of these, first consider the condition of the whole Body, see that
it be well cleansed, by diverse Evacuations and Alterations, having used
Preparations for the same. Then give those things that consume a Scrophulous
tumor, and discuss it, or if that cannot be, yet ripen and digest it, so that
it may come to suppuration, and either break of it self, or be opened by
Incision, and then use it, for the cure, as a corroding, cancerous Ulcer, into
which sometimes they are converted. Sometimes when they are grown hard and
scirrhous, and cannot otherwise be taken away, you may cut them or burn them
off: as we shall show.

Blood-letting if there be Plethory or Fullness, is good both to revel and draw
from the part, as also to derive and send the Humors another way, and also
Scarification.

They usually purge Phlegm in this this Disease, because they suppose that it
comes from a Defluxion of Rheum, not only when the Scrophula is in the Neck,
but when it is in any other part: First they prepare Phlegm, then they purge it
with Potions, Decoctions, Pills, such as are described in the Treatise of
Defluxions and phlegmatic Diseases. But we labor to purge the Humors as we
find them in the body, either plethorick or cacochymick that is over full, or
over foul, with any Humors; and when there is abundance of evil Humors we
purge often, especially when many Scrophulas break forth, because without so
doing we shall never cure them.

If gentle Purges will serve, you may find them in former treatises; but if
strong are required, you must use those mentioned in the Scab and French pox.

And when you purge, you may give this Syrup between, upon the days of rest,
which has in it, things proper for the cure of Scrophula: Take of the opening
Roots three ounces, of Orris, Acorus, Piony, each one ounce and an half; the
Roots of the lesser Celandine, Crowfoot, Pepper wort, stinking Gladon, each one
ounce; the Roots of round Birthwort, Pellitory, and Asarum, each half an ounce;
of Squills prepared two drams, the Leaves of Fig-wort, Burnet, Mugwort, Baum,
Bettony, Marjoram, Maidenhair, each one handful; Flowers of French Lavender,
or of ordinary Lavender, Rosemary topps, and Time, each one pugil; Broom
flowers two pugils, Juniperberries half a pugil, the great and less hot seeds
six drams, Liquorish two ounces, Raisons one ounce, Polypody two ounces, senna
three ounces, Turbith half an ounce; make a Decoction when it is strained, add
of Honey or Sugar half a pound: boil them to such a consistance that it may
keep.

It will be more strong, if instead of Turbith you take two or three drams of
Esula prepared, and infused in Oxymel, the Roots of wild Cowcumbers half an
ounce. And stronger if you add of black and white Hellebore, each one dram; or
some approve Laurel or Dragons, if you steep half the quantity of the
Ingredients-mentioned in Wine, it will work as much and more safely.

They use to add strong purging things to the things we shall mention for
alteration, and give them a long time that the evil Humors may be purged, and
also consumed in the part affected. Thus, take of the powder of white and black
Hellebore, each two drams, with the altering Pouders that shall be presently
prescribed five ounces, mix them, and give one dram for four Weeks every
morning, others add Diagredium, or give it with Frankincense, Coriander, Spike
and other Spices.

They highly commend Euphorbium half a scruple, made into Pills, with the Juice
of Flower-de-luce, and given every third day.

Sweating, if there be many Scrophulas dispersed in the body, which show
abundance of Humors, is sometimes good, especially in phlegmatic Bodies, not in
hot and colerick, because it would inflame them: In which the Surgeons are
deceived, when they go about to cure old external Diseases in colerick Bodies
by sweating.

But when the body is phlegmatic and fit for sweating, after purging you may
sometimes sweat by fits, or constantly if for many days together, using a
slender Diet: as we shall show in the cure of the French Pox.

We give in Scrophulas things that are drying and digesting, or that consume
them by a secret Propriety. And they are to be continued long, because they
remove gently. Therefore these Pouders which dry up Moistures in the Brain and
Stomach before mentioned, especially those that dry most of all, as Ashes, are
good in this case.

These Pouders following are to be given with wine, or other convenience
fasting for a long time together.

Take of the powder of a well dried sponge or burnt, so that it may be beaten,
one dram, give it fasting some Weeks together, you may mix Sugar or spices to
make it pleasant.

The Roots of Spurge-wort or stinking Gladon, Broom flowers, the Powder of
stone amiantus given as the former are also commended.

Or this Compound: Take of the powder of Sponge dried as aforesaid, half an
ounce, of the Sponge stone, Cuttle-bone, or Pumex stone, each two drams, the
powder of Egg shells half a dram, burnt Acorns, Galls, Birthwort, each one
dram; Plantane seeds, and Cinnamon, each half a dram; Pepper, Ginger, and Sal
Gem each one scruple; make a Powder.

Or thus: Take Sponge one ounce, of Stone Amiantus, and Sponge stone, each six
drams; of Burnet and Mugwort, each one dram, of Birthwort, and Pellitory, each
a dram and an half; make a Powder, you may mix it with spices.

To these you may add strong purgers, as white and black Hellebore, and
Diagredium, as we said, to purge and consume the Scrophula.

Also Sea sponge made of powder or ashes given by it self, or with other
Medicines: also the powder of burnt Paper, and filings of steel.

The troches of Vipers and Ashes of Vipers, or the skin of the same, are
esteemed consumers of Scrophulas, and to be mixed with others, also the skin of
Snakes are as good; therefore you may often give that Treacle which has the
Troches of Vipers. Dioscorides says that Vipers Flesh eaten is also excellent.

Conserves of Roses made with Honey or Sugar, or of Broom flowers two drams, is
highly commended if often taken. Also the Conserve of Spatula foetida, or
stinking Gladon takes away Scrophulas, according to Pliny.

Vulnerary Drinks as they cure Wounds and Ulcers, so do they cure Scrophulas,
of which I have showed diverse sorts, which may be used, as also this: Take of
Agrimony, Wintergreen, Saracens Consound, Dropwort, or Burnet, Ceterach, red
Coleworts, each one handful; Comfrey roots four ounces, Liquorish one ounce and
an half: boil them in the broth of gray Pease, or in the Decoction of
Guaicumin three pottles of Water, and the third part Wine, till the third be
consumed, make it sweet if the Patient loves it so, let him drink it often.

There are Wines for the same, more proper to be drunk many days together; as
Wine wherein Pilwort bruised has been long steeped or boiled.

Or this: Take of the Roots of Dropwort, stinking Gladon, each one ounce and an
half; Roots of five leaved Grass one ounce, round Birthwort half an ounce,
Pilwort, Burnet, Mouseare, Agrimony, each one handful; Mugwort, Tansey, red
Coleworts, each half an handful; Broom flowers one pugil, Raddish seed two
drams, Nettle seed one dram: boil them in Wine and Honey, let the strained
Liquor be drunk four ounces at a time, this must be continued.

Wine wherein a Mole has been boiled is commended.

The Juice of Pilewort, or of the Root of black Briony, or of great Penny-wort
taken with Wine and Honey, or syrups made thereof, are good.

Let him drink for a long time Spaw, Waters of Niter, Alum, or Sulphur.

They commend the Stones of a young Boar to be eaten for to cure the same.

Some things cure the scrophula in the Neck, if they be held in the Mouth, as
the Troches of Diaireos melting in the Mouth, especially when the scrophula
lies upon the rough Artery.

Also if you take some of the Powder of Sponge aforesaid and mix it with Honey
like Troches or Lozenges, and hold them under the Tongue at night, it will cure
the scrophula in the Neck.

To gargle or wash the throat often with the Decoction of Orris, Pellitory, and
other Plants in Wine, is accounted beneficial.

The Applications upon the tumor, must be made of things that digest strongly,
and consume this thick juice, mixed always with Emollients, least when the
thin part is discussed, the thick should grow harder, which if they tend to
Maturation, may do much good. But if the scrophula comes it self, or by art to
open as an Imposthume, you must cure it as an Ulcer. These that digest,
mollify and ripen are applied in diverse Forms, either by Baths or
Fomentations, or by things that stick longer on.

We often apply fat and slimy things, as: Take old Oil of Olive, or of Nuts,
Lillies, or Elder, of Flower-de-luce, or Wall flowers, and of bitter Almonds,
each two ounces; of Hens Geese, or Ducks Grease, the Mucilage of Line seed, and
Foenugreek, each one ounce and an half; of the Marrow or Suet of a Calfe, Goat,
or Dear, one ounce, of Wax as much as will make an Ointment or a Cerot.

You may add stronger Oils, as the Faeces or Dreggs of Olive Oil, or of Lillies
one ounce, or of Oil of Castor, or Euphorbium half an ounce.

Or these stronger, as of Turpentine, Oil of Saffron by Decoction, or of wild
Cowcumbers, or Oils where in other proper Plants, or their Juyces have been
steeped or boiled, as this: Take the Juice of Briony, Savine, or Rue,
Celandine, each two ounces; Vinegar of Squills three ounces, Aqua vitae one
ounce, Honey two ounces, old Oil of Lillies and Orris, each two ounces and an
half; boil them in the Consumption of the Juyces.

You may add dives sorts of Grease to these Ointments, because all mollify,
especially of wild Beasts, which they say digest also, Hogs and Man's Grease is
chiefly commended, also Hens Grease, also of some Fishes, as of Eels, of wild
Beasts, as of a Wolf, Fox, a Badger, a Bear, a Lion, Elephant, Estrich, Vultur,
Eagle, which as rare so are accounted precious.

The Fat which drops from a roasting Goose which was first stuffed with many
Mice, is highly commended.

Butter and Pilewort roots, which Mathiolus teaches to be made thus: Take the
Roots gathered in Autumn, washed and bruised with fresh Butter, and put them
in a moist place fifteen days in a pot well covered, then melt it gently, and
strain it.

You may steep or boil the same Roots with Mice in oil for the same.

These are made of Gum: Take of Gum Ammoniack, Bdellium, or Galbanum, each two
ounces; Opopanax one ounce and an half, dissolve them in ordinary Wine Vinegar,
or that of Squills, or Aqua vitae, or both, with two or three ounces of the
Oils aforesaid, make a Liniment, or with Wax and Ointment.

Or, Take the aforesaid Gums dissolved, and mix them with the Fats and Greases
aforesaid.

To these Gums add Serapinum, Elemi, or Labdanum, or Storax, Aloes,
Frankincense, and Mastick poudered half an ounce, and so make an Ointment or
Cerot; or with wax and Rosin, and Pitch make a Plaster.

A Plaster of WAx, Rosin, and Pitch with some proper Grease, is good also.

Diverse Applications are made of Plants, as this of roots: Take Roots of black
and white Briony four ounces, if green, bruise them, if otherwise boil them in
Wine and Vinegar or both, or with Lie and pickle or brine, or Aqua vitae, make
a Cataplasm, or with Honey, or Oil or Grease.

You may thus prepare Orris, and Raddish roots, with Briony for the same Use.

Or to make them stronger do thus: Take Briony roots four ounces, Orris two
ounces, Dragons, Sowbread, each one ounce and an half; mix them as formerly,
and with Roots of wild Cowcumbers it will be stronger, or Roots of stinking
Gladon, or of rest Harrow, or of Cane one ounce.

There is a good Application made of round headed Roots, as of Onions, Garlic,
Lillies, Daffodills, roasted under the Embers, or boiled and bruised, and mixed
as the former; and Squills boiled or roasted are stronger.

You mix this and the former Cataplasmes together.

Also of dried Figs and Raisons bruised, or a little boiled, and mixed with the
round headed Cataplasm, or with that of other Roots, are excellent.

Also Applications by Dioscorides by Pileworts, Clowns al heal, Maidenhair,
the lesser Housleek, Capar roots, of five leaved Grass, and Docks beaten or
boiled, with the former, and Roots of Marshmallows.

The Herb Mustard, and Leaves of Agnus castus, Savine, Pine, Cypress, Misleto,
Pitch, or Reeds, with Arsemart, Spurge etc. are also commended.

The Misleto of an Oak, or Pear Tree beaten into an Ointment, with Oil of
turpentine, does soften and cure all hard Imposthumes and Scrophulas.

Also Dungs of Beasts, as Ox, Ass, Boar, Goat, Pigeons dung, and of a wild
Goat, Weezle, with Vinegar or Oxymel, or Grease, and Oils.

Or with other Applications of Gums and Plants, or of Onions, Figs and Dung,
make a Cataplasm.

The blood of Weezles is commended by Dioscorides.

The Gall also of a Turtle alone, or mixed with other things.

There are diverse Pouders used, in Cataplasmes, Ointments, Plasters, or with
the former.

The first is made of Seeds, as: Take Line-seed, Foenugreek, Beans, Lupines,
Orobus, with Honey and Vinegar, or with Oxymel simple, or of Squills.

Or, Take one ounce and an half of the Powder, and mix it with the fat
Ointment, or that of Gums, or with the Cataplasm of Roots, or Brounbread, and
Figs.

Another more discussing is this: Take of the Meals aforesaid three ounces,
Mustard seed, or of Watercresses two drams, Cummin and Nettle seed, each one
dram; mix them.

Another Powder is made of Plants more proper: Take of Cypress nuts half an
ounce, of Birthwort, stinking Gladon, each two drams; Agnus Castus leaves, and
Wormwood, each one dram; with a Snakes skin: mix them as the other, or with the
Ointments or Cataplasmes aforesaid.

Another of Roots: Take Orris, and Briony, each half an ounce; Roots of
Sowbread, or wild Cowcumber three drams, Dragons two drams, Birthwort one dram:
mix them as the former, or with Oils and Grease, or with Wax, Pitch and Rosin,
make a Plaster.

Another strong Powder: Take Brimstone half an ounce, Sal Gem. or Niter, or the
Froath of the Sea, or Pumex stone, each two drams; Mustard seed two drams,
Nettle seed one dram, Markasites, or Litharge one dram.

Another is of the ashes of Juniper, Fig Tree, Cabbage stalks, Wormwood, Agnus
Castus, Cray fiish, Snails, Sponge, Ass Hoofes, and burnt Weezles, mix these
with Oxymel or Vinegar, or with the former Pouders, and Applications.

Another Powder is of the burnt Clay of an Oven, with Vinegar, mixed with the
other.

Unslaked Lime with Honey and Grease, or other Compositions, is good.

Also Rust of Brass, or burnt Vitriol, mixed with the rest.

Dung dried also to powder, may be mixed as the rest.

The Emplaster of Diachylon with Orris, is the best composition, and it will be
stronger with the Pouders aforesaid, and proper Oils.

Galen has a Plaster to take away Scrophulas, of Bdellium, Ammoniacum,
Mustard and Nettle seed, Birthwort, Sea Foam, Brimstone, Oil and Wax.

Oribasius has another prescribed by Mesue.

The burning Oil is excellent to take away Scrophulas without pain, and
Fistulaes, and other Excrescenses thus made: Take Oil of Bricks, Mastick, Gum
Arabic, Turpentine, each three drams; powder them, and with a Glass still draw
an Oil, mix it with Ashes of Ivy, and by a retort in Ashes or Sand, draw an Oil,

Stupefactives or Narcoticks do dissolve, as we showed, used externally, and
are good here, as Mandraks, Henbane, Poppy bruised or boiled, or with Meals,
with other Pouders and Liquors, make a Cataplasm.

The Juice of them alone is good.

Also the distilled Water thereof, as; Take Henbane, Hemlock, Celandine,
Savine, each two handfuls; Spurge half a handful, Raddish roots three ounces,
Dragons one ounce, Onions, and Garlic, each two ounces; Mustard seed half an
ounce, Salt one ounce; draw a Water.

This Emplaster of Opium is of great force: Take of Opium one dram, Scammony
two drams, Myrrh one dram, Saffron one scruple: mix them with Honey.

Or this Ointment: Take of Gum Ammoniack, or Galbanum one ounce, dissolve them
in Aqua vitae, which is also narcotick, with Opium one dram, Henbane seeds two
drams, Hens or Pigeons dung dried half an ounce, Grease or Oil, as much as will
make an Ointment, or with Wax make a Cerot.

The Oil of wild Cowcumber stufft into the Nose, is held good.

Roots also of Plantane and Sorrel hanged about the Neck.

Also Fomentations with Spunges, prepare well for other Applications.

They are made of the Plants aforesaid, of which Cataplasmes are made, in Wine,
Vinegar and Honey, Urin, Lie, Brine, or Smiths Forge water.

Or with other Herbs aforesaid, make this: Take the two Roots of the first
Cataplasm mentioned, or more of the second, add of the round Roots three or
four, Figs twelve, of the Herbs mentioned three or four handfuls, Mustard seed
two drams, Brimstone half an ounce, Salt two drams: boil them as aforesaid for
a Fomentation, if you rub the tumor till it be red, it helps to discuss, if
done before other Applications.

Sometimes we cut away those that cannot otherways be cured: we first open the
skin till it lies bare, and then we cut it out by the Roots; in doing of
which, you must take heed of hurting a Nerve or other Vessel. For which cause
when the Scrophula is under the Chin, and deep, it is dangerous; but if it be
there, or in any part else, outwardly hanging forth, it is safer, provided that
you cut not the kernels which are hardened between the Vessels, especially those
in the Joints, or a Nerve or Tendon, which will cause Contraction of the part.

We have often taken them off with a potential Cautery, which makes an Eschar
in the skin without pain, or made them better ripen with other Medicines
thereby.

It is difficult to use potential or actual Cauteries that burn, because of
Inflammation, but if the place be not dangerous, it may be done.

Some think that they are taken away, or kept from growing, if pricked with the
finne of a thornback.

It is thought that some Kings have the Gift from God to cure them by touching,
especially they of France, to whom they come at a set time in multitudes, also
that the Kings of England have the same.

Some think that the seventh Son that comes in order without a Sister between
has the same Gift. I had a friend one Picto in France that studied Physic,
who told me that when he was a Child, he touched many publicly in the Church,
using many superstitious Ceremonies.

Struma, is either simple or compound, The cure of Struma.
either in the throat or hanging therein: if it be haereditary to the Country,
and grown great and hard, is incurable, and not to be broken, but must be all
the life, except it be cut off at the first: if it be not haereditary, or
belong to the Soil or Country, you may attempt it, and after purging use
Applications: you need not purge so often, as when there are many Scrophulas,
except other Causes require it.

But you must mix those things which consume it, by which we have found that
they have coased growing, and vanished, being not confirmed. You may give
things mentioned for Scrophulas, especially Pouders of Sponge, Amiantus stone,
stinking Gladon, Broom flowers, and the Compound Pouders mentioned, and
Conserves for vulnerary Drinks they will be needless, because it seldom
ulcerates.

As for outward Applications, they must be stronger then those for a Scrophula,
because a Struma is more difficult to be cured, and they must stick faster, as
Emplasters of Gums or Cataplasmes of Roots, and Roundheads, and other Herbs, or
of Dungs, with the stronger Pouders, as of Ashes and Lime, either by
themselves, as mentioned, or with Vinegar, or other strong Liquor.

We take off Strumas by Incision, if they be confirmed, and be uncomely, and
hinder breathing, as we do scrophulas, and it is safe when they hang out; but
it is dangerons, when they are so rooted into the Vessels that they cannot be
taken off without hurting them; and then it is better to let them alone, then
to endanger the Patient, and dishonor your self.

It may be done also with a Cautery, as a scrophula.

I leave it to the Judgment of those who have seen it, whether the great
Struma may be cured by a touch or not.

A cold Parotis is a kernel behind the Ears, hard, without pain. The cure of a
Parotis, which is without pain
If it be old and scirrhous, it cannot be cured without cutting, but that which
is young, and in the increase, or not quite hardened, may be cured better then
kernels in other parts, by Discussion or maturation or Imposthumation, or by
Ulceration, by which means diverse sorts of matter may flow forth, or come forth
in a bag, sometimes hard as a Stone.

This Cure is done with some things used in Scrophula's, as first by
Evacuations of the same sort, to take away plenty of Humors and Excrements, and
altering Medicines to hinder the increase of thick Humors. And then by giving
things that consume a Scrophula, there mentioned, if it last long. And because
there is not so many Glanduls or Kernels as scrophulas, we need not use so many
things.

Of those which were mentioned, these are fittest, things made of Gums, Plants,
Roots, round Roots, Dungs, and Pouders.

And when it tends to Maturation; you must mix things that help it, as this
Cataplasm made of Onions, or Lillies, Roots of Marshmallows, or Orris, baked
under the Embers, and bruised with Figs, Meal of Lineseed, and Foenugreek,
Honey, Oil, and Grease.

Or if it incline to break: Take four ounces of baked Figs, Leaven one ounce
and an half, green Flower-de-luce roots one ounce, Aloes two drams, Niter one
dram: mix them with Oil and Grease.

Or you may ripen this Tumor with things mentioned for Imposthumes that follow
Inflammation, and open it when it is ripe, and then cure it as an Ulcer.

If it be old and scirrhous, cut it out, as we showed in Scrophula, or burn it
off, taking heed of the great Vessels.

A cold Bubo, that is a swollen, hard Kernel without heat in the Groin, The
Cure of Bubo without pain.
or Armpit, is sometimes scirrhous and incurable, as that of the Plague, which
has continued to my knowledge all their life: sometimes it may be discussed: but
it seldom comes to an Imposthume, as that with Inflammation, and if it do,
there will be a malignant Ulcer.

This must be ordered almost like the Parotis behind the Ear, with the like
Evacuations first, and Alteratives, among which some of those which were good
to cure Kernels, may be used for a Bubo.

Apply such things as are mentioned in Parotis and Scrophula, choosing those
which most discuss and soften. And if it tend to Maturity, proceed as you did
in Parotis and Imposthumes.

We cannot well use Incision or Cautery, because they lie too deep.

The Stones being swollen and hardened without Inflammation, The Cure of hard
and soirrhous Stones.
(though Inflammation usually go before,) if they grow scirrhous, they so
continue, and are troublesome, chiefly in riding. And if both Stones swell, and
the spermatick Vessels grow hard, the Man will be unfit to get Children. But if
this Tumor be looked to, in time it may be taken away.

In the Cure of this, having first used general Medicines, you must use more
Digestives then Mollifiers in your applications, least Suppuration be too
quick, and so the stones putrify, and be lost as has often been. And you must
apply things mentioned in the Scrophula, Cataplasmes, Plasters, and
Fomentations which work powerfully.

and if it tend to an Imposthume, you must bring it to suppuration. As we
showed in Imposthumes open it, and cure it as an Ulcer.

If it will not yield to Medicines, but the Stones continue very hard, and
painful, you must take them off by gelding, as we showed in Sarcocele.

The Cure of Tumors which come of nourishing Juice in fleshy parts, is as that
of Scirrhus, and those in the belly which come from an internal scirrhus; and
like the Cure of those which contain strange Matter, as Atheorema, Steatoma,
Meliceris.

When Scirrhus is in a fleshy part, whether it follow Inflammation which is
usual, The Cure of Scirrhus.
or grow of it self, which is seldom, and is either one, or more together; as
in the Belly, sometimes there is a scirrhus in the flesh, or made of Glanduls or
Kernels, when they grow hard and confirmed without sense of pain, which can
neither be softened, disussed or maturated, or made ripe, but if it be not grown
to the height, but it is yet sensible, there is hope of Cure.

This Cure is to be attempted with strong Remedies, because weak will not
prevail: first, disposing and ordering the Body, by Purgations if needful, or
other Evacuations, so that if it be foul or supply the part with Humors, that
may not hinder the work. But in respect of the scirrhus it self, especially if
it come from Inflammation, which dried up the Juice, or from some thick Juice
which belongs to another part, brought hither: there is no necissity to follow
the Custom of purging thick Humors: But rather to apply those things that
mollify the scirrhus, make it thin, and discuss it, these may be either mixed
together, or applied severally.

The things prescribed for a scirrhus scrophula, may do well here.

When we desire to soften, we use Oils, Fats, and Mucilages or slimes, and
things made of Gums, and Gum drops, there mentioned.

Or this Cataplasm following: Take Althaea or Marshmallow roots, and Lillies,
each two ounces; Orris roots one ounce, the four mollifying Herbs, Orage,
Coleworts, Pellitory of each about three handfuls; Chamomil and Melilot
flowers, each one pugil; Line seed and Foenugreek, each one ounce and an half;
boil them in Water or fat Broth, stamp them, and add of Hens Grease, or Goose
Grease or the like, about two ounces, Oil of Olive, and of sweet Almonds, each
one ounce: make a Cataplasm.

Foment it often with a Decoction of the same Plants, or Oil of Lillies, and of
sweet Almonds, or Oil in which emollient things have been boiled.

But when we intend to soften, and discuss, we must apply diverse Roots, and
Herbs, and Dungs, with Pouders, or the like, and Emplasters for the same.

Things good in a Scirrhus may be used here, as Raddish roots beaten with
Nettle roots.

Onions roasted in the Embers, and beaten with the flesh of Snails, and other
things.

Also Misleto with Time and Grease.

Also Pitch, or Rosin, with Wax and Grease, and Powder of Marchasites called
Fire stones.

The Blood of a Bull with Barley flower, or other Flowers.

Those Fomentations which we commended for scrophulas, may be used for to
digest and soften a Scirrhus.

A Fumigation of Vinegar poured upon a hot stone, is good in a scirrhus; Or if
you heat the Marcasites, or Firestones, and cast them into Vinegar, or if you
quench Iron in Vinegar, and let the Vapor come to the Scirrhus.

If you rub a Scirrhus, as was showed in Scrophula, before you use outward
Applications, they will work the better.

It is Rashness to attempt to cut off a scirrhus, or burn it off, because it is
deep rooted, that it cannot be taken off without Danger of much bleeding, and
worse Inconveniency. Moreover it will be Labor in vain to take off part of it
with pain, and leave the rest behind to grow again.

We have sufficiently showed in a Cachexy, and in the Dropsy, The Cure of
Scirrhus, and Kernels in the Belly.
how the Tumors in the upper part of the Belly, coming from the Scirrhus of
the Liver or Spleen, are to be cured.

And if a Tumor come from a scirrhus in the bottom of the Womb, The Cure of
Sirrhus in the Womb.
externally in the lower part of the Belly, it must be cured as a scirrhus, and
we have showed in the Inflammation of the Womb, how it is to be ordered, if it
tend to an Inflammation. And though it be hard to be cured of what Cause soever
it comes, yet it must be attempted for to abate it.

Wherefore after the Body is purged and prepared, we give such things as are
mentioned in the Scirrhus of the Liver or spleen; as Pills of Ammoniacum and
the like, mentioned in a Cachexy, which comes from that Scirrhus, you may apply
the things mentioned for an outward Scirrhus and for Scrophula, when the Tumor
is in the Belly to be felt hard.

As Fomentations of Oils, or Decoctions, adding things that respect the Matrix.
As Roots of Marshmallows, Lillies, Flower-de-luce, Briony, Mallows, Line seed,
Faenugreek, Figs, Flowers of Chamomil, Violets, Melilot, and other softners and
digesters there mentioned, Mugwort, Nip, Flower of Featherfew, Elder,
Dane-wort, Hops. And in the Declination, Calaminths, Pennyroyal, Rosemary
Flowers, and of French Lavender.

The Ointments, Plasters, and Cataplasmes mentioned in the External Scirrhus,
are good here, made of Fats slimes, and Gums, and of Plants.

To these add things for the Matrix, as Rue, and Wormwood.

Also Roots of Mandraks, Henbane leaves, or Poppy or Hemlock, boiled in Wine,
and made up with Oil and Grease, are excellent, to which you may put Gums
dissolved.

Dioscorides advises Wormwood, Rue, Flower of Lupines, with Myrrh.

Galen, Goose blood, with Foenugreek, or Lupines, Diachylon, with Orris, is the
best ordinary Plaster, there are other Plasters and Cerots mentioned in the
Cure of Knots or Nodes.

Also Oil of Myrtles, Storax and the like.

Also those Pessaries mentioned in the Scirrhus of the Womb coming of
Inflammation, are good here, with the Oils aforesaid, and Juice of Foenugreek.

Also the Fumigation there mentioned Dioscorides commends the Fume of Agrimony.
The Cure of Atheroma, Steomata and Meliceris.
Atheroma, Steatoma, and Meliceris are often without hurt, and therefore are
neglected, and turn to Imposthumes: as the Tumors in the Head called Talpae or
Moles, and Testitudines, and Snails. The Cure is not so difficult, as that of
scrophula and scirrhus, and they may be taken off when they hinder the part, as
we said concerning the Atheroma under the Chin.

It is done as that of scrophula, struma, parotis, and scirrhus, by using first
general means, if need be as purging, and the like; and then applying
particulars to the tumor, that dissolve, soften, and ripen, mentioned in
Scrophula, and they will do it sooner in these Tumors, which are not so hard,
and cousume them, if not yet confirmed, or bring them to Imposthumes, which
must be broken and cured as an Ulcer.

Dioscorides commends Raysons stoned, beaten with Rue, to cure a Meliceris,
also sour Dock, with Oil of Roses faffron, and Melilot. And for a Steatoma,
Crowfoot flowers with a Cerot.

These are also good; Roots of Sowbread, Dragons, with old Grease, and
Brimstone.

Unslaked Lime, with Grease or Oil.

Dogs dung or the like with Vinegar.

Gum Ammoniack, or Bdellium in Vinegar and Honey.

Or this of Pitch: Take Ship Pitch dissolved one ounce, Powder of Brimstone,
half an ounce; spread them upon Leather, take it off every day, and wipe it,
and lay it on again, renewing it every fourth day.

Also Fomentations mentioned in scrophula and scirrhus are good.

Because these will not well open of themselves, we use Incision, not cutting
the skin transverse, or cross, longwaies, or like a Myrtle leaf; and we take
out the Membrane which contains that thick, Suet-like or pap-like, or honey
like Matter, from whence the tumors are named, and eat away what remains with
cleansing Medicines: this done, we cure it as an Ulcer.

This may be done by an actual or potential Cautery, as in scrophula.

The Cure of soft tumors rising in fleshy parts from the nourishing Juice, is
by distinguishing those that have pain as the Condylomata or Tumors in the Anus
or Matrix, the Cure of which is mentioned in the pains of those; for those that
are without pain, some under the true skin called Sarcomata and Sarcocele in
the Codds, and fleshy part of the womb; others only under the scarf skin, as
the Polypus in the Nose, Epulis in the Mouth, Encanthis in the corner of the
Eye: and excrescent or proud flesh in an Ulcer.

The Sarcomata which grew here and there in the Body are under the skin except
you prevent them at first, The Cure of Sarcoma, or Wenne.
cannot be easily cured, because they become like Natural Flesh, and a part of
the Body: to consume it is impossible with potential things, therefore we take
it off by cutting or burning, but if it cause no pain nor trouble, it is better
let it alone, by reason of the danger through bleeding and hurt of Vessels.

If we will attempt the Cure, we must take it at first, and remove the
Nourishment from it, by Blood letting in some Vein nigh it; and by
scarification and Cupping-glasses, the Body must be brought down with purges,
sweats, and fasting.

Use externally Repellers, or things that strike back the Humors that breed it
at first, such as are mentioned for the beginning of an Inflammation.

Then roll it hard with a plate of Lead upon it.

When it is grown great, in regard we can no way consume or ripen, it being
mixed with the Veins, we must if we will take it off, use rather Incision, then
burning, either taking it off with the skin, or without, bewaring of the
Vessels underneath the great Veins, Artery and Nerves, and then stop the Blood,
and cure it as an Ulcer.

In the lesser sarcoma, if you will not cut it off, only open the skin, and
consume the bare Flesh with actual or potential Cautery by degrees.

If these Wenns or Sarcomata, have but a small Root, or may be tied with a silk
about the Root, you must tie it so hard, that the flesh may want Nourishment,
and so decay; and being made senseless, it may be the better cut off.

You must dip your silk in Arsenick, or sublimate, that may burn the Root, and
mortify the Wenne; And because so doing, may cause Pain and Inflammation, it
is better to dip it in our Cautery, that is without pain, which will turn into
water by the Air, and to use it often.

I have taken off Wenns with a thread, not very straight bound at the Root, and
a potential Cautery put into the circle which is made by tying with a sticking
Plaster thereon.

When flesh grows to the stone in the Codd, it is called Sarcocele, The Cure of
Sarcocele, or Flesh in the Codd.
and is sometimes very large, and will scarcely be stopped in its growth, or
taken off any way, but by cutting, with gelding, and therefore is not meddled
with.

If you will attempt it, you must have it in hand at the beginning, and open
the Vein in the Foot often, to take away Blood from the part.

Applying astringents to the Codds that repel and hinder the grows; such as
were mentioned to hinder Defluxions upon the Eyes. And if they do not stop it
when the flesh is in the Codd, and grows not to the stone, it will be in vain
to use Causticks to open the skin, or otherways, because the stone will be in
as much danger of being lost by corrupting, as if it had been cut off.

Nor can softners do any thing, because it is not a scirrhus, but flesh, which
being molllified will grow bigger, and drying things are best to harden it,
hinder it from growth.

If the Patient weary of the burden, desire to have it off, let it be cut as a
Hernia or Rupture in the Groine, opening the skin, and taking out the seminary
Vessels, and the stone with the flesh growing thereto, tying the Vessels, and
cutting it off beneath, this is gelding and dangerous. But it were safer, if
the stone could be taken out, as when Hogs, Dogs, or other Creatures are gelt,
which heal without any Care or Binding.

And if you take out the flesh, or part thereof without the Stone, the Stone
must be put up, and you must heal the wound by Injections.

We may gather, that this cutting is not so dangerous in the Cod being cut,
since it is a spungy part, which will more easily be enlarged and contracted
then other parts, and sooner. I have seen half the Cod taken off with a Bullet,
and the right Stone lie bare with the spermatick Vessels, cured with Balsom of
Sulphur, and a common Wound-Plaister.

Sometimes there is Carnosity or Flesh growing to the Womb, The Cure of
carnosity in the Womb.
which hangs down, which rather hinders the Husband then the Wife, who is
unwilling to make it known and therefore it is not meddled with, because also
it is dangerous.

But at first, you may prevent the growth, as that of wenns, and if it must be
taken off, you will either tie it, to stop the Nourishment, and make it wither,
or burn it with a Caustic thread at the Root, which will cause Pain and
Inflammation, therefore you had better use the Cautery without pain, above
mentioned.

The Cure of Polypus when great, is hard, but at first is more easy. The Cure
of Polypus.


First, you must use Generals to hinder the Flux of Blood to the part, by
Bloodletting; and purging if the body be foul.

The Applications to the part called Topics, are Epuloticks or mild Healers or
Dryers to cicatrize, or make a Scar. And if it be not confirmed, it may be
often scarrified, or cut off, and these applied. If these prevail not, proceed
to stronger, called Cathaereticks, which eat the flesh, called Corrosives. And
if these do not, you must use Causticks, which burn and consume and mortify:
Or at last cutting. These are of diverse sorts, mentioned in the Cure of
Imposthumes, for cicatrizing and corroding.

Pouders to cure a Polypus, are prescribed among those Remedies that cicatrize,
or dry up both simple and Compound; the Corrosives mentioned, are of
Hermodactils, black Hellebore, Borax, Pumex-stone, and Wine Lies burnt, and
this. Take burnt Alum three drams, or: Take Vitriol four ounces, Alum etc.
Another is there stronger, with Vitriol and Arsenick, or use the powder of
Dragons, Grap-stones, and of Iron.

Soote which rises from the smoke of things burnt at the Nose, when the Breath
is held, does dry excellently, if it be often, made of Frankincense, Mastick,
Pitch, upon Coals, or if you make a Candle thereof with a wick, and after
lighting, put it out, and hold it to the Nose.

It will dry more with Brimstone, and other Minerals.

Ointments are applied with a Clout, or if very strong with a quill, least the
parts adjacent should be touched. Of Cicatrizers, mentioned in an Ulcer, that
is best, which begins thus, Take of the sixth Powder, half a dram, of
Corrosives, mentioned in an Ulcer, this is best, which begins with Take
Antimony etc. And thus: Take Hermodactyls, or Agrimony etc. Aegyptiacum also
mentioned in Fistulaes, or that made with Sublimate, or that which is mentioned
for opening Imposthumes, of Sublimate, or Troches. Our Caustic made of Oil of
Bricks, and mentioned in Scrophula, which is called the Caustic without pain,
is good.

If you will use milder, take the powder of Dragons mentioned, make an Ointment
with Oxymel of Squills, or Juice of Pomegranates, or Oil.

Or the Juice of the Peels and Stones of Pomegranates boiled forth with Oil.

The Juice of Dragons, also is good.

Or this strong Ointment: Take Aegyptiacum half an ounce, Pomegranate Peels,
and Galls, each half a dram; Oil of Vitriol one scruple.

Or, Take the strongest Vitriol, or Verdegreece, and mix them with Oil or
Honey, with Scales of Brass.

It will be more strong with a little Arsenick or Sublimate.

There are Waters also for the same, to touch them with a Quill, or a little
button of Lint.

These are mentioned in Fistula's, as that which begins thus. Take of
Verdegreece three drams etc. Or thus, Take of Orpiment one dram, Verdegreese
three drams etc. Or thus, Take of Orpiment and Verdegreese, each one ounce etc.
Or that Receipt which is mentioned for the Cure of Imposthumes, and begins
thus. Take Vitriol and Arsenick etc.

Also this stilled Water. Take of Alum half a pound, Vitriol one ounce and an
half, Galls, or Powder of Pomegranate peels three ounces, of Oil, or Syrup of
Grapes two ounces, or Juice of green Grapes: mix them with strong Vinegar, and
distill a Water thereof, with which often wash the Polypus.

The Oil of Vitriol is stronger.

Or this: Take Oil of Vitriol one scruple, burnt Alum two drams, dissolve them
in Plantane-water.

Another most powerful. Take Sublimate two drams, boil it in Smiths
Forge-water, three ounces to half, and use it alone, or with Oil of Vitriol
half a scruple, burnt Alum half a dram, Aqua fortis with Orpiment, also cures
it.

The Oil appointed for Fistula's, which begins thus, Take Antimony etc. Is also
good.

Cauteries of Time, burnt Tartar, and those which are without pain, being
warily applied with a Quill, to desend the parts adjacent, do cure it.

This is done sooner by an actual Cautery, or hot Iron through an Iron quill.

We also cut it off with an Instrument, first made hot in the fire, to hinder
bleeding.

That flesh which grows over the teeth, The Cure of rank flesh in the Gums.
because it only hinders chewing by bleeding is not much regarded, because it
goes away by chewing.

But if it grow over the Grinders, then you must wash the Mouth with dryers and
astringents, such as are mentioned in the Ulcers of the Mouth, and use things
to rub the teeth such as were prescribed in Foulness of teeth.

The powder Lapis Prunellae, or spirit of Salt-peeter, or of common Salt, must
be applied with a Pencil.

If these help not, use stronger, as the Ointment of Dragon powder, and that
made of Oil and Juyces, mentioned in Polypus, or Oil of Vitriol, as there
mentioned.

Or this, when the teeth are covered. Take Alum half a pound, Vitriol etc. As
is there prescribed, or Aqua fortis, and touch the superficies of the Gums, and
not the Roots, least the teeth grow loose, defend therefore the parts in the
time of Operation, and wash the Mouth well afterward.

Epulis is a little flesh growing at the roots of the teeth, it hinders not,
The Cure of Epulis.
though in a Defluxion, it is sometimes bigger, and goes away of it self,
therefore it is neglected.

But if it hinder chewing, and cause pain, then take it away with astringent,
Mouth waters, such as are mentioned in the consuming of the Gums, with Care, as
aforesaid.

But if it hang down with a slender Root, and may be tied, it may be so cured.

Encanthis is a Caruncle in the corner of the Eye, which is troublesome, The
Cure of Encanthis.
therefore you must prevent the Blood which comes thither, as we showed in
Ophthalmy, or Diseases of the Eyes.

We use outwardly dryers and astringents, such as are prescribed in Ulcers of
the Eyes, by which it will quickly be cured.

But if not, use stronger Remedies, so that you hurt not the Eye, or take away
all the flesh, which will cause a Rhyas which is worse; therefore proceed by
degrees from mild things to the strongest. These are all mentioned in the Cure
of the Eyes, and taking away Filmes, and will be as good for this.

This Water is most excellent, and is also good for other Ulcers.

Take a Copper Vessel, fill it with Spring water, or rainwater which is better,
and put therein an indifferent quantity of unslaked Lime, and let it stand,
till it is setles to four quarts of the clear water, add, (if you make it for
the eyes) half an ounce of Sublimate, and if for foul Ulcers, an ounce, and let
it fall to the bottom, and will be yellow, pour off the clear water, and keep,
this with you must gently touch the Caruncle in the Eye, but wash the foul
Ulcer soundly.

When Flesh grows rank in an Ulcer, if it be not skinned, The Cure of proud
Flesh.
it is easily cured, as we showed in an Ulcer, but if it be cicatrized, and
grown over with skin, it must be cured as a Wenne.

The Cure of tumors growing in parts without flesh, is first of those in the
Joints, as a Ganglion and Nodes which grow also upon the bare Bones; as also of
those of the Nails, and then of those which grow to the skin, as Warts, Corns
and Callus: and lastly, of Freckles and Tumors, like a Barley corn, called
Hordeoli.

A Ganglion is a tumor in the Joints, and though it be softer then a Scirrhus;
The Cure of Ganglion.
yet is it hard to be cured, if of long continuance, sometimes it is incurable,
but being deep rooted, it hinders the motion of the Joint, and so of the
Membrane. This must be prevented before the tumor be confirmed.

And we must use all means to discuss it, or make it less, so that the Joint
may move. And this after fitting Evacuations, mentioned before in hard and soft
Tumors, must be done by topical or outward Remedies, that soften and digest,
being wary as may be, least it come to suppuration; because when it is come to
matter, either of it self, or by neglect, it causes perverse and incurable
Ulcers, which do so corrupt these Nervous Parts, that the motion of the Joint
is either hindered, or utterly lost thereby. But by manual Operation, something
may be done, as I shall show.

The Applications external, must be the same that were prescribed in Scrophula,
which mollify and digest, adding things proper for the Nerves, and increasing
the quantity thereof, to make them prevalent.

It may be done by Fomentations, or Baths thus made. Take Lilly roots, and
Marsh-mallow, Briony, and Orris roots, each two ounces; Mallows and Coleworts,
each two handfuls; Henbane one handful, Groundpine, or Sage, and Wormwood, each
half a handful; Chamomil, Melilot, Wall flowers, or Elderflowers, each one
pugil, Line seed, and Foenugreek, each one ounce; Bay Berries half an ounce:
boil them in Water and Wine, or Lie for a Fomentation, or in greater quantity
for a Bath.

To these may be added stronger, as Roots of wild Cowcumber, Dragons, Sowbread.

Or the Fomentations mentioned in Scrophula, with these mentioned here.

Also a Decoction of Frogs, and Earthworms, or if that will not do, of strong
Vinegar alone, or in which Mil-stone or Fire-stone has been quenched.

Or a Lie made of Ashes, especially of Fig Tree; or Urin, or the like mentioned
in Scrophula, with the things here mentioned.

Also Oil of Earthworms, and of Frogs, or of Savine.

A Plaster of Galbanum, in which a little Opium is dissolved, with some drops
of the distilled Oil of Savine, is good to soften and discuss a Ganglion. If
they sit long in hot Brimstone Baths, using them for a month, this Tumor will
be discussed, and the Limb relaxed. For which Cause, let them be sent to the
Bath betimes, and use it as a remedy.

The Ointments, Cataplasmes, and Plasters mentioned in Scrophula, are good
here also, because proper for the Nerves; as those fat and gummy things and
slimy, or of Plants, Dungs, Pouders, with Oil of Earthworms, Foxes, Frogs, for
the Nerves. The Grease of a Man, Bear, Badger, or Fox.

Also this Plaster. Take Pitch two ounces, dissolved in Oil of Earthworms,
and Orris one ounce and an half, with Labdanum, Mastick, each two drams; Storax
one dram, ashes of Earth worms half a dram.

Also this Cataplasm. Take the Kernels of old Wall-nuts three ounces, Meal of
Lupines, or Orobus one ounce and an half, Raddish, and Flower-de-luce roots,
each one ounce; Honey as much as is sufficient with Salt: mix them.

A Fume also of Vinegar, in which Fire Stones have been quenched.

Or this: Take Benjamin, Storax, each two drams; Myrrh and Bdellium, each one
dram; Orris roots half a dram, Marcasites two drams, with Turpentine, make
Troches for a fume.

You must beware of Incision, because it can scarce be made without danger to
the Tendons, Ligaments, and Nerves,

We may use other manual Operations, by which though a Ganglion cannot be taken
away, yet the Limb may be rectified.

It is dangerous to open a Ganglion, as I showed.

It was declared in the Treatise of contracted Members, how when it comes from
a tumor, they may be reduced by Art and Instruments.

Knots or Nodes in fleshless parts, are of three sorts, either in the Joints as
the Gout, in the bare Bone as in the Pox, and Headache, or from some violent
Cause, called callous Nodes: we shall speak of them severally.

The Gout Nodes in the Joints of the Hands, or Feet and elsewhere, The Cure of
Knots or Nodes in the Gout.
are hardly discussed, and when they are opened they produce some humor, or
sandy stone, or they grow hard, and fixed in the joints so that the Fingers or
Toes are either straight out, or crooked, as I showed in the Gout.

But to hinder their growth, or to discuss, or ripen them; you must first use
the Cure for the Gout, which is the cause by Evacuations and things mentioned
against the Gout, which are so strong, that if the quantity of a small Nut be
taken for a month or a year, it would dissolve the Nodes of the Gout, which
they say this following will also do.

Take St. John's Wort, Germander, Groundpine, each six drams; Tops of lesser
Centaury half an ounce, Roots of round Birthwort, Valerian, Spiknel,
Hermodactyls, Agarick, each three drams, Roots of Gentian, and Parsley, each
two drams; Spikenard one dram: powder them well, and with Honey make an
Electuary.

Also apply things to mollify and discuss, or ripen, as to other tumors, but
the strongest are these.

A Cataplasm: Take Roots of Marshmallows two ounces, Flower-de-luce one ounce,
Line seed half an ounce: boil them in Wine and Honey, with a little Turpentine,
apply them.

These are most proper, the Roots of wild Hemp, Teasles Stone Crop, Groundsel,
Hemlock, and Henbane green and beaten, or boiled first in Wine or Vinegar, with
Honey or Oxymel, and sometimes Grease.

Or, Take Rue, Shepherds purse, and Raisons, beat them together.

The Heads of Onions and Garlic, roasted and boiled with Grease of a Hen,
Badger, or Mountain-mouse.

Rotten Apples applied, are good.

Ammoniacum, Sagapenum, Galbanum dissolved in strong Vinegar, or Oxymel with
Bran, Oil of Turpentine.

Or, Take Galbanum melted in strong Vinegar, one ounce and an half, Birdlime,
or Glue, moistened with Vinegar, Turpentine and Wax, each half an ounce; mix
them.

Dogs or Goats dung, with Wine and Vinegar, and Barley meal, is also good.

Also old strong Cheese, of Sheeps Milk, beaten and applied.

The Roots and Seeds of Gith, powder of Orris, with wax laid constantly thereon.

Also the Powder of Oak-moss, or Hazel-moss, with French Soap, and Niter.

The Ashes of Willow Bark, with strong Vinegar.

Or this. Take of Oker two drams, the Ashes of Willow-Barks, Nigella seeds,
each one dram; dried Dogs dung one dram and an half, make a powder, and mix it
with old Cheese, adding, if you please Gum and Vinegar.

Also the Juice of Capars, and Oil of Indian Nuts.

You may apply Fomentations to the Nodes, and they work best; first wash with
warm water, or an emollient Decoction.

Fomentations are most used to consume hard gravel Tumors, and strengthen the
part made with red Wine, Marshmallows, Mallows, Docks, etc.

Or thus: Take Sea, or salt Water ten potles, boil therein one pound of
Guaicum, of Guaicum bark four ounces, Wormwood, Groundpine, Bettony, French
Lavender, red Roses, each six handfuls; Orris roots one ounce and an half, boil
them to six pottles, then add twelve pottles of red Wine, and boil them till
the the fourth part be consumed, strain them, and use it for Fomentations, for
twenty days.

If you fume the part with the same Decoction through a Pipe, it will discuss
the Hardness, and strengthen the Part, as has been experienced.

Also it is good to put the part into a Wine Press, first of moist, then of dry
Grapes.

You may also open Nodes, by cutting and letting out the Matter, and they will
either fall, or the Medicines applied, will have better Operation.

The Nodes in the French Pox, in the Forehead, The Cure of Nodes or Knots in
the French Pox, and Headache.
Shinns, and Backs of the Hands, because they require a general Cure proper for
the Pox, and also some particulars, they shall be declared in the Cure of the
Pox.

The Nodes in the Headache, in the Forehead vanish when the Headache is gone,
usually; but if they remain, you must evacuate, and use external Applications
mentioned.

The callous Nodes which come not from a Disease, Of Callous Nodes.
which eats the Periostium or skin upon the Bone, but from over much
Nourishment by Bone Juice, so that it seems to be a new Bone growing to the
other: Or which come after a broken bone are hard to be taken off, but continue
the whole Life.

But if they be offensive, we shall study to remove them with outward Remedies:
Not using Evacuations, because they come from an outward Cause.

We may apply things mentioned for the Gout, or for Scrophula.

And we know by Experience, that Narcoticks, or Stupefactives do much, by which
we have dissolved desperate Nodes, in Men, and Beasts: Taking the Roots of
Mandracks, Leaves of Henbane, and Hemlock boiled in Vinegar, for a Fomentation,
and Cataplasm, to which Bee-nettles may be added.

Plasters and Ointments of Quicksilver, are as good here as in the Pox.

To soften Nodes, use the Cerot of Oesypum, which is made of Oil of Chamomil,
Orris, Oesypum, or Grease of Sheeps-wool, Rosin, Turpentine, Mastick, Wax,
Spikenard, and Saffron.

Also the Plaster of the Son of Zachary made of Nerve-Oyl, Oesypum, or Grease
of Sheep-wool, Goose grease, Marrow of a Cow bone, Turpentine, Bdellium,
Ammoniacum, Mastick, Storax, Aloes, Foenugreek, and Chamomil, with Saffron.

There is another of Calfes suet, Olibanum, Juice of Squills, and Wax; also the
Oesypum'd Plaster of Paul, and the Diapente of Democritus.

The Nodes are sometimes cut off, especially when they grow toward the Joints,
and hinder the Motion. And this Operation is safest, when they are upon the
bare bone only covered with the skin. This is done, first by opening the skin,
and laying them bare, and then with a sharp knife with one cut, taking them
from the Bone, and by curing the wound, which may be done by burning, but not
safely nor quickly.

If the Callous Tumors of the Nails come from any Hurt, The Cure of the
callous Tumor of the Nails.
it will be gone as the Nails, grow out, and are paired.

But if from an internal Cause, they become uneven, and thick, they will not be
made thin; yet we must attempt it, if we suppose the Distemper of the Body was
the Cause, by removing that, and by external Remedies, Emplasters, and Baths
which soften that we may still cut off the Tumor, that the new Nails may grow
thinner.

A Callus in the Hands, The Cure of the Callus, or thickness of the Skin.
is a sign of labor, and no dishonor, and in the Heel does strengthen the
Motion, and therefore requires no Cure, besides if there be rest, it will peell
off, and a new skin succeed.

But if they grow to be an hinderance in touching or going, as Corns, then we
must use Softners.

And chiefly Baths for the Hands and Feet, of warm water, and softning Plants,
mentioned in Clysters, that mollify, and in the Baths for a Scirrhus, with
Grease, and fat Tripe-broath, and Oils.

Also Ointments, Plasters of Oils, Grease, Mucilages and Gums mentioned in
Scirrhus, and things that soften a Corn.

Among the which Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar is most softning.

After bathing, pare the Hands, Nails and Feet about the Heel, with a Pumex
Stone, or File.

We took away a Corn in the side of the Foot, which was very troublesome and
hard with our Cautery, that causes no pain.

The Cure of Scars or Callus in the skin, The Cure of Scars.
is not accounted needful, especially in Soldiers, to whom a wound in the Face
is honorable, because it argues they saced their Enemy, and ran not. Also when
it comes from any other Cause, if it be even with the skin as a white Lie, it
is neglected, because it is like the skin, and must not be altered to another
Color, least it be more apparent.

But when it sticks forth, or is uneven, we must make it with cleansing
Remedies equal with the skin, such as follow.

The Decoction of wild and Garden Poppy, for a Fomentation.

Also the Water of Lilly, or Bean flowers, and that of Man's dung commended by
some.

Also Oil of Myrrh, and Yolks of Eggs, of bitter Almonds, Peaches, Dates, or
instead thereof, beat the Kernels, and rub the part.

The Common People rub it with fasting Spettle.

The Liquor that sweats through Eggs, roasting in the Embers.

The Grease of the Fish Thymalus.

Or an Ointment of Rocket, and Mustard seed with Ox Gall.

Or of Borax, Camphire, and Grease or Marrow.

Oil of Nutmegs boiled in Vinegar, and Niter, is commended of Dioscorides.

An Ointment. Take of the Roots of wild Cowcumber or Dragons, Orris, Reeds,
each two drams; Mellon seeds, and Raddish roots, each one ounce; Hearts Horn, or
burnt Egg-shells, each half a dram; white Chalk, Crystal, or Amiantum, one dram
and an half, Frankincense, one dram, Sugar Candy three drams, Gum Traganth
infused, or the Mucilage, of Foenugreek one ounce, with Oil or Grease; Make an
Ointment.

If these avail not, use strong Cleansers, Corroders and Burners, if you will
take it quite away. Such as we showed in Discoloration to take away Spots.

You must also pare it with a Penknife, as a Callus.

If the Scar be deep like a pit, you cannot make it even, unless you first cut
or burn it, and they fill up the Cavity with new flesh, and after heal it.

But in the pits after the small Pox through the Face and Nose, The Cure of the
pits of the small Pox.
because strong things cannot be well applied, there is little hope of Cure,
great Men would have spared for no cost, to have it done for their Children if
possible. If any thing be done, it must be softners and attracters, to raise
the flesh and make it even. As the Decoction of Lillies, Calfes feet, which
will do but little; and this is rather to be prevented in the Cure of the small
Pox: as we shall mention there.

The Cure of the pit of the Navel growing too deep is neglected, The Cure of
the pitting of the Navel.
because being private, it is no Impediment; as also that tumor which comes
from the growing of it hard; but we shall show the cure of the Navel, Rupture
and Water-rupture.

Warts and Corns either depart of themselves, The Cure of warts and corns
or are not regarded, when they are not visible, but when in the Face or Hands,
as Warts, or when they cause pain, and hinder motion as Corns, we may cure
them easier then other hard tumors, though they have deep Roots and be hard;
yet being in the Pores, and not fastened to the true skin, as one with it, nor
covered with it as other tumors, and being without seeling, so that you may
apply what you please, the Cure is easier which we thus order, that they may be
consumed without force or burnt, cut, or drawn out.

We consume them, either by things proper for the same, or such as dry up their
Nourishment, and make them vanish, because these are so hard, that they can
scarce be softened or discussed.

Some Remedies are made of Plants, as the green Leaves bruised, of Groundsel,
Agrimony, Sumach, Herb Robert, Toad flax, Dandelion, Succory, Beets, Poplar,
Rue, Yarrow, Watercresses, Asarum roots, Orris, Teazle, Celandine and Daffodil
roots.

These are stronger, bruised With wine or Vinegar, with Salt or Niter, Pepper
or Aloes.

Leeks, Onions, and Lillies roasted with Grease applied are good.

Also the Juyces of the Plants aforesaid, chiefly that of Dandelion like Milk,
and the like in Succories, with the Juice of the Leaves and Flowers of Moulin,
Pomegranates and Purslain, and Laserpitium.

Honey of Anacardus is excellent also.

The Water that comes out of a Vine being burnt.

The Powder of Nigella seed, with Urine, or Lie, or Honey.

Also the Seeds of Sun-flowers, being like Warts, is said to cure them, also
Pease meal, and Barley.

Wheat Leaven consumes Corns.

The Ashes of Willow bark with Vinegar, and the ashes of Squills is approved.

Frankincense, and Pitch poudered, with Salt, Vinegar, and Juice of Onions like
a Plaster.

From Living Creatures take these, Gudgeons tied to a Corn while they rot,
drive them away.

Dioscorides commends the Head of a Lizard.

The Head of the Fish Smaris salted, and burnt, and applied with Wax and
Vinegar, does the same,

The rough scaly skin, also in a Hens foot, which is taken off by fire, is said
to take away warts, if you rub them or apply them therein.

The Juice of Cornel-berries also is good.

Also Dogs dung, Sheeps, and Goats dung, with wax, Soap, Lie, or Urine.

Also the Gall of the Ox.

Also Sal niter, and Ammoniack, and Alum, with Honey, Suet, or Soap.

Lapis Lazuli also poudered and mixed with Vinegar.

We sometimes burn Warts and Corns, and so they are rooted out, and return not,
this is done by actual or potential Cauteries, you may use the strongest, if
you defend the skin round about.

Crow-foot leaves, and Roots are the gentlest potential Cautery, yet beaten and
often applied, they may consume them, as also other burning Herbs.

Diverse Causticks work stronger before mentioned, which must be used warily,
only to the Wart or Corn, covering the part about with wax or plaster, leaving
a Hole in the middle.

These are most usual, the Milk that comes from Figs, or their green Leaves,
and of Spurge, the Spurge, Mirlinites has the best Milk, and it is to be had
in winter; also the Milk of Lathyris, Peplus, and Chamaesyce, which are all
several sorts of Spurge.

Aegyptiacum the Ointment mixed with Juice of spurge, or Rust of Brass poudered
with the same, with a little Sublimate, or Orpiment is excellent.

Unslaked Lime also with Soap, and Vitriol, and Verdegreece, or with Arsenick,
or Sublimate.

The cautery which causes no pain, made of Quicklime in a Lie, and such as
are mentioned for to open Imposthumes, do it quickly.

Also cantharides with Leaven.

Also if it be touched with a drop of Aqua fortis, let it be black.

Or with Water and Vitriol, Arsenick etc. mentioned for opening Imposthumes.

Or this: Take Sal Ammoniack, Alum, and Vitriol, each two ounces; Quicklime
one ounce, Verdegreece half an ounce, distill them, it is stronger with
Sublimate and Arsenick.

Paracelsus commends this for taking off warts and corns. Take of Oil of
Juniper berries, Benzonna, (which is that Mush-room that kills Flies) Agarick,
each one dram; Ox gall: make an Ointment, to be used often.

I would rather use those little Mush-rooms, that are full of Juice, and grow
upon Dunghills, gathered before Sunrising, which I have used to Horses
successfully for the same.

We also actually burn them, with an Iron and a Quill to defend the parts about.

Or we fire a Birch twig, and blow it out, and then burn the wart with the the
coal-

Or we drop a wax candle thereupon, or burn them with a Match, defending the
part with a Plaster, or thin Plate of Lead, with a Hole in the middle, when it
is done.

Or thus, we boar half a Nut shell as wide as the wart, and put the wart
therein, and then lay Brimstone upon the wart, and set it on fire, till the
parts adjacent begin to feel it, and then give over.

We cut them diver ways, or scarifie them, to make the Remedies applied
sooner, and better prevail.

Or we cut off their tops with a sharp Rasor, and so go on, till the pain will
no longer permit, and then the Medicines will easily take away the remainder,
or when we are at the quick, we burn it with strong Dryers, or apply a Plate of
Lead hard bound.

If they hang down, they must be tied with silk very hard to hinder their
Nourishment, that they may fall off.

VVarts are suddenly drawn out by the Roots, by Art by Mountabanks with their
Nails, or an Instrument, which they first anoint with an Ointment, which they
proclaim good for diverse Diseases to deceive the people.

Some things are thought to cure warts by a secret Propriety; as wart-succory
used in Sallets, or Horse-time.

Also the Seeds of Wart-succory one dram taken before sleep, for some days
together.

If you take so many Pease as there are warts, and touch every wart therewith,
and then wrap them in a clout, and throw them behind you in the new Moon, thus
Dioscorides: the vulgar use to burn them.

Pimples in the Face and Head, The Cure of Pimples in the Face.
called Vari or Jonthi and Psydraciae, must be cured with strong Cleansers,
Softners, and with Corroders and Causticks, all which we have showed in
stubborn Spots and Morphew in Discoloration: as also how the Body is to be
prepared and purged.

These following dissolve Pimples, Goose grease, Wolf or Cats grease, and that
of the Fish Thymalus.

Also the Grease that comes out of a burnt Linnen-ragg.

And Aloes, with Gum of Fennel, and Vinegar of Squills.

Or, Take the Juice of Docks four ounces, Vinegar of Squils one ounce, Gum
Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar, half an ounce, Borax three drams, Salt and
Alum one dram.

This is excellent: Take Juice of Onions, Leeks, and Scabious, each half an
ounce; soft Soap one ounce, Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar, two drams,
Myrrh, and Aloes, each half a dram; Powder of Pennyroyal, Hysop, and Basil
seed, each one scruple; Salt, Niter, or Alum one dram, Borax half a dram,
burnt Vitriol one scruple: make a Liniment.

Or, Take Dock roots, and Elicampane sliced, boil them in Vinegar, and bruise
them, adding Borax, Aloes, Frankincense, Cuttle-bone, or stronger things.

Or, Take Pennyroyal, Hysop, or Agnus Castus dried, each one dram; Meal of
Lupines, or Orobus two drams, Salt, or Juyces before mentioned, or Borax one
dram and an half, Frankincense half a dram, with Oil of Mustard, make an
Ointment.

Or, Take the Meal of Lupines two ounces, of Orobus, or Vetches one ounce,
Melon seeds peeled two drams, Raddish seed one dram, Orris roots two drams, Sal
Ammoniack one dram, burnt Hearts horn half a dram: mix them with the Infusion of
Gum Traganth, for Troches to be dissolved in Milk.

Ointments of Fish gall and Oil, Honey, and Sugar does discuss Pimples.

If these in the Head are mattery, you must add Lytharge with Vinegar, and
Verdegreese, and other Dryers, mentioned in the Scab.

The last Remedy for hard Pimples, are the corroding and caustic Medicines
mentioned in Spots.

Hordeolum is a hard tumor like a Barley corn upon the Eyebrows, The Cure of
the Tumor in the Eyes, called Hordeolum and grando.
beneath, and Grando like Hail, is the same above in the upper Eye-brow, and
they are cured as warts, by applying things which consume them, but so that
they may touch only them, and not get into the Eye, and hurt it, especially
when they are strong.

These following are good in these tumors, Gum Ammoniack, or Serapinum spread
upon Leather.

Also Flies their wings taken off, and Ants mixed with Rosin and Wax.

Wine Lies, Vitriol, Honey and Wax.

Lime with the third part of Vitriol, and Turpentine.

If nothing will prevail, we may burn them off, defending the Eye carefully, as
in warts, whether we do it by actual or potential Cautery.

We may also scarifie them; but it is not safe to out them off, or forcebly to
pull them out.

We may, if it be convenient, tie them with silk like warts, but gently, least
it through pain, should cause Inflammation.

The Cure of the Swelling of the Breasts from Milk, The Cure of the Tumor of
the Breasts with Milk.
because it goes of it self, is seldom undertaken. But if it be such as it
causes fear of Inflammation, then we must have a care to hinder the coming of
Milk into the Breasts, and to consume that which is there, or draw it forth.

But if it be curdled, and the tumor hard, we must discuss it, if it tend to an
Imposthume, we must ripen, open it, and cure it as an Ulcer. And if
Inflammation follow, it must be cured as a Phlegmon: of which we spoke in the
treatise of Pain.

We hinder the increase of Milk, with a slender Diet, Evacuations by bleeding
and purging, and giving things that consume both it and the Seed, as Agnus
castus, and Rue seeds, we keep it from the Breasts, by revelling and deriving
the Blood another way, as by opening a Vein in the Arm or Foot, (especially if
they were not well cleansed after Childbearing) and with other things that
provoke the Courses, Scarification, Cupping on the Shoulder, and above the
Knee, by Frictions and the like.

Also by binding the Breasts, and using Emollients, you may hinder the farther
increase, and consume the Milk in the Breasts. The English and French Women,
which use not to nurse their own Children, apply bags of Lin-seeds to their
Breasts, and bind them down, for the same end.

We repel the blood by outward Applications, which we place upon the visible
veins, that come from the Armpits to the Breasts, not upon the Breasts, but
about, and without them, because if Milk be curdled in them, it cannot be
repelled.

There are also repelling Emplasters called defensatives, made of Bole,
mentioned in Phlegmon, and in the Pains of the Eyes from Defluxion, used to the
Forehead and Temples and the like, elsewhere mentioned, which must be laid
about (not upon the breasts) but toward the Armpits.

Especially those we mentioned for hindering the growth of Breasts, may also be
good to hinder Milk.

Also an Epithem of Vinegar, Rose Water, and Alum, with a little Camphire to
penetrate rather then cool.

We dissolve Milk in the Breasts with Dryers and Digesters laid all over upon
the breasts, and if there be a tumor, you must lay thereon things that consume
Milk, and bring it to matter.

Mints is chiefly good for this, and next Calamints, Smallage, Coriander, Agnus
castus, also Wormwood, Horehound, Ladies-glove, Palma Christi, Epimedium, Rue,
Rocket, Celandine, Cole-wort, white Beets, Briony Leaves, and water Lilly roots
beaten green, or boiled first in Wine and Vinegar equal parts, and the third
part Honey to a Cataplasm.

Or that which is made of Wheat-bread, or Bran, Bean, Barley, Lentils, Orobus,
and Foenugreek meal boiled as before, sometimes with Herbs, and Oils of Dill,
Chamomil, and Lillies.

As for Example. Take Marsh-mallow, and Lilly roots, each two ounces; Mints two
handfuls, Wormwood, and Celandine, each one handful; Chamomil flowers one
pugil, boil them in Wine, Vinegar, and Honey, as before, beat them up with
Bean, and Barley meal, or the like four ounces, Oil of Dill, Ducks grease, each
two ounces; make a Cataplasm.

Or thus: Take Bean and Lentil meal, each four ounces; boil them in Vinegar,
and the third part of Honey, with dry Mints, half an ounce, dry Wormwood two
drams, Cummin seed half an ounce, Agnus Castus seeds, and Chamomil flowers,
each two drams and an half; Liquid Storax half an ounce, Saffron one scruple,
Oil of Dill two ounces and an half; make a cataplasm: to this add of the Runnet
of a Kid six drams, to dissolve Milk if it be curdled.

Another, mix Bread with Purslain, and Sage-water, and Honey for a Cataplasm.

Some only steep Bread long in Mint, Sage or Purslainwater, and apply it.

The Root of the greater celandine, beaten and laid upon the Nipple, is said to
dissolve curdled Milk.

Dioscorides teaches that Hemlock does destroy Milk, and hinder the growth of
Breasts, and other Stupefactives, also not by cooling, but by discussing, as we
have showed their Nature to be.

Ointments made of the Juyces of the Herbs mentioned with Oils, as of Mints and
the like, do consume Milk, and dissolve it when curdled, as this: Take the
Juice of Smallage, and Mints, each two ounces; Vinegar one ounce and an half,
Honey two ounces: boil them a little. and wash therewith.

Dioscorides commends wine Lies, with Vinegar.

Also a Fomentation of the Herbs aforesaid, with a sponge or Linnen-cloath is
good, especially a Decoction of cummin and coriander.

Or with strong Vinegar, Sack boiled with a little Saffron.

We take away abundance of Milk by the way ordained, by the Infants sucking,
and if it will not move, Children must suck, or let a woman draw them with her
mouth or with an Instrument for the purpose. If this cannot be done for want of
Nipples, you must do what is taught in the Loss of Nipples, and want of Milk.

The Cure of Tumors coming from Blood, is first of the Veins, as of Varix, or
swollen Veins, Cirsocele or Codrupture; and secondly of the Arteries, as an
Aneurism.

As to the other Tumors of the belly, The Cure of a swollen Belly in women with
Conception.
coming from the Terms stopped, as if they were with Child, without
Conception: because it ends with a large Flux of Blood at the womb, we shall
speak of it, in things cast off, when we mention bleeding at the Womb.

If Women with Child have great Stretched, The Cure of Varix or a swollen, and
crooked Vein.
and crooked Veins in their Legs, after they are delivered, they commonly
vanish. And if either Man or Woman have them continually, they regard them not,
till they trouble them. But if they itch or pain them, or turn to an Ulcer,
they must be cured, because while they continue, the Ulcer cannot be cured, as
we showed in the Kind of Ulcer.

For the Cure, first consider the Plethory, and evil Habit or Juice in the
blood, and this must first be cured by letting blood, and purging: as we showed.

Then we must apply things that may repress, and consume the filthy blood that
stretches the Veins. And that with Lotions or Fomentations, with a Decoction
made in Forge-water, or Lie or Urin, of Fennel roots, Bugloss the great,
Agrimony, Laurel, Cole worts, of Rosemary, Elder, and Lavender flowers, Cypress
nuts, Sloes, Lupine seeds, Cole-wort seed, with Salt and Alum, and if you will
astringe more, with Vitriol.

Or with this Fomentation, or Epithem. Take burnt Chalk three ounces, Bole, or
fat Earth one ounce and an half, Acacia, or dried Sloes one ounce, Sanguis
Draconis six drams, Myrrh half an ounce, strong Vinegar one pint and an half,
Lie three pounds, with a little Salt and Vitriol we stop the flux, by
Ligatures, or Roulers about the part, beginning from below upwards, as we
showed in Oedema, alone, or with a Fomentation before, or we wet the Rouler in
the Fomentation, and strain, which will be stronger thereby, especially if it
be made of Sloes.

Sometimes we cut off the great Vein, which nourishes the Ulcer, when it
hinders the Cure of the Ulcer; if there were no Ulcer, we would not do it,
because dangerous if but opened. It is better therefore to bleed in the other
Leg for Revulsion. But when we will cut a Vein out that nourishes the Ulcer,
first you must mark its Passage above with a Pen, as it comes from the Ulcer,
and then open the skin by longitude, and lay the Vein bare, then rub the Blood
down, and tie the Vein above, and cut it beneath in length to let out the
blood, then bind it next to the Ulcer, and cut it that part of the Vein, which
is between the two Ligatures, and so the way will be stopped, by which the
Ulcer was fed.

The small crooked Veins in the Codds, Privities of women, and Eyebrows, or in
other parts of the skin, because they hinder not, are not regarded, but if you
will do any thing, you must revel the blood from the part, and repel and
discuss it, as in Inflammations, only your astringents must not here be so
cold, least the Blood congeal.

Cirsocele is when the spermatick vessels are swollen, The Cure of the Stone
vessel rupture.
and if it hinder not the Seed, it is not regarded, because it is hard to be
taken without Gelding, and except it grow great, like a flesh Rupture, it is
not attempted, but you must use Fomentations and the like, before it comes to
that.

Aneurisma, that is a Tumor from the opening of the artery, The Cure of
Aneurisma.
when the blood thereof gets under the skin, when it is old is not curable,
because the blood cannot be repelled by astringents, or the mouth of the Artery
lying deep be shut. Nor may we open it, because the Patient would certainly die
of a Flux of Blood, which cannot be stopped. Therefore if at the first
Repellers and Closers of the Artery mentioned in Haemorragy or Bleeding do
nothing, we must leave it, except we will use a Ligature, or Plate of Lead, to
keep it down.

As for an internal Aneurism, because it has no external Tumor, of which we
spoke, but produces the Heart beating, we have showed how it must be ordered,
when we treated of Palpitation of Heart and Cachexy.

Tumors coming from Seed, as that which is Natural of the Belly in Women with
Child, require nothing but good Government, to prevent Abortion or Miscarriage,
as shall be showed in the Treatise of unseasonable Births.

The tumors of a Woman's Belly from a Mole, The Cure of the Belly swollen with a
Mole.
is to be mentioned in things cast off, because the cause is not to be
certainly known, till the Mole is brought forth.

The Cure of particular Tumors, is not here to be repeated, The Cure of tumors
that are from the Birth.
if they come from the Seed, at the Birth, as Sarcomata, Kernels, Struma's and
the like, because they are to be cured as those.

CHAP. IV. Of Defoedation or Defilement.
The Kinds.
UNder the Name of Defoedation, we understand those Infections which defile the
Body with many Diseases. so that they are that infected with them, must leave
the society of sound Men. Of this there are two Kinds principally, The one is
old, called Lues Elephantica or Leprosy, the other new called the Lues Venerea
or French Pox. The body is many ways defiled by them, with such as are common
to both, as tumors, pustles, ulcers and falling of the Hair, and others that
are proper to them in particular Pains, and Hindrance of Functions.

There are also other Infections, that have been first known our age, that
defile the Body, and are proper to some Countries, among which the Scurvey is
most known, usual in the North, of which we shall speak here, leaving other
Infections to them that know them.

It is called Elephantiasis, The Leprosy called Elephantiasis.
from the Likeness of the Patient to an Elephant, his Ears growing thin and
broad like wings; they are called Lepers, from the Roughness of their skin, and
from their Lion like looks, it is called Leontiasis, and because they are
Lecherous Satyriasis.

In this there are diverse accidents, which are to be searched and described,
because they show how it came, and they who have it, are to be examined by the
command of the Magistrate, and separated from the sound, that we may judge
rightly, and not mistake as usually, and offend either sick or sound. In regard
I have been thirty years appointed, and have examined above six hundred
suspected of the same, I will faithfully declare, first the Diseases they have,
and then the Actions hurt, and examine the things cast off, that we may know
how to judge of the same.

The outward Infirmities, are chiefly in the Heads and Joints, and the
Searchers do scarce examine any other part, and yet give sure Judgment. In the
Joints they examine the Hands, and Feet, Fingers, and Toes and Nails, and above
the Knees to the Thighs, above the Elbow to the Shoulder; and in the Head they
search the Mouth, Eyes, Nose, inside and outside, Face, Ears and Hair,
Eyebrows, and Beard, and the tumors and ulcers there, to judge by them alone,
or together.

There are oftentimes little tumors in the Leprous upon the Face, and Joints;
in the Face, upon the Forehead and Cheeks; and making them look wildly, which
first discover the Disease, and are in the Arms, Backs of the Hands, and in the
Feet and Thighs. These are moveable, and without pain, and are bluish, red,
especially in the Face, like a cancerous Tumor. These Pustles be they in one or
more places, A general Cancer.
fewer or more, do certainly declare an Elephantiasis; and if these appear not,
you cannot judge directly, except other signs concur.

There are other Tumors, which are in the Mouth, the Palate and Jaws, more or
fewer, yellow, blew, which are signs of the same; such as are in Hogs, and
therefore in Germany they look in their Mouths, and if they find them, they
will not eat of their flesh.

There are also Ulcers, especially between the Toes, and in the Soles of the
Feet, in the thick skin there, and in the Hands, also in the Elbow, and other
Joints. These Ulcers pierce through the skin, and seldom go farther, but are
broad, with hard, swollen Lips easily bleeding, like Carcinomata; and because
the tumor is like a Cancer, and the Ulcer resembles a cancerous Ulcer. This
Elephantiasis is called an universal Cancer. Neither do the Ulcers feel any
pain, nor the Tumor though they be molested; hence they are supposed to be void
of feeling: besides these Ulcers creep, and being cured in one place, they
break forth in another. From these alone rightly understood, we may determine
the Leprosy, but surer, when the other agree. They who are infected, pretend
they were burnt to take away suspicion, because they resemble the Scars of
burnings. Experience shows that the Ulcers and Tumors in a Leprosy, want
feeling. So November 22. 1625. a young Man of three and twenty years of age,
being to be searched for a Leper, who was full of such tumors and Leprous
Ulcers and signs, and therefore judged to be a Leper, I being brought in with
many other Physicians, (by my Father of pious Memory) to give censure, thrust a
Needle into a Tumor on the outside of the right Arm, being high to the bottom,
in the presence of them all, and the Patient being blindfold, perceived it not.

There are Ulcers in the Nostrils, and they are worst which eat the spungy
Bones thereof, and make the Nose fall off, and corrode on further, and eat
through the Palate and Uvula, and the Jaws, and if they get down to the
Windpipe do kill the Patient, as also when they are too corroding in the Nose.

Sometimes the Swelling of some parts declare the Leprosy, as the broad Grisle
of the Ear growing thick, swollen or broad, as an Elephants, from whence it is
called Elephantiasis. Also the Nostrils are dilated, which makes the Face very
uncomely, especially when the Nose between them is flat, which also hinders
breathing; also the other parts of the Face swell besides the tumors: as also
the eyebrows, so that the red hangs out, and seems horridly. Also the Hands,
and Feet are swollen, when the rest of the Body is lean.

If a skin be grown over the Eye, it is an Argument of the Leprosy, if other
signs agree. And if it be in the larger corner grown thick, it gets over the
Pupilla, and hinders the sight, as we showed in the Hurt of sight.

Sometimes the skin of the Leper is rough in the Feet, Hands, Face and Ears,
and also in the Head, and Eyebrows where are also Dandrough and Scabs,
somewhile blew, or black, with little, or no itching. The skin is also cleft in
some places, especially the Hands, and it is hard and scirrhous, the Nails are
also cleft and bent; there is also a Scab dry and stinking, over the whole Body,
which seems to pollute the whole Body more then an Elephantiasis, which is only
in the Head and Joints, and that called Psora, by the Greeks, is most desperate
and taken for Elephantiasis; as we showed in Psora, but being not the same, it
must be distinguished. And the Greek Leprosy is not to be called the Arabian
Leprosy, which is the Elephantiasis, except other more certain signs accompany
it.

Also the hair falls off both from the Head which is bald, as also the Chin, so
that the Beard is either fallen or very thin, and from the Eyebrows.

The strange color may help the Discovery of this Disease which is not fresh,
but pale, yellow, black and dark, especially the Face, and the Eyes are red or
blew. Also if Veins under the Tongue are black and swollen; but this sign I
have little regarded.

The Functions are not hurt at the first, wherefore they feeling no pain
neglect their cure, till more manifest signs appear: And then they have defect
in the Operations by the Increase of the Distempers mentioned, especially in
breathing which is hindered by the stoppage of the Nose, so that they breath
with open Mouth, and by Ulcers and Tumors in the Nose, so that their Voice is
hoarse, and the Party grows in danger of being choked, and so they many times
die, when notwithstanding other accidents, they might live.

Also the Senses are hurt in the continuance of the Disease, as the sight with
a filme in the Eye, which either hinders sight, or makes blind. Also the
touching is so stupefied, that the skin feels not any offense in the part, and
therefore they try them, chiefly by the prick of a Needle. But Experience
shows that is not always true, but only in the swollen Feet, which have long
been so, and want Heat to be felt as if dead, this I have tried by pricking
them to the bottom, neither did they bleed, but only water. And this made them
think that in all Leprosies there is want of feeling, or it was because the
ulcers and tumors are without feeling: as we showed, therefore they suppose all
the Body insensible.

As for other Functions, except by the continuance of the Diseases the strength
fail, they can perform any actions, as eat, concoct, digest as found Men, and
if poor, they beg for Meat. Moreover, lust is not gone from them, because by
many instances, they are proved wanton, and though they impute it to other
causes, yet we suppose it to be from their being kept from their Wives. And
they can procreate, as appears by their Wives lest with Child, though they were
Leprous long before, and also they beget leprous Children.

There is nothing voided which does especially declare this Disease, though
many Chyrurgions and Physicians say they may be known only by their blood,
which the People believes, and therefore they bleed all they examine, and
pronounce by the blood, as it is black, blew, or gravelly. Others strain it,
and seek for worms, which they say is the true sign; others try the blood, thus
they throw hot Salt into the blood, and if it dissolve not, or if Vinegar mix
not with it, it is a true sign of the Leprosy. But we that have above thirty
years, diligently searched into the Blood of Lepers, do plainly declare that
neither we, nor our Chyrurgions could ever find any sign of Leprosy from the
blood, but it was either like sound Men, or not much different corrupted or
infected, or so bad as in a Fever or Jaundies. And we declare the same
concerning Urin, which the vulgar esteem so much of for discovery, as also of
the Pulse, which has no Alteration.

The Venereal Disease called by that name, The French Pox.
because it comes from Venery, and because it is there frequent, and came from
thence the Neapolitan Disease, or French Disease may be more truly called the
Indian Disease, thence it came first, does corrupt the body with as many
accidents as the Elephantiasis, and makes it filthy, sick and uncomely. And in
this there is great pain, and if it be alone, it is referred to the pains about
the bones; but if it be mixed with other accidents, it is to be referred
hither. And these accidents are to be diligently searched into, because it is
infectious, and that it being known betimes, the unsound may be separated from
the sound, for which end there are proper Hospitals. These accidents following
are the chief.

The Hair usually falls off in the French Pox, which is a sign, One kind of
French Pox.
especially about the Temples, Forehead and Eyebrows; and in men the beard
falls, and this is a more certain sign, if other accidents concur, albeit if
there be no sign of another Disease, it will be a sign of the Pox alone; and
also if they confess that they have had to do with unclean Women.

The skin is sometimes sprinkled with small Spots, Another kind of French Pox.
red and like Fleabits, or Freckles, dark, yellow, or blew in many places, in
the Face, Neck, Breast, Belly, Privities, sometimes all over. And we have
sometimes seen these Spots so joined together, that the skin has been broadly
infected, especially in the Breast and Back, and sometimes in the Belly, or
other places, which being pressed the strange color flew away, and the pit was
white, and presently returned to its former color. These Spots either alone,
if we can discover no other cause thereof, besides unclean Copulation, declare
the beginning of the Pox, or some small kind of it, as also the falling off of
the Hair alone; or with other accidents they will be more certain, and show the
Disease to be worse.

High Pustles without pain, are sometimes in the skin, The third kind of french
Pox.
reddish, or yellowish, round, hard, and covered with a dry Scurfe in the
Forehead, Ears, Nostrils, Jaws, and in the Head; also in the Neck, Breast,
Arms, and other parts: and these certainly declare the Pox.

Besides, there are diverse malignant Pustles in the inward parts, the Mouth,
Jaws, Nostrils and Praepuce, or Foreskin of a man's Yard, and Women's Privities;
these if many together, do certainly signify the Pox, especially if other
signs went before, or come after. In Children infected, these Pustles in the
Mouth, are the chieft sign of it.

There come also filthy Ulcers from the Pustles mentioned in diverse parts, yet
chiefly in the tender parts of the skin, Face, Nose, Lips, and about the
Privities, and that cancer in the Praepuce or Foreskin of the Yard, and those
in women's Privities, also in the Jaws, Mouth (as the little sores called
Aphthae, or thrush) Nostrils, and in the Posteriors.

Some of these creep on, and corrode the subject parts, and corrupt the bone,
and bring hurt to the parts, either by Lameness or loss of the same. Others
disfigure the Face by eating off the Nose; others corrode the Lips, so that
they cannot drink, or sup, which must be done by the lips, as I have seen.
Others have eaten through the Palate, and consumed the Uvula, whereby the voice
has been hoarse, and they have spoken through the Nose, and snuffled. Also
these Ulcers corrupt the Glans, Nut or Head of the Yard, and makes them unfit
for Venery: as we showed in corroding Ulcers, such as hinder Functions and
Actions. By these, especially if many together, and mixed with other accidents,
we certainly discover the French Pox.

Pains about the Bones without flesh, as in the Shins, The fourth kind of the
French Pox.
Shoulders, Head, Forehead, and Temples, sometimes in the Breast, which is only
pained in this Disease. These pains are great, and worst toward night, and
when they are touched, neither will they be assuaged with Anodines or
Stupefactives as other parts, but worse thereby. These if without other signs,
are to be referred to the pains in the Habit of the Body. And if they be joined
with other accidents, they make a distinct Pox from the rest, and it is easily
known.

Besides these, there are other accidents which are signs of the Pox, which
being alone, (because they may be also in other Diseases,) cannot determine
certainly, except after copulation with unclean Women, they cause a suspicion.
And then also we cannot undoubtedly pronounce it the Pox, except there be other
signs, for before ever the pox was known, there were venereal Buboes or
Swellings in the Groin, without Infection, that came by Copulation; and other
accidents which we shall explain. And if they come from the Pox, there will
presently be other signs, as pain about the Bones, falling of Hair, Spots or
Pustles. These following accidents, are both in the Pox, and in other diseases,
and are exactly described elsewhere, therefore we shall but touch upon them
here.

The Swelling in the Groin called Bubo venereus, sometimes breaks forth in the
beginning, and vanishes presently, or if it remain, it grows hard, or comes to
matter, nor is it unlike that Bubo which is without the Pox.

These are Swellings called Condylomata in the Privities of a Woman and of a
Man also, which are also like those that are without Infection.

There are clifts also in the Hands and Feet, and the skin in the Palm of the
Hand, being thick, comes off without pain, as we showed it may without the Pox.

It is observed that the Nails and Hair also fall off.

Sometimes there are Nodes or Knots in that kind of pox, which is about the
bones with pain, in the Forehead, Shins and other parts without flesh; as we
showed in pains about the Bones, which are without the Pox, and yet very like
it.

Sometimes there is matter that flow from the Privities, both of Man and Woman,
fouling their Linen with a yellowish stain, which follows a venomous Matter or
Seed, mentioned in the infectious or virulent Gonorrhaea, or running of the
Reins, this is joined with the Pox, and is sometimes without it.

There is also here a burning of Urine with dropping of the same, as in other
Diseases. As for the other accidents that hinder Actions, because they come not
of themselves from this Disease, but by accident from other Causes and
Diseases, if they grow troublesome, being general, and belonging to other
Diseases of continuance, and do not constitute the Pox, neither can we take any
certain signs thereof from them, we willingly pass them by. As we counted it
also to be superfluous to predict or foretell any thing hereof by the Urin or
Blood being contrary to experience; and we think it sit to cherish the people
in their Folly of supposing all things may be known by urin.

The Scurvey is called by Pliny and Strabo, Stomacace, The Scurvey.
because it is in the Mouth and Scelturbe, because it is in the Shins with
spots, and Scorbeck or Schverbuych in High Dutch. This being first found in the
Northern Seacoasts and infectious, makes me suspect that it was brought by the
Seamen from some remote part, as the French Pox was brought first into Naples
being near the Sea from the Indies, and called first the Indian Pox; not unlike
that which comes without Infections, for both infirm the Body, and hinder
Action: as shall be showed.

These have Spots in their Thighs, first small, then lying hid, of a purple or
violet color or black; others have black or blew skins all over, and sometimes
in other parts, sometimes these Spots wear away with the skin like scales,
sometimes they vanish suddenly before death, and after death they appear again.

Their Gums are swollen and loose, Itch, and are painful, and sometimes bloody.
Also the Legs swell, or grow very small, with small Pustles, which are hard in
the Kernel parts of the Body, and between the Muscles, and in other parts,
sometimes without pain, like those Tumors in the Glandles, and cause that
Infection which is called by the French Scrophula, of which we have spoken.

Afterward the Gums ulcerate and stink which infecteth the Breath, and when
they are consumed, the Roots of the Teeth lie bare, and they are loose, as in
the Cancer of the Gums, mentioned in the pains of the Mouth, where we mentioned
the Scurvey of the Gums. There are Ulcers in the Shins, but seldom, these are
putrid or stinking, and rotten, or gangrenous, and without feeling.

There is also a stretching, or a contraction, or a roughness in the Legs about
the Calfes, which comes at the first with little pain, and pricking about the
soles of the Feet, which keeps them from standing or going: and sometimes the
Veins of the Legs swell, and are crooked.

There is also Heavines and Laziness of Body at first, and the Pulse is weak,
then there follows such a Weakness and Straightness of Breast, that when he
would arise and move he faints, and the Pulse stops.

As for other signs, there is loss of Appetite, or Increase in some. The Belly
is bound in some, and loose in others, the Urin red and thick, and the Sweat
stinketh.

A gentle Fever accompany's it, or an acute or sharp malignant Fever goes
before it, sometimes a quartan follows, and then the Pox returns after it, and
brings worse Diseases, as Convulsions, Palsies and the like, in which it
concludes, as Atrophy, or want of nourishing, Consumption, Dropsy, and bloody
Flux etc.

The Causes.
We refer the Causes of these Infections which so disturb the Body, whether it
be the old Leprosy or latter Pox, or the Scurvey only known in some Motions
and the like, not to a certain and manifest Quality, or Humor, or to Venom
which lie by its Malignity, as appears by the Effect does act secretly and
deadly destructive. But we shall show what parts of the Body they invade, and
what Diseases they produce therein, and from what Cause, in these several kinds
following.

The Distemper coming from the Leprosy called Elephantiasis, The Part
affected in Elephantiasis.
shows that only the Membranes are infected, and chiefly the skin, and some
places thereof, especially in which this Infection produces the accidents
mentioned, as little Tumors in the Face, and in the Hands and Feet, Ulcers in
the skin of the Feet, Soles thereof, and between the Toes, the Swelling of the
skin, in the Nostrils, and Ears, and of the Face and other parts, and sometimes
Roughness and Clefts in the same, and in the Nails, and the falling of the
Hair: also the same Venom breeds Pustles in the Palate, and Ulcers in the
Tunicle or Skin of the Mouth, Jaws and Nostrils, and thickness in the skin of
the Eye, and at length a film. But in other parts, as the Muscles, Bones,
inward Bowels, and Vessels, this poison cannot do the same, as is vulgarly
thought, as appears by their having no other Disease that pierced so deep, when
they are opened, and in regard no Functions are hurt, either in the voluntary
Motion, or animal, vital or natural Actions, except there come another Disease,
neither does Urin, Blood, or other Excrements show any Infection of the Bowels,
as we showed.

The Disease which this Venom produces, A venomous Distemper is the cause of
Elephantiasis.
must also be a venomous Quality or Distemper in the skin, not only perverting
the true temper thereof, but corrupting the whole substance, so that it
converteth the Juice with which it is nourished, and supplied when it is worn
away, (although it be made from good Blood fit to nourish sound parts) into the
like evil substance, when it comes to it. Even as we showed another venomous
Quality produced a Cancer, and that evil Juice nourished and increased it. For
as from this, a tumor only in one place, so from that are diverse Pustles and
other Distempers. Therefore because Elephantiasis, and a general Cancer come
from a like venomous Cause, producing diverse Operations, that Elephantiasis may
be called a general Cancer, rather then that which infecteth the whole Body,
because it is not all over but in the skin, and some Tunicles.

The Cause from which this poison producing an evil Quality in the skin and
tunicles, which is the ground of the Leprosy is diverse.

Sometimes it comes from the Parents that were infected; sometimes from other
Humors, or Causes in the Body. When this Venom comes from the Seed of the
Parents, it causes an hereditary Elephantiasis, for Seed coming from the whole
body, that which comes from the parts infected, is polluted, and when the Child
is formed, the Venom makes an Impression in the parts like those from whence it
came, as the skin and tunicle which it produces. And it seldom appears
presently after the Child is born, but being tamed and qualified by the
strength of the purer part of Seed, it lies hid sometimes, and is only in
power, till that growing weak, this prevalent Venom breaks forth, into Act,
sometimes sooner, and then it is greater, and sometimes later, and then it is
less, and shows it self at that time of age, wherein it appeared first in the
Parents. And it happens that lying hid in Children a long time it appears,
sometimes in their Children before it appears in them, so that the Children are
free, and the Grandchildren infected. And though there be no certain sign of
it in the Parents, yet it may be derived to the Children, and be first manifest
in them. As in a certain old Man that had no signs of a Leprosy, who had one
Bastard and two Legitimate Sons, which in their Youth were wonderfully
infected, and yet three Daughters begotten by the same Man were free from it
all their lives: this we saw. And it was credible from the polluted Seed of the
Father, not yet appearing in him, upon the Sons; and the Daughters escaped by
the purity of the Seed of the Mother. Although God sometimes inflicts this as a
Punishment with that means.

It is a received Opinion that one Body will infect another, and therefore they
are separated one from the other, and it appears to be so, because the
Infection being in the external parts and skin only, nay by touching or lying
together, especially in Marriage, may easily be conveyed to the skin of
another; or by the use of the same Cups or Spoons, or taking in of meat, which
the infected have chewed, it may get first into the Mouth, and then into other
parts. As we showed the venom of the Pox, and of beasts, could infect by
spettle. And they are soonest infected that are of a like temper, as those of a
Kindred, as we have upon search found two or three Brethren infected in the
same Family. Or they have some capacity to receive it, which we can scarce
declare; but it is such, because when many have been together in the same
danger, only one or two have been infected.

Also they say that other Creatures infected therewith, may infect Mankind;
for although Beasts have somewhat like the Leprosy, as tumors in the Jaws in
Hogs, yet because it is not every way the same, neither have they other signs
of it, as men have, it is either not the Leprosy, or another kind, and will
infect only beasts of their own kind and not men. Also we daily find by
Experience, that poor people eat daily meazled Hogs, and yet have no signs of
Leprosy.

I have observed that a Woman with Child that longed for meazled Pork and eat
much of it, brought forth a Son who had meazly Pustles all along his Backbone,
very like those of Swine spread abroad, continuing a while and then vanishing
without any other inconvenience. We shall affirm little, but leave it to every
Man's Experience, whether from the biting or stinging of venomous beasts, or
touching only of Venom, or drinking or smelling, as they say of basil, this
Leprosy can come or not, although the people have diverse Opinions thereof.

It appears this Infection may come from Humors very often, because many
Leprous Persons have not taken it by Insection, and we see often them that have
conversed long with Lepers, and been married to them, to have remained sound.
Therefore because we cannot perceive any other Cause from whence it should
arise, we conclude that it comes from within. Moreover we cannot say that these
Humors from whence the venomous Quality comes into the parts, arise from
Distemper or Corruption, as is generally believed, because they produce no
other Diseases or accidents, or signs of the same, which use to arise from the
change of Humors in that manner: but that a certain venomous Quality produces
a Disease like it self. And this may be bred in the Blood, and with that
property by which it can only hurt some places, according to the Nature of
poison, it hurts only the skin and Tunicles only and no other part. For the
doing of which, and that its force may come to the Supersicies of the Body, it
is not needful that all the blood be corrupted, for then it would kill the
Party, but some part thereof. Or if this poison being against Nature, be driven
to the exterior parts by it, the Cause with its Effect produced will stick
there, only where the Infection brake forth, and no longer be in the Blood,
although it came originally from thence, and so corrupt the substance of the
parts, and that will corrupt the nourishing Juice; as I showed, and so cause,
and nourish and Elephantiasis. These venomous Seeds in the Blood, except the
Blood be first insected, and then the parts of the Body from it, may come from
some Corruption in the same; or Putrefaction, in which the blood may be turned
into Venom. as in other poisons, whereof we have spoken in other Diseases,
among which as some are said to come from the Terms, which are accounted
venomous, so they say the Elephantiasis comes also, not only in a Woman, when
her Courses are stopped, but in a Man by Infection, when he has had to do with
a menstrous Woman, or in a Child conceived at that time. All which come not
from the menstrual Blood, because it is not of its own Nature in sound women,
filthy, as we showed, except that it or other blood, for other Causes contract
such evil as may produce the venomous Seeds of an Elephantiasis. And it is hard
to judge by bleeding, whether it comes from meat or a Disease before going, or
what kind of Venom it is but by the effect.

In the Cause of the Elephantiasis begin other Humors, as Melancholy (as some
think it is) or any other, and if it proceed not from its certain quality
(though hurtful) or if it be Naturally in Humors preternatural, or become such
from Corruption; because other Diseases come from thence, which are not found
in an Elephantiasis, but then also it will come from the corruption of them,
from whence these Humors receive a venomous and malignant Quality fit to
produce an Elephantiasis, they will produce it, that as we showed of Blood by
driving it the outward parts of the body, and by infecting them.

It is thought that this Leprosy is contracted by extreme Cold external of the
Body, when men have been long in Water, Air, or Snow, or after vehement Heat,
as bathing they endure a great cold, or when they cool a hot Tumor, as
Erysipelas too suddenly. But because other accidents come from thence, as when
there is extreme cooling, the extinguishing of Natural Heat and Mortification
of the part, we cannot make this a cause of the diverse accidents in this
Leprosy.

Nor can we affirm that other Tumors and Ulcers in these outward parts, can be
turned into this Disease, although many think it to be possible in an
Erysipelas and Herpes, because when they are changed into a malignant Scab,
which the Greeks call a Leprosy, they take it for a kind of Elephantiasis,
from which it differs, as I showed. And if any external Diseases should turn
into this, the Humors that caused them, must first of Necessity turn into a
venomous Quality by Corruption.

In the French Pox, that Venom which produces it, The part affected in the
French Pox.
is chiefly in the Membranes which causes Diseases there and Pain, as we
showed. As pains about the Periostium, or Skin, or Bone, where there is no
flesh in the Head, Shins, Breast, and Nodes in some places. But the
Elephantiasis chiefly in the skin, the mouth Jaws, Nostrils, causes the Hair
to fall, Spots, Ulcers etc.

The Disease of the French Pox is a Distemper of these parts, An evil quality
is the cause of the French Pox.
and such a venomous quality, as is fit not only to produce such accidents as
are in the Elephantiasis but more, and great pains; as appears by what is said
in Elephantiasis, and in the second Book of the Pox.

Where we have at large declared, where and how this Venom coming of a
venomous Cause, can by contagion by the Copulation of Male and Foemale, or
other touching, or by Spettle, or by a Vapor or Humor, be carried into the
Membranes and infect them, and bring forth the accidents mentioned, so that we
shall not need to repeat it here.

Also in the Scurvey, a certain secret poison which produces a venomous
Quality breeds the like Disease, A malignant quality is the cause of the
Scurvey.
as appears by the Diversity and the Malignity of the accidents thereof, which
are also in the skin, as Spots in the Legs, Pustles, and Ulcers, Swelling of
the Gums, and other inconveniences. And we rather determine this to be the
cause, then a melancholic Humor, to which it is attributed by some, that they
may not fly to an occult Cause, as in other Diseases, whose Malignity shows
them to come from Venom. And I had rather leave it to the Inhabitants of those
parts, where the Scurvey is most to judge whence this Venom arose, and got into
the Body, and whether it came by Sea into the North as the French Pox; then
search into the Causes of Venom which are hard to find out, and not to be known
but by their Effect.

The Cure.
Elephantiasis, The Cure of Elephantiasis.
although it be only in some parts of the skin, yet is it hardly prevented at
first, and cured when old, especially when hereditary. Nor have we found them
that cure it, though they brag when they cured only an Itch, as if they had
cured a Leprosy. Yet it is not to be neglected, but at first opposed by all
means, that if it be not cured, it may be allayed. And we must remove the
accidents as they come forth, because without them the Patient may live long.
And because they cause great Deformity, that they may be less suspected when
they keep men company, there may be a palliative Cure: which great Men do
entreat from Physicians with great promises.

The Cure is two ways, first generally of the whole Disease, the second
particularly of the accidents.

The general Cure, is to labor as much as may be to take away the poison which
is the cause, with Evacuations, and to correct the venomous Quality. But
because as yet the Medicines are not found not which do it by a peculiar virtue,
as in the French Pox, and we cannot proceed that way, the best way is to take
away the accidents. And therefore it must be done as the venomous Itch, and the
evil Spots, Pustles, and malignant Ulcers are cured, by the means following.

You must purge as you find the Body abound in Excrements; and because you
cannot purge Venom, yet purge Melancholy, and use things to abate it, such as
allay the sharpness with Moistness and Cold. Those which are good against al
salt choleric humors, as the Scab and Pox are here also good, with which you
may purge twice or thrice every Spring and fall, to prevent evil, and other
times, if the Body be foul.

First use gentle things for the common Excrements, as a sharp Clyster,
mentioned in diverse places, in the Cure of Melancholy.

Or give Cassia, Catholicon, Tryphera persica, or Saracenica, or Diasena, with
convenient Waters, or Decoction of Pease, or Goats Whey.

Or, Take Rhubarb infused in Endive water, or Whey one dram or four scruples,
Syrup of Roses solutive one ounce and an half, Cassia, Catholicon, or Tryphera
persica half an ounce, with Bugloss and Fumitory water; make a Potion.

And that the Excrements may abate, give a Vomit instead of that Potion, if it
has been used, weaker or stronger of Hellebore.

Prepare before purging with Syrups of Violets, Fumitory, Bugloss, Endive, the
compound Svrup of Fumitory, of water lillies, Gourds dissolved with Fumitory,
Hops, Bugloss; Endive, Succory, and Sorrel-water, etc. and a little
Trionsantalon.

Or with this Decoction: Take both Buglosses with the Roots two handfuls, Grass
roots, Sparagus, Liquorish, each two ounces; Capar barks, and Tamarisk, each
one ounce; of Endive, Succory, Lettice, Maidenhair, each one handful; Cordial
flowers, red Pease, each one pugil; the four great cold Seeds six drams,
Anise-seed two drams, Raisons two ounces; make a Decoction and in two pints and
an half of it, dissolve of the Syrup aforesaid as much as is sufficient, or
Sugar, with Trionsantalon: for five or six doses.

Or this Julep mentioned in the preparing of Melancholy, which begins thus.
Take Syrup of Violets, Borage etc. Or thus: Take Juice of Bugloss, and sweet
sented Apples, or the Decoction that begins thus: Take of both Bugloss-roots
etc.

We purge with this after Preparation. Take Rhubarb infused in Endive water one
dram, Agarick infused in syrup of Roses solutive, two scruples, Confectio
Hamech, or Diasenna three drams, Syrup of Violets one ounce and an half,
dissolve it with Fumitory, or Hop-water.

Or give this Bole. Take Catholicon half an ounce, Confectio Hamech two drams,
de Succo Rosarum, one dram, with Sugar, make a Bolus.

Or this Potion. Take the Herbs and Roots of both Buglosses, or Succory, or
Endive, Fumitory, Hops, each half an handful; Endive, Purslain, Melon, and
Citron seeds, each half a dram; Anise seeds one dram, Cordial flowers one
pugil, Raisons one ounce, Prunes five pares, pulp of Tamarinds half an ounce,
Liquorish, and Polypody, each one ounce; Senna six drams, Epithymum two drams,
with some convenient Liquor and Sugar make a Potion, you may add Myrobalans,
Rhubarb, dissolve Electuaryes therein.

Instead of these, you may give the purges mentioned in Melancholy, as that
which begins thus. Take Chatholicon one ounce, etc. Or thus, Take Senna,
Polypody etc. or the Pills there mentioned.

We prepare and purge with this Apozeme. Take Grass roots, Asparagus,
Butchers-broom, barks of Capar roots, Ash, and Tamarisk, each two ounces: mix
them with sharp Wine, or adding a little Vinegar, take the Roots of Liquorish
three ounces, of Elicampane one ounce, the Herbs and Roots of both Buglosses,
Succory, Sorrel, Docks, each one handful; Fumitory, Hops, Mercury, Scabious,
the Capillars, each two handfuls; Endive, Lyons-tooth, Lettice, Liverwort,
Ducks meat, each one handful; Bettony, Thyme, Tops of Rosemary, Groundpine,
Germander, each half a handful; Cordial flowers, Broom, Tamarisk, and
Water Lillies, each one pugil; the four lesser cold Seeds half an ounce, Sorrel
seed two drams, Anise seed three drams, Fennel seed two drams, red Pease one
pugil, Jujubs and Sebestens, each five pairs; Tamarinds one ounce, Polypody of
the Oak four ounces, Senna three ounces, Carthamus seeds bruised one ounce and
an half, Epithymum six drams: boil them all in Water, with the Roots, and their
Infusion as was said, adding as much Sugar as is sufficient, with a little
Sanders, cinnamon' or Powder of the three Sanders, or Diamargariton frigidum.
For five or six doses.

Let purges be given by turns, some days together, or once or twice in three
or four days, as the Body abounds with Excrements.

Syrups for this purpose will keep longer; made of the Apozeme before
mentioned, that purges and prepares, of Roots, Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, and
Seeds, adding two ounces of Tamarinds, six ounces of Polypody, Senna four
ounces and an half, Carthamus seeds bruised three ounces, Epithymum one ounce,
black Hellebore half an ounce, boiled in Water, and strained, adding Citron,
and Indian Myrobalans rubbed with Oil of sweet Almonds, each three drams,
Rhubarb half an ounce, Spike half a dram, Cinnamon one dram, Agarick five
drams, strain it, and add Syrup of Roses solutive four ounces, Sugar half a
pound: boil them to the consistance of a Syrup, you may give it alone, or with
Pease Broth, or Whey or the Decoction of pot Mercury, or with proper Waters.

A Syrup of Juyces: Take Roots of Polypody, Liquorish, each three ounces; Senna
four ounces, Carthamus seeds bruised two ounces and an half, Epithymum six
drams, Tamarinds two ounces, Raisons one ounce, Anise seeds two drams: boil
them in Goats Milk Whey, take two pints of it strained, and add the Juice of
Fumitory, Hops, Bugloss, Scabious, Docks, each three ounces; boil them again,
and skum them, then add Sugar half a pound, boil it to a consistance, and add a
little Cinnamon, and Sanders; if the Juice of pot Mercury be added, it will be
better.

The Infusion or Decoction of Hellebore to take away the sharpness, is thus
made. There is a Decoction made of Endive, Succory, and both Buglosses in
Water, and in six pints thereof strained, they insuse one ounce and an half of
the Roots of black Hellebore sliced, and after steeping a while, they boil it
till two parts be consumed, and of the third part, they give four ounces, with
half an ounce of syrup of Violets for some days together.

Two drams of the Powder of Epithymum, with Whey is given for a month together
every morning, it will work better, if one dram of the Powder of Senna be mixed
with a dram of Epithymum, and half a dram of Tartar, and one dram of Sugar
Candy with Whey; to which you may add Turbith, and some Spices, and this is
better then the powder Diarena.

A pleasant laxative Electuary. Take Pulp of Tamarinds one ounce and an half,
Pulp of Cassia two ounces and an half, Pulp of Raisons, and sweet Prunes, thick
Juice of sweet Apples, each one ounce; syrup of Violets, and Roses solutive
each one ounce and an half; Diagridium two drams, powder them with half an
ounce of sugar candy, Turbith three drams, the powder of Liquorish, and
Cinnamon; each one dram and an half, make an Electuary, give two drams at first
for trial, and after more or less, as it works.

It will have more taste like a Medicine, if you leave out Diagridium and
Turbith, and mix with the Pulps Catholicon, Tryphera, Syrup of Roses solutive,
with infusion of Rhubarb, or the Powder of Rhubarb and Senna, or the stronger
purging Electuaries, as that of the Juice of Roses, Hamech, Diasenna, de Citro.

The Purges mentioned in the Cure of Melancholy are here proper, as that
Apozeme or Syrup of Juyces, or the Wine, or the Electuary; also the Powder.

Also these mentioned in the cure of the malignant scab, as the Whey with other
Ingredients, also the Syrups and purging Decoctions, that Syrup of Juyces, the
purging Wines, and chiefly the Decoction of Hellebore, and other Potions,
Electuaries and Pills, there mentioned.

Also many purges mentioned in the French Pox, especially from the abundance of
sharp Humors.

After purging strengthen the Bowels, with Conserve of Roses, both the
Buglosses, Succory, Violets, Maidenhair, Water Lillies, or Diarrhodon,
Trionsantalon, Diamargariton, or Treacle, or with Conserve of Bugloss.

Before purging they use to let blood spring and fall, to make a general
Evacuation, but the Seeds of this Infection cannot be taken away thereby, in
regard the blood in the Veins is not infected; as we showed, and therefore it
ought not to be. They bleed first in the Arm, and when the Body is full, some
days after in the Hand and Foot, and the common people think often bleeding
prevents it; but the Body being consumed thereby, the Infection will come
sooner and more. Therefore they are too rash, who when they examine this
Disease let Blood for trial of it to satisfy the vulgar.

They also think Scarification every month, upon the Shoulders and Legs, with
Cupping-glasses, is very good, and also Horsleeches.

It is profitable to provoke the Terms if they be stopped, by opening the Ankle
Vein or the like.

It is excellent to open the Haemorrhoids with Horseleeches and the like.

Sometimes we burn with actual and potential Cauteries as the last Remedy, not
only in the Arms and Legs which is most usual, but in the Head.

The Ancients advised Men to be gelt when they were desperate and past other
Cure, and that to change the temper of the whole Body, making them effoeminate,
and of another Constitution. And this they did with less difficulty, because
Lepers were forbidden Copulation, least others should be infected thereby: and
taking away of Manhood did then no hurt, but caused their Cure.

We alter their Constitutions, to bring them to a better, but when there is no
manifest Distemper, you cannot administer contrary things certainly: but for
the most part we give those that prevent sharp Humors and assuage them;
Moreover, seeing they have a Dryness and Consumption, we give things to moisten
and refresh and restore, such as are mentioned in the Hectic Fever, and these
following.

Let them live in pure Air, not hot but temperate, and far from them of the
like Disease.

Let the Meat be of good Nourishment, of young Creatures, Broaths, Eggs, Milk,
pot Herbs, Fruits that moisten and are temperate, as in Hecticks and
Consumptions.

The flesh of Frogs, Cray-fish, Sea and Land Turtle, are good here, as in
Hecticks.

Let the Drink be Wine not too strong, or with too much water; sometimes Goats
milk, and the Decoctions prescribed for Hecticks.

There are Medicines that cool and moisten, and temper sharp Humors, mentioned
in the Cure of external Diseases, which you may use here, and the Syrups,
Waters, Confections, and Conserves prescribed for a Hectic Fever.

Among the rest this Electuary is most proper. Take conserve of Bugloss flowers
one ounce and an half, of Succory, Violet, Water-lilly, and Rose flowers, each
one ounce; of Maidenhair, and Rosemary flowers, each half an ounce; candied
Bugloss roots one ounce, of Trionsantalon, or Diarrhodon, Diamargariton
frigidum, each half a dram, of the Troches of Camphire one dram, with Syrup of
sweet sented Apples: make an Electuary.

Let him drink after it Fumitory, Bugloss, or Endivewater, etc.

Many other Medicines for the Liver and Spleen, which are thought to be the
cause of this Infection may be given, and to be applied outwardly, mentioned in
the hot Distemper and Obstruction of the same: but except we are certain that
the Liver and Spleen are distempered, they are given in vain.

There are Antidotes which have a proper Virtue against Leprosies, as these
following.

Vipers flesh (many ways taken) is held best, and they say the flesh of other
Serpents, as those which the Germans call Blindensleich or blind Vipers, these
take off the skin and the faults thereof; because these Serpents cast their
skins every year, therefore they suppose they may cause man to do the same.

This Vipers flesh is given diverse ways prepared, sometimes boiled in Broth
with Salt, and Eels their skin stripped off, or peeled off by boiling, their
Heads and Tayls cut off and Guts taken out: and so, if you persuade them to eat
Eels, they will less disdain the Food; you may also boil them, and mince them
otherways, that they may not be known; some report that by the use of these,
the skin of the Leper has peeled off in diverse polluted places.

The Broth sometimes is sufficient in which these have boiled, or they eat it
with the flesh, in which you may boil Salt, Anise seed and Dill, others add
Mints and Leeks.

A Syrup made of this Viper Broth, with Sugar and cinnamon, will last longer.

Some say that if you fat Hens with Vipers flesh till their feathers fall off,
and then boil them, and eat them, they will do the same.

Some give Wine in which Vipers have died.

Also the flesh of Vipers is dried and made into Troches to be kept, when
Vipers cannot be had. They take the flesh only without the skin, Head, Tail and
Guts, and boil it with Dill and Salt, then beat it, and with the Broth make it
into a paste, with Wheat-bread the fourth part, and so make it into Balls, and
dry them. These are called the Troches of Vipers.

These troches are seldom used by themselves, but with Conserves, such as are
mentioned in the Electuary above, and if you add one dram of the troches to
that Electuary or more, it will be better. These troches are in treacle, to to
resist Venom, and therefore it is good against the Leprosy.

As the Vipers cast their skins, so the Cray-fish cast their shells every year,
and therefore are thought of as much virtue as vipers; they have a refreshing
and restorative virtue, Dioscorides gives the flesh of Hedghogs dried and
roasted, and Salamanders with other Medicines, and if they can do any thing, it
is by a propriety.

Some Histories if not Fables say that man's blood taken when he is newly slain,
and drunk is good, and also a water distilled thereof, some say Hearts horn, and
Ivory is good against Leprosies, as well as other poisons, and great Men have
Unicorns horn at a dear rate for that purpose.

Some magnify the Powder of an Emrald.

The Chemists promise the perfect Cure of the Leprosy by the use of Aurum
potabile, of high tincture, of Antimony, the true tincture of Coral, with
proper Purgers, among which they extol the secret of Coral, Mercurius dulcis,
Antimonial Pills that purge only by stool. The famous Dr. Hartman in chemical
Practice, commends the use of the sweet Essence of Sulphur, Vitriol, for the
Cure of the Leprosy.

The outward means used in a general Leprosy, are baths, to take away the
Venom in the skin, by often use of them to prevent and cure the Leprosy, or at
least to take away the Deformity of the Ulcers, Nodes, and Roughness of the
skin. These are Natural or Artificial.

The Natural Baths are of sweet Waters warmed, used at certain times, the Body
being well purged before and after, Spring and Fall before and after Dinner,
sitting in them, using them till the skin flourish, and grow sound, and these
take away the malignant cause that lies in the skin.

Hot Natural Baths are stronger, especially of Brimstone, such as are in
Helvetia, Argovia, Valesia, and Bath in Summerset-shire, which as they cure all
sorts of Scabs, so the Leprosy, or take away its Malignity, and at least abate
all accidents, if not take them away, if they be long used. And therefore they
go to the Baths to conceal the Leprosy, and we send them thither after
Examination, when we doubt to see what change will follow.

Most artificial Baths, are to be used long, and they must sit in them, they
are of Water and things that cleanse and make thin the skin, and so consume the
evil Juice, as roots and Leaves of Marshmallows, Docks, Dwarfe-elder,
Elicampane, Roots of Dragons, wild Cowcumbers, Briony, Sowbread, Orris,
Raddish, Bath, Hellebore, Lillies; also Leaves and Roots of Mallows, Bugloss,
Succory, Endive, Sowthistle, Beets. Also Wormwood, Senna, Fumitory, Hops,
Scabious, Sopewort, Pellitory, Violets, Liverwort, Duck-meat, Groundsel,
Sorrel, Agrimony, Mugwort, Plantane, Golden-locks, both Ivyes, both Celandines,
Water Lillies, Tamarisk, Flowers of Chamomil, Melilot, Elder; also Beans and
other Pulse, Bran, Line-seed, Foenugreek, and all Guords.

They add to these Salt, Brimstone and Alum, when the Decoction is not strong.

Others are added for the Joints, Primrose, Groundpine, also Calaminth,
Rosemary, Lavender, and the five opening Roots.

These moist Baths which were mentioned for the malignant Scab or Itch are not
unlike these, and that is best, which has Chalk or Lime in them. And the
Decoctions to take away spots, may be good here for a Bath.

Some Histories say that a bath of Man's blood has been used to sit in with
success.

Dry Baths in hot Houses, because they too much inflame the Body, and violently
draw the Humors to the superficies of the body, are not so commended, but we
may prepare the body for the moist Bath by the steam thereof.

There are Washes for the parts affected, with Pustles, Ulcers, and Roughness
of the skin, to take away (if possible) the Malignity.

They are made of Cleansers and Dryers, and such as have a propriety, as
Serpents and Vipers. The Grease of Vipers, they say, will take off the skin and
its faults, as well as the flesh eaten; also the Oil wherein their flesh was
boiled, or a quick Viper drowned, some mix the flesh boiled, with Ointments.

Make this Ointment of the aforesaid. Take the Roots of Dragons, and
Cookow-pintles, Daffodil, or Lillies, Elcampane, Beets, Saffron, each one
pound; beat them with Oil of Roses Omphacine, add half a pound of Vuguentum
Citrinum, Vipers Grease three ounces, Turpentine half an ounce, Oil of Wheat,
or Yolks of Eggs one ounce and an half, Oil of Tartar two ounces, Sulphur
vivum, Niter, each three drams; Lytharge, or Ceruss half an ounce, burnt Borax
six drams, Tutty prepared, Sarcocol, Frankincense, each two drams; the Mucilage
of Line-seed two ounces, Juice of Docks, Fumitory, Lemmons, each three ounces;
make them into an Ointment, for rough, ulcerated and pustuled.

Or thus: Take Juice of Lemmons, or Oranges, or Citrons, of Docks, Fumitory,
Scabious, Elicampane, one pint, Vinegar two ounces, Aqua vitae one ounce, Oil
of Roses Omphacine, Myrtles, or Mastick, each four ounces and an half; boil
them till the Juyces be consumed, adding Oil of Yolks of Eggs, two ounces, of
Tartar one ounce and an half, French Soape, two ounces, Vipers Grease four
ounces, Pomatum two ounces, the Gall of a Bull or Goat half an ounce, the
Mucilage of Fleabane, or Line-seed two drams, Honey one ounce and an half,
Roots of Dragons, wild Cowcumbers, Sowbread, Orris, each three drams; both
Helebors two drams, Staphisagre, Raddish seed, each one dram; and Borax and
Tartar burnt, each half an ounce; Quick-brimstone three drams, Cuttlebone two
drams, Snails burnt to Ashes, one dram, Camphire one dram and an half,
Lytharge, Tutty and Ceruss, each one dram and an half; mix them well for a
Liniment.

To these may be added Oil of Bread Corn, of Raddish seed, of Vipers, Juice, of
Sowbread, and Niter.

Also Quicksilver may be added, which though it does not destroy the Venom,
either in Leprosy or French Pox, yet it takes away the accidents in the skin,
use it not in quantity, as you do in the Pox, especially if you anoint all
over, least it cause spitting, because it will not cure an Elephantiasis, apply
it only where the accidents are in the particular parts: one ounce with the
former Ointments is enough, if it be used all over.

Or make this Liniment therewith. Take Vnguentum Citrinum four ounces, Oil of
Eggs one ounce, Oil of Tartar half an ounce, Quicksilver dissolved with
Turpentine, and the ointment prescribed formerly, half an ounce, Juice of
Lemmons, or Oranges two ounces and an half, Borax two drams, Roots of dragons,
Docks, Daffodil, Lillies roasted and beaten, and mixed with the aforesaid two
ounces.

Treacle of Andromachus, and Oil of Juniper added to these Ointments, will much
increase their virtue.

Particular Applications are only to the parts affected, to take away
Deformity, though they cannot cure. And they are used to the Pustles and Ulcers
external, to diminish or take away, or to correct them, as the falling of the
Hair; but we must use them chiefly to internal, least they produce worse
accidents, as in Pustles and Ulcers internal, mentioned in difficulty of
breathing.

Medicines are applied outwardly to Pustles, in the Face and other parts, and
they are of dryers and cleansers, or Causticks that is burners. As we showed
the blackness of the skin, in the Discourse of Pains and Spots, Pustles, and
Freckles: which Remedies may be used here, either gentle strong, or burning,
when Pustles are to be taken off. These are applied in diverse forms.

Distilled Waters are used for the Face, of things that corrode not.

As this. Take Brimstone six ounces, Tartar calcined, two ounces, Sal Niter,
Crystal calcined, each one ounce; Frankincense, Myrrh, each three drams;
Camphire one dram, Juice of Docks four ounces, Juice of Lemmons two ounces,
Rose, Beanflowers, Lilly flower, or Plantane water one pinse: distill them.

Another Water. Take Tartar calcined four ounces, Borax half an ounce,
Frankincense, or Mastick two drams, sugar candy one ounce, Camphire one dram;
powder them, and mix them with Mucilage of Fleabane, or of Gum Traganth in
Bean-flower water, or Water Lillies, six ounces, three Whites of Eggs beaten,
Juice of Lemmons, or Oranges two or three ounces: distill them in an Alembeck.

Other Waters mentioned in Discoloration, which have Urine, Tartar, and
Sublimate are here good; and those for a red Face, for Lytharge, and Tartar and
the like, and those for Spots made of Tartar.

A white Liquor for the Face, like Virgins Milk: Take Lytharge one ounce and an
half, Vinegar six ounces, Juice of Lemmons or Oranges two ounces, Alum, or Sal
Gem. two drams, Tartar calcined half an ounce, Camphire one scruple: steep
them, and stir them often, or boil them a little, if you must use them
presently.

Or boil in strong white Vinegar, equal parts of Sulphur, Niter and Crystal
finely poudered, and wash the face with it strained.

There are others mentioned in a red Face, and in Discoloration of Brimstone,
and Milk, and Lytharge; also Lac virginis, or Virgins Milk so called.

There are diverse Ointments for the parts, mentioned in Discoloration, as
Unguentum citrinum for the Face, and in a red Face and other Spots, made of
Juice of Plants, of Oil of Eggs, Tartar, and Hellebore, of the Blood of an hare
and Galls, especially of a wild Goat approved by Dioscorides, also Oil of a
Lizard.

Another Ointment excellent against pustles. Take aloes three drams, Asarum
roots one dram, both Hellebors, each half a dram, staphisagre one scruple,
Coloquintida half a scruple, with Bulls gall, make an Ointment for the Face.

Ointments made of Quicksilver, mentioned in Discoloration, and in the French
Pox, are good here.

Some extol this, steep two or three Eggs a long time in strong Vinegar, till
the shell be consumed, then beat them with the fourth part of Vinegar, and add
Frankincense, for the Face; and it is stronger with black Soap.

The Causticks against pustles, made of Sublimate for the most part, are
mentioned in the Cure of Spots in Discoloration. Also Cauteries, these we may
use in the Elephantiasis.

Or this: Take Unguentum Citrinum, Oil of Tartar, each half an ounce; Juice of
Lemmons one ounce, sublimate half a dram, Vipers or Hens grease half an ounce:
make a Liniment for the Face.

Some gather the Worms that breed in a Viper that is buried, and dry them, and
mix them with Cantharides, and sharp Vinegar to an Ointment.

To wash off the Ointments and other things, take a decoction of Bran, and
Beans shaled, Pease, Rice, Barley, Lupines bruised, not in Meal, least it turns
to a past in boiling, adding the Flowers of Beans, Water Lillies, and an Orange
cut in pieces.

Or wash with Bean-flower-water, or the Decoctions mentioned for a red Face.

In outward creeping hard Ulcers, many mentioned for pustles are good; and
these in pains, for malignant ulcces, are here good.

We spoke of Medicines against falling of the Hair, in deformation.

In the internal pustles of the Nose, Palate, Jaws, we use those mentioned for
other Ulcers, and when the Uvula is eaten off, and there is Hoarsness, as we
showed.

Also we give things mentioned in shortness of Breath and Hoarsness, and if the
Nose be stopped, you may know there, what to do.

When a fleshy red skin grows in the Eye, least it cover the sight, and cause
Blindness, it must be presently prevented, with things mentioned in the Cure of
the skin or film of the Eye; if the Eye brows are red or rough, there are
Remedies.

The French Pox, albeit it comes from an external hidden Venom, The Cure of the
French Pox.
yet daily Experince shows it is curable, yet with pains, and more when it is
old and deep rooted, and has many evil accidents; of which some remaining,
when the rest are cured and are incurable.

The Cure is general of the whole Pox, or particular of its accidents.

The general Cure which respects the Pox and its accidents, is in taking away
the Cause, that is the Venom, brought into the Body by Infection, and the
Disease that it caused: That is the Quality or hurtful Distemper in the skin
and Membranes.

Experience has taught us that this is done by Evacuations, and Reason shows
how, that is when the Excrements desire to be expelled with other Humors, by
Sweats and other ways, they discharge the Venom also. And the sooner, if the
evacuating Medicines have a secret force or manifest quality of drawing out the
poison and consuming it, then it is better drawn out, and the evil quality
departs, and the more perfectly, if they have a propriety hidden, by which
they oppose the pox, resist the poison, and take away the noxious Quality.

These Remedies which thus cure the pox do it not by one kind of Evacuation, or
by a consuming force or propriety. Therefore we cannot divide the Cure
according to their Operations. For the better declaring the Cure, we shall
speak of the way by Guaicum, and by Quicksilver; and by others since invented.
First, we will speak of the Cure without Quicksilver, then with Quicksilver.

The Cure of the pox without Quick silver is twofold, one by sweat chiefly, the
other by purging.

The Cure which is chiefly by sweat, is done either by inward or outward
Remedies.

The Cure by inward sweating Remedies, is the oldest and most usual, and it is
done first, by giving things that provoke sweat, and if they have a propriety
against the pox besides, they will do it the better; then by giving things
which help forward this Sweating and evacuate the Body by slender Diet which is
convenient; and besides these, you must first use other Evacuations, especially
purges. This way of Cure is most desired and most in use, although it be long
and troublesome, by reason of sweating, fasting and purging, because it is safer
then other ways, which are dangerous upon the least mistake.

This cure is commonly by Guaicum, which was brought hither with the pox from
the Indies, and has been used for the Cure ever since; because it does not
only cause sweat, but because it is thought to have a propriety to resist the
Venom of the pox.

We make for this purpose a sweating Decoction of the Wood, which has a
sharpness and bituminous Sent, and sometimes of the Bark thus.

A plain Decoction commonly used. Take of the dust, filings or shavings of
Guaicum from the hard stock, or from a stick, which being barked or peeled is
outwardly yellow, and inwardly black one pound, pour upon it twelve pints of
Springwater, let it stand to infuse in a glassed Vessel covered, then boil it
with a gentle fire by degrees, till two parts of three be consumed, of which
pour the clear part after it is settled into a Glass, and keep it stopped, and
keep the Faeces for the use that shall be after mentioned.

It will be stronger, if, as they who boil with more care, use to do, you add
three or four ounces of the bark to the pound of Wood; or if you boil it higher
then is mentioned, or take at first but eight pints of water.

Being thus made, it has not such a sent and taste as Physic, but it is a
little sharp, and pleasant to the Party, when used to it; if any desire it
sweeter, you may add sugar and Cinnamon; some do with Wine, but it is better
without, because it is to be taken fasting, which will hurt the Head, and it
will inflame the Body when they sweat, at which time it must be given also.

These must drink of this Decoction four, five or six Weeks, every morning
fasting in their bed, a little warmed from six ounces to eight, arising by
degrees, and so descending: and let them cover themselves to sweat after it, as
long as they can two or three hours; and let them be wiped with hot Clothes,
and the sheets changed for others that are dry and warm, then let them rise,
and dine about two or three hours after.

This Decoction is given three or four hours before Supper to strong Men, for
the better Evacuation and speedier Cure, especially when the Disease is old, in
the same quantity. Others take it again some hours after supper, but to no
purpose, because it will hinder their rest in the night, and being to take it
in the morning, it will be to soon, and will weaken him.

As for their Diet in this time, because it must be exact, they call all this
course of Physic a Diet, because the patients desiring not to be known to have
the pox, by their constant sweating and staying within, pretend that they use a
convenient Diet only: this Diet is to be strictly observed in these particulars
following.

Let the Air be hot in the time of the Cure, that he may sweat the better, and
not have it driven in, by keeping a good fire all the time, and let him not go
forth, except it be a hot day, and then only at noon.

Let his Meat be little, only so much as will keep up his strength, of good
Juice, and no Varieties, for the consuming of the Humors and Excrements, and
that by reason of good Food in a small quantity taken, they may be hindered
from Increase, by which the Cure will proceed the better, and Nature will be
less hindered in sweating, being not burdened with meat, or called in to
Concoct. Therefore let him keep a very strict Diet, and eat but twice in a day
or but once if he can forbear, and that without gorging: Let him have but one
dish or but twice at the most: and that it may be of good Juice and not
excrementitious, some eat only flesh, and bread and fruits, after this manner.

Hens flesh is most usual, and Chickens, boiled for broth or of old Hens or
Cocks, because it is the pleasanter and stronger Broth, excellent against the
pox, one quarter at a time of a Cock, is sufficient. Also Veal, Kid, Mutton, if
tender, may be taken three ounces at the most, at one Meal; sometimes Pigeons,
Partridges and Chickens roasted, may be given in the same quantity, Rear Eggs
or the Yolks only may be given, if you abate them so much of their flesh.

Four ounces of Bread are enough, for their Meat and Broth, because the Diet
must be very slender, and it must be of pure Wheat, but a little leavened and
well baked.

Dried Fruits may be the second course, in a small quantity, such as fill not
over much, as Raisons, Prunes, Figs, if they nourish much, as Almonds, you must
abate so much bread.

As for Sauces, all salt things must be avoided, neither flesh nor bread must
be salt or very little, not only because they hinder sweat (as they say) but
because salt meat will make more thirsty, who by reason of sweating are apt to
be so, whereby they will drink more, and be more hot and unquiet. Therefore
Spices must be avoided or regulated, and sharp Fruits are forbidden, except
they be given to allay the Heat.

Drink is not to be denied in this Disease, because it is quickly digested, and
they may drink freely, if they be thirsty, because it refreshes them without
burden, and helps Sweating, therefore at meat and between meals, let them drink
except other things hinder; but no Wine, because it would inflame the Body, and
hurt the Nerves and Head, and therefore we only allow a little to weak persons
to refresh them either alone or with Water, Water boiled, to take off the
Crudity, and to provoke Sweat the better, is commended. Thus, Take the shavings
of Guiacum which were boiled, put twevle or eight pints of water thereto, boil
it to half, and strain it. This they may drink freely at Meat and othertimes,
and it will not be unpleasant when they are used to it, especially if you add a
little Cinnamon, or Sugar, or Raisons boiled therein, others add many things as
Liquorish, which causes a Physical taste, and make them loath it, except you
put Wine to it which is allowed but in great weakness.

Sleep is allowed not only at night, but in the morning and before supper when
they Sweat, because it does not only provoke sweat, but being at rest they
better endure it.

Let him walk about the Chamber, use Frictions or Rubbings, especially after
Sweat, let him Comb and Rub his Head. Also,

You must keep the Belly loose which is apt to be bound by fasting and
sweating. Let him beware of Venery, and refresh his Mind with Sport, Discourse
and Music.

You must always purge before you begin to give Guiacum for sweating to void
the thick Humors and Excrements. And sometimes you must purge in the time of the
Diet, the rather if the Body be fowl, that the Cure may proceed the better,
because it helps the operation of the Guiacum by taking away the cause of the
Disease. And because no certain humor, as was showed, produces this Disease,
therefore you must direct your purges to the constitution, and to the quantity
and quality of the Humors and Excrements. Thus,

First give an Emollient Clyster to take away the Excrements from the Guts that
may cleanse, and be sharp, such as are prescribed in many places. Or a
Suppository, or give Cassia, Manna, some mollifing Decoction, the the Infusion
of Rubarb, syrup of Roses Solutive, syrup of Peach flowers, Catholicon, and
other mild Electuaries or gentle Pills, or Lozenges, such as are Mentioned in
other Diseases.

These being administered, If the Body be full, let blood in the Arm, which is
not needful in the Phlegmatic and lean Bodies, except used to it. Then prepare
the Humors as we suppose they abound, if they be Choleric or sharp, with syrup
of Fumitory, Hops, Bugloss, Mayden-hair, Endive, Succory, Violets, Apples; or
the like with proper Waters, as of Scabious and the like, and so let him take
thse Juleps some days together before Purging.

When they are Phlegmatic and full of pain we add the syrup of Stoechas or
French Lavender, which is very good made of Bettony and Hysop, also Honey of
Roses and the like, with the waters of those Plants, or of Calamints, Bawm,
etc. And when there is pain about the bones, the water of ground pine and
Prim-roses. You may also prepare with Decoctions made of the same Herbs.

We put Spices, as Cinnamon, into those Juleps, and Decoctions to make them
pleasant. Or Trionsantalon, Diarhodon, Aromaticum Rosatum. Or give a Lozenge
thereof after it.

Many times we purge and prepare at the same time, mixing gentle purgers, with
the preparatives, when they are weak and Choleric, or strong purges when they
are Phlegmatic and Lusty. Proper for the Humors we intend to oppose especially
such as purge watery, Salt, and sharp Humors, when there are Spots and Ulcers,
such as were prescribed in diverse Diseases, especially in the Itch. Or if there
be pain about the bones, we must give such as are prescribed in the Diseases of
the Joints from watery Humors.

We give these Apozems or Decoctions for five or six days to prepare and
purge; Thus made, Take the Herbs following with the Roots, Succory, Endive,
Dandelion, Docks, Sorrel, Bugloss, Capillar Herbs, Scabious, Germander, of all
five or six handfuls; Fumitory, Hops, pot Mercury, of each one handful;
Asparagus, or Kne-holm and Grass Roots, of each two ounces, Cordial flowers
three pugils, red Roses two pugils, Tamarisk flowers one pugil, Prunes ten,
Raisons three ounces, Sebestens, or Jujubs twenty, of the four great Cold seeds
and Annis seed, of each half an ounce; Fennel seeds two drams. Boil them in
Water or in the Decoction of Guiacum strained, which is more proper. And
infuse, Senna three ounces or four, Polypody, Carthamus seed, of each two
ounces, Epithymum two drams. Boil them again, and then add, Sugar or Honey to
sweeten it, with a little Cinnamon.

In moist Phlegmatic Bodies, add these following, Calamus Aromaticus or
Galangal one ounce and an half, Elicampane, Bettony, Majoram, each one handful,
Rosemary, and Lavender flowers, of each one pugil, tops of Time one pugil and
an half, Figs twelve, Caraway seeds one dram, and those that purge water, bark
of Elder and Dwarf Elder one ounce and an half: or stronger purgers, Agarick
or Rdubarb half an ounce, Turbith three drams, Soldanella two drams, or in
strong men who commonly have this Disease, Hermodacts two drams in the pain of
the bones. Or half a dram of the Pulp of Coloquintida tied in a cloute, which
is strong, or one dram and an half of black Hellebore.

If there be pain in the Head and Bones, you must add things good against it,
and against Poison, as Tormentil roots, and the like, you may use the
Decoctions mentioned for the Itch, as that which begins thus. Take the roots of
Docks three ounces, of Grass, etc. Or you may give purging Wines, made of the
simples of the former Decoction, infused therein, or that prescribed in the
Itch.

After preparation, or purging with preparation, we use strong purges, if we
suppose the Body not purged sufficiently, we give strong Purges diverse ways,
by adding to the last draught of the Decoction, an Electuary, or the like that
purges, or another Decoction, Electuary, or Pills, considering the spots,
Pustles, Ulcers and Pains. Commonly they purge Melancholy that suppose it to
be the cause of the Pox, and therefore they give Confectio Hamech and Diasenna,
also Pills of Lapis Lazuli, of Fumitory, and others mentioned in Melancholy
Diseases. And we allow these in strong people, because they Purge Choler and
sharp Humors of all sorts. Other Purges also mentioned in the Cure of the
Scabs, and if there be pains about the bones, Pills of Hermodactils, stinking
Pills, or Pilulae faetidae, and others mentioned in Arthritis. And many others
mentioned in other Diseases, which have both Scammony and Coloquintida, which
are used indifferently, though many think, they should purge but one Humor.

But Empericks and Chyrurgions presently purge, without preperation, before
they use things that Evacuate by the habit of the Body and without choice of
purges, or careing what Humor, so they do but purge sufficiently. Therefore
they give the strongest. And among the rest Wine, wherein an Apple of
Coloquintida has been all night infused, or that wherein some of the lesser
Spurge Seeds have been insused; or they bid them swallow the seeds, or they
purge at first, with the Decoction of Hellebore, such as we mentioned in Cure
of the Itch: where we showed how the Empericks cured the Itch and other
Diseases only with Stybium infused, which is good here also; As also how good
purging at first in many perverse Diseases has excellent success, as with the
dry leaves of true black Hellebore poudered and made into Pills with Aloes.

After Evacuation made, you must refresh the Body a day or two with Conserve of
Bugloss, Borrage, Roses, Stoechas, Rosemary, Marjoram, Treacle or Mithridate,
and the like. Among Cordials those of Guiacum are best, and they give the
Powder with Conserves and Electuaries. And the Chemists Magnify the Salt
thereof, others use the Powder or Salt of Sarsaperilla. There are usual Purges
for the time of the Cure when they take their Sweats to keep the Body open, to
be given between Sweats, diverse Times.

You may make Syrup of the Decoctions mentioned that will keep, or use the
Syrups prescribed for the Itch, as that of Hellebore, or of Apples, and that of
Montanus made of Juyces, or you may purge with Electuaries or Pills.

The Cure may be also by other Sweats besides Guiacum, and good Diet, and
purging, such as are good also against other cold Diseases. And although they
taste not, nor smell like Guaicum, yet they are thought to have a propriety to
cure the Pox; as Sarsaparilla and China fetched from the Indies, and known since
Guaicum to be good.

They make a sweat of Sarsaparilla roots, which are long and slender, of like
taste and no scent. thus,

Take Sarsaparilla sliced three ounces, Water twelve pints, let them be infused
as Guaicum was, and boised to the third part, which you must strain and keep,
this quantity you may increase or diminish as you please.

They drink this Decoction every morning for some weeks, and sometimes at
evening and sweat; first purging the Body, and at several times after, as we
showed concerning Guiacum.

Use the same order, for Air, Meat and Drink, and make a second Decoction of
the same for ordinary Drink, and the like.

There is another made of China, which comes from China in the East Indies, to
cause sweat; this Root is thick red and without taste, and the Decoction is
reddish, not unpleasant, nor offending the Stomach, and thus made.

Take China roots that are ponderous, two ounces, cut them in slices, add
twelve or eight pints of Water, steep them, and boil them, as the former, keep
it being strained very close stopped, least it grow sour: or to prevent that,
boil half the quantity, and repeat it.

This is taken as the rest, and it provokes sweat, and the Patient must be
governed as formerly, and purged, and a second Drink made of the same Roots as
formerly: And being thrice boiled, they have some Virtue, and may be drunk
while other is prepared.

There is another Root lately come from the Indies, called Sassaphras, of which
a Sweat may be made, used as the rest for this and other Diseases, thus made.

Take the Wood with the Bark sliced into Chipps, two ounces and with twelve or
eight pints of Water, infuse them, and boil them as formerly, and give the same
quantity as of the other; this is pleasant and better taken, because it
disturbs not the Stomach, nor breeds wind, as may be gathered by its scent,
resembling Anise and sweet Fennel seed.

There are sweating Decoctions for the Pox, made of three or four of the former
Roots mixed, they add to half a pound of Guaicum one ounce and an half, or two
ounces of Sarsaparilla, and boil them with eight pints of Water, as the former.

Or instead of Sarsaparilla one ounce of China.

Or we mix Guaicum, China and Sarsaparilla in the same quantities, and boil
them: or we take less of Guaicum, and more of the rest.

To these we add Sassaphras, because it gives a good smell and taste, and is of
the same Virtue.

These must be used in the same quantity, and with the same order and
government as the former, and an ordinary Drink must be made of the same, by a
second Decoction.

Sometimes they make Compound Decoctions with many other things, added to these,
which they add many times to Guaicum, and Sarsaparilla, but seldom to
Sassaphras, and China, least they loose their scent; sometimes they add things
to correct, as when Guaicum is too hot Succory and Lettice, yet though it has
a little sharpness, it does not inflame the Body; and if you take away the
sharpness, it will not sweat so well, and rather hinder then profit, as also by
those things, the pleasant taste is taken away, and it will be loathsome;
sometimes they use things to increase the Heat, and cause more Sweat, as Asarum
roots, Elicampane and Spices, and the opening Roots and herbs, Baulm, Time,
Marjoram and the like, Nigella seeds, sometimes things good for the head and
joints if pain be there, as Bettony, Groundpine, Rosemary, and Lavender
flowers; sometimes things to purge the Blood, as Fumitory, Hops, Bugloss,
Elder, Dwarfe-elder, Orris and the like. And to dry the Body more, they use
Amber, Frankincense, and Benjamin.

By this mixture, they make the Decoction of less force, and more unsavory, so
that the Patient will not take it, especially when they ad Gentian that is so
bitter, and Mummy which stinketh, then it is abominable. But if you will add to
the Decoction any thing to allay the Heat, or to provoke sweat or the like, it
is less unpleasant, when you boil the Roots in the Waters of those plants which
are for that purpose.

You may make your Decoction in Arsemart water, which is beyond all the other
for its admirable propriety for cure of the pox, it is made of the Herb at the
end of September, and all October, by Distillation.

Besides these many, mix gentle and strong purgers with Guaicum while it is
boiled, as Polypody, Asarum, Epithymum, Carthamum, Agarick, and other bitter
things, as aloes, and if the pain be in the Joints, Hermodactyls. And sometimes
the strongest, as Hellebore, and Coloquintida. Which purging Decoctions, if
they be given at first before sweating, and used in the times of Intermission,
are good. Or if we intend not to cure the pox by sweating but by purging, we
may use them instead of other purges constantly or by fits with Intermission.

It is found by Experience that other plants besides Guaicum, Sarsaparilla,
China, and Sassaphras make a good Decoction for the same. And hence we gather
that these work the Cure of the pox, rather by sweating then by any hidden
Virtue, such Decoctions are made of these following.

A Decoction made of yellow Box, which is hard like Guaicum, does the same, but
because it is not so pleasant as Guaicum, we take not a whole pound to twelve
pints of water.

I have cured poor people with Juniper, and it is sweet and somewhat sharp. I
took the Chips not so much as of Guaicum, but half so much or three parts, and
with twelve pints of water I boiled and used it as the former; to these you may
add Guaicum and other Roots; and it is an excellent Sweat and safe, although
from Dioscorides some speak against it as destructive, which often use shows to
the contrary: and I judge that place of Dioscorides to be false, and so do
others.

We doubt not but a Decoction made of Cedar, Cypress, Sabine that bears the
Berries, Wood-Aloes, Rhodium that smells like Roses, will do the same; and
others as they write of the Turpentine-tree.

It is written by some that the Decoctions made of the Roots of Dittany,
Tamarisk, Butter-Burre, Tormentil, Calamus, Elicampane, Cane roots, Orris and
Sowbread in twelve pints of water will do as much as Sarsa and China in the
same or less quantity.

And of Herbs, as Cleavers, or Goose grass, Ceterach, Scordium, and
Rupture-wort, and you may use also Jack in the Hedge, and chiefly Arsemart.

Or of Seeds, of which Juniper Berries are the chief, the Decoction whereof
made as the sormer, will have a sharp taste and sweet sent, and it is better
then all the rest for cure of the pox by Sweat.

There are other Sweats to cure it besides, as sweating Wines made by Decoction
or Infusion, for weak and cold persons, as this which is of Honey and pleasant.
Take Galangal two ounces, Ginger half an ounce, Cinnamon two ounces and an
half, Cloves one ounce and an half, Nutmegs or Mace one ounce, Schaenanth half
an ounce, bruise them and put them in a Vessel, with one pugil of Rosemary
flowers or tops, then add ten quarts of white Wine, one pint of Honey or more,
keep it stopped for your use: drink three or four ounces of it every morning
and sweat, continue it.

It will provoke sweat more, if you add four ounces of of Juniper Berries.

Or thus. Take Orris and Calamus, each three ounces, Galangal one ounce,
Asparagus one ounce and an half, Elicampane half an ounce, Sowbread roots two
drams, Thyme, Scordium, Dittany, Rupture-wort, each one handful; Rosemary,
Lavender, and Chamomil flowers, each one pugil; Juniperberries six ounces;
Cinnamon two ounces, Cloves one ounce, Mace half an ounce, Schaenanth two
drams, bruise them, and put them in a Vessel with four ounces of Guaicum,
Sassaphras one ounce, infuse them in twelve pints or more of Wine: let him
drink it thirty days or longer.

Another very powerful, with which alone some say they have cured the Pox. Take
Plantane leaves, Olive or myrtle leaves, Yarrow fresh gathered, each one
handful; Sowbread two drams, or more when the Party is strong, white Wine five
pints, give six or seven ounces of the strained Liquor, let them sweat, and
continue it every morning for five and twenty days together.

Stilled Waters are given to provoke Sweat, but seldom alone in this Disease,
because they agree not with the stomach, but they say that these cure some
people, or take away the Relics of the Disease.

This following is best. Take Filings of Guiacum one pound and an half, the
Powder of the Bark of the same, half a pound, Sassaphras Chips two ounces,
Grass and Sparagus roots each one ounce and an half; Elicampane three ounces,
Sowbread roots one ounce an an half, Carduus, Pennyroyal, Sorrel, each one
handful, Bugloss, Roses, Rosemary, Chamomil flowers, each one pugil; Cinnamon
half an ounce, Nutmeg two drams, cut them, then ad Treacle of the best, four
ounces, Spanish Wine, Dock and Succory water cach two pints, distill them, give
three or four ounces of this Water, with other convenient Liquors, or the
Decoction of Guiacum or the like Sudorifick, as of Milium, some add four ounces
of Polypody, and one ounce of Epithymum to the former.

There are other Sweats or Sudorifick Decoctions and Wines, stilled Waters and
Electuaries good against other Diseases, which may do well here if often
administered, such as were mentioned in the stoppage of Sweat and the like,
especially those mentioned in the Cure of a pestilential Fever, which are
thought as good here. In this Disease being venomous, they cure not only by
sweat, but by resisting of Venom. Among the rest the Treacle waters there
mentioned are good.

As for Government, when they take these Sweats of wine or distilled Waters
thus prepared, they must observe the same Rules, that were before prescribed,
they must keep their warm Chamber, eat little, and no varieties, and for their
Drink use the thin Decoction of Guaicum and Sarsaparilla; or if the sweating
Wine mentioned, be pleasant, they may drink it at Meals, and if it inflame, it
may be mixed with Water. And if you fear least the Liver or other Bowels should
be inflamed by the use of these hot sudorificks, you must give some cooling
Syrups to allay the Heat, and have a care the Belly be not bound, and that the
Cure may go on the better purge the Body now and then.

The Cure of the Pox by outward Applications, without Quicksilver to cause
Sweat, is not performed; but they must keep warm, as we showed, and use bathing
or hot Houses to farther it, the dry Bath or hot House is the best; for the
Body there shut up is made hot and opened, and the Humors drawn forth by Sweat;
and it may take away the seed of the Disease by long continuance, if it be not
deep rooted. But in regard this hot House alone is not always sufficient, if
you will use it, let it be when sweat is hard to be provoked, by things given
inwardly in the bed, and then to go into the Stove, and by its heat make way,
and dispose the Body once or twice, till Nature does it of her own accord, is
good. The chief use of a hot House in the end of the Cure, is to take away
whatsoever remains fixed in the skin, and to cleanse the same; and then we give
leave to wash in the hot Honse with wine, water and lie, which could not be
granted before. But in the Cure of the Pox, not only dry Baths are used, but
before the Cure is taken in hand, if you doubt of the same by reason of the
obscurity of the signs: And the often using of these sweating Baths, by drawing
forth the hidden seeds to the superficies, will discover the certainty of the
Disease by Spots and the like.

And because the use of those Baths is ordinary known, we will not speak
further of them: but that they may sweat the better, we give the Patient before
he goes in, Treacle or some other sweating Medicine; and we let him stay there
as long as he can, and after we keep him from Cold.

A moist Bath either Artificial or Natural, is seldom used for the Cure of the
Pox, because Experience teaches that it does more hurt then good by its
Moistness.

Yet some there are that though they deny the Bath of sweet water, and other
things that astringe too much, yet they allow things that rarifie or strongly
attract, for the helping of the Medicines to work, when they are slow: and
therefore use moist Baths before, in which they boil hot herbs and flowers, and
seeds of all sorts, especially Dwarfeelder, and Elicampane Leaves and Roots,
Mugwort, Chamomil flowers, Melilot, Juniper Berries, also Guaicum, and Juniper
chips, yet these being not so sase may be left out. Others commend strong
drying Baths, but I have observed that they do hurt and not good: except after
the Cure, to refresh some Member that has been wearied with Medicines, and to
streng then the Body, and then we add to the former Artificial Baths things
proper for that, as Groundpine, and other Herbs mentioned in the pains of the
Joints.

The Cure of the Pox by purging is not so usual, because lately invented, and
this is done by giving violent purges often, and refreshing the Body by turns.
And sometimes it is cured by this way alone, without the use of any other
Evacuations, Sweating or Fluxing. Sometimes we join sweating with purging,
especially when the Patient will not endure strong purging, such as is required
for this Curre, and then after purging diverse times, we give the decoction of
Guaicum some days to sweat, and then purge again, and so as sormerly till it
be cured: sometimes we consume half the time in purging, and the other in
sweating, with internal Sudorificks, also we use outward dry Baths, and mix
purging by fits. And in purging, we choose not things for some only Humors,
because we know not it is that causes the Pox, but any thing that will purge,
for they which abound will be soonest evacuated when Nature is stirred up. And
we observe that al Physicians, though they talk of purging, Melancholy or
phlegm, yet they use any kind, which we give according to the constitution, and
strength, and as there are Spots, Pustles, Ulcers, or Pains, as we said for
purging with sweating: these are diverse ways prepared.

Of Decoctions and Apozemes, after general purging for a time, shorter if for
fifteen days together they take it twice a day, or longer, if the Patient
being weak is constrained to rest a day or two often, and then to fall to it
again, for then it will require three weeks or a month. Some continue this
Course four or five weeks, purging three or four times in the week together,
then resting three days, in which morning and evening they take strengthners;
and use good Diet, but not so strict and little, as when they sweat only: nor
are they to be so prohibited the Air, but may eat often of the best, and walk
forth sometimes when it is fair, which they desire, least they should be
suspected to have the Pox by staying within, and therefore they like this way
of cure best.

These Decoctions are thus made when the Body is hot and choleric, spotted,
pustulated, or ulcerated. Take Polypody three ounces, Senna two ounces,
Epithymum, Myrobalans, Citrin, and Chebulars, each two drams; Cordial flowers
two drams, Capillar Herbs, both Buglosses, each one handful; Succory roots half
and ounce, Anise-seeds two drams: boil them in Water for five or six doses,
sweetning them with Sugar, dissolved in each dose of the Juice of Roses, and
Fumitory, each half an ounee; or of their Syrups, or of Violets, each one
ounce; sometimes mixing one dram of Rhubarb infused in the Decoction, and
sometimes stronger Electuaries if you will purge more, as that of Juice of
Roses, Confection Hamech etc. sometimes forbearing the Decoction, one day or two
you may give a stronger purge, and then return to it again; thus let him
continue taking those Potions by sits five or six times, and make new, stronger
or weaker according to the Operation of the former, and while he is cured. And
because it is troublesome to make the Decoction new so often, it is good to
increase the quantity of Ingredients and Sugar, and boil it to the consistance
of a syrup, that it may last, and give that quantity thereof of that will purge
sufficiently.

For those that are phlegmatic, waterish and cold, if there be pain about the
bones, this Decoction is made. Take of Carthamus seeds bruised one ounce and an
half, Senna two ounces, Polypody one ounce, Turbith half an ounce, Epithymum
two drams, Raisons one ounce, Figs ten, Liquorish one ounce, Elicampane six
drams, Galangal half an ounce, Thyme, Bettony, Marjoram, Hysop, Groundpine,
each one handful; Bugloss, Rosemary, Staechas, or Lavender flowers, each one
pugil; Chamomil flowers half a pugil, Coriander seeds, and Anise, and Fennel,
each one dram; Nigella seed half a dram: boil them in Water, for five or six
doses, sweeten them with Honey, and dissolve in each, the Juice of Orris half
an ounce, Syrup of Roses solutive, of Fumitory and Hops, each six drams. If we
will have it work stronger, insuse Agarick or Mechoacan one dram, Gingar one
scruple, or mix an Electuary therewith, as Diaphaenicon or the like: these
Decoctions are used as the formerr

Other Decoctions such as are properly against the Pox may be used, as of
Guaicum, Sarsaparilla etc. which often used cure other Diseases as well as the
Pox; as this following which must be drunk twenty five or thirty days
together, with a little Intermission, and that when necessity requires. Take
Guaicum Chips one ounce, Sarsaparilla six drams, Liquorish half an ounce,
Succory roots two drams, Bugloss flowers two drams, Raisons half an ounce,
Prunes six; steep them in eight pints of Water a day and a night, then boil and
strain them, and add a little Cinnamon in five ounces of this, infuse half an
ounce of Senna, Mechoacan or Agarick one dram, Ginger half an ounce; let it
stand a day and a night, strain it and add syrup of Roses solutive, and
Balmwater, each two drams, give it at one Draught, and prepare another for the
next morning, and so continue till he be cured.

We mentioned a Drink like this in the Cure of the scab, which must be
continued thirty days together also.

You may use more or fewer purgers in the Decoctions of Guaicum, and
Sarsaparilla, Senna is best and safest, and Hermodactyls which is not to be
omitted when there are pains, as is showed in the Cure by Guaicum alone.

There are also Decoctions with Hellebore, as in Melancholy Diseases, and the
like, good for the Pox, if often used, or if they be too violent, every other
day, and let the day of rest be for Cordials, Antidotes and good Meat and
Drink; which must be observed in other violent purges.

The chief Decoction with Hellebore is this. Take the Bark of black Hellebore
six drams, of the five kinds of Myrobalans, each half an ounce; Senna and
Polypody, each one ounce; Sowthistle one handful, Chipps of Guaicum four
ounces: boil them in eight pints of Water, and a pint and an half of white
Wine, strain and sweeten them with Sugar, and Cinnamon, and Cloves, let him
take three or four ounces as it works.

Another Decoction or Insusion of Hellebore for the same, mentioned in the
Scab, is good here.

Or this: Take the Barks of black Hellebore poudered, one dram or four
scruples: boil it with Whey or other Decoction, and give it strained with syrup
of Fumitory, and syrup of Roses, use it often.

Wine wherein only Hellebore is infused, will do the same without Decoction: or
if you make a Wine of the Grapes of the Vine that has black Hellebore growing
at its Root.

A samous Chemical Emperick cured the Pox with this Electuary, giving it
morning and evening fifteen days, if the Patient be strong. Take Guaicum bark
four ounces, of the Wood of the same, of Ebony, Oak, or Box, each six ounces;
Sarsaparilla six ounces, Hermodacts four ounces, Turbith two ounces, Cloves two
drams, Anise-seed one ounce, Sassaphras three ounces, Senna six ounces, Water
nine pints, let them stand a day or two in the hot Embers, strain them, and
then pour on as much more water, then boil them till the third part be
consumed, strain them, and let the first Insusion of this be mixed with this
Decoction, by Evaporation made with a gentle fire, to the form of a Syrup, and
add clarified Honey four ounces, the Powder of Sarsaparilla, Senna, and
Hermodacts, each half an ounce; Turbith, Jalap, each three drams; Cloves one
dram, Extract of scammony two drams: make an Electuary, the dose is one dram
and an half, to two or three, and let the Patient while he takes this, drink
the Decoction of Sarsa, China, Hermodacts, Anise-seeds, Cloves and Guaicum.

Pills made of Quicksilver, or Mercury precipitated, or made red, are here
used, which taken but twice or thrice, by violent purging cure the Pox, but we
intend to speak of Mercurial Medicines by themselves. Diverse other purges often
taken do the same, as Electuaries, Pills and the like, mentioned in Diseases of
long continuance, especially those with which the Body must first be generally
purged, as Extracts of Senna and Rhubarb etc.

While you purge, give by Intermission, things that strengthen the Heart,
Stomach, Liver, and Brain, especially when you use violent purges, or apply
things outwardly to the Heart or Stomach if weak by purging, as we showed in
fainting.

There are Antidotes against the Pox, which are also good against other venoms,
either given alone or with other Restoratives. Those we before mentioned to be
given after other Purges.

If the strength fail in the use of the Apozemes mentioned, one day in the week
or two or three as need requires, give these. Take Tormentil roots one dram
and an half, Dittany two scruples, Citron seeds, Carduus, and sorrel seeds,
each half a dram; all the sanders one dram, shavings of Ivory, or Unicorn one
scruple, Pearl prepared half a scruple, red Coral half a dram: make a Powder,
mix two drams, with Conserve of Roses, Citron bark candied, Conserve of
scabious, or Cordial flowers one ounce, and with syrup of Bugloss, make an
Electuary; let him take the quantity of a Nutmeg, and drink Balm, Scabious, or
Carduus water and wine after it.

In cold and weak Persons, add to this Powder, Cinnamon, and Cloves, each one
scruple, Mace half a scruple, Conserve of Rosemary flowers, and of Acorus, each
one ounce.

You may make Lozenges of the same, some give purges one day and another the
Decoction of Bugloss and Wormwood, and so continue.

When you use Decoctions and Infusions of Hellebore every other, or the third
day use the former Cordials, or this following which is good after all strong
purging. Take the thick Juice of sowthistle two drams, scordium dried one dram,
Citron seeds half a dram, Mithridate or Treacle half an ounce, syrup of Citron
barks as much as is fit for an Electuary.

Mithridate and Treacle are given alone after purging, when we fear a
Dysentery, Flux, to prevent it, as I showed in Dysenteries.

The Pox is usually cured with Quicksilver, so called, because like silver,
and Hydrargyrum, because it flows like water, and by the Chymicks, Mercury, it
is used inwardly or outwardly.

Outwardly, we observe it cures ordinarily, but by what quality or force is
the doubt, although at that time we also dispose the Body for sweat, yet it is
uncertain, whether sweating is not then provoked by the silver; and although
they spit after it very much, by the particular force of the Quicksilver which
nothing else will cause, yet the question is whether the spitting cures the
Pox, it seems to cure for these reasons, because the Cure is not without it be
raised, and because there comes Inflammation, Ulceration and stink in the Mouth
and Teeth, which is thought to come from the Venom of the Disease, and not from
the Quicksilver. And besides its manifest power to flux, it cures it by a
secret Virtue, as it does other Infections as Itch etc. and by a propriety
contrary to the Venom of the Pox; for which it seems the Antidote.

It is not needful to search out for a manifest quality, as Heat or Cold by
which it acts, as great Men have done, and how it works, because we see
that by its secret qualities and proprieties it does it when nothing else will,
neither does its Operation demonstrate any other. Nor must we omit the use of
it, because of the accidents it produces in the Mouth or the like, as
Convulsions which are most to be feared, when it is abused; for the Mouth is
easily cured, and if it be rightly used, you need not fear Convulsion. And we
see many mistakes in other Medicines, as Sweats and Purges, when they are not
rightly administered.

Moreover the Cure of the Pox by Quicksilver, is either with it crude or
alive, or fixed or mixed.

Of the crude we make an Ointment to cure the Pox, which is called the
Neapolitan Ointment, because the Disease was called Neapolitan coming from
Naples. These are made with Grease, Butter, Oil, Rosins and Gums, that the
Quicksilver may stick the better to the Body, so mixed that you cannot see the
Quicksilver not killed, but all looking blew when it is right, they mix also
therewith things that make the skin thin, and open the Pores to make it
penetrate or pierce, and to prepare for sweat, and to digest that filth in the
skin. The quantity is two ounces of Quicksilver with one pound of the rest,
and sometimes half Quicksilver if the Body be strong, and you may use more or
less as you please, according to the Constitution and its Operation.

This general Ointment is the best. Take Quick si-lver two ounces, either crude
or killed, with Juice of Lemmons, or fasting spettle, fresh Hogs grease tried,
with the third part of Hens, Ducks, or Goose grease, or Butter, six ounces,
Rosin washed in Aqua vitae one ounce, Powder of Mastick, and Frankincense, each
one ounce; Oil of Bays two ounces, Oil of chamomil, Dill, Lillies, or Roses
one ounce, with a little Wax make a Liniment. First mix the Quicksilver in the
Mortar with the Rosin, and then add the Greases, and after the Oils in which
the Wax is dissolved, and then the Pouders.

To make it sweet sented and to correct the greasy sent thereof, add one dram
of Oil of Spike, or more for it will make it pierce, some leave it out, because
it discovers the Pox in the Patient that smells of it, being strong and known
to be used. Liquid Storax gives a better sent, and dissolves more.

They mix Treacle and Mithridate with this Ointment to resist Venom, the
quantity of half an ounce, but to what purpose I know not, for it will neither
mix with the grease nor is it good outward, but inward.

When there is pain in the Head and about the Bones, make it thus: Take
Quicksilver, Grease, Rosin, and Gums as formerly, with the Marrow of Veal one
ounce, Oil of Orris, Wall flowers, Worms, or Foxes, or Bays five ounces,
Powder of Orris, Hermodacts, Bay Berries, each one dram; Euphorbium one
scruple, with Wax make an Ointment.

For scent and piercing, add Oil of Spike, Storax, and Labdanum, and to pierce
more, half an ounce of Oil of Turpentine, or Petroleum which is not accepted by
some for the scent.

Others, to make it better for the Nerves, boil the Juyces of Rue, Dwarfe-elder
and Sage in the Oils till they are consumed, and add Aqua vitae and Wine.

If there be Pustles and Ulcers, add dryers, and if the Ointment be too dry and
hinder sweating, use them not but after openers, they are thus made. Take
Quicksilver, Grease, Rosin, Gums as formerly, Oil of Bays, of Bricks, each
two ounces; of St. John's Wort one ounce, Myrrh half an ounce, Lytharge and
Ceruss, each two drams; Vine ashes half a dram, with Wax make an Ointment. You
may use Oil of Juniper for Oil of Spike, and Juice of Fumitory, Docks and
Briony boiled in the Oils.

It will be excellent, if you add Cinnaber, or red Lead two drams, or
Verdegreese one dram, or Sublimate, one dram. These are safer, as in particular
Unguents shall be showed, when they are applied only where there are Ulcers and
Pustles, and not daubed all over.

They mix ordinary Grease one pound, and two ounces of Quicksilver, or in
pains the four hot Ointments, Dialthaea, Martiatum, Aregon, and Agrippa, or
Enulatum and the like in the Scab.

Another. Take Quicksilver two ounces, Frankincense, Mastick, each half an
ounce; Hogs grease, Butter, each four ounces; Oil of Bays four ounces, Salt
one ounce and an half, Alum burnt, and Tartar, each half an ounce; Aqua vitae
one ounce, make a Liniment, and in Ulcers add two drams of each of Ceruss and
Lytharge.

Some make an Ointment of Quicksilver, the four hot Ointments and Oils, with
Treacle and Mithridate, powder of both Hellebors, wild Cowcumbers, Euphorbium,
Verdegreese, and they confess it cures not all.

Others make it of Sublimate, or Cinnaber, with Brimstone, Grease, Rosins and
Wax, and Aqua vitae, but it is not safe.

Others make it with Quicksilver and Grease alone, or Vine ashes. Others of
Quicksilver, with Turpentine, and Aqua vitae, all these must be used warily.

The use is thus, let the Patient be anointed naked in a warm Chamber at the
fire, Hands and Feet in the palms and soles, and up the Backbone, under the
Arms, and in the Groins, not touching the Breast or Head, and this done once or
twice a day morning and evening, or one day once, and the next day twice, as
the strength requires. When thus anointed, you must wrap him in warm clothes,
and put him into a warm Bed, and let him sweat while he is able; and if he
sweat not, freely use bottles of hot water or pillows, silll'd with hot Pease
to keep the heat, placed at the Feet or under the Arms, or Bricks, let him
sweat an hour and an half or as long as he can, and then wipe him, and change
his Linen, and after he is up and has walked a little, let him eat, let him
do thus eight or ten days, leaving when he begins to spit, and if he do not so
in that time, make the Ointment stronger with Quicksilver, or anoint oftener
till his Mouth be fore, which you must after cure, and look to him till his
Ulcers, Pains and Pustles be gone, and then to cleanse him for the remaining
filth of the Ointment, put him into an hot House, and wash him with Lie, and
bring him by degrees into a temperate Air.

Let him keep in hot Air, and use Diet of good Nourishment, moderately. A
little Wine is allowed to the weak when strength sails, and Wine and Water for
others, or three pints of water, boiled with two ounces of Guaicum.

Let him first have a general purge and bleed if need require, for when the
Body is cleansed the Cure will proceed the better, and between his days of
Ointment using let him purge if he be costive: As we showed in purging.

The curious people use these Ointments only to some parts, as the Joints and
Backbone, but then the Cure is long and not always certain.

Others anoint only the Palms and the Soles of the Hands and Feet, and this is
less troublesome, and less perceived if they wear Gloves, especially if they
walk abroad, as they may in warm weather, and exercise, which is good for
sweating, and when they return home they may sweat further and use other things.

These must have more Quicksilver in them then the other.

There are also Plasters of Quicksilver to Cure the Pox. Or Sear-cloths used
seldom but by such as have the ointment, because filthy, and requires more
stricktness, and desire the Plaster, because they have more freedom, but this
if slower, and must be used longer, and with more Quicksilver. And if they
neither spit, nor have sore, Mouths, you must provoke them with Ointments, and
Fumes afterward, and so the Plaster does well to prepare.

These are made of the same things, that the Ointments are made, with half an
ounce more of Quicksilver, with Cinnaber and Sublimate by some, with Wax for a
Cerat, and Rosin for an Emplaister, spread upon Leather, or by way of
Cere-cloth.

Or they take other Gum Plasters, as Ceroneum 'Melilot, Zachary, Diachylon,
with Orris, and put as much, or more Quicksilver as to the former. There is
another Plaster of Quicksilver, by Uigo called the Emplaster of Frogs, which
are therein, which is applied to the parts pained, and may be used generally
with more Quicksilver and Euphorbium which has, besides Quicksilver,
Hog's Grease and Vipers grease, Turpentine, Frankincense, Euphorbium, Storax,
Wax, Oil of Chamomil, Dill, Lillies, Bays, Spike, of Saffron or Juniper, juice
of Dane-wort, Elicampane, Wine, Mother-wort, Stechas, Schaenanth, Litherige,
Frogs, Worms. The use is, spread it upon Cloth or Leather, and lay them to the
places you use to anoint, as the Hands and Feet, and Emunctories and to the
Backbone; tie them on, and wear them day and night, and renew them every third
or fourth day, and labor to Swoat every night, continuing till the Mouth is
fore. Let him purge and Diet, as when anointed, and because the Cure is longer,
they may have liberty to Ride, or go abroad sometimes; with their Plasters on.

These do something, if but applied to the Hands and Feet. Let them therefore
were Gloves and Socks to conceal and keep the Plasters on. And because they
keep company they are less mistrusted. This in tender Bodies and long
continuance will do the Cure. We use also for the Cure of the Pox, not only
crude and running Quicksilver, but fixed, either with Brim-stone or Vitriol.

You must boil Quicksilver with Brim-stone, til it come to a red clod, which
they call Cinnabat; because their artificial Cinnabar is like the natural, by
which name they also call red Lead. Thus prepared it is used for curing the Pox,
not by anointing, as when it is Crude, but by the Smoke of it, when it is burnt
to Fume the Body. For this Artificial Cinnaber keeps still the force of
Quicksilver, and when it is burnt by reason of the Brimstone, it has a
greater and more peircing sum, or smoke and works as strong as Quicksilver
when it touches the Body, and causes Salivation or spetting and a sore mouth,
and Cures the Pox. And therefore ours hyrurgions use it more then the Unction,
or if there be any relics after another course has been taken, this will
clear remove them. They mix things to correct the stink of Cinnabar, when they
raise these Fumes, which they powder and lay upon the Coals; or they mix
Cinnabar with Rosin, or the Infusion of Gum Traganth, and make Troches thereof,
which they lay upon the Coals to smoke. Observing this quantity, that is one
dram of Cinnabar be used at a time.

This Fume is made for eight times. As,

Take Cinnabar one ounce, Frankincense alone or half Mastick three ounces; make
a Powder, use half an ounce at a time, or mix it with Turpentine which makes a
great Fume, or with Gum Traganth make Troches for eight times.

To make them sweeter. Take Cinnabar one ounce, Frankincense, or Mastick one
ounce and an half, Benzoin six drams, Storax half an ounce, Labdanum two drams,
Wood Aloes or white Sanders half a dram: make a Powder, let him use half an
ounce at a time.

You may add other sweet Gums and Spices, as Cloves, Cinnamon, Nutmeg and the
like.

In Ulcers you may add to the second powder prescribed half an ounce of Myrrh,
and Amber, and when the Ulcers are very malignant, you must use very strong
dryers, as half an ounce of Antimony, two drams of Brass, or Venice Glass one
dram.

And sometimes strong, if the Party be strong, as Orpiment one dram, Quick
silver prepared, otherwise a sublimate or prae cipate one dram, with this
Caution, that they take none of the Fume into their Nose.

Some suppose that they can resist this Venom in the Ointments and Fumes by
mixing of Treacle; but in regard the strength is lost by burning, as it will do
little in Ointments, so we suppose it is good for nothing in Fumes.

These Fumes are thus administered: the Patient is put naked into some warm
close place, which is kept from the Air, as a hot House, or a Tub for the
purpose, which beneath of wood and above covered with a Mat o^ the like, arched
a Tent. Thus sitting let him take the Fume which comes from the Troches thrown
upon the coals there, with his Face out, that he may endure it longer, but his
Head so covered that the Air come not at it, but toward the Conclusion, let
the Head be a little fumed also; let him sit while he can endure it without
fainting and sweat. Then cover him with warm sheets, and carry him to another
place where there is no smoke; not too far off, least he catch cold, there put
him into a warm Bed, as we said in Unctions, to sweat while he is able. There
is another way of smoking for the Pox, for gentle Folks, with less trouble: if
you do it against a Chimney covered with Tapsstry, and so the Smoke will get up
the Chimney, and the Patient breath the better. And the best way is to lay the
Patient straight in his Bed, and conveigh the Fume by a spout from a Funnel or
fuming pot under the clothes unto his naked Body, and there they keep it, with
his Head out of the Bed, till a little at the last as we said before.

These Fumes are to be used once every day, and if the Patient be weak every
other day, or if he grow faint, let him rest some day till his Spirits be
recruted, and to it again till by his fluxing, or spitting or foreness of
Mouth, you are admonished to give over, which usually will be after ten times,
sometimes sooner, and sometimes later.

The Diet is the same with that of Unction, but they must eat oftener, because
Fumigation weakneth more then Unction and Abstinence cannot do so much good
here, as weakness will do hurt; you must also purge sometimes, as in the Unction.

Quicksilver made into Sublimate, with Vitriol and vinegar, which flies up,
and sticks to the Head or covering by the force of the fire is used
outwardly, also for the Cure of the Pox, mixed with some Liquor to wash the
ulcers; for Quicksilver is in the Sublimate, and sticks to the Body, and does
the same that it did in the Ointment and Fumigation, and cures the Pox by
spitting, which also makes a sore Mouth as the other. And moreover by the
sharpness of the Vitriol, it burns the skin, and blistereth it, and draws out
the venom from the fore and knotty places. Thus they cure the Pox by it alone,
and take away the Pains and Nodes, and root them out when no other way will.

For making this Mercury water of Sublimate, a middle quantity is one ounce of
Mercury to two pints of Liquor, and you may increase or decrease the quantity
according to the Operation.

By Decoction you may make it thus: Take of Sublimate Mercury one ounce, common
Water, or Rose Water, Scabious, Fumitory, Marjoram, or Sage-water etc. two
piuts, white wine four ounces. or Aqua vitae two ounces: boil them a little and
keep them for use.

An Infusion for a Water to wash with. Take Sublimate one ounce, Alum one
ounce and an half, Lytharge, and Ceruss, each one ounce; Aqua vitae two pints:
steep them in a close stopped Glass.

A Decoction. Take Sublimate one dram, Arsenick four drams, Euphorbium half a
dram, Rose Water or the like, with Aqua vitae, each twelve ounces: boil them a
little in a Glass.

Thus we use these Waters, let the Legs be washed with a clout dipped in this
Water from the Knee downwards, and the Arms from the Elbow foreward, sometimes,
morning and evening by the fire, continuing it ten days, till the Mouth be
sore and they spit.

Let the Patient be governed as in the Unction in a hot place sweating, and
taking proper Meat and Drink, and let him be purged before, and in the time of
using it.

Also Experience has taught, that Quicksilver taken inwardly cures the Pox,
either crude or calcined.

When it is taken crude, it does it by the same way, as when outwardly applied,
causing no other manifest Evacuations, but spitting, neither will it cure
without it make the Mouth sore. And in regard, it does the same externally, it
is thought prejudicial inwardly; give it not rashly therefore but in an old
Pox, or when others fail, or to save Labor and Charge. And it is safer, when
it stays not long in the Body, for being crude, it commonly gets out soon by
its weight and slipperiness, or usually some other things are muxed to carry it
away: and so it hurts not the Stomach and Guts, and leaves its strength
notwithstanding.

We give crude Quicksilver from six to eight or ten grains, with something
added to dissolve it, and to carry it away; for of it self, it will not cause
stools, it is made into pills and so given every day till there be Heat, and
stink in the Mouth with spitting, which must continue thirty days, and the
Cure is complete, if general Purges went before and a good Diet with it.

You may make these Pills thus: Take of crude Mercury half a dram, kill it with
Juice of a Lemmon or Sage, or of Roses, or with Syrup of Roses, or with
Turpentine, add the best Agarick two scruples, make three Pills, let him take
every night after Midnight, one, and repeat them till the signs aforesaid
appear, Rhubarb is given instead of Agarick: some mix one or two grains of
Opium to the Composition, to take away pain, and provoke Sweat. Sometimes Musk
and Ambergreese, or a drop of Oil of Cinnamon, to refresh it by it scent. Also
because Gold is good against the Venom of Quicksilver, and to make them
dearer, they use to guild them.

Another Composition. Take Aloes one ounce, Rhubarb or Agarick two drams,
Mastick one dram, Quicksilver killed with Turpentine two or three drams, with
Syrup of Roses solutive, make them up, adding the aforesaid Spices, give one
scruple at a time, or more if the former work not.

We make these Pills stronger, by adding strong Purgers, which take away
spitting, they are given every day, or every other day, and Treacle between.

They are made thus: Take of the Pills mentioned of quicksilver, Rhubarb,
Agarick, and Mastick, add to the Scammony, or Coloquintida prepared two drams,
give half a dram at a time.

Or thus: Take Cochy and foetida Pills, each half an ounce; Rhubarb, and
Agarick, each one dram; Quicksilver killed with Turpentine three drams, with
syrup of Roses solutive, make a Body for Pills, let him take one scruple or
half a dram. as they work.

Mercury calcined called Precipitate, is given to cure the the Pox so called,
because it is precipitated or thrown down into the bottom of the Glass by the
fire, or because it moves the Belly downwards. And then it does not work by
its Natural force, as when crude, but by an acquifite or new gotten Virtue, by
which it stirs up Nature so violently to stool; and not to spitting: and that
not as other purges in a long time, but quickly given but twice or thrice,
causing abundance of vomiting and purging, sometimes sweating and urin, so that
they are cured, as by a Miracle, but not without danger.

The way to prepare it, is as follows. Take Quicksilver two ounces, Aqua
fortis three ounces, let them stand a day or two in a Glass, till it fall to
the bottom like chalk, pour off the Liquor by degrees till the bottom is dry:
or draw off the Moisture by Evaporation upon the fire, or boil them to a
hardness, powder that which remains, and put into a Crucible or melting pot
upon the fire for an hour, stirring it with a stick, till it be calcined, and
made like red Lead, this they call Precipitate,

Take it and infuse it in Rose Water, Plantane, Scabious or Bettony-water at a
gentle fire, till all the Water be gone and the powder remains dry, then
calcine it in a Crucible: this powder must be mixed with Conserve of Roses, or
of Apples or the like, and a Pill as big as a Pease thereof given in the
morning; others add some Cordial or Stomach powder; others Treacle, and
Confectio Alkermes.

Some work with more pains to rectify it, that it may do less hurt: first they
wash it in hot water, then they boil it in Vinegar four times distilled, three
or four fingers above it, in a close Glass for four hours, then they pour off
the Vinegar, and boil it again in new, the third time also, then they distill
the Vinegar that was thrice poured off, and after the vinegar is gone, they
take that in the bottom which is like Salt, and boil it in Rainwater, and when
it is settled, they pour off the clear top, and distill it in Balneo mariae,
till the Liquor be gone, and keep the remaining Body, and this they use as the
safest precipitate.

Others take more pains, and steep it in Spirit of Wine, and still with a
retort, and then dry it to a red Powder it. One grain of this in wine does
wonders in the Pox, say the Chemists.

Some give Pills of precipitate, with Rhubarb, Senna, Scammony, or Hellebore,
Saffron, and Starch, with Juice of Lemmons, and give every day one.

I thought fit not to omit that famous Medicine of the Chemists called Bezoar
mineral, for curing the Pox, it is thus made. Take Antimony, and Sublimate
calcined with Vitriol very white, and let it be thrice finely poudered, of each
as much as you please, first ground by themselves, and then together, and draw
out the Oil by a Glass retort with a gentle fire, by degrees increased,
separate the coagulated Mercury as much as you can. Take four ounces of this
Oil, and pour upon it three ounces of Vitriol by drops, which will make a great
Noise, still them in sand till they are dry, fortify the Spirit with one ounce
of fresh, do thus thrice and the Mercury will be fixed, calcine this in the
fire of Fulmination, and it will be very white, and it must be sweetened with
spirit of wine, often poured on and drawn off, this is Bezor mineral, keep it
in a glass and give two or four grains at a time. These are not to be used
rashly because dangerous, and when all things fail, nor must all know them. And
when we use them we must refresh them with things internal and external, and we
prevent the Flux, Dysentery: as we showed in Dysentery.

The accidents of the Pox are diverse ways cured.

The pains about the skin, bones, shoulders, head, and forehead, with the
Nodes, if they continue after the cure fully administered and trouble the
Patient, must have peculiar Remedies; and if they help not, you must begin the
Cure again, the Remedies follow.

If after the general Application of things, there remain any accident, it may
be removed by the anointing of the part with the common Ointment mentioned in
the Pox, and if you add Wax thereto, you may make a Plaster for the Forehead,
and use it like a Cap or the like, constantly.

Or use the Plasters mentioned, or Cerots to the particular parts, or that
called Divinum or Gratia Dei, or of Bettony with Quicksilver, adding
Euphorbium, Castor, Hermodactyls, Orris, Pellitory, Hellebore, and other hot
things for the Joints, especially that usual Emplaster of Vigo called the
Plaster of Froggs, excellent for pains and Nodes or Knots.

Also that Cerot which we mentioned for curing of Nodes.

That excellent plaster which I have found so successfully, is thus made. Take
Quicksilver three ounces, mix it with Turpentine washed in Aqua vitae one
ounce, Hogs grease or Calfes Marrow, each one ounce and an half; Oil of
Lillies; Chamomil, Dill, Bays, Worms, or Foxes, each half an ounce; Oil of
Spike, or Turpentine two drams, Euphorbium, Frankincense, each half an ounce;
Storax six drams, Hermodactyls two drams, Castor one dram: with Wax, make a
Cerot. They say the Oil of Guaicum allayeth the pains.

Wash the Legs pained with Mercury-water, it is the best for Pains and Nodes,
as is mentioned.

Some say that Fomentations and Ointments of things without Quicksilver will
allay the pain, being temperate and anodine, or takers away of pain, or heating
much the Nerves. But we have showed that actual and potential heat does
increase these pains, except Quicksilver be mixed.

Besides it is good to purge often with Pills, Potions, and the like, mentioned
in the Gout and Headache, which alone sometimes takes away the Relics of the
Disease, and with other Medicines to the part they are more effectual,
especially if you give between, things that strengthen; and if the Head ache,
give peculiar Medicines therefore.

Sweating also by Decoctions mentioned, does take away the after pains,
especially with purges and Medicines to the part. Stilled Waters are the best
for it, as that of the Decoction of Guaicum, or that of Treacle, mentioned in
the general Cure given in Potions.

Narcoticks or Stupefactives are sometimes given to assuage pain with good
success, because they also bring rest and cause sweat; and they may be taken
without hurt. Therefore Treacle is so good to cause sweat and assuage pain, and
the rest the stupesie, called Narcoticks.

The Nodes or Swellings in parts without flesh, as the Forehead, or Head, or
Shins, or Backs of the Hand, depart when the pox is cured; and if it be by
Unctions or Fume the sooner, because they are anointed with the other parts,
but if the Cure be by internal things, and the Knots or Nodes remain, you must
cure them by Unction and Fumigation, and the whole Disease is not perfectly
cured, adding more Oils and Gums, and Grease to the Ointments.

The Emplasters mentioned are good for these, especially that of Vigo, which
sostneth and consumes them.

Or this Cerot. Take Gum Ammoniack, Opopanax, each two ounces; dissolve them in
Aqua vitae, Goose grease, Hens or the like, each one ounce and an half; the
Marrow of Veal, or Goats bones one ounce, Labdanum, Storax, each two ounces;
Storax liquid one dram, Powder of Hermodactyls, Orris, each three drams;
Cinnabar one dram, Quicksilver dissolved with T^rpentine six-drams, with Oil
of Worms, and Wax, make a Cerot.

Or boil Briony roots, and Orris roots in Wine, to half a pint, ad Gum
Ammoniack, Galbanum and the like dissolved in Aqua vitae to three ounces,
Liquid Storax, Bears grease, horse Marrow, each one ounce; Quicksilver killed
with Turpentine two ounces: make a Plaster.

Or take black Briony roots, and fill them made hollow with precipitate, keep
it in a moist place, then take out the Mercury, and anoint it with the Juice of
the Root.

Mercury water is good against Nodes to wash as mentioned, especially when it
raises Blysters as it usually does and burns the skin, and this is done by
adding more Mercury, or some Arsenick, as we showed.

That Froath which is skummed off at the boiling of guaicum, does discuss the
Nodes, if it be often used.

You may use the strongest of those Remedies which were prescribed for taking
away other Nodes, as we showed in tumors, especially those of Quicksilver.

And the Stupefactive Roots and Herbs will do good applied, as is showed. As
Briony roots bruised and applied without Quicksilver, does wonders.

Some boil Rhubarb and Aloes in one part of Lie, and half a part of Soap, till
it come to a Plaster with Wax.

Also they foment the Nodes which softning Decoctions, mentioned in Scirrhus,
and Knot-gout, and other hard tumors.

A Bag filled with Oats, and boiled, and often applied hot, is accounted good
for the same.

The Nodes are cut out if they will not away, but hinder the Patient, as we
showed in the Cure of other Nodes. And if they be not near the Joints or
Nerves, as in the Head, or if their be fear that the Bone is foul, they may be
burnt with an actual Cautery, and if the Head or Shins be infected, so that the
Bone will not scale, you must take it out with a pair of Forcipes or little
tongs, if the skin of the Brain appear, you must desend it with red silk or
fine linen before you lay a Plaster to the Ulcer, and cure it as a Head-wound.

The Ulcers external and internal that come in the Pox, if they be small are
cured with the general way, but if they be fixed and filthy, they must have a
particular Cure, least they infect the parts adjacent and the Bones, and it
must be speedily administered after the general.

In the external Ulcers of the Face, about the Mose, Lips, the Privities or
Eundament, you must first cleanse them if foul, and if hollow apply
Incarnatives, and then heal them up if the Bones be foul, they must be scaled.
As I showed by Remedies mentioned in the Cure of malignant ulcers, where these
are comprehended, and in the general Cure of foul Bones by actual and potential
Cauteries.

Chiefly in the Ulcers of the Pox, they which contain Quicksilver, Sublimate,
or Precipitate, or Cinnabar all made thereof are the best, because they are
contrary; as I showed to the Disease, such as is prescribed in the Cure of
Ulcers. beginning thus,

Take Quicksilver one ounce, Turpentine etc. and that following for the Ulcers
of the Legs.

Or that made of others there mentioned, as Apostolorum and the like, adding
four ounces of Quicksilver, with half an ounce of Turpentine dissolved, or one
dram of Sublimate, or precipitate: or mixing equal parts of the general
Ointments for the Cure of the Pox, and for the Cure of Ulcers together, or
another there mentioned, good against Pustles and Ulcers, this may be used to
the Ulcers after fluxing etc. as we said there, if the Ulcers be filthy,
Cinnabar, Verdegreese, and Sublimate must be added, and if you fear the Bone is
foul, add one ounce of Myrrh more. And if the Bone be foul, add six drams of
Euphorbium, which will take Scales that are rotten from the sound Bone.

The powder of white Hellebore roots, Agarick, Senna added, also do cure those
perverse Ulcers.

Oil of Guaicum is commended above the rest, also of Antimony, of Bricks, and
Juniper.

They also teach that the Foam, or Skum arising from Guaicum boiled, cures
these Ulcers.

Other internal Ulcers in the Pox, although as we said of external, they must
have a general Cure, yet it is good in the time of the cure, and after if they
continue to apply particulars to them. Which differ not much from them that are
used to other Ulcers which are in the same places without the Pox.

For in the Ulcers of the Nose which are internal, we proceed as we do in other
Ulcers of the Nose, by sternutations, or Errhins snuffed up, or pouders. Among
the rest they are not proper which are made of the Decoction of Guaicum,
Cinnabar, and Sublimate, the Fumigation of Cinnabar cures not only the whole
Body, but also the Nose, if taken: as we showed.

In the Ulcers of the Mouth as the thrush, Fissures, and Excoriations, whether
they come from the Pox, or after the use of Quicksilver, those which are
declared in the like Ulcers, in the pains of the Mouth and Jaws, are here also
very convenient. Among which some are mentioned, which are proper for the pox,
which have treacle in them.

The Ulcers in the Fundament of both sexes, and in the Privities, as those
called Condylomata, require the same cure, which is mentioned in the pains of
those parts.

If the Ulcer be in the Yard of a Man and Neck of the Bladder, or in a Woman,
so that it cause burning, and corrupts Urine, we shall show the cure thereof,
when we speak of pissing of matter in things cast forth, and in the infectious
running of the Reins, which goes many times before the pox.

The Inflammation and Pustles of the Mouth usually sollowing the use of
Quicksilver is cured, as we showed in Diseases of the Mouth with Ointments of
Grease and Milk. And there we showed, how they are to be cured, when they
follow the use of Quicksilver, as other Inflammations of the same parts, and
how those Medicines that have treacle therein are to be administered, and if
they turn to Ulcers, of which we now spoke, how they are to be ordered.

We cure all Spots and Pustles by curing of the Pox, for if the Pox be rooted
out, by diverse purgings, as we showed, they will be gone, or if they remain,
you must begin the Cure again with outward Applications, and they will take
away the Relics. But when the pox is gone, the pustles remain fixed, you must
cure them with the same remedies that we prescribed for red pustles, if they be
such or venomous, by cleansing, consuming and burning them off.

And because quicksilver does powerfully take away the accidents of the pox,
you must use the general Ointments made thereof.

And you must mix them with the particular Ointments mentioned in red Spots.

Or apply Quicksilver and Grease, with Turpentine or Rosin.

Or mix quicksilver well, after washed with Juice of Lemmons or Docks, with
Ceruss, Frankincense and Mastick for an Ointment.

Or, Take Quicksilver one dram, Lytharge two drams, mastick half a dram,
Camphire one scruple, Turpentine one dram, with Oil of Eggs: make an Ointment.

And if you add a little Sublimate, it will be better.

Or use the Waters, Mixtures, or Unguents made of sublimate, mentioned in the
Cure of red and infectious Spots.

But if you will add the first, apply gentle Remedies, use the Topical
Medicines there mentioned, or that Ointment of burnt Alum, Aloes, Juice of
Oranges, or Docks, with Oxymel of Squills.

Or the Emplaister of Lilly-roots, roasted and beaten, with Sugar, and
Camphire, or Oil of Tartar to anoint.

Some cure with Baths in the time of the Cure by Unction, and they use the Bath
after Supper, and the Unction in the morning. The Bath is made of such things
boiled, as were mentioned for other Pustles, as Docks, Scabious, Fumitory,
Lentils, Lupines, black Hellebore, Brimstone and the like: but these will not
do except the Disease be quite taken away: therefore these and the like Baths
are to be used at the Conclusion, to wash away the Relics of the Disease and
Itch of the Ointments; but it is better to use a hot House or dry Bath.

If Clefts continue in the Hands and Feet after the cure, it is a sign that
some Relics remain, therefore the cure must be repeated by the Unction, or
you must anoint the palms of the Hands therewith, and the soles of the Feet.

Or dissolve half an ounce, of Quicksilver with two ounces of either of the
four hot Ointments, or with that of Turpentine, or with Grease and Turpentine,
and a dram of Sublimate, and anoint the Clefts.

Or mix the powder of Sublimate, with Oil of Violets, Almonds, or with Pomatum,
so much as may not corrode, or with Alum, Borax, and Camphire.

Or boil Sublimate in water, and touch the clefts therewith, or use those
Remedies prescribed in Discoloration for the cure of fissures and clefts, and
of the peeling of the skin, there you may find Medicines which are here proper
also.

Where we also showed, how the clefts must first be washed before they are
anointed, with an emollient Decoction, to which you may add Docks, and Fumitory
or the like to cleanse.

Scales in the Hands, if they remain after fluxing may be cured by the same
means, or by the Remedies mentioned in that Disease with the pox, in the
Chapter of Deformity.

And if Dandrough remain after fluxing, you may use the Remedies mentioned
there for the cure thereof.

The falling of the Hair from the Head or Face, as Eyebrows and Beard, showing
this kind of Pox, or mixed with other accidents, is commonly cured in general
with the pox, by purging and the like, and it is not needful to treat thereof
in particular, but if it be left after the Cure, you must either renew the cure
again, if you conceive the pox not gone, or else apply Medicines mentioned in
the Falling of Hair. Among which those which allay the sharpness of Humors,
which corrodes the Roots of the Hairs, are good to prevent the Falling off, and
when they are fallen off, you must take away the Cause thereby: as we showed.

Ointments of quick silver may do here good, as in other accidents left after
the general cure; but because they are not convenient for the Head and Face,
you may use other things without quicksilver, and that is the best which we
mentioned to be made of Cantharides, or Spanish Flies, and Oil of Spike.

Other accidents and Symptoms of the pox are to be cured, of which these are
the most usual following.

The decay of strength from sweating or purging over much, is cured by ceasing
from Evacuations, till strength return; and by refreshing the Patient with
restoring meat and drink, and strengthening Physic inwardly and outwardly,
mentioned in the defect of vital Spirits, such also may be used to fortify the
Patient in the time of Evacuation. But if they faint away in the Cure, and
swound, then you must recall the Spirits by diverse Applications. All which and
how they are to be used, are prescribed in the Defect of vital Spirits.

If the Flux Diarrhaea or Dysentery come from much purging, you must cure them
with Remedies mentioned in these Diseases. Among which Narcoticks or
Stupefactives of Nature, as treacle and the like, are very good to take away
pain and not hindering sweat: as was there showed.

The Scurvey though it come also from a venomous Cause, The Cure of the Scurvey.
yet it may more easily be cured then the pox; and if it be neglected or evil
ordered, it turns to a Dropsy or a worse Distemper.

Experience has taught that the total and perfect Cure of the Scurvey, is by
Evacuation and things that alter by manifest or secret Virtue, contrary
thereunto, by which also the cause is taken away, and the Distemper amended.

We must evacuate those Humors which we perceive chiefly to abound, and because
that Melancholy is thought the chief, which is in the Meseraick Veins about the
spleen or in the same, they study to evacuate that only, by bleeding, purging
and sweating.

They bleed, if the Body be full before purging, in the Arm and Hand, on the
left side, sometimes in the Foot, especially in Women when the courses stop.
Also the opening of the Haemorroids is very profitable.

After a Clyster or the cleansing of the Guts from Excrements, and
Blood-letting if need be, we prepare the superfluous Humors and evacuate them.
And because they are Melancholy, you must prepare and purge with the same
things, that we used for the pox, as therein at large is mentioned. But you
must not continue so long purging as in the pox; but only at first sometimes,
repeating them. To which Remedies you must add things that open Obstructions,
especially in the Bowels and Spleen which are the occasion of Melancholy,
therefore you may use the remedies prescribed to prepare and purge Melancholy,
and to open Obstructions mentioned in other Diseases of Melancholy; and they
will be more fit here, if you mix those things that alter, and are properly
enemies to this Disease.

Sweating is good in the Scurvey as well as in the pox, but it must not be of
so long continuance, but after purging, now and then, in a morning in the Bed,
or in a hot House, if strength will permit. Therefore the Decoction of Guaicum,
Sarsa, and Sassaphras, and the rest mentioned in the pox are good. Or we may
give treacle or mithridate, or which is better, the thick Juice of
Dwarse-elder, Elder or Juniper, adding to three ounces of these one ounce and
two drams of Syrup of Poppies, or give the stilled Waters mentioned, in the
altering Medicines.

We use things that alter the maglignant Distemper of the Scurvey, which are by
a secret propriety contrary thereunto.

Some Plants which are sharp, which Experience teaches have a propriety
against the Scurvey, among the which Scurvey grass is the chief, a sharp Herb
like Watercresses, this all men conclude to be the Antidote against it.
Whether it be eaten in Sallads, or made into a conserve with sugar, and eaten
often: or the Juice be boiled to a Syrup and so taken, or it be boiled in Milk,
or Wine or Ale, and drunk constantly, or the distilled Water thereof.

Watercresses are judged to be of the same Virtue, taken as Scurvey-grass, or
with it.

Brook-lime also is good though it be not so sharp.

Wild Purslain also, or great Stone-crop which is a little biting, may be added
to these.

Also the Herb, and especially the seed of Mustard, which candied with Honey
like sweetmeats, is excellent, not only for the Cure, but the prevention of
the Scurvey.

There are diverse other things that correct the Distemper at the first in the
Liver and Spleen, by opening Obstructions, which are mentioned in the like
Diseases of Melancholy in the form of Decoctions, Syrups, Infusions in Wine,
distilled Waters, Conserves, Electuaries, Pouders, and Tablets, and Pills made
thereof.

Which are made of these following, which are openers of Obstructions, and good
against the spleen, the five opening Roots, Avens, Restharrow, Elicampane,
Rhubarb, and Monks Rhubarb, the Leaves of Fumitory, Thyme, Epithymum,
Polypody, Bugloss, Germander, Agrimony, Tamarisk, Celandine, Burnet, and bitter
things, as Gentian, Squills, Hedg-hysop, Wormwood, four things, Sorrel, Wood
sorrel, and of the hotter Medicines for cold people, as Bettony, Mints, Sage,
Rosemary, Staechas, Organ, Hysop, Mugwort, Rue, Bay Berries; also of Spices, as
Nutmeg, Mace, of Minerals, as Vitriol, Steel, Iron, Bezoar-stone, and the like
Cordials.

As for the Symptoms of the Scurvey, the Tumors and Ulcers of the Gums, you
must use such Remedies as in the Diseases of the Gums, drying Waters, with such
things as are properly against the Scurvey, as Decoctions of Scurvey-grass,
Brook-lime, Watercresses, or the Waters, or Juyces thereof.

Also the Juice of Oranges, crude and boiled, especially in the filth of the
Gums to wash and to drink inwardly.

Also Lapis prunellae or Salt-peeter prepared, mixed with the things mentioned,
or with Sage, Self-heal, Privet-water or the like, is an excellent Remedy for
the Ulceration of the Mouth and Gums, approved by Experience.

If there be Ulcers in other parts, the like Medicines are to be applied.

The spots in the Legs and elsewhere, because they vanish when the Disease is
cured, require not a peculiar cure, and if any remain after, use the Remedies
against spots in Discoloration.

(...) after accidents be, as Contraction or Resolution of Members, or
Leucophlegmacy or a Dropsy, you must direct your Cure at that, and proceed as
we showed in the like cases in Motion, Hurt and Tumors.

CHAP. V. Of Consumption of the Body.
The Kinds.
WE call that a Consumption when the Body or any part thereof is consumed or
decayed, for if they grow leaner, we spoke of that in Deformity, when Magnitude
is diminished: also when the internal parts are consumed, as the Bowels, Liver,
Spleen, Kidneys without Corruption, as has appeared by Anatomies, as also it
may be found in the Lungs, Heart, and Brain: we have spoken thereof in the Hurt
of the great Functions. But of outward Consumption whereof we here speak. There
are two sorts, one when the whole Body, another when any parts thereof is wasted
or consumed.

Sometimes the whole Body consumed in thickness, Leanness or Slenderness.
and not in length, which seems to be increased; in some there is a falling
away or Leanness, and if it come from want of Nourishment it is Airophia, as
shall be declared in the Causes, but if the whole Body or the greatest part
consume it is called Tabes, and then the Temples of the Face fall in, and the
Eyes, and the Nose grows sharp, such a Face is called Hippocrates Face, because
he so described it, also the Cheek bones stick out, the Mouth keeps open,
except the Beards of Men keep them from being perceived. In the Breast all the
Ribbs are visible; and the Gris^le like a sword between them is bent, the
shoulder blades are like wings, and the Channel bone like a bow, under which
there is a deep pit, and they stick out, the Back bone is plainly seen, but the
Belly is fallen down and seems empty except a Dropsy follow, the Neck is
slender, long and unequal, and the external Larynx or Bone called Adams apple
is visible, the Buttocks are lank, the Hipps fleshless, the Coccyx or three
lower bones is like a Tail, the Legs, Arms Hands, and Feet are lean and
withered, and they seem swollen about the Joints, because the adjacent flesh is
lost, the Nails grow longer and at length crooked; sometimes the Roots are so
consumed, that when they grow again, the hinder part grows lower, and there is
an Impression as it were dividing the Nail as across, which also grows away;
the Hair being dried at the Roots falls away: the Skin lanke, wrinkled, soul
and dry: in which the Veins are to be seen blew.

Thus in sound Men otherwise you may perceive leanness or Atrophy, or Tabes
which is to a total Consumption as they who want Food, or are worn away with
labor and care or with age, lean, dry and withered.

In sick people the Consumption is most usual, and is a Symptom of diverse
Diseases, especially of acute and lasting Diseases, which consume the Body, and
when the recovery of the Body repaireth; sometimes they are all their lives
time lean, and seem old, when not, therefore it is called Senium or age-like.

When other Diseases last long they consume the body, Senium or Age-like.
and that is Tabes which has many Symptoms accompaning it, as a Cough, and
then it is called Phthsiis or Corruption of the Body, or the Ulceration of the
Lungs, from the cause that shall be mentioned; and in this kind of Consumption
there is a cough night and day, Phthisis or Corruption of the Body.
and spitting sometimes with Blood mixed, and at first pure Blood, and in great
quantity, as we showed in spitting of blood, which comes by fits, and there
follows matter stinking, white, or yellow or green, or black; sometimes a piece
of the Lungs is spit up with the matter, and there is a constant hectic
Fever, with a small Heat and a quick Pulse, as in Fevers mentioned, which
causes shortness of Breath upon little Motion, and coughing, these continue
many months and years, and brings the body like a Sceleton or Anatomy of Bones
covered with skin.

There is another accident to this Phthisis or Phtisick which is called Empyema
or Suppuration, Empyema or matter in the Breast.
when matter is in the cavity of the breast, like the Ulcer of the lungs by the
signs; but sometimes it appears by a flowing of Matter at the side, and more
certainly when there is a Node between the Ribbs, which being pressed flies in,
and then returns, if these signs go before those of a Phthysick will presently
follow.

This Consumption with a Hectic Fever is called Marasmus, Marasmus or
Withering.
from the decay rather then from the Fever, there are three sorts thereof,
when it begins, increases, or is confirmed, and this is called Marasmus
Fever; when it is at the height of the Body, is so lean and withered that the
Grislles bend, especially in the Breast, and sides and stick out, the Skin is
rough, the Nails crooked, and the Hair falls.

This Consumption of the Body is joined with another kind of Hectic Fever,
The Colliquation or Melting of the Body.
which comes from the burning Fever, and this is called Colliquation or
Melting, because it lasts not long, but is sudden and short: as we showed in
Fevers.

Sometimes there is a decrease or consumption with other accidents mentioned in
the Cachexy, Atrophy joined with Cachexy or evil Habit.
as loss of complexion, a pressing pain at the Heart, as there is a Swelling of
the Body; and this called Atrophy or want of Nourishment, which may be called a
kind of Cachexy, because decreasing it causes an evil Habit, although evil
Habit or Cachexy, is rather when the Body is increased then decreased. The
practick Physicians describe this Atrophy under the Diseases from whence it
comes, as those of the Liver and Spleen, and comprehend that Consumption in the
Names of those Diseases.

Besides this Atrophy joined with Cachexy, Atrophy with a Dropsy.
there is another joined with the Dropsy and its Accidents, by which though
the Belly and Feet swell, the upper parts are extenuated, and grow lean, so
that the body is partly swollen and partly consumed, miserable to be beheld: as
we showed in the Dropsy.

Sometimes some Parts consume, and that is called Atrophy, A particular Atrophy
of a Part.
which is a kind of Consumption, this is usual in the outward Joints or
Members, as about the Hip, Foot, Thigh, and Calse of the Leg, where it is more
visible; or upon the shouder or Elbow, or between the Thumb, and forefinger.

Besides these, the Eye is said to have an Atrophy or Phthisis and not the
Pupilla, The Atrophy or Consumption of the Eyes.
when it is not exactly distended and filled, and seems less and obscure and
the little black is more straight and contracted, this contraction of the black
is mentioned in Hurt of sight: and thither may this falling of the Eye be
referred rather then the Consumption thereof, which is in the thick Tunicle.

The Causes.
The Cause of total or particular Consumptions is of the parts when they are
soft, fleshy and fat, these comsume sooner then the hard, as Bones, Grisles,
and Membranes, which manifestly decrease not, although while a man lives their
Juice and Humidity may consume, and they may wither. Hence as it is that fat or
flesh being consumed, their places are empty, and the bones are only covered
with skin. This unevenness is most in those places where there are more and
greater Muscles, as the Temples and Cheek, when the jugal bone sticks out, when
they are fallen, and there is hollowness of Eyes, when the Muscles and Fat of
the Eyes are consumed, and when the Muscles in the Neck are consumed, or in the
Breast, Back, Belly, Buttocks, there are void places, and cavities and bones
stick out, as the backbone, Ribbs, Throat, Grislle, Shoulder-bladds,
Channelbone, and the crupper-bone or Ilium, and when the Muscles are gone from
the Arms, Legs, Calves, Fingers; the places are naked and depressed, and the
Bones seem to stick out, especially tho Joints, and the Nails, which some say
increase in a Consumption, unless Nature being content with a little
Nourishment for them as I said of Bones, should keep them growing all the life.
As when the whole body is consumed, the Hair grows except by the force of the
Disease the Roots dry up, and they so fall off. In Grislles there is no sign of
Consumption, but that being naked they stick more out, as the Nose is sharper,
and the Nails, which only of all Cartilages come forth of the skin, are crooked
in a great consumption. As for the Membranes, of the skin which is only
visible, makes the body even, and if the flesh and sat under it, and keeping it
out be consumed, it grows wrinkled and dry as I said, and obscure from the
wrinkles that cast shadows, and the Veins are naked, because of the fat
consumed, the cause of the Consumption of these parts is the want of
nourishment or substantial radical Moisture, or the change of the Temperament.

If the Body grow lean for want of Nourishment, The want of Nourishment when
blood is either not, or unprofitable, is the cause of every Atrophy.
it is called Atrophy, in which the parts wanting their Juice of nourishing
blood, grow lean, in regard instead of the substance lost there is no new,
especially flesh which requires more Nourishment then other parts, and being
soft is sooner consumed, but the harder parts, as Bones, Grisles, Membranes
consume not, because they are nourished with little, and are more firm, as we
see the bones of dead Men last long. This want of Nourishment is from diverse
Causes, and first because it is not bred, or it is unprofitable, or it is
hindered.

When the Bloood is not sufficient, then because the Juice nourishing the parts
fails, and the fat continually decaying is not renewed by the like, the body
consumes, this is from want of Chyle in the first concoction, when sound men
have too little Food, or sick men too little Appetit^, which causes decay as
well as the Disease. And this may come from other Diseases of the Stomach, as
want of concoction, when there is little or imperfect chyle, as in the Tympany,
those parts which are not consumed. The body is extenuated from the want of a
second concoction, when the blood is not made, this causes an Atrophy, this is
from the fault of the Liver or Spleen, as weakness etc. When a Cachexy or
Leucophlegmacy from their actions diminished, or from their actions lost, so
that there is little or no blood; also other Diseases of the Liver or Spleen
breeding a Dropsy Ascites, may cause an Atrophy therewith, where the parts
above not swollen like Feet and Belly are consumed, these are described in the
cause of the Dropsy.

The blood is unprofitable and unfit to nourish, if it be foul, not crude,
which causes cachexy and Leucophlegmacy but impure, then it breeds Leanness or
Atrophy, which is joined with Cacochymy; and if it be watery it gets the
Atrophy with the Dropsy Ascites: this is from the first concoction which is
not mended in the second, or in the third, as we showed.

When the blood is stopped from a part it has an Atrophy, The want of
Nourishment, from ^^ood. hindered is the cause of the Atrophy of a Part.
this comes from an outward cause, for the internal from want of blood would
cause Leanness of the whole body. The blood is hindered from distribution by
the Veins stopped and pressed, by the Dislocation of some Joint, as the Hip;
from which follows often an Atrophy of the Legs, and sometimes Numness, if the
Nerves be pressed with the Veins. Also when Members are too long bound, or if
the Veins are straightned by a Callus, Tumor, Node, or Wenne, about the Joints,
or cut off, especially if the great Veins or many be so cut off, for the lesser
Veins, and few being cut, there are others to nourish the part. And if the
great Arteries be cut off, there will be Mortification rather then Consumption.

For the want of Substance making Juice and of Natural Heat, The want of
substance making Juice is the cause of Consumption or Tabes.
the Body consumes, and that sometimes through age, for as the body grows
thereby being young, and flourishes thereby in middle age, so in old age as
that decays, the Body consumes, through the dryness of the parts also which
comes by their Temperament, whereby they are withered.

The same may come from Labor, Care and Diseases, being vehement and
persevering, whereby the radical moisture and Natural Heat is consumed and
weakened, as in old Age, so before by Labor, and Cares and Diseases, Men become
sooner weak and lean, and so continue all their lives, except the Natural Heat
be not so weakened, but it may be repaired. And then, though they be very lean,
yet if they leave off Labor and Care and grow sound, they will recover their
former Vigor.

It happens through the change of the Constitution into a more hot and dry
temper, The change of the Constitution into hot and dry is the cause of
Marasmus.
when all the parts are of a like temper; that the Body does not increase in
young Men, and in the aged it decreaseth, and grows dry and withered. As in a
Hectic Fever, coming from the heat of another Fever, which changed temper of
the Heart making it too hot and dry, the Body consumes of a Marasmus, as we
showed in Hectic Fevers.

And though it is by degrees in this kind of Hectic, yet is it of a sudden in
Colliquation or melting, and it follows a burning Fever, the extreme Heat
whereof, did not only turn the temper of the Heart into hot and dry, but
melted the substance whereby the whole body became dry and consumed: As I showed
in the melting Fever.

This is not only in simple Hecticks but in such as are joined with a Distem^er
of the Lungs, The Ptysick is caused by the change of the Constitution into hot
and dry, and a Hectic Fever.
so that the Body consumes as in a Hectic, and this is called Phthisis
Ptysick, because the Lungs distempered are the cause of it. This Consumption
rising from a filth and Rottenness of the Lungs, does continually disturb the
Heart adjoining by Heat, and makes it, and the whole body hot and dry, which
causes a Hectic Fever; as other Hecticks come from other Fevers: as we
showed in Fevers. The first Cause of this Rottenness of the Lungs, and the
Hectic that comes from thence, and the Consumption that follows that, is the
Ulceration of the Lungs, till they rot, so that the Lungs are in part or all
one side turned into matter, and the Vessels of the Heart which are joining to
the Lungs, are lost on that side, and as it were cut off about the Heart, and a
Callus at the Root, And this Corruption has been so great that the Mediastinum
that divides the Lungs, and the Pericardium or Case for the Heart have been
infected thereby.

These things being thus; the matter which breeds in the Ulcer of the Lungs,
Matter in the Breast is the Cause of Empyema.
is not only spet out, as it falls upon the Branches of the rough Artery, but
at length when the substance of the Lungs is divided by corruption it falls into
the Cavity of the Breast, and there being heaped up it causes the-Disease
called Empyema. This appears to come from the Ulcer, by Anatomy, for when there
is corruption of the Lungs, you shall always find some matter in the Breast.
As also in regard, that matter coming from the Suppuration of the Membrane that
compasses the Breast, falls seldom into the same, for it will rather fall out of
it, as was showed in the Pleurisy. But an Impostum, growing to the Membranes,
or to the outward Tunicle of the Lungs being broken by other Causes then
Inflammation, may send its matter into the Breast: or matter may flow
there(...) as they say may be from an Angina suppurated, or Squinsie, or from a
Defluxion of Phlegm into the Breast. But in regard there is no passage from the
Neck into the Breast, and if they should get into the rough Artery, except they
were coughed up they will rather fall into the Lungs then the Cavity of the
Breast, this is not probable to come from a Squinsie much less from a
Defluxion. But if an Empyema should breed without an Ulcer in the Lungs, after
the manner mentioned; the Lungs would at length be infected by the matter
retained in the Breast, and the Ulcer of the Lungs would follow, which usually
goes before the Empyema, or matter in the Breast.

The cause of this Ulceration, and the rottenness that comes from thence, The
solution of continuity in the Lungs is the cause of Ulceration.
is either Inflammation or breach of some Vessel in the Lungs, or a Wound, or
corroding of the substance by some sharp putrid or venomous Humor.

In a Peripneumonia or Inflammation of the Lungs, or in the Pleurisy, if the
blood, as we showed in the Pleurisy, be not turned into matter by Concoction,
and so spet out: But the inflamed substance of the Lungs is also supurated,
there is an Exulceration of the Lungs which usually follows such Inflammations,
in which there being more matter, which is thrown out by coughing, in great
quantities. And this matter, except death prevent, corrupting the substance of
the Lungs, more, begets that lasting Ptysick, joined with a Hectic Fever in
which the Body pines aaway. If either in the beginning or afterward, any
matter falls into the hollow of the Breast, there will be also an Empyema, as
Hippocrates shows, if Men in a Pleurisy be not purged in fourteen days, they
will have a Suppuration or Empyema: And this will sooner come from the Pleurisy
and Inflammation of the Lungs, then from the Membrane that goes about them,
because a true Pleurisy, as I showed, comes from the Inflammation of the
Lungs, as well as Peripneumonia or Consumption of the Lungs.

This comes often from the breaking of a Vessel in the Lungs which passes
through the substance of them being full of Blood, and then the Blood being sut
from the Vessels into the branches of the rough. Artery there is coughing up of
blood at the first which goes before the Ptisick, and shows that it comes from
the breaking of a Vein. Because there is a Wound made in the Lungs by the
breaking of the Vein, which by the continual Contraction and Dilatation of the
Lungs seperating the Lips thereof cannot grow together and be healed but turns
into a filthy Ulcer which corrupts the substance adjacent of the Lungs and
causes a Hectic Fever, and a Consumption, sometimes the cause of this Rupture
of a Vein in the Lungs, is too often and vehement Dilatation thereof, by
hollowing, crying and blowing, or straining in lifting, or carrying of burdens,
or in voiding of Excrements, or Childbirth. Sometimes from other external
force, as a blow or fall if the Breast be so bruised that the Lungs are hurt.
As we showed in the causes of spetting blood.

There is also an Ulcer in the Lungs often, from an external cause, either from
a Contusion of the breast breaking the Vessels and substance of the Lungs which
causes a contused Wound, or from a thrust into the Breast which touches the
Lungs, and causes a wound, both which turn into Ulcers.

Sometimes the cause of a Ptysick or Consumption, is a sharp humor flowing from
the Brain which corrodeth the Lungs and this they suppose to be the chief
cause, but it is not, in regard many who have a long time had this Defluxion
and Cough, yet have no Consumption, and young men fall into Consumptions rather
then old who are more troubled with Defluxtions. Yet if we grant that a Ptysick
may come from a Defluxion, which causes a Cough, and the Cough the breaking of
a Vein, because by forcing often the inner parts of the Lungs, they may be hurt
in time. And that Defluxions may easily befall Consumptive men, which though
they do not first hurt the Lungs, yet by reason of the Cough which is added to
that which proceeds from the Ulcer, they cause an increase of the Disease. But
we suppose it more often comes from an humor ulcerating the Lungs, which lies
in the substance thereof and there corrupts, and is not coughed out, but
often recruted. Because (being bred in the substance of the Lungs and not
getting into the branches of the rough Artery, and less provoking a Cough then
when it falls from the Head upon the rough Artery) it may continue longer, and
do more hurt. They teach that the Lungs may be infected with blood or matter,
and so a Ptysick may come; and because in the Disease of spetting of blood, the
blood is not sufficiently discharged, it putrifies and hurts the Lungs and so
causes a Ptysick. But this comes rather from a broken Vein as we showed, and
when the blood out of its Vessels, lodges and corrupted. And if the blood
comes not from a broken Vein in the Lungs, but falls down by the rough Artery
there upon, (except it be coughed up again (as it is usually) and lodges
(which is difficult) then putrefying it may also hurt the Lungs. In the
Inflammation of the Lungs in the Pleurisy and Peripneumonia, the blood that
sweats through or matter that breds thereof, if it be not sufficiently coughed
out but retained in the Lungs, it infecteth them, and causes a Ptysick which
follows a Pleurisy, or Peripneumonia that is inflammation of the Lungs not
well expectorated or coughed up. And that matter in their ulcerated and
Corrupted Lungs continually increasing, and sticking to the Ulcers, makes a
greater corruption.

If the Lungs be ulcerated from any venomous humor, as is written of a
Sea-hare, that eaten, it will ulcerate the Lungs, if it be true, it is from its
quality contrary to the Lungs.

The Cure.
It must first be general of the whole Body, and then particular to certain
parts thereof.

The general Cure of the Consumption of the whole boby, is to be as it is in
sound men and sick.

In found men that have no other infirmity the body through fasting and want of
nourishment, The Cure of Atrophy or Leanness.
has an Atrophy sometimes: or from labor and care which dry up the natural
moisture, and then you feed them moderately again and they abstain from
violent labor, and cast away care, they recover of themselves, except they be
very far spent, and then they are incurable. Neither can leanness in old Age,
when the substance making moisture is consumed and the Members dried, be more
cured then old age its self.

That Atrophy which is from the disease of the Bowels ordained for sanguifying
or making Blood or Chyle, The Cure of Atrophy joined with Cachexy and Dropsy.
especially the Stomach, Liver and Spleen, through the want of Nourishment
which is caused by those Diseases, by which means either blood not sufficient
or unfit for Nourishment is bred; requires that Cure which belongs to those
Diseases which being cured, the Body flourishes, and if not the Patient dies.
The cure of which we have showed in other great accidents that come from the
same: as in the Cachexy whereof Atrophy is a Species or Kind, and in the
Dropsy and the like accidents that come from the Diseases of these Bowels,
joined with Atrophy. In all which because of the Consumption of Body, it must
be nourished with good Juice, often choosing the best that are prescribed in a
Hectic Fever and Ptysick, and such as the weak Stomach can digest. Therefore
if the Appetite be dejected, that they take little, let nourishing Clysters be
administered. Such as we taught in Hectic Fevers, or Milk, Yolks of Eggs, and
Chicken broth, also Broth of other flesh, and Juyces; or Gellies, or stilled
waters, cream of Barley and Wine.

If a Marasmus follows a Hectic Fever caused by the change of the Complexion
too hot and dry. The Cure of Marasmus or withering and Colliquation or melting
of the Body.


We showed the Cure in the Hectic Fever called Marasmodes.

As also we showed the Cure of Colliquation or melting from a burning Fever in
the cure of the melting Fever. The Consumption or Ptysick which comes from a
Hectic Fever through the Ulcer of the Lungs, which also changes the
constitution, shall here be treated of.

The Solution of continuity in the Lungs, The Cure of the Ptysick from the
Ulcer of the lungs and Empyema.
is scarce united when they spit Blood; and therefore cannot be kept from an
Ulcer. And if it be in the substance of the Lungs, and they spit filth and
matter, the cure is very hard to be done: and it is desperate if the Lungs
begin to corrupt, and to be turned into matter and to corruption causing an
Empyema in the Breast. The constant motion of the Lungs causes this difficulty
and impossibility, which hinders the wound from growing together; also the
cough that comes from that matter, or from a Defluxion which more and more
stirs the Lungs. Besides, because Medicines for the Lungs can scarce come
thither with their least part, they can do little in the breaking of a Vessel,
or an Ulcer. Moreover the Lungs corrupted cannot be repaired, and that
Corruption which falls through and turns to an Empyema, in the Breast, can very
little be coughed up. And though it should be let out by cutting, yet the
Ulceration of the lungs remains, without which the Empyema could scarce have
been there, as we showed. But if an Empyema come without the ulcer of the
Lungs, from some Imposthume in another part, as we said, except you presently
make way for it by cutting, (which may cure the Patient, if it be cettainly
from that Cause) it will corrupt the Lungs by continuance, and bring the same
Danger.

In regard we must leave nothing unexperienced, we must take the Cure in Hand^
foretelling the worst; and we must begin at the Disease that is the Ulceration
or corruption of the Lungs with the matter and cough, and the collection of
matter in the Breast, if there be an Empyema, then we must regard the Hectic
Fever and Consumption. Then the causes, namely the Defluxion which causes or
nourishes the ulcer, and increases the cough. As for the other cause that is
the breach of a Vein, which is known by spitting of Blood: we showed in
spitting of blood the cure thereof.

We give somthings which though they can come but in a small quantity to the
Lungs through the rough Artery, yet are good against the Ulceration,
Corruption, Cough and Collection of Matter. They are cleansers, such as are
good for other Ulcers, which purge the Lungs and inward parts of the Breast
from matter, and provoke coughing; which are good also in an Empyema, without
the Ulceration of the Lungs. Then we give astringents which by a drying and
emplastick Virtue, do as much as may be glue and unite, the substance of the
Lungs divided. as follows.

Milk being cleansing by its Whey, and glueing by its cheesie part, is chiefly
used for the cure of this Ulcer, and because the Butter therein does also
loosen and diminish the cough; these it does given with Sugar, or plentifully
drunk to repair the consuming Body: as we shall show.

Water and Honey, twelve parts of Water to one of Honey, is good for an
ordinary Drink to cleanse the Ulcer; also Water and Sugar or Ptisans of Barley
and Figs, stilled water also is good to dry an ulcer.

Some commend a Julep of stilled Waters, of Parsleyroots, Fennel,
Marshmallows, and Elicampane mixed and boiled with Sugar: adding while they
boil a little Gum Traganth, Arabic, or Juice of Liquorish.

There are also Syrups for the cure of ulcers in the Lungs, as that of Myrtles,
which are slimy, glutinating and astringent; also the Syrup of dried Roses and
of Quinces.

Or make this following, which is fittest. Take the Roots of Comfrey, and
Liquorish, each one ounce and an half; of Marshmallows one ounce, of Brank
Ursine, or Birthwort, each half an ounce; the Leaves of Plantane, Bettony,
Lungwort, Coleworts, Coltsfoot, Shepherd purse, each one handful; the Flowers
of Roses, Violets, each one pugil; of the four great cold Seeds half an ounce,
of the four small cold Seeds, and Line-seed torrified or parched, each two
drams, Water-cresse seeds torrified one dram, red Pease one pugil,
Myrtle-berries two drams, Jujubies, Sebestens, each six pair; Raisons stoned
ten pair: make a Decoction, adding Honey and Sugar, each four ounces: boil them
to a Syrup, of which let him take a little often. The Decoction of the Oak of
Jerusalem is commended against spitting of matter.

Or, Take Comfrey roots three drams, Juice of Colts foot and red Roses, each
one ounce; Juice of Liquorish, and of Sloes dissolved in the aforesaid one dram
and an half, Gum Arabic and Frankincense poudered, each one dram; Water and
Honey four ounces, Penidyes or Sugar pellets, of Roses, each two ounces; Sprup
of Jujubes and Myrtles, each one ounce and an half; to these you may add Juice
of Scabious, and Juice of Plantane to heal.

The things that are licked called Eclegmata, or Electuaries taken now and
then, or Tablets or Troches, which are held in the Mouth till they dissolve,
which are good against the Ulcers of the Lungs, are made diverse ways.

Of these usually, as D^atraganth frigid, Dipenidion without Species in
Tablets, also Sugar of Roses in tablets is excellent, and the Conserve of Roses
often taken. Also the resumptive Electuary without the Species, and the Lohoch
of Poppies, which does assuage the cough of those mentioned in the Cure of a
cough, some are more thickning, and by their glu^ing quality are good against
ulcers, as those of Mucilages, and that of Turpentine of the Larchtree.

These following Pouders will cure, if possible, the ulcer and corruption of
the Lung, either given with Sugar of Roses penids or with Milk, or with Sugar
dissolved in convenient Waters made into tablets, or with Syrups into
Lambitives, or mixed with Electuaries.

The first is: Take Comfrey roots two drams, Marsh mallow roots and Liquorish,
each one dram; red Roses two scruples, Gum Traganth, and Arabic a little
parched half a dram, Starch one dram: make a fine Powder.

Another: Take Red Pease, Line-seed, and Quince-seed parched a little, each one
dram; Plantane, Marsh mallows, Mallows, Purslain and Cotton seed, each half a
dram; white Poppy seed one dram, the four great cold Seeds two drams,
Pomegranate flowers one scruple, Frankincense, or Mastick and Amber, each half
a dram. Make a Powder, use it alone or with the former.

You may add burnt Ivory or Crabs eyes and coral, each one dram, or if you will
glutinate more, Bole or sealed Earth.

They are counted better though less pleasant, with Fox Lungs, and Windpipes
dried one dram, Ashes of cray-fish half a dram; also the Powder of Snails
dried, and of weezles Lungs. If he spit Blood still, you may add one scruple of
white Henbane seed.

For spitting of matter, use the Roots of Clot-burre, or Moon-wort, the Leaves
of Bettony, Dioscorides gives winter-cresse seeds; others the Leaves of Elm,
Paul's Bettony and Scabious, with the former Pouders.

This Electuary is Excellent. Take Conserve of Comfrey roots one ounce and an
half, Conserve of red Roses one ounce, the Infusion of Gum Traganth in Plantane
water one ounce, Coral, Bol^ or Earth of Lemnos, each one dram, Conserve of
Sloes half a dram, Saffron half a scruple, Syrup of Myrtles as much as will
make an Electuary.

These tablets following are pleasant and profitable. Take red Rose flowers
without the white, dry them, and powder them finely, sprinkle it with Juice of
Lemmons, and with Sugar boiled in Rose Water, make tablets.

Or, Take Sugar dissolved in Rose Water, and with Juice of Roses make Tablets.

Or, Take four ounces of Sugar dissolved with Juice of roses and boil it, add
at the end the species Diapapaveris and Diatraganth frigid, each one dram;
Conserve of Comfrey roots half a dram: make tablets.

Troches to be held in the Mouth. Take Rosin of the larktree, or Turpentine a
little boiled, and poudered, Frankincense, each half an ounce; Myrrh, Sanguis
Draconis, or Pomegranate flowers, each one scruple; Saffron half a scruple,
Comfrey roots two scruples, Sugar of Roses one ounce, with the Infusion of Gum
Traganth in Coltsfoot water: make Lozenges.

Brimstone infused in Plantane, Coltsfoot or Rose Water, or the like to give it
a scent twice or thrice, given in a rear Egg in powder, or with Sugar, is good
for this, as for other Diseases of the Breast. The Chemists give the flower of
Brimstone by making it whiter; chiefly with Saltpeeter fixed mixing one part of
Salt Peeter, with two of Brimstone which shines, and subliming it in the fire
according to Art with Sand. Salt Peeter is sixed with Sulphur even as Lapis
prunellae is made. Also they think that sulphur waters drunk, do good.

There are also Fumes that dry the Ulcers which are received at the Nose or
Mouth, and drawn into the Lungs by the breath, which way they can best get
thither.

The Fume of a Decoction mentioned in the cough, which must be taken hot into
the Mouth is good.

The best Fume to dry, is that of the Roots and Leaves of Coltsfoot burnt, and
of Horse tail.

Or that which is made of Henbane seed, and the like in the Troches of the
Cough.

Or they that are made of Brimstone, and other things mentioned in Asthma.

Or thus. Take Gum of Ivy one dram and an half, frankincense one dram, Myrrh
half a dram, Amber one scruple, Bezoin, Storax, each half a dram, Conserve of
Sloes two scruples, Coriander, Rose seeds and red Sanders, each one scruple;
powder them, and with Gum Traganth or Turpentine of the Lark-tree: make
Troches. You may add a little of the Bark of Mandrake root, or Henbane seeds,
some use a little Orpiment but not safely, supposing that Sandarach was called
Orpiment, but Sandarach is the Gum Varnish.

A dry Air is better then a moist for men in Ptysicks, this may dry the Ulcers.

Ointments to the Breast may do something of relaxing Ointments, that they may
easily spit up the Matter, such as are mentioned in the Cough and the Asthma.
And when the Matter is little, you must use astringents to heal the Ulcer, if
they may reach the Lungs possibly.

As, Take Oil of Myrtles or Roses, and Mastick, each one ounce and an half; the
Mucilage of Comfrey, and Marsh-mallow seeds, each one ounce; Line seed, or
Foenugreek two drams, Sarcocol insused in Milk, Frankincense or Mastick, each
half a dram; Myrrh one scruple, Rosin one dram, Saffron one scruple, with Wax
make a Liniment.

To ripen the Imposthume, which being in the hollow of the Breast produces an
Empyema, to break it before it does great hurt, they apply things to the
Breast, they make Concoction that the matter may be spit out.

You may apply the great Diachylon Emplaster, or that of Orris.

If you add to the Ripeners things that draw forth then by making the skin
thin, and digesting the matter, they cause a Tumor, and show where it ought to
be let forth by cutting.

For which this following is good. Take Marsh-mallow roots, Briony and Orris,
each two ounces; Figs ten pair, Dates six, Chamomil and Melilot flowers, each
one pugil; Foenugreek and Line-seed, each one ounce, boil and bruise them,
adding Oil of Lillies two ounces, of Peppers one ounce, Mustard seed two drams,
Leaven one ounce, make a Cataplasm.

You may apply Pitch over the Breast, if you are certain there is matter by the
stretching forth and noise thereof, that the Tumor may more appear.

Injections into the Cavity of the Breast, are good when it comes from a wound
without, and we have seen by the use thereof, and other things which are good
in ulcers, one that had a Knife struck into his Lungs, and an Ulcer, so that
some parts of the corrupted Lungs came forth, and the Party consumed, and yet
lived a long time after. And I knew another that spit bloody Matter a long
time, that by these things lived long. And in the year 1645. I saw a Scholar
who had a Pleurisy evil cured, and his Breast opened for an Empyema, too low,
so that all the Matter was not let out, that had abundance of Matter after, was
gathered in his Breast, so that when he held down his Head, the Matter came out
at his Mouth, as I often saw; we took from him the Matter, (by conveighing into
the old Ulcer that was stopped a swelling Tent) with some parts of the
substance of the Lungs, and we sent him home sound where he is yet living.

These Injections are made of Cleansers, and after of Dryers, using some gentle
things which are prescribed for other Ulcers, made of Water and Honey, Whey, or
the Ointment of Smallage, Barley water, and of other Plants.

Or make this Cleanser. Take Whey of Goats Milk one pint and an half, Honey of
Roses four ounces, Juice of Celandine and Smallage one ounce and an half.

Use this Injection by turns when no matter comes forth. Take Goats milk in
which Comfrey roots are boiled two pints, Juice of Plantane one ounce and an
half, Sarcocol steept in milk and dissolved one dram and an half, Myrrh one
dram, Rosin of the Lark-tree dissolved in the White of an Egg one dram: mix
them.

If you are certain of the Collection of matter in Empyema, by the little Tumor
between the Ribbs and the Nose, you must make Incision, for otherwise you
cannot take out the matter. And so he may be cured, if the Empyema be without
Ulcer of the Lungs. And if there be an ulcer and the Cure proceed not, yet in
regard that otherwise an Empyema cannot be cured, it is better in extremity to
use the means, then leave the Patient, and so by showing the matter we excuse
our selves. And if we doubt of the Empyema, when we are certain of the ulcer of
the Lungs, and make Incision at first, it will help the Cure, for so the matter
would be better let forth then by coughing. And because Injections may be made
into the Lungs, this way when Medicines cannot come other ways to them, and
come forth by the same Orifice: as we showed in the cure of the Wound in the
Lungs.

This Incision is made always, foretelling first the Danger, and if there be a
little Tumor, thrust the Knife into the Breast there, and take the matter out,
not all at once least the strength fail; if nothing appear, make the Incision
above the twelveth Rib in the lowest part of the Breast, where no Muscles lie
upon those between the Ribbs, so that the matter being fallen into the breast,
and lying upon the Diaphragma which is joined to the twelveth Rib, may come
better forth, and the Wound is to be kept open till all be let out by degrees.

Hippocrates shows that matter may be let out by burning, with an actual
Cautery, because a potential cannot reach so deep: but because it is not safe
to use there a hot Iron, it is better done by Section.

The Remedies used for a Hectic Fever with the ulceration of the Lungs, must
be such as repair the lost Substance of the Body, and correct the dry Distemper
thereof, and if they be also good against the Ulcer, they are the better.

They which chiefly restore the Substance of the Body, Restoring Medicines in
the Ptysick.
and are used therefore though they have other Virtues also; are either such as
are administered inwardly or outwardly or injected.

Things are given inward, as Nourishment only, or as Medicines.

They which only nourish are good to restore the Body consumed with flourishing
Juice that moisten, and correct the Dryness which is procured by the Hectic
Fever; and to this end you must give things of easy concoction, that breed
good Juice, that are quickly digested and applied to the substance of the Body.
Among which Milk is preferred before all, because it does not only what is
mentioned, nourishing the Body with its whole substance; but also by its temper
and moistness, qualifies the sharpness and saltness of the Matter and Humors in
the Lungs, or that fall down; and cleanses the Ulcer of the Lungs with its
Whey, and binds them with its Cheese, and allayes the Cough with its Butter.

We give Cows Milk, or of Goats and Sheep, and Woman's Milk to people in years,
though it is not usual, and Asses Milk, in all which though there be four
Virtues of which all Milk partakes, namely to nourish, mollify, cleanse and
glue, yet because one sort of Milk is better then another for some Bodies and
works stronger, we shall choose that which is most proper.

Of the usual sorts of milk Goats milk is best, because it is most cleansing in
regard it has more Whey, which is best when the Lungs are ulcerated; it is
taken new from the Cow, or warmed, fasting in the morning four or five ounces
at first, and so increasing by degrees to eight or twelve ounces: and sometimes
at night going to bed, for a month together.

You may mix it with Honey or Sugar to make it more cleansing, and to keep it
from Corruption. And if you feed the Goat with Herbs that cleanse the Lungs,
the milk will be better; as with the Leaves of Brambles, Willow, Lungwort,
Coltsfoot, with Barley, Beans, and beaten Lentils, Fennel feed, and a little
Salt and the like.

Cow milk is not much unlike Goats, in want of which it may be ^sed, or to
those that have been accustomed to it, because it cleanses, though not so
much, but Sugar will help it. And because Cow milk does glutinate more then
Goats, with its thicker part, it is good after he has drunk Goats milk, or
other cleansing milk to purge the ulcer to drink Cow milk the rest of the time
after in the same order.

And that the Ulcer may better be healed, you must take it with Sugar of Roses
a long time, some quench flints, iron or steel in it first, so that the watery
part or Whey being consumed, it may be more glutinous; or they boil it with
Rainwater, and Roses, or Comfrey roots which are better, but these are better
toward the end of the milk, taking then at the first; also Sheeps milk is good
at the conculsion to glue up the ulcer.

Some give Milk without order for their ordinary drink.

Asses milk is commended above Milks that are not usually taken, and are
therefore more nauseous, because it is cleansing, but by its Whey which is not
most to be required in the ulcers of the Lungs. And therefore when it may be
had, and the Patient affected it, it may be used in the same quantity and
manner, and as long as Goats milk, because it is better.

Woman's milk is chiefly commended against the Ptysick, because it has the same
strength with the rest, and is also more proper to restore, nourish and refresh
the Body of a weak Man, being more agreeable and familiar to Nature, and is
turned sooner and better into the substance of the Body, it must be sucked
twice or thrice a day from a sound Woman, for a long time, as if he were a
Child at Nurse. Thus I have known some cured, and that one grew not only well,
but got such strength, that least he should want Milk for the future, he got
his Nurse with Child.

There are other things which are of good Juice and easy concoction which
nourish a decayed body, such as are mentioned in the Cure of the Hectic
Fever, as the flesh of beasts that are young, tender and full of Juice, hens
flesh, Capons and Partridges; also the flesh of Birds, especially of the Woods;
also the Brains, Stones and Eggs of some Creatures. Also the flesh of
Brook-fish which is good Nourishment and moistneth more; also from Plants the
Seeds of Corn, as Barley, Wheat, Rice, Oats, and shell Fruits, as Almonds,
Pine-nuts, Pistacha's, and Raisons, which do fatten exceedingly.

The flesh of Wood-tortoyses or Snails is preferred before the rest, for the
repairing of the substance of the Lungs, and moistning the Body; also the tayls
and shells of Cray-fish, and thehinder parts of Froggs.

Of all which you may make innumerable Preparations for Meat and Drink. As the
flesh aforesaid boiled or roasted, or minced or the like, or broth made
thereof, or Jellies, or the Gravey of the Roasted; also pure Bread and Cakes,
with broth or milk; also Almond bread, Pinebread, Barley, Rice, and Oat-bread
which Galen says is excellent against the Ptysick. Also Emulsions which they
call Milk made of those Corns, Raisons, and Grapes, also sweet Wine, and
because it refreshes much, you must not take it rashly from them that have
been used thereto: as we showed in the Hectic Fever, where we showed some
kitchen Physic for the Ptysick.

Among the which there are simple Waters distilled of Nourishment, by which the
body is restored and moistened, and the Capon water is the chief, and the Snail
water is highly commended, as also of Froggs, Cray-fish etc. distilled.

There are also nourishing Medicines or Kitchen Physic which resist the
Hectic Fever, and the ulcer of the Lungs, which are mentioned in the Hectic
Fever, in the form of Bread or Lozenges.

There may be others made which are both pectoral and cordial, of Diamargariton
frigid, and the Electuary of Gems without the Species, also precious Stones,
Pearls filed, and leaf Gold and the like, which are precious and powerful.

There are also stilled Waters of Food, to which you add these good for the
breast, and to restore the strength, those they call Restauratives, because
they restore the substance of the body, such as the Capon water compounded of
the broth of a Capon, and the like, mentioned in the Hectic Fever.

Or you may make this Restaurative of these following distilled. As, Take of
the musculous flesh of Capons or Hens which is about the Breast one pound, with
the same flesh of Pigeons, Chickens or Partridges, of Snails taken out of their
shells twelve in number, of the Tayls of Cray-fish, or hinder parts of Froggs
twenty, boil them al in six pints of Water, til two be consumed, then put the
Broth remaining into a Lembeck, with half a pound of Crumbs of white Bread,
four ounces of sweet Almonds, two ounces of Pine nuts, Melons, Pompion seeds
one ounce and an half, beaten and steeped in Milk; also Raisons and Figs, each
four ounces; Comfrey roots and Liquorish, each one ounce and an half; Orris and
Elicampane roots, each half an ounce; Colsfoot and Plantane, each one handful;
Cordial Flowers of each one pugil; Gum Traganth, Frankincense poudered, each
two drams; Amber one dram, Bole or other fat Earth, two drams, Spikenard one
dram, Sugar or Honcy two ounces, draw a Water for your use.

Those Medicines which you give to correct the Hectic Fever here, may be the
same which are prescribed in a hectic Fever alone, as that Julep which begins
thus. Take of Violet water etc. Or thus: Take Juice of Purslain etc. Or the
Syrup which begins thus. Take of the Roots of Bugloss, or Purslain, or Scabious
wator, or the Tablets of Sugar of Roses, or the Candyes, or that which begins
thus. Take conserve of Roses etc. These must be used here, as we showed in the
Hectic Fever.

Outwardly for the Hectic and Ptysick, we use baths and Ointments for the
backbone after them, gentle rubbings, as we showed in the Hectic alone.

And we mentioned there nourishing Clysters, as in the Cure of Atrophy, which
must be used in time of necessity, when Meat is abhorred or loathed, which is
seldom.

These Medicines following are good against the Humor which flows from the
Head, The Cure of a Ptysick with a Catarh.
which increases the former Cough, when a Defluxion and a Ptysick are joined
together.

Sometimes we purge to prevent it, and keep it from falling down, when it
abounds, when otherwise in respect of the ulcer, Purges do not profit, because
they draw nothing out of the breast. And if the body be very lean and weak,
they do hurt, and bring danger by a Flux which is deadly in the Ptysick.

If necessity require, we use gentle things, as in the Asthma, to which there
is a Defluxion joined, as in Manna, which also cleanses the breast, and
Cassia, with the Decoction of Polypody, and Fruits, or old Cock-broath, and
others more gentle, Troches, Potions, Infusions, Pills, and Electuaries there
mentioned: also in the Cough that comes from a Defluxion, you may use those
gentle Purges there mentioned, and things that stop the catarrh.

We give also Preparatives for the Humor that flow's down, that it may be the
better purged, and that, that which is already in the breast may be
expectorated,, if it be thin they thicken it, or make it easy to be spit up,
if it be thick and fixed to the Lungs, they cut it, if it be tough, they
cleanse it: which we showed in the Cough and Asthma, how and in what form they
should be used. Among which they which cleanse most are best, because they take
away the matter from the ulcerated Lungs, and they which thicken, because they
glue up the wound in a measure. For the stopping of the flux or catarrh, we
give things that thicken, to which we add things that allay the sharpness of
the Humors, and stupisie the exquisite Sense of the Jaws, and mitigate the
cough; which is raised both from the matter in the breast, and the Humor
flowing down: for which we declared in the Cough from a Catarrh, Narcoticks,
and Lambatives, or to be licked, waters, and Pills, and Opiates, and other
forms in the Asthma.

To which this following may be added, which mollifieth, and stops the Flux.
Take Mucilage of Fleabane seed one ounce and an half, the Infusion of Gum
Traganth, or Arabic one ounee, Starch two drams, the Milk of white Poppyseeds
made with Violet-water one ounce and an half, Syrup of Poppies, Sugar of Roses,
each one ounce. Let him take it often, and it will be better, if a little Oil
of sweet Almonds, or fresh Butter be given therewith.

Or, Take Starch or Sugar of Syrup of Violets candied, or Penidyes, each two
drams; fat Bole one dram, Spikenard half a scruple, Henbane seeds half a dram,
with the Infusion of gum Traganth: make Troches, to hold upon the Tongne.

There are also things to draw back, and drive the Humor flowing down from the
breast, as Clysters often used, which are safer for diversion then Purges.

There are also Pouders for the Hair which dry, and fix the Head, stop and
consume Defluxions, or Bags; also Emplasters, and Washes for the Head; also
Fumes taken into the cap and Pillows, and are taken at the Nose, such as are
mentioned in Defluxions, and in the Cough, and Asthma.

The Humor flowing from the Head, is turned away from the breast by
cupping-glasses to the Shoulders, and sides of the Neck; also by Ligatures,
Frictions or Rubbing: as we showed in other Defluxions.

It is necessary, if Defluxions from the Head will not stop, to revel and
derive them by burning of the skin, in the Arm, Leg, with an actual or
potential cautery for Revulsion; but for Derivation of the crown of the Head
upon the coronal Suture; all kinds whereof are described in Defluxions of old
Headaches, and in the Cure of Imposthumes; also in the cough and Asthma etc.

If a Flux of the Belly come thereupon, it must be presently stopped, for it is
deadly, because it weakneth the body, and carries away nothing of the cause of
the Disease.

In this cause increase the dose of astringents, which are given at the Mouth
for the cure of the ulcer, as of bole, Terra Lemnia, Roses, and those that are
outwardly applied to the belly to be mentioned in Diarrhaea.

The cure of a particular Atrophie or Consumption of some part of the body,
which is musculous, The Cure of Atrophy or want of nourishment in some Parts.
as the feet and Arms, by reason of the stopping of the blood from that part
which should nourish them, is thus, if it comes from a Luxation or Relaxation
of the Nerves, or from Ligatures long and straight bound, or from some Tumor,
you must first look after them, and reduce the bone that is dislocated, and
untie the bands or roulers, and the Tumors if possible must be removed by that
way which is prescribed in the Treatise thereof. If this come from them by
cutting off the great Arteries or Veins, or of many little ones, the way being
stopped by which the Nourishment should pass, the Disease is desperate.

Howsoever we must use all means to bring the Blood more or less to the part
consumed, using things that by Heat, or opening the Passages, or some other
ways do attract, and draw it.

Use Ointments actually hot rubbed hard on, every day, a long, time till the
Member seems to grow bigger, which we may try by a Leather measure, or rather
of Paper for that will not stretch.

These ointments are made of things potentially hot and opening, many whereof
are prescribed in other Diseases and may here be used.

It is found by Experience that this is the best. Take Tops of Savine, and of
Juniper and Lovage leaves, each two handfuls; Chamomil Leaves or Flowers two
pugils, green Juniper Berries, and black, each one pugil; cut them, and bruise
them all a little, and with Oil of Bays or Lillies, as much as will cover
them, fined Hogs grease, especially of a red Hog, four ounces, Aqua vitae two
ounces: boil them till all the Moisture be consumed, then strain them, and add
Oil of Spike, or of Juniper Berries distilled one ounce, Pellitory roots three
drams, round and long Pepper, or Ginger two drams, and Wax make a Liniment or
Ointment.

Tops of Pine Tree, Leaves of Rue, and Nettles, and other hot things, as Oil of
Peppers, and Euphorbium, and Greases, especially Horse grease, Dogs, Bears,
Foxes, and Badgers grease, and Butter, are sometimes added. And if you boil
Cray-sish, and Earthworms there with, it will be stronger, especially if you
mix with the other Pouders two drams of Euphorbium or Castor, or Powder of
Ginny Pepper, which is very burning, or half an ounce of the powder of the
Stone Amiantum, or so much Salt.

Sometimes the Juice is taken from these Herbs, and is boiled with Oils and
Grease till it be consumed, and so is made up with other Ointments, or the
Juice with Oils, Rosin, and Pouders is mixed for an Ointment.

You may make Plasters of the same with Rosin.

Some commend the Blood of a Calfe, with Powder of Pepper.

This Liniment is made of few things, but it is against a Consumption of a
Part. Take the Grease of a Fox, Dog or Man, which is most proper two ounces,
Oil of Earthworms, or Toads one ounce, Philosophers Oil half an ounce: mix
them and anoint the part warm.

Baths made of the Decoction of the hot Herbs mentioned for Ointments, with
others proper for the Parts, as Sage, and Mollifiers, as Mallows are good, if
you often bath, but the consumed parts therein, and anoint them.

A Dropax or sticking Plaster laid often on, and drawn off again will attract
the blood, and Sinapismus or things made of Mustard, which will attract the
blood till the part be red.

It is also good to exercise and rub the Part often.

Gentle whipping often with Rodds, especially when the consumed part is
stupefied, may do good when other things fail.

The End of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE Functions, HURT of the Body. TREATING of the FAULTS of
EXCREtion, or things sent forth.
THe Faults of things sent forth or rejected out of the Body, are Symptoms of
the third Kind, which are in the Excrements or thing voided; and therefore are
Diseases besides Nature as well as the rest, whether Diseases or Causes
thereof: of which we spoke. These Faults in Excrements after they come forth of
the Body, are to be seen touched, smelt, tasted, and heard. And they differ in
that some are wholly besides Nature, and from the Substance; others from the
Quality, if they be otherwise then they ought, or from the Quantity, if they
come forth more or oftener then they need, and so they become preternatural and
evil. And if any thing come forth at a place it ought not, though it be not
evil in it self, yet it is a Fault, and if it be also evil, it is a double
Fault or Disease, as it is a preternatural Excretion.

These preternatural Excretions that are in themselves also evil, as well as in
Respect of their Excretion, because they are diverse: we shall first thus
distinguish them. They either are such as constitute and make up the Body, or
are contained therein, either from their Original, or proceeded from without.

Such as constitute the Body, are part's that originally compose it, The
Excretion or voiding of Parts.
or such as after grow in it, and are parts of the child's Body; a Child
preternaturally delivered, is mentioned in Abortion, and the parts constituting
the Body, in the taking away of Parts: all these shall be explained together in
the Excretion of Parts, Chap. I.

Some Parts that constitute the Body, do not altogether come forth but stick
out: The sticking forth of Parts.
these shall be treated of in the sticking out of Parts, as the Guts, Cawle,
Womb, Fundament, Eyes, Stones, Chap. II

There are diverse things contained in the Body, and are bred which cause the
preternatural Excretion, as Wind, Humors, Excrements, and diverse Bodies
following.

There is a preternatural Excretion of Wind, Efflation or breaking of Wind.
by Breathing, by a Wound, by Snorting, Belching, Farting, Stinking of the
Breath, Nostrils: these we shall explain in Esslation, Chap. III.

The preternatural Excretion of Humors and Excrements is in diverse following,
as for Milk though it be plentiful, and come forth of its own accord, yet is
not preternatural, and if it swell the Breasts it belongs to Tumors, where we
spoke thereof.

There is preternatural Excretion of Seed, in too much Venery, The Excretion of
Seed.
in a simple and venomous Running of the Reins, of imperfect Seed, or when it
comes another away or too quick: of which we shall speak in the Spermatick
Excretion, Chap. III.

There is a preternatural Excretion of Blood, Excretion of Blood.
in the Bleeding at the Nose, in the Terms or Haemorrhoids, immoderate Flux,
and at the Eyes, Ears Yard, Privities of Women, Fundament, the Pores and other
open Parts: of which we will treat in the bloody Excretion, Chap. V.

There is a preternatural Excretion of Matter, by the Eyes, Ears, Nose,
Excretion of Matter.
Vrinary Passages, Womb, and other opening Parts: these shall be handled in
purulent Excretion, or of Matter, Chap. VI.

There is a preternatural Excretion of Water in Tears, dropping at the Nose,
snotty Nose, Excretion of Water.
Whites, over much Swcating, or evil Sweat, and by the Ears, and other open
Parts: of which we shall speak in the watery Excretion, Chap. VII.

There is a preternatural Excretion of Spittle and Humors mixed therewith, in
Ptyalismo, Spitting.
or Venom, Spittle, and other Water, or Blood, Matter, and Imposthumes: these
shall be described in Spittle, Chap. VIII.

There is also a preternatural Excretion of Meat and Humors, Vomiting.
and Excrements in diverse Vomitings, as of Phlegm, Choler, to which the Disease
of Choler is referred: also of Blood: of which we shall speak in Vomiting,
Chap. IX.

There is a preternatural Excretion of Urine, Pissing.
and other Humors in unvoluntary Pissing, or immoderate, burning Urin, mattery
Milk like, blood, and when the Urin cannot be held, and when it flows out at a
Wound or is tinctured: which shall be explained in Pissing, Chap. X.

The preternatural Excretion of the Excrements of the Belly, Dejection or
Stooling.
and the Dung is in the Flux Diarrhaea, Lientery, Disentery, Needing,
Liver-flux, of thick Blood, Matter, Slime, Phlegm, Fat, Vomiting of Dung,
Pissing it out, or sending it out by the Womb, or a Wound: of which we shall
speak in Dejection, or going to stool, Chap. XI.

There is a preternatural Excretion of diverse Filths, by the Ears, Nose, Eyes,
Womb, Skin, Excretion of Filth.
between the Toes, Teeth: which we shall describe in the Excretion of Filth,
Chap. XII.

The diverse Bodies which are in the Body of Man which are wholly besides
Nature, and are preternaturally sent forth, are either living or without Life.

The live Creatures that come out of the body either live and move, Excretion
of Living Creatures.
as Worms, Fundament-worms, Worms in the Nose, Ears that come forth by
coughing, Pissing, from Ulcers, Wounds, Worms in the Teeth, Navel, Lips, in the
Hands: of all these, we shall speak in the Excretion of Living Creatures, Chap.
XIII.

Other Living Creatures that come forth are alive but move not, Excretion of
living Creatures that move not.
nor are sensible, as a Mole, Grove-wormes, the Gourd-worm: which shall also be
described in the Excretion of living things Chap. XIIII.

The Bodies without Life that are sent forth, are earthy, Excretion of Earths.
as Pissing of Sand, and Stones, or from the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Fundament, from
the Tongue, Pores, as Gravel, from the Teeth, and the like: of which we shall
treat in the Excretion of Earth, Chap. XV.

There are many things come forth of the Body which are not there bred, The
voiding or Excretion of things that get into the Body.
by the Eyes, Ears, Nose, Mouth, as by Spitting, and vomiting by stool, Urin,
by the Breasts, Nipple, and the Skin: which shall be described in the Excretion
got into the Body, Chap. XVI.

CHAP. I. Of the Voiding or Excretion of Parts.
The Kinds,
THe Voiding or Excretion of the Parts of Man's Body, by which they are taken
from the Body, is twofold, first when the parts fashioning the Infant, or the
Infant it self is cast forth; or when the Original parts that constitute the
body, fall off.

When the Infant is put forth of the womb, A Natural Birth, but not without
Pain.
it is called Partus or bringing forth and this is either Natural, as when the
Child, being ripe (the time being expired of travel) is brought forth. And this
being Natural, is not reckoned among the Diseases that disturb Mankind. But
seeing this Action by reason of Sin is painful and must be looked after, we
shall here speak of it, that we may know how it differs from that which is
preternatural, and how it ought to be ordered.

The Birth is preternatural, when it is untimely, Abortion or Miscarriage.
or before the time ordained, which is commonly the tenth month, although some
hold the birth of the seventh month to the Legitimate. Abortion is when the
Child is not come to its full Ripeness and Growth, is sent forth sooner then it
ought to be, either dead, or in desperate condition; sometimes it is so little,
in a Lump, no bigger then a Grape, that you cannot distinguish the Arms, Legs,
or Head, such we have seen often, after some weeks conception sent forth; and
that we might perceive the Limbs, we divided them with an Instrument; and we
perceived two black points like Eyes in the Head, and a little Spot upon the
right side showing the Liver, the body being all over white besides. We have
seen at other times a Child of a fingers length, having all the Members plain
to be seen for the distinction of sex also, with Nails, and we made a sceleton
thereof, by cutting an Anatomy; as we did by others that were larger. Also I
knew a woman, that after she had brought forth a Child naturally at the time,
within a few days after was delivered of another a span long.

I observed also that a famous Merchants Wife which was delivered with little
pain, of a Child a hand long, after she had with hard Travail brought forth,
another dead Child in the eighth month; and which is more wonderful in the year
1655. A Contrey-man came to me for Counsel, concerning his wife lying of a
lusty Child which she brought forth three weeks after she had miscarried of
another that was dead.

If there be three or four at a Birth which is rare, Supersaetation or too many
at a time.
yet is it not preternatural (when they are complete,) either at one time or at
diverse; some talk of an infinite Number, which could not come to a just
proportion, and that may be counted Abortion.

Children so delivered although unripe and little, yet are sometimes whole and of
good Complexion; otherwhiles lean, and consumed, if they have been long dead in
the womb, and they come out slowly, and sometimes corrupted and sticking;
sometimes we perceive the signs of Diseases in them. As we discovered a Child
that was but half the time in the womb by the Swelling of the Legs, bigness of
the Belly, and abundance of water there, and in the great Veins to have the
Dropsy in the womb.

But if a complete Child should die through the difficulty of bringing forth,
it must be referred to the defect of bringing forth: also if it remain in the
womb after it is so dead, as we knew a woman that kept a Child that died so,
twenty weeks after the time of Delivery, she died also, and after we took it
out rotten and stinking.

If a woman bring forth a monstrous or ill shapen Child, except it be by
Abortion or it be dead, this is not to be referred to a preternatural Birth,
but to evil conformation or Deformity from the Birth: as we showed in Deformity.

The taking away of parts from the body, The taking off of parts that
constitute the Body.
although it may be a Disease in number diminished, or if they come piece meal,
in magnitude diminished, where we made mention of them, yet they may be
reserred hither.

As if the Eye be thrust out of its place, or if any humor as the watery,
Crystal, or glassie Humor of the Eye should flow forth, or if part of the Brain
should come forth at the Nose, the Teeth pulled out of the Mouth, the tongue
cut off, the Lungs be spit up, the Guts fall out, as in the Haeretick Arrius,
by a divine Judgment rather then by a Natural Cause. Or, which is usual, when
from a wound any part of the Brain, Lungs, Liver, or Spleen comes forth, as we
said in the Hurt of those parts.

The Causes.
The Causes of the Excretion or Voiding of an Infant, or of any parts that
constitute the body, is the solution of Contiguity, or things near or of
Continuity, as shall be showed.

Natural Birth when the Child comes ripe and quick into the world, The
separation of the Vessels of the Child which were joined to the Vessels of the
Womb, is the Cause of Natural Birth.
is when the child (...) so grown that the Mother can no longer contain it, but
it must have have more Air for life, and more nourishment, and if it should
grow bigger, it could not get out of those strait Passages. Therefore provident
Nature, arises and moves it by the expulsive Faculty, separating the Veins
and Arteries, by which the bed of the Infant or Secundine was joined to the
womb, without any hurt, even as the stalks of ripe Fruit fall easily from the
tree, drives down the I^^^ant by the help of the Mother, and so brings it
forth, not without pain, labor, sweat, and bleeding, by reason of the opening
of the Veins in the Womb and Secundine more or less in all Women.

In a preternatural Birth, The separation of Vessels before the Child is ripe
is the Cause of Abortion
when the Child is sent forth unripe, by Natur's force, dividing the Connection
of the Vessels, there are sometimes less accidents then in a Natural, if the
Child be small. But if there be this Separation of Vessels by a greater force,
and solution of continuity, and tearing, which stirrs up Nature to the work,
there are greater accidents, as Pains and Bleeding.

There are diverse Causes of the dividing of the Vessels, The Separation of the
Vessels by the violent Motion of Body or Mind is the Cause of Abortion.
and spurring of Nature to the work which procure Abortion, if the Child be
shaken by violent Motion of the Body, so that the Vessels by which it hangs to
the womb are divided. Nature especially when near the time, will send it forth,
so it may be driven down by leaping, as Hippocrates speaks of the tyre-maker,
that cast away her Child voluntarily, also it may come by other violent
motions, especially of the lower parts, by riding, running, or other violent
Motion.

It may come also with pressing of the Belly, by some external Injuries, or
with strong tying of the Muscles of the Belly, or from couging, vomiting,
neesing, crying, scowring, by which also in a Natural Birth, the Delivery is
helped.

As the Excrements of the belly, so the Child also may be driven down in a
Convulsion made by the compression of the Muscles, and a violent motion of the
body. As we saw one that without Sense aborted in the fit of a Convulsion: and
wondered when she came to her self what had been done to her Belly.

Also Nature stirred up by Passions of the Mind, through the vehement Agitation
of the Spirits, will cause Abortion; as by Fear, Anger, and other Passions has
been ordinarily seen, especially if they swound, for then the Child is deprived
for that time of vital Spirits, with the Mother from whom it receives them.

When Nature is stirred up by things taken or applied, Abortion caused by
stirring up of Nature.
it voided diverse things, and so also the Child, as by the use of purging
Medicines, which force Nature violently, so that not only the Excrements, but
the Child also is voided. Also by the use of those things mentioned in the want
of Terms and bringing forth, either taken in, or applied to the womb by opening
the Passages, and provoking the womb, by a Propriety to provoke Terms, or
driving down the Child, Abortion may be caused.

The expulsive Faculty is compelled sometimes by humors that burden the womb, to
void not only them, but the Child also, especially by blood, which if it be
too plentiful for the nourishing of the Child, and not consumed by it, about
the Veins of the Womb, it burdeneth Nature, which labors to throw it out, and
sometimes the Terms coming upon a Woman with Child, the Child is also sent
forth with them. Therefore when women with child have their Terms, they are in
danger to miscarry. Or if the Terms be provoked by opening a Vein in the Foot,
the same may happen, and therefore women with Child must not be let Blood in
the Foot. Also the Terms will sooner be provoked, if the blood be thin,
choleric or foul, and unfit to nourish the Child.

When the womb is moistened with water, so that it is too loose to hold the
Child, that it is the chief cause of Abortion, as some say. And if it were so,
it must needs be without it, and moisten the Orifice of the Neck of the womb,
which is close shut in women with Child, because it cannot be in the womb,
whose cavity is filled with the Child; and if it could be there, it could not
so loosen it; nor can it do it when in the Neck of the womb, because it cannot
remain there, and there must be a greater cause of Abortion then that.

The chief Abortion is from a dead Child, Separation of vessels by a dead child
is the Cause of Abortion.
because then Nature labors to void it, as being burdensome, the causes of dead
Children are diverse.

As external force to the belly being great, as a Stroke or Contusion.

Want of Nourishment by which it decaies and at length dies, this is not
easy, for while the Mother lives, the Veins can scarce be so empty, that
there is nothing for the Child. Moreover, though the Mothers blood be impure
and foul, the Child will have the best of it, hence it is that we have
observed, that women in Ptysicks and Hecticks, have gone their time and brought
well. But it may happen, that if a woman with Child have her Terms violently
and long, the Veins of the womb, and all other parts will be so exhausted, that
the Child must want Nourishment. And this is so, if for the Causes aforesaid,
the Child being alive, the Vessels are separated from them of the womb. And
then it can live no longer, not only because it wants Blood, but because it
wants vital Spirits, by reason of the Separation of the Arteries, and cannot
take breath.

The Mothers by certain signs do know that the Child in the womb, has a
Disease and is sick, and like to die, but those are not easily determined till
Birth, nor then, except there be visible manifestation, as I said of the
Dropsy. But without doubt Children in the womb have some Diseases, as a hot
Distemper must needs be in the Child, when the Mother has a Fever, which is
in all Parts, and also in the Child. Or when the woman has another Disease,
she may communicate it to the Child, or she being full of evil Humors, may
conveigh them into the Child with the blood, and so it may be cacochymical or
of evil Juice, or she may give it the Pox, or Plague, and this is not without a
great cause, because the Child takes the best, and most agreeable to it, and
though the Mother be sick the Child may be sound. As Children that sucked their
Mothers of the Plague have been by us observed to escape it when others have
died. Yet I knew a Child born of the mother when she had the small Pox to be
full of the same. Also it is thought that things taken by the mother or applied
to her womb may bring a malignant quality destructive to the child; as many
Medicines which do kill children, and are Poison.

Some Diseases that come from the Seed in conception to the child, appear
sooner some, later, and kill him before his Birth, or continue by him after,
they are mentioned in Deformity in Diseases original.

There is a Solution of continuity, A Wound or an Ulcer is the Cause of taking
away a part that constituts the Body.
diverse ways in the voiding of parts that constitute the Body, as a wound,
when part of the substance of the brain Lungs, Liver, Spleen, is cut off and
comes out by the wound, or the teeth or tongue is cut off; they or some of its
Humors fall out, which also may come from an Ulcer. Also the Brains may come
out at the Nose by a contusion: as we showed in Wounds of those parts.

The Cure.
A natural and legitimate Birth, when the Child comes ripe forth in due time,
he must not be delivered, but well ordered, and if it be difficult, assisted.
Concerning which how the Mother and the Midwife should behave themselves, we
showed in the defect of Childbirth.

When travail is past, then you must have a care of the Mother and child, The
Gournment of the Mother and Child after Labor.
for the Mother you must mitigate her pain, and provoke her Flux after Labor,
and strengthen her thus. Let her be raised up gently in her bed that she faint
not, and give her broth, and wine, and good Scents to refresh her, and let her
be moderate in eating and sleeping, and keep her out of the Air till she grows
strong, and her womb be brought to its former Condition, which will be sooner
if her Belly be rouled gently down.

As for the Child, let him be washed in hot water from his filth, and wiped
with Feathers, and anointed with cream or butter, or Oil of sweet Almonds, then
roll him, and lay him in a Cradle, and rock him to sleep, and to learn him to
suck, hold him to the breast: it is best to try that as soon as he is washed,
for coming thirsty out of the bath, he will presently lay hold on the Teate
and suck.

After Abortion or Miscarriage, there is no other order to be observed then
after travail. And you must after take heed that it comes not again, which it
is probable it will if she has been formerly subject to it. And this is done
by things given and applied before conception, and when she is with Child.

Before the woman has conceived, which she may be certain of, The preventing
of Abortion before Conception.
if she has not used a man since her Abortion: you must consider diligently,
if there be any secret cause in her body, by reason whereof though she do
conceive, and the child be formed (for if the Seed conceived presently flow
forth, it is not a true but fase Conception, and the cause of barrenness: as we
showed) yet she does not keep it. And this is done by observing her
constitution, whether she be Plethorick or Cachymick, of much or evil blood,
and as the Humor abounds, you must cleanse the body by bleeding, purging,
sweating, and good Diet. Or if she have a Disease or Fault in the womb, which
may cause this, you must study to amend it. But if there be no Humors appearing
that can be thought prejudicial, you must strengthen the womb, that the child
hereafter may stay, by Medicines mentioned in Sterility, external, and
especially baths which they say are best, and therefore they sit in hot baths
often.

After the woman has conceived; which she knows by certain signs, To prevent
Abortion after Conception.
then you must take care that she may go out her time, and that the child may
be lusty. But if you perceive it to be dead, you must not do so, and if you be
certain thereof, you must use things that provoke Abortion, for either the
child or Secundine remaining, will be the Death of the Mother.

There are diverse things good to retain and keep up the child, after you have
removed all causes that may hurt it, or remove it.

Sometimes it is good to let blood, if we perceive that abortion came from
blood abounding about the womb the former time, by reason of Plethora, in
regard she had her Terms in the time of her being great: and if we see they
begin to flow again as they did, you may let blood in the Arm not the Foot,
because that will move the terms: nor is litting blood to be feared, as the
Ancients thought, when people with Child are full of blood, for I never knew
any miscarry thereby, though it has been done twice or thrice; and have seen
diverse wounded, and that have lost much blood, and yet the child has not been
the worse, yet is it not to be done rashly, but a little must be taken at once,
and more the next month, and the third time if need require.

Also you must not be rash in purging women with child, that are apt to
miscarry, except the body be too much bound, and then administer Clysters, of
some opening, gentle Medicine; or if the body be very foul, then you may give
some stronger Purge, and that will do no hurt but good; for many women by
chance, not knowing they were with child have taken Purges, and had a great
looseness, and the Child not the worse, neither did they miscarry.

There are things that prevent Abortion by altering, which have an astringent
Quality, to fix the Vessels by which the Child is tied to the womb; and these
add strength to the womb, and vigor to the child, and this they do by a
Propriety known by Experience.

Some things are given often, especially when they are nigh the time. These
Pouders are best taken in Wine, or the Yolk of an Egg, or with Sugar of Roses,
or made into Lozenges, with Sugar dissolved in Rose or Plantane-water.

Take Red Coral in powder two drams, I vory one dram and an half, Mastick, or
Frankincense half a dram.

Or, Take the dry Grains of Cuchynele one dram, Pearls or precious Stones half
a dram, with a little Leaf Gold make a Powder: It is given by it self, if the
woman supposes her Child not well, or mixed with the former, or with
Margariton frigidum.

Another, Take Roots of Bistort, or Tormentil two drams, Date stones one dram
and an half, Plantane seed one dram, water-cresse seed a little parched half a
dram, Amber two scruples make a Powder.

Or, Take the Runnet of an Hare dried two drams, Crayfish parched one dram,
burnt Ivory two scruples, Coriander seed prepared half a dram, Red Sanders one
scruple: make a Powder, this may be given alone, or with the other: and if the
Matrix of an Hare be dried and poudered it is better, others add the Pizle of a
Bull, or of a Dear.

You may make of these this Mixture. Take Conserve of Roses one ounce and an
half, Citron peels, and Quinces candied, each one ounce; Conserve of Sage
flowers, or of Mints which strengthen the Womb, six drams, of candied
Myrobalans, Pulp of Dates, each half an ounce; of one or two of the Pouders
aforesaid two drams, and with Syrup of Citrons make an Electuary.

Dates their Stones taken out, and they filled with the Powder of Cuchyneile,
and eaten before and after Sleep, are said to prevent Abortion.

The Water called the Childrens Balsom, made of many things steeped in Sack,
and distilled Waters, is good to be taken every day to prevent Abortion.

Outwardly Ointments and Plasters, applied to the Womb, before and behind
about the Reins are also good. And they are used when we are certain of
Conception, at first a little and then more often, especially if any signs of
Abortion appear.

The Ointment. Take Oil of Roses, Myrtles, Mastick or Quinces four ounces,
Juice of Sloes, Bdellium dissolved in Vinegar of Roses, or red Wine half an
ounce, Liquid Storax two drams, Wax as much as will make an Ointment. You may
add Oil of Mints half an ounce, which is good against all Fluxes, and proper
against Abortion.

Make other Ointments of these Pouders. Take Frankincense, Mastick, each two
drams; Sanguis Dracouis one dram, Bole, or sealed Earth half an ounce, of all
the Sanders one dram, Spike half a dram, mix them with the Oil or Ointments
mentioned; or with Wax make an Ointment.

Or this: Take Snakeweed, or Tormentil roots, Cypress-nuts, Acorn cupps or
Gall, each half an ounce, Myrtle leaves, red Roses, Pomegranate flowers, each
two drams; Myrtle seeds, Sumach, or Berberries, Coriander seed prepared, each
one dram; Water-cresse seeds, or Cummin seeds steeped in Vinegar half ae dram,
of all the Sonders, Roots of Galangal, each half a dram; Gum Arabic, or
Dragach one dram: make a Powder, mix it into an Ointment as the former.

Another proper Powder for an Ointment. Take Red Coral two drams, I vory one
dram and an half, Goats or Hearts Horn, Runnet of a Kid or Hare, each one dram,
make a Powder. You may add the Powder of a Turtle baked, mix them as the former.

Ointments are made more Compound of the Pouders aforesaid mixed with Oils etc.

Cerots alsd and Emplasters, may be made of the same either simple or more
compound, to be spread upon Leather, and laid on at night, and at other times,
with more Wax, and Rosm to make them stick.

The usual Ointments are that of the Conutes and the Emplaster against Ruptures.

Or we may use that Application which we mentioned to stop the Courses, like an
Ointment or Plaster: it begins thus. Take Roots of Snakeweed, or Tormentil etc.

Some commend Amulets, or things to hang about the Neck, as Eagle Stones which
has a Stone within that rattleth, if it be tied to the left Arm, bare, or tied
first in Calfes skin, which is thought to provoke the Birth, if tied to the
Foot, and to hinder it if to the Arm, or under the Breasts.

Others commend the Jasper or Lapis Lazuli, to be hanged about the Neck, or
Mallows, Pellitory, Tormentil with the Roots.

The course of Life which a Woman must use to prevent Miscarriage, consists in
temperate Air, let her beware of Heat and Baths, let her eat meat of good Juice
temperate, let her drink small red wine and water; let her take heed of sharp
or hot things, pot Herbs, or Spices, or bitter things which hurt the Child:
from things of strong Scent, as Saffron and the like, which move the courses or
provoke Abortion, as we showed in the Causes. Let her take heed of Passion of
Mind and violent Exercise. Let her either rest or walk gently. Let her not
often use man. Let her Body be kept from costiveness. And let her abstain from
all things that may breed Diseases in the Child, as convulsions, and let her
keep a good Diet.

If the parts that constitute the Body that be sent forth are noble it is
deadly, The Cure of Parts taken from the body.
as the Brain, Lungs Liver, Spleen, when otherwise it hinders the Functions,
and when these parts are quite gone, these cannot be renewed, therefore we use
no other Cure, but to the solution of continuity, as the wound, contusion or
ulcer: as we showed in the Functions Hurt, of those Parts.

CHAP. II. Of the Falling and Sticking forth of Parts.
The Kinds,
THe Falling and Sticking forth of Parts is preternatural, although they be not
quite separated from the Body, because they are removed out of their place,
outwardly. Those Stickings forth of parts which come from Fractures, or
Dislocations, because the parts are not then in another place or out of the
Body, but only stick out, and so cause a Deformity, are showed in the Diseases
of Deformity.

When a part is removed and yet not fallen off, The coming forth of Parts.
as when the Guts, and Cawle come forth, it is seen by the Tumor, and therefore
we spoke thereof in Tumors.

The coming forth of parts from the Body, when they appear to the Eye, are of
the womb, Fundament, Stones, the Eye, or Tongue.

The Womb or Matrix, falls through the Privities far sometimes; The coming
forth of the Womb.
and then you may see the Neck turned, thick, and rough and white for the most
part, though red in some places, and it is swollen, and stops all the
Privities, hanging down a span in length like a bag, sometimes less, and the
bottom of the womb is seen, and its orifice reddish and like Blood, with
swollen Lips, as I have often diligently observed.

Sometimes the Womb falls down a little above the Privities or into them, The
falling down of the Womb.
and comes not forth, and is to be felt only, or it only hangs out a little,
and grows forth more and more, except it be prevented, and this is called the
Descending or Falling down of the womb

And if Inflammation or Corruption happen not, when the womb has long been
forth, and ill ordered, there uses to be no great accidents, but filth,
hinderance in walking, and a sense of weight, so that the Belly and Loins seem
to be drawn down, but otherwise if the woman can put it up again, as usually it
is, she may use a man, and conceive, and go out her time without the Falling of
it down while she is with Child.

The Fundament externally like a purse internally is made of the end of the
Muscles of the strait Gut, The Falling out of the Fundament.
if it be let more forth then at the time of going to stool is usual, and
cannot be put up again into the Body, but remains outward with some part of the
Fundament, it is called the Falling down of the Fundament.

Sometimes it is without any other Disease, as when by straining it comes forth,
and continues longer or shorter, and comes of it self, or with little trouble
into its place again.

Sometimes though it be put up, it presently especially at the stool, comes
forth again, this is usual in Children, and sometimes in Men.

Sometimes the strait Gut falls down and swells, so that it cannot be put up, or
with much difficulty. Sometimes it is red and inflamed, and will endure to be
touched, that it may be put up.

Sometimes it falls out without sense, The Looseness of the Fundament.
and cannot be drawn up at will; this is called the Palsy of the Fundament.

We have seen the Codds open and the Stones hang far out. The Falling out of
the Stones.


The Eye cannot hang far out of its place, as we showed in Deformity, The
Falling out of the Eye.
and if it stick far out, it is called the Falling out thereof.

The Tongue sometimes hangs out of the mouth, The coming forth of the Tongue.
and this is called the hanging forth of the Tongue.

The Causes.
The Cause of the coming forth of the Guts, Cawle, Womb, Fundament, Eye, or
Tongue is either from some opening, and the Rimme of the Belly, or weakness,
and dissolving of the Neck of the womb, or the turning of the Fundament, or
strait Gut outward: or the loofening of the knitting of the Eye, or Tongue; or
a wound of the Codds.

By the opening of the Rimme of the Belly which keeps the Guts and Cawle in
the same, if the Guts or Cawle fall through the opening, then there is a
Rupture or Falling out, of which we spoke in Tumors. And this opening of the
Rimme, is either when it is broken or dilated.

The Falling forth of the Guts and Cawle is from the breaking of the Rimme of
the Belly, The Cause of the rupture of the guts called Enterocele, and of the
Cawle called Epiplocele.
that causes the Swelling called Hernia or Rupture, of which there are diverse
sorts according to the Diversity of Parts where they fall; for if it be in the
Groin, and in the male-kind, so that the Rim be open which covers the Stones
and seminary Vessels, the Guts get through the opening, and so lie under the
skm, which is called Enterocele; and sometimes into the Codds, and cause a
great Swelling when much falls down, or when they are stretched with wind, or
with Excrements. And if they be hard, it is selt, and if there be wind, they
make a noise being pressed. And if the Guts stay there and cannot be put up,
because they are stretched and rouled together, because the Passage of the
Excrements is stopped, they are thrown up again. But if part of the Cawle fall
into the Groin by the aforesaid, it is called Epiplocele, and the Tumor remains
there, not going lower because the Cawle being short and scarce, reaching
beyond the Bone of the Privities, cannot fall so low as the Guts, except some
part of it be broken, when the Rimme is broken, and then it may fall into the
Codd, which cannot be put up again. We saw one in the Groin very big, which we
knew was the Cawle by feeling of it to be unequal with Knobs of hard Fat; which
we knew was broken by the quantity or relaxed as we shall show, but being
without pain it was neglected, and the Patient lived not long after.

If the Rimme be broken in the groin of a Woman, The breaking of the Rimme is
the Cause of the Rupture in the Groins of Women.
where a certain Vessel passes by it outwardly in the Groine, then there is
the Rupture called Enterocele or Gut-rupture in Women, which is sometimes very
great. And if the Cawle fall there which is longer in Women then in Men, the
Tumor is larget then in Men, and is called Epiplocele or Cawle-rupture.

But if the Rimme be broken in another part of the Belly and the Guts, The
Cause of Navel-rupture.
or the Cawle get there under the skin, if it be in the Navel, it is called
Omphalocele Navel-rupture, or Exomphalocele, or Rupture about the Navel, if in
any other part it is called Hernia or Rupture, which you may know by touching,
whether it be the Guts, for then they will make a noise, but the cawle will
not, and the Guts make a larger Tumor then the Cawle.

The Rimme is broken, either by a Stroke or Fall, or vehement Leaping, or
Vaulting into a Saddle, as I have observed. Also by great straining when the
Belly is pressed by the Muscles in Labor or Travail with Child, or going to
stool, also in Children by crying. Also by a cut, when the skin is healed, and
the Membrane left open, or the like.

A Portion of the Guts or Cawle may fall down, The Dilatation of the Rimme is
the Cause of ruptures.
only by the enlarging or dilating of the Rimme of the Belly, by which the Seed
Vessels descend into the Codds. This comes not speedily but by degrees, with
often straining; for when the Guts are carried to the entrance of the Rimme of
the belly, they work themselves through or break through, when the force is
great. And that this may be so, and that the entrance of the Rimme of the
Belly may be so dilated and opened without breaking, it appears, in that more
narrow and thick parts, may be so enlarged as the Ureters, through which a
Stone falls down, as we showed. And this we have seen to be by degrees. And in
a Rupture-dropsie, when after Death we opened him, we found a round hole not
cut or broken, by which the Guts fell into the Codds, by which that thin part
of the Gut which is above the blind Gut, was carried to the bottom of the Codd
which was full of Water, and it grew firmly to the Rimme in the whole Passage;
and the Patient while he lived and was in Health otherwise, voided his
Excrements orderly, and complained of no pain. Fernelius who distinguishes
this Passage of the Rimme into that which is internal, and that which is
external, faith that in the Gut-rupture, and cawle Rupture, the inward Rimm or
Skin must needs be broken, and the outward only enlarged. It may be he meant
that it was so in Women, that these Ruptures came from the Relaxation of the
Rimme of the Belly in the Groin where they have as we showed a peculiar Vessel.

For he says that there is a Tendon sent from the Groine to the Rimme of the
Belly which strengthens it, and so also the Guts and cawle.

But in regard that Vessel is not so membranous and thin as the entrance of
the Rimme, but is nervous and hard, and therefore is not so easily enlarged,
the Guts or Cawle cannot fall into the Groin by the relaxing thereof, except it
be broken.

When the Rim of the Belly is enlarged without being broken, The cause of
Navel-rupture is the enlarging of the Rim of the Belly, there.
there may be a Navel-rupture also: and this appears, because in great
straightness, especially of Woman in travail, the Navel often swells, by the
Guts through straining, sent chiefly to that part of the Rim, where there is a
short Passage in the Navel, which appeared at the birth in the Navel string and
after grew together, and there distending or stretching the Rim, and when the
straining is over, and the stretching, the swelling goes clean away and returns
no more, which would not be, if it came from the breaking of the Passage: for
which cause, as we perceive plainly that the Navel-rupture continues not, so we
may collect, that the Rupture which remains, comes from the Rim of the Belly,
so stretched by the Causes aforesaid, that it cannot return, which cannot be in
other parts of the rim of the Belly, but that in the Groine, without a breaking
thereof.

From the Dissolving or Division of the Neck of the Womb, The cause of the
falling out of the Womb, is the dissolving of the connection of the Neck thereof.
from the parts unto which it is knit, comes the Falling out thereof. For the
Womb being chiefly held up by its Neck, upon which it rests, and unto which
it grows firmly, and in other parts being free from all connection or joining,
that it may better dilate and enlarge it self in Conception, (except on each
side a little, and that loosely to the Rimme of the Belly) it cannot be that it
should fall all to the Privities, except the Neck thereof which is so fastened
thereto, that it cannot be separated, do also follow. And because this cannot
be without the rending of the fibrous Connection which is made by the Neck and
Parts adjacent. The immediate cause of the Falling of the Womb, must be the
dissolving of the Connection of the Neck thereof. And if this dissolving be in
some part only near the womb, the womb will hang down in the Privities, with
some part only of the Neck turned, but if the Neck of the Womb be wholly
separated from the parts under it, then the Womb will all hang forth, with the
Neck turned inside, outward, and the womb will not be so turned in the bottom,
but as it was when in the Belly, the Orifice only being open, drawing with it
the Membranes and the Rimme which is joined to them with the Vessels and
Stones. And this may be without a Rupture; only from the Looseness of the
Membranes which can stretch much, (as we see in Dropsies, when the Belly is
swollen, how the Rim thereof is stretched) although the womb has been long
down, as appears in that when it is put up again, Women may conceive, which
could not be, if the Vessels were divided from it.

The womb it self causes chiefly this Separation of the Neck of it from the
Fibers or small Veins by which it is joined to the parts adjacent though not
strongly, and therefore it may be without great hurt or bleeding; when it is
forcibly so drawn down, that it brings the Neck with it, either suddenly or by
degrees, when there is less force, first tearing the Veins next to it, and then
turning out the neck downward, which hanging forth, makes it fall more down by
degrees through the weight thereof.

The womb is thus driven down by great and often straining, The forcible
untying of the Neck of the Womb, is the cause of the wombs Falling down.
by blowing the wind, or otherwise which presses downward the Guts and Womb,
especially in a woman's throws in childbirth; when the travail is hard, and the
womb gets too much downward with the Child, and the rather when the Child
getting through with difficulty, thrusts the Neck of the Womb down, and so
untieth it from the Veins. Or if the Secundine or after Birth, sticking still
to the womb, be so driven by the Midwife, that the womb is driven down also
with the Neck thereof. For these Causes after Childbearing the womb falls
down; and those Women which have often brought forth, and endured such
Midwives, are presently troubled therewith, or when they grow old.

The same may come from Leaping, or the like Shaking of the Body; and the Womb
may hang out thereby.

Also from the Neck of the Womb it self besides, when it is pulled away by the
Womb, there may be a Falling out of the same, when it is separated by Force
from the parts beneath, by violent and frequent Copulation, as in Harlots which
are continually rubbed; or from some Corruption in the Neck, by which we once
saw the womb fallen out.

Also from other Causes, this Falling down of the womb can scarce proceed. As
for the looseness of the Ligaments (or of Muscles by which some thought the
Womb did hang) which they say comes from the Force mentioned (and by which the
womb is driven down,) or from the plenty of Humors that wet the Membranes. We,
(since there are no such Muscles, because as we showed the womb must be free,
and Membranes so loosned, that they may follow the womb, nor so fast tied as
they ought to be, if the womb hang by them) cannot grant the Falling out of the
womb to be from the looseness thereof. For although the womb be loosned, and
the Vessels stretched beyond their bounds, yet can it not fall through the
Privities, except the Neck be separated, also which only holds it in.

Nor can the breaking of the Membranes be the Cause, as some say, because, we
found in the Anatomy of a Woman whose Membranes were putrified and consumed,
long before her death, as appeared by a Flux of stinking matter, that the womb
moved not out of its place, but was firm.

As for the watery Humor which they say causes the Falling out of the Womb, we
showed that it could not do it by moistning the Ligaments, and now declare,
that in Women that have the Dropsy, in whom the womb and its Membranes swimms
in water, the womb falls not out; yet it may come to pass in the Whites, that
the neck of the womb being continually moist, and therefore too loose, that the
womb being compelled by other Causes, may easier slip down, and the neck may
yield more easily, and be inverted.

Some teach that besides this Falling down, that the womb while in the Belly
may be moved on one side, and get also up to the Stomach. But being it grows to
the neck, and is compessed every where with the guts, abiding commonly in the
middle, it will not easily get into other parts, and will rather go downwards
then upwards. Except perhaps it grow so that it take up more room then
formerly, as we see in Women with Child: and then also it rather goes downwards
by its weight, and the Belly is more swollen and harder beneath. For which
reasons, and the other accidents in the Mother-fits, we declared in the Cure of
them, that they come rather from Vapors that arise from the womb, then from the
ascending of the womb it self.

The Falling out of the Fundament is from the Inversion or straight Gut, The
cause of the falling out of the Fundament is straining.
for then it swells, as when going to stool, the Fundament sticks out with
straining to let out the Excrements, till it be drawn in again; so that if by
great force and straining with hard Excrements, it be so brought down, that it
brings a part of the straight Gut with it, it is the cause of its staying out.
The same may be from other causes that bear down, as in Childbirth, when the
Delivery is hard, the Fundament also falls out, also from forcing about the
Fundament, as in the Tenesmus, or needing or in the Flux called Dysentery. And
we have seen in an Incision made in the Rimme or Peritonaeum near the Fundament
for taking a stone out of the Bladder, that through pain, the Fundament has
been by straining thrust out, and the Yard also though in an Infant and little,
has been swollen and stood. And I have observed in some Children troubled with
the Stone, that they had not only this coming forth of the Fundament always
when they strained to make water, but an Extension of the Yard, especially in
the Head and Foreskin, from their often handling of it through pain, which
were the undoubted signs of the Stone in the Kidneys.

And if the Fundament be so thrust out by straining, that the straight Gut be
drawn from the Mesentery or middle Membrane by which the Guts are held, then
they cannot be put up or kept in; although the Muscles be right against the
Fundament to draw it in again gently, yet if it be far forth and tied with no
Ligaments, the Muscles alone cannot do it, because if the Fundament be far out,
they will fall out also.

It may come from the weakness of the Muscles which draw in the Fundament after
stool, The Looseness of the Muscles of the fundament is the cause why it cannot
be drawn in.
and constrain it up, that the Fundament may be so far forth, that it cannot be
drawn in, by which means the Fundament may be said to be forth, but not to fall
out except Force or Straining perceeded; because it is not so retained by these
small Muscles, that when they cease to act, it should presently fall out of the
Body in which it was included without any Force. These weakness which makes the
Muscles unable to draw back the Fundament, that falls out by stool, bofals
them, which have often had the Falling of it out; or it comes from too much
cold of the part which is very sensible, by sitting upon a cold stone or the
like, or by staying in the cold Air or Water, which touch the Fundament.

Many suppose that Falling of the Fundament, The Looseness of the muscles is the
cause why the fundament cannot be drawn back.
and that which is called the Palsy of the Fundament, comes from Looseness of
the Muscles through a Defluxion upon the Nerves. But it is improbable, that a
particular Palsy of this part should be alone, without any other part affected
from the Defluxion. Nor is it probable that a Defluxion which must needs fall
in abundance to cause a Palsy, should fall only into the lowest part of the os
sacrum, where these slender Nerves are accompanied with these Muscles, and not
rather sill the whole Cavity of the os sacrum, by which means the Nerves might
be dissolved. Therefore if there be a Palsy in the Muscles of the Fundament,
it would be in the whole Body, or in the inserior parts, as well as there. And
though there be a great Resolution of parts in an Apoplexy, we find none there,
nor does the Fundament fall forth, nor in any other Palsy, when all the lower
parts are resolved, yet the Patient can go to stool and draw in the Fundament,
and though it be weaker for the Disease, yet it falls out. For which cause, if
difficulty of drawing back of the Fundament be from the Nerves, which comes
soldom, it comes from a Palsy caused by a Defluxion, and we suppose that it
comes from compression of the Nerves, or contusion by Fall or Stroke about the
Crupper, or from some great Coldness of the part which is not only upon the
Muscles but Nerves.

When the Connection of the Eye with its hollow roundness is loosned, The
Connexlon or Fasting of the Eye being loosned by a Contusion is the cause of
its coming forth.
it falls out, and this comes by foam violent Cause, because it is so fixed
to the place, that when it is brought to the Table boiled it can scarce be got
out.

Yet the Eyes fall out by a great Contusion of the head, by a Fall or Stroke.

And scarce by another means, except they start out a little by straining, as
in Childbirth, crying or roaring and so seem bigger, yet they fall not out by
that means but only stick out, of which we spoke in Deformity: because by
straining they cannot be much dissended, but a little forced by the Muscles.

Some think that the Eye may fall out by the stretching of the Globe with Wind
and Moisture gathered before it, but since we find no Cavity in the Eye, but it
is full every where, and there is no way for these to get in, or can they be
bred in the Eye, or come from other parts, we cannot yield to them. As we
showed in the Causes of pains of the Eyes, from Wind and Filmes, which they
suppose to come from Defluxion of Water.

The Falling out of the Tongue may be from the loosning of its Connection, The
loosning of the Connection of the tongue from a contusion, is the cause of its
coming forth.
it is so strong bound by Muscles, a Coat and Ligaments, that it must be done
by great Force. But it happens from a Contusion of the Neck or Breast, as when
thieves are racked, their Tongue sticks out, and it may also come by other
means.

I saw one whose Stones hung out by a wound which was given upon his Codd. The
cutting of the Cod causes the falling out of the stones
And I observed the same in one which was shot with a Bullet and lost half his
Codd, that his right Stone, with the Seed-vessels hung forth bare.

The Cure.
The Falling down of the Guts and Cawle which comes from the breaking or
stretching of the Rimme of the Belly, The Cure of the Falling out of the Guts
and Cawle in Ruptures.
causes the Tumor called Cele, if it be in the Groine, and be but little,
causing no great pain, it is neglected, or it is easily cured if taken in time;
as also the Omphalocele or Navelrupture, which some have all their lives, which
will fall in when it is pressed, or the like; but some Navel-rupture vanishes
of it self: as I showed. But if the Tumor descend to the Codd, in the
Gut-rupture it is harder to cure, or dangerous, for if it will not return by
any means, but cause Pain and Costiveness of Body it is deadly, and the
Excrements are spewed up which declare it.

Also the Navel-rupture or the like, if it cannot be put in, and produce the
same accidents is deadly. And we showed that the Cawle-rupture killed one, when
the Tumor in the Cod grew hard* In other kinds of Ruptures in the Belly or
Codds, if the Tumor will yield, although it be of short continuance, yet to
take it quite away that it return not, and to make a perfect Cure, it is
difficult, especially because the Patient must continue them for their
Operation, and Rest, and be bound which he will unwillingly undergo. But if it
be old, it is impossible, except by manual Operation, and that is painful, and
dangerous of death if by Incision, as is usual, and the Stone on that side must
be left, if it be made in the Groine. And if the Patient will not adventure
that you must labor to hinder those Tumors from increasing which you cannot
take away. All which shall be declared and the manner how, by Medicines both
inward and outward; first how Medicines may be applied to the cause that is the
part fallen, then how to the Disease which is the Solution of Continuity in a
Rupture; or of Contiguity in the relaxing of the Rimm of the Belly.

We use things to put up the part fallen, and to keep it in, and hinder it from
falling out again; if it be Gut or Cawle fallen out of the cavity of the Rimme,
either causing a Tumor in the Groine or Codd.

We put up the Tumor in the Groine and Codd with the Hands by degrees, or in
the Belly, by pressing and moving it to the hole whence it fell, which we find
out with the finger. And this is done when the Patient lies upon his Back, so
placed that if it be below, that his Feet may be higher then the rest of the
Body, by which sometimes the Gut goes in of it self, so I saved the life of a
Countreyman twice that was broken on both sides, when he vomited his
Excrements, and was in great pain; and a while since I cured a Virgin that was
bursten, which vomited her Excrements, by putting up the Gut with my Hand.

And if this Operation do it not, as when the Gut is out it comes to pass
often, through Distention by the wound, and Wrinkling and Hardness, that the
Gut is so swelled, it cannot be reduced by the Passage, and then you must have
a care, least the Passage of the Excrements being hindered, they should fly up
or an Inflammation should kill the Patient.

Also you must apply the Anodynes or takers away of pain, when there is Pain,
Heat and Fear of Inflammation, mentioned in the Tumor Phlegmon.

And chiefly this Pultis, which opens the ways and mollifieth the hard
Excrements, and expells Wind. Take Marsh-mallow roots two ounces, Lilly roots
one ounce, Mallows, Violets, Brank-ursine, Pellitory, each one handful; Roses,
Violets, Chamomil, and Melilot and Dill flowers, Bran, each one scruple; boil
them in Milk and Water: if there be great pain, beat and seirse them, adding,
Barley flower, and Bean meal, each three ounces; the Flower of Line-seed, and
Foenugreek, each one ounce and an half; Fleabane seeds one ounce, Powder of
Earthworms one dram, Oil of Roses three ounces, Ducks or Hens Grease one
ounce: make a Cataplasm.

When the Heat is not, and we will use Softners and Expellers of Wind, add to
it, Orris roots, Briony, or wild Cowcumber roots, each one ounce; Wormwood,
Calamints, or Organ, each one handful; Elder, Rose and Centaury flowers, each
one pugil; Cummin and Caraway seeds, each two drams; Agnus Castus seeds one
dram, and without Milk, we add Wine, and with the Meals or Brans aforesaid, or
of Orobus and Lupines, each one ounce, Bay Berries half an ounce, with Oil of
Orris and Rue: make a Pultis.

Or when there is much Wind. Take Caraway seeds one ounce, Cummin seed half an
ounce, Oil of Rue one ounce, with Oxymel, make a Cataplasm.

Rue fried with Oil, and applied is good.

Fomentations are made of the Decoctions, of the which the Cataplasm was made
of the first if there be Heat, of the last if you must discuss more, adding the
Oils there mentioned.

Also anoint with Oil of Roses, Dill, Lillies, Chamomil, Melilot, Orris, Elder,
Rue.

You may discuss with Baggs, of dry Plants, and Milium seeds, and the other
great Seeds and Salt.

Besides you must use against Wind inwardly and outwardly, things to dissipate
or discuss and prevent it also. As we showed in the Wind of the Stomach, and of
the colic.

You have need of no external Applications, when the Cawle comes forth, being
commonly in the Groine, and will go back only with lying down, or with the
Hand, except it be in the Codd, as we showed: and then you must foment and
plaster the Tumor with Loosners, not regarding wind, except it be gotten in
the same way.

If the Guts cannot be put up, we are constrained to cut, that the skin being
open, and the Guts bare, and the hole by which they sell open, they may better
be put up; which is dangerous to do in the Groine if the Guts are gone from
thence into the Codds, because the Guts sticking to the skin, may easily be cut
also, as we have seen. Moreover if the Incision be made with such care, the
Guts are not hurt, yet in regard the naked Entrals are worse to be meddled
with, for the Cure of the pain of the wound, then when they were covered with
skin, by this Operation in the Groine, we either do no good, or we give
occasion to have cutting to be thought the Cause of his Death, which would
otherwise have followed, while the Guts were forth. But we have observed good
success by cutting in other parts of the Belly, when the Guts get through the
Rimme of the Belly being burst, and can by no Art be put up again, because the
Tumor is seldom so great in those parts, and the hole of the Rimme may better
be found, and the Guts better put up without danger, being taken hold of near
the hole, and by degrees wrought in.

We keep the Guts and Cawle in, and the Tumor from returning diverse ways; by
placing the Body conveniently, and compressing the Tumor with the Hand or
Instruments.

The placing must be such that the Guts and Cawle may rather tend inwards then
outward, with the Face upwards, and let him keep his Bed in that posture,
because it keeps them in till other Art be used.

The Hand pressing the Tumor, does not only drive it back, but keeps it from
returning while it is held there, and though this cannot be done continually,
yet it is good sometimes to apply the hand, especially when the Guts are pressed
by the Belly by coughing or straining, and strive to get out. And if the Tumor
be not great, and the straining be usual, you may keep it from increasing with
the hand.

We keep them also up with Instruments called Trusses, which they must wear
while they sit up, and not leave them off but at night if they hurt not nor
hinder, and when they are constrained to change them or remove them, you must
supply their place with the Hand. These are made of Bolsters laid upon the
Tumor which stops its return, which that they slip not nor be too strait, are
tied by diverse Bands like a Girdle, or from the Shoulders, and the like, tied
with Points, or with Claspes, and they are to be fashioned according to the
Tumor that the Patient may wear them with little trouble, of which these
following are the best.

The first for the Groine-truss, is made of a Pillow of the length and breadth
of the Groine, stuffed with wool two fingers thick, and least by use it should
fetch off the skin covered with Linen, Silk or Leather, and that it may stick
fast, there must be a broad Girdle of the same stuff about the Loins so fastened
as I showed, to the Groine before, and a broad Rouler of Cotton to the hinder
part of the Girdle, to come between the Thighs, that goes through the middle of
the Pillow or Bolster, passing through a loop to keep it fast; and the Girdle
must be there tied again.

The first Instrument opened.
A the Pillow. B the Girdle. C the Girt underneath. D D the Thongs of the
Girdle and Girts. E E the Loops through which the Thongs pass. F F the Loope of
the Pillow which the string passes through


diagram

There is another for the Groine, made of the Girdle and Bolster, as the first;
but the string going under, is fastened before to the Girdle, and passes
through the Loop of the Bolster, and is divided into two bands, which put under
the Thighs, are tied in two places to the Girdle, that they may hold faster,
and keep the Pillow right in its place.

The second Instrument laid open.
diagram

The Instrument closed, and as it is bound to the Body.
A A the Pillow. B B the Girdle. C C the String going underneath. D D D D two
Roulers into which that string is divided. E E the Loop of the Pillow, under
which the Girt passes. F F F F the Girt by which the Girdle and the Roulers
underneath are tied.


diagram

The third Instrument to be fitted to the Groin, so strong that it is proper
for unruly Children, is made of an under Girdle, which is tied to the Girdle
above the Groins, being broad and large upon both Groins and the Codd, and on
both sides, where the Groins must be pressed, like two Pillows stuffed with
Wool, but in the middle the Yard passes through a hole, and under there is a
Bag which holds the Stones not close, and ends in two Roulers, which brought
under the Thighs, are tied both to the Girdle, and do attract the under girt,
and besides there are two other Roulers which are brought forewards under the
Thighs, which pass through the Loops of the two Pillows, to six the Girt and
the Pillows, as the following Figure shows.

The third Instrument open.
diagram

The same Instrument close, how it is fitted to the Body.
A A A the Girdle. B the Girt. C C the same open, D D the hole of the Girt. E E
the bag of the Girt. F F F F the two bands of the Girdle. G G G G the two bands
of the Girt. I I I I the Points that tie the Girdle and the Girt together.


diagram

Sometimes the three kinds of Girts which are under the Girdles, that they may
not slide down, and be faster, are held by two other Girts that are fastened
behind to the Girdle, and cast over both Shoulders, and bound with Points again
to the Girdle before.

The fourth and most proper Instrument or Truss, is made of two broad cotton
Girts, to both which there is a Bolster, which are tied behind to the Doublet,
and are carried under the Thighs, come up again to both Groins, where they lie
upon both Groins with Pillows, and are again tied to the Doublet, and that the
Pillows may be fast, they are tied fast with a Leather-girdle that passes
through the Loops of the Bolsters, before and behind, and so in the greatest
Motion it will hold, and the Bolster in the sound Part, does help the Bolster
upon the Tumor, that it slip not. As the following Figure shows.

The fourth Truss or Instrument laid open.
A A two Bolsters. B B two Girts. C the Leather Girdle. D D the Loops of both
Pillows. E E the Loops of both Girts. F F F F the Holes of both Girts by which
the Points are fastened to the Doublet.


diagram

The fifth Truss is made of Wood two inches thick, thin and round beneath,
which has a space in the middle for the Yard, least it should hurt the Root
thereof on both sides, with two Bolsters upon the Groins. This Girdle made of
firm thin Iron, that it may yield a little, and covered with Leather is fastened
above with Nails and Hinches in the outside, that it may open and shut, and the
leather it is fastened. As this Figure following shows both open and shut.

The fifth Truss open.
diagram

The same Instrument shut as it is upon the Body.
A A A A the Wood. B B B B the Iron Girdle covered with Leather in the first
figure, and bare in the second. C the outward part of the Iron Girdle bare,
fastened to the Wood by Nails and Buckles. D D the two Hooks. E the outward part
of the Iron Girdle bare, with holes for the Hooks. F F the Iron Girdle divided
there, in the first figure only held together by Leather. G the Bar made of
the ends of the Girdle, joined with Hooks and covered with Leather.


diagram

The sixth Instrument made of Wood, that is broad, to cover both Groins, bowing
inwards, and holding up the Codd, with an Iron Girdle like the former. Under
which upon the side where the Rupture is, there is a Bolster or Pillow to press
down the Tumor: as follows.

The sixth Truss made of a broad Board, fastened to an Iron Girdle, like that in
the fifth figure.
A the broad Board. B the outside of the Iron-Girdle fastened to the Board. C
the Girdle there divided.


diagram

The seventh Instrument or Truss is made of Iron, only for the Groyn where the
Rupture is, with an Iron-Girdle as the former. This is made of thick and broad
Plate of Iron, with an Iron-spoon of the same breadth, joined to the Joint,
that it may move, lined with Leather, and stuffed where it touches the
Rupture, which is held with the Iron-spoon. As may be seen in the Figure
following.

The seventh Truss open.
A the Iron-Plate. B the Iron-Spoon. C the Unequal, or bunching part of the
Spoon covered with Leather. D the Iron-sh^ll which thrusts the Spoon down. E
little Holes through which the Leather is sewed to the Plate. F the Iron-Girdle
as in the fifth Figure.


diagram

For the Ruptures of other parts, as of the Navel, and the places adjacent,
Trusses are made of Cotton or Iron-Girdles, as formerly, which goes about the
Belly, where the tumor is with a Bolster, or wooden or Iron-Plate to press it
down, as you may artificially invent, which Girdle may be held up with Girts
about the Shoulders, or fastened to the Doublet.

Also we keep the Rupture from falling down, by taking away the Cause that
drives it out, as much Meat and Drink, and such things as breed many Excrements
and wind, because they fill the Guts, and make them strut out.

To this end also we purge, with Medicines mentioned in the Diseases of the
Stomach and Colic. To which we add astringents for the Rupture, as Rhubarb,
Myrobalans, and the like mentioned in the Dysentery, or we add some of the
Decoctions following.

You must give no Clysters in Ruptures, for if the Guts be out, they fill them,
and increase the tumor, and keep them from being put up. And if the small Guts
be out, whether Clysters can scarce come; yet in regard it is hard to
distinguish them, and the Clysters may sometimes get thither, it is better to
forbear, except, after the Guts are put up, when there is a great costiveness.
In the falling out of the Cawle called Epiplocele, because Clysters cannot be
sent thither, if the Belly be full of Wind and Excrements, you may administer
them with good success.

Also Cold does hurt in Ruptures, especially when they are out, for it will make
them swell, therefore beware of it.

Also take heed of violent Exercise, straining or whooping, for they contract
the Belly, and thrust out the Guts. Also Venery is evil, if forcibly used. Rest
is most convenient, not only to prevent it, but also to cure it: As we shall
show.

For the Cure of the breaking of the Rim of the Belly, or when the passage
thereof is enlarged in the Groyn, or opened about the Navel, we give, and apply
many things, or if they will not do, we use Incision.

We give inwardly such things as are mentioned for glutinating of wounds, which
by their drying and binding virtue, do help the Rimme when it is loosned or
broken, by their glutinating force, if the Lips of the wound are not yet grown
hard, and then they can do little, except they can make new flesh to stop the
passage. These must be used long, for many weeks, that their virtue may reach
to the part affected.

For this purpose, you may use wound-drinks, mentioned in the Cure of Wounds.

Or of other Plants, green, or dry, boiled in wine, or the like, or made with
Honey, or Sugar into a Syrup: As we showed in Wound-drinks.

The simple Decoction of Knot-grass, or Salomon-seal, which is called
Rupturewort, for its virtue in Ruptures; or of Sanicle; or that of Fernelius,
which is called Royal Osmond, made in wine, is excellent.

The Compound Decoction of these three is also good.

Or with three colored trinity Violets, called Jacea or Knapweed, or
Ladies-mantle, Mugwort, Bettony, Agrimony, Horstayl, Burnet, Mousear,
Thorow-wax, Cresswort, each one handful; Comfrey roots one ounce and an half,
Madder, and Snakeweed, each one ounce; round Birthwort half an ounce, Flowers
of Mullein, and St. John's Wort, each one pugil; Cypress-nuts half an ounce,
Southernwood, and Water-cress seeds, each one dram; Anise seeds two drams, boil
them in Wine and Water, till the third part be consumed, to four pints, and
drink thereof, or with Honey or Sugar, make a Syrup.

There are others for the same, which may be boiled with the former, as
Daffodil roots, or Avens, or Bearfoot, or Mary-thistle, or Lady-gloves, or
Hog-fennel roots, the Leaves of Comfrey, Golden-Rod, Avens, Plantane,
Adders-tongue, Strawberries, Mullein, Primrose, Bears ears, Orpine, Yarrow,
Tansey, Hemp, Sage, Calamints, and the rest mentioned in Wound-drinks.

The Arabians commend a Goats head boiled with the Hair, and the Hair of an
Hare boiled.

You may make a Wine with the Infusion of the best of the things mentioned,
being dried, and it will be less distasted, and drunk longer.

Some Juyces drunk, do the same, one ounce at a time, with Wine, or other
Liquor, or boiled thick, to an Extract, one dram at a time: Or with Honey or
Sugar made into a Syrup, and given one ounce and an half.

The Juice of Rupturewort is best, then of trinity Violets, and Osmond Fern,
and of great Comfrey roots, and one dram of the Juice of Gentian roots
according to Dioscorides, and the Juice of Butchers broom, the Juice of other
Plants mentioned in the Decoction; also the Juice of Laserpitium.

The stilled Waters of Ladies-mantle, Comfrey, Horsetayl, Plantane, red Roses,
and others mentioned, drunk alone, or with other Remedies.

There are also Potions for the Rupture, made of one dram of powder, with red
wine, or a Decoction, or stilled waters, or with water and Milk for Children,
or with a rear Eg, or the like, with Sugar, or Honey, if you please.

As these following, simple, or mixed, the chief is of Rupturewort, and
Horse-tongue roots, of the Leaves of Adders tongue, of Roots of Swordgrass,
wild Orris, or three colored Violets.

Also the pouders of Horstayl, Shepherds purse, Ladies-mantle, Thorow-wax;
also of the Roots of Comfrey, Valerian, Birthwort, Snakeweed, Tormentil, five
leaved Grass, Briony.

Also Dioscorides commends the pouders of other Herbs, as of Bettony,
Liverwort, Cuckoo bread, Balsom, Woodbine, Marygolds, Rock Comfrey, Burdock
roots, Elicampane, Lovage, Seeds of Watercresses, and Country Mustard, and of
other Plants mentioned for Decoctions.

Also the powder of Earth worms, and of the worms of Byzant, the Filings of
Steel, of the Bloodstone, Amiantum, and of Osteocolla, which glews bones
together. Also of Fat Earths sealed, and other dryers.

Also the pouders of Troches of Amber, Ivory, or Bole, or of Diacydonium, made
of Quinces without the Species, with some convenient Liquor.

These may be taken in powder with Sugar, or made into Lozenges with the same,
with proper waters, and things good for the Stomach, and to expel wind, for
that sills the Guts, and increases the tumor.

As, Take Coriander seeds prepared, one dram, Caraway, or Cummin, and
Water-cress seeds, each half a dram; Rupturewort one dram and an half,
Horstongue, or Adders tongue, or Horstayl one dram, Comfrey roots, Pomegranate
peels, each half a dram; Bole one dram, red Coral half a dram, Sanguis
Draconis, the Ashes of a Bulls, or Staggs pizzle one scruple, Cinnamon one
dram, Sugar of Roses, as much as all the rest, or with more Sugar dissolved in
Rosewater, make Lozenges.

You may make Electuaries of the same pouders, with Conserves, Candies, and
Syrups, or Extracts two drams to be given with convenient Liquor after it.

Or thus: Take Conserve of Comfrey, and Daffodil roots, each one ounce and an
half; Conserve of Rupturewort one ounce, old Conserve of Roses, and of Acorus,
each six drams; Conserve of Sage, or Stoechas, French Lavender half an ounce,
Coriander seeds prepared, and Fennel seeds, each half a dram; Amber, Mastick or
Frankincense, each two scruples; Bloodstone half a dram, Cinnamon one dram and
an half, with Syrup of Myrtles: make an Electuary. To which you may add some of
the aforesaid pouders.

You may also make a Mixture of diverse Pouders mentioned, and give half a dram,
or two scruples like Pills, every day, because they are unpleasant.

Thus: Take Comfrey, Madder, Tormentil, Birthwort, Rhubarb, and Briony roots,
each one dram and an half; Rupturewort, three colored Violets, Horstongue,
Adders tongue, Shepherds purse, Ladies-mantle, Horstayl, Water-cress seeds,
Mummy, Byzantine worms, Bole, Coral, each one dram; Gum Arabic, Sarcocol,
Mastick, or Frankincense, Amber, each half a dram; make a Powder, and with
Syrup of Myrtles, and Infusion of Gum Traganth, make a Past.

You may with all the other pouders make up as excellent Medicines, as the
former.

The usual Pills for the Rupture, are those of Bdellium.

Or these: Take of Bitumen, or Mummy two drams, of Bdellium, Galbanum, or
Sagapenum, and Myrrh dissolved in Vinegar, each half a dram; Powder of Steel
prepared one dram, Hares dung dried, half a dram, Powder of Earth worms one
scruple, with boiled Juice of three colored Violets, or of Rupturewort, with
Honey in form of a Syrup: make a Mass, the dose two scruples, or a dram.

Others commend the Dung and Hare of an Hare cut small, and boiled in Honey,
given one dram at a time.

There are diverse outward Applications for a Rupture, whether the Rimme be
broken or loosned in the Groine or Navel or any other part, which by binding do
astringe the Relaxation or Looseness in the Groine, and if it be broke do unite
the Lips of the Wound, to which you must add Healers, by which (though the
Rimme cannot grow together,) yet new flesh may breed, which may stop up the
Passage, as the Astringents or Binders make it straighter. That this may better
be effected, you must use all means to keep up the Guts, least they return to
the part to get out, and so hinder the uniting of the part. Therefore during
the Cure, for a month or more, let him either lie upon his Back, or wear a
Truss continually, and take heed of all things mentioned which force the Guts
down.

These Applications are by Plasters, which will stay on, and which must be
renewed.

As this. Take the Roots of Comfrey and Snakeweed, each three drams; Birthwort
two drams, Galls and Cipress-nuts and Pomegranate peels, each two drams; the
Leaves of Misleto of the Oak, Pomegranate flowers and red Roses, each one dram;
Aloes, Sanguis Draconis, Juice of Sloes or Acacia, each one dram and an half;
dried Earthworms one dram, Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, Sarcocol, Mummy, each
two drams; Pitch, Colophony, each half an ounce; Bole, Lytharge and
Boodstone, each half a dram; Plaster of Paris burnt three drams, Rosin of
the Fur, or Larke-tree, or Pine Tree, as much as is sufficient, powder what
is to be poudered, and let the Gums be dissolved in strong Vinegar, and so make
a Plaster; or with Oil of Quinces, Mastick, or Myrtles, and a little red Wax,
make a Cerot.

To these you may add the Roots of Daffodil, Plantane, Water Lillies, the
Leaves of Rupture-wort, Acron-cups, Myrtle seeds, Gum Ammoniack, Bdellium,
Galbanum, Serapinum, Traganth, Arabic, Amber, Lodestone, Steel, and Iron
filings, Alum, Vitriol; also Powder of Oak moss, of Toad-stools, red Snails,
Hedghogs skins, Hares hair, Bazantine-worms; also dried Man's blood, Glue, or
Mucilage, which is made of Sheeps skins boiled with the Hair. All or some of
these with those aforesaid may be made into a Plaster, or with the Oils
mentioned or the like (in which Shepherds purse, Juice of Plantane, and other
Astringents, and Vinegar have been boiled) make a Cerot.

Other Emplasters without Oils, which dry sooner and stick faster, do not only
potentially astringe, but actually by pressing the place, are thus made. Take
Frankincense, or Mastick three drams, Bole and burnt Plaster of Paris, each
two drams; Aloes, Sanguis Draconis, each one dram and an half; Galls or
Pomegranate peels, Cypress-nuts, and Roets of Birthwort or Snakeweed, each one
dram; or burnt Earthworms, and the Hair of an Hare, each half a dram; make a
Powder, and mix it with the White of an Egg, and Vinegar, or Glue of Fishes, or
beat them being softened and dissolved in Vinegar, and apply it with Cotton,
renewing it twice or thrice in a week.

A Plaster of Pitch and Rosin may be long worn, and changed when it itcheth or
falls off, to which you may ad astringent Pouders.

That Plaster is most usual, which is made of Sheeps skins, called the
Rupture-plaister of Arnoldus, made of Lytharge, Boodstone, Bole, Gums,
Frankincense, Mastick, Ammoniack, Galbanum, Myrrh, Pitch, white Wax and red,
Turpentine, with Juyces, as Aloes, Sanguis Draconis; of Sloes, Opium roots; as
of Comfreyes, Birthwort, Pepper, Flowers of red Roses, Pomegranates, Misleto of
the Oak, Galls, Earthworms, Man's blood, and Sheepskins.

Also the Plaster of Mastick, especially against Wind, mentioned in Weakness
of the Stomach.

The Countess her Ointment called Comitissae, is astringent, and here may do
good.

There are other Applicatations of Plants boiled in red Wine. As,

Rurpture-wort boiled with Comfrey roots.

Osmond Fern, also boiled, with Horsetayl, and Shepherds purse; also Galls,
Cypress-nuts, and Pomegranate peels.

The Leaves of Misleto of the Oak, or instead thereof Pear Tree leaves green,
with glewy seeds of Misleto, with Comfrey roots, St. John's Wort, Sanicle, and
Bettony, are good boiled and beaten.

Besides these some commend the Powder of dried hemlock, mixed with the white
of an Egg, and so applied.

Also Bdellium made soft with fasting Spittle, sharp wine, or Vinegar, is
highly commended.

Lupines burnt with a Linen rag are applied with wine to the Navel-rupture.

Astringent Fomentations are with a Sponge or clout dipped often in a Decoction,
very hot to be applied, they are made with astringent Wine and Vinegar, or
Lead, or Iron-water, of the simples following, Roots of Snakeweed, Tormentil,
five leaved Grass, Madder, Daffodil, Herbs, as Rupture-wort, Horse-tayl,
Plantane, St. John's Wort, Mullein, Rock-comfrey, Oak leaves, Bar-berries,
Sumach, and other Astringents, as Pomegranate peels, Cypressnuts, Rose flowers,
Coriander, and Water-cress seeds parched.

To which you may add things to expel Wind, least it drive the Guts out, as
Rue, especially the wild Rue, the topps of the lesser Centaury, and of
Rosemary, common or French Lavender flowers, Cummin, Caraway, and Fennel seeds.

And to these, if you add of Vitriol and Alum, each one ounce or more, it will
be stronger, of which alone with Bole, and burnt Plaster of Paris, you may
make a Fomentation.

Some commend the Liquor sound in the Leaves of an Elm.

Cutting is the last Remedy, which is proper in the Rupture, and Looseness of
the Rimme of the Belly, and when the skin is laid open, you may lay hold upon,
and bind the Rim, yet because it is dangerous and painful, it is to be used
only when all other things fail, and then not rashly, and except the Tumor is
very troublesome, and slips out easily, and is exceeding painful, and we fear
least when the Guts are out, they cannot be put in again. Otherwise it is
better to use a Truss, which with little trouble takes away pain and danger.
This cutting is said to cure Ruptures, for the skin being open in the Groine,
the Mouth of the Rimme being torn, or broke nor relaxed, may be bound together;
and the Passage so stopped and held together by the string till the flesh grow
up, least the Membrane should open again being united, which will not grow
together. And this cutting will cure other Ruptures, although in other places
the Rimme is not so easily laid hold on and tied, yet the flesh that grows may
stop the Passage.

That this may be done handsomely in the Groine, where it is most usual, after
you have implored the Assistance of God, because it is is dangerous; you must
place the Patient upon a table with his Face upwards, and so tie him that his
Head may be lower then the rest of his Body, and his Feet higher. And if the
Guts be in the Groine or Codd, they must first be put up, and the tumor pressed
down, and after the skin must be drawn up, and out in the length of the Groine,
and you must take hold of the Passage of the Rimme, which descends from thence
into the Codds and contains the Seed Vessels, and separate it, by drawing or
cutting from the parts adjacent to which it cleaves, and tie it strongly with
a hempen thread, leaving the ends of the thread hanging out, and you must cut
off the Passage below the thread, and pull it away with the Seed Vessels, and
the Stone that grows thereto. Then you must place him upon a Bed, and lay him
upon his Back to rest till the Wound be cured, which is done as other wounds
with washing and good Ligature. And it will not be amiss, before you cut, to
put the Patient into a mollifying Bath, that the Guts may be better put up, and
for the better success in cutting.

Also this cutting may be without Gelding, (which all desire,) if the
Chyrurgion be a good Anatomist, and can so tie the Passage separated from the
Seed-vessels, that no other part be tied therewith.

Some have attempted this by a prick without cutting, they pierce the upper
part of the Codd with a long Needle, through the Passage of the Rimme of the
Belly, and draw a thread after it, and so say that they can stop the Passage by
tying of the thread, and cure the Patient without loss of Stone or Seed-vessels.

I have often heard that a Rupture might be cured without cutting, but while I
write these things, there came to me very seasonably a French Surgeon, which I
saw performed the Cure with good success by this way. And being it is without
pain, or but with very little, and without loss of Blood, it is the best and
safest way. And in regard the Vessels may better be seen and felt without
Blood, it is the best way for males, to prevent Gelding.

He applied a potential Cautery, a little above the stone on the Rupture side,
where the passage of the Rimme goes into the Codd, so large that it mortified
the skin half a fingers length and breadth, making an Eschar or Scab which he
took off, and applied another Cautery, till the skin was all taken away and the
sat appeared, which he cut off, so that he could perceive the passage that
carried the Seed-sessels. This being done in two days time, he handsomely
separated the Vessels from the passage, and with a crooked Needle conveyed a
thread underneath, and so gently tied the passage without pain, and after the
thread fell off in time, he with incarnative or flesh-breeding Medicines,
produced a Callus or Hardness, which grew the better to the passage, because
the second skin to the Testicles called Erythrois, is red, fleshy and
musculous. And so by pressing down, and filling up the place where substance
was lost, he stopped the passage by which the Guts came forth, and so he
performed the Cure perfectly and happily without Gelding. And I understood by
Letters, he brought to me, that he had cured diverse the same way.

In other parts you may not use cutting or burning for a Rupture as in the
Groine, because you cannot so easily lay hold of the Rimme of the Belly and
bind it; yet it may help sometimes, especially because proud Fesh will sooner
grow, while a wound is healing: as I showed. And this must be done when the
Patient is upon his back, by an Incision upon the tumor, or a Caustic, and by
other Applications for the Cure.

Sometimes the Womb and neck thereof falls out of the Body, The Cure of the
Falling out of the Womb.
when the Connection of the Neck is dissolved, as we showed, which can scarce be
repaired, and then the Cure is difficult, and if it be old, because the parts
separated are grown hard and cannot be closed, it is impossible. The greatest
hope is when the Womb is not quite fallen out, but hangs in the passage,
especially when it is deep, for then the small Veins are less divided.
Nevertheless, for the Cure perfectly or imperfectly, first you must consider
the Cause and then the Disease.

The Cause of Falling out of the Womb must first be removed, by keeping them at
rest, or with little motion, and from immoderate Venery, and preventing
neesing, coughing and roaring. And if she be with child, give her things to
help the Birth, when it is at hand. And let her Body be always kept soluble by
Meats and Medicines, to avoid straining. And it is better to purge so, then to
use moistning Diets, which cause the Ligaments to be loose, and the Womb to
fall out. And if the womb be moist, or she have the Whites, you may give strong
Purges to take away the slipperiness of the part which causes the womb to fall
forth. Those Medicines are drying also: as we showed in the Cure of the Whites,
otherwise purging or bleeding do little good for taking away the Cause, except
to keep the Body clean.

The Cure of the Disease which is twofold, namely the Dislocation of the womb
and the neck thereof, and the solution of Continuity, is to put the womb into
the right place, and keep it there, and to unite it to the Parts from which it
is divided.

The womb must be put up, and for the better performance there of, you must
take away first the Excrements from the Guts and Bladder, least they straiten
the passage, because the neck of the womb lies upon the straight Gut, and the
Bladder upon it.

This done, you must lay her upon her Back, with her Thighs abroad, and her
Knees up, and with her Hands thrust in the bottom of the womb into the neck,
till all be put up. Or let the Midwise help her; or let her have a blunt stick
with a clout at the end, which will pass farther in. Or let her make a Pessary
of Linen for the same purpose. Thus did I two years together, put up the womb
which could not be done by any other Art, as the Butchers do the Guts of
Beasts, and she yet lives, and has had Children in the time.

I have also happily cured oftentimes the turning out of the Womb after hard
Travail, by the help of Midwives which I instructed, with a bag of wool stuffed
with sweet Roots, Herbs and Seeds.

And if there be a Swelling that hinders the putting up, you must first take
it away; or an Inflammation, or Wind, you must discuss that, as we showed in
the Rupture.

Anoint the womb with Butter, Oil, or Grease, that it may get in the easier,
but if there be no necessity avoid them, because the womb will slip out again
the sooner: which to prevent, use Astringents, that they may make the part
rough, for the keeping in of the womb and its neck in its place, after put up,
or when it is in danger to fall out, and that they may grow to the Parts
adjacent, we use diverse things, Astringents, Dryers, and glewing Medicines
which make a perfect Cure, or things that only keep them up, and then the Cure
is palliative and imperfect. They are inward and outward to the neck of the
womb, when it is forth, or things conveyed into the Privities or Scents.

You may make trial of things prescribed for Ruptures, and Wounds.

Besides which, this Powder often taken is excellent. Take the Roots of Mullein
two drams, Leaves of Myrtles, Parsnip seeds, each one dram, Hearts horn half a
dram, Ashes of Cray-fish or Crabs one scruple, red Coral two scruples: make a
Powder.

Diverse things are applied before, behind and below the womb while it is in, to
dry it, and bind it, to the Parts adjacent, that it may not fall forth, and
such as strengthen.

This is done by Fomentations about the Loins for many days. They are made by
boiling these following in Forge-water and Wine, or Vinegar sometimes, Roots of
Snakeweed, Tormentil, five leaved Grass, the Budds of Oak, Pear Tree, and
Sloes, Medlers, Brambles, Myrtles, Mastick-tree, Cistus, Pine Tree, Cypress,
Bays, Shepheards-purse, Vervain, Mullein, Yarrow, Blood-wort, Ivy, Solomon's
Seal, Rupture-wort, Wormwood, Centaury, Mugwort, Rue, Bettony, Lavender; also
the Peels of Pomegranates, Acorn-cupps, Galls, Sponge Bedguar, or Lady-thistle,
Cypress-nuts, Lentils, Pease, Myrtle-berries, Bay Berries, red Roses,
Pomegranate-flowers, Lavenderflowers, Sage and Rosemary; also Moss, or
Lungwort, ad to the Decoction of all or of some of these, Alum, or Salt, or
Vitriol, Bole or Plaster of Paris, or Filings of Iron.

Also Natural Spaw-waters of Vitriol, Alum, Salt, or such as petrefie or turn
to Stone, and when they are boiled, leave much Chalk upon the Vessel, being
drunk for a month together, or more, are very good. For though they seem to
moisten, yet are they potentially drying, and by reason of Sweating, they
consume the Humors, and by the Effect we perceive that they dry and astringe by
the wrinkling and Roughness of skin which follows.

Ointments or Plasters to be applied to the Womb about the Privities and
Loins, are as follow. Take Roots of Snakeweed two drams, Roots of Cypress,
Rupture-wort, and Moss, each half a dram; red Roses and Pomegranate flowers,
each half a dram; Galls, or Pomegranate peels, or Acorncupps two drams,
Cypress-nuts, Dates stones, or Myrobalans burnt, each one dram; Myrtle seeds
half a dram, Frankincense, or Mastick, Acacia, or Juice of Sloes, each one
dram; Spiknard half a dram, red Coral one dram: make fine Powder, and with Oil
of Myrtles, or Mastick, and the third part of Oil of Bays, Turpentine, and
Wax, make an Ointment, or with Rosin, Pitch and Colophony, make an Emplaster.

Another Ointment which is mentioned to anoint the Privities, to prevent
Abortion. Take Oil of Roses etc. and the two Ointments that follow made of
pouders, are also good.

The usual Ointments and Plasters for other Fluxes of the Mother, are also
good against the Falling out of the womb. As that of the Countess, the
Emplaster of Mastick, and against Ruptures and the like.

Also Cataplasmes made of the remainder of the Decoction, beaten with the Oils
mentioned.

Dioscorides commends Nettles applied, being green and bruised.

You may fill Baggs with the remainders of the Fomentations, and apply them.

Great Cupping-glasses or three or four little ones to the Belly under the
Navel, often applied, will help to hold up the Mother.

Some things are applied outwardly to the womb and the neck thereof, which
after they are put up, will astringe and wrinkle the part from whence the womb
fell, and keep it from falling out again, which are of a drying and glutinating
Quality.

We may use Fomentations made of things mentioned, and Roots of Comfrey,
Daffodil, and other things mentioned for healing of Wounds: as Frankincense,
Mastick, or other Gums.

When we will bind more, and there is no hope otherways, by reason of the
Continuance of the Disease, we must foment the part with a Sponge dipped in red
Vinegar, Lie, Salt or Allum-water.

Or apply a Clout dipped in water of Nuts, or of Pine-apples.

You must sprinkle pouders after you have anointed the parts with Mucilage of
Comfrey, or the Infusion of Gum Traganth, or Glue that is made of boiled Bran,
which must have no Roughness, least they lying under the womb hurt it after it
is put up, and they must be more glutinous then Astringent, as this. Take of
Frankincense or Mastick one dram and an half, of Sarcocol steeped in Milk one
dram, Gum Arabic, Juice of Sloes, each half a dram; powder them.

You may use this powder with the Mucilages aforesaid, or of Quince seeds, or
with Oil of St. John's Wort, or the like, that consolidate or glue things
divided, mentioned in Wounds.

These following are put in, and injected into the womb, which hinder Falling
of it out, by astringing, and drying and straitning the passages.

As Pessaries long and thick, so fastened that they may be worn when they walk.

They are made of the Ointment mentioned, with pitch, into a hard plaster, in
such a form as may fill the womb, with other Gums dissolved in Vinegar, as
Galbanum, Bdellium, Sarcocol; also Opopanax half an ounce. To which they add
stinking things to make the womb fly up, as Assa foetida, which is not
necessary, because it will distaste the woman, and discover her Disease by i^s
Scent.

Those Emplasters which cure the Rimme of the Belly by increasing flesh, as we
showed, may do well here in this solution of the Continuity of the small Fibers
or Veins.

You may make other Pessaries of pouders in the aforesaid Ointments, if they be
first mixed with the white of an Egg, the Infusion of Gum Traganth or Mucilage
of Comfrey or of Quinces, and put into a bag.

And if these Pessaries be troublesome, you may make others as big as your
finger for the night only, of the same things.

Or you may wet wool in Vinegar, and the white of an Egg, and sprinkle the
pouders thereon, and put it in.

Another Pessary prescribed for the Whites, begins thus. Take Galls or
Acorn-cupps, etc. is good here.

Some commend an Eg that a Hen has sitten upon some days, beaten and put up
with wool.

There is a way among women to keep the womb from falling out, by carrying a
round Ball therein, which must be so big that it fills the Privities, and not
be put in by great force. It must be smooth, slippery and light, that it may
not hurt the tender parts with its roughness or weight; and hard, that it may
better hold up the womb, and dry, that it may take in no Moisture, least it
fall out again. It is made thus of Cork, or Beets, by glewing two pieces
together, if one be not big enough, brought into a ball, or a bottom of thread,
and let it lie in melted wax, till it be covered over therewith. Which she must
thrust up with a string fastened thereto to take it out; and let her wear it day
and night, and not take it out but when she is to use a Man. This though it be
a little troublesome, yet it is better then to have the womb fall out.

This trick have I showed to many women in a miserable Condition, which has
cured them, among whom one which a long time before had not known her Husband,
conceived with the ball in her womb, which she voided when she was delivered of
a Boy, with her Secundine or afterbirth.

You may use Injections with a Syringe for the same, made of the Decoction
mentioned for a Fomentation, and this is best.

There is a strong Injection made of few things. Take Galls three ounces, Moss
two ounces, Comfrey roots one ounce, Vine ashes two drams: boil them in
Forge-water, and the third part of red Wine, for an Injection.

There are also Fumes for the same, made of the same Decoction, for a
Fomentation hot, which is very piercing and good.

As those of Comfrey roots, Snakeweed, Cabbage stalks, Box topps.

The Fumes of Frankincense, Mastick, Amber, Labdanum, Bitumen, Pitch,
Colophony, with stinking things, are stronger, as Galbanum, Castor, and that
abhominably stinking Devils Dung, with other astringent Pouders, or they may be
made into Troches with Rosin.

Orpiment is very drying, but in regard the sm^ak thereof is hurtful, you may
better use Varnish.

That Fume which is prescribed for the Whites that begins thus. Take Mastick
two drams, Frankincense etc. is good here.

Experience teaches, that the Smoke of dried Cow dung is very good.

And the Hoof of a Mule burnt does the same miracles, with the Smoke in this
case.

Many things mentioned to stop the Terms outwardly or inwardly, are good here
to astring; but it is better to forbear, them least they stop the Courses,
except the time be past.

They suppose that the womb follows sweet things, and flies from stinkes, and
therefore they apply the sweets to the Nose, and the stinkes to the Privities.

Something vomiting will fetch it up, but it is too forcible, and so is neesing,
and rather presses down the Entrals.

The womb is kept up by lying down, and while the woman is so, it remains in
its place.

Also Conception keeps the womb from falling out, and while she is with Child
it cannot fall down, because it grows larger with the Child, and cannot fall
out till after Childbirth, it grows little again.

The Fundament by straining, The Cure of the falling out of the fundament.
and the straight Gut may be turned out, and sometimes it will return again with
ease, but if this be at every stool, and the Patient weak and the Muscles
relaxed, it is hard to be cured, and not at all, if it be torn from the
Membranes, to which it was fastened. For the Cure first begins at the Cause, and
then look at the Disease which is the falling out of the Part.

To avoid the Cause, if straining at stool, be it, keep the Body loose with
Clysters, and Medicines and good Diet. If it come from hard travail, or from
cutting of the Stone it will be gone when they are over. Then you must have a
care to put up the part, and keep it in by diverse means.

The Fundament is put up, by the Hand of the Patient, or of the Surgeon,
pressing with his fingers, or with a clout for that purpose. And if it be
swollen or inflamed, which hinders its going up, you must first cure them. As
we showed in the Falling out of the womb, when it is swollen.

We keep in the Fundament that it fall not out again by diverse Remedies, either
such as astringe and stop the Passages, or that unite the separated parts, or
by things which amend the temper of the Fundament when it is too cold or weak,
or loose and relaxed, by which means it cannot keep up. And this is done by
things given inward, or applied outward to the Fundament or injected into it.

If it come from Solution of Continuity, you may give somthings prescribed in
the Falling out of the womb to consolidate or heal, but abstain from strong
Astringents, least you make the Belly more hard, and cause greater straining,
which will force it forth. But if the Fundament come forth by looseness through
the Falling down of an humor, you must use things that purge and alter which
are mentioned in the Palsy.

The same things that are prescribed by way of Fomentation and Pouders, for the
falling out of the womb, may be used for the falling out of Fundament and
straight Gut, and they will do the same by holding up and fixing the Part.

You may also use other pouders, such as were used to the womb in form of a
Pessary, as a Suppository, here anointing before; As we showed, least they
should by their sharpness get forth again.

Or this powder. Take Galls two drams, Pomegranate-flowers one dram and an
half, Mastick, Frankincense, each one dram; Amber, Sanguis Draconis, each half
a dram; burnt Hearts horn, and Antimony, each one dram: make a fine powder.

You may add Bitumen, Pitch, and Cockle shells, saltfish, Dogs dung, and Hogs
brisles, and the like burnt.

Or take some of the pouders, mentioned in the Ointment for the Falling down of
the womb, or anoint the sundament when it is forth, with that Ointment.

Fume or Smoke is best, because the thick and moist things will not be so well
retained, as that prescribed for the Falling out of the womb, especially that
of the Decoction of Mullein, with Vinegar, or that of Vinegar from a hot piece
of a Mil-stone.

Also the Fume of Gums and Rosins, there mentioned, leaving out the stinking
Gums, as Devils dung, and Castor, adding Bdellium, Juice of Sloes, and other
Astringents, and Spices, and Galangal, Cypress, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Roses,
and Flowers of Mullein.

You must foment the part and the Loins, with astringent and healing
Decoctions, if the Connection be divided, and if there be weakness or coldness
in the Muscles, with things that cherish the Natural heat, and strengthen the
Nerves.

These are made of the Decoction of astringent Plants, and such as heal,
mentioned in the Falling out of the womb, boiled as there, with warm things,
and proper for the Nerves, as Groundpine, Sage, Primrose, Wormwood, Horehound,
Bettony, Pennyroyal, Chamomil, Rosemary, and Lavender flowers.

Spaw-waters mentioned for the falling out of the womb, are here good also.

When the Fundament comes forth in Children from Cold, it is good to set them
upon a piece of green warm Oak, which is astringent and good for men also.

The Ointments and Plasters there also mentioned, are good here for the Loins
and Fundament, to which if the Nerves and Muscles be weak, you may add hot
Oils, as of Pepper-wort, Bays, Spike, Foxes, Castor; also powder of
Pepper-wort, Galangal, Cypress, and other spices, and among other Plasters,
Oxycroceum and Ceroneum.

You may also make Cataplasmes of the remainder of the Decoction mentioned, or
thus. Take Rupture-wort, dry Moss, each half an ounce; Galls one ounce, Orobus,
and Lupines, or red Pease poudered two ounces, Roots of Sowbread half an ounce,
Groundpine two drams, Dung of a Goat, Pigeons, or Swallow, or Lizards one
ounce, with Oil of Myrtles, or Juice of other proper Herbs, make a Pultis.

Dioscorides says that the Cramp-fish applied is good.

You may also apply Baggs, as in the falling out of the womb, or other hard
Pillows to press the Fundament up, when they are sitten upon or tied hard
thereto.

The hanging out of the Tongue is commonly from some deadly wound, The Cure of
the hanging out of the Tongue.
and if it be cured, it is by preventing worse accidents.

If the Codd be cut, The Cure of the hanging out of Stones.
and the Stones hang out, it is easily cured, by putting them up, and keeping
them so, without sowing or stitching.

The Eye falls not out but by some violence used to it or the Head, The Cure of
the Eye thrust out.
and because death commonly follows, we meddle not with it; and if the Party
lives, it cannot be rightly restored without wrinkling and blindness, by the
Astringents that are to be applied, to fasten the Eye in its place.

CHAP. III. Of Efflation or Sending forth of Wind.
The Kinds,
WE call that Efflation by which not only wind is sent forth from whence the
word is derived, but when breath or air is sent forth, the Efflation of breath
by the Mouth and Nose is Expiration, but the Efflation of wind by the mouth is
called belching, and by the fundament farting, these are preternatural, when
they are depraved or stopped, or vitiated or corrupted, or when they break
forth by an unusual way.

The Expiration or Breathing is depraved when it is interrupted, Preternatural
Efflation or sending, forth of wind
or too violent, or too long, or with a strange noise, or with other Excretion,
not only of Air but, Matter, in a short breath, Sighing, Yawning, Hickets,
Neesing, Cough, Blowing the Nose, Spitting, Hawking, Vomiting: as we showed in
Respiration depraved.

To this is Snorting referred, when the noise is so troublesome, that others
cannot sleep for it. This is also in some Diseases when men are awake, as the
Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, and difficulty of breathing; as we showed in those
Diseases.

When wind is senth fort by the mouth in Belching, Belching and Farting.
or by the Fundament in Farting by reason of its strange sound and stink, it
sometimes is depraved, and that rather when they may be restrained, hence are
these sounds more indecent then others in depraved Respiration mentioned,
though they make a noise, as in the Cough and Snorting, because these cannot be
restrained.

To these preternatural Sounds may be added those winds that presently come not
forth, Rumbling and noise in the guts
but rumble first in the Belly, under both sides, but especially the left, and
if they sound like water, they are called Fluctuations, if they rumble,
Murmura, and if they croak, Rugitus; sometimes there is a noise like Froggs or
the like, and some imagine them to be really there. These noises are usually in
Virgins and others, and are signs of Diseases in the Stomach and Guts. Also
there is sometimes a noise about the Navel, with a Swelling that moves; this is
usual in sound people, before stools or farting, and in the Colic: as we
showed.

The other strange Noises, as in the Belly of them that have the Dropsy,
wheesing in the Breast, beating of the heart, which may be heard as well as
felt. The diverse noises in the Ears, because they break not forth of the Body
with wind, do not belong to the Efflations or Sendings forth of wind, but to
other Diseases where they show themselves, and where they are described.

The Breathing is faulty when it stinketh.

As when the Breath smells of Excrements or of dead fish, A stinking Breath.
or rotten Cheese or the like, mentioned in a stinking Breath. This is
troublesome, and better known to the standers by then the Patient, and it is
most when he is fasting, and sometimes it is constant; sometimes after eating of
diverse Meats, or Drunkenness, staying but a while; sometimes it is the Symptom
of Diseases, or forerunner, when without any other manifest Cause, they are
said to begin to be sick from the Scent, which the Germans call Stechesen.

The Breath that comes forth at the Nose, when it stinks, Stink of the Nose,
causes the Disease called the Stink of the Nose, which is intolerable to the
Standers by, and makes them that are troubled therewith to be shunned.

There is in belching a sending forth of wind that is corrupted, The Stink of a
belch or fart
like the smell of roasted flesh, and sometimes stinking. And in breaking of
wind downwards, by which the Stink of the Excrements comes forth, there is sent
and most often stink.

Sometimes Breath comes out at an unusual Passage, An evil scent from a wound.
not by the nose and mouth, but through a Wound in the Breast or Neck. This may
be felt or perceived by a burning Candle held to the wound.

Sometimes wind comes forth of a wound in the Stomach or Belly not at a
distance, as breath, but together suddenly.

The Causes.
The Cause of all preternatural Efflation, which is the depraved Sending forth
of Breath or Wind, is the disorderly breaking of them forth, or the Corruption
of the same.

How from the disorderly breaking forth of Air or Breath, An inconvenient
Breathing, is the cause of preternatural Efflation.
through the rough Artery into the Mouth and Nose, Expiration is depraved, and
there is a Noise, was declared in the Causes of depraved Breathing.

Also Snorting comes from the forcing out of Air drawn in at the Nose, Snorting
is caused by air drawn in, and sent out at the Nose.
especially in those that have Apesnoses, and the Passages of the Nostrils
straighter, or when the Bridge is fallen by other means, or when some part is
stopped with Snot, then the sound being broken causes that called Snorting,
especially in sleeping, when the Mouth is shut, and the Air drawn in at the
Nose, or if the Party lies upon his Back, for then the phlegm falls easier
down, and sticks there; which causes a Snorting in some Diseases, when it
comes to the Nose, and stops there, as in an Apoplexy, falling sickness etc.
This Symptom is constant with them, for the Causes mentioned in those Diseases.

When there is a wound in the rough Artery or Breast, Breath or wind breaking
at a wound, is the Cause of preternatural Efflation.
the Breath comes forth at an inconvenient place. These wounds are made on
purpose in the breast in an Empyema, in the rough Artery in Squinzie, or by
chance, as was there declared.

And if the Stomach or Belly be wounded, wind will come forth, as when we cut
for the Dropsy, or when a wound is there by chance.

Belching comes from wind rising up from the Stomach through the Gullet and
Mouth, When wind breaks from the stomach at the mouth it causes belching.
and when it goes downwards through the Guts to the Fundament, it causes
farting, making the greater noise by how much they are more forced. From the
Guts by the Fundament farting.
And if these be shut up in the belly, they run through the Cavities, and cause
a Rumbling in the belly, When it is included in the belly, it causes Rumbling.
especially about the left side, if they be in the belly, or the Colon which
lies under and is joined to it. For these parts are chiefly on the left side
(albeit some think it is from the Spleen which cannot be filled with wind) or
if they be about the navel or other parts they will cause noise, because the
Guts are thin about the Navel, we have showed the Cause of these winds in
diverse Diseases of the Stomach and Guts, among which the strait lacing of
Virgins to seem slender is one, for so the wind constrained causes noise, and
many times disgrace.

Besides these simple Winds, Wind with an humor in the stomach and guts, is the
Cause of Fluctuation.
if there be another Humor therewith, there is then a Fluctuation, or sound of
water with the croaking, or if it be water alone, it will be only fluctation.
And as this may be from diverse Causes mentioned in Diseases of the Stomach, so
often from water-drinking and the like, when the Body is stirred, and the Belly
pressed.

A stinking Breath comes from the Infection of the same with things that have
evil scent, as also that stinking of the Nose and Mouth, and then Belchings and
Farting will be very stinking, which comes from diverse things taken and from
Excrements.

Some things taken that have an ill Scent, infect the breath, The Infection of
the breath by things chewed, is the cause of the stink thereof.
especially if they stick in the Teeth, and in the Stomach, the the scent
rises to the Mouth, as when you eat Garlic or rotten Cheese, and the like
which, though not so bad is distastful to the Standers by, as belching from
wine in drunkards, or from fat meats. Many other things not ill scented but by
their Corruption, do infect the Breath: as flesh in a hollow tooth, or between
the teeth, if it continue long and corrupt and rot. Also flesh corrupting in
the stomach, may cause a stinking Breath, and other things that of themselves
are not ill scented, corrupt in the Stomach which is usual, as Raddishes, and
cause a stinking belching and breath.

Also stinking Excrements, The stink of the Excrements, is the cause of a
stinking Wind and Breath.
being in the Stomach or Guts, sent forth evil Scents, as when they are out.
Excrements in the Guts are Naturally stinking, especially being choleric or
mixed with other evil Humors, and they stink not only when they come forth, but
by Vapors which come from them, they discover their evil Scent.

Also a stinking Breath may come from the Excrements of the Belly, when the
Stomach is too open, especially the Pylorus or Orifice thereof, which opens
into the Guts, and then the stink of the Excrements gets into the Stomach, and
so into the Mouth, and infects the Breath. And this we take to be the chief
cause of that stinking breath which smells like Excrements, which continues so
long, because it comes from a fault in the Organ or Part called the Pylorus and
Stomach which is scarce repaired.

This is occasioned by long surseiting, by which the stomach is so loose, or so
weak: as we showed in the Weakness of the Stomach.

Some Excrements in the Stomach that stink and are bred there, or brought
thither, do send their scent through the Gullet to the Mouth, or rise up and
infect the breath, as in many Diseases, especially when the Excrements putrify
about the Stomach in the Meseraick Veins, there is stinking Breath going
before, and accompanying them.

The Mouth is not stinking only from things eaten, The Stink of the mouth is
the Cause of a stinking breath
and putrefaction in the Teeth, but from the Spettle and the like, as in the
French Pox, from the evil Humors sent thither by the anointing with
Quicksilver. Also Filth above the Teeth, causes the same. The filth which
grows in ulcers of the Mouth and Jaws, causes also a stinking breath, yet
Matter that is Natural will not stink, as in the Ulcers of the Lungs, there is
little stink in respect of the matter, till it rot.

When Phlegm, The Stink in the nose, is the Cause of the Stink of the Breath.
Filth or the like, is long contained in the farthest part of the Nostrils,
about the spungy bones and in the cavities of the upper Jawbones, they send a
loathsome stinking Scent. And this is called the stink of the Nostrils. And this
may come from the slimyness of the Snot, mixed with diverse Humors, and from the
straitness of the Passages, where the filth is gathered, and lodges, till it
fall or be blown forth, and this straitness is either Natural or Accidental,
and then the Nose is flat. The same comes from ulcers in the Nostrils, and
there is a stink from them according as they are corrupted: as we showed in the
Ulcers of the Nose. They write that the same may be from Humors putrified
within the Skull, about the Organs of Smelling, or in the Ventricles of the
Brain, but this is not probable, for such Putrefaction could not be in the
Brain without greater accidents, and sometimes death.

The Cure.
The Cure of preternatural Efflation which comes from breath depraved was
showed in depraved Breathing. The Cure of preternatural Efflation.


Nor can you cure that Snorting which is from the straitness of the Nostrils
any way, The Cure Snorting.
but as you cure the stoppage of Breath by the straitness of the Nostrils: as
we showed there, as also how you should purge the Nose from Snot and Phlegm.
Notwithstanding, if it come from the fault of the Instrument, when the nose is
flat or strait, it can scarce be taken away, but it may be mended, if they
sleep not upon their back but side. In Horses this snorting is cured by cutting
the Nostrils.

Belching and Farting though they are good and for easement, The Cure of
belching and farting.
yet because they are unseemly, they are to be restrained, or to be let
privately. But if they be so forcible, that they cannot be stayed without
danger, you must hinder the increase of wind, and this will hinder the noise
and rumbling of the Guts, by taking away Crudities, The Cure of noise in the
Guts.
and by discussing of wind with inward and outward Medicines, such as are
prescribed in the Weakness of the Stomach; to which they usually apply things
proper for the Spleen, in the Noise under the Ribbs, usual to Virgins. And this
is good not because the wind comes from the Spleen, or is contained there, but
because the virtue of the things outwardly applied to the left side does reach
the Spleen, and therefore in some measure ought to be proper for it; as when
you mix Seeds, as Cummin and the like in baggs made to discuss wind with Rue,
Agnus Castus, Ceterach, and the like, and rub the Pouders with Vinegar, or when
we add Oils proper for the Spleen, to the Ointments we use to expel wind.

If stinking Breath come from things eaten, as Garlic, The Cure of a stinking
breath
or Raddishes which causes belching, it will shortly be gone, and you may for
that time keep a distance from Company, or if you must needs converse, use some
Persumes to correct it. But if it come from unclean teeth, or from between, or
in the Hollowness of them, or other filth in the Mouth, then you must pick the
teeth, and cleanse the mouth, and pull out rotten teeth.

If it come from the Stomach, that must be purged and amended, if from
Diseases, as the Pox, they must be cured, and then it will vanish. If from
Looseness of the Stomach, when the stink comes from the Guts to the Mouth, it is
almost an incurable Disease in the Organ. But the Stomach must be strengthened
and astringed, and in all these Causes, sweet things must be held in the Mouth
and chewed, and the mouth washed with them, and they must be gargled and
swallowed to correct the Stink, as follows.

If the Cause be in the Stomach, purge it with things proper to the stink of
Excrements, and the moistness of the Stomach. Among which the Pills of Aloes
are best, because they cleanse the Stomach, and resist Putrefaction, or purging
Wine, with Wormwood, which does the same with Aloes, and is also sweet. Also
other Purges, mentioned in Weakness of the Stomach. Among which Rhubarb, and
Myrobalans are the chief and best Purgers; but you must mix many sweet-sented
therewith, to correct the stink, as well Plants as Spices, and therefore the
Aloephangina-pills made of Spices, taken often are good. And we add to the
purging Wine, Angelica, and the like that are well scented.

The Alteratives that are given to strengthen the Stomach, must hinder the
producing of Excrements: and this is by good Diet, which is little and drying.
Let him be temperate in eating of flesh, because it easily putresies, and let
it be well spiced, and with Vinegar, sour Juyces of Sorrel, Citrons, Lemmons,
Oranges; as also his other Meat. Let his Bread be made with Caraway and
Fennelseed. Let him after Meat eat Quinces, Pears, and other Astringents. when
the Stomach is loose especially; Also let him eat Anise-seed, Fennel, and
Coriander, Comfits, and other Pouders to be used after meat. In the morning
fasting let him take the Pouders, Lozenges, Electuaries, Confections, and
Conserves, which are good in a moist and loose Stomach, mentioned in the
Weakness of the stomach, choosing those that are most sweet-scented, as
Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamoschum, Diambra, and the like. Tryphera magna is
commended to make Men well colored, and of sweet Breathes. And they say that
Mastick often taken, does amend this Infirmity.

You must hold sweet things in the mouth, and chew, and sometimes swallow them,
as these following.

Of Simples, Angelica-root is most sweet-sented but bitter; also Master-wort,
Zedoary, Nutmegs and Cloves, are good.

Musk and Ambergreese for rich people, are excellent, with Sugar, made into
Lozenges, with the Infusion of Gum Traganth, made in Rose or
Orange-flower-water, or the like, and held in the mouth, to dissolve and give a
good Scent. To these they add Wood-Aloes, Sanders, Angelica-roots, which are
good for a weak Stomach. Also a little Benzoin.

Besides these, many sweet-sented things may be chewed, as Orris, and Acorus
roots, Cypress, Elicampane, Orange peels, Citron peels, Roses, Bays, Marjoram,
Smallage of Parsley chewed, takes away the stink of Garlic and the like, and
conceals that which is from the mouth. Also Dill, and Anise, and Sowthistle,
Dioscorides commends Myrrh, and Mastick. Mathiolus commends Gold held in the
mouth.

Of Compounds, Wine is good to wash the Mouth, or to be drunk, in which the
Roots and Seeds of Angelica, Marjoram, Sage, Coriander seeds, and other sweet
Herbs and Spices were steeped.

Vinegar of Roses, Currance, Ras-berries, Straw-berries, is very good, mixed
with other things for to wash, or held in the mouth or swallowed, does
presently take away the stink of things eaten.

Let him constantly wash his mouth with sweet red wine, Vinegar, Salt, and
Alum.

The Decoction of green Myrtle leaves in Wine, is good to wash the mouth, and
the Decoction of Citrons, and the like.

Another is made of the Decoction of Cypress roots, Citron peels, Roses,
Sanders, Cloves, Cinnamon.

There are diverse sweet stilled Waters, as of Roses, Musk, or Cloves, and other
Spices, Salt, Orange-flower-water. Also Aqua vitae, with the Infusion of
Cinnamon and Spices.

The distilled Oils of Cinnamon, or other sweet things, are very good, either
mixed or alone, if the least drop be held in the mouth.

If the teeth be foul, rub them with sweet astringent things, and such as
resist Putrefaction.

As, Take Orris roots two drams, Angelica half a dram, Sanders, Wood-Aloes,
Savine, or Juniper one dram, with a little Musk, and two drams of Salt Alkali.
Some add Cuttle-bone, Hearts horn, burnt Alum, when the teeth are foul, as
shall be there declared.

Or mix a little Musk with Salt, or Hearts horn, etc.

If the stink of the Nostrils come from an Ulcer, The Cure of the stink of the
Nostrils.
when that is cured it vanishes, of which we spoke in the Ulcers of the
Nostrils. But if it come from an Organical Disease of the Instrument or Nose,
when it is too strait, it is almost incurable, except you prevent the Falling
of the Excrements from the Brain to the part.

But if it come from filth which either from its plenty or malignity is easily
corrupted, being retained and stopped, then you must go thus to work.

First we purge the Head and Body of the Humors that abound, with Medicines
mentioned in the Excrementitious Diseases of the Head.

Then snuff up things into the Nose, or anoint the Nostrils with Ointments
which cleanse and provoke Nature to expel the filth, and leave a sweet Scent in
the Nose. For which use we have mentioned diverse Errhines or Purgers of the
Head by the Nose, the Phlegmatic Diseases of the Brain, with which you may mix
these sweet-scented things following.

The Juice of Flower-de-luce anointed or snuffed up, is sweet and very good.

Or thus. Take the Juice of Flower-de-luce one ounce and an half, of Marjoram
one ounce, of rich Spanish Wine half an ounce: mix them, and add Juice of Beets
to force more.

Or when there is great putrefaction, add to that the Juice of Centaury and
Wormwood, each one ounce; Vinegar of Roses, or Squills half an ounce, Myrrh one
dram.

The Juice of Bays, and Myrtles, and other sweet plants may be added.

Sometimes these are boiled thick, that they may stick the better. Thus,

Take of the aforesaid Composition one ounce and an half, ad Labdanum, Storax,
each half a dram; with Honey, or the infusion of Gum Traganth made in sweet
Water: make a Liniment.

We use such things to be snuffed, or poured into the Nose to cause a sweet
Scent, as Spanish Wine in which Basil, Marjoram, Calamints, Bays,
Lavender-flowers, Cinnamon, and Cloves have been infused.

Or the stilled Waters of Orange flowers, Roses, or Lemmons, or of those Plants
which were steeped in wine.

Or other waters of Plants seeds, and Spices, that smell sweet, which with Musk
or Ambergreese will be more pleasant.

Also there are sweet Ointments of Musk and Ambergreese dissolved in Oil of
Been or the like, which take not away the Scent of the other Compositions if
they be added. Civet is to be used alone.

The stilled Oils of Cinnamon, Cloves, Marjoram, and the like, mixed with white
Wax, and put into the Nostrils do smell strongly, and last long.

If a wound be in the rough Artery, The Cure of breath from a Wound.
which sends forth Air, Breath or Scent, it is deadly for the most part,
because that part cannot easily be cured. But if the wound be in the breast and
the internal part hurt, it is the like for the most part, although as I showed
in the Diseases of the Lungs, I saw one escaped that had a wound in his Lungs,
The other wounds of the Breast without hurt of the internal parts must be cured
as ordinary wounds.

When wind comes from a wound, that shows the Stomach and Bowels to be hurt,
and it is incurable. I know other wounds in the Guts that have been cured.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Voiding of Seed.
The Kinds,
A Spermatick Excretion or Voiding of Seed in men, is the Effusion of it by the
Yard, in Women it uses to be Naturally into the cavity of the womb; and it is
preternatural, when it is too much or flows sooner then it ought, and the
more when it is foul, or passes by an improper way.

Too great Effusion of Seed weakneth very much, and makes the Body faint, and
unfit for its Offices, and discoloureth it, and hastneth Age and Death; and it
comes either by Venery or without.

When there is too great Effusion of Seed by Venereal Acts, Too much Venery.
Men through Intemperancy and Luxury destroy themselves, and Women that before
were strong, grow weak, and men by that means are unfit for Procreation, and
women for Conception: so that as it may be observed in men only, The Voiding of
imperfect and crude Seed.
they send forth in Copulation only a drop or too: or it is not concocted but
crude and bloody, and rather Blood then Seed.

If Seed fall out without a Venereal Act against the will it is called a
Gonorrhaea or Running of the Reins; and if it be with pleasure, because it
often comes in the sleep and Dreams, it is called a Nocturnal Pollution. And if
it be often, because it weakneth as a Venereal Act, it is preternatural: and it
does more weaken, if it be without pleasure night and day, and crude and watery
for Continuance.

Sometimes there is an involuntary Effusion of venomous Seed without sense of
delight, A venomous Gonorrhaea or Running of the Reins.
which is not like Natural Seed, but is like a certain white and yellow Venom,
after which follows matter at the Yard, and heat of Urin: as we shall show, and
this is called a virulent Gonorrhaea, which is commonly a symptom of the French
Pox, as we showed, sometimes it is without it, in some especially unclean
Strumpets with which she infecteth them that trade with her, with the Pox or a
Disease like it.

Hitherto you may refer the involuntary Effusion of Seed in the Fallingsickness
and Convulsion, The Voiding of Seed in a convulsion.
and although it do no hurt, yet it is preternatural.

We showed, that Seed might flow preternaturally by another Passage, The
voiding of Seed at another Passage.
namely by some Origmal Passage, or Fistula under the Yard of a Man, either
from a defect in Conception, or which may cause the same Defect.

It is also preternatural, The too quick Effusion of Seed.
if the married people do not at the same time spend their seed, especially
when it is at the beginning of Copulation, or before by the way, because this
causes a defect in the Venereal Act, so that it either is not, or diminished
and imperfect.

Hither may also be referred that Effusion of Seed, when only a little froth is
voided with vehement desire, without sense of satisfaction in pleasure, by
which though they are not weakened, yet it hinders the persection of the Art.
Some say that matter flowing from the Brain may be sent forth of the Yard, but
it seems improbable, because there is no plain passage into this common way for
the Seed and Urin.

The Causes.
The Cause of the mentioned preternatural Fluxes of Seed, is either from
Irritation, or provoking or Weakness, or Anastomosis, or from a Disease by
Consent.

Too much or too quick Effusion of seed, The Irritation or provoking of the
Seed-vessels, is the Cause of too much Venery and of a Gonorrhaea.
or involuntary in both Sexes, comes from the Irritation of the seed-vessels,
which pricks the expulsive Faculty. If the vessels swell from plenty of seed,
because it passes with delight, caufing many to be too much given to Venery;
it is the cause of too great Effusion, and of the weakness that follows,
except it be from Heat of Lechery, to show themselves powerful at Venereal
Game, or for gain sake, as Harlots do. And the same is done by Irritation, if
there be more heat or sharpness then is fit: as we showed in the Causes of
Lechery.

Also the same Seed by pricking, (through the Imagination only of the Act,
which is usual in dreams, and the like thoughts) being moved and sent forth,
causes Pollutions sleeping and waking.

Also this comes from the heat of Seed, so that it is sooner ejected in the
Action then it ought; or some part comes forth before the Act.

And also that it comes forth with Heat and Burning.

But if there be great sharpness in the Seed from Infection or Corruption, then
follows the virulent Gonorrhaea, or venomous Running of the Reins, coming
commonly from the French Pox. And this may come before they have the Pox from
some other Venom which was gotten by Infection of other seed in Copulation, and
so turned corrupt and sharp, by which means, not only this foul and involuntary
Excretion comes by the sharpness, but also in continuance of time an ulcer and
pissing of matter.

The involuntary Flux of Seed in the Gonorrhaea, The weakness of the
Seed-vessels is the Cause of a Gonorrhaea.
comes from the weakness of the Spermatick Vessels: when the seed is watery,
and not concocted to the likeness of milk; for then being thin it easily comes
from its place without sense or with very little, and without any Cause, or
with the least pricking not only in the Yard, but Fundament, when the stools
are very hard, or as Fernelius speaks of one, when a Clyster is given. And this
weakness comes from distemper, especially cold, or want of Natural Heat in the
Parts, or the whole Body which makes the Seed so watery. For it is not likely
that the Waterishness of the Seed should come from Phlegm, because it is made of
blood, which though it be crude and watery, yet the stones and breasts do
always take the purest blood to make seed and milk, in foul Bodies full of
Excrements, as appears by men of evil Habit of Body getting Children, and women
that nourish their Children, by giving suck when their Blood is impure.

Also Weakness coming from the looseness of the seedvessels, produces sometimes
a Gonorrhaea, when the places containing the seed in their windings, and the
Vessels that carry it, are too large and loose, so that it may easily fall out.
This looseness comes from often Venery in a short time, sometimes sooner,
sometimes later to luxurious People, by which the baggs of seed being often
emptied and filled, and from the loss of spirits, are so loose and weak that
the seed is thin and watery.

By the opening the mouths of the Seed-vessels which make it of Blood, The
Anastomosis or opening of the mouths of the Seed-vessels, is the Cause of
imperfect and bloody Seed.
there comes bloody seed or blood instead thereof in Copulation, when by the
often Action, in a short time, the Vessels that contain the seed are so empty,
that they draw blood or imperfect seed from the mouths of the seed-vessels
opened by this sucking. And this sucking comes from the Lechery, or Heat of the
Womb (as is said of African Women) as it happned to a Soldier a while since,
that lying forcibly with a Countrey-wench, was so brought down, that after
often Lechery he voided bloody seed, and by that means fell into a Consumption
that caused his death.

There is also an involuntary Effusion of Seed from a Disease in other parts,
The shaking of the Seed-vessels in a Convulsion, is the Cause of loss of Seed.
when the Seed-vessels suffer by consent, as the Nerves in a Convulsion, in
which through the forcible shaking which moves the whole Body, the Spermatick
vessels being shaken, do cast out seed sometimes, especially when it abounds,
even as by the same violence, through the pressing of the Muscles, of the
Belly, the Bladder being pressed, sends forth the Urin. And this is rather the
Cause of loss of seed in Convulsions, then the Convulsion of the Muscles of the
Seed, although they also suffer. For though in the Act of Venery, they help the
Effusion by gentle opening the Vessels, yet they do it not before the seed be
out of its bag, and is carried by them, wherefore in Convulsions they do not
help the Effusion, but the disorderly motion drives it from its place. Neither
does the Loosning of these Muscles in an Apoplexy cause the flux of seed as it
does of Urin, because these Muscles are made for Retention, and not as the
Sphincter.

The Cure.
If the involuntary flux of feed in both sexes, The Cure of the Gonorrhaea.
be by Nocturnal Pollution from plenty of seed, it is not regarded, because it
never comes but when it abounds, and hurts not much, and is cured either by
Marriage, or if not, by abstaining from things that increase it, and provoke it
forth. But if the Gonorrhaea come from hot and sharp seed, that must be
tempered. And if from weakness of the Vessels it be made too watery, it flow
too easily, or cannot be contained by reason of the looseness of the Vessels by
too much Venery, because it weakneth the Vessels must be strengthened, and the
seed thickened; all which may be done by the following Remedies applied to the
Causes of the Gonorrhaea.

Sometimes we purge, if the seed grow to sharp and watery from colerick and
watery Blood, to cleanse it, so that it may afford good matter to make seed.
And with such things as are fit for the Humor abounding, these are so ordinary,
they need not be mentioned here.

Things that alter are given to stay this Flux according to the diversity of
the Cause. And if it be from plenty of seed, we diminish it with Dryers, and
that by a proper quality destroy it or consume it; if from heat and sharpness,
we allay them with cool and gentle Remedies. If it be too thin and watery, we
thicken it; if the Vessels that contain it are weak or loose, we strengthen
them with astringent, hot and proper things. All which are partly done with the
Remedies mentioned in Saelacity or Lasciviousness, especially if the Gonorrhaea
come from plenty or heat of seed, which causes Lechery, and partly with these
following, which are fit for the Gonorrhaea that comes from any Cause.

A drying Powder that binds and works by Propriety. Take Roots of Orris,
Agnus Castus seeds and Coriander prepared, each one ounce; Seeds of Plantane,
Roses, Rue, Winter-cherries, Mints, each half a dram; Amber and red Coral, each
one dram; Frankincense, Mastick half a dram: make a fine Powder, give one dram
by it self, or with Sugar of Roses, or some convenient Liquor.

When you will dry and astringe more, you may ad these following to the former,
as Myrtle seeds, Bay Berries, Sumach, Yarrow, Agnus Castus, Rue, Roses, and
Ceterach, Acorns, Pomegranate flowers, the Powder of the Guts and Gizards of
Hens, Bulls, or Dears pizles, Hair of an Hare burnt, Ivory, Bole, Boodstone,
Crystal.

For to allay the heat and sharpness of the seed. Take the four great cold
Seeds two drams, the four less cold Seeds, especially of Purslain, Lettice or
Sorrel, each one dram; of Water-lilly roots or flowers and Roses, each one dram
and an half; of Gum Abarick or Traganth parched, one dram: make a Powder, to
which you may add the third or sourth part of the Powder aforesaid. Some add
Camphire to cool, or because it quenches the seed by a secret Quality.

A Decoction extinguishing the heat and sharpness, and staying the Flux.

Take of Orris and Water-lilly roots, each one ounce; the Leaves green or dry
of Agnus Castus, Coriander, Ceterach, Yarrow, Sumach, Plantane and Lettice,
each one handful; Mints, and Rue, each half a handful, Roses and Water Lillies,
each one pugil, of the four great cold Seeds half an ounce, of the four less
two drams, Plantane and Purslain seed, each one dram; Myrtles two drams, Winter
cherries half a dram: boil them in Water and red wine, and in three pints of
the strained Liqnor, dissolve two ounces of Syrup of Quinces, and with Sugar
boil it to halfes. Let him drink it often.

The Syrups of Purslain, Plantane, and others made of the Juyces and
Decoctions, of the aforesaid Plants, or of sharp things, as Citrons,
Pomegranates or Myrtles, is also good.

Also the Juyces of those Plants, and the distilled Waters of the same.

Also Conserves and Candies alone, or with the Pouders or Syrups aforesaid.

Sheeps Milk or stilled Milk often drunk, temper the sharpness of the seed.
Also an Emulsion of the cold seeds, of Almonds, and of white Poppy seeds, and
others mentioned in heat of Urin.

We sometimes use Clysters in this cause, as Topics to the part, because their
strength will reach from the Guts to the seed-vessels, they are made according
to the Cause, of a cooling Decoction, if heat be the cause, with dryers and
astringents, mentioned in the Decoction, and others, as Oak leaves, Cypress,
Pomegranate flowers, and the like, boil them in Water, red Wine, or a little
Vinegar.

Some use drying Injections of Tutty, and the like into the Yard.

Also Baths, Fomentations, Ointments which repress Lechery, may be here used.
Also a Fomentation of the Codds, made of the Roots of Dogs-tongue; or of a
Decoction of the Herbs mentioned for Decoctions and Pouders.

For strengthening of the Vessels that contain and carry the Seed, when they are
weakened or loosned, when the Gonorrhaea is old, or subject thereto. The Natural
hot Baths that bind, are good for some time continued. Or other artificial
Baths, of the virtue, to which you may add hot things to cherish the Native
Heat, as Rosemary, Marjoram, Lavender, and the like.

Also if Heat be the Cause, you may use Ointments to cool, dry and astringe,
such as work by propriety to the Reins or Codds.

Among which this is excellent. Take Oil of Myrtles, Mastick, Quinces, each
three ounces; Oil of Orris two ounces, Juice of Plantane, Purslain, Lettice,
Mints and Vinegar, each one ounce and an half; boil them till the Juice be
consumed, add Cypress roots, or Galls, Orris roots, Agnus Castusseeds, each one
dram; Juice of Sloes two drams, Spikenard one scruple, with Wax, make an
Ointment.

The Oil of Camphire is commended to the Codds, and Seam or Seat.

A thin leaden Plate applied at night to the Back, as it will restrain Lechery,
so will it cure the Gonorrhaea.

A Pillow stuffed with Wool, with Agnus Castus, and Rue, laid under the back is
also good.

Opening of a Vein is good, if it come from plenty of seed, especially where
there is Plethory, to take away the cause of seed.

Let them be dieted as in salacity or Lechery mentioned: and use much Vinegar,
for it wonderfully allayes the heat and sharpness of meat and seed. And if the
seed be too thin, let them eat gross meats, as Lentils, parched Beans, with
Vinegar; also Pine-nuts, Almonds, Rice; also Turtle and Parsnips.

A virulent Gonorrhaea is not to be cured, and stopped as another, The Cure of
a virulent or venomous Gonorrhaea or Running of the Reins.
because it comes from corrupt seed, which will hurt if retained, by ulcerating
the parts, but you must provide that better may follow that which Nature sends
forth. And this is completely done by curing the Fench Pox, if it be joined
therewith. But if it come after the Pox, which leaves an Ulcer in the Yard
which sends forth this matter, then you must cure it as a mattery Excretion, as
was showed there.

Also if this malignant Gonorrhaea come from another impure Copulation, because
it turns to matter, it must be cured as this.

Other involuntary Excretions of seed in Epilepsies and Convulsions, The Cure
of Seed flowing forth in Convulsions.
because they do no hurt, and neither the Patient, nor they about him observe
it is not regarded.

Too much Venery which causes Faintness, The Cure of too much Venery.
requires no other Cure but abstinence from immoderate use thereof. And for
that end I have in Salacity mentioned Medicines to quench the Heat. And let the
Body after be restored by nourishing and refreshing Diet: as we showed in the
involuntary Excretion of Seed.

When seed is spent sooner then it ought, The Cure of too quick Effusion of
Seed.
in the beginning or preparation to Venery, by which means the act is imperfect
and unprofitable for Conception, because it is too hot and moist; you must take
those things mentioned in the Gonorrhaea from Heat and Moisture, and this will
be cured with more ease then that, which is involuntary, if it be corrected,
and the Diet continued.

CHAP. V. Of Voiding of Blood
The Kinds,
THat Excretion of Blood which is according to Nature in Women's Courses, and at
the Nose, or Haemorrhoids turns preternatural, if it flow by places not
ordained for the same; or if the blood offend in quantity or quality: as we
shall show. But if blood be spet out, vomited, pissed, or void by stool, with
other Humors mixed, the Cure shall be mentioned in those Excretions.

If blood come forth at the Eyes though little, Bleeding of the Eyes.
which is very seldom, it is preternatural.

Or if the Ears send forth blood or matter with blood. Bleeding at the Ears.
I saw one that used to bleed at the Nose, who had a great beating pain of his
Head with redness of Face, and bled both at Nose and Ears very plentifully.

The Nose often bleeds, and it is called the Haemorrhagia. Bleeding at the Nose.
And because it is usual and Natural with some; it is not counted
preternatural, till it is immoderate, and the Patient faint or die, as it
happens to some both sound and sick. And in some Disease of the Nose, blood
flows forth with snot.

Pure Blood seldom flows from a Man's Yard without Pissing, Bleeding at the Yard.
and then it is preternatural^ and painful. Sometimes Blood instead of Seed is
voided in Copulation: which as I showed, is rather imperfect seed.

In Women there is a preternatural Flux of blood from the passage of the urin,
Voiding of blood by the passages of urin.
without pissing with great pain, when the stone is taken out of the Bladder.

The Natural Flux of the Terms is preternatural, if it be not at the night
time, or be longer, The immoderate Flux of the Terms.
or in great quantity; or after they have been long stopped; or when women have
been thought with Child, by reason of the greatness of their bellies, through
that stoppage, and then have them suddenly, and in great quantity with great
weakness and hazard of life. But that Flux is preternatural and different from
the Flux of the Terms, In old Women there is a Flux of blood from the womb
different from the Terms.
if when the Terms are past, and the Woman is old, it come without order,
sometimes more, sometimes less, remaining long, which we call not the Courses,
but an Haemorhagy of the womb.

Faintness, Palness and evil Habit follows these preternatural Purgations of
blood from the womb, either pure or mixed. And after a long stoppage, if there
come suddenlya great Flux, it weakneth and sometimes kills. I observed in three
Women which were past their Courses, this Haemorrhagy or Bleeding of the womb,
in one it lasted above two years, in the other a long time, and in one of them
with such great pain of the womb, almost continuing a whole year, not yielding
to any Medicines, it continued till death.

Sometimes the Flux after Childbirth is so great that the woman is much weakened
thereby. Bleeding after Childbirth.
And this is not only after a Natural birth, but after Abortion with great
Danger.

There is another Flux of Blood from the womb at the first Copulation of the
woman, Bleeding in the time of deflowring and Copulation.
when she loses her Virginity, such as when she has her Terms, and this
because it is counted the sign of Virginity, and therefore ought to follow, is
not counted preternatural or hurtful.

Also this bleeding in Copulation, is afterward and with great pain.

There is another Flux at the Fundament, besides that of a Dysentery, The
immoderate Flux of the Haemorrhoids.
Needing, or Liver-flux, which is common in both sexes, called Haemorroids, as
any other flux of blood may be called. Which albeit it is usual and profitable
to some Tempers and Constitutions, especially of Men, and sometimes of Women,
when old especially, coming not in order like the Courses, but once, twice, or
thrice in a year: yet is it preternatural, when it is immoderate, and flows too
long, or returns too often, and causes Faintness, Weakness, Paleness, evil
Habit and Dropsy, as we showed in other Fluxes of blood.

In this Flux, the Blood is separated from the other Excrements being almost
pure, and not so black as blood that flows from other parts. And if it be
discolored or impure, it will be rather very red or yellow, then otherwise.

When this Flux comes in a Disease, and does not good, as when it comes in
order, curing the Disease, but hurt by its violence, making the Body weak, it
is preternatural.

Also that which comes not Naturally, but by a violent Cause, as shall be
showed, and therefore is unprofitable, especially when painful, and hurt
follows, is preternatural

Besides this Flux of the Haemorrhoids, Another bleeding at the Fundament
different from the Haemorrhoids.
there are other preternatural from the Fundament. As that which is of little
blood appearing, coming from a violent Cause, with Itching and Pain.

Hither may be referred that bleeding in women, when the Terms come not only
from the womb, but Fundament. This is seldom, but sometimes it has ulcerated
the Parts.

It can scarce be without a Miarcle as in our Savior, The drops of blood from
the Pores of the Skin.
that Blood should sweat through the Pores of the skin. But we saw once in a
Child that had a Dropsy most of his Pores bloody, as if his Body had been
sprinkled with blood, and yet the blood did not flow or foul the Linen.

Blood usually flows from the body, Bleeding by wounds or Orifices.
not naturally by its orifices and wounds great or small, either made for
bleeding by Art or by Chance: as we shall show here, and as was declared in
Wounds, and the like Divisions of the Skin and Diseases.

Blood flows but little from the skin, when that is only divided without other
hurt.

When a Vein is opened, it leaps out abundantly, and this will weaken the
strength, if immoderate: As also when there is no need, and when it is done
rashly, and from an evil Custom, by which means many have grown weak and old
before their time.

In the opening of an Artery, the Blood being hot, leaps by starts, and if it
continue, it brings weakness and worse accidents. As it happened in the opening
of an Aneurism, there was a total loss of blood and strength which causes
Death.

We have feen in the Feet a Vein open of it self, as in Phlebotomy, and it has
flowed in great quantity into the Shoes be for Notice has been taken thereof.
And we have seen the same in the crooked Veins of the Thighs. And some say that
it has been so in the Face, Arms, Breast and under the Ribbs; from whence, if
it should come at night, and not be discovered, it would be as dangerous, as
bleeding over much from opening of a Vein by Art. This is rare in Men, but
usual in Horses, when they are very hot, but it does no harm.

When I was at School, I saw my School-fellow that sat next me, bleed at the
small Vein, in the tip of his Nose very much and often, and it opened of it
self, and this came from the heat of his Body by violent Exercise.

Sometimes the Blood flows more or less from the Habit of the Body in Wounds and
Amputations, and it is so great sometimes, that it causes great weakness,
except it be stopped.

Sometimes Blood flows from the internal Cavities of the Belly, Breast, Head
etc. In wounds there, or falls into the Cavities. And if this be immoderate, it
weakneth, and if it be contained in the Cavities, it grows together and
putrifies, and brings greater Symptoms then those that come from a Wound.

The Causes.
The Causes of all these Kinds of Bleeding from diverse Parts of the Body, is
either from the Solution of Continuity, by opening of the Mouths of the Veins,
or the solution of Continuity from the Hurt done to some Veins or parts
underneath.

Some comes from the opening of the Mouths of the veins according to their
diversity. The opening of the mouths of the Veins or Anastomosis in the Ears,
nose, neck of the womb, strait gut or skin is the Cause of bleeding in those
Parts.


The inward Veins of the Ears opened by Anastomosis, sometimes bleed much; and
this comes from the plenty or the thinness of the blood in the head but seldom,
for then Nature would rather send it forth by the Veins of the Nose, except it
flow both ways: as we showed.

The inward Veins of the Nose that come from the jugular Vein, that ascends
by the Jaws to the Brain, being opened by Anastomosis, cause an Haemorrhagy.
The Cause of this Anastomosis is the plenty of blood, which Nature desires to
discharge, by these tender Veins in that place of the Nose, which are more
easily opened, in Men who have no easier Passage for it. For that Evacuation
which they have by the Haemorrhoids, which is seldom, and but in some, is only
of that blood which is in the branches of the Gate-vein. But in Women, if they
be so full of blood, that it cannot be sufficiently discharged by the menstrual
Veins of the womb, or when the Terms are stopped, Nature does often send it
forth by the Nose. And this Haemorrhagy though it be not usual, yet it is
Natural, except it be immoderate. Also when Blood is too hot, it opens the
Veins of the Nose, either when it is so hot by Nature, or by Motion, Sunning or
Baths. Or if it be inflamed in hot Diseases of the Head or Fevers, it breaks
forth at the first, or in the height of the Disease by Crisis or judicially.
Also thin blood and more watery, and mixed with Choler, which sooner pierces
the Mouths of the Vessels, causes bleeding at the Nose. Hence in evil Habit,
Dropsies, and Jaundies, although blood abound not, this bleeding may be. But if
more Causes agree, the Flux will be the greater. And this is oftener and
greater, if the Veins be loose by Nature or often purging. Also it flows and is
increased by force, as violent and often blowing of the Nose, which opens the
Veins by force of the blood thither.

If the Veins in the Neck of the Womb, that come from the hollow Vein, be
opened by Anastomosis, there is great Effusion of blood. For as when these open
at their set time, they cause the Natural Flux of the Terms, so when they open
at other times, they cause a pr^^^ natural Flux which is immoderate, or the
like which is unseasonable, but like to the Courses which we mentioned before.
When the Mouths of the Veins are open by plenty of blood sent thither, in a
Plethory, and they bleed sooner and oftener, which is unseasonable, or when they
bleed at the appointed time, but immoderately: Or when the blood there, by its
Heat and Thinness, opens the Mouths of the Vessels, and causes an immoderate
Flux: Or when Nature discharging her self by this way of Superfluities, with
the Blood at the time of the Courses, or otherwise causes this unusual and
large Flux: In which the Blood is sometimes watery, and sometimes impure. But
this Flux is greatest, when much blood either pure or impure, is in the Veins
of the Womb, from the long stoppage of the terms, and suddenly breaks forth,
and so enlarges the Mouths of the Veins by its violence, that blood is not
only out of the womb, but other great Vessels which supply, and the Body left
as it were without blood.

And as this is in the Veins of the Neck of the Womb, so it is in those of the
bottom thereof, in Women that have had their Courses long stopped, which swells
their bellies: as we showed in Tumors, and when they open suddenly they cause a
dangerous Flux.

Sometimes there is a Flux of Blood from violence, when the Mouths of the Veins
of the Neck of the Womb are only opened without Solution of Continuity. And
this is often at the first Copulation, not by reason of the skin called Hymen,
being broken (as they suppose) because a Membrane has no blood, and if it came
from thence, it should be torn away. But which is more probable, it is from
that sudden and strong enlarging and dilating of the Orifice of the womb, or
from the Rubbing of the Neck of the Womb, which it has not felt before, that
the menstrual Veins are a little opened, and send forth blood like the Courses,
or at least some Sprinklings.

Also there may be a Flux of Blood at the womb, from Medicines that open the
Veins thereof, especially if they be strong, or things put into the womb, as
Pessaries, etc.

And, there may be an immoderate Flux after Childbirth, from the Causes that
the Terms overflow: and as it is Natural, to have the Vessels open and bleed,
so it is preternatural when the quantity is too great, or the blood too thin.

As the Haemorroids come Naturally from the opening of those Veins which come
from the branches of the Gatevein, yet they flow not so as the Terms, (by which
it is necessary that that blood in women that are fit to conceive, which is
laid up for the nourishing of a Child, should be avoided every month till they
do conceive) but only then, when the blood in the Meseraicks abounds, or is
hot and chollerick (as we showed in the Causes of intermitting Fevers that
Choler is chiefly increased) and abounds there, not carried into the hollow
Vein, or purged by the Gall, and therefore is sent forth by the Fundament which
is near, and which is ordained for other Evacuations also. So when these Veins
are too open, or too long closed, Nature, being provoked by the plenty of
blood, or the Heat thereof, or by Choler, which may cause great Diseases,
endeavors to make an immoderate Flux, and the rather, when the Veins are so
open, that they cannot close themselves. From which Cause I showed you that two
very Learned Men who lived a sedentary Life, and procured the Haemorroids by
Art, were brought to such a violent Flux, which could not be stopped, but
caused their Death.

But if Nature being moved, neither by Repletion or Impurity of blood, but by
other Causes, does send forth good Blood from the Meseraicks without Necessity;
this Flux will be preternatural, neither usual nor profitable.

By the opening of the Veins of the skin, blood cannot flow through it or the
Pores, nor by the Rarefaction or Diapedesis of the skin, can blood strain
through the like Sweat, because it is thither, and the Pores very little,
except the skin be divided, but if it be under the skin with the Sweat there it
stays, and causes the Hypochyma or Suffusion of Blood, which I spoke of. And
although as I showed in the Boy with the Dropsy, it was sprinkled about the
body, yet it past not through the skin, but stuck in the Pores, and this is
very rare.

There are many Fluxes of blood that come from the Solution of Continuity in
diverse parts, The dividing of the veins in the Eyes, ears, Yard, Womb,
Fundament, Skin, is the cause of Bleeding.
which differ in that Respect.

If the Tunicles of the Eye be rubbed when they itch, or divided, the Veins may
be hurt, and they may bleed though but a little.

Also they may bleed from the hurting of the horny Tunicle; For I observed in a
Boy that had a piece of sharp Glass in the Pupilla of his Eye which I drew
forth, that the blood was discussed without any hurt.

If the inward Veins of the Ears be hurt by things thrust into them, a little
blood may come forth; or more from a Fall or Stroke, when the Veins are broken.

If the inward Veins of the Nose be hurt, they bleed. This is done by the Nails
when they are pricked sometimes, or with other things, by which Men willingly
cause Bleeding; as when they provoke Sneesing it may happen. The same comes
from a blow or stroke upon the Nose, or a sharp Humor in the Nostrils. In the
Gravedo, that is, when a raw Humor falls into the Nose, the blood will flow,
especially when it is much blown. As also from the rubbing off of a Scab
therein.

If the Catheter or Instrument thrust into the Yard, do hurt the same, there is
a flux of blood alone, or with piss. And this may come also from a stone that
passes through the same.

Also the Veins of the Neck of the Womb being hurt cause bleeding: as in hard
travail, after the drawing away of the Secondine, which teareth the Vessels. Or
by the Child, which passing through a narrow place tears the same. Or from the
Abortion, when the Vessels of the Child growing to those of the womb, will not
so well be separated, as when the Child is ripe, but are violently broken.

Or there is a Flux from violent Copulation at the first or afterward.

There often follows a Flux of Blood, from the using of a widening Instrument
to the Neck of the Bladder, when they take out the Stone.

Also from the hurt of the strait Gut; the Veins thereof are of two sorts, if
the internal Veins be hurt, which come from the Meseraicks; there is a Flux of
Haemorrhoids, but it does no good: But if the inward Veins of the Fundament
that come from the hollow Vein, there is but a small Flux.

This comes often from things voided, as hard Excrements, or from sharp things
eaten, or sharp Suppositories, or from difficult Travail, which hurts the
Fundament by straining.

Or from a hollow Ulcer, going from the Neck of the Womb to the strait Gut, the
Terms may pass through the Fundament. For without a wound it cannot be so,
because Nature cannot make her way, where there is no Continuity of Veins, with
the Menstrual which come from the hollow Vein and the Haemorrhoidal which come
from the Gate-vein.

The Cause of all Bleeding in the outward Parts, is Solution of Continuity from
internal or external Causes: and they are diverse in respect of the Parts.

If the skin be flayed off by scratching, when it itcheth or the like, there
may be a little bleeding.

There will no great Flux come from a wound, only in the skin, when you cut it
for the crooked Veins curing, or for Tumors, it bleeds but little, till the
Veins be opened.

If any great Vein be opened under the skin, Opening of a Vein causes Bleeding.
there is bleeding, especially if it be cut, as in Phlebotomy, which so much
used to prevent and cure Diseases, in which there will be a great Flux, except
it be stopped: Or when any great Vein, as the Jugular is cut. And sometimes when
the crooked Veins are cut. And it happens that when the skin is cut for other
Causes, for Ruptures, or preternatural Tumors that the Veins are cut and bleed;
or by a Wound by chance.

Sometimes the Veins open of themselves, and bleed as if they were cut. When
the mouth of a vein opens of it self, it causes a Flux.
This is caused by Plethory, or Fullness, or by Heat, which may open the mouths
of the Veins, but seldom break them, except the Vein be very much stretched, as
in the crooked veins. Or when Nature has been used to be often discharged at
one part, and seeks to get out by the same, which is the easier done, when the
skin is thin, and the veins larger from the often opening.

When an Artery is opened by Art or otherwise there is a great loss of Arterial
Blood. The cutting of an Artery, the cause of bleeding.
Also there may be a strong and long Flux of Blood from an Artery pricked or
torn under the Teeth: If the Gums be only hurt, the bleeding is little. And if
you open an Aneurism that is let out the Blood that came from the Cutting of an
Artery to lodge under the skin, there follows a dangerous Flux of Blood.

If many Parts be wounded, A wound in the Parts is a Cause of Bleeding.
the bleedings are diverse. Some wounds are made to cure Diseases, as
Imposthumes, Tumors, the Stone in the Bladder, Ruptures: Others are by
accident. In which if one or more of the great Veins or an Artery be cut, the
bleeding is greater. And because Nature has placed those great Veins, that
they may be safer under the Muscle of the Arms and Thighs, the bleeding is
greater. And as in great Vessels, so if the small Veins only are hurt, or if
the fleshy Parts be only wounded, the Flux is less. And in great wounds of
great veins, if the blood fall into the internal Cavities, as of the Belly or
Breast, there will be no great flux at the wound. When such wounds are made by
art, not only the blood but matter, which you desire may be let out therewith.

The greatest Fluxes are from the Cutting off of Members, which must be done
when they are uncurable or putrified; or when an Arm or Leg is cut off first,
and then the bone sawed asunder; or when the smger is cut about the flesh, and
then the bone nipped off with a pair of Forceps; or when any Parts that stick
out and want bones, are cut off as the Nose, Ears, Lips: or wounded by chance.

The Cure.
When Bleeding comes from the Anastomosis or opening of the Mouths of the
Vessels because it is great, that is first to be treated of, because we did not
explain the Cure thereof in other Diseases.

When the Ears bleed from Anastomosis, The Cure of bleding at the Ears.
because it is seldom and from great plenty, it requires no particular Cure, if
it be joined with the bleeding at the Nose, you must first look to that.

If Bleeding at the Nose do good, The Cure of bleeding at the Nose.
as when it takes away fullness, or foulness, and stays a Disease, it must not
be hindered, unless it be so often that the strength fail. Otherwise when it
does hurt coming from Heat, Thinness, Force, or the like, if it be immoderate,
it must sooner be stopped: if it be little, or without Snot, it is to be
regarded. And if it comes from an Ulcer, that is first to be cured.

The best Method to cure it, is to take away the Cause, when it comes often,
especially at the time that it flows not, if it come from Plethory, by
diminishing the blood, and if it be hot or thin to temper it. But when the
blood flows, you must endeavor to draw it from the Nose, and to stop the
Passages, and drive it back: which is done by these following.

You must open a Vein in the Arm, on that side that the Nose bleeds, that that
blood may follow from the Head into the place of that which is let out, and so
be drawn from the Nostril; you must not take much at a time, but stop the Vein,
and then bleed a little more, and so by often stopping and bleeding, the blood
will be turned, and the Patient not be weakened.

Scarification is like Blood-letting to attract, but is not so violent, because
it draws only at the small Veins in the skin: This is best in the Shoulders and
sides of the Neck. Some commend it in parts more remote, as in the Wrists.

Also you may draw blood from the Nose by Horsleeches behind the Ears.

Cupping-glasses with a great flame, do drive the blood if often applied,
behind the Ears and Shoulders: they are best to the Breasts in Women. And if
the right. Nostril bleeds, apply a great Cupping-glass under the right Ribs,
and if the left under the left.

Ligatures made with Roulers, or the like to the Arms and Feet, do restrain the
violence of the blood running to the Nose, and draw it from the Head, if they
be tied till the Part be red or pained; and this is better in the Fingers and
Toes where there is less danger, it is dangerous in the Codds.

Frictions also or violent Rubbings of the Parts do draw down the blood.

We purge, when the Blood is too watery or choleric, because choleric blood
pricks and provokes, and water makes it flow; and by cleansing the blood in an
old Haemorrhagy or Bleeding, we have done very much.

We purge with gentle things, for hot and sharp Medicines will inflame the
blood after and weaken the Patient; and with things that bind, as Rhubarb,
Myrobalans, Juice and Syrup of Roses, Senna, and the like, or with stronger
things mentioned when there is much Choler or water.

We use things that alter which are cold and drying, or thicken the blood, or
with some other Property stay the flux.

The Decoction of five leaved Grass, Plantane, Shepheard-purse, Solomon's Seal,
Myrtles, Comfrey, Horsetayl, Mousear, Sanicle, Pyrola or Winter-green, and the
like, mentioned in Wounds, with Lettice, Water Lillies, Sorrel, and
Rose-flowers.

You may make Syrups of the Decoctions of the same, mentioned in Spitting of
Blood; and these of Sorrel, Lemmons, Pomegranates, Quinces, and Water Lillies.

The Juyces also are good of these and the Plants, mentioned in Spitting of
Blood, used as there is taught: and with those sour Syrups and Juyces, as
Pomegranate-wine and Vinegar, or used for Sauce.

Also the distilled waters of the same Plants, as of Sorrel, Water Lillies, and
Roses, as there mentioned.

And the Powder of the Troches there mentioned against Spitting of Blood are
good here, or of stronger things then may be given for Diseases in the Breast.
As, Take Bole or sealed Earth two drams, Boodstone, red Coral, each one dram;
of Bulls or Dears Horn burnt, half a dram, Pomegranate-flowers and Plantane
seed, each one scruple: make a Powder.

The Conserves are that of Roses which is old, Violets, Water Lillies, Succory,
Sorrel, and Comfrey-roots candied etc.

Electuaries are made of these Syrups, and Pouders and Conserves, or that for
Spitting Blood, that begins; Take old Conserve of Roses, and Violets, etc.

Potions are made of Syrups, Juyces, Waters and Pouders, or you may give those
mentioned in Spitting of Blood.

To allay the expulsive Faculty of Nature, you may give Narcoticks, which will
be proper, as we showed in spitting of blood, or Pills of Dogs-tongue, Syrup of
Poppies, or the Powder there mentioned: And other things mentioned in the
Colic, choosing those which are coolest, and have less hot things, with which
they that do correct Narcoticks do ill, because they are hot.

You must put Astringents and Dryers into the Nose, or things that bring a
Crust by burning a little, or that stop by glewing these, or snuffed up, or put
up with the finger like an Ointment; or are put into a Sponge covered with a
Clout, or blown up. They are made as follows.

Some Plants only a little bruised may be put up, as Plantane, Horse-tayl, or
the Root Shepheard-purse, Yarrow, Willow herb, and other Astringents: Also
Leeks, Basil, Nettles, Bettony, and Rue according to Dioscorides.

Also the Juyces of these Plants.

This following Powder is good to be blown up, or put up with the white of an
Egg, and a little Vinegar, or with a Clout.

Take Frankincense two parts, Aloes one part, make a fine Powder; Spiders webs,
or Touchwood, or Hairs of an Hare may be added, but because you cannot cut Hair
so, but it will prick the Nose, you may leave that out.

Another. Take Galls one dram, Juice of Sloes, Dragons blood, Mummy, each half
a dram; Varnish one scruple: make a Powder.

You may mix it with the former.

A third very strong. Take Bole, Plaster of Paris, each one dram; burnt
Vitriol and Alum, each half a dram: make a Powder.

You may use the Powder of Troches of Amber.

Asses Dung is commended both dry, and the Juyces with Vinegar, adding the
Pouders or Juyces aforesaid, and a little Hoggs Dung, which is as good as that
of Asses.

The Ashes of Paper, Rags, Hares Hair, Cotton, Sponge, Egg-shells, burnt by
themselves, or with their Yolks; also of Snails and Froggs: also Soot is very
good.

The Blood which flows if it be long stopped, till it clodder will stop the
Veins. Also the same burnt with Eggshells and their Yolks to powder.

Spiders webbs alone, or mixed Mill dust, and Touchwood poudered sine: Also the
Down of Willow-flowers, and other Plants, and of white Poplar, and other Down
that sticks to Leaves, first steeped in Vinegar and dried, thrust into the Nose
stop the veins, with the help of the congealed blood.

Also dip Clouts, or Cotton or Silk in Ink, such as they write with, and dry
them, and put them into the Nose, or make them into Powder.

And burnt Vitriol with Orpiment and Asses Dung, and the Juyces aforesaid.

The smell of strong Vinegar, with Camphire, is also good.

That Moss which sticks to old walls and tyles of houses, that is moist and
sandy at the Roots, if you hold it to the Nose, and snuff up the scent which is
cold and moist, does stop bleeding at the Nose suddenly when all things fail.

Let him hold cold water in his Mouth, and renew it often when it grows warm.

There are things outwardly to be applied for stopping of blood at the Nose,
which work both by manifest and hidden Qualities.

They which do it manifestly are actually cold, or potentially cold, which
allay the Heat of the Blood, and by thickning it, keep it from flowing, and
stop the Passages by binding. These are applied to the parts following.

To the sides of the Neck by which the veins and Artetyes ascending to the
Head, pass to the inward branches of the Nose, to stop up the blood from
flowing thither. And these do good applied to the Temples and Forehead by
cooling and thickning; they are made of the following Remedies.

Epithems are made of Water and Vinegar, a Clout being dipped therein, applying
it very cold, with which you may also wet the Face.

You may add the Juice of Plantane, and to make the Liquor stick better, the
white of an Egg beaten or Mil dust, and instead of common water, the distilled
water of Plantane or Shepheards-purse, and of other astringent Plants, and of
Rose Water: The Juice of Nettles applied to the Temples does also stop Bleeding
at the Nose.

Other Applications that stick longer, are thus made. Take Juice of Plantane
four ounces, red or Rose-vinegar two ounces, the Juice of sour Grapes one ounce
and an half, Bole six drams, Dragons blood half an ounce, Pomegranate-peels or
flowers, two drams, Wheat flower or Starch, one dram, three Whites of Eggs
beaten, apply them with Cotton or a Clout.

Another. Take Galls one ounce, Frankincense, or Mastick and Varnish, each half
an ounce; Juice of Sloes two drams, Boodstone one dram; mix them with
convenient Liquor, as Juice of Plantane, Shepherds purse, Solomon's Seal,
Blood-wort, or other Astringents, or with Vinegar, and whites of Eggs, or the
Infusion of Gum Traganth.

You may add to these other astringent Pouders, as of sealed Earth,
Fullers-earth, red Coral, burnt Ivory, Asses Dung, or Swines Dung, Roots of
Snakeweed, Cypressnuts, Myrtle-seeds.

We showed in the Cure of Ophthalmy or Redness of the Eyes, Emplasters that
keep the Blood from flowing into them, and they are good here. As those that
are to be applied to the Forehead and Temples. Also the common defensative of
Bole there mentioned, which is very good, if two of them be laid to the
Jugulars on each side of the Neck.

Ointments though they are weaker, may be used to these parts of astringent
Oils, as of Roses, Omphacine, Myrtles, Mastick, with the Juyces aforesaid, and
Vinegar, and the astringent Pouders.

Or that which is mentioned in Ophthalmy to be used after the defensative.

Cataplasmes of these astringent Herbs whose Juice we commended, are good,
applied to the places aforesaid, to which you may add others mentioned.

Cold things applied to the Stones, because they have many vessels that carry
blood, and have great consent with the whole Body (as appears by the change of
Constitutions in them that are gelt) do stop the bleeding at the Nose.

If they be washed with a Clout or Sponge dipped in cold water or snow-water,
because it is less dangerous to the Stones then the Head, or with Vinegar, or
the like mentioned.

They do the same applied to the Breasts, because there are also many veins.

Cooling of the Hands and Feet is also good, with Vinegar and Water, or wetting
the wrists where the Pulses beat, or the Palms of the Hands and Soales of the
Feet therewith: Or hold Flints or Iron in the Hands, or the like, or apply
Plates of Lead to the Feet.

The same do well under the Armpits, because the veins meet there. Or,

Plung the whole Body in cold water except the Head, to cool the blood; this is
good for strong people in hot weather, but not for weak.

You must apply things that are potentially cold to the Liver to cool the
Blood, especially if the Liver be very hot.

As those Epithems which are mentioned in the Cure of the Inflammation of the
Liver, and of continual putrid Fevers; and the Ointments there mentioned.

These following Amulets are said to cure the Bleeding at the Nose by an occult
Quality, if hanged about the Neck, or held in the Hands, so that they touch not
the naked flesh.

Beads are thus used, made of precious Stones chiefly the Jasper, the Cornalian
or Coral. These about the Neck cool the jugulars and soporal Arteries, and
stanch blood.

The touching and wearing of some Plants is good, Perwincle, Shepheards-purse,
Snakeweed-roots, Moss of a dead Man Skull, and of Box-tree.

They say the Carpe-stone held in the Mouth being cold stops bleeding at the
Nose; it is thought to be a square Grisle between the Head of the Carpe, and
the first spondil partly Bone, partly Grisle, and therefore it is found in the
Palate. But there is another stone found in the brain of a Carpe near his Eye,
like a half Moon harder then that is found in other Fishes as the Perch; Beads
made of the Stones mentioned, cooled in water as they grow hot, held in the
Mouth or applied. The Root of Perwinkle and of Dandelion held under the Tongue
does the same.

Nettles put under the Cap will stop bleeding at the Nose, also if the
Forehead be anointed with the Juice thereof.

Also Perwincle with Salt, or Niter or Vitriol beaten and applied to the Head
or Forehead.

Because Imagination does much, I shall tell you what some say, viz. That if
you write with the Blood upon the Forehead, It is finished, it shall stop. I
shall omit the other as superstitious and wicked.

The Diet must be as follows, because some things hurt, and others do good.

Let him be in cold Air rather then hot, not too light or near the Sunshine,
because it tickleth the Nose, and moves the expulsive Faculty to neesing; as
also strong Scents; the vulgar think that beholding the Blood or red Colors
does also provoke bleeding; but this may be from Imagination.

Let his Meat be such as keeps the blood from being thin, gross and
glutinating, of young Beasts feet well boiled, and the like, green Cheese, but
a little salted, Rice, Barley, and binding Fruits, as Quinces, Pears, and
cooling Pot Herbs, Endive, Lettice, Purslane boiled and crude in Sallets: Let
him take heed of spices and salt.

Let him drink water and not wine, except the strength fail. And though he
cannot abstain from wine, that is very subject to bleeding: let him beware of
Drunkenness. And let his wine not be strong, but red and mixed with water, and
somewhat sharp.

Rest is good, for Motion will cause the flux to increase, therefore let the
parts especially near the Nose be at rest. Let him not speak much or loud; and
not chew violently any hard thing.

Let himly with his Face upwards, his Head backwards, that the Blood may go
back, and it will do good, provided the blood fall not into his Mouth, or
descend farther which is worse.

A sudden Commotion or Passion of the Mind draws the blood in, and stops it.
This you may do by a fright, if his strength will bear it. Fainting and
Swounding does it better, and presently stops Bleeding. But this we shall not
advise to be forced because of the Danger. But when it comes of it self from an
over bleeding, we have observed that it has often stopped the blood.

Bleeding at the womb which is Natural to Women, The Cure of the over flowing
of the Courses and other Fluxes of the Womb.
if it be somewhat too violent, because some Bodies require more, some less, if
it cause no Distemper, is not rashly to be stopped. But if you fear Diseases as
Dropsies, then you must stop in time. And as if the Terms flow more violently
and oftener then usual; Or when they have long been stopped with a swelling in
the belly, they break out violently in great quantity, and with great weakness
and danger of life. Or if the purging after Birth be too great, especially
after Abortion, which is no less dangerous. That Flux which women have in age
when their Courses have lest them is preternatural, and cannot continue without
harm, must be also stopped, and the rather if it be large, often, and of long
Continuance. That bleeding which comes from external violence, especially from
Copulation, if it be at the loss of Maidenhead, because it is not much, and
hurts not, and is a good sign is not regarded, especially if the Terms come the
sooner for it. But if it be great and from some great hurt, either at the first
or other Copulations, it must be stopped.

That bleeding which comes from the tearing of the neck of the Bladder in a
woman when a Stone is taken out, requires no other Cure but that of other
wounds.

The Cure of all Bleedings at the Womb is by Evacuation of blood, and turning
it from the womb, with things that make it more pure, thicker, and less
flowing, and stop the places by which it is carried thither. Or that act by a
hidden Property, you must proceed according to the cause with some of these, as
considering whether it came by violent use of hot and sharp Meats, the violent
Motions of Body or Mind.

Blood-letting is good to prevent it in those that are subject to it, if it be
in the Arm, and in women with Child, if they formerly had the same in
Childbirth, for it has bin so often used to the same woman, being full of
blood and has not taken the Nourishment from the Child, as some suppose.

In the time of the Flux to drive it back, it is good to open a Vein in the
Arm, or Hand or other place above, not below, for in the Foot it provokes the
Terms. And you must take a little at a time and by degrees, for much will
weaken.

Great Cupping-glasses, or many little ones are applied under the breasts to
draw up the blood, because the Veins there, and of the womb consent. And they
may also be applied to the right side, and to the shoulders. Frictions of the
extreme parts, are here also good.

If water in the blood causes it to be fluid, you must sweat often in dry
baths before the flux to prevent, but in the flux it will heat and move the
Humors, and do more hurt then good.

If there be Water and Choler in the blood which causes the flux, you must
purge them away. But this is better to prevent before the flux comes from them;
you may use the stronger Medicines, which you cannot well do in the flux,
because it would more weaken, and inflame the body, and by moving it, increase
the Flux.

And then if the belly be bound, use gentle Lenitives, that leave an
Astriction, as Rhubarb, Myrobalans, and the like, mentioned in Dysenteries.

And this Potion. Take Tamarinds and stoned Prunes, each six drams; yellow
Myrobalans half an ounce: boil them in Water and the third part Wine, and when
it is strained, infuse half a dram of Rhubarb, of Spikenard one scruple, strain
them, and add Syrup of red Roses dried one ounce, give it at once. It will work
better with a little Senna, and not stir up Nature much, because the Juice
being taken out by Decoction, is very like the Juice of Rhubarb, and of Saffron
Color, by which we gather that it does not differ in strength: And because it
is used as Rhubarb in many diseases from Choler.

Or this. Take yellow Myrobalans poudered two drams, infuse them in red Wine,
with one scruple of Spike, strain them, add Syrup of Roses solutive one ounce,
Rhubarb finely poudered two scruples, or a dram, give it at one dose.

Half an ounce of Tryphera Persica taken does the same, because it has many
astringents, and things that allay the heat of the blood.

It is not safe to give other hot and sharp Compositions which have Scammony,
or Agarick, or Turbith, in a great flux, because by pricking, they force the
Terms.

We give things that alter which thicken the blood, and allay its heat, and
bind the Passages, and stop it. Many whereof have been mentioned in the
Bleeding at the Nose, and Spitting blood which are good here, but these are
chiefest that follow.

Let them eat things that breed thick blood, of Flower of Bread-corns, and
Pot Herbs of glutinating flesh, and green Cheese; to which they add sour Milk,
and Eggs, and the like, mentioned in immoderate Pissing.

Let them use astringent Fruits crude or boiled, or diverse Sauces made hereof,
as Quinces, Pears, Services, Cornel-berries, Medlars, Mul-berries,
Black-berries, Sloes, Straw-berries, Currance, Myrtles.

Of Pot Herbs, Purslane, Lettice, Endive, Succory, Sorrel, Plantane; boiled in
broth, or raw in Sallets: to which you may add other plants, mentioned in the
Decoction which taste less like Physic.

Let him drink Decoctions often, and if they must be kept, boil them to Syrups.

The best ordinary Syrups are of Myrtles, and red Roses dried.

Or this Decoction. Take Comfrey roots one ounce, Plantane with the Roots,
Shepheards-purse, Yarrow, each one handful; red Rose flowers one pugil,
Pomegranate flowers two drams, Myrtle and Plantane seeds, each one dram; boil
them in Rainwater, add to the straining, as much Sugar as will make a Potion
for three doses, or boil it to a Syrup with Sugar.

Decoctions may be made of diverse others, mentioned in Bleeding at the Nose, as
of Herbs for the vulnerary or wound-drink, of Winter-green, Agrimony,
Horse-tayl, Sanicle, wild Tansey, Moufear, Comfrey, Solomons-seal,
Straw-berries, Bears-ear, Sumach, Shepherds rod, Lungwort, Blood-wort, Burnet,
Sorrel, Purslane, Moon-wort, wild Basil, Mints, Arsmart, Phoenice,
Rock-Comfrey, flower, Leaves and Roots, Myrtle leaves, Mastick leaves, Olive
leaves, Oak leaves, Brambles; also Roots of Avens, Ras-berries, Water Lillies,
Sulphur-wort, Sanders, Brasil, Lote-tree, Olive Tree, Pomegranate-peels, Roses,
Grapes,

The Indian Milium-flower gentle.

Some Juyces are given, either crude or boiled to a syrup, as those of sour
Fruits, Quinces, Pomegranates, Currance, Bar-berries. These Juyces with Sugar
may be set in the Sun, and so they will have a taste and scent like wine. These
Juyces are made into Lozenges with Sugar, and are very delicate, with Rose and
Plantane water and the like. And instead of these, you may use other sour
Juyces, as of Citrons etc.

You may likewise use the Juice of some plants by themselves or boiled, as of
Plantane, Sorrel, Purslane made into Syrups; and of Shepheards-purse, and
Yarrow; and as Dioscorides teaches, the Juice of Water-bettony, and
Goats-beard, and Arsmart.

Waters simple or mixed, are of Plantane, red Roses, Shepheards-purse,
Purslane, Sorrel, and the like abovesaid.

Some approve the water of Snails: and that wherein Iron is quenched.

Mucilaginous or slimy things also, as whites of Eggs, Mucilage of
Quince-seeds, Gum Traganth etc.

The old Conserve of Roses, and Tablets of Powder of red Roses, with Sugar
candied, or conserved Comfreyroots; also the Conserve of Peach-flowers: or
others of Sorrel, or of the Plants mentioned.

These following Troches may be taken with sugar of Roses, or with wine and
water, or in Electuaries, or Potions.

The troches of Amber, thus made. Take Amber, Gum Arabic, Traganth, Mastick,
Frankincense, Lacca, Acacia, or Juice of Sloes, burnt Hearts horn, Coral,
Pomegranate-flowers, black Poppy-seeeds, Saffron and Mucilage of Fleabane.

The troches of Terra Lemnia. Take Terra Lemnia, Bole, Boodstone, Coral,
Pearl, burnt Horts horn, and Ivory, Amber, Gum Arabic, Traganth, Frankincense,
Juice of Sloes, Dragons blood, Roses, Pomegranate-flowers, Seeds of Purslane,
Roses, black Poppyes, Galls, burnt Starch, Plantane-water.

The troches of burnt Ivory. Take Spodium, or burnt Ivory, Gum Arabic, Seeds
of Sorrel, Purslane, Coriander, Grains of Sumach, Bar-berries, burnt Starch,
the Juice of Grapes.

Instead of which you may make these pouders following, as this of Plants. Take
of the Leaves of Plantane or Agrimony, or Horstayl, Myrtles, or Oak, Roses,
Pomegranate flowers, each one dram; Seeds of Plantane, Sorrel, or Docks,
Purslane, Coriander prepared, Cummin torrefied, each half a dram; Cypress-nuts,
Galls, Myrtle-berries, Bar-berries, Sumach, Pomegranate and Grape Kernels, each
one drams; Hazle-nuts, Ches-nuts or Acorns, each one scruple; red Sanders,
Cypress-nuts, each half a dram; Spike half a scruple, Acacia, Gum Arabic,
Frankincense, Mastick, Dragons blood, each one scruple: make a powder. Which
with the Infusion of Gum Traganth in Rose or Plantane-water, make into Troches.

Another is thus made. Take Amber, red Coral, Bole, or Terra Lemnia, each one
dram and an half; Boodstone half a dram, Pearl one scruple, burnt Hearts horn,
and Ivory, each one dram, Cuttle-bone half a dram, burnt Egg-shells one
scruple: make a powder.

This is stronger. Take Cork, Pomegranate peels, Dates, Roses, Mary-thistle,
Acorns, roasted Chestnuts, Berries of bloody Rod, Nut shells, burnt Date stones,
Ashes of Bee-nettle, dried Mulberries, Services, Cornil-berries, Medlars,
Lemmon Kernels, and of Sea bull-rushes, Water Lillies, Piony, Juniper Berries,
Mummie, the Runnet of a Kid and Hare, Snakes skins, precious Stones, Jasper,
and burnt Oyster-shells: Some add the filings of Iron.

There are diverse Mixtures of the aforesaid, as Juleps, Waters with Syrups, or
Potions, Decoctions, Pouders, Electuaries, Conserves, Syrups.

You may make pills of those that are unpleasant, that they may be the better
taken, or of prepared Steel or Iron quenched in Vinegar, not in Aqua fortis, as
Crocus Martis is made, though some say this makes women barren: Also of dried
Goats dung. To which you may add other things, and with Syrup convenient, make
pills.

Some women say this is experienced, you must swollow nine turds of the greater
sort of Mice.

Also things mentioned for the Haemorrhoids are good here, as pills of
Bdellium, Micleta, Electuary of Myrtle-berries, or the Consection of Rhasis,
made of Filings of Iron.

Narcoticks stop the Terms as well as other Fluxes, and because they provoke
sleep (which stops all fluxes but Sweating,) they are good. You must give those
Compositions that have Opium besides the things that stop blood, as Troches of
sealed Earth, of Amber, with Opium, and Diacodium Galeni, Philonium Persicum,
and others that have Terra Samia, Lemnia, Bole, Coral, Starch, Juice of Sloes,
pomegranate flowers, Juice of plantane, with Henbane seeds and Opium. There are
other Narcoticks, as Syrup of poppies, the Decoction of poppy topps and the
like, mentioned for the Colic, with things which stay fluxes, as Syrup of
Myrtles, Bole, Acacia, it is good to give one scruple of Henbane seeds with
some of the same, or as in the Spitting of Blood. Some give poppy seeds instead
thereof.

Outwardly you may stop the blood with Ointments and Applications to the Reins
and privities.

Anoint them with Oil of Roses, Myrtles, Quinces, Mastick.

Or Oil wherein sour and unripe Fruits have been boiled, as pears, Sloes,
Medlars, Cornil, and Service-berries, or Juice of plantane, Shepheards-purse,
Solomons-seal, Leaves of Brambles, Oaks, adding red Vinegar as much as Oil.

Some think that Stupefactives to the womb are good, as Oils that do take away
sense, as Narcoticks, and so they stop Fluxes, and not by cooling. Oil of
Henbane or the like, wherein Opium is dissolved, or Barks of Mandraks, and the
like.

Of Ointments, that of the Countess is the best, made of these following boiled
in Plantane-water, as inward rinds of Acorns, Chestnuts, Beans, Celandine,
Snakeweed, or Tormentil roots, Horstayl, Capars, Sloes, Medlars, Acorn cupps,
Galls, Myrtle-berries, Grape stones, with Galls, Ashes of Ox bones, Troches of
Amber, Oil of Myrtles and Wax.

The usual Ointments are of Roses, that cools the Reins. Such take away the
Heat from the Blood which is sent plentifully from the Emulgents to the
Kidneys, and so stop the Flux.

Also the Plaster against the Rupture, applied before and behind to the Region
of the Womb.

Or this Ointment. Take Bistort, or Snakeweed, Tormentil, Galls, Acorn cupps,
Cypress-nuts, Pomegranat peels, each one dram and an half; Pomegranate flowers,
Myrtle-berries, Grape kernels, Acacia, each one dram; Dragons blood half a
dram, Bole one dram and an half, red Coral one dram, Mastick two drams, with
Oil of Roses or the like, in which Vinegar has been boiled, and with Wax make
an Ointment, or with Rosin and Pitch an Emplaster. These may be also applied to
the Soles of the Feet.

The Troches of Amber, sealed Earth, Ramich etc. are better inwardly then
outwardlp used.

You must use Fomentations about the Privities, or baths to sit in, of the
Decoction of these, Roots of Snakeweed, Tormentil, five leaved Grass, Acorus,
Comfrey, Pomegranate peels, Plantane, Shepheards-purse, Solomons-seal,
Brambles, Horstayl, Sumach, Mullein, Tamarisk, Sage, Mints, red Roses,
Pomegranates, Galls, Acorn-cupps, Cypress-nuts, Myrtles-berries, Sumach, Sloes,
Acacia and other sour Fruits, and if stronger is required, burnt Chalk, Bole,
Alum, or Vitriol: boil them in Iron-water, or red Wine, and a little Vinegar.

An Epithem to be laid to the part, is made of Plantane-water, and
Shepheards-purse two parts, and one of Vinegar, it is good also laid to the
Soles of the Feet with a Sponge, as also Alum boiled in Vinegar.

Apply this Cataplasm. Take Plantane, Shepheards-purse, Rupture-wort, Mints,
each one handful; boil them in red Wine, beat them, add Lentil meal half a
pound, Goats, Asses, or Hoggs dung dried two ounces, Juice of Sloes half an
ounce, Dragons blood, Frankincense, each two drams, burnt Chalk and Bole, each
one ounce: mix them with the white of an Eg, and Vinegar, and apply them to the
Region of the womb, or with Oil of Roses and Myrtles.

Things put into the womb, do well to stop the Mouths of the Menstrual Veins if
they be open: also Injections are good if the Flux come from the bottom of the
womb, for their virtue will reach thither.

They are made of the Decoction mentioned for a Fomentation; Or of the Juice of
Plantane, Shepheardspurse, Yarrow, Horstayl, Solomons-seal, with the like.

Or this. Take of the Decoction or Juice of the Plants mentioned one pint, ad
Juice of Sloes, or sour Grapes six drams, Dragons blood two drams, Bole half an
ounce, the red Juice which is taken from Grinding of a Boodstone half an
ounce, Asses or Hoggs dung two drams: make an Injection, it is better with a
little Vitriol.

Or the Decoctions or Juyces of Herb Willow, Goats beard, Coriander, Yarrow,
Rue, Housleek.

Pessaries are made of the Ointment of the Countess, or the Linaments mentioned
with wool: Or of the Plants mentioned, as Plantane in a bag.

Or thus. Take Galls one ounce and an half, Acorn-cups one ounce, Starch, Roots
of Snakeweed, or Tormentil, each half an ounce, Pomegranate flowers, Myrtle
seeds, each two drams, Frankincense three drams, Acacia, Dragons blood, each
two drams, Boodstone one dram: powder them finely, and with the White of an
Egg, Juice of Plantane, and Vinegar make a Pessary.

Or, Take Pomegranate peels one ounce and an half, Cypress Nuts one ounce, Meal
of Lentils, Roots of Docks, each half an ounce; red Roses and Sumach-berries,
each two drame; Mastick three drams, Mummy and Juice of Sloes, each one dram
and an half; Gum Arabic one dram, Bole or Oaker half an ounce, Alum or
Vitriol one dram, dried Goats dung two drams mix them in powder, with the
Infusion of Gum Traganth, with Juice of sour Grapes, or Wine-Lyes for a Pessary.

You may add astringent and drying Pouders, of Roots and Herbs, Ashes of an
Oak, Down of Willow flowers, and the like, the pulp of Wolves fat, Spiders
webbs, Hares dung, Rust of Iron, Coral, Troches of Amber, of sealed Earth, with
Micleta.

It is experienced by some Women that a Pessary made of hot ashes, and hot red
Wine, with Juice of plantane cures: but one spoiled her privities by applying
it too hot.

Let her take this Fumigation from the hot Decoction. Take of Frankincense and
Mastick, each two drams; Labdanum one dram, Amber, Cypress-nuts, red Roses,
Pomegranate-flowers, each half a dram; Spike one scruple, with Gum Arabic
infused in Rose Water, make troches.

Also the Fumes of an Asses or Horses hoof, Shoe-soles, and burnt Hearts horn,
with Frankincense and Mastick to make them smell sweet.

Also the Fume of Vinegar from a hot Iron.

Also the Vapors that comes from a piece of green Oak warmed hot, and sprinkled
with Vinegar, put between the Legs.

Things also applied to the Liver when it is too hot, and weak, as Ointments,
Cerots, and cooling things that strengthen it, are good, as in bleeding at the
Nose, and Inflammation of the Liver, especially that Cerot of Sanders.

These Amulets stop blood, hung about the Neck, or held in the Hands, as
Boodstone, red Coral, Cornelians, Onyx, Jasper; also the great Celandine,
wild tansey, Sorrel, perwinkle, tied to the Legs and Thighs. Eggs beaten, and
Cotton dipped therein, tied to the Soles of the Feet, and renewed when they are
dry.

The Flux of the Haemorrhoids, though it be troublesome at the first, The Cure
of the preternatural Flux of the haemorrhoids.
yet must it not be stopped, because it cures many dangerous Diseases, and
prevents others.

But if it do weaken by being too large, too often, or too long, then you must
moderate and stop it. And it is done by Evacuations and Alteratives, as the
terms overflowing are cured.

There are diverse Evacuations, and Blood-letting is good when it abounds in the
Meseraick Veins, and though the blood comes not from them, because they reach
not to the skin, but because the hollow Vein is emptied thereby, and then takes
blood from the Meseraicks, it must be good. Especially if it be taken in great
quantity from the Arm or Hand, or from the Leg or Foot, by which means the
flux will not be provoked as in the terms, because these Veins are not
continued from the Haemorrhoids, as from the Menstrual Veins, and therefore it
will rather stop by Revulsion then increase the Flux.

Scarifications, Cupping-glasses, Frictions, although they cause Revulsion in
other fluxes, when the blood comes from the branches of the hollow vein, yet in
this they do no good, because they can neither draw the blood from the hollow
vein, or from the Meseraick, you may purge when the Body is bound, least
straining provoke them, with Laxatives mentioned in want of Stools. You may
also purge the Humors, if the Haemorroids flow frym too much Choler in the
Meseraicks, or the like, to prevent when any are subject to them, and to hinder
yellow, or black Choler which is made of the yellow, and not of blood; this is
best before the Flux, when those Excrements lying in the first passages, are
sooner carried into th e Guts.

Nor must you neglect purging, when the Haemorroids flow, to keep the
Excrements from increasing the Flux, with such things which stir up Nature to
stool, and yet provoke not the Haemorrhoids or Pills, with gentle things that
leave a binding, and not with strong and hot. But such as are mentioned in the
overflowing of the terms, as Rhubarb, Myrobalans, Syrup of Roses, and the
like, also Tryphera persica.

Then we proceed to alter, with things that thicken, assuage, and stop, as in
the immoderate terms.

Many things may be used here, as in the terms, as those Meats which make thick
blood, and make it less hot and choleric, by which the blood in the Meseraicks
will be more temperate, and flow less.

The Medicines there mentioned are good here, as the Decoctions, Syrups,
Juyces, Conserves, pouders, Mixtures, whose virtue going by the Guts to the
Meseraicks and Haemorrhoids, which join to the Guts, does sooner work then in
any other Flux.

Micleta is also good, made of parched Myrobalans, Pomegranate-flowers,
Water-cresse feeds, Cummin, Anise, Fennel, Ameos, Caraway seeds steeped in
Vinegar, the Medicine used for Spodium called Antispodium, Mastick, Gum
Arabic, powder of Sumach, Syrup of Myrtles.

Also Electuaries of Myrtle-berries, Myrobalans, Anise, Cummin, Smallage seeds
steeped in Vinegar and Syrup of Quinces.

Also the Confection of scales of Iron of Rhasis, of Myrobalans, Schaenanth,
Cypress, Ginger, Pepper, Ammi, Frankincense, scalls of Iron.

And chiefly pills of Bdellium, Amber, Sea-snails, Ammeos seeds, and Juice of
Leeks, and others of Myrobalans only, and Bdellium, with Rust of Iron.

Narcoticks are good, if the expulsive Faculty be stirred up too much to
stupifie it, they are mentioned in the overflowing of the terms.

Outwardly these are applied to shut the Veins of the Fundament.

You must foment with Decoctions made of Mullein, which is specifical and
proper, boiled in red wine, and Iron-water.

To which you may add things mentioned in the overflowing of the terms.

As Cataplasms there mentioned, or the Fomentation, with Hog-fennel, and
Perwincle.

Or this following easy to be made. Take Mullein, Plantane, Oak leaves, each
one handful, Housleek, or Nightshade one pugil; boil them in red Wine, and
Iron-water, ad Oil of Myrtles one ounce and an half. make a Cataplasm.

You may add the pulp of Quinces, Medlars, and of other astringent Fruits.

Also apply Ointments, Cerots, and Plasters to the Fundament, as the Ointment
of the Countess, plaster for Ruptures.

Or this: Take Snakeweed roots two drams, Galls half an ounce, Frankincense two
drams, Acacia, or Dragons blood one dram and an half, Bole half an ounce, Rust
of Iron two drams, make a fine Powder, and add Oil of Roses Omphacine, or
Myrtles, or Oils in which the Juyces of Mullcin, Plantane, Shepheards-purse,
Sparrow tongue, or Brambles, or Basil, with red Vinegar have been boiled, and
with Wax make an Ointment, or Cerot, or with Rosin, an Emplaster.

There is another Ointment or Plaster which is good here, and the dripping of
a roasted Eel, is excellent therewith.

This plaster is stronger without Oil, take those pouders, with Amber, and the
White of an Egg, or Mucilage, of Fleabane seeds, or Infusion of Gum Traganth,
in plantane-water, and let it be applied and renewed before it be too dry: Or
to keep them from drying, mix them with Syrup of Myrtles, or other Astringents.

Mix also other pouders if you please, as of the Stones of Myrobalans, burnt
Sponge, Hedg-hogs, Chestnuts, Ashes of Hare-foot, Mummy, Amber, Mastick, burnt
Hartshorn, Eggs and shells, Ceruss, Antimony, Lytharge, Bloodstone etc. also
Soote of a Chimney.

This plaster stops it excellently. Take Aloes, Frankincense, Bole or Chalks
each half a dram, Dragons blood, or Juice of Sloes two drams: mix them with
Syrup aforesaid, and apply often renewing it, least it should stick too fast.

Things are put into the Fundament to close the Veins, as those Ointments and
plasters with Cotton, or Sponge, or the pessaries, mentioned in the flowing of
the terms.

And if these come forth by their sharpness, use these suppositories. Take
Colophony, Frankincense, each three drams; Bole half an ounce, Ceruss, burnt
Lead, each one dram; Acaeia half a dram, powder them finely, and with the White
of an Egg, or other Glue or Wax, make a Suppository.

The Mush-room called Wolfes-fart, being dried and poudered fine is good; also
Spiders webbs, and Hares hair.

You may inject with a Syringe, with things made of plantane, or the like,
mentioned in the Flux of the terms Man's blood, or other Blood injected, does
wonderfully stop the flux of the belly. Sheeps Lungs hot applied to the
Fundament, is also good to stop Bleeding.

Also a Fume of Decoction of things mentioned, taken into the Fundament, and of
Bdellium, and things mentioned in the Dysentery.

Also if the Vein appears, when the Patient straineth, you may apply strong
astringents, as Bole, burnt Alum, Vitriol, and the like, or things that burn a
little, when there is Necessity, but warily, least you hurt the strait Gut, as
the Powder of Roots of Cabbage, Dogs dung, burnt Wine-Lyes, burnt Vitriol. It
is an excellent Remedy to touch the Vein with Oil of Vitriol, or in great
Desparation with Aqua fortis. It is dangerous and unprofitable to use other
potential Cauteries, because they cannot stick long. But the actual Cautery, is
the only last Remedy with a touch.

Also if you take up the vein with a forceps, and sew it with silk.

You must apply cooling Ointments that strengthen to the Liver and Spleen, when
they are too hot, because the Meseraicks are in them: such as are mentioned in
the Inflammation of the Liver.

The Leaves of black Hellebore, green, and bruised, and tied on, like a Girdle
next the skin, and renewed when they are dry, do cure this flux, as well as the
terms, and flux after birth.

The Cure of bleeding is different according to the diverse parts and veins. The
Cure of bleeding from diverse Orifices


If blood flow from the adnate tunicle of the Eye being hurt, or from a wound:
the Cure is mentioned in the hurt of the Eye.

If blood flow from the Ears, from hurt by things put therein, it is treated of
in the Wounds of the Ears: if from a Contusion in the Head, that must be first
cured, because it is most dangerous.

If blood come from the Yard by a Catheter put in, or by the passing of a Stone
through; it is not worth the Cure, but if Heat of Urin follow, or there be fear
of an Ulcer, that is to be prevented with things mentioned in their proper
place.

Bleeding of the Neck of the Bladder in a Woman, from the taking out of a
Stone, requires no other Cure but to assuage the pain, as in other wounds, for
it will cease of it self.

If the Privities bleed from hard travail or violent Copuplation, you must cure
it as other bleeding at the part by Anastomosis. If the Haemorrhoids bleed from
sending forth, or taking in any thing, you must cure it as formerly mentioned.
But if it bleed little, you must respect the wound more then the bleeding. But
if the terms flow at the Fundament from a fistulated Ulcer which pierces the
strait Gut, it is to be cured as a Fistula.

You must cure bleeding of wounds in the external parts according to the part
wounded. The Cure of bleeding by Wounds.


If it be from the skin taken off, it is not worth the Cure; for it will cease
of it self, or with little trouble. Also it is easy to stop a vein, either
opened by art, or broken. But if a great vein be cut, or an Artery, it is hard
to be stopped; if the Artery be small, for I have known a great flux of blood
not to be stopped from the tearing of a small Artery, at the drawing of a
tooth, and one dyed thereof. And the reason was because the Artery lay so deep,
that the medicines could not be conveyed to it. And therefore in wounds they
hurt the internal part, because it is dangerous to fill up the Cavities with
medicines, in which the blood lies, it is impossible. In other wounds though
great, and with a great flux, yet is blood easily stopped, because medicines
may be applied. In the stoppage of all which we proceed as follows.

We revel or draw back the blood from the part whence it flows, and turn it
another way to abate its force: By Letting blood, Scarifying, Cupping,
Ligatures, Frictions, as in other fluxes. And that in the remote parts from
that which bleeds, if we intend Revulsion, or in the adjacent part, if we
intend Derivation.

We hinder the flowing of blood to the part, by applying upon the Passage of
the Veins not far from the womb, Epithems, Unguents, Plasters, which may bind
the Passages, and cool the Blood, and repel or drive back, and thicken: such as
were mentioned in other fluxes, as of the Nose, to the sides of the Neck of the
Eyes, to the Forehead and Temples.

For the same you may cut off the Vein first above, opening the skin gently,
and laying the vein bare, and binding it at both ends, that it go not back, but
this is not to be done but at last, and when all fail.

Or when the Vein is bare, bind it till it cease.

We stop Veins with Astringents and Causticks, by Ligatures we do not only keep
things on that are applied, but hinder the flux; these Ligatures are to be made
as we showed in the Cure of Wounds.

Surgeons usually stop Blood with a Bolster of Lint, and good Ligature only.

Bleeding is also stanched by pressing the wound if narrow, with the finger, by
which means the blood stopped congeals about the wound, and hinders the flux.

We keep it from flowing, by keeping up the wounded part above the rest.

Also by stuffing it if deep, we stop or restrain it, this is done with soft
Lint. And if things be added that will also stanch blood, it will be the
better, as these following.

Spiders webs thrust into small wounds of the skin, because being light and
thin, they get into every part, and stop the blood, not so much by drying as by
filling the part, and glutinating the Lips, by help of the blood which grows
hard, and these are better with Mill-dust.

The Down of Flowers and Fruits, and Cotton, or Lint, with Hares hair, are good
with Plasters that stanch blood, but without well cleansed, if put into small
wounds.

The round Mush-room or Fuzball, being very light, laid upon the vein, or
thrust into the wound, sticks close, and keeps the Blood from flowing,
especially mixed with other Pouders, or Plasters.

The spungy skin in old Trees between the Bark, or Touch-wood laid upon small
wounds, is also good.

Also a Sponge laid on, or thrust in, if the wound be large; And if the Artery
be dilated as in an Aneurism opened, and bleed; because it requires large
stuffing, a Sponge is good; yet the flux was so great, and the Orifice so
large, that the Sponge would do no good to one Man, but he bled to Death of an
Aneurisin opened.

There are diverse things laid upon the part: first such as dry, bind, and glue,
as the Pouders alone, or with Lint, or the like, or with Glue like a Plaster,
either laid upon the Vein or Artery, or upon the wounds, or put in when it is
deep, and bound on, for diverse days, till the fear of bleeding is over, and
then after gentle moistning taken off. Also if the wounds be deep, a Plaster
is put in. And when it is after cutting off an Arm or Leg, let the pouders be
put into a Bladder, and laid on, and the Bladder tied fast about. Those
Plasters were mentioned in the Cure of Wounds, and they are to be applied at
first to stop the flux, and heal the wound. As that of three parts of Bole and
Frankincense etc. to glue the lips of the wound; and to heal them, as that with
Frankincense and Myrrh; or that of Galen, which is one part Aloes, two parts
Frankincense, with the White of an Egg, and Hairs of an Hare; and others there
mentioned, beginning thus. Take Galls etc. Or, Take Colophony etc. Some that
are mentioned against Fluxes in the Eyes, are good here, as that which begins
thus. Take Mastick, Frankincense, etc. Or, Take Bole half an ounce, Sanguis
Draconis etc. without Oil of Roses. Also Pouders of burnt things, ashes of
Froggs, Worms, Asses or Horses dung, Eg-shells, Sponge, Rags, Cotton, Paper,
Nettles. Also Soote, burnt Blood, Rosin poudered, Gum Arabic, and Traganth
parched. Also Boodstone, Stibium, burnt Lead. Also other fat Earths besides
Bole. And Downs mentioned; of Flowers and Fruits, as that in the shells of
Chestnuts, or Cotton, Down, or Lint: All which mixed with the Pouders mentioned
for Plasters, and incorporated with the things mentioned, may be applied like
a Plaster. Or you may apply the pouders with the Juice of Plants, as of
Plantane, Solomons-seal, Shepheards-purse, or Blood made into a past, with some
Glue or Rosin to make it stick.

There are other Fumes, as that which we saw stopped presently, the blood of a
Theif that had both his Hands cut off; It was thus made: The Wife of the
Executioner put the wrist where the hand was cut off into a Hen, in which she
had made a large Orifice about the Rump, and tied her with the feathers to the
part, and so he lived till he was brought to Execution without any great loss
of blood. And this Course have I taken often with good success, when fingers
have been cut off.

This remedy may be used in other parts, by tying it fast upon the part, when
it is cut or slit in the middle, whether it be Hen or Chickin, or the Lungs of
a Sheep bleeding, or other fresh Entrals; such as we prescribed for the Cure of
a Frenzy.

Also Man's blood, or other blood hot, and mixed with Bran to a past, may do the
same.

A Linnen-clout three or four times doubled and dipped in Frogs-spawn when
squeesed, will surely stop blood: and it is usual to keep Clouts dipped in the
Spawn of Froggs at the time of the year, for the same purpose.

The last remedies are Causticks, which cause an Eschar, and stop the Blood.

Burnt Vitriol is the best, or Copperas what Color soever it is of; or burnt
upon a hot Iron till it be red, which the Chemists call Colcothar, with burnt
Alum, and burnt Tartar, or Wine-Lyes. Or if you will have it burn more, a
little Arsenick, or Sublimate, which you may apply with the White of an Egg,
and a little Lint.

Quicklime poudered does the same, which you may make of more force with the
other.

Sometimes we add other astringents, which allay their violence, and by
straitning the part, stop the blood, as that powder for healing Plasters for
Wounds, which begins thus. Take burnt Bones etc. also Vitriol, and burnt Alum.
Also things which are used to take down proud flesh, which begins thus. Take
burnt Alum three drams, Pomegranate-flowers etc. Or, Take Vitriol half an
ounce, Alum etc. especially the corroding powder there mentioned.

The Spirit of Vitriol dipped in Cotton, and applied to the Vein, does astringe
and somewhat burn; which if it ly deep, must be stopped in, as you do for an
hollow tooth.

Aqua fortis does it more powerfully, so applied, and burns more. Of which
sprinkled upon filings of Iron, you may make Crocus Martis from the yellow
Color so called; which you may use for the same.

Clouts wet in Vinegar or Steel-water, wherein the Physical Stone has been
quenched, and dried. Or in Aqua fortis, or Oil of Vitriol often dried and wet,
will do the same.

The actual Cautery is the last, which will presently stop Blood, if you can
touch the Veins or Arteries. This is done with a hot Iron proportioned to the
wound, either small pointed, or flat, or with a round bottom, for great wounds:
such as are used in Disinembring. But this is done with small success,
especially when the amputation or cutting off is in a thick fleshy part,
because the burning reaches not to the Veins, but only to the flesh. And by
this lingering before the Plaster is put on, there is a great loss of Blood;
and the new pain which comes after the pain of amputation, does much weaken the
Patient.

If you thrust the remaining part of a finger cut off into melted Pitch, and
presently pull it out, it will stop Blood, not only by the burnining of the
wound, but by the sticking of the Pitch thereon, which will grow hard, and stop
the Veins. And this you may do in other parts.

If you lay Cotton upon the wound, and set it on fire, it will by the flame
insinuating into the wound stop wonderfully, and the rather if it be dipped
first in Oil of St. Johnswort.

You may stanch Blood by Potions which we use for the Cure of Wounds, for they
thicken the Blood by a drying virtue, which heals, and also stops the
Flux, especially if you mix things proper to stop blood. As that Potion for a
wound from a Contusion, which is chiefly used for to dissolve blood congealed,
which begins thus. Take Mummy etc. to which to stop bleeding, you may add Bole,
sealed Earth, Dragons blood, Sperma Ceti etc. or the like.

Many other things which are given against bleeding at the Nose and Womb, may
be applied here while it lasts. Which will be most proper when the wounds
pierce into the internal Cavities and Bowels.

The Brain of Hens given in Drink, is good against any flux of blood from the
Head, says Dioscorides.

They attribute much to Amulets, about the Neck, and held in the Hands,
supposing that they stop all sorts of bloody Fluxes. Those that were mentioned
in other fluxes of blood, may be here made use of.

CHAP. VI. Of Excretion, or Voiding of Matter.
The Kinds,
A Purulent or Mattery Excretion, is when liquid Matter made of some other
Humor by Suppuration, and turned white is voided, differing according to the
Humor, sometimes concocted, sometimes crude, and stinking, and filthy: All these
are called Matter. And this is preternatural in respect of the Excretion and of
the Matter, and it comes from diverse parts. We shall speak of that Excretion of
Matter, which is in Spitting, Vomiting, Pissing, and going to the Stool, in
those Diseases.

Oftentimes there is in the Eye without any other Infirmity, Matter in the
Corners, Matter from the Eyes,
or about the Ball or Sight thereof, and it falls off of it it self. Or it gets
at night into the Eye-lidds being shut, and glews them together. Sometimes it is
seen in red inflamed Eyes; sometimes it comes from Ulcers there, either white
and concocted, or thin and watery, from the Corners of the Eye, or through the
Nostrils, smelling strong sometimes. And we have seen it get out under the lower
Eyebrows by a Passage there made.

Oftentimes Matter flows from the Ears at certain times, Matter voided from the
Ears.
and for a long season, especially when any part adjacent is hurt: Either with
pain, or without, as we showed in the Pains of the Ears.

In the Disease called Coryza, Matter from the Nose.
Matter flows from the Nose, especially toward the end, stinking and white,
after a thin flux of water.

Or Matter and Snot are voided together in an Ulcer of the Nose: as we there
showed.

And we saw in a Child, a little before he dyed of a co^ sumption, thick matter
that flowed like milk out of his Nose. And I saw in my Fathers days, the like
matter with some of the substance of the Brain, come out of the Nose in two
Virgins which had the Falling Sickness from their Birth, it came forth in the
fits, and they presently after dyed.

From the Yard or Passage of Urin in Women, Matter from the Yard, Vreters, or
Neck, of the Bladder.
there comes either yellow or white matter, sometimes that souls the linen:
This is accompanied with burning of Urin, pain in the Yard, or Vreters, when
Urin is rendered, or it flows without sense, and is less troublesome. This is
called an Ulcer in the Yard, or neck of women's Bladders. This Disease in Men
comes from unclean Copulation, and sometimes from a venomous Gonorrhaea. This
ends sometimes in a hollow Ulcer, about the lower part of the Yard and Seam,
where it opens in one or diverse places, and sends forth Matter and Urin.

I observed in one that when his Yard was squeezed, a great deal of matter came
forth, which before was mixed with Urin a long time. And after he voided matter
at the Yard and Fundament, especially when a Clyster was given, and he had
great pain about the Os sacrum and Rump; but an Inflammation upon each Buttock
followed, and Imposthumes out of which the matter flowed, and not from the
other Parts.

To these we may refer the Voiding of tough Matter by Urin, and at the Yard
without it, or after Urin made, which stops the Passage, and will not pass but
by degrees and with pain. Sometimes it will not come out without pulling,
hanging like a long string. This is joined with the Ulcer of the Bladder, or
the Stone: as shall be showed in the Causes.

Sometimes it flows from the womb with cutting pain. Matter from the Womb. From
the openings of the body.


Also from openings made by a Disease or Cutting: sometimes from Ulcers in the
superficies of the Body; otherwhile from deep ulcers. And inward Cavities,
sometimes more or less, and of different Color; sometimes with other filth: as
we showed.

The Causes.
The Causes of al Excretion of Matter from diverse parts, are different, as the
Excretion is either with, or without an Ulcer.

If it be with an Ulcer, it is from Suppuration of Blood or Flesh, turned into
Matter, after an Imposthume broken: this is in diverse parts of the Body
ulcerated.

There may come Matter from an Ulcer in the Eye, The ulcer of the Eye, is the
cause of matter voided.
and more usually from that which is in the inward corner of the Eye, from
whence it flows, or it fixes it self in a hollow, and falls into the Nose, or
eats a way through another part. As we showed in Ulcers of the Eyes, and
Fistula Lacrimalis.

There comes Matter from the Ulcer of the Ears. The ulcer of the ears, is the
cause of matter voided.
If it be deep, when the Ear is pressed, the matter comes forth, if it be
higher, it flows of it self, and if it got to the drum of the Ear, and eat
through, it takes away Hearing. But if it be external, it does not hurt the
Hearing.

There comes Matter from ulcers in the Nose, The ulcer of the Yard inwardy is
the Cause of matter from it
for the Causes there mentioned. From the ulcer of the internal Passag^ for
Urin and Seed in the Yard, there flows Matter. This ulcer is from some greater
hurt then that of the Catheter which fetches blood; or from venomous Seed,
which breeds the Gonorrhaea. Also it may come from seed not corrupted, but out
of its place when it stops there, which will cause great pain by Irritatino, or
Pricking, and Heat: as we showed there, and also an Ulcer if it be sharp.

There comes a Pissing of Matter from the Ulceration of the Neck of the Bladder
in both Sexes, The Ulcer of the neck of the Bladder, the cause of matter
without Pissing.
and sometimes it flows without Piss, especially when it is in the fore part of
the Bladder, out of which if it be foul, there will come much matter.

And in the same Ulcer of the Neck of the Bladder, the Matter which comes with,
and without the Urin, is the Cause of the Excretion.

The Excretion of Matter from the Womb, An ulcer in the neck of the Womb, the
cause of Matter voided.
is caused from an Ulcer in the Neck of the Womb. As we showed in the Ulcers of
the Womb.

There is a Voiding of Matter from the external Ulcers, External and internal
Ulcers, are the Causes of the Excretion of matter by the opened places of the
Body.
dispersed by the Superficies of the Body in the skin and flesh, either made by
force external, or opened of themselves. And from the internal Imposthumes also
opened. From whence if the Matter have been long there, it will freely come
forth, either ripe or stinking, pure or venomous, or mixed with Venom: the
Causes of all which we showed in Ulcers and Imposthumes.

When an Empyema is opened, of which we spoke in its place, there comes forth
as much matter from the Cavity of the Breast, which came by the Ulceration and
Corruption of the Lungs, sometimes as will fill diverse Basins.

That Matter which is in the Belly from an Imposthume in the Liver or Spleen,
as we showed, can scarce be discharged by opening of the belly. For although
matter may be in the belly, from Imposthumes which broke of their own accord,
yet, in regard it is seldom known, nor can it be discovered by a tumor
external, because so much cannot be gathered together, you must not be rash in
opening a part to let it out. And if matter be gathered within the skull, you
must be as wary: For it is not to be known certainly that matter is there, and
therefore we must not open the skull but upon necessity, when we know there is
matter, because it is dangerous; and Nature (if death prevent not,) will
discharge it at the Nose.

There is also an Excretion of Matter without an Ulcer, in the Eyes and Nose,
which are always wet, which causes it.

In the Eye when the water is concocted, The moisture of the Eye turned into
matter, is the cause of the Excretion of matter.
and made thick.

This comes from the Heat of the Eye-lidds, which dries the humor, as we see
in red Eyes, which goes away when the Heat and Redness is gone, which caused
it. But while they continue, there are always tears, as in Epiphora, and
Filth. As we showed in this Disease of the Eyes.

When slimy Phlegm stays too long in the Cavities of the Nose, The moisture of
the Nose turns into matter.
it causes an Excretion of Matter concocted, as in the end of a Coryza or Pose.

That Flux of white Matter like Milk out of the Nose of a Child, came from the
Brain, where it was made of blood and phlegm; because the brain was affected, so
that there were continual Convulsions and Death.

The Cure.
If Matter come from the Eyes, The Cure of matter in the Eyes.
and that from an Ulcer, first cure the Ulcer. If the Eyes be mattery without
an ulcer as in Epiphora, you must cure it as was there showed. If it come from
too great a Heat of the Eyes, when that cease, the Matter will cease. If
Matter be in the Eye from any Cause, and hinder the Sight, it is taken away by
gently rubbing the Eye with a fine Clout, to bring it to the corner, that it
may get out.

We showed in the Ulcers of the Ears how any matter flowing from thence should
be cleansed away. The Cure of filth or matter in the Ears.


If the Matter in the Nose come from concocted Phlegm, The Cure of matter from
the Nose.
in regard it signifies that the Flux or Coryza cease, it must not be
stopped, but rather provoked with Errhines and things mentioned in the Stoppage
of the Nose. As also the milk-like Flux which is seldom seen, must not be
stopped, though usually death follow. But if the Matter come from an Ulcer in
the Nose, the Cure is mentioned there.

When there is Matter voided at the Yard not with Piss, The Cure of the ulcer
of the yard and the matter that flows from it.
but by it self, and when there is heat of Urin also, which comes from an Ulcer
in the Yard, it is less dangerous then pissing of matter, which comes from an
Ulcer in the neck of the Bladder, because the part is less noble. And if it be
not old, or lie too deep, it is more easily cured, but more hard when more
filthy and deep, then it requires a long Cure, or else it eats through the
Perinaeum, and lets out the Urin there.

Voiding of Matter from the Ureters in Women without Piss, or with it, because
it comes from an Ulcer in the neck of the Bladder, it is as hard to be cured,
as pissing of matter.

The Cure of the Ulcer of the Yard, and the Heat of Urin from thence, is as
that of the Ulcer in the Neck of the Bladder: And the things to heal the Ulcer,
and abate the Heat, are to be used here.

In Women it is cured, as pissing of matter, to which disease I refer you, for
both come from an Ulcer in the neck of the Bladder. But if it come from the
neck of the womb or an Ulcer there, the Cure was mentioned in the Treatise of
those Diseases.

In both Sexes, we give Clysters, to loosen the Belly, there mentioned.

And the Cleansers and Dryers there mentioned, because this Ulcer is near the
neck of the bladder, and in the same Passage, so that the medicines good
against those Ulcers, must needs be good against the Ulcers in the Yard, if
they be used often.

The Decoctions mentioned in the Cure of Ulcers in the neck of the bladder, may
be here given to be drunk, because good both against Ulcer and Heat, and also
they have Guaicum, and the like which heal Ulcers.

Also the Vulnerary or Wound-drinks, are good here, as in other Ulcers. They
are best which are mentioned in the general Cure of Ulcers, as the wines and
distilled waters, or the Decoction that begins thus. Take Comfreyroots, Fennel
etc.

Juyces, Waters, Milk, and Rosin are here to be used, as in the neck of the
bladder.

And the Compound Pouders, and those three Pouders, two whereof are good
against heat of Urin and Ulcers, and the third only against Ulcers.

Simple Pouders are of Acrons, Horstayl, perwincle etc.

To assuage pain when violent, the Narcoticks mentioned in Heat of Urin are to
be administered alone, or mixed.

Injections into the Yard come sooner and easier into the part affected, then
when it is in the neck of the bladder, and therefore are here of more
concernment. And those mentioned there, which first cleanse, and then dry and
heal; also Milk, Decoctions, Juyces, Waters etc. to which you may add
Aegyptiacum, if it be very foul.

For the Ulcer in the Yard, when you must cleanse, make this Injection. Take
Liquorish one ounce and an half, Beanshales six drams, red Pease one pugil:
boil them in Goats Whey, with a little Lie, and Honey of Roses, Sugar, or
Turpentine dissolved with Honey, and the Yolk of an Egg.

Another Injection to heal. Take Roots of Comfrey one ounce and an half,
Horstayl and Plantane, each one handful; Litharge six drams: boil them in
Iron-water, and in one pint thereof, dissolve Honey of Roses, or Sugar of Roses
two ounces, Turpentine one dram, dissolve it in the Yolk of an Egg, for an
Injection.

Or thus: Take the white Troches of Rhasis half a dram, Lapis Calaminaris,
Tuity, burnt Lead, Bole, each a dram, dissolve them with convenient Liquor, or
Milk, or Whey.

Another. Take Ceruss half an ounce, Lytharge two drams, Tutty prepared three
drams, Starch one ounce: make a Powder, and inject it with Water, or drop it
into the Nut or head of the Yard.

A good Water for an Injection. Take Comfrey roots half a pound, Roots of
Snakeweed, Tormentil, each two ounces; ten Heads of Daffodil roots, Horstayl
and Plantane, each two handfuls, Tops of St. John's Wort, with the Flowers two
pugils, Alum one ounce, Honey of Roses as much as is sufficient, twelve Eggs
beaten, if the Herbs be dry, sprinkle them with Plantane-water, and distill them
all.

If you add to these Injections, some Drops of Spirit of Vitriol, or of Salt,
they will be stronger. And if these spirits be used alone with Whey, they will
cleanse and heal.

The Balsom of Suphur invented by Roland, does cleanse and heal excellently.

These may be dropped into the Yard, if the Ulcer be not too deep; as also
Juyces.

They put some Ointments also, as Pompholygos, with a wax Candle, which is
better then other Instruments, because it will bend better in the crooked
Passage. But you must remember that you tie it with a thread, least it should
get into the Bladder, and the Ointment go beyond the Ulcer. The distilled Oil
of Henbane dropped into the Yard, does assuage pain.

You must anoint the seam or suture between the Stones and the Fundament, and
soment it, when there is heat and it will be felt within, and the Passages must
be loosned, with Ointments mentioned in the Ulcer in the Neck of the Bladder,
to which add Opium, if the pain be great. Anoint also the part with Ointments,
there mentioned to heal the Ulcer.

And let the Diet be as there men^ioned.

The Excretion of slimy Matter from the Yard without Urin, The sure ofe U^cer
in the Neck of the Bladder and the slimy Matter.
and in Women from the Urin-passage, is cured as that of the Stone and Matter,
with Injections which cleanse the slimy Matter, and if it stick in the Yard, it
must be drawn out. Or if you put the Yard into a hollow Raddish, the matter
will be drawn forth.

The Matter which comes from the Womb, The Cure of the ulcer in the womb and
the matter that slows from it, as also from other parts of the Body.
is to be cured as the Ulcer of the womb. When it flows by any other Orifices,
from any internal filthy Ulcers, which lie deep in the Body, and are made of
Imposthumes that break or are opened, you must cleanse and heal: As we showed
in Ulcers, Imposthumes, and Wounds. And we showed in the Cure of Empyema, how
you should order the Matter that flows from the Breast after Incision.

CHAP. VII. Of Excretion, or Voiding of Water.
The Kinds,
WE call that a watery Excretion, when a moist Humor, thicker or thinner, made
of the Excrements of Phlegm, or of that which is Natural and crude; and of the
Serum or Whey mixed together, so that the one is more then the other flows
forth. Which Excretion is preternatural, chiefly when it is much and often, and
corrupted, or comes not out at the proper place. This comes from diverse parts,
besides that of Spitting, Vomiting, Pissing, and Purging: Of which shall be
spoken in their places.

Tears flow from the Eyes often, which are like Whey, Tears.
or Serum, or Phlegm mixed with water, they break out in sound people,
especially in Children, and doting old Men, from a small Cause, and in others
from a great Passion of Mind. And therefore are not counted preternatural. But
when they are troublesome, and of long Continuance, in some Diseases of the Head
and Eyes, they are Symptoms of the same. Some Tears are hot and sharp, others
cold.

There is often water from the Nose which is natural, The dropping at the Nose.
because it is by the right way, but when it abounds, it is preternatural.
And it is in some from whose Nose, water flows like tears, and a drop hangs at
the end of it. Or it is like slimy Phlegm which being usual in children, is
counted less noisome then in Men.

The same is in the Kind of Defluxion called Coryza; Coriza or Pose.
there falls at the first a thin moist Humor constantly, actually cold,
sometimes hot and sharp, that makes the Nose smart, and provokes Neesing, and
causes Tears, inflamming and corroding the Nostrils and Lips, with great
Spitting, Hawking, and Coughing sometimes. And this Humor at the last, is thick,
white, or of another Color.

The same happens in other Diseases of the Head and Defluxions: As was showed.

There comes a water out at the Ears thin, or thick sometimes, Water from the
Ears.
but seldom. And a certain Maid had diverse measures of water that flowed from
her Ear without any other hurt.

It is usual in Women to have the white Flux. The Flux of the womb or the
Whites.
And because it uses to come when women are past their Courses, they are
called the white Terms. But these use to be out of order, and with women that
have their Courses, and last more or less time. And sometimes they trouble such
as have their Courses stopped: As those who are past them, and are in old
Women. In Virgins it is but seldom, and often in women with Child.

Sometimes this Flux is of water, and very much, and clear, and milk, sometimes
sharp or salt, yellow, green, or black, sometimes mattery, stinking.

Sometimes it is mixed with Phlegm that is tough, without scent, cold and
little, or as much or more then the water.

If this Flux be immoderate, there is no other accident, and both Wives and
Virgins have it many months and years without hurt. But if it be immoderate,
there is an evil Habit of Body therewith: Also Faintness and Weakness, also
Barrenness in some, although it hinders not some. If the matter befoul there is
an Itching, Pricking, and Heat in the Privities. And it is very noisome when it
stinks, and makes the Husband loath her.

Usually there sweats a whey or water out of the Pores of the skin,
Preternatural Sweat.
it is Natural and common to all Complexions: but it is preternataral, when it
is too much or soul, as it is in Diseases, and sometimes without.

There is too much Sweat without a Disease, when it is caused oftener then it
should be, or continued longer, so that they faint, and if it be often, they
grow faint.

The Sweat is evil when it stinketh. This is sometimes al over the Body, or in
the parts, as Feet, as we showed concerning the Stink of the Feet. Also that
which is cold and clammy, not hot, moist and like water, is preternatural: As
also that which staineth the shirt with any Color, or like Saffron.

That Sweat is also counted unseemly, when the Hands and Soles of the Feet are
constantly, or for no, or little Cause, wet as is usual with some.

In Diseases, if Sweat be not convenient, or at an unseasonable time, as in
Fevers, or too great, as in the English Sweats, it is preternatural, because
the Patient is not refreshed thereby, but is worse and weaker. Also it is evil,
when the Sweat is not over all the Body, but only in some certain places. And
if it be cold and tough, but when it stinks, if it be beneficial, it is not
evil: as we showed in Fevers and other Diseases.

In the Dropsy Ascites when the Belly is opened, there is great store of
Water, The Voiding of Water at other Parts opened.
and if the Thighs be opened, it drops and continues long. Also in the
Water-rupture it flows freely from the Codd being opened, and out of the
Bladder, Pustles, and watery Tumors. Also there flows a watery Humor from
Ulcers; as we showed in Ulcers.

The Causes.
This watery Humor which flows at the Eyes, Ears, Nose, Womb, Pores, and other
openings, comes from the Brain, or from other parts of the Body.

It is plain that Tears come from a Defluxion of Water from the Brain, A watery
humor from the brain, is the Cause of tears.
because they are sometimes without sharpness, and heat, like water, but somewhat
clammy. As Phlegm sometimes thin and clear, as whey, sometimes sharp, salt,
choleric and hot. And that these Humors flow from the Brain is plain, because
Tears break forth so speedily, and in such plenty. For though that Moisture
with which the Eyes are moistened for their better Motion, come from the Serum
which sweats through the Veins of the Eyes; yet those little Veins cannot
contain so much as will make Tears to flow. This Defluxion of water into the
Eyes to make tears is more easy, because there is an usual Passage to the
Nose, by which it is evacuated Naturally, by a private Hole at the Roots of the
Eyes, and another in the inward Corner of the Eye. By which means upon the
least Motion, the Eye is filled with tears. Also an Excrement of Phlegm and
Water, gathered in the brain, as we showed, may flow forth diverse ways, and so
it may descend into the Nose and Eyes. We cannot grant that the tears should
flow by an internal or external Veins, as some have supposed; because the Veins
carry Blood, and not Phlegm, and the water cannot be quickly separated from the
blood, but we say it comes from the Brain by Passages ordained therefore. And
if by Chance such excrementitious humors should flow to the Eyes from without
the Skull, we suppose it would rather lie under the skin and Eye-lidds swell
them, then make many tears.

And the reason why this Phlegm and whey is carried into the Eyes and causes
tears, which in sound people are phlegmatic, in sick more watery, which are of
long Continuance, is the abundance of those excrementitious humors in the Head,
by which means they flow into the Nose, and also into the Eyes, keeping them
always wet and full; and the rather, when the Eye is made fit to receive it by
being often watered, or is weak, and loose from some Disease. And these Kinds
of Tears do not ways inconvenience, but by their Moisture, especially when
they come from a phlegmatic Humor. But if they come from abundance of water,
being salt, sharp or hot, with Itching, or redness of the Eyebrows, mentioned
in Epiphora, they are troublesome.

Also from an Ulcer of the inward Corner, or the Eye, when the little flesh
that grows there is consumed, and the Hole enlarged, by which the Moisture of
the Eye falls upon the Nose, or from a Fistula there, when it falls into the
Nose, and fills the Eyes, and causes a continual weeping. As we showed in
Epiphora, or Rhewm of the Eyes, and fistula lacrymalis.

The expulsive Faculty being stirred up by the provoking of the Eye, or the
parts adjacent, driving the Humors suddenly into the Eyes, causes tears,
though not of long Continuance. As the Sunshine, Smoke, any sharp Fume, as of
Onions, or Mustard, and the like, or things fallen into to the Eyes cause
Tears. Also the pain of any part near, as the Toothache.

Tears usually break forth from a violent motion of the Humors by straining; or
from a disturbance of the mind, in which, by reason of that wonderful
Convulsion of the Muscles, Cheeks, Lips and Eyes, which we observe to go before
tears in crying: these watery Humors near the eyes being moved, insinuate
themselves into the Eyes, and cause tears. As we may observe tears to fall from
violent laughtre, when the Mouth is strained with too much Joy. Also we may
observe that tears will fall in other strainings or forcings, as at stool, or
in Childbirth, with Coughing or Sneesing.

When a moist Humor falls from the Brain into the Nostrils that are ordained
for the discharge thereof, A moist Humor coming to the Nose from the brain, is
the cause of dropping and Coryza or Pose.
it causes the dropping of the Nose. In which the Flux is greater, by how much
it abounds in the Brain. And there falls a thin Humor like water, if it comes
directly from the Brain, because it is generally that of the Brain, and if it
be kept long in the Cavities, it quickly grows thick and clammy. Also there is
a serous Humor in the Brain which is an Excrement as we showed in other
Defluxions mixed with Phlegm, and flows to the Nose, and either causes or
increases this Flux, and then it is thinner, sharper, and hotter, and causes
Itching and Sneesing, and that which is called Coriza or Pose. The Collection
of Humors in the Brain causes this Defluxion: And these things that stir up
the expulsive Faculty, do increase it. As we showed in other Diseases from
Defluxions, especially in the Cough.

That water which flows out at the Ears comes from other parts besides the
Brain, A watery humor coming from the Veins, is the cause of the moist Flux of
the Ears.
for it cannot come to the place of hearing any way, but by the hole in the
hearing Nerve, and if it should enter by that, it can only come into the
internal seat of hearing, and cannot pass to the external, except it pierce
through the Tympane, which it cannot do without hurting of it, and loss of
hearing. But when this Flux is without the loss of hearing, and comes
externally, it is plain that the water was carried to the outward Passage of
the Ear, into which the serous Matter sweating through does moisten; and when
it is too much, it comes from the Veins there about, and causes this Flux:
this is seldom, because there are better Passages for it; and but sometimes,
especially when the Passages are loosned. As we shall show in the Whites, that
water and phlegm comes from the Veins.

As we showed that the Terms come from the veins of the neck of the womb, A
moist Humor coming from the Veins to the neck of the Womb, is the Cause of the
Whites.
so the Whites come from the same; and not from the Cavity of the womb, as some
dream, because that is so narrow, that it cannot hold such a quantity as
usually flows, neither can it be contained therein, or pass through the veins
which are small, and are not enlarged till the woman be with Child; as it may
through the Veins of the neck of womb which are larger. And this is, when this
excrementitious Humor is mixed with blood, or with the terms, which makes it
ill-coloured; or after the terms are gone, when it presses by the same ways
they did, for which Cause it is called the white Terms. And this may be at
other times, when Nature is burdened, both in such as have, or such as are past
their Courses. As it is sometimes in women with Child: In whom in regard the
inward Orifice of the womb is closed it cannot flow from the cavity of the
womb, but from the neck; and in them who are not with Child it is the same. Nor
is it a wonder, that nature should purge these Excrements by the same way that
blood is evacuated, because she does the like in other Vessels ordained for
other Evacuations. And the reason why they are white. and without Blood is,
because Nature discha^geth them at that time, when there is no blood to be sent
forth. As also because Nature separates the blood from the Impurity, and keeps
it, and sends out the Excrements as noxious. Which Excrements, if serous or
watery, come from the whey, if phlegmatic, from crude blood, if mattery from
blood stained. And if other Humors be mixed, as yellow, green, or black
Choler, it is discolored therewith. And if they be sharp, or the whey salt,
then by pricking, and burning in the Parts to which it sticks, it causes
Itching, and sense of Heat; and if it continue long, ulcerateth. But when it is
alone, it flows without sense, like water, or the white of an Egg beaten, nor
is it then noxious, except it be immoderate.

The Cause of these Excrements in the Blood which feed this Flux, is that which
is eaten or taken in, and the weakness of Concoction, and of those Bowels which
separate the Excrements, as in a Cachexy, of which we spoke sufficiently. These
Excrements are sent forth by nature when she is burdened, and the sooner if
there be weakness of the womb, as may be from diverse Causes, and also from this
Moisture which wets and cools the Part. As also when Nature is stirred up to
expel them by other means. As we have known women who never had the whites
before after they have taken a Purge, which stirred up Nature have had them.
And many have had the same by sitting long in a Bath, not from Infection, as
they have thought from other that were in at the same time. But Nature throwing
out Excrements by bathing, does cause the whites which are too thick to be
sweated forth.

That water which is swet forth through the whole Body, is serous; Serous Matter
getting through the Pores, is the Cause of Sweat,
and mixed with blood, gets into the Superficies of the Body, by an obscure
solution of contiguity of the skin, it goes through the Veins.

This Solution of Contiguity comes from the opening of the Pores, or
Anastomosis, or Rarefaction of the Skin, or Diapedesis: For then the Serum
being very thin, passes through the Pores of the skin, and causes Sweat,
being either drawn, or driven thither.

Serum or water is attracted by Heat external, for then that with the Blood is
snatched to the superficies of the body, and goes through the skin, as water is
distilled from Plants, as I showed. And the rather, when the water is made thin
and hot, that it may pierce. And if there be plenty, or if it be thin, sharp,
or choleric, it will be more easily drawn out by the heat. And as Heat does
cause a Natural sweat, so if it be vehement or long it is preternatural. This
Heat is from Exercise or Baths, dry and moist, and the immoderate use of these
causes immoderate Sweats. Therefore Baths are said to weaken.

In Diseases, as Fevers, though the whole Body burn, yet it scarce sweats, till
Nature expells the Cause thereof by sweat, which is in intermitting Fevers
when the heat cease in the day of rest, and in continual Fevers, when they
decline. For when the Body is hot, and Nature is busy in the Concoction of the
Cause of the Disease, it cannot be sent forth by sweat, but when it is
prepared, and made thin it may.

Nature drives water to the Superficies of the Body, where it is burdened
therewith, and then the expulsive Faculty labors to cast it out by sweat.

Nature is burdened, when the quantity or quality of the Serum is offensive;
when it is too much in the Veins for want of Evacuation by Urin; then when it
cannot be purged from the blood, otherwise it is sent forth, or drawn forth by
sweat. Therefore they which piss little, sweat much, especially they that use
moist Diet, and drink much.

If it be offensive in quantity, and be impure by mixture of other Humors, and
so burdensome to Nature, it is sent forth by sweat as well as urin. In
Cacochymicks or Bodies of evil Juice, Sweats are not Natural, but are stinking
or clammy, and sometimes discolored; now all over the Body, and sometimes in
some places only; wherefore some sweat in their Hands and Feet, and are filthy:
as we shall show in Filth. All these Sweats are evil, and forerunners of
Diseases.

If the Cause of a Disease be in the Blood, part whereof is Serum; as in
Fevers, Nature if she can find no other way, as the Urin sends it forth by
sweat. And this if it comes kindly is healthful, though it stink and be
discolored. But if it be immoderate, or not sufficient, or at an unconvenient
time, when Nature is not prepared for Expulsion, it is evil and unprofitable.
This is usual in Contagious Diseases, Nature oftentimes sends forth the evil
Quality with the Whey with Sweat, which is sometimes healthful, and sometimes
deadly. And if it come when Natural Heat begins to be extinguished, and the
Body is outwardly cold, then a cold sweat will appear. All which we have
mentioned in such Diseases.

Also when Nature is moved by Passion, and drives the Spirits inward or
outward, there will be sweat, which will presently be cold, if the heat go in,
as in a swounding, and in the pangs of Death.

There follows a Flux of moisture from solution of continuity in any part of
the Body; Moisture getting into the openings of the skin, is the Cause of the
flux.
and if the skin be only scratched, the water is little, as in Scarification,
Incision, Burning, in Water-pusles, or Hydropick Legs: but if the Orifice be
large, by cutting, pricking, tapping in a Dropsy, or when water is taken out
of the Codd, or from watery Tumors. Or when it comes from an Ulcer, it is
larger.

The Cure.
Some Tears are to be cured, The Cure of Tears.
some not. For if they come from a Cause that continues not, as Passion of
Mind, or be provoked by Brightness, Scents, Smoke, and the like, they will be
gone, when they are removed. And these are to be avoided that are subject to
Tears. But those Tears that come from a lasting Cause which returns, require
Cure. And if they are joined with Redness, Heat, and Itching, as in Epiphora or
Flux of the Eyes, and come from thence, it is cured as that is. Also if tears
be with an ulcer of the Eye or Lachrymal Fistula, and come from thence, they
must be first cured before the tears will cease. And in regard these Diseases
of the Eye are hard to be cured, the tears from them are hard to be cured also.
Except it happen as sometimes it did in the Cure of a Lachrymal Fistula, that it
grows so big, or there be so great a hole from the eating away of the bone of
the internal corner of the Eye, that all the water falls no longer by the Eye,
but from the Nose.

If often, or constant tears be without the Diseases mentioned, by reason of
water flowing not by usual Passages, but into the Eyes, it must be cured. Thus
the Humors that abound in the Head must be purged, and they are to be hindered
in their Passage, and the Flux sent from the Eyes to another Passage, and
stopped, the tears consumed, and the Eyes strengthened.

Thus you must purge by stool, by mastication, or chewing, by sneesing, for
though sneesing cause tears, yet because it sends them to the Nostrils, it does
good: such as are prescribed in Defluxions, and the Pain they cause, in the
Cough, Ophthalmy, or Inflammation of the Eyes, and in Weakness of Sight.

Sweating often does chiefly take away those Moistures from the Head and whole
Body, which may be done by the Decoction of Guaicum, and other Sudorificks long
continued, because Baths are not so good for the Eyes: As we showed in
Defluxions.

We hinder the increase of these Humors by a wholesome, slender Diet, by applying
and giving things to the Head that dry and strengthen, and by Fumigations,
mentioned there.

We divert or turn away these from the Eyes by Cupping-glasses, Frictions, and
other things that revel and derive: And last of all use Causticks and
Vesicatories to the Neck behind, and to the Shoulders. And use actual and
potential Cauteries to thoseparts, or to the Crown of the Head.

Every day after he has combed his Head, let him rub his Neck with a rough
Cloth, this is good against all Defluxions.

Apply Dryers and Binders to the Forehead and Temples, to hinder the coming
down of the Humor, especially the Emplaster, mentioned in the cure of a salt
rhewm in the Eyes.

At Bedtime, use things to the Eyes at their corners, that they may be better
kept in, with Cotton, or Sponge, the Patient sleeping upon his back; or
Ointments, or Pouders, or Fumigations.

Those are prescribed in Epiphora, and in the Cure of the Ulcer of the Eyes, as
that Powder in Epiphora which begins thus. Take Cadmia, or Brass, Ore etc. Or
thus: Take Antimony prepared, or that of Boodstone, Smoke of Frankincense,
etc. and that of Salt, and the Collyria or Eyemedicines made of white Vitriol,
and the strong astringent Powder there mentioned.

And the Ointments mentioned for the Ulcers of the Eyes, both white, red and
black, and that with Sarcocol, etc. And the three Collyriums of Rhasis, called
Eleiser, of Lead, and Polycreston, leaving out the Opium in the two last.

Besides these you may add some drying Waters, as of Myrtle, Honey-Suckles,
Sumach, Agrimony, Privet leaves, wild Vine, Osiers; or of sharp Fruits,
Pomegranates, and Sloes distilled.

The Decoction of the same is good, chiefly of Pomegranates, and Dioscorides
commends the Decoction of plain Tree leaves.

He also commends Buck-wheat, and dried Flower.

Also the Powder of Ebeny.

This is an excellent Ointment to put into the corner of the Eyes. Take the
Juice of sour Pomegranates, or of Bramble tops, or Roses as much as you please,
boil it to the consumption of half, mix it with Powder of burnt Myrobalans,
sour Grapes, and add a little of that Juice which is taken from a Boodstone,
or a Hone, such as Barbers set Raysors with, being rubbed with another
Whet-stone, and convenient Liquor. And other drying Pouders.

Burnt Vittiol with Sugar dissolved in Water is excellent.

In regard the dropping at the Nose and Snot, is an Excrement of the Brain, The
Cure of the dropping at the Nose.
you must rather prevent the increase of the Humor then stop it.

In the Coryza or Pose, The Cure of the Coryza or Pose.
water slows from the Nose abundantly, and the Nostrils are offended, and the
Parts adjacent, which brings also a Cough. You must purge the Excrements of the
Brain and the Defluxion, as there mentioned; Not neglecting the Nostrils which
are sore, but using things against Inflammations and Ulcers.

If a Water-flux from the Ears be little, and do no other hurt, The Cure of
matter from the Ears.
you need do nothing but take away the Humor in general, and if it be large,
use things that hinder the increase of the Humor, and purge it with
water-purgers and Diuretics that is by urin; of which there are diverse in the
Cure of the Dropsy Ascites. If it be thick Snot, and flows not so readily as
the other, you must use Cleansers: such as are used to purge the Ears, there
mentioned.

The Whites, although women have them without hurt a long time; yet at length
it makes them discolored, and slothful, and unfit to conceive, and distastful
to Men, for which Cause they desire much to be cured: which is difficult when
it is old, and scarce absolutely to be done so, but it will return. And if the
Whites be malignant, then besides the Filthiness and Stink, there are hurts in
the neck of the womb to the bottom and ulcers: And sometimes other Diseases are
caused by the too great Evacuation.

The way of Cure is, to hinder the Bleeding of these Humors in relaxation to
the Stomach, and so fetch them out of the Body, and consume them, and to draw
them, and turn them from the womb, and to dry and strengthen the Part. But if
other Diseases be joined therewith, that came before, or after it, as Cachexy,
Dropsy, then you first must look to them; and those parts that are ordained
for Concoction, and are faulty, must be amended. If barrenness follows, and the
woman be troubled therewith, you must aim at both in the Cure: And if
Conception be hindered by moistness or plenty of Excrements, you may use the
Course mentioned in the Cure of Barrenness. But for the Whites alone, you must
use things to evacuate and to alter as follow.

There are diverse Evacuations to purge these Excrements from the whole Body, as
Blood-letting, Purging, Vomiting, and Sweating.

Blood-letting is good in full bodies, because some of the Excrements are taken
away thereby, either at a Vein or with Scarification: As also by provoking the
terms is stopped, because thereby the Excrements that cause the Whites are
totally taken away or in part.

First we must purge, and the more by how much the greater the Flux is: and we
must regard the Constitutions and purge with things proper for the humor
abounding, always using those Purgers which have an astringent quality, as in
other Fluxes.

In moist bodies, in whom this Flux is most ordinary, we prepare before
purging; first we give a Clyster or a Laxative, then we give these following
three, four, or sive days.

As this Julep. Take Honey of Roses, Syrup of Hysop, each two ounces; Syrup of
Staechas, Mugwort, each one ounce; Water of Balm, Bettony, Nep, Pennyroyal,
Sage twice as much as the Syrups: mix them with a little Cinnamon, or
Diamoschum, or Diambra.

Or this Decoction. Take Orris roots one ounce and an half, Madder, or Valerian
one ounce, Cypress roots, Elicampane, each half an ounce; Bettony, Nep, Balm,
Mugwort, or the like, three or four handfuls, Rosemary tops, Lavender,
Walflower, red Roses, each one pugil; the great hot Seeds two drams, the lesser
hot Seeds one dram, Pease one pugil: boil them in Waters, and with Sugar, and
Honey, and Cinnamon, mix them for four or five doses.

Purge afterward thus. Take of the Decoction mentioned as much as will serve
for once, add Carthamus seeds, and Senna each half an ounce; boil them, and
infuse two drams of Agarick well mixed with Honey of Roses: make a Potion.

Or give Diaphaenicon, Diacarthamum, de Citro solutivo alone, or dissolved with
the Decoction, or preparing Waters, or Pills of Agarick, Cochy, Foetidae.

You must purge often, gently, as with Pills of Hiera, Mastick, Assaiereth,
Alephangine, or with the stronger mentioned, among which the preparative
Decoction increasing the quantity thrice, and adding Agarick five drams,
Turbith three drams, Ginger half a dram may be given ordinarily: Or you may
infuse them all in Wine, with a little Wormwood.

Things good to prepare and purge Phlegm, as in Defluxions, are good also here.

When the body is corrupted, and the humor malignant and evil colored. Prepare
thus,

A Julep. Take Honey of Roses two ounces, Syrup of Bettony, Endive, Fumitory or
Hops, each one ounce; Wormwood, Maidenhair, Bugloss, and Fennel-water twice or
thrice as much as the Syrups, take it often.

Or with this Decoction. Take Liquorish one ounce and an half, Succory, Fennel,
Dandelion, Elder, and Danwort barks, each an ounce; Endive, Succory, Bugloss,
Fumitory, Hops, Bettony, each one handful; Cordial Flowers, and Broomflowers,
each one pugil; the four great cold Seeds half an ounce, Fennel, and
Anise-seed, each two drams, Dodder seed one dram: make a Decoction, strain it,
and sweeten it with sugar, Cinnamon, and Diarrhodon.

Purge thus: Take of the preparing Decoction, as much as will serve, add Senna
half an ounce, yellow Myrobalans one dram and an half; boil them, infuse
Rhubarb one dram, Syrup of Roses one ounce and an half, or Juice of Roses one
ounce: make a Potion.

Or with the Potions mentioned in the Flux of the terms beginning thus. Take
Tamarinds, Prunes etc. Or, Take yellow Myrobalans etc.

Or give the Electuary of the Juice of Roses, Diasenna, Confection Hamech,
dissolve it with the aforesaid Decoction or Waters, or Goats whey; or give
aggregative Pills.

When we will purge often, we give gentle medicines, Catholicon, Diasebesten,
Tryphera Persica, or Syrup of Roses, or the Infusion of Senna, Rhubarb,
Agarick, or of Fumitory, or Epithymum, or stronger mentioned.

Or this Apozem. Take the Decoction mentioned to prepare, add Raisons ten pair,
Prunes six, Tamarinds one ounce, Polypody two ounces, Senna three ounces,
Epithymum two drams, Myrobalans yellow, Chebs and Indian, each two drams; boil
them in water, and infuse the straining Rhubarb three drams, Spike one scruple,
strain them, add Sugar to sweeten it.

You may use many Preparatives and Purges, mentioned in Cachochymy, and the
like Diseases, as Cachexy and Dropsy, when the Body is inclined thereunto.

A Vomit makes a great and sudden Evacuation, and is good here. When the body
can endure it before meat; or after, meat when they are weak. And this draws the
humors upwards.

Diaphoreticks are either insensible by transpiration, or sensible by Sweat,
and they are good in phlegmatic bodies, when the Diseases are old.

Also Exercise to provoke Sweat, is good.

And to lay on Clothes to provoke Sweat.

But a hot House is best, because it is stronger, especially if it be heated
with the Decoction of things that provoke Sweat: As Chamomil flowers, Melilot,
and other sweet Herbs, of which we shall show how to make moist Baths, in which
they may sit. And which also do provoke Sweat.

Fumigations also for the whole Body, and Ointments for the Backbone; these do
not only sweat, but dry the body, and consume the humidity. Among which is that
of Cinnabar for the Pox. But here we use but a little with other things, least
the Jaws should be infected, and it is good when the Disease is desperate.

Also you may give things to drink, that provoke Sweat. And continue them for
some weaks, when the Disease is old, with a spare Diet. And this is to be done
by the decoction of Guaicum and Sarsa, as in the French Pox.

You may give Alteratives to dry and consume the Humidity if it be very watery,
with Astringents if it be immoderate; such as are mentioned in the Cure of the
overflowing of the Terms, which stop them, and may also these. But because the
filth is purged by these, and not profitable blood, as in the Courses, and the
body is not so much or so soon weakened by these, they are not so suddenly to be
stopped, therefore let the medicines be rather drying then binding, and warm to
comfort the womb: They are thus made.

Pouders are best alone with red wine, or steeled wine, or the like, or with
Sugar in tablets.

The first Powder. Take burnt Hearts horn two drams, Ivory one dram, red Coral
burnt one dram and an half: make a Powder.

Another. Take Amber two drams, Frankincense, or Mastick one dram, Gum Arabic,
or Traganth half a dram, make a Powder.

A third Powder. Take Date-stones burnt two drams, sour Pomegranate kernels, or
Rose-seeds one dram, the inward down of Chestnuts, or Hazel-nuts half a dram.

The fourth Powder. Take burnt Cork two drams, Grains of Sumach one dram,
Acacia, or Hypocistis half a dram.

The fifth. Take dried Berbery seeds, of the two low Bramble-berries,
Ras-berries, or Mulberries, Myrtles, each one dram, Agnus Castus seeds half a
dram: make a Powder.

The sixth. Take Comfrey leaves two drams, Ladies-mantle, or Yarrow one dram,
Mints half a dram: make a Powder.

To any of these you may add half a dram of the following Powder which is
pleasant. Take Cypress roots, and Galangal, each one dram and an half; dried
Citron peels, Cinnamon, each one dram; Anise-seeds (which Dioscorids commends)
one dram and an half, Coriander seed parched one dram, Spike one scruple.

Or, Take as much Aromaticum Rosatum, Diagalanga, or other Dryers.

Of these you may compound others. Others are of the Roots of Avens, Fullers
thistle, Mead sweet, Oak leaves, Brambles, Sumach, wild Tansey, ^ungwort,
Adderstongue, Moonwort, Rosemary, Flower gentle, Millium, Roses, Piony seeds;
also Ashes of Cray-fish, Shellfish, Sponge.

If you must bind more, you may add some of this Powder following to the
former. Take Galls, or Pomegranatepeels one dram, Pomegranate flowers half a
dram, Bole, or the like one dram, Bloodstone half a dram, Acacia, or Dragons
blood half a scruple. Or use the Astringents, mentioned in other Fluxes.

You may make Decoctions of the same Plants, or you may make Wine in the
Infusion of them dry.

You may also use the Juyces of the same, alone, or with other Drinks.

You may make Syrups of the same, or give some astringent usual Syrups,
mentioned in the Terms, as of Mugwort, Stoechas, etc,

Drink Waters of Plantane, Oak budds, wild Tansey, Yarrow, Ladies-mantle,
Roses, Water Lillies, Mints, Service-berries.

Conserve of old Roses, Pomegranate flowers, Acorus, Rosemary flowers,
Stoechas, candied Citrons.

You may make Electuaries of the same, with Pouders and Conserves, and give
Waters to drink after them.

Pills of Bdellium are good here, as in other Fluxes.

Cymbalaria, or that wall herb which is like Ivy, is good in Sallets, and
Bee-nettle.

The Chymicks cry up the Vitriol of Iron for a great secret, and give every
night one grain thereof at bedtime for a month, in Plantane-water, or red
Wine, and make Pills of Magistery of Coral and the same.

Many things are applied outward, which dry up the humors, and being
astringent, do six the Vessels about, which conveigh the humor, and strengthen
the womb.

The use of Natural Baths for many days, or weeks after purging often, and
good Diet, with drying and sweating, is good; therefore women that have the
Whites, and are barren, do much use them. All Dryers are good, as in Sterility
or Barrenness, Alum, Niter, Salt, actually hot by Nature or Art. Also the
Sulphur Baths, by use whereof women as I showed had the Whites, and were cured
by the same.

Artificial Baths to sit in, do the same, used long or often, as we showed in
Barrenness: Of Salt, Alum, Sulphur, boiled in Rainwater, till the water taste
of them, adding Vitriol to bind, or Rust of Iron.

Or you may use Iron-waters, with burnt Plaster of Paris to make it dry more.

Baths of Plants, decocted in the Waters mentioned, or with Iron-water, or
Bean-water, or Lie, or red Wine, with Snakeweed roots, Docks, Madder, Valerian,
Cypress, Perwincle, Mugwort, Bettony, Tamarisk, Savine, Ivy.

If you will bind more, use Galls, Acorn-cupps, Pomegranate peels, Cork,
Sumach, Roses, Pomegranate flowers, Oak moss, Myrtle-berries, and the like. In
cold women, add the hot sweet Plants, as Pennyroyal, Organ, Calamints, Mints,
Balm, Sage, Nep, Marjoram, Rosemary, the great and less hot Seeds, Rue, and
Agnus Castus. To which Decoction add Earths that are dry and salt or Bole, or
Boodstone, and then they will astringe more.

You may use Fomentations instead of baths, or bags to be sitten upon hot, full
of the said Herbs, wild Rocket boiled in wine, is the best. It is good to put
in some sweet plants to take away the stink of the excrements, chiefly Bay
leaves, and Myrtles, Angelica roots, Corianderseeds, Cloves and the like,
Vinegar of Roses, Elder flowers, or the like.

Ointments and Plasters applied to the Privities, Reins, and Loins, stop this
Flux, as well as that of the terms: and the Oils there mentioned, especially of
Henbane. To which you may add hot things, because the humor is watery, and some
of the powder for a Pessary. Gallia Moschata, Musk, and Ambergreece, yet the
scent will be lost with other things.

Many things are put into the neck of the womb to dry, and astringe the loose
Orifices, and stay the Flux, and strengthen the Part.

Some Herbs are put in stamped, Perwincle, Yarrow, Tamarisk, and the like, also
Asarum roots which cleanses, and takes away the stink.

A drying Pessary is thus made. Take Galls, or Acorncupps three drams,
Cypress-nuts two drams, Pomegranate flowers one dram, Frankincense one dram and
an half, Ashes of Tawarisk one dram, Savine, or Mugwort half a dram, Goats
dung, or Ashes dried one dram, with Juice of Shepheardspurse, and the White of
an Egg, and fill a bag for a Pessary.

To take away the evil Scent. Take Cypress roots two drams, Marjoram, Mints,
Pennyroyal in Powder, each one dram; Schaenanth, Spike, each half a dram;
Cloves one dram: make a Powder to be used alone, or with the aforesaid, you may
add Sanders, and wood Aloes.

Gallia Moschata, Musk, and Ambergreece will make a better Scent.

You may use cleansing Injections, such as are mentioned in the Ulcer of the
Womb, and these following.

You must make drying and astringent Injections of the Decoction that dryes and
heal the Ulcer of the womb, or of the Baths and Fomentations, which we use
outwardly. And if there be a stink, let them be qualified as before.

Fumes pierce best into the womb, they dry, bind, and strengthen, and refresh
the womb by their Scent.

These are made of the Decoction of Plants, mentioned for a Bath hot, and taken
in with a Funnel, or under the Clothes.

Or you may cast Pouders, or the Troches, mentioned in Barrenness, upon Coals,
Or thus: Take Mastick two drams, Frankincense, Labdanum, each one dram; Amber,
Hypocistis, Storax, Benzoin, each half a dram; with Bdelium, make a Powder.

Keep a good Diet. Let the Air be dry, and avoid cold and moisture. Eat little,
and that which is of a good Juice and breeds little superfluous Moisture. Let
the D^ink be little, rather wine then water. Avoid idleness and too long sleep.

Evil Sweats that stink, are clammy, The Cure of preternatural Sweat.
or stain Linen, because they purge Excrements from sound and sick must not be
stopped, but rather furthered. And you must cure it by taking away the Cause of
the abundance of Excrements, and prevent those Diseases which sweating
forerunneth. And if this Sweating be in a Disease, and the Disease not cured
thereby, you must use all diligence to take away the remainder of the Cause of
the Disease.

There is nothing peculiar for cold Sweats, for in Diseases they are deadly. If
they come from fainting, they cease when the Patient comes to himself. If Heat
causes sweating with faintness, that must be allayed. If the abundance of
Moisture that must be diminished. If Sweats in Diseases be superfluous and
unprofitable, and cannot be well stopped without weakness: though Nature
endeavors to discharge her self thereby, yet being so great that the Patient
may sooner die then the Disease be discharged, they must be stopped.

We open a Vein when there is fullness, and the Body sweats too much, that with
the blood some water may also come forth.

Also by purging water, or such humors as make it too fluid. Also in Diseases,
if the Sweat be too much, and neither cures nor abates the Disease, we are
thereby admonished to purge again often.

Forcing of sweat does sometimes cure sweat that comes of it self, as often
bathing, or hot Houses, which takes away the Matter.

We give Drinks to thicken the water, to cool and astringe, and so hinder
Sweat. As we showed in immoderate Pissing, that they would stop it, which are
proper here, if we mix Restauratives when there is weakness, also the Diet
there mentioned is proper here.

Provoking of Urin does hinder sweating, by diverting and evacuating it.

Also Syrups, Decoctions, Waters, Conserves, Mucilages, Pouders there
mentioned, with Cordials, as Diamargariton frigidum.

Outwardly apply things to repel the Flux of water, and that bind the skin, and
stop the Pores, by degrees.

Anoint the Back and other parts, with Oil of Willowleaves, or of Myrtles,
Roses, Quinces.

Or, Take Oil of Willows three ounces, Myrtles two ounces, Juice of Housleek,
or Nightshade, Vinegar, each one ounce and an half; boil them till the Juyces
be consumed.

To this you may add things to close the Pores, as of Mucilage, of Fleabane, or
Quinces, one ounce and an half, Infusion of Gum Arabic, or Traganth in
Rose Water one ounce, one white of an Egg, and Wax.

Or, Take Mastick two drams, red Sanders one dram, red Roses, Pomegranate
flowers, Myrtle leaves or Berries, each half a dram; with this Oil mentioned
make a Liniment, or with Wax an Ointment. Dioscorides adds Sulphur, Gypsum, and
the Stone Morochthus.

Smoke the Linen with Frankincense, Mastick, Gum of Juniper, Roses, and
Pomegranate flowers, to dry the Body.

The Smell of Camphire in Rose Water is commended.

Actually cold things close the Pores, if they touch the skin, these are to be
used by degrees, not suddenly.

Cold Air is the best, by opening windows, and casting off Clothes, or by
sprinkling cold water in the Chamber, Vinegar, or cool Herbs.

Sprinkle the Face with water and vinegar, it is excellent.

Apply cold things to the Heart and Pulses, being cordial.

Let the Air be free, and not hot, and the Garments thin. Let Baths be avoided,
the Exercise moderate. Let sleep be little, if the Sweat be most then.

That Flux of water which comes from the tapping for the Dropsy in the Belly,
The Cure of a watery Flux from a Tumor opened, or an Ulcer.
or from other pricks or cuts, or burnings in the Water-rupture, or in
Pustules, or watery Tumors, or Ulcers is cured: As we showed in Tumors and
Swellings.

CHAP. VIII. Of Spitting.
The Kinds,
SPitting by which Spittle is sent out of the Mouth, with Hawking, and sometimes
Coughing is preternatural, chiefly when it is much and filthy; because other
humors are also spet forth, it differs, and is either of Phlegm, or Blood, or
Matter.

There is a Spitting of phlegm or water more often then is sit, in sound Men,
Spitting of Phlegm.
so that some spit when they are speaking at every full point. This is not
commendable in Orators, except it be seldom, and after a long Sentence.

In some Diseases, as Catarrhs, Ptyalismus.
and Moistness of Stomach, there is the same continual Spitting called
Ptyalismus.

That great Spitting which comes from Medicines for Salivation or Head-purgers,
cannot be counted preternatural, because it is good for Health; nor that which
comes from Quicksilver in the Pox, because it conduces to the Cure.

Phlegmatic old Men use to spit Phlegm with more difficulty. This is either
hawked out of the Passage of the nostrils, or Jaws, or coughed from the
Breast. In phlegmatic Diseases that cause a Cough, this Spetting of Phlegm comes
often. In which it is sometimes thin, sometimes thick and mattery with scent, and
without sometimes, sometimes with more ease, sometimes harder fetched up: As we
showed in the Cough.

There is sometimes a Spetting of Blood without a Cough or Pain, Spitting of
Blood.
in which the Spittle is only bloody which defiles the Meat, sometimes pure,
thin, or thick, with a bleeding at the Nose, going before, or with it. Sometimes
it is with pain, or hurt about the Jaws, Tongue, Palate, Gums: as shall be
showed.

Blood is coughed out at the Mouth, either alone, or with spittle like matter,
in a Pleurisy, or Imposthume of the Lungs, with a pricking of the side, and a
Fever, as we showed in the Pain of the Breast.

Pure Blood is sometimes spet out at the Mouth with a Cough, Spitting of Blood.
sometimes more plentifully then others, and at a certain time, at a distance. A
Consumption follows this if it continue.

We have known diverse women that have without hurt coughed up pure blood every
month, but not much.

Others have cast forth great quantities, which have been otherways sound, or
short breathed, and some have lost their lives thereby.

And some in Fevers, and other Diseases, have filled basins with blood, and
then died.

As I knew a young widow that had a Consumption from her Husband that died but
a little before, who after she had with great difficulty, voided sharp Stones
or Gravel with great pain by coughing, voided abundance of blood by the rough
Artery, twice, and the third time died.

Sometimes there is Matter spit up with Phlegm or follows it; sometimes it is
clear, Spitting of Matter.
thin, or snotty; sometimes thick and white, yellowish, greenish, or blackish;
sometimes without taste; sometimes ill-tasted. Other voidings of matter follow
other Diseases, and are joined to their great Symptoms.

The chief are pain in the Ulcers of the Mouth, Nose, and other parts, as of
the Jaws in the Squinzie, in which diseases, Matter is spit up. Also in
spitting of blood with Matter and a Cough, in the Pleurisy and Ulcer of the
Lungs, in which we have seen a basin full of thin Matter spit up in a little
time. The Consumption of the body is joined with spetting of matter with a
cough in the Phthisick, which continues till death. As we showed at large in
those Diseases.

Also an Empyema joined with a Pthysick, the Spetting of Matter is the more.

There is also a Spitting of Matter by which there is Matter sent forth with
its bag, as big as a pease or nut, The Spitting forth of an Imposthum.
one or more at a time, when they are little. Sometimes the Matter is spet forth
before the bag, which is broken; this is accompanied with a shortness of
breath, a Cough, and ends in a Phthisick.

The Causes.
The Cause of all these Kinds of Spitting is from Spittle, or Phlegm, or Blood,
or Matter, or a corrupt Humor.

Often spitting comes from much water which is Naturally in the Mouth, Plenty
of Spittle is the Cause of Spitting of phlegm
to moisten it, mixed with Phlegm; from an evil custom, as of Orators who that
they may not seem to be out, will spet at every full point, or oftener. Also
much water gathered to the Mouth by long moving of the Tongue in Discourse, may
cause the same, Also medicines may cause the same, but because it is then
profitable, it is not preternatural. Also the phansying or remembering of sharp,
bitter, four, or things pleasant to the Tongue and Palate, may cause the Mouth
to water, but it is preternatural.

The great Spitting in the Diseases called Ptyalismus comes from a water
without taste or salt, Phlegm from the brain is the cause of Spetting.
or four, falling from the Head into the Mouth, and mixing it self with the
spettle. And if this Humor falls as low as the Lungs, it causes the Spetting
with a Cough which is mentioned. In which at first the humor is thin, and then
thicker by continuance, and at length being baked with heat and white, it
resembles Matter: As we showed in the Causes of Spetting of Matter.

Phlegm made of the Excrements in the Lungs, Phlegm sent from the Lungs to the
jaws, is another Cause.
either like Snot or Matter, if it be coughed into the Mouth, causes the like
spetting. And this is usual in sound and old men: And in the Disease of the
Cough, and sometimes in the Asthma, in which it is not spet forth, and being
clammy, causes no Cough: As we showed.

Moisture carried up from the Stomach and mingled with the Spittle in the
mouth, Moistness of the stomach, is another Cause of Spetting.
is the Cause of Ptyalismus or Spitting, as it is from the Head. In which
Nature by often spetting, labors to disburden her self in the morning fasting,
when the Stomach has nothing in it but that water. The Cause of which Moisture
of the Stomach, we showed in the Weakness of the Stomach from that Distemper.

Spetting of Blood comes from Blood brought to the Mouth, from a Vein or Artery
opened in the Nose, Mouth, Jaws, or Lungs, or Breast.

We showed in Haemorrhagy, how blood might flow from the Nose to the Mouth, The
blood from the Nose, is the Cause of Spetting it from the Mouth.
but the plenty thereof, or when the lower Veins are opened, or when the Nose
is stopped, and the Patient lies upon his Back to stanch it, is the Cause of
the Falling of it into the Mouth.

Blood easily gets into the Mouth from the Gums easily when they are swollen,
The Swelling, sucking, or hurt of the Gums, is the cause of spitting Blood.
because they are soft, and so loose flesh. Or when they are sucked, as in the
toothach, or otherwise hurt, as by picking the Teeth, or eating hard things.
But especially when a tooth is pulled out, and torn from the Gums and
Membranes. I once saw so great a Flux of Blood from an Artery opened by the
drawing of a tooth, that it could not be stopped, and the Patient died thereby.

Without great violence, blood will not flow from other parts of the mouth, A
Wound in the inward part of the mouth, is the Cause of Spetting of Blood.
as from the tongue, cut, or bitten, as it is usual in Convulsions, or from the
skin of the Mouth wounded. Also Blood flows plentifully from the Veins under
the tongue when they are opened, called the Ranunculi or Frog-veins. And I knew
a widdower that caused both those Veins to be opened, who spit blood till he
died.

Blood from the Lungs is often spet at the Mouth, The opening of the Veins of
the Lungs by corrosion, is the Cause of Spetting blood
and it comes from the inward Vessels of the Lungs, which sill them with blood;
being opened or broken, it is carried into the branches of the rough Artery,
and thence into the windpipe, and so by coughing into the mouth, and then spet
forth. Sometimes the Veins are opened by Anastomosis, and there is a Disease
called Haemoptoica Passio, or spetting of blood. As when there is a plenty of
blood in the lungs which stretches the Vessels, and opens the Mouths thereof,
till it sweat through, or flow forth, more or less. And this is often without
other hurt, if the Mouths do shut themselves again, as we have seen in men of
full bodies, and women that wanted their Terms through Conception, or the like.
But it is dangerous, and deadly often, when the Mouths of the Veins are so
enlarged, or continually moved, that they cannot be shut. Or when any part of
the blood gets into the substance of the Lungs which putrifieth them: As we
showed in the Phthysick.

From the same Blood of the Lungs, that gets out by Anastomosis, and does not
go directly into the branches of the rough Artery, but first into the substance
of the Lungs causing Inflammation, and thence into the branches of the rough
Artery: There is a Spetting of Blood and Matter in the Pleurisy, and the
Imposthume of the Lungs, or Peripneumony: As we showed.

When the great or small Veins of the Lungs are broken, there is a Flux
accordingly with a Cough, and that is called Haemoptoica Passio, which being
hard to be cured, ends in an Ulcer of the Lungs, with the Phthysick. And this
breaking of the Veins may be from violent Dilatation, or Contraction; as great
blowing or whooping, or trumpeting; sometimes from a Cough or Sneesing but
seldom; sometimes from violent holding of the breath in straining and
Childbirth, or in carrying of burdens. Hence I have known diverse
Stone-cutters, which removing of great Stones spet blood, and became Phthysical
or Consumptive, which the Vulgar supposes to come from the Saw-dust which they
breath in, but falsely, for if the dust should get into the rough Artery, it
would presently be coughed out by its roughness, rather then sharpness which it
has not, and therefore cannot hurt the Lungs. The same may come from other
violent labor, or from a bruise of the Breast, by a fall or stroke, or the
like that breaks the veins.

When the Vessels of the Lungs are corroded, and the substance of the Lungs
also, it is by degrees, and causes a silthy Ulcer, there is the Phthysick
rather then the Haemoptoick Passion or Blood-spetting; Yet blood is from the
Ulcer spet up: As we showed in the Phthysick.

When Veins are opened in other parts of the Breast besides the Lungs, and they
sweat through, or pour sorth blood to the Lungs, there may be Spetting of
Blood, as in the Inflammation of the Membrane, in the Pleurisy* or breaking of
any Veins in the hollow Breast. But when the blood flows into the Cavity of the
breast, and not into the Lungs and stays, and corrupts, causing a Phthysick,
or Empyema; we showed in the Causes of a Pleurisy: we cannot make this the
Cause of spetting of blood. Except from a wound in the Breast and Lungs, when
the blood flows not only into the inward parts of the breast, but into the
Vessels, and so to the Mouth. And the rough Artery be wounded, the blood flows
into the Lungs, and it is coughed up.

Matter is spet from an Ulcer in some parts; as the mouth and nose, Ulcers in
the Mouth, Nose, Jaws, Lungs, Breast, Causes of spitting of Matter.
and the Jaws in the Squincie. Also from ulcered, rotten Lungs, in the
Phthysick, as we showed. In an Empyema there is Matter in the hollow of the
breast which falls from the Lungs, and if the Lungs be rotten, and a way open
thereby, it is coughed up, neither can it be sent any other way then by opening
it externally. As we shall show.

But the Matter of the Lungs is not always from an Ulcer, The Blood of the
lungs turned into a matter, is the cause of Sperting of Matter.
but from blood when the Lungs are inflamed without an Ulcer. And that Spetting
of Matter in a Pleurisy and Peripneumony is blood ripened.

Sometimes Blood flowing in a small quantity from the Veins of the Lungs into
some other part of the Lungs, where it stays, and turns to Matter by degrees,
which is by the dryness of the outside turned to a Bladder. And this is the
Cause of the Spetting of Imposthumes, with little skins or bladders. And this
may be without any other inconvenience, except the Matter so enclosed, has
hurt the Lungs. And then a Phthysick or Consumption follows.

There is a also a Spetting of Matter with Phlegm for the most part, The Phlegm
of the Head, or Nose, falling upon the Lungs, is the Cause of Spetting of
Matter.
when Rhewm from the Head, is fallen into the Cavity of the Nostrils, or upon
the Lungs, where it lies, till by Heat it be baked into Matter. This we have
often seen in sound people, and in phlegmatic Diseases that cause Coughing,
when there has been neither Ulcer, nor Consumption.

It may come to pass, that a putrid Humor concocted, The substance of the Lungs
corrupted, is the Cause of Spetting of the Lungs.
may so eat the substance of the Lungs, that a piece of them may be spet up.

The Cure.
The Cure of most kinds of Spttings joined with other Diseases, is mentioned in
those Diseases: But we shall speak of the Cure of other Spittings according to
their Causes.

Often Spetting from an evil custom, as in Orators, The Cure of Spetting of
Phlegm.
is not to be cured, but by forbearing by degrees: If it come from much
speaking, let him be silent. If a Ptyalismus or Spetting come from Rhewm in the
head or from the Stomach, when a watery Humor rises up and fills the Mouth.
For that from the Head, you must hinder the increase of Rhewm, and purge it,
and consume it, and stop the Defluxion, as in the Cure of a Catarrh, and Cough
mentioned. As for that from the Stomach, you must hinder the increase of Phlegm
in the Stomach, and that which is must be purged, and the weakness of the
stomach strengthened, with things mentioned in the Cure of a weak Stomach, which
done, in both Causes, dry up the moisture in the Mouth, and draw it away with
Masticatories to chew and the like, mentioned in the cold Diseases of the
Brain, and in the Toothache.

Spetting, by reason of a Defluxion upon the Lungs, or Phlegm bred in the Lungs,
is cured as a Cough.

The Cure of Blood-spetting is diverse, as blood is from one part or another.
The Cure of Spetting of Blood.
From the Gums when blood flows, we take blood, because it is a sign of
Plethory, least it should cause worse accidents: And we cure it as a Plethory.
And if it continue, we use astringent Mouth-waters. Bleeding from a Tooth
drawn, although it stop usually of it self, yet it stops sooner, when the Mouth
is washed with red Wine, Rose Vinegar, and Rose Water. But if it stop not by
reason of a Vein or Artery broken, then you must use Astringents, mentioned in
the Inflammations of the Mouth, and looseness of Teeth: And if it cease not, you
must stop the place from whence the tooth was taken, with Pouders mentioned in
Bleeding of Wounds. Burnt Vitriol is excellent. If these will not do, use an
actual or potential Cautery that will burn speedily, least it be held long in
the Mouth. And this is done well with a Pill made of Cotton, and dipped in
Aquaf ortis, and stopped into the space between the Teeth. And this we have
found by Experience, to have done the work, when others failed, in this and
other bleedings. When bleeding is from other parts of the month, ^urt or
wounded, it is stopped with the same washings of the mouth. And if there be a
great Flux from the biting of the tongue, as I have seen after Convulsions with
danger of death, then you must use stronger Causticks.

When Blood falls from the Nose into the Mouth, it is cured, as the bleeding at
the Nose. But if there be danger, least it falling into the Mouth should be
swallowed, or fall upon the Lungs, which can scarce be, for when it comes to
the rough Artery, it causes a Cough which casts it forth: He must lie with the
Face downward, that it may rather flow out at the Nose then backward. Also you
may keep it from flowing down, with holding water in the Mouth.

Blood-sweating from the Lungs, and mixed with Spetting, and coughed up in a
Pleurisy or Peripneumony, is cured, as is mentioned in the Pains of the Breast.

The Haemoptoical Passion, although it be in some, especially women, The Cure
of Haemoptoica Passio, or Spetting of Blood.
without other hurt; yet is it sometimes dangerous, if often, and in great
quantity: And sometimes deadly, though the sudden loss of blood, both in
Diseases and without. But usually it turns to a Consumption. Therefore it must
be stopped in time, and if the Mouths of the Vessels be open, they must be
closed: And if they be broken, they must be healed. A^^ ^n both cases, the
blood that clodders in the breast mu^^ be cleansed, least it hurt the Lungs,
and the Cough cured. But if the Lungs be ulcerated, and there be blood voided
with matter, from the corroding of the Veins; then you must cure it as a
Phthysick by healing the Ulcer, and the like.

For the Cure of the Haemoptoick Passion, or Spetting of blood, is as follows.

There must first be Evacuations by Blood-letting in the Arm, upon which side
there is a pain, or heavyness, or pricking.

Also by Scarification, with Cupping in the Shoulders, sides of the Neck, and
Wrist; or by a great Cupping-glass under the Ribbs, or Hypochondria's. Also by
using Ligatures, and Frictions, as in Bleeding at the Nose.

In full bodied Women we provoke the terms, if stopped or but few. And in Men
the Haemorrhoids, if they formerly had them.

If the Blood be watery we purge, but with mild things, and not hot, least they
should cause Vomiting, which would do hurt. And with things that astringe, and
stay other Fluxes, though they open the belly, as Rhubarb in powder, with Juice
or Syrup of Plantane, or Purslane, and a little Spikenard.

Alteratives must be in their Meat, and Medicines.

Let the Air be cool, and dry, either Naturally or Artificially, because it
being taken immediately into the Lungs, will dry well, as burnt Frankincense,
Mastick, and the like.

Let the Meat be glutinating of boiled Flesh, boiled Snails are commended, and
the blood of Turtles and Kids. Let him eat Starch boiled in Rose Water; and
things made of Rice, or Barley, and rear Eggs, with boiled or raw purslane in
Sallets: Also sour Fruits. Let him drink water, milk, ptisanes, and the like,
avoid strong wine, and other things, actually or potentially hot.

You must provoke sleep, if it be absent.

Let him beware of coughing and speaking loud, or much.

The Emplastick Medicines and Astringents mentioned in the Haemoptoick Passion,
which stop the Mouths of the Vessels and heal, not with too much binding, least
the blood be stopped in the breast, with such things as dissolve and cleanse
the breast, not too sharp and sour, may also be used.

Let him drink morning and evening for two or three days this Decoction. Take
Comfrey roots two ounces, Marsh mallows roots one ounce, Purslane, if it be to
be had green, Plantane, Shepheards-purse, Solomons-seal, each one handful; red
Roses one pugil, Seeds of Purslane, Plantane, Sorrel, Endive, Coriander, white
Poppies, each one dram; Myrle-berries three drams, Jujubies, and Sebestens,
each six pairs. Boil them in Rainwater, or Cistern-water, when it is strained,
add to one pint and an half thereof, as much Sugar, Penidyes, or Honey of Roses
as will make an Apozem.

Other things are good in a Decoction, as Roots of Avens, Brambles, Oak barks,
or Acron-cupps, Sumach, Horstayl, Comfrey, Willow-herb, Vervain, Flowers of
Teazles, Cheese-wort, Osiers, Reeds, Pomegranates, Haresoot, Leek, and Rose
seeds, the Berries of bloody Rod.

They mix with these Plants for Wound-drinks, to heal the Veins, as
Winter-green, Mousear, Sanicle, Golden Rod, wild Tansey, Yarrow, Agrimony,
Nosebleed.

You may add for the Breast, Liquorish, ^oltsfoot, Melon seeds, and Herbs that
thicken the blood, as Violets, Endive, Bugloss, Water Lillies.

Some commend the Decoction of Iron, and Hearts horn, in plantane-water, or the
Decoction of the powder of Boodstone.

You may make a Syrup of the former Decoction to keep it longer, with more
Sugar, and give it by ounces.

Or a Syrup of the other plants, as of purslane, which is best; it is made of
three parts of the Juice of Purslane, with two parts of Sugar boiled to a
consistance. In the want of which, you may use the Syrup of Purslane by Mesue,
of it, with Juice of Endive, Vinegar, and Sugar. Juice of plantane in a Syrup
is also good.

The usual Syrups are Astringents, as that of dried Roses, Myrtles; and
Thickners, as of Jujubes, Violets.

You may give also the Juyces of the plants aforesaid, alone, as of plantane,
purslane, or with others, and with Honey, or Sugar.

Some give Juice of Sage, and Mints, with Sugar or Honey.

The distilled Waters are good in three ounces or more at a time, especially of
purslane, plantane, Solomons-seal, Shepheards-purse, Comfrey, with other
Astringents, as Horstayl, privet, Myrtles, Oak leaves, Roses. Some commend
Water of Sowbread; others that of Mints and sugar.

A Compound Water is thus made. Take red Snails out of the shells one pound,
Comfrey roots half a pound, Plantane, Purslane, each one handful; red Roses one
pugil, Myrtle-berries half a pugil, Juice of Quinces, Bar-berries, or
Cornel-berries four ounces, Spikenard half a dram: distill a water.

There are pouders of diverse things to be given with Sugar, because they are
unpleansant, as this. Take Comfreyroots one dram and an half, Seeds of
Purslane, Plantane, white Poppy, St. John's Wort, each one dram; red Roses half
a dram, Pomegranate flowers one scruple, Starch, Amber, each one dram; Gum
Arabic and Traganth, each one scruple; burnt Hearts horn half a dram, Bole, or
sealed Earth, red Coral poudered, each two scruples; Dragons blood one scruple,
Sugar of Roses, or Penidyes as much as all the rest, make a powder, give a
dram, or a dram and an half at a time.

The Pouders of the Troches of Amber, or sealed Earth without Opium, or of
burnt Ivory, are also good.

To which you may add Grape seeds, Bar-berries, Myrtles: Also Frankincense,
Mastick, Ashes of Egg-shells, Cuttle-bone.

Old Conserves of Roses also, often taken, and that of Comfrey roots, and
Sugar, or Honey, or of the strongest Herbs mentioned.

Also candied Comfrey roots.

And this Electuary. Take Conserve of Roses, Violets and Comfrey, each one
ounce and an half; of Quinces one ounce, of the Pouders mentioned, two drams,
Acacia one dram: mix them with Syrup of Myrtles.

Another when there is fear of congealed Blood. Take of the Looch of Furslane,
Powder of Comfrey roots half a dram, Amber one scruple, the Runnet of an Hare
half a scruple, with Syrup of dried Roses: mix them, let him take it often.
Some add Mummy, when the blood is clotted.

Or this Lohoch. Take a White of an Egg well beaten, and add as much Mucilage
of Fleabane, made with Purslanewater, and the Infusion of Gum Traganth in
Rose Water, with Penidyes, and a little Starch.

The Lohoch of purslane is the best against blood-spittlng, made of Juice of
purslane, Gum Arabic, Dragons blood, Troches of Lemnos, Earth, Amber, burnt
Hares hair, and Sugar.

Another of Traganth, and Arabic infused in Rose Water, and old Conserve of
Roses, Syrup of dried Roses, Lemnos, Earth, and Bole.

You may make Lozenges of the aforesaid pouders, to be held in the Mouth, with
Gum Traganth infused in Rosewater, or with Sugar dissolved in proper Water.

Sugar of Roses, and Diatragacanth frigid, are good to be held under the tongue.

Potions are thus made, or Juleps. Take the Syrup of Purslane, and Plantane,
each one ounce and an half; Water of Solomons-seal, Shepheards-purse, and
Roses, each two ounces; sweeten it with Sanders or Spike. Let it be given at
thrice.

Of other Waters and Syrups you may make the like.

Or: Take one dram and an half of the Powder mentioned, and give it with Water,
or Milk, or Water and Honey, or with some Syrup, and then you may give half a
dram without Sugar.

Or this: Take ^yrup of Purslane, or Plantane one ounce, of Myrtles, and red
Roses dried, and Wine of sharp Pomegranates, each half an ounce; Bole, or
sealed Earth, Coral, each half a dram; Bloodstone and Amber, each one scruple;
or of the Pouders, or the Troches mentioned, one dram, give it with Water of
Shepheards-purse, or of Solomons-seal.

We make these stronger with Narcoticks, which do not only astringe, but
stupesie the sense, and keep the motion of Nature from bleeding, and assuage
the Cough, they are thus made.

An excellent powder. Take Sugar boiled with Rose Water, or Violet water till
it be thick, one ounce, Powder of Henbane seeds one dram, give one dram at a
time, alone, or with convenient Liquor, you may add Powder of red Coral, Bole,
or other fat Earth, each half a dram, Gum Arabic one scruple, Penidyes two
drams, then give one dram and an half, if the Flux be violent, or add the
pouders that begins thus. Take Comfrey roots etc. and Henbane seeds two drams.

They may be made into Lozenges, with Gum Traganth infused in purslane-water.

Or give this Opiate. Take Conserve of Roses, or Violets one ounce and an half,
white Henbane seed poudered, one dram and an half, Syrap of Poppies, or
Diacodium one ounce: The Dose is a dram at a time.

Philonium persicum, and Diacoralium of Galen, the Troches of Winter-cherries
with Opium; which have besides the binders, and the Opium, Henbane seeds. Also
the troches of Amber, with Opium. All these are given a a dram in weight with
convenient Liquor.

Athanasia Nicolai is commended, Treacle and Mithridate are not so good here.

Seven grains of Cynogloss pills which have Opium, and Henbane seeds, are good
to stop Blood and Fluxes.

The Syrup of poppy, or Diacodium, with Syrups, Juyces, and other convenient
Waters, is good also.

Outward Applications can do little to stop Veins in the Lungs, because they
grow not to the breast, and strong astringents laid to the breast, do keep in
the blood; therefore use only a little Oil of Myrtles, Mastick, or Quinces
which do but little good or hurt. And if the Vein be opened in the breast,
apply stronger things where the pain is, for then there is no spiting of blood,
as I showed.

You may here if the bleeding be great, apply things to the Liver, Stones, and
other parts, as in other Fluxes. As the Amulets for bleeding at the Nose.

That Spitting of Matter which is from Phlegm changed into Matter, The Cure of
Spitting of Matter.
is cured as the the spitting of Phlegm.

If it be mixed with blood coming from the Inflammation of the Lungs, cure it
as a Pleurisy or Peripneumony, or Inflammation of the Lungs.

If it come from an Ulcer in the Lungs, cure it as the Phthysick. If it come
from the cavity of the Breast in an Empyema, passing through the Lungs
ulcerated, cure it as the Phthysick also, opening the Breast: As we showed in
the Excretions in the Superficies of the Body.

If a Bladder with Matter be voided by spitting, The Cure of a bladder or
imposthume spet up.
either whole or broken, cure it as an Ulceration of the Lungs in a
Consumption. But if the Lungs be not hurt or no signs thereof, you must not
take that course; except, after they have bin often voided, there be a
suspicion that others may grow, then by the medicines mentioned for the Cough,
you must hinder the growth of them. And if they be new grown, as will appear by
the heaviness of the Lungs, least it should hurt the Lungs by Continuance;
Dioscorides orders that Goats Organ, and Sowbread seeds be often drunk, or
licked with Honey. The Fume of dried Coltssoot will do the same. And other
strong expectorating Medicines.

CHAP. IX. Of Vomiting.
The Kinds,
AVomit or Vomiting by which the thing taken, and other Humors and Excrements
are sent forth from the Stomach by the Gullet and Mouth, is almost always
preternatural, though it does good, because it is not usual and necessary as
spitting, pissing, going to stool, nor is it so easy as those, when they are
according to Nature; but is like a Cough with labor, pain, crying, and sweat,
and there goes before a loathing moistness and bitterness of the mouth,
trembling of the Lips, and other accidents, worse in them who are unfit, and
hard to vomit. And it is chiefly preternatural, when it is often and much, or
things are voided that ought not.

These are of diverse sorts, both in Diseases whose symptoms they are,
Preternatural Vomiting.
and without Diseases.

When Vomiting is without a Disease or other accidents, but only those of
Vomiting, that is after Gluttony or Drunkenness: They cast up their gorge, and
immoderate wine, and therewith sometimes many Excrements, both of Phlegm and
Choler. This happens to many, either suddenly or after sleep, with a Diziness.
And though it refresh, yet if it be usual, and continue long, it weaknens the
Stomach, and leaves thirst and other accidents.

There is another Vomiting after nauseous meats, by which they, and other
things are cast out of the Belly; and this, if immoderate is hurtful.

There is also another which is usual, and comes after the giving of venomous
medicines purges especially, which are suddenly thrown up again; or when they
begin to work downwnrds, with diverse Excrements.

Also that Vomiting which is from a Vomit given on purpose, if it be violent or
much, is dangerous. And such symptoms as follow Cholar, follow these Vomitings.

There is another usual Vomiting with Women with Child, who Vomit after their
Conception, when fasting, or after meat.

And though this is without hurt, yet if it be with great force, and continue,
it hurts.

There are some Vomitings when Men are sick, in which some throw up easily too
much, or nauseous meat, crude and unconcocted.

Some vomit much Phlegm, Snot, Choler, especially in the morning, with pain of
the Heart before, and sourness, bitterness, and roughness of Teeth after it.
All which, though they give ease, yet by continuance, they hurt, and bring
other Diseases. As that excellent Printer Frobenius that used after his first
sleep for many years, to vomit corrupt matter blackish, dyed after of the same
Disease.

In diverse Diseases of the Stomach, Guts, and other parts, Vomitings are with
other symptoms: As I showed in them which are different in respect of Phlegm,
Choler, or Blood.

There is in diverse Diseases, Vomiting of Phlegm.
Vomiting of Phlegm alone, or with other Humors. And it is either clammy,
snotty, glutinous, muddy, frothy, or watery, either sweet, sour, or sharp, al
these are called phlegmatic. We showed this in other Diseases at large.

Vomiting of Choler is as usual in many Diseases, where it was described,
Vomiting of Choler.
in which yellow, or like Brimstone, or like the Yolk of an Egg is voided,
which is tough, or green, and that like Herbs; moist and thin, like Leeks, or
Horehound in color; or so green, that it is compared to Verdegreece, or black,
or skie-coloured; which I saw plentifully vomited by women in a Dropsy alone.
And then there are worse Symptoms.

There is a kind of choleric Vomiting, The Disease of Choler.
worse then the other accidents, which is accompanied with purging of Choler,
this is called the Disease of Choler: differing from the Colic.

A continual Purging or Vomiting with great force and conturbation, is of sharp
and bitter Choler, thin, or thick, green, black, or yellow, pure, or mixed, and
sometimes bloody.

There are great Pains in the Belly, and Guts, with pricking, and pain of the
Back and Loins.

There is often herewith burning of Urin by reason of Choler.

And an intolerable thirst without a Fever, which is but sometimes, called a
Synochus, which we described in choleric Diseases, which is not great, nor can
be, except another Fever come.

Then follows great weakness and faintness, the pulse is swift and weak, and
when the Disease continues, and increases, there is fainting and swounding,
the Heart beats, and when the outward parts begin to grow cold, and of a cold
sweat, Death is at hand. Usually a Convulsion follows, before which went the
Hickets, and Cramp of the Legs, which foretells the Danger.

There is Vomiting of blood but seldom, Vomiting of Blood.
in Diseases that have others joined therewith, and in women that want the
terms, in which blood is vomited alone, or mixed with them; sometimes more
plentifully pure or mixed; sometimes clodded and tough like Pitch, and black,
sometimes like Ink, which a famous Lawyer vomited in abundance, and purged also:
Not only purging of blood, but great Diseases follow this Vomiting.

There is also a Vomiting of Excrements by themselves, or with Humors
mentioned: Vomiting of Dung.
when the dung of the belly which should be sent forth by stool, is vomited at
the mouth, of which we shall speak when we treat of the wrong passage of the
Dung.

The Causes.
It is necessary in all Vomiting that the Stomach be troubled, from whence the
expulsive Faculty is stirred up, to expel that which troubles it, and throws
out all, or some part that is in the Stomach into the left upper Orifice, and
so into the Gullet, by the help of the Midriff which is near to it. This
Vomiting is called the subvertion of the Stomach. The stomach is thus affected,
either when it is troubled, or oppressed, or pricked. And the sooner when the
Cause is great, or many meet, or when the stomach has a most exquisite sense,
and easily suffers, or loosned from an evil custom of Vomiting, cannot so
righty contain the meat, and cannot contain them, when they are too many, or
unpleasant. The Cause of the troubling, pressing, or pricking of the stomach,
is either from external force, or from things taken in, or from the Humors,
Excrements, and other things in the Stomach.

Outwardly the rubbing of the stomach, The trouble, oppression, or pricking of
the stomach either from outward force, or things taken in, is the cause of
preternatural Vomiting.
or violent thrusting, or bending forward, or motion by Wagon or Ship,
especially after much eating, or drinking, or lying down after Drunkenness,
causes Vomiting, by disturbing the meat in the stomach.

The Finger, or a Quill, or the like, thrust into the throat, by tickling the
tunicle of the mouth, which consents with the stomach, causes it by laboring
to expel what offends it, to throw out whatsoever is contained therein.

From too much meat and drink, especially wine, the stomach being too full,
vomiteth; and the rather, if they offend the stomach. And this may come from a
Physical Diet.

If things be taken that are loathsome, they are vomited up again. As unusual
meats, (as we showed in Loathing) and such as Nature abhors, or filthy, and
abominable things, either by chance, or necessity: the very conceit, or
imagination of which makes some vomit. Also ill-scented things, as medicines,
especially Purges cause a Loathing, and therefore are often thrown up again;
some meats are loathed, not because they are unpleasant, but because they are
contrary to some Natures, so that if by chance they be eaten, they are spewed
up again. In many Diseases where meat is loathed, any smell of Food, flesh
especially fat or roasted, which is of it self pleasant, is loathsome, and they
vomit it up.

Medicines taken, that prick the stomach, or burn it, or that purge, as Hairs
cut, or shavings of the Nails will provoke Vomiting, and if they work long, or
violently, they are the Cause of hurtful Vomiting. Other vehement medicines,
especially purges do the same by troubling the stomach. And they are vomited as
soon as taken, or when they begin to work, they cause the pain at the Heart,
and so Vomiting. But chiefly corroding medicines or poisons taken by chance, or
otherwise. In which Vomiting, whatsoever juice, humors, or Excrements are in
the stomach, are thrown out together or a sunder: But chiefly thin Choler, as
we see after the giving of Stibium or the like, it has been voided by basins
full. Which was not in the stomach or Guts before, because there were no
symptoms of it; but it was forced by Nature from the Meseraicks, through the
violence of the medicine, as we shall show in Vomiting of Choler.

Besides many things swollowed by chance, Choler pricking the Stomach, is the
cause of the vomiting thereof.
have caused Vomiting.

Among Humors and Excrements, Choler is the chief cause of Vomiting, either
fasting, or in Diseases of Choler. And if it be clammy, as that like yolks of
Eggs, or sharp, as the green and black, it pulls and burns the stomach, and
makes not only Vomiting, but purging; and the more, if it be plentiful, and
sent to the Guts, especially the thin Guts which are united to the stomach. And
it is greater or lesser, as it is more or less offensive to the Stomach and
Guts.

This Choler breeds in the stomach from meats, which are too hot, and of sharp
choleric Juice, or turns such by Corruption in the stomach. As appears by the
use of Cowcumbers, and Melons, as we showed in the Disease of Choler. Also
Choler that is sent from the gall, and corrupted, may turn to such, and cause
the same. Also when it has been long in the Meseraicks till it corrupt, Choler
may get into those parts, and cause the Disease of Choler. As we showed in the
Causes of intermitting Fevers, how it was gathered in the Meseraicks, and of
what it was made.

Sometimes vomit is raised from other Humors and Excrements which fill, The
Cause of Vomiting of Phlegm is the fullness of the Stomach or Loathing.
or offend the stomach. As from crude Juice made of meat not well concocted,
which flowing in the stomach, and filling it with wind, compels it to vomit it
up four for the most part. Or from other sharp Juyces, besides Choler, made of
the Corruption of meat. Whence come Vomitings not long after eating, or when
Concoction is beginning. Also Vomiting may come from any Phlegm, or from tough
Matter in the Stomach, long retained, or from water, which cause Loathing; as
we showed in the Want of Appetite: Or from other immoderate things, especially
if there be other evil Humors mixed. These alone, or with other Humors bred in
the stomach, or sent thither, offending the stomach, cause Vomiting in diverse
Cacochymicks, and in Women that are with Child, and want their Terms, or others
that have not conceived, by reason of the filth stopped with the terms; and in
the beginning of Fevers, and other malignant Diseases, when the stomach
consents, or is hurt by them. As we showed in the Causes of these Diseases.

Blood getting into the Stomach by the Meseraick Veins which go through the
same, Vomiting of blood from the stomach filled with the blood from the
meseraicks.
or rising from the Veins of the Guts, is the Cause of Vomiting blood, and as
the Blood is, so is the Vomiting; sometimes watery, filthy, or black, such as is
laid up in the Meseraicks, as we showed in Fevers; sometimes when it has been
long in the stomach, it grows thicker. Now it gets out of the Veins, either
from the plenty thereof; as we showed in the stopping of the Terms, that Women
with Child may vomit blood without hurt, or from the ceasing of other bleeding
at the Nose, or when blood is in the Body from the taking off of a Member. Or
from the thinness of the blood mixed with water, or from the thinness of the
Choler in diverse Diseases, or from other impurity or malignity. Also Blood is
vomited sometimes from a Contusion, about the stomach, upon the parts adjacent;
or from some hurt of the stomach, by any thing swollowed, or a wound. Also
blood from the Jaws, or Nose, or Breast swallowed down, is vomited up in
clodders. As I lately observed in our Cap-maker, who being laden with his
wares, and coming from a fair, toward night, made great have to get into the
City before the Gates were shut, but being tired, he lay in the Suburbs all
night in a sweat. And coming into the City the next morning, he grew very weak
with Vomiting of clotted Blood, with a Megrim, and purging also of Blood.

The Cure.
When any thing is sent forth by Vomit, profitably or necessarily, it must not
be stopped, but provoked, if it come not freely. But if by violence, and long
continuance, the strength decay, or the like, then you must make it more easy,
or shorter. When it is unprofitable, as of meat or medicine, it must be
prevented and stopped.

If Vomiting come after surfeiting, The Cure of preternatural Vomiting from
things taken in.
or Drunkenness, it must not be stopped, but furthered. But if it be often,
take heed of it, and use things mentioned in Alienation of Mind, and let them
not sleep presently upon a full stomach, nor let them cause Giddiness usually
goes before, with reading or motion. And if it continue, give things mentioned
Agarist, Vomiting, Choler.

When Vomiting is from Loathing of things necessary which were better kept in
the Body, that must be prevented, especially after a purge is taken, because if
it be suddenly vomited up, the working is lost, but if it be kept any while,
the medicine may have an Operation, though cast up with many Excrements, which
could not go downwards.

And though the stools are not large, because of the double Evacuation, yet the
medicine will work its effect. And the rather, if it be not all vomited up.

You must prevent the Vomiting up of a medicine, with pleasant scents and
tastes, which resist the evil scent and taste thereof; as with a crust of bread
toasted, and dipped in Vinegar, applied to the Nose, with the powder of Nutmeg
or Cloves; or by tying a clout dipped in Vinegar, about the Neck; or washing
the Mouth with Vinegar and Water. Or by eating or chewing some sharp fruit, or
other pleasant thing.

An Eg held to the throat, is thought by the common people to hinder the
Vomiting of a medicine. Also there are many things in Vomiting Choler, which
will prevent it here.

But if Vomiting begin when the purge should work, with pain at the Heart, it
is not amiss, because Evacuation is made both ways. Yet because they are
weakened by the heart-pain, so that they sound sometimes, let them wash the
stomach from that which pricks it, when it first begins. As Barley-water, which
Hippocrates says must be taken warm with Sugar, or Cream of Barley, with
Sugar, or Pease-broath, whatsoever allayes pricking is then good: As any Broth
of flesh.

A Clyster then given, takes away the Heart-pain, and quickens the medicine,
and hinders the Vomiting.

If Vomiting follow the violence of any medicine or poison, then we give things
to resist the sharp burning, and malignant force, and to cleanse, that they may
vomit easily, and stop it not. Or if we do, it is with stupefactives, to take
away the sense of the stomach. Or we give Antidotes against poison, which if
they have Opium as Treacle, are the better. Such as are mentioned in the Pain
of the Heart.

If Vomiting be from Phlegm, or any crude Humor, The Cure of Vomiting of Phlegm
raised from Excrements.
or Excrements, whether in Cacochymicks, Women with Child, or Diseases, and
Excrements be voided thereby, it must not be stopped, But if it come often, and
in sound men, or sick, it is convenient, or if it be too violent, you must stop
it, observing diligently if it be in women with child, or the Patient be sick
of another Disease, that proper medicines may be given.

Vomits are given in Vomitings, when there is a tough Humor in the stomach,
which continually provokes, and yet will not be voided, but always provokes
to vomit. Then you must give a Vomit that cleanses and cutteth, when it is
clammy. The Kinds of Vomits are mentioned in the Cure of Weakness of the
Stomach.

Purgers to provoke downwardly, are given when vomits cannot work, or
sufficiently discharge, that they may cease to molest, and pass the usual
ways. Such are mentioned in the Weakness of the Stomach. But you must make
choice of the best, and pleasantest Purges, least they be vomited up again.
Among which the purging wine is the best: Or Pills, if they can be swallowed.

Clysters also draw down the Cause, and are good in great Vomiting, not given
in great quantity, nor too sharp or loosning, least when they get into the
Colon, they shouldpress the stomach that is near, or relaxe it, or provoke it:
such as are mentioned in the Colic.

When in a constant Vomiting no meat can be retained, you must preserve the
Patient with nourishing Clysters* such as are prescribed in the Hectic.

When the Matter is voided by Vomit, by Nature, by Art, by Stool, you may give
things to stop such are in this Cause, hot and binding, proper for the stomach,
such as are mentioned in the Weakness of the Stomach. To which you may add the
following, which are good when Vomiting is too violent.

Cinnamon Water being pleasant, is good to stop Vomiting, and other distilled
Spices, that are not loathsome, mentioned in the weakness of the stomach.

Wine is best to stop Vomiting, because it is pleasant to the stomach,
especially Rich-wine.

A Physical Wine made by Infusion, which is bitter, is better then sweet,
because that provokes Vomiting. That of Wormwood is best, to which the matter
is very tough, we add Squills, Gentian, and topps of Centaury.

Another of Mints, Marjoram, topps of Rosemary, Bettony, Myrtle-leaves, red
Roses, Cor^ander seed infused in wine, with Wormwood, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace.

Hippocras is good also, or other Wines, mentioned in weakness of the stomach,
or made of the Aromatical Pouders in wine, as shall be showed; with Powder of
red Coral, with but a little Sugar, least the sweetness offend.

Decoctions are not so pleaseant, but are easily vomited up, but they may be
made into a Syrup, and given by spoonfuls: As of Wormwood, and Mints, with
wine, with Juice of Mints, Pomegranates, and Quinces

Or this Decoction. Take Roots of Cypress, Galangal, white Thorn, each half an
ounce; Mirts, Bettony, Burnet, each one handful; Rosemary topps one pugil,
Coriander seed* two drams, Piony seeds one dram, Schaenanth, Spike, and Coral
poudered, each one dram and an half; boil them in wine, and Water, and with
Sugar make a Syrup.

It is good to eat Beans, Kidney-beans, Lentils.

Dioscorides directs twenty two Lentils.

Diverse Stomach-pouders, mentioned in the weakness of the stomach, which are
astringent, as Aromaticum Rosatum, and Gary ophyllatum, Rosata Novella, and
Diagalanga.

Or make this astringent Powder. Take Roots of Cypress, Galangal, Acorus,
Cassia Lignea, each one dram and an half; Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves, each one dram;
Schaenanth Spike, Wood Aloes, each half a dram, Pepper, and Ginger, each half a
scruple: make a Powder, which will be stronger, but less pleasant, with
Marjoram, Mints, Roses, each half a dram; Mastick, or Frankincense two
scruples. These are given with Wine and Sugar.

Also there are many Conserves, and Candyes good, as that of old Roses, Mints,
Marjoram, Citrons, Nutmegs, and the like.

You may apply to the Stomach, strengthners and astringers, mentioned in the
weakness thereof, choosing those which are best scented.

Anoint the Stomach with Oils there mentioned, which strengthen and bind. And
least the greafiescent offend the stomach, keep the Head off, and use some
sweet Scents. Or sprinkle some sweet Pouders there mentioned, after anointing,
or mix sweet things with the Ointment. Oil of Nutmegs is good for that.

The Ointment mentioned for a moist and loose stomach, is good if you sweeten
it.

It is better to apply Plasters, least by chasing the stomach, you cause
Vomiting, as that of Mastick, mentioned in the weakness of the stomach.

Also the Fomentations there, which strengthen and astringe, which are the
better for being sweet-scented.

The sweet pouders also there, are to be sprinkled here upon the Ointments, and
to be applied in bags to the stomach.

Also use the Cataplasms without the unctious things, which are well-scented,
and there mentioned.

The Juice of Mints with Leaven, laid like a plaster to the Stomach and Guts,
does quickly cure Vomiting of phlegm and wind. And the same is good for
choleric Vomiting, and the Disease Choler.

Also Cupping, Dropax, Ligature, Amulets, are good, but best in Vomiting of
Choler.

Remembering always a spare and convenient Diet.

If Vomiting come from Choler, or a sharp Humor, The Cure of choleric Vomiting
and the Disease Choler.
from corrupt Meat, or otherwise which pricks the Stomach, when these are
voided, you must provoke rather then stop it. But if it be often in
Cacochymicks, because it is worse then that of phlegm, and causes hurt,
threatening diseases, it must be cured. As also when it is immoderate, and
vehement. And in regard Vomiting is the chief symptom in the Disease Choler,
and so dangerous: The cure in general must be aimed at. This Disease of Choler
is most acute and dangerous, if it come without a manifest Cause, but it is
less dangerous, when it is from eating of Cowcumbers, Mellons, or the like
turned into Choler. And it threatens Death, if the Pulse be weak, the Heart
beat, and faint, with Hickocks and Convulsions: And if the Pulse intermit, and
the Urin be blew, and the outward parts cold, Death is at hand.

Your aim in curing of these immoderate Vomitings of Choler, or sharp Humors,
is to cleanse away the Choler that sticks so fast with other Humors, always
regarding the Disease and other Symptoms if there be any,) and to abate their
force, and drive them down when they ascend too much. And then to strengthen
the Stomach and Outs by astringents. And if need require to take away their
sense of feeling, with inward and outward Applications. And to have regard to
the strength, and to drive away all accidents approaching, and to mind the flux
of the belly in Choler: which are all done by these following.

The Vomits mentioned in Heart-pain from Choler, are good here to take away the
Cause. These also evacuate Choler that cleaves, and stop the violent Flux of
the Belly by Revulsion.

Also Purges mentioned for the Heart-ach, from Choler chiefly Myrobalans, and
Rhubarb, with Spike which corrects it, and stops all Fluxes, giving always
things which stop the Vomiting by drawing the Choler downwards. The things
mentioned in Dysentery, are good in the Disease Choler, because the belly flows
too much, when the Choler sticks to the Guts. Stronger remedies are not given
but to prevent in such as are subject to it. And therefore in the time of the
Disease, abstain from them.

Clysters are best to draw down Choler, which cleanse and allay Heat.

Many Alteratives are good, which are mentioned in choleric Heart-ach, if you
choose those that bind, and are not nauseous, as also these.

Sour Fruits raw, or boiled, eaten, or used as Sauce, or the Juyces thereof in
Meats, if not too ripe, as Grapes, Cherries, Medlars, Services, Cornil-berries,
also four Popherbs, or eaten with Vinegar, candied Cabbage topps, and Turnips.

The conserved or candied four Fruits are good, also Myrobalans, Citron barks
candied, Conserve of Roses, and Sorrel.

Also the Juyces of the same four Fruits and Herbs, without Meat stay vomiting.
Also vinegar drunk alone, after a surfeit, or Drunkenness, as it allayes
Drunkenness, so it hinders vomiting. Wormwood-wine cures the vomiting of
Choler, therefore Drunkards use it for their morningsdraught, when pain of the
Heart forerunneth it. Also to drink cold water after Meat, will stay vomiting.

Those four Syrups mentioned in Heart-pain are good, given alone, or with
Sortel-water. And you may add which is the best of the Syrup of four
Pomegranates four parts, of Mints one part.

Or boil the Juyces of both to a Syrup, or boil a little Mints, with the Syrup
of Pomegranates therein.

The Chemists give some drops of the Oil of Pearl in this Disease.

You may make a Powder to be given in wine, or otherwise thus, Take Pulp of
Quinces, or of sour Pears, Medlars, or Services, or Cornil-berries dried before
they be ripe, half an ounce, dried Citron peels one dram, Galls half a dram,
Cynk-foyl roots, Sorrel seeds, and of Plantane, Grapes, Barberries, Sumach,
Pomegranates, Roses, Coriander, each one dram, Roses and wild Vine, each half a
dram; Antispodium of Ivory, or Hearts horn, red Coral, each one dram and an
half; Crystal half a dram, Pearls one scruple, Bole, or other fat Earth one
dram, Hypocistis half a dram, red Sanders, and Gross Cinnamon, each one dram:
make a Powder.

Also the Powder of Mastick, Frankincense, Amber, with the Yolk of an Eg, and a
little Salt.

Also Powder of three leaved Grass, Chesnuts-shells, Mallow-seeds, Cherry, Gum
drunk with wine.

The Moss of Trees called Lungwort, and the Leaves of Harefoot, with the Seed,
is commended by Dioscorides.

Also Diacydonites without the Species, Troches of Spodium, with Sorrel seeds.
Also Troches of Frankincense is good, except the scent offend, as that of
Rhasis, of Frankincense, Mastick, Bole, Amber, Champhire, Gallia Moschata, with
Cloves to sweeten.

The Powder of Liquorish with Ivory and Cinnamon given in Broth, stays both
Vomiting of Choler and Phlegm, and are good after the taking of a Purge.

Also the Electuaryes and Candyes, mentioned in Heartpain.

Or this: Take Conserve of Quinces two ounces, Citron peels candied, Conserve
of Roses, each one ounce; Conserve of Sorrel half an ounce, Rose, Sorrel and
Coriander seeds, each half a dram; red Coral one dram, with Trionsantulon, or
Diamargariton frigidum. If they swound, Narcoticks, Antidotes, mentioned there
also, by taking away sense from the Stomach, stay Vomiting by themselves, or
with other things.

You must apply strengtheners to the Stomach, before and behind, temperate, or
somewhat cool, but actually hot, because the Stomach is quickly offended with
Cold: therefore we mix cold things with hot. These are always good in Fluxes,
especially when there is a loathing of meat, being of sweet scent.

Oils relaxe actually, therefore are not to be used alone, but with cold
Astringents, adding some that are hot, as in Heart-pain. Vinegar, as there
said, is good, but in a greater quantity, or with other four Juyces, and
astringent Pouders that are sweet.

Or this which is more binding. Take Mastick two drams, Frankincense, Cypress
roots, Pomegranate flowers, each one dram; dried Wormwood and Spike, each half
a dram: make a Powder.

The cooling strengthening Ointment, mentioned in Heart-pain also, or this which
is more binding. Take Oil of Mastick, Quinces, Roses, Omphacine, each one
ounce; Oil of Myrtles six drams, Oil of Wormwood half an ounce, Vinegar of
Roses, old white Wine, each one ounce and an half; Juice of Quinces, or Pears,
or of Citrons, and Lemmons one ounce, boil them to the consuming of Juyces,
then add Powder of Mastick, Olibanum, each one dram; Bole one dram and an half,
Acacia, or Hypocistis, or Juice of Sloes, each one dram; Galls, Pomegranate
flowers, red Roses, each half a dram; with Wax make an Ointment.

Or an Emplaster, adding to the aforesaid doubled in weight, Dragons blood two
drams, Acorn-cupps, Cypressnuts, Citron peels, Bramble leaves, Myrtles,
Wormwood, Mints, Myrtle seeds, Coriander, each one dram; Antispodium one dram
and an half, Spikenard, Nutmeg, each half a dram; red Sanders one dram, Gallia
Moschara two scruples, with Pitch, Rosin, and Oils aforesaid, make a Plaster.

Powder of Mastick with the White of an Eg, and some of the Oils aforesaid is
good, if it be applied as a plaster.

Rose-cakes sprinkled with Rose Water, and Vinegar of Roses, with red Wine, is
excellent.

A Crust of Bread toasted and steeped in Vinegar of Roses, and then dried, and
tied with a fine linnen-clout, that it may stick to the stomach, is a good and
easy remedyon which you may sprinkle Mastick, Cloves, and the like.

Or you may wet the Tossed in Juice of Quinces, or of four Grapes, or the like
astringents, or red Wine; or apply the Juyces with Bran, or Barley-meal, These
will be stronger, with the Powder of Mastick, Wormwood, Mints, Roses; or boil
the Plants, in red wine, and beat them with Bread, and other Astringents,
mentioned in the Emplasters.

The Compound Plaster of the Crust of Bread, with Oils is made of the Crust of
Bread, toasted and steeped in Vinegar, with Barley-meal, each two ounces; Oil
of Quinces and Mastick, each one ounce; Mastick, Antispodium, Coral, red
Sanders, Mints, each one dram. To which you may ad Wormwood, and other
Astringents.

The Emplaster made of Dates by Alexander, with Bread, Quinces, Vinegar, Oil,
and many Astringents, is also good to stay vomiting.

Or that made of Pulps; thus: Take Quinces, or Pears, or sour Apples that smell
sweet, or the like, bake them if they be green, if they be old, boil them in
red Wine, with Vinegar, beat them, and apply them. Add Oil of Mints, and
Wormwood which are good by themselves, and keep the other from drying, and from
being too tough.

An Epithem of Rose Water four ounces, Vinegar of Roses two ounces, applied hot
with a red Cloth, with two drams of Mastick, one dram of red Sanders, red
Roses and Cloves, each half a dram; and some grains of Camphire. Also a Clout
dipped in Juice of Quinces, Pears, or sharp Apples, with Juice of Citrons,
Lemmons, Pomegranates, and applied hot with the Pouders mentioned.

An astringent Fomentation is made of the Decoction of Wood and Leaves of
Pears, Quinces, Oak Services, Barberries, Privet, Olive, Medlars, Sumach,
Myrtles, Brambles, Roses, wild Vine, Pomegranate flowers and peels, and Galls,
with Wormwood, and Mints, Coriander seeds, and Myrtles, and Sanders, with
Spices, in red wine alone, or with water, or in Iron-water.

Cupping-glasses fixed to the Stomach, or at the bottom thereof, stops
vomiting. And if done while the Patient is eating, he will not vomit it up. But
if Choler be carried from the Meseraicks to the Stomach, you must apply the
Cupping-glass to the Liver or Spleen, where the great veins are, or a Dropax,
or sticking Plaster of Pitch dissolved in Oil, laid to the Stomach, and
violently drawn off, does stop vomiting.

Ligatures also, and Frictions of the extreme parts, and sprinkling of the Face
with cold water. Let him smell and eat things pleasant to the Stomach, as
Apples, Pears, Quinces, and other things mentioned for the keeping down of a
Potion, or put his Hands in cold water.

A broad Plate of Ivory laid to the Stomach, is reported to stop vomiting.

Also a Jasper-stone hung about the Neck to touch the Stomach.

As for Diet. Let his meat be little, and often of good Juice, pleasant, not
loathsome, rather thick then thin, with Sauces aforesaid.

Bread of Wheat or Barley, with Juice of Pomegranates, or with Rose Water,
Rose-vinegar, and Sugar is proper.

And Gelly of Capon-juyce, boiled between two dishes, with Juice of Citrons,
and other Cordials, when swounding seared.

Let the Drink be actually cold rather then hot. Let the wine be sharp, or if
they love not wine, let them drink water boiled with Coriander seed, or water
with sharp Syrups, with a regard of Nature and custom.

Cold water drunk after meal, does the same.

They commend the drinking of Spaw-waters, for them that are subject to
vomiting, not only for to stay it, but to cure the Cachexy from thence. Also
sharp Drinks.

Let them rest, and speak little, and not move the mouth with chewing.

Sleep is profitable, because it stops Fluxes, and to provoke it, you must
give Dormitives.

We cure the accidents of Choler as we cure choler, as the Flux of the Belly,
with outward things that stop vomiting.

Also Thirst, with sharp Drinks. The Fever with things that void Choler. The
Convulsion which is present, or at hand, with Ointments to the Back, and the
like, mentioned in the Cure of Convulsion. Faintness or Swounding we cure with
cordials, and good victuals. Or if there be heat of urin, or the like, let
medicines be sought for in their proper places.

If Blood be vomited, The Cure of Vomiting of Blood.
and sticks clottered in the mouth, then you must provoke vomiting, rather then
stop it, least other Symptoms be produced. If blood come from the Meseraicks,
it shows the danger, and greatness of the Disease, and then the Disease must be
chiefly looked at. If it come from the hurt of the Stomach, or any part
adjacent it is very dangerous, and the remedies must be applied to the wound,
or contusion. In every cause, when blood is vomited in great quantity, you must
rather hinder the flux of blood into the Stomach, then stop the vomiting, with
inward and outward means. And you must hinder the Flux, with things that
dissolve congealed Blood in the stomach, which causes dangerous accidents.
Thus,

Blood-letting can draw but little from the Meseraicks, which fill the Stomach
and Guts with Blood: Yet in Plethory or Fullness, when the cause requires it,
you may open a proper vein. And if the Terms be stopped, open that in the Foot.

Revulsion of this Blood-vomiting, is also made with Cupping-glasses to the
Hypochondria under the Ribbs, in the Belly, below the Stomach, or to the Hipps,
when the Terms are stopped.

Also with Ligatures and Frictions of the extreme parts, especially of the
Thighs.

Purge not, except the Disease do require it, and then not with strong
medicines. But with a little Rhubarb, to take away the congealed blood, which
will bind also afterward, or with Syrup of Roses.

Also if blood be voided by vomit and stool, congealed and black, give Clysters
to cleanse, and stop the mouths of the veins, such as are for a Dysentery. And
when clots of blood stick in the Guts, Water and Vinegar will dissolve them.

Let him eat Pap of Starch, Rice, Barley flowers, Gelly, and Milk.

The White of an Eg, and Mucilage of Quince seeds, and Gum Traganth extracted
with Rose Water, or Plantane, well beaten; may be given alone, or with Sugar
pellets, or Sugar of Roses, or with red Wine, or Vinegar of Roses.

Or make a Syrup of the Juyces mentioned, boiling them with Sugar; or of the
Herbs with one pugil of red Roses, Pomegranate flowers half an ounce, red
Sanders one dram, boil them in Iron-water, with Vinegar and Sugar, to a Syrup.

The usual Syrups are good, as of Myrtles, Quinces, dry-Roses, Bar-berries, of
unripe Grapes, of Plantane-water also drunk, or Water of Nuts to dissolve blood.

Let him drink steeled Water, with one ounce of Mastick, white Coral half an
ounce, Crystal, or Jasper two drams, or Vinegar and Water.

A Powder. Take Bloodstone two drams, red Coral one dram and an half, Bole,
Acacia, each one dram; Gum Arabic, or Traganth parched, half a dram, make the
Powder, add the Roots of Snakeweed, Pomegranate flowers, Horstayl, each half a
dram; of Henbane seeds: let him take one dram, with Wine alone, or with a
little Water and Sugar two drams, or make Lozenges thereof with Sugar, boiled
in Plantanewater.

To dissolve clotted Blood, give Amber, true bitumen, Mummy, or the Runner of a
Kid, etc.

The Pouders usual, are of the Troches of Amber, of Lemnos Earth, which both
stop blood, and by reason of the Amber, dissolve it when congealed. Also the
Troches of Antispodium, with Sorrel seed. These are better, because of the
Poppey therein.

A good Electuary. Take Conserve of Comfrey roots, and old Roses, and Quinces,
each one ounce; Troches of Amber, or Lemnos Earth, or the Powder mentioned two
drams, and if he be faint, the Powder of Diamargariton frigidum, or of Gemms
half a dram, with Syrup of Quinces, make an Electuary, or with Sugar, Lozenges,
give as much as a Chestnut, and let him drink after it some distilled Water that
is proper.

One dram of Philonium Persicum is highly commended, to which you may add half
a dram of Rhubarb, to dissolve the congealed Blood.

Outwardly the Fomentation and Epithem described in Vomiting of Choler are
good, as also the Ointments and Plasters there.

Or these: Take Oil of Myrtles, and Quinces, each two ounces and an half; Juice
of Plantane, or the like, one ounce and an half, Vinegar of Roses one ounce,
boil them till the Juice is consumed, add Acacia, and Hypocistis, each one
dram, make an Ointment, or add Mastick half an ounce, Bole two drams,
Pomegranate flowers and peels, Galls and Sumach, each one dram; with Wax make a
Cerot, or with Rosin an Emplaster.

CHAP. X. Of Pissing.
The Kinds,
THat Pissing by which the Urin in Males, Preternatural Pissing.
passes through the Yard; in Women through their pissing place is Natural. But
when it is involuntary, or immoderate, or often, or little, or thick, or
bloody; or comes by a wrong passage, it is preternatural.

When the Urin flows out of its own accord, Involuntary Pissing.
without the Will of the Patient, it is involuntary. And this is sometimes
without Feeling, as in Apoplexies, Palsies, and Swoundings. And some who have
been cut for the stone have it for ever.

There is another involuntary Pissing, which they have who piss their Beds,
Pissing of Bed.
especially Infants, if it be a fault in them: It is unseemly in young people
that know it, and ought to avoid it. But worse when they come to years.

It is called immoderate, when it is too much, Immoderate Pissing.
too often, or unseasonable, as in Drunkards. They fill themselves with wine
and rise from meat to piss. This is thought unseemly among people of
reputation, which hold Drunkenness for a great shame, as indeed it is.

There is another immoderate Pissing, when it is not after large Drinking, but
oftener then it ought to be: For which cause they cannot tarry long in
Assemblies, but are forced to go forth, and piss.

But that is chiefly immoderate Pissing, when they piss more then they drink or
eat of moist meats. This is in sound Folks, which are called Vritici without
another infirmity. And in sick in the Crisis or Declination of a disease. And
because it is profitable, and not hurtful, it is not preternatural, except it
continue to the loss of strength, which will easily decay by such an Evacuation.

There is another in the Disease, called Diabetes but seldom; Diabetes Dipsacus.
which is a large and unmoderate Pissing, when what is drunk is little or
nothing changed, with an unquenchable thirst from whence it is called Dipsacus,
when the Body is hot and consumes.

There is another, Dropping of urin. Strangury.
often and little Pissing, when the Urin is voided by drops, called Strangury,
which is sometimes without pain: Of which we spoke in the want of Pissing.

There is often a burning pain in pissing, called scalding Urin, or Dysury, Hot
Pissing, scalding Urin, Dysury, or difficulty of urin.
though this word is more proper to pissing with difficulty or pain, as
Dysentery is in the Guts, then to little Pissing. In this Disease while the
Urin drops, there is pain: but when it comes more freely, it begins at the
Conclusion. And continues a little after, and begins again before the next
Pissing, causing such a straining, that it produces horror and sweat. A
grievous pain in Males about the end of the Yard or Glans, which is then
touched; hence the Germans call this, cold Pissing, though it be hot. Women are
pained also in the passage for Urin.

This Dysurie or Difficulty of Pissing troubles young and old, sometimes without
other Diseases, and is short, if it come from the taking of any thing, or from
some cause that continues not, as we shall show. Sometimes it is longer in
which there are some signs of a foul Body.

Sometimes it is with other Diseases, as in thick Pissing, when it is mattery,
slimy, or like Milk with Urin, for the Diseases of the Reins, Bladder, or other
parts: Also in the Ulcer of the Yard, and Bladder, matter is voided alone; and
Seed involuntary in a Gonorrhoea, or Running of the Reins, especially when it
is venomous: As we shall show concerning them.

Sometimes symptoms of the Stone in the Bladder, are with this Dysury, as
Itching about the Privities, standing of the Yard, sense of Heaviness about the
Fundament, into which, if the Finger be thrust, the Stone in the Bladder may be
felt; also straining with crude Urin, sometimes thick and bloody, and sometimes
it is quite stopped.

There is often turbulent or thick pissing as of matter which settles in the
urinal like a Pultis, Thick Pissing.
and mixeth again with the urin when it is shaked, and goes to the bottom again
when it settleth. It is sometimes white, without scent, sometimes stinking,
sometimes white Filmes do fly in the Urin, as in the Ulcer of the Kidneys: As we
shall show. Sometimes it is without scalding, but with heaviness, and pain of
the Reins, sometimes with scalding.

They say that pissing of Matter may be from an Imposthum in the Liver which is
rare, and from a Pleurisy, or Peripneumony, or Empyema, which is most rare and
seldom.

There is another thick Pissing of Slime with the Urin, which sticks to the
bottom of the Urinal, like Glue after the Urin is poudered out, this is from
the Ulcer of the Bladder, and then there is also scalding of Urin. Also this
slime is voided alone: As we shall declare in the Excretions of the Yard
without Urin.

Another thick Pissing is like Milk, Milkie Pissing.
and then there is a great white sediment at the bottom of the Urinal, and is
mixed with the urin when it is shaked. I have observed this in my self and
others, sometimes for many days, and sometimes at certain hours, especially at
night, after Exercise without other accident, except heat in Pissing and
straining after.

Pissing of Blood, Pissing of blood.
is when the Urin is colored like blood. In which after settling there is a
thick and black sediment.

This is often with other accidents in the Stone of the Kidneys, and after
violent Exercise; also in the Stone of the Bladder. And if there be an Ulcer,
there is Matter with Blood.

They who use the Catheter have often a little blood in the Urin. And they who
have had a great (...) or Stroke piss blood.

And they who have taken Cantharides, or Spa^^^ flies, or the like.

Otherwise there is seldom Pissing of Blood. Only in Fevers it may be a
Crisis, or for Judgment: And I knew a Maid in a pestilential Fever, that
pissed some chamberpots full of blood before she dyed.

Also Bloodhath been pissed without a Disease: As we shall show in the Causes
of all sorts of Pissing Blood.

There are also other kinds of preternatural Pissing. Urin of a preternatural
color or mixed.
As when the Urin is of another strange color, mixed with sand, slime, which
show Diseases, or the approaching of them. Of these we shall not speak, because
when the Disease is cured, they vanish.

Here may be mentioned Urin with dung, Urin mixed with dung, bones, or the
terms.
as we showed in the preternatural Voiding of Excrements of the Belly, or with
bones, or the like, which we spoke of in preternatural Excretion. Or with the
Terms, as we showed in their preternatural Flux.

Sometimes the Urin flows another way, as out of a Wound, The Flux of urin by a
Wound.
as in cutting for the Stone, it flows at the Perinaeum, till it be healed. The
same may be about the loins and lower parts of the Belly, from a wound there:
As we knew one who made no Urin, but at his Groins for many years.

The Causes.
The Cause of all preternatural Pissing, as involuntary, immoderate, often,
little, thick, bloody, dyed, or mixed, is from an evil custom, or Disease in
the Reins or Bladder, as a hot Constitution or weak, a cold or hot Distemper;
or forcing, or solution of continuity or contiguity: Or from a Disease by
consent of the Bladder. Or some Disease in a part like the Reins and Bladder.

Sometimes often pissing is from an evil custom; An evil custom is the Cause of
often Pissing.
for when Nature is not disordered by Diet, she keeps her order and time for
voiding the Excrements of the belly: And if you disorder her by any means or
forcing, it will not be seasonable. Therefore Infants that have long pissed
their beds, are familarly troubled therewith, an it continues with them, when
grown up, which is unseemly.

Some kinds of Pissings come from the Constitution of the Reins and Bladder.
The Constitution of the Reins and Bladder.
As when there is exquisite sense in the bladder, which being pricked by the
urin, sends it forth before the time. And this may be the cause why Children
piss a bed, except they be raised at night. And if to this exquisite sense,
there be a sharpness of Urin, it will be rendered oftener, and sooner scaul'd,
as shall be showed.

A Natural Heat of the Kidneys, may cause more, Heat and weakness of the
Kidneys, is the cause of often Pissing.
and oftener Pissing, because heat makes a sooner separation. As also weakness,
when the retentive Faculty cannot retain the Urin long enough.

This is often from the Birth, through want of heat, or from the looseness and
softness of the Vessels, or from much drinking: Or from immoderate Venery,
which weakens these parts.

When the Bladder is weak, loose, or soft, there is often Pissing. Or when it
is over-stretched, and too thin, which is from the birth in some, or from long
retention of Urin, in Assemblies.

Also strong Imaginations in a Dream, may cause this, when they dream they piss
in a convenient place, which stirs up the expulsive Faculty.

When the retentive Faculty is weakened by a cold distemper in the reins and
bladder, there is often Pissing: A cold Distemper of the Reins, is the Cause of
often Pissing.
this is from external cold, so cold at the Feet by consent of these parts, may
cause Pissing.

Many think that Diabetes comes from a hot distemper; but the Reins are many
times hot without that distemper: And if the Reins were very much inflamed,
pissing would not be increased, but diminished, or suppressed, and the
attractive virtue rather destroyed then increased. Moreover though there be
Thirst and Consumption, with the Diabetes, or often Pissing, yet it is not
proved to come from the heat of the reins. Because thirst may come from want of
moisture, through continual pissing. And the heat of the whole Body cannot be
kindled, only from the heat of the Reins, without an Inflammation, whence
pissing will be diminished: neither can the Body be consumed thereby. Therefore
there is another cause of Diabetes, which is seldom seen. We freely grant that
pissing may be hastened from a hot distemper of the Reins, if there be much
water: As we showed it might be in the hot Constitution of the Reins, but we
deny that this confused and unusual pissing can come from heat thereof.

But scalding Urin comes from the heat of the Reins, or is increased thereby: A
hot Distemper in the Kidneys, is the Cause of scalding Urin.
As we showed in the Inflammation of the Reins, in which the Urin is made hot.
And this may come from a simple distemper without Instammation, but the Urin is
sharp and hot, first from other Causes, and thenis farther inflamed by the
Reins,

From the pricking of the Reins and bladder, Pricking in the Reins and Bladder,
is the cause of preternatural Pissing.
there are diverse kinds of preternatural Pissing. And it is caused by Urin, by
Matter, by Seed, or by a Stone.

There is a large Pissing from too much Urin that pricketh the bladder. Much
Urine, is the cause of large Pissing.
And that is from the use of watery things, and drinking much.

From great Drinking, Too much drink is the Cause of immoderate Pissing.
it happens that the Drink is little changed, but passes through the veins to
the Reins, and so to the Bladder. When the Drink taken is so much, that it
cannot stay to be changed and mixed with Humors, but passes through
unconcocted.

An immoderate Pissing may be when a great quantity of water, Plenty of Water,
is the Cause of immoderate Pissing, and Diabetes.
which lay in the veins, is suddenly sent this way. As in many superfluities of
the Body: and in some Diseases, as in Cachexy or Dropsy, and the like,
especially in continual Fevers, in which the cause of the disease is expelled
by urin in a Crisis: Or when an intermitting Fever declineth.

There is also a large pissing after a long suppression of urine by a Stone, or
slimy Matter in the Vreters. As I observed two years since in a Preacher, who
made no urin in eleven days, by reason of the Stone, and slime in the Ureters,
and was in a miserable condition: But in one night on a sudden the Vreters
opened, and he voided eight measures of water concontaining every one three
pints, with great refreshment to his whole Body.

But if this Evacuation be too much, and nature sending forth the Cause of the
Disease, be so profuse, that all the moisture begins to be voided, there will
follow a Diabetes. Thence comes the heat of the whole Body, and thirst,
especially, if there be a Fever; and Leanness, especially if the Fever be
consumptive. And because in Fevers this pissing is seldom seen, only in a
Crisis, when the Fever is cured thereby. Diabetes is a rare Disease, which
weakneth exceedingly. Nor is it a wonder, when the urin passes through so
quick, that it is crude and not colored. And this is the cause of a Diabetes,
and not the hot distemper of the Kidneys, from which alone it cannot proceed.
And though the practical Physicians did not plainly mention a Fever in the
Cause of a Diabetes, yet in their Prognostics, if it be joined with a Fever
they pronounce it deadly, and prescribe cool Remedies. We suppose that a true
Diabetes in which there is sudden melting of the Body with heat and thirst, is
an accident of a burning Fever, and gives some occasion also of the melting;
and therefore it is a Symptom joined therewith, as the Fever is also, except
there be a Diabetes without a Fever, by reason of abundance of drink, long
kept in the Meseraicks, (for it cannot stay so long in the Stomach and Guts)
and after thrust by Nature to the Reins, rather then attracted. Hence the drink
is as it was drunk, and not altered in the first Concoction which it escapes.
And if there be then heat of the Body or thirst, these come from great
emptyness, and not from the h^^t of the Kidneys which cannot do these things,
or so weaken the body, as I showed. But in regard drink is seldom so contained
in the veins. This Diabetes is very seldom seen.

There is a scalding Pissing with a Strangury from the quality of the Urin,
Sharpness of urin the Cause of scalding Piss.
provoking and pricking the Bladder to render it. And if it be sharper then it
is by Nature, by which it naturally provokes the bladder to let it out,
presently after it comes to the bladder, though in little quantity, it provokes
it to get out, especially when the bladder is very sensible, hence it falls
often by drops, and being in a narrow passage that is very sensible, it pricks,
and causes this heat and pain in Pissing.

This is especially in the top of the Yard, because when sharp Urin comes into
the neck of the bladder which is narrow, and into the Yard, it causes pain
there by scalding. And this is felt chiefly in the Head or Glands, which is
most sensible. And because through great pain the Yard hangs down, and grows
loose for want of blood and Spirits: It turns cold and pale. And this pricking
is when the urin is too hot and inflamed; or when it is corroding, or too salt;
or too four, by which means it does not only prick, but bind the passage.

From this provoking or pricking of urin, Sharpness of urin is the cause of
pissing.
there is a bloody pissing also, when it is corroding to the bladder.

The Urin takes these qualities, by which it causes scalding and bloody
pissing, from things taken into the Body, sometimes mixed with Humors and
Excrements.

As from Diet, as too much Wine and Spices, and hot Oils, of Watercresses,
Onions, and Mustard. It receives saltness from salt Meats, fourness from four
things, especially four wine, as has been experienced, and a cleansing quality
from the things mentioned, and other abstersives. Among which is beer which
makes the urin sharp in them that are not used to it. The same may be from
Medicines, and from hot Purges, as Spurge, and Coloquintida which provokes
urin, as stools by their sharpness. Also Cantharids inflames the urin, and such
things cause pissing of blood, and ulcers in the Yard. And it appears that
Spanish-flies do it by heat, because outwardly they raise Blisters. The Urin
may take the same qualities from the mixture of Humors, as of Choler, it may
take heat, sharpness, and cleansing, when it is preternatural and burning; for
Natural Choler in the Gall mixed with water, cannot make the urin so sharp, as
it is in the Jaundies, though the water be dyed with Choler, yet the urin is
not scalding. There are diverse Causes of this choler, both in Diseases, and
without; of which heat of urin is a symptom. The cause of this Choler mixing
with the Serum, and so with the Urin, is mentioned in other Diseases. And if
the Serum be salt and four from other humors, the urin will be such.

Pricking coming from other matter mixed with the urin, may be the cause of
Scalding or Dysury. As from the matter which comes from Ulcers in the Reins,
and other corruption in foul Bodies ripened by the heat of the Reins. These may
cause burning, and matterry urin together. Matter without Ulceration, causes
foul Urin without other accident, except heavyness in the Reins.

Corrupt Urin from matter like milk, is like the former, except the color,
when there is also heat, which though it come from the Reins, as the other, is
more salt, as appears when it is dry, being like white salt in color and taste:
And I collect that it comes from the saltness of the Serum in the Reins made
thick and concocted, because when it is more hard, it turns to sand, or a
stone, as we showed in the Stone.

From Seed in Men, Seed out of its place, is the Cause of scalding Urin.
moved from its place, and not sent forth, pricking and burning, may come
scalding urin, for seed by Nature is sharp, and in its one place it does no
hurt, as Choler in the Gall, but going forth, and sticking in the passage, it
corrodes and exulcerates which causes heat of urin* As it is in them who have
nocturnal Imaginations or diurnal Lusts, which stirs up the Seed, without
action or spending. This is in old men from the little quantity of seed, and
insufficient extension of the Yard, and in sick people, and causes scalding
Urin.

In a venomous Gonorrhaea the same happens from corrupt Seed, Corrupt Seed is
the Cause of ^^alding urin in the Running of the Reins.
so that it runs not only from the sharpness, but also corrodeth the passage,
especially when any part sticks by the way, and causes scalding Urin.

There is a dropping of Urin with pain, and desiring to piss, A Stone in the
bladder, is the cause of hot urin.
from a stone in the neck of the bladder which pricketh, and i^ it be great, is
burdensome. These Stones fall first from the Kidneys by the Ureters into the
Bladder, and there being kept, they increase daily by the Urin which washes
them: As we showed in the Causes of the Stone of the Kidneys. And in
Hypochondriack Pains, where we showed how sand and stones, which are the causes
of preternatural Pissing, grow in the Kidneys, and sometimes in the Liver.

There comes Pissing of Blood from the Solution of Continuity in the Reins and
Bladder, The Solution of Continuity in the Kidneys and Bladder, is the cause of
Pissing of Blood.
when the substance of the Reins is wounded or bruised. But usually from a
Stone in the Kidneys, which rubbs and chaffs them till they bleed; which blood
is mixed with water, and pissed forth, and separateth from the urin to the
bottom when it is settled: But if the urin be too long in the bladder, then it
is so mixed with blood, that it will not be separated. This also happens when a
stone moved from its place, cannot get forth, but by forcing a passage,
bruiseth the Reins with its hardness or unevenness; or when it is forced by
external motion through the pressing of the Reins, by which means the
Hypochondria are also troubled, and so causes bleeding within, which blood
being rendered with the urin, signifies the stone in the Reins, especially if
there be other signs therewith. And if there be an Ulcer in the Kidneys
therewith, the Stone by chaffing it, causes it to void not only matter, but
blood.

A Stroke in the Bladder, or a Wound piercing to it, may cause bloody Urin, or
a touch with a Catheter, which is an Instrument to let out urin. Also a stone
striving to pass the neck of the bladder, may cause bloody urin; and then only
some few drops come after the urin is made with great pain. And t his is one of
the infaillible signs of the Stone.

When the Sphincter Muscle which is the Cause of the stopping of the Urin is
wounded, A Wound upon the Sphincter muscle of the bladder, is the cause of
involuntary Pissings
there is involuntary Pissing, as is usual in cutting for the Stone, and though
the wound be cured, yet by reason of the hurt of the Muscle, the urin cannot be
contained.

Sometimes there is a preternatural flux of the urin from a wound of the
bladder, A Wound in the bladder, is the cause of urin passing that way.
not only by the cutting for the stone, but by other external means: As when
there is an Incision made for a fleshy rupture in the Groin, as I showed in the
want of Pissing, how one always pissed that way. And we saw one that gored
with an Ox whose horn pierced through his bladder that voided urin at both
Orifices.

And this may be from any other Wound in the Bladder.

From an Ulcer in the Kidneys follows a pissing of Matter with urin, An Ulcer
in the Reins, is the cause of pissing matter.
which settleth at the bottom, which causes pain in pissing, if it be sharp,
with other accidents. The cause of the Ulcer is an Inflammation.

Those Causes of Solution of Continuity in the substance of the Reins
mentioned, may cause pissing of blood, if the wound be not cured, but turned to
an Ulcer.

When there is a wound in the neck or bottom of the bladder, The Ulcer of the
bladder, is the cause of pissing hot matter.
there is pissing of Matter, with Urin, and sometimes without, where the wound
is in that part of the neck which is farther from the bladder. This matter
makes the urin stink. Or is pressed with difficulty, and sticks to the bottom
of the chamber pot. And then there is hot pissing, because the ulcer is
disturbed, and then the matter is sharp. This Ulcer comes from a wound.

That strange pissing of the Dung and Bones mentioned, Hurt of the neck of the
bladder is the cause of pissing of dung, bones, or terms.
comes from an Ulcer in the neck of the bladder. This Ulcer comes from a Wound
in the neck of the womb, or strait Gut, which eats into the bladder. And hence
women's terms are mixed with Urin.

Sometimes Blood is pissed from solution of contiguity by Anastomosis or
Diapedesis of the Vessels; The Anastomosis, or Diapedesis of the Veins of the
Reins, is the cause of pissing of blood.
when through plenty of blood, or founlness thereof, in Plethory or Diseases
from thence, Nature purges blood from the emulgent veins, into the Reins, and
from thence by the Ureters into the Bladder. And then the blood is voided
without pain, or other distemper. And as I showed, Fevers have been cured
thereby, but seldom. And it is probable in the wench that had the plague, and
pissed blood before she died, that Nature was stirred up by the force of the
venom, to throw it out that ways, which it could not complete.

The thinness of the blood, is the Cause of the Anastomosis or Diapedesis of
the Vessels of the Reins, which causes pissing of blood. By which means before
the blood is separated from the Serum in the Kidneys, Guts, through the Vessels
into the Bladder, and causes, blood with urin, more mixed then when it is
carried to the bladder alone.

The next Cause of pissing blood, is the weakness and looseness of the Reins,
Looseness of the Vessels, is the cause of pissing blood.
and then there is often pissing also.

There is also involuntary pissing from a Disease by consent, as when the
bladder is hurt, and the Muscles suffer also.

The Sphincter Muscle suffer from the want of Animal Spirits, Want of animal or
vital Spirits is the Cause of involuntary pissing.
for then being relaxed, they cannot contain the Urin. This want of Spirit is
from a distemper of that Nerve which moves the Sphincter Muscle, either alone,
or with all the rest in a Palsy. Therefore some men in Palsies and Apoplexies
piss involuntarily.

In a Swounding, when there is a total privation of vital spirits, so that all
the Functions rest, the sphincter muscle being idle, the Urin flows forth.

The same is in the Convulsion of the Muscles of the Belly, A Convulsion of the
Muscles of the belly, is the cause of involuntary pissing.
when the Urin is driven out of the Bladder by constriction or straitness of
the Muscles, and pressing of the belly, and if the sphincter be also strained,
it cannot stop the veins.

Preternatural pissing comes also from other parts, An Impostum in the bowels,
is the cause of pissing of matter.
as from an Imposthum of the Liver turned to an Ulcer, the matter being mixed
with the Serum, and there with the Urin. As also from the Lungs and Breast in a
Pleurisy, Peripneumony, and Empyema. And if it may come from thence to the
Ureters, then it may come from other parts internal being ulcerated; the matter
may go back into the Vessels, and so be carried with the Serum into the Reins,
and mixed with the Urin.

From Diseases in the Stomach, The diseases of the internal bowels may cause a
tincture in the urin, and a mixture.
Liver, Spleen, and other parts, especially in Fevers, and from their
distemper and humors; the urin may be discolored, or mixed with other matter,
and cause preternatural Pissing. As we showed in those Diseases.

The Cure.
There are diverse sorts of Cures for diverse Pissings, as involuntary,
immoderate, often, or hot pissing, thick, and bloody. Or when it passes a
wrong way.

If involuntary pissing comes from a Palsy, or want of strength, or the like,
The Cure of involuntary pissing from want of animal or vital Spirits.
you must cure it as the Apoplexy, Palsy, or Swounding. Apply medicines to the
Back, and Loins, and to the Fundament, where the neck of the bladder is; such
as were mentioned in the Palsy.

If involuntary Pissing come after a wound in the Muscle of the bladder, or
when it is torn for the taking out of the Stone, it is incurable ordinarily.
But you must use such things for the allaying of the urin, and binding the
passages, as are mentioned in immoderate pissing.

That involuntary pissing in the sleep, when young Children, The Cure of
pissing a bed.
and others piss their beds, must be cured by preventing an evil custom; by
pissing before they sleep, and by being raised at midnight to piss, till Nature
is brought to another custom. And this is the best Cure, especially if you take
away the Causes which provoke urin, as large drinking, especially at bedtime.

But if it come from weakness, or too much sense in the bladder, then you may
use things to abate the sharpness, and make it thick, and bind, and a little
stupesie: As shall be showed in immoderate Pissing.

These following are good by propriety, boiled, or roasted, as a Hedg-hog,
Mice, Lungs of a Kid, the Brain and Stones of Hare, or Fox, the brain of a
Vultur, or Eagle, and Fat of a Partridg.

Also the Pouders of these following, or the Ashes, as the powder or ashes of
an Hedg-hog, a Hares head, with the skin burnt, the Bladders of an Ox, Hog,
Goat, Sheep, and Swimms of Fishes, the inward skins of Hens Gizards, Cocks
necks, Geese tongues.

It is good against Pissing of bed to put the Yard into a dried Bladder, or the
like; others use a Sponge, but the bed will be wet, notwithstanding that.

Immoderate Pissing, when it is too much or too often; The Cure of involuntary
Pissing from the distemper of the Reins, immoderate pissing.
if it come from an evil custom of pissing often, let them not piss at every
motion. And that will bring Nature into order.

When it is from the exquisite sense of the bladder, then keep the urin from
being too sharp, and if it continue, abate the sense with remedies mentioned in
hot Pissing, yet not so strong, because this is not so considerable.

If too much Urin be made by reason of a hot Constitution, because it does
little hurt, let them only take heed of hot meats and drinks, and use temperate
things that cool.

That often pissing which comes from weakness, or want of Natural heat, or
looseness of vessels, or enlarging, or making the bladder thin, if it come from
the Birth, is hard to be cured, but if from much drinking, and long holding of
the water, then take away the Causes, as also when it is from too much Venery,
which weakneth the Reins.

But if being old, it will not so be cured, in regard there are worse accidents
begin first with them.

If often pissing come from a cold distemper of the reins and bladder, chiefly
from the cold of the Feet, it is but of short continuance, and not regarded.
But if the cold distemper remain in the parts, these hot remedies mentioned in
the Palsy of the Bladder are to be used, as also when there is weakness from
that Cold.

If much pissing be from much wine, because it is good, The ^ure of much
pissing after much Wine.
there is no other course to be taken, to prevent rising from the table, or
pissing Breeches or Bed, but to avoid drunkenness, and use the remedies against
pissing a bed.

When much pissing comes from abundance of Serum or Whey in the veins, The Cure
of much pissing from abundance of serum.
it is necessary, and good in sound men to prevent, and in Dropsies and
achexies to cure the Diseases, except it be immoderate.

But if from the sudden Evacuation, the strength is abated, it may be hurtful,
as in the tapping for a Dropsy, if much water be taken out at once, so here
though the way be Natural, yet the Flux being great and sudden, may be
dangerous.

This immoderate pissing in Fevers, when Nature expel the cause, in a Crisis
of a continual Fever, and in the declination of an intermitting, is good to
cure the Fever. But if be too much, and too long, and the matter not concocted
without a Crisis, because then the Cause of a Disease is not abated, nor the
Patient refreshed thereby, but weaker, thirst increased, and the body withered,
there follows the deadly Diabetes. But when the cause of the disease is taken
away by pissing, you must not stop it.

In other violent pissings that weaken, as in Diabetes which is seldom seen,
The Cure of Diabetes.
which consumes the body, and causes thirst, you must speedily stop them;
first hinder the increase of Serum, and then evacuate it otherwise, after
correct the thinness, heat, or sharpness, with things that thicken, cool, and
assuage. Also stop and astringe the passages, and stupesie the sense of the
bladder. As we showed in hot Pissings; and use these following with respect to
the Disease accompaying them. If the Disease hinder not, in full Bodies let
blood.

Also give cooling, and gentle astringing Clysters, with the Decoction of
Rhubarb, and Myrobalans, and stilled Waters of Roses, Plantane, with
glutinating things, as whites of Eggs, Mucilage of Fleabane, Quinces, or
Infusion of Gum Traganth in proper Water.

Let the Diet be sparing, only that which will keep the strength: Let them
beware of four things, salt, sharp, burning, and hot Spices, all which provoke
urin.

Let them rest, and not heat the Reins by lying upon their backs.

Purges to derive the Whey and Serum from the Veins to the Guts, and so to
hinder the plenty of urin, are good, because when men purge they piss little;
and often pissing in sound men does signify the need of purging: and in
Diseases it shows that the Body is not sufficiently purged.

These must be gentle, if the strength abate, and astringent with Rhubarb,
Myrtles, Citrons, Syrup of the Infusion of Roses, with other astringent Syrups,
Decoctions, or Waters, as in the Dysentery.

Sweating is good to send the serum through the Habit of the Body, and derive
it from the Veins, and so to abate Urin. And it must be provoked betimes, when
we fear too much pissing, before the strength be abated.

There are diverse Drinks that thicken, bind and cool, and heating Meats, as
Bread, Pulse of Wheat, Starch, Groats of Barley hulled, as Ptisans of Rice,
Almonds, diverse ways prepared; Lentils boiled, Almonds, Nuts, roasted
Chestnuts; also gross and clammy Flesh, Whites of Eggs, Lettice, Endive,
Bugloss, Purslane.

Also Broaths of Corn and Flesh, Milk, steeled water, Emulsions of Almonds,
thick binding Wine, with water of Myrtles, Bugloss, or the like.

Also Syrups of Myrtles, dried red Roses, Juice of Sorrel, and others that
bind, and heat not.

Or this Decoction. Take Comfrey roots, and of both Buglosses, each one ounce;
Plantane leaves two handfuls, Cordial flowers one handful, dried Pomegranate
flowers, yellow Myrobalans, each half an ounce; Myrtle seeds one dram,
Plantane, Dock, Purslane, and Sorrel seeds, each one dram; boil them in six
pints of red Wine. Let him drink thereof.

Plantane and Shepheards-purse-water, and the like, if there be heat, are good.

Also candied Comfrey roots, Myrobalans, Quinces, Elicampane, old Conserve of
Roses.

Also Mucilages of Fleabane, Quinces, Infusion of Gum Traganth in Rose or
plantane water, given half an ounce, with Sugar or convenient Syrup.

Also pouders, with sugar of Roses, red Wine, or other Liquors.

That of Acorns only is excellent, or mixed with Lentils, husked and baked.

Or this: Take Coriander seed two drams, Agrimony one dram, red Roses half a
dram, red Sanders, Cinnamon, each one scruple, Spikenard half a scruple.

With Acorn-cupps, Galls, Pomegranate flowers.

Or, Take Frankincense, Amber, each one dram and an half; Myrrh two scruples,
the Ashes of burnt Ox, or Hoggs, or of other domestic Creatures Bladders, half
a dram, make a Powder.

Another. Take yellow Myrobalans, Date stones burnt, each two drams;
Bay Berries, Rose seeds, Pomegranate seeds, or of Myrtles, each one dram;
plantane and purslane seed, red Roses, Gum Traganth, or Arabic, each half a
dram; Acacia, and Dragons blood, each one scruple, with burnt Ivory, and
Camphire, make a powder.

Or, Take red Coral, and Bole, each one dram and an half; Bloodstone half a
dram: make a powder, give it alone, or with the other the fourth part of this.

To these you may add pouders and ashes of living creatures, which have a
propriety mentioned in involuntary pissing; and others, as wild Rue seeds and
leaves, Mints, Calamints, Myrtles, Dates, Snakeweed, Tormentil, and Elicampane.

The Chemists in the Cure of Diabetes and Dysentery, extol the Essense of
Crocus Martis according to Crollius, and the tincture of Smaragds, which
Hartman commends, and shows how to prepare it in his Practice of Chemistry. And
they also extol to admiration the tincture and salt of Coral.

If the Urin prick, give Stupefactives, as Syrup of Poppies, Philonium Persicum
which also binds, and the like. Treacle is commended against Diabetes, and
they say it quenceth thirst: which being hot, it cannot do, but it may help by
its Narcotick Quality.

Externally apply Coolers to the Reins and Binders, as the Ointment mentioned
in the Inflammation of the Reins and Liver, beginning thus: Take Oil of Roses,
Quin. etc. to which you may add Oil of Violets, Water Lillies, Juice of
Lettice, Mints. Also Oil of Earthworms which is thought to stop pissing by a
propriety. Also Seeds of plantane, purslane, Camphire. Also the cooling
Ointment there mentioned, and that of Roses, the Cerot of Sanders, made of Oil
of Roses, Sanders, Roses, burnt Ivory, Bole, and Camphire.

The repelling Epithem mentioned in the Inflammation of the Reins and Liver, is
also here good, and this of rosevinegar. And that mentioned which begins. Take
water of Nightshade, and Lettice etc. to these you may add Sorrel, and
Wormwood-water, with Bole and Spike.

A Fomentation or Bath for the reins, is made of the decoction of plantane,
Shepheards-purse, Mullein, Violet-leaves, Mallows, Water Lillies, Vine leaves,
Roses, Pomegranate peels and flowers, Sumach, Bar-berries, Myrtles, Roses etc.
with Smiths-forge-water, or Iron-water.

You may make Cataplasmes of the same, with Barleymeal, and the Oils mentioned,
and Earthworms.

If Heat of Urin come from Irritation in the neck of the bladder, The Cure of
scalding urin.
or passage of the Yard, it is more easily cured, then when it comes from an
Ulcer in the passage of the Yard. If it come from an Ulcer in the neck of the
bladder, it is most difficult, because the heat of the urin will not be gone,
till the ulcer be cured, which is very seldom done. If it come from the Stone,
it is not cured, till that is taken away. And if there be many causes together,
and the heat comes both from the ulcer, and urin, it is worse and worse, when
there is a stone there, which cannot be voided

As for the Cure: we shall first speak of scalding Urin from Irritation. And if
there be an ulcer, because then the urin is muddy; we shall treat of it in
turbulent Pissing: As also if it come from a Gonorrhaea, we shall speak of it
there. And lastly we shall show the Cure of it when it comes from the Stone.

If pissing be hot from heat and sharpness of Urin, The Cure of scalding
pissing from heat of urin only.
from things taken, or from the mixture of humors, with the heat of the reins,
it must be cured, by taking away the cause, correcting the heat and sharpness
of the urin: And by deffending the bladder and passage from the sense of the
pain. These are done by internal and external remedies that cleanse and alter.

If the Belly be bound, it must be loosned, because straining at stool causes
a pressing of the passage of the urin and pain. Then we purge Choler or sharp
Humors with gentle means.

Cassia is the best, which is also Anodine, and Diacassia, Diaprunis, Diabesten.

This common Electuary does loosen and lenisie. Take Cassia newly drawn two
ounces, Manna one ounce and an half, Pulp of Sebestens, Tamarinds, or sweet
Prunes, each one ounce; Mucilage of Fleabane six drams, the four great cold
Seeds half an ounce, Juice of Liquorish one dram, with Syrup of Roses solutive:
make an Electuary, give one ounce at a time.

We chiefly respect Choler in purging, and therefore ad Rhubarb, Myrobalans,
Syrup of Roses laxative, Violets, Catholicon, and the lenitive Electuaries
mentioned, with Senna, if you will have it stronger, or Diaprunis.

A Potion is thus made. Take Polypody two ounces, Senna one ounce, Liquorish
one ounce and an half, Raisons one ounce, Prunes ten, Jujubies, Sebestens, each
ten pair, Barley one pugil, Anise seeds one dram; make a Decoction, add Syrup
of Roses solutive two ounces, Syrup of Violets one ounce, you may infuse
Rhubarb.

Also use Clysters of Mallows, Marshmallows, Violets, Prunes, the four cold
Seeds, with Cassia, Honey of Violets, Oil of Violets, red Sugar, etc.

Vomiting, because it draws Choler from the Meseraicks, which keeps the urin
from sharpness, is good.

They also use Frictions and Sweating, to revel or draw back the Choler.

If you fear an Inflammation in the lower parts by reason of pain, let blood in
the vein under the Knee.

And open the Haemorrhoids when they are usual, to take away Choler.

Give Alteratives which cool the urin and reins, and lenisie the passages, and
stupesie, and take away pain, of which there are diverse forms.

Any Milk drunk, does lenisie, and heal Excoriations of urin.

An Emulsion is excellent, of cold Seeds the greatest, being bruised, and mixed
with Barley-water, and strained; or of Almonds, pine-nuts, or altogether, with
white poppy seeds, which take away pain and heat.

Make a Mucilage of Quince seeds, Lime seeds, Mallows, Marshmallows steeped in
proper water, or boiled in the former Decoctions, give one ounce and an half,
with Broth or Milk, the Mucilage of Fleabane is excellent, and the Infusion of
Gum Traganth.

The White of an Eg well beaten, and the froath cast off, taken often alone, or
with Sugar of Roses, or Oil of sweet Almonds.

Also a Decoction of Marsh-mallow roots, Mallows, Sebestens, the great cold
Seeds, white Poppy seeds, Fleabane or Quinces in Water or Broth, with Sugar.

To this we add to provoke urin, red pease, Liquorish, Winter-cherries, and in
choleric Natures, these Coolers, Endive, Lettice, Violets, Bugloss etc.

The Julep and Syrup of Violets, purslane, and Jujubes, and other Coolers, is
also good.

The Waters also of Mallows, and Marshmallows.

A Powder to abate heat in the urin. Take the Seeds of Guords, or Pompions
husked, and other new cold Seeds, one ounce, white Poppy seeds three drams,
white Henbane seeds one dram, Sugar pellets, or Sugar of Roses one ounce: make
a powder, give one dram with Milk or Broth, or Julep, or convenient Water.

Or, Take of the great cold Seeds one ounce, white Poppyseeds fresh three
drams, Line-seed, or Quince seed one dram and an half, Mallow seeds, and white
Henbane seeds, each one dram; Purslane seeds, and Winter-cherries, each half a
dram; or Smallage seed to provoke urin, Starch one dram, Almonds, Nuts,
Pine-nuts, or Pistachaes three drams, Gum Traganth, Arabic, each half a dram;
or Gum of Peaches, or Almonds: make a sine powder, use it as the other. You may
add powder of Liquorish, or the Juice thereof.

Sometimes we add Opium when the pain is great, to two ounces of the Powder half
a dram, mixing it well, and giving one dram at first, to try the Operation.

When necessity urges, we give stronger Narcoticks, as Syrup of Poppies, and
the like, mentioned in the Colic.

Injections are used to lenisie the passage, and the bladder, and to take away
pain which the urin causes.

Of Women's Milk, or other Milk; or of the Emulsion of the cold Seeds, or of
white poppy seeds.

The White of an Eg, the Mucilage of Quince seeds, Line-seeds well dissolved,
with water of Violets, Mallows, Nightshade, Guords, or with Milk, or the
mucilage of Mallow seeds, with Henbane and poppy seeds, is also good.

A Decoction. Take Marsh-mallow-roots one ounce, mallows one handful, Barley
one pugil, the great and less cold seeds and white Poppy seeds, each two drams;
boil them in Milk. It will more assuage pain, if you boil therewith half an
ounce of the Bark of the Roots of Mandraks, or some Heads of Poppies, or two
drams of Henbane-seed.

Also the Oil of sweet Almonds, and Violets mixed with the Injections. Or to
take away sense of pain, the Oil of Mandraks, or that of Poppy seeds, or
Henbane-seeds.

These Oils are to be put into the Yard with a tent.

You may mix Opium with these Injections, or with Milk, one dram to twelve
ounces. Sometimes you may add Camphire also, with Opium, and Saffron to the
tents.

A Bath to sit in is good, of Mallows, Violets, Chamomil, and Melilot flowers,
and the like: Or you may foment the Pecten, and Perinaeum therewith.

Also bath the Yard therein, or in warm Milk and Oil.

Or soment it with the same warm, with hot Clouts, and also the Fundament, and
this will do well, because while the pain remains, the Glans is cold, and when
it is gone, it is warm. It is good also to heat the Feet, because Cold does
them hurt.

To piss in running water, till it make a noise, we have found profitable.

Also to piss often in a Sheepfold, where the Dung is hot, or in Horse dung,
is good against heat of Urn or Strangury.

Epithems to the Liver and Reins, and Ointments are good when the urin is
choleric, especially when they are hot. They are mentioned in the hot
Distemper of the Liver and Reins.

The like are to be given at the mouth.

A certain Soldier affirmed that he was cured of the strangury by only looking
upon the Flower of the milkie Mary-thistle.

Let the Air be temperate and cool, beware of too much heat, and things that
cause Choler, from great motion of the Body, or passion of the Mind; from hot,
salt, and sharp Meats and Sauces; from Wine, except with much water, and a
little. Let him drink Barley-water, or Syrups with Water, or Whey. Let his Meat
be such as allays sharpness, and gleweth the passages as Neats feet etc. Also
Pap of Milk and Meal, or Starch: Also Barley-cream, of Almonds, Pine-nuts,
Pistachaes, small Nuts, and rear Eggs. Also prunes, Apples, Jujubes, Sebestens,
with Lettice, Spinach, Orach, purslane, Bugloss, boiled in Milk, also Oil and
Butter.

Copulation is hurtful, because as I showed, the Seed is sharp, and will
provoke as it passes.

If scalding Urin come from the stone of the bladder, The Cure of hot pissing
from the Stone.
without ulceration; of which we spoke in troubled Urin. And if the Stone has
not been long there, but fell from the Kidneys, nor be too great, it comes
forth with the urin of it self, or by the use of medicines. But if after it is
fallen into the bladder from the reins, and it grow so great that it cannot
pass the neck of the bladder, but when it comes thither, causes pain and heat,
then it must be taken out, either by medicines to which it will scarce yield,
or by cutting which endangereth the life: As shall be showed in the Cure of the
Stone of the Bladder.

Turbulent or mattery pissing, like slime, The Cure of the ulcer of the reins
and bladder.
coming from the ulcers of the reins and bladder with heat of urin, is not
cured but by the Cure of the ulcers. And that being difficult, makes the cure
also difficult of that which comes from the ulcer. The ulcers of the reins
being old, increase matter in the vein, and devour the substance of the reins,
leaving only a hard skin like a purse. And if this be but in one Kidney, the
Patient may live long, and the other Kidney may perform the duty. The ulcers of
the bladder are either incurable, or very obstinate, because they cannot unite
by reason of the moisture, and because the urin being salt, does always
provoke. The greatest hope is when the fleshy part of the Neck is only
ulcerated: but when the membranous part suffers it cannot be healed, except
as we showed in Wounds of the Bladder, it grow to the flesh adjoining. If a
Stone he with these ulcers, either in the reins or bladder, it makes them
incurable, because the ulcers cannot be cured, except it be taken out, and that
is impossible.

We shall speak of the Cure of the Ulcer of the Reins and Bladder together,
because they agree in many things. They are to be cleansed, and then dried and
healed, always mixing things that resist sharpness of urin, and lenisie the
passages, and stupesie the pain; or using sometimes one, and sometimes another,
as necessity urges: For the ulcer of the bladder and neck thereof, use
Injections. And if a Stone be therewith, mix things to break it, but gentle,
least you enrage the ulcer, or cut out the stone, for the ulcer will not else
be cured: As we showed in the Stone of the Bladder. Many Cleansers mentioned in
the Cure of the Ulcers, are good here to break the Stone.

Also slimy and glutinating things which defend the ulcer, and take away
sharpness, and cover the stone, and make it smooth. But for the Cure of the
ulcer of the reins and bladder we take this course. As for purging it is
sufficient to purge the Guts for excrements and wind, which increase the pain,
bewaring of strong purges, which would do the same, and not cleanse the ulcer.

Gentle Laxatives mentioned in the heat of pissing for the urin, are good,
especially Cassia, with Liquorish powder etc. Also Manna which cleanses
ulcers, and Whey, and chiefly Turpentine, which loosneth the belly, and heals
the ulcer.

Things that alter, cleanse, and heal, and allay the heat of urin, are given in
diverse sorms.

Also the Decoction mentioned in scalding Urin, with the Roots of Comfrey,
Agrimony, Plantane, Ceterach, Myrtle seeds, and the like.

Or this Decoction. Take Guaicum half a pound, Comfrey roots two ounces, Skins
of Guords dried one ounce and an half, Horstayl one handful, red Roses one
pugil: boil them in Rainwater to four pints. Let them often take a draughat
with Honey, Sugar of Roses, or Syrup of Myrtles etc,

Also the Juyces of the Plants alone, or made into Syrups, are good.

Also Water of Horstayl, Plantane, Myrtles, etc.

As Milk is good in ulcers of the Lungs by cleansing, glewing, and lenifying,
so especially here, because it can better get to the reins.

Rosin of Larke-tree, or Tutpentine is good, for it cleanses and glueth, and
you may know the virtue of it reaches to the reins by the violent scent of the
urin; give one dram or more, if you will have it loosen the belly, or in pills
with Liquorish, Sugar, and the like: It will work best with the Yolk of an Eg,
and Honey, with water and wine.

The chiesest Pouders to cure ulcers in the Kidneys and Bladder, are made into
Troches, with Gum Arabic, that they may keep. These are poudered again, and
given one dram with, or without Sugar, with Milk, or Water, and Honey, or the
like in the morning fasting, or at night, especially if they be Narcotick, that
they may sleep four hours after supper.

These pouders may be made a bolus, or pills, with turpentine.

The troches of Alkekengi are usual, being made of Seeds of Nightshade,
Winter-cherries, the four less cold Seeds, Poppy, sweet Almonds, Pine-nuts,
pistachaes, Barley, Liquorish, Roses, Gum Arabic, Myrrh, Bole, Spodium,
Sugar Candy, pellets, and Hydromel.

Others that cure the ulcer, and assuage pain, are thus made.

The first. Take the Powder to abate heat, mentioned in often Pissing, Comfrey
roots one dram, red Roses, Amber, Franksncense, each two scruples; Bole, or
sealed Earth one dram, Dragons blood, Spodium, each half a dram; make a powder,
give it as formerly.

Another made of diverse things, and very excellent. Take Almonds, Nuts,
Pistachaes, Pine-nuts, each half an ounce; bitter Almonds, and Peaches,
Cherries-stones each two drams; Chestnuts, Acorns, and cold Seeds, each half an
ounce; Barley, and Rice, each three drams; Comfrey roots two drams, Liquorish
half an ounce, red Roses, Pomegranateflowers, Purslane, Lettice, Endive,
Fleabane, Cotton, Line, Quince, Mallow, Myrtle, Coriander, Winter-cherries
Anise, Smallage, and Parsley seeds, each one dram; white Poppy seeds half an
ounce, Henbane seeds two drams, Date-stones five, Cherry, and Plum-tree Gum,
each two drams; Gum Arabic, Traganth, each one dram; Turpentine half an ounce,
Frankincense, Amber, each one dram; Juice of Liquorish, Wheat, or Starch, each
two drams; Acacia, or Juice of Sloes one dram and an half, Sanguis Draconis
half a dram, Opium when there is pain, one dram, Bole, or sealed Earth six
drams, red Coral, Osteocolla the stone so called, Crabbs eyes, each two drams;
Spodium one dram, Ashes of a Bulls or Dears pizle half a dram, red Sanders one
dram, Sugar Candy, and Penidyes, each one ounce: make a Powder, give it alone,
or with Gum Traganth made into Troches, or with ten ounces of Sugar mixed, give
two drams by it self, or made into Troches.

The third Powder is only for curing of Ulcers. Take red Coral washed two
drams, powder of Horstayl, and ashes of the shells of Pompions, each one dram;
Frankincense, Mastick, Sarcocol steeped in Milk, each half a dram; Sanguis
Draconis one scruple, Sugar candy, or of Roses, the weight of all the rest.

Half a dram of the Powder of Cuttle-bone, or from six grains of the Magestery
thereof to ten, given in a rear Eg, or old Conserve of Roses, in the morning,
as it stops the running of the reins, so does it the burning of troubled urin,
from the reins and bladder ulcerated.

To these Pouders you may add Opium, as in the Troches of Winter-cherries.

Or other Narcoticks as in scalding urin, which I have observed a hundred times
and more, being taken every night in this and other painful Diseases, has
allayed the pain, and refreshed the Patient that he has lived, though without
it he could not for pain.

Healing and narcotick Pills. Take Frankincense, and Mastick, each one dram;
Myrrh, Storax, and Gum Traganth each half a dram; the Barks of Mandraks one
dram, Henbane seed half a dram, Opium, and Juice of Liquorish dissolved in
Wine, each one dram; with Syrup of Poppies, make Pills, give one or more, as
you shall think fit.

Injections are not for the Kidneys, but for Ulcers of the Bladder, to which
they scarce reach in men, by reason of the bending and length of the Yard, but
return again, though not in women; and if the Instrument be thrust to the neck
of the bladder, it will hurt the ulcer: yet they are to be used for necessity.

For making whereof, take Cleansers and that also dry, which is hard by reason
of the constant moisture, and things that abate heat of urin, as those Anodine
Injections there mentioned.

They are made of Milk which asswageth pain, cleanses and heals Women's and
Cows Milk assuage pain best, or Goats, with Sugar, or Honey, Water, and Whey,
when you will heal, use Sheeps milk, or other boiled and mixed with Sugar, or
Honey.

Also the Decoction of Barley, with Bean shales, Sugar, and Honey.

Wine is good to cleanse, if white and thin, with some drops of Spirit of
Vitriol.

Also Whey, and some drops of Spirit of Vitriol injected with a Syringe, does
cleanse.

A Decoction for an Injection to cure ulcers. Take the Roots of Comfrey one
ounce and an half, the dried barks or skins of Pompions one ounce, Horstayl,
Plantane, Nightshade, each one handful; Rosemary, and St. John's wort flowers,
each one pugil, the four great cold Seeds six drams: boil them in Barley-water,
in a pint where of dissolve four ounces of Sugar, or Honey.

If you must dry more, add Mousear, Solomons-seal, Shepheards-purse, Ceterach,
Bettony, Herb Robert, Dassodil roots which glue well, also plantane and
purslaneseeds.

Adding also the Juice of Plantane, Horstayl, Shepherds rod, also Starch.

Also the Waters of those Plants are good, especially plantane, or Myrtles,
Brambles, or Olive tops, Roses, Centaury, of St. John's Wort.

Also steeled Water, or wherein Iron is quenched, or melted Lead has been
often infused.

There are glewing mixtures for Injections. As, Take Sarcocol steeped in Milk
one dram, the Infusion of Gum Arabic or Traganth half a dram made in an ounce
and an half of Plantane-water, Ceruss half a dram, Dragons blood one scruple,
dissolve them in Milk, or a Decoction, or stilled Waters.

This oily Injection heals ulcers. Take Hens dung, fry it in a pan with Butter
or Oil omphacine, then put them in cold Water, preserve the Oil that swims at
the top.

Mix with these, sometimes things that assuage pain, as the Decoction of white
poppy seeds, Rinds of Mandraks, or Mucilages, the white of an Eg, and Opium in
case of great pain.

In obstinate Ulcers the Decoction of Litharge is good, two ounces, in
plantane, or Rose Water four ounces.

Or mix with the Injections mentioned, Bole, Cadmia, or Brass ore, called Lapis
Calaminaris, Tutty, Ceruss, Lead burnt and washed: Antimony, and the Juice from
the grinding of a Bloodstone. And in filthy ulcers a little Myrrh.

The troches of Alkekengi, and Gordonius, are good to be taken at the mouth,
and those of Amber, sealed Earth, Spodium, dissolved in the Liquors aforesaid.

Some drying Collyriums for the Eyes are good here, as that white one, and the
yellow one, and that of Frankincense of Rhasis; also of Tutty, and the like, of
Ceruss, Sarcocol, Frankincense, Gum Traganth, Arabic, Starch, which assuage
pain, with Opium.

A little Aegyptiacum is good when ulcers are very foul.

The Chemists commend the spirit of Mercurius dulcis, with plantane or
Horstayl-water, injected to cure ulcers in the Yard and Bladder, cool Ointments
for the reins are good to cool the urin: As we showed in burning urin.

You must anoint the privities, and perinaeum, or seam, with Oil of Roses or
Violets, with Oil of Myrtles, Quinces, and a little Vinegar, if the pain
threaten Inflammation.

To these Unguents are added, Ceruss, Litharge, Juice of plantano, and Horstayl
to dry the ulcer, yet they do little outward, and because by astringing
outwardly, they will stop the passage of urin, it is better to use relaxing
Ointments to open, as Oil of sweet Almonds, Chamomil which also stay pain.

You may make Fomentations of the same for the pecten or perinaeum, as of
Mallows, Chamomil, Melilot, with Coolers if there be heat, as Water-lilly
roots, and flowers, Violets, etc.

The Diet must be as in the Cure of scalding Urin without an ulcer, and
glutinous Meats that cover the ulcer, to keep it from sharpness. Fat things
soul ulcers, and are not here good.

Other thick pissings as of matter, The Cure of turbulent pissing from the
Reins.
or of milkie white from the Reins not yet ulcerated, come from a filth that is
bred there, and mixed with the urin, because they cause heat in pissing, and by
continuance also excoriation of the bladder that causes an ulcer, must be
cured.

This is done by purging the Body from foul excrements and humors, which cause
the filth to grow to the reins, and is turned into matter: then by cleansing
the reins with things mentioned in the Cure of the Ulcer of the Kidneys. Among
which Turpentine is excellent, and Milk, and the like, with Lenitives which
take away heat, mentioned in Heat of Urin, which allay the acrimony of urin,
and of this matter also.

As for the Pissing of Matter which comes from Imposthumes in the Liver or
other parts, The Cure of pissing of matter from the Liver and other parts.
besides the Reins and Bladder, or from an Empyema a Pleurisy or Peripnumony.
In these you must help Nature in her motion, and not stop, with things that
cleanse the filth of the blood by urin, mentioned in Fevers, and for the rest,
go to the Disease rather then the Symptom.

If Pissing of Blood come from a stone which grateth upon the Loins, The Cure
of pissing blood from the stone
through motion, because there is then but little blood mixed with urin, and it
continues not but when motion cease, the urin comes to its color again, it
requires no other Cure but that of the Stone, which is the cause thereof: As we
showed in the Cure of the Stone.

But if Pissing of Blood come from the Kidneys, The Cure of pissing of blood
from Anastomosis or hurt of the Reins.
being too full of blood, which Nature sends forth with the urin, being impure
or too thin, it must be cured, if it contiune. And also if it come from a hurt
in the Reins, with these medicines following.

We revel or pluck back the blood when it flows too much, by blood-letting and
cupping, in the extreme parts, but if the Loins be cupped, the blood would be
drawn thither from the great Veins.

If the Flux come from the blood being watery or unclean, it must be cleansed
with gentle purgers that astringe as we showed in all other Haemorragies.

We stop the Flux with things that thicken the blood, and stop the passages,
with some things that stupesie the sense, as follow.

Pouders are given with Sugar of Roses, or an Eg, or steeled Milk, or Sheeps
milk, or old red Wine, Syrup of dried Roses, Myrtles, or convenient Waters.

These are proper, powder of Horstayl, Yarrow, Comfrey roots, Snakeweed, five
leaved Grass. Myrtle seeds, Date-stones, Maudlin according to Dioscorides, wild
Cummin seed, Bole, or sealed Earth, Boodstone, red Coral which dissolves the
clotted blood, Amber, burnt Ivory, Gum Traganth, Arabic, Acacia, and the like.

The troches also of Amber, Winter-cherries, of Gordonius, and such as bind,
mentioned in the Ulcers of the Reins, that allay the heat of the urin.

Waters, Juyces, and Decoctions of Plantane, Purslane, Yarrow,
Shepheards-purse, Sumach, Quinces, and the like.

Also Narcoticks, as Philonium Persicum, as in other Fluxes, and other Troches,
with Opium. And with Henbane seeds, as in Spitting of Blood.

Anoint the Reins with this. Take Bole, or other glutinating Earth, half an
ounce, Rinds of Pomegranates, or Galls two drams, Dragons blood, Alum, each
one dram; with Oil of Myrtles, the White of an Egg, and a little Vinegar: make
an Ointment or Plaster, Juice of Plantane instead of the Oil, is better.

Mix Juice of Purslane with Barley-flower, and apply it to the Reins.

If Pissing of Blood come from taking of Cantharides or Spanish flies, The Cure
of pissing blood from taking of Spanish Fliks.
we give things which allay the heat of urin, by which the mouths of the
emulgent Vessels are opened, and this Flux is raised; chiefly the Decoction of
Line-seed, and steeled Milk: Emulsions of the great cold Seeds, white Poppy
seeds, and sweet Almonds. Also Oil of Almonds, Roses, whites of Eggs, and
Mucilage of Fleabane seed. And if it continue other remedies mentioned.

If Pissing of Blood come from a hurt of the bladder, The Cure of pissing of
blood from hurt of the bladder.
in regard much blood cannot flow from so few veins, you must apply remedies to
the hurt or wound, both at the mouth, and by Injections. And if it continue,
use the remedies mentioned, and the Ointments to the bladder.

If clotted blood stop the bladder, we give things to dissolve it, as Amber,
Kids Runnet, and the like, mentioned in want of Pissing from clotted blood,
chiefly Savory dissolves blood in the bladder. And if you put the Yard into a
hollow Raddish, the clotted blood will come forth.

When the Urin comes forth at a Wound, as when you cut for the stone, The Cure
of preternatural pissing from a Wound.
there is no way but to cure the wound.

When a wound pierces the lower parts of the belly and bladder, and the urin
comes forth, cure only the wound; but if it be incurable as usually it is, the
urin will pass that way till death; neither will the ulcer grow together: As we
showed in the Cutting of a fleshy Rupture, when the bladder was divided, so
that the wound turned into a Fistula, and the Patient pissed through it without
other inconvenience, because the urin fell not into the belly, but came forth.
Sometimes as in him that was gored with an Ox through the belly and bladder,
when the wound is cured, the urin turns to its proper passage; which we suppose
was done because the wound was in the fleshy part of the bladder, which will
grow together, and be healed, otherwise in the membranous part it will not,
except the wound be near to some flesh which is pierced, unto which the
membrane may grow, so that the hole in the bladder may be covered with a
Callus, and the urin return to its Natural passage.

CHAP. XI. Of Dejection, or going to Stool.
The Kinds,
DEjection is commonly that Excretion which is by the Belly, by which the
Excrements thick and thin are voided with diverse Humors. This is preternatural
when the Excrements voided are too many, and is called Diarrhaea. Preternatural
Dejection.
Or when other humors are mixed with the excrements or raw flesh, in the
Lientery: Or the Chyle in the Coeliack passion mentioned, or blood in the
bloody flux, or matter, or fat, mentioned in the unctious Dejection. And if
things are voided, as worms, and other things taken; we shall mention them in a
Chapter by themselves. Also that is a preternatural Excretion of the belly,
when the excrements pass the wrong way. Of which we shall speak in order.

Diarrhaea is a Flux of the Belly, Diarrhaea or Flux of the belly over purging.
if it come after the taking of a purge, it is called an over-purging, this is
a preternatural, immoderate, and often going to stool, when the dung and other
excrements and humors, are voided often, more or less. These are first thick,
then thin and watery, of diverse colors, ash-colored, claylike, yellow, black,
equally or unequally tinctured: many times mixed with white, thick, clammy
phlegm. This excrement is sometimes waterish, frothy, clammy, clear, and white,
like Froggs spawn; sometimes thick, like melted glass, as we have seen after a
stool, without evil scent. Sometimes frothy Phlegm is voided in abundance, The
Flux of the Brain.
and then it is called the Flux of the Brain from whence it comes; sometimes it
is yellow, choleric, and froathy; sometimes black and thick. These, because
they are voided thick, and but few, rather cause a needing or Tenesmus, then a
Dirrhaea: Of which we shall speak, which continually molesteth without voiding
much, and with great difficulty.

In Dirrhaea's there are sometimes pains of the belly, greater and less, with
stretching and rumbling, especially at first: Sometimes there is a heat in the
Fundament, and desire to void often, especially in Tenesmus.

Sometimes there is pain of the stomach or heart as they say, with vomiting, yet
not so violent as in the Disease Choler, mentioned in Vomiting, by which the
meat, chyle, slime, phlegm, or choler in the stomach is vomited up; sometimes
other natural faculties are hurt, and there is a Fever.

Lientery is a preternatural Dejection of the belly, Lientery.
in which the meat eaten is little changed, but comes forth with other
excrements in a Flux, not so great as a Diarrhaea: Sometimes with noise of the
stomach and belly, and hurt of Natural Functions.

The Coeliack passion, is that preternatural Excretion of the Belly, Caeliack
passion.
whether it be more or less, in which the Juice made of the meat eaten, or the
Chyle impersectly concocted or crude, and moist of an Ash, or Clay-colour,
thick and whitish: sometimes more or less, pure, is sent forth. And the Patient
is weak, and evil colored.

Dysentery is a voiding of blood, either alone, Dysentery.
or with other things, it is so called, because the guts are affected. It is
mamy times popular or Epidemical, most in young men, sometimes in old men, and
men of such and such a constitution. In this there is an urging molestation to
void sometimes more, sometimes less, with often needing and gripings with noise
and rumbling, and blood is mixed with the excrements, and besides that a slime
like phlegm, or like that fibrous substance which is in blood that falls into
water, when a vein is opened, this is falsely called phlegm, and is voided
sometimes in great abundance: The Germans call it the white Dysentery. This
slime is thought to be fat by some, because the guts being turned by the
Butchers are fat, they suppose that they are inwardly also fat, which is not
so; some say it is the shavings of guts, which if they come forth, as seldom
they do, are membranons. Also Choler yellow, green, or black is mixed
therewith, and also Phlegm as in all Dejections or Stools.

There is commonly a thirst in this Disease, and signs of heat, the urin is
dyed and choleric; and there is a Fever called Synochus, usually, as we
showed in the Disease Choler.

Sometimes a Dysentery follows a Fever, either putrid, continual, or
intermitting, or which is more usual, malignant, and pestilential, which is
contagious and epidemical.

I have often observed a Hiccup to contiune till death in a Dysentery, and
other great Symptoms.

Bloody Stools that come from an Inflammation, with gripings and symptoms of a
Dysentery, not from an Ulcer, mixed with excrements, are taken for a Disentery.

Sometimes slimy matter mixed with a little blood is voided, Tenesmus.
and it is called Tenesmus, or Needing from the great straining without
intermission, without other pains, if this continue, at length there is nothing
voided but abundance of matter, without any ulcer appearing in the Fundament.

Sometimes waterish blood is voided like that water wherein bloody flesh has
been washed, The Liver-flux.
and it is called the Hepatick Flux, because it comes from the Liver. This Flux
is great and without pain, most in the night, and continues long: It weakens
the strength and the natural Functions, and comes with thirst and other
accidents. The bloody thin Flux in a Dysentery, is like to this.

Sometimes congealed blood or parched black like Pitch, Voiding of clotted blood
by stool.
is voided with the excrements more or less joined with vomiting of the same:
As we showed in Vomiting, with great weakness and other accidents.

Sound people have often a Flux of pure Blood from the Haemorrhoids, which is
not mixed with the excrements, and shall be mentioned in other Excretions of
Blood.

The voiding of Matter in the Dysentery and Tenesmus, Matter voided by stool.
is little and without pain, and sometimes when the Dysentery is gone, it
continues and weakneth the Patient. Sometimes matter is sent forth in abundance
without pain, for a long time, and the Patient is evil colored, and consumes,
with other Diseases in the Natural parts.

There is sometimes a slimy and phlegmatic Dejection in a Diarrhaea: Slime and
Phlegm voided by stool.
and it is often mixed with blood in a Dysentery and Tenesmus, and toward the
end in a Tenesmus it comes forth pure matter. And Fernelius observes that more
white Phlegm may be voided without pain, after long Diseases and great riding.

Sometimes Stools are unctious and fat like Oil or Butter, or other Grease.
Voiding of Fat by stool.
And we have seen them like tallow candles ends, with other excrements for a
long time, and many. I have seen the same like suet not melted often, as big as
Hazel-nuts in an old Diarrhaea. This is a kind of Lientery, if they come from
things eaten, and often; or of a Diarrhaea. if they be voided with other
things, and come from any thing but meat. And this they call the melting of the
Guts, from a mistake of the cause.

When excrements or dung come another way then the ordinary, it it
preternatural, as when they come from these places following.

Dung or Excrements are vomited sometimes which stink, and are thin, The voiding
of Excrements by vomit.
like Chyle with great pain, and wonder to the Spectators. In the Disease
called Convolvulus in Hernia or Rupture: as we showed.

We have seen the Faeces or Excrements of the belly voided by urin, The voiding
of Excrements by urin.
with bones of birds, with pissing of matter, heat of urin, and great pain. And
I have seen the kernels of Apples voided the same by stool.

We have also seen the Excrements of the belly voided by the womb, The voiding
of excrements by the womb.
with matter and other accidents.

Sometimes the Chyle as also the Excrements will come forth at a wound of the
belly, The voiding of excrements at wounds.
not in such only as die presently, but in them that live long after, from a
Fistula that has remained.

The Causes.
The Cause of all these preternatural Dejections, being more or oftener then is
fit, or strange, and unusual, is in the Stomach and Guts.

And the chief is the irritation or provoking of the bowels that are so
sensible, which so stirs up the expulsive Faculty, that it strives to expel
what is therein, especially if the parts adjacent be also stirred up by
consent, so that they endeavor also to expel what is in them; this causes
diverse kinds of Dejections, with griping and pain. The irritation of the
stomach, is the cause of preternatural Dejections by stool.
For if the Stomach be stirred up, it sends things to the Guts, rather then to
the mouth, except it be so disturbed, that it must presently discharge: as I
showed in Vomiting. Therefore the stomach avoids great evils, and is more
seldom ulcerated then the Guts.

When there is an irritation in the long passage of the guts, The irritation of
the guts, is the cause of Dirrhaea Dysentery, and bloody Flux.
it causes Dejections more or less. By this the expulsive Faculty of the guts
is stirred up, and sends downwards what is in them, and by straining causes a
Diarrhaea, with griping. Or if it be greater, and knaws or corrodes the
substance of the guts there is a Dysentery; and if the Colon be affected, the
pain is about it, especially on the lest side. And because the Colon passes
under the Navel, there is pain also. And if the thin guts are affected, the
pain will be there. And the blood which is voided with the excrements, is more
or less mixed, by how much the farther it flows from the thin guts, and the
nearer from the strait gut. And the greater the hurt, the more the blood, and
the less when the ulcer begins to ^^ink, for then there is matter also. And
this blood is thinner or thicker, purer, or more impure, as it is in the
Meseraicks. And from the pain there is a Fever, especially if it cause an
Inflammation of the guts, which is sometimes joined with a Dysentery. And by
reason of strong irritation, when the guts are not ulcerated, through the
opening of the mouths of the vessels, there may be voiding of blood by stool,
seldom pure, often clotted, and sometimes black: as we showed. Or there may be a
bloody Flux like a Dysentery with an Inflammation, in which without an ulcer of
the guts, blood flows with great pain, a Fever and straining: As we have
observed in Infants opened, that have been thought to die of a Dysentery.

If this irritation be in the end of the strait gut, The irritation of the
strait gut, is the cause of Tenesmus.
or an ulcer, then by reason of the exquisite sense of the part, there is a
continual provoking to stool, and is the cause of Tenesmus; which if it come
from an ulcer, has signs of blood and matter, this is the first kind of
Tenesmus. If Choler flow, or other clammy Matter, it causes the second sort of
Tenesmus, if nothing, the third. And then the strait gut is provoked or
molested with the stone in the bladder that lies near it, or with a tumor, or
hard excrements, or heat which inflameth the urin; or from worms called
Ascarides: As shall be showed. This Tenesmus which has needing or straining,
without voiding of any thing, may come from cold gotten into the Fundament. And
this irritation may open the Haemorrhoids, and then pure blood is voided.

Some Diseases of the stomach and guts cause Dejections with less pain, Pain of
the stomach or guts, is the cause of Dejection.
then irritation, as the being burdened with excrements and humors, and other
bodies, or when they are so many that they cannot contain them longer, being
preternatural, and of an evil quality which provokes Excretion. Hence are
diverse sorts of Dejections: In all which the stomach and guts do sooner void
excrements, when they are dilated or loosned.

The Faeces of the Belly, and the Chyle coming upwards, The stopping of the
guts, is the cause of vomiting Excrements.
by reason of the stoppage of the guts, cause this preternatural Excretion by
vomit, the cause of which stoppage we showed in the Convolvulus, and in the
Cure of the Rupture.

When the guts are wounded, A Wound in the guts, is the cause of voiding
excrements thereat.
the excrements come out there, if it pierce the belly, and wound the guts, and
if the thick guts are wounded, thick Excrements flow out, if the thin, thin:
And if the Jejunum be wounded, the Chyle comes forth. And sometimes being turned
into a Fistula, the Excretion remains there, and the Patient lives. And this
is when the lips of the wounds of the guts and belly grow together, which is
sooner in a fleshy part of the belly. And then if the ulcer be not closed as I
have seen, it turns to a Fistula, and lets out the excrements, and keeps them
from falling down. This is like that of the bladder: As we showed in
preternatural Pissing.

That voiding of dung at the womb, A Wound in the strait gut, is the cause of
Excrements from the womb.
and by urin mentioned, comes from an ulcer in the strait gut which joins to
the neck of the womb and bladder.

The Causes of all these Diseases of the Stomach and Guts, from whence these
preternatural Excretions arise (besides wounds, ulcers, and obstructions, from
whence the excrements are sent forth by vomit, urin, or the womb: As we showed
in the Iliack passion,) are from these following.

If purging medicines do so stir up the expulsive Faculty of the Stomach and
Guts, that they work too strong, Purges cause over purging, and bloody Flux.
or too long, there is super-purgation. And though this comes commonly from
strong medicines, yet gentle things, as Cassia, Manna, may cause it by their
cleansing quality being dry, unctious, and provoking Nature by contrariety.
Some purges are sharp, and hot, as Spurge, wild Cowcumber, Coloquintida,
Laurel, and these do not only over purge, but ulcerate by corroding, and
inflaming, and cause Dysenteryes, or bloody Fluxes, by opening the veins. If
the force of them reach to the Fundament, it causes Tenesmus, as from
Coloquintida, or they open the Haemorrhoids. And the same may be done by
Clysters and Suppositories forcibly thrust up, which cause a Tenesmus. And this
may be done by the violent use of a Clysterpipe.

Besides purges, Clysters and Suppositories, the cause of Diarrhaea and
Tenesmus.
poison may cause Diarrhaea's and Dysenteryes. Among which the powder of a
Loadstone drunk, is the cause of a Dysentery.

Also other sharp and pricking things swallowed, Also Poisons, and some Meats,
Drinks.
but they stay seldom in the Guts, Meat and Drink by plenty and corruption, or
crudity, causes preternatural Dejections, especially when swallowed down, and
being crude, they lie heavy, breed wind, disturb, or being moist, loosen, or
fat, and cause slipperiness, and so produce a diarrhaea. Or things that easily
corrupt, cause a Diarrhaea sooner, being turned into bad humors: Of which we
shall speak. Or things that breed many Excrements, Mud, or Filth, or sordid
Matter, by their plenty and adverse quality, may cause a Diarrhaea.

This may be partly from the Meat that will easily be so corrupted, and from
the Stomach which is apt to pervert them: As we showed in Weakness of the
Stomach. But if meat remains crude, without any concoction, there is Lientery,
when it is much and burdensome to Nature, and thrown out as taken in. This is
when things are taken that either cannot be digested, but with great
difficulty; or when the stomach is so weakened, as that it cannot concoct; as I
showed in Weakness of the Stomach; also a Scar left in the stomach from a
wound, is reported to be a cause when these causes meet, there is a Lientery;
and if they be at a certain time from meat that many eat, or the like, there is
a popular Lientery, which they suppose comes from the Air.

Sharp pricking Humors that burn and corrode, cause preternatural Dejections,
Choler is the cause of Diarrhaea, Dysentery, or Tonesmus.
as yellow and black Choler, which if bred in the stomach and guts, or sent
thither from the gall or meseraicks, by its plenty, or in Diseases, as in
Jaundies and Fevers, being mixed with the Phlegm and slime of the Guts, and
with water or serum, made milder, causes only a Diarrhaea, which sends forth
moist, froath, yellow, or black Excrements, as the Choler is. But if the Choler
bemore malignant, such as corrodes and grips the guts, whereit can lie longer
then in the stomach, then it produces a Dysentery, with Inflammation or Ulcer,
or such a bloody Flux as was mentioned, as Choler is, which flows with the
blood and excrements, either yellow, green, or black. Also the same Choler
descending to the end of the strait Gut, and there sticking if it be clammy, by
provoking or ulcerating the part, causes Tenesmus. And this may follow a
Dysentery, by reason of Choler brought thither by it. This Choler may come from
the same causes, with that of the Disease Choler; and is chiesty in young
people that eat much green Fruit, which corrupt and turn into holer, and
therefore they have the Dysentery, chiefly in Autumn, when the Fruit is
plentiful, and the rather, when the Fruit is not kindly but worm-eaten; or as
Rondoletius says when they eat astringent Fruit, which stops the passage of
the former. This Dysentery is popular or epidemical, when many have it.

A Diarrhaea may also come from other sharp Humors that gripe like yellow or
black Choler, Other sharp Humors are the causes of Dysentery, Dyarrhaea, and
Tenesmus.
or are corrupt and malignant, when they are qualified with phlegm: Or a
Dysentery or Tenesmus, may come from the same, being more sharp and not
qualified. And if these Dysenteryes have a malignant cause, they are
epidemical. And these humors come from evil diet, or humors in the stomach and
guts, or meseraicks. As it is often in malignant and pestilential Fevers, that
the putrid humors, or venom in the plague which is very hot, being sent by the
force of Nature to the guts, as the common shore, and there retained, does
provoke and prick them, and sometimes ulcerate. As I have often observed in the
small Pox, that the guts have been ulcerated by the humors, which has caused a
deadly or long lasting Dysentery. These are either joined with the fevers, or
follow them. Also in other venomous Diseases as in the French Pox, when the
malignant humor is carried by Nature or medicines into the guts, as by
Quicksilver, it will cause a Diarrhaea or Dysentery, as well as a flux or
ulcer in the mouth.

Sometimes Phlegm mixed with dung or humors or water, Phlegm is the cause of
Diarrhaea, enesmus, and Flux of the Brain.
causes Diarrhaea's, and is sometimes most pervalent, especially at the
conclusion, when all other excrements are purged away. And this Phlegm is bred
in the stomach and guts, being sometimes waterish, slimy, or glassie from the
causes thereof; sometimes it is sent thin like water by the meseraicks, with
other humors from diverse parts of the body. And this may come from the brain to
the stomach and guts, being froathy, and cause the flux of the brain, according
to Hippocrates Aphorism, which teaches that they who have froathy excrements,
have a flux of Rhewm from the brain. The cause of which defluxion of phlegm from
the brain was mentioned in Defluxes. Also it is affirmed that salt phlegm
gathered about the Fundament, may cause a Tenesmus. And if it be not very
sharp, there well be no ulcer, but only a straining.

This pricking in this kind of Tenesmus comes not from the sharpness or
saltness of the slime, but from its sticking by which it cleaves to the gut,
being very sensible, and continually provokes a needing and straining to
discharge it.

The Serum or Whey mixeth it self with the Blood, and other other Humors and
Excrements. And the greater quantity there is of it, the more thin are the
stools. Especially in a Diarrhaea, where the stools are like water, because the
serum mixeth with, and moderateth the sharp and choleric humors; and this
serum is made in the first concoction for moist meat and drink; or it is sent
to the guts by the meseraicks, and carries diverse humors with it, either by
nature or medicine in time of repletion, and causes a Diarrhaea thus mixed.
And it appears that this could not come from the serum that sweats through the
meseraicks, because the quantity is great, and the flux is constant, and so
much cannot be retained in the stomach and guts, nor can the moisture taken in
at the mouth cause it, being sometimes very little: Neither is that an
objection, that being mixed with blood, it receives no color from it; when the
sweat from the whole body and the water that comes from wounds, and to the
reins by the emulgents is not bloody: And after a vein is opened, when the
blood is settled, the water or serum is separated from it.

It comes to pass, but seldom, Bloody Serum or Whey is the cause of a
Liver-flux.
that Serum is voided in a Liver-flux in great quantity like water, wherein
flesh was washed, tinctured with blood, which it receives from the blood in the
meseraicks; And yet in other fluxes of water, are not discolored or red. The
question is how this should be. Some say the weakness of the liver is the
cause, and want of sangnification. And although this may be the cause of
abundance of serum and crude blood which causes a Diarrhaea, yet because the
tincture is seldom, there must be another cause not ordinary in the liver and
meseraicks. As the thinness of the meseraick blood, or the dilatation or
opening of the mouths of the vessels. And the cause hereof is rather the heat
then coldness of the liver, as appears by the heat, thirst, and burning about
the Hypochondria, with a Fever sometimes, and sometimes after; as also in regard
it is cured by cold things rather then hot.

From this heat of the Liver, and Constitution of blood, with the Anastomosis
or opening of the Veins caused by this heat, it comes to pass, that the Serum
returns the same way tinctured with a little blood, and falls into the Guts,
causing this bloody tincture in the flux of serum, as in a Dysentery from an
ulcer that opens the mouths of the veins.

That Slime which besmeareth the stomach and guts, Slime in the stomach and
guts, is the cause of slimy Dejections and blood slime, is the cause of a
Dysentery.
cannot alone cause a preternatural Dejection, because it comes seldom forth
alone, but when it is mixed with other excrements being much in quantity. The
cause of the abounding of this is clammy meat which breeds excrements. But that
slime which is in a Dysentery, if it be voided more then other excrements
causes the white Dysentery, and the same causes a Tenesmus. This slime from
the ulcerated substance of the guts, which being membranous, causes such
matter, as we see in the ulcer of the bladder; which at first has some signs
of blood, and is after white matter. And because it is gathered into the strait
gut about the Fundament, it being thick, comes forth alone in this Disease.

Therefore we count this Slime, Matter rather then phlegm, which some account
salt phlegm, that has only a force of pricking, when it is not so. And the
needing in a Tenesmus, comes rather from the hurt of the gut which is very
sensible, then from this phlegm, though sharp. As for the Slime which Fernelius
says, is voided without pain, which some think to be Matter, it is he says
the dreggs of blood from the veins of the Fundament, in long melancholic
Diseases, as the Whites in women.

We showed formerly how Matter like Slime comes from a Dysentery and Tenesmus,
and also from a Colic.

Besides these, Matter in a Dysentery from an Ulcer is continually voided,
Matter voided by stool.
and also without pain. Which must come from a great ulcer that is foul,
because there is so much, and from a part that is insensible, and of no great
Functions, because he dies not suddenly, but consumes by degrees. This has
been in the mesentery, which is an ignoble part, and sent by the veins into the
guts, as appears by Anatomy. If it should come from farther parts, as liver or
spleen, it may be brought by the meseraicks; and then there will be great
symptoms, as the Dropsy by reason of the ulcers there. If it cannot come from
the breast or head, because the matter may not be brought for want of passage,
though diverse have been invented. And if any should pass, it would be very
little, and it must pass through the hollow vein into the branches of the
gate-vein, which would rather then pass the emulgents to the reins and bladder:
As I showed in their places.

When the Chyle slips through the guts it is called the Coeliack passion; The
Chyle is the Cause of the Coeliack passion.
and by reason of the distribution thereof hindered, it is not carried into the
meseraicks, but gathered into the guts in great quantity, corrupted, or mixed
with sharp humors, and so cast down by stool, as it is in quantity and color,
or mixed with other humors. This want of distribution, comes either from the
weakness of the bowels ordained to sanguifie, which cannot attract the Juice,
or from the obstruction of the passages or meseraicks. Also Chyle made of moist
and fat meats, does sooner pass through.

Much fat in the excrements causes greasy Dejections, and slipperiness of
guts and excrements, but does not enlarge them. This comes from eating Fat, Fat
Meats and Drinks, the cause of fat stools.
Oil, Butter, that come forth without concoction; as we showed in a Lientery.
And they which teach that fat may be voided by reason of the melting and
colliquation of the Fat of the Guts, being persuaded that the guts are fat
within, and that that Fat may be dissolved or shaked off, were persuaded
thereunto, because Fat may be carried from the mesentery, or cawle by the fat
membranes that are joined to the guts, (which if it should be, it must first be
melted, that it may pass the meseraicks) which being hard to be done, it is not
probable that either that Fat or other that is more remote, should pass.
Because there cannot be actual heat enough within to melt it, neither does the
heat of the heart melt the Fat which is about it. Therefore as we showed in the
Hectic Fever, it cannot pass by urin, so can it not pass here by stool: As we
showed concerning Matter.

We showed how blood may cause a flux from the corrosion and ulceration of the
guts that flows pure with the excrements in a Dysentery, or in the Haemorrhoids
or clotted. And how being mixed with serum, it may cause the Liver-flux.

And we showed how Meat might pass not changed, in a Lientery.

The Cure.
First, I shall begin with those Dejections or Purgings that are most
difficult, that is the Desentery, then Tenesmus, then Diarrhaea, then Lientery,
Liver-flux, Coeliack or Chyle passion, and purulent Dejections, and voiding of
sat by stool.

A Dysentery is a dangerous Disease that destroys Infants young and old, The
cure of a Dysentery.
and especially when the Guts are hurt, which is known by the plenty of Blood
and fleshy Fibers, and Matter voided, with griping of the Belly. And if there
be an Inflammation, there is a Fever and Convulsion. And it is worst when
yellow, or yolk-like Choler, or green, like Verdegreece, or black is voided.
Also if the strength suddenly sail: And Hiccup following are deadly. It is very
obstinate, if it be constant, or if when blood is stopped, there be a Lientery
or Diarrhaea, or stinking Excrements. All these fore show death which follows
within a week two or three. If a Dysentery be a symptom of a continual
malignant or pestilential Fever or epidemical, it kills many. Sometimes it ends
in a filthy ulcer; and then when the Dysentery is past, they have long after a
purulent Dejection which consumes and kills.

The Cure is by taking away the Cause, whether it be Choler or other evil
Humors, or corroding Medicines, or Poison. By Evacuations and Cleansers, and by
abating the violence of the Lenitives, Stupefactives, and Antidotes, if the
Humor be venomous; and with Coolers, if there be Inflammation. Then we must
cure the Disease, which is an Excoriation or Ulceration, with Dryers: As we
showed in Ulcers, with Astringents that dry, and stop the Flux, as follows.

Among evacuating Remedies, Purges are best, to take away the Griping, venomous
Humors of what kinds soever. And these are of the best Operation, when the
Cause lies deep in the small Guts, unto which Clysters cannot reach: And when
they are given at first, before great hurt be done, and often if need require.
You must make choice of such Purgers as have an astringent quality, to prevent
too much Evacuation from the Disease and Medicine.

And Rhubarb is the best first torrified, to make it more astringent. And then
it will be better poudered, but if it be over dried, it is of no force. Give it
at first while strength lasts, for if you give it after it requires more
torrifying or parching. The dose is from half a dram to four scruples or five,
with red Wine, Rose Water, Plantane, Dock or Sorrel-water, or the like, with
Juice of Quinces, Plantane, or the Syrups of the same, or of dried Roses, or
Myrtles one ounce, or two drams of Acacia. And if you also dry up the Ulcer,
use powder of burnt Hearts horn, seed of Roses and Plantane, and other drying
Pouders to be mentioned.

To Rhubarb we add yellow Myrobalans, because these purge and bind after, twice
as much, because they are weaker.

Also the Syrup of Roses solutive, or of red Roses which binds more, made
with the Infusion of Rhubarb one ounce, or one ounce and an half.

In the beginning of a Dysentery the purging Extract of Quinces, given four or
five spoonfuls is good, it is thus made. Take two or three ripe Quinces, paired
and sliced, the Seeds taken out, put them in a glassed Vessels well stopped,
and put it in another Vessel of boiling Water four or five hours, keeping the
Water from boiling into it. Then pour off the Juice which I call purging
Extract, gentle, and keep it for use.

Of all these you may make this Potion, adding things that heal the Ulcer.

Take Liquorish one ounce and an half, Plantane and Roses each one pugil;
Raisons one ounce, Tamarinds six drams, yellow Myrobalans infused in Wine three
drams: boil them in Hydromel, when it is strained, insuse Rhubarb one dram,
Spike half a scruple, strain it, and add Syrup of Quinces, or red Roses dried
one ounce.

When the Flux is more slimy, choleric, or the Excrements many, and not so
bloody, give Tryphera Persica, or Sarasenica Nicolai two ounces, with
astringent Syrup, and convenient Waters; or dissolve half an ounce of Triphera
Saracenica in a Decoction of Citrine and Indian Myrobalans.

Catholicon is given to one ounce, with Rhubarb and Myrobalans, and the like;
also Hiera, Agarick one dram by Dioscorides, which purges strongly, and is not
sharp, if it be given with Honey, or Syrup of Roses, and Rhubarb. Some give
Carthamus seeds in Whey: Others the Pulp or Decoction of Tamarinds, which
allays the heat of Choler. It is dangerous to use stronger, which will inflame
the Guts.

Vomiting is only allowed in a Dysentery, when the cause reaches to the
stomach, and is nourished from it. And if it come from a burning Medicine or
poison.

Blood-letting will do little good, because little is taken from the Meseraicks
thereby, which send the Blood into the Guts, and it weakens. Yet when the
Hemorrhoids open of themselves, and flow not too much, they do good.

Sweating does stop this Flux, and must be used while there is strength, with
Coverlidds, Bricks, Bottles, or the like, provoking of urin does the same, by
carrying the matter in part to the Ureters, as with this. Take of the four
great cold Seeds beaten with their shells, each two drams; Maidenhair half an
handful, Asparagus roots one ounce, or Seeds thereof one dram, Sumach three
drams, Coriander and Aniseseed, each one dram and an half; boil them in Broth,
and let him drink it when he is thirsty.

If the thick Guts are hurt, Clysters are good, because they reach to the part,
but if the Ulcer be deep in the sinal Guts, they cannot so well reach the part,
and are not so proper; but only to take away pain and the Excrements, and to
stop the Flux gently. You must give them in small quantity, when the great Guts
are hurt, and in larger, when the small are hurt, that they may reach the part,
which if they do, they must be repeated.

These are made of Lenients, Cleansers, and Astringents, against the sharp
corroding Humors, and the Ulcer.

Lentive Clysters allay the sharpness of Humors, and defend the Guts, take away
pain, prevent further hurt, are given at any time, alone, or mixed, as with
Stupefactives to take away pain, and stop the Flux. These are good also to cure
the Ulcer, if they be mixed with Cleansers and Dryers.

Cleansing Clysters must be first given to take away the Humor that provokes,
and wash the Ulcer, with dryers. And must be continued while the Ulcer is foul;
and least these should prick, the parts being very sensible, or inflame them,
they must be moderate, except the Ulcer be very foul: And then you use
Lenitives after, if they cause pain, or mix Lenitives therewith.

Drying Clysters must be used after cleansing, to heal the Ulcer, with which
use things to glue: As we showed in Excoriation and Ulcers. Among which, they
which dry most, and bind are best. These if they be strong, are used in the
conclusion, after weaker, mixed with cleansers, if the Ulcer be foul. And when
we use strong Astringents for the violence of the Flux, we add glutinous
things, that they may not exasperate: And we do not hinder healing, but cause
it to be more safely done. These forms following are best.

Among lenitive Clysters, Milk does not only take away pain, but cleanses and
heals. That cleanses most which has most Whey. And it will heal more, if
you quench Stones or Iron in it, to consume the Whey.

It is more operative, and takes away pain better, if to one pint you add one
or two yolks of Eggs, or four ounces of Mucilage of Fleabane, or Quince seeds,
or one ounce of fresh Suet, which heals Excoriations; As was showed, Goats suet
is best, and then Dears, especially that taken from the Kidneys, which is
hardest. This in a great pain is given with an equal proportion of Oil of Roses.

When we must cleanse and lenifie together, we add one ounce and an half of
Sugar, or Honey to the Milk. And if we will heal or glue more, three or four
ounces of the Juice of Plantane.

Cream of Barley, or Almonds, or an Emulsion with Rice, is good to be injected.

Mutton-broath, or Chicken-broath, with yolks of Eggs, or Mucilages, are good
here, as in the Colic.

A lenitive glutinating Decoction. Take Marsh-mallow roots one ounce, Barley or
Rice one pugil, Line-seed, or Foenugreek, Quince seeds one ounce, Fleabane
seeds half an ounce, and against wind, Anise-seeds two drams, Chamomil, or Dill
flowers one pugil. make a Decoction in Milk or Broth, adding yolks of Eggs,
Suet, and Oil, as in the Clyster of Milk.

To all these Decoctions, you may add in time of pain Philonium one or two
drams, especially Persicum, which stops Fluxes, or one or two scruples of
Cynogloss pills, or as I have done often with good success, one ounce and an
half of Syrup of Poppies.

You may use one scruple, or one dram of Opium with the former, but it is
better when it is dissolved in Compositions, and fermented.

In time of extreme pain, we are constrained to use oils alone, which otherwise
being greasy, and enemies to the Ulcers, we omit them, as Oil of sweet
Almonds, or of Roses that is more astringent especially Omphacine, or a little
Oil of Quinces, or Myrtles, with Mucilages, and yolks of Eggs.

The common cleansing Clyster is this. Take Barley-water one pint, course
Sugar, or Honey two ounces.

When we will lenifie also, add to it two yolks of Eggs. And to astringe, use
Oil of Roses instead of common oil, and one dram of Turpentine, dissolved with
the yolk of an Egg, to cleanse and heal.

Whey alone, or Hydromel, that is mead, cleanses, to which you may add the
former.

Another cleansing Clyster. Take Liquorish one ounce and an half, Figgs,
Raisons, each two ounces; Bran one pugil, Barley, Pease, Lentils, or Lupines
two ounces: boil them in Whey, or Mead, and dissolve therein Sugar, or Honey.

A stronger in foul Ulcers, add to the former Pellitory, and Beets, or
Centaury, Wormwood, and Gentian, boiled in weak Lie. And if corruption follow,
use stronger, as Lie, or Piss, salt Water, Brine, or pickled. Some use
Aegyptiacum, as in outward Ulcers; or Ovntments of Orpiment. The safest of
which are mentioned in the Ulcers of the Mouth; and are to be carefully used
with Milk, Barley ^ream, or Rice, and the like.

To glue and heal an Ulcer, a gentle drying Clyster is made of burnt Milk, with
Flints or Steel quenched therein, and Roses boiled,

Another is of Barley-water, and Rice parched, and one pugil of red Roses, with
two yolks of roasted Eggs, Honey of Roses, and if you will have it stronger,
one ounce of Juice of Plantane.

The third Clyster to glue and astringe. Take Comfreyroots, and Mullein, each
one ounce; lantane, and Consound, each one handful; red Roses, and parched
Barley, each one pugil; Myrtle seeds two drams, Grapet half an ounce: boil them
in Cistern-water, and dissolve Honey of Roses one ounce and an half, a White of
an Eg, or Gum Traganth one ounce, Goats suet two ounces, Juice of Plantane, or
Solomonsseal one ounce: make a Clyster.

The fourth Clyster to astringe and dry the Ulcer. Take Roots of Snakeweed, or
Tormentil one ounce and an half, Comfrey one ounce, Shepherds purse, or Rod,
Solomon's seal, or Rupturewort, Horstayl, Monsear, each one handful; Pomegranate
flowers, Acorn-cupps, Cypress-nuts, each two drams; Lentils, and parched Rice,
each one pugil; boil them in Forge-water, add Juice of Plantane two ounces, and
two yolks of roasted Eggs: make a Clyster.

To these Decoctions Astringents and Healers may be added, as Sanicle,
Wintergreen, golden Rod, and other woundherbs; also Myrtles, Mastick-tree,
Olive, Sumach, Ceterach, Agrimony, Brambles, Bloodworr, Osier, Sparrowtongue,
Flowers of Chamaeleon, Galls, Pomegranatepeels, and the Juyces of astringent
Fruits, and Juyces of Plants aforesaid.

Juice of Plantane alone, or with Milk, or Barley-water is good, two drams of
Gum Traganth, dissolved in a Clyster, or infused in Rose and Plantane water,
and so mixed, is excellent.

The Infusion of Gum Traganth, with Juice of Plantane or Goats suet, is also
good.

Also the Mucilage of Quince, or Fleabane seed, with water of Plantane, or
Shepheards-purse, and an astringent Decoction.

Gum Arabic is as good as Traganth, also Frankincense, Mastick, Sarcocol:
these dissolved, glutinate, and do not exasperate the Ulcer, as strong
Astringents.

Dried Juyces, as Acacia, Hypocistis, Dragons blood, a dram or two dissolved in
Clysters cause astringency.

Also red Wine from the grinding of the Bloodstone, with Plantane, or
Rose Water two drams, added to the rest, does glutinate and stop the Flux of
Blood.

Also fat Earths that are not rough, but drying and smooth, as Bole, and Terra
Lemnia, are good to be mixed two drams, with the former.

The Troches of Amber, or the white troches of Rhasis, two drams, with Milk,
Juice of Plantane, or Decoctions, or with other Clysters, are good here, as in
the Excoriations and Ulcer of the Bladder. And if you add Opium, it will abate
the pain.

Other Pouders are not necessary, because they settle at the bottom, and
provoke and exasperate the part: Yet some add burnt Paper, and burnt Vitriol.

Ointments are too greasy, as of Roses, Pompholyx, Diapalma, Divinum, though
some use them.

Some commend the Blood of a Dear in a Dysentery.

If the Disease be in the upper Guts, there are other Medicines to be taken at
the Mouth, besides Purges: to lenifie, cleanse, and cure.

Cow milk lenifieth, cleanses, and heals all inward Ulcers, and is given
with Honey, or Sugar of Roses, when you will cleanse, or Goats milk.

But if you desire to heal more, give Cow or Sheepsmilk, which has had Flints,
Iron, or Steel quenched therein.

Take three ounces of Cow milk, one ounce of Juice of Plantane, and as much of
Sugar of Roses, and it will heal.

You may boil Comfrey roots in the Milk.

Veal-broath that is strong of the Flesh, is best.

Also Rice-porrage is good to heal.

And a Decoction of Barley, and Liquorish, with Sugar, or Honey, to cleanse.

A healing Decoction. Take Roots of Tormentil one ounce, Comsrey and
Marshmallows, each half an ounce; Plantane, Shepheards-purse, each one
handful; red Roses dried one pugil, Sumach, or Grapestones two drams: boil them
in Rainwater, and a little red Wine, add to the straining Sugar of Roses. Let
him drink it at twice or thrice.

Or, Take Cynkfoyl roots, or Bistort, Snakeweed one ounce, Water Lillies six
drams, Yarrow, or Horstayl one handful, wild Vine one pugil, Plantane seeds,
and Sorrel seeds, and Dock seeds, each two drams; boil them in Plantane-water,
and a little Wine, and dissolve therein the Syrup of Quinces, or the like: make
a Potion, give it as the former.

You may add to these Decoctions the Roots of Avens, Fern, Sorrel, Polemount,
Water-plantane, and these wound Herbs, as Consound, Wintergreen, Mousear,
Straw-berry leaves, wild Tansey, Sanicle, golden Rod, Willowherb, Scordium,
Agrimony, Knot-grass, or Rupturewort, Hearts tongue, Balsom, Perwinkle, Oak
leaves, Brambles, Myrtles, and Mastick-tree. To these we add Discussers of
wind, as Chamomil flowers, Anise-seeds.

We mix Rhubarb to take away the Cause of the Disease. As, Take Rhubarb parched
one dram, Coriander parched two drams, infuse them in red Wine, or Juice of
Quinces; let them boil, and strain them, add Syrup of dried Roses one ounce and
an half: make a Potion for two doses. If you add one dram of Acacia, or
Hypocistis, it will be stronger.

Or two or three drams of Bole, or Spodium, or half an ounce of Mastick, boiled
alone in Rose or Plantane-water.

Dioscorides commends Wax boiled in Broth.

The Decoction of Ass dung is counted a secret, to be drunk after boiled in
wine, with things to take away the scent.

The Decoction of Earthworms is also good, but let not the Patient know it.

Physical Wines are made of burnt red wine, with Steel, or Gold quenched
therein, or Tormenril, and Snakeweed roots boiled, which makes the wine more
astringent, and not unpleasant. To which you may add Sugar, or Cinnamon that it
m y be like Hippocras.

You may boil ripe dried Sloes in red wine, and it will be astringent and
pleasant, and other astringent Fruits.

Some highly commend Rice boiled in red wine.

Also Juyces, as of Quinces boiled, are good, one spoonlful, or two at a time,
or of other Fruits that are not too sour to cause torments, as of Pears,
Pomegranates of the middle sort, of which wine is made, pressed with the peels.
Also the Juice of Cornil-berries, and the like.

Three or four ounces of the raw Juice of Plantane heals, and takes away
Inflammation alone, or you may give it with Milk or Broth.

Hollerius says that the Juice of Ground Ivy drunken, has saved the lives of
many.

Some give the milkie Juice of English Galangal.

Some sharp Syrups not too sour, are given by spoonfuls, as of Quinces alone,
or boiled in Wine, Myrtles, or red Roses, or of Juice of Plantane, or the
Decoctions mentioned, with Sugar. Boil one ounce, of Watercress seeds parched
in a pint of Syrup of Quinces.

Also Juleps are good, and quench thirst, as that of Roses, or Plantane water
boiled.

Or give the Syrup with steeled water, or stilled waters, or Rose budds, or of
Privet, Plantane, Shepheards-purse, Oak, Goos-grass.

Let the Diet be of nourishing Papps.

As of boiled Rice in Milk, with yolks of Eggs, and Juice of Ground Ivy, by
which Lerius in his History, says many Seamen almost killed with Dysenteries,
have been recovered: Also Rice boiled in Almond milk. And if Steel or Gold be
quenched in the Milk, it is the better.

Also Starch boiled with Eggs beaten, and with Rosewater, Sugar, and Butter, or
Veal suet, is good.

Also Milium boiled in Milk, with yolks of Eggs, or drink the powder thereof,
with a roasted Eg.

Oate-meal, or the Grewel made thereof is used in Germany.

To these Papps of Rice, Oats, Starch, Milium, you may add Bean flower,
Tormentil roots, seeds of Plantane, Sumach, and Bole.

Or two drams of Virgins wax sliced and boiled in the same.

Bread also made with whites of Eggs, Powder of Galls, or Pomegranate peels, is
good to be given in Powder, with Wine.

Dioscorides commends Beans boiled in Vinegar and water; others commend Lentils.

Also Eggs poached in Vinegar or fried, till hard, with one dram of new wax, to
which may be added powder of Sumach, Plantane seeds, or Hemp.

The Blood of a Goat or Dear fried, is commended by Dioscorides. And chiefly
that of an Hare, with Barleymeal, also a roasted Turtle stuffed with
Myrtle-berries, and new Wax, each two drams; or two drams of Frankincense, and
one dram of dried Pigeons blood, and other Astringents, as Plantane seed,
Roses, Sumach, and Cinnamon.

Among Fruits, Quinces, Pears, and Apples that are sharp, roasted, or boiled,
are the best: Also sweet Meats made thereof. Or roast a Pear, or Quince, with
Wax, and let him eat it.

Also Medlars, Services, Cornil-berries, Cherries, and sharp Plums before they
are ripe, are astringent.

Also Goos-berries are astringent, and Bramble-berries. And Mulberries, but
they cause pain, and therefore are to be used warily.

Dioscorides commends the Berries of the Lote-tree, and Bar-berries, and the
Husks of Beans.

Also roasted Chestnuts, and Acorns, with Almonds not roasted, but these will
clog a weak Stomach.

Purslane is the best pot-herb for a Dysentery, it takes away the sharpness.

There are diverse Pouders which dry and bind, or have a secret quality, given
alone, or mixed from one dram to one dram and an half, commonly with sharp red
Wine, or with steeled Water, Broth, or Milk, Plantane water, or the like, with
Sugar, Honey, or proper Syrups.

The Powder of the Roots of Tormentil, Snakeweed, are not ill-tasted.
Water-lilly roots do wonders in Dysenteries: Also Comfrey roots, wild Sage, and
Avens roots.

Dioscorides commends the Powder of Yarrow, Fleabane, Scordium, and the tops of
Tragus; also Mousear, Cudwort, Sun-flower with the Roots, the middle of the
root of Mullein, Horstayl, Balsamine, or the like, mentioned for Decoctions.

Flowers of Ivy, Cistus, Palma Christi, Flower gentle, and Pomegranate flowers.
Also red Rose cakes: Also the Fruit of the Rose, with its down and seeds, and
Bar-berries.

Roast a Pomegranate, and give it in Powder.

Also Seeds of red Roses, Pomegranates, Raisons, Grapes.

Seeds of Watercresses alone, or with others, is counted an excellent Remedy
against a Dysentery, and because they are sharp and burning, they are first
parched. Also Tamarisk seed.

The Seeds also of Docks, and Bloodwort, or Sorrel.

The Powder of roasted Acorns does wonders. Also of Chestnuts, or of Beech mast.

The Down of Chestnuts within the shell, as also of Acorns, and Hazel-nuts, is
good in powder.

Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrh, Traganth, swallowed or drunk in powder.

The pizle of a Dear also poudered, and drunk in wine.

Also burnt Hearts horn, or unburnt, and the powder of Ox shanks.

The Runnet also of a Hare, or Kid, or Mare, is commended by Dioscorides.

He also prescribes Goats suet, with Barley-flower, and Roses.

Also Hares, Dogs, or Swins dung, is given with Milk that has had Steel
quenched therein.

Also Bole, or other fat Earth, as that of Lemnos, red Coral, Crystal, Pearl,
Sapphyres, Smarag'ds.

The Chemists commend the tincture of Smaragds, as specifical in a Dysentery:
It is thus made. Let the sparks or pieces of Smaragds be ground finely upon a
Marble, with the Urin of a Boy, or distilled Vinegar, or Juice of Lemmons, and
the tincture drawn out at the fire. And then let it be evaporated, till it be a
gray powder, then draw out the green tincture with spirit of wine, and then
evaporate the spirit of wine, and let it be brought to an Essence at the
bottom; two or five tops of this they say, taken with Plantane-water, cures
Dysenteries miraculously.

Some give Alum with an Eg.

And Dioscorides gives Salt with red Rose seeds for sauce with Meat.

There are diverse Pouders compound of these, to be given in the like quantity,
or with Sugar in a greater quantity, with a Sop in Wine.

The first is: Take Roots of Tormentil two drams, Snakeweed one dram, Seeds of
Docks and Sorrel, each one dram and an half; red Coral half a dram.

Another: Take half of this Powder that is three drams, Seeds of red Roses and
Myrtles, each one dram; Pomegranate flowers, burnt Hearts horn, or Ivory, each
half a dram; Pearl half a scruple.

The third Powder more astringent. Take with the former Galls one dram, Sanguis
Draconis, or Acacia half a dram, Bole, or Terra Lemnia one dram, and half a
dram of Bloodstone which is stronger.

A Powder of Acorns which binds and heals wonderfully. Take roasted Acorn
kernels one ounce, Coriander seed prepared one dram and an half, Purslane and
Fleabaneseed, each half a dram; you may add roasted Chestnuts.

If you will heal more, mix Starch one dram and half, Gum Traganth a little
parched one dram.

And if you will dry and astringe more, mix it with a dram or two of the former
Pouders.

Ashes also are highly commended, as of a quick Hare, burnt in an earthen pot
well stopped.

Land-turtles, or Snails also burnt with their shells.

Also Powder of Man's bones, or ashes in red wine, or steeled wine.

These may be mixed with other Pouders, as Bole, Dragons blood, and Mummy, with
powder of Turtles, or powder of Galls, with ashes of a Turtle, and a little
white Pepper.

Also these Ashes following. Dip a hempen Cloth in two parts of
Plantane-water, and one of Rose-vinegar, in which a little Alum, and Bole are
dissolved, then dry it, and burn it to ashes.

Also the Troches of Amber, burnt Ivory, or sealed Earth, with Sorrel seeds,
Ramich half a dram, taken every day: Give in powder, with red Wine, or other
proper Liquor, Sugar of Roses, or convenient Syrups, or with old Conserve of
Roses, or Syrup of Myrtles: make Pills or a Bolus.

These Electuaries following are made of Conserves and Candyes. Take old
Conserve of Roses, and Marmulate of Quinces, each one ounce; Conserve of
Comfrey roots half an ounce, Coral two drams, Troches of sealed Earth, or the
like, simple or compound one dram, parched Nutmeg and Cinnamon, each half a
dram; Sugar of Roses, as much as will make a Mixture.

Or, Take the Conserves and Candyes mentioned, with those of Services, Cornils,
Roses, Medlars, and other Astringents, Powder of Rhubarb parched one dram; mix
them with syrup of Quinces, or Juyces or Syrups mentioned.

Micleta Nicolai of Myrobalans, Mastick, Gum Arabic, Sumach, Pomegranate
flowers, burnt Ivory, Water-cressseeds, and others that expel wind, is good in
Dysenteries, and other Fluxes.

Two drams of Watercreess-seeds parched, and poudered, boiled in Syrup of
Quinces, till they be thick, and three spoonfuls given at once, is excellent.

Another that lenifieth and heals. Take Mucilage of Quince seeds, Comfrey
roots, Infusion of Gum Traganth, all made with Rose Water one ounce, Starch one
dram, red Coral two drams, Bole one dram, Pomegranate flowers half a dram,
Juice of Services, Cornil-berries, or Marmalade of Quinces two ounces, Sugar of
Roses one ounce: make an Electuarie, give two drams.

Narcoticks as we said in Clysters, assuage pain and stop Fluxes, and they do
better taken at the Mouth, causing rest and sleep, which the Dysentery
hinders, and so do increase strength: these are to be given as often as pain
and watching require, for nothing does better allay the expulsive Faculty,

Philonium Persicum is best, one dram, and a little more.

Also pills of Dogs tongue called Cynogloss, stay Defluxions, and are good with
Juice of Plantane and Roses, and other astringents from half a scruple, to a
scruple.

Troches of Amber, with Opium, do also cure Ulcers, and other Narcoticks,
mentioned in the Colic and Stone, here are good, if mixed with astringents, as
you mix Syrup of Myrtles, with syrup of Poppies, or Diacodium, and dissolve
them with plantane-water, and add a little Diamargariton frigidum, or boil
white poppies in Rose Water.

Or mix Bole, Terra Lemnia, Galls, Pomegranate-flowers, Acacia, Hypocistis,
with Treacle, Mithridate, Athanasia, with the like Confections, or Narcoticks.

Or if you add to the Pouders and Electuaries mentioned, a little Opium well
prepared: As we showed.

As for external Medicines, anoint the Belly with Oil of Quinces, Myrtles,
Roses, or Oil onmhacine, if you will bind more, or add the third part of
Vinegar, then boil them till the Vinegar is consumed. And if the Stomach be
disordered, add Oil of Mastick, or Wormwood. If the pain be great, add Oil of
Chamomil, or sweet Almonds, if there be Inflammation or Heat, Oil of Violets.
Some anoint the Fundament with these.

After anointing, sprinkle these pouders following.

The first: Take Myrtle-berries, or Bar-berries, or Grapes, or Raison-stones,
half an ounce, Galls, or Pomegranate peels, Cypress-nuts, or Acorn-cupps, each
two drams; red Roses, or Ponegranate flowers one dram and an half, Mastick, or
Frankincense one dram.

Another stronger: Take the Powder mentioned, half an ounce, Bole two drams,
Sanguis Draconis, Acacia, or Hipocistis, each one dram; Sumach one dram and an
half, red Coral burnt one dram.

The third is made of the troches of sealed Earth, or of Bole, or Amber, with
other Astringents.

Of these pouders is made an Ointment, with proper Oil and Wax.

Also an Emplaster with astringent Oil, Rosin, and Pitch, with Aloes, and
Varnish, each two drams.

Or this astringent Plaster. Take Bole six drams, Frankincense half an ounce,
ragons blood, Masticl, Mummy, each two drams; with white of an Eg, and Vinegar,
make a Plaster, and tie it under the Navel with a Clout.

This Cataplasm is excellent. Take green Quinces or dry as they are kept, or
Pears, or other Fruit that is astringent, pulped four ounces, the Crust of
Bread burnt and often sprinkled with Rose-vinegar at a time two ounces, boil
them in red Wine, Oil of Roses omphacine, beat them, and add Powder of Galls
six drams, Bole, Mastick, each half an ounce; or one ounce of the compound
Pouders mentioned.

Instead of these, apply Mullein, and the Roots, Shepheards-purse, Plantane,
Comfrey roots, red Roses boiled in Oil of Roses, and beaten up with the pouders
mentioned.

The Cawle of a Weather, or Goat, or Lamb, applied hot, as is said in the
Colic, does take away pains in Children. And it must be taken anointed with
Oil that is astringent, as of Quinces, or Myrtles: Or add pouders of simples
mentioned, or powder of Mullein. Cumminseed steeped in Vinegar, and parched,
and applied to the Belly, does the same.

Also the Emplaster of Mesue called Diaphaenicon.

Also a Rowler steep' din Vinegar, and bound about the Belly.

Also Cupping-glasses applied to the Navel, or Center of the Belly, or on both
sides, about the Groyns, are good to stay a great Flux.

Foment the Belly and Fundament with a Decoction of astringent Herbs, as of
Mullein with the Roots, Plantane, Solomons-seal, Oak leaves, Pears, Quinces,
Services, Cornil-tree, Myrtles, Bar-berries, red Roses, Pomegranate flowers,
Sumach, Fern roots, white Chamelion, Pomegranate peels, pine-nuts, Acorn-cupps,
Galls, Myrtles, Grape seeds made in red Wine, Vinegar, and steeled Water.

You may foment the Belly with the Oils mentioned, to anoint, adding a little
Vinegar, and Juice of proper Herbs.

Dioscorides advises that the Belly be anointed with the Broth of a
Sheath-fish, River-whayl. And to wash the Feet in the Decoction hot, before
mentioned, is good.

And it is as good, if they be washed with a Decoction of Steel, or Iron, in
strong Vinegar.

It Is also good to let the Vapor of these Fomentations be taken up into the
Fundament, or the Vapor of the decoction of Eels.

Also a Fume of those Rosins mentioned in Tenesmus, burnt upon Coals, or hot
Iron; or of the powder of Mullein; or dried Asses dung, or the Fume of strong
red Vinegar, after a red hot Iron is quenched therein, in which Vinegar you may
boil the aftringents.

The Suppositories mentioned in Tenesmus, as that of Suet, which allay pain,
are also good.

It is good after stools to cleanse the Fundament with Mullein, or Haresfoot
leaves, which are soft, and strengthen: And also with Marsh-mallow leaves.

As for Diet: Let the Meat be of good Juice proper for the Disease, as Milk,
Eggs, Papps, and the like; Or boiled in Iron-waters, or Rose Water, with the
Pouders and Juyces mentioned. Let the Drink be steeled Water, or Almond milk,
or red Wine mixed with steeled water. Let all salt, sharp, and sour things be
avoided.

Let the Patient be at rest, and not move from Bed, but void the Excrements
with a Bed-pan, or the like.

And if there be another Disease joined therewith of the Liver and Spleen: then
if the Choler come from the Liver, or there be a Flux of the Liver, which is
most to be feared, and is deadly; the Liver must chiefly be regarded, and
Epithems, and Cerots proper, must be applied, mentioned in the Flux of the
Liver.

And if there be pain and weakness of the Stomach, you must mix things proper
for it, with other astringents, as Mastick, Roses, Wormwood, as are mentioned
in the weakness of the Stomach.

Other bloody Fluxes are from the opening of the Meseraick veins, The Cure of
the bloody Flux without ulceration.
(besides the Dysentery and Liver-fllux) with an Inflammation thereupon: And are
like a Dysentery, only there is no Ulcer. Yet are they not so obstinate and
dangerous as a Dysentery, if the Inflammation be abated. And they sooner vanish
then a Dysentery, if they be well ordered. But if the Inflammation and Fever
increase, they die of Convulsions through pain, as in the Colic. Or if they
tend to Imposthumation, they are changed into a true Dysentery, which leaves a
filthy Ulcer from which matter is voided by stool. In the Cure of this Disease,
the cause which provoked it, if it persist, must be removed, with the same
Emptiers and Cleansers, as in a Dysentery, only they must be milder, in regard
of the Inflammation. And Coolers must be used as in a Dysentery, with
Inflammation, and the Colic. Then you must have regard to the Meseraicks, the
Inflammation being gone, and stop the Flux, with such astringents as are
mentioned in the Dysentery. And if the Inflammation tends to an Imposthume, and
so to an Ulcer, then use the things mentioned in Dysenteries for Exulceration.

If much clotted Blood that is black, The Cure of clotted blood voided by stool.
be voided from the opening of the vessels, by reason of strong purging, or the
like, or by vomiting, it is dangerous: And we have known some die suddenly
thereby. For the Cure thereof, you must use such things inward and outward: As
we mentioned in Vomiting of Blood.

A Tensmus is less dangerous then a Dysentery, The Cure of Tenesmus.
because the Cause is in the end of the Guts, which may be easily reached with
Medicines, only the difficulty is caused, and the cure prolonged, by the
pricking and provoking to stool, which will not let a Medicine be retained,
though it be gentle; and by the foulness of the Ulcer.

The end of curing is according to the diversity of the cause. For if it be the
first kind of a tenesmus with ulceration, and voiding of slimy matter with
blood, or if it come of it self, or follow a dysentery; in regard the ulcer is
in the strait Gut, it must be cured as a dysentery, with the like medicines.
But if only Irritation produce the other kind of tenesmus, in which the
Excrements are choleric and sharp, the remedies must be such as abate the
sharpness and heat, and then such as cleanse and heal. In the third kind of
tenesmus, where there is needing without Excretion, you must remove it with
respect to the cause, as if it come from hard Excrements, they must be
mollified, if from cold, the part must be warmed. If it come from a Stone in
the Bladder that passes the Gut, or from worms, or from the passage of the
Bladder: the cure was showed in those diseases. In other causes you must use
these remedies following.

Purges are seldom given, because the Humor that causes it, is in the
extremities of the Guts; except they be to take away the antecedent cause,
which may increase the disease. And then use such as are prescribed for a
dysentery, if there be an ulcer, such as purge and bind. If the cause be
otherwise, use other Evacuations, such as are gentle, least the belly be
provoked too much.

Things given at the mouth, can have but little operation open the Guts which
are so remote; yet if they be given in great quantities to lenifie and heal the
Ulcer, or often, their virtue will reach to the part. As Milk, or Barley water
drunk much and often. The Decoction of Bettony, and Sage, mentioned against the
tenesmus.

Clysters are chiefly given in this case, because they come near to the part
affected, and wash it; and that they may be long kept, they must be little in
quantity, and be given often with care that the pipe offend not.

Lenifying Clysters are good in all sorts of tenesmus, whether the part be
corroded, ulcerated, or provoked by straining and pain, to mitigate the pain,
and allay the sharpness. These were prescribed in Dysentery, of Milk,
Decoctions, and Oils, as you will have them cleanse or heal.

If there be a stinking Ulcer in tenesmus, or pricking from slime, you must use
cleansing Clysters: As in a disentery of Whey, Water, and Honey, Barley-water,
and the like.

Healing Clysters are only used in tenesmus from ulceration, made of things
mentioned in a Dysentery.

Turpentine unwashed or washed in Plantane water, or Nightshade water, put into
these Clysters, makes them cleanse and heal better.

Mollifying Clysters are used in a tenesmus, when the Excrements are hard. To
which you may add Laxatives, if there be a needing, and no voiding of stool. If
the Humor be cold, or caused by cold or wind, use things to heat and discuss
wind, and things gently warm do also assuage pain. When we will mollify and
loosen, we take the decoction of the five mollifying Herbs, Line-seeds
Foenugreek, with Oil and other Fats that loosen. If we will heat, and expel
wind, we use hot Herbs, as Organ, Calamints, both Penny-royals, Baulm, Hysop,
Sage, Marjoram, Bay leaves, Rue, Flowers of Chamomil, Melilot, Dill, Rosemary,
Stoechas, or French Lavender, Caraway, and Fennel seeds. Such Clysters are
mentioned in the Colic from Excrements, Wind, and Cold.

In every tenesmus you may use Suppositories to abate pain, and then such as
cure Corrosions and Ulcers, if they cause it: these must do good to the part
which they touch, if they can be retained, for the part is so sensible, that it
is provoked by the touch of any hard thing, therefore the Suppositories must be
gently made of these following.

Goats suet made like a Suppository, takes away pain and Excoriation.

And it is better, if you first melt down the Suet with Poppy, and Henbane
seeds, and then cast it into a mould like a Suppository, to take away pain. And
also if you put some drops of Oil of those Seeds, or half a scruple of Opium
dissolved in Oil of sweet Almonds.

And it will heal better, if you add Starch, or Gum traganth poudered or
infused in plantane-water.

Or thus, infuse a little Gum traganth in plantane water, let it not be too
thin, and mix it with Mucilage of Fleabane, or Quinces, and the yolk of a
roasted Egg, and while they are hot, with a little white Wax: make a
suppository, if it be too soft, dip Cotton, or Silk therein, and apply it. To
these you may add the Narcoticks mentioned.

To these pouders may be added to cure great Corrosion, but they must be very
sine, least they offend. As of Ceruss, Tutty prepared, Bole, Pomegranate
flowers, and other dryers that are not sharp.

If you will astringe more, add the Juice of Sloes, Dragons blood, with the
Infusion of Gum Traganth.

Rhasis makes a healing and anodine Suppository of Lycium, which is the Juice
of Brambles.

When the Excrements are hard, use mollifying Suppositories and Laxatives, with
hot things to expel wind: As we showed in Clysters for the Colic. Some are
made of Labdanum, and Storax, with hot Oils.

The Fumes and Vapors mentioned for a dysentery, are good here. Besides which,
make Fumes of strong dryers that smoke much, as of Pitch, Bitumen, Amber,
Colophony, Turpentine, Rosin, Sarcocol. Some add a little Brimstone, and steep
them first in Vinegar.

If you must heat more, use the Vapor of the Clyster there mentioned, or the
Fume of Savine, boiled in Wine, and Vinegar.

You may make a Fomentation to heal the Ulcer in Tenesmus of Plants mentioned
in the Dysentery, or a Bath.

A Fomentation of the Decoction of Myrrh, cures a tenesmus that follows a
dysentery.

If much Blood be voided. Take Mullein, with the Roots, two handfuls, red Roses
one pugil, Pomegranate peels, and Galls, each half an ounce; boil them in two
parts of Iron-water, and one of Wine. You may add half an ounce of Prmegranate
flowers, or of Pine barks.

It is stronger with half an ounce of Alum.

To heat, you may make Fomentations of Plants in the Clysters mentioned, for
the Fundament, and lower parts of the Belly: And they may sit in the same. To
which, if there be Corrosion, we add Plantane, and Mullein, or Mullein only
boiled in Wine, if the Haemorrhoids be open.

Or foment with warm Water, Oil, and Wine, or Oil of Chamomil, Dill, Rue, etc.

Use the Ointments mentioned for Ulcers in the disentery.

When there is great pain in Tenesmus, anoint with Oil of Roses, Violets,
Water Lillies, Mucilage of Fleabane, yolks of Eggs, or the like, mentioned in
the Haemorrhoids.

If you must heat, use Oil of Chamomil, Dill, Bays Rue, and the like.

You may make Cataplasms of the same Ingredients.

A warm Anodine bag is made of Milium, Bran, and Salt, fried with hot Herbs
dried.

In an Ulcer make it of astringents, as Coriander seeds, Myrtles, Acorn cupps,
Galls, and other Herbs, mentioned in the Fomentations for a Dysentery. And let
him sit upon the bag boiled in red wine.

A Brick that is black with Smoke, beaten, and steeped in wine, and put into a
cloth, is good to be applied to the Perinaeum and Fundament, when there is an
Ulcer.

Let the Patient sit upon hot Mugwort.

Also warm Clothes applied to the Fundament and Perinaeum, are good to abate
pain.

If a Diarrhaea be a Flux of silthy Excrements and Humors, The Cure of
Diarrhaea.
by Medicine or Nature, which takes away the plenty of them, it must not be
stopped, neither in those that are sound, because it preventeth Diseases; nor
in those that are sick, from plenty of humors, and evil Juice; nor in the
beginning of acute Diseases, for as Hippocrates shows if things which ought to
be purged, be purged, and the Patient endures it well, it is good. Nor in the
declension or Crisis of a Disease, which sometimes is cured thereby. But it is
to be stopped if it happen in sound and pure Bodies, especially if there be an
over purging. And in sick, when it is provoked, or comes of it self, when it
will not cease, and takes not away from the cause of the disease, but weakneth.
As in internal Inflammations, Pleurisy, Peripneumony, and in some acute and
malignant pestilential Fevers: and others that weakens, as in Hecticks,
Consumptions, Dropsies, with which it is deadly. In all which we must prevent
it, or stop it, foretelling the danger.

Observing first, if it be alone, without other diseases, with it, or after it,
whether it came from an over purging Medicine, or too much meat and drink that
is crude or corrupt, or from Choler, or sharp humors or water. Then we must
evacuate the cause, and abate the pricking. Then we fortify and bind the
Stomach and Guts, with hot, temperate, or cold things, as the cause requires,
as follows.

The Stomach and Guts are to be purged with gentle things, least the Belly that
is already moved, should be too much troubled. And if the tumor be water or
phlegm with pills for the Stomach: As these of Mastick, and Assaiereth, and
others in the Lientery.

Or give six drams of the Electuary of Hiera, or two drams of the Powder, with
one ounce of Syrup of Vinegar, to take off the bitterness, all dissolved in
Wine and Water, or Liquor convenient, or sweet Wine. But Pills of Hiera are
better taken.

There are other purges to be taken in wine, mentioned in Lientery and Weakness
of the Stomach.

If the Humor be choleric and sharp, use Remedies for the Dysentery there
mentioned.

As a Potion of Rhubarb parched or not, or the Infusion thereof, with Wormwood
wine, or Syrup, or that of Mints.

Also you may make a Potion of the Infusion of half an ounce of yellow or chebs
Myrobalans, or of two drams of Myrobalans, and one dram of Rhubarb.

Or give two scruples of the Pills of Rhubarb, made with one scruple of
Mastick, and half a scruple of Spike, with Juice of Roses. Or a bolus of the
same, with Conserve of Roses, or Quinces, or the Powder of Rhubarb, with
Cinnamon, and Sugar of Roses, and Myrobalans; if they make not the Medicine too
large.

If you must purge in a Diarrhaea, use the troches of Roses, burnt Ivory,
Barberries, the cold great Seeds, with Diagredium.

The Tryphera Saracenica Nicolai, is given in six drams, when there is plenty
of Humors, or so much Catholicon in potions of Myrobalans, and Rhubarb, it is
not safe to use stronger Remedies to purge in this Disease.

A Vomit sometimes is good to revel, and take away the cause, as in a Dysentery.
Also Sweating, especially when it comes from much water. And if strength will
suffer, use them often, moderate fasting, is also good to hinder the increase,
and to consume Humors, but in people of sharp, choleric Constitutions, it
hurts.

All Clysters are good that have astringent qualities, though they be presently
voided.

The fourth Clyster mentioned in a Dysentery, is good here, it is a strong
astringent, to the Decoction of which you may add also other astringents; as
Juice of Plantane, Bloodstone, or drying Earths. And if the humor be sharp, and
threaten Excoriation, you may give the third Clyster there mentioned, to
astringe and heal.

But before, use Cleansers, if the Humor be sharp and choleric, and fret the
Guts.

And you may mix other things, if there be other Humors; as Wormwood, Centaury,
and in a phlegmatic Cause, against pains and noise of wind, things to expel
wind, as Fennel, and Anise seeds, Chamomil, Melilot, and Dill flowers, or Oils
thereof.

If the Humors fret the Guts, use Lenitives, or when a violent purge hurts
them, they are mentioned in Dysentery: As that which begins thus. Take
Marsh-mallowroots one ounce, Barley, etc.

Medicines must be given in diverse forms, twice or thrice in a day, especially
that bind, or that cleanse and lenisie, least Nature being accustomed to one,
should be no way moved thereby.

Dioscorides commends diverse Decoctions in wine and water, as of Maidenhair,
golden Locks, Marshmallows, Brambles, Cinquefoyl, or five leaved grass, Piony.

Also wine of the Infusion of dried Sloes, and the like, Moss of a tree,
Wormwood, Snakeweed, Citron peels, and the like astringents.

Also Juice of Plantane, Solomons-seal, Horstayl, Gum Succory, Quinces, sour
Pomegranates.

Also Syrup of Quinces, Myrtles, red Roses dried, Barberries, Currance, with
the waters following in Juleps.

Waters of Plantane, Roses, Sorrel, Shepherds purse, Services, Sloes, Oak
leaves.

Or the Decoction mentioned in Dysentery. One begins thus: Take Tormentil roots
one ounce, Comfrey rorts etc.

Another thus: Take Roots of five leaved Grass, or Snakweed, etc. Of which you
may make Syrups.

Or make a Syrup of the Juyces to be kept. Take Juice of Quinces, three ounces,
of Bar-berries two ounces, Juice of Plantane, or the like, one ounce and an
half, red Wine, and Rose Water, each two ounces; Sugar four ounces: boil them
to a Syrup, and add a little red Sanders, it is better, if two drams of Juice
of Sloes, and in a choleric Cause a little Rose Water be added to make it
sharp.

The Syrup of Nicolas of the Decoction of Fruits, and the like, is good in all
Fuxes of the Belly.

Also this distilled Water. Take Yolks of Eggs boiled hard twenty, Nutmeggs
parched a little, two ounces, infuse them in red Wine. Let them stand a while,
and then distill them according to art: the dose is one or two ounces.

Let his Meat be boiled in steeled water, with Sumach, or other things that
bind, and are not unpleasant, as in a Dysentery.

Let his Broth be seasoned with Juice of Quinces, or the like.

Let his Meat be thick, and not thin.

A Turtle prepared, as in a Dysentery.

And fried Blood,

Steeled Milk of Cow, or Sheep, as in a Dysentery.

Yolks of hard Eggs, with Vinegar.

Take out the white of an Eg at a little hole, and fill it with Rose Water,
stop it well, and boil it till the water be consumed, and let him eat the Yolk,
or drink it in Broth.

Also the Husks of Milium, with a roasted Eg,

Or an Eg and Wax.

Or Cheese boiled in Milk or toasted, which is the Helvetian Medicine, and
commended by Dioscorides. Let the Bread be wheat, not new, nor moldy.

Or made of Starch, Bean flower, and Eggs, with Plantane seed. Or of Barley,
and Rice, with Yolks of Eggs, which well dried, will keep long, and may be
taken in Milk like pap,

Other Bread is made of Barley meal, with Juice of Elder-berries, dry baked,
give one spoonful, with red wine.

Rice boiled with steeled Milk, or Broth, with Gum Traganth, or Arabic.

Also Starch with Almond Milk, as in a Dysentery.

Also Pap of Oat-meal, Milium, and boiled Lentils, with Vinegar, and other
Astringents, and with Beets, as Dioscorides.

Medlars, Services, Cornil-berries, wild Pears, green or dry.

Boil Coleworts, Beets, with the Roots, plantane, Endive, Smallage, and with
Vinegar, eat them.

Let Meat be seasoned with parched Cloves, and Vinegar.

Let him drink Barley-water, or steeled water, with the pouders, in a Dysentery.

The chief Roots are Marshmallows, Tormentil, which is good against poison,
Horstayl poudered and drunk in wine; also Leaves of Harefoot, Dock seeds, and
of Sorrel, plantane, Watercresses parched with Mastick, and Gum Traganth.

Powder also of pease, Earth-nuts, Hyacinth, Brank ursine, water-plantane,
Tamarisk, Mullein, Rasberries, barks of Tamarisk.

Leaves of Burnet, Strawberries with the Roots, wintergreen, Mousear, golden
Rod, Lungwort, perwinkle, Alkanet, Lentils, Hart's-tongue, Housleek, Dates, Rue,
wild Basil, Dill, Anise, Fennel.

Flowers of wild Vine, Mullein, Indian Milium.

Stones of Myrobalans burnt, Nut shells, parched Nutmeggs, Cloves, Coriander
seeds, Husks of Milium, Dill, and pomegranate stones, Hares Runnet, Dogs dung,
and Hearts horn.

Bole, Earth of Armenia, Crystal, Pearl, Coral, Gum Arabic, Traganth.

Also troches of Ramich, and Mesue against Fluxes, of sealed Earth, Amber,
burnt Ivory, with Sorrel seeds, given as in a Dysentery, or in pills: Also
Diacoralium.

A powder with Rhubarb. Take Rhubarb parched one dram and an half, Bole,
Bloodstone, each one dram; burnt Stones of Myrobalans, Amber, each half a dram;
make a powder: or make pills of it, with Gum Traganth, infused in Rose, or
Plantane-water: Give a dram.

Add Cordial pouders, if strength fail, as Diamargariton frigid de Gemmis,
Trionsantalon, Diarrhodon.

Or thus: Take roasted Chestnuts, or A corns half an ounce, the Rines of yellow
and chebs Myrobalans parched two drams, Coriander, and Water-cress seeds
steeped in Vinegar and torrified, each one dram and an half; Myrtle seeds,
Sumach, Medlars, sour Pomegranates, Bar-berries, Roses, Plantane, and Dock
seeds, each one dram and an half; Cummin seeds steeped in Vinegar,
Frankincense, or Mastick, each half a dram; red Coral two drams, Bole,
Bloodstone, each one dram, burnt Hearts horn half a dram, Pearls, or precious
Stones one scruple, Acacia, or Juice of ^loes one dram: make a powder. Give one
dram by it self, or with Sugar, or make an Electuary thereof.

Diacydonites, in a cold cause with the species, in a hot cause without, is
given by it self, or with other things, as an Electuary, or powder, with Sugar
of Roses, from one dram and an half, to two drams.

Old Conserve of Roses, Galangal, Comfrey, and other cordial Conserves, or
Marmalade of Quinces, Citrons, Myrobalans candied, are given alone, or with the
powder of troches for that purpose.

Micleta, or the Electuary of Nicolas, is given in a Diarrhaea, and other
Fluxes, as in a Dysentery, where the way to make it, is declared.

The Electuary also of Mesue, of Myrobalans, Myrtle-berries, Anise, Cummin, and
Smallage seeds, with syrup of Quinces.

I think it fit not to let pass unmentioned, the Electuary of smaragds, which
is excellent in the Falling Sickness, and in Dysenteries, and Diarrhae's, and
to stop all Fluxes, it is thus made.

Take Smaradgs well prepared one dram and an half, Piony seeds husked, and the
Extract of the Roots of Piony, each two dram; red Coral prepared three drams,
Salt of Coral one dram, Wood-Aloes well poudered, two drams and an half, the
Extract of Saffron eight grains, of the best Cinnamon, Sorrel seeds, Citrons,
Purslane, Dock seeds, Misleto of the Oak, Cucheneil, or grains of Kermes, each
two drams; Pearls prepared four scruples, Salt of the same one dram, Hearts
horn, Philosophlcally prepared four scruples: mix them prepared exactly with
syrup of the Juice of Citrons, or Quinces three ounces, and let them ferment in
the sun, or by the fire, and keep it close stopped for use.

Narcoticks, as in Colicks, so in Diarrhaea's mitigate pain, and stupefie the
expulsive Faculty, which stays the Flux. And they must be used as in a
Dysentery, with astringents proper.

Outward Applications do better in a Diarrhaea then a Dysentery. And Clysters
do better in a dysentery, by reason of the Ulcer internal; which the stomach is
afflicted with cold, things to be mentioned in Lientery, are good: but in a hot
Diarrhaea, things to be mentioned in a Dysentery, are good.

The same Oils are to be used here, as in dysentery. And if the stomach be
afflicted, use the things mentioned in a Lientery.

Or anoint the stomach and belly with this. Take Oil of Myrtles, Quinces, Roses
omphacine, each one ounce and an half; Oil of Mastick one ounce, Wormwood, and
Nard Oil, each half an ounce; Juice of Plantane, and Shepherds purse each one
ounce and an half; Vinegar of Roses one ounce: boil them till the Juyces are
consumed, with Wax, make an Ointment. And either mix therewith, or sprinkle
upon it after anointing some of the pouders mentioned for a Dysentery. To which
you may add Nutmeg two drams, Sanders one dram, Galangal, or Cypress, Coriander
seeds, Storax, each half a dram; Dioscorides mixeth Wine Lies therewith.

Fomentations and Baths are made of tormentil, snakeweed, five leaved Grass,
Calcatrippa, or prickle Herb, Fern, Mullein, Plantane, Horstayl, shepherds
purse, Knotgrass, Bramble leaves, Barberries, sumach, Mastick tree, with
Wormwood, and Mints for the stomach, Cypressnuts, pomegranate peels, Myrtle
berries, Watercresses, Roses, pomegranate flowers, sponge boiled in red wine,
or steeled water, with a little Vinegar, and Alum added.

You may make a bag of some of the same, or two to be changed, and applied to
the belly, after boiling.

Use the Vapors and Fumes for a Dysentery mentioned.

Make a Cataplasm of the remainder of the Fomentation, with the Oils mentioned,
Goats suet, Bran, starch, or Bread, with pouders mentioned.

Or of the Juice of the Herbs mentioned; or of astringent Fruits, pears, sour
Apples, sloes, Quinces, services, Medlars, Cornil-berries, Barberries, with
Bran, or Bread, Oils, and the pouders aforesaid.

The Emplasters and Cataplasms mentioned in a Dysentery, are good in a hot
Diarrhaea, and those for a Lientery in a Cold.

Or this: Take of the astringent Fruits mentioned, well dried, four ounces,
Barley meal two ounces, fried in Vinegar, Roots of Snakeweed half an ounce,
Hyrstayl, Wormwood, Mints, Pomegranate peels, Galls, Myrobalans, Cypress-nuts,
each two drams, Myrtle berries, Grape stones, Coriander prepared, Cummin,
Water-cress seeds torrified after they are steeped in Vinegar, each one dram;
Frankincense half an ounce, Mummy, Acacia, Dragons blood, each one dram and an
half; Bole, Bloodstone, each one dram; Nutmeg two drams, red Sanders, Cloves,
each one dram; Spikenard half a dram, old Cheese, and Glue of Fishes, powder
them, and mix them with red Wine, and Juice of Herbs proper. And let them be
fried and beaten with Oil of Mastick, Roses omphacine, each two ounces and an
half: make a Cataplasm, or with Wax, and Pitch, Colophony, and Rosin, a
Plaster.

The usual Plasters are of Gallia moschata of Mesue, Mastick, Diaphaenicon,
that against Ruptures, Ceratum santalinum, with strong astringents.

Also the Cawle of a Weather, with Oil of Roses omphacine, or others, may be
sprinkled with the pouders.

And a Cupping-glass applied to the Navel.

Also wild tansey applied to the Feet.

Let the Fundament be wiped with Mullein leaves.

It is excellent to heat the Feet, either actually or potentially, to stop
Fluxes, especially when a diarrhaea comes from cold of the Feet, or other
parts. Or when Phlegm or water washes and cools the Guts; or when cold is
taken by sitting upon a cold stone, then the part must be warmed.

If another disease be with a diarrhaea, which is not mixed with it, or the
cause thereof, then cure it distinctly, and look first to that which is worse.
But if it be the cause of a diarrhaea, then take that away first: and then if
it yield not after the cause is removed, proceed thus.

If a Catarrh or Defluxion meet with a diarrhaea, you must use medicines for
both, The Cure of a Diarhaea, meeting with a Defluxion.
especially when a salt or sharp water flows from the brain to the stomach,
then first look to the defluxion, and after to the diarrhaea. As for the
defluxion, it is not good to purge with strong medicines, but with particular
Evacuations by the Nose and Mouth, and diversions, as washing of the Feet hot,
which is good for both, if the decoction be made of Head medicines and
astringents. Also by Frictions, and Cupping galasses. Then strengthen the Head
with Pouders, Capps, Emplasters, and Fumes: Of which there are diverse Forms in
defluxions, mentioned in Cephalaea, sleeping Apoplexy, and Palsy.

But for the diarrhaea, you must purge the stomach from phlegm, gently, and then
strengthen it, and apply astringents: as we showed in a phlegmatic Diarrhaea
and the Lientery. Making choice of things for the Head: as many astringents
are, Nutmegs, Galangal, Cypres.

If a Diarrhaea follows an intermitting Fever, The Cure of Diarrhaea coming
after other Diseases.
and Choler be voided from thence, you must purge as in a chollerick
Diarrhaea, and stop the Flux as a disentery always regarding the Fever. And
this is to be observed in continual Fevers when nature discharges choler, in
which you must not stop except it cause much weakness: If it comes otherwise by
weakening, it signifies no good: yet we must stop and strengthen. And the same
must be done in Pestilential Fevers, in which if the Flux take naught of the
cause away, it is dangerous.

If it come in diseases of the Liver or Spleen, you must observe the same rule.
A flux of the belly after a Consumption or Phthysick, Atrophy, Hectic or
Dropsy is usually deadly: yet it must be resisted, always having regard to
the disease that accompnieth it.

Lientery is a Flux wherein the meat is not changed, The Cure of a Lientery.
but is voided, as eaten. If it come from the fault of things eaten, it is
cured more easily. If from the Stomach, it shows much weakness, in regard the
meat is no ways concocted, the Cure is harder, and in old men impossible. As
also that which is joined to great diseases.

The method of Cure is in respect of the Cause: If the distemper be cold and
moist or simple weakness, or joined with Water, it is to be cured as the
weakness of the stomach: always choosing in this case things that astringe and
evacuate Phlegm, and change the temper and strengthen the Stomach.

The Humor is to be voided by Vomits, if it cleave to the stomach: By which
means the Flux of the Belly is diverted, with Oxymel simple or of Squils.

Also we purge the same humors with things proper for the stomach, and that
strengthen it: as gentle Pills, of Hiera, alephanginae, Assajereth and stomach
pills; or stronger, as of Mastick, or Agrick, such also as are mentioned in
weakness of the stomach, good to purge and strengthen the stomach; beginning
thus: Take Aloes prepared with juice of Wormwood half an ounce etc. Or thus
Take Aloes the best prepared half an ounce, Rhubarb etc. Or use the Physical
Wine mentioned for the Cure of a loose weak phlegmatic stomach: that begins
thus: Take Rhubarb two drams, yellow Myrobalans etc. and others there that
purge and strengthen the stomach.

Clysters are not here necessary, because the stomach is here worst which must
be more regarded then the stools: except there be an immoderate dejection, as
in other Diarrhaeas: And then things that stop other Fluxes may be used:
Choosing those that respect the stomach, oe mixing such with the Decoction, as
Cypress roots and Nuts, Wormwood, Sage, Roses, French Lavender, Rosemary and
the like.

We strengthen the stomach with diverse things mentioned in the weakness
thereof, choosing those that are most astringent for a loose and moist stomach:
as Nutmegs and Cloves which must be torrefied a little: Or swallowing two or
three grains of Mastich.

Old, Red, astringent Wine is good; by it self or after other strengtheners: in
a small quantity. Or that physical wine that begins thus; Take roots of
Masterwort, Galangal. etc.

Or this: Take roots of Tormentil or Snake weed one ounce Citron peels six
drams, Nutmegs and Cloves, of each three drams; Coriander seeds two drams,
Mastick one dram and an half: beat them for wine

Some commend the wine of the infusion of Tree Moss.

The stomach powders mentioned in weakness of the stomach are good, the usual
are Aromaticum Rosatum of Gabriel and Mesue, Rosata Novella, Diagalanga.

And those after meat to be given, as that which begins: Take Cinnamon half an
ounce, sweet Cassia two drams, Galangal, etc.

And those made into Lozenges which begin thus: Take of the eighth Powder, and
of Aromaticum Rosatum one dram, etc.

Or this: Take parched Nutmegs two drams, Cloves parched and Coriander seeds
prepared, each one dram; Coral two scruples, give it with Wine or with Sugar of
Roses or pulp of Quinces: Make an Electuary.

Or add to this powder, Pomegranat seeds and Sorrel seeds one dram, Dock seeds,
Raysons stones, each half a dram; and other stomachical astringents, as Acacia,
Box-thorne, and torrefied Myrobalanes.

Other strengtheners and astringents for a loose moist cold stomach, are of
Candies as of Acorus, Citron peels, Quinces, Nutmegs, Cloves.

Electuaries, are Diacydonites with the species, of wild Acorus, with the
species: Or our Composition which consists of Marmalad of Quinces one ounce and
an half, candied Citron peelsone ounce, etc. and the two mixtures there
mentioned.

Conserve of Rosemary flowers has been often given with good success: with
some drops of spirit of Vitriol.

After phlegm is purged, apply outwardly to strengthen and bind the stomach,
things mentioned in the weakness thereof, especially astringents which are good
both to the stomach and belly. And some things mentioned in Diarrhaea, if the
looseness be very great.

Oils mentioned in weakness of the stomach, strengthen and bind.

And the two Ointments there mentioned, which begin thus: Take Oil of Mastick
and Spike, each one ounce; etc. Thus, Take Oil of Myrtles etc.

Also Galens Cerot for the stomach or that which begins thus: Take roots of
Birthwort, Galangal, each half an ounce, etc. Or thus, Take Mastick one ounce
and an half, Frankincense, etc.

Also Emplaisters, as that of Mastick, which begins thus: Take Mastick two
ounces, Frankincense one ounce, Storax etc. Or that Diaphoenicon of Mesue, or
of Montagnanus made of a crust of bread, all there mentioned.

Also the Cataplasm there of Juyces, which begins thus. Take Mastick half an
ounce, Frankincense, Labdanum, etc. with the Pulp of Quinces apply it.

Or this: Take Pulpe of Quinces, or Pears (as in the cataplasm for the
dysentery) three ounces, Rie-bread Crumbs eight ounces: boil them in strong
Wine, and toward the conclusion, add Powder of Citron peels two ounces,
Pomegranate peels one ounce, Nutmeg half an ounce, Roots of Galangal, or
Cypress two drams, Cloves one dram, Spike half a dram, Wormwood dried, Mints,
each two drams, Labdanum three drams, Mastick half an ounce, beat them well
together, and with Oil of Myrtles, Roses omphacine, each one ounce and an half;
Oil of Spike one ounce: make a Cataplasm.

Also Fomentations, as that for a weak stomach, which begin thus: Take
Galangal, Masterwort roots, etc. Or that for a flagging loose stomach, which
begins thus. Take Citron peels half an ounce, Pomegranate peels two drams, etc.

Also that astringent bag, which begins thus. Take Mastick half an ounce,
Frankincense two drams, etc.

Cupping-glasses to the stomach, (as we showed in Vomiting) keep the meat
longer in the stomach.

Some use a Dropax or stinking Plaster, and Sinapisms, or those of mustard.

If a Lientery come from other causes as from choler, The Cure of a Lientery
from a sharp Humor, or Choler, or meat eaten.
or a sharp Humor which forces the stomach to send out the Nourishment; then
the first care must be to evacuate that, and allay its sharpness; and to stop
the Flux and Vomiting, as in a Dysentery, and the Disease of Choler.

If a Lientery come from meats eaten, let those be afterward forborne, and a
good diet be kept, as in the weakness of the stomach. Let not the Food be
moist, but thick and clammy, that will stay, and also will easily concoct: as
lean and moist flesh, green Cheese, Rice, Papps, not made of milk. Applying the
mean while outward astringents, and a Cupping-glass.

If a Lientery proceed from an Ulcer of the Stomach, The Cure of a Lientery
from an ulcer or scar.
that must first be regarded: as we showed in the Pain of the Heart, from the
Ulcer of the Stomach, and the Flux as in a Diarrhaea.

If it come from a scar, it is scarce curable, because it cannot be taken away,
except it depart of it self.

A Liver-flux, if it follow a Dysentery, and the strength be spent, The Cure of
the Liver-flux.
and the Liver naught, is deadly. There is another which weakneth, by reason of
the great Evacuation of water; as we showed in Diabetes and dropsy. And the
Liver has then a preternatural Heat, and is weak: For the Cure of which, the
temper must be altered, and the Liver strengthened, and the Flux stopped, as in
a Dysentery. Therefore it is good to take heed of too great openers that are
hot, and of opening the Veins, except with temperate things that carry the whey
to the Ureters: Thus,

Opening of a Vein is not needful, for the bleeding is so little in this
Disease, that it requires not so large an Evacuation, which will weaken.

Rhubarb is called the Soul of the Liver, and is good here as in a Dysentery,
where there is any thing to be purged. The powder is given to two drams, with
half a scruple of Spike, or half a dram of Cinnamon, with Myrobalans, or others
mentioned in a Dysentery. Or make pills of Rhubarb and Mastick, as in the
Diarrhaea: Take heed here of Aloes, for it opens the mouths of the Veins.

Clysters are not good but of milk, if there be pain or other accident, use a
cleanser, or a healer, or an astringent Clyster, as in a Dysentery.

Or use these Potions to stop the Flux, and to correct the distemper of the
Liver.

Take Syrup of Quinces, and of dried Roses, of Myrtles, each one ounce; of
Succory alone, or with Rhubarb, and of Endive, each half an ounce: mix them.

Or make a Julep thereof, with water of plantane, of Oak leaves, Endive,
Liverwort.

Also Syrup of Liverwort, boiled with Sugar, is good.

A proper Decoction. Take Asparagus roots, Sorrel, Plantane, Fennel, each one
ounce; Liverwort one handful, Endive, Agrimony, each one handful and an half;
Raisons, with the Stones, three ounces: boil them in Broth or Water. It is
better with half a dram of the Powder of a Wolfes Liver, given at every draught.

We allow Milk sometimes, because it stops the mouths of the Vessels, especially
to them that have used it, and love it. It must have Steel quenched therein,
and Sheeps milk is best, if the Whey be taken out by the quenching.

Also Almond milk, and Rice milk, and Barley cream, are good.

Raisons, and Currance are good for the Liver, especially if unstoned or
bruised.

You may make a thick Juice of Raisons by boiling them in red wine, and
straining them, and then boiling them again to a Rob or Quiddeny. This may be
given alone, or with pouders.

Pouders are given alone, with Wine, Broth, Milk, or with Rob of Raisons,
Quinces, or with Syrups, like Electuaries, or with Sugar of Roses, or
Conserves, as of Succory, etc.

The first powder. Take Coriander, and Dock seeds, each one dram; Endive,
Purslane seeds, each half a dram; of red Roses one scruple, Sanders half a
dram, red Coral two scruples.

The second: Take Sorrel seeds one dram, Seeds of Hatchet Herb, or Dodder, or
Watercresses, each half a dram; burnt Ivory two scruples, the inward Skins of
Hens Gizards one scruple.

You may add to these one dram of the Powder of Wolfes Liver, or to strengthen,
Diamargariton frigidum.

The third Powder: Take Rhubarb, Wolfes Liver prepared, each one dram; Bark of
Frankincense-tree half a dram, Cinnamon one scruple, Spike half a scruple.

The usual Powder for the Liver and the Flux thereof, is Dlatrionsantalon, by
reason of the Sanders, and the Rhubarb, which is sometimes doubled in quantity.
And by reason of the Gumms, it stops the Veins, and of coolers, it allayes the
Heat. It may be given in Lozenges or Powder. Diarrhodon Abbatis does the same,
being of the same Ingredients, and more. When the Heat is not great and the
Stomach weak, you may use Aromaticum Rosatum.

Narcoticks are rather given against watching then pain, because the Flux is
most at night. Among which Philonium Perficum is good to astringe.

Outwardly use things mentioned for the Dysentery to the Belly, because the
Veins must be stopped, and the Flux stopped, always adding things proper for
the Liver, which lies under the right side of the Ribbs, and the Ointment
uses to reach to it. You may use the Ointments, Pouders, Cataplasms, and
Plasters there mentioned, adding for the Liver Wormwood, Agrimony, Sanders,
Spike, Schaenanth, Asarum roots, burnt Ivory, Storax, etc.

You must apply to the Liver if it be hot, things that temper and strengthen,
as in the beginning of an Inflammation, as that of Oil of Roses, Myrtles, with
Juice of Endive, or Succory. Also the Unguent of Roses, and Cerot of Sanders,
with Wolfes Grease, which is highly commended outwardly and inwardly. And the
Epithem there mentioned, which repelleth, which is of Rose Water etc with burnt
Ivory.

You may apply some Coolers mentioned for the Liver to the Reins, which suffer
and consent therewith.

Also to bath the Feet, and use externals mentioned in the Dysentery, it is
good.

Coeliack passion, The Cure of the Coeliack passion.
or the Flux of the Belly, when the Chyle is voided pure, is an usual Disease
in Children, and not dangerous, except joined with other Diseases, or a
Diarrhaea. In this case when it comes from the Obstruction of the Meseraicks,
with weakness of the Liver, and the Veins adjoining, which cannot suck: You
must first open Obstructions, with things proper for the Liver, that disturb
not the Belly; abstaining from astringents, because the Flux is not immoderate:
Nor must they be used except after Obstruction is opened, there follow another
Diarrhaea or Flux. The remedies are these following, besides those mentioned in
Obstruction of the Liver.

These gentle Pills are good to take away Phlegm, Slime, and Filth, which stops
the Veins. Take Rhubarb one dram and an half, Agarick one dram, Cinnamon half a
dram, Spike, Schaenanth, each one scruple: make a Powder. Or with Water, Juice,
or Syrup of Endive, or white Wine, Pills, let two scruples be the dose.

Or, Take that powder, and sprinkle it with white Wine for a night, and with
Fennel, Smallage, and Succory-water strain it, and add Syrup of Roses laxative
of Endive, Maidenhair, each half an ounce: make a Potion for once.

Then give these following, the Lozenges of Diarrhodon, Diatrionsantalon: Or if
you will open more, of Diacurcuma, all which have Rhubarb.

Or give this Electuary. Take Conserve of the Flowers and Candyed, Roots of
Succory, each one ounce; of Maidenhair six drams, Conserve of Smallage, or
Fennel, one ounce and an half, Conserve of Eryngus roots half an ounce, Powder
of Diarrhodon, or Trionsantalon one dram, Diacurcuma half a dram, with Syrup
Bizantine, make an Electuary.

Corcus Martis made with Juice of Citrons, or distilled Vinegar, is good to be
put into Electuaries.

Let distilled Waters be drunk presently after the taking of Lozenges or
Electuaries, of Fennel, Smallage, Succory, Endive, with the third part of white
Wine.

The Syrup Bizantine, of the five Roots, or of two roots, of Succory, Endive,
or Maidenhair, may be given alone, or with distilled Waters.

Or this Decoction. Take Roots of Succory, Fennel, Smallage, each one ounce;
Eryngus, wild Parsnips, each half an ounce; steep them in white Wine, of
Maidenhair, Sowthistle, Endive, each one handful; red Pease one pugil,
Coriander, and Smallage seeds, each one dram; boil them, and add to the
straining Sugar, and one dram of Cinnamon, Sanders, and Schaenanth, each one
scruple. Let it be for three draughts.

A Wine of the Infusion of those Roots is better, adding Monks Rhubarb, Madder,
each one ounce; Cypressroots half an ounce, Wormwood, and Agrimony, each two
drams.

The Belly must be anointed, not with astringents, but things that open
Obstructions, which will pierce to the Mesentery, and the Veins of the Omentum.
Therefore, Make this Ointment. Take Oil of bitter Almonds one ounce and an
half, Spike, Chamomil, or of Melilot, each one ounce; Juice of Smallage, or
Fennel, and white Wine, each one ounce and an half; Let them be boiled or mixed
for a Liniment, used with the hand first dipped in Aqua vitae.

Or, Take the aforesaid Liniment, and with Asarum roots, and Gentian, each one
dram; Spike, and Schaenanth, each half a dram, Smallage seed one scruple, and
Wax make an Ointment.

Apply things mentioned in the Weakness of the Liver, to the region thereof.

A Cupping-galss applied there, is thought to draw the Chyle thither.

If a Diarrhaea follow, then you may use gentle astringents inward and outward,
as in a Lientery, but not otherwise.

If it come from the Dysentery, or coick, The Cure of mattery Stools.
the Cure is there mentioned: or from the Liver or Spleen.

If this Voiding of Matter be of long continuance, and come from an Imposthume
of the Mesentery turned to an Ulcer, the Patient is of ill Habit of Body, and
discolored. And the Cure is difficult, because the Ulcer is without the Guts:
and the Matter may easily fall into the cavity of the Belly. But the same
things must be used as in a Dysentery and Tenesmus, with Matter.

It is cured as a Lientery, if it come from eating of fat Meats that are not
concocted: The Cure of fat and oily stools.
Or as a Diarrhaea, when fat is mixed with other Excrements.

The Excrements are voided otherwise then by the Fundament. The Cure of the
Voiding of Excrements at the mouth.
And if by vomiting, it is dangerous, and few escape: As was showed in the
Iliack Passion and the Rupture. And then you must look to the cause of the
Disease, as was showed; and wash the Mouth with wine-vinegar, and sweet things,
by reason of the abominable stink, and strength Stomach, but you must not
stop, least the filth be retained.

If Dung come forth with Urin, you must regard wholly the Ulcer fistulated, The
Cure of the excrements voided by Vrin.
which passes through the strait Gut to the Neck of the Bladder: As was showed
in Pissing of Matter.

You must cure the hollow Ulcer in the neck of the womb, The Cure of
Excrecrements of the belly voided as the womb.
which pierces the strait Gut: As we showed in the Ulcer of the womb.

If Dung or Chyle passes through a wound of the Belly that has pierced the
Guts, The Cure of Excrements voided by wounds and and Fistula's.
the wound must be cured. And if it be deadly, as usually it is when great, or
if the Excrements fall with Blood into the hollow of the Belly, then it ends
with death. But if the wound be turned into a fistulated Ulcer, then the
Excretion is permanent and incurable. But if this wound not only in the skin
and flesh, but in the Guts, grow together by a Callus, as we have seen, or by
the flesh that grows near to it: As we showed in Wounds of the Bladder. This
filthy Excretion may be cured, and the Patient may live.

And in these desparate wounds, if they be large, so that you may see the Guts
that are wounded, or if you enlarge them, you may put in a silver Pipe or
rather of Lead, and bind the Gut strongly thereupon, which has saved many from
their Graves.

CHAP. XII. Of filthy Excretions.
The Kinds,
When other Excrements besides those mentioned, come from the Body, they are
preternatural; as from the parts following.

There is always Filth in the Ears, Filth from the Ears.
and it comes not forth but by being taken out, it is commonly like wax yellow
and thick, sometimes hard, and discolored other ways. This causes Itching
when there is much, and hinders Hearing, as we showed in the Hurt of Hearing.

There is sometimes Filth in the Nostrils that is thick, moist, or dry, white,
yellow, Filth from the Nose.
or black, sticking so, that it cannot be taken off without hurt, or filling
the Nose, of an ugly aspect when it is forth: And esepecially when Children, or
other nasty people swallow it.

Besides Matter and Tears, there is thick, Filth from the Eyes.
white, or yellowish Filth in the Eyes, in bleareyed people, and others, as I
showed in the Diseases of the Eyes.

Filth sticks in the Corners of the Mouth which are called in Latin Bridles,
Filth in the corners of the Mouth.
and ulcerateth it, it continues long.

Sometimes in sluttish women there is Filth in the Privities besides other
Fluxes, Filth in the Womb.
and also in the Glans of Men's yards, that is covered with the Foreskin, which
causes a stink.

Filth sticks in many places to the Skin, Filth from the Skin.
thin, and thick, which makes a stink like that of a Goat, called in high Dutch
Brietelen; as if by long continuance in a place, like a Hen hatching of Eggs,
they had contracted it.

They who have sweating Feet have filth and stink, this is usual, Filth between
the Toes.
especially in Summer, which is offensive to their Companions: And between the
Toes there is thick, black Filth, that stinketh. As also under the Arms and in
other hairy places, where it easily sticks.

The Teeth are often foul all over, Filth of the Teeth.
or at the Roots: And the Filth is either soft like Pap, or yellow; sometimes
hard and like Gravel: And sometimes they are black, as with Soote.

The Causes.
The Color and Bitterness shows Choler is the cause of filth in the Ears
that Choler is the cause of the Filth of the Ears. This Choler comes with
water or whey into the cavity of the Ear, and the water sweats out, and the
Choler grows thick. And it appears that it comes not from the inward passage of
the Ear, because it hurts not the drum nor the hearing, but by stopping the Ear
outwardly.

The watery Humor which moistneth the Eyes and Ears, Water is the cause of
filth in the Ears, Eyes, Nostrils, and Privities.
being made thick by continuance, causes the filth in the corners of the Eyes
and the yellow filth in the ears. And from Moisture especially, if they have
the Whites, women's Privities smell strong. And the filth between the Glans and
Praepuce in men which stinketh, and causes Itching, is from corruption of
Seed, or a slimy Humor.

And the same Humor dried in the Nostrils by hot air, causes the filth there,
which sticks so close, especially in the night, if the Head lie back, so that
the moisture cannot come to the Nostrils.

From usual Vapors and Sweats which come from the Body, Sweat causes the filth
in the Feet and Skin.
that smell strong like a Goat, in slovenly people, the skin grows foul and
stinketh. And Nature throws them to the extreme parts, whereby men that sweat,
have stinking Feet, especially in Summer. And when filth is long kept in strait
places, or hairy, as in the Arm-holes, Groyns, Privities, and between the
Fingers and Toes, it sends a noisome Scent.

Those fluffs that foul the Teeth, being thick and clammy, Meat is the cause of
foul Teeth and Corners of the mouth.
come from Meat that is slimy, and sticks thereto by chewing, except they be
rubbed and washed. And also those in the Mouth that cause Ulcers, if they be
not cleansed, come from the same.

Spittle being slimy, fouls the Teeth, Spittle is the cause of foul Teeth
especially when the meat eaten makes it more tough, or hot breath when the
mouth shut, dries it. And when the teeth are idle, and chew not any hard
thing, as bread which uses to cleanse them, they are foul. Hence it is that
they which chew with one side of the mouth only, have the other side filthy;
and that Filth grows hard like gravel, discoloureth, and makes the teeth
uneven. And this may come from serous earthy matter in the Spittle growing to
the Teeth: As we showed other Stones may grow, especially where the Teeth are
rough, and about the Gumms, and where they are worn. This Filth will grow hard
and over the teeth, if they be not cleansed. Also in the French Pox the Spittle
defiled with Quicksilver which blacks the teeth, and makes them loose.

From a hot Breath in hot Diseases, Vapors are the cause of foul Teeth.
or malignant Vapors in the Plague, the Teeth and Jaws may be likewise
affected.

The Cure.
We showed in the Hurt of Hearing how the Ears are to be cleansed. The cure of
Filth in the Ears.


The Eyes must be cleansed as in Epiphora and Tears. And in the eyes.


The Filth in the Nostrils may be taken out with the Finger, In the Nose.
if not, let Milk or other Liquor be snuffed up first.

Filth must be wiped from the Mouth which the Spittle and Meat causes: In the
corners of the mouth.
Or if there be an Ulcer it must be cured as the Ulcers of the Mouth.

It is taken of with water, In the Skin.
especially if warm. And if it is much by bathing. And if it be too slimy, and
tough, greasy, and stinking, it must be washed of with cleansers and oily
things. As with Lie of Ashes, with Lime sometimes, if we will have it stronger,
which has also a fat Slime besides its cleansing virtue: Soap is of the same
force, being made of ashes, Lime and Suet boiled hard, adding a sweet scent, as
Orris roots. Oil is used for Suet, and then the Soap is softer and blacker. Rub
these Soaps in the hand till it makes sudds, and it will take off any Filth:
wash the Hands in your own Piss, and it will cleanse almost as well as Lie.
Other things to make clean white and soft hands are mentioned in Cosmeticks or
Paints and Washes.

The stink of the Feet from Filth and Sweat is hardly cured, The Cure of the
Filth of the Feet.
because sweat returns; it often continues long, and is nauseous to company,
and therefore requires Cure. And it must be done as follows; as also the
stink of the Arm-holes. First purge away the matter which occasioneth the
sweat, as the humor is.

Then provoke Sweating that the abundance of Humors may be thrown to the
Superficies, often, till it cease.

Then wash the Feet or Arm-holes, with Cleansers and Dryers, mixing always
sweet Scents.

A Lie of Ashes is good for this, especially of drying Wood, and burnt Bones,
with Bole, Tartar, Salt, Alum, Vitriol, if you will dry more.

All, or some of these may be boiled in Smiths-water, or water of other
Minerals.

A Decoction of Vitriol alone in water, is good.

In all these for scent sake, boil sweet Herbs, as Sage, Lavender, Spike,
Myrtle leaves, Wormwood, and mix Wine therewith, and other astringent Herbs, to
dry strongly.

Dioscorides commends Applications of Myrrh, and Alum, Carduus roots, and
Daffodil roots.

If it be very strong, and hard to be removed, use drying Baths, etc.

We showed in the Cure of Whites, how the Privities should be cleansed from
filth which is so stinking and offensive to the Husband.

All kinds of Filth of the Teeth, white, The Cure of foul Teeth.
or yellow, or black, or gravely, hard are taken away with the following
Remedies.

First by pricking them after meat, and by washing the mouth.

Tooth-pickers must not be made of Iron, least the teeth be hurt, nor must you
pick them with the point of a knife which is an evil custom, but of wood, or a
strong bone that will bend, as of some Fish, or the tendons of Cocks Legs, or
claws of great Birds.

Some are made of Wood that six the Teeth, and give a scent, as of Mastick
tree, Myrtle, Bay, Juniper, Fennel stalks, laid in Musk.

A good Tooth-picker is made of a Marsh-mallow root, when we fear that hard
will wear the Gumms, you must first dry the Root in a Oven, and then cut into
Toothpickers.

The Mouth is to be washed also with water. And the Teeth must be wiped, or
rubbed with the finger, or a cloth or with a piece of Scarlet. Or the outward
bark of a Nut-tree, or with inward green, or the like cleansers.

This is better done with Dentifrices or things to rub Teeth, made of Pouders,
to be taken wet with the finger or cloth. Or to be made into things like
Suppositories, with Gum Traganth infused in Rose Water: Or with honey like a
Pap. These must not be used constantly, least the teeth be worn away thereby.

These Pouders do actually cleanse as Sand and the like, does cleanse Vessels,
or potentially, by a drying and cleansing quality. And they must be beaten very
fine, least they make the teeth rough, or wear them.

As Powder of Cuttle-bone which is easily beaten, Crabs Eyes, Pumex, and Sponge
stone, and that of the Froath of the Sea called Halcyonius.

Some must be burnt as the Pumex, instead were of finders well burnt may be
used.

This burning makes them cleanse more; Hearts horn is of most use, Ivory, and
diverse Teeth, as of Horses, all kinds of shells, of the Sea, Land, as of
Snails, and of Fruits, as of Dates, Myrobalans, Olives, Cypress-nuts; these are
all best burnt. Also Powder of Stones, as of Alabaster, the specular or clear
Stone like Grass, and others that are easily beaten, or burnt, also Bricks or
Tiles.

Some soft things are dried in an Oven, as Crusts of Bread of Barley is the
best.

Also of Plants, as Burnet, Pellitory, Beets, Maidenhair, Coleworts, Myrtles,
Mastick-tree, Olive Tree, and of sweet scented Herbs, as Pennyroyal, Organ,
Hysop, Mints, Sage, Rosemary, burnt as the other.

To these are added Powder of Cinnamon, Cloves, wood aloes, to make them sweet;
or Marjoram, Lavender, Orris roots, and Musk.

And to fasten the Gumms if loose, Mastick, Frankincense; and Myrrh, if foul.
And if the Teeth be rotten, use things formerly mentioned for them.

And to take away Phlegm, add Pellitory of Spain, mustard seed, Pepper, Ginger;
or a little Hellebore, if phlegm be abundant.

Salt does not corrode, and yet cleanses the Teeth, therefore is good to be
rubbed upon the teeth, being it is always at hand. And it may be mixed with
other Pouders to make them stronger and more pleasant. The boiled common Salt
is good as well as that which is dug out of the Earth called Sal Gem. Also
Alum and Niter burnt.

The fat that swims upon the Salt Leati or Glass-wort, dissolved with broken
stones to make Glasses, which being cold turns into a stone and is called the
grease of Glass, being poudered, does wonderfully cleanse the Teeth.

And white Wine Lees or Tartar does the same with other Powder.

You may make diverse compositions of the former, and these are easiest made.
Take Cuttle-bone half a dram, Coral finely poudered one dram, burnt Hearts horn
half a dram, Salt two drams, or more, make a Powder.

Or, Take Pumex stone half a dram, burnt Ivory half a dram, Powder of Alabaster
one dram, of the Grease of Glass two drams.

Or, Take burnt Crusts of Bread two drams, Crabs eyes one dram, Date stones
burnt half a dram, Ashes of Rosemary one scruple, burnt Alium half a dram.

You may make these sweet with Angelica, or Orris roots, or Cinnamon, or
Cloves, or the Oils thereof, or make them into Dentifrices with the musked
infusion of Rose water, with a little Mastick to strengthen the Teeth, and
other simples mentioned.

This Dentifrice is of excellent virtue: Take Barley meal and common Salt, each
equal parts; and with Honey, make a Past, put it in Paper and dry it in an Oven
till it be almost burnt, powder it, and add to three drams thereof, ashes of
Crabs, Pumex calcined, Egg shells, Cypress, Alum burnt if you please, two
drams, dried Citron peels, Camphire, each one dram: make a fine Powder.

The Teeth are cleansed by the juyces of some Plants, as of Burnet, and roots of
Sowbread. Also with a clout dipped in some distilled waters. As this: Take
common Salt, or Sal Gem three ounces, Sal Ammonjack one ounce and an half,
Alum one ounce: let them be beaten, and dissolved with a little Rose, or Lemon
water, and distill them.

Aqua fortis, if it be mixed with other waters, til it be made harmeless, is
admirable to cleanse the Teeth, especially in the French Pox.

Also Oil of Vitriol used as the former.

By washing of the mouth, the meat that sticks in the Teeth is not only washed
out, but also the filth and soil which by breathing at night sticks to them is
taken off, or prevented. If every morning you wash with water, Wine (...) a
little Vinegar and rub the Teeth, and after use Dentifrices if need require,
and then wash them again with the same. If this should be done daily, as the
Teeth need no less washing then the Hands, they might be kept clean and sound
til old age, except some other accident, and without these they cannot be kept
clean, white, and uncorrupted.

Eating keeps the Teeth clean, therefore on that side where the Teeth are
rotten and they cannot show, is sooner infected and there are scales. Therefore
let them use to eat one both sides.

When meat fastened in the Teeth is picked out, something is taken from the
sides, because it cannot be so easily come at, when it is lodged within, as
when any filth is without. Therefore it is good to dip the Tooth pickers made
of wood (as was showed) in Salt, or Alum water.

You must take off the hard slakes with Iron Files or flegms for that purpose,
made broad or sharp.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Voiding of Living Creatures.
The Kinds,
THere are some Living Creatures bred in the Body which are wholly besides
nature, as also the voiding of them. And they are either Worms, or Insects, or
Lice. As for Fleas it is a doubt whether they be bred in man's body or not: but
no doubt they come from others.

There are diverse kinds of Worms that come from diverse parts of the Body, Worms
voided by Stool.
which are like other Worms.

The long worms are called Lumbrici, Long Worms.
because they are like Earth worms. They are round, sharp at the both ends like
Earth worms, showing neither head nor tail, whitish and hard usual in Children.
They are voided more or fewer usually dead, and sometimes alive.

Diverse accidents accompany them, the gentlest are pain of the belly, gnawing
at the Heart, sighing, a dry Cough, Itching of the Nose, therefore they rub it
constantly: grating of the Teeth, restlessness, heavy dreams, which makes them
suddenly awake and cry out. The great accidents are greediness, vomiting,
looseness, Lientery, Fever, Convulsion and Swouning.

The short worms that come from the Fundament are called Ascarides, Arsworms.
they are round, like Mites in Cheese, or Worms in Ulcers. These are voided
alive with the Excrements, with great itching and bring scarce any other
accidents.

They reckon flat worms with these, but because they neither live nor move as
the other but are long membranes, that grow in the body, we shall mention them
in other excretions.

Such Worms come also out at the mouths of Children, in their sleep, Worms
coming out at the mouth.
and from others at other times causing Vomiting.

I cannot omit the mentioning of a monsterous worm very great behind the Head
like a Canker worm, hairy, with a black shell like a beatle upon the back, with
many Legs like an Ear-wig voided by a soldier vomiting, after long heart pains.

Some thought that worms breed in the Teeth within, Worms of the Teeth.
being deceived by the small Fibers found in broken teeth, as in cavities of
great bones. Some thought them to be Nerves: Others Worms. But they may be in
hollow teeth.

The Lumbrici or long worms will come out at the Nose, Worms in the Teeth.
or Mouth, and cause itching.

Sometimes little worms have been blown out at the Nose, from an Ulceration
there.

A Bergen Physician affirmed seriously to me that he saw a hairy worm with many
Feet, like an Ear-wig sneesed out at the Nose by a woman, which a long time
before felt a great Itching about her Forehead.

It was showed in Ulcers of the Ears, that worms come forth with matter. Worms
in the Ears. Worms coughed up. Worms pissed forth.


Some affirm that men in Consumptions have coughed up worms.

I saw a Man who had the Colic (of whom I spoke in the Colic) that made Urin
with infinite small worms like mites in cheese, swimming alive therein; which
dying, sanke down in a great lump to the bottom. And I saw the same after in
others. And have since read of diverse that have seen the same.

We showed in verminous or worm Ulcers, Worms in Ulcers.
how they bred there.

We have seen in the bottom of the navel a long round worm, Navel-wormes.
such as breeds in meal, that thrust it self forth, and drew in again.

Some affirm that the long worms of the Guts have come forth at an Ulcer which
has pierced through the Belly and Guts. Worms in a wound of the Belly.


It is reported that in some Diseases there are worms in the Arms, Dracunculi
or little dragons.
Legs, Thighs, and sides called Dracunculi, in high Dutch Mittfross. But we
leave the description of them to them that have seen them.

Besides these kinds of worms, Worms remaining enclosed in the Body.
others are bred in the Body, where there is no passage for them to get out.
But after death are found in dissection or Anatomy; of which neither the
Patient that complained of other Diseases, nor the Physician knew. These belong
not to things voided or Excreta, but to other accidents, where they shall be
spoken of.

Under the Heart, it is reported that worms breed which prick and molest,
Worms under the heart.
but they express not the part: being deceived with those worms that rise to
the mouth of the stomach, and there molest the Heart. For they cannot breed any
where about the Heart or Pericardium or under it, because it grows to the
Midriff.

Lice come from diverse parts of the Superficies of the Body, Phtheiriasis or
the lousie Disease.
and cause an Itching molestation, which is called Phtheiriasis. The kinds
whereof are distinguished by the parts of the Body.

Lice breed most in hairy places, Lice in hairy Parts.
especially the Head, usually in Children and poor people; and sometimes in
other unclean persons. When they are grown they are broad with many feet equal,
because they leap not, but creep. And they have a black spot in their backs
sometimes. The young ones are called Nits.

Sometimes they grow in the Beard and Eyebrows, and cause Itching there: But
are little, and are quickly routed from those small quarters.

Also in the Hair under the Arms, Worms that eat the Hair.
some teach that the Hair of the Head and Beard may be eaten and cleft with
worms or lice, scarce visible.

There are Lice found fastened to the skin about the hairy parts of the
Privities, Lice that grow to the skin, or crablice.
that cause grievous itching and pricking, and stick very fast. Which the
French call Morpions: Or kil-Doves, because they are like the Lice in Dove-cots
that kill Pigeons. We call them Crab-lice, because they resemble the Crab-fish.
These sometimes creep into other parts, and there stick in the skin.

There is a peculiar sort of Lice that breeds in the Palms of the Hands,
Hand-lice.
and in no other part, except the Soles of the Feet, under the skin which
causes a little swelling or cleft, and a continual Itching. And when they are
taken out, they cannot be seen to move but upon a clear glass. These are called
Chirones from the Hand in Greek, and Acari.

The Causes.
All kinds of Worms or Lice breeds of Juice or Filth.

Worms breed of Juice that putrefieth by heat, which is either Chyle, or any
putrid Matter.

The Lumbrici of the Guts breed of chyl in the hungry Gut called Jejunum, Chyle
is the cause of long Worms.
where any of it, which is not sucked away by the Meseraicks, because it is too
thick, or too fat, but is wrought by the heat of the guts, through long
continuance into one or more living worms. This Chyle is produced from the
eating of certain meats which afford matter for worms. For which cause chiefly
Infants that seed too soon upon flesh, and have not milk that is convenient,
are so troubled with worms. These worms as they breed of this Juice, so are
they nourished thereby. And when they consume it, they cause a great appetite.
And if they creep into the guts, they torment them with tickling, sucking, and
pulling, and cause griping and Fluxes. And if they get up to the stomach,
whether they may easily go from the small guts, then by molestation and
hindering of concoction, they cause accidents and diseases of the Stomach and
Lientery: And if they gnaw the mouth of the Stomach, they produce Symptoms of
the Heart and Brain. And if they rise upwards to the Jaws and Nostrils, they
trouble them. But they cause the greatest accidents when they are killed and
putrefied in the small Guts, and send up stinking vapors to the Heart and
Brain, which cause Convulsions and Fevers. It is thought that worms a long
time retained, can so gnaw the Guts, that they may pass through the Belly about
the navel or Groyns. But this is not probable, for they have neither sharp
bills nor open, nor teeth, and by sucking, they cannot do it. Therefore if
worms come forth there these come from some Imposthume in the outward parts,
and are not Lumbrici or long worms, but such as breed in Ulcers. And if they
come from the Guts, there was first a wound which made the passage. But if
worms come downward from the small Guts with the Excrements, into the Gut
Colon, then if they pass presently through they come forth alive at the
Fundament. Or if they be mixed with the Excrements and kept long, they are cast
forth dead with the Excrements.

Ascarides or little Worms in the Fundament and elsewhere, Slime or phlegm is
the cause of Ars-worms and Noseworms.
come from a putrid matter which getting a new heat from putrefaction,
produces diverse worms according to the diversity of the matter, which is
simple or compound.

Ascarides come from Phlegm or Slime long kept in the folds of the thick Guts,
and they will lie long there, till they are sent forth by the Excrements. Also
from phlegm long lodged and putrefied in the cavities of the Nose, may come
worms. And that hairy or downy Canker-worm which we reported to be sneesed out
from a woman's nose was so bred.

From Matter not only ripe, Matter is the cause of worms in the Nose, Ears, and
Lungs, and Teeth.
but putrefied in Ulcers of the Nose, and external Ulcers of the Ears. And from
that in the Navel, come worms. And from that in the Lungs ulcerated, come worms
which are spit forth. And if they be found in the teeth, they come from the
putrefaction in the cavities thereof.

Ascarides or Arse-worms come more usually from Meat that easily putrefieth,
Meat eaten that putrefieth is the cause of Arseworms, and teethworms, and such
as are pissed forth
as Flesh, Cheese, Fruits, when it sticks in the windings of the thick Guts,
then from Phlegm. Because we may perceive that such things being out of the
Body, produce the same. The same things sticking long in a hollow tooth, may
produce worms.

We showed formerly, that some worms bred of cheese were pissed forth, and it
is probable, for they are very like mites. And the Patient as we showed in the
Colic, lived long upon Cheese, and voided a quantity of it by the use of a
Clyster. Of which Cheese long retained and putrefied in the Guts, it is
probable that these worms bred. And were sent by the Meseraicks with the Serum
or whey into the hollow Vein, and so into the Kidneys and Bladder. And this is
easy, because they are very little bodies. And in regard thicker Humors, and
bodies do pass the same way. And this is the reason why others have pissed
worms from eating Cheese, which had them or bred them after it was eaten. For
in another corruption of Humors, either in or out of the Veins; it is seldom
seen that worms are voided by urin. And every corruption does not produce worms
of this form like mites, but ascarides, or the like. Nor can they be from the
ulcers of the Reins and Bladder, because they come from Ulcers in another form.

Lice breed from filth sticking to the skin, which filth proceeds from Vapors,
Filth of the skin, is the cause of Lice.
Sweating, and the Excrements of the Skin, both under and above it, in
Children, and poor people, and such as are nasty in certain parts of them where
they putrefie. Especially in hairy parts, because filth will stick faster
there, and can be less taken off then from the smooth skin. Especially in the
Head, where they are most abundant, small at the first, and sticking to the
skin, but being nourished by the nourishment that comes to the skin, they grow
great, and march about the Head, and sometimes into the Garments and other parts
of the Body.

But if this Filth have any other Infection besides the excrementitial
moisture, as about the Privities, where there is a venomous Vapor in unclean
persons, it causes a worse Progeny; and then the Lice are worse stick deeper
in the skin, called Crab-lice. These come from Copulation when the hairy parts
are united.

From that which causes Scabs, being retained under the thick skin of the palm
of the Hand, The Venom of humors, is the cause of Lice in the Hand.
and corrupted, proceed those little Lice under the scarf skin called
Chirones, as appears by the Pustles and Scabs that are at the same time there.

And the thickness of the skin in the Palm of the Hand, is the cause why they
are rather there, then in another part, which keeps these thin Excrements from
being discussed. And the same may be in the Soles of the Feet.

The Cure.
Lumbrici or long Worms bred in the thin Guts, The Cure of long Worms.
staying long, and nourished with Chyle: are not known when they do no hurt.
And without other Remedies pass through the Guts with the Excrements, or get
upwards, but seldom, through the Mouth and Nose. But when they do hurt, either
alive or dead, by staying in the Guts, and producing accidents, in tender
Bodies especially, and endanger life, they ought to be cured.

The intention of Cure is to keep them from breeding, and to expel them that
are bred out of the Body. We prevent their breeding, when we keep the Chyle
from turning into worms; by making it moderate and thin like Milk, not much,
and thick with Meat of good Juice, not suffering Children to feed upon flesh
and sat: but keeping them long to Milk and Pap.

When worms are bred, we expel them alive or dead, with things that provoke
Nature thereunto. When alive, with things that cause them to fly, or kill them
by a contrary quality, either manifest, as bitter and sharp, or salt, or sour,
which worms hate. Or by fatness, which stops their breath. Or by a hidden
quality which we know by Experience. Also we allure them to destruction, with
pleasant things. All these are to be directed according to the constitution and
the accidents. As when there is a Fever you must avoid hot things that are
bitter and sharp, or temper them with things which by sourness, allay the heat,
and yet resist the worms. If the Belly be loose, you must use things that bind
somewhat, and also kill worms. If there be swoundings, give Cordials. If
Convulsions, things proper against them. For the doing of all these, let this
course be taken,

Purge to stir up Nature to expel the Excrements and worms, with things that
are proper to kill them if alive.

Rhubarb is the best ordinary Purge, especially in a flux, for it binds
afterward: and also in a Fever. Also Myrobalans, Juice of Roses, and Peaches,
Laurel tops, are enemies to worms. Especially Aloes, by reason of its
bitterness, and being good for the Stomach, it purges it from crudities, and
makes the Chyle pure.

Most strong Purges are bitter and sharp, and therefore good. As Senna,
Agarick, Turbith, Scammony, Coloquintida, of which you must give more or less,
according to the strength.

A powder is thus made. Take Rhubarb two drams, powder against Worms half a
dram, Coraline one scruple: give it with convenient Liquor, or Syrup, half to
those in years at a time, and less to Children one dram, of Senna, or Turbith
will make it stronger, and half a scruple of Scammony, if you will have it yet
stronger.

Pills are thus made: Take Aloes two drams, Myrrh one dram, Worm seed one
scruple, with Syrup or Juice of Wormwood, or Gentian. Make a Mass for Pills,
give a dram, or half a dram to the younger fort. You may make them quicker with
the former Purgers, or six grains of Niter.

A proper Infusion: Take Rhubarb four scruples, infuse them in Wormwood wine.
Or if there be a Fever in Purslane, or Knot-grass water, strain it, and give
it with Sugar.

A good Decoction. Take Knotgrass roots one one ounce and an half, white
Dittany one ounce, Southernwood, Hysop, Peach leaves, each one handful; Lupines
two drams, Wormseed one dram, Cummin seed one scruple, Sebestens ten pairs.
These are said to kill worms, Senna one ounce, Polypody six drams: boil them,
adding two drams of Rhubarb toward the Conclusion, and one dram of Cinnamon.
Give it at twice, and to young people at three or four times.

A very good Wine, which is not so bitter and unpleasant. Take white Dittany
roots one ounce and an half, Tormentil roots one ounce, Fern, and Gentian
roots, each half an ounce; Wormwood, Southernwood, each two drams; Mints,
Hysop, each one dram and an half; Tops of the lesser Centaury one dram, Worm
seed half an ounce, Senna one ounce and an half, Agarick or Mechoacan three
drams, Turbith, Rhubarb, each two drams; beat them, and infuse them in four
pints of Wine. Let it be given more or less, according to the Operation.

The Syrup of Peach flowers is the best usual Purger, to kill worms. Or Syrup
of Roses solutive, which kills them by its bitterness, and they are better with
Rhubarb infused in them, or a little Scammony.

Pills and purging Lozenges, if there be a Convulsion with the worms, mentioned
in the Cure of the Fallingsickness, may be given here.

There is a good powder against worms that purges, made of Senna, worm seed,
Coriander, and Hearts horn.

Also the usual Pills of Aloes, and Ruffi, and Hiera, and other Pills that have
Aloes.

Also purging Electuaries which are good against worms, adding other things
that kill them therewith, you must observe the strength and Constitution, and
other accidents, when you give them, especially if there be a Flux or Fever,
and give astringents for the one, and coolers for the other.

There are many things that kill worms by a manifest or occult quality, or make
them depart. To which we put pleasant things, that they may suck them fasting,
with things also that respect the accidents.

Some Food also, and Sauce is good against worms, as white Bread, green Nuts,
Garlic, and Sebestens. And in Sallets, Beets, Endive, Succory, all green. Also
Purslane, Watercresses, Vinegar, Salt. Therefore when children begin to eat
salt Meats, they are less troubled with worms, then when they did eat Milk, and
fresh Meat. Also Salt keeps them from rising up at the mouth.

There are also Pouders to be taken with Sugar, or wine, water, or Milk, with
Honey, sour or boiled wine, from half a dram to a dram, Or to be made into
Lozenges, with Sugar dissolved.

The simple Pouders are, the powder of Worm seed, Coralin, Hearts horn, best for
Infants, because not unpleasant.

The Compound Pouders are first of these three. Take Worm seed half an ounce,
Coraline steeped in Vinegar, and dryone dram, Hearts horn two drams.

Another: Take Worm seed, Lupines, each two drams; Coleworts seeds, Coriander
prepared, Purslane, Citron, or Orange seeds, each one dram.

A third: Take white Dittany two drams, Tormentil roots one dram, Gentian half
a dram, Wormwood, Southernwood, each one dram; Thyme, or Mints, Flowers of
Centaury, or Hysop, each half a dram, Zedoary one scruple.

A fourth Powder: Take burnt Hearts horn two drams, Ivory shavings one dram,
Earth worms half a dram, red Coral one dram and an half: make a Powder.

If you add Rhubarb to any of these, it will kill them, and expel them better.

You may make greater Compositions, with the Roots of Fern, Swallow-wort, white
Thiftle, Birthwort, Devilsbit, Alkanet, Madder, Barks of the Roots of
Mulberries, and Cappars; Rue, Polymountane, Goosgrass, Savine, Horehound,
Calamints, Sea-wormwood, Tansey, Mints, Cat-mints; also Seeds of Orrach, Dill,
Henbane, Gith, Pepperwort, Watercresses, Rochet, Turnips, Lovage, Hopps,
Sorrel; also with Brimstone, Saltpeeter, Pease, Earth-nuts, Myrrh, Gum of
Juniper. And to make it precious, with Gold, Pearl, precious Stones, Unicorns
horn, Bone of a Stags heart, Musk, and Ambergreese.

Another is usually made of worm seed, Lupines, wormwood, and Hearts horn all
poudered.

If there be a Convulsion or Swounding therewith. Take Piony seeds one dram and
an half, Purslane, Citron, or Orange seeds, each one dram; Hearts horn half a
dram, red Coral, Diamargariton frigid, each one dram; Sugar of Roses as much as
all the rest.

A Decoction or Syrup. Take Roots of Knotgrass, Dittany, each two ounces; (
Tormentil or Bistort when there is a Flux of the Belly,) Orris, Elicampane,
Fern, each one ounce; Carduus, wormwood, Horehound, Time, Calamints, Mints,
Rue, Hemp, each one handful; Lupines, Bay berries, each two drams; worm seed
three drams, Purslane, Colewort, Coriander, Citron or Orange seeds, each one
dram; Sebestens ten pairs. Boil them, and dissolve in the Liquor strained,
Sugar, or Honey, adding Cloves, and Cinnamon, and make a Syrup.

A Decoction of Rye is good to expel worms.

Also Sebestens, because the clamminess thereof stops their breath, when other
sweet things will not hurt them.

The Decoction of green Nut shells will kill worms, because we find by
Experience, if it be poured upon the ground, the worms come forth.

The Flowers of Lupins, which kills Flies boiled in milk, will also kill worms,
and the seed also.

The usual Syrups are bitter, as of Wormwood; and it there be a Fever, of
Endive, Succory, with, and without Rhubarb. And sour, which are best in
Fevers, as of Citrons, Lemmons, Oranges, Bar-berries, Currance, Sorrel,
Vinegar, Byzantine.

Also their Juyces, and of Goats-Rue, Germander, Mints, Agrimony, Elicampane,
etc.

Wormwood-wine, with other bitter things mentioned, as worm seed, etc.

Also Wine of the Infusion of Groundpine, and of Agrimony.

Also an Infusion of Rhubarb, Wormseed, and Scordium in Aqua vitae, or
Brande-wine, may be given to Children.

A distilled Water of Wormwood, Gentian, Knotgrass, Purslane, Horsraddish, Rue,
Mints, Flowers of Sloe-bush. And if there be a Fever, of Endive, and Succory.

Conserves for the same, are of Peach flowers, Gilly flowers, Orange flowers,
Lemmons, Citrous: as I have proved. Also the Peels candied, so that they may
keep their bitterness.

To drink your own Urin, or Lie, or Brine, is also good.

Also Oil of Olive choaks the worms, and other things that breath. And if you
take as much of the Juice of Lemmons, and give them to drink, it will kill them
effectually.

Also Oil of bitter Almonds, Peach kernels, Indian Nuts, and Oil of St.
John's Wort.

Also distilled Oils, as of Spike, or Vitriol two or three drops.

There are diverse Mixtures for the same Electuaries or Pills.

In fear of a Convulsion, This: Take Citron peels candied one ounce, Conserve
of Piony, Roses or Bugloss flowers, and of Mints, each half an ounce; of the
Powder mentioned one dram, Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, or Lemmons, as much
as will make an Electuary. Let it be taken, and water of Purslane, Piony, or
Bugloss, etc. drunk after it.

Treacle and Mithridate are also good.

Some give a drop or two of Quicksilver, or half a scruple, and it will make
the worms fly away. And it may be given safe: as I showed elsewhere.

Water in which Quicksilver has been steeped and stirred and strained, does
wonderfully expel them. And you may do the same in wine, or other Liquor.

Give warm water that has had Lead or Tinn quenched therein, and it will expel
all sorts of worms, as I have known by Experience.

Clysters are given to draw worms out of the thin Guts into the thick, and keep
them from ascending. They are made of these following which are pleasing to the
worms: first giving things at the mouth that drive them down.

They are made of Milk, which may be omitted in Fevers; or of flesh Broth, or
the Decoction of Figgs, Raisons, Barley, Wheat one pugil, with Sugar, Honey two
ounces, and two Yolks of Eggs.

If we conceive that they stick in the thick Guts, we give in Clysters bitter
things. As, Take Roots of Gentian one ounce, Wormwood, Southerwood, Arsmart,
each one handful; Tops of Centaury one pugil, Lupins half an ounce, Wormseed
two drams: boil them, and dissolve in the straining, Oil of Wormwood one ounce
and an half, Salt one dram.

The same, or made of pickle or Brine, or Lead, with one ounce and an half of
the Oil of Bays, Hiera picra, Aloes, Juice of Wormwood, Gall of an Hog or Ox.

When you repeat a Clyster to fetch them out after killed, boil them in
Agarick, Carthamus seed, or dissolve Benedicta Laxativa, or Hiera, or other
Purgers.

If there be a Fever, leave out these hot things, and use others that are
bitter. As, Take Endive, and Succory with the Roots, Dandelion, Purslane,
Sowthistle, with the Roots, each one handful; Rye one pugil; boil them, add
Juice of Beets, or Pot-Mercury one ounce and an half, Juice or Syrup of Roses,
Oil of bitter Almonds, each one ounce; Salt half a dram, make a Clyster.

If there be a Flux of the Belly. Take Tormentil roots, Birthwort, each one
ounce and an half; Pomegranate peels, Myrobalans, each one ounce; Lentils one
pugil, Myrtle-berries half a dram, red Roses one pugil: make a Decoction, ad
Oil of Mints one ounce, make a Clyster.

These following things are applied outwardly to the Navel, where the small
Guts meet, and where the worms are.

The Oils to anoint with Hands dipped in Aqua vitae, or Vinegar first, are Oil
of Peach kernels, or bitter Almonds, Wormwood, Rue; also Oil of Coloquintida
made by infusing Oil in the hollow of a Coloquintida Apple, or boiling the Pulp
of Coloquintida therein.

Another Compound Oil. Take Oil of Nuts six ounces, Juice of green Nut shells
two ounces, of Peach leaves, or Watercresses, Vinegar of Squills, each one
ounce and an half; Hogs or Ox gall one ounce: boil them till the Juice be spent.

An Ointment of these Juyces is good. Take Juice of Garlic, or Leeks, and
Wormwood, or Arsmart, or Stonecrop, each one ounce and an half; Juice of Orris,
Aloes dissolved in strong Vinegar, Gall of an Ox or Hog, each half an ounce,
Aqua vitae two drams. If you add the Juice of wild Cowcumbers, it will be
better.

An Ointment or Plaster is thus made: Take Gentian roots one ounce, Dittany,
or Birthwort roots six drams, Orange peels one ounce, Coloquintida one dram,
burnt Hearts horn two drams, Saffron half a dram; make a Powder, adding Gith
seed, Agarick, white Hellebore: mix it with Oil of wormwood, Peach kernels, or
bitter Almonds, and wax, and Rosin, make an Ointment or Cerot, or with Pitch a
Plaster. This Powder may be put into the fore mentioned Ointment, and with
Rosin made a Plaster.

The Ointment of Sowbread is usual to anoint the Belly, which purges, and
kills worms.

An easy Cataplasm to be made of Rye flower, or Lupins, and strong Vinegar;
apply it so, or boil it a little. To which you may add some Oils, mentioned to
keep it moist, or the Juyces mentioned.

Other Cataplasms are thus made. Take Garlic, Onions, or Leeks, if the scent
of Garlic displease, four ounces, Squills one ounce, Peach kernels one ounce
and an half, Lupine meal two ounces, Gall of an Ox one ounce, Oil of wormwood
two ounces.

Or thus: Take of wormwood, Southernwood, Horehound, Mints, Motherwort, Tansey,
Rue, Croswort, Scordium, Goatsrue, Peach leaves, Centaury tops: boil them in
Vinegar, beat them with Flower of Lupins three ounces, Oil of Peachkernels two
ounces, Aloes dissolved in Aqua vitae half an ounce, Myrrh two drams: make a
Cataplasm.

A Fomentation for the Belly of the same Herbs boiled in Wine, Vinegar, and
Water, is also good.

Also Baggs filled with the remainder of the Herbs, or the same dried in
powder, or sprinkled after anointing.

You may apply things to the Stomach, if you suspect the worms to be there, as
wormwood, Mints, Aloes, etc. And if there be a Flux ad Oil of Mastick, Quinces,
Spike, Roses, Powder of Mastick, Roses, Cloves: and the like proper for the
Stomach.

Some approve of Ointments for the Heart, of things that kill worms and
Cordials: these are good in Faintings, and reach to the Stomach. Some apply
them to the Pulses also, and Temples, and Backbone.

Chiefly this following. Take Aloes an ounce, Myrrh two drams, Saffron half a
dram, ^^^er them, and add juice of Citrons, Lemmons, or Orange^^ or Rose
vinegar, for an Ointment.

Instead hereof you may moisten the pestilential Pills in the Juyces, and apply
them to the Heart.

Or this Ointment. Take the three things mentioned, and add Citron seeds
peeled, Ivory shavings, burnt Hearts horn each one scruple; red Coral half a
dram, Piony seeds, If you sear a Convulsion, two scruples, Cloves, wood Aloes,
each one scruple: mix them with Juyces as the former, for an Ointment or a
Plaster.

Treacle may be mixed so, also with Pouders or Juyces, and applied to the Heart
or Pulses.

The Urin of a Boar that is found in his Bladder, mixed with Oil, and hung in
the Smoke, is good to anoint the Pulses and Temples.

This Oil following also to the Heart, Pulses, and Temples is highly commended.

It is made of Oil of Scorpions in which Treacle, Aloes, Myrrh, Scordium,
Gentian, white Thistle, Gith, and Vinegar are boiled.

Others make Epithems for the Heart, adding to the former Wormseed, Cordial
pouders, Piony seeds, and mix them with the Ointments.

Of Amulets, they say that Garlic hung about the neck kills worms, and yellow
French Lavender.

Ascarides that breed in the thick Gut, The Cure of Ars-worms.
are often voided with Excrements, greater or less. And if they come to the
fundament, and cause Itching, they must be cured.

Which is done by keeping the Excrements from too much putrefaction, with good
diet and purging, and things that resist putrefaction; as sour Juyces, and
other Dryers, as Hearts horn, and others mentioned in the Cure of Worms.

Also such things as draw them down, or kill them.

They are cured as the long worms, with Purges and proper Medicines. But
especially with Clysters and Suppositories, for things taken at the mouth,
loose their virtue before they come to the part. For Suppositories they are to
be put into the Fundament, and tied with a thread, being made of things that
allure them. As Flesh, Fat, Lard, a little Salt, or of a Fig the inside
outward, or of a Beet root, or Cabbage stalk spread over with Honey.

Also a Suppository of boiled Honey without Salt, with Pulp of Figs or Raisons
boiled, and put up, does bring them forth, though it come not it self whole
forth.

And to kill them, mix Aloes, and Gall of an Ox, with Honey, without Salt at
first, that it may be kept in the longer.

Clysters to kill these worms, are the same with the former, in a less quantity.

Or this: Take Gentian, and Birthwort roots, each one ounce: Wormwood,
Horehound, Arsmart, Calamints, each one pugil, Lupins one ounce: boil them,
adding the Gall of an Ox, Goat, or Hog two drams, Sal Gem, one dram, make a
Clyster. You may add Hiera, Benedicta Laxativa, or some bitter Oils.

Also a Clyster of Lie, Pickle, Brine, or Urin, kills these worms in the Arse.

Anoint the Fundament with Quicksilver, Rosin, and Grease mixed, or anoint a
Suppository therewith, this is the best Remedy to cure these Arse-worms.

For the Cure of all these Worms, you must as here prevent the cause that
breeds them and kills them, and carry them away. The Cure of worms in the Nose.
As the worms in the Nose must be cured by curing the Ulcer: as we showed in
Ulcers. And by the smoke of Leek seed, Wormwood, and Aloes taken into the Nose.

They are cured by curing the Ulcer: The Cure of worms in the Ears.
as was showed in Ulcers of the Ears. And with the Juice of Calamints, and
Hemp, and as Dioscorides shows, with the Juice of Capar roots, or Urine boiled
in a Pomegranate shell, and dropped in.

And with other things there mentioned. The Cure of worms coughed up.
If from an inward Ulcer of the Lungs, worms be coughed up, which is seldom,
you must cure the Ulcer as we showed in the Phthysick.

If pissing of worms comes from eating of any thing, The Cure of worms pissed
forth.
as Cheese mentioned. Let them abstain from it.

Bitter, The Cure of worms in Ulcers.
sharp, and cleansing things cure lousie Ulcers, and kill worms in them, as
Juice of Wormwood, Centaury, Garlic, Leeks, Onions, and Galls of Beasts.

Or a Decoction of Hellebore, Dittany, Gentian roots, Wormwood, Centaury,
Calaminth, Horehound in Lie, with Bran.

Or the Powder of Dandelion, Hogs-snout sprinkled upon the Ulcer.

Especially the Ointment of Quicksilver.

We have cured the worm that lies in the Navel, The Cure of worms in the
Navel.
and drawn it out, with Flower of Lupins boiled in Vinegar, without any hurt.

If worms breed in a hollow tooth, The Cure of worms in the Teeth.
they cannot remain long there, but fall out, or are easily taken out, when the
teeth are cleansed.

And if they stay, and be thought the cause of the toothach, stop the teeth
with Aloes, and Camphire mixed with aqua vitae.

Or take in the Smoke of Leek seed, Wormwood, and Aloes cast upon fire.

The Smoke of Henbane seed taken in with a Funnel, cures the worms in the
teeth, as those in the Hands. Some write that by the taking in of those Fumes
to allay the Toothache, there are bred things like worms.

They say that worms are bred under the Heart, The Cure of worms under the
Heart.
and are killed with drinking of the Juice of Garlic, Radish, and
Watercresses: and if there be a suspicion of their breeding by an Itching
about the Heart, that may be from the worms that suck the Mouth of the Stomach,
nevertheless give the same Remedies.

Those Lice that march about, are more easily cured, The Cure of Lice.
then they that are fixed to the Skin: they have been in such swarms in some
diseases, that they have caused death. But this is rather imputed to Divine
Judgment then to Natural Causes.

The Cure is first of the Cause, then of the lousie Disease.

The Cause which is Nastiness, must be prevented and taken away. By
Evacuations, if there be foulness of blood thereby, or Plethory which causes
the abundance of them: Such as we showed in the Cure of the Itch. Among which
Sweats are excellent to cleanse the skin, either with a dry or moist Bath.

To the Evacuations, join a good Diet, for some things drive the Excrements to
the skin, and breed Lice, as Figs, and Vipers flesh: Of which we showed the
force in Elephantiasis. And for Figgs, they thought from the likeness of the
seeds to Lice, that they bred them, but were deceived.

Washing often with Lie, rubbing, and combing the Head, is good to take away
Grease and Dandrough, and in other parts of the Body.

We use strong Dryers and Cleansers to the Disease it self, to kill the Lice,
and take away filth that breeds them, which are bitter or sharper.

They cannot do it by being taken inwards. But some eat Garlic, or drink it
with the Decoction of Organ, to kill Lice, and Worms. And some Countrey-fellows
eat Garlic to keep off the flies.

Outward things are best to kill them, and take away Itching: as Lotions for
the Head, and other parts.

As this: Take Birthwort one ounce and an half, Hellebore roots half an ounce,
Beets, Arsmart, Wormwood, Horehound, Tamarisk, Tops of the lesser Centaury,
each one handful; Staphisager, Lupins, each half an ounce; Berries of the
Spindle-tree, and Agarick two drams: boil them in Lie. And wash the part
affected.

It is stronger with Salt, Alum, or Niter, or Vinegar, especially of Squills.

When we wash the Head, we use things proper for it: as Bettony, Sage, French
Lavender,

For Lice in the Eyebrows, wash with Vinegar, and Aloes, and Salts.

A Powder to drive Lice from the Hair. Take Staphisager two drams, Salt three
drams, Aloes one dram, Cinnabar two drams.

The Ointment also of Quicksilver mentioned, is best here; for it kills
infaillibly all sorts of Lice and Itch.

It may be thus made. Take Quicksilver one dram, Turpentine two drams, Hoggs
grease, Butter, or Oil six drams: make an Ointment.

Or instead of Quicksilver, use two drams of Cinnabar, which is made of Quick
silver and Brimstone.

Or for the Lice in the Hands, use one dram of Sublimate instead of
Quicksilver.

There are other Ointments of Staphisager, and Grease.

Thus; Take Staphisager half an ounce, white Hellebore one dram and an half,
Pepper, Niter, each one dram; Grease, Butter, or Oil, with a little Wax make a
Liniment.

To these add some of that with Quicksilver, or one dram of Sandarck.

The usual Ointment in shops is this. Take Staphisager, white Hellebore, Salt,
Quicksilver, Hoggs grease, Oil of Bays, Soap, and Vinegar.

Another Ointment of bitter things. Take Aloes two drams, Myrrh, Gum of Ivy,
each one dram; Hogs gall, or of an Ox one dram and an half, Quick-brimstone,
Alum, each one dram; Oil of Wormwood, or bitter Almonds, as much as will make
a Liniment.

A Paste made of Ox gall, or other Gall and Meal of Lupins, and held in the
Hands long, kills the worms there.

The linen Clouts that Goldsmiths use when they guild Silver with Gold, and
Quicksilver, applied to the part, kill Lice insaillibly.

The Fume of Henbane seed taken into the Palm of the Hands, kills the worms
there. But we suppose it rather allayes the Itch, as anointing with the Oil of
Henbane seed, or Poppies, or Syrup of Poppies, or a little Opium dissolved in
Aqua vitae.

Smoke your Cap with Tobacco, and the Lice will be killed.

Also Tobacco ashes and Piss cures Crab-lice.

The worms in the Hands are picked out with a needle, not thrust in deep to wet
the part, and hinder the sight of them. And then wash the Hands with Wine, or
Vinegar, Salt, Alum, or Niter often.

A very fine Comb will take them out of the Head.

Or a rubbing Brush which is invented for that purpose, with which Women daily
cleanse their Childrens Heads.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Voiding of living Creatures or Animata.
The Kinds.
THose Bodies are called Animate which live, are nourished, and grow like
Plants, and yet have no sense or motion: They are preternatural, and so is the
Voiding of them. These are chiefly from the Womb and the Fundament.

There is an insensible and unmoving Body called a Mole, sent forth from the
womb, A Mole.
without shape, being soft flesh without bones, full of veins, covered with a
skin. Sometimes it is more membranous, and still without shape, such as I saw
voided by a woman, through the use of a Pessary after eigteen years barrenness.
Sometimes it is like a Sea-star; as I have seen and cast into the water, to the
great amazement of the Beholders: and sometimes it is of other forms.

This casting forth of a Mole, is like a mischance or abortion, before or after
the time, with such striving and voiding of blood. And the accidents before,
are like those of Women with Child. We spoke of the Tumor of the Mole and its
accidents, and causes in the Tumors of the Belly.

The like but seldom come from the Fundament, The long Membrane from the guts
called Fascia.

The broad worm or fillet of the Guts called Taenia.


of diverse kinds. One is like a long Ribband, like the small Guts, as long as
they, but not hollow, a fingers breadth, this they call a flat worm, but it is a
Taenia or Fillet of the guts, nothing like a worm, nor is it alive or moves:
coming forth so long, that the Patient is frighted, least his Guts should come
forth. In which there are black strokes a fingers space distant all a long,
like the Vertebrae or Spondils.

This Taenia, The Gourd-worm.
though very long, is of many little parts which may be divided, and they are
like the Seeds of Gourds, and are so called from thence. This is seldom whole
but in pieces, every one of which is called a Gourdworm, but they are only
pieces of the long Fillet or Fascia.

There is another kind of Taenia as long as the rest, The Ligula or round point
from the Guts.
but not so broad round like a worm, and even, called Ligula or a point, it
moves not, seldom seen from men, but usually from dogs whole or broken, not
coming forth, till it be drawn out.

There are no accidents of this Disease, but the sudden fright, and the Patient
is well: Except there be a greediness before, and a heaviness in the Belly. And
if any part remain and stink, the Symptoms are worse then if worms died in the
Belly.

The Causes.
The Cause of these Bodies breeding, is either Seed or Chyle.

We showed in the Swelling of the Belly, Conceiving of imperfect Seed, is the
cause of a Mole.
that imperfect Seed caused a Mole. And the cause of voiding it, is that of
Abortion, the expulsive faculty of Nature burdned with the preternatural
weight, which divides the Vessels, by which it grows to the womb, and sends it
forth the proper way: And the sooner, when there is external help: Of which we
spoke in Abortion.

As we showed long worms bred of Chyle that is too thick or fat, The Chyle is
the cause of the Taenia, and Gourd-worm.
so if it be so much, that it be in the thin Guts from the Stomach to the
Colon, growing thereto, that Membrane called a Taenia is caused. This Chyle is
not in the whole compass of the Guts, but in some part as broad as it comes
forth, only there where the Guts are fastened to the Mesentery al a long, and is
turned into these Taeniae which are not alive as worms. Therefore they are
sometimes as long as the small Guts. But they cannot grow in the thick Guts
where the Excrements are, and no Chyle is, and from whence they will be
expelled, but not from the thin Guts which contain moist and fluid matter, that
may pass by. Hence it is that they may be long without any hurt but heaviness
of the Guts, and hunger, because they are nourished with much Chyle; till by
violent motion they fall off wholly or in part into the thick Guts, and are
voided whole or in pieces, as when the Chyle grows by parcells to the Guts. The
plenty of clammy Chyle in the Guts is the cause, which is seldom seen, as also
the Disease.

And the worse Symptoms are when they come not clean away, but stay behind,
and putresie.

The Cure.
The way to cure a Mole in the Belly of a Woman, is to prevent it, The Cure of
a Mole.
and to expel it before it grow too big. For then it is difficult and
dangerous, by reason of great bleeding which it causes.

We use preventions, when we know women have had them, before they conceive,
or use man; you must labor to know which seed is imperfect by considering both
constitutions, and if both be out of health, to prescribe them a good Diet, and
convenient Medicines.

The woman must be let blood, if there be Plethory, and purged, If there be
superfluous. Humors or evil, and the womb strengthened, and the rather if the
Disease come from the weakness, and want of natural heat in the womb, which
cannot conveniently cherish the Seed conceived. Those are prescribed in
Barrenness and Whites, and other Diseases of the womb, Among which hot Baths
are excellent.

When a Mole is bred of Seed, as we showed in the Swelling of the Belly, we
must hinder its growth, and labor to expel it. But we must not use violent
Medicines before we know the certainty of a false Conception, and only take
away a little Nourishment by Blood-letting, and so hinder the growth, and purge
away other filth, with which Nature may discharge the Mole also; and we not
fear thus doing to cause an abortion, if it should be a true Conception; for
many women with child have been safely purged, and had Diarrhae's; because
Nature is not so ready to cast forth things Natural, as unnatural which are
burthensom.

But if we are certain that it is a Mole, by many tokens, such as women have
formerly had in the same. Or if the time of delivery be past, and the swelling
and hardness remains, then we must give, and apply, put in, and inject into
the womb, things that may expel it. And open the passages. All which we must
first attempt with the same things that we provoke terms with, and then with
those that expel a dead Child and Secundine; and use a Midwise, if it appear,
and need be to use manual Operation. Or if all fail, we must make Incision into
the womb at the belly. All these Operations are showed in the want of Terms,
and difficulty of Travail.

The Taeniae or long Membranes, The Cure of Taeniae, and Gourdworms.
whereof one is broad, called the broad Worm, the other made of many Joints
called the Gourd-worm, a third is round like other worms, if they grow in the
thin Guts, which is seldom, they lie very long, and being they are not
certainly known, they are neglected.

But if they be suspected to be there, from stretching, heaviness, and great
appetite, then they must be expelled, and kept from breeding again. And the
rather because they seem monstrous, like Serpents.

They are cured thus: Before they breed, the matter must be diverted that
breeds them; and cleansed. But when they are bred and grown to the Guts, you
must use strong Cleansers to take them off, and Purges. It is needful to give
things against worms, though they have neither life nor sense, as worms have.
The Diet and Medicines must be as follow.

The Chyle must be made moderate and thin, like Milk, by taking away the
increase and clamminess thereof, and by cleansing it, that it stick not, and
this will keep them from breeding. It must be such as was ordered in the Cure
of Worms, by eating Garlic, Nuts, bitter and sharp Herbs, Salt, and spiced
Meats, Mustard, and taking Wormwood-wine.

Purges force these from the Guts, and when they are corrupted, drive them out,
and cleanse, being commonly bitter or sharp. They are mentioned in the Cure of
the Worms, the best whereof are those of Aloes, and Wormwood, and sharp things
often given. To which you may add Tartar, or Niter to cleanse.

There are diverse Cleansers which take away the Matter that breeds them, and
them also, and hinders their return; or if they return, make them sooner fall
off, and come forth. They were mentioned in the Cure of Worms.

As the Pouders simple and Compound, that are good here, by reason of their
bitterness and cleansing. To which Dioscorides adds the Seed of great
Sun-flower, and Gith seeds.

Also many Decoctions there mentioned are good here, and Syrups, Juyces, and
Conserves.

Wormwood is best with other bitter things, as Centaury, and Horehound. Also
Urin, Lie, pickle or Brine drunk, do cleanse much. Also Wine, or Water, with
some few drops of Oil of Vitriol.

Clysters reach not to the thin Guts, where these Ribbands are fixed, and
therefore cleanse not so well as things taken down at the Mouth. But if some
pieces of them are fallen into the thick Guts, they will carry them forth, and
their cleansing quality may reach to the small Guts, if they be often
administered. And for that cleansing quality you may give bitter things that
kill worms.

Also Oils, Ointments, and Emplasters, and Cataplasms, mentioned against worms,
are good here to be applied to the Belly, being bitter, sharp, and cleansing,
and they will in process of time do very much good.

CHAP. XV. Of the Voiding of earthy Bodies.
The Kinds.
THe earthy Bodies that grow in Man, are Sand or Mud, Stones hard and soft, and
they are preternatural, as also their Voiding. They come from diverse parts of
the Body which shall be mentioned, from some often from other parts seldom, or
very rarely.

Many piss Sand or Gravel, Sand pissed forth.

Stones pissed forth.


with and without another Disease.

Also Stones are pissed forth forcibly, and this follows the pain in the
Kidneys in the Cure of which these were mentioned. Sometimes Blood or stoppage
of Urin went before, or burning of Urin, or slimy Matter: As was showed in those
Excretions. Sometimes there is a muddy white matter with the Urin with signs of
the stone in the Bladder. The Gravel in the Eyes.
There is often in the Corners of the Eyes and in the Eyebrows a sandy, rough
Matter, brittle and yellow, which sticks to the Hair in the night, when the
Eyes are shut, so that the Eyes are hard to be closed: as we showed in the
Diseases of the Eyes.

Sometimes a stone as big as a pease has been blown out at the Nose, A Stone
blown from the Nose.
white and brittle, which we keep in the treasury of our Physical Rarities.

Not only I, A Stone hawked forth.
but others have known stones to be hawked forth with a cough some white, some
brittle, and hard, round, long, or broad, equal, and unequal. And a great
difficulty of breathing has gone before, in which Disease as was showed,
Stones are oftener kept then voided. I keep by me some such that were voided by
a comely widow, that was married to one in a Consumption, that infected her:
Of which I spoke, she voided them with great pain and coughing.

Sometimes other Stones have come from the Mouth, Stones under the Tongue.

In the Jaws. Stones voided by stool.


as from a swelling under the Tongue, called the Frog, or from a swelling in
the Jaws.

I keep at home a stone that was voided by stool; and another that came forth
of a Horse that dunged.

A famous Physician of our time, A stony Birth.
says publicly in writing, and told me that a Woman was delivered of a Child
hard as a Stone.

Sometimes they grow in the Pores of the skin, and are taken out, Stones fixed
in the Skin.
as in the Face: I keep one by me that was taken out of the Sole of the Foot.

One had a little Stone taken out of the white of his Eye with a Needle, Stones
in the ball of the Eye.
and he brought it to me.

There are often scales which cover the Teeth, Gravel upon the Teeth like
Scales.
and they are chiefly about the Roots.

As we showed in the Gout, Stones from the knots of the Gout.
stones are often taken out of the Nodes thereof.

Stones are cut out of the Bladder by a Wound made in the Perinaeum. Stones
from the Bladder.


From a Wound in the Groyne, Stones from the Fistula.
when a fleshy Rupture was cut, which turned into a Fistula, there came, as I
showed Sand and Stones with the Urin a long time.

The Causes.
We showed in the Pain of the Reins from the Stone that Sand and Gravel and
Stones came from a earthy Matter and Phlegm, especially that which is mixed with
water fastened in dry parts. And when other earthy Matter is gathered and fixed
in certain Excrements or parts, it may do the same, because we find by
Experience that wood and bones out of the Body may be turned to stones, and
such are found in the Body. And we shall now show how they breed in diverse
parts of the Body.

As we showed in the Causes of the Stone, An earthy Matter in the Kidneys, is
the cause of the stone.
there comes sand and stones by urin from the Kidneys, rather then other parts,
and they are from an earthy Matter fastened to them. And they fall from thence
into the Bladder by the Ureters, and if they stay there, as great stones do,
and increase by the earthy part of the urin, Sand fallen into the Bladder, the
cause of pissing of Sand and Stones.
there is the stone of the Bladder. If they go farther, they are pissed forth:
Otherwise they must be cut forth. Which we showed was done by chance, from a
wound in the Groine.

We showed in Diseases of the Liver, that Gravel might grow there, The earthy
matter of the Liver, is the cause of Sand that is pissed, and of gravel.
by reason of the Serum that pierced into the Vessels, from which it might pass
with the Urin to the Reins, and so to the Bladder, but stones cannot pass that
way.

Also Gravel is bred in the Eyes, The sandy Matter in the Eyes, is the cause of
Gravel.
from water that continually moistneth them: Or it is brought thither with
tears, if they be hot and sharp, or earthy. And in sound Eyes this sandy Matter
is gathered in the Corners of the Eyes and Eyebrows, at night when the Eyes
are shut. And in diseased Eyes, if there be tears and heat, as in Epiphora is
showed.

From the same Cause come little Stones, when sand is fixed in the hard Tunicle
of the Eye.

In the Cavities of the Nostrils from the Earthyness of the water and phlegm,
Earthy Matter growing to the Nose.
which flows from the Brain, proceeds the stone that was blown out. For though
stones are found in the Brain, yet cannot they get that way through the narrow
passages.

We showed in Asthma the Cause of a Stone in the Lungs. An earthy Matter in
the Lungs, is the cause of Stones.


When Matter lies long, and grows hard in the Guts, from the Serum which
wetteth them with the Excrements, The Cause of Stones in the Guts is thick
matter that grows in them.
a Stone may be caused there. But it is not much regarded, because it passes
with the Excrements without pain. And this is probable to be in a man, for I
saw the same voided by a Horse. Other things turned into Stone, may be from an
earthy salt Matter taken in, and hardened with the Excrements.

The rare bringing forth of a stony Child, The earthy salt Matter in the womb,
is the cause of a stony Child.
comes from an earthy salt Matter in the womb which turns it to stone, even as
other things are turned to stone out of the Body.

When Earthyness is in the Serum in diverse Pores of the Body, An earthy Matter
in the Pores, is the cause of the Stone there.
it causes Stones by being externally dried, This is most in the Face, when it
is exposed to hot and dry Air. The same is the cause of a Stone in the Eye.

We showed in Tumors, The earthy Matter of Tumors, is the cause of stones
under the tongue in the Jaws, and the Gout.

And the Filth of the Teeth, is the cause of Scales.


how stones grew under the tongue and in the Gout. And the same may be in other
Tumors.

We showed also in Filth, how from the Slime and Filth of the Teeth, Scales
and Gravel grew.

The Cure.
The Cure of Stones is to be after some have been voided, or other signs have
discovered them, from whence we conjecture that they may grow again. For that
they are seldom, if they will not go of themselves, they must be taken out.

The voiding of Stones by Urin is not to be stopped but furthered, The
preventing and Cure of the Stone in the Bladder.
or Gravel, and the growth must be hindered. And if a stone stick in the
Bladder, it must be taken out.

A Caution must be for the prevention of the Stone in the Bladder, as in the
Reins: As we showed in the Pain of the Kidneys. The Gravel grows first in the
Reins, and falls from thence into the Bladder. And the beginning of them must
be prevented in the reins. And then the stone in the Bladder will not grow so
fast.

For the Cure of the Stone in the Bladder, it must be worn, or broken, or
expelled, or removed from its place, or taken out by these means following.

Purges are sometimes given, when the Body is full of evil Humors, to prepare it
for things proper, that they may work the better.

And the Belly must be kept open: As we showed in the heat of Urin from other
causes.

Also strong purges are given to put nature to the expelling of it, as it does
the other superfluous Excrements.

As we have often seen, not only Excrements but stones have been voided by
strong purgers.

To all these are added break stones to diminish them, and break them. These
Purges are mentioned in the stone of the Kidnyes and are good here, for the
virtue of them will reach to the Urin and Bladder.

Mollifying Clysters are good, which are mentioned in many places, and Anodynes
when the Urin burns, mentioned in the Colic, always adding things that
break the stone: Such as are mentioned in the stone of the Kidneys, in three
examples.

They who suppose the stone is bred of phlegm, use Vomiting often to prevent.
But it is better to cleanse and prepare the Body, then for any thing else.

And this Vomiting by great straining may force the stone from the Bladder into
the passage.

The same things mentioned in the stone of the Kidneys are given here to open
the passages, and to cleanse the Earthiness, which increases the stone, and to
make less the stone; And they are good to prevent the Stone in the Kidneys,
from whence heat in the Bladder comes. And because the Bladder is farther off
then the Kidneys, you must give the strongest Medicines and the greater
quantities, that their virtue may reach it.

As nourishing and Physical broaths, and diverse Decoctions. And this: Take
Liquorish two ounces, Knot grass roots one ounce, Asarum half an ounce,
Bettony, Maidenhair or Goldy locks, Mouse-ear, white Saxifrage, Pellitory of
the Wall, Sea fennel, Burnet, of each one handful, flowers of St. John's wort,
Broom, Roses, each one pugil, Myrtle berries, Annis seed, Fennel seed, each
half a handful; Gromwel and white Thorn seeds two drams, Garden Smallage seeds
and wild Smallage seeds, each one dram; Raysons stoned two ounces, red Pease
one pugil, boil them in Wine and Water; for five or six Doses in a good
quantity, that so it may sooner come to the part affected, dissolving in every
draught, syrup of Limons and Oxymel simple, each one ounce; Oxymel of Squils
two drams.

To this Decoction, may be added other openers and stone breakers, as the
opening roots, steeped in Vinegar, Madder roots, and Mulbery roots, Rupture
wort, sweet broom, Ladies Gloves, etc.

Also the infusion mentioned in the stone of the Kidneys and the Lies.

Also the juyces, as Urin, Vinegar, natural waters, and the like there
mentioned, with the sharp juice of Barberies, and of Sea fennel, Saxifrage, St.
Johnswort, of green Nuts and Leeks, given alone, or with Sugar, or other
Liquor, or Decocted to a Syrup, or extract, or made into Lozenges. Those of
juice of Limons and Berberies are most in fashion and are very excellent and
pleasant.

Simple and Compound waters distilled, for the stone in the Kidneys mentioned,
are here also good. If the Patient will use them freely.

The Urin of a Goat or Boar, is commended by Dioscorides, if drunken.

Also Oils mentioned in the Cure of the Stone of the Kidneys are here good.

And the same Diet may be used.

And those Medicines which are diverse ways prepared of which we use the
Simples, as the Rosins of Plants. Medicines given in substance, are diverse
ways prepared: some of Simples, as Rosins, Pouders of Herbs, Blood and Ashes
of Beasts: Some are Compounded of Plants, Animals, and the like, into Pouders,
Electuaries and Pills.

Besides which in the stone of the Bladder is commended Mouse dung, Snailes
shells, Stones in the Gall of an Ox, the Stomach or Gizard of an Eagle that
breaks bones, therefore called Ossifraga, Connies blood, burn, Glass,
Sagapenum; Euphorbium with other things mixed, Gum of Almond-tree, Vine,
Eryngus roots, wild Parsnips, Elder flowers, not open being dried, and given
often. Nettle seed, Cappars, Water-mints.

You must use Injections into the Bladder, of such things as allay Heat,
mentioned in hot Pissing.

Lastly, to break the Stone if possible, use Oil of Scorpions, and Medicines
made of Goats blood, or Wolfes blood. Of Juice of Lemmons, and Bar-berries, and
other sharp things, as Vinegar, with Coral, and Pearl, which often, used
dissolve the Stone. These may be injected with other things that allay them
from hurting the Bladder.

Baths to sit in, and Fomentations, of such things as relaxe, and open the
passages, and break the stone, are made of such things as we use in the Stone
of the Kidneys: Which as they are there good, when applied to the Hypochondria,
or under the Ribs, so here to the lower part of the Belly. To which add these,
Fennel, Spignel, Saxifrage, Melilot flowers, St. John's Wort, and other
breakstones.

Also Natural Baths are good, if sharp, and of Brimstone, instead whereof, you
may make Artificial of Brimstone boiled in Water.

Ointments prescribed in the Stone of the Kidneys, which open the passages,
assuage pain, and break the Stone, are good to be applied to the Breast and
Back, Yard, and Stones. Among which Oil of Scorpions is best alone, or with
other; as Birthwort, Gentian, Cypress, and barks of Cappar roots boiled
therein, with prepared Goats blood.

Instead of this, we make an excellent Oil of Cantharides, and Beetles, and
Grasshoppers boiled in Oil, with Juice of Raddish, Pellitory, and Goats blood,
adding a little Vinegar of Squills.

We mentioned a Girdle with a stone in it, good against the stone of the
Kidneys: The same is also good here in the stone of the bladder.

Also a Girdle made of diverse things, used all night, is highly commended; as
of Linen washed with Juice of Tansey, Plantane, Housleek, Bean flower, and
Honey.

You must use Operations, when the Stone of the Bladder sticks in the neck
thereof, and stops the passages of urin; as shaking when the Patient lies upon
his back, his Thighs drawn up, for the Motion of the Bladder and Loins.

We thrust the Stone of the passage of the Bladder with a Gatheter thrust in,
which is hollow, that the Urin stopped may presently flow forth, and crooked
like the passage of the Yard: The same is done with a wax Candle, because it
will work into the passage better, being softer.

We take the Stone out of the Bladder by other ways; some suppose it may be
done by applying things to the Yard, which have a property to attract the
stone; as the brain of a Mag-pie tied to the Head, or Glans, and Praepuce,
called the Foreskin. Or they leave the Yard thrust into a great Raddish made
hollow.

Sometimes the Stone is expelled by forcible pissing, after sharp wine long
retained after great Draughts, especially if the lower parts be shaken at that
time by stamping upon the ground with the Feet.

Sometimes it is sucked forth of the Yard, when it sticks there. This is down
often in Infants.

We are constrained to cut for the stone as the last remedy, when there is
great pain and stoppage of Urin, albeit it is not without danger of death, or
Convulsions, or some other following impediment, especially in Pissing, which
they cannot hold afterward. But many have been thus cured, and never had stone
after in the bladder. Some have been twice cut, by reason of some signs of the
stone falling from the Reins, or left behind at the first, and yet have
recovered, when others have died at the first Cutting.

The Cutters for the stone do thus. The Patient sits upon a table bound to the
back of another that holds him (so that he cannot hinder the Operation of the
surgeon with his body or hands) with his thighs drawn up and spread abroad,
then they put a Catheter into the Yard and Bladder, and thrust it outward,
above the Podex in the Perinaeum, or into the place between the Podex and Cods,
where the Neck of the Bladder is; which thrusting out the skin, shows them
the way, then they make Incision long ways upon the Noch of the Catheter, made
for that purpose, and open the Neck of the Bladder, not according to the future
or middle part, but upon the one side, then they draw out the Catheter, and put
a directory Instrument with a pipe or guttur upon the outside; or an Instrument
like that which opens the Matrix, (made to enlarge the neck of the bladder)
into the wound so made. And then with a forceps or Instrument made at both ends
where they meet, hollow like two little spoons, they lay hold upon the stone,
and draw it out, through the hollow Instrument, or directory Pipe, if there be
many Stones, they draw often, this done, the wound will easily be healed,
except the Body of the bladder be hurt.

When a Stone sticks in the passage of the Yard it is taken out with less
labor and danger, by cutting it out underneath, between the two Bodies.

You may take a stone from a woman's bladder, by enlarging the neck thereof
without cutting, with an Instrument called Speculum Vesicae, which being put
in, may be by degrees scrued, so that there will be room for the Forceps or
Tongues to enter. And because through the enlarging by force of so sensible a
part, there is great pain, and sometimes a tearing, and wound of the part. This
operation in women is not without danger of the accidents that we showed would
follow cutting.

There are some that say a stone may be taken out of the Bladder, by cutting
the Belly in that part that is nigh to the same, and the Patient recover. This
we saw in a Fisherman wounded by chance in the bladder, who had a Fistula
after the wound, through which he voided his urin and many times stones and
gravel.

Some say that by the finger in the Podex, when the bladder is pressed down,
you may thrust down the stone in the bladder into the passage for Urin, and
through the the Yard afterward without cutting. And when one tried it in my
presence, he brought it to the entrance of the passage, but there it stuck,
till he took it out by a small Incision. Thus by a new and less provision is
the stone taken out, but not without danger neither, for some part of the
bladder may be thrust into the neck of the stone, and so cut off.

They must use the Diet for the stone of the Kidneys, for this of the bladder
proceeds from thence, and is nourished thereby, by the cleaving of earthy
Matter, and salt of the Urin together: And the same things that hurt or help
the one, hurts and helps the other.

For the Cure of the Gravel sticking to the corner of the Eyes and Eyebrows,
The Cure of Gravel in the Eye, and stone upon the Eye called Tophulus.
it is by taking away the great moisture from the Eye. And this is done, as I
showed in the Cure of Weeping; and if there be redness as in the Cure of
Epiphora or Rhewm of the Eye. And when the Eyelidds are glewed together, to
open them with ease, use Rose Water, or Milk, to soften this Matter that grows
hard, especially in sleep. The Tophulus is upon the ball of the Eye, and
hinders little, and will fall off of it self, or must be taken off with a
needle, which is without danger in that thick Tunicle of the Eye.

If a Stone be blown out of the Nose, The Cure of Stones in the Nose.
and you suspect from a new Obstruction thereof that there is another, you must
presently, use Errhines, or things to provoke Neesing.

If Stones be spit from the Lungs, The Cure of the Stones in the Lungs.
and the shortness of breathing, and Asthma go not away, we may gather that
there are more stones yet, and it is good to force them away, with things that
expectorate, or cleanse the Breast, mentioned in Asthma.

If Stones are voided by stool, The Cure of Stones in the Guts.
because it is the general place for to discharge all Excrements, you must do
nothing, except it be to prevent the growth of them, if they come often.

It is better to admire as a thing unheard, The Cure of an Infant turned to
stone.
that the Child should turn to stone in the womb, then to attempt any thing to
prevent it.

Gravel Tumors in the Pores, The Cure of gravel tumors in the Pores.
go not away with the Nails, or needle opening the skin, when in the Face. But
when in the soles of the Feet, they are taken out by cutting and dividing the
thick skin thereof.

If Stones come from a Tumor in the Tongue, The Cure of stones in the tumors of
the tongue, almonds of the ears, or in the nodes of the Gout.
or Almonds of the Ears, or the like, or from the Nodes in the Gout, you must
cure the Ulcer. And if there be more in the tumors, and be troublesome, you must
bring it to matter, as an Imposthume, that they may come forth, or be easily
taken out. And if they will not be suppurated, or the Patient be impatient of
delay, open it, and take them out: As we showed in the Cure of the Tumors under
the tongue called Rana or Frog.

When we spoke of Filth generally and particularly that of the Teeth, The Cure
of Gravel in the Teeth.
we showed how Gravel should be taken therefrom.

CHAP. XVI. The Voiding of things that get into the Body.
The Kinds.
THings without that get into the Body, and come forth again are diverse, either
such as get into the inside of the Body, or only into the outside. And they are
all besides Nature, as their voiding is, coming from diverse parts of the Body.

Many things come out of the eye which fell into it, The voiding of things
gotten into the Eye.
and caused tears, pain, itching, redness, or ulceration: As I showed in the
pain of the Eyes.

Some things creep in, or are thurst into the Ears, The voiding of things got
into the Ears.
which cause a noise, and deafness: As we shewin the Cure of Deafness, before
they come forth.

Things that are drawn by breathing into the Nose, The voiding of things gotten
into the Nose.
and cause itching are voided by sneesing: And sometimes things taken at the
Mouth came out at the Nose.

Some things that fell from the nose into the moth, The spitting out of things
gotten into the Mouth.
are spit forth, or coughed out, if they fall upon the rough Artery. Or things
taken at the mouth which offend the stomach, are vomited up, The vomiting of
external things got into the Body.
or that stuck in the Gullet: And sometimes things given, as a Clyster have been
vomited at the Mouth.

Diverse things taken which disturb the Stomach, are cast out at the Podex, and
some without disturbance; and some things are put into it, or creep into it,
and come forth again.

Some things have gotten into the Matrix, and come forth again. Voiding of
things got into the womb, bladder, breasts, etc.


Some things taken have been pissed out.

Others have been swallowed, and sent out of women's breasts.

Some say that things taken, or by Witchcraft thrust into the Body, have been
voided at diverse places.

Hitherto may be referred things that get into the skin, and under the Nails,
and come forth again.

The Causes.
Many are the things which by chance get into the Eyes, Ears, Nose, Mouth,
Womb, and Podex, and come forth as they went in, or otherwise; or that has
been in the outside of the Body. It is impossible to repeat them all, let the
chief suffice, and those of most concernment, or which are most usual, and how
they got in.

Many times Flies get into the Eyes by chance, and get out again, as Dust,
Things fallen into the Eye.
Moates, Hairs, Sand, Gravel, mentioned in the Causes of the Pain of the Eye,
where we showed how the Eyebrows getting into the Eyes, caused pain.

The things that get into the Ears, Things in the Ear.
and out again, are chiefly water, when they swim; also Fleas, and Lice,
Chinches, Ear-wiggs, and other creeping things, as worms, the earwig is most
feared. Sometimes other little things, such as get into the Eyes, mentioned in
Deafness, as a Cherrystone, which getting into the Ear of a Child terrified the
Parents that it might grow there.

There are also small things in the Nostrils by breathing, Things in the Nose.
and are either presently blown out, or sneesed forth, or falling into the
Mouth, are spit out, or upon the rough Artery, and are coughed out. Other
little Creatures that creep into the Nose, in sleep, cannot stay long, because
they provoke sneesing by tickling.

There are diverse things that get into the Mouth, Things gotten into the mouth,
is the cause of their voiding by stool, vomit, or urin.
that are voided by stool or vomit, with griping of the Belly, or without.

Some kind of Meats eaten, are thrown out again, not only unconcocted, as in a
Lientery-flux; but when the Stomach is sound, and yet they are unconcocted, and
come forth as they went in, because they were taken in too great quantity for
concoction, being fat or unctious, and then there is a voiding of fat, as we
showed, or are too hard to be concocted: As we showed in the Colic, how one
voided Cheese that he had long before eaten immoderately. And we saw two maids
which after Clysters voided abundance of Chestnuts: And one in a Dysentery
voided Chestnuts, which he had plentifully eaten, some weeks before.

For the most part, that which cannot be concocted in a man's stomach, is sent
out unchanged, as in beasts, as are Cherry and Prune stones, and Cornil-berry
stones, and of the like Fruits, as Medlars that are as stones very hard, five
of which were sent to me for stones of the Kidneys, which upon Examination I
discovered.

You may plainly see the skins of things, as Fruits, and the like, in the
stools unchanged, when the insides are digested, especiallly after eating of
Pease, which the vulgar count unholsom therefore.

I saw many Hens bones voided by a woman after a clyster, who had eaten hens
feet for a diet.

Besides Meats, many other things are taken in and voided. As some Creatures
quick, some dead, which being whole. could not be digested, come forth so,
contrary to other Creatures, who swallow mice, serpents, and the like, (as I
have a Cod fish swallowed a Beetle) and digest them whole, and though it be
alive, yet they hurt them not.

As it is manifest that a foolish fellow swallowed an Eel by jesting, and
voided it by stool the next day, after great torments, dead, and as it were
flead.

I knew a Soldier that in his sleep upon the ground, had a Lizard that crept
into his Mouth to his Stomach, by which he was miserably tormented, but voiding
bones by stool, he was free.

Some Fools, and Melancholic persons, that hear noise in their Guts by wind,
persuade themselves that they have swallowed Snaks, and the like, as Froggs by
drinking of Froggs-spawn, when they swam in the River. But this is false,
because if these or other Creatures get into the Belly, which is hard to be
done, they can live no longer, but are stifled, and killed with heat.

Hairs are swallowed and voided again, and if you look upon them while hot, you
will think they are alive by their motion. Thus the people think true, and I
knew an Impostor, that gave little short threads in pills, to make them think
they voided worms, and after showed them how they moved, and deceived many. I
have seen, and have by me balls of hair found in the stomachs of Calfes, and
Goats, made of hair they swallowed, compacted, and knit together, and hard all
over. The like may be in a Man, if he should swallow hairs, as they delight to
do.

Some earthy things are voided, as swallowed as sand, Clay, Stones, and Metals.
As a Fool who for gain sake, swallowed Flints as big as Nuts, suddenly, and
filled his Stomach, so that you might hear them rattle, wash them, and swalow
them again in our sight. And I saw a woman that had swallowed Quicksilver, who
voided it in my Chamber, while she was declaring to me the same. These no man
can digest, being hard and earthy, as Sand and Stones, but I have observed
certainly that sheep digest them, and Wolves in time of famine preserve
themselves by eating Clay, and I keep by me stony Clay, taken out of the
Stomach of a Wolf, as a rarity.

Many Artificial of Earth or Wood, swallowed by chance, except they stay in the
Guts, are voided by stool, as a bullet which some swallow for death. Other
Drunkards, and mad Men swallow glass that they have chewed.

One Drundard swallowed a spoon, wherewith he was eating Milk, being thrust by
his Companion, which the next day hung at the Fundament, and was voided, after
great pain.

Vesalius reports of one that lying with a Concubine, swallowed down her great
golden Crucifixe, she had about her Neck, least it should be found about him,
and voided it again.

A famous Physician writes that one swallowed a knife in a cloth, and after
great pain thereby, it produced a great Imposthume in his Groine, and was there
cut out, he living long after.

The famous Physician of Regiomont writes a Book of the swallowing of a knife
taken out of the stomach by Incision

Another writes that a Needle swallowed, was voided forth at a Vein.

A Physician to be believed, did certainty affirm to me, that a Needle came
forth of a Woman's Breast with the Milk.

Many things taken at the Mouth, are vomited up presently. Some, if they go
aside, as they say, and fall upon the rough Artery, as Crumbs of Bread, after
Water is drunk, or the like, they are coughed up again, or forced into the
Nostrils with the Drink.

Some sticking in the Jaws, hinder swallowing and breathing, and sometimes
choke; as Thorns, Bones, and Money swallowed: As we showed in the Defect of the
Throat, which stopped in the way.

Rhasis shows that a Horsleech sucked in by chance, stuck in the Throat.

Some things eaten, and passing from the Guts by the Meseraicks, have been
pissed out, as Oil in great quantity drunk off, and the like, neither does that
which swims upon the urin come always from the Kidneys.

We showed in the Treatise of Urin, that worms eaten with Cheese, have gotten
to the Bladder, and have been pissed out.

Also some sand passing through the Meseraicks, may make the Urin gravelly, for
it is not necessary that it be bred in the Body, which is rare.

I have observed also, that Birds bones eaten, have been pissed out at a wound
of the strait Gut, which was fistulated, and pierced the neck of the Bladder.

Clysters ascending out of the thick guts into the small, and so into the
Stomach, Vomiting of Clysters.
have been vomited up.

Horsleeches are applied to draw Blood from the Haemorrhoids.

A Countryman told me that his Neighbor carrying a quick Mole in his Pocket,
had him so far in his Podex, that they could not get him forth without killing.

One told me of a Mouse that got into a Woman's Matrix, and not unlikely, for
women are very fearful of them.

We shall not here mention things put into the Body by Witchcraft.

Things like bones, hairs, and other things are bred in Imposthumes, but they
are not here to be spoken of, because they come not from without, except put in
by Magic, which also may depend upon a Natural Cause: As we showed in Tumors
that imposthumated.

Those that cleave to the skin and are taken off, are chiefly filth, not that
which is from within, of which we spoke, but that which by touching filthy
things in the Hands, Feet, and under the Nails, which infects them, and makes
them black, as we said in Discolouration. Telling of Money infects the Hands
much, though the desire thereof tolerates the chief cause is, that so many
thousands of Lepers, Beggars, and infected persons have handled it. Among
Creatures, Fleas do most usually stick to the Body to bite, and suck blood,
which we suppose, are not bred as Lice from the Body of Filth, but come from
without, as we showed, and appears, because they have a different shape from
Lice are red, creep not, but skip with two long feet, they feed not of filth as
Lice, but of blood. Nor are always about the Body, and change their place; and
though they may breed in Dogs, or increase there, yet not in a Man, whose
Filth is distinct, as other Creatures have other Lice, from the diversity of
their Excrements and Filth: which is not only from their Bodies, but from the
Nests of Birds.

Horsleeeches are applied to draw blood, Horsleeches.
and seldom fix upon Swimmers in the River: As we see sometimes the little
Horsleeches stick to the Fish.

The Cure.
These, or the like, getting into the Body by falling, or being taken in, or
creeping in. If they continue, and we know not, or if we know not of them, are
neglected, but if they declare themselves by hurt or pain, then we must get
them forth, as we said in the Symptoms of some of them. And when they come of
themselves, this is to be committed to Nature, and the pain must be helped, and
they forwarned when they come forth.

Slowly it was prescribed in the Cure of the Pain of the Eyes, The Cure of
things fallen into the eyes.
how things got in might be taken out, and what you should do when the Hairs of
the Brows hang in the Eyes.

We showed in Deafness, Into the Ears.
how you should take things out of the Ears.

Things drawn or gotten into the nose, Into the Nose.
are sneesed out by their tickling, or they get into the mouth, and if into the
rough Artery, they are coughed out, and spit out.

And so are they that get in by the Mouth, The Cure of things got into the
Mouth.
or by the Nose, you must use Expectorations, if they be in the rough Artery,
and not let the Patient be choked, as is reported with a Fly.

If they stick in the Gullet, or about the Throat, as we said of Horsleeches,
and the like, which endanger Suffocation, we showed the Cure in the Hindrance
of swallowing.

If they come into the stomach, if they cause not vomiting, you must give a
Vomit.

If they go into the Guts, and out at the Podex, help with Clysters, and
Instruments, if they stick there.

If Clysters are vomited up, it is an evil sign, The Cure of things in the
Podex.
and when it is so in the Colic, you must cure it as was showed in the Colic.

Horsleeches after they are filled with blood, will fall off, or be taken off.
If they will not off, cut their tayls, (which they do to make them suck after
emptying) and they fall off, or sprinkle salt or ashes upon them, which will
make worms depart.

That Mole which got into the Podex, caused great pain with his Feet, when
drawn out, till they killed him, The Cure of things crept into the Womb.
and hurt the Podex, that it was after cured, and so did the Mouse in the womb
of which we spoke.

We showed in the Cure of Filth coming from within, The Cure of outward Filth.
how you should cure Filth without.

The Filth which is under the nails, The Cure of Filth under the Nails.
for want of paring, must be taken away by paring.

It is not our purpose to show how Fleas are driven from Chambers, To keep off
Fleas.
Beds and Clothes, but that you may with a Decoction, wash your Body to keep
off Fleas and Lice.

Horsleeches fall off as we showed before of themselves, or by Art. The taking
off of Horsleeches.


FINIS.

