A pitiful Remonstrance, or just Complaint MADE
To all freeborn true-hearted Englishmen, sensible of the Kingdoms miserable
slavery. From all the poor afflicted and miserable, inslaved and immured
Prisoners for Debt, Contempts, and other trivial matters; Mr. John Raiment, a
man of known fidelity, being 500. l. out for the State, yet having been most
unjustly held in suit these 12 years in the Court of Request and Chancery for
pretended Debt of 537 l. 19 s. 6 d by one John John's: although never a pen y
proved against him, but has been cleared by Mr. Leigh. and Mr Northy Merchants
of known ability, to whom it was referred, who brought upon acocmpt 54. l. due
to the said Raiment; yet did that corrupt Judge Manchester, after he had
pronounced him clear, in the open Court, yet in private suffered it to go on in
suit, and being here twelve years, Mr. Speaker ordered, the 537. l. 19. s. 6.
d. to be brought into the Court, and then they should have a trial, though
never a penny proved to be due upon the not doing, of which he is committed to
the Fleet in his old days, there to end his days without some course of Justice
be taken, which he always desired: The said John's having neither Bill, Bond,
Hand, or any Witness against him, to prove penny or pennyworth due. In all the
several murdering slaughter-houses, and dens of cruelty, called Gaols, Prisons,
and Comptors, within the Kingdom of England, and principality of Wales, about
20000 in number.
SHOWS,
THat we the oppressed prisoners have (though fruitless) for these seven years
by our humble Petitions addressed our selves to the high Court of Parliament,
craving deliverance from this unjust, inhumane slavery of imprisonment for
debt, illegally fastened, as on us, so, on this whole Nation and their
posterity, contrary to the Law of God, and the fundamental great Charter of
Englands Liberty, and the Parliaments several Declarations, Manifestations,
Protestations, and Imprecations, and to the trust reposed in them at their
Election, as the Kingdoms Stewards to see Injustice and Oppression banished the
Land, and Justice and Mercy recalled and established, where the inslaved
prisoners are buried alive, and robbed of their Estates, Callings, and precious
Liberties, contrary to the true Liberty of the Commons of England; as appears
plainly by Register. folio. 77. Dehomino Replegiando, folio 66. the 3 of
Edward, the 1. chap. 15. the 25. of Edward, 3 chap. 4. where it appears, That
the body of no Commoner of England is to be imprisoned for Debt, but only for
Murder, Felony and Treason, Nisi per legem terrae, the 9. of Henry, the 3.
chap. 29. the 52. of Henry the 3. chap. 5. and the 14. of Edward the 3. chap.
1. and Abridgment of Statutes, folio 65. and 6. as also by the Petition of
Right, in the 3. of King Charles, confirmed this Session of Parliament, and it
appears by the Statute of the 42. of Edward the 3. chap. 1. That all Statutes
which have bin since made, to the insringement of the Subjects Liberty,
contrary to Magna Charta, are absolutely void, and of none effect, as if they
had never been made, and reason good, for the lesser and latter must needs give
place to the greater, and Mother Law of this Kingdom

Thus you see, dear Countrymen and fellow Commoners, it appears clearly, that
imprisonment of the persons of the free Commons of England for debt, (which had
its rise and original but from the time of Henry the 8. at his dissolution of
Abbeys, Frieries, and Nunneries,) is only an unjust, illegal, slavish
Innovation fastened upon us, the free Commons of England, within these hundred
years, by the subtle, diabolical practice of ambitious, unjust Judges, and by
evil minded, covetous, exacting Lawyers, whose beginning and rise also was with
Ignatius Loyola, the Infernal Father and Founder of the order of Jesuits,
about an hundred years since, under whose heavy, slavish yokes of Injustice,
Tyranny and Oppression, this Commonwealth has long groaned, and does still
groan: Witness the many thousands of stained houses, and ancient families in
this Kingdom.

Nor can this great oppressing evil be ever redressed, unless these wicked
Mercenary, Contentious Instruments of Injustice and oppression (the Lawyers) No
Lawyers suffered to fit in Parliament, or in any great Council, in Scotland,
nor in any other Kingdom, but only in England. Many hundred of poor Christians
have been murdered, starved and destroyed, in the Gaols of Kings Bench, the
Fleet Newgate, and in diverse other Prisons; by the Gaolers, their Clarks and
Servants; as will be proved when ever by Justice required.
be quite expelled the House of Commons, as the proud Lordly Bishops were out
of the House of Lords; a Lawyer being no more fit to be chosen for a Parliament
man then a Butcher, or a Jailer, for a Jury man, much less for a Justice of
Peace. For we, the Commons of England, must not expect, that these Mercenary
Lawyers will ever suffer the Conduite of Justice to be opened, or the free and
clear current thereof to overflow and drown their Infernal, Impious, gainful,
filthy, raging waters of contention: so long as they can keep the staff of
honor, credit, respect, and power in their hands, and by their wicked, gainful
Instruments the bloody Gaolers, Bailiffs, Sergeants, Atturnies and Solicitors,
bring all the Wealth or Grayn of the Kingdom to their impious, abominable
Mills of contention, corruptly called Courts of Justice, or rather of Fees and
Bribes, where they grind the faces of the poor, the widow, the fatherless and
the stranger even to dust, and devour their estates, liberties and lives.

The abovesaid particulars being by you, dear Countrymen and fellow feeling
Commoners, truly and seriously considered:

Our humble and earnest request unto you is, That you would be pleased by some
speedy, just and pious course (in your addresses to the high Court of
Parliament) to acquit your selves and us, and the posterity of this whole
Nation. from this inhumane, cruel bondage, and starving condition of Being,
that so our lives, and the lives of our wives and children may be preserved
from perishing, and we by our liberties thus regained, may be enabled in and by
our several Callings, to provide for our and their future subsistence.

And Courteous Readers, We beseech you in the bowels of compassion, to suffer
this our pitiful complaint to stand, that so all may see and read it, and by
it may become sensible of this our inhumane, cruel, slavish, starving condition
of Being, not to be paraleld by any other Country, or in any other Kingdom,
Christian or Pagan, within the confines of Europe, Asia, Africa, nor America,
being a cruelty repugnant to the Law of God, of all other Nations, and of this
Kingdom.

In the Fleet, Prisoners upon contempt.

1 Mr. Robert Ramsey has 700. l. per annum, unjustly kept from him by Sir Tho.
Walsingham, and yet kept in prison by him upon a pretended contempt these 12.
or 13. years.

2. Henry Adis, whose cruel Adversary Keyzar (by Mr. Lenthal, the Speakers
unjust practices) illegally turns Adis out of his house, seases upon all his
goods, and upon a pretended contempt keeps Adis close prisoner in the Fleet.

3. Robert Cole (now more then two years) illegally detained prisoner by the
Warden of the Fleet, upon a pretended contempt, obtained against him by his
Adversary Bayber, who is 2000. l. indebted to Cole, and Cole owes him nothing.

4. James Frese Merchant (upon a private verbal command from the Speaker, (Mr.
Lenthal) and his brother Sir John Lenthal,) has been these two years, and four
months, (and is still) kept close prisoner in the Tower Chamber by the Warden
of the Fleet.

5. Captain Sanford, who, in the service of the Kingdom, has adventured both
estate and life, to whom are great sums due from the State, was taken and
imprisoned upon a pretended contempt, out of the Chancery, although he has
proved, that he was not served with any Subpaena in the cause; and also that he
was then in actual service for the Parliament, far remote from his house.

These, and many other such like cruel, illegal practices in the Law, exposes
and inslaves all the Commons of England in their Lives, Estates and Liberties,
to the imperious will of greatness, and to the rage and cruelty of their
Adversaries, Lawyers and Gaolers. Although they know, that only the poor
prisoners future endeavors by liberty enjoyed, must give some hope to the
Creditor, of satisfaction for his debt, although not in whole, yet in part,
which is better then the loss of all their debt. Besides, the guilt of the poor
prisoners blood, and the perishing condition of his poor wife and children to
lie upon him. Under the impious, heavy burden, of which several great cruelties
this whole Land groaneth.

And thus it plainly does appear,
That Lawyers do rule all things there.
Where we expected Justice, that the Speaker
Rules Lawyers, the Jailer rules the Speaker,
But himself in every thing
Is ruled by that wicked sting.
Of Death and Hell, named Thomas Dudson,
Who is none other then the Devils godson,
Directed always, by that fiend of Hell,
For all his actions in cruelties excel.
Thus Englands Steed is carried still
By Lenthals, Dudsons, and the Devils will,
Rubbed and furbisht by the Lawyers Fees,
The Priestly tithes have brought him on his knees,
And Jailer cruelties have made him lame,
Are not these imps of Hell for this to blame?
Yea, worthy to be whipped, their proper fee,
Being just sentence, and the triple tree.
Justice, and Mercy, preserves the Land, and all
Her Sons and Daughters, from ruins final fall,
But they that Justice, Truth, and Mercy slight
Are foes to Christ, despised in his sight.
O then let Justice, Truth, and Mercy sway,
That so from England, wrath may fly away,
And Mercy, Truth, and Justice, then may dwell
Within our Land, till then 'twill never be well.

