A FULL ANSWER TO A Printed Paper, ENTITLED, Four serious Questions
concerning Excommunication, and Suspension from the Sacrament, etc.

Wherein the several Arguments and Texts of Scripture produced, are
particularly and distinctly discussed: And the Debarring of Ignorant and
Scandalous persons from the Sacrament, vindicated.

Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine.

1 Cor. 11.29. For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body.

1 Cor. 5.13. Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop, 1645.

A Full ANSWER To a printed Paper, entitled, Four serious Questions
concerning Excommunication and Suspension from the Sacrament, etc.
SIR,
YOur Questions were, I suppose, sent abroad in expectation of an Answer.
Until you receive a better from some other hand, you may please to make use of
this. If it satisfy not, I neither challenge nor refuse a Reply. Our Readers,
I hope, will be gainers, if impartial, whether you or I win or lose. Nor
will I despair of gaining you over to that Truth, which as yet you acknowledge
not. And if my Answer be in part by way of Questions, you will not blame me,
your self have led the way.

First then, whereas in your Title you say, Questions etc. propounded to the
Reverend Assembly, and the like afterward in your Preface: I ask, whether you
do not know that the Reverend Assembly have no power to take notice of any
Questions for debate and determination, unless ordered so to do by one or both
Houses of Parliament; and therefore not till then in a capacity of returning
Answers to such Quaeres? A friend to the Assembly should have thought of this
before he had spread such a paper before all the world to their prejudice.

Next, whether the Titles of the Reverend Assembly, and our Venerable Assembly
(unless put upon them in scorn, as they have been by others) in a business
which you acknowledge to be of much difficulty, and requiring a very
circumspect handling, and upon which accordingly they have spent so much time,
and laid so much weight upon their desires of it, might not justly have kept
you from publishing in print, under the guise of Questions, your private
judgment, and (it may be) sudden thoughts, against them, without ever hearing
of them?

Thirdly, it seems strange, that you, professing such circumspection to be
necessary in handling this point, should yet so speak of it, as one not
sufficiently acquainted either with the Advice of the Assembly, or Resolutions
of the Parliament, concerning it. For, in two maine things at least, you quite
mistake: As first, you seem to take for granted (and especially Qu. 3.) that it
is desired, the power of Suspension should be in a single Minister, or in
Ministers alone, according to their private judgment: whereas the advice and
desire of the Assembly is expressly contrary; they place it in the whole
Eldership, nor may they do it but upon due proof. Secondly, you seem to bend
your strength wholly against Suspension before Excommunication, as granting the
latter; but supposing that such an antecedent Suspension is the only thing
stuck at, and unfit to be established; whereas the Parliament has already
agreed on such a Suspension, in the case of seven sins by name, which I
presume you have heard of; so that you have bestowed Arguments, not only
against the humble advice and desires of the Assembly, but the Votes of both
Houses of Parliament, which I hope you will hereafter forbear.

Fourthly, whereas you seem to load that advice of the Assembly with many
reproachful Insinuations, of an Arbitrary, Unlimited, Tyrannical, Papal
domineering over the Consciences and the spiritual privileges of Christians;
I desire to know, First, whether much of this was not wont to be said of the
conscientious and zealous preaching of Practical truths, and charging sin
upon men and women, in Books, for things in which they had a mind to be free,
as Stage Plays, Lovelocks, drinking Healths, and such like? Secondly, why a
general power of binding Consciences by Censures (purely Ecclesiastical, as
Suspension questionless is) should be more reproached for Arbitrary, etc. then
a general power of binding Conscience by preaching, wherein certainly every
Minister has his Commission from Christ, without any limitation, but to keep
within the bounds of the Word; and the wills of men have nothing to do to
restrain him? Thirdly, whether it be not be true way of preventing Tyranny, not
to deny the Power Christ has left to his Ministers and Elders, but to use it
in Classes and Synods, in censuring any that exercise Tyranny, and if need be
the Parliament may put to their help to repress Tyranny in this kind as well
as in any other. Fourthly, as for Papal or Prelaticall Domineering, and
claiming such a Power as our very Lordly Prelates never durst to claim, 1.
Why, I pray, do you borrow this courteous language from the Independents, with
which they most familiarly grace the Presbyteriall Government? Sure you are not
Independent I think, or if you were, you might have forborne this reproach,
since in this desire there was a full Harmony in the Assembly between them and
the Presbyterians, as became brethren that desired to see the first and maine
Foundation of the Reformation surely laid; which is not done till this be done
which is desired. 2. Papal or Prelaticall Domineering over Consciences, is
power, 1 engrossed into one hand, 2 to command things, and 3 forbid things
without Christ's Word, or 4 even against it; whereas there is not here the least
shadow of any such thing pleaded for; but only a Power in a Community (the
Eldership, entrusted by Christ with Church Government) to bind the Consciences
of sinners by Censures, who are first bound by the Word. This the Prelates did
not care for further then to get money, or vex Consciences of men; which they
had power enough for by one way or other, if not full out as much Power for all
scandals. Fifthly, If all Christians may claim, as one of their spiritual
privileges to come to the Sacrament till they are excommunicated, or to be on
no pretense kept from it if they do desire it; Then how shall the Parliament
be justified, as not wronging Drunkards or Adulterers (and the rest of the
sinners upon whom their Votes are already past) in their spiritual
privileges? I am confident they must either recall those Votes, as not
warranted by Scripture, and leave all to come when they list; or the same
Scriptures that prove those seven sins to be matter of Suspension, will prove
altogether as much as the Assembly ever did advise or desire.

Fifthly, you desire this matter should be settled with caution and moderation,
certainly as little as possible therein left to any man's Discretion. Some of
this you would have spared, I suppose, if you had seen the sundry Rules which
the Assembly has advised to be observed about this power; which they think
none will deny but to savor of much Moderation and Caution. Withal you may
remember (for sure you know it) that in all Courts of Equity or Conscience (as
they are called) much is, and necessarily must be left to the discretion of the
Judge: which is in some Courts with less certainty, and less remedy also (of
Appeal in case of wrong or Tyranny) then could be in Elderships, if the power
desired were settled in them.

Sixthly, you advise the Avoiding of Extremes, and the seeming Affectation of a
greater Lording power over the Conrciences and Privileges of Christians and
Brethren, then of right belongs to them. I answer, 1. Surely no Lording power
at all over Consciences and Privileges of right belongs to any in the Church
of Christ; But a Ministerial Power of judging and censuring scandalous sinners
belongs to Church Officers, according to the Word; as your self cannot but
grant, if you grant Excommunication at all: And if you do not grant
Excommunication at all, why do you so sedulously bring in the mention of that
in three of your Questions? and lay so much weight upon it, as you plainly do?
2. Do not you your self know, even by experience, that no man can show zeal
against scandalous sins but by some, and even too many, he will seem to run
into Extremes, and to affect a Lording over men's Consciences?

Finally, to end these preparatory Animadversions and Answers to your Title,
Preface, and other circumstantiall Passages of your Paper; you will be pleased
sadly and seriously to consider, that all this reproach obliquely cast upon the
Assembly in the forementioned Infinuations and others in this Paper, do in like
fort asperse all the Reformed Churches of Christ, that have any Ecclesiastical
Discipline, who all practice what the Assembly has desired: And yet further,
disgraces all the Discipline of the Primitive Church in her purest times, which
was rather more strict then less: as has been in part already manifested to
the Parliament, and may be more fully, if they shall require it.

And now I come to your four Grand Questions in their order, whereof the first
is this, [ Whether Matthew. 18.16, 17. or 1 Cor. 5.5.11. 1 Timothy 1.20. be meant
properly of Excommunication, or Suspension from the Sacrament only?] I answer,
first, This, under your favor, is a very impertinent Question to your
propounded scope of avoiding Arbitrary, Tyrannical domineering over
Consciences and Privileges. For if they prove Excommunication properly, which
is a greater censure then Suspension; then either a greater power proved by the
Word, must be reproached with Tyranny and Arbitrary unlimitednesse etc. or else
that load was unjustly cast upon a lesser Power (a power of a less censure;)
for sure you will not say, that it is Tyranny and an Arbitrary unlimited
Domineering, to deny a Childa meals meat when it would hurt him, and none to
turn him quite out of doors, whereby he may be in danger to starve. So that if
there be any use of this Question in this dispute, it seems to me to be only to
perplex the Reader, and entangle the business. And so I might dismiss it.

But I shall answer distinctly to your Texts. First, Matthew. 18. speaks properly
(as I suppose) of Excommunication, as your Quaere intimates. Mean while your
Gloss you give in a Parenthesis will not hinder it to be meant of either. For
first, though the words are, Let him be to thee; yet this is not Exclusive (to
thee and no other) but Respective, to thee who have been scandalized. And from
thence the Argument will be strong. 1. If to thee for resusing to hear the
Church, then to all others who know that he has refused to hear them; for
that makes it as much a scandal to them, as before it was to thee, when thou
only knewst it. 2. Also binding on earth, and binding in heaven, when known by
the publication of the Churches sentence; and thy holding him thereupon as a
Heathen and Publican, will reach to make him so to others as well as to thee
the Complainant. Secondly, though the words be, If thy brother trespass
against thee; yet neither is this exclusive, (nor yet Luke 17.) so as that this
Rule should extend only to pesonall private trespasses between man and man; But
contrarily, here also the Argument is strong (a minori ad majus) If thou may
complain for a private personal trespass, and finally repute him a Heathen
and Publican for impenitent obstinacy, and not hearing the Church; then much
more is this to be done in public scandalous sins against the Congregation: or
else the publikenesse and scandalousnesse of the sin, which are fearful
Aggravations, shall obtain an Impunity and Immunity from that complaint and
censure which belongs to a lesser and more private offense; which is absurd to
imagine. But, supposing it to be as you contend, Let him be to thee, not to the
Church; and that it is for a private trespass, not a public scanda; yet how
does this tend to prove, that the place is meant properly of Excommunication,
and not of Suspension from the Lords Supper only?

Secondly, 1 Cor. 5.5. and 1 Timothy 1.20. which speak of delivering to Satan, are
properly meant of Excommunication; yet neither do they deny Suspension, by way
of endeavor to prevent the highest censure, and for the present preventing of
mischiefs to the Offender, and the Congregation, or those that know his
offense, or of the dishonor of Christ, if such an one (being as yet not
penitent) should approach his holy Table, to partake of his Body and Blood; of
which he will be guilty infallibly, if he so come in his sin.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 5.11. With such an one no not to eat, inferres Suspension
first, and after, Excommunication, upon the grounds now mentioned; and
afterward to be enlarged and applied even to this Text, and proved by it.

Under your former Question you have another, which has also two branches (and
so we have three Questions in stead of one in this one Section, and we shall
see the like afterward) You ask What warrant here is in Scripture, for
Ministers or others to suspend men from the Sacrament, and not from the
Congregation, and all other Ordinances with it? A. Because Excommunication is
the highest censure of the Church, to which men should not proceed till extreme
necessity, from the Offenders obstinacy, compel. Mean time it may be evident,
that if he should be admitted, he would dishonor Christ in stead of worshipping
him, and mischiave his own soul, in stead of doing it good. And therefore may
fitly in this Interim be suspended for the preventing thereof, till it do
appear whether there will be a necessity of cutting him off by
Excommunication. And against this none of the forementioned places, which you
do annex, do make opposition. And among them, 1 Cor. 5. and 2 These. 3. will
give great approbation to Suspension. The one requiring, no not to eat with a
Brother (at a common table) that is a Fornicator, if I can avoid it, and
therefore certainly, not to suffer him to eat with me at the Lords Table, even
because the Church must endeavor to keep the Feast without leaven, celebrate
the Supper without the mixture of scandalous wicked persons. The other
commanding to withdraw from, and keep no company with a disorderly walker,
requires that he be not suffered to keep the Church company in their partaking
of the most Sacred Privileges. The Reason is most strong, that he may be
ashamed; which certainly he is not like to be, so long as he may as freely as
ever come to the Sacrament and highest privilege of Christians. And as for
Numb. 12. out of the Old Testament, which is an example of a Leper etc. this
brings to mind a plain Type of Suspension; namely, the shutting up of a
suspected Leper seven days, and again seven days sometimes, before he is a
together to be shut out. What is this, but first a Trial (and prevention of
infection) by Suspension, before actual and final casting out. And I wonder
you who appear to be read in Antiquity, should affirm, that scandalous
persons were ever excommunicated and wholly cast out of the Church, never
barely sequestered from the Sacrament; whereas it is clear, that they had
Abstension, and abstenti, both before Excommunication; witness Cyprian in
diyers places: And after Excommunication, before Absolution, the Poenitentes
(as they are called) were kept some of them a long time, Abstenti, from the
Sacrament, and yet allowed to hear the Word among the faithful, and even to
join in some prayers though not in all.

Neither do the Schoolmen deny this, however they define Excommunication, sc.
the Major Excommunicatio, (for they had a Minor Excom. which was only
Suspension; and so some of our Latter Divines call Suspension.) Befides, that
is not greatly material how they determine in matters of Conscience. As for
Aretius, he apparently defines it wrong, making it an Exclusion from Communion
in all both sacred and profane or worldly matters. Whenas it cannot be denied,
nor is by any but Papists, but in manifold profane or common matters,
Communion may be and must be held by the faithfulest persons with the most
scandalous, even when excommunicated with the highest Censure of the Church:
and so for some sacred matters; at which even Heathens might be present 1 Cor.
14.23, 24. else how should they be converted? And so I have done with your
first Question, and its branches and amplifications.

The second follows. By what divine Authority can any keep back any Christian
from the Sacrament, who earnestly desires to receive it? (This is all that is
material in your Question: although you mention a Minister single, and his
private judgment, and the person kept away not yet excommunicated: but to all
this I have spoken already, and so spare tautology.) To which I answer, The
desire of any, whosoever he be, or how earnest soever it be, is no protection
to secure him from being kept back, while the thing that he would do will
certainly be to the Dishonor of Christ (making that person guilty of his body
and blood) and to the parties own mischief, by his eating and drinking
judgment and damnation to himself. In Conscience, Sir, would you have a man
in a frenzy not kept back, or a man extremely drunk? Yet either of them may
earnestly desire to be admitted. I knew a woman, that in the depth of malice
and detestable prophannesse, took the Bread out of her mouth and carried it
home in a clout, and only touched the Cup without drinking at all, and afterward
boasted of it, and vowed the Sacrament should never come within her body, till
she had satisfaction for the wrong done her; and yet afterward, without the
least show of Reconciliation toward the party with whom she had a quarrel, or
of Remorse for her abominable practice, offered to come to the Sacrament, and
contested for it; would you have had me to have admitted her upon those teimes?
If you say, No, then you may answer your Question your self by Matthew. 7. Give
not that which is holy to dogs, (for certainly she showed her self a dog or
swine in this) or by any other Text you will; and then all your Arguments to
the contrary (presently to be considered) fall to the ground: If you say, Yes,
you shall give me leave to say, you shall be no Casuist in this to satisfy my
conscience: And yet I believe you walk by rules of Conscience in other matters;
only I know not how you swarve in this great Question.

But you say We read of no circumcised person that was ever debard from the
Passeever by the Priests, that was willing or desirous to eat it. Ans. Sure you
have forgotten (for you have certainly read it) Numb. 9. a case of persons
unclean, desirous to Receive, and yet kept back, and a Rule made upon it for
time to come, that such should be kept back. And 2 Chronicles. 20. Officers set by
that Godly Reformer Jehojadah the high Priest, to keep away the Unclean from
the Temple. And if you say, This was only for Legal not Moral uncleanness; I
would for the present ask you, whether this were not written for our learning
(and imitation) and what this Typical Law did signify, but out contended for
Suspension. And as for those 2 Chronicles. 30. admitted, though not purified after
the purification of the Sanctuary. If the Priest knew any to be unclean, you
dare not (I think) say, but that they sinned in admitting them, contrary to the
forementioned express Law. And God showed some sign of displeasure, till upon
Hezekiahs prayer he healed them.

Next you say, Christ himself admitted Judas to it, though he knew him to be a
Devil and a Traitor. I grant it (and that Luke 22. proves it, though many
argue the contrary from the other Evangelists,) But Christ had not convicted
Judas to be such an one (nor yet named him to any, till by the Sop he
insinuated him to John) which wholly alters the case: For the Assembly would
not have any man kept away by the Minister upon his own private knowledge
(though never so certain) but upon just proof and conviction before the
Eldership.

But you add, that Paul usurped no other authority to himself, nor gave
authority to others to keep unworthy Receivers from the Sacrament, but only
admonished them etc. I answer: Sure Paul never usurped any authority at all,
neither this nor any other; but his delivering the Incestuous Corinthian, also
Hymeneus and Alexander to Satan, was at least a keeping them from the
Sacrament, whatever it was more. For I cannot believe your self can think,
that a man while so in the Devils possession may be admitted to the Lords
Table, to partake of the pledges of his Body and Blood. And for giving power to
others, he does it not in syllables in that Chapter; But in declaring openly,
such as are openly unworthy Receivers, to be such Offenders against Christ, and
Enemies to themselves in the very Act of Receiving; he must needs imply that
those who are to judge those that are within (1 Cor. 5.12.) ought to keep such
away from adding sin to sin, and mischief to mischief.

Therefore your subordinare Question (Whether a Minister by admonition and
dehortation has not discharged his full duty and conscience) is soon
answered. In a Doctrinall way, as a Preacher to him, he has; but not, as he is
one to whom, with the rest of the Eldership, the Rule and Care of the Church of
God is committed 1 Timothy 3. 1 Timothy 5.17. unless he have, what in him lies,
judged (according to proose) and censured a scandalous Offender, and so kept
him from the Sacrament; which, I take it, S. Paul threatens to do to such
Impenitents as he should find when he next came to Corinth, 2 Cor. 12. and
Chap. 13. And your cited Text of 1 Cor. 11. says nothing to the contrary. For
Ezekiel. 33. and Acts 20. they are spoken only of the Duty of Preaching, that a
Prophet or Preacher, in reference to that duty, has delivered his soul when
he has given warning: But so far as he has a further power, he is not quit,
if he use it not. Witness Elyrs sin and judgment, who yet gave his sons
as grave and serious a warning as could be, 1 Samuel 2. but because being a Judge
he restrained them not, by censures suitable to their scandals, God charged
guilt heavily upon him and all his Family.

But I wonder much (I say not qua fide, but qua cura) you say the Lyturgies of
our own and the French Churches in their Exhortations before the Sacrament,
both intimate and resolve what you affirm; that a Minister has discharged his
full duty and conscience by admonition and dehortation. When first, you know
that in express words in the Rubric before the Sacrament in our late Book of
Common prayer, the Curate (a single Minister) is expressly charged, not to admit
an obstinate uncharitable person And secondly, all the world knows (or may
know) that the Discipline of the French Churches, charges Ministers with the
rest of the Eldership, to suspend all scandalous persons from the Sacrament
when proved so before them. And accordingly they do so in all the Reformed
Churches in France, and all others of that Nation in Holland or elsewhere: And
so have done in England over since K. Edward the sixth time (except in Q.
Mary's) by the allowance of our Princes. As for the Exhortations before the
Sacrament, they serve to warn those whose sins are secret and not proved,
and not to stand for all Discipline toward those that are notoriously
scandalous. I add, if it were meant to be the only bar of open scandals, it
would be ridiculous to such as knew themselves to be such, and knew that others
knew it also, to say, If any of you be a Blasphemer, or an Adulterer etc.
bewail your sins, and come not to this holy Table etc. as it was in our
Lyturgy: Or much more to say, I excommunicate such and such (as in the French
Liturgy) and yet I see them and know them, and so does all the Congregation,
and let them communicate notwithstanding. The very Pagans were never so
careless of their Sacra, as to let those they counted profane, to partake in
them. If Christians should, will not they rise up in judgment against us?

Your third Question is, Whether unprofitable and unworthy hearing of the Word
be not as great, as dangerous, as damning a sin, as the unworthy Receiving of
the Sacrament? Whereunto you add diverse Texts Mat. 10.14.15. Mark 16.15, 16.
Luke 8.18. Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. and 3.7, 8, 12. and 6.6, 7, 8. and (after) two
subordinate Questions in the same Paragraph. I answer to them all. First, to
your maine Question I say, That every single Act of unprofitable and unworthy
hearing of the Word, is not so great, so dangerous, so damning a sin, as
unworthy Receiving the Sacrament. Because 1. those sins are greatest upon
which the Spirit of God puts the greatest weight; But the Spirit of God puts no
where such weight upon a single Act of unprofitable hearing. For all your
Texts, every one of them, speak only of habitual and customary, and some of
them only of final unprofitable hearing. But 1 Cor. 11, 27, 29. speaks of
every single act of Receiving the Lords Supper unworthily. 2. Again, whoever
receives the Sacrament unworthily, has first received the Word unworthily (and
that, it may be, not once, but many times) and so has added a further sin to
it. But a man may receive the Word unworthily, who receives not the Sacrament
at all, and so sins but a single sin; whereas the unworthy Receiver of the
Sacrament sins certainly double. 3. Moreover the matter preached oftentimes, is
but a Particular of lesser consequence, and so the sin less to receive it
unworthily: But the matter of the Sacrament is the highest of all Christianity,
and therefore the sin is the greater to receive it unworthily. 4. Further,
suppose the Sermon was of the Grace of Christ, and the benefit of his Body and
Blood; yet is it a greater fin to receive the Sacrament unworthily, because in
that is a further manifestation of Gods love, and Christ's Grace, a seal to the
Word. Therefore to despise it, and receive it unworthily, is a further
manifestation of obstinate impenitency unbelief, and sleighting the Grace of
Christ, and the Love of God. 5 Once more, The Receiver of the Sacrament does
more solemnly pretend faith in Christ, and owning him as his Lord, then the
hearer of the Word: he seals outwardly to God and Christ, as well as receives
outward seals; which the Hearer does not by the act of his hearing (for a
Heathen may come in to hear, 1 Cor. 14.) Therefore he sins a greater, more
dangerous, more damning sin, then any man that this or that time, receives
the Word unprofitably and unworthily.

Next, if you would compare a customary unworthy hearing, with a single act of
unworthy Receiving, and ask whether it be not as great a sin, etc. To this I
shall answer, by considering your two subordinate Questions, which are, 1
Whether Ministers upon some pretense may not as well keep the people from
preaching, and refuse to preach to them, etc? And 2 What substantial
difference they can produce warranted by Scripture, why they may not deny the
Word as well as the Sacrament? I answer, First, there is an express charge to
preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, even to Pagans and Infidels
while remaining such: you will not say, there is the like for giving the
Sacrament, while such. Secondly, there is a like Charge of instructing in
meekness those that oppose themselves, which will hold, I believe, even to
professed Christians, for they are but too often opposers, and you will not say
but such must still be instructed, if at any time God will give them
repentance, etc. But there is no such charge to administer the Sacrament to
opposers or impenitents. 3 That which gives a warrant not to baptize a man
(though pretending to desire it) will, from the parity of the nature of both
the Sacraments, give warrant to deny him the Lords Supper. Had Philip
manifestly seen Act. 8. that which Peter did afterward, that Simon Magus was in
the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity; doubtless he would not have
baptized him, though he should have offered himself. An ignorant man, or a
profane man is to be preached to, but not to be baptized, till he have gotten
knowledge and expressed repentance: Therefore by the same reason, one equally
ignorant or profane (though baptized) is not to be admitted to the Lords
Supper: and if you would say, yes, his baptism gives him right, and nothing can
after deprive him of it; I pray, would not this furnish the Anabaptists with a
most forcible argument against baptizing of infants? That such baptizing them
makes parents and others careless of their education, and themselves of their
behavior when grown up? And I remember this was once urged to me. To which no
rational answer that I know can be given, if upon this baptism they may
challenge the Lords Supper at such an age, how ignorant soever they remain, and
how scandalous soever they grow. Were not this the way to make all that are
zealous of Christ's honor and the good of souls, to abhor such baptism as
hardening parents and children both in impiety and contempt of God? I pray
consider it. 4 But I add, the word is the proper Ordinance to convert men,
which therefore must be preached even to pagans and opposers (till they grow
altogether desperate.) But the Lords Supper is a Seal for confirmation of those
that are or seem to be believers and penitents. If therefore any relapse into
sin and remain impenitent, the Word is the proper means still to be offered
to him for his recovery, which must be spoken as to an impenitent: but the
Sacrament is to be denied him (and that denial is also a concurrent means of
this recovery, as proclaiming him to his conscience unworthy of it, and so to
others, if the Suspension be published, as it must sometimes be published to all
the Congregation, but not always,) and that because it cannot be given but as
an actual Seal of Gods forgiveness, which for the present he declares himself
to be incapable of. 5 Finally, the Word has a power (often manifested) to
conquer obstinate sinners, and there are many promises of it, though the
dispensation of this power be not at every Sermon, or to every person, but when
and to whom God pleases: But there is no such power mentioned in Scripture
accompanying the Sacrament; it is for living men (and such as are not in a
swoon neither, but somewhat lively and hungty) to feed upon that banquet; not
to be put into dead men's mouths or hands, or those whose mouths (that is,
their hearts) appear to be shut against it: But the word preached has raised
dead souls, thousands, millions, (according to the prophecy and promise John
5) even all that ever come to life in an ordinary way. Here is difference
enough to fatisfy both your Questions. And for your Arguments added to the
first of them, I answer briefly, first a Minister is no way partaker of any
ones unprofitable hearing, or guilty of his damnation, being commanded to
preach to him for his good; as it may be, how ill soever he be when he begins
to preach to him: But he, and the Eldership, are partakers of the sin of the
unworthy Communicant, if they admit him, of whom they have such proof that
they know he will be guilty of Christ's body and blood, and will eat and drink
damnation to himself; for they are no where commanded to admit such to the
Sacrament; but forbidden by the nature of the Ordinance, and his apparent
unworthiness together, (beside the places forementioned, 1 Cor. 5. 2 These. 3.)
Secondly a Minister is not to give holy things to dogs, etc. This is general,
and not confined to the Word only. Your self only say, It is principally meant
of the Word; and sure it has a Truth even relating to the Sacraments; for they
also are holy things, and pearls, and so are not to be cast to such as will
trample and despise them. And though it is true, that sometimes there may be
such a Desperate opposition against Preaching, as that this sentence will
forbid a man to preach any longer to such: As your Texts, Mat. 10.24. Acts
13.46, 51. do indeed prove. (But Mark. 16.15, 16. has nothing at all to that
purpose but only speaks of the damnation of obstinate unbeleevers,) yet this is
rare. And in this case I will grant, such are not to be preaent to, but kept
away what one can; but no others are so in regard of the word. But a man that
is infallibly and grossly ignorant of the principles of Religion; or notoriously
scandalous and impenitent in it, is to this Ordinance of the Sacrament, a dog
or a swine, as certainly dishonouring Christ and mischieving his own soul, if
he communicate; as a Pagan (who has nothing to do with Christ;) and therefore
such a holy thing such a pearl is not to be given or cast to such. 3 Though the
word profit not where faith is wanting, Heb. 4.2 yet this is not meant where
faith is not already; for then it should profit none ordinarily, all being
without faith till by preaching, the Spirit of God work it in them; and
therefore it is to be preached to men that want faith, that they may want it no
longer: but ignorant persons have certainly no faith, and impenitents have
either none or use none while impenitents, and so cannot profit by the
Sacrament, because they cannot seed upon Christ, and therefore may not be
admitted to the Sacramental eating of the Bread and Wine to the provoking of
Christ, and further undoing their own souls. 4 Finally, though the word
unprofitably heard, (that is, finally, to the end of a man's life) increases and
aggravates his sins and becomes the savor of death to death, to such
unworthy receivers of it; yet because, as the Apostle told us, there is still a
peradventure that God may give even to those that oppose themselves now,
repentance hereafter, and accordingly he therefore charges still to instruct in
meekness even such; till they come to be open and obstinate blasphemers, they
must be preached to: But no such hopes being given nor charge toward unworthy
receivers of the Sacrament: Ministers and Elders must refuse them till they
appear to be of a better mind. And this leads to your fourth Question.

Which is (summarily) Whether such may be denied the Sacrament, who profess
sincere repentance, and promise newness of life? (here again you interpose not
being excommanicated, and if he desire to receive, and the Ministers private
opinion; to all which it is needless to speak again, having done it
sufficiently already:) To which you premise fundry Arguments to prove the
negative; and some follow to refell the affirmative. I will first answer your
Question, then consider your Arguments on both hands. To your Question then I
say 1. if he profess his sincere repentance, etc. in such a manner as
according to the Rules of Christ the Minister and Elders, and those that know
the scandal are bound to believe that he does sincerely repent; none ought to
keep him back, and if he were excommunicated, he ought to be absolved, and
received again into the Church without delay, as soon as such repentance
appears. 2 But if you mean his bare saying so much without further sign of
Repentance, or only such sign as according to the nature of the crime; no
rational man can say it is a sufficient proof of repentance; the case is
otherwise foradultery, or incest, or blasphemy, there must surely be such a
sense of the sin manifested, such a taking heed of the occasions, and the
like, as may make it probable that he intends to keep his promise of a new
life: or else it will be a mere mockery for any one to be called before the
Eldership for any scandal; for a word shall excuse and acquit them, although
perhaps before they came thither, they told their companions, that they meant
not to keep any such promise; and if this be told to the Eldership, yet they
must take his single and bare word that he is sorry for those speeches as well
as for his other fault; and so it must be twenty times one after another:
Which, I say, were to turn all Church Discipline into a Ridiculous Folly, and a
hardening of sinners rather then doing any good upon them.

Yet for this you seem to argue with many reasons. 1 God alone knows the
heart, and who are his.] Ans. They are the Scriptures words, but misapplyed in
this case. 1 Chronicles 6.30. speaks of a man's secret prayers to God, not of proving
or approving Repentance toward men. 2 Timothy 4.19. speaks of Gods knowing his
elect, and not at all that men are not to judge of men's repentance; rather the
next words plead for this [let every one that names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity] implying that he who does not so in his behavior, cannot be
owned among men, among Christians, as belonging to Christ, whatever he may be
in Gods secret Decree. This then confirms the Elderships power of judgeing by
his departing or not departing from iniquity, and not by bare and slight words
only. Would you in the forementioned case of the wicked woman, have taken a few
words as a sufficient proof of repentance, without great proof of sorrow, and
detestation of her self for so horrid a wickedness? 2 You say, Ministers know
not the heart, nor who are Gods, but may often deem those worthy communicants who
are not, (as close hypocrites, etc.) and those unworthy which are not, 1 Samuel
16.5. to 14. Ans. You seem not to be afraid of judgeing those worthy that are
not; when so slight a matter as a profession of repentance, without mention of
any fignes, must suffice to count them worthy, because God knows the heart,
not Ministers. But Ministers and Elders are to judge as the Apostle directs
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. Somemens sins are manifest beforehand, and go before to
judgment (and so their good) and some follow after that is, according to
apparent proof offering it self, or discovered by time, or enquiry, so the
judgment ought to be. Samuels judgeing was not by any words or shows of good
but by a bodily comeliness, and it was a peculiar Office; that hinders not but
Ministers and Elders may judge by men's lives, whether they be worthy of the
ordinary privileges of Christians. They are blameless if they admit only
close hypocrites, because God only can judge of them. But men may judge
competently of men's be haviours, else why says the Apostle, Do not ye judge
them that are within? 1 Cor. 5.12. and that known Text. By their fruiis you
shall know them; and if they judge by proof and tokens, and fruits of
repentance, according to the word, they will hardly judge any unworthy who are
not, though this be the great Fear alleged against them.

3. You say, God can fuddenly change the heart in a moment, before a Minister
can take notice of it, Act. 9.3. to 28.] A. God can, but what is this to your
purpose? By this Argument, there needs not Judges, with the Elders, of those
that are within, then surely they must go according to sufficient outward
expressions, and not imagine that God has turned any ones heart, before others
can take notice of it. And your Instance of Saul's (Paul's) conversion clears it.
Indeed there were no Ministers by, when he was struck down; But when Christ
sent Ananias to him after a second charge to go, he was feign to avouch him a
chosen Vessel; and after that the Church at Jerusalem durst not own him, till
Barnabas brought him to the Apostles, and bare witness that he had preached
Christ at Damascus. And when sinners express any sign of Repentance like this
(though they were converted before any took notice of it) blame them that
refuse them. But in the mean time, I pray. give leave to Ministers, the
Stewards of Christ's Mysteries (of whom it is required that they be found
faithful) that they be so jealous over Christians with a godly jealousy, and
so zealous for Christ's honor (the honor of his Death showed forth in the
Sacrament) as not to believe or judge them worthy, who have showed themselves
unworthy, upon a possibility that God can turn their hearts in an instant;
which is so far from a Godly jealousy or zeal, that there cannot lightly be
a greater Carelessness or Lukewarmnesse imaginable.

4. You say, [ We must not censoriously judge one another, because we stand or
fall to our own Master, Mat. 7.1. Luke 6.37. Romans 14.4. to 15.] It is true, but
very impertinently alleged: Your Texts Mat. 7 and Luk 6. forbid only private
judging, without or beyond just cause, as to judge a man ill who seems good; or
judge ill, when it is as possible he meant well as ill; or to judge a man a
wicked unregenerate for a particular failing, or a man to be a Reprobate
because he yet shows no repentance, and the like; it is such judging as this
that is forbidden, not all judging, unless you will make void (as I am sure
you will not) all Civil Judicature, as well as all Ecclesiastical. And Romans
14. speaks only of judging men as unconscionable, or not sound Christians, for
forbearing or using Christian Liberty about days and meats and such like; not
at all of judging men in an Ecclesiastical Iudicatory (no more then Civil)
for open scandals and impenitency: which also appears by the words next after
those you name, yea he shall be holden up, which you will not, I think, affirm
offcandalous sinners. God has not promised to uphold or recover such, as he
has to uphold weak scrupulous Consciences, that do (or do not) things to him,
and not to themselves: Therefore all the strength of this Argument lies in the
word Censorious, which I deny can be truly urged against the Elderships
censuring scandals upon proof, and not receiving without sufficient proof of
Repentance.

5. You go on (and so do I) [ None must quench the smoking flax, or break
the bruised Reed; nor discourage weak Christians by overmuch rigor or
indiscretion, Mat. 12.20. Romans 14.] Answ. Very good But will you say, that
every one that barely says, he does sincerely repent, and promises to lead a
new life, is a bruised Reed, or smoking flax? or that to require a rational
proof of Repentance for an undeniable scandal (perhaps very gross) is to
discourage weak Christians by overmuch rigor and indiscretion? You will
remember (I am sure Ministers and Elders must) that of Prove. 17.15. He that
justifiet the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are an
abomination to the Lord; the one as well as the other.

6. But you add [Every Communicant is bound to examine himself, which he best
knows (not others peremptorily to examine him) 1 Cor. 11. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal.
6.4, 5.] I answer. First, a man's being bound to examine himself is no
Exclusive in such matters as fall within the cognizance of other men; But it is
a precept to every man for his Conscience within, after all the examination and
approbation of others. Secondly, withal it is not universally true, That a man
is best known to himself. For the Apostle says of some, that they measuring
themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not
wise, 2 Cor. 10.12. And Solomon speaks to the same purpose more then once; The
rich man is wise in his own conceit, but his neighbor comes and searches him,
Prove. 28.11. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet
are not cleansed from their filthiness, Prove. 30.12. And there is nothing more
certain among men, then that many wicked persons, think they have sufficiently
repented, and have faith in Christ and love to God, when the contrary to all
this is more then apparent. Thirdly, are there not Duties, which even private
Christians, much more Ministers (and Elderships) stand obliged unto toward
wicked men, and impenitent sinners? And if so, then certainly they may
peremptorily (that is confidently and undoubtedly) judge such, and accordingly
examine them in such cases as they may meddle in; and your other cited Texts
say not a syllable to the contrary: For, as for 2 Cor. 13.5. S. Panl expressly
in that chapter, and the soregoing threatens to censure (even sharply) many
among the Corinthians; which questionless he never meant without strict (and
if you list to call it so, poremptory) examination And says he, not clearly, 2
Cor. 13.1 In the mouth of two or three witnesses every wordshall be
established? Even while he is speaking of his not sparing them when he came
again? As for Gat. 6. the very first verse confutes your exclusive glo^^^ upon
v. 4. and For how can I (or any) restore with the spirit of meekness one that
is fallen through infirmity if I may not peremptorily examine his fact and
offense? If I meddle at all with him being fallen, I may call that an
Infirmity, which is an Enormity, if I examine him not, and others too perhaps
about him: I may speak peace, when God speaks none. And I pray, if I give the
Sacrament to one whom by all Rules of the Word I cannot but judge impenitent,
do not I really preach Pcace, when God says there is no peace to him? And
offer him that as an actual seal that he is forgiven, when God declares to me
in his Word, that such a man is not forgiven, while he so goes on in his sin,
as in not forgiving another, or the like?

7. What you add, [ That every One is to bear his own sin, not another, in
which he is no partaker, Gal. 6.4, 5. Exek. 33.1, to 20. Ezekiel 18.4. to 21.]
advances your Cause nothing. For how can a Minister avoid being partaker of
another sin, which is notoriously scandalous, if he (with the Eldership)
use not the Power which God has given them, (to edification and not to
destruction) to censure those that refuse to repent, as unworthy to partake of
the Seal of forgiveness, and those that so abuse the grace of Christ as
visibly to continue in sin, as unworthy to partake of the visible Pledges of
that Grace of his? To Gal. 6. I have answered already; and your self answers
the Texts in Ezekiel, by putting in [in which he is no partaker.]

8. But you have one thing more, [ Every Christian when he is invited to the
Sacrament, is bound under pain of sin and contempt, to receive it, 1 Cor.
11. Heb. 10.29.] I answer: If you mean, That though he be, and resolve to be
impenitent, he is bound to receive; how said you above. That a Ministers duty
is seriously to dehort such as he deemes unworthy, not to receive till they
become more fit to participate, under pain of eating and drinking their own
damnation and other judgments that will follow thereon? Is it a Ministers duty
to dehort a man from his Duty, and to threaten with damnation, other and
judgments to forbear, when he is bound under pain of sin and contempt to
receive? If you say, No, he is not bound to receive being impenitent, but
rather bound not to receive till he becomes more fit: But that he is bound to
repent (to examine himself, that he may repent) and then to come under pains,
etc. I say so too. And from thence infer, That the Ministers and Elders, who
are by Christ made Governors in his Church to judge those that are within, are
to keep him that is apparently unworthy and manifests not repentance, from
eating and drinking his own damnation, when they see he offers to do it: And
when they see him penitent, they are to urge him to come to receive the Seal
of his Pardon, under pain of sin and contempt, if they see him backward to
it, or doubtful about it. As for your Texts, that in 1 Cor. 11. has often
been spoken to; and Heb. 10.29. is very strangely cited to your scope; for I
beseech you, is the not receiving the Sacrament, (even when a man voluntarily
neglects it, through some sinful distemper) a treading under foot the Son of
God? or counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an
unholy thing? or a doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace? (which are the
Apostles phrases there:) Or rather is not unworthy receiving, which is
expressly said to be a being guilty of Christ's body and blood, nearer to that
horrid wickedness he speaks of? Though I am far from saying, that every
unworthy Communicant is guilty of such prodigious impiety. But I ask again,
which of the two in the Scripture language and account comes the nearer to it?
If the place had any relation in special to the Sacrament, I should not doubt
to say, but the scandalous Communicant were much sooner meant, then even the
profane forbearer. And thus I have answered your Arguments which lead in your
Question, and whereby you would prove the Negative: and withal part of your
refutation of the Affirmative. The rest I shall dispatch briefly.

9. You say, [He eats and drinks damnation to himself, not to the Minister or
the other Communicants;] Ans. Not to the Minister or other Communicants: First,
If his sin be unknown: Secondly, If his sin be unproved: Thirdly, If he
make such show of repentance (though God knows it to be counterfeit) that by
the rules of the Word, he is to be judged penitent: Fourthly, If the other
Communicants have done their duties to bring him to repentance, or have him
kept back: Fisthly, If the Minister do what lies in him to keep him back, by
judging him for his part according to just proose. But to the Minister also
(and the Communicants in their degree) if he willingly consent to his coming,
by resusing or forbearing to use his part of power Christ has entrusted him
with, to keep unworthy ones back; and if the Communicants help not the Minister
in a fitting manner to debar them.

10. This is not disproved by your saying, [he shall only bear his own
burden, and give an account of himself to God, Gal. 6.4, 5. Romans 14.12.] For
the Word [only] is your addition to the Text of Gal. 6. And no other Text in
Scripture, I speak it peremptorily, has any such exclusive as to discharge
other men from doing their duties to reclaim impenitents, by shaming them, and
hindering them from that which would harden them in their sins. Neither is the
Word, only, in the Text, or sense of Romans 14.12. relating to undeniable sins,
or open proof of repentance or impenitence but only to his inward
conscienciousnesse in using or forbearing Christian Liberty about meats and
days (as was touched before) of that a man only shall give account for himself
to God and not for another: But in open matters, I am sure there were that had
the rule over Christians, some that Watch for their souls as those that must
give an account, Heb. 13.17. And those, I suppose, were the Ministers and
Elders: And the Word has not taken that office from them since.

11. And whereas you say. [The Administration is only the Ministers Act, which
is a holy and Divine Institution, the unworthy participation the Parties own
iniquity,] I answer, first, that there is no such Institution that a Minister
must administer it to all baptized persons that offer to come, and promise to
lead a new life. Show me such an Institution, and I yield you the whole cause:
But this I am certain you can never do (to return you your own words above)
neither expressly nor by any Scripture-consequence. For if so, then no man may
be at all Excommunicated, or kept from the Sacrament, by any power left to any
on earth; Which yet you have not offered to assert, what ever your Arguments
have seemed to insinuate. As for the Parallel of unworthy communicating with
unworthy hearing, I have already spoken I suppose, enough to it: and so shall
not multiply more words about it at this time.

I have done with your Questions. But have something to say to your Conclusion,
wherein your confidence and language rises high, and you lay load enough upon
that sort of men, Who have not yet put off their prophesying in Sackcloth,
What ever others have done. In your Title and Preface, the Assembly is styled
by you, Reverend and Venerable: But now (as St. Paul speaks of himself, that
he was as unknown and yet well known) they are to you, only, some men that
pretend to such a large unlimited Ecclesiastical power, as you cannot discern
any shadow of reason, why any godly Minister should ever earnestly contend for
it; much less, that any of them should resolve to give over their Minister, to
which Christ has called them unless they can obtain such a power from the
Parliament as neither Christ nor his Apostles, nor the Primitive Christians in
the purest times did ever exercise. For are you, or can you be Ignorant that in
all this you strike at the Assembly, the whole body? who as an Assembly have
presented their humble Advices and desires to the Honorable Houses; and no
other persons (that I know of) have formally appeared about the largeness and
unlimitednesse of the power to keep persons scandalous, or ignorant, from the
Sacrament, but the Assembly only And they only, (of which I shall now give the
World some account, since you have made so public a complaint of it,) tendering
their humble desires in a late petition, were the men that expressed their sad
straight (in case etc.) and humble resolution accordingly. Unhappy men, (sure)
that contend so long, so over earnestly, with such an unfitting resolution for
that which you cannot see any shadow of reason for, and which Christ nor his
Apostles, nor the Primitive Church in the purest times, did ever exercise? But
I suppose that all men are not of your mind, and that some of our Readers, that
were so partly heretofore, have by this time seen somewhat more then a shadow
of reason for what the Assembly has desired, and I have now pleaded. And that
though Christ did not in person exercise any power of Suspension or
Excommunication at all, nor the Apostles frequently that we read of: Yet both
Christ and his Apostles have given so fair grounds and directions for as much
as is desired in either kind of censure and that the records of the Primitive
Church in the purest times speak so probably for the exercise of it in those
days, as that they will rather wonder at your confident opposition, specially
in such a season as this, then at their desires or resolution. Which latter,
was not by them rudely taken up or affectedly expressed; but upon the nature of
the business in hand, and the pressure upon their consciences to discharge
their duties in speaking out the full truth before it were too late. They had
before their eyes how extremely Christ is dishonored, by those that pretend to
honor him; how desperately such wound and destroy their souls, with that
which they pretend and expect to receive for their eterhall good: That this
being general throughout the Nation, and no sufficient provision against it,
must needs be a National sin, bringing and continuing National judgments:
That God has brought the Nation, (that part among whom we are) into a solemn
and sacred Covenant of Reformation according to the Word of God and the example
of the best Reformed Churches, and to endeavor by all weanes the reoting out
of prophannesse and whatsoever is contrary to the power of godliness. To
effect this, they saw no way appointed by God nor possible in reason, if the
Ecclesiastical Power of those whom Christ has fet in his Church to govern it,
be limited so, as that seandalous persons of all sorts cannot be kept away.
From all which they concluded, that to sit down under a partial Reformation,
as contented with it (now specially when Gods Judgments still show he is in no
wife contented with what we have yet done,) would be to betray the Cause of
God, and the hopes of all the People of God, that have groaned and wept so long
for a through Reformation, and specially in this particular: and withal to
expose many thousands of souls to the danger of being drawn away to schism
and heresy (also Covenanted against:) The Fautors and Agents of which have
never had any such successful engine to draw many well affected fouls to
them, as the pleading our want of the exercise of this power in our
Congregations. therefore after their sundry humble Petitions and Solicitations
for the settling of this due Power by the Authority of Parliament; They saw no
other way left them to bear sufficient and full witness to the truth, then by
keeping themselves from acting in such a Government as would be so unsuitable to
Christ's will, to the end of Government, and the expectation of the World after
so many professions, and such a Covenant of Reformation. And being necessicated
to resolve thus (in case etc.) they could do no less then acquaint the
Honorable Houses therewith, that so none might say hereafter, that had they
declared so much in time they might have obtained their defires. And herein, so
many as wholly condemn not their desires, I suppose, will not think them so
far mistaken in their resolution or the expression of it, as you see me to
do.

Two words more with you, and I have done. You say, Modarata durent. What is
the English of this? I mean, how agrees this Item with your arguing upon your
Quaere's? For if you have said right, (specially on your second, third, and
fourth Quare's) there ought to be no Moderation, but a rotall Abolition of all
Ecclesiastical Bower both of suspension from the Sacrament, and of
Excommunication too: If I understand you, your arguments confute all, or none.
For, I beseech you, which of all your ceasons or proofs admit of
Excommunication, and not of Suspension? Or which admits of excluding for any
one scandal, how great soever, which does not for all s^andals proved and
persisted in? Or how will you answer any one of your own arguments a general
unlimited power, if it be urged against you, even for the seven scandals
already voted against? (Incest, for instance, or Murder, or Blasphemy?) And
what room then for advise of moderation among such arguments? But shall I tell
you my heart concerning that motion you make in those words, and the argument
couched in them? And it is among the deepest thoughts I have, concerning this
Matter and this Age. Mr. Brightman (whose Interpretations of Revel. 3.
concerning Sardis and Laodicea, have been to Admiration, and near to
Prophetical) makes England, as you know, the Antitype of the latter: Surely
whoever thinks he is at all in the right therein, and withal have seen that
lukewarm Angel so strangely spewed out, almost to the destruction of the
whole State, (through the difficulty of it joined to the necessity,) ought to
take special heed, that they themselves degenerate not into like
luke-warmnesse; which if you can show me how it can be avoided under such a
limited Presbytery, as shall have no power to censure all scandals, Eris mihi
magnus Apollo, you shall be next an Oracle to me. Mean time I only add, that,
though I will yield to no man (no not to your self) in my Reverentiall regard
to the Honorable Houses of Parliament; yet, I say, that it can be neither the
Authority of Man, nor the Reputation or Esteem of their Wisdom or Piety, that
can satisie Consciences in any other Boundarie than the Word of God sets, to
prevent Scandal and Profaneness in People (and Ministers too) and Tyranny
and Oppression of men's Consciences in the Presbytetie. And, if I had leisure to
look over some books, that you have been acquainted with in the Prelaticall
times, I am confident I could show you like Assertions to this in other cases.

My Hopes and Prayers are with God, That he will make the Parliament
Honorable and Happy (above all other things) in this great work for his
Glory, his Sons Kingdom, and his Peoples Souls and Comforts. And my special
consolation is in that Prophetical Sentence, Isai. 33. The LORD is our Judge,
the LORD is our Law-give, the LORD it our King, He will save us. Amen, Amen.

A Postscript concerning a second Edition of these four Questions.
When I had well nigh finished this Answer to your four Questions, with the
Preface and Conclusion, I was showed a second Edition, with some alterations. I
wondered in many respects at the former, but in some, much more at this second:
Of which I shall now give you a brief account, that neither you nor our
Readers may complain of me, as careless or injurious.

First, you have now Englished your Quotations of Aretius in your Preface, and
first question, which while it stood in Latin, I over-lookt in my Answer. But
now I must needs take a little notice of it. As for his first sentence, may it
not be true of all exercise, even of civil authority? Yet he should (justly)
incur your blame, that would use such language to blast any lawful authority
(and if this Ecclefiasticall pleaded for be not lawful, no danger of a buse
must limit it, but the intrinsecall evil of it, must reject it altogether,) 2.
Next, your Author himself seems to wish it, while he would not have men
despair of restoring it. If it be so dangerous or evil, as some would make
it, it is the object of Fear and Hatred, not of Desire or Despair. 3. He
lays the blame on men's manners, that will not submit to such a discipline.
This commends the Discipline, though it blame the opposers of it. When David
should have punished Joabs murder of Abner, he says the sons of Zerviah were
too hard for him. This commends justice, though it could not then be executed.
4. As for his last clause, you were (it seems) willing to make your Readers
merry in these sad times; and yet (I doubt) his double metaphor of Mus and
Spongia joined together, will mar the mirth of most that look on it, unless
they be so wise as to laugh at they know not what. 5. But were Aretius never so
fully yours in all the Questions (which he is not) though I despise him not,
yet he cannot overweigh, nor counter-ballance Calvin, Beza, and others that
have written clearly and strongly for us. Muchlesse is he to be opposed to all
the Reformed Churches, who are so abundantly known to have for many scores of
years practiced, what we are now laboring for.

Secondly, next I find you have inserted some words in diverse passages, which
so far as I understand them, do exceedingly alter the sense, and the state of
your Questions. As first in your second Question, after these words, Not
actually excommunicated for some notorious scandal upon a legal conviction;
you add, Or judicially accused, Pendente lite. Secondly, afterward Quest. 4.
after the words, Not actually excommunicated, you add again, Or judicially
accused of some gross scandal, Pendente lite. And thirdly in your conclusion,
whereas before you said, Not actually excommunicated; now you say Not actually,
or preparatorily, excommunicated. What do you, or can you mean by this, which
destroys what the rest of your paper builds, or builds what that destroys. Do
you not, to any Readers understanding, seem, not to argue against keeping such
from the Sacrament, who are judicially accused, Pendente lite. And is not this
to grant suspension from the Sacrament, before excommunication? Let but us
obtain this power, with relation to all scandals, to keep away such as are
judicially accused, Pendente lite, and we will promise you to ask no more. Have
you not then with this dash of your pen yielded us our whole cause? and been a
Spongia, to censure your paper, una litur^? Again, What is to be preparatorily
excommunicated, but suspended? You pretend not to argue against that: We
desired no more. Shall we be friends then? And will you be entertained of our
Counsel, to plead our Cause, so far as these new inserted phrases will bear?
If so, I shall love a second Edition, ((...)) the better as long as I live.
Fourthly, you interpose these words near the end of page 3. [ Every Christian
has a right to the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10.4, 5, 16, 17, 18. Mat. 26.27.] I
answer: An Original Right, no man denies; as every freeborn subject has a
right to go abroad to the market or elsewhere, without restraint; and sue for
debts, and challenge the protection of the Laws: But you will not say, but he
may forfeit this right for a time, he may deserve to be banished, outlawed,
imprisoned; and imprisoned for some accusations, even upon suspicion. In like
sort may a man forseit his right to the Sacrament for a time, so as to be
banished (excommunicated) or restrained of this spiritual liberty, by
suspension, which if in some cases it may not be, even for suspicion, yet at
least upon unquestionable proofs of scandalous practices. Neither do the Text
you cite gainsay this. For though all the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10. are said to
eat of the same spiritual meat, and to drink of the same spiritual drink; yet
this was not qua spiritual meat or drink, not as Sacramental food; but a they
had no other at all to eat or drink. The other verses speak only of the joint
participation of Christians, which is not denied ordinatily. And Mat. 26.27.
though it says, Drink ye all of this, yet it says so to none, but those that
were not convicted of any scandal, even Judas was not proved (nor so much as
openly named) Trayrour or Devil; but the Disciples at the Supper say, touching
themselves, Lord, is it I? no man points at him, and says, Lord, is it he?
Therefore neither that speech Drink ye all of it, (not Judas his admission,
as was roucht before) declares all Christions to have such a right to the
Sacrament, as that they cannot fall from it, no not for a time. But
notwithstanding, they have often been admitted, they may appear so unworthy,
by scandal and impenitence, as that they cannot for the present claim that
right; and it is for his own good also, that he cannot claim it, as a man in a
distraction, or violent seaver, cannot claim the use of those things that
would undoubtedly do him mischief but may be kept from them, even from meat and
drink, by those that are about him, specially by those that have any power over
him. Finally, you have some marginals, the first is Q 1. p. 2. unto the words
of 1 Cor. 5.11. With such an one no not to eat. Your Margent says, not meant
of eating the Sacrament, etc. I answer. Not properly those words at first, for
the Apostle makes his sentence an argument a minori ad majus: you must put away
wicked persons out of the Church, because with such you must not so much as
eat, willingly, at an ordinary table, if you can avoid it. It is granted then
that it is meant in familiar civil conversation (so that you might have spared
all your consequent Texts, which yet would hardly prove interpretations of 1
Cor. 5. especially some of them, if it were needful to speak to them
particularly.) But I pray, offer but to analize the Apostles Discourse there,
and make him speak sense in bringing in these words, while he was urging them
to put away the incestuous Corinthian (and so making a rule for other
scandalous sinners.) To what purpose says he, No, not to eat? but that more is
meant; you must not so much as eat with him at home, therefore much less allow
him to eat with you in the Congregation.

Your second Note is to prove Judas was at the Sacrament: I have granted it;
and so am contented to say no more of it: except in thanks for your proofs, to
requite you with the Answer of your Objection hence (and prevention of some
other) a little more fully then before, in the words of the French Catechism,
which follow.

The 55. Sunday.
Q. Ought the Pastors, to whom the Dispensation (of the Sacraments) is
committed, to admit every one without any difference?

A. As for Baptism, because now adays it is only administered to Infants, there
is no room for any making a difference. But in the Lords Supper the Minister
ought to take heed that he give it to none who appears openly to be unworthy.

Q. Why so?

A. Because it cannot be done without reproaching and profaning the Sacrament.

Q. But did not Christ vonchsafe to Judas, though he was a wicked man, the
participation of it?

A. I acknowledge it, while as yet his impiety was concealed. For though it was
not hidden from Christ, yet it had not broken out as yet into the light and
knowledge of men.

Q. What must be done then to Hypocrites?

A. The Pastor cannot put them away as unworthy, but must let them alone,
until such time as God reveal their wickedness, that it may be known to men.

Q. What if the Minister himself know any man to be unworthy, or any has
admonished him of it?

A. Even this will not suffice to put him from the Communion, unless hereunto
be added a legal cognizance and judgment of the Church upon it.

Q. It is requisite then to have a certain settled order of Government in the
Church?

A. It is so. For otherwise they are not well managed or rightly regulated.
Therefore this is the order, that Elders be appointed, who are to censure men's
manners, and watch over the scandals that may arise, and to debarrt such from
the Sacrament as they know to be unworthy, and who cannot be admitted without
dishonor to God, and scandal to the Faithful.

Your third note is Q. 3. page 3. upon not partaking of other men's sins. You
say, 1 Timothy 5.22. not meant of administving the Sacrament. I answer. No man
says it is only meant of that; but you have not disproved this to be included,
which we contend for; That to suffer scandalous persons by those that have
authority to judge them (as you have not yet denied the Eldership to have) is
to partake of their sins: And I think I have proved it.

But your last Note, running along almost all your last page, is an admirable
one, about the Ministers private opinion. There, if ever, you set up a man of
straw and sight against him, or fight against your own shadow. For what Relator
(or Delator) told you this was the Assemblies advice? Or what book of
Discipline or particular Writer, plead, for such a Power in a fingle Minister,
as you oppugn; Why then do you insinuate them guilty of going about to
introduce the grearest spiritual Tyranny that ever was heard or practiced in
the Christian world, and to make every Minister an absolute Pope? I add, and
(...) then a Pope; for a Pope in Church censures has usually I take (...), his
Cardinals with him. But, if we disclaim this, will you grant us the rest? Will
you yield that the Eldership, upon just proof, may suspend for any scandal?
If so, all is well: If not, why do you trouble your self and them, and the
world, and make men believe so vile and odious a slander of them (as thousands
will believe it upon the sight of your Paper) as if they were as badde as the
Pope, or worse, the greatest Tyrants in the world to Conscience.

It was not an Enemy that reproached me, says complaining David. I will ask no
other Reparation then what your own Ingenuity will prompt you unto, when you
see your Error.

Your concluding Text for Moderation, I shall only turn into this Prayer; God
give us all spirits of meekness, and lead us into all Truth by Jesus Christ.
Amen.

FINIS.

