A DESCRIPTION OF THE FAMOUS.

KINGDOM OF MACARIA; SHOWING ITS EXCELLENT GOVERNMENT:

WHEREIN The Inhabitants live in great Prosperity, Health, and Happiness; the
King obeyed, the Nobles honored; and all good men respected, Vice punished,
and virtue rewarded.

An Example to other Nations.

In a Dialogue between a Scholar and a Traveller.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Constable, Anno 1641.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT.
WHereas I am confident, that this Honorable Court will lay the Corner Stone of
the worlds happiness before the final recesse thereof, I have adventured to
cast in my widows mite into the Treasury; not as an Instructor, or
Counselor, to this Honorable Assembly, but have delivered my conceptions in
a Fiction, as a more mannerly way, having for my pattern Sir Thomas Moore, and
Sir Francis Bacon once Lord Chancellor of England; and humbly desire that this
honorable Assembly will be pleased to make use of any thing therein contained,
if it may stand with their pleasures, and to laugh at the rest, as a solace to
my mind, being inclined to do good to the public. So humbly craving leave,
that I may take my leave, I rest this 25. of October 1641.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE FAMOUS KINGDOM OF MACARIA. SHOWING ITS EXCELLENT
GOVERNMENT.
Traveller. WEll met sir, your habit professes scholarship, are you a Graduate?


Scholar. Yes sir, I am a Master of Arts.


Trav. But what do you hear in the Exchange; I conceive you trade in
knowledge, and here is no place to traffic for it; neither in the book of
rates is there any imposition upon such commodities: so that you have no great
business either here or at the Custom House. Come let us go into the fields,
I am a Traveller, and can tell you strange news, and much knowledge, and I
have brought it over the sea without paying any Custom, though it be worth
all the merchandise in the kingdom.


Schol. We Scholars love to hear news, and to learn knowledge, I will wait
upon you, go whither you will.


Trav. Well, we will go into Moore fields, and take a turn or two, there we
shall be out of this noise, and throng of people.


Sch. Agreed; but as we go, what good news do you hear of the Parliament?


Trav. I hear that they are generally bent to make a good reformation, but
that they have some stops and hindrances, so that they cannot make such quick
dispatch as they would; and if any experience which I have learned in my long
travels, may stand them in stead, I would willingly impart it for the public
good.


Sch. I like that well, I pray you declare some good experience, that I may say
that I have gained some thing by the company of Travelers.


Trav. In a Kingdom called Macaria, the King and the Governors do live in
great honor and riches, and the people do live in great plenty, prosperity,
health, peace, and happiness, and have not half so much trouble as they have
in these European Countries.


Sch. That seems to me impossible: you Travelers must take heed of two
things principally in your relations; first, that you say nothing that is
generally deemed impossible. Secondly, that your relation has no contradiction
in it, or else all men will think that you make use of the Travelers
privilege, to wit, to lie by authority.


Trav. If I could change all the minds in England as easily as I suppose I
shall change yours, this Kingdom would be presently like to it: when you hear
the manner of their government, you will deem it to be very possible, and
withal very easy.


Sch. I pray you sir declare the manner of their government, for I think long
till I hear it.


Trav. As for brevitie in discourse, I shall answer your desire. They have a
Great Council like to the Parliament in England, but it sits once a year
for a short space, and they hear no complaints against any but Ministers of
State, Judges, and Officers; those they trounce soundly, if there be cause:
Besides, they have five under Councels; to wit, A Council of Husbandry. A
Council of Fishing. A Council of Trade by Land. A Council of Trade by Sea. A
Council for new Plantations.


These sit once a year for a very short space, and have power to hear and
determine, and to punish Malefactors severely, and to reward Benefactors
honorable, and to make new laws, not repugnant to the laws of the Great
Council, for the whole Kingdom, like as Court Leets, and Corporations have
within their own Precincts and Liberties in England.


Sch. I pray you sir declare some of the principal Laws made by those under
Councels.


Trav. The Council of Husbandry has ordered, that the twentieth part of every
man's goods that dies shall be employed about the improving of lands, and
making of Highways fair, and bridges over Rivers; by which means the whole
Kingdom is become like to a fruitful Garden, the Highways are paved, and
are as fair as the streets of a City; and as for Bridges over Rivers, they
are so high, that none are ever drowned in their travels.

Also they have established a law, that if any man holds more land than he is
able to improve to the utmost, he shall be admonished, first, of the great
hinderance which it does to the Commonwealth. Secondly, of the prejudice to
himself; and if he do not amend his Husbandry within a years space, there
is a penalty set upon him, which is yearly doubled, till his lands be
forfeited, and he banished out of the Kingdom, as an enemy to the commonwealth.

In the Council of Fishing there are laws established, whereby immense riches
are yearly drawn out of the Ocean.

In the Council of Trade by Land there are established Laws, so that there
are not too many Tradesmen, nor too few, by enjoining longer or shorter times
of Apprentiships.

In the Council of Trade by Sea there is established a law, that all Traffic
is lawful which may enrich the Kingdom.

In the Council for new Plantations there is established a law, that every
year a certain number shall be sent out, strongly fortified, and provided for
at the public charge, till such times as they may subsist by their own
endeavors: and this number is set down by the said Council, wherein they take
diligent notice of the surplusage of people that may be spared.


Sch. But you spoke of peace to be permanent in that Kingdom, how can that be?


Trav. Very easily; for they have a law, that if any Prince shall attempt any
invasion, his kingdom shall be lawful prize: and the Inhabitants of this
happy Country are so numerous, strong, and rich, that they have destroyed some
without any considerable resistance; and the rest take warning.


Sch. But you spoke of health, how can that be procured by a better way than
we have here in England?


Trav. Yes very easily; for they have an house, or College of experience,
where they deliver out yearly such medicines as they find out by experience;
and all such as shall be able to demonstrate any experiment for the health or
wealth of men, are honorably rewarded at the public charge, by which their
skill in Husbandry, Physic, and Surgerie, is most excellent.


Sch. But this is against Physicians.


Trav. In Macaria the Parson of every Parish is a good Physician, and does
execute both functions, to wit, cura animarum, and cura corporum; and they
think it as absurd for a Divine to be without the skill of Physic, as it is to
put new wine into old bottles; and the Physicians being true Naturalists, may
as well become good Divines, as the Divines do become good Physicians.


Sch. But you spoke of great facility that these men have in their functions,
how can that be?


Trav. Very easily: for the Divines, by reason that the Society of
Experimenters is liable to an action, if they shall deliver out any false
receipt, are not troubled to try conclusions, or experiments, but only to
consider of the diversity of natures, complexions, and constitutions, which
they are to know, for the cure of souls, as well as of bodies.


Sch. I know diverse Divines in England that are Physicians, and therefore I
hold well with this report, and I would that all were such, for they have great
estimation with the people, and can rule them at their pleasure?


Sch. But how comes the facility of becoming good Divines?


Trav. They are all of approved ability in humane learning, before they take
in hand that function, and then they have such rules, that they need no
considerable study to accomplish all knowledge fit for Divines, by reason that
there are no diversity of opinions amongst them.


Sch. How can that be?


Trav. Very easily: for they have a law, that if any Divine shall publish a new
opinion to the Common people, he shall be accounted a disturber of the public
peace, and shall suffer death for it.


Sch. But that is the way to keep them in error perpetually, if they be once
in it.


Trav. You are deceived; for if any one has conceived a new opinion, he is
allowed every year freely to dispute it before the Great Council; if he
overcome his Adversaries, or such as are appointed to be Opponents, then it is
generally received for truth; if he be overcome, then it is declared to be
false.


Sch. It seems that they are Christians by your relation of the Parochial
Ministers, but whether are they Protestants or Papists?


Trav. Their Religion consists not in taking notice of several opinions and
sects, but is made up of infallible tenets, which may be proved by invincible
arguments, and such as will abide the grand test of extreme dispute; by which
means none have power to stir up Schisms and Heresies; neither are any of
their opinions ridiculous to those who are of contrary minds.


Schol. But you spoke of great honor which the Governors have in the Kingdom
of Macaria.


Trav. They must needs receive great honor of the people, by reason that there
is no injustice done, or very seldom, perhaps once in an age.


Sch. But how come they by their great riches which you speak of?


Trav. It is holden a principal policy in State to allow to the ministers of
State, Judges, and chief Officers, great revenues; for that, in case they do
not their duty, in looking to the Kingdoms safety, for conscience sake, yet
they may do it for fear of loosing their own great Estates.


Sch. But how can the King of Macaria be so rich as you speak of?


Trav. He takes a strict course that all his Crown lands be improved to the
utmost, as Forests, Parkes, Chases, etc. by which means his revenues are so
great, that he seldom needs to put impositions upon his Subjects, by reason
he has seldom any wars; and if there be cause, the Subjects are as ready
to give, as he to demand: for they hold it to be a principal policy in
State, to keep the Kings Cofers full, and so full, that it is an astonishment
to all Invaders.


Sch. But how comes the Kings great honor which you speak of?


Trav. Who can but love and honor such a Prince, which in his tender and
parentall care of the public good of his loving Subjects, uses no pretenses
for realities, like to some Princes, in their Acts of State, Edicts, and
Proclamations?


Sch. But you Travelers must take heed of contradictions in your relations;
you have affirmed, that the Governors in Macaria have not half so much
trouble, as they have in these European Kingdoms, and yet by your report they
have a Great Council, like to our Parliament in England, which sit once a
year: besides that, they have five Under Councels, which sit once a year,
then how comes this facility in government?


Trav. The Great Council hears no complaints, but against Ministers of
State, Judges, and chief Officers; these, being sure to be trounsed once a
year, do never, or very seldom offend: So that their meeting is rather a
festivity, than a trouble. And as for the Judges and chief Officers, there is
no hope that any man can prevail in his suit by bribery, favor, or corrupt
dealing; so that they have few causes to be troubled withal.


Sch. I have read over Sr. Thomas Mores Vtopia, and my Lord Bacons New
Atlantis, which he called so in imitation of Plato's old one, but none of them
gives me satisfaction, how the Kingdom of England may be happy, so much as
this discourse, which is brief and pithy, and easy to be effected, if all men
be willing.


Trav. You Divines have the sway of men's minds, you may as easily persuade them
to good as to bad, to truth as well as to falsehood.


Sch. Well, in my next Sermon I will make it manifest, that those that are
against this honorable design, are first, enemies to God and goodness;
secondly, enemies to the Commonwealth; thirdly, enemies to themselves, and
their posterity.


Trav. And you may put in, that they are enemies to the King, and to his
posterity, and so consequently, traitors: for he that would not have the Kings
honor, and riches to be advanced, and his Kingdom to be permanent to him,
and to his heirs, is a traitor, or else I know not what treason means.


Sch. Well, I see that the cause is not in God, but in men's fooleries, that the
people live in misery in this world, when they may so easily be relieved: I
will join my forces with you, and we will try a conclusion, to make our
selves and posterity to be happy.


Trav. Well, what will you do toward the work?


Sch. I have told you before, I will publish it in my next Sermon, and I will
use means that in all Visitations and meetings of Divines, they may be
exhorted to do the like.


Trav. This would do the feat, but that the Divines in England, having not the
skill of Physic, are not so highly esteemed, nor bear so great a sway as they
do in Macaria.


Sch. Well, what will you do toward the work?


Trav. I will propound a book of Husbandry to the high Court of Parliament,
whereby the Kingdom may maintain double the number of people, which it does
now, and in more plenty and prosperity, than now they enjoy.


Sch. That is excellent: I cannot conceive, but that if a Kingdom may be
improved to maintain twice as many people as it did before, it is as good as
the conquest of another Kingdom, as great, if not better.


Trav. Nay, it is certainly better; for when the Towns are thin, and far
distant, and the people scarce and poor, the King cannot raise men and money
upon any sudden occasion, without great difficulty.


Sch. Have you a copy of that book of Husbandry about you, which is to be
propounded to the Parliament?


Trav. Yes, here is a copy, peruse it, whilst I go about a little business,
and I will presently return to you. Well, have you perused my book?


Sch. Yes Sir: and find that you show the transmutation of sublunary bodies,
in such manner, that any man may be rich that will be industrious; you show
also, how great cities, which formerly devoured the fatness of the Kingdom,
may yearly make a considerable retribution without any man's prejudice, and
your demonstrations are infallible; this book will certainly be highly
accepted by the high Court of Parliament.


Trav. Yes, I doubt it not; for I have showed it to diverse Parliament men, who
have all promised me fair, so soon as a seasonable time comes for such
occasions.


Sch. Were I a Parliament man, I would labor to have this book to be
dispatched, the next thing that is done; for with all my seven Liberal Arts I
cannot discover, how any business can be of more weight than this, wherein
the public good is so greatly furthered; which to further, we are all bound by
the law of God, and Nature.


Trav. If this conference be seriously considered of, it is no laughing
matter; for you hear of the combustions in France, Spain, Germany, and other
Christian Countries; you know that a house divided against it self cannot
stand: This may give the Turk an advantage, so that England may fear to have
him a nearer neighbor than they desire. Why should not all the inhabitants of
England join with one consent, to make this country to be like to Macaria,
that is numerous in people, rich in treasure and munition, that so they may be
invincible?


Sch. None but fools or mad men will be against it: you have changed my mind,
according to your former prediction, and I will change as many minds as I can,
by the ways formerly mentioned, and I pray you, that for a further means, this
Conference may be printed.


Trav. Well, it shall be done forthwith.


Sch. But one thing troubles me, that many Divines are of opinion, that no
such Reformation as we would have, shall come before the day of judgment.


Trav. Indeed there are many Divines of that opinion, but I can show an hundred
Texts of Scripture, which do plainly prove, that such a Reformation shall come
before the day of judgment.


Sch. Yea, I have read many plain Texts of Scripture to that purpose, but when
I searched the Expositors, I found that they did generally expound them
mystically.


Trav. That is true; but worthy St. Hierome, considering that those places of
Scripture would not bear an Allegorical exposition, said thus, Possumus sicut
and multi alii omnia haec spiritualiter exponere, sed vereor, ne hujusmodi
expositionem, prudentes lectores nequaquam recipiant.


Sch. I am of St. Hierom's mind, and therefore with alacrity let us pursue our
good intentions, and be good instruments in this work of Reformation.


Trav. There be natural causes also to further it; for the Art of Printing
will so spread knowledge, that the common people, knowing their own rights and
liberties, will not be governed by way of oppression; and so, by little and
little, all Kingdoms will be like to Macaria.


Sch. That will be a good change, when as well superiors as inferiors shall
be more happy: Well, I am imparadised in my mind, in thinking that England
may be made happy, with such expedition and facility.


Trav. Well, do you know any man that has any secrets, or good experiments? I
will give him gold for them, or others as good in exchange; that is all the
trade I have driven a long time, those riches are free from Customs and
Impositions, and I have traveled through many Kingdoms, and paid neither
straight nor Custom for my wares, though I valued them above all the riches in
the Kingdom.


Sch. I know a Gentleman that is greatly addicted to try experiments, but how
he has prospered I am not certain; I will bring you acquainted with him,
perhaps you may do one another good.


Trav. Well, I have appointed a meeting at two of the clock this day, I love
to discourse with Scholars, yet we must part; if you meet me here the next
Monday at the Exchange, I will declare to you some more of the Laws, Customs,
and manners of the inhabitants of Macaria.


Sch. I will not fail to meet you for any worldly respect; and if I should be
sick, I would come in a Sedan: I never received such satisfaction and
contentment by any discourse in my life: I doubt not but we shall obtain our
desires, to make England to be like to Macaria; for which our posterity which
are yet unborne, will fare the better: and though our neighbor Countries are
pleased to call the English a dull Nation, yet the major part are sensible of
their own good, and the good of their posterity, and those will sway the rest;
so we and our posterity shall be all happy.


FINIS.

