A LETTER Sent from the PROVOST Vice Chancellor of Oxford, To the Right
Honorable the Earl of Pembrooke Lord Chancellor of Oxford.

Together with his Lordships ANSWER To the said Letter.

ORdered by the LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament, That this Letter and Answer be
forthwith Printed and published:

H. Eisynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
SEPTEMBER 13. 1642.


London, Printed by L. N. for E. Husbands and J. Franck and are to be sold at
their shops in the Middle Temple, and next door to the King's Head in
Fleet Street.

The Copy of A LETTER Sent from The Provost Vice Chancellor of Oxford to the
Right Honorable, the Earl of Pembrook and Mountgomery: Lord Chancellor of
Oxford, dated September the 12. 1642.
Right Honorable:
May it please your Lordship to know, that this Universitie is now in extreme
danger of the suffering all Evils and Calamities, that warlike forces may may
bring upon it. Such forces we hear for certain are some of them already upon
their March, some others in raising to assault, and if they may have their wills
(I mean the common sort of them) to spoil and destroy us. My L. you have been
sollicitous, whom to appoint your Vice Chancellor over us for this next year.
But if these forces come forward, and do that Execution upon us and this
place, that we fear they intend; there will be no use at all of any
Vice Chancellor. For what will be here for him to do, where there will be no
scholars for him to govern? Or what should Scholars do here, having no
Libraries left them to study in? no Schools to dispute in? Chapels to serve
God in? Colleges or Halls to live or lodge in? but have all these ransacked,
defaced, demolished. So that Posterity may have to say, See here was for a
long time, and till such a year an Universitie of great Renown and Eminence,
in all Manner of Learning and Virtue. But now laid utterly waste and buried in
her own Ruins. And then with the question be; What had they then no L.
Chancellor over them? Or was He unable to protect them, either by His power,
or by his mediation and favor in their behalf! Or were men of place and
Governors in the Universitie so sleepie and stupid, as not to implore his
protection of them? Or was he foreacquainted with their danger, and regardlesse
nevertheless of what might befall them? We are all of us very confident, that
if your Lordship would vouchsafe to interpose with your entreaties for us to
the Honorable Houses of Parliament for our safety and security therein all
would be well with us, as now it is, the delinquents that were one while sent
for are not one of them here at this time. Sir John Byron with his Regiment of
Troopers (who have been 2 few days here without the least damage or grievance
that I know of any man) we shall (I doubt not) soon prevail withal to withdraw
from us, if he may with his safety return back to His Majesty, who of His
own gracious Care of us sent him hither; And if your Lordship shall be
secured, that no other forces shall be here imposed upon us, that will take the
liberty to exercise that barbarous Insolence with which the illiterate, rude,
and ruffianly rabble of the Vulgar threaten us. Against such and against such
only, our young men have lately taken in hand the Arms: We have (a very few
God knows, and in weak hands enough) to save themselves and us from having our
Libraries fired, our Collages pillaged, and our throats cut by them; if they
should suddenly break in upon us. And this (my Lord is all the sinful intent
we have had in permitting them to train in a voluntary and peaceable manner so
as they have done. Good my Lord, and that which I most earnestly beg of your
Honor is out of the sense and humble Request of the Univerversitie, vouchsafe
to put in action with all speed, what you in your wisdom conceive may be most
effectual and prevalent with the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the
peace and security of this place, and for the staying of our Students, a great
part of whom, (such stout and hardy men they are) upon Alarmes and affrights,
such as have been hourly here of late, are sled away from us home to their
mothers. The disciples then in danger of drowning clamored our Savior with
Master carest thou not that we perish? But I am bold to assume for your Honor
and to assure all of this University under your happy government, that you will
not (so far as in your power is) suffer any one Member of it to perish, no
not to receive any the least hurt. And that of the tender and vigilant Care you
have of us you will at this time give us a clear and real evidence, having
this representation of the peril that we are now in, made unto your Honor by
me,

Your Lordships humble servant Provost-Vice-Chancellour of Oxford.

The Answer to the said Letter. Dated September the 13.
SIR,
IF you had desired my advice and assistance in time I should willingly have
contributed my best endeavors for safety and Protection. But your own unad
vised Counsels and Actions have reduced you to the steights you are now in:any
discretion might have forseen: That the admitting of Cavaleers; and taking up
Arms, could not but make the University a Notorious mark of oppositions against
the Parliament, and therefore to be opposed by it. If you had contained your
selves within the decent modest bounds of an University, you might justly have
challenged me, if I had nor performed the duty of a Chancellor. The best
Council I can now give you is, that you presently dismiss the Cavaleers, and
yield up unto the Parliament such Delinquents as are amongst you, and then the
Cause being taken away, the effect will follow: When you have put your selves
into the right posture of an University, I will be a faithful Servant to you,
and as ready to do you all the good Offices I can with the Parliament, as I am
now sorry you have brought these troubles upon your selves. So I rest.

Your Very loving Friend, Pemb. and Mount.

September 12. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this Letter with the
Answer be forthwith Printed and Published.

H:Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


