THE SPEECH OF Master Plydell, ESQVIRE: Concerning the Church, Febr. 8. 1641.

fleur-de-lis printer's device

London Printed, 1641.

THE SPEECH OF Master Plydell, ESQVIRE.
Master Speaker,
I Have heard, since I had the honor to sit here, many grievances presented,
and truly Sir, my heart bleeds within me when I think of them, especially
those that concern Religion. But what should I speak of grievances concerning
Religion, when Religion it self is become a grievance, nay the very Nurse and
Mother of all grievances, all scandalls, all reproaches. Tantum Religio potuit
suadere malorum.

SIR, Sylla and Charybdis, Popery on the one side, and I know not what to call
it on the other; in many respects both alike dangerous, unless the Italian
Proverb may alter the Case; God defend me from my reputed friends, and I will
defend my self from my professed enemies.

Sir, We are entrusted by God, the King, and the Country, with the managing of
this Bark, fraught with the fortunes of three great Kingdoms. Now should we
so decline the former Rock, that we dash on the other side; I humbly offer it
to this Honorable Assembly, whether she might not have just cause to say, she
had changed her Pilot, rather then her Condition; and only shifted places to
find her ruin: For Sir, there is as much beyond Truth, as on this side it,
and would we steer a right course, we must be sure to keep the Channel,
lest we fall from one extreme to another, from the dotage of Superstition, to
the frenzy of Profaneness, from bowing to Idols, to worship the Calves of
our own imaginations.

Sir, I beseech you consider what libellous Pamphlets are now Printed, what
Sermons are preached, not building hay and stubble, but utterly subverting the
foundations of Truth; What irreverence in Churches, what profanation of Gods
Service, to the scandal of Christianity, the reproach of Religion, and the
intolerable grief of all good men, of which I may take up the words of Petrus
de Aliaco, to the Council of Constance, Nisi celeriter fiat reformatio, audeo
dicere quod licet magna sint quae videmus, tamen in brevi incomparabilia majora
videmus, and post ista tam horrenda majora alia audiemus.

Sir, I take God to record, I am no man's Advocate, no man's enemy, but a
faithful lover of truth and peace, and a dutiful Son of our distressed Mother
the Church of England, in whose behalf, and our own, my motion shall be
shortly this. That the Ministers petition, with so much of their Remonstrance
as has been read, may be committed, and the rest of it concerning matter of
Doctrine may be referred to some learned and approved Divines, as have spent
their time in that noble study. For give me leave to tell you, there is a
Vulgus among the Clergy, as among the Laity, Et in utroque nil modicum; and for
these and all things which strike at the root and branch as they please to
call it, I shall humbly move, that we rather consider how to satisfy the
petitioners with some timely declaration from both Houses, of the lawfulness,
and convenience of Episcopal Government, derived from the Apostles, and so
long established in this Kingdom, rather then to venture upon any alteration,
the consequence whereof, the wisest man cannot foresee, and in truth Sir,
should we once begin, for my own part, I know not how, or where we should
stay. Nevertheless, if any one doubt the superiority of Bishops over Priests
and Deacons in Ecclesiastical government, or in ordination, I shall be ready,
whenever this House shall command me to make it good, and I think by as
pregnant testimonies, as we are able to prove the difference betwixt Canonical
and Apocryphal Scripture, the necessity of Infants baptism, or that the
Apostles were the Authors of their own Creed: But Sir, I hope you will save
your self and me that labor, and rather devise of some set way to bind up
the Churches wounds, which God knows are too wide already, that so the Clergy
and Laity being made friends, and all reduced to the model of our Ancestors
since the reformation, we may all together preserve the unity of the Spirit, in
the bond of peace; and so his Majesty having graciously, and prudently expressed
himself, I am the more confident we shall not only put an end to all
misintelligence betwixt Prince and People, but also highly advance the
Protestant cause, and give a deadly blow to the Sea of Rome.

Sir, I humbly crave the favor of the House, for God is my witness, Non potui
aliter liberare animam meam.

FINIS.

