Plain Dealing WITH ENGLAND IN Matter of Conscience, BETWEEN The KING and
PARLIAMENT.

I. Concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty. II. Concerning the Parliament.
III. Concerning the grand Reformers. IV. Concerning the Parliaments Army. V.
Concerning those called Malignants. VI. Concerning the Cavaliers.
Chrysostom. Hom. 8. ad Pop. Antioch. ^rah pater Abrahae fuit Idolorum cultor,
sed in hoc mundo DOMINUS ^impietatis poenas non dedit, and merito: nam si DEUS
praeveniens ^radicem praescidisset, unde tantus fidei fructus exortus fuisset?

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Griffin. 1643

Plain Dealing with England, in matter of Conscience.
AS the actions of the English demonstrate the inclination of their hearts, so
were their hearts veiled only with a Chirstall, each man's intention would be
better known; And the representative body of the State, who are careful to
Cure the present malady would purge the distempered humors to save the much
gangred body by cutting of some rotten and some putrified members which infect,
infest and in vade the republique.

Their profound sighs and earnest prayers might quicken my ingenie, better then
the sound of excellent instruments can revive the spirits: to deal plainly with
England in matter of conscience concerning the present wars this kingdom groans
under, submitting my self modestly to both the head, and body thereof: And if
those streams of tears, and sweet presumes make not my pen fruitful, and
pleasent, pardon my rudeness, and consider the state we are now in.

I. Concerning the Kings Majesty.
I FOr his Regal power, he is (by specall Prerogative) the Lords anointed,
the head and sole governor of the Kingdom, established by the law of God, and
we his subjects the body, (next under God:) are bound in obedience to him
alone. 2. For his parts and virtues, they are rare, surpassing other Princes,
of far that their imitation of his Majesty's splendour would not only veil
their imperfections, but preserve their lives: make his judgment O God as
clear as the sun to reduce the general capacity to an influence of justice,
peace, Religion, and liberity; and make him a rich and potent king.

II. Concerning the Parliament.
II THe Parliament is as one body, and the chief, or head of this body is the
King, and with this agreed all our books. Dyer, Fol. 60. a. 2. says the state
of Parliament consists of three parts, viz. of the King, as the chief head, and
of the Lords, the chief and principal members of the body, and of the Commons,
Knights Citizens and Burgesses, the inferior Member, and these make the body of
the Parliament. So that it must needs follow, that the King is the Head of this
great Body, not divided in law, though he be in distance, for if so, it must
needs be, that the body would be destroyed, be cause it cannot subsist without
an Head: Neither do they usurp any power to themselves more then by the law is
due, to style themselves the Parliament, whose ordinances are pub^i^hed in the
Kings name, and under his protecton.

The Parliament is the representative Body of the kingdom, and their judgment
is our judgment, and they that oppose the judgment of the Parliament, oppose
their own judgment, for we have bound our ^lves by our contents and election,
to stand to their Judgment, and determination, so that although the miserable
condition and imminent danger, be not manifest to the universal Body yet the
Parliament being the most proper Judges, seeing the wrinkles put on the brow of
rui^ed affairs, ought to be the only Judges of it. And indeed the law which is
above a ^law ^s S. Ius Populi; the safety of the people, to their law all ought
to subscribe, and therefore the Parliament have done that which is agreeable
both to law, and reason in preferring of the public safety.

III. concerning the grand reformers
III THose who labor hard: and take great pains to procure a Reformation have
their warrant out of Gods word, (for whatsoever is dissonant from that, however
it may bear a pretense of reformation will rather deform then beautify the
Church of God;) but a Reformation according to Gods word ought to be labored
for; and much desired of all the people of God; And as all rivers return to the
ocean, so may the labyrnith of this be by help of wise Ariadnes escaped, and
the golden Fleece, continuance of the Gospel in purity, justice, peace and
downy tranquillity, procured and preserved, with the help of those godly
Medeas, who would make the Church of England (that has so long connived at the
papists, and born with them till now they are risen against her to cut her
childrens throats) to be henceforward more wise, and become a glorious Church;
not by being made naked like their peace offerings to the golden calfe; as too
many would betray us to the Romish whore, aiming therein at the overthrow of the
fundamental laws, the change of Religion; and by fire and sword to force us to
Idolatry. But by becoming a true reformed protestant church, advansing the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, that he may rule in the purity of his Ordinances above
all the traditions of men.

IV. Concerning the Parliaments Army.
COncerning the Militia, I conceive it is warrantable by Law: 1. Because of the
necessity of it, Bracton fol. 227. a. 10. Rep. fol. 61. a. And secondly in
respect of reason, for it does stand with reason, Pl. Com. fol. 13. b. Thirdly,
it concerns the Commonwealth, Dyer 29. H. 8. E. 4.23.13. H. 8.16. And
fourthly, in respect of the favorable construction it bears, 9. H. 3. c. 29.
alib. 5. Because of the Kings Charter, Bracton fol. 34. where he says, De
Chartis Regis and faclis Regum, non debent; nec possunt Iustitiarii, nec
privatae prisonae disputar^: that is, of the Kings Charters, and his deeds,
neither Justice nor private persons may or ought to dispute: It is a rule in
the Law, that Judges ought always to make such construction of the deeds of
men, and of their Grants, ut nec res magis valeat quam pereat: that is, that
they should rather take effect, then perish: so I say, it may well be taken for
a rule, that the Judges should not so construe the Law, that the Law should
destroy it self; which will necessarily follow in the destruction of the
Commonwealth, if they should not so interpret it, ut respublica magis valeat
and floreat, quam p^reat and destruatur^ that the Commonwealth should rather
flourish, then peri^h and be destroyed.

V. Concerning those called Malignants.
V THose who are called Malignants, are of two sorts. 1. Evil Counselors; 2.
Evil actors; both burning in their fury against the happy peace, and
tranquillity of the Church and Kingdom, seeking the blasting of the Reputation
of the State, O God! suffer not ill counselors to be as a bad spleen, to swell
to such a biggnesse, as shall make lean the Common wealth, that our empty
purses, be not killed with blood, though with tears.
These would take away the lives of our Worthies; as it was plotted against six
at one Clap; these would overthrow our laws, and rob us of our Religion, take
away the property of our goods, and compel us to an Arbitrary way of
government; that justice may be bought and sold again; but oh what misery,
what sad event would ensue; when the Judges shall affirme^t legal, the Clergy
wrongfully in their pulpits teach it; and the Cabinet Council authorize the
convenience for matter of State.

The States of Venice, jealous of any their members, confederating with
enemies, cause them to be strangled, and hanged up between columns confiscate
their goods, and estates; banish their children, and make them incapable of
government.

In the 18. and 21. of King James, the whole house adjudged it treason to
alienate the hearts of the subjects, from the Sovereign, which has been the
continual practice of evil counselors, and malignants; I humbly desire God to
bless his Majesty; but Oh! that he would be pleased to suffer the Parliament
to expiate the distractions of the land with the oblation of the troublers of
England, who hinder both his, their, and our peace.

VI. Concerning the Cavaliers.
IN my discourse concerning the Cavaliers I shall be somewhat large, because in
them (indeed) is the intent of this discourse; and in speaking of them observe,
1. What kind of men they are: 2. What their practice has been, and then you
may the better judge what it is to trust them.


1 Observe what kind of men they are, and that for nation, religion, and
estate. 1 For nation: they are a mixed Army, some from Holland, of the Dutch;
others from France, On^ale, and others of the Irish, etc. besides the English
Cavaliers; which may prove of dangerous consequence, in case that any of those
foreign nations should come against us with a foreign Army. They have not
only amongst them many Irish Rebels, but many women that are come over with
them, who kill, rob and pillage worse then the men, and are more bloody and
cruel, and at the end of a skirmish, use to pillage the dead corpse, and many
times finding them wounded, but not dead, with knives that they have for the
purpose they cut out their throats, and abuse and launch them in most woeful
manner: good Lord rid us of them.

2 For their religion: there are, no doubt, some Protestants, but Papists,
Neuters, and Atheists good store: we are in danger of the Popish Cavaliers,
that if they should prevail, then we must look for fire and faggot again, as
it was in Q Mary's days, if not worse. The Newters they are ready for any
design; and the Atheists, I will give you notice of some of their practices:
1. By their blasphemies against heaven; by these and the like words: We will
drink, and be drunk, whore, and be damned, and will not be beholden to God to
save us; we had rather be in hell together, then in heaven with the Roundheads:
the devil that made me, damn and ram into the mouth of a Canon, and shoot
me nine miles into hell. They make Proclamtion amongst themselves, that he that
can invent some new oath to damn and destroy Pym and his adherents, shall have
a sum of money given him. 2 By their action they appear to be many of them
no better but plain Atheists; they drink healths to King Charles, in whom they
live, and move, and have their being: but amongst other things, it is credibly
reported, that when they came toward London with the King, hoping to get an
opportunity of pillaging the City, though His Majesty knew not their intents;
His Majesty was asleep one morning when they had a desire to be marching for
London, who hearing that His Majesty was asleep, they wished that he might not
awake in a whole fortnight, and drunk healths to his confusion, and to the
confusion of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ and his Gospel, as also the
confusion of the Lord Kimbolton, Sir Arthur Hazzlerig, M. Denzill Hollis, M.
John Pym, M. Strode, M. John Hampden, Sir John Hotham, the Earl of Essex, the
Earl of Warwick, Alderman Pennington Major, Sargeant Major General Skippon,
Colonel John Ven, Alderman Fulke, Colonel Manwaring. Oh Lord! what a miserable
condition were we in, if we should expose our selves to their mercy.


3. What they are in their estates: Oneale was a prisoner that broke out of the
Tower; many of them are Delinquents to the Parliament, many Malignants, many
Irish Rebels, that hope for better pillage here then there; many soldiers from
other places, whose livelihood is service in the wars, from one country to
another, many of them are such as have spent their means which their father
left them, and now are glad of so convenient an opportunity, hoping to raise
themselves on the ruins of others.

2 What the practice of the Cavaliers is, we may judge, by considering what it
has been; and that shall be declared briefly by their extreme boldness with
His Majesty,

1. By urging him to undergo all dangers with them; or if His Majesty ever
comply with the Parliament, to assure them of a pardon. 2. To grant them the
pillage for their pains. 3. That His Majesty would give way for some of the
Irish Rebels to come over to assist him, etc. a boldness of an infinite
height, God bring His Majesty safe home from amongst them.
2 Lastly, their cruelty in their practices gives us most cause of all to
beware of them, for that has been most cruel and bloody, besides their common
plundering and pillaging.

1 One Jane White of Leicester, a woman great with child, they came into her
house, the good-woman little thinking that they would have wronged her, but
because she did not please them with discourse, they shot her clean through the
belly with a brace of bullets, and she died. 2. After they had plundered Sir
Edward Rhodes his house in Yorkshire, they slew his servant that kept the
house. 3. One William Wright of Abbington, before the Cavaliers came thither,
gave counsel, and advice to the rest of the Inhabitants, to stand upon their
guard, and oppose them, and thereby to keep the said town from violence and
oppression, and that the Ammunition of the town might be secured. By the
special Command of Prince Rupert he was condemned by martial law, and hanged
up at his own door. 4. Two gentlemen of good repute traveling from London,
were met at Hounslow at the sign of the Catharine wheel; The Cavaliers hearing
(...) were Citizens, brake violently in upon them; took their horses (...) the
stables, and tied them to other horses and carried them away like slav^ these
men were carried to P. Rupert, and set in a smoky chimny where the were almost
choakd and Prince Rrupert being to march to Hounsloe, the were drove before,
and the Cavaliers followed, threatening every mome^ to shoot them, not
permitting them to eat, nor so much as to lap w^ and were ready to starve for
cold, and hunger. 5. They executed martial law on Captain Blake. 6. They cut
in pieces the Ministers of Cicester after the skirmish wa^ over. 7. A gentlman
was hanged in a with upon a tree for saying that he w^ for the King and
Parliament, and no man was suffered to cut him down (...) so much as to cover
his face. 8. Master Bray of Isleworth, because he said that he was for the Kin^
and Parliament, they cut off his ears, and gave him thirty wounds i^ (...) body
besides, and when they had done, they tauntingly throw him ^on a dungill, with
this most unchristian scoff, saying, let the Dogs l^ him whole. 9. Another in
the same town they tied by the feet, and when they ha^ drawn him up and down
many streets in the town till they were we^ they shot him to death. 10. They
pistolled one Francis of Vxbrige for saying that he was (...) the King and
Parliament as he was coming out of an Inn to go to (...) wife, and children.
11. M. Pierce his wife at Brainford, A woman that had layen in the^ but one
week; they drove her out of the house in her smock with the chil^ in her Arms
which cost her her own and her child's life. 12. Many more such like cruelties,
plunderings and Robberies are done by the bloody Cavaliers; the Lord cease
their power and fury and send (...) peace to his glory. Amen.
FINIS.

