The Pleasant and Delightful History of Johnny Armstrong:

battle between footsoldiers

London: Printed by Tho. Norris, at the Looking-glass on London Bridge.

HISTORY OF THE Renowned Northern WORTHY, Iohnny Armstrong, OF WESTMORELAND
SHOWING His many Noble Deeds in his Youth in diverse Countries, in Arms against
the Turks and Saracens in the H^^y, Land; and how, settling at Guiltnock-hall
in Westmoreland he by his Industry, without any Estate in Lands or Rents' kept
eight score Men to attend him, richly apparelled well-mounted, and armed: How
he married a fair Lady, a poor Knight's Daughter, and of the noble
Entertainment at his Wedding who brought him a fair Son: Also an Account of his
many Victories over the Scots, and how going to Edenborough upon the friendly
Invitation of that King he and his Men were all slain, valiently fighting,
whose Death was revenged by his Son; with many other Matters of Note.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Norris, and sold by the Booksellers.

THE HISTORY OF Iohnny Armstrong, OF WESTMORELAND, etc.
CHAP. I. How in his youthful Days following Wars abroad in the Holy Land, and
other Countries, he learned the Art of Arms, came off with great Success and
Applause; and after his Return, settled at Guiltnock-hall, in Westmoreland; and
of the noble Entertainment he gave to his hundred and sixty Men.
IN former Times when the Wars were frequent between England and Scotland,
before the two Kingdoms were united in King James the First of England, and
Sixth of Sco^land, the bordering Countries, by reason of the Inroads that were
made, were sometimes possessed by one Nation, and sometimes by another; so that
in these Contests there happened to live in Westmoreland, a brave and jolly Man
named Johnny Armstrong, who made it his Business to keep up the good and
laudible Customs of Charity, supplying the Poor with Clothes and Food, not
denying to any that asked; so that for his Liberality he was famed every where,
and extremely beloved by all, as well of his rich Neighbors as poor Ones; and
though he had no free estate, yet there was such a Providence upon his
Industry, which he used many ways, as in clothing, buying and selling Forests
of Timber, breeding Cattle, and the like, that his Store vastly increased,
insomuch that a great many wondered how he could live at the rate he did, not
well knowing how his Incomes should maintain it. For building a long Hall on
purpose; he had a Table every Day furnished for eightscore Men, which he not
only fed, but kept clothed, and maintained in all other Marters; having Horse
and Arms upon Occasion for the Defense of his Country, ready for them to mount,
taking great Delight to exercise them, having been trained up a Soldier in
foreign Lands, fighting against the Turks and Sarazens many Years in his
youthful Days, and done great exploits which made him by many be styled the
Ch^mpion of the North, so that he kept the Borders very much in

His Mansion House was called Guilt-nock-hall, and his famed to this Day for
his living in it, there being small Houses standing in the same Place, bearing
the Name to this time; however, the larger Ruins shows it has been a Place very
famous in former, for upon digging, the workmen found the Foundations very
spacious; and some of them have had the Luck to light upon earthern-pots, with
the Coin of diverse Kings, to the great enriching of them, and so they called it
Johnny Armstrong's Bountymoney. Upon these things he employed himself, till he
was forty Years of Age, without being married, though several rich Offers were
made to him of wealthy young Maidens; this made him consider of altering his
Condition, not so much for the Desire of Marriage, as he might get an Heir to
keep up the Grandeur of his Hospitality, and to carry his Name to Posterity, as
being defcended of a very ancient and worthy Family, some of which are living
to this Day.

CHAP. II. How being settled, vnd living gallantly, he bethought himself of
Marriage, and fell in Love with a Gentleusan's Daughter of ao Fortune; and of
the sp^endid Entertainment he made; and how thereupon he was taken for the
King, etc.
HIs Thoughts about Marriage were no sooner known, but out of the Respect the
Gentry and others in the Country had for him, many suitable Matches were
proposed; but as for Riches he lightly regarded it, relying mainly on the
bounties of Providehce, he resolved to choose out one Handsome, Ingenious and
Virtuous; and so it was not long e're he saw One as he was passing through a
Market Town, that he could fancy; and upon Inquiry, found she was a Gentleman's
Daughter, though of a mean Fortune, her Father being fallen much to Decay, by
the Losses he had received by the War between the two Nations, in his Estate
and Goods: But this made no Difference between them, the Gentlemah was was glad
to put his Daughter off so well, and Johnny was as well pleased he had met with
a virtuous modest Woman, not without a Sufficiency of beauty to please him well
enough; and the Day being appointed, he promised to come and marry her, and so
fetch her home to his House. And in order to this, he arrayed his eightscore
Men in Purple, laced all with Gold and Silver-Lace, with Silver-hilted Swords,
embroidered Belts, gilded Spurs, and Plumes of white Feathers in their
Bonnets, and bravely mounted, he rid in most gallant Attire at the Head of
them; so that the People through the Towns as he passed, taking him for the
King, they run before him, throwing up their Hats, and shouting; nor could they
hardly be persuaded by himself to the contrary.

His fair Mistress was of the same Opinion, when looking out at the Window,
upon the knoc^ing at the Gate, and seeing her father's House surrounded with so
gallant a Troop, fancying it could be none else, and that he might be a hunting
in those Parts, and so came thither for entertainment; upon this she run and
waked her Father, it being yet early, and told him the King was come with a
numerous Train to visit him.

God forbid, said he, what shall we do then? We shall be undone, for all our
Provisions for thy Wedding will not be a Mouthful for them. Indeed the house
looks fair and promising without, though my mean Fortune can allow but lean
Coasmons. Go down and tell them I am not at home, I am sick, or any thing to
put them off; for better so, than pretend to entertain them, when we cannot do
it; better strain a Complement, than to be disgraced, or at least fast I know
not how long after.

Upon this, down she went, and peeping through the Wicket, demanded what brought
them to ^er Father's House; to which Johnny Armstrong replied, My Promise to
you, that I would this Day make you my Wife. Upon this, knowing his Voice, and
looking wishfully on him, she could not but fancy him to be what before she had
thought, till he alighted, and saluted her kindly, assuring her he was no other
than Johnny Armstrong of Guiltnock-hall, in Westmoreland. Upon this throwing
open the Gates, she conducted him in, and run up to tell the Business,
vvhereupon her Father coming down, kindly vvelcomed him. But when he favv his
Train, he blessed himself, to know what he meant by bringing such a number of
Men so bravely accutred, fancying he had invited all the Gentlemen in ten
Countries: But when he told him they were such as usually attended him when
he went upon any important Affair, his Wonder yet more increased, for though he
had heard he had daily relieved abundance of Poor, he could not believe he
could keep so many Men in that Garb.

CHAP. III. How he was married, and of the noble Entertainment be made, the
number of his Servants and Attendants, and how he invited the whole Country to
his Weding, etc.
man and woman, presumably Johnny and his bride

NOW Matters being at this pass, the Pages had the Care of the horses, whilst
the Men light to refresh themselves; though all the Liquor in the house was not
a Morning's Draught for them; which made the old Gentleman, the Father
conclude that this would be a Fasting-day of a Wedding. But whilst these
Doubts and Fears shook him like a Palsy, all on a sudden arrived Armstrong's
Cooks and Scullions, twenty in Number, with a Carrivan of Provision ready to
dress: after them his Butlers, being eight, with another of Wine, Cider, Ale,
and other Liquor; so that it seemed, when taken out, a Plenty sufficient to
have supplied a little City against a Siege. So to work went the Cooks, etc.
whilst he and his Bride, bravely mounted, rode attended by his Men to the
Church, making such a Show as that Country had never before seen. The People
upon Notice of it, coming far and near to be Spectators, some giving out,
especially the ignorant Sort, that Esquire Leonard's Daughter had married the
King for certain; for as he came out of the Church, he gave a hundred Mark to
be distributed among the Poor, which they fancied none but a King could or at
least would do.

When they came home, after the Wine of diverse Nations had gone briskly about,
they found the Tables covered with all manner of Varieties that Sea, Earth, or
Air could afford, as, Fowl, Fish, Flesh, Fruits, and other Dainties; and yet
above half was not brought in, so that they were obliged, for want of Room in
the House, to have Tables spread in the Courtyard. For the Porter was ordered
to make Proclamation, That all Comers should be welcome that Day; and so till
Night they drank and feasted plentifully; and then his Music and his
Masqueraders to divert the Company till Bedtime; though indeed there was not
Lodging for a fortieth part of them, so that open House was kept all Night. And
he finding the ill Conveniniency of staying there longer, took his leave of his
Father-in-law the next Morning, and conveyed his fair Bride home with him in
great State, and with her lived very happily, supplying her Father's Wants on
all Occasions with Provision and Money, and made him live very comfortably.

CHAP. IV. How having carried his fair Bride home, she was magnificiently
entertained: How soon after he had diverse Encounters with the Scots, and
thereupon a War arising between the two Nations, after the Battle at Bannock 's
Bourn, Westmoreland fell into their Hands.
BEing now at home, he so settled all things in good Order in that Country,
that the King of England sent him Thanks for the Care he had in protecting
Passengers from Robbers and Thieves, as likewise from the plundering Scots,
which he made many times go short home, wherefore they mortally hated him, and
laid some Designs to entrap him, but having his Guard of merry old true
hearted Blades with him, he always came off with flying Colors. And during
these Transactions his Wife was brought to Bed of a fair Son, which much
rejoiced Parents Hearts, so that holding a Feast at his Christening, all the
Country in a manner, so that the Fame of it rung far and near.

In the middle of this Joy, he had Notice, that a Party of Scots were advanced
within ten Miles of his Seat, ravaging and plundering the Country, so that the
People came flying before them a pace; but he and his Men mounting, gave them
Battle on the Borders of the Country, and overthrew them with so woeful a
Slaughter, that very few returned to Carlisle, (which Garrison in those Days
the Scots held) to tell of the Defeat.

These, and such like Encounters and Depradations, caused an open War between
the two Nations, which had been stilled for a Time; and King Edward of England
marched toward Scotland, and entered it with a mighty Army, but very ill
disciplined; for the Scotch Historians tell us they were a hundred thousand,
besides Women, Lackeys, and other Servants, many carrying their whole families
with them to settle, when Scotland should be overrun. But Fortune was here
against the English, by reason of their Security and Over-confidence in their
Number, for in a mortal battle at a Place called Bannock's Bourn, Robert, the
Scots King setting upon 'em, utterly vanquished 'em with a lesser Number,
killing about ten thousand of them, with the Earl of Glouc^ster and two hundred
Knights, Squires; and on the Scots side about six thousand were killed, with
diverse Nobles and Gentlemen, so that they pursuing their Success, won
Westmoreland and Cumberland. Our famous Armstrong was not at this Battle, but
was much surprised at it, and would have persuaded the retreating English, to
whose Aid he was coming, to rally and face about; but wanting a warlike Prince
to lead them, it proved ineffectual; and now he sound himself constrained to
become a Subject to the King of Scotland, or leave his fair Seat, which he
resolved not do, though his Wife and his Father in-law main^y persuaded him to
it, considering how much he had done against that Nation, and that he could not
well expect but now it was in their Power they would not forget it: But he
being of an undaunted Courage, told them, that he had been brought up a
Soldier, and what he had done, was according to the Law of Arms, and that even
a generous Enemy could not but approve it: Besides, in a little time all might
be won back again by the English; and therefore he not being used to despair in
Providence, or subject to fear, would not remove from a Place he so dearly
loved upon Suggestions of Dangers that might ever happen, least the World might
impute to him a Cowardice he was never guilty of.

These Words put them Silence, and he still went on in his own generous Way of
Living, keeping open House, and doing all the Good he could even to the Poor of
either nation without Indifferency, that no Exceptions might be taken, or he be
branded with Partiality.

CHAP. V. How being persuaded to leave Guiltnock-hall, and retire from the
Scottish Revenge, being refused for many Reason; and great Commotions arising
by the landing of the Danes and Redshanks, he was suspected upon the false
Accusvtion of a Lord: How the King invited him to Edenborough, to destroy him,
and he promsed to go.
DUring these Stirs, the Danes and Redshanks, two bloody Northern Nations, made
great Havoc in the Western Isles of Scotland, where they had landed, and with
them joined some of the discontented Scots, as well Noblemen as others, so that
the King knew not who to trust, since some proved treacherous on whom he seemed
mostly to rely; this vexed him, and made him suspicious even of his Friends, so
that he imprisoned many of them out of Fear they should join with the English,
who were making Preparations to recover what they had so shamefully lost; or
with the Northern Enemy, to whom flocked a great many Outlaws and idle Persons,
who supposed in the midst of Spoil and Plunder, they should be enriched with
the Goods and Chattels that others had industriously labored for.

These Proceedings made many of the Great Ones whom he sent to, refuse to come
to him, least they should be clapped up as the others had been; and then what
Accusations might be brought falsely against them they know not.

This made him clap his Hand on his Breast, looking on those that were about
him, and with a Sigh, said, Ah! is Scotland so full of Treachery, that never a
Man from the highest to the ^owest Degree, dare appear before his King when he
s^nds for him.

Hereupon an Officer of his Household standing up, and then bowing low said, May
it please your Majesty, there is one, named John Armstrong in Westmoreland, a
valiant and trusty Man, whom I doubt not may do you Service. What is he, said
the King, or his Ability? Why, replied the Officer, he lives very splendidly,
gives Noble Entertainment to all Comers, and yet I never heard he had any Land
to maintain it. Then, said the King, he must live by Plunder and Robbery; and
of such there are too many in the Kingdom already. But does he keep any Men to
attend him? Yes, replied the other, he a^ways in intains eightscore gallant
Fellows, bravely attired; and when he goes abroad, they ride with him well
mounted and armed.

Whilst this Dialogue held, in came a Lord whom Armstrong and his Men had a
little before the Fight at Bannock's Bourn routed on the Borders, and rescued a
great Booty of Cattle taken from the poor English Country People, and
challenged him to single Combat, but he durst not answer him. Of this mortal
Enemy of his the King demanded, if he knew one Johnny Armstrong, of
Westmoreland, and what he was? Know him, replied he, Yes, may it please your
Majesty, and so does all your poor ^ubjects on the other, and this side the
Tweed; he has been a bitter Enemy to our Countr^, and is like to be so again,
when the English, who now I hear are prepaparing to make an Attempt upon it;
and unless your Majesty can get him into your Hands, and d^stroy him, and the
Nest of Rebels he keeps, your new Conquests can never be secured to you.

This false and malicious Report so incensed the King against this just and
valiant Man, that he resolved, if possible, his Destruction, without enquiring
further into the Matter; purposing to go with Forces, and immediately fall upon
him: But that was objected against lest, upon notice of the March, he should
retire into the English Territories, and become yet a more implacable Enemy:
Therefore it was thought advisable in a secret Council, called to that
purpose, he should be sent for to Edenborough under fair pretenses of
friendship, and there he and his Train he brought with him, might be cut off
without much Resistance.

This was agreed on as proper, whereupon the King writ to him the following
Letter:

WE having heard much of the Fame of you, our dear and loving Subject, and your
great Bounty, and many singular Virtues, have raised such Admiration in us,
that we could do no less at this time, then take Notice of one who is beloved
of the common People, and may be so greatly serviceable to us, when things go
so badly; Therefore I will not command, but earnestly require you on the sight
of this our Letter to repair to us at our City of Edenborough, with your
Attendance, where you shall be heartily welcome. And for your safe Conduct,
this our Letter, with our Royal Word and solemn Promise, shall be a sufficient
Pledge and Security.

Robert Rex.


This Letter was sealed with the King's Signet, and sent with all secrecy and
speed, which he received as he came from Hunting; and having highly treated the
Messenger, and giving him his Promise to wait on the King on the Morrow, he
dismissed him.

CHAP. VI. How he went bravely attended with his eightscore Men to Edenborough,
notwithstanding many Presages that forbid it: The Discourse he had with the
King, who charging him wrongfully as a Traitor, and ordering him and his Men to
be hanged, they fought with the King's Guards, the whole City in a bloody
Battle, till they were all slain but his Page; and how his little Son promised
to revenge his Father's Death.
THe valiant John Armstrong being at this Invitation a little puzzled to think
what the Reason should be and therefore communicated it to his Friends, to have
their Opinions; but they were as much in the dark as himself; but since he had
received the King's Letter of Conduct, and passed his Word to go, they
concluded (all but his Wife, who was full of Fear for him) that it would be
convenient for him to fulfill his Promise.

Whereupon he ordered his Men to be ready the next Morning, and to put on their
best Apparel, which were Velvet Coats laced with three broad Gold Laces, and
Scarlet Cloaks with five of Silver, as the most modish Fashion of those times,
was also to put on their gold embroidered Belts, which were made to hang over
their Shoulders, and every one a Falchion by his Side, with a silver Handle, a
Buckler of Steel, and a plume of white Feathers in their Hats or Bonnets. The
Emblem of them that they unluckily went into War and Mischief.

His Commands were not disputed, but in the Morning they were up with the Sun,
and immediately had put themselves in array to march; when all on a sudden the
glorious Luminary, that shone so bright at his ascending our Horizon, was
clouded and overcast, and Thunders began to rumble in the Air, which was the
Forerunner of Rain and Whirlwinds; however, there being some Signs of clearing
up, he resolved to set forward, but coming to take his leave of his dearly
beloved Wife and little Son, and giving them many tender Kisses and Embraces,
Tears trickled from his Eyes, contrary to their wonted Use, and his manly
Courage failed him, and all on a sudden he grew sad and melancholy; without
being able to give any Reason for it. But his Wive's Entreaties and his Son's
Tears, were too weak to stay him; so with kind Farewels they parted as they
hoped, but for a time, but it proved a long one.

As they rid through several Towns, the People slocked to see their Bravery; at
last they came to the flowery Banks of Tweed, which part rightly Scotland from
England, and is its Boundary, over which River they passed by a Foard, and so
rod on toward Edenborough, sending word before of his coming, least so great a
Troop might make the City shut their Gates on a sudden, for fear of a Surprise.

The King no sooner had notice of this, but he placed his Guards to be ready on
the first ^rder to execute his Commands; but when he came to his Prese^c^ so
nobly attended, he began to doubt it might be a mistaken Rumor of Armstrong's
coming, fancying it might rather be some foreign Prince come to pay him a
Visit; wherefore upon his low bowing, the King moved his Bonnet to him in a
courteous manner, bidding him stand up; but he was no sooner certified it was
he, e're the kind Language was turned into the hateful Names of Villain
Traitor, Enemy to Scotland, Thief, Robber, and much more of this unexpected
Language, which something startled him; whereupon he bending one Knee to the
Ground, begged Pardon if he had done any thing that had offended his Majesty;
but as for his coming thither it was in Obedience to his Letter, which promised
him better Entertainment, and safe Conduct, and therefore desired to know to
what end he was sent for, tendering his Service if it might be accepted. No,
Traitor, replied he, in a Rage, I need not thy Service, and as for the fair
Promises in my Letter, 'twas to decoy you and your Nest of Thieves hither; and
lastly, the Cause of sending for you, was to hang you and your Men; which shall
be done by eight of the Clock to morrow Morning. At this, the bold English Man
rising up unconcerned, without out fear desired he might justify himself and
his Men and be cleared of the false Report his Majesty had perhaps received of
them. But the Lord who first accused him and some of his Creatures incensing
the King against him, it was denied, and the Guards which were about two
thoufand, had the Signal to drag them to Goal, and the next Morning to execute
them.

Hah, says Armstrong, have thou thus broke thy Word with me, thus basely to
ensnare and destroy me and my Men. Well, we are Men, and like Men we will die,
if it must be so, and Scotland shall buy our Lives at a dear rate. Upon that,
looking behind him, and encouraging his Followers to take Example by him, he
drew his trusty Sword, and making at the King through the thick of his Guards
struck at him with such Fury, that he had taken off his Head at the Stroke, had
he not nimbly avoided by falling on the Ground. Armstrong's Men seeing their
Leader engaged among so many Swords, immediately drew; and so laid about them
that all the Place was slippery with Blood; driving those that remained unslain
out of the Palace into the open Streets; wh^lst the Cry arose through all the
C^ty, as if it had been taken by Storm; so that at last three thousand more
coming upon the Heroic Armstrong, being tired with the Slaughter of h^s
Enemies, and faint with Wounds and loss of blood, after some staggering, fell
to the Ground; yet calling to his Men, encouraged them to fight on for after he
had bled a little, he would rise and help them again. This made them like
enraged Lions, so that Heaps of dead bodies barred up their way; till at last
overpowered by fresh Numbers, and seeing no way of an honorable Retreat; they
all, like valiant Men, dyed in their Master's Cause, leaving a bloody Victory,
for there fell by their Hands two thousand five hundred Citizens and Soldiers.
The King the mean while was retired to a strong-hold for Shelter; and only of
Armstrong's Party a little Page escaped, to tell the dismal News; at which the
Mourning of his Wife and all that Country made for his untimely Fall, is more
than we can relate: However, his little Son sitting on his Nurse's Knee, vowed
to revenge his Death, which, being a Man, he as gallantly performed,

Johnny Armstrong's last Goodnight.
IS there never a Man in all Scotland,
from the highest estate to the lowest degree,
That can show himself now before the King,
Scotland is so full of Treachery?
Yes, there is a Man in Westmoreland,
and Johnny Armstrong they do him call,
He has no lands nor rents coming in,
yet he keeps eightscore men within his hall.
He has Horses and harness for them all,
and goodly steads that be milk white,
With their goodly belts about their necks,
with hats and feathers all alike.
The King he writes a ^oving letter,
and with his own hand so tenderly,
And has sent it unto Johnny Armstrong,
to come and speak with him speedily.
When John he looked this Letter upon,
good Lord, he looked as blithe as a bird in a tree,
I was never before a King in my life,
my Father, my Grandfather, nor none of us three.
But seeing we must go before the King,
O we will go most gallantly:
Ye shall every one have a Velvet-coat,
laid down with golden laces three.
And ye shall every one have a scarlet Cloak
laid down with silver laces five,
With your golden belts about your necks,
with hats and brave feathers all alike.
But when John he went from Gui^tnock-h^ll,
the wind it blew hard, and full fast it did rain,
Now fare thee well thou Guiltnock-hall,
I fear I shall never see thee again.
Now Johnny is to Edenborough gone,
with his eightscore Men so gallantly,
And every one of them a milk white steed,
with their bucklers and swords hanging on their knee.
But when John came the King before,
with eightscore Men so gallant to see,
The King he moved his bonnet to him;
he thought he had been a King as well as he.
O Pardon, Pardon, my Sovereign Liege,
pardon for my eightscore Men and me,
For my name it is Johnny Armstrong,
and a Subject of yours, my Liege, said he.
Away with thee, thou false Traitor,
no Pardon will I grant to thee,
But to morrow morning by eight of the clock,
I will hang up thy eightscore Men and thee.
Then Johnny looked over his left Shoulder,
and to his merry Men thus said he,
I have asked Grace of a graceless Face,
no Pardon there is for you or me.
Then John pulled out his trusty Sword,
and it was made of Mettle so free,
Had not the King moved his foot as he did
John had taken his head from his fair Body.
Come follow me my merry Men all,
we will scorn one Foot for to fly,
It shall never be said we were hung like Dogs,
we will fight it out so manfully.
Then they fought on like Champions bold,
for their hearts were sturdy, stout and free,
Till they had killed the King's good Guard,
there was none left alive but two or three.
But then rose up all Edenborough,
they rose up by thousands three,
A cowardly Scot came Johnny behind,
and run him through the fair body.
Said John, Fight on my merry Men all,
I am a little wounded but am not slain,
I will lay me down for to bleed a while,
then I Will rise and fight with you again.
Then they fought on like mad Men all,
till many a Man lay dead upon the Plain,
For they were resolved before they would yield,
that every Man should there be slain:
So there they fought courageously,
till most of them lay dead there and slain,
But little Musgrove that was his Foot-page,
with his bonny Grizel got away untain.
But when he came to Guiltnock-hall,
the Lady spied him presently,
What news, what news, thou little foot Page,
what news from thy Master and his Company.
My news is bad, Lady, he said,
which I do bring, as you may see,
My Master Johnny Armstrong is slain,
and all his gallant Company.
Yet thou art welcome home my bonny Grizel,
full often thou have been fed with Corn and Hay,
But now thou shall be fed with bread and wine,
and thy sides shall be spurred no more I say.
O then bespake his little Son,
as he sat on his Nurse's Knee,
If ever I live to be a Man,
my Father's Death revenged shall be.
FINIS.

