Die Mercurii 30. September. 1646.
ORdered that Mr. Long do from this House give thanks to Mr. Palmer, for the
great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day, at the entreaty of the
House, at Margarets Westminster (it being the day of public Humiliation) and
to desire him to Print his Sermon, And he is to have the like privilege in
printing of it, as others in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

I Appoint Thomas Underhill to print my Sermon.

Herbert Palmer.

THE DVTY and HONOR OF Church-Restorers: Set forth in a Sermon preached to the
Honorable House of COMMONS, September. 30. 1646.

Being the day of the Monthly Solemn FAST, AT Margarets Westminster.

By Herbert Palmer, B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Ashwell in Hertfordstire,
and a Member of the Assembly of Divines.

Micah 6.8. He has showed thee O man what is good, and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with
GOD?

Amos 9.11. In that day will I raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen,
and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and I will
build it as in the days of old.

I Sam. 2.30. The Lord God of Israel says, Them that Honor me, I will Honor,
and they that Despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Thomas Underhill, at the Sign of the Bible in
Woodstreete. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE The House of Commons now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe Reformation of England, is the great expectation of the world, I think I
may say of Angels, as well as men; and the Parliament of England, under God, is
the great hope of the Christian world, to bring this reformation about. If any
would set himself to study abstractly, how God might prepare a company of men
to carry on such a work, he would not easily find out any thing, which God
has not already fitted the Honorable Houses with. Great pressures to help to
make them humble before their meeting: Manifold dangers all along from the
beginning of their meeting to help keep them humble: A mighty concurrence of
providence to necessitate their meeting together: And an unparalleld overruling
of hearts, for their continuance together, without limitation of time, oother
then their own prudence should determine: A watchful eye, and a strong hand,
to preserve them from all sorts of attempts, to dissolve their meeting:
Mavelous and manifold actings of Gods almighty power and richgrace, in making
their enemies fall before them, notwithstanding their frequent expectations,
and most probable hopes of swallowing them up suddenly, and in making the
people every where to stoop to every part of reformation by them promoted,
notwithstanding all their habituated and doted on customs to the contrary; the
most solemn engagements to carry the work on for God, and accordingly to God,
that are to be found upon earth, or are directed by heaven: A spirit of
reformation in the hearts of many thousands throughout the Kingdom, and more
particularly near unto the place of their siting, breathing out prayers and
supplications to God for them day and night, with giving of thanks, that the
reformation may prosper in their hands, and be perfected by their hands: And
finally, most frequent entercourses between God and them, by his sending to
them, (and even directing them to call to themselves) his servants in great
variety and frequency; to pray with them daily, to fast and pray with them
monthly, (besides extraordinary days of humiliation, and to pray and give
thanks with them upon extraordinary days of thanksgiving, and these
extraordinary days both of the one and the other sort being not a few, put
them altogether) and upon all these public and solemn occasions, to speak to
them in the name of God, words of direction and encouragement, and all this as
a joint body together, with the advantage of having every affecting Sermon
perpetuated to them, by Printing such as they see cause, orapprove; (while in
the mean time the several members have the opportunity of constant hearing
from God every Sabbath, and many of them every morning.) And with all this to
have a selected number of men, c^^sen by themselves, to attend years together,
merely (...) giving them advice about this reformation; may I not now say in
the close of all, what could have been done more for such a company of men, to
make them willing and able to do Gods whole work for his Church and people, for
a full and perfect reformation?

And is not this your story (honorable and worthy?) is it not the manifest
story of Gods providence toward the Parliament of England? And what does he now
expect from you? Or what may we expect further from him? Surely from him, for
my part I can expect no less, but that his intents are (though yet through some
further difficulties perhaps) to carry your spirits, and the spirits of the
whole Parliament strongly and powerfully on, to finish this so blessed a work.
He has pardon, and grace, and wisdom, and strength enough to answer and
overcome all that can be said or thought to the contrary; in this persuasion I
have diverse years lived, and I hope in it I shall dye, if I must dye before the
work be perfected; this persuasion and hope, as it directed me to choose for
you this text, which is here discoursed upon, so it commanded me to speak what
I could understand God expected, and does still expect from you: wherein as for
the general, I am sure I have pointed you to the whole council of God; so for
the particulars I bless God that I can say, your selves have manifestly owned
diverse of them, in making some Ordinances accordingly, and that adds to my
confidence and comfort, that all other things of Gods will toward you, shall
be fulfilled by you, according to his will from time to time; in which work,
both by prayers, and all faithful endeavors in my station, I am, and shall
ever be in him,

Your most humble, and most devoted Servant, Herbert Palmer.

Errata.
Page 23. Line 17. read or p. 23. l. 37. r. task p. 29. l 3. r. could p. 30.
l. 6. and l. 19. r. Sabbath p. 31 l. 11. r. remember them, and also p. 31. l.
19. r. particularly Sermons then p 37. l. 11. r. the p. 45. l. 24. r. reserved
p. 54 l. 16. r. Secondly.

THE DVTY and HONOR OF Church-Restorers.
Esaias 58. v. 12. And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste
places, and thou shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou
shall be called, The repairer of the breach, and the restorer of paths to dwell
in.


THey are words that you have often met with in Prayers, and Sermons, and
Books, and Epistles, and have been many a time applied to you (Honorable and
Beloved) as your portion from God and men. It is my Hope and Prayer that they
shall be so: and that they may so be, the sooner and the more certainly, it may
be good that you once hear them expressly and on purpose discoursed upon. And
indeed being called to this days service. I could not in my Meditations find
a more suitable rise, whereon to build those Exhortations and Encouragements
which the necessity of things calls you at this season to set your hearts upon.
And they are so much the more fit for the season, as well because God has
already begun to fulfill them by you and to you, as a happy presage of his
further purposes toward you; as also for that they are the prosecution and
conclusion of a most ample promise made to right Fasting, which is the present
work of every one of us all. Therefore the words belong to us all in our
several relations and places, if we can make a right use of them: and
doubtless if God vouchsafe us all the grace to have our hearts so intent upon
them, as they are suited to every one that hears them this day, the fullest
extent of them shall be accomplished to each one of us respectively, for our
portion and comfort; and no other portion shall we need in this world, then
what they contain together with the foregoing Verses to which they are
connected: and if we have our share in them in this world, we shall not need to
doubt of a greater and higher portion in the world to come.

Without any further Preface or Preamble, let us come to confider first the
Sum of the words, and then the several instructions that do hence arise unto
us.

The Sum of them is plainly a Promise of raising up, The Churches restoration
here intended.
and blessing, and honoring instruments of the Churches restoration. The
Churches Restoration, I say, not as excluding the State from the benefit of
the Promise; for the welfare of it was ever included in the Churches
prosperity: and never did God make his Church in any Nation happy, but that
Nation and civil State was so to: and scarce is it to be found, that even any
particular City or Town did visibly entertain and embrace the Gospel, but it
prospered the better, and did the more flourish in trading, etc. But because,
First, All the promises that God made to his people of old, has ever the main
reference to the Church, (virtually at least, if not formally:) And if any
would limit these (or any other promises) merely to the civil State, instead
of a blessing they would get nothing but a curse, for that God curses those in
the end, whom he blesses not spiritually as well as outwardly. Secondly,
besides this, the stream of the promises, which run through a great part of
this Chapter both before and after the Text, will easily appear to any
observant eye, to carry a spiritual sense, both relating to particular
persons, and even to the Nation or Church. See verse. 8. and 9. Then shall thy
light break forth as the morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily,
and thy righreousnesse shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be
thy rereward. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry,
and he shall say, Here am I. Surely those words are not only temporal promises
(though we suppose them personal) but also spiritual and heavenly. And so v.
14. Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, is unquestionably, a
spiritual promise (though directed to the Nation, as the next words conclude,
and will make thee to ride upon the high places of the earth.) And so are we to
judge of the intent of this promise. Thirdly, finally, that which helps much to
put it out of all question, that the Church is mainly concerned here, is the
frequent use of the phrases of building, etc. in relation to the Church, and
when God promises blessing to it. Building (or Edifying) the Church and the
members of it, is the common language of the New Testament. And besides other
places, we have it twice undeniably in the Prophets, Amos 9.11. compared with
Acts 15. In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen,
and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and will
build it as in the days of old, says the Prophet. What was this meant merely
of the outward prosperity of the Kingdom of David to be restored? No, but
properly of the building of the Church. So the Apostle James has it in that
place Acts 15 14, 15, 16. fully and clearly. For by the citation of this text
of Amos, he proves the calling of the Gentiles to the faith of Christ, and so
that his Church and Kingdom should be built among them: and so this is the
building our Prophet here speaks of. Also a few chapters after this, namely
Esaias 61.v.4. (the foregoing words whereof were Christ's own text at Nazareth,
Luke 4.18. and by himself applied to himself, and his mercy to his Church)
there are almost the very same words repeated that are in our text here. And
they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the former desolations,
and they shall repair the waste Cities, the d^solations of many generations. By
all which it is clear, that here is intended a promise of the Churches
restaurateur, by raising up, blessing, and honoring instruments for that
purpose, as we have said.

Therefore in the next place, let us come to consider, what is more specially
taught us in this text, with the context. The ^ctrines that I shall observe
unto you from hence are three; which I shall now propound together at the
first, and then clear and prove them severally and distinctly: and afterward
make application of them all, jointly, and together.

1. Religious Fasters, that do justly, and love meroie, are greatly pleasing to
God. 2. To be instruments employed in the churches restoration, with success,
is a great mercy. 3. To religious Easters, doing justly, and loving mercy,
employing themselves for the churches good and restoration; God promises that
they shall find success, and have also the honor of it.


There are none of these points but merely concern us all, and therefore I
cannot doubt of your christian and faithful attention, and application of them
all.

The first point (That religious Fasters, Doct. 1. Religious fasting, joined
with Justice and Mercy, ple^sing to God.
that do justly, and love mercy, are greatly pleasing to God) leans mainly upon
the context, and so indeed do the other also in part.

To clear which, we must look back to the beginning of the Chapter; where we
shall find (as I intimated before) that the promise in the text, is plainly in
prosecution of the direction which God gave his people about Fasting. They make
a great matter of it, that they had fasted v. 3. though they had been untoward
enough in it: therefore God first chiaes them for their untowardnesse, v 4 and
5. and then airect them to add justice and mercy to their fasting, v 6. etc.
and upon those terms makes them man's gracious pr^mises whereof the text is the
conclusion. Therefore we must needs take notice of religious Fasting, and of
Justice and Mercy withal or else we can never rightly improve this Promise.
But now this Promise being, with the rest, made to such Fasters, it affords us
this Doctrine, That they are greatly pleasing to God, which is a general
Doctrine, fit to make way for the other that follow after.

And I express the respect to Justice and Mercy, by doing justly, and loving
mercy; partly for that the justice here required is an Active justice,
requiring somewhat to be done in several cases (as we shall see) and the merci
here to be showed, is to proceed from love, (v. 10 the soul must be drawn out
in it,) and partly, because those are the phrases of the Prophet Micah, c. 6.8.
(who has also a third phrase, which has some relation to fasting or fasting
to it:) The people then had made a great enquiry, what they must do to please
God, and the Prophet answers them, v. 8. He has showed thee O man what is
good, and what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Our fasting if we fast
religiously, will teach us to walk humbly with God, it being a solemn
Humiliation day, wherein we are both to exercise and practice, as also to study
and learn Humiliation. And that this is to be accompanied with doing justice,
and loving mercy, as Micah there expresses, and Esaias here instructs. And this
may suffice for the general proof and confirmation of the Doctrine.

But it will not be amiss to offer some further manifestation of the respect
that God has showed to Fasting, and such fasting as is here required. When
read you, that there was ever a solemn Fast kept with uprightness of heart,
but there was a gracious regard manifested, as to a thing well pleasing to God?
Jehoshaphat in a time of war, and apprehension of so great danger, that he
says in prayer to God We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee, 2 Chronicles. 20. Proclaimed a solemn Fast, and before the day was ended, a Prophet
is stirred up from among the people, who from God assures them of deliverance
and victory, v. 14. without their striking a stroke. So Ezra 8 when he was to
seek a right way from God for himself and the people that were with him
journying to Jerusalem and in danger of enemies, he proclaimed a fast at the
River, Ahava: and it is said, v. 23.31. That Goa was entreated by them, and
delivered them from the enemies, that lay in wait for them by the way. Also
Nehemiak, hearing of the desolation of Jerusalem, and the misery of Gods people
in Judea before he durst speak to the King about that which he had in his
heart, to crave leave to go thither, and build up the walls of the City, he with
some others set themselves to seek God by fasting, c. 1. and he had a very
happy success of it, c. 2. Our Savior likewise, Mat. 17. speaking of casting
out a stubborn Devil, which diverse years had possession of a young man, and
could not be cast out by Christ's Disciples, He says v. 21. This kind goes not
out but by Prayer and Fasting. therefore one thing that God is pleased with;
and so (particularly) when a Church is to be Restored (according to the
business of our Text and Time) there being many stubborn Devils to be cast out,
we are to look at it, as an acceptable piece of service to Him, and a
profitable means toward that desired good. Provided always that we rest not in
bare Fasting (as they did here in the beginning of this Chapter,) but look
also, as the Doctrine and Context requires. at Justice and Mercy, and join
those with it.

Wherein, that we may the more clearly understand the will of God, let us
briefly consider five things about it.

First, What this people did which was good and right? Secondly, What they did
amiss, and wherein they were wanting? Thirdly, What God further required of
them, namely about Justice and Mercy? Fourthly, Some special Reasons why God
requires these particularly? Fifthly, General Reasons of the whole Point, that
such religious Fasting joined with Justice and Mercy, is specially pleasing to
God.
I. 1. Wherein these Fasters did well.
You shall find they did well in sundry particulars, which had a very fair
face. 1. They were very diligent in their Devotions. v. 2. They seek me daily.
2. They took pleasure in knowing Gods will as though they had been wholly bent
upon doing their Duties, (in the same verse) And delight to know my ways as a
Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinances of their God. 3.
They appeared very forward to make enquiry after the Commands of God. They ask
of me the Ordinances of Justice. 4. They seemed to be very glad to have an
opportunity and freedom to frequent the service of God. They took delight in
approaching to God. 5. Unto all which they added Solemn Fasting sometimes, v.
3. with much outward show of Humiliation and loud cries, causing their voice to
be heard on high, v. 4. Seeming to afflict their souls, and apparently Bowing
down their heads like Bulrushes, and spreading sackcloth and ashes under them,
v. 3 And all this was very well thus far.

II. 2. What they old amisle.
But now wherein did they fail or come short? 1. They were not exactly strict
in the very outward part of their Humiliation upon their Fasting day. Behold in
the day of your Fast you find pleasure, v. 3. Part of the time which should
have been wholly taken up with sad Devotion they squandred away in carnal or
worldly pleasures; so borrowing or stealing away some of that which was wholly
consecrated to God. 2. While they fasted themselves, they yet set their
inferiors to work; And exact all your labors, in the same verse, though it
concerned all sorts as well as any to humble themselves before God at those
times. 3. They had Hatred, and Malice, and Oppression in their minds while
they Fasted. 4. And even had such intentions, as to make their Fasting serve to
promote their malicious and covetous Oppressions v. 4. Behold you fast for
strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. 5. What ever
seeming Humiliation they had on their Fast Day, it was no more to be seen or
heard of after the day was once over, as appears by v. 5. A day for a man to
afflict his soul, etc. Though they did not keep the whole Day (as was noted
before) yet when the Day was once past, all they then pretended was as it were
quite forgotten. Which when we read, we need not wonder that God rejected them
and their Fasting: rather we may well wonder at their pride and self conceit*
that durst expostulate with God or his Prophet* that they were not regardad for
it, as they thought they deserved, v. 3.

III. Now what would God have them specially do? What God required of them
To add Justice and Mercy to their Fasting, v. 6. etc. Is not this the Fast
that I have chosen, To loose the bands of wickedness, etc. Which he declares
himself so earnest for, that He goes over it again and again; adding and
intermingling exceeding great and precious Promises, upon those terms.

1. He calls for Justice, v. 6, 9. Justice.
[1 for the remedying of wicked Obligations; (to loose the bands of
wickedness) verbal or real, whereby any one, unrighteously or fraudulently,
according to any law, or pretense of law, was tied to do or suffer what was not
meet. These unjust laws, or fraudulent pretenses of law, God would have them
show justice, in cancelling and making void.

2. To undo heavy burdens.] There are burdens, which are not properly wicked,
and not so plainly unjust, yet very grievous, (as with us some Customs of
Manours, and Fees of Courts, and the like) and which lie very heavily upon
people.

3. To let the Oppressed go free.] Which points at Prisoners, and the setting
them at liberty, when detained with rigor and extreme severity.

4. He interposes a general sentence. [That you break every Yoke] whereby is
meant the quitting of all galling slavish customs and practices whatsoever.

5. This he repeats, v. 9. [If thou take away from the midst of thee the Yoke.]
intending the utter removing of all such things, that they might be no more
found in the midst of them.

6. He would have them forbear even the Signs of oppression, tyranny, or
scorn, (the putting forth of the finger.)

7. And finally, to cease the speaking of all w^rds of vanity, that is of
deceit, or scorn. These are the parcels of Justice, which God particularly
insists upon, and requires them both of Governors and private persons
respectively, as the language of them plainly notes.

2. He also requires Mercy, Mercy.
v. 7, 10. and that also in sundry expressions, and particulars.

1. Relating to those that want Necessary food, [Is it not to deal thy bread to
the hungry.] And this is expressed with a special Emphasis in the phrase (The
bread) It was N^bals covetous and churlish speech, 1 Samuel 25 11. Shall I take My
bread, and My flesh. To prevent the like now, and all pretense of propriety,
which might disappoint the showing of mercy, God says, Thou must deal Thy
bread. It is thine indeed and thou must deal it; The needy may not be their own
^arv^rs, and wrest it from thee by violence; But though it be th^ne, thou must
^eal it to the hungry, to those that are in need and distress. 2. Also this is
enforced a second time, v. 9. with a special Accent, requiring inward
compassion, as well as outward contribution: [ If than draw out thy Soul to the
Hungry] Thou must draw, not only Bread out of thy cupboard, or Money out of thy
purse, (or be drawn to bestow somewhat merely by their violent cries and
clamorous importunities) But draw out thy Soul to the hung^y; Give what thou
do give, with inward sense of their miseries, and affection for their relief.

2. To the Harbourlesse. To afford them convenient Lodging, even rather then
fail, in thine own house, if thou can not otherwise wise provide for them,
and can lodge them there, [That thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy
house.] When cruel Landlords, or other hard-hearted Creditors have turned them
out of doors, that thou make what provision possibly thou can for them,
rather then suffer them to perish.

3. To the Naked, that want Clothing, to afford them supplies and covering.
Which has a double illustration to back it: 1. [If thou see the naked, that
thou cover him] that is, although he make no complaint, but thou cast thine eye
upon him; even though he see not thee, but thou see him, Thou shall not pretend
or affect ignorance of his necessity, or pass away from him (as did the Priest
and the Levite, when they had seen the wounded man, Luk 10.) But thine own eye
shall be a sufficient remembrancer to thee, and solicitor for him. 2. [That
thou hide not thy self from thine own Flesh.] Specially if he ask of thee, thou
shall not withdraw thy self from him; If he follow thee, thou shall not run
from him. Because there is a common tie of Nature between thee and him, he is
thine own flesh and blood, of kin to thee, a man as thou art. And thou see
his naked flesh, thou art to consider it, as if it were thine own proper flesh,
and so be affected with it, as to provide a covering, a clothing for it.

4. Generally to the Afflicted mind. v. 10. To afford a suitable satisfaction to
the affliction: which notes out the Degree of Charity, which sometimes calls to
more than the Eye or Ear naturally is observant of: his Soul or Mind may have
a further want, then he shows or tells; and his Weakness sometimes may require
somewhat more then his Necessity, which yet it is fit sometime to condescend to
and gratify, as a special perfection of compassion, [If thou satisfy the
afflicted Soule] That his very soul and mind within may find contentment in
thy compassionate commiseration. Now all these particularities of Mercy are
called for also, as well from public as from private persons, according to
their several conditions and abilities. And these are the Specialties which
God would have to be practiced by those that would Fast to him religiously and
acceptably.

IV. The Reasons of which, why God stands upon these things so strictly, and
regards them so graciously, 4. Why God requires these.
come next to be considered. GOD requires Justice and Charity to accompany our
Fastings: 1. Because he is the King of the whole World, and of all Men, poor
and rich, high and low; And all are his subjects, and He cares for one as well
as another, and accordingly will have them to care one for another, and behave
themselves fittingly one to another; observing Justice and Mercy toward each
other, as well as Piety, and Devotion, and Holiness toward Himself. It is the
glory of a King, to have all his subjects live orderly one with another, and
helpfully one with another: And all Kings therefore have Laws to this purpose,
and Penalties for the violators of them, as well as for the violators of His
Majesty: And the style of Indictments for wrongs done to Fellow subjects, runs
thus: That it was done against our Sovereign Lord the King, and his crown and
dignity. So in Gods Law, his Statute book, are manifold Precepts for Justice
and Mercy, and Prohibitions of Oppression, and Cruelty, and Promises and
Threatenings to back those Precepts and Prohibitions, and Records in his Words,
of Examples of Obedience and Disobedience in those kinds, and of his Executing
Judgment, and showing Mercy; and in both, fulfilling his Truth accordingly.
And to this purpose is that counsel of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.27.
When by the interpretation of his dream he had warned him, that God threatened
to take away his kingdom from him: Wherefore, O King (says he) let my counsel
be accepted with thee, and break off thy Sins by Righteousness, and thine
Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor, if it may be a lengthning of thy
tranquillity. 2. There are many Hypocrites, that abound in outward Devotions to
Godward, but are abominable in their Practice toward men; like those spoken
of, Tit. 1.15. That profess they know God, but deny him in works, being
abominable and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. And more plainly,
Esa. 1.11.15. That brought multitudes of sacrifice, and fat of fed beasts, and
incense, and observed new moons and sabbaths wonderfully, and made many
prayers, and yet their hands were full of blood, oppression and cruelty.
Therefore GOD, calling them to repentance, instances specially, v. 17. in
seeking Judgment, and relieving the oppressed, Judging the fatherless, and
pleading for the widow. Devotion in pretense (or to shelter and protect in
wickedness, as they meant it, Ier. 7.) Is exceeding suitable to many corrupt
hearts, while they may please themselves in satisfying others lusts. Although
sometimes also, Devotions are grievous torments to men's corruptions, especially
in some proportions of Continuance and Frequencies; As those here could not
well afford to give God the whole day. But however, God hates all such
hypocrisy and partiality in his Law, to seem much for Piety, and to neglect
Justice and Mercy. 3. Even Nature teaches the Oppressed, and those that are
neglected in their Distresses, to cry to God, and even their miseries force
them to cry against such as pretend great Devotion, are yet unjust or
unmercifull to them. When those from whom, even by their seeming Piety, they
were invited to expect Justice and Compassion, are either injurious or wanting
to them, they usually make loud cries in the Ears of God. And therefore He
gives such a special Charge, to have care of those Duties of the second Table,
as well as they seem to be of any of the first: according to that of the
Apostle, Tit. 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that
thou affirm constantly, that those that have believed in God be careful to
maintain good works; these things are good and profitable to men. And v. 14.
And let ours learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful. 4. Commonly when men fast, they themselves are apprehensive of some
Injustice or Oppressions, or of Wants: Specially almost all National Fasts, are
upon such occasions, when they are under oppression of Enemies, or in fear of
them, or in danger of Famine, and so of want. And so they betake themselves to
God for support and supply, and to incline men's hearts to do them right, and to
do them good. Now God cannot endure that they should do this, whiles themselves
neglect their own Duties to other men, and will not help them, or not do them
justice, when it is in their hand to do it. Therefore when they Fast and pray
to Him, He lays an equal Law upon them, that they join Justice and Mercy to
their Humiliations and Devotions.


V. And now we may clearly and soon see, why such Fasting, 5. Why such Fasting
is pleasing to God.
with doing justly, and loving Mercy, is acceptable to God, which is the last
thing in this Point.

1. It is not because He either needs their service, or Observance, or fears
their Injustice, or wants the Help of their Charity, being in Himself
Eternally blessed, and Almighty to protect and provide for whom He pleases: But
from a threesold ground.

2. One is, because it is certain, that they who are such religious Fasters,
and so Just and Merciful, are in Christ, and in Christ they are sure to be
accepted. As they have a command from Christ for all these things; So, Hereby
they know that they know Him, by keeping his Commandments, 1 John 2. v. 3. And
v. 5. Who so keeps His word, in him verily is the love of God perfected, hereby
know we that we are in Him. And if we be in Christ, then He is our Advocate (as
v. 1.) and Mediator, and all that we do is excepted in Him.

3. Another Reason is, because these are all Graces which we receive from the
Fullness of Christ, and which God Himself has wrought in us, by his Spirit. It
is He that works in a man a love to Righteousness, and a Merciful
disposition. Now God uses to regard what himself has wrought in us; as is
every where implied in Scripture, particularly Psalm. 37.23. The steps of a good
man are ordered by the LORD, and He delights in his way. And Heb. 13.20. The
Apostle having prayed, that GOD would make them through Christ perfect in every
good work to do his will, adds, Working in you that which is well pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ. If we do his will in these things, we shall be
sure to be pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ.

4. Lastly, Such greatly honor GOD, even before Men. Of all things men are
most sensible of Justice and Mercy: Therefore when they find those that seem to
be Devour, and Fast and Pray, and delight to draw near to GOD, and inquire
after him; to add to all this, the practice of Justice, Mercy, and Charity,
that their fainting and oppressed spirits are revived by them, and their bowels
refreshed, they stand amazed at this, and begin to think Religion has
something in it. To this tends that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.12. Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles: that whereas they speak evil of you as
of evil deers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify
God in the day of visitation. Worldly men use to speak evil of those that
profess piety and devotion, That they are all for Preaching, and Praying, and
Fasts, and such like, and neglect Duties between man and man; and that they are
as unjust, and unmercifull, and hardhearted to the poor, as any other: and so
call them Hypocrites for their Devotion. When therefore they see these moral
virtues and good works accompany their profession of piety, and even to flow
from it they are forced to admire and justify them and to glorify God, at the
sight and hearing of them. Now God (we know) cannot but be well pleased in his
beloved Son, with those that are in this manner to his glory, and accept of
their fidelity and performances, which redound to his own honor.

And accordingly, in this chapter, not only are these Duties recommended, as we
have seen, but exceedingly encouraged with variety of exceeding great promises,
worthy to be much pondered, v. 8, 9, 10, 11. And our Text is the close of them,
specifying a most eminent blessing, which God will vouchsafe to such, as our
ensuing Doctrines will more fully discover.

The next then is, Doct. 2. To be a successful instrument in Church
restoration, a great mercy.
That to be Instruments employed in the Churches restoration, with success, is
a great mercy. The Text, as we have seen in the beginning, is a promise of the
Churches restoration, and it is expressed as an encouragement to the
forementioned duties, and the right performers of them: as a reward of mercy to
them: so that the Doctrine is beyond question, clearly within the scope of the
text, and grounded upon it.

And in the handling of it, I shall endeavor three things. Terms explained.
1. By way of explication, to open both the general sense of the Promise, and
the particular phrases in it. 2. To lay down the general grounds and Reasons
of the Point; 3. To annexe some special Reasons, in relation to the several
Phrases.

The general sense of the Churches restoration, The Charches Restoration.
is the procuring of good to it, when it lies under some calamity, To supply
what is wanting to it, and remedy what is amiss in it, and that in some way
which may be for Continuance. For, all the Phrases of Building, and Repairing
breaches, etc. apparently point at Continuance. Now this is specially effected
by making Laws and Orders for the Churches behoof; and the discourse of it most
properly looks at those, that have that power in their hands; though others
also in their ranks and conditions may do somewhat toward it.

Now for the particular phrases: The ^. is, Building.
Building the old waste places. Building, is the most comprehensive word in the
Text, and plainly includes, raising up Foundations, in the 2. phrase, and
repairing the Breach, in the 3. And in Nature implies, Joining together
materials, to make room for habitation commodious and safe. But in a
Metaphorical sense relating to the Church or State, it signifies, actually
settling Things and Persons together in such an order, as may be for common
safety and conveniencie. As namely in the Church, It concerns the Establishment
of Doctrine, worship, and Government in such a way as may unite Christians to
Christ, and one to another most firmly, to receive mutual strength and help
one from another, for their mutual increase in all good, and security against
all commor enemies and mischiefs. This, in general, is to Build the Church.
And in all this work (as in all Buildings, and namely in the Building of the
Temple, and of the walls of Jerusalem) there are diverse forts of persons
employed in it. 1. Some whose hand is in the settling of all the glorious things
that concern the Churches edification principally, or only by way of command.
So Solomon in his time, is said to build the Temple, though his hand wrought
not about it. Such are said to build, because by their authority, and through
their care and oversight, others are set awark about it. 2. Some are properly
Workmen, (as Hyram and others about Solomous temple, and Bezaleel and Aholiab,
and others about the tabernacle in the wilderness) they did the work in their
own persons, and with their own hands, having skill in it, and it being their
proper profession and office. 3. Others afford only private help, as Laborers
and bearers of burdens, and of this sort also there were diverse that were
employed in the building of Solomon's temple; and so it may be in their
proportion in all buildings that concern the Church and State; there are some
chief commanders, others special workmen, and others that afford only private
help.

As for the old waste places, The old waste places.
they properly signify places where formerly, or at least in the memory of
man, there has not been any building, but altogether desolation, and void and
empty spaces; and so to build those old waste places, is to settle those things
which former Ages have not done, or not of a long time; as also to settle them
(as for instance, the Preaching of the Gospel) in such places where they have
not been of late days, if ever at all. And this is the first Phrase.

The 2. is, To raise up the foundations of many generations, Raising up the
foundations of many generations.
which fignifies the going on with that which former generations had some
maning to do, or perhaps made some beginning in, (laid some foundation) but
could not, or did not finish the effecting that which others wished to have
settled and established, but were hindered in, and so left it to their
successors, who accordingly bring it to pass.

The 3. is, To repair the Breach, Repairing the breach.
which intends to make up what the injury and violence of others have broken
down; and procure again that good unto the Church, that safety and
conveniencie, which it did enjoy formerly, until the mischief of men
interrupted it: but now amends is made for that mischief, and things settled
again as they were formerly in their strength and beauty.

The 4. and last is, To restore paths to dwell in; Restoring paths to dwell in.
which imports both resuming what through former discouragements and dangers
has been disused, (as ways and paths are, when they grow unsafe by any means)
and also to bring back, and restore, and encourage such persons, who have been
driven away from their habitations and employments, through fear, and the
general hazard such were in, although they were not particularly assaulted
with any violence. And this is the sum and substance of these Phrases.

Whereunto it will be convenient to add a word or two of the circumstances of
them, and the expressions about them.

First, as they are all expressed by way of promise, as it is most apparent, so
also do they all imply a duty and endeavor, as well as success; and success
upon endeavor, and the performance of duty. 2. The first of them is set down
in a plural phrase, They that shall be of them, implying some choice persons
whom God would raise up from among those that did so religiously Fast unto him
(as has been mentioned) and whom he would specially set on work about this
building: the other three are in phrases of the singular Number, like the Law,
(Thou) which speaks of all, and to all severally to urge them to do their duty,
and encourage them with promise of success. 3. The two first phrases do
chiefly imply Endeavor, and Blessing, in building the old waste places, and
raising up the foundations of many generations; and the two latter, Honor,
together with blessing upon endeavor, Thou shall be called the repairer of the
breach, and thou shall be called the restorer of paths to dwell in: although we
are not to confine any of these merely to those phrases, but apply all to all,
which for variety sake, and even for some special relation to the particular
phrases (as may be touched hereafterward) they are thus particularly expressed,
as has been noted.

Now these things being thus explained, General Reasons.
The general grounds why it is such a great mercy to be employed in the
Churches restoration with success, are briefly four.

First, Gods great work in the world, why he even made the world, and why he
preserves it in being, to build his Church in it: the world and all things in
it were made for the Church, and are continued for the Church; and therefore to
be serviceable to the Church herein, is to be employed in Gods greatest
design, which is worthily to be esteemed a great mercy: Also it was Christ's
great work for which he came into the world, to build his church throughout the
world; And though he does it in a manner infinitely transcending our weakness,
yet he being pleased to take men as instruments into his hand, and even to call
men fellow. workmen together with him, 1 Cor. 3.9. and 2 Cor. 6.1. And
Builders, and even Saviors and Gods. This is a very great favor and mercy
that he does afford unto such, to set them awork about it, and to prosper them
in it.

Secondly, End of all a man's life, next unto a man's immediate attendance upon
God, and taking care of his own salvation, to promote the Churches good in
building and restoration. God did not bring any of us into the world, to enjoy
honors or pleasures, or to live to our selves, but to be serviceable to the
Church of God: the very Heathens esteemed, that a man's country challenged a
main part of his life; the Church may challenge much more of every Christian,
as a child of hers, and a member. For God therefore to direct a man's
employment to a special serviceablenesse unto this great end of his life, and
to let him see his blessing withal, that he does really live to be profitable
unto his Church, is clearly a great mercy.

Thirdly, end of all offices, relations, gifts which God invests a man with:
And of all of these. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, some pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, and 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the spirit is given to every man
to profit withal: which holds in proportion and degree in all those that are
members of the Church, who have every one of them somewhat whereby the Churches
edification may be advanced, and what they have, they have received it to this
very end. Therefore Prophesying is by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.1. preferred
before speaking with tongues, as being more proper to edify the Church
withal, and charity as that which is the greater builder, or the great spirit
of the builders is made best of all. Now to have a heart so filled with charity
and with zeal, as to improve all the gifts, relations, and offices unto Gods
ends, here must needs be a great mercy, and so also to see an answerable
success.

Fourthly, the memory of such as have been in such a manner serviceable to the
Church, has been sacred, as Iehojadahs, and Hezekiahs, and Iosiahs, and
Nehemiahs, and others, as we shall touch more anon; when as the name of wicked
men who have done hurt to the Church, is rotten and does stink; as Ieroboams
for instance, who is scarce ever named in the holy story after his death, but
he is called Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. Now no man
will question but it is a great mercy to have an honorable name both living
and dying. And this may suffice for the general meaning of the point.

Now for the particular reasons which relate to the several phrases. Particular
Reasons.


First it is a special mercy to be employed in building the old waste places,
because doing such a good to a Nation generally, or to particular places in a
Nation, which was never done before, or not time out of mind, is an act of
mavelous compassion to men, and after times, of greatest zeal for God: as to
place faithful Ministers where none have been of many years, perhaps never
since the Reformation; many such people desire it not, think not of it, rather
refuse it, to them therefore it is a high piece of charity, and a most eminent
service to God. If a Traveller lie for dead in the high way, and has not so
much sense in him as to call out for help, such a compassion as the Samaritan
showed, Luke 1e. was very great; and much more it is to do a man good, who is
not willing to receive it, as to send a Physician to cure a distracted man; so
also when no time can prescribe against that which may be for Gods honor and
the Churches good, but that men will be the more forward to build those old
wastes because they have layen so long desolate, this argues singular zeal for
God, and it is a great mercy to have such a heart, and a great blessing to
prosper in such an endeavor.

Secondly, so it is to be employed with success in raising up the foundations
of many generations, for this is both to have the faithfulness to pay our
Ancestors debts, which they acknowledged to be due, but were not able to
discharge, and to have the happiness to be heirs of their prayers, hopes, and
endeavors; and if they were now alive, they would greatly rejoice to see their
intentions perfected, as David did before he dyed, to foresee that Solomon
would build the Temple after he was gone: for though David did not actually lay
so much as one stone for a foundation, yet virtually he did by the great
preparation of materials and the directions he gave Solomon for it; and Solomon
expresses it more then once to be his glory, and his joy that he was allowed to
do that which his Father was not able to effect. It is therefore a special
mercy so to be set a work, and see the work go on to perfection by his
endeavors.

Thirdly, repairer of breaches, as being the noblest revenge upon enemies to
make up their evil in such sort as it may afterward be forgotten by putting
all things again into that good frame wherein they were before the breach was
made: And likewise being ordinarily the most sonsible kindness unto friends:
men are not always so sensible of old wastes but can be content to let them
lie desolate still; and so for the foundations of many generations they take
not al. ways much thought for them, but breaches lately made in things, have
often made great breaches upon men's spirits; to heal therefore those evils by
filling up again that which the enemies malice has destroyed, and to make that
as strong and beautiful as it was before, which they have violated and
weakened, gives great contentment to the Churches friends, and therein proves a
special mercy to those that have labored in it. It was Esthers great suit and
endeavor to Asuerus, that the breach which Hamans malice had made, might be
made up, Esther 8 v. 3. etc. and her happiness to prosper in it.

4. Finally, a restorer of paths to dwell in, as a special and necessary piece
of justice and thankfulness both to those that have been injured by being
driven away from their habitations, or deprived of the comforts which were due
to them, which are now restored to them again. It was part of Deborahs joy and
glory, Judges 5. that before her time the inhabitants of the villages ceased in
Israel, but she restored them to their dwellings. And so you see all the
particulars cleared, and the two points dispatched; the last remains, which is
this.

To religious Fasters doing justly, and loving mercy, employing themselves for
the Churches good and restoration, God promises that they shall find success
in it, and have also the honor of it.

This I shall endeavor to clear, first by resolving a question about these
promises; Whether they be made to the generality of a Nation, and how far?
Secondly, produce some reasons of the success promised. Thirdly, give reasons
also of the honor promised.

The question is, whether these promises are made to the body of a Nation here
as they seem to be (as has been noted in the exemplification of the former
point) because the Church also may seem to be very much built when men are
generally become such religious Fasters: and withal it may be further
questioned, What these promises are to a Nation, when it is very seldom seen,
and hardly to be expected, that such a generation should be found any where in
the world: and the rather, because of that sentence, ler. 18 9, 10. where God
says, And at what instant I shall speak concerning a Natior, and concerning a
Kingdom, to build and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it obey
not my voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit
them. Confidering which, one may be apt to say, that if God hold this promise
at such a rate, what good shall we do upon it? what use will they be of to us.

To this question and objections unto it,

First, in general, this promise shows the riches of Gods grace to a Nation
that stands in need of restoration; that if they will regard his charge and
his promise, they shall be made happy, notwithstanding any present calamity; as
also the riches of his grace, in doing for a Nation sometimes more then he here
promises them, in that he affords them some restoration according to the
expressions of the text, even when they do not generally come up to the
perfection of what he here requires.

2. It renders a Nation inexcusable, when God offers to do so much for them
upon so reasonable terms, if they generally refuse it; they had there nothing
to plead against God if he shall wholly pull them down, and pluck them up, and
repent of all that good which he was in doing, and withal, to have done for
them.

3. It may provoke all that Nation, or so many that love a Nations felicity,
and the Churches good in a Nation, to all the faithfulness that God calls for,
and to urge others to the like; because if they be generally obedient, they
shall be sure to partake of this promise.

But further we may give a fourfold particular answer concerning the nature of
this promise.

First, we may say, that it is not directed so much to the whole body of the
Nation in general, as to the religious party in the Nation, to those that
made a special profession of serving God, according to v. 2. and 3. of which we
spoke before. Now it is possible that such a number of men may be faithful
with God, though others not; and if but they be faithful, though the
generality of the Nation be ungodly, God will do the work by them: if but they
be what they pretend to be, from among them will God raise up those by whom he
will fulfill all this promise.

Secondly, we need not expect, that even all they that more specially profess
godliness in a Nation, should be upright; God ordinarily looks upon any
company of men according as the major part of them behave themselves; the
greater part stand for the whole in promises of this nature. Achans case was
somewhat singular, having a singular warning before hand, which should have
made them to have made inquisition whether there were no such fault committed.

Thirdly, we may yet go somewhat lower, there may be hopes even from a number
of considerable persons, though they at the first cannot make the major part,
no not of the professing party; as God admits a very few to stand in the gap to
save a Nation from destruction; ten would have saved Sodom you know, and God
leems to have been content to have found but even one man of eminency, Ier.
5.1. Ezekiel. 22. So a small number in comparison suffices sometimes for God to
make use of to begin such a work by: And indeed seldom at the first are there
many faithful men to be found in a Nation or Church, when God begins to afford
them a gracious restoration, and God knows how to win himself glory by a few
at the first, and by them to engage a greater number. Therefore,

Fourthly, This promise plainly serves to a threefold purpose (which will be
the Uses of all the three Points) first to show how far they are too blame that
neglect this promise, or look not after it, nor after the conditions upon which
God offers it. Secondly, to exhort all to be doing their duties, their utmost
endeavors toward the participation of so happy a promise. Thirdly, to
encourage greatly, those that are and will be faithful, that they shall not
labor in vain, but the work shall prosper in their hands, and they shall have
the credit of it, as the reasons following will confirm. And first, consider
the reasons why God promises to grant success unto such, which are chiefly
four.

1. The work is to be done; They that shall be of thee shall build, etc.

2. Such as have been faithful to God in religious fasting, will be willing to
employ themselves in the work of the Churches restoration, notwithstanding any
cost, pains, or hazard; as we see in Nehemiah and his builders, what hazards
and difficulties they were fain to undergo in that work, chap. 3.4.6. what
charge he himself was at particularly, for carrying on of the work, and
encouraging the people in it, chap. 5. (all those Chapters are worthy a serious
reading and meditation for this very purpose, they watch sometimes whole
nights, put not off their clothes for diverse days, but when they put them off
for washing, work with one hand, and hold weapons with the other, etc.) Now it
is not so ever with every one, and particularly those that are not willing to
fast for God, or unto God, they are not likely to be, of their own good will,
among the number of Gods builders. But those that have a spirit of devotion put
into them, will also be forward for any other service God has for them to do;
and that conscience which has wrought them to those duties of justice and
charity, together with their fasting, will also stir them up to all those
performances which concern the Churches edification: Now as men usually do set
those awork in any thing who have a mind to that employment; so does God, and
in that respect he here promises to employ and assist such in this work for
this Church.

3. will be faithful in the work which they take in hand, and build the Church
to purpose, and not mind the building of their own houses (or making their own
fortunes, as the phrase is) they who have made proof of their self denial, and
zeal for God, in Devotions, Fastings, and exercise of justice and mercy: the
same principles will keep them from false by asses and carnal respects, which
would mar the work of Reformation in their hands: There are too many that
seem willing, and are indeed forward to be employed toward the Churches
building, but that which they do is only with a squint eye, with base regard
unto themselves and their own private interests, commodities and conveniences;
and further then that they act not, but rather pervert the work, then prejudice
or hinder their own private advantages. Now here again, as men willingly will
choose to employ such as will be faithful in the work they take in hand, and
not wholly look unto their own gain, and so care not how slightly they do the
work, so they may make the more advantage to themselves: So it is with God, he
sees who they are that have faithful hearts, and he sees it even in their
former fidelity, and therefore he will employ such. It is recorded for the
perpetual praise of those that were employed to set men a work in repairing
the Temple in Jehojadah's time, 2 Kings 12.13. that they dealt so faithfully,
as that neither the King nor the High Priest, nor any of their Officers, did
reckon with them for the money that they had received: their fidelity was so
apparent, as that every one saw there was no need of calling them to an
account. And the same is afterward recorded in Josiah's time, 2 Kings 22.7. Now
we know it is not so with every one, every one that is employed, does not so
deserve to be confided in; but God discerns this spirit in whom soever it is.
and what opinion soever men have of any of his servants, he both sees their
faithfulness, and the unfaithfulness of others, and accordingly puts such
into his work, and prospers them in it.

4. Such will glorify God and bless him for blessing them, Nehemiah at every
time has recourse to God in prayer, and makes acknowledgement of Gods
assistance and blessing: but other men will not do so: they that cannot afford
to humble themselves to God in solemn religious fasting, or that have no zeal
for justice, or no love to mercy; if they do any thing that carries any show of
worth in it, they will make their boast of it, for their own vain glory, to
ascribe the praise of it to those who are only Gods instruments; therefore God
delights in his humble and faithful servants, and will bless their labors
with success, even above others. And these are the reasons of Gods promising
to employ and prosper such. But this is not all that is promised here, but
honor also. Thou shall be called, the repairer of the breach, the restorer of
paths to dwell in.

And now the reasons which concern this honor promised, Why God will honor
them?
are five.

1. God takes certain notice of what his servant do more or less, whether men
do so or not. See Nehem. 3. Tekoites, that their Nobles did not put their necks
to the work; and yet those Tekoites and some others did a second piece of work,
after they had done their first tract. All this God there declares that he
looked upon, and has caused it to be recorded for all posterities to their
honor.

2. with what affection men works in his service; in that Chapter again it is
said of some, that they earnestly repaired such a part, and chapter.. that the
people had a mind to the work. God sets it down for their honor, and he will
remember them for it (and men shall remember it with honor) for the great zeal
and sincerity, earnestness and singleness of heart wherewith they did any
thing for him and his Church; these things he distinctly observes, according to
the Record he has caused to be made of Hez-kiah for his perpetual honor, 2 Chronicles 31.20, 21. Thus did Hezekiah throughout all Iudeah, and wrought that
which was good, and right, and truth, before the Lord his God. See here how
notice is taken of his universal care for his whole kingdom, and not for one
part only; and what multiplicity of words are used to express his integrity
and fidelity, he wrought that which was good, and right, and truth, and that
not before men simply, but before the Lord his God; and then it is added in the
last verse, and in every work that he began in the service of the house of God,
and in the Law, and in the Commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all
his heart, and prospered in it: Here again is vatiety of words to express his
readiness and universal faithfulness, and that accordingly God honored him
with blessing and success, and all posterities are made to honor him
according to that testimony of God in his behalf.

3. whatsoever his servants suffer in his work, ( Hear O God for we are
despised, Neham. 4.4. and else, where he prays to the same purpose) God
observes how they not only lay out themselves, and spend their strength and
their substance, but also how hereby they provoke enemies against themselves,
and how far the enemies malignity and opposition against them for opposing
their wicked designs against the building of the Church, has put them to more
pain and trouble, and what persecutions they are forced to endure, because they
will not leave Gods work, nor be false and partial in it, and for this also
God will honor them.

4. all false pretenders, that do not good, but rather hurt, and that even
purposely many times, and yet would have the honor of the work: so Eliashib
the High Priest is noted by Nehemiah as an unfaithful man, in diverse passages;
and diverse of the Nobles of Judah and some of them by name are expressed to be
confederates with Tobiah and Sanballat, the enemies of the Church. So,
whosoever does the work of Gods Church slightly and fallaciously, that might do
more service then they do, and whose hearts are froward and carried away with
self respects, so as they often times hinder the work instead of helping it
forward; God so sees and observes their carriage and their spirits, as that he
disdains them and their behavior, and their pretenses of service, whereby they
would deprive his servants of their due estimation, and falsely challenge it to
themselves.

5. Finally, make known the uprightness and faithfulness of his sorvants,
even though it be mistaken and undervalued for the present, and so give his
servants honor and acquittance, and withal clearly discover the falsenesse
and hypocrifie of evil men, for which we have an evident promise, Esa. 32.
where God has first promised to raise up a righteous king, and faithful
Princes, and those that should do justice, and help the oppressed, and
endeavor the common good, he adds ver. 5. The vile person shall be no more
called liberal, nor the Churl said to be bountiful; for the vile person will
speak villainy, and his heart will work iniquity, to practice hypocrisy against
the Lord, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of
the thirsty to fail: the instruments also of the Churl are evil, he devises
wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaks
right. See here how God threatens to uncase the unjust and oppessing hypocrite,
that yet aspired to great credit and reputation for (...) doings: and then
follows, v. 8. But the liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal things
shall he stand. There God gives assurance, that he will give favor at last to
his servants, who have been, and are faithful in his work. And this he has
also said long before unto Eli, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor me, I will
honor, and those that despise me, shall be lightly estermed. And this may
suffice for the proof of this third Point, and so for the whole Doctrinal part
of the Text.

I come now to the application of all the three points together; according to
these three points, the application is to be threefold; first for humiliation,
unto all, according unto the day, that I may speak somewhat about afflicting
our souls, now that we are come before God professedly to that end. 2. For
exhortation also to every one in their places, to do the duties that God calls
for and injoyns in relation to such a Day, and to the promises that he here
makes. 3. For consolation and encouragement unto all that will be faithful
with God, endeavoring the Churches good.

For Humiliation. Jer. 2.35. to whom God speaks thus: Yet thou say, because
I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn away from me: lest God say to us
again, as he did to them, Behold I will plead with thee, because thou say, I
have not sinned. Better all the Lawyers in the world should plead against us
then to have God to put in a plea against us: And if yet we could have any such
thoughts at another time, I trust they are far from us on such a day as this,
when we are come to humble our selves before him: and if we do but look upon
the promises of the Text, sure we cannot say; (and therefore must not) that
they are all fulfilled as yet, nor overlikely to be fulfilled instantly; and it
is either Gods fault, or ours: not Gods, I dare be bold to say; it must be ours
then, that all the work is not yet done, that the old ^^ste places are not yet
built, etc. And we have no great reputation neither, none of us; rather
reproach is cast upon all those that have any hand in the building of the
Church, and who may by the blessing of God, hereafter have the honor to be
called the repairers of the breach, etc. And therefore there needs no other
argument to convince us of guilt, and to humble us, if we will lay it to heart,
then that God has made such sweet promises to us, and we have made no more use
of them. We must remember also what God did, Psa. 81.13, 14. Oh that my people
had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have
subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. Somewhat
God has been pleased already to do this way, but there is a great deal yet to
do, there are still a great many adversaries that have not as yet submitted
themselves to God so much as in show, therefore we must charge this upon our
own disobedience. So we must think upon Esa. 48. ver. 18.19. Oh that thou had
bearkened unto my commendements, then had thy peace been as a river, and thy
righteousness as the waves of the sea, thy seed also had been as the sand, and
the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof, his name should not have
been cut off, nor destroyed from before me. We are not yet in full possession
of this promise neither, and therefore we may still thank, or blame our selves
for our own untowardnesse, and it is certainly our duty so to do this day. I am
not ignorant, nor may I be unmindfull or unthankful to God or men, that
somewhat is done by way of beginning, that God has employed you, and made you
honorable instruments to repair breaches, and to do those things that God here
says shall be done: But I must again remember, that we are in a day of
Humiliation, and even matters of thankfulness are matrers of humiliation: God
has not done so much by us, but he would have done much more, if we had not
provoked him in being wanting to our duties. Oh that it might sadly lie upon
all our hearts, as private persons, as public, as Magistrates and Ministers,
Governors of families, Parliament men, Assemblymen, or who ever we are, that
the particularities in the Doctrines (as they have been opened) might affect us
with our failings in devotion, justice, charity, desires and endeavors for the
Churches restoration and prosperity. If we would lay them seriously to heart,
we could not but find great cause of lamentation, that there are such woeful
cries of so many oppressed souls, of so many bodies ready to perish, and souls
also, for want of mercy shown to them. Besides, is there not in many parts of
the Kingdom still perpetual desolation, Countries that have been for many
generations most of them like a howling wilderness, in reference to any
spiritual building, or builders among them: And in how few places are any
foundations raised up? or rather are they not in many places much shaken, or
even ready to be blown up, and many a breach never yet repaired, but rather
more increased, and many leaving their paths and habitations, so far from paths
being generally restored to dwell in. And are we not every one of us too much
guilty of these things? If I know my own heart, or if I know any thing of
religion, I know no body that is able to excuse them wholly before God of all
these things so that the complaint that God makes against Israel when he would
have reformed them, may certainly be applied to us, (God will apply it) with
but the change of the phrase, Hos. 7.1. When I would have healed Israel, then
the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria. So may
he most justly say, When I would have healed England, then the iniquity of the
body of the Country, and the wickedness of the chief City, and chiefest
Persons was discovered, witness the rottennes of her pillars, and the brittlenes
of her walls, the unsoundnes of her foundations. Who would have thought there
had been among us so many unsound Professors as have discovered themselves; so
many selfseeking pretenders of zeal for the public good, who have only
regarded their private interests; so many ungrounded, unstable souls, who
believe nothing but what they have not heard contradicted, love nothing but
what serves their fancies and humors; with whom Parliaments, Assembly,
Covenant, Confederate brethren, Ministers, Sacraments, Sabbath, Scriptures,
Christ himself, and the Holy Spirit, are all nothing: And yet such Opposers are
sometimes, and by some spared, pleaded for, if not hugged and loved, beyond the
most deserving Patriots, and most faithful builders. If we consider the Fasts
we keep, have we not cause to be humbled for our untoward humiliations? for,
with how many are our Fasts grown a burden, if not a reproach? And if they do
keep them at all, may it not be said (in another sense then the Prophet means
it in the Text) that they afflict their souls for a day; they afflict
themselves, that they are forced to such unpleasant penances, and even vex at
the time wherein they seem to give attendance upon the duties of the day? And
do not many also usually on this day find pleasure, which they will have, after
they are once gone hence; and though I am not with them in their houses to see
it, yet God is, and he sees it in many, and even men may see many things that
make it very suspicious; yea, are there not many that do professedly eat, and
that in the middle of the day, even without the least show of necessity to
excuse them, and so do not fast at all: and I much doubt that many also exact
their labors of their servants, whatsoever they do themselves; of which our
thin Congregations upon these days give a sad cause of jealousy. And in fine,
how few are there that make show of any thing of all that they seem to regard
in their humiliation and devotions, beyond a day? And if this be the general
account of most of us upon these days, we have then no cause to brag of our
Fasts.

And what shall I say about Justice and Charity, or Mercy? My heart trembles to
think upon a sad Dilemma that will necessarily lie upon our spirits: it cannot
be denied but that there is a great cry of injustice, and oppression, and
unmercifulness: now either this cry is causeless, and then those clamorous
complainers are guilty of most unthankful injustice; or if they be true then
are those against whom they are made, guilty of great unthankfulness to God,
and of injustice with a witness. Let us therefore consider a little what those
cries mean (as Samuel said to Saul, when he would needs have justified himself,
1 Samuel 15. What means the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen
that I bear?) what mean the outcries against Committees every where, against
those that have the administration of justice in their hands? God of old
complains of his Vineyard, that when he looked for judgment, behold
oppression, and for righteousness, and behold a try, Esaias 5. Whatsoever there
be, he beholds and sees it, and if there be any cry, he hears it, though men
mind it not; as himself tells us in the verse that follows the words lately
quoted from Hos. 7. For thus he says, Verse 2. And they consider not that I
remember all their wickedness, now their own doings have beset them about,
they are before my face. Let us therefore consider it, I beseech you, and
particularly (that which I cannot forbear remembering) the loud clamours of poor
men, that say, they have served the State; of Soldiers, and even Commanders,
their Wives, Children, Widows, Friends, those that tell how they have
ventured, and given, and lent, and afforded their commodities, and done
service, and are now ready to perish. If there be any truth in these cries, and
that there should be any supply found for them; there is doubtless a great
deal of cause to be humbled for it, specially by all those that lay Gods Word
to their hearts; must we not remember (and if we do, can we choose but tremble
to think of it) what the Apostle James speaks, cap. 5. v. 4. It is a sad
expression against the rich men of his time, Behold the hire of the laborers,
which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries,
and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord
of Sabbath. If the hire of any has not been kept back by fraud in one sense,
yet it may be in another, if any have been paid only with promises or with
delays, where means has been to help them, this is fraud; specially to tell
them there is no means to help them, or promise them and fail: so if there be
means for others wh^ need it less at the present, and perhaps deserve it
less, and nothing be to be had for the clamorous necessities of those that
have done service; certainly this is no better then fraud: and the sentence
that speaks of laborers that have reaped down your fields, is equally applied
to soldiers that have ventured their lives in the field, and secured your
fields, and houses, and cities, and persons, and families, from plunder and
violence: and the term of the Lord of Sabbath, that is, the Lord of Hosts, is
very suitable to the mention of Soldiers; if therefore there be any truth in
those cries concerning soldiers, that the want of pay has in a manner forced
many to plunder, etc. who ever has bin the cause of it, all the injuries and
insolences done by them will cry against him: if any now rob and pilfer, they
that injuriously detain their pay, shall surely bear a share in that blame: if
it be true which has been said, even of some Captains among us. that they have
starved for want: or but any common soldier who have had any pay due to them,
doubtless this must needs be a great cry in the cars of the Lord of Hosts,
that friends should kill those whom enemies could not. If but the children of
any should starve whose father has lost his life; or if his who has but
ventured his life, and if he would now give it for bread to save his children
from perishing, and yet could not provide for them, how lamentable a thing were
it? if they (or theirs) be cast in prison among us for debt, when more is due
to them; if they (I say) be made prisoners for debt whom their enemies could
not take prisoners; but they contrary have made many an enemy perhaps prisoners
to us: what shall we say to it? is not this a woeful thing to think upon? is
this to deal our bread to the hungry? which God in this Chapter calls so for,
as we have heard? is this to draw out our souls to them? are prisons the houses
we harbor them in? is this kind of usage that which will satisfy the
afflicted soul? or is it true that any do hide their eyes from them, and will
not see them, when they pass by them? or at least deasen their ears, and
harden their hearts against their complaints? how will God take this? I
profess (beloved) I scarce know any thing, except blasphemies and heresies,
that is more dread full to think of then the clamor about these things, and
the like, that concein justice and mercy. Oh then that there were in us a heart
to consider and remember our transgressions against devotion, and that we would
every one of us charge so much upon our own souls, as our consciences tell us
we are guilty of, and that we would thereupon say to our hearts, why have I
used God thus? why have I dealt so with him? And all this evil of ours,
whatsoever it be is not for want of knowledge or warning, there was never such
means even firequented ( they seek me daily, says God in this chapter, v. 2)
nor for mere for get fullness, our very Fasts, Confessions, and partly the
specials there, besides cries and Petitions mind us of the severals. Nor yet
for want of acknowledgement of duty; how many Promises, Protestations, and
Declarations have there been? what vows and Covenants to do all duties to God
and man, and does God or men see them fulfilled? nor for want of encouragement;
never any Nation or company of men have had more since Christ went into Heaven:
Nor lustly, for want of correction altogether, for we have sometimes been
scared. Oh how is it then, that any of us have been so wanting to our duties?
and how should our souls now bleed within for it? and be greatly humbled before
God this day with bitter lamentations, and all the mercies and promises of God
should move us thereunto! Oh that I could be my self more afflicted with those
things, and so all of you! I will pray for it: But I must not dwell upon this
Use.

The next is for Exhortation. to perform all the duties that have been
intimated in the former part of my Discourse: And to this purpose we should
consider, That there is never a soul among us, whether public person or
private, but is in some degree a pretender to all the duties fore-noted in the
two first Doctrines, and some very much to some duties, and some to all: and we
have all had (as was mentioned but even now) frequent remembrances of our
duties, great encouragements to them, great frights which we are not yet quit
of, for neglecting them; are still under deep engagements both to God and men
about them; and we have now particularly very gracious promises to win us unto
them. And shall not (will not) every one of us now resolve once more to fulfill
all our duties insinuated both in the text and context? Wherefore else come we
hither to give our attendance upon God this day? wherefore else are we
appointed to preach and pray, or do you come together to hear? Do we mean to
mock God in all? dare we do so? and do we not so, if we take not up now new
resolutions and practices in all these matters, of Devotion, Justice, Mercy,
Faithfulness, and Church-restauration? at least confirm our selves and others
in all good, and do our own duties according to our own places and power,
whatsoever others do. Here were opportunity for a days, a weeks, a years, a
lives whole discourse. But I must remember you, and my self and desiring all to
consider, that as nothing that any can desire for themselves, and the Church,
and State, is omitted in the promises of this Chapter: so in vain shall any
expect the benefit of those promises, if they cross, or contrary, or be
wanting unto the duties of the Chapter, etc. But let me come to some special
particulars suitable to the foregoing explications.

1. So long as we keep up these solemn Fasts (which I hope I shall not live to
see laid down, so long as the miseries of this Island, and even of Ireland,
which first occasioned the taking of them up, do call for their continuance)
let all us, what ever others do elsewhere, put to our hearts and hands to a due
and solenine observation of them: and let me beseech you that are our
Governors (upon whom the care of it lies) to put some more weight upon the
outward observation of it, in the Countries, and in the City, in Churches, and
Streets, and Tavernes, and upon the River, and every where: and that each of us
would take care for our Families also, as well as for our own selves.

2. But specially Justice and Mercy may not be forgotten, since God puts so
much weight upon it, as if it were the whole of the business; ( Is not this
the Fast that I have chosen? v. 6. etc. And after he had promised great things
to it, is not satisfied, but is over with it again and again, and then makes
new promises to it, v. 9. and 10.) do you also put weight upon it I beseech
you. It is good to be of Gods mind; where God puts any emphasis upon Duties,
it concerns us to do the like: You use to meet after the Public services ended
on these solemn days: would it not be a happy thing if you would call one upon
another, and enquire one of another, what special acts of justice and mercy
have been done this last month? or what further there were to do, for those
that hunger and thirst after righteousness, or relief? and accordingly give
orders upon it. Such reports as these from Committees, and even from private
Members, might greatly advantage both Justice and Mercy, and produce abundance
of good: and might not the calling for Reports from every such Committee, as
have been made upon special Petitions or Motions, upon a limited day (or if by
that day they could not dispatch it then to set them a new day, with a renewed
charge to to be diligent, and expedite it) might not this exceedingly quicken
Justice and Mercy both; and either confute or prevent the clamours that are now
so rife, That if a business be once referred to a Committee (unless they have
a particular affection to it) it is lodged there no man knows how long; and
they cannot be gotten to meet, scarce with any importunity; even though persons
that are interessed have been at great charges to bring up witnesses, and
perhaps made long journies, and fee'd their Counsel, and all is lost, perhaps
to a poor man's undoing, well nigh, if not altogether: when after a long
attendance he is forced to return with shame, and disappointement. I will not
press the phrale, for the time of the day (in business referred to
Committees) but I beseech all to consider Gods meaning in that place, Jer.
21.11, 12. And touching the house of the King of Judah, say, hear ye the word
of the Lord. Ok house of David, thus says the Lord, execute judgment in the
morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor,
lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it because of the
evil of your doings. Certainly, he intends hereby to forbid all unnecessary
delays: and I need not tell you what our Laws and our great Charter speaks to
this purpose. I know there are multitudes of causes and businesses which often
hinder one another, and am far from thinking all complaints of delays to be
just and true; but I may and must again beg of you, and in the Name of God
exhort and charge you to set your wisdom, faithfulness and compassion awork
to find out a way to help this, and accordingly effectually to remove all
needless delays, as a great part of the duty God requires from you as Judges;
and remember withal, that sometimes a speedy dispatch of a business, even a
denial of a suit or Petition, or a sentence against a man, is both more
justice and more mercy then a long delay, or at least less injustice and
cruelty. I beseech you therefore set your hearts upon this, and let not this
Exhortation be in vain.

3. Study I pray the latitude of the phrase in this Chapter for justice and
charity, and draw them out into practice. I cannot (if I had time) speak to
all, because I am ignorant of many Laws and Customs; yet let me point at some.
If any cause come before you (or any of you) wherein inferior Judges have done
notorious wilful injustice, being corrupted by bribery and partiality, or any
great man be complained of who is too potent to be rectified by inferior
Courts: consider and remember what is prophesied of Solomon, and of Christ,
Psalm. 72. that he should judge the people with righteousness, and the poor
with judgment, v. 2. and v. 4. Judge the poor and needy, and save the children
of the needy, and break in pieces the oppressor. Mark those last words, and
think how much of that belongs to you: There was a time that some Courts among
you, were severe enough against great men by fines and imprisonment when they
were found in any fault. Those Courts because of their arbitrary power and acts
of tyranny many times, you have worthily taken away: yet doubtless it belongs
to you, in whose hand the Supreme justice of the kingdom is entrusted, both to
be a refuge to the oppressed, and to break in pieces the oppressor, in a
fitting and righteous manner. I take not upon me to prescribe ways nor
degrees; but your wisdom and justice must needs think the thing lies upon you,
that you may verify that which David delivers from God among his last words, 2 Samuel 23.6. He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. Oh
what an honor will it be to our Parliament, when men shall say of you, that
you fulfill those prophesies spoken of Solomon and of Christ? and what a voice
of blessing will it be to you, when God shall fulfill to you that which is
promised, Jer. 31.23. They shall yet use this speech in the land of Judah, the
Lord bless thee oh habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness! All the
Armies in the world cannot make you so strong, or so secure, as such a blessing
from God, and such an encouragement from his faithfall people, even from all
sorts of people, whom nothing wins, so much as a free and unpartiall execution
of justice, and compassionate exercise of Charity and Mercy. And on the other
side, nothing brings the curse of God or of men sooner, then oppression and
unmercifulness. This is that which gains or loses men's hearts generally above
all other things; that when Magistrates are like gods indeed, in doing justly,
and loving mercy, and so bear his image in their foreheads, and faces, and
actions, he then vouchsafes them such a gracious blessing by putting somewhat
of his Majesty upon them, with the impression of awe; wherewith he affects
their inferiors, that they cannot but give them exceeding great reverence,
even with love and affection: whereas on the contrary, if they neglect to use
aright, or abuse their power and authority, God oftentimes withdrawes in his
just judgment the stamp of his image out of their faces, and so out of the
hearts of people, and then they are as much despised as the meanest Peasant,
and hated into the bargain. Oh be zealous then for Justice at all times, and
let not those that have spent their estates, and ventured themselves to
maintain your just authority, be at any time sent away ashamed, unheard or
unredressed when they have recourse to you in a righteous cause, and present
nothing but just desires.

4. Look upon that phrase in the text, to lose the bands of wickedness, and
consider whether there are not to be found some unrighteous laws left, which
may most properly be called bands of wickedness indeed? and whether also there
be not such defect in some laws, as cunningly malicious, or covetous men, make
to be bands of wickedness in like sort; and if you find any such, I beseech
you loose those bands, alter those laws. If perhaps not formally wicked, yet if
they be liable to be abused to much unrighteousness, show your wisdom and
righteousness in taking them away; at least so much of them as you find to be
snares and bands of evil. And if it be said that they are Laws of long
continuance; what is continuance in comparison of Justice? Remember the text
before you, that you are to build the old waste places, and this properly
signifies to let no prescription of time prejudice a common good. If evil have
been long continued, it is now more then time that it were taken away, and you
have done so with diverse things without scruple. Go on in Gods name to do so in
all other: this is the proper use and glory of Parliaments, to repeal or alter
any law that is found prejudicial to the common good. Let it be yours then;
and consider withal, what motions and offers there have been in former
Parliaments, and how the opposition of the Court, and the shortness of time
allowed for their sitting interrupted them: and then look again upon the text
which speaks to you of raising up the foundations of many generations. Let this
be a main part of the improvement of Gods mercy, in making you a perpetuated
Parliament, and putting so much power as well as authority into your hands,
that you settle those things for Justice and Mercy, and all that is beneficial
to the State (or Church) which your Ancestors desired to do, but were not able
to effect. And in particular cases that may come before you, consider how far
it will become you to mitigate the rigor of any Law, and withal what a happy
thing it will be to appoint faithful men with whom you entrust the conscience
of the Kingdom, and that power ordinarily of mitigateing the rigor of Laws and
Bands.

5. Consider also that expression to undo heavy burdens and yokes; as
excessive fees and slavish customs, and such like. But specially let me
mention two things of this kind to you. One is, Oaths imposed upon men to
take in Universities, Colleges, other Corporations: and when any undertake
offices, or become tenants, and the like; some of which are within the former
compass of bands of wickedness, being Obligations to things unlawful; as it
was with part of the Sheriffs Oath (I know not whether it be so still or no)
being made in the time of Popery, it was to persecute the Lollards, whereby
were signified those of the true Religion (as you know) and in some places that
I have heard of, there are still Popish Statutes remaining, and Oaths to be
taken to those Statutes. I beseech you fail not to break and dissolve those
bands of wickedness: but besides these, there are many most unnecessary Oaths,
which prove very heavy and grievous burdens, wherein men are made to promise
to do so many things, as before hand it is well known there is no probability,
if any possibibily of their performing all, and yet they are sworn to all You
happily took away the Churchwardens Oaths, (and the blessing of God be upon you
for it) though I doubt the Land is not yet purged from the guilt of imposing
those Oaths, nor our persons purged as yet that took them. There is the same
reason for taking away all of the like nature: it must not be forgotten that
God says, Because of Oaths the Land mournes, Ier. 23.10. You shall be happy
in taking away this cause of mourning. Some months ago, there was sent me by
an unknown hand, a long Letter, charging me in the Name of GOD, that when ever
GOD should give me an opportunity to speak to you, that I would entreat you to
take away all such unnecessary Oaths, which I now with all humble importance
do beseech you to do; there comes no good at all by them while they are
continued, but much mischief is done and increased daily thereby: Gods Name is
from time to time fearfully taken in vain, the parties consciences wounded
grievously, and they inured to wretched profaneness, and not to fear an Oath
at any time in the most serious matters of justice, or truth, or duty, and
there may be (no doubt) other ways found out to effect all that good for which
they were first introduced. Also in great matters where ever you find them
necessary it is fit they should still remain. But certainly there is not a
greater burden upon this Kingdom, then the multitude of unnecessary Oaths;
which therefore I again most earnestly and humbly beg of you to resolve
effectually to take away.

The other is the burden of Prisons. There are some honest men, whom not their
own riot, nor folly, but the hand of God has made poor, and plunged into
debts, who would most gladly pay every one, but cannot tell how to do it, at
least not yet: and if they might continue at liberty might be useful to the
Commonwealth, to themselves, and even to their creditors also. Is it not now a
heavy burden and a grievous yoke, that such must first be prisoners in their
own houses, and deprived of all the public ordinances of God, for fear of
being arrested and haled to prison, where when they are once in, they know no
means of getting out; and when they are once in they are in danger (besides the
miseries that they must endure sometimes in their bodies, lying there till they
even rot or starve) to have their souls starved or poisoned, through want of
Preaching, and through the abominable wickedness of diverse of those that they
must be forced to be in company with daily? Cannot the wisdom of a Parliament
find out a remedy for all this? That such Debtors that are out of prison, may
go to Church, and come from Church in safety, upon the Lords days; and that
all Prisoners may enjoy the Word of God constantly upon those days, wherein
all Gods people should solemnly worship him, and have their souls fed by his
Word and Ordinances? I know there are objections diverse, against these things
that I am now speaking of; But I say again, cannot your wisdom, quickened by
your zeal, (or justice, mercy and charity to bodies and souls) find out a
remedy for those objected inconveniences? Let no man say or think so, for
shame; that were a disparagement to you of a very high nature. And if this
cannot be said, then, shall not this part of my exhortation be both acceptable
and profitable, as well as any thing else that I have said, or can say? Withal
I beseech you to take into serious consideration, the wickednesses that are
acted in those places usually, both by the Keepers, and their officers and
servants, showing unlawful favor to some, that pay them what they will
require, to the great wrong of the Creditors, when they suffer their Prisoners
to go whither they list with a Keeper, so that their prison is to them a
sanctuary rather then a house of bondage and on the other hand tyrannizing over
those that are not able, or not willing to satisfy their unreasonable demands,
using them with that barbarous cruelty sometimes, that were not fit for Beasts,
much less for Men, and least of all for Christians: and toward all using
great injustice, in exacting most excessive fees. And take some care to remedy
and redress those burdens: God, in this chapter, calls (as you have heard) to
break every yoke; and therefore certainly he would have these notorious ones
not to remain. And when you are consulting to redress these evils, forget not
also to take some course to restrain the wickednesses that are studied and
practice by prisoners themselves, who seldom (as it is commonly said) remain
any time in a Jail, but they learn and act more wickedness there, then any
other where; as if they had been sent rather to a school of villainy, then to a
place of restraint and punishment.

6. Consider the great emphasis that is put, in this chapter, upon the
compassionating the poor, Dealing thy bread to the hungry, etc. And let those
be specially remembered, that are impoverished by doing you service, unto whom
you have engaged the Pub like faith, that they may find it was worthy to be
trusted, and that you deal faithfully, and righteously, and nobly with them.
Remember your own need of them, (even of them) when time was, (and of such as
they) or their Parents, Husbands, or even Children: and now that they have need
of you, let them find you readier even then they were. Consider that, whatever
men do, God records how many days such a poor Woman, Widow, or Orphan, such a
Soldier or Officer has waited at your doors, upon this or that Man, or upon
any Committees; and what answers they have had, what frowns or checks, or
perhaps threatenings, or what fair words or promises, and tedious delays after
all? All this comes within the compass of speaking of vanity (or iniquity)
mentioned ver. 9. If God himself consider all this (as he most severely
threatens all those that in any wise oppress the widow or fatherless;
particularly, that he will hear the cries of such, and his wrath shall wax hot,
and he will stay them that oppress them with the sword, and their wives shall
be widows, and their children fatherless. Exodus 22. 22, 23, 24.) Do not you
forget it; for there are also manifold other expressions to the like purpose,
and scarce any thing that God more frequently or vehemently insists upon in his
Word. Satisfy therefore the afflicted soul with your justice and charity,
that God may satisfy your souls, as he promises among other things in this
chapter, v. 11.

7. Add unto this, I beseech you, Set the Poor on work.
the quickening of the laws that are already made for the setting of the Poor
on work, and begin here in these Cities of London and Westminster, and so set a
copy to the rest of the Kingdom. This would help many that have been plundered
and undone, both Irish and others, who are now so numerous, as there appears
not to be charity enough in the world, to keep many of them from perishing
through want. And withal take into consideration that most horrid abomination
(if but a small part of that be true which is spoken) of the Commonwealth of
Beggars, then whom, according to all relations, there scarcely lives a more
godless generation upon the face of the earth. A general survey of the Poor
every where, and a command to every Parish to take care of their own poor,
according to the Laws, would remedy this speedily, infallibly, and with ease
and advantage to the Commonwealth. The example of the stranger-Churches among
us, who maintain their numerous Poor without suffering any either to beg, or to
want, (besides their helping to maintain our poor) is both a remarkable pattern
for us to imitate, and takes away all excuse or pretense of impossibility, or
extreme difficulties to effect it. Consider it therefore, I beseech you, the
rather because hereby their scules may be taken care of as well as their
bodies; and they who are now little better then mere stocks or stones, in
regard of their ignorance and sencelesnes in matters of Religion, might be made
lively stones in Gods spiritual building of the Church among us.

8. Receive Petitions.
Finally, to add but one particular more about Justice or Mercy, Think of
satisfying the afflicted souls that sue unto you, by receiving and preferring
their Petitions. When poor people, or any other Suitors bring fitting
Petitions, let none turn away, or hide their eyes from them. It is accounted
the birth right of every English man, to have liberty to petition the
Parliament: but what is this worth? or how are poor souls the nearer to have
their suits granted? If when they may not tender them, themselves, in the
House, without special leave; there be none that will present them for them,
or make a motion in their behalf: Though their cause or desire be never so
just, yet what help have they, if no man be found so just or charitable, as to
prefer their humble supplications unto you. I would not have it thought that
I speak any word for the receiving of unjust or seditious Petitions; but what
the consciences of any that are desired to help a distressed soul, are
convinced that there is nothing in it but that which is just and equal, and
warrantable. Certainly it becomes every one to be so ready to satisfy them, as
to be willing to present it for them; from which if any turn away, into what
hazard do they run of that sentence, Prove. 21.13. Whosoever stops his care at
the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall nor be heard. Some
Petitions would certainly be granted, if they were but once read; but it is
impossible that can be, if the Petitioners cannot find so much favor as to
have them tendered: and there are diverse that would take it for a satisfaction,
that you think not their Petitions fit to be granted. It is one of Gods
glorious attributes, that he is a God hearing prayers, and therefore it is
said, To thee shall all flesh come, Psalm 65.2. And he most frequently invites
all to sue unto him. It shall be also your glory to hear Petitions from all
sorts of persons, and I hope a Parliament will never so much as seem to be
unwilling to it; and that every one of you will count it an honor, rather then
a trouble, to be employed as to promote an honest Cause, by bringing it in in a
Petitionary way; and to be more willing to offer many, then to deny one: when
the danial of one may kill an honest Heart, and undo a Righteous person, that
has fled to you as to a sanctuary of Justice, and a storehouse of Mercy. And
so I have done with that branch of the Exhortation which concerns Justice and
Mercy, and specially relates to our Commonwealth.

I come now to what concerns the Churches restoration and building, which is
most formally before us in the Text. I may here also but touch a few things of
many; but I dare not altogether omit some which lie specially upon my heart,
and I hope I shall speak nothing but what you do already acknowledge to be the
Will of GOD, and correspondent to your own Promises and Covenants, and greatly
necessary to the Churches good: Or will see them to be so, when they have been
set before you. Only remember to carry the Text so in your eyes all the way, as
that you may not stick at any thing upon this suggestion, That it is a thing
was never heretofore among us, or not within the memory of any man, at least:
For this is plainly, to build ths old waste places, (as you have heard) and it
is properly a great part of the duty which God expects from you, and which will
be your great glory to fulfill. And so for those things that former Parliaments
looked at, and talked of, but gave over again; For this is also in the Text, To
raise up the foundations of many generations. And this is also a certain duty
lying upon Parliaments, from time to time, to finish what their Ancestors left
deficient; and will be your singular honor to do it fully. And indeed there is
nothing that can be suggested to prevent the Churches full restoration, but
the Text, rightly weighed, does suggest that which will prevent such an
objection.

1. Provide a faithful Ministry.
That which I first begin with, (and which is of most universal concernment for
the Churches building, even among the old waste places, and whereof former
Generations have laid some, and but some, foundations) is the providing of a
faithful Ministry throughout all the Land: and I doubt not but you will hear
of this with special acceptance and profit, because you have already resolved
this, and often declared it, and begun happily to do something toward it, and are
going on daily: (It is a praise to any one, rather then a disparagement, to be
exhorted to that which he is already forward for.) And by doing this, you set
builders awork (so the Scripture very frequently calls them, as you know) to
carry on Gods design toward his Church among us. Therefore concerning these,
give me leave to offer you a threefold consideration. 1. The necessity of this
care. 2. The benefit of having such Builders. 3. The means of providing of them.

1. The necessity.
For the Necessity, you will be both convinced of it, and quickened by it, if
(as you are come from the several parts of the Kingdom) you do but ask one
another a little carefully, and tell one another of the great want of faithful
Ministers in your several Counties: Every where there are many old waste
places, in every part of the Shire; and they that can speak of the best
provision, will scarcely be able to tell you of one half enough: But if enquiry
be made of the remote parts of the Kingdom, specially Northward, they will
scarce be able to tell you of any thing, but of most sad desolations, old waste
places, scarce a Sermon preached among them in many miles compass, ever since
the Reformation; and in those that have had some show of a preaching Minister,
there has been among too many but a mere show of building, for they have laid
together nothing but rubbish and rotten stuff, hay and straw, preached nothing
but vanity and falsehood, and fed the people with wind, or poison, in stead of
wholesome nourishment. Of all which the causes are notorious, (as the effects
are most woeful) but it is not now time to insist upon them: But certainly No
man can be sufficiently apprehensive of the extreme want that there is of
faithful Builders, even when they think they speak most largely of it; and no
man can hope to see a provision made, but by your zealous and christian
compassion, and laying it to your hearts, and your hands to it, for the
procuring of it.

2. The Benefit is unspeakable; The benefit.
It is a provision for GOD to dwell among us. If we compare Psalm. 18.18. with
Ephesians. 4.11, etc. we shall find, that the Gifts which Christ received, when he
ascended on high, were, to furnish men for the Ministry, and to put them into
the Office, for the Churches edification or building, even for the Rebellious
also, says the Psalmist that the Lord God might dwell among them. There are
many places of this Kingdom where men have been rebelltous against God, even
for many generations: their fathers, and grandfathers, and all their ancestors
that they know of have been Papists, and that kept them in a way of rebellion
still, and of late they have proved rebellious against you. Now Christ has
gifts to pour out upon his servants, for the work of the Ministry, even that
his Church might be builded among such rebels, and that he himself may dwell
even among them. There has dwelt for a long time none but Zijni and Jim, and
Ohim, Satyrs and doleful creatures, as the Prophets call them; in plain
terms, Devils have only had their habitation among them: But by your sending
Builders thither, place will be prepared (through His blessing) for the Lord
God to come and dwell among them: and then what a blessing and happiness will
that be to those people, and even to you? There has been, and are thousands,
if not millions of souls, destitute of all true blessings and exposed unto all
curses and wrath, even to everlasting, blind, captived, ready to starve for
want of Ministers to break to them the bread of life. Oh, what a mercy will it
be to them, when you furnish them with such as are skillful and faithful!
Without it, all you can do else for them is nothing, and will come to nothing,
in reference to any true good: Peace will be nothing, and restoration of Trade
will be nothing; Church government and discipline, if it could be without this,
would be nothing; Administration of Sacraments, I mean that of the Sacrament of
the Lords supper (which is so earnestly called for every where) without this,
will be worse then nothing: and it has been the great sin, and shame, and
mischief of our Nation, that we have had that administered, where there has
been not only no Preaching, but no knowledge at all of Christ, to speak of,
much less any seeming care to live according to his Gospel. So Universities
will be nothing, in reference to the Churches building, or to the souls of
people, if they help not mainly to supply this great want of Ministers and
Builders. But if these be once provided, and rightly ordered in their several
stations, they will make way for all the rest, and make all other things
prosper: and this in the mean time will recompense for all other miseries and
supply other wants very much. God takes it so; and therefore as a singular
promise to his afflicted people, he tells them, Esa. 30.20 Though the Lord give
you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy
Teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy
Teachers. As if he did enough for them, if he provided Ministers for them. And
contrariward, he threatens as the worst of judgments, a scarcity and famine of
hearing the Word of the Lord, That men should run to and fro, from the North
even to the East, to hear the Word of the Lord, and should not find it, so that
they should even faint for want of it, Amos 8. Where note that he threatens it
to those that were weary of the Sabbath, and the services of God, in comparison
of their trading and gains, ver. 5. And threatens also an outward famine to
follow, together with a war, in the end of the chapter. We have therefore
cause to fear another War, if there be not provision made of Spiritual fort
fications all the Land over. Churches in many places, have been made use of to
a wrong purpose in this war, to make Castles of them; but in this sense,
certainly they will be your strongest Castles, if you furnish them well with
Ministers. You will remember what benefit your own souls have found from the
Ministry, and then you will not be able to keep your bowels from yerning
toward those that want it: and as you cannot forget that it is GOD who has
made you Armies victorious, when you sent them forth to subdue those people
that had rebelled against you; so you will not forget to send Spiritual
Commanders among them, to subdue them to God; Builders, that may prepare a
place for God to dwell among them. It is that which himself has bespoken, in
substance, in that notable place, Mic. 4 3 last verses: where having let his
people know, how low they should be brought, and how they should yet prevail
and recover, (both which have been remarkably verified unto you) Did not your
enemies boast that they should see your destruction? (as it is there expressed)
and has not God made you altogether unexpectedly strong, to beat them in
pieces, and make them like chafe? Now what remains, but that you labor to
fulfill the last Verse, of consecrating their gain to the Lord, and their
substance to the Lord, of the whole earth (or the whole land) making advantage
of your Victories, to settle the Gospel of Christ among them, and bring them,
and all that they have, unto the obedience of God. I comfort my self, that the
phrase there runs that God will do this himself, that is, he will put it into
the hearts of his people to take effectual care of it. I trust, it is his
purpose to make you his happy instruments to fulfill it even to a most
remarkable blessing upon all the places whither your Victories have extended,
and even unto all the Land.

3. Now for the Means of effecting this: The means of it:
I desire to offer you three things to consider. 1. Maintenance. 2.
Encouragement. 3. Prayer.

For the first, which is Maintenance: You have undertaken it, Maintenance.
and have begun with the Revenues of Deans and Chapters, and have resolved
somewhat upon some Delinquents compositions, who have Impropriations in their
hands: and you have excepted the Impropriations of Bishops out of the sale of
their lands, and I hope you intend them for this purpose. And if all this will
not suffice for a sufficient maintenance for a Ministry throughout the
Kingdom, (as for my part I believe it will not by a great deal) yet you are
wise to find out other ways of provision, and you have all humane power that
can be desired, in your hands, toward it, and cannot want a Divine blessing
when you effectually set about it. Let me yet so far presume (by your favor)
as to offer my weak thoughts toward a way for it, and so far anticipate the
next Use of Encouragement, as to speak a word of this kind here.

If you shall think fit, to make it plain and easy for any who have
Impropriations, to give them up to this use (which hitherto they have not known
how to do certainly, who have most earnestly desired it) and withal please to
appoint a voluntary contribution to be made throughout every Shire
particularly, for a Ministry in that Shire; but also with reference to the
whole Kingdom: and appoint faithful men, who shall every where (upon strict
accounts) receive every ones charity: I am confident, that within a few years
(that I say not months) incredible sums would be brought in for this
service. And this, both the examples of Gods people in the Old Testament and in
the New Testament, and the experience of our own Kingdom, and some Religiously
rational considerations, force me to believe. In the Old Testament, first, when
the Tabernacle was to be built, and a Proclamation was made for a voluntary
contribution, there was so much suddenly brought in, as they were fain to be
restrained by another Proclamation, because there was more than enough, Exodus
35.36. Afterward, when the Temple was to be built, and David invites the people
to join with him in a voluntary contribution, there was so much silver and gold
brought in, as amounts by computation to 1300 cart-load, and 2000 weight to a
cart-load, which is a most astonishing proportion, and, but that the Scripture
records it, beyond all credit. In the New Testament, Act. 2. and 4. you find
the first Christians so liberal one to another, that none wanted, but every one
helped those that had need, and those that had lands and houses, sold them, and
distributed out to those that were in want, and this for a long time together
to the relieving of multitudes. And 2 Cor. 8. it is particularly expressed of the
Churches of Macedonia, that (even in a great trial of affliction) their
abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, abounded to the riches of their
liberality, and that to their power, and even above their power, as the Apostle
bears them record, they were willing of themselves. Now if God gave such a
spirit to his servants in those days, both under the Law, and under the
Gospel. to be so liberal for the outward building of the Tabernacle and Temple,
and the outward relief of the necessities of his people; can we imagine but
that he will pour out a special measure of his grace upon his servants in this
Kingdom, toward the spiritual building of his house, and the spiritual relief
of the souls of so many thousands as now are in want? Certainly, the spirit and
grace of Christ is not so weakened in Christians now, but when there shall be a
ready way showed how their liberality may be certainly employed to these
spiritual purposes, they will manifest somewhat like. England, they say, (and
some have computed it, and declared so much to the world in Print) has been as
abundant in charity, as any other Nation in the world, and publicly since the
Reformation (besides all private ways of charity, which cannot come into a
reckoning) done more in 50. or 60 years, then in 3 or 400 in times of Popery,
notwithstanding all their boastings of their good works: doubtless then they
will not be wanting or scanty-handed in this case. When a man of any
considerable estate, dies, or recovers out of a deadly sickness, or escapes
some other frightfull danger, or has received any affecting mercy, and would
show some thankfulness to God for it, and desires to honor him with some of
his substance: How readily would this come into his mind, and his thoughts
would hardly apprehend any other business worthy regard, till this were fully
provided for. And if there were but in all places of public meeting, a Chest,
(like that, 2 Chronicles. 24.) whereinto men might secretly cast in their free will
offerings, it would exceedingly add to the heap in a short time. The great
obstacle being once removed, (by your undertaking that it should be faithfully
employed) all scruples would be removed, and men's hearts would pant continually
to be putting in more and more according to their abilities, (and we should
have Widows mites too) toward so blessed a work. The event will verify my
confidence, when ever a Peace being settled, God directs you to take this work
into your present and special consideration and care. However, this I suppose
none among us will question, but that as on the one hand, if there be no meat
for builders, there will be no workmen found; so on the other hand, there can
be no want of maintenance for any good work, when God gives a Parliament of
England a heart to engage themselves in it, for his honor, and the good of so
many thousands of souls as are concerned in it.

The next thing is Encouragement for the Builders: Encouragement.
It is not bare Maintenance, that will provoke men to enter upon this work They
who are growing up toward a fitness for the Ministry, and have had their
faces bent by their education toward that calling, will be apt to draw back, if
they see no encouragement in their undertaking, more then that they may have a
mere subsistence by their labor in it: They are flesh and blood as well as
others; and we may well say so, and think so of them, when the Apostle offered
to say of Elias, that he was a man subject to like passions as we are: And they
know, that if they will be faithful in their office, they shall provoke many
spirits against them, against whose displeasure and opposition they will never
be able in an ordinary course to hold out, if they have not some Encouragement
from You, and your authority and countenance. Afford it them therefore, I
beseech you both living and dying: While they live let them be secure under
your protection, when they discharge their duties conscionably and rightly; And
specially, Let them not be tried and found guilty, for matters merely
Ecclesiastical, by men who have not so much as any skill to understand in these
matters, For this could not but be a mavelous discouragement unto them; as it
would be a great discouragement to a learned Lawyer, or learned Physician or
Surgeon, if those that have no skill in their sciences should be set to try
them, upon an accusation of having been unfaithful in the particular matters
of their professions; as, Whether a Lawyer has given his Clyent right counsel,
or pleaded his cause faithfully; Or, a Physician or Surgeon applied a proper
Medicine for the Patients grief. And I hope, when you have once settled the
whole Ecclesiastical Government, you will see so much safety and advantage to
the public good, in that order, for the suppressing and preventing of all such
faults in Ministers, as that (reserving still to your selves a supreme
supervision) you will conclude it both unnecessary and unprofitable to put it
into other hands. And this will be like our Law in other things, That every
Freeman of England is judged by his Peers; For surely, ordinary Countrymen
that may be fit to try Civil offenses, are not our Peers in matters that
concern properly the Ministerial function, whether in Preaching or Government.
Hereunto let me add another thing of like nature for their encouragement,
namely, that they may not be more hardly dealt with, even in things wherein
they do amiss, then any other sort of men: that they may not be presently
ruined (as has been the manner in former times) for every omission, or
commission, but that they may both have space to amend as well as others, as
also punishment of an inferior nature, as well as others, for lesser offenses.
I know that they should be more holy then others, and so I hope, God will make
them; but it is the manner not to be forward or rigorous in punishing every
failing of those that are in office; every petty Constable is favored and
encouraged as much as justice will permit, and surely Ministers by their office
deserve no less. Also I am far from pleading for those whose scandals make
them fit only to be cast out as unsavourie salt; but zeal against them does not
require that those that are not such (whether in the nature of their offenses,
or the hopes that they may give of being reformed) should therefore be
destroyed and ruined. But there is one special piece of encouragement more,
that I would beg for those that shall approve themselves to be faithful, that
is, that you would both when you at any time go into your several Countries,
take notice of such, and cast respect and countenance upon them, which will
mightily encourage and strengthen their hearts and hands in good; wherein you
have more advantage then all your predecessors, by your perpetuated authority:
As likewise, that you will frown upon those that shall causelessly oppose them,
and check, and even punish those that shall maliciously accuse them. Finally,
there will be an encouragement for them dying, if you shall vouchsafe to settle
a way, that those who have deserved well in their places, and yet were not able
to leave their wives or children any considerable subsistence, may know, that
when they are gone, there shall be a special care had of them, not only as
poor people, but as the Relicts and Orphans of those that have been faithful
and useful to the Church of God; it is so in other Churches, and it is a
mavelous quieting to their spirits, even all their life time, and a diverting
them from worldly cares, to attend their ministry with more diligence and
assiduity.

If any shall now ask why I am thus solicitous and importunate about
maintenance and encouragement, considering what entertainment the Apostles
found, what wants they did undergo, and sufferings; and why should we look for
any better condition then they? I answer, I hope there are many of our
profession that are preparedly resolved to submit with a humble and Christian
patience, to whatsoever the providence of God shall call us unto, even to be
reduced to Apostolical poverty, and to undergo Apostolical sufferings; but
withal I must needs say likewise, that it ill becomes men in the time of a
reforming Parliament, and in a prosperous Nation (as we hope to be shortly) to
speak this kind of language, and that when our God (I say again, OUR GOD, not
as engrossing him wholly to our selves, but as challenging a special interest
in him by his own grace) has so blessed the Nation, and the Parliament, it is
not suitable to his dealings, with them, to deal so with us, as to put us upon
the thoughts of any such condition, and I am sure he will not be pleased with
it; nor can it be expected from him, that he should provide such a Number of
builders as this Kingdom stands in need of if men will not provide sufficient
maintenance for them, or do provide withal vexation for them, which at least
evil minded men may take advantage of, to molest them for their faithfulness.
Nor yet, in reason, will many train up their children to such a calling, or
they venture upon it, who have already some abilities, when instead of
encouragement suitable to the cost of their education and difficulty of their
studies, and the certain provocations of corrupt consciences against them, they
may foresee either a scanty pittance for their subsistence, or withal any
legal pressures that may fall heavy on them, to a sore crushing, if not a
total undoing, even when they are guilty of nothing but discharging their
duties carefully, and conscionably.

The third is prayer, Prayer.
Christ directs to this in a time of greatest scarcity, and when there was no
godly Magistrate to give either maintenance or encouragement Mat. 9. ult. the
harvest (says he,) truly is great, but the laborers are few, pray in
therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers into his
harvest. And this contains a vertual promise, that God will do it, when he is
earnestly, and effectually prayed unto for it. I desire therefore that every
one of this great assembly would resolve to make it their daily and earnest
suit to God, even in their clossets and most retired devotions; He is able to
do all things, to furnish men enough, with sufficiency of gifts, and to
overruled all hearts, and overcome all difficulties; and if I might presume to
make an humble motion concerning this also, I would entreat for one solemn and
General fast extraordinary all the Kingdom over, that we might particularly
humble our selves before God, for the want of a preaching Ministry in so many
parts of the Kingdom, so many years, and for the neglect both of former
generations, and even of our own, in not thoroughly settling about this most
necessary work: then that after such seeking of God, all consultations and way
as that may bring this to pass, might be effectually set on foot and pursued
with all diligence and faithfulness. We that have had so large experience of
the blessings which God has vouchsafed in answer to our prayers and fastings,
should think nothing impossible that is so undertaken.

The next thing that is to be looked unto toward the building of Gods house,
Settle the Truth of God.
is the settling of the Doctrine of Gods truth firmly by your authority
throughout all the kingdom. The Covenant in which we are all engaged, mentions
a confession of faith to be framed for all the three Kingdoms, part of it (by
your special commands) is already presented unto you, and the rest by Gods
assistance will speedily follow. Of it give me leave to speak a word humbly and
modestly, yet hopefully; I trust you which find it as worthy of your
approbation as any thing that has hitherto been presented unto you, as having
been composed with care, and reviewed again and again with care; Plain to
those that understand religion, and full against the errors of our age; yet
moderate in things controverted between Orthodox and sober men; and which
contains no other doctrines then such as your selves and former Parliaments
since the Reformation have asserted, against Papists, Arminians, and
Antinomians, Libertines and such other erroneous spirits; and so tending to
advance godliness, as we doubt not when it shall come abroad into the
Christian world, the Churches of God will bless him for it not a little, and
afford it such a testimony as your selves will rejoice to see and hear.

3. The settling of the government of the Church is another thing requisite to
the building of Gods church, Settle the government of the Church.
and within the Covenant also; This is the wall of Gods house, or at least the
cement of that wall, or it may be called the door or gate to let in and shut
out, and both ways to benefit and secure the churches habitation and
commodities, but of this I intend no further discourse at this time, as well
because some things are hopefully settled already, (for which we bless God and
thank you) and so I doubt not but you will take the remaining part into your
consideration within a while; but specially because concerning the mainest part
thereof (of which any question can well be made) you have already required the
Assembly to show you what is the will and appointment of Jesus Christ according
to the Scripture: in which some progress has been made; and it had possibly
been finished by this time, if your commands had not called them to another
work, which being once finished, they intend to return to those questions
again, and doubt not but in convenient time to give you satisfaction about them.

4. Another thing most requisite for the churches safety and edification,
Suppress heresies and errors.
is the suppressing of blasphemous herresies and other hurtful errors, the
covenant speaks fully to this, and you have made some beginnings against
blasphemy and heresies, I beseech you proceed, and God will be with you in it;
his honor and the honor of his son Jesus Christ, and the salvation of
millions of souls will admit of no excuse for not endeavoring without respect
of persons to extirpate these, It is a vain thing to think of building, if
those things or persons be suffered to undermine and blow up the very
foundations of religion, of christianity; and so woeful a breach has been made
among us by the licenciousnesse of the times, and the miseries of the war, as
that a most sad reproach lies upon us for these abominations vented and not
suppressed among us: and it is impossible for you to have the honor from God,
of being called the repairers of the breach, if this be not done. Certainly the
light of nature teaches all to punish for blasphemies against God, as well as
for treasons against an earthly King, and the Scripture expressly commands to
put such to death, as also all Seducers to Idolatry, and the sutablenesse of
these laws, to the law and light of nature, shows they cannot be tipycall, or
merely Indiciall laws, considering how necessary they are both for the honor
of God, and for the safety of others souls, (what ever may become of the
offenders themselves) for shall the murdering of men's bodies, or the stealing
of their good. be capital, and shall not the stealing away or murdering of
souls be so much rather? neither is this sevarity unfitting the times of the
new Testament, when Zachary prophesying of the fountain opened unto the house
of David, which is the blood of Christ expressly says, that even parents should
(...) to death a false Prophet, chap. 13. besides other insinuations even in
the new Testament it self, concerning the the Magistrates duty to draw the
sword against evil doers: neither is the plea of conscience any thing in this
matter, as well because no man's conscience can be known in these things, as
also for that men's consciences are not meddled with, but their outward evil
deeds, for which if any pretend conscience, the Magistrates must show their
consciences in suppressing such mischiefs: Go on therefore in the prosecution
of this, in zeal to God and his peoples good: only let not any evade by
varying the phrase, it having ever been the practice of heretics to attempt to
conceal their errors, by denying those expressions that were commonly received
in the Church, under pretense of their not being found expressly in Scripture,
although apparently they carried no other sense then that which the Scripture
did evidently hold forth, and therefore were taken up by the Church to be
characteristicall notes who they were that held the Orthodox truth, and who
rejected it.

5. Moreover toward the churches restoration, Stop and prevent divisions.
another thing is, to cause contentions to cease, and prevent any further
divisions among the builders, among brethren, this is a necessary work, else
the building will be like to fall again soon, whatever hands be used in the
raising of it; and it is a notable work, who ever God shall make able to
accomplish it, they will be called, to their very great honor, the repairers
of the breach, according to the language of the text. Do therefore I beseech
you what you can in this also: Some think a tolleration is the way, if it were
so, God forbid but we should all plead for it, and it must be only those that
neither love God nor men that would be against it. I shall speak my sense and
my heart freely and fully in it, and that which I have been able to attain by
my most serious thoughts these many years: As I take it for granted that our
brethren and we agree, that All persons and things are not to be tolerated,
nor so much as connived at; so I for my part profess, that I believe some
things and persons ought to be borne with, and that I do subscribe with my soul
(and desire to make it appear practically that I do so) unto that of James 3
17, 18. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality and hypocrisy: And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of
them that make peace; But first pure: So that all the question about
forbearance is, Who, What, and How. Concerning which I have only two things to
say, first, let us resolve formally and clearly, who must not, and settle that
second; for the residue, set those that desire to be borne with, but show us
how their desires may be granted them without the hazard of truth and peace,
the Christian peace of Congregations and Families, and how any government can
be maintained in our Churches, if any gap be left in our Walls, or our Doors or
Gates be left open for their sakes, without a manifest danger of letting out
the household unfittingly, or letting in robbers and evil minded persons
dangerously; if this I say can be showed, let all mankind reproach us as
enemies to peace, if we consent not to them.

6. Finally, Take care of Families.
Look to the foundations, not only of things, but persons, and that in three
particulars: First, Families. 2. Schools. 3. Universities. In Families, by
making strict Laws for the prevention of ungodly Marriages; these, as to this
consideration, are specially of two sorts; first Clandestine marriages without
or against the consent of Parents; about which above all other things, I stand
amazed that nothing is done, since each one of you that has any Childern
unmarryed, is in perpetual danger of it. The other is Incestuous marriages, an
abomination, which even the Prelates would not endure, and I beseech you let
not any wickedness be lawful, or unpunished now, which was not then.

2. For Schools; Schools.
There is a great deal to be done for their reformation both having fit persons
set over them, and fitting orders settled in them, that they may train up youth
in piety, as well as in learning, and teach them the knowledge and fear of God
as well as languages, which is extremely wanting every where, specially in pub
like Schools. Yet without this there will be a generation that will soon grow
up and undermine all your building, what ever it be that you set up, for
profaneness will generally be bred in the bone, and then (as our proverb is)
it will hardly dui of the flesh as long as they live.

3. For the Universities; Universities.
though there is a happy beginning in the one, and a hopeful expectation of
the other, yet there is much to be done. But I beseech you consider, whether in
this scarcity of Ministers that we groan under, there be not much time lost;
things being but weak (when they are at the best) by reason of some Statutes
which are deficient, and others that are great burdens and hindrances. I will
not presume to prescribe the manner, but I heartily pray to God, and beg of
you, that somewhat may be done speedily toward it, which will not more become
your prudence and care, then prove your glory. I will instance in no more
particulars of duty at this time, but only desire of you, that according to the
wisdom that is given you, you will consider from time to time what is further
to be done according to the Text and for the Churches good.

And now spare me, I beseech you, a few minutes longer, Consolation.
the Text is full for it and you have need of it as well as of any exhortation
whatsoever; and upon the terms forementioned you shall be sure not to fail of
it. First, God will still employ you, and honor you in the restoration and
building of his Church, and of the Nation also. It was an excellent
encouragement that God afforded Zerubbabel, when he set the second time upon
the building of the Temple, Zach. 4.9. The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the
foundation of this house, his hands shall also finish it, and thou shall know
that the Lord of hoasts has sent me unto you. God has made you the instrument
of laying the foundation of his Churches reformation the second time, and if
you go on in it, your hands shall finish it; what ever difficulties there
appear in it, they shall not hinder; there were such in Zerubbabels time, but
to them speaks the same Prophet in the same chapter, verse 7, Who art thou oh
great mountain? before Zerubbabell thou shall become a plain, etc. All the
great mountains of obstructions shall become plains before you; God has
raised you up, to finish what former generations left undone; and if your
hearts be set upon his work, I shall be bold to say, God has spoken to build
by you, and it shall be done; If the Kings concurrence be necessary (as at
least, it would be greatly comfortable and helpful to the work) it shall not
be wanting: God has his heart in his hand, as well as Cyrus his heart, whom he
commanded to build the Temple, Esa. 44. and 45. And accordingly Cyrus put it
into his Proclamation, 2 Chronicles. 36. and Ez. 1. That the Lord God of heaven had
commanded him to build his house in Jerusalem. God turned the heart of
Manasses, though he had been an Idolater, an Enemy; he proves a reformer, as is
related in 2 Chronicles. 33. There is no cause to distrust God then, who has all
hearts in his hand, and specially speaks it of Kings, (as you know Pro. 21.1.)
and he has great mercies in store for those that will be faithful unto him,
and will reward and honor their faithfulness even in this life.

2. For a Ministry: there is the greatest likelihood that may be (spiritual I
mean) that there shall be found no want within a while, but that God will
pour out his spirit abundantly upon his church, and provide you ministers
enough more speedily then any worldly heart would imagine. Christ has received
gifts enough for all his church, his store is not spent, nor will ever be while
the sun lasts: in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead. Consider the
expression, Psalm. 68.11. The Lord gave his word great was the company of them
that published it. Do but then implore God to give out his ward, and there
shall be found a great company of those that will be fit to publish it, there
are already more fit for that office, and employment then we are aware of; and
if you pray to the Lord of the harvest according to Christ's charge
forementioned, he will send them forth, the word is, thrust them forth, even
out of their corners where yet they lie hid, and put them on, notwithstanding
the disincouragements that yet keep them from adventuring upon it, and raise up
others where we expect them not; do but you your duties, and God can and will
make them do theirs, in all humility and diligence, according to his promise,
Jer. 3.15. I will give you pastors after mine heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding; and according to the gracious answer that God
makes to his peoples prayers, Psalm. 132. David in his own and in the peoples
name prays, verse 9. Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let
thy Saints shout for joy. And God promises, verse 16. I will cloth her Priests
with salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for joy. God will make them
blessings, and such whom his people shall greatly rejoice in. They desired
those that were faithful, that they might be clothed with rightcousnesse, and
God promises that they shall be means of salvation to them; and instead of the
peoples complaining of their pride, or covetousness, or the like, they that
are Gods Saints shall exceedingly rejoice in their faithfulness, and withal
forget not what is spoken of that time, that then the poor shall be satisfied
with bread, and the horn of David shall also bud; the Commonwealth shall
prosper, and flourish as well as the Church.

3. God will suppress the spirit of blasphemy and heresy, that is broken out
of hell, and turn it back from whence it came, and make it to vanish before his
servants, as Satan fell from heaven like lightning before the seaventy
disciples; Luke 10.18.
and as the Apostle speaks of Janes and Jambres, 2 Timothy 3. Who resisted Moses,
but yet were foiled before him, so also he speaks of the false teachers and
seducing spirits of the latter days, verse 8, 9. their folly shall be made
manifest unto all men, as theirs also was, and they shall proceed no further;
that is, to do mischief to the Church of God, though for their own particulars
they grow worse and worse, (as long as they are suffered,) endeavoring still
to deceive, and being more and more deceived, verse 1.3. Christ also gives a
like encouraging promise to the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.9.
Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and
are not, but do lie; behold I will make them to come and worship before thy
feet, and to know that I have loved thee. God has broken the Popish and
superstitious party wonderfully, that they are not any more manifestly a
molestation unto you or to his people; that they do not, nor dare not, lift up
their heads to oppose the reformation: why should any then be afraid of these
who have far less pretense or color for what they hold, and certainly far
less number or strength? It cannot be that any open error should stand before
a reforming Parliament, and a religious, power-full, painful, and faithful
Ministry, joined in opposition of them. I prosesse though now the blasphemies,
and damnable heresies, and other pernicious errors that are among us, be among
the greatest of my griefs, yet are they among the least of my fears, if once I
may but see both swords but shaken against them, the sword of the Magistrate,
and the sword of the Word.

4. God will also reconcile the differences that are among his people by ways
that we cannot as yet think of; it is not too hard for him, though it be
hitherto too hard for us to contrive and effect. There is but one truth in the
things wherein we differ, and God can show that truth to those that now
mistake, and discover the right way to those that are now in error, and then
we shall be agreed; or he can so compose the spirits of those that differ, that
where he does not vouchsafe to manifest the truth unto all, yet they shall see
a way how to hear one with another without mischief, and be of one heart, when
they cannot be of one mind. No man can doubt but God can do this, his people
pray for it; he has bidden them, Psalm. 132. Oh pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, and that shall not be in vain; Christ himself prayed for it, when
he was upon earth. John 17.11. that all those that were his might be one: and
he prays so still, and that must not be in vain: God himself has more then
once promised it, Ezekiel. 11.19. Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one
way, and that cannot be vain.

6. God will give you the honor to be called the repairers of the breach, and
the restorers of paths to dwell in: and under God it shall be ascribed unto
you, that you were the men that did build the old waste places, and that you
were they that raised up the foundations of former generations. It shall be
said of you, as Job speaks of himself, Chap. 29. verse 11 12, When the ear
heard me, then it blessed me: and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me:
because I delivered the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had
none to help him. And verse 13. The blessing of him that was ready to perish
came upon me. Certainly God will do it for those that faithfully and humbly
seek him, and do justly, and love mercy, and labor to build his Church, and
repair the breaches of his people. First, if you have any special zeal for
God, as he observes it, so shall men take notice of it, as you heard it was,
Neh. 3. such a one repaired earnestly, verse 20. Secondly, If you do, any of
you, more then others expect from you, or then it may be thought comes to your
share, God will have that also observed, as it was there also, that such a one
repaired another piece, verse 21. Thirdly, If others be in fault that the
reformation is not advanced so forwardly as you desire, God will own your
faithfulness as he did Asa's, when the high places were not taken away:
noverthelesse, (says the text, 2 Chronicles. 15.17.) The heart of Asa was perfect
all his days; and the blame shall be laid on them who are in fault, as 2 Chronicles
20.32, 33. Where first Iehoshaphat is commended that he did that which was
right in the sight of the Lord, and then it is added howbeit the high places
were not taken away, for the people (mark it, the people) had not yet prepared
their hearts unto the God of their fathers. Fourthly, If others join with you
even cordially and affectionately, this shall not take away from your praise,
the people did zealously act in the reformation, 2 Chronicles 30.1. yet Hezekiah
lost not the honor of it, he is said to have done it, 2 Kings. 18.2, 3 and 2 Chronicles 31. v. the last, in both which places his integrity is excellently set
forth. Fifthly, If you do any thing in this work for the souls of people
against their will, and so do them good whether they will or not, you shall
have the praise of it alone as Josiah had, of whom it is remarkably expressed
that he did thus and thus; and they brake down the altar of Baal in his
presence, and such and such high places did the King defile, and he went a
Progress throughout the land as far as Bethell to see every thing done
himself, 2 Kings. 23. and 2 Chronicles. 24. and 35. How exact is God in taking
notice, and setting down upon record what every one did, and what help and
hinderance they had; all which is written for your learning, and encouragement,
and honor, and you shall be honored while you live, so shall you be also
honored when you dye: and so was it with them that had been instruments of
public good. Ichojadah when he dyed, was buried among the Kings. 2 Chronicles. 24.
because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house.
And Hezekiah when he dyed, was buried in the chiefest of all the sepulchers of
the sons of David, and all Judah did him honor at his death. 2 Chronicles. 32 ult.
And for Josiah there was a mavelous lamentation made, such as the like had
not been before, 2 Chronicles. 35. 24, 25. Also in the close of either of their
stories, there is this most remarkable expression, (his goodness) the rest of
the acts of Hezekiah and his goodness. 2 Chronicles. 32.32. And the rest of the
acts of Josiah, and his goodness, 2 Chronicles. 35.26. And most singular high
commendations are given to either of them, as being without compare: to
Hezekiah for his zeal for God, from the very beginning of his reign to the
last reforming, even during the life of his father, having power put into his
hands, as appears, comparing 2 Kings. 16. and 18. with 2 Chronicles. 29. there was
none like him; and to Josiah for his being a convert, 2 Kings. 23.25. compared
with 2 Chronicles. 4. He began to look after God in the eight year of his reign;
but, after he was once turned to God, there was none like him for a most
complete reformer. These I say are patterns for you to encourage your selves
withal, and to let you know what honor he will put upon you living and dying,
and dead, and to eternity, according as you formerly heard that general
promise of honoring those that honor him. 1 Samuel 2.30.

And now can all this choose but encourage you to set about Gods work with all
zeal, diligence, and sincerity. And may I not say to you, into whose hands he
will put the power for the building of his house, as the Prophet spoke to
Zerubbabel, Hag. 2.4. Be strong O you Governors, and so to the rest that hear
me this day in all your several relations: Be strong O you Ministers, and be
strong O ye people of the Land, and work, for I am with you faith the Lord of
Hosts: and remember how this was admirably fulfilled, Ezra 5. and 6. Complaint
was made against them unto Darius an heathen Prince, that they builded the
Temple upon pretense of a Commission from Cyrus his predecessor, and he was so
far from hindering them, or forbidding them, as he commands all his Officers,
and Lieutenants to afford them all assistance, and even maintenance out of his
Revenue, and that he should be proceeded against with all severity that should
offer to hinder them, Ezra 6.7, 11. And which of all other things was the most
remarkable in a heathen Prince, and which could not but be a mavelous
encouragement to the people of God, he pronounces a most dreadful curse even
against all, Kings or People, that should offer to alter, or to destroy that
house of God, v. 12. Cannot God now, think you, overrule any heart (even a
Kings) and make him to promote that work, which every one thought he would have
hindered? So afterward, how did God work upon the heart of Artaxerxes? Ezra 7.
and Nehem. 9. to grant Commissions to Ezra and Nehemiah for the further
promoting of the welfare of the Church of God? Also how suddenly was the
grievous evil of ungodly marriages reformed by Ezra's zeal, and the
concurrence of the people with him, even though there were chief men that had
their hands in the transgression? Ezra 9. and 10. and with what speed the
building of the wall went on in Nehemiahs time, (Nehem, chap. 3, 4.5, 6.)
notwithstanding all attempts of enemies, the peoples hearts fainting, some
chief ones treachery and confederacy with the enemies, (Nobles and Priests
making affinity with them) and withal a grievous oppression by Usury
obstructing the work (which yet was suddenly reformed, Chap. 5.) and in a very
short space, in 56 days the walls of that mighty City were all made up, to the
great terror and amazement of the enemies, who were forced to see, that the
work was wrought of God: and afterward, how strongly and successefully did he
reform the profanation of the Sabbath? though sundry of the Nobles of Judah
were in fault, and strangers also of the neighbor Nations helped forward the
evil: and the mischief of ungodly marriages broke out again, but he quelled
all by his wisdom and zeal, and scared the strangers away. Chap. 13. And is
there now any cause why you should despair of any assistance that you have need
of in Gods work in your hands, or, that the greatness or quality of any
offenders, the fainting spirits of the people to bear the burdens, that yet
they must bear awhile longer, the treachery of any among us, or the malice, or
cunning, or power of any adversaries should yet discourage you, or weaken your
hands? Forget not how he dares put God in mind of his fidelity in all, and
though craving pardon, and that GOD would spare him according to the greatness
of his mercy, yet expecting acceptance in all that he had done for God, and
that GOD would remember him for good, and with this he closes his book:
Accordingly let me leave this upon your hearts, that never any people found God
wanting unto them who were not wanting to themselves in a remarkable manner.

The first time that God called me (by your Vote) to speak to you in his name,
I was bold to tell you, that I desired no other safety, then what God would
grant you in a way of uprightness: and though within a few days after, God
brought you into great streights, the greatest that ever you were in since the
beginning of the war, yet has it appeared abundantly, that my confidence was
not vain: I now say the like (and more) that I desire no greater happiness, or
Honor in this world, then God will put upon you, if you shall believe what I
have preached unto you this day, and shall act accordingly: And then, as you
shall not need any thing more for earth, so shall you not want either felicity,
or glory in heaven. See what God faith to his people Jer. 33.9. And it shall be
to me a name of joy, a praise, and an honor before all the Nations of the
earth, which shall hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear
and tremble for all the goodness, and for all the prosperity that I procure
unto it. And accordingly strengthen your selves against all enemies, that you
may be apt to fear from foreign Countries, or Malignants that you may suspect
among our selves. All those that now reproach you secretly (and often but too
openly) shall then have their mouths stopped with shame, and wonder, and fear.
And as for the faithful people of God among us, unto whom you have done
justice, and extended mercy, who have been rescued, protected and relieved by
you, their children educated, and especially their souls built up by your
pious care, how will they bless you daily, according to the language of Psalm.
20. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. Changing but the number: The Lord hear thee in the day of
trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend thee, send thee help from the
Sanctuary, and streng then thee out of Zion. Remember all thy offerings, and
accept thy burnt sacrifice: Grant thee according to thine own heart, and
fulfill all thy council. And even strangers shall bless you, as the Queen of
Shebah did Solomon, 1 Kings 9. and pronounced those blessed that were under
him, and near about him; and when any of you shall pass by, they will be ready
to say, There goes one of them that did me justice when I was oppressed, that
helped to prefer, and promote my Petition when I was in distress; but for him
I and my children might have starved, I and my children might have perished for
want of spiritual food, the Lord bless them, the blessing of God light upon
them where ever they go, and what ever they take in hand Oh what an honor,
what a happiness will this be to all of you, and to every particular man that
is faithful among you, when God shall fulfill that promise, Esa. 62.3. To make
you a Crown of glory, and a Diadem of beauty in the hand of the Lord, precious
in his sight, and honorable even to all generations; So that all men shall
acknowledge, that there is no Nation so near unto God, nor unto whom he has
vouchsafed to be so near, as this Nation of ours, since he raised You up to do
his great work among us.

Shall I say, your Line shall be extended even to build Ireland also? I am
confident it shall upon the same conditions, that having gone on faithfully
here, you carry along in all your attempts for that wasted and desolate
Country, the same zeal, and affection to build Gods house there also. But I end
all with that wish or prayer of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. and the two last
verses, begging that the uttermost of the blessing there mentioned may be your
portion in the fullest latitude. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God
even our Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting
consolation, and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you
in every good word and work.

FINIS.

