DELICIAE MUSICAE: BEING, A Collection of the newest and best SONGS, With the
Additional Music to the Indian Queen, by Mr. Daniel Purcell, as it is now
Acted at His Majesty's Theater. Most of the Songs being within the Compass of
the Flute. WITH A Thorow-Bass, for the Theorbo-Lute, Bass-Viol, Harpsichord, or
Organ. Composed by several of the Best Masters.

The First Book of the Second Volume.

depiction of a richly-dressed woman seated at a covered table with an open
song-book, and a man seated playing a lute reading a sheet of music; on the
table lies a fipple flute F.H. Van. Hove. Sculp:


LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the
Temple-Change, Fleetstreet, and for John Church, Sold by Daniel Dring at the
Harrow and Crown at the corner of Cliffords-Inn-Lane in Fleetstreet. And also
Sold at Oxford by Francis Dollife Book-binder, who Sells all other
Musick-Books. 1696.

Price One Shilling.

A Table of the SONGS contained in this Book.
C
Come all, come all at my Call, Page. 2
G
Good People, I Would make you all Blessed if I could Page. 4
I
I Am glad, I Am glad I have met him, Page. 3
M
My Honey, my Pugg, Page. 5 Make have to put on, Page. 11
R
Rich Mines of hot Love, Page. 18
S
Sound, sound the Trumpet, Page. 9 So well Corinna likes the joy, Page. 15
T
To Bless the Genial Bed with Chaste delights, Page. 1 The joys of Wedlock soon
are past, Page. 7
W
While Phillis does drink, Page. 14 What ungrateful Devil moves you, Page. 17
Vocal and Instrumental Music lately Printed and Reprinted with large
Additions, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change.
CAntica Sacra, the first Set in Latin, the second Set in English and Latin,
containing Hymns for 2 and 3 Voices to the Organ. Price of each 3 s.

Harmonia Sacra, in 2 Books, containing Divine Hymns and Dialogues lately set
to Music by Dr. John Blow, and Mr. Henry Purcell, and several Eminent Masters.
Price Bound of both Books 15 Shillings, the second Book Sticht 4 s.

Deliciae Musicae, in Four Books, with Three Elegies on our Late Queen, being
the first Volume, which Contains most of the newest and best of Songs, by the
Late Famous Mr. Henry Purcell. The Price of the Volume Stitch't, 5. s.

The Psalms in 4 Parts in Folio. Price stitcht 3 s.

The whole Book of Psalms in 3 Parts, by John Playford, as they are Sung in
Churches: Printed for the use of several Masters in most Countries, who teach
the same. The 2 Edition in 8o. Price Bound 3. s. 6 d.

The Treasury of Music, in Folio. The price Bound 10 Shillings.

The new Treasury of Music, being the best Collection of Song-Books for this
20 years last past. Price Bound 25 s.

The first Part of the Musical Companion, containing Variety of Catches and
Songs for 3 and 4 Voices: to which is added several Dialogues for 2, 3, and 4
Voices, in one Volume in Quarto. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.

The Second Book of the Pleasant Musical Companion, being a Choice Collection
of Catches in 3 and 4 parts, from the Year 1690, to 1695. To which is added
several Songs for two Voices, by Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters.
Price Stitcht 2 Shillings.

The Introduction to the Skill of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, by J.
Playford; the 12th Edition Corrected and Amended, with new Rules for Composing
in 2, 3, 4, and 5 Parts, by Mr. H. Purcell. Price bound 2 s.

INSTRVMENTAL.
Musick's Handmaid, in 2 Books, containing Lessons and Instructions for the
Harpsichord, or Spinet. Price stitcht of each 2 s. 6 d.

The Dancing Master, with Directions for Country Dances, with Tunes to each
Dance. The 9th. Edition, with 36 new Dances never printed before. Price bound 2
s. 6 d.

The Division Violin, in 2 Books, containing Divisions on Grounds, with several
Solo's for the Treble-Violin. Price stitcht of the first Part 2 s. 6 d. the
second Part 1 s. 6 d.

Apollo's Banquet, in 2 Books, containing the newest Tunes, Jiggs, Minuets,
Bore's, Sallabrands, Scotch-Tunes, and French-Dances, for the Treble-Violin,
most of which are proper to play on the Flute. Price of the first Book stitcht,
being the 7th. Edition, with large Additions, 1 s. 6 d.

The Sprightly Companion, being a Collection of the best Foreign MARCHES, now
played in all Camps. With two Farewells at the Funeral of the late Queen. Price
6 d.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THere will be speedily Published an Elegy on the Late Mr. Henry Purcell, the
Words by Mr. John Dryden, and Set to Music by Dr. John Blow.

Proposals are Printed for a Choice Collection of Songs in 1, 2, and 3 Parts,
by the Late Famous Mr. Henry Purcell, being formerly Printed in several
Volumes, and not to be purchased under great Rates, some being, out of Print,
with several never yet Printed, with a Thorow-Bass, Figured for the Bass-Viol,
Harpsicord, and Spinett.

Several Books of Italian Music both Vocal and Instrumental lately sent over
from Italy.

Oroonoko, a Tragedy by Mr. Southern, Acted at the Theater Royal, Price
stitch't 1. s. 6 d.

A New Comedy Called The Lover's Luck. Acted at the Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Feilds, Written by Mr. Dilks, Price 1. s.

The last New Comedy called the She Gallants, Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Masque. in the 5th. Act of the Indian Queen.
Set by Mr. Daniel Purcell.
^ Sung by Hymen. TO Bless the Genial Bed with Cha -- st de -- -- lights, to
give you hap -- py Days and plea -- sant, pleasant, pleasant pleasant Nights,
Lo I ap -- pear to Crown your soft desires, to Crown your so -- -- st de --
sires, and with this sa -- cred Torch to Con -- secrate, to Con -- -- se --
crate Love's fires, to Con -- -- se -- crate Love's fires.

A Song Sung by one of Hymen's followers.
^ COme all, come all, come, come at my Call; come all, come all, come, come at
my Call: Heroes and Lovers come, come a -- way, come, come, come a -- way, come
all, come all, and Prai -- se this glo -- ri -- ous Day.

CHORUS.
^ Come all, come all, and Sing great Hymen's Praise, come all, all, all, and
Sing great Hymen's Praise; the God who makes the darkest Nights, ap -- pear
more joy -- full, more joy -- joyful, and more bright; than thousands, than
thousands, than thousands, than thousands of Vic -- -- torious ^ days, than
thousands, than thousands, thousands, than thousands of Victorious days.


^ Come all and Sing great Hymen's Praise, come all, all, all, and Sing great
Hymen's Praise; the God who makes the darkest Nights, ap -- pear, ap -- pear
more -- full, and more bright; than thousands, than thou -- sands of Vic --
torious ^ days, than thousands, than thou -- sands of Victorious days.


A Song, Sung to Hymen by a Married Couple.
^ IN -- Me glad, I Am glad I have met him,


^ Let me, let me come at him,


^ Bane of Passion,


^ Pleasures Curse,


^ confounded, confounded in venture of Better for Worse;


^ confounded in venture of Better for Worse;


^ you told us in -- deed you would heap Blessings up -- on us, you made us be --
lieve you, and so, so have un -- done us;


^ you told us indeed you would heap Blessings up -- on us, you made us be -- lieve
you, and so, so have undone us;


^ in Railing,


^ and Wailing,


^ La -- menting, Re -- penting, we pass all our Days;


^ La -- menting, Re -- pent -- ing, we pass all our Days;


^ what Stomach have we, what Stomach have we to Sin -- g, to Sing thy Praise.


^ what Stomach have we, what Stomach have we to Sin -- g, to Sing thy Praise.


A Song Sung by Hymen.
^ GOod People, I Would make you all Blessed if I could, but he that can do it must
be ^ more, more, more, must be more than a God; and though you think now
perhaps you are cursed, I Will warrant you thought, I Will warrant you thought your
selves hap -- py, hap -- py at first.

Second Song by the Married Couple.
^ MY Honey, my Pugg,


^ My Fetters, my Clogg,


^ let us tamely jogg on, let us tamely jogg on, jogg on as others have done;


^ let us tamely jogg on, jogg on as others have done;


^ And sometimes at quiet,


^ But oftener strife,


^ let us tugg, let us tugg the tedious Load, the tedious, tedious load of a
Married life;


^ let us let us tugg the tedious Load, the tedious, tedious Load of a Married
life;


^ let us tugg, let us tugg, let us tugg the tedious Load, the tedious, tedious
Load of a Married life.


^ let us tugg the tedious Load, the tedious, tedious Load of a Mar -- ried life.


Simphony for Flutes, with a Song Sung by Cupid.
^ ^ THe joys of Wedlock soon are past, but I, if I please, can make them, ma --
ke them last, can ma -- -- ke them, ma -- ke them, make them last: ^ Where Love's a
Trade and Hearts are sold, how weak, how weak's the Fire, how soon, how soon,
how soon it is cold? The flame en -- creases and re -- ^ -- fines, where Virtue
and where Merit joins, where Ver -- tue, where Virtue and where Merit joins,
where Ver -- tue, where Virtue and where Merit joins.

A Song Sune by one of Cupid's followers.
^ Trumpet. SOund, sound, soun -- d, soun -- d the Trumpet, ^ Sound, sound,
soun -- -- d the Trumpet; Let Love's subjects know from Heavens high, Vault to
Erebus to E -- -- re -- bus be -- low; that from this ^ hour their Discords,
their Dis -- cords all shall cease; Love, Love that can on -- ly, can only
do it, will give 'em, will give 'em, * * give 'em, * * give 'em Peace, give 'em,
* * * * give 'em Peace.

A Song Sung by two of Cupid's followers.
^ MAke have, make have, make have to put on, to put on Love's Chains, ye
Heroes that de -- light, delight in Arms; forsake, for -- sake fond Honors
gaudy Charms, forsake, forsake fond Honors gaudy Charms, and join, and join
your True -- mpets to our Rural strains. your,


^ Make have, make have, make have to put on, to put on, to put on Love's
Chains, ye Heroes that de -- light, de -- light in Arms; forsake, for -- sake
fond Honors gaudy Charms; forsake, forsake fond Honors gaudy Charms; and
join, and join your True -- mpets to our Rural strains. your,


CHORUS.
^ Let loud Renown with all her thousand Tongues, let loud, let loud Re -- nown
with all, with all her thousand Tongues, re -- peat no Name, re -- peat no
Name, no no, no Name but his in her im -- mortal Songs; repeat no Name no, no,
no Name, but his in her im -- mor -- tal, in her im -- mor -- tal Songs; no,
no, no Name but his in her im -- mor -- tal, in her im -- mor -- tal Songs.


^ Let loud Renown with all her thousand Tongues let loud, let loud Re -- nown
with all, with all her thousand Tongues, re -- peat no Name, re -- peat no
Name, but his, but his in her im -- mor -- tal Songs; re -- peat no Name, no
Name but his in her im -- mortal, im -- mor -- tal, im -- mortal Songs; no, no,
no Name but his in her im -- mor -- tal, im -- mor -- tal Songs.


The end of the Masqe.
The First Song in the New Play called the She Gallants, Sung by Mr. Coper.
Set by Mr. John Eccles.
^ WHile Phillis does drink, Love and Wine in all -- lyance with Forces u --
nited bid re -- sistless de -- fiance; by the touch of her Lips the Wine
sparkles higher, and her Eyes from her drinking are double the fire: Her Cheeks
glow the higher re -- -- cruiting their color, as Flowers by sparkling re --
vive with fresh Odor; his Dart dipped in Wine Love wounds beyond cureing, and
the Li -- quor like Oil makes the flame more en -- du -- ring.

II.
By Cordials of Wine Love is kept from expiring,
And our Mirth is enlivened by Love and desirng;
Relieving each other the Pleasure is lasting,
And we now are cloyed yet are ever a Tasting:
Then Phillis begin, let our Raptures abound,
And a Kiss and a Glass be still going round;
Our joys are immortal while thus we remove,
From Love to the Bottle, from the Bottle to Love.
The Second Song in the She Gallants, Sung by Young Laroch a Boy of Seven
Years Old.
^ SO well Co -- rin -- na likes the joy, She vows she will ne -- ver more be
coy; She drinks e -- ternal draughts of Pleasure, e -- ternal draughts of
Pleasure, e -- ter -- nal draughts will not suffice; Ah! give me more, give me
more, give me more, give me more, give me more She cried, it is all too little,
little, little, little, lit -- tle measure, ah! give me more, give me more,
give me more, give me ^ give me, give me more She cried, it is all too little,
little, little, little, lit -- tle measure, ah! give me more, give me more,
give me more, give me, give me, give me more, She cried, it is all too little,
little, little, little, lit -- tle measure; it is all too little, little,
little, little, lit -- tle measure.

A Song, Set by Mr. Daniel Purcell, Sung in Love's Last Shift.
^ WHat un -- grate -- full De -- vil moves you! Come, come my Friend, the
Truth de -- -- clare; You Love Sylvia, Sylvia Loves you; why, why then will you
Wed the Fair? Marriage-joyning does dis -- co -- ver, but Love-free -- ing
joins for Life: Would you, would you, would you Love the Nymph for ever? Never,
never, never, never, never, never let her be your Wife.

Mr. Bomans Song, Acting Goosandelo, in the Lovers Luck.
^ RIch Mines of hot Love are Roo -- ted here, flashes of flames in my Eyes ap
-- pear; when swiftas the Sun, to the Arms of Thetis I run, I run, I run, I
run, I run, I run, I run, I run, to seize on my bliss, in the parts where it
is, oh! you know, oh! you know, oh! you know where, oh! you know, oh! you know,
oh! you know where.

II.
She laid by her Knotting with wondrous have,
And took me about my well shaped Waste;
I envied not Jove his Celestial Throne,
Nor all the Gods above while Kisses came on,
And something was done,
Which I know, which I know best.
FINIS.

