SECTARIES UNMASKED AND CONFVTED. BY The treating upon diverse Points of
Doctrine in debate betwixt the Presbyterialists and Sectarists, Anabaptists,
Independents, and Papists. By GEORGE PALMER wel-wisher to a warrantable
Uniformity in Godly Religious exercises.

Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou have ordained strength, because
of thine enemies, Psalm. 8. 2. Matthew. 21. 15, 16. If these should hold their
peace, the stones would immediately cry out, Luke 19. 40. And my speech, etc.
was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the
Spirit, and of power, that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1647.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Beloved,
IT may seem strange to you, that I am approached to the Press; And I confess
it is strange to my self. And therefore, both you and I may revive the ancient
proverb, viz. Is Saul among the Prophets? But yet considering the great
distractions among the children of God generally, and that in a time after so
manifest issues of blood, which have been mortal to many hundred thousands,
and yet notwithstanding we being in want of the two happy staves; viz. the
staff of Beauty, and the staff of Bands: And that they are obtained, First,
by a warrantable uniformity in godly exercises of our true Religion, which is
compared ^o a staff of bands; and the second (which is a consequence of the
first) viz. unity of affection, which is compared to a staff of beauty, these
two being the supporters of a people from confusion and destruction, wherever
they have their being. Secondly, considering also, that although a man ought to
see to his own house, and not to adventure to meddle with his neighbors
dwellings, until he be called by an outward voice, as well as by an inward
provocation, and that notwithstanding upon an extraordinary case of danger, he
may (if not absolutely prohibited) put to his helping hand when a whole City is
on fire, for it is then expected that their neighbors should come without an
outward call, and put to their helping hands. Provided that when he appears,
he be allowed and approved by those in Authority there, that he be able to
do good and not hurt; And also, considering how many have adventured now in
these times of danger, that have been much defective in some things by them put
forth: And further seeing some have thrust forth the poison of Aspes to the
increasing of our Kingdoms sickness: And also that many have been permitted
to use their Pens, who were but private men, and perhaps, they have not all of
them brought gold, nor much silver, yet accepted too: These things being by me
thus considered, and being absolutely persuaded that I have some water to
quench the fire; and also some gold, if not silver, and pearls, to help
repair what wild fire has exhausted; I therefore have adventured toward the
ruinated House of this our Israel: And my chief care is to bring such
materials as is most wanting to it, for if I come not with fitting matter, I
shall do little good, if not much hurt, as some others have done before me:
Yea, I, in so doing, may too easily increase the flame. For sometimes, the
less straw or combustible matter is best, especially when the fire is too
near the thatch already; And so many (that seem to be friendly helpers) are
crafty hinderers in this our great necessity: And truly I see many at work,
and labor at it too, but they cannot well conclude about those things that are
wanting to this House. Therefore I am busied in the viewing of the materials,
which (as I think) be those that truly belong to some special parts of this
frame; the which are sought for by many, and yet scarce found; (especially by
diverse of the Sectaries:) One says, this is the piece that ought to be next;
and another says to him, that that piece does not belong to any part of the
building, but that it belongs to Romes Synagogue; and another he would lay a
foundation where there is a good one already; and a fourth, he would take away
both that good one already laid, and the other that perhaps should lie somewhat
near it too; and a fifth, he like a cunning fox, would persuade them that it
does not belong to any of them all to build about that frame, and tells them in
plain terms, that they are not lawfully called to build there in this
Workmanship; his policy was no other, but to keep them at strife from building,
until the House were quite consumed by his wilde-fire brought from Rome, to
which place he did belong, (but that he had clothed himself in a sheeps
skin, and would be thought to be a true sheep, that he might the more easier
deceive.) But I am sure there are many honest builders, and they are lawfully
called too, and also that they have true materials, but that notwithstanding
this fox, with wolves, and certain beasts of the bottomless pit do hinder
them, by putting all the parts of the materials of the House in such a mixture
of confusion, that many who have least policy, cannot easily find the true
piece that is to be laid next in the building: And some other of them do know
the right pieces, but will not confess which they are, because they would
hinder the other builders, that so they may take some of the parts of it, and
build little caves for their own private profit and gain; My pains herein,
is to describe the true parts of this frame, and to lay them in order ready for
those that are the true builders, and to unmaske the counterfeit builders, (or
rather, the pullers of it down) as also to help the weak in judgment, who
can scarce know the right piece, or true part of the building, because the
smoakie flame has discolored it: I do persuade my self, if this could well
be done, we should soon build peaceably, lovingly, and in a godly
uniformity, though some peevishness would be still amongst many, because they
have suffered some loss since this flame began.

My endeavor is to show what the Church of Christ in the largest sense, does
consist of, and who ought to feed them, and who ought to ordain those Pastors;
and where, or how they should dwell, and many particular Points that are in
difference betwixt the Presbyterialists, and those that dissent from them in
the government of the Church, etc.

If you think me too tart in my passages, I pray consider with me, that the
government of the Church is no light fly; it is either a great happiness if it
be in a good frame, or a great misery if it be in confusion, we have experience
of it too much already.

Secondly, my sharpness is not intended to any, but to those that deserve it,
to others it is not meant.

Thirdly, I believe that rational men, and single-hearted, will not much
dissent from me in those things which I have labored to prove and maintain for
truth.

Fourthly, I am ready to receive a confutation in any thing wherein you can
with either Scripture or Reason confute me; provided, that you do not argue
against Scripture, where a Babe may not only read, but as easily conclude what
is truth.

Sixthly, perhaps my plainness in phrase and method may dislike some that have
more learning in the Tongues, and other Liberal Arts to display truth with, I
entreat them to note what my end is in this my pains, not to come with
excellency of speech, if I had it, I aim at truth of matter, for it is that
which we have need of in these times.

Seventhly, I believe that they are the vulgar sort of people that have most
need of help in these Points I treat of; for the Learned I hope, there are not
many of them that do much miscarry in these things, nor will dissent from the
substantialls in them.

Eighthly, if I chance to come out a second time, it may hap I may sore higher
then some look for, but I would first appear to the weakest, for they are
those that the wolves do watch to make a prey of chiefly; therefore I would
endeavor to secure them, and then I pass very little to meet with both Fox,
Wolf, and all the Frogs of Rome: And so much I believe you will conclude upon,
when you see their skins so pulled about their ears, as in this Book they
lie, if a course be but timely taken with them, they will rather be gone from
us, then stay to be so mangled, as here they be.

Ninthly, I entreat you to be advised by me in this one thing, especially,
viz. when any Point is treated upon in any Book, wherein the Text to prove a
Doctrine by, is not expressed at large by the Author, but the place named by
figures only, there take good heed lest you (too soon) make a conclusion of a
(supposed) truth, before you look in the Text it self; for many Writers do
not rehearse the sentence it self, but name the place, and so go on in
argument with it; and many times the Reader makes a conclusion as the Author of
the book do conceive to be the truth, although it be many times false;
therefore it were good that all Writers would rehearse the sentence of the
Scripture they quote to prove any thing by, at least in a matter that is of any
great weight, as in this Book I do. Another thing I entreat of you, which is
this, that you will read seriously, and mind only that you read (free from
distraction or trouble of mind) as you read; and read through a Point from the
beginning to the end, when you read. And when you have a Book, whose matter is
sure Divinity, and short for memory, and plain for capacity, keep that by you
to view continually.

I entreat the Reader to accept of this my good will to do him good, and by
his so doing, I shall be well satisfied; and be ready in any way I may or can
be able to be

Your Servant George Palmer.
Canterbury, June 11. 1647.
Sectaries unmasked and confuted.
NO separation ought to be in the Church of Christ, nor divisions, or
forsaking the assemblies of our selves together in the public Ordinances of
godly and religious exercises; The Texts a^ named.
Romans 16. 17. Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I
beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And in
Chap. 3. 3. Ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is among you envy and
strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal? etc. And Heb. 10. 24, 25. Let us
consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works: Not forsaking
the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, etc. 1 Cor.
12. 24, 25, 26. God has tempered the body together, having given more abundant
honor to that part which lacked, that there should be no Schism in the body,
but that the members should have the same care one of another, that they should
suffer one with another. By all these places of Scriptures it does appear that
the Church should have no divisions, viz. Christ's body: I say it should not
have divisions; for although at some times it had some divisions, yet the
Apostles did always endeavor to reclaim them from such divisions, as you may
see by these texts of Scriptures here now quoted. Question, wh^^ divisions
thos^ were, to be examined.
But it is to be now considered, what kind of Divisions those were (at least
chiefly) that the Apostle does disclaim, which was amongst those members he
then did dehort these Corinthians from: and how far he then (for the present)
did (condescending to their weakness) permit them liberty of conscience; for,
as I said, he did endeavor to settle them in one way of religious exercises
void of division, though (for the present) he permitted them some liberty of
conscience in some things that were of least concernment, and not destructive
to the whole Body, or endanger it to an absolute confusion; And to this end, I
will first look over the Texts already quoted, and produce what I am able from
them; and after that produce Reasons to show the inconveniences that comes by
the divisions that are amongst Christians in their religious exercises. The
inconveniences of divisions promised to be observed.
Briefly, and also the happiness that we may attain unto by a godly unity in
affection; and next after I will by Arguments endeavor to show, that this
unity in affection is much forwarded by a uniformity in religious exercises,
The excellen^ie of godly u^ity.
where it may be attained in a warrantable way; and next, whether we may not
now in these our days attain unto these things, This unity is much forward^d
by a uniformity.
without offending (at least much) any (good) conscience though weak. And then
I will hang forth some signs or characters by which we may collect which
party is in most fault in their conversations between those that stand for the
Presbyterialists government, And whether we may not ar^^in it now.
(or at least nearest it) and those that dissent from it, and proceed to the
Independent ways, which they call Congregationall, The hinderers of this
uniformity to be ex^mined.
that so we may by that means see our hearts more clearly: For doubtless many
of us that are assured that we have some goodness in truth in us, are not so
forward and apt to espy our sinister ends, or by-respects; and that it is a
great trial to a man (who having once interessed himself to maintain an
opinion) to undergo a disgrace by renouncing it afterward, ^t's a great trial
^o them that ^ave once inte^essed themselves in an op^osing way, to ^eforme
from (...), though con^inced, because ^f disgrace.
though he be convinced in his judgment; And I will briefly note some things
that may move us to give God the glory, and our selves take some shame, seeing
we all deserve it. And lastly, endeavor to persuade those that stand for the
Presbyteriall government to embrace those (that renounce the other ways, or
any sins whatsoever) without casting their sins in their teeth; for, in many
things we sin all. The first Text quoted, is, Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you
Brethren, Motives to the ^ontrary: ^erswading those that stand ^^r the
Presby^erians to im^^ace them etc.
mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which
ye have learned, and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own belly and by good words and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple. The scope of these Texts, is, to prevent divisions in
the Church of these Romans which in some was already begun, and that division
was in their not assembling themselves according to the Apostles institution,
and that in some pretense, The text ex^mined and ^bserved.
that all that Paul had taught, was not an absolute truth, for they divided
contrary to the doctrine, which they had received (says the Text) (for in some
case a man may divide, but he must have some warrantable cause) but the end of
this their division was not to serve Christ Jesus, but their own bellies; (for
so says the Text) and this must be done in or by some fair colorable
demeanor, viz. good words, and fair speeches (says the Text) but all this was
but to deceive, (says the Apostle) and because they could not delude the wise,
therefore they would tamper with the ignorant, (for so says the Text) they
deceive the hearts of the simple; from hence I note also, that these were false
Teachers, that did make this division for their own private gain; viz. to suck
from the poor silly people, in way of pretense to teach them the truth (for
they did it to serve their belly.) You shall see more of them in some of the
next Scriptures following. The next Scripture quoted, was 1 Cor 1. 10. Now I
beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. In this
Scripture the Apostle persuades these Corinthians, from division amongst the
common hearers there, (chiefly at least) and shows some cause of it in them,
and that was for want of a mind and judgment well informed, and therefore they
did much contend with each other, as in the 11 verse you may see. And therefore
they were partial in respecting and affecting of their Teachers without just
cause; (for those Preachers were so knowing, that they did not differ in their
judgments in those things they taught) but this was their carnality in
affecting the Preacher more for his wisdom in words and phrases, etc. rather
then for the truth of matter, (as is very likely and clear in the 17 verse)
for there he says he did not preach the Gospel with wisdom of words, (that
is, chiefly) lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect. But by
what has been observed here chiefly for our purpose, is, that there ought to
have been no divisions amongst them, seeing there was no cause; and in Chap. 3.
ver. 3. he did also forbid divisions, and tells them the reason of it, viz.
they were carnal, and looked upon their Teachers more then to Gods word and
working by the Ministry of their Preachers, as is to be seen in the fifth
verse: and truly I must note one thing more from the words of the third verse,
and that is this; The reason why men have not their judgment better informed,
is, because they do not renounce their carnal corruptions, for the more a man
desi^eth to renounce his corruptions, the better understanding he shall have in
the Word of God; Ye are carnal, said he. But I pass to the two other
Scriptures named, for they are those which I do most intend for my (chief)
purpose. The text proper to the point intended, viz. not to forsake the
assembling, etc.
The first of them is Heb. 10. 24, 25. these are the words of the Text, Not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, etc.
In this verse the Apostle pre-admonisheth them to beware that they be not
drawn away from their public Assemblies in their godly exercises by the
examples or enticing of some that had already forsaken them. By the Apostles
expression in this verse it seems those that did forsake, did not show forth
any notorious evil aim or end, (for the present) wherefore they did forsake
the assembling of themselves together with those that the Apostle here
forewarneth, therefore those might have some close colorable pretense, which
as yet did not break out, but some evil aim they had, for the Apostle notes
them and forewarneth the rest, Selah. Surely, it was an evil in them, (for the
Apostles Constitution was good in the government he had established amongst
them) it seems here also that amongst the Church of God divisions are naught,
for the Apostle endeavors the contrary, what ever the intent be of those that
forsake and divide without some apparent and weighty cause. The chief text or
illustration
The next place is 1 Cor. 12. 24, 25, 26. I will name but part of the first
verse, and then all the rest; these are the words, God has tempered the body
together, having given more abundant honor to that part which lacked, that
there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the
same care one of another; And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer
with it; or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it; the
Apostle in these verses excellently alludeth to the body of a man, to show the
constitution or frame of Christ's mystical body, viz. his Church on earth,
that, as the body of man consists of diverse members, so does the Church of
Christ, and have their several offices of care and good performances one unto
the other, and if any member suffer, the residue are sensible of its wants of
prosperity; and if it be well and healthful, the residue of the members of
the body rejoice with it, because the honoring of one member is the honoring
of the whole, (as a gold-ring on the finger, is esteemed an ornament to the
whole body) etc. Thus it is with the mystical body of Christ, (says the
Apostle in ver. 27, 28.) they are to take care one of another, as the corporal
body of man, the which it cannot do if it be divided member from member;
therefore (says the Apostle in ver. 24.) God has tempered the body together,
etc. and in ver. 25. he tells us, that the end of Gods joining the members
together thus, is, that there should be no Schism in the body, but that the
members should have the same care one of another; thus it is with the mystical
body of Christ, if the members be divided, then is the body (spiritual)
weakened, and in great imperfection and danger, especially if many members be
either lame, or quite divided from it. ^he Doctrine ^ncluded on.
Thus you see by all these Texts of holy Scriptures, that Schisms, Divisions,
and forsakings the Assemblies (of Gods people) in the only way of Religious
exercises is utterly forbid, and the Reasons (in some particulars) also rendered
by the Apostle in the words of this 12 Chap. of 1 Cor. 24, 25, and 26 verses:
Now next I am to perform three things which I have promised you, before I come
to the Goliath and his younger brethren, and of these three things I will be
brief, The first Reason to prove that such divisions are naught; it estrangeth
their affections
(for I long until I come to the main ones.) The first is, to show by Reasons,
That divisions in godly exercises of our Religion, do occasion great
inconveniences to the Church or children of God; First, it estrangeth and
weakeneth their affections one toward the other: this we have experience of
enough already on both sides, amongst us in these days: I shall not need to
use many words to cause you to conclude with me this truth, for by our
divisions in some points of doctrine, and much more in the government of the
Church, and the several ways that several persons and Congregations steer;
the Church is divided or weakened in their affections. 2 Reason, it causes an
evil opinion of each other.
Secondly, by these divisions there is produced an evil opinion one of
another, whereupon one is jealous of the other, lest the one do circumvent the
other in his way, which he has resolved to walk and rest in, (for all men in
every way in Religion, accounts his one way best, and therefore thinks him not
so good as himself that differs from his ways) whereupon (upon small
occasions) they will be ready to flout and scoff at each other, and to fall at
length to blows perhaps too. 3 Reason, it occasious Civil wars.
Thirdly, when our affections are so weak toward each other, then Civil wars
are apt to be amongst us, for every one will be jealous lest the other would
rob him of, or divert him from that which he accounts so precious in his own
way of Religion. 4 We are liable to a common enemy, etc.
Fourthly, when we be so much divided, then we are liable to be a prey to a
common Enemy. Fifthly, by divisions (in these kinds) we are liable to have
Teachers of diverse errors, to a farther confusion in Religion; 5 Errors will
hereby be increased, etc.
for the several preachers of the Word of God, that are Preachers to so many
several sorts of Sects, will be as strange to each other themselves, so that
they will not meet to confer together about Religion (or at least but few
together) because there are but few of many Sects, that are of good ability in
knowledge (as Preachers) and so they will be the more unable to know and
preach the truth to the people. 6 We shall have little restraint of evil, etc.
Sixthly, there will be little power in any to punish or restrain those that
are to be restrained or punished, because the State will be so divided both in
opinions and several Companies: in sum, we shall be an absolute Babel. The
next in order (which I promised you) is the benefit or happiness which we may
attain unto by a godly unity in affection; I hope much need not to be said of
this, for all people have experience of it (unless fools and little Infants,
etc.) but yet something of it I will note in particular. ^he benefit ^^at comes
by a ^^dly unity.
First, I will (in sum) conclude in this truth, that the deprivation of
inconveniences is an enjoying of happiness; for if that which is evil be
taken away, there remains that which is good, and so says Solomon in these
words, Take away the dross from the silver, and there remains a vessel for
the refiner. We shall then be joined in our affections to love each other,
the which will have joined to it a good opinion of each other, and this is in
holy Scripture called the staff of Beauty; Neither shall we be so jealous of
each other with an evil suspicion, nor fall to blows, nor jars, nor Civil
wars. For then we shall be joined together in one, and be a staff of Bands;
and being so, we shall the less fear a Common enemy; then shall our
Preachers meet, advise, and confer together, for to be the better able to
teach us the truth, yea, they and we shall be so amiable to each other, as
that they will be encouraged to watch over us with joy, and not with grief,
the which will be (not unprofitable, but) profitable unto us; then we may
retain a power to restrain errors, Heresies, and stubbornness in evil; (In
sum) I say, we shall not be a Babel of confusion, but as a flock of doves or
sheep, by this blessed unity in godliness, here in this world, and attain
everlasting bliss after this life ended, in heaven with God and his holy
Angels. One point more I have to wade in, before I come to the Hydra and his
young ones; And that is this, viz. (...) godly unity (...) affection is ^uch
forwar^ed by a law^^ll uniformi^^e in divine ^rdinances.
That a godly unity in affection is much forwarded by a lawful uniformity in
divine Ordinances. I hope I shall not need to trouble my self nor the Readers
hereof with many arguments to make this good, seeing we now are taught it by
woeful experience, (by the want of it) but yet I will begin with an authentic
Scripture, and that is in matter of Religion, for that is it which most
occasions either unity, (if we well comply together) or divisions, if we
dissent from others in it, (for we esteem that best, which we think will most
advantage us) for men do not usually strive much for chafe or dross, but for
wheat, gold, silver, or pearls, or such like things. This Scripture is Heb.
10. 24, 25. these are the words, Let us consider one another to provoke unto
love and good works, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as
the manner of some is; but exhorting one another, etc. Let us, said he, (we
who are not disunited in our way of our godly exercises of Religion) provoke
one another to love and good works; as if he should say, We who are not
divided from each other in our ways of godly exercises, are not divided in our
assemblies, whereby we may be helpful one to each other, in provoking each
other to love, (that is, unity in affection) and good works. And that this is
the true genuall sense of the verse, it will appear in the next verse, where
he dehorteth them from forsaking the assembling of themselves together, as the
manner of some then was. In which words you may see that some (having forsaken
the uniformity in those godly exercises, which these that are here exhorted did
perform) had forsaken their assemblies also, and therefore had lost this good
opportunity which these in ver. 24. had (that is to say) to provoke unto love
and to good works; you may know by experience, that what one man disliketh in
another, does cause so much the less love or liking in him toward that man in
whom he imagines something worthy of his dislike; for the true proverb is,
Like loves its like, and the more they fail in their likeness, the less
they love: and this holds in every thing that is esteemed good, and the more
good the matter or thing is accounted by one party, and disliked by the other,
the more will their affections of love be abated, especially in mankind, and
much more in divine things and heavenly ordinances. Now I come to the chief
Masterpiece, or Goliath with his armor-bearer: Whether we may not attain^ to
this uniformity in a warrantable way.
And that is, Whether we in these our times may not attain to this uniformity
in a warrantable way, without much offending any good conscience, (though
weak) that so we may attain to this unity of affection in godliness, and
thereby attain to the happiness I spoke of, both in this life and the world
to come sempiternally. And I will name some points of Doctrine which those that
stand for the Presbyteriall government (or nearest it) do hold and maintain,
the which those that do dissent from us do oppose, some of them in one point,
and some of them in another point, etc. the which points are not (amongst most
of us) held to be fundamentalls of our Religion, as in truth they are not;
that is to say, both parties (if honest and true hearted in the fundamentalls)
may be saved without them: (if they could hold and continue so to the end of
their days, and their seed also successively) But those things we differ in
are such as are to maintain and preserve us in those fundamentalls chiefly, and
without which we cannot long stand upon them, but shall fall off: And these
points do chiefly concern the government of the Church, and diverse particulars
in the demeanors or manners in the same; The chief points named.
as also, who ought to be accounted worthy to be esteemed a member of the
Church, and accordingly received to be of the company and partakers of the
ordinances belonging to the Church. Therefore I will name so many points, as I
have heard differenced between those that are for the Presbyteriall government
(or nearest it) and their opposites, (and perhaps I will insert a few more
points too) and produce what Scriptures I can remember to clear the truth of
the points, and bring diverse Reasons for some points too, by which means many
may not pretend liberty of conscience without just cause, and bring ruin to
the whole body spiritual: To name these points in order (strictly) I will not
promise content to every one: The first chief Point aimed at viz. who are the
Church, etc.
And first for the Church, viz. Who are it: To this I answer, in strict
knowledge of it, none but God can tell; but so far as the Scriptures give us
light to see, so far we are to conclude in a charitable esteem, and that is
thus, Those that profess to be saved by faith in Christ Jesus (according to
the fundamentalls contained in the Word of God) and are partakers of his
ordinances, and frame their lives according to his commandments. Now herein we
differ much about this latter part, the Independents and we Presbyterialls. The
Presbyterialls say, that there be diverse degrees of sanctification, which in
some is more, and in some is less, yea, so little in some, as that they do
but eschew the habitual acting of capital sins in their outward demeanors to
man's view, (so to speak comparing one sin to another) as those the Apostle has
laid down as a rule for us to be guided by in this particular point now in
hand, viz. to judge and account of a fit member (in some degree) of a Church,
as we may see in Ephesians. 5. 5. These are without the pale of the Church.
No whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, which is an idolater,
has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, nor such like, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
But the Independents, or (as they will rather be called) the Congregationall
party, they hold, that except there be a more greater and more larger or
stricter walking in the ways of God, there can be no conclusion made that
those persons have any saving grace in them at that time, and therefore not to
be received as members of a Church, but that if they will be esteemed members
of the true Church, they must have such godly exercises in their families in a
more demonstrative degree and manner, then do appear to be in them that are
for the Presbyteriall government, (for the more part) and more zealous and
frequent in the exercises of divine ordinances, or else they are not to be
received as members of Christ's mystical body. Now to decide this question, I
will bring diverse Scriptures to prove, that there were diverse sins, and diverse
sorts of sins both of omission and commission amongst the true believers, not
only in the time of the old Testament, as the sins of David a man after Gods
own heart, (as the Scripture terms him, and diverse others also of good
report:) but in the Primitive Churches, What corruptions were in those that
were believers in the Apostles time.
in the Apostles time. And first I will begin in 1 Cor. 3. 1. to 5. these are
said to be carnal and addicted to strifes etc. and yet they are called babes
in Christ; Heb. 5. 12, 13. these are such as are said to have need to be taught
again the first principles of the oracles of God, etc. they were not capable of
strong meat, but had still need of milk, (viz. babes diet) for they were still
babes, these were relapsed in part, yet Christian babes; Col. 3. the former
verses, These had their affections too much set upon the things of this life; 2
Pet. 1. 5, 6. these must then add to their faith, virtue, and to virtue,
knowledge, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. to the end of ver. 6. and also ver. 10, 11.
these are wanting in knowledge and holiness, and were addicted to carnal
lusts, to uncleanness, and to fraud and deceit, (as too many professors are
now adays.) 2 Cor. 7. 1. these were exhorted to cleanse themselves both of
flesh and spirit too; 1 These. 3. 12, 13. these were to increase in love one
toward another, and toward all men, that God might establish their hearts
unblamable in holiness; Chap. 5. 23. here the Apostle prays for these, that
God would sanctify them wholly, etc. Heb. 13. 5. these were dehorted from
covetousness; Col. 1. 9. the Apostle prays for these, that they might be
filled with the knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, and that they might be fruitful in every good work; Joh. 17.
17. in this place Christ prayed for his Apostles, that they might be (yet more)
sanctified; And the Corinthians were too much hankerers after fornication and
adultery, as you may see in 1 Cor. 6. 23. to the end of the Chapter, and some
of the former verses also; and in the eight first verses you may see a great
fault in them, reproved by the Apostle, viz. so great a defect of love and good
will each to other, that they went to law one against another, and that before
the (unjust) unbeleevers, yea, they themselves did use fraud to each other, as
in v. 8. appears, and yet these to whom this reproof was given, were
believers, as you may see in ver. 6. By all these Scriptures it does appear,
that many (in the present state of grace) have been charged and reproved for
many sins and corruptions at that time when they were in the faith, and present
state of salvation (yet the Apostle did not make a separation, nor divisions,
nor schisms.) I do not note these faults and defects of sanctification (which
betoken weakness in the faith) to strengthen any in sin, far be it from me to
encourage or comfort any in their persisting in vice; but I would not have any
judge of men too rashly and uncharitably, contrary to the rule of Gods Word,
lest we condemn some to be in the way of damnation, when they are in the
present state of salvation. And from this mistake arises a spirit of
uncharitable and unwarrantable, ^^om those ^remises ari^eth their sepa^ation.
and dangerous separation from all the ordinances and means of salvation (or
at the least the most part of them) by this their blind judging without the
true rule. How shall such weak Christians (beset with corruptions) be helped
and strengthened against their sins and ignorances, if the stronger
Christians separate from them. We that are strong (says the Apostle) ought to
bear the infirmity of the weak, viz. instruct them, exhort them, reprove them,
and allure them by the Word of truth, by the danger of damnation in hell, and
salvation in heaven. Now consider these things, you that are so forward to
censure men so much uncharitably, as to separate your selves from men that are
not worse in their conversation then these men aforesaid were; nay, you
separate from some that are not so scandalous as many of these now quoted were,
and you do debar these and such like men from receiving the holy Sacrament of
the Lords Supper which is due to all Christians, and such as you are to account
so, These were ^^ruly, and yet ^aul gave no order for sepa^ation, but to
^dmonish them ^till.
(they being not worse then these aforesaid, in their outward demeanor) nay, we
are to hope better of some that are worse then these before quoted. See for
this also in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. these are the words, If any man obey not our
Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed;
yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother, as in v. 25, and
in the 6. such a person is named to them also; and in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. are these
words, Warn the unruly: By all these places it does appear, that these were
not to be separated from the Church, for still they were to admonish them as
Brethren, which they were not to do, if they were utterly cast out or
rejected, only they were to estrange themselves from them, that is to say, not
to have so much familiarity as before, or as with those that were not so
disorderly or unruly, but yet admonish him as a Brother still, and thus much
shall suffice for this Point, now thus stretched and tagged.

Now having found a Rule out of Gods Word, The chief Point now follows in
order, concerning the Ministers of the Word. etc.
by which we are to esteem and receive a member of the Church, viz. the body of
Christ, (lest we cast out or reject more lambs of Christ then we shall retain
sheep:) In the next place it is requisite to know who ought to feed them, or
be their most public Teachers, (for although the members of Christ are all to
be helpful each to other, that is, as the Apostle commands, edify one
another) yet the same Apostle did ordain public Preachers over the flocks, as
we may see easily in Timothy and Titus, and diverse other places, and that
successively too, as I shall afterward show in the point for the ordination of
the Ministers of the Gospel: Now for this, I will be brief, thus, they ought to
be the Teachers, Those that are best able, ough^ to be the Teachers.
that are best able, and true Christians, according to the former rule in the
former point, that is, those that are most knowing, and obedient to the will of
God so known, according to the rule which God has given us to judge by, and of
those two properties neither ought to be wanting, but if a man have in some
good measure the latter, and have not the former, viz. knowledge, he then
cannot give strong meat to any; If a Minister have honesty, and want knowledge,
then he^ is dangerous, he will lead men into Errors.
and if such a one be a Teacher, we shall have but babes at the best, yet
(which is worst) he will for the more part be meddling with the matters too
high above his reach, and so lead those whom he teaches to errors and
heresies (as we have too much experience of at this time.) But some may demand,
How if the Preachers have knowledge (in a competent degree) and too little
honesty, he will do much hurt that way by his ill-example, for men live more
by example then by precept, If he want honesty, and have knowledge, how then,
what is to be done then?
(for the more part, (if they be very ignorant especially.) To this I answer
thus, briefly, were it not for the love of God to us, we should have neither
knowledge nor honesty, neither the Preachers nor hearers; therefore we are to
look to God in this point, more especially, for if those that are the people to
be taught, do frame their lives according to that little measure of knowledge
that God does give them in faith and obedience in Christ; Yet we mus^ not
choose a novice, as in 2 Timothy 3. 6.
he then will provide such as shall be both able and honest too, to be their
guides and examples also; however we may not choose a novice, 2 Timothy 3. 6. for
we must take it as a curse of our God to us, It is a punishment of God to us,
when we want fitting Preachers.
when we want such as should be able and honest too, the Scriptures of God do
testify thus much, and thus I prove it, When the people of Israel did
perversely sin against their God, (after long instruction and means of their
edification in the will and word of God) then he did threaten them, and said
thus, By men of other tongues, and stammering lips, will I speak to this
people, etc. as in Esa. 28. 11. and in Ezekiel. 3. 26. it is said thus, I (said
God) will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be
dumb, and shall not be to them a reprover, for they are a rebellious house.
These places are clear for this purpose, that God will send unable Teachers to
a people as a curse to them for their sins against him in time of plentiful
knowledge: and for their sins he did at another time tell them that he would
let them have as bad Prophets in their lives and conversations, to be evil
examples for them, see this in Mich. 2. 11. these are the words, If a man
walking in the spirit of falsehood do lie, saying, I will prophecy of wine and
strong drink, even he shall be the Prophet of this people; and in another
place it is said, There shall be like people, like Priest. And so much for to
prove that, because of the peoples disobedience when they have the Word of God
taught them truly; they shall have evil Teachers as a curse to them, in the
stead of good and fit guides: And now that God will give better Teachers of his
people, when they walk obediently to him, according to his will revealed in
his Word, is also as true; for in a certain place God promised to send them
Pastors that should teach them with knowledge and understanding. And when the
people under King Saul's government were well humbled, and brought down by his
oppressing them; then God heard their cry, and pityed them in their misery, and
provided them a blessed guide and feeder of them with knowledge and
understanding, viz. the kingly Prophet David; thus you may see, that it is the
love of God to us, in giving us able Teachers, the which we shall have when
we live obediently to him with all our hearts, according to his will revealed
in his Word: and thus much shall serve for this Point, viz. Who ought to be
the public Teachers, and also some Objections answered. And I have concluded,
that those that are best able ought to be the public Preachers of the Word of
God to the people.

But now follows in good order another Point, Who ought to ^rdaine the
^reachers of ^^e Gospel.
and this is a special one too, and this point the Independent party, (for
some Congregations at least) and almost all Sectaries are against me in; only
the Presbyterialls are on my side; and this Point is concerning the proving,
allowing, and ordaining these Preachers for the work of this great
Ministration: I shall for this, pitch upon Scriptures in the first place, and
after that confirm the Point by Reasons, and my Reasons will be strong I am
sure; this question is, Who ought to ordain the Preachers of the Gospel. ^he
preachers ^well qualifi^d) ought to ^rdain the mi^isters of the Gospel.
I answer, that chiefly and ordinarily (at the least) the Preachers of the Word
of God ought to do it: and the first Scripture is Act. 14. 23. And when they
had ordained them Elders in every Church, and prayed with fasting, they
commended them to the Lord on whom they believed: for the places where they did
ordain them, you may see in the end of ver. 21. If you doubt whether these
were preaching Elders that the Apostles did there ordain, I must say, that it
is very likely they were: but if not, yet it makes for my point in hand, for if
it belonged unto the Apostles to ordain inferior Elders, then I am sure you
will grant me the other, viz. that they did ordain the preaching Elders, I can
prove it out of other Scriptures plainly, but I know you will not oppose me in
this. But here is another objection, and that is this, although the Apostles
did it, yet we are not to follow that Rule still, unless we had a command left
unto us, so to do for evermore successively. To this I answer, that what the
Apostles did then, was for our imitation in that particular, for they did not
give or leave any other order or rule to us in the Word of God, and therefore
we must say as Paul said, Whatseever was written, was written for our
instruction. Titus was to ordain elders for the ministry of the Gospel.
But I will proceed to other texts, Titus 1. 5. to the end of ver. 9. these are
the words, For this cause left I thee in Cre^e, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I have
appointed thee. That these were preaching Elders which Titus was to ordain (or
at least some of them) is apparent in verse. 7. for those that in ver. 5. Paul
had called Elders, he in this verse called Bishops; now in that Titus was left
to ordain those Bishops, you may see a succession of the ordination of
Preachers of the Word of God, by the Preachers of the Word of God; The ministry
of the Word of God, was to be committed to those that Timothy could find fit to
be the Teachers of the people.
and 2 Timothy 2. 2. you may see what Paul commanded Timothy; these are the words,
The things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man; neither be partaker of other men's sins, keep thy
self pure; here you may see a second succession of the ordination of the
Ministers of the Word of God, by the Ministers of the Word of God, for now
Timothy must commit the doctrine or the word of God to others that he could
find able and fit to teach others also: the word commit carries weight with it,
and signifies the leaving in trust (as it were) the Word of God, to their
dispensation to whom it was to be so committed; The reason why Timothy shall
ordain etc.
here you may see that the common hearers were not to ordain the Preachers of
the Word of God, and the true reason thereof is rendered in 2 Timothy 3. 10. in
these words, Thou have fully known my Doctrine, etc. it seems Paul knew well,
that those that were best able in knowledge, were the fittest to ordain the
Preachers, and they were most knowing men, that were then the Preachers of the
Word of God; and farther Paul gave him a Rule whereby he might know who were
those fit men to be the Preachers of the Word of God, as you may see in 1 Timothy
3. to the end of ver. 13. whom in ver. 1. he called Bishops, yea, he had
characters given him, Timothy did choose Deacons also.
whereby he might know how to choose fit and able Deacons also, as in ver. 8,
9, 10. are to be seen, and they did use to lay hands on them that they ordained
for the Ministry of the Word of God at that time, They used to lay hands on
them that were ordained.
as in 1 Timothy 4. 14. and in Chap. 5. 22. and 2 Timothy 1. 6. at which time Timothy
had a special gift given him when Paul (or others with Paul) did ordain him to
be a Preacher of the gospel, and also in Heb. 6. 2. Alas, if every one may be
permitted to preach that would do it, we ^hen must needs have a Babel,
therefore they ought to be proved by the Preachers of the gospel before they do
preach. And now I demand of those that would have every Congregation ordain
their own Pastor or Preacher, why those that are in the Synod (or Ministers
like them) should not be the ordainers of men for to be the Preachers of the
Word of God, rather then those that are more ignorant by thousands of
particulars in the Word of God, and so many honest men there too: What, are
they not so? I say they are, and ablest, and honest too; but put case, some
should be thought otherwise, you know that no company of any sort is usually so
entirely good, but that some may be defective; what think you of your selves,
may there not be some worse then others? Nay, may there not be hypocrites and
varlets too, if so, then you every way are worse then the learned, and
therefore every way more unfit for to ordain men to be Preachers of the Word of
God. Now a touch of one thing more, and then I will pass to another point, and
this is somewhat differing from the former, but I will join them together, and
that is this; The Preachers of the word of God were superintendents of other
Preachers in the Apostles time, and this I prove as follows, Some ministers
were superintendents of others too.
1 Timothy 1. 3, 4. where you may see that Timothy was to charge some (that were
already the Preachers of the gospel) that they should teach no other doctrine,
then that which they had received, etc. from the which some had already then
swarved and turned aside to vain janglings, as many do now amongst us in
these days; and in 2 Timothy 2. 14. you may read the like, these are those words,
Charge them before the Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit, but
to the subverting of the hearers; these men, to whom this charge was to be
given by Timothy, are those men that are deciphered in ver. 2. of this Chapter,
that is to say, to those that were already in the ministry of the Gospel, this
authority the Apostle sent to Timothy to exercise toward those Preachers, and
did not send it unto those Preachers directly, this power to give the charge
was seated in Timothy by the authority of the Apostle: and truly if it may not
be somewhat like it now at the least, in some degree, we shall be in great
danger to be distorted upon all occasions, though I can well wish that some
choice men from among the people may be joined with them too, in this
superintendency; for it will give the people great satisfaction from their
fears of an unjust compulsion. This one thing more I will note as the great
cause of our distractions, Some being ordained to be ministers of the Gospel
before they are able, do much hurt.
yea, the greatest of all, (next the peoples sins in general) and that is the
allowing of men, and ordaining them to be Ministers of the Gospel, before they
were fitted for that great employment. Alas, I have seen some in the Pulpit
that have thought a sentence in Latin would have given such a box on the ear,
that it would make an opposer of truth to have the staggers, and if he brought
in a phrase of Greek, it must needs beat him to the earth; but if he produced
some scraps of Hebrew, that would beat him into the earth, so deep, as that he
could never rise more until the general day of resurrection; although the
matter be poor and un^ound Divinity, and his method as bad; I am not against
the knowledge in the tongues, and other Liberal Arts, but honor the learning
of the same; but if they are not better grounded (or at least as well) in
Divinity, what should then the Pulpit do with them? Poor silly ignorant
people come to learn matter whereby they may be saved, and if the Teacher be not
well grounded in Divinity, how can he defend the ignorant from sophistical
and knavish Foxes, and devouring Wolves? The Separatist's objection against our
ministers, viz. they are of the Popes order, etc.
The next point which the Separatists pretend to be unwarrantable in our
Ministers for to ordain Preachers of the Gospel, is, That they are of the
Popes order, and receive their own ordinations from him; it being first and
primarily received of him, and therefore (he being the maintainer of Idolatry
(from whom they had their ordination) they cannot be the lawful Preachers of
the Word of God, and therefore ought not to be the ordainers of the Preachers
of the Gospel. This objection is like a Remora who turns his belly upward, (as
is said) opens his legs, or some such parts of his body, and claspeth about
this goodly Ship of ours, viz the Church, to the hindering of us from arriving
pleasingly and safely to our heavenly Haven. But I will knock him off thus,
first, you cannot prove that (if in case they have their ordination from the
Pope) the Pope at first was absolutely an Idolater, but that he then held the
fundamentalls of the true Gospel, though he then was received as the universal
head of those that subjected themselves unto him: That this may appear a truth
to you, I pray you take a view of a Book called the Apology of the Protestants,
written about the time of the massacre in France, dedicated to the King of
Navarre, in which you may see the Canons of the Pope and Popes at first, and
also those that had been made by succeeding Popes since until that time, and
there you may observe that those Canons that were made by the former Popes, are
so much different from those that have been made since, as that if he would
hold himself to those first Canons of those first Popes, he must then renounce
his Antichristianity and Idolatry, and so join with us, and walk together to
heaven, although it was a sin in him to assume that universal style and power.
But secondly, put case it had been so, yet this makes little for you, for if
they see the evil that he persisted in, and yet themselves hold the
fundamental truths of the Gospel of Christ, (though perhaps tainted in some
particulars) and so part from him to hold to Christ, what is or may be objected
against them for their so doing? shall we condemn them for their forsaking the
badnes of the Pope, and adhering to the goodness of the truth of Christ? God
forbid; Nay, I will say more in their behalf, they have converted
(instrumentally) many thousands to the true faith by their Ministry, and built
them up in it also, which is a sign that they were true Ministers of the Gospel
of Christ, and thus much the Apostle avoucheth in these words in one of his
Epistles, 1 Cor. 9. 2. If I am not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am
unto you, The true sign of a minister of God.
for the seal of our Apostleship are ye in the Lord, etc. It seems there were
some such Jesuiticall tricks in some of his adversaries, at that time, who were
subtle prevaricators, or dangerous Sectaries; from such cunning foxes, and
barking dogs, good Lord deliver us; I condemn not all, there may be honest men,
but yet deluders must needs be there; And so much for this Point, with this
conclusion, viz.

Where we had one was bad before,
If this remain, you will have a score.
Now seeing I have found out a Church, according to the Rule the Apostle has
left us to esteem and judge the Church by, (for secret things belong unto the
Lord:) And also who are fittest to feed, or to be the Preachers of the Word of
God to it: and who are to ordain those that ought to be their Preachers (at
least chiefly and ordinarily) with other Points (as younger sisters to those
chief Points:) Now it follows in the next place for me, Where it is fittest the
Church of Christ should dwell, or how near to each other, viz. together.
to view out a habitation for them, viz. where it is fittest they should dwell,
or in what order, manner, or fit accommodation they should be in. I shall be
very brief in this, especially if I do not meet with some ravening wolves in
the way, who perhaps will think that I am laboring to prevent them of their
prey. In brief thus, they ought to live near together, both shepherd and
sheep, for convenience, that so in the first place they may have more familiar
acquaintance one with the other, thereby performing neighbourly duties each to
other, knowing thereby so much the better each others wants, and accordingly
accommodating themselves the better together in the more frequent exercise of
edifying themselves in the truth, by the admonishing of themselves in the
principles of Religion, (though not in things too high for their intellectual
faculties, (for that more chiefly is the public Pastors duty,) And also in the
accommodating themselves in these outward comforts of the things of this life.
And it is fit that their Preachers of Pastors should live amongst them also,
that so they may the better view and know the state of their several flo^ks,
The Preacher ought to live among, or very near those he is to be the Preacher
unto, etc.
that they may give them their meat in due season, as they are able to digest
it, (for some must have milk being babes) and some (at some times) may be able
to concoct and digest stronger meat; and also that he may keep out wolves the
better, that would devour the flock; and thieves that would rob them of their
fleeces, and especially in cold weather, viz. when they cannot well spare it;
and that they may the better maintain their own Pastors or Teachers, that so
they may have a maintenance for themselves and their families, and provide some
portions for their children, yea, leave their wives some better maintenance
after their death, (if they chance to survive them) and not leave them in want
to their grief and disgrace; yea, their Pastors or Teachers should have to give
to those that want, viz. to the Poor especially, that so he may be a good
example to his flock, and so be well encouraged to take care of his flock with
joy, and not with grief; because that will be unprofitable for themselves, viz.
the flock. Not like some that would have them live any where scattered abroad
as sheep without a shepherd among them, somewhat like some in some times, whose
Pastors would have them come from every quarter; yea, and to allure them to
them from other their faithful watchers and feeders that are abler then
themselves, yea, draw as many as they can get from all parts, under pretense
that their Pastors are not able to teach them truth, nor that they are lawfully
called to be Preachers of the gospel unto them, and so discourage them in the
Ministry of the gospel, and deprive them of a maintenance for their
livelihood, The peoples Preachers are undone by others that draw their flocks
from them.
and their wives and children; they thus occasioning such people with fair
words and insinuations to approach too often (as is said) to their boles or
basins or such like thing, or some other thing in stead thereof; which if this
be, and be permitted long time together, they will (as perhaps some of them
hope) ere long have as great sums of money, as some whom they have condemned for
having too much. And further, what (think you) will become of the residue of
the poor sheep, And the residue of the poor sheep must starve.
left in all those parishes, from whom these were thus allured? they must
starve, for their Pastors or Teachers have not wherewith to live, therefore if
they stay there still, many of them may starve, and hunger you know is a sharp
sauce, surely they must leave the rest of the flock, and then that remnant of
the flock must starve for want of spiritual food; and this will occasion them
to be more wicked, to the dishonor of God, and their own damnation, and the
perverting of the whole kingdom. Judge now if this way of the Separatists be
not a dangerous way, thus dividing without just cause, doubtless this is a sin
that will be closely laid to their charge that are the workers of it; therefore
if you will do it still, cause them then to allow to their own Pastors that
are able and honest (in some competent degree) their own maintenance, and this
you may easily do, by not suffering them to follow you, or be of your company,
unless they will do this their duties to their own Pastors or Teachers, that
so you may not be thought to have silver colored fingers, The Monster.
and golden colored hearts. But me thinks I spy a monster now appearing,
arising out of the bottomless pit, with a foxes head, and a crocodiles heart;
its heart had a dark superscription on it, hard to be read (but that God gives
some some ability in times of great danger to discern it) but looking wishfully
upon it, I discerned it to be anagrammatticall, and then I knew how to read
it, and the word was (as I had put the letters in their due place)
Covetousness; As for his head, I did read presently what that did portend or
foreshew, I knew there must be subtlety, I bethought my self of this mystery,
and thus interpreted it (summarily.) This Monsters heart whose name is
Covetousness (in the mystery) does employ his foxes head to prevent this fair
accommodation of the Church, which I am now working with my pen, and me thought
he presented to me an objection, to prevent my diverting of him of his ungodly
(and kingdom-destroying) gain; The objection against a National Church.
and that was this as follows, viz. you cannot prove that there is any
promise that a National Church is to be any where, at least not now under the
gospel; Upon this me thought I soon understood his head, and the Anagram of his
heart also, and then I compared them together, and easily and truly knew him to
be one of Baalzebubs crew; and from that conclusion I quickly drew another, and
that was this, he (that is) this Monster, under pretense of a more purified
Church, (which I wish also (but with a true heart in the sight of God) would in
pleading against a national Church, overthrow parochial Churches, otherwise
he could never have hopes to obtain his desire. Then I bethought of what I had
before concluded concerning the Church of Christ, what it does consist of in
the largest sense, and that is this, Those that make an open profession of
faith to be saved by the merits of Jesus Christ, and declare it in the
partaking of his ordinances, and frame their lives accordingly, viz. do not
habitually act capital sins, though it may sometimes fall out (through more
then ordinary temptation) they be, as it were, overtaken now and then, as David
was sometime one way, and others some another way; These we are to esteem the
Church of God, although perhaps they may not have grace in their hearts, nor
yet be saved; But this is the rule that we ought to be guided by, to esteem of
a supposed member of Christ's mystical Body, until he declares the contrary
by wicked words, or more sinful deeds; for secret things do belong to God
only, and the strict knowledge of the heart is one of those secrets. Thus when
I had noted again this point, I then thought, and was fully satisfied, That
Christ has more members amongst us, in most Parishes, then this Monster did
pretend, although by reason he has much hindered the settling of the government
of the Church with us in the Presbyteriall way (or at least very near that
way.) Many for want of a good discipline and laws to restrain vice, be lame in
their practice of godliness, etc. I then adventured as a Lion (me thought) to
encounter this Monster, and I took the way which my Savior did in the
wilderness, viz. it is written Psalm. 33. 12. Blessed is the Nation whose God
is the Lord, etc. this was spoken of the Jews then the people of God: Genesis 22.
18. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed: Genesis 18. 18.
All the Nations of the earth shall be blessed in Abraham. I know some will not
be satisfied fully with these Texts of Scripture, and I know their objections,
therefore I will produce some other, although I know these are for the same
purpose. Another Scripture says, That Nations stall flow to thee, viz. to
Christ. But let us see what the Lord says by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias,
chap. 55. ver. 5. these are the words, Thou shall call a Nation whom thou
know not, and Nations that knew not thee, shall run unto thee, The Nation
should in the more general profession embrace the Doctrine of Christ.
viz. to Christ; he did not mean that whole Nations should, or would run to
Christ singularly general, viz. not every particular man or woman should be
converted to Christ; but that the Nation should in the more general profession
embrace the doctrine of Christ; and many of them in truth of heart, as the Jews
did at that time, when David the kingly Prophet spoke those words now quoted
out of the 33 Psalm aforesaid, though there be many rebellious Corahs, and
other sinful murmuring people and wicked transgressors amongst these, as there
was amongst those Jews, as they were in the way to Canaan land (the type of
heaven.) And now me thinks this Monster is stopped in his aim and hopes; I
therefore now will proceed to another Point, as I have proved it by Reason and
Scripture, that divisions in the divine exercises of our Religion, is naught
and dangerous to the state of Christians: And also that it is a great
happiness to be united together in a warrantable uniformity in the Divine
ordinances of our Religion; Now I come to prove more particularly what special
decrees and ordinances the Apostles did ordain and appoint for the Churches of
God in the Primitive time, the better to accommodate them in a warrantable
uniformity, The special de^e^s that the Apostles did ^eave with the Churches
for their rule or ^uide.
and thus I prove it, Acts 15. 23. to 31, and 4^. compared with chap. 16. v. 4.
In ver. 23. we may see the Apostles and Elders, and Brethren sent greeting to
the Brethren in Antioch, in Syria, and Cilicia, (these were diverse Churches;)
And in ver. 29. you may see what the decrees were that they had decreed for
them, or at least what some of the decrees were, the which were for (all) those
Churches. And in chap. 16. Paul and Silas going through the Cities, delivered
them the decrees for to keep that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders
which were at Jerusalem. Here we may see, that all those Cities had but one
sort of decrees, as is more then likely, for the Apostles did ordain for
Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia, but one sort of necessary things as in ver. 28,
29. of chap. 15. does appear plainly; the which Paul and the rest delivered to
those in Antioch, as in ver. 30. appears, and afterward they came to Syria
and Cilicia, as in ver. 41. you may see, and those ordinances did much confirm
the Churches, as you may see in the last words of this 41. ver. aforesaid; and
in ver. 5. of chap. 6. also; surely uniformity in the truth is a means of
confirmation and unity of affection; and in 1 Cor. 7. 17. Thus ordain I in all
Churches; in this place the Apostle resolves some questions to the Corinthians,
and puts them and other Churches into one uniformity, as is clear by the
words of the text, viz. Thus ordain I in (all) Churches, and so in 1 Cor. 16.
1, 2. As I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do ye; there
was a uniformity in providing for the poor. Thus we may see the blessed Apostle
did endeavor uniformity in all the Churches of God, I wish the like practice
were amongst us in these days, viz. uniformity in godly ways. But some may
demand a question, if the Apostle did not sometime in some cases give leave to
Christians in case of Conscience for want of true knowledge in some
particulars, Some cases of Conscience.
to do, or not do. It Is true, he did so, but not in those things that were of
any danger to the state of the Church or Churches, for those that were weak in
knowledge for the present, that they might not sin against their conscience in
eating of herbs, by him that did think he might not eat flesh; and likewise to
celebrate service to God upon some special day or days rather then in some
other days, (provided that they did not do it as having respect to the old
types or shadows) that did foreshew the coming of Christ, the substance, lest
they either be entangled with justification by works, or else in stead of
relying on the true Christ already come, should (as the Jews do now) look for a
Jesus to come, as he is already come: But this liberty the Apostle did not
confirm to be as a law always for them to rest on, as not to seek for better
assurance of knowledge therein, for he at that time did show the very legs of
that statue, in these words, viz. He that eats herbs is weak, and so said
he of him that should be opinionated about the observation of a day; Not that
which before was to be observed as a type, Gal. 4. 10. but that we may set
apart some days more especially then others for divine exercises, for the
Apostle had done so himself very likely, setting apart the first day of the
week, as in 1 Cor. 16. 2. and as you may perceive by their usual meeting upon
the Lords day, and other days so often spoken of in the Scriptures. But what
is all this to those things that are now in these our days so much pleaded
for? Alas, those things were but flea-bitings, to them that some would have now
adays; shall we give way to such things as are so material, The government of
the Church is of greater weight then (...) etc.
as will ruinate the state of Christians? God forbid, the government of the
Church is of a higher nature, the Apostles did not give toleration in such
great matters; this is the staff of Bands, the which if it be broke, I am sure
the other staff called Beauty, will soon be all to shivers. If all that plead
tenderness of conscience may have liberty as they desire, every one that is
without grace will take up that plea; Do you not think that a very varlet, or
peevish, or perverse man, out of a malignant disposition will plead liberty of
conscience to act mere knavery? If men may have what they list, under pretense
of tender Conscience, then knaves may plead for knavery.
surely yes. I condemn not all, but if men may be allowed to plead, and in
pleading obtain liberty as they list, you will hold them in no good duty: To
speak plain, and short, he that has been a professor of Christianity any
competent time, and yet is pleading for liberty of conscience against those
things that common capacity can fathom, is either a vain professor, or else
his Teacher or guider is to be much suspected; and I fear such Leaders teach
not sincerely, to show what is the truth in those things, A rule to judge by in
some measur^*
but hold men blind for their own advantage, especially if it be any long time
together. But take this for a rule, that if we find a man that is apprehensive
in matters of Divinity in the general, among many things, and yet is defective
in his confession of some truths that are as easy, and of as low a nature, as
those he confesses to be truth, and sensible too, and thus remains a long
time together, such a one is (ungodly) wilful in his way, against his own
conscience, and ought to be dealt withal by force, for he has an obstinate or
malignant spirit; and you may know, that after a man have persisted in sin
wilfully against his conscience, God does then usually blind the eyes of such a
one; yea, sometime the very children of God have some lower degrees of this
blinding (for a time) but the froward much more. These things considered, we
have cause to dislike like confusion, and love a godly uniformity, imitating
the Apostles in the same. But I suppose many that plead so much for diversity
of government, (which is confusion) do not believe that it is the best way for
Christians so to be; but that indeed there is some greater matter lies
couchant in this heap of confusion. And in plain English, I think it is a
blind uncharitableness in many, ^t is wilfulness ^ather then ^enderness of
Conscience.
mixed with malignity in their intellectual faculty and heart together; I would
not have caused my Pen to have drawn this curtain, at this time, but that me
thought I heard one at my elbow, longing to hear something of the cause (in
some measure) of our kingdoms confusion; for some things may be accounted and
esteemed less worthy of so much striving for to maintain this confusion on the
Sectaries part, then some will allow of, although we have no express command
for it; if you think otherwise, why then did the Apostle St. Paul deliver some
things in such general terms, Diverse general precepts are so ^eft to the
Church for small matters.
as he did in 1 Cor. 14. 41. in these words, Let every thing be done decently
and in order? It seems Paul knew well, that those who had any measure of true
knowledge, and true sincerity together, (far from hypocrisy) might be able to
judge what was fit in some things of a low nature, without any strict precept
for every particular wagging ones finger; 1 Cor. 14 43. God is not the author
of confusion but of peace, as in (all) Churches of the Saints, and chap. 11.
44. yea, from the 6. to the end of the 15. these are some of the words, Judge
in your selves, etc. And Phil. 4. 8. are these words, viz Whatsoever things are
comely, etc. And so Romans 14. 17. these are those words, The kingdom of God is
not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; for
he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
all (good) men. It seems that this Apostle had no such intent, as to have
them hazard their peace, or endanger themselves to a Civil war, nor give an
occasion to a forain enemy to break in upon us, nor yet to hinder those that
are without, to stand off the further from being of our true Religion, to their
everlasting damnation. It Is fit we should have some way to restrain those that
make such confusion.
Neither is it necessary to let men alone in their separations and divisions,
for such matters as the government of the Church, (for that is of a high nature)
lest their leaders (viz. some of them) do make the divisions so great (in time)
that there will be no power to reclaim them: therefore those things that you
know not, and therefore have scruple in your conscience concerning them; You
should (to satisfy your selves therein) ask of your Teachers: But because it
has been so long time your weakness, and yet is so still, it does cause some
to think, you are either wilfully obstinate, (not all so) or else your Pastors
(many of them) do forbear in policy from revealing them unto you, Whether
their leaders do no^ hold them in these errors o^ purpose, etc.
lest you should forsake them and join with those that are on the Presbyteriall
way, which (for the more part) are the most knowing men: And truly it is a
great sign that the Sectaries are the weakest in knowledge in Divinity, because
(as it is reported) most of the women-kind bends that way. If these things
be not so, then I will tell you what the next apprehension is, (as many say
and absolutely conclude) and that is this, There are some Preachers that lead
the silly weak people in this way into by-corners, because they want ability
to give them strong meat, or little better then such as is fit for Babes, Boles
and Basins etc.
and so occasion the building our Babel of confusion with the content they have
in their boles and basins, etc. (as some think and say) to the undoing of the
Parishioners lawful Pastors, and occasioning and hindering those Ministers
that are able for the work of the Ministry of the Gospel from undertaking the
cure of souls, and perhaps to the undoing of those so blindly led by them, and
the starving of the souls of those inhabitants that remain behind in those
Parishes too. The Sectaries answer, to maintain his drawing of inhabitants to
him, and leaving the rest toget^^ what they can, and where.
I know what objection some subtle head will make to this my latter assertion,
but I will prevent him, because I would not have him show forth openly his
weakness or subtlety to his shame, or else his wickedness to his open
condemnation; his answer is this, those people that have a mind to come out and
hear the Word of God, may, if they will come and follow us, and hear us
preach in our own houses, and sometimes in some other places also, and all of
them may pay us as others do for their coming to us, and hearing of us; and
we will have one free way for it, viz. a common offering. But I answer, by this
means of their alluring them, to their private houses, etc. they keep
themselves from showing what their inabilities are from them that are more
judicious in many points which they teach in private; yea, and by those points,
so in private taught, they hold these silly Lambs to them as they list for
their own sinister ends; making them believe, that those points are of such
concernment, that if they desert from them, as they themselves with mouth
(though perhaps not with heart) do teach, they then are in exceeding great
danger, and then the poor Lambs in stead of safe refuge, are held in the
wolves claws; I hope better of some. And thus much shall serve for this point,
and I hope all honest men will join with me:

Some do invent malignity, with breezes in their ears;
The truth his mouth does so untie, of God he has no fears.
Now in the next place I will treat upon another point in difference between
the Presbyterialls and some of the Sectaries, The Antinomians.
and they are called led Antinomians: I shall pitch upon Scripture to confute
these, who hold this cursed Tenet; I told you that the last Monster (as I
thought) did arise out of the bottomless pit from Baalzebub, but I think this
is that old Dragon himself; nevertheless I believe, some honest people might
be entangled in this error also, because this has been a time of difference,
in many things among the learned; The first Scripture is, Acts 21. 20. compared
with ver. 24. In ver. 20. you may see, that the Jews that were believers were
zealous of the Law; and in ver. 21. you may easily collect, that they still
observed the old Ceremonial rites and customs from which Paul did dissuade
them in teaching; but in ver. 24. you may see it clearly, that Paul observed
the old moral Law still, for there you may perceive that some had given a
false information of Paul's not observing the Law, (as is very likely) the which
is by those Jews mentioned in this verse, and confessed to be an untruth,
being now better informed, for these are the words of the Text, at the latter
end of it, All may know that these things whereof they were informed concerning
thee, are nothing, but that then thy self also walk orderly, and keep the
Law. Now Paul had always preached down the Ceremonial Law: that were but
types and figures of Christ, etc. therefore it was the Moral Law: and truly,
why not to be observed by us under the Gospel, as well as by the believers
before Christ's coming in the flesh? provided we observe it but as those
believers did, for they used it but as a guide to live honestly by, for
Abraham, Isaac, and all the servants of God recorded in the Scriptures of truth
are said to be justified by faith, and therefore God commanded the Jews that
were believers in the promise of everlasting life, by faith in Christ, in the
time of the Prophet Malachi, to remember the Law of Moses, which he had
commanded in Horeb; these are the words of that text, Remember ye the law of
Moses which I commanded him in Horeb for all Israel, etc. and Romans 7. 14. We
know the Law is spiritual, says the Apostle there, viz. it is suitable to the
pure Spirit of God, by the which our Spirits should be qualified and guided to
thoughts, words, and deeds, and therefore in Matthew. 5. 17, 18. our Savior
Christ forbids us to have so much as a thought, that the Law or the Prophets
should be destroyed, but shall continue till all things be fulfilled, (and that
will not be till heaven and earth be passed away, etc.) Now that he meant the
written Law in this Text is plain, for the words are, Until heaven and earth
pass, the Law shall not pass; But if he had meant the Law only written in
the hearts of the godly, darkly, (for so it is but darkly in the best) then he
would not have said, till heaven and earth pass; for the Law spiritual in the
hearts of those that are to be saved shall be more perfect in them for
evermore. And beside, to put you out of all doubt, see 1 Cor. 9. 21. where Paul
confesses ingenuously, That he was then under the Law to Christ, even then
when he was a believer in Christ for salvation; yea, as in Romans 7. 22. he
confessed he did delight in the law of God, after the inner man, but even then
there were some that did slander him in this very point, (as is more then
likely) as you may easily perceive in Romans 3. 31. by his speech there as by way
of vindication; the words are these, Do we then make void the Law through
faith* God forbid, yea, we establish the Law; thus you may see that he did not
null the Moral Law, by his preaching of faith, nor yet by his believing it,
therefore O ye Antinomians detest your cursed Tenet, for the best of us do
see our sins but dimly in our selves; and although the more a man is sanctified
the more he can discern the remnants of his sins in him, yet he cannot see
them all: And you know the less a man is sanctified, the darker he is in his
judgment in the knowledge of sin; to speak plainly thus, we have all (even the
best of us) need of a guide, for God has ordained outward means, as well as
inward, for the edifying of his Saints; And if we retain the Law for a
looking-glass to show us our deformities, and not to be justified by it, what
hurt then is there in the retaining it? It is to us not a curse but a blessing;
but if we reject it, and cast it off from using it, I am sure we shall thereby
procure not a blessing but a curse, therefore beware lest you have unawares
admitted of some Jesuiticall spirits. I will note one thing more out of that in
Mat. 5. 17. viz. that our Savior joins the Law and the Prophets together, and
says, That he was not come to destroy the Law or the Prophets; why will you
understand one of them in the spiritual sense only, and the other in the
literal only? for I hope you will all conclude, that he spoke of the Prophets
in the literal sense, that their prophesies that are written shall last no
longer then the end of the world; therefore it is the Law also that is written
that our Savior meant, and not the Law written in the hearts of his children;
and I hope that in 1 Cor. 9. 21. and also that in Romans 7. and 22. will fully
satisfy any honest man, that is capable of Babes meat; but I fear they hold
another dangerous Tenet, which this latter cursed Tenet does produce, Some hold
that God is not angry*
viz. God is not angry with his children, though they act or commit such
actions or deeds which God by his Moral Law has forbid, as adultery, or
fornication, or theft, or idolatry, and the rest; and consequently, that a man
needs not repent after any such vile actions. To this I answer, that God is
angry with them when they so transgress against him, and also did usually
afflict them sore; see for this, Deuteronomy. 9. 20. the Lord was angry with Aaron,
even to destroy him, in making the golden Calf, although he were occasioned
thereunto, through fear of the peoples doing him some hurt; this evil deed of
Aaron you may see in Exodus 32. 21, 22, and 23. 24, 25. Deuteronomy. 4. 21, 22. Moses
said, That the Lord was angry with him for their sakes, for they occasioned him
to be rash and unadvised in his words; as in Psalm. 106. 32, 33. And he smote
the Rock in a rash anger, and therefore God was angry with him, Deuteronomy. 3. 26.
and 2 Chronicles. 19. 1. Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord; for my
part, I do conclude with Saint Paul, and say, I am under the Law to Christ, 1
Cor. 9. 21. for he, in (almost all) his Epistles brings some of the Moral Law
against them, dehorting them from sins contained in it*

As for this Moral Law, it brings to us no curse,
That Rule may still us awe, and we be never the worse.
Now in the next place (having found a Law by the which we ought to walk by as
a guide to us) we are to encounter with another enemy, and this is one that
would run where he pleases, and do what he list without control, and this I
thought came so fierce as though he came from Bedlam, for he seemed to be a
stark mad Atheist, for he ran against his captain, ^he use of the ^ivill
Magi^^ate.
Reason, and his lieutenant both together; the points of Divine threats he
labored to blunt, and nothing must restrain him, neither must he be punished
for any of his mad and unruly deeds; he will obey no Law, but what he out of
his inherent devilish inclination thinks fittest, and yet he (being blind)
will not be restrained from dashing himself in pieces: I knew not how, or
which way to meddle with him at the first, until I heard of a pair of stocks,
a cage, a jail, and a jibbet, and then I began to walk a little nearer him,
remembering what (as it is said) a champion once did with a spear (though on
hors-back) his name was called George for England, and when I came near him, I
intending to join battle with him, (as he thought) he began to pause, being
almost weary and out of breath; so then I began to endeavor to persuade him to
a fair and right understanding to the yielding to be ruled by some wholesome
restraint of correction, alleging the authority of Heaven against him; my
first allegation was Deuteronomy. 25. 1, 2. If there be a controversy between men,
and they come into judgment, that the Judges may judge them; then they shall
justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked. And it shall be, that if the
wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the Judge shall cause him to lie down,
and to be beaten before his face, according to his fault, by a certain number
of stripes; and in Deuteronomy. 21. 18. it is thus written, If a man have a stubborn
and rebellious son which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of
his mother; and then when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them,
then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out to the
Elders of the City, and unto the gate of his place; and they shall say unto the
Elder^ of his City, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey
our voice, he is a glutton and a drunkard, and all the men of the City shall
stone him with stones that he die; so shall thou put evil away from among you,
and all Israel shall hear and fear; and in Exodus 32. 26, 27, 28. you may see
that Moses called a host of men to put Idolaters to death, (for those Idolaters
were many at that time) they had a Calfe-god made of gold; and 2 Chronicles. 15. 15.
whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, was to be put to death, (by a
covenant which they then made) therefore they had the use of the Magistrate at
that time also: And surely a compulsive law to make people come to the
ordinances of God (in a kingdom where there is a power seated in the
Magistrate, hereditary, or otherwise (among a people, especially that do
profess the Religion of God, as these in 2 Chronicles. did) ought so much the more
to be used and put in execution, as those laws were in the time of Asa, as in
the place before quoted; and so much you may easily conclude from that of our
Savior, Luke 14. beginning at v. 16. and so forward to the end of v. 24. for
the Jews being invited to the great Supper, made light of it; for which cause
they were rejected of the King, viz God the Father; upon which rejection we
Gentiles were, and are invited, and in case we be unwilling to come to the
Supper, the servants have power put into their hands to compel men to come
into this Feast, (that is to say) the fatted Calfe; Compelling men to hear the
Word of God.
for these are the words of the text, Go out into the high ways and hedges,
and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled, viz. that they may
partake of the ordinances of salvation, and yet all these had not on the
wedding garment, as another of the Evangelists informs us, there was no
strict choice to be made of all that mixed company that were in the highways
and hedges (at first) before they were partakers of the ordinances of God, (so
to speak in the spiritual sense.) If any object, that St. Paul in Acts 19 made
a separation, and therefore we may also separate from them, and not punish. I
answer, that Paul had no power to compel the unbeleevers to submit themselves
to him, neither had he power to punish them for any fault, for he, and those
that were then converted had not the lawful power of superiority; but if the
principal powers of that People had been believers, then they might have
punished the people for not obeying their commands in matters of the gospel, as
well as they then would have done it for any other misdemenor, neither would
the Apostle have forbad them; But when a man comes into a strange place, he may
not exercise any authority of superiority, it belongs to the Magistrate, and if
the Magistrate or Magistrates, (in whom the power is seated, together with the
chief part of the people) will not comply with the gospel of God, nor be
favorable to the believers in Christ, but oppose, and be injurious to the
Professors of salvation by faith in Christ, then may the Saints separate from
the unbeleevers; and we may see in the book of Nehemiah, chapter 13. v. 25. that
Nehemiah did not only curse the Jews with the curse of God, (that is, wished
them some punishment) but he also smote them, and plucked off their hair, etc.
If we were but so wise, as to note the end wherefore punishment was ordained
and appointed by God, to be exercised upon the bodies of men, (for the more
part) we might soon see more clearly then blind men do; for these are the
words at the ends of many Texts of the holy Scriptures, viz. All Israel shall
hear and fear, and do no more so: And again, So shall you put away evil
from among you. But I wish with my heart and soul, that our punishing or
afflicting were such as God appointed by Moses, at least, in most particulars;
Corporal punishment was then the command of God (most ordinarily) and that
without respect of persons, or very little favor to those that were higher
then others, (amongst those that were under the King:) surely men would more
fear and be ashamed of bodily punishment, then of Purse-punishment, for he
that has this worlds goods, makes very light of paying a competent sum of
Money for his offense; but if (as God commanded) they might be otherwise
afflicted, viz. on their bodies, without much partiality, they would forsake
their sins sooner; But this would then hinder the filling of many Purses, and
therefore me thinks I hear their owners crying out against me: but if this were
amended, I hope many that would have now no Civil Magistrates, would then
easily conclude with the Apostle St. Paul, and yield obedience to Principality
and Powers, as in Tit. 3. 1. and Romans 13. 1, 2. and if they will not be a
terror to good works, but to the evil workers, and will be protectors of
those that do well, then I hope many will obey for conscience sake, as in ver.
3, 4, 5. O that all had hearts to say with me this truth. Amen.

The next Point that hinders us and the Independents, ^^ages, Pi^^ures, and
Mo^^ments an of^^nce to the ^^ctaries and ^^esbyterialls ^^c.
and diverse Sectaries from joining in a uniformity in the government of the
Church, is the Images, Pictures, yea, and the monuments of Idolatry, because
they are not more fully taken away, the which causes them to doubt, that
Idolatry will increase in this our Kingdom again, ere long time be. But for
this, I will answer them thus, the Parliament has made a good progress
already against them, and therefore I hope well for time to come, that there
will be some farther progress in this particular; and for my part I will
willingly join with you in this point, and I hope to produce clear Scriptures
for it too, for unless we have a special care to keep Idolatry out, I know
the wrath of God will fall upon us, for that is the sin which our Savior
Christ himself did say would bring desolation: My first Scripture, is Deuteronomy. 7.
25. Burn the Images, covet not the silver nor gold that is upon them, etc. And
Chap. 9. 21. Moses burnt the golden Calfe with fire, and stamped him, and
ground him small even to dust, and cast the dust thereof into the River, and
made the people drink it, (in a holy indignation against them, and the golden
Calfe, as you may see in Exodus 32. 20.) And in 2 King. 18. 4. was the like
zeal of Hezekiah, in breaking in pieces the brazen Serpent, the which was set
up for a good use and end at the first, (but that the people had afterward
Idolatrized to it, and therefore it was broken, to take away, or cut off the
occasion of Idolatry in future time:) And he called it Nehushtan, viz. a piece
of brass, in way of detestation, etc. so that we shall well enough agree
herein, and I hope all honest men will say Amen to this; for see Ezekiel. 43. 7, 8,
9. and there also you may learn, that God would not be appeased toward those
Jews, unless the carcasses of those Kings that had been Idolaters were taken
away, which then lay there as Monuments, etc.

Another Point which those that divided from us are afraid of very much,
Idolatrous Marriages, etc.
is this, viz. lest Idolatry be occasioned to be in this Kingdom, by reason of
the permitting of Idolaters to live amongst us; and some peoples marrying with
those that are Idolaters; The permitting Idolaters to live with us, does offend
Sectaries; and that is no fault in them.
and truly that is some cause to be feared: yet we have good grounds of hope
to the contrary too, for much is amended in this kind already, we may expect a
farther care will be taken herein, by the chief eyes of this our Israel, for
it is a dangerous sin, as we may prove by Scripture and experience too: We will
produce them as follows, the first is Exodus 34. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. in this
place you may see that the Parents of those people there mentioned, viz. the
Jews, might not take the daughters of the Idolaters, (that were Idolaters) to
be their sons wives, nor give their daughters to be wives to their sons, as you
may see in Deuteronomy. 7. 3, 4. And therefore those were to be drove out of the Land
from the people of God, as you may see in Exodus 23. 31, 32, 33. But the people
would not do as God had commanded them, but mixed themselves amongst them, and
(too soon) learned their works, as you may see in Numb. 25. 2, 3, 4. And the
Lord was so fiercely angry with them for this their so doing, that he spoke to
Moses to take the heads of those people, and hang them up against the Sun, that
the fierce anger of the Lord might be turned away from Israel; I pray you see
the place. And by this their mixing with them they learned their works, as you
may see in Psalm. 106. 34, 35, 36. And Ahab was forwarded in idolatry, by
marrying of a daughter of a Zidonian king, for which cause the Lord sent a sore
famine, as you may see in 1 Kings 16. 30, 31. It is such a bewitching sin, that
even wise Solomon himself was led and occasioned to it by such marriage, as you
may see in 1 Kings 1. 2, 3, 4. and therefore he lost ten Tribes of his kingdom
from his son afterward for it. Thus we see how prevalent a thing it is to be
mixed with idolaters, but more especially to have a wife lie in his bosom that
is an Idolater; and see what severity Nehemiah used to the Jews in his time for
this sin, even for such marriages; he did separate them again, and pulled them
by the hair, and smote them for it also, even for this their sin, as in
Nehem. 13. 23. to the end of that chapter. Doubtless his heart cannot be right
with God, that likes Idolaters no worse, then to take of them to be his bosom
friend, and especially in marriage; And Popish Idolaters are worse then those;
If any will say that the Papists are not Idolaters: Papists are Idolaters.
To this I answer, they are worse then many other Idolaters; and thus I close
against them: First, their Images are Idols, which they bow unto, and therefore
their Worship is idolatry, see 2 Chronicles. 33. 7. If they say they do not worship
the Image, but that they worship God by that Image; I say they lie: 1 They
cannot make a resemblance of God. And 2 they cannot prove that ever God
commanded any such manner of Worship. 3 God has forbid the making of such
Images throughout the holy Scriptures, but has commanded his servants to break
them down; and if you look in Zeph. 1. 5. you may see the Jews had intended
some such hodge-podge, for they worship the Lord, and yet they would swear by
their Malchom too; and you may read, 2 Kings 17. 41. that the Israelites at
that time are said to fear the Lord, and yet they then served their Images
too, where you may see clearly, that those Jews pretended to worship God by way
of those Images; and this is just so as our Papists do plead for their
Idolatrous Worship, or Worship by Images; and so in many places in that chapter
aforesaid are the like passages: Where you may see also, that the Lord
threatens them for it; yea, those in Zephany 1. aforesaid, are threatened to be
cut off, as in the former part of that first chapter you may see, in Deuteronomy. 4.
God forbad the making of any resemblance of him, and tells them by Moses, that
they saw no manner of similitude, in the day the Lord spoke with them in Horeb,
etc. lest they should corrupt themselves, and make a graven Image, the
similitude of any figure, the ^ikenesse of male or female, or the likeness of
beast, foul, fish, or ^reeping thing, or sun, moon, or stars, or host of
Heaven, and so they should be driven to worship them, and serve them; I pray
observe the word, driven, viz. God will deliver such a one up to the power of
Sa^an, and so become a worshipper of the Image it self: and truly it is the
only way to become an Idolater: First, to invent a similitude of God, and make
it accordingly; and then worship God by it; and after that to worship and adore
the thing it self; How Idolatry came into the world, as history reports.
and History does declare thus much to us, as we may read in the book of
Wisdom, chap. 14. ver. 12, 13, 14. to the end of ver. 20. Now if we have cause
to beware of Idolaters, then much more of Popish Idolaters, for they are more
dangerous then those former Idolaters were, for these do more persecute the
true Servants of God, then those Idolaters did; these profess they do God good
service in slaying of us the true Servants of God, as our Savior foretold, and
we always have found it to be true, by all their treacherous and murtherous
plots; yea, they are so much the more dangerous, because (that although they
call themselves Christians in way of dissimulation) they call us Heretics, The
Papists call us Heretics.
and our Religion Heresy too; and therefore we ought to be more wary of
them, then of other Idolaters, for all the Devils in hell cannot devise a more
dangerous People and Religion then they, and theirs is, therefore it is good to
lay out some of their Tenets, by the which we may see them the more clearly to
be the Doctrine of Devils, leading to damnation.

And thus I do begin briefly, The Popes tenets, or some of them.
They hold that there is a Purgatory, or a place to purge us of our sins, after
this life, so that if we be not the true servants and children of God in this
life, yet notwithstanding we may be there made capable of everlasting salvation
in heaven: the which will nourish all men in sin that so believes; for if men
be persuaded that there is another place after their death to prepare them for
heaven, then they will live here as they list, and so be damned: But to what
end is the doctrine of faith and sanctification so much preached in this life,
both by the Prophets, our Savior, his Apostles, and succeeding Ministers; And
why is Dives complaining in hell, (so to speak) if this be a truth; Those that
are not converted in this life, shall not be acknowledged by Christ after this
life ended, he will then say to them, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Secondly, that Images of God and Saints
are to be worshipped. Thirdly, that prayers to Saints departed are to be made,
and their intercession to be required. Fourthly, that there is a propitiatory
Sacrifice to be offered daily in the Mass for the sins of the quick and
dead. Fifthly, that a man may merit heaven by his good works. Sixthly, that it
is a mortal sin to read the Scripture, (but by the Popes dispensation.)
Seventhly, that their Clergy ought to preach in an unknown tongue. Eighthly,
that if the Pope do pronounce a man to be a Saint, he then is one, and must be
so. Ninthly, that there is a virtue in their water with which they baptize
their infants, that does conjure the evil spirits out of them, putting oil
upon them, and salt and spittle in their mouths. Tenthly, that the Pope cannot
err in his judgment or decrees. 11 That the Laity are not to drink the blood
of Christ in the Sacrament, viz. the Wine. 12 That those are Heretics that
have recourse to the Hebrew and Greek Tongues. 13 They represent God the Father
in the similitude of an old man. 14 They represent God the Son sometimes like a
Lamb, etc. they may as well make a Rock, a brazen Serpent, a Pillar in a
Cloud, etc. 15 They resemble the Holy Ghost like a Dove, and why not as Cloven
tongues, as Fire? but as the Holy Ghost says by the Prophet Esaias, 46. 5. To
whom will ye liken me that I may be like him? 16 They pray to the Cross
blasphemously, in these words, Hail Cross our only hope, give to the godly
righteousness, and to the guilty pardon: yea, all that pass by it must
worship it, otherwise they are liable to be punished. 17 They offer Cakes to
the Picture of the Virgin Mary, and worship it. 18 Bonaventure has transformed
the Psalter of David, to the honor of the Virgin Mary, changing God into
Goddess, and Lord into Lady, and where it is said by David, Praise the Lord,
by him it is said, Praise the Lady; and for, trust in the Lord, trust in the
Lady; and in his 35 Psalm are these words, Incline the countenance of God upon
us, and compel him to have mercy upon us. 19 Bellarmine affirmed, that if the
Pope did err, commanding vice, forbidding virtue, the Church should be bound
to believe vice to be good, and virtue to be evil, except she would sin
against conscience. 20 They offer incense to the Saints in general, and pray
unto them, and swear by them. 21 The Roman Church maintains that the merits,
intercession, and blood of the Saints and Martyrs, are mixed as satisfactory
with the blood, merits, and intercession of Christ: O horrid blasphemy! 22 They
baptize Bells and Ships. 23 They bless Holy water, (as they call it, and
sprinkle it upon Men and Beasts upon St. Anthonies day, (as they call it) and
on all the horses and beasts in the Country, (as some that are converted from
their Religion affirm) whereby the Monks get abundance of money to maintain them
in their base knavery and idleness a long time afterward. 24 They allow
incestuous marriages, contrary to the fourth Commandment. 25 They deny
concupiscence to be formally sin after Baptism, as if in any article of time
it might be said of man, that he is without sin. 26 (Notwithstanding all these
blaspemies and abominations) he yet affirms himself to be the Vicar of
Christ, yea, the head or supreme over the Catholic Church of Christ.

And now I will note the Popes Pride: The Popes pride.
1 Frederick Barbarossa was forced to lay down his neck upon the stairs of the
Church of St. Mark (as it is called) in Venice, to be trod upon by that proud
man of Sin; and his son (after the Pope had crowned him) was uncrowned again,
by the Popes kicking off his Crown with his foot, etc. 2 Kings and Emperors
must act the parts of Foot-grooms, to lead his horse by the bridle, and
supporting him by holding his stirrup, and mounting him upon his horse. 3 They
must be as Pioners or Porters to bear him upon their shoulders. 4 They must be
as Pages, to hold water to his hands. 5 He commands the Angels to transport
souls out of Purgatory, (I hope you will say he is climed very high now.) 6 He
(even the Pope) wears a Triple Crown, signifying that he is the three-one-God;
and so much the Apostle says of him in 2 Thessalonians. 2. in some of the former
verses, That he should sit in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God.

And now (according as I have collected out of History) I will note the
horoscope of his Nativity; The Assenden^ of the Popes nativity.
and thus I begin it: This Popery was conceived in the Apostles time, as in 2 Thessalonians. 2. is showed. 2 It was quickened in the time of Victor. 3 It did stir
more powerfully under Stephanus and Cornelius, Bishops of Rome. 4 More under
Damasus and others following. 5 It moved more strongly in the time near its
birth, under Leo the first. 6 It was born and brought to the view of the world
by Boniface the third, upon whom the title of Universal Bishop was conferred
by Phocas the Emperor. 7 It came to its height and ripeness in the time of
Hildebrand, in whom Antichrist was visible, France and Germany espied it then,
and Greece, Syria, Africa, and Aethiopia has disclaimed his power, as
Antichristian; I will add one people more in particular, that have and do now
see him to be Antichrist, and child of the Devil, and those are we in
England; now those that have seen him in these colors, may well (if they have
any saving grace in them) know and believe, that both the Independents, (so
many as are sincere hearted) and we the Presbyterialists, have great cause to
be jealous of his wiles* and fear lest he get footing again with us in England,
I hope in this we shall all be joined in uniformity. But now in order I come to
note another great hinderance of many of the Sectaries joining in a uniformity
in this Presbyteriall government, and that is this, viz.

They have a fear lest we should have some want of Laws to punish those that
shall hap to be Idolaters amongst us: ^^e Indepen^^nts (many of ^^em) do fear
^^at we shall ^^ve no Laws (...) punish Ido^^ters as God ^^^h comman^ed.
for if so, then the sheep that as yet have not the scab will soon be Itchy,
and be spoiled too, for (say they) the true Proverb is, That one scabbed sheep
will spoil the whole flock: it is true so, I am not against you in this
neither, because you have the Word of God for your direction to this
conclusion, both commands, and the reasons for it too, and examples of the
inconveniences that have followed the neglecting of the putting in execution
those good laws that God has commanded us to use against Idolaters, to prevent
this so great a mischief, yet now I hope we shall have care taken by the
Parliament for this matter too, and we have some experience of it already.

Let us now see what it is that God has commanded in this case, and then we
willl endeavor to make a true conclusion from the Word of God, (for he is no
honest man that will refuse to be ruled and guided by that) I will produce some
Scripture for this point also, and the first place is in Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. where we may see, that those that were occasioners of Idolatry in Israel
were to be put to death, yea, though it were a man's own child, yet he must die
for it, and his parent must not conceal him, but bring him out that he may die
for it: And the Parents hands must be first upon him to put him to death; and a
special Reason is rendered for it too in ver. 11. viz. All Israel shall hear
and fear, and do no more such wickedness; pray see these Texts, for I
conclude it is a most hellish sin in any man to make a separation between God
and his people, thereby robbing God of his glory, and his people of their
salvation; and in 2 Kings 23. you may read that Josiah did put to death the
idolatrous Priests, and Eliah did the like to the Priests of Baal, as it is to
be seen in 1 King. 18. 40. and in Exodus 22 20. you may see Gods command is so
there, these are the words, He that sacrifices ^o any God, save to the Lord
only, shall be slain and L^v. 26. 30. yea, the bones of Idolaters that were
dead and lay in the m^numents were burnt, 2 Kin. 23. 16. and the bodies of the
idolatrous Kings, must not lie near the place of Gods worship and service, as
you may see in Ezekiel. 43. 7. let us leave this a while to the Parliament to
consider of: thus you see that I am willing to yield to you in any thing that
is certainly to be concluded on. And thus much for this Point.

If naught but truth you will maintain, I strive to have the same,
If you the golden Truth would claim, then I am for that name.
Now appears another point unto me ready for its taggs, The Lords prayer.
sent to me as from a messenger of heaven, bemoaning and lamenting in the
behalf of the Lords Prayer, sanctified with his own lips. And truly this almost
affrighted me. And I wondered what Beast (amongst those in the Apocalypse
mentioned) this was, that sent forth such a smoking sulphurous favor. At
length, I thought I had espied two kinds of creatures; and the one me thought
was a subtle Jesuit in an honest man's habit, who seeing an honest man willing
and forward to run away from Rome, and that they had but a weak judgment, (and
therefore might run too far) he therefore fluttering with the invented wings
of either Dedalus, or the wings of his son I^arus) beat the wind so close to
their backs as they ran, that they were too far gone of a sudden, and were
almost in the Red Sea before they were aware of it, and were like to have been
drowned in their own blood. And then I was well persuaded in my mind
concerning this Beast, and knew he was one of Romes croaking Frogs: But as for
the other, me thought he had some goodness in him indeed, but yet he had some
malignity and peevishness in him against those that had abused the Forms of
prayer before, (for there is some malignity in some of those that are in the
most right way) and so he helped forward this distemper. I seeing thus where
the distemper lay, did resolve to walk in the middle way of truth, that so I
might guide the simple, and settle him in the truth, and send the croaking Frog
to his home at Rome; and thus I began to argue; First, that a Form of prayer of
it self, being the Word of God, must needs be good. Secondly, that a man may
pray to God in the words of that Form; for though some do but babble in a
Form, yet you may not conclude that all are babblers that use a Form, for then
you will condemn our Savior, for he used a Form two or three times together a
little before his death; and the Psalms of David were penned for praises to God
for some mercies before received, and were to be sung afterward to Gods glory;
this you cannot deny I am sure. And if you say, men do now but speak the words
of it; and therefore if they were debarred of them, then they would pray in the
Spirit, (if they have any saving grace in them.) To this I answer in the first
place, Tit. 1. 15.
with the words of St. Paul, To the pure, all things are pure, but to the
contrary party nothing is pure, for their minds and consciences are defiled;
the meaning is this, That those that have honest hearts, will honestly make use
of honest things. Again, if you would utterly deprive all sorts of a Form of
prayer, how then shall ignorant youths, and little young maids pray? nay, many
times old men are but new converts, and what will you have them do? If they use
many words in a prayer, they will too soon ask they know not what, like the
mother of Zebedees children; yea, they (being ignorant) will presently in their
pride of Spirit think themselves fit to fit at the elbows of Christ in heaven,
(for they will think they are fitter for the place then Moses or Aaron;) surely
it were safer for such to use that Form which God taught the people in the time
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 28. it was to them a Form, viz. Amen. But if you can pray
knowingly, then pour out your hearts to God according to true knowledge: But I
have heard some pray, or say many words, and but little matter, but chiefly it
was tautologie, and often repeating the same words, and could not proceed
farther, and thought themselves highly gifted too; therefore take heed of
spiritual pride, judge of your abilities with a single eye. I know some that
have applauded a Minister for making such an admirable prayer, as none near him
was to be compared unto him, but it was the sillyest tautologie, that I was
ashamed to hear it. Do you think in your conscience, that if you were taught
in a Form to ask for a hundred pounds of some that are both able and willing to
give it; and also you wanted bread to put in your belly, (being hungry and
empty) that then you could not ask in that Form? yes, I warrant you; therefore
beware of spiritual pride. But now having thus a little prepared you (as I
hope) for some sure instruction, I now come more home to you, Luke 11. 1. you
may see that our Savior taught his Disciples a Form of prayer, (they not
knowing how to pray, as it seems (unless some short prayer, as at some other
times they did, as in these words, Lord increase our Faith, etc.) in these
words, When ye pray say, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. here you may see
that they were to use the words that he taught them. And although Luke has it
in this manner, Pray you, that is nothing to overthrow this Evangelist, for both
ways are lawful; nay, God sometime did bid the Jews that they should take
unto them words, and come to him in prayer, and taught them a Form of words too
by the Prophet H^sea, 14. 2, 3. these are the words, Take unto you words, and
turn to the Lord; say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips; Ashur shall not save us,
we will not rid: upon horses; neither will we say any more to the work of our
hands, Ye are our Gods, for in thee the fatherless finds mercy. All this
Form of Prayer the Lord taught the people by the Prophet Hosea: And Col. 3. 16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with
grace in your hearts to the Lord, etc. He did not here mean (in this place) any
new Psalms or hymns, for he bad them admonish each other in those Psalms and
hymns; therefore those Psalms and hymns were then Canonical: although I
could wish that upon some occasion, (were it not for startling the weak in
knowledge) that some Preacher that were a solid man, would frame a Psalm for
that special occasion, (for he that can make a prayer according to the Word,
is able also to make a Psalm) but this I think would be inconvenient; but this
is fit to be done, viz. the Preacher himself should fit a Psalm out of the
Book of Psalms for the several occasions, and suitable to his Sermon. And
thus much for this point also, with this conclusion:

Now since we had no Prayer-booke,
The Sabbath afternoons;
The sleep so much, some heads have took,
That dead they are in swoons.
Some Scriptures we in stead thereof,
Might safely entertain;
Lest we so much from it be off,
That there we sit in vain.
And now me thinks I see another stand by, Of Music.
with a question in his mouth; (for these times are fraught with them now) And
this is it, viz. How if Pipes and Organs should chance to be put upon us
again, as they were before the Parliament begun, will not that be Idolatry
think you? and if so, then I hope you will grant us a warrant to run out of
the Church? To this I answer, First, what is lawful in it self is one thing,
and what is an inconvenience, is another thing; therefore ye ought to be
informed well in your judgment before you be too forward to make a
conclusion. First, if in it self it be Idolatry now, what was it all that
time, when God himself in David's time allowed it, in the praises of his people?
If you say that the Pope uses it to his Idols, and therefore it is Idolatry. I
answer, so did the heathen very likely; And besides, if that be it by the which
you would gather a conclusion, viz. that because the Papists use it, therefore
we may not use it, then may not we sing unto the true God because the Papists
sing unto their Idols, (for singing is melody) therefore this your argument is
of no validity. But here is another question put to me, and this is the maine
one, viz. In the time of the old Law it was lawful, but is not now, it being
not now commanded, therefore it is unlawful. To this I answer, briefly: if you
consider the end wherefore it was at the first allowed, you may easily make
conclusion. The end why it was first allowed was this, to occasion joyfulnesse
or cheerfulness in the users and hearers of it, that so they might praise God
with the more lively affections, (for all know it is an outward occasion of
natural joy;) and the Word of God being then used with it, viz. in Psalms or
hymns, do turn the use of it (by the operation of Gods Spirit) to the more
hearty praising of God. Secondly, to your question more fully, that is, because
it is not commanded by the Apostles, therefore it is not now lawful for us to
use it in the praises of God. Why, the Apostles would have us to use all means
possible to enable us to praise God the more cheerfully: But (says some) some
do regard the melody more then the matter they sing, or God to whom they sing.
To this I answer, so without all question do some that sing without Music,
and have no devotion to God. Therefore the Apostles conclusion must be ours,
viz. to the pure, all good things are pure, but to them that are otherwise is
no good thing pure.

Thirdly, But the Parliament has forbid it now, and therefore it is unlawful.
I do answer, that many things at this time are forborne for diverse reasons.
First, it is (and especially has lately been) a time of mourning, yea, to
mourn with sorrowful hearts, rather then joyous hearts, although we be
godly disposed at that time, (for you know in the time of David music was not
used, when they fasted to God, and were humbled for some punishment that then
was upon them.) Secondly, it might be forbid by the Parliament to satisfy the
People who are weak in their judgment and thought every thing was Popery or
Idolatry, because some did begin to leave that way, and then it ought to be
taken away for the present. Thirdly, because the People were addicted to
Idolatry, (many of them) therefore it ought to be taken away. For the Brazen
Serpent that was set up (at first) for good use, was taken down, yea, and
broken in pieces, in way of detestation and called a piece of Brass, when the
people had idolatrized to it; But this shall be my conclusion, it is no great
matter whether it be or be not, and so I end this Point, with a general
reason why I have treated thus much in it, which is this, I would gladly learn
the Reader hereof, to make some distinctions; for, for want of this, many
mischiefs are amongst us; and the Leaders of the Sectaries, either cannot or
will not do it: what the Reasons are I leave to you, to be guided by some of
those I mentioned in my former points, viz. policy. But now I will set to your
view some Scriptures to you to pitch your judgment on more clearly, both out
of the Old and New Testament: first in Exodus 15. 20. Miriam the Prophetess did
praise the Lord with instruments of music. Judge. 11. 34, 35. There you may see
Jephthah's daughter did it too. Chap. 21. 19, 20, 21. There was a feast at
Shiloh yearly, a feast of the Lord, (says the Text) and the daughters of
Shiloh did use to dance there at that feast. Psalm. 149. 3. Let them praise the
Lord in the dance, let them sing praises to him with the tymbrell and harp:
and Psalm. 150. and Psalm. 33. 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 108. 1, 2. And I will end with that
in the Revelation of John, chap. 14. v. 2, 3. and I pray consider of it; these
are the words, I heard the voice of harpers, harping with their harps, and they
sung, as it were, a new song before the Throne, etc. And Chap. 15. 2. 3. These
are the words of those that had gotten the victory over the Beast, They had
harps of God, (says the Text) and they sang the song of Moses the servant of
God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvailous are thy works Lord
God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. And thus much
for this point.

Some have such tender sculls, they will dye with little hail;
As goslings tender be, alas what do they aile?
And now I desire to know wherein the difference lies betwixt those that stand
for the Presbyteriall government, and those that separate from them, by reason
of those things contained in those Points thus lately treated of; and
consequently why we may not join together in the Presbyteriall government.

And now I come to the first of the last three things I promised to touch,
Signs to show whether party is the best in their conversations.
and that is to answer some of the Sectaries to some things which they affirm
of themselves, concerning their conversation, that they are the most godly
people in their lives and conversations, and therefore they have the better
judgments. To this I answer, we may not take your bare word for it neither;
for if men plead for a confusion, it is rather a sign of the contrary.
Secondly, it is is an ill sign in you, to be so uncharitable in your censures
of us the Presbyterials, you account most of us to be incapable of the
Sacraments, although you cannot prove us to live in such sins, (and especially
in that degree in those sins) which the Word of God does exclude a man for; and
is this a good sign think you? Thirdly if you say that you are more zealous in
your following the Preachers, and the exercises of Religion; and therefore you
are better, and more godly then the Presbyterials. I answer, so might the
Pharisees have said, for which cause they had their name zelotes (many of
them;) yea, this was the cause that they did separate from the residue of the
people, and would be called Pharisees, the which word comes of the Hebrew
word Phares, which signifies to make a breach by separating from others; and
is this a commendation always think you? you know the Pharisees were worse
then the common people were from whom they separated, for inwardly they were
full of rottenness; yea, our Savior said of them, that they were ravening
wolves, although they were so zealous to pay tithe of mint, anise, and cummin.
By all this you see now, that your argument therein is stark naught; besides, I
have found that the Presbyterialls are more forward to neighbourly goodwill,
and to accommodate a man with what they can, then you are: this I have proved
to be true (although I have not any thing of any man, but what I pay for.) But
the Independents are full of shifts and excuses, (so many as I have been
acquainted with) I wish they would not equivocate so much as they do; I hope
they will ^eale truly in their shops. Fourthly, they say they have more
knowledge in the Word and will of God then the Presbyterialls have. I answer,
(if this were true) you are so much the worse, if your hearts are not thereby
made better; for you come much short of the Pharisees in our Saviors time, in
the literal knowledge of Divine things, yet they were the worst of people.
Besides, it is not true neither which you affirm of your selves, viz. that you
are the most knowing, for you are exceeding weak in your judgments, (for the
more part) And many of the Presbyterialls, which have not the tenth part of
literal knowledge, have notwithstanding a better understanding in many things
in the Word of God, and sincere hearted too. Fifthly, I wish I might not say
that there is with you too many mountains of spiritual pride; for there was
another sect among the Jews, that called themselves Sadduces, and would be
thought to be more just in their dealings then other men, and yet were not such
as had saving grace in their hearts, they called themselves Sadduces from the
hebrew word tsedek, (as some Expositors affirm) and yet they denied the
resurrection from the dead, therefore this is no true infallible sign neither.
Sixthly, are you not as forward to corporal pride, as the Presbyterialls too?
(although I think you are not so sick of the fashions, as some of the
Presbyterialls are.) Seventhly, are you not more obstinate in your way of
separation after conviction, then the Presbyterialls are? I wish I could not
justly complain of this; for I have known many, when they have yielded in
many chief things in their way of separation, and yet would go on still in
their way of divisions; so that with you is wilful obstinacy also. I do not
speak this to excuse the Presbyterialls from many sins, no, I blame our selves
exceedingly too: But this is the maine thing which I aim at, to beat down men
from esteeming of themselves above that which they are. And thus much for this
point also.

Some have such shallow-heads and gnats about their ears;
I think their hearts be dead; where is their hopes, their fears?
Now farther (you say) that many of our side are ignorant in the Word of God,
and live loosly in their conversations; It is true, they do so; and you say
they be proud and scornful in their carriage to their inferiors, and think to
have others to stoop to them because of their gay-cloaths and big looks, they
having (many of them) much of this worlds good; but yet they have little or no
virtue in them; the which is that which is worthy of the true respect, and not
a bare title. In this I will not dissent from you, but will conclude, that a
wise man will not much respect any thing that is but an adjunct of a man, and
is no part of the man, for Dives was gay, and had this worlds goods, but yet he
was not any whit the better esteemed of God, but hell must be the place of such
a one: Coruptions in Gods people, and especially in those that live in wealth,
and at ease.
but yet these with us may have some saving grace in them; for you must
endeavor to distinguish degrees of good and evil, otherwise you will never be
able to make a true conclusion. And truly this is a great reason for me to
conclude that your Leaders are either ignorant of these things, or else they
keep you blind on purpose, that so you may remain Separatists still. You may
know that those that have this worlds goods are liable to many temptations,
which other inferior people are more free from; and though they themselves
fail as much another way perhaps too. Have you never seen a man that being
holden in from occasions of temptations, by being in a mean estate, and thereby
afflicted; who, afterward, having been raised to a greater estate, was more
vain then those whom he before counted wicked; David's failings.
see how good David failed in godliness, when great temptations encountered
him, as being at rest in his kingdom of wealth, walking and solacing himself
upon his house top, and having such an object of carnal delight; and that sin
did occasion another as great, O that was a great one indeed! for having fallen
into the sin of adultery, and thereby being liable to disgrace, he thought to
cover it, by using policy, and yet that policy must nevertheless go somewhat
near him too; but yet he thought, having such an occasion to hazard Vriah in
battle, it would be the more tolerable, and therefore he adventured upon the
cutting off of Vriah, that so he might take her to be his wife, to cover the
sin from being known: To be short, they are more liable to carnality and vanity
then many other men are, although they have saving grace in them. But what is
all this for the Point we stand for, viz. the government of the Church? I still
stand for truth, although abuses be; for I know, no outward accommodations will
bestead us at the great and dreadful day of judgment.

No strouts, nor clouts, nor words that swell,
That will bestead us then;
For I know well, and do you tell
It Is virtue makes men.
And now in the next place I must note another thing which is prevalent in
keeping men from renouncing an opinion once maintained by them, The hindrances
that keep men from the ^^nouncing an opinion, though convinced of it in their
conscience.
though now convinced; and that is the undergoing of some disgrace, lest others
do deride them; and truly my heart almost bleedeth to think of it, for it is a
great trial indeed, and especially if men have not a great measure of grace;
but yet I hope we do consider that God is to have his glory, what ever we
undergo; Let God be true, and every man a liar.

And I hope, Motives to the Presbyterialls to be kind to those that renounce
the other ways.
^f the Presbyterialls be well admonished, they will forbear scoffing at those
that shall come and join with us. For, (as one once said, so say I) Are there
not sins with us also? yes surely, in many things we sin all: O that we could
join together, then might we easily prevail of the Parliament, wholesome Laws,
yea, and Officers too, to keep us in a more stricter way in godliness.

Now let us take some notice of such things as may whet our affections more
specially to perform our duties severally: Motives to ^oth parties to perform
our duties, whatsoever hap to us, (so to speak) viz. look to the great
allurements mentioned in the Word of God, and the punishment if we neglect our
duty, etc.
First, God is worthy of all honor, and to have all glory ascribed to him,
yea, all good is (and ought) to be ascribed to him, for he is the totality of
all things; in him we live, move, and have our being; and in him all things
consist, whose goodness does appear in his creating of us after his own
Image, in holiness and righteousness, and knowledge, and other qualities; in
a fit degree for creatures to have resemblance of their Creator, and to be
blessed for evermore; whose purity may be seen in his Law which he has set to
our view, to behold his excellency in; the which Moses the man of God admired
with these words to the children of Israel, What Nation is there under heaven
that have Laws so righteous as ye have? And David says thus of them to God,
Thy Law is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it. And consider also how
we (in the loins of our first Parents) are fallen from that happy estate of
that blessed Creation; and also what is due to us now by falling from God by
our disobedience, even everlasting damnation and torture, and torment in hell
for evermore. Consider also the goodness of God in providing for us a remedy,
that we may not be subjects of torments in hell, but be vessels of glory in
heaven, only upon good and honest conditions, faith in the merits of his Son
our Savior, and requi^eth nothing of us but to walk honestly, righteously, and
godly in this world, according to those graces of his holy Spirit knocking at
the doors of our hearts, and bidding us open, yea, that gives us power and
ability to open, only that we be not wanting in the not using those abilities
which he does give us; but if we slight and neglect this second great mercy of
his, then must we be subjects of the greater torments in hell for evermore with
dreadful Devils, and cursed Fiends, and damned Angels, and with Men in a woeful
condition, being tortured and tormented, easless, and endless, gnashing their
teeth in anguish and pain. Consider this, and beware, and take heed in time,
before time be no more. Now let us consider what allurements the Lord our God
has set forth in his Scriptures of truth for our encouragement, the Prophet
Daniel in his 12 chapter, says, Those that be wise shall shine as the Sun; and
those that turn many unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever,
and ever. And in the Book called the Ap^calyps or Revelation, are many
allurements for us to be whetted on in godliness; To him that overcommeth will
I give (said God) to eat of the Manna that is hid; and to walk in white; and
to drink of the water of the pure river of God that is in that celestial
Paradise; yea, to wear a Crown; and to eat of the tree of Life in the midst of
the paradise of God; and to have power over the Nations, (which betokens the
glory of an Emperor;) and to have a morning Star; yea, he shall be a pillar
glittering in the Temple of God; yea, Christ will write upon him the name of
God; and the name of the City of his God, new Jerusalem, etc. yea, Christ will
write upon him his own name also. Rev. 3. 12. And be will s^p with him, yea, ^e
shall sit in the throne of Christ with him, ver. 21.

Thus we see the goodness of God in giving us such allurements to become his
sons and heirs of the celestial kingdom. And these are held forth to us, to
the end we might not be weary in well-doing, though we meet with many
discouragements; for God has ordained, That we must through many afflictions
enter into the kingdom of heaven; These things made Moses, Joseph, and the rest
of the Patriarchs (or the most of them) to undergo many trials; and the
Prophets to be content to be sawne asunder, beheaded as John Baptist was, and
to be slain as James the Apostle, and diverse of the rest of them, and to be
cast into dungeons, as Jeremiah* etc. to be bound and imprisoned, and slain or
beheaded, as Paul was; yea, to be so tortured as those you may see in Heb. 11.
And cruly I wish some in these our days would beware lest they use some little
better then those that stripped honest Joseph of his goodly coat, because it
seemed in their eyes to be too good for him; I am sure at length they confessed
that their trouble and afflictions were repayed into their own bosoms, because
they were guilty concerning their brother; And therefore behold, (said Reuben)
his blood is required.

I will conclude with that holy and heroicall-spirited Habakkuk in 3 chap. and
17, 18, 19 verses; these are his words, Although the fig should not blossom,
neither fruit be in the Vines; though the labor of the Olive should fail, the
field should y^eld no meat; though the flock should be cut off from the fold,
and there be no herd in the stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy
in the God of my salvation; the Lord God is my strength, and ^e will make my
feet like hindes feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places; To
the chief singer on my stringed Instrument, etc.

HEre follows a few other Points, ^ereticks deny ^^at Christ ^^ok flesh of
^^e Virgin ^ary.
that some fearfully do miscarry in, and the first I stand amazed at, viz.
That any should either believe or say, That our Savior took not flesh of the
Virgin Mary; I will only quote Scriptures to satisfy some, lest weak honest
souls do chance to stumble and fall by such Heretics; the first is Romans 9. 5.
Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came; here
you see that Christ came of the Fathers, yea, that of them he received his
flesh. Romans 1. 3. Jesus Christ was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh; here the Apostle says, that he was made of the seed of David, etc. Act.
22. 30. Of the fruit of David's loins according to the flesh, God would raise
up Christ to sit on his Throne. Acts 13 23. Christ was of the seed of David
according to the flesh. And so much for this Point.

Another sort there is, ^ome hold ^^at the child ^eriveth or re^eiveth its
soul ^^om its Pa^^nts.
(I know not what to call them) That hold that the soul of man is begot or
derived from its Parents, or one of them; but this is such a fancy, that I
detest to think of it: First, a word or two by Reason, against it, Why should
not every child have two souls and so be a Monster, if that your conclusion
were a truth, by receiving it from its parents? for although the matter of the
body is to be derived by reason of its nourishment which it receives from the
4 Elements, yet the soul is not to be derived so from the Parents, for that is
a spiritual inspiration, and is not nourished by any of the four Elements, but
has its existence and subsistence from God only. And now I come to
Scriptures, the first is Mal. 2. 15. When God made one, yet ^e had the residue
of the Spirit, etc. Therefore man had no more Spirit, neither has any man, any
more Spirit or soul but what he has received from God immediately, for says
the Text, God had the residue of the Spirit. Eccles. 12. 7. The Spirit shall
return to God who gave it; and hence it is (very likely and chiefly) that God
is said to be the God of the Spirits of all flesh, rather then of the flesh it
self; for although God be the God of the flesh too, yet that being made of the
four Elements, is not so specially regarded of God, as the spirit or soul is;
and hence it is very likely that Moses calls God, the God of the Spirits of
all flesh, as in Numb. 16. 22. Let the Lord the God of the Spirits of all
flesh, set a man over the congregation: so much shall serve for that point.

Gods dearest children sometimes falling into some capital sin or sins, If
Gods people sin some capital sin, (especially openly) they may smart
temporally for it as long as they live here, though repented of.
may thereby occasion the Lord to scourge them temporally for it, especially if
it be openly committed or publicly known, though they repent of it, and more
especially if it be not more speedily repented of, as we may see in David for
his numbering his people in his pride, and 2 Samuel 12. 10. there you may see,
that a man may have a scourge for some sin as long as he lives; for because of
David's sin with Bathshebah, and his slaying of Vriah in a kind of politic way
to save his credit, and cover his sin, the sword did never depart from his
house: Let us beware of sin in that regard also.

Now a word for the comfort of all that are in Christ by faith, to prevent some
men's discouraging of good Christians, telling them that they cannot be sure of
everlasting life, so long as they are here on earth.

Here follows some Scriptures to prove that a man may be assured of his
salvation here in this world; A man may be assured of his salvation.
the first is in Joh. 6. 47. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that believes
on me has everlasting life; here the Evangelist does not barely say, that a
believer has life, but that he has everlasting life; and in ver. 54 also, and
Joh. 5. 24. He that believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death to life; and 2 Pet.
1. 10, 11. Make your calling and election sure; for if you do these things you
shall never fall, for so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; now if you
would know what things those be that you must have, that so you never fall,
but be assured to be entered into heaven, as it were, beforehand, then look in
ver. 5, 6, 7. going before, and there you may see them; the which if you get,
you are sure never to fall.

I do not affirm that all believers have that faith of assurance, spoken of in
this last Text, but that it is and may be obtained.

The reason why men do not see the salvation of God in Christ is (among many)
especially because they do not yield obedience in their hearts to so much of
the moral Law, as they know, either in the letter of it, informing their
hearts or consciences; or without the letter, viz. written in their conscience.

If any man will do his will, Men (not repenting of known sins) are still
left blind in matter of salvation.
he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my
self, Jo^. 7. 17. Psalm. 50. 23. To him that orders his conversation aright,
will I show the salvation of God* Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11. If they be ashamed of all
that they have done, show them the form of the house, etc. I know there must
be some general hopes in a man that has the knowledge of his sins which he
sees in him; although that knowledge be not with saving faith in the merits of
Christ, but some general notions that will not bestead him that rests in
them. 2 Cor 3. 16. When the heart shall be turned to the Lord, the vail shall
be taken away. Until a man repents himself of those sins which God has
convinced him of in his conscience, he shall remain blind in the matter of
salvation by Christ, for there must go a legal repentance before an
Evangelicall repentance; therefore Christ says, Mat. 21. 23* You when you
heard, repented not that you might believe him; God gives many gifts, but man
neglects him.

Here are places to show, A man may speak in the defense of his own integrity,
^f the same be ^n him indeed, etc.
that there is a difference between a man that is in the true justifying faith
concerning inherent holiness, and a man that is out of Christ, contrary to
some men's conclusion, that all men are alike in their inward hearts or
quali^ications; the first place is Psalm* 18. 19, 20, 21. to the 26. and Psalm.
26. Psalm. 28. Psalm. 131. 1, 2. and in 2 Samuel 22. very largely. See all these
places, and there you may have assurance that a man may speak in his own
defense concerning his own integrity of heart, if in case others would blast
his due reputation; provided that it be so in deed and in truth. I speak this
to stop the mouths of some wicked people, that are ready to say that there is
no difference among men, viz. that all are alike now in the state of grace,
excepting only the imputative righteousness of Christ; yea, I have heard with
my own ears to my great grief, some man say, that those that are justified
have no inherent holiness nor righteousness. But if this be a truth, why then
did our Savior pronounce a blessedness to those that are pure in heart? And
why did all the Apostles preach sanctification to be inherently in the
justified ones? yea, if any man be in Christ he is a new Creature, yea, Paul
himself (in the behalf of himself, and the residue of the Apostles and
Brethren) said thus, God has revealed the hid mysteries to us his holy
Apostles and Prophets, etc. And all the Apostles calls upon men to be (not
only believers in Christ, but) sanctified throughout both in body and soul,
etc. But yet notwithstanding it is imperfect in regard of degrees; and
therefore it is that the Prophet concluded that all our righteousness were as
filthy rags; and the Apostle James affirmed, that in many things we offend, etc.

This point is to show how many subjects have neglected, refused and opposed
their Kings commands, when those commands were unjust by Gods express Word;
yea, they did hinder their King from acting sin himself, and that by force too.

My first Scripture is 2 Chronicles. 26. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Azariah, and fourscore
valiant men withstood Vzziah their King, to hinder him from sinning against
God, in doing that which belonged to his subjects to be done, he being forbid
by Gods special command; and if they had not hindered him, then they should
have smarted for it as well as their King. 1 Samuel 14. 45. shows, that the
people of Israel did hinder their King Saul from committing a sin against one
of his subjects, which he had sworn to do, but they did resist him, and swore
that Jonathan should not die, Accidental ignorance pardoned.
(seeing he did not deserve death:) Jonathan knew not of his Fathers oath
concerning that thing; if the oath it self had been lawful, as you may read in
ver. 27. and such a one was to be pardoned by Gods command, as in Ezekiel. 45. 19.
Numb. 15. 27, 28. and Levit. 4, 27. And this is noted also as a good deed of
the people, in opposing their Kings in these things. And in 1 Samuel 20. 30, 31,
32, 33. and so forth, Jonathan would rescue good David from Saul's ma^^cious and
murderous intent, though he had Saul's displeasure so far, as to the hazarding
of his own life, for this his so doing. This did good Jonathan contrary to the
command of his Father, though the King; and this also is recorded for his
commendation. But contrariwise when the people did not hinder their Kings, but
joined with them in that which was evil; then they and their Kings must smart
for it too; as you may see by the peoples joining with their King Ahaziah,
against Elijah the Prophet, as in 2 King. 1. And so always throughout the
Scriptures, you may observe the like punishment upon the people for seconding
their Governors in evil. Yea, this was the very cause of the casting off of
the Jews chiefly; for they joined with their High Priest, chief Priests and
Pharisees, and the Rulers of the Jews in crucifying of Christ; and therefore
his blood is upon them, as well as upon their governors unto this day: Do you
not think it had been happy for the people of the Jews, if they had opposed
their Elders and Governors, and kept them from slaying our Savior Christ? Yes
truly, it had been well for that people. And the subjects of Ahab were
accessory to Ahabs sparing of Benhad^d, and see what they were to receive of
God for that sin, as in 1 King. 20. 42. they must die for it.

Here follows certain Scriptures showing what was to be done to the places
where the Idolaters worshipped their false Gods, viz. the places that were
built for that purpose, and so used publicly; and the reason rendered by God
himself, viz. to take away, or destroy the name of Idolatry, (and Idolaters)
out of that place, etc.

Nevertheless their Cities, This is Zan^hi^s resolution also, who was a good
Reformer.
Vineyards, and dwelling Houses were to stand still for their habitations,
(except those places where they publicly or usually wove hangings for their
Groves, etc. 2 Kin. 23. 7.) as you may see in Deuteronomy. 6. 10. and Chap. 19. 1.

Idolatry (it seems) is too easily entertained into the hearts of men by small
occasions; and we have had woeful experience of it with us, in not watching to
prevent it, before it was entertained into many hearts, so prevalent is this
sin with the sons of men. How soon were the Asian Churches be-pestered with
corruption in this sin, as others also, but that God out of his infinite mercy
forewarned them before they were utterly fallen away; and so have we now been
warned from God by many instruments which he has stirred up in his Cause, to
set us in a right way again, contrary to the expectation of the Roman frogs,
which have troubled us with Baalzebubs sulphur.

When some did wink, and closely think
To leave us in their lurches;
God did provide with Pen and Ink,
His John's to save his Churches.
FINIS.
THE VOICE of INFANTS BY INFANTS DEFENDER.

LUKE 9. 50. Forbid him not; for he that is not against us, is for us, Is there
not a cause, 1 Samuel 17. 29. Behold the Babe wept, Exodus 2. 6. And I Brethren,
when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom,
declaring to you the testimony of God, 1 Cor. 2. 1. But truly I am full of
power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might to declare unto
Jacob his transgressions, and to Israel his sins, Micah 3. 8. I thank thee O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them to Babes: even so Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight, Matthew. 11. 25. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them
which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 17, 18. London, Printed by R. Cotes, 1647.

An Advertisement to the Reader, for the better understanding of the Subject in
the ensuing Discourse, as a preparative.
1. I Pray you note the occasion of this Discourse, it was upon a challenge to
dispute the case of Baptism, at which time I found the party so weak, that I
was both ashamed to observe his imbecility, and grieved to observe people so
misled; therefore out of pity I have thought good to show the chief heads of
the discourse, though it be not so exquisite as perhaps you all could wish it;
but I did not intend any more should see it then himself, and some few of his
followers; but perceiving the importunity of some of my acquaintance, I
supposed they would cause it to be somewhat more public: But had my thoughts
stretched so far at first, I would have enlarged the matter, and drawn the
Discourse into more particulars, and more orderly, whereas now you have but the
substantialls summarily, and somewhat confusedly.

2. Observe, I have showed the institution of Circumcision, and that it was an
outward sign or token of inward Circumcision in the party to whom it was first
given, he being a man, namely, Abraham.

3. That his seed were to receive the same sign in their Infancy, whether they
had inherent holiness, yea, or nay, as having a right to the ordinance, they
being children of the faithful, or at least children of the Professors of the
faith of Abraham.

4. That this sign of Circumcision was belonging to those that were not of
Abraham's natural seed also, if they would join to Abraham and his seed in the
profession of the same faith; and that then the children of those strangers
were to receive the same sign of Circumcision also, and to the same end that
Abraham and his seed were, until the coming of Christ, at which time the sign
of faith was changed from Circumcision to Baptism to the believing Jews, or
those of Abraham's natural seed, as well as to the Gentiles which then did
believe.

5. That the sign being changed from Circumcision to Baptism,(...)

(...) them, for with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes
after their covetousness. And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song,
of one that has a pleasant voice, etc. Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. And ^ee that
departs from evil makes himself a pray, and the Lord saw it, and it
displeased him, etc. Esaias 57. 16. I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of
thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to them a reprover, for
they are a rebellious house, Ezekiel. 3. 26. By men of other tongues and
stammering lips will I speak to this people, etc. Isay 28. 11. If a man
walking in the spirit of falsehood do lie, saying, I will prophecy of wine
and strong drink, even he shall be the prophet of this people, Micah. 2. 11.
Oh Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? Oh Judah what shall I do unto thee? for
your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away,
Hosea 6. 4. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin, Ezekiel. 18. 30. Come and let us return unto
the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he
will bind us up, Hosea 6. 1. Turn ye, Oh turn ye, for why will ye die O
ye people of England? Ezekiel. 33. 11. Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord, let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the
heavens, Lam. 3. 40, 41. To the Law, and to the testimony, if they speak not
according to this rule, it is because there is no light in them, Esaias 8. 20. If
any man will do his will he shall know the doctrine whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self, John 7. 17. When the heart shall be turned to
the Lord, the veil shall be taken away, 2 Cor. 3. 16. To him that orders
his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God, Psalm. 50* 2^. If ye
be willing and obedient, ye shall ^ate the good of the land, but if ye be
wicked, and rebel, ye shall be consumed with the sword, etc. Esaias 1. 19, 20.
FINIS.

