A WORD OF PROPHESY, CONCERNING The Parliament, General, and the Army. With A
little of the First Adam. Wherein Are diverse Objections answered, concerning
that position of God, being the Author of Sin.

By Henry Pinnell.

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my people
their transgressions, and the House of Jacob their sins,

Es. 58.1. I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them,

Jer. 5.5. Thou shall speak my words unto them, whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear,

Verse. 7. It is required in Stewards, that a man be found faithful,

1 Cor. 4.2. Printed for George Whittington and Giles Calvert, and are to be
sold at the Blew Anchor near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.

To the Right Worshipful the Lady Anne Aston, elect and called of God, and
therefore despised of the World, but honored and beloved of all that are
chosen and called out of it.
Madam,
COnfusion and Controversy, the consequence and companion thereof, like two
black clouds, cover the face and glory of this visible Creation.

The comfort and content, the heaven and happiness of the creature, is
overspread and hid with the thick vailes and shadows of death and darkness.

What peace then, or prosperity is to be expected here, Ps. 119.96 Eccl. 1.2.
Es. 23.9.
in the midst of such perplexities? Vanity and mortality is written upon all
sublunary and earthly perfections, and will stain them. Increated light only
cannot be comprehended by darkness. Joh. 1.5. Jesus Christ in the spirit was
seen by those that were spiritual in the darkest times: We beheld his glory
(when the Jews and others saw only his shame and (assumed) baseness) We saw
it, as the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father, v. 14.

But when men wait for (created) light, behold obscurity: when they look for
the brightness (of the earthy and created state) they walk in darkness.

The Sun of this world goes down into a night, yea, it sets at noonday, and
the earth is darkened in the clear day: Did not Adam dye when he was risen, and
ascended to the Meridian of his created life? And did not, even then, the sable
cloud of death overshadow all the inhabitants of his Ioynes, and eclipse all
that Beauty, splendor, glory, excellency and perfection of his created state?
You are therefore admonished from the Lord [the Glory of whose majesty when it
arises, will terribly shake all earthly foundations, carnal confidence and
fleshly Principles] to cease from man, Genesis 2.7.
[from that man, that Adam] whose breath is in his nostrils, as one not to be
accounted of. What reckoning should you make of that dust of the ground, that
earthly Adam who has (only) breath breathed (but) into his nostrils? The
earthy and fleshly Microcosme, or that little world, Man, with all that he
has, which is beneath heaven, which is not of an heavenly nature, shall be
destroyed when the flood of the spirit is poured out upon all flesh, though it
has the breath of life in it, the life of the first Adam, as once the old
world was by the deluge of waters. No man (no not the first Adam) did ever
ascend to an heavenly state: None but Jesus Christ the second Adam, this Son of
man which came to earth from heaven, Io. 3.13. Ephesians. 1.3. and 2.6.
and was in heaven upon earth; He, and He only ascends to heaven, and
raises up those that are in him to heavenly places, a condition, state,
righteousness truly heavenly. Adam had his root and rise but in and from the
earth; how then could his righteousness be heavenly or spiritual? as is the
tree, such is the fruit: Men do not expect grapes from thorns, nor figs from
thistles. I never heard of any tree so tall, whose root was in the ground, and
the top touched the skies. The Tower that was intended to be carried to that
height, Genesis 11.
could never be finished: the workmen were scattered before the work was
perfected. How vile and void of understanding is vain man, to think to escape
the vengeance of heaven, the foundation of whose security is laid in earth?

And yet how are the childrens teeth of this generation set on edge with the
sour grapes that their Fathers have eaten: bad presidents in the parents are
of mischievous consequence to their posterity. Adam had but a terrene Paradise
at best, yet by the fruit of knowledge therein he aspired to an equality with
God: and how do his children still banker and long after that earthy
excellency of his? How do they struggle and strive to creep up unto that
terrestrial glory? How do they hunger and thirst after that goodly appearance
of his spiritual and heavenly knowledge, falsely so called, supposing it to be
really and properly of a celestial and divine perfection? This is the
(earthy) Mountain that the Fathers have worshipped in, and their children do
not yet know the way to Sion. Many there be that say, We will follow our
Fathers; but few call to remembrance, how they have sinned with their Fathers.
Ier. 44.17. Ps. 106.6.


The entrance, progress and pattern of confusion is laid down, Genesis 11. and
every generation of Adam takes up an exact imitation.

For when men take their journey from the East, when they forsake the spring of
light, the morning of the day, the Day Star; that bright and Morning Star,
Jesus Christ, the Sun of Righteousness; when they depart from the fountain of
light, life and living waters, they dig and drink at the broken Cisternes of
earth; they find a little plain, smooth, faire-promising plat of ground in
the first Adam, and they dwell there; they take up their habitation in this
Land of Shinar; Jerusalem, the Vision of peace, is built upon the High and Holy
Hill of Sion, the Mountain of the Lord; Babel, the confusion of the creature
is founded in the plain of Shinar; Shinar, what it means.
the low valley of the earthy Man. Shinar signifies the watching of one
asleep, or the changing of a City. The farther men go from the East, the more
they leave Christ (who awakeneth the sleepy, and gives life to the dead) the
more dull and drowsy they become, they watch and are awake no more then one
that sleeps; they may have waking dreams of Adams rich, full and plentiful
state, but when they shall awake in the spirit of Christ, it will be with them
as with that hungry man, Es. 29.8. Or as with the Church of Laodicea. Rev. 3.
Those that take sanctuary, and seek refuge in Adam and his perfection, do
change a new and heavenly City for an old and earthy one.

This City they build with brick made of the earth with hands, not of that
linging stone cut out of the mountain without hands: they lay the foundation
of their Tower and City, upon Adams purity, innocence, righteousness, they
pitch themselves in Shinar, etc.

This building upon the man, Adam, always has been, still is, and ever will
be carried to a great height: some in every age of the world strive to make it
reach to a spiritual and divine nature, but the top thereof never yet touched
Heaven: God blasteth the building with confusion, and calls the work Babel,
before it can be finished; Mar. 12.10 Luke 17, 25
and al1 because men will build with brick instead of stone; The Foundation and
chief Corner stone is rejected of the builders: Jesus Christ in the spirit is
slighted, as a mere Europia, a world in the Moon, a Chymaera, a Castle in
the air, having existence only in supposition, notion, and a deluded fancy.
The language of men is confounded; one calls for Presbytery, and a multiplied
Episcopacy is brought up; one cries out, Here is Christ; another, Lo there he
is; every man seeks to set up his form, and would have a shrine made for his
own Diana. It Is just with God to bring those down, and leave them below under
fleshly forms, and visible, sensible appearances, who (like Peter) out of a
drowsy and sleepy temper, cannot be contented with Christ alone in the spirit,
and that righteousness of God in him, but must have a Tabernacle for Adam also
when he apppeares (like Moses and Elias) in his glory.

I foresee the cavil and exception; some say and conclude, that I (and your
Ladyship has had your share with me in the censure) deny all set order and
established form of Church government. These may go to the plowman for their
answer and satisfaction: He will tell them that by the continual motion of his
Cart and Plow wheels, he has his business done, whereas if they stood still,
he could have no seed sown, no crop reaped, nor any profit at all made of his
land; yet in the revolution of the wheel, no spoke therein is always fixed
either upward or downward. In Ezekiels vision you have a wheel in a wheel,
Ez. 1.16.
an internal mystery in an external appearance, form or dispensation; the
spirit of life within keeps this wheel in motion: God will have his people
make a progress; He will carry them from dispensation to dispensation; from
strength to strength, and never let them stand still (in any form) till they
appear in the perfection and beauty of the Spirit.

Madam, I know you are removing from Shinar to Sion; from Babylon the City of
men, to Bethel the House of God. Let it not trouble you to see the confusions
that are in the world, or in your own heart, concerning the first Adam: there
is good hope and great likelihood that the building of the earthy state will be
at a stand. You are a gainer by changing rotten rags for rich, righteous and
royal robes; there can be no loss of mortality being swallowed up of life. I
have heard one (and it has been mine own case) miserably complaining once of
the confusions, distractions and division of heart; indeed the Babylonish yoke
and captivity is a sore bondage; fightings without, and fears within, troubles
on every side, will give the flesh no rest; such heavy and grievous pressures
will make sad and amaze a true Israelite, whose heart is upright before the
Lord: Yet I told you (not long since) that John did grow and wax strong in
spirit in the Wilderness, John signifies beloved.
Luke 1.80. The seed of Gods love may lie under the rough, un-even, earthy
clods and thoughts of man's heart; but will at last break through, and grow up
above them; this seed thrives in the night (of insensiblenesse and
dis-apprehension of the flesh) as well as in the day (of sight, sense and
feeling:) When man sleeps, as well as when he awaketh; in winter as well as
in summer; the day and the night are the Lords; he made summer and winter; the
sharp, cold and frosty winter nights of trouble and disquiet are for the
chastening of the weeds of flesh, that the old and outward man may perish, but
that the inward and hidden man of the heart may be renewed day by day. See 2
Cor. 4.26, etc.
Divine favor is not of such shallow rooting as to dye and wither a way in the
time of the creatures grudgings, murmurings and confusions.

The Sun of Righteousesse is not turned into darkness, but gives light, and
shines in its strength and glory to the celestial and spiritual part and
principle, when by reason of a cloudy sky of fleshy frailties, it has but a
weak influence upon the terrene and sensible part of man. The way by which God
will comfort his people thoroughly, is by consuming their supposed comforts, and
withering their carnal confidence. See Es. 40.1, etc. to verse 11. God would
have his people comforted, and the Voice was to cry, All flesh is grass, etc.
1 Cor. 11.7.
Adam was as the green grass of the ground, and Eve was as the flower of the
field, the glory of the earthy man: but neither the flower, nor the grass,
could endure the scorching heat of the Serpents temptation. Ioh. 4.
The earthy and created excellency of the first Adam, is unto man as the Gourd
was to Jonas: It may cover his head in the night, and give him the shadow of
rest and peace in his natural condition, and the time of his Ignorance; but
when the Sun arises, when Jesus Christ the greater light breaks forth to
discover the darkness of that light, it withers away and shrinkes into
nothing; this; like the Meteors and Glowworme, has its spark and splendour
from the earthy glory; it shines only, and is seen in the dark state of the
Creature: a worm at last, that deadly and never-dying worm will smite the
root of it: Adams righteousness will not, it cannot succor the soul in the
great and terrible day of the Lord.

Two great rocks lie hid in the deep heart and sea of man's nature, which make
the voyage to heaven dangerous to the passengers; of which I would give your
Ladyship warning before hand: earthy excellency is one, the other is fleshly
Forms. The first derives its descent from Adam, and therefore will claim
precedence and primogeniture; the second, though they come into the world to
wait upon the sons and heirs of God, during the time of their nonage and
minority, yet would share and divide the inheritance with the children, when
they are of full age; the servant would abide in the house with the Son. The
Church in her captivity complains of two great evils, as the aggravation of
her calamity, Law. 5.2.8.
viz: Strangers possessing her Inheritance, and Servants ruling over her. Among
all the vanities which Solomon saw under the Sun, Eccl. 10.7.
he took notice of Servants riding on horseback, and Princes walking like
Servants upon the earth.

What a stage of Vanity is this world, where every Art and Science is made up
of madness and folly? Would you not take it as an affront to your self, and a
disparagement to your friends, if a stranger, that lives upon the mere
charitable benevolence of your Father, should (by a base Parasiticall
insinuation into your near relations) bear more sway in the family then your
self? If a proud, saucy, malupert Intruder should dip his hand in the dish
before you, This you have seen, and had patience and borne it.
and most uncivilly snatch the meat from you? Slight, scorn and jeer you to
your face at Table? Would it not trouble you and undervalue your Fathers love,
if you must make way to him by a base, beggarly, upstart fellow, who (like a
Stage Player) has but lately put off the rags of a slave, now appears in the
habit of a Master? I came not (Madam) sneaking under your Fathers roof, to
sharke and slocke away your Treasure and Jewels, but to warn your Ladyship of
those thieves and cheaters which lie in wait to steal and rob you of these
heavenly treasures, Joy, peace, comfort, and a quiet spirit. Created
excellencyes and glory, the the fair shows and specious forms of the flesh,
are but strangers and forraigners to the New Jerusalem above, servants only in
Jerusalem below; keep your heart with all diligence, these else will slinke
into it, flatter your fancy, deceive your understanding, delude your judgment,
work upon your will, cheat your affections, and keep under the Highborn
Heir of Heaven Jesus Christ, the King of Righteousness, and Prince of peace,
shall be in low esteenie, it once these get too much favor: This Prince must
walk like a servant on earth; attend and wait upon the necessities, wants,
faults, frailties, and serve the sinful Righteousness of man so long,
Splendida peccata.
till he is wearied with his iniquities, Es. 43.24.

I do not prostrate this small Present to your Ladyship for Patronage, but
peruse all; and though it come to your hands without former acquaintance, yet
(I believe) not without a candid acceptance. One part concerns you little, by
the other you may get something. I must not live long with you, This may be a
Testimony of my respects when I am gone from you. I came not to you to make my
abode with you, but to put you in remembrance of your departing from your
self. Your own self is the last Cottage you live in here, and that but a
poor, mean, earthy one neither: When this is dissolved, and, like a shepherds
tent, removed, your soul rakes possession of an heavenly Mansion. When Self
is conquered, the Soul is crowned: But this victory is not got not gained by
might and power of fleshly force, but by the spirit of the living God; all the
auxiliary additions and contributions of the first and natural Adam, will not
help so much as hinder in this combat and conflict; no less then a
celestial Army, a multitude of heavenly hosts can do this work. Not he that
boweth down upon his knees, that kneeleth upon the ground, that worshippeth in
the earthy Adam, but he that keeps on his legs, that stands on his feet, he
that stands steadfast in the everlasting Gospel, Doctrine, Righteousness and
faith of the Lord Jesus the heavenly Adam* not he that lies down and takes
his rest at the earthy springs and fountains of fleshly, natural, created
perfection, excellency, joy, satisfaction, etc. but he that only lappeth and
away): He has that. Midianisish man, that enemy Self, that carnal mind
which is enmity against God: He it is, I say, Canis ad Nilum.
that has all enemies delivered in to his hands, and subdued under his feet.
And yet how many forsake their feet, their walking in Christ Jesus the Lord,
and the faith of the Gospel; kneeling upon the ground of the earthy Adam,
under pretense of devorion and divine Worship to God. Gideons soldiers were to
be proved at the wawater, Judge. 7.4, 5. And Israel provoked God at the waters,
Psalm 106.32. Your trial also is like to be at the waters of the first Adam,
out of whom all humane glory and perfection (as ail things at the beginning
were brought out of those waters, Genesis 1.2, etc.) is produced, formed, and (as
it were) created. Though Christ (like Gideon) bring you to the perfection (and
further then that) of the natural and created state, it is nor that you should
lie down and live in it, but rather lap at it and leave it. Cleanse not your
soul with water only, but bathe it in that open Fountain of water and blood,
Zech. 13.1. 1 Io. 5.6. This (like the river Brecos) will turn black into white,
Es. 1.18.
scarlet and crimson into the likeness of wool and snow: this is the Jordan in
Israel, Joh. 9.7.
where leprosyes are cleansed, the pool of Siloam (or sent, i.e, whither you
are sent) that restores to spiritual sight from natural blindness. Rev. 3.18.


The gold I present your Ladyship with may happily be soyld a little on the
outside, by the earthen vessel it is brought in; an experimental construction
and a spiritual interpretation will make it bright and glistering. I know no
other treasure that will enrich your heart, nor is there any thing else worth
your acceptance, from the hand of him whose heart does, and ever will
exceedingly rejoice in the prosperity and stability of your foul.

What was said to the General at Windsor, as it was written in a Letter
shortly after it was spoken.
Brother,
IN my last by H. W. the Carrier, I intimated somewhat to you, concerning my
present condition; which if you should hear of by others, might happily be
mis-reported unto you, and raise some jealousy and trouble of spirit in you,
and the rest of my friends.

Therefore that you may know the certainty of my state, I do, with mine own
hand write unto yon, and shall truly inform you of things; more particularly of
such as respect my relation to the Army.

When I lay at Autrie, in Devonshire, the Lord began to confound my thoughts
concerning the present War; my spirit was much taken off from following that
course any longer, as a way that God seemed to have left, and therefore should
wither and dye; but he would set up his Kingdom, and bring forth his own
glory, and his peoples safety, another way. Strong reasonings there were Pro
and Con, and many disputes in my heart, whether to leave the Army then, or no:
during which conflict in my self, my Colonel, Mr John Pickering, fell sick
and died. By his death the Lord seemed to satisfy me, and to put an end to all
my enquiries; I thought that it was his mind and will that I should abide no
longer in that way: With this I sat down well contented for a time.

December. 16. I buried my Col: at Lyme, without any customary ceremony at all,
and the next day departed, with a resolution not to return again to exercise,
or to be considered in the notion of a Chaplain to the Regiment any more: Of
which resolution I privately acquainted one or two of my friends, but did not
publicly take my leave of the Regiment, for my heart was not quite taken off
from those worldly advantages which came in that way. Then I came through the
coasts to visit my friends, among whom I was silent, though I had great
disputes still in my self, and was at much uncertainty in my spirit, whether
to fir still or no. I durst not discover my mind unto you, and the rest of my
friends, for fear that either I should grieve you, or that you would persuade
me contrary to my own will. So I came to London, where I acquainted some
friends with my thoughts and workings of heart, and desired them to find out
some way of employment for me; for I was not weary of the Army only, but (such
as it was) of my Ministry too. They told me I was under a temptation, and
wished me not to give place to the Devil. With much love and good intention,
they persuaded me to proceed, not considering that the Lord is blasting and
breaking down this Antichristian and Babylonish form of Ministry now so much
magnified in England, and that he will put a more pure, faithful andeffectuall
ministry into the hands of his Saints. Many worldly and carnal arguments they
urged to me, such as my own covetous and deceitsull heart had laid hold on
before, but now stuck more closely unto, being pressed again by friends: So I
took up new resolutions, and did return again to the Army, to that which I
had lately vomited up, my dogged nature barking at the approach and appearing
of God.

But God, who is just and holy in all his ways, pursued me with a strong
wind, his spirit wrought trouble and disquiet in me, and rai sed a continual
tempest in, and round about me all the while I lay, and remained in this broken
bark and splitted ship, unto which I had committed my self for security, ease
and perfect honor; for such like were the motives of my return and entrance
again into the Army: only for a little season I had some calm in my spirit,
when the Army was marching to London, with engaged resolutions to follow truth
and righteousness, and to oppose oppression, cruelty, violence, corruption and
injustice among men in the earth, though of place, power, and abused authority:
herein I was carried with all freedom, peace, clearness and cheerfulesse of
spirit. But when men began to neglect their under takings, to falsify their
vows, to turn aside and corrupt their ways before the Lord, I was at a
stand. But my dull and dark heart could not see the end of the Lord, till he
sent a voice into the Wilderness, and after that a Vision into his Temple;
then I discerned the way of the Almighty. While I walked in my confusions and
distractions, as in a wilderness, the Voice cried by Mr Sedgwick and Mr
Saltmarsh, Forsake, Forsake, and come out of these crooked and carnal ways
and paths, and come into more strict and spiritual courses and enjoyments: I
heard the sound of words, as. of a mighty rushing wind, but could not tell
whence it came; I did not clearly understand that it was of the Lord, but
thought it had been the strong workings of their own melancholy and private
fancyes: nor could I tell whether it would go; I did not know that the Lord
would breath into my heart the same or the like evidences which were given to
them, nor did he as yet. But after this wind came an Earthquake, which shaked
my earthly, carnal and worldly frame; the oppositions, disputes and reasonings
of my earthly heart began to be moved; objections came in amain, and my
distractions increased: Sometimes the flesh (and Satan together) would put me
forward with motives of pride, vainglory, singularity, popular applause,
getting a name, becoming famous, eminent and be taken notice of, as Mr.
Sedgwick, Mr. Saltmarsh were: and why sbould not I say something as well as
they? By and by I was discouraged upon the same grounds; and thus the
temptation wrought; Why should I so play the hypocrite and seek the the praise
of men? And thus I was tortured between two, and lay in a trembling condition:
the two seeds, the two Nations, Flesh and Spirit strove in the womb of my
heart together: fleshly fear and discouragements, fleshly pride and boldness
striving which should come forth first. Fleshly fear, discouragements, pride
and boldness one Seed, the spirit, the other Seed.
But before either could come to the birth the the Spirit caught it by the
heel, and made it halt that it could not rise to its height, nor run to its end.

This earthquake within me removed me from London, December. 11. 1647. I could
not rest till I went to Windsor to ease my thoughts before the General and some
others. December. 13. I came thither: my objections and confusions followed me,
and lay sore upon me. The next day I pressed into the General Counsel of War,
where I was tormented between fear and boldness. My time was then; fain I
would have spoken, and was almost angry with God, because he would nor suffer
me: but the Lords time was not yet; and an answer was given into me that (the
Commissioners o Parliament being there, to whom I haf no word from the Lord) it
was not seasonable.

When I was thus silenced, a fire followed the earthquake, and entered into my
bones and bowels, for that (an occasion being offered by L. G. Cromwell seeing
me there, and coming to me with much courtesy and respect) I spoke a few words
unto him, but not to his satisfaction nor mine because of the present business
of the Council interrupting. This fire or new wine of the Lord wrought in my
body beyond the usual and accustomed manner and measure after my travel and
change of air. Still I endeavored to disbur then my thoughts to the General
or some others of the Army, but I found no convenient opportunity for that end,
for the Lord was not in the wind, earthquake, or fire, so as to bring forth
what he had formed in me; I thought that was not the time, nor place, nor way,
wherein God would speak by me, and therefore resolved to return to London and
send my mind in writing to the Army. As I was resolving thus to do, a small
still voice (and but small and very still) Came unto me, set me upon my legs,
composed my spirit, silenced all my carnal reasonings and disputes, made me
sir down in quiet assurance and confident expectation from the Lord, bid me go
yet again to the General, and told me, Dec. 18.
He would be with me. So I went in a dark misty morning, and as Iwas going, it
was said unto me, that I should speak unto them in a day like their condition,
full of clouds and darkness. When I came to the Generals Quarters, I found him
in the orchard alone; with all reverence and respect I addressed my self unto
him, though it is reported that I never put off my hat, nor gave him any honor
at all: I told him that I had a message to him, and must entreat his patience
to hear it. Hedesired me to walk into the house, and said, he would come
presently, and nothing sbould interrupt his hearing of what I had to say. When
he came in, I applied my self to his Excellency, and (after some digression
caused by the Scoutmaster) I spoke more particularly to this effect unto him.

Sir, you are (like Ephraim) oppressed and broken in judgment, you know not
what to do, nor which way to turn; your understanding is lost, your counsel
and wisdom blasted; you know not how to manage or dispose your Army as
formerly you have don; all which the General confessed. Thus (said I) you are
at a loffe every way; and all because like Ephraim, you have willinglyfollowed
after the commands of men, and not of God Then he was pleased to give me a
particular account of his Principles and Actions, in reference to the war, from
his first taking up of Arms unto that day. The Parliament, he said, was his
Mother, and put the sword into his hand; which he never took up to pull down
authority, but to relieve the oppressed. I replied, true, Sir, the Parliament
was your mother that brought you forth, and gave you life and power to act in
the way yon have don; it put the sword into your hand to suppress the violence
of the oppressor; yea, the Lord of hosts was with you as a mighty man of war;
he guided your connrell and strengthened your hand; he covered your head, and
kept you in the day of battle went before you, and chased your enemy; he gave
you success and victory; prospered your designs; and did great and wouderfull
things by you. But your mother the Parliament, became unjust, corrupt, and
oppressing; the Lord bid you plead with this your mother, as an harlot, and a
wife of whordome. You did so, and did well in so doing: you refused to disband,
you engaged with the Army to do justice, to relieve the oppressed, Hos. 2.2.
to purge the Houses, etc. you came to London with that resolution, but have
neglected to do what you promised, and now the Kingdom cries and groans under
your neglect as much as under the former oppressions. God has persuaded me
that you will bear with me, and therefore I shall with all freedom and
plainness speak unto your Excellency what is in my heart.

Sir, You have committed great adultery and defiled your self with much
uncleannes; you clime up into the bed of a strumpet, a whore and an adusterous
woman: for now the Commissioners of Parliament are here, you join and mix your
counsels with them, and will do nothing without them, though they remain in the
state they were, when you first pleaded against them; only the eleven Members
are withdrawn; and yet you think to settle this Nation in peace and qiuetnesse.
But what peace so long as the witchcrafts and whordoms are so many? No, God
will weaken your hands, and wither your hopes; yon shall not prosper as you
have done, because you have forsaken the Rock of Israel. The neglect of their
undertakings: the General did (for the most part) confess, but somethings he
excused. Moreover concerning the Army, I said:

The whole Army is like unto an Island of Willowes, confusion and distraction
compasses it about like waters; they nor you have not any bridge or boat to
get out; you know not which way to turn or go for safety; your own counsels
and policies, your carnal reason and Wisdom in which you now act so much;
some sudden flashes of Repentance and Reformation all these and the like give
you up and bind you till the enemy has put out vour eyes, brought you to his
mill and made sport with ye. Other things fell in to discourse, as touching
Mr. Sedgwick, Mr. Saltmarsh, and the Agitators, which I shall omit; these
things were so fastened and lay so sore on my spirit two or three days before I
spoke to the General, that I could by no means shake them off, till I had cast
them at his seet. No sooner had I delivered my message, but my bowels were
settled, and the whole frame of my body reduced to a good temper again. The
General gave ear to all that I said with much candor and clemency, took all
in good part and (as asterwards also by Mr. Peter's gave me thanks for my plain
dealing, as he called it; so I bowed before him and took my leave.

The next day Mr Peter's was to preach in the morning, and I in the afternoon;
hard censures and conclusions were put upon my sermon, by some from whom (a
little before) J had received thanks for it: but the Lord showed me so plainly
from what spirit it proceeded in them, that I had no cause at all of
Repentance for any thing I had said; and if there had been any that had taken
my sermon of whom I might have had the notes, I would have published it with
this Relation for all to judge.

My business being now ended I was snatched from thence with a strong hand (
December. 21.) and carried on my way rejoicing: that night I came to Sir Thomas
Evelings in Surrey; early in the morning before day ( December. 23.) as I was
lying in my bed (Major Axel lying a sleep by me) my sleep brake from me, and
the Lord suffered Satan to tempt me; J was fearful at first to open my eyes,
lest J should see some ghastly and ugly sight to amaze me; but it was told me
that J should see nothing to affright; so was the Lord graciously pleased to
indulge my weakness. Being strengthened and encouraged thus from on high, I
opened my eyes, but saw nothing as yet to astonish me. The Tempter came upon me
with much eagerness and violence, took hold of both mine arms, spread them
abroad, held me down and strove earnestly to get into me, but could not. My
flesh at first was somewhat afraid, but no sooner did fear arise, but instantly
the Lord appeared in me, in the midst of my body, ten thousand times brighter
then the Sun, and spoke in me so plainly, that 100000 witnesses cannot make it
so sure unto me; that it was He that spoke unto me, as his own voice did,
which said? Stronger am I within then he that is without thee, and withal
threw off the Tempter as a very vveak thing, as little and as light as a
feather. Presently after he came and appeared before me, but stood at a
distance and durst not come near me, for the Lord yet stayed with me and in me,
and J plainly perceived that he was afraid of the glorious power and Majesty,
which was my breast plate and bulwark; yet he stood vaunting and vaporing and
breathing out high threatenings against me. He upbraided me with singularity and
vain glory, and charged me that what I had done at the Headquarters I had done
altogether in hypocrisy. Upon the accusation my flesh contracted some guilt;
for (as I told you) the deceitfulness of my heart did much to put me on, and
pull me back before I went; and yet I can truly say, that with integrity and
singleness of heart, and in faithfulness to God J discharged my self in this
matter: how this should be, you will easily discern, if you know what the two
Natures, the two Men are; what the two Nations, Seeds, principles, with their
different inclinations, motions, actions in Man are. But to proceed: No sooner
did guilt begin to fasten but immediately the Lord set himself against Satan,
and said; Take away the filthy garments from him; he spoke further with
invincible evidence, and said, Iniquity is not there; sin is at an end; the
wicked one comes and finds nothing: Now is the Accuser of the Brethren cast
out. These words though J heard them not with the ear of Sense, were spoken
with such a mighty, powerful, and effectual demonstration of truth, life and
glory, that in the strength of them J can stand against the contradictions of
the whole World; and such indeed was their efficacy, that the devil instantly
did fly and shrink away with such shame and silence as you cannot imagine. Now
(and never till now) did I know what justification is, and what it is to have
God so nigh as to justify: J understood the Notion of it long since, J mean
Notionally; and was so far acquainted with it, as to have much peace and
comfortable expectation from it, but infinitely short of this; for this was so
glorious, excellent, and transcendent that it is impossible for me to express
it.

All storms were blown over, and my soul being sweetly received into the
vision of Peace, that City where it would be; not long after J sell into a
slumbering sleep, and in a dream, me thought J heard my Dear friend Mr. Bacon,
preaching in one of the public places, with much plainness and weakness of
speech, but with great power and demonstration of the Spirit; his doctrine was
malicionsly opposed by an eloquent young man with great Wisdom and excellency
of flesh and humane accomplishments, whose mouth was soon stopped by Col. Har.
Many of rude behavior come forth cursing and banning at his doctrine, and
exclaiming on him for an heretic, scismatique, etc. This also was given into
as the interpretation of it, viz. that the appearances of God in a higher and
more spiritual way then formerly shall be contradicted and blasphemed, by Jew
rather then by Gentile, by professors more then by profane, by protestant more
then by papist, by those that keep their Church (as they say) rather then by
those that know no Church at all. If every days experience does not bring in
too full a testimony hereunto, J shall be contended to be so accounted of as
Joseph was by his brethren. Genesis 37.19.

Yesterday in the morning ( December. 27) as J was lying in my bed at Mr. Smiths
in Cheapside, the Devil came again and got under my left shoulder, moved a
little, and left me: J know he shall never set upon my Right arm, my strength,
and power, which is of, and in the Lord: he may come on my left side and stir a
little in the infirmities and weaknesses of the flesh, but the Spirit lusts
against him so, that he cannot do the evil that he would: the Lord is so
rebuking him that J begin to lay my hand on the Dragons den, and the nest of
the Adder, to come near the hole of the Asp, to play with the Serpent and
Cockatrice without hurt or fear: J could show you the meaning of this more
plainly, and tell you of my further privileges, but J forbear because J know
what the World will say.

These things J have written to you that you may not be troubled at any; rumor
whatsoever which shall arise concerning me; but know that the Lord is with me,
and has given me to rejoice in reproaches and evil speeches, as well as in
the praise of men. To 10.6, 7, 8.
The same Lord is nigh unto every one that waits for him; yea, he is over
all, and in all, that you shall not need to go hither and thither to seek him,
but rather look for him within you, and wait for his rising out of his
sepulcher of the flesh, even the flesh, who at his appearing will bring life
and immortality, to light. Fare you well.

Your loving brother, Henry Pinnell.
London, December. 28. 2647.

I know I shall seem as a Dreamer and a Deceiver to many; as an insolent and
proud man for what J have said of the Parliament and Army; but my answer to all
that censure me, is:

First, It is a very small thing with me to be judged of man, or to stand in
man's judgment day; and therefore no such thing moves me at all.

Secondly, J bless God who overcame my fears and fraylties, and made me
faithful and bold to discharge the duty which then he laid upon me, and
required of me; his spirit moved me to speak, and has (to this very day)
sealed and settled upon me an abundant great reward of much more peace and joy
then J should have had for my silence; though J seem as a deceiver to men, yet
was J true to him that trusted me.

Thirdly, Those that judge me, let them tell me, Why God did not give up Jsrael
into the hand of their enemies after he had threatened to deliver them no more,
( Judge. 10.13.) without any restriction or limitation of their amendment or
returning to him: or why he did not destroy Nineveh when he had sent Jonas
peremptorily to denounce ruin against that City without exception of
repentance or reformation, Jon. 1.2. and 3.4. Jf it be said that God secretly
reserved in himself the condition of their humiliation, and so would not
overthrow them, as he had threatened; but respite, suspend; yea, altogether
divert and withhold his judgment from them, in case they did repent; though
there be no such thing expressed: I demand then, whether or not God does not
still retain the same prerogative and liberty in himself now, as he did then?
And therefore whether men now commanded to declare the message of God to any
people or persons, are to be censured of, being led by a lying spirit, though
the thing spoken by them do not come to pass any more, then that which Jonah
said of Nineveh? And though God may suffer an evil and hurtful Angel (during
the time of Antichrists Reign) to withhold the four winds from blowing on
the Sea or Land, yet where has he bound himself from loosing those winds
again, and pouring out the spirit of prophesy upon his people?

4. If some may take liberty to revile and reproach the Authority of
Parliament, and that in the hearing of some of their members, without any
control or check: If some (and they of the more strict and precise sort of
Presbyterian Preachers too) may have the freedom to scandalize and asperse the
most faithful men of the Army, accusing them of errors, schisms, heresies,
etc. as I have heard some of them do, though they confess they never spoke
with those men they thus charge: why then may not others take the boldness
(from better grounds, and in a more honest way) to speak as freely to the
faces either of Parliament men, or Officers, or Commanders of the Army, and
reprove them for such miscarriages, which they will not deny themselves to be
guilty of? For my own part, I have not spoken so much behind the back of any
of them, as I have, or would do to their faces, esteeming it a base and
dishonest thing to do other wise.

5. Neither am I any whit displeased (as he was, Jon: 4.1.) at the prosperity,
good success, and strange victories, which God, in much mercy to this Kingdom,
has wonderfully crowned the Army with since I left it; I have the testimony of
a good conscience to rejoice in: If I was deceived, I can boldly say, the Lord
did deceive me; and, if he will have it so, it is better for me (who am but
one) to dye in the repute and credit of all men, and be counted a liar, rather
then the whole Nation (or so many godly in it) should perish. But

6. The thing is sulfilled already to me; for the Army, which once was so
beautiful and lovely in mine eye, is now become most black and ugly, God
having made me ashamed of fleshly confidence therein.

I am yet confident of what I said to some at Windsor, who asked me about the
disbanding of the Army, i. e. That it shall lie as one mountain in the scale
against another; as one hill in the balance against, another; as one potsheard
to dash against another; It is a vessel wherein is no pleasure, fitted only
to break and to be broken.

And though I know there are many precious Saints of several dispensations in
it, yet shall they more and more relinquish that way, as they grow up to more
immediate and more spiritual enjoyments. As God guides and goes before every
man, so let him walk, and let his name be praised

FINIS.
A little of the first Adam, and how occasioned.
Mr Baker,
WHen I was at Dale ( June 25.) you know my discourse in public was upon Jo.
9. At which discourse you took great offense, as appears both by your
carriage toward me, and your charge against me; which two things I shall (as I
told you) bring to public examination, that they may have an open trial, and
have verdict pass upon them accordingly.

Your carriage.
1. Your carriage, as I told you, when I had endeavored and obtained a
conference with you; I thought was very uncivil, unjust, and altogether
unbeseeming a professing Christian, much more a real Saint, contrary to the
rules of right Reason, and the Royal law of Love. For after I had ended my
discourse, you neither propounded any thing presently, wherein you were
unsatisfied, in a fair, friendly and brotherly way; nor did you come or send
to me to receive satisfaction concerning my opinion or doctrine, which might
happily be mis-understood, either by your hearing or my speaking; which it you
had don, I suppose would have been the most probable way to preserve unity and
peace; and I should very gladly have embraced any such overture from yor, but
(contrary to the principles of true Christianity) you did slanderously report
of me behind my back, bitterly inveighing against my doctrine, going from one
to another, and dissuading them from hearing mo, as being a most dangerous and
erroneous way, every way laboring to vilify and make me odious, that my person
and preaching might be brought into contempt and scorn. When I met you at
Hophill, you did peremptorily justify and maintain all that you had said and
done, as honest and lawful. This was your behavior; now whether it be suitable
to the Gospel or no; let all men judge, nay judge your self.

1. Whether it be suitable so much as to the Law? I know you contend much for
the Law to be your rule of life. Does the Law teach you to order your
conversation thus? Does the Law allow you to murder your neighbors name, to
rob and steal from him his credit and reputation among men? Do you (like
those Jews, Jer. 7.4.9.) cry the Law of the Lord, the Law of the Lord is our
rule, and yet backbite, stander, and maliciously detract contrary to the Law?
You that make your boast of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonor you
God? Surely the Uncircumcision that keeps and fulfilleth the righteousness
of the Law, To. 2.23. V. 26, 27.
shall judge and condemn the Circumcision, which by the letter transgresses
the Law: there be some that are led by the Law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus: who (though they are accounted carnal, loose and licentious, yet) live
more holily then those that are Moses Disciples, and pretend so much unto the
letter: though they be as without a Law, yet are they not so to Christ and God.
Whilst you justify your erroneous and irregular actions, you prove your self
a downright Antinomian, one that in words pleads for the Law, but walks
directly contrary to it in practice.

2 In dealing thus with me have you observed the law of equity or moral
honesty, doing as you would be done by? Or is your name and credit so little
worth, that you care not how it be traduced?

3. Does not the Scripture say, that a man is not to be rejected as a Heretic,
till after the first and second admonition? Tit. 3.10: Mat. 18.
And that a brother is to be dealt with as a brother, before he be cast off?
Wherein have you walked thus toward me? In reviling me and my doctrine behind
my back, before you ever admonished me to my face? Is the Scripture your rule?
Is this your walking up to it? Or would you be counted an Anti-Scripturist? Who
is now the erroneous man, Mr Baker?

4. When men shall see and hear of your practice to be so contrary to the
peace, purity, and profession of the Gospel, how can you escape the censure of
a seditious person, a railer, a backbiter, a factious Schismatic, causing
division, strife and contention, not endeavoring to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, as you ought to do?

Neither has the rancour and venom of your tongue kept within the bounds of
Derbyshire, but the poison thereof is spread as far as Nottingham already;
for I hear that your Brother the Schoolmaster in that place has (as
dishonestly as your self) defamed me there also. If what he has said be by
your instigation, you must be contented to bear the greatest share of his
miscarriage; if not, he has brought his own good behavior into question, and
must bear all the burden himself. It is reported by him that I deny the two
Sacraments (so called) the Supper, and Baptism: Upon what grounds I know nor,
for I never had any discourse with him; I do not know your Brother, nor does
he (I suppose) know me: I believe ye are brethren, your carriage is so much
alike.

But because he has interposed between us with his new raised rumor,
Digression.
I shall step aside to speak a word to thar, and then rereturne to the
examination of your charge,

1. For the Supper.

First, I never forbad the use thereof to any until the coming of Christ.

Secondly, If by the coming of Christ you understand it according to the vulgar
sense; for his last coming at the end of the world: I leave you and every man
to your faith therein. But

Thirdly, Why may not the coming of Christ, and that (until be come) be
understood of that coming of Christ in the spirit, which he foretold before his
departing out of the body.

2. As for Baptism, I leave you and others also to the freedom of your faith
therein. But if you will impose the observation thereof, and the obedience
thereunto upon me as to an Ordinance, I must first be satisfied.

First, Whether (by Baptism) you understand Poedo-baptism, Childish-baptism,
or the Baptism of Children? If so, then where is either your precept or
pattern for so doing? Or

Secondly, If you will have Baptism of water to be restrained, and to belong
only to those that are adult and of ripe years; yet then, where is your
authority from any institution of Christ after his resurrection, who had before
by his death put an end to foregoing Types and Figures of himself? Therefore,

1. That place ( Mat. 18.19.) will not hold Water, nor serve your turn at all
in the sense you urge it, and would have it brought unto; for those words (into
the Name) do rather exclude then imply, in, into, or with water.

2. Nor is it enough that you tell me of the Apostles practice, that they did
baptize (with water) and that after the resurrection and ascension of Christ,
unless you produce a warrant from Christ, authorizing them so to do, and
commanding them and us, by way of injunction, to submit unto it, as a necessary
and binding duty. But I say,

First, If you will make the practice of the Apostles your rule in one thing,
why not in another, the ground and authority being equal for both, and
therefore both alike binding? And then, why do you not anoint your sick with
oil, as the Apostles did, Ja. 5.14.
and as James commands you? Is the use and virtue of anointing lost, and does
the efficacy of Baptism last? Will water keep longer then oil? Again; why
do you not circumcise, as Paul did? You will say, Circumcision is abolished,
but Baptism is not: Was John any more then a servant, as Moses was? why then
must he abide in the House of God, when the Son himself is come? I do not find
that Paul did repent for shaking hands with Moses in circumcising Timothy, more
then he did for saluting John, in baptizing some of the Corinthians. Yet,

Secondly, I deny not, but that the Apostles might have an indulgent
dispensation given unto them, suitable to the infancy of the Church then, as
others may have now answerable to the lowness and weakness of the faith of
some in these days, whom I leave to stand or fall to their own Master. But if
Baptism be enforced as a Law, I shall question two things, and very much
scruple.

1. Whether it be not an adding to the Book of God to interline and insert
the Baptism of Children into the Bible, when there is no such thing mentioned
by Christ or his Apostles in all the New Testament, either by way of Command or
Custom?

2. Whether to conclude Baptism of water, and so consequently to impose it on
any, from that in Mat. 28.19 be not a part of will worship; a making void the
command of Christ by men's traditions; and a taking away from the Book of God?
For whereas Christ there brings up Baptism to its height, fullness, glory,
purity and perfection; some go about to empty, weaken and make void the sense
and scope of that Scripture, by applying that to water, which Christ expressly
attributes and appropriateth to the Father, Himself and the Spirit.

I have not the faith to believe, that the Ratiocinations and arguments of men,
the conclusions, inferences and inductions of Reason are sufficient to make any
Ordinance in the Church of Christ, without an immediate, plain, direct, M.
Den, M. Tomes, etc.
punctual and divine institution from Christ. But enough has been said of
this by others already: Therefore, Mr Baker, I shall pass from the manner of
your carriage, and come to examine the matter of your charge.

You charge
1. You charge me that I should say the first Adam was borne (or created) blind;
and this, you say, is error, heresy and false doctrine.

Answer.

First, I did say that every man, by nature, is borne blind, in respect of
discerning the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Secondly, I said also, That the first Adam in his created state was blind, as
to the understanding of the Mystery of God in Christ to be revealed unto him,
or as to the true knowledge of himself and the condition he was then in. He
had the sight of sense, he saw his wife, the tree and the apple that he did
eat; but he had not a sight of the imperfection and shortness of the present
state he was then in, to that which he was afterward to be raised up unto, in
Christ. For,

1. If he had known the property of the Tree of life, (which represented
Christ) he would not have forsaken and rejected it, but rather how eaten of the
fruit thereof, that he might have lived; as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2.8. If
the Princes of this world had known the Wisdom of God, they would not have
crucified the Lord Jesus: If Adam that was the chiefest and most excellent in
knowledge above all other creatures in the world; if he had known the mystery
of Christ in the Tree of life, he would not have been seduced by the Serpent
to seek his perfection in the forbidden fruit. Man that is ignorant of Gods
Righteousness, goes about to establish his own, Romans 10.3.

2. Why else is not the opening of their eyes affirmed of Adam and Eve, till
after their eating of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.7? What coverings had they
(of the divine nature, glory and righteousness of God) in the day of their
Creation? and could they see the want thereof before their eyes were opened?

Let me further illustrate this thing thus; A child as soon as it is born, is
said to be an innocent, harmless child, Phil. 3.6.
free from the guilt or commission of any sin; is his nature therefore pure,
perfect, holy, heavenly, and void of all inclinations to sin? Again, Paul says
of himself, that he was blameless, as touching the righteousness of the Law,
before his conversion: had he therefore an adequate righteousness, every way
agreeable and equal to the spirituality and holiness of the Law? Before the
Law came he had little or no sin, he was lusty and strong in his fleshly
confidence, he came into no misfortune or danger of his life: but when the Law
entered, his sin abounded, his strength weakened, his life withered and dyed.
Romans 5.20. Cap. 7.9. Sin was in his nature before, but not discovered till the
Commandment came; it lay in him as a dead thing, under ground, out of sight,
and out of mind, it troubled him not, it was as a benumbed or dead member, he
was not sensible of it at all; Romans 7.8.
Without the Law, sin is dead.

Thus the first Adam, He was created innocent (as they speak) harmless, and
void as yet of Doing any evil till the act of his disobedience in eating: but
his condition, state, or nature, in the day of his Creation, was not as pure,
perfect, and holy as the Law of God: And the commandment came unto him to kill
him, to make sin abound and become exceeding sinful, that he might not think
his present state sufficient, Genesis 1.31. Nakedness is want of divine
righteousness. Genesis 3.11.
and content himself therewith, but dye unto that, and seek a better state in
Christ. He was naked and without the Wedding garment at first, but was not
ashamed of his nakedness; he was showed, told, and convinced of his nakedness
by his presumptuous undertaking, of being more perfect in his own Way. And
therefore God reasons thus with him, Who told thee that thou wast naked? have
thou eaten, etc? Thus Adam who was alive before the commandment came, is now
killed by the Letter, and dies to that first life, his resurrection to a better
life being by the Promised Seed.

Mr. Baker.

But Adam in his Creation was not as Paul and all men else, or as children are
now since the Fall, defiled with any original polution.

Answer.

First, I do not say that Adam was contaminated with any act of sin, or
uncleanness before his fall; yet this does not prove him to be as exactly holy
and perfect as the Law, for if he had been so, how came he so crooked and
contrary to the Law? The perfection of the Law consists in perpetuity as well
as in purity, and such should Adams state have been if it had been equal to
the Law. Yet,

Secondly, If Adam had not in him the Principles and Seeds of sin, how could he
have transgressed and become a sinner? for the spawn of wickedness and evil
in the Devil had not been enough to produce and propagate the prodigous
offspring of iniquity and sin, unless there had been suitable matter in Adams
nature to mix with his serpentine suggestion and temptation. It is said, Joh.
14.30. Mat. 4.11.
That the Prince of the world came to Christ, and found nothing in him. He
could never fasten any temptation on Christ, all his assaults could not prevail
over him; had he found as little in the first Adam, as he did in the Second,
there had been the like success, and no monster of Misery had been brought
into the World.

Mr. Baker.

The Cause of the Cause, is the cause also of the effect, therefore if Adam had
but the seeds and Principles of sin in him, at his Creation, though he were not
actually a sinner, yet you make God the author of sin.

Answer.

First, What if I say, that God was the cause without which Adam had not
fallen, Causa sine qua non. not causa impulsiva.
is there any hurt in that? God might have made Adam in such an Immutable
condition that he could not have fallen, and then certainly you would have
said, God was the cause of his standing.

Secondly, A blind child is not in so good a condition as one that has his
eyes; yet the blindness of the child is neither his fault, nor his fathers,
Luke 3.38
though it be the cause of the child's stumbling and falling. Adam is called,
The Son of God, this Adam was created blind, as to the spiritual understanding
of divine things; Io. 9.2, 3. Ephesians. 2.10.
yet neither did this man (Adam) uor (God) his parent sin, in that he was born
blind; but that the Workmanship of God in Christ might be manifested in him. It
was not the fault, but the Wisdom and pleasure of God to make Adam so, that he
might make way for the exaltation of his Holy child Jesus, and the magnifying
of the riches of his grace and love in Christ.

Thirdly, Once more take it thus; A virgin not yet defloured, but retaining
still her chastity as in the day she was born, you will not say, but this
chaste and pure virgin has the Seeds and Principles of propagation, and a
desire too of natural issue; yet this Damsel cannot be reproved of
fornication as an harlot, nor has she sinned if she marry and have children;
she is not to be accused of folly, unless she give up her self to a stranger
in an illegitimate and meretricious way. Who more chaste and innocent then
Adam? yet did he violate that primitive and created purity, when he turned
aside to couple and close with the allurements of the Serpent. He had not
offended, if he had betrothed his soul to God in the Sacrament of the tree of
life; yea, it had been more honor, happiness and safety, for him so to have
done.

The Devil is called the Father of murder and lies; Ioh. 8.44.
indeed he is the Father of all that is evil; and therefore it is said, 1 John
1.5.19. that the whole world (all that is of the word in opposition to God)
lies in the Wicked one: every wicked and sinful act lies in the loins of
the Devil, as the Father thereof; but except Satan had gendred with the
lawful heart of Adam, there had been noe such bare born brat as sin ever
brought into the World, Iam. 1.13 15.
there was first lust in Adam, which by the injections of Satan, conceived and
brought forth sin; Genesis 2.17
when he had completely finished his sin in the actual eating of the forbidden
fruit, then he dyed and not before, though he was mortal at first. Satan is
the Father, man's heart the Mother of all evil.

Mr. Baker.

But Adam was Spiritual at first, and therefore had not so much as any
propensity or inclination to sin of himself, but what he was enticed unto by
Satan: nor can it be said, that he was blind, as to the understanding of
spiritual things, in his created state.

Answer.

If Adam was spiritual or heavenly, in his created state, what is the meaning,
then of that in, 1 Cor. 15, 47. where it is said that the first man is of the
earth, earthy? And this is spoken of Adam before his fall, the materials of
which he was formed at first, were but dust and earth; Genesis 2.7. yea, God, who
best knows his frame, mold, nature, and constitution of his being, called his
name but Adam; man, or earth, Genesis 5.2. 1 Per. 1.7 18.
In the day he was created: Or, as some will have it, red earth; which if it be
meant of gold, to intimate the golden and excellent state of Adam above other
creatures, yet was he but red earth, or gold that perishes; gold that could
not make him rich to God: but the Saints gold which they have of the second
Adam is tried in the fire, and makes rich indeed. Rev. 3.18.

Again, the Apostle in distinguishing the two Adams, calls the one natural, and
the other spiritual, and concludes the natural to be before the spiritual;
and that the First man, in his greatest excellency and highest perfection, viz.
when he was a living Soul, was but natural and earthy. 1 Cor. 15.44, 45, 46,
47. how you will prove Adam to be spiritual I cannot yet understand.

Mr. Baker.

Adam was at first endowed with a spiritual understanding, knowledge,
righteousness, holiness, and every way like God, Immutability only excepted;
for he knew the nature property, and use of every thing, and was able to give
names to every creature.

Answer.

First, That a natural man might understand the virtue, quality, causes,
operations, and effects of natural things; yet not discern the glory and
excellency of supernatural and divine things; these none knows, but the
spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2.11. But,

Secondly, If Adam were in all things like unto God, Immutability only
excepted, where then was his Eternity, omnisciency, omnipresence, omnipotency,
and the other Attributes of God?

Mr. Baker.

If Adam had not been in a spiritual condition, how can he, be said to fall,
for his falling presupposes him to be in a better and higher state before,
then he was after his fall?

Answer.

To this I reply, by these instances, Instan.
and ask you again:

First, Suppose a man to be clear and free from debt, one that owes nothing to
any man, but has no stock or substance of his own to make him to be accounted
a rich man; yet he is a very rich man in comparison of him that has nothing,
and owes much besides; that is so far in debt, he knows not which way to get
out. But may not he that had nothing (though owed nothing neither) run into
debt, and become a poorer man then he was, when he neither had any thing, nor
owed any thing. Some men are said to be 1000 l. worse then a groat; and as the
Poet said,

-- Nil habet, and tamen ille
Perdidit, infoelix, totum nil -- Juven.

He that has nothing, may lose even that whole no thing. Secondly, A civil
honest man that has but Moral principles and qualifications of
righteousness, justice, equity, temperance, moderation and sobriety; Such a
man is more excellent and lovely, then a profane, rude and wicked man; yet may
this man fall to lewd and vile courses, though he never was a true Christian
and believer of the Gospel, does his following of devilish practices now prove
that he was a Saint before? does his present walking, like an infidel, prove
that once he had the faith of God?

Thirdly, may not a pure virgin invitiate her primitive chastity, and become a
notorious strumpet? yet you will not conclude, that therefore she was lawfully
married,-first to an honest man because she is nowfallen from her first state,
and has lost her virginity.

First, Adam was created in a wealthy state, in as much as he was not all
indebted to the Law, though he was not in possession or seized of the true
riches of divine righteousness and glory. He had the perfection of an earthy
nature by Creation; but he had the participation of the divine nature by
Promise. Genesis 3.15. 2 Pet. 1.4.

Secondly, He had all moral and natural excellency belonging to his earthy
and created state. But was he ever the more endowed with the true treasure of
divine righteousness and holiness, for having she image and superscription of
the Heavenly King, upon no more but a piece of earth and clay? It must be more
current coin of the purest silver and gold upon which the Kings picture must
be stamped to make a man really rich in the possession of it. It must be the
divine nature, Jesus Christ the second Adam, the Heavenly man, that eternal
word of God which passes through the seven sold dispensation of God to the
world, in the seven days works of his hands, as silver through a furnace; and
is brought forth in spiritual purity, Psalm. 12.
the purity of the spirit and divine affection, this is that upon which God
stamps his glory, and by which man is eternally happy.

Thirdly, Adam had a virgin-like inn ocency in his created state; but not a
Matrimonial Union unto God: Or, at best, he was bound to God but with the bond
of creation, which was as himfelf earthy; or the bond of the first Covenant,
the Covenant of works; during which time he was barren and unfruitful in the
knowledge of God, and in respect of any spiritual issue of divine comfort,
immortal peace, joy unspeakable and glorious, etc. Hos. 2.19.20.
But (in the second Adam) God does betroth his people to himself, in Mercy,
Righteousness, and Truth, whereby they shall KNOW the Lord: their Espousals
are for ever, and such as whereby they have a true Spiritual knowledge of God.
The Lord does unite his people to himself in Christ, by a New Covenant, Es.
10.54
the Covenant of Grace; such a Matrimonial engagement that cannot admit of a
divorce; such sweet enjoyments have they from Him, such Conjugall and
Spiritual Communion with Him, that they increase and multiply in their Joys,
Peace, Comfort, Rest, etc, the barren is made fruitful and a joyful mother of
many children. Es. 54.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ps. 113.9.

Mr. Baker.

It it said, Eccles. 7.29. that God made man Upright, and what is that else but
heavenly and spiritual?

Answer.

First, in the creation ( Genesis 1.) you shall find that God approved of his work
(as he made it) as Good: and when he took a view of it altogether he concluded
that it was very Good. Genesis 1.31. It is said of every thing as well as Man,
that it was very good; will you therefore conclude that every thing that was
made, is Heavenly and Spiritual?

Secondly, Seeing there are so many Scriptures against you, to prove that Adam
was but earthy and natural, and not so much as one Scripture for you, to prove
expressly that he was spiritual; what ground have you to conclude so?

Thirdly, It Is true, Adam was made Right, strait, direct, even, plain, smooth,
(or, 1 Cor. 15.40.41.
Upright, but not Righteous, Holy; or if Naturally and Morally, Righteous and
Holy; yet not spiritually so. He had a rectitude suo genere, a purity and
perfection in its kind; answerable to his created being. The first Adam had
(no more then a terrestrial body, and a glory suitable unto it: but the glory of
Terrestrial is one and the glory of Celestial is another. Adams glory was as
far inferior to the glory of Christ, as the Moon and Stars are below the
Sun. The first Adams glory was to fall like the Stars, and totally to be
eclipsed, as the Moon may be. His hare, and even the ministration of his
Condemnation was Glory, how much rather then shall the Dispensation of
righteousness by the second Adam exceed in Glory? For even that glorious stare
of Adam, 2 Cor. 3.10 11.
which was but mean and transitory, had no glory in respect of Christ's glory,
which excels and remains, as the Apostle discourses concerning the
transcending liberty of the Saints under the Dispensation of the Everlasting
Gospel by the Spirit of Glory, above what the Jews had under the beggarly
Rudiments of the Law.

So far as the Natural Jew can heighten himself toward Perfection by all the
furniture and accommodations of the worldly Sanctuary and the carnal
Commandment, so far may he be a Post-represention (as I may so say) unto us of
the first Adam. For as the first Temple was to be destroyed, and all the
Worship and Services thereunto to belonging to be abolished; as the outward Jew
was to be cut off, that the inward Jew might sprowt forth; so may we thereby be
put in mind, that we cannot enter into our Heavenly house, Christ Jesus, that
building of God; till this earthy house, 2 Cor. 5.1.
the Natural state of the first Adam be dissolved. We take not possession of
our glorious Mansion House, Christ Jesus, in the promised Seed, till our old
mud-wall, earthy house of the first Adam be fallen about our ears, and become a
ruinous heap; and God (as the Apostle says of the Law and first Covenant)
takes away the first Adam, Heb. 10.9 To. 8.20.
and subjecteth the first Creation to Vanity, that he may bring in the second
Adam, who establishes and sustaineth all things by the word of his power, Heb.
1.3.7.19.
and with him a better hope, the hope of gaining a better state in Christ, then
was lost by Adam.

When the soul is once environed with, and wrapped up in the glory of Christ
Jesus, it will tread and trample upon all the excellency of the earthy man.
Rev. 12.1
It will not disdain and scorn the sublunary dross and dung of his fallen
state only, but it will also despise and contemn the very Lunary glory, the
shining excellencies, the gold, silver, pearls and precious stones, the
perfection of the natural and created state.

Mr Baker.

But Adam was made in the likeness and Image of God; and is not that
spiritual?

Answer.

First, No like is the same: Adam was made in a similitudinary and
adumbraticall Righteousness and Holiness, Nullum simile est idem. Ephesians. 4.24.
but not in Righteousness and Holiness of Truth.

Secondly, He was the shadow of the Substance, the Picture of the body: If a
Painter draw the picture of a man never so exactly, will you say it is a living
picture?

Thirdly, If the image of God in Adam be enough to make him spiritually holy
and perfect, how will you defend Christ from being a sinner? Gal. 4.4. Romans 8.3.
For it is said, that God made his Son of a woman, under the Law, and sent him
in the likeness of sinful flesh: therefore Christ was really a sinner: does
this follow? Yet this is your ratiocination, and the manner of your dispute.
Adam (you say) was made in the likeness of God, who was spiritual holy,
therefore Adam was so too: Why will not my argument hold as well as yours? And
then it follows, that because Christ was made in the likeness of sinful
flesh, therefore he had sinful flesh really in him and about him, more then
by imputation only, if Adam had a spiritual holiness more then by imputation.

Fourthly, Not to dispute the Rise and Original of the soul, whether it be,
extraduce annon, by propagation or infusion? I conceive Adam may be said to be
made in the Image of God in a twofold consideration.

1. Either as he was a living soul. In Luke the third, and verse 38. Adam is
called the Son of God, as Enoch was the Son of Seth, and as Seth was the Son of
Adam: for there the Genealogy of Christ after the flesh, is carried back and
driven upward from Joseph, and terminated in God.

Mistake not what I say, but read it with a grain of salt. I do not say, that
Adam was the Son of God by natural generation, Caution.
according to a gross, vulgar and carnal construction, no more then any of
the rest were the sons one of another by Creation; but as there was a continued
derivation of life, by successive propagation; the fountain of which life was
in God.

Now as God is said to be the living God, and as Adam is said to be a living
soul; so Adam (as living, or having life) may be said to be in the Image of
God. This seems to me to be the sense and scope of that in Genesis 1.26. compared
with Chap. 2.7. For that man which God would have to be made in his own image;
that man, even when he was completed and perfectly finished; the most that was
said of him is, that he became a living soul. Here is the altitude and height
of the first Adams perfections, as the Apostle takes measure of him: There is
(says he) a Natural body, which is the first Adam, and was made a living
soul, 1 Cor. 15.44, 45. A beast, quatenus Anmalis, as he is a living creature,
is the image of a living man; yet this does not prove a beast to be rational;
nor can you conclude that Adam was spiritual, because he had a natural life.

If Adam had the image of God but only as he was a living soul, Ob.
then every living creature, as Beasts, Birds, etc. may be said to have the
image of God as well as man.

1. They might, indeed, be said to have the image of God, Sol.
if the Scripture did any where so speak. But

2. God, who is Perfectissimus, most perfect, would attribute his image to the
most perfect Creature, Man.

3. Beasts, Birds, etc. have the image of God in a large sense, i. e. as they
(with the whole creation) bear the stamp of the eternal wisdom and power of
the Godhead, Romans l.20.

Secondly, Adam may be said to be made in the image of God, as he was a
public person, representing Christ; and so he is said to be the figure of
him that was to come, Romans 5.14. Adam was before Christ in priority of time and
appearance in the flesh; as the picture of a King sent unto a foreign
Princess, may be said to be first (discovered and seen) in being in that
Country; 1 Cor. 15.45.
and thus the Natural is before the Spiritual. But in priority of cause
Christ was before Adam, in the nature of his existence; as the Efficient before
the Effect, and as the body or substance must be before the picture which does
represent the body; and thus Christ is Alpha as well as Omega, the beginning
and end, the first as well as the last, Rev. 22.13.

God, who is Essential but One, has a threefold manifestation of himself.

First, In the livelesse and dark shadow of the Law; in the Temple which had a
graduall holiness, a place holy, more holy and holiest of all. In the
sacrifice, etc. The Law was but the shadow, not the Image, Heb. 10.1.

Secondly, In the lively (though dim and dull) semblance of man; in which
thick earth the divine majesty had but a little weak splendor and luster.
Nor did the eternal power of the Godhead stamped on Adam, make him divine, or
of an eternal power like it self: Neither did the image of Gods spiritual
Righteousness and Holiness in man make him spiritually righteous and holy.
The Kings image stamped upon a piece of Clay, does not make the Clay to be Gold,
nor living Clay.

Thirdly, In the living substance, Christ Jesus, who is the brightness of his
Fathers glory, and the very character of his being, Joh. 1.17.
Heb. 1.3. This, and this only is that Son, that only begotten Son, that came
out of the bosom of the Father, which alone can (spiritually) declare and make
known God as he is a Spirit, and bring forth abundance of Grace,
Righteousness, Life and Immortality to light, Romans 5.17, 18. 2 Timothy 1.10.
Immortality comes by Christ; Adam was not Immortal, nor Spiritual.

Abraham had two sons, one after the flesh, the other by promise; the elder
was after the flesh, and was not to inherit with the younger, which was by
promise, Gal. 4.22, 23, 30.

Our Abraham also, God, the High and Holy One, the Eternal Father, has two
Sons, one after the flesh (as I may say) the natural or first Adam; the
other after the spirit, Christ, the promised seed. The elder Son, or first
Adam, had not the Inheritance of Righteousness, Life and Glory settled upon
him; but Christ, the second Adam, was appointed heir of all things. Ishmael,
though he was the firstborn of Abraham, Heb. 1.2.
had no possession of Abraham's heritage; the promised Land was not entalyd on
him, neither was he counted for the seed. And why should we think that Adam,
though he was the firstborn of God by creation, had an hereditary right to
heaven, righteousness or (Divine) holiness, seeing he is not counted for the
Seed. The inheritance of true divine righteousness, etc is conferred and
confirmed on Christ, the spiritual Isaac, and those that are his, Gal. 3.14,
16, 29.

Mr Baker.

We are exhorted, Ephesians. 4.24. to put on the new man, which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness. And Col. 3.10. the Apostle tells them,
That they had put on the new man, which is renewed after the image of him that
created him. What else does the Apostle there mean (by the new man) but the
first Adam recovered from his fall, and reduced to his pristine and primitive
state?

Answer.

1. Look upon those Scriptures again, and tell me whether the Apostle speaks
of putting on the new man, or the old?

Now if you will have the new man there to be meant of the first Adam, then you
confound the two Adams: For the first Adam, (in his pure natural, as well as
in his lapsed estate) and those that are of his race, are every where in
Scripture, that I know, distinguished by the name of (Old Adam) from Christ,
and those that are his seed, who (in opposition to the first Adam) is called
the New Man.

2. It is said ( Col. 3.20.) that that New man which we are to put on, is
renewed (in Knowledge) after the image of, etc. Which cannot be understood of
the first Adam: for me never read that knowledge is called the image of God in
the first Adam.

There is therefore a twofold image of God.

1. Of Life: In this Adam was formed, when he was made a living soul. This
life, and the righteousness, perfection and glory thereof, though it be but
natural, is so precious unto man, that skin for skin, and all that he has
will he give for it. Genesis 2.7. Job. 2.4.
It is the master-peice of Satan's temptations, and the last plot usually, that
he has on man to set upon him as he did on Christ, Mat. 4.8, 9. The Devil
will carry a man to the highest pitch of the first Adam, as to the top of an
exceeding high mountain (for Adams created state was far more exceedingly
high, then any present, natural and worldly condition of man now) and there
show him all the dominion that Adam had over all that earthly creation, and
what a glorious state he was in: And then this old serpent tempts and
entiseth man to look upon this golden ball of vanity, and accept of it, tells
him he shall be (As) God. But the spiritual man, Christ, discernes and
foresees the danger, espies the serpent under the herb, knows there is death
in the apple, and therefore despises all the pompous vanity of the first
creation. When Satan, by despair, cannot break a man's neck from the fall of
Adam, he will bring him to the brinke and brow of his created state, and from
thence endeavor to call him down (as the Jews did to Christ) and make him
run headlong to his flattering ruin. Luke 4.29. V. 5, 6.
When the Devil cannot drive a man away from God by the corrupt Adam, he will
draw him to himself by the pure Adam, and there hold him as a close prisoner,
in fetters of Gold, as he did before in shackles of Iron. The Kingdom, Power,
Glory of this creation, is delivered to the God of this world. The Serpent
took away man's excellency and glory; the Serpent offers it him again upon
terms Surely that cannot be worth the taking up, which the Devil proffers,
and if Satan have dominion, and be Lord over man's riches, to give and take at
his pleasure, I can hardly be persuaded that it is spiritual: The enemy of man
has laid his earthy honor in the dust, Sic transit gloria, mundi.
and trod his life to the ground.

I wonder that we should so much dote upon the painted Beauty of man! It Is a
sign our eyes are weak, and that we are dim-sighted, not able to behold the
Beauties of holiness in God Besides, what hope is there for us to recover
Adams State? For if there was a total privation (as doubtless there was of
Adams life, a privatione ad habitum non datur regressus.
there can be no more regresse to it. Adam is not said to swou^d or faint, but
to die in the day he did eat: not the death of the body, for he lived many
hundred years after; but the death of that State, to which he was not to return
again. And therefore we are bid to mortify the old man, not labor to recover
him to his health and strength. Nor will it serve the turn to say, that as we
dyed in Adam, so we are made alive by Christ; as though our reviving by Christ
were no more then a restitution to the life or the first Adam: for our life
which we have by Christ, is by resurrection not by regression; not a returning
to the same life, but a raising to another life.

There is also the image of God as it consists in knowledge, Col. 3.10. And
this image I do not find attributed to Adam; but is peculiarly appropriared to
Christ, Es. 11.2.3 Col. 2.3.
and those that are his. Not Adam, but Christ has the spirit of Wisdom,
Knowledge, and a quick understanding; and in Christ not in Adam, are hid all
the Treasures of Wisdom and knowledge. If Adam had had a true spiritual and
Divine knowledge of God and Christ, in the tree of Life, he had been immortal
and could not have dyed, for the seed of that Knowledge is Eternal, and so is
the fruit too. John 17.3. and 1 John 3.9.

Every man is brutish in his knowledge, says the Prophet, Jer. 10.14. yea, he
is become brutish by his knowledge. Ier. 51.17. Not only in his low, base and
fallen state; but even in his high and Honorable state; Man (in Honor) is but
as a beast, for want of understanding. Ps. 49.20.
Man (Adam) had so little knowledge in his excellency, glory, Honor, that he
became as the Behemoth, as the multitude of earthy beasts. Adam was as a
Behemoth, or the multitude of earthy beasts.

1. Either in that he had as little true and spiritual knowledge of the Mystery
of God and Christ as all the whole multitude or any particular beast of the
field.

Secondly, Or as he was a public Person, and had in him all posterities and
generations of men, who in him and with Him are altogether out of the way,
brutish in their knowledge, and naturally as Ignorant of God, and his
Righteousness as the beasts that perish.

The Wisdom of the flesh is the Serpent, that most subtle beast in the field
of this earthy Creation, Genesis 3.
which steals into the Paradise of Man's natural excellency and glory, and
there circumventeth him with the enchantments and snares of Death. Cursed
Creature! let it be thrown flat on its belly and let its food be for ever
nothing but the dusty vanities of the ground that is under foot and trampled
upon (like that lofty City, Isa. 26.5, 6.) by the feet of the poor and the
steps of the needy, scorned, despised, slighted Saints, let it eat and live
only upon the foolish, frothy, fleshly praises of the Natural Man; let its meat
be nothing else but the carnal earthy righteousness of that fickle, frayl,
inconstant, unstanle, transient state of the first Adam.

And yet, O the depth of the Wisdom and works of the Lord! how unsearchable is
his understanding, counsel, purpose! his ways are in the waters, and the
beams of his chambers are there; He has a sweet and secret entertainment for
his people beneath and within the fluctuations, oestuations, ragings, foamings,
confusions of the sea and waters of this creation; his thoughts toward his
Saints are very deep, a fool cannot fathom them, an unwise man cannot find
them out; He contriveth the way of man's happiness, to lie within the Gates of
his ruin and destruction, that he which loses his life may find it. Man's
wisdom of the flesh, his own lust draws and drives him to the ditch of
Death, Periissem nisi periissem.
Ian. 1.14, 15. this like the Serpent, does stab man to the heart by a glance
upon the rib, Genesis 2.22 and Ch 3.1, etc. to say that man's wisdom was ordained
for a trap and snare of death unto him cannot be born, and will not be granted
by all; but to say that God did, and does so order and dispose it to that end,
can be denied by none: the Lord can overwhelm the Egyptian flesh with its
chariots and Horses, humane Wisdom and carnal reason, in the self same sea
that he carries the true spiritual Israel into she Holy land. The principles
of man's mortality are seated within Himself, Nemo loeditur nisi ase ipso.
but the cause of his health and life is in, and from the Lord. Hos. 13.9. The
earthy Wisdom and knowledge of man consists in, and is conversant about doing
that which is evil. Jer. 4.22. thus was Adams knowledge employed and improved;
and will any one say, this was the image of God?

3. But perhaps you lay hold on the word (renewed) Col. 3.10. and think that it
imports and implies as much as Restitution, (and no more) of Man to Adams
first state.

First, If you look well upon that Scripture, you shall find that the Apostle
speaks of that New Man in whom there is neither Greek nor Jew, etc. ver. 11.
which the Apostle more plainly affirms to be Christ. Gal. 3.28.

2. But if you do keep to that word, Renewed, it will stand you but in little
stead. If a man pull down his old house and renew it, or build another New
house; 2 Cor. 5.1.
you will not say that new house is the same that the old was. Hag. 2.9.
The first Temple was a stately structure although it had not a commensurate
and adoequite splendor and magnificence to the second, which did far exceed
the first in luster and glory. The earthy Jerusalem was an holy City, it had a
holiness of attribution and dedication, nor of inherent, essential or true
divine holiness, nor was it the same with that Jerusalem, which is above. And
that holy City, Gal. 4.25.26.
the earthy Jerusalem you shall sind given up to be trod under foot of the
Gentiles. Rev. 11.21.
Rev. 11.2. and Chap. 21.2. you have the holy City the new Jerusalem coming
down from God out of heaven; but differing from the former, for this had no
Temple, 22.
nor need of Sun, or Moon to shine in it, ver. 22, 23. and Chapter 22.1, 2, 3, 4,
5. there is the Heavenly paradise described, as the Antitype of the earthy,
but with this difference, i.e. of Immutability and perpetuity. The curse entered
into Adams paradise and blasted all his happiness, he abode not there as a
Lord for ever; but here is no curse, and they that have (holiness) the name of
God in their fore heads, shall reign for ever and ever, Ver 3, 4, 5. The first
Paradise, Holy City, and Temple, were types of the heavenly, but not Heavenly.
The holy City of man's earthy and created state and Paradise, God subjected unto
vanity and corruption, and gave it over to be trod under foot thereby, and
afterward causes righteousness to look down from heaven. Ps. 85.11.


Mr. Baker.

If Adam was any way defective and not made spiritual in his Creation then it
argues insufficiency and want of wisdom in God.

Answer.

This objection was none of your own, but borrowed of a neighboring preacher,
as I was informed by one, after our conference was ended, and we parted. But
seeing I have met with it (though at second hand) I shall take notice of it,
and return this answer thereunto.

It was the will of God, not any want of Wisdom in God, to make the first Adam
but earthy and Natural. Psa. 135.56.
He is, to give account to none but himself. He is above all Gods, and may do
what pleases Himself in heaven and in earth. If his pleasure was to make an
earthy Adam as well as a spiritual, and yet would find fault too with that
earthy Adam; nevertheless, who shall reply to him, Romans 9.19.20.
or ask a reason of him, why he did so?

Was it not one and the same piece of clay in the hand of God, of which he made
Man and beast? And did it imply want of skill in God because he did not make the
bruit beast a reasonable Creature as well as man? it is at the potters pleasure
to form his vessel as he will, whether for honor or dishonor.

In a great house (says the Apostle) there are, vessels, not only of gold and
silver, but also of wood and earth, 2 Timothy 2.20
some to honor and some to dishonor. It does not argue want of skill in the
workman, nor want of wisdom in the master of the house, in that every vessel is
not of gold. But what if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his
pleasure known, dashed in pieces the vessel of dishonor, that earthen vessel
of the first Adam and his created State, sitted to ruin and destruction; and
that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of Mercy which
he had before prepared (in Christ, not in Adam) unto glory: what if the wisdom
of God (which orders all things) disposed so of these things, have you any
thing to say against it? what if God would make way for the magnifying of his
heavenly riches of grace in Christ, by undermining the earthy treasure of man
in the first Adam.

It is rather a prudent plot, then an improvident folly; and the admiration of
divine Wisdom, no detraction from it, to make darkness first, and then
command light to shine out of it.

The earthy man in the beginning of his created state was without form, and
void of divine righteousness, and then darkness was upon the face of the
deep things of God: and when God by his spirit in the Eternal Word; Christ
Jesus had (as now he does) brought forth light, ( Genesis 1.2. 1 Cor. 2.10. John
1.3, 4, 5.) yet he did, and still does divide and distinguish between the
light and darkness, Genesis 1.4, 5. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. 1 Cor. 15.40, 44, 47, 47.

Light and Darkness, Earth and Heaven, the first and second Adam, and their
righteousness are not all one, yet God did not want art and skill when he made
all these, though he did not make Earth Heaven, nor the first Adams
righteousness spiritual and heavenly.

If you exclaim thus against me for error and heresy when I tell you but of the
earthy man, how would you cry out blasphemy if you should be told all that may
be said of the heavenly man, Christ Jesus himself, in respect of the fleshly
knowledge of him? If you tremble and stagger thus at an earthquake, what
perplexity would you be in, if you should and see hear the heavens pass away
with a great noise, and the elements melt with fervent heat? If you cannot
endure to see the earth and the works therein to be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10.12.
how will you be able to behold the dissolution of the heavens by fire, and the
melting of the elements by a scorching heat? If you cannot bear the ruin of
the earthy Adam, but are so moved at the shaking of the foundation of his
state; He. 12.27.
how then will you undergo the dissolution of the heavenly Adam, when he
shall resign his Kingdom, 1 Cor. 15.24.28. Gal. 4.3.9.
Glory, Dominion and State to a higher Dispensation? When the Apostle wrote of
these things, viz: these weak and beggarly Elements which were to pass away,
and not to return again; these things, these Elements were hard to be
nnderstood. 2 Pe. 3.16
And because you discovered your weakness to bear the one, I shall forbear
to burden you with the other. (...) Mr Baker.

You go against the judgment of all Divines; contrary to the opinion of
Orthodox, learned and godly men. Answer.

1. I respect, honor and reverence godliness in every man, in all men; Yet am
I not to regulate, bound or modulate my faith by the wisdom, notion or
measure of any man's apprehensions: no, though the most godly and most learned
among men. And therefore we are not to enquire what this or that man's thought,
opinion or judgment is, of such or such a point, but what the Scripture does
say, determine or conclude of this or that particular.

Our faith is not to stand in the wisdom of men; 1 Cor. 2.5 1 Th. 2.13
this were to lay the foundation upon sand. Nor are we to receive the Word it
self in the word of man, but as it is, in truth, the word of God.

Truth is not Truth because man says it, but because it is so in it self;
neither is it so to any man, till it come unto him in the power and
demonstration of the spirit. The Scriptures themselves were given, not by
tradition of men, but by inspiration of God. Scripture is not Scripture to a
man, till it come to him in the same spirit by which it was dictated at first.

2. Whereas you urge the opinion of godly and learned men, as contrary to mine,
and they preachers too; among whom you made mention of Mr Ball, in his
Catechism; it is more then I know, or care to enquire what he says in this
matter: but be it granted that he (and others too) are contrary-minded: What
then? I could produce many that are on my side, and so oppose godly and
learned men against your godly and learned; yet then there would be but man
against man.

Let the matter be brought to the Test, and let the Touchstone distinguish
between the gold and the dross: to the Law and to the Testimony; If the
Scripture cast the truth on your side, I will subscribe. I cannot be
satisfied, because some of your Authors are in print: the publishing of an
opinion in print will not make it Orthodox.

3. By what Council or Synod am I convicted and condemned for an Heretic?
Produce it if you can. But, if you cast me by your own single vote, will it
not savor of too much arrogance and pride, to ascribe unto your self a
definitive sentence, and power to determine what is truth, and what is error?
And may not I, upon the same ground, and by the rule of your own practice,
rail upon and defame you, as you have served me? Or if you take in others to
join with you, (or rather prostitute and give up your faith to their
judgment, as you seemed to do) may not you and they be mistaken as well as I
and those that are of my judgment.

Yea, grant that what I hold to be condemned and exploded for heresy, I am not
therefore to dissert and relinquish my opinion, because a Convention of men
does eliminate, exterminate and eject it for an error: And you (who are led so
much by the determinations of men) will confess what I say to be true, and
when you see my authority, you will not censure me of singularity.

It is the saying of one, eminent for godliness, and for learning inferior,
Mr. Reynolds in Exposion Psalm. 110. in fallor
I think, to few or none, that we are not to build our faith upon the
authority of men, or counsels, whether Papal, Episcopal or Synodicall; I have
not his Book by me, these are his words, I am sure. So that if this present
deliberate and long-considering Synod should put it, as an Article of their
Faith, into their New Creed, and enjoyne all to subscribe to it under pain of
Anathema, viz: that the first Adam was made spiritually holy and righteous: Yet
I am not bound to believe it: The results of humane counsel are not
infallible; and one Paphnutius may be in the right, when the whole counsel is
in the wrong.

Mr Baker.

I cannot yet be persuaded, that what you say, is true; though you may seem to
make any thing good by your Schollarship.

Answer.

1. It Is not the work of man, but of God, to persuade the heart. Act. 16.14
Paul may plant in the ear of Lydia, but God must give the increase in her
heart. Paul, and other men, may sow the divine seed in the letter thereof, in
the sense of hearing and the rational fadulty of the understanding; but God
must break and pierce those clods of earth, flesh and natural reason; he must
thoroughly open the carnal heart, before there can be any increase or fruit
springing up in the spirit, before there can be any improvement of that seed
unto the knowledge of the Divine Mystery. And therefore, as the King said to
the woman in another case, 2 Ki. 6 27
If the Lord help you not (to understand and receive the mystery of the two
Adams) whence shall I help or persuade you?

2. I see you are very prone to mistake, and too ready to run into extremes:
for whereas, at first, you did me too much wrong, now (in a Complement) you
would do me too much right. If you ask all that knew me both in the Country
and University, there is none that can say I ever had so much learning as might
give the denomination of a Scholar.

3. But how do you entangle your self? For you confessed (and I did believe
you without an oath) that you had but little learning your self, and yet you
affirmed with much confidence, that learning was necessary (indeed you did not
say absolutely necessary) for the understanding of divine Truth.

Immediate revelations, you said, are not to be expected now adays:
Necessarium est sine quo res non possit se habere.
How then can you judge between truth and falsehood? or so peremptorily
conclude me to be in an error, seeing you acknowledge your ignorance in humane
learning, which, you say, is necessary to the better understanding of
spiritual things? If you rely on other men's opinion, and jurare in verba,
resolve to be of their judgment: your fairh will stand in the wisdom of men,
not in the power of God: and why may not one man (the wisest man) deceive you
as well as another? If humane learning, and the wisdom of this world be so
necessary, what then is the meaning of that in Mat. 11.25. 1 Cor. 1.18, etc.
and Chap. 2. It may be said of learned as well as of great men, that they are
not always wise.

Concerning humane learning, I gave you my judgment at our meeting: I look
upon it as the flourishes of flesh, an handsome fashion, a neat dress, a
comely ornament of the creature: It is as studds and barbes, the external
furniture and trimming of the outward man; It is Phallera ad populum Gay and
gaudy trappings, to make an ugly Jade or a dull Cart-horse look like a good
mettled and well-bred Beast: a block-headed Dunce in the mystery of God and the
Gospel, in this Canonical habit, may pass, Vervecum in patria, amongst a
generation of Idiots, and silly animals, for a most Reverend, Grave and
Orthodox Divine. It serves to scratch the pruriginous humor of the sensual
part and principle, to tickle the itching ear of a nice, quaint and curious
man: Yet good still in its kind, and to be allowed in its place and sphere,
so long as it moves regularly and in order; but but when once it begins to
usurp and tyrannize, it is no rebellion to oppose and disclaim it.

Humane learning is of an Heroicke Race, well descended, of noble blood and
birth in natures family; but a most profuse and prodigal Steward in the
mystery of God, Maxima quaeque domus servis est plena superbis.
not fit to be entrusted with the Heavenly Treasure. It will ever be aspiring
to precedence, like a new raisd servant, or some proud encroaching Gentleman in
a great House, who has nothing to subsist by, but the courtesy and bounty of
the Master of the House, and is but as his Almes-man; yet if he can but
insinuatingly collogue and play the Parasite with one that bears rule; he will
be ready to domineere over the home-born Children and the natural heir of the
Family. Such base and degenerate spirits may be found (as too many presidents,
to the shame of our Nation) here in England, who can but, cliena jactare, boast
of other men's worth, and do aliena vivere quadra, live on other men's wealth,
who live and lurk like Dorres and Drones in a Commonwealth, without care and
calling and have no cloak or covering for their sloth and idleness, Phil.
3.5. Act. 22.3.
but that they are Gentlemen: whereas a truly generous Nature loves to be
active and industrious, and hates a supine and sottish sluggishnes as the most
sordid and odious kind of life. Cha. 18.3. and 20.34.
Paul was as well born and bred as most men; yet he did not scorn, or think it
any disparagement to him or his family, to earn his living manu ac tela, with
the labor of his hands, when he might have lived upon the sweat of other men's
brows, in respect of his own bodily pains, 1 Cor. 9.12.15.

If humane art and Wisdom can but once flatter the favor and steal into the
friendship of the Natural Will, the carnal reason and understanding; it will
soon inveigle the heart, and alienate the affections of a man from the holy
seed, the Spirit, Jesus Christ the true heir of salvation.

I deny not but that godliness and the mystery of God may be bestowed upon men
of learning, but I say also that it is not committed to the learning of men, so
as that, thereby they should be more qualified for the dispensation of the
everlasting Gospel. But if man's Wisdom be set in the chair and called Rabbi,
Father, Master, or Doctor; if it be any ways ascribed unto either for
generation or education of the new Man, I detest and abhor it, as the vilest
off scorning in the world, and as a thing so bad as that I want a word to
express my utter hatred of it.

You will ask me how I could have had the Scriptures without learning and the
knowledge of the Tongues to translate them? Quest.


Humane learning will serve for translating the letter, Answ.
and render the grammatical sense and construction of Scripture, and this is
all. But how did the Saints do before there was any Scripture?

But are not you your self better qualified by your learning for the exercise
of your ministry? Quest.


All the learning I had at Oxford, I laid out and improved in opposing the
truth. Answ.
I cannot say, that the little learning I once had, did advantage or further me
one jot in the knowledge of God, nor do I think my self any whit the fitter to
be a minister because of the repute and notion of schollar-ship which some
vainly harbor of me. And to deal plainly and ingeniously with you, when I was
under the teaching of men I got more from simple country people, husbandmen,
weavers, etc. about Brink-worth, Southwick, and those parts in Wiltshire, then
ever I did, or yet have by books and preachers.

If you make no more account of learning, but so much despise and undervalue
it, Quest.
why do you make any use of it?

1 The dregs and relics in a vessel will remain a while and retain some cent
and favor of the liquor that was it it, Answ.
after the liquor is drawn out. Quo semel est imbuta recens, etc.

2. There be some men that sometime may, and sometime may not be answered
according to their cavils and proposals: Pro. 26.4.5. I know some will cast
this proverb in my dish, The Fox dislikes the grapes because he cannot reach
them, and Science has no enemy but Ignorance. I may as well retort, Nemo magis
Rhombum stupet quam Catullus coecus, who more bold then blind Bayard? who more
blind then those that see? Joh 9.40.41.

3. I would strike off Goliah's head with his own sword, if I could. If I could
but enter them, I would smite the strong holds and garrisons of the Philistines
with their own weapons, and turn the mouth of their own Canon against them, to
batter down all their bulwarks. If my breeding had been at Court, and all the
learning of the Egyptians had been bestowed upon me, I would disdain to be
called the Son of Pharaohs daughter. He. 11.24
Had I the art and skill of Archimedes; yea, all the Wisdom of the World and
could thereby make such an engine as would remove the abomination of desolation
out of the holy place, I would not fayl to do it, and make such a scourge as
should whip the Simonaical merchants (who think that the qualifications of a
Minister are to be purchased with the cost of education at some University) out
of the Temple of the Lord, it should have no place in the Worship of God,
though it may be allowed in the Worshippers. The tools of man will polute the
Altar of God. Ex. 20.25


4. That may be used for reprehension of men's enormities, which is not used by
way of edification in Truth and Godliness. Paul (after he had disclaimed and
renounced the Wisdom and learning of man) took occasion to lay open and
reprove the vicious courses of the heathen from their own Poets, 1 Cor. 15.33.
Tit. 1.12. But the reformation from those lewd and wicked manners he ascribes
to the dispensation of the Gospel, Tit. 2.11.12. The law it self may curse and
kill, it cannot cure; it may reprove and convince, it cannot make alive, quicken
and convert unto God.

5. It was lawful for the Israelites to take the jewels of silver and gold
from the Egyptians, that they might spoil the Egyptians. Exo. 32.4.
Exodus 3, 22.12.35.36. Yet see what a snare these jewels became unto Israel,
when their very Priest Aaron himself had converted them to an idolatrous use in
the Molten Calfe. Now they became so loathsome and odious that Moses burnt
those jewels to ashes. The children of Israel could not carry so filthy and
abominable thing into the holy and promised land of Canaan.

Humane learning, Natural parts, etc. are the Egyptian jewels of this world,
which the Israel of God, the Saints themselves may borrow and wear as
earrings, they will serve to adorn a man's discourse and hang as a jewel in the
ear of the Auditor. But such is the madness of outside Jews,
Letter-Christians, and formal professors that they must see their God; their
God must go before them, they will not be content with the Making-God, but
they must have a made Gods, Gods-made in a visible and sensible shape that they
may see their God before them: But blessed are they that have not seen and yet
have believed. And such is the rashness, folly, and simplicity of Men-priests,
who seek the favor and praise of men, more then of God; that to please a
giddy, and head strong Multitude they will comply and give them what religion,
Worship, or God they call for. If the vulgar popularity cry up Presbytery, that
shall be established for a time, and but for a time, for the tide may turn;
Independency may come in fashion, and then very like if that be desired, it
will not be denied. The common people must be satisfied or else tithes, dues,
and worldly mainterenance will fail. Now the earrings are called for; gifts,
parrs, abilities, indowments, these qualifications of nature with a little of
the Spirit (which may well enough be left out too, were it not for fashion and
better sound sake in discourse) will make up a complete Minister. How many
having but passed through the sire of an Academicall education, a slight: and
formal examination, and a powerless, weak, and livelesse Ordination, have
come forth molten Calves, and many a silly soul has danced about them as their
Ghostly-Fathers, demy-saviours, and petty-Gods When humane parts and learning
are mixed in the worship of God to specificate, modifie, or denominate it, then
it becomes Idolatrous. This calfe we carry not into Canaan, any otherwise then
as Israel having drunk of the water into which the powder was thrown, Exodus
32.20. might be said to carry the Calf into Canaan as it is obsert in Christ;
it is not seen nor named under the dispensation of the Spirit: Man's Wisdom and
parts may beautify the things of man, but no way adorn the things of God; what
need you overlay gold with copper?

Mr. Baker.

Is any man (think you) so simple to make a god of learning, or to look, upon
it as any thing, any farther then as it is sanctified by the Spirit?

Answer.

1. Where has the Spirit sanctified it to the qualification of a Minister in
all the Scripture?

2. Do you think that the Israelites were so stupidly ignorant as to take the
Molten Calfe for the Immortal God? yet when they would have a visible
representation of the invisible Being, and change the Glory of the
Incorruptible into the image of corruptible man, beasts, etc. God gave them up
(as well as the Gentiles) to dote upon and follow that which was not God, Psalm.
81.12. and Job. 19.20. Romans 1.21, 23, 24. When God speaks to man there is no
similitude of Himself (in the wisdom, parts, and excellency of Man, or the
Righteousness of the first Adam) to be seen. The ambition and industry of the
Creature is to bring down the Creator into the lower region of sensible
appearances, to cloth and compass the incomprehensible Diety and Mystery of
the Lord Jesus, and the glorious Gospel of God in visible forms and the
Wisdom of the flesh; and when men have made a God like themselves, and
fashioned a Religion and Worship after the invention of their own fancies, they
are ready to cry out with the Lystrians in Lycaonia, God is come down to us in
the likeness of man. Act. 14.11
The longest, largest and widest form, Order, and Ordination of man is too
short strait, and narrow to circumscribe and limit the blessed teaching of the
infinite Spirit of the Holy one of Israel. He has learning enough that can
speak a word in due season to him that is weary. Esa. 50.4.

Mr. Baker.

You go about to bring in a boundless and unlimited Independency, to give
liberty to any that does but pretend unto the Spirit to preach; you open a door
to let into the Ministry every mechanical fellow, tinker, shoemaker ( such an
one as is at Nottingham) weaver, amp;c. And if such as these may be permitted
to vent the frothy humors of their shallow brains, under pretense of being
qualified by the Spirit for the Ministerial function and office, then we are
to have a goodly, wise, and learned ministry indeed.

Answer.

1. Did the Bishops (or will the Presbyters) keep all Dolts, Drones, and Dunses
out of the ministry?

2. Why may not (even) an exorbitant Episcopacy and a boundless Independency.
(as you call it) be as good as a groundles, proud, tyrannical and domineering
Presbytery? I stand no more for an established form of Independency, then for a
settled government by Presbytery, and for neither any more then for a reformed
Episcopacy. 2 Cor. 5.16
to let this pass, for though once I had this fleshly knowledge of men, yet
henceforth know I neither men nor C. so any more, but rather seek to know as I
am known in the Spirit.

3. As for the shoemaker at Nottingham, which you spoke of, and other
mechanical men, R. J.
(as they are termed) I know nothing to the contrary, but that they may sit in
the chair as well as many of your great Rabbis. I gave you instances of diverse,
who, having performed the priests office in his Canonical vestments, have been
saluted for current divines both by Parliament men, and Synod men too; and they
no Independents neither.

Jerome speaks of it as the glory, not the shame, and makes it the
commendation, not the dishonor of those times, that the Scripture was
familiarly known to taylers, semsters, delvers, shoemakers, etc. why should not
we rejoice of all the Lords people were Prophets, and to see the Spirit powered
out upon all flesh?

I approve not any more then you do of precipitate, rash, ignorant fools, that
run before they are sent into the ministry. If any pretend to have the
qualification of the spirit, and has it not, reject that man as a Pharisaical
hypocrite: but if any have the gift take heed you throw not water in his face
to quench the spirit of prophesy in him; If God bid any one go about his work,
let no man discourage or forbid him to do it; Christ will not allow his own
beloved disciple to forbid another to do his work, although he has not the same
formal and verbal commission, and does not walk in the same external call and
ceremony of Discipleship with the other. He that never had hands of Men laid on
him, Luke 9.49 50.
may cast out as many Devils and convert as many souls, as he that goes out
with never so many spells and charms of fleshly Ordinations and Institutions of
Men.

Mr. Baker.

In your discourse concerning the blind man, Joh. 9. you said, that when eyes
were fully opened we never read that afterward he prayed to receive his sight,
whereby yon seemed to glance at such a state of Perfection here, in which there
should be no need of Prayers, but a continual rendering of praises.

Answer.

1. I say again, that mercies received should cause returns of praises, one
of the ten lepers returned to Christ: what to do? to pray unto him to be
cleansed, Luke 17.15, 16.
or to give him thanks for being cleansed? when you have bestowed your alms,
do you expect the beggar should lie at your gate begging, or go away thankful?

2. I know there is such a state of Perfection attainable here, wherein there
shall be continual praises. Is not death, sorrow, crying, curse and pain
removed, and all tears wiped away in the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.4.22.3. and
what will there be left then, but matter of incessant praises? this is the
condition which some, I do not say all, are in; do I therefore deny the spirit
of supplication to those that are in doubts, wants, straits, bondage, and have
not yet the pokession of their desires and hopes? Do I hold prayer useless and
needless in every condition?

Mr. Baker.

You give me cause to think so; for when you preached last year at Derby you
never made confession of sin, nor prayer for the pardon of it before your
sermon, though it were on a fast day, whereby I guess you are against fasting
and humiliation.

Answer.

1. If I had followed the form and pattern of your private spirit, I should
have given you content; but I am not bound to take my dictates from man.

2. You say that I did not (then) confess nor pray for the pardon of sin; no,
though it were on the fast day: hence you infer, that I deny confession and
prayer for pardon of sin to be lawful. I do not well remember what I said so
long since: But let me follow you in your reasoning; When I met with Mr. Baker,
I heard him plead much for prayer, but little or nothing for praises. Ergo, Mr.
Baker denies praising of God to be lawful. I pay you in your own coin, you
must not refuse or dislike it.

Mat. 11.25. Christ gave thanks to his Father, but did not then pray for any
thing we find there; ergo he never prayed at all, as holding it unlawful so to
do. I did not confess, etc. when you heard me, therefore I say that none ought
so to do, or I never did or may do so my self. I never had so much Logic to
understand your argument.

And whereas you conclude also that I am against the duty of humiliation, I
reply as before; If you had the disposing of my spirit, I should please you.

3. I forbid not the Disciples of John and the Pharisees to fast and pray often.

4. I grant that the children of the bridechamber may (and cannot do otherwise
but) mourn when the Bridegroom is absent: Mat. 9.14.15.
must they therefore fast and weep and mourn when he is present?

5. Days of humiliation are ordained by men now, and observed by such as are
subject to men, in the manner, notion, and nature that they are enjoined. Men
may commend the observation of days, they cannot command the sanctification of
them; they may propose the form and time of fasting, they cannot dispose the
frame and affections of the heart. It may be seasonable for one man to pray,
when it is more suitable for another to be singing of Psalms. National
communion, seldom or never has its Union in the Spirit. If Principalityes or
Powers cannot separate us form the love of God in Christ Jesus; To. 8.38.
if rulers and Magistrates of this present world cannot estrange or take away
the Bridegroom from the Saints, they cannot impose upon them the bewayling of
his absence. Civil powers may command the corpse, they are not captains of the
conscience.

I hear what will be objected: Did not the Jews (say some) observe those days
and times which were appointed for fasting, Ob.
feasting, etc. and enjoined by their Kings and Civil Magistrates, who were
but men.

1. They did so; so may the Jews do still: let those that are under the
dispensation of the Old Testament walk in it. If the civil Magistrate make
decrees and send forth his edicts, let them be obeyed by those that are bound by
conscience thereunto, but let not conscience be bound or enforced by them. The
outward Jew has no King but Caesar, the inward none but Christ: let both these
exercise their respective power and jurisdiction, and all strife will cease.

2. The whole Paedagogye and Policy of the Jews, people and all were an
external and typical Ceremony, which yet had in them and contained an
internal and Anti-typicall equity and morality. The Law in the letter, was by
Moses, the Law in the Spirit is in Christ: The children of Israel would needs
have a King over them, like other Nations, whose Kings exercised Lordship over
them, and were called benefactors; the the children also of Israel in the
Spirit have (Christ) their King over them, the Government is upon his
shoulders; He reigns over the House of Jacob, He exercises lordship over the
conscience, yet so, as that he may well be called a Benefactor: He breaks the
earthen forms, customs, Principles, Religion, Worship, etc. in pieces, with
his iron rod (of the Spirit) like a potters vessel, but withal does erect and
set up such a divine and spiritual discipline that (He may well be called a
Gracious Lord, because of the Word of Truth, Meekness, and Righteousness, the
scepter of Grace, Mercy and Love with which he rules; and the terrible things
which his right hand does in shooting his sharp arrows into the heart of his
enemies, Psalm. 45.
lust, sin, flesh and corruption, He it is that can kill and cure, destroy and
make alive, confound and comfort, make sad or rejoice, command a feast or fast.
It Is no good way of arguing to make up the conclusions of one science from the
Principles and Proemises of another: Transitus a genere ad genus.
That which was done under the law, and in a type or ceremony will not hold
under the Gospel in the verbal and litteral sense of it: what things the Law
says, it says to them that are under it; and what things the Spirit says, it
says to them that that are led by it.

But we are commanded by the Apostle, Romans 12.15. to weep with those that
weep, and to mourn with those that mourn, even now under the New Testament,
was not this present fast enjoined for Irelands sad conditition whose miseries
yet continue?

It Is all confessed and granted, but does that imply a constant and continued
observation of a set and fixed time? Sol.
Is any man sure to have his heart in a fit and suitable temper for fasting
against the last Wednesday in every month? are not the preparations of the
heart, and answer of the tongue (wholly) from the Lord? Pro. 16.1.
God may dispose one man for singing at the very selfsame instant of time, that
another is stirred up to prayer. If the Lord give a cheerful heart to offer up
praise and thanksgivings, will it be convenient, at that time to sacrifice the
oblation of a dull and pensive spirit received from the injunctions of Man? He
that has his heart disposed to mourn, let him mourn: who does forbid him? and
he that has his spirit drawn forth to rejoicing let him rejoice: who ought to
hinder or judge him? One man may have his heart in a frame fit to keep the
monthly fast, another man may be more fit to fast at another time; yet this man
may truly bewail and condole the miseries and afflictions of Ireland and
England as well as the other, and so fulfill the command or exhortation rather
of the Apostle, in weeping with those that weep. He that does fast upon Monday
or Tuesday, without an Ordinance of Parliament, may be as tauly humbled as he
than keeps the Wednesday-fast, and more truly it may be: for those duties
which flow from the more immediate suggestions of God unto the soul are more
sound and cordial then those that are irritated and provoked by the
instigations of man's precepts. He that observes a day, let him do it to the
Lord; and he that observes not a day, let him not be judged and condemned by
men. Read the 14. Chap. to the Romans.

Mr. Baker,

Hitherto I have contended for truth, not for triumph, I shall now let fall the
discourse and leave it before the judge. In all that I have here set down, the
most High God, my conscience and yours can bear me witness that in nothing
you are wronged by me. Your name is prefixed to nothing but what (for matter and
substance) was spoken and asserted by you; when you justified your charge and
carriage, and maintained, and defended your slanderous reports and defamation
of me, you provoked me to a sharp reply, and to tell you that you had done very
uncivilly, dishonestly and most unchristianly, at which you took great snuff,
but let others judge whether I had not cause. I told you also that I might as
well rayl against you behind your back, as you had done by me, but that I
scorned such baseness, and thought it not sit to render railing for railing;
this I said to your face, and more then this (nor so much) you shall never
prove that I spoke behind your back. Nor did I intend to put these passages and
proceedings between us in print, when I told you at our parting, that I
resolved to require a more public account from you, supposing that a fair,
free, and friendly debate of the matter among some friends in these parts might
have been sufficient to have taken up, and composed the difference. But when I
heard (about three weeks since) that you had divulged and blazed it abroad into
other parts, I thought it as convenient, just and reasonable for me to make the
vindication of truth as public as you have made the imputation of an error.

Your practice in this kind, I doubt, has been a bad President to others; for
two or three Parish-preachers hereabout have since accused me of poisoning the
people at Hener with error and false doctrine: Mr. Cr. of Br. Mr. H. of Was.
but by that time their covetous practices, common tippling, excessive gaming,
etc. are fully examined and laid open to the world they will appear to be such
Antinomian Independents, such Independent Antinomians as will make them
altogether incapable of the office of a Bishop. I cannot charge you of being
active with them, but I suspect and fear that you have been exemplary to them.

Sir, Before I take my leave, I shall (as a friend) suggest one thing unto you,
i. e. When the shadow of the first Adams excellency is so big and long upon
the earth, it is too clear a sign that the Day Star is very low and little
in the Horrison of man's heart; the second Adam; that Heavenly Sun of Divine
Righteousness, Christ Jesus, is declining and drawing near the solstice of
Capricorn, He is in a weak and low appearance, known too much after the flesh,
when the glorious light and day of the blessed and eternal Spirit is so short
and Dark.

I have not endeavored to shame you, but to sift out the truth, and to give
you and others occasion to exercise your thoughts upon the mystery of God and
man, Christ and Adam. When your meditations are ripe and perfected, let public
profit be made of them. I have laid down nothing but my experiences, and what I
have heard and seen, as I have received the Lord Jesus, and been taught the
truth in Him. I have no more to say to you, or any man else, but,

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.
Mr. Calvert,
I Hear it is reported by some that I am sad, melancholic, sick, and keep my
chamber; by some that I am dead; by others that I am mad, and out of my wits,
since I was with the General at Windsor. This (as I am informed) is reported
by my friends. When Christ began to set forward his Fathers work, his friends
thought he was beside himself, Mar. 3.21. and when Paul carried on that work
he fell under the same censure, Act. 26.24. and what of all that, so long as it
is to God? 2 Cor. 5.13. I bless the Lord of whom I have obtained mercy, and
from whom I have received the spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. I enjoy that which is better then my self, or the life it self, which
makes me to scorn and overlooke the reports and reproaches of men. Here it is
said of me, (as of others heretofore) that I am a pestilent fellow, a mover of
sedition, one that poysoneth and deceives the people, etc. I am not ashamed of
the blessed and glorious Gospel of my Lord Jesus Christ, nor afraid of the
bonds of the Gospel, or of persecution, for the Spiritual, Divine, and
Heavenly Righteousnesse-sake of God. I have therefore sent you these few sheets
of paper, desiring you to make them public to the view of all men. I am

Your assured friend Henry Pinnell.
Risly in Derby-shire October. 14. 1648.
FINIS.

