A TRUE RELATION OF THE PROCEEDings of the Scots and English Forces in the
North of Ireland:

Sent in a Letter to Mr. Tobias Siedgwicke, living in London; Relating these
particulars: viz. 1. Their meeting at Drumboe in the County of Antrem. 2. The
manner of their March toward the Nury, with the taking of a Fort near
Kilwarlin Woods. 3. The taking of the Town and Castle of the Nury, and the
releasing of diverse Prisoners of note. 4. The great Spoil they took in those
parts, with great terror to the Rebels, and their flight from those parts. 5.
Diverse Skirmishes with the Rebels in Mr. Cartons Woods. 6. The desires of the
Earl of Antrem to be received into the English Army.


With diverse other things worthy your Observation.

London, Printed for F. Coules, and T. Bates. 1642.

THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from a Gentleman in Ireland, to his friend, Mr.
Tobias Siedgwicke, living in London, June 8. 1642.
SIR,
ACcording to my promise I shall labor briefly to inform you of what has
happened in these Northern parts of Ireland since my coming over; wherein I
shall endeavor, not willingly to vary from the truth in the least
circumstance, that you may believe what I write without doubting, and may
report it without blushing.

On Thursday the 28. of April 1600. of the Scottish Army, 500. of the Lord
Viscount Conwayes Regiment, 500. of Colonel Chichesters, 400. of the Lord of
the Ardees Forces, and 400. of the Lord Clandeboyes, 3. Troops of Armed Horse,
the Lord Conwayes, Colonel Chichesters, and the Lord Cromwells, and part of
the Lord Grandisons, t^gether with some 4 or 5. Troops of light Horse, all
these Forces met together, and encamped at a place called Drum-Boe, near
Belfast, in the County of Antrem; Sir John Clatworty promised to come with 400.
men, but he could not get so many men to m^ke his Regiment complete, all these
Troops made some 300. Horse.

On Friday the 29. of April, this Army marched onwards all together toward
the Nury, and when they came a little beyond Lisn^garney, they discryed a
party of the Rebels Horse, which showed them at the edge of the Woods of
Kilwarlin, upon which our Horse made directly toward them over the fields, the
foot marched along the high way; when our Horse came within twice Musket shot
of them they made a stand, in the mean time the foot marching along the high
way, perceived a party of the Rebels in a Fort which they had made at the
entrance of Kilwarlin woods, which it seems they bad made, thinking thereby to
block up the way; this Fort played upon our Foot with their Muskets. Colonel
Chichesters Regiment being then in the Front he drew out certain companies,
and made them to give fire by ranks upon the Fort, they remained this
Skirmishing until our Horse with much difficulty in regard of the ways which
were blockt up with Trees came into the woods another way, and got betwixt the
Fort and the wood, the Rebels seeing the Horse come behind them fled, our horse
being divided into several parties went several ways pursuing of them, one
party of our Horse some 40. met with some 400. of them, and fought with them,
put them to flight, and killed some 30. of them, the rest of our Horse chased
them in the woods as far as they were able to follow them for Thickets and
Bogs, some of them would atempt to give fire at the Horse standing behind Trees
and Bushes, but as soon as they but offered to make toward them, they durst
not stand, but run away after the Horse had chased them a pretty while, this
way a company of the Scottish Soldiers came into them, Lieutenant Dullen who
is Lieutenant to Colonel Chichesters Troops spoke to those Musketeres to
follow the Rogues which were running in the woods where the troops could not
follow them, the most of them would not go, I will not say durst not, they
pretended they wanted powder; But afterward before our faces they shot at
least 40. shots at Randum in the woods; at this Shirmish there were in all killed
and taken prisoners some 80. of the Rebels, we lost but one man, who was one
of Colonel Hills Light Horse men, and one of the Lord Cromwells Troops had
his Horse killed under him, and some two Light Horse men were slightly wounded;
this night the Army encamped in the middle of the woods of Kilwarlin, which is
held to be the place of their strongest hold, yet the Rebels had not so much
Gallantry in them as to give us an Alarm.

The next day being Saturday the 30. of April the Army marched onward in their
way to the Nury, through Drommore, which is so consumed with fire, and
ruinated, that there was not a house left standing except the Church. This
night we encamped at a place (...) eight miles of the Nury called Logh
Brickland in the middle of this Logh there is an Land in which were some of the
Rebels, with diverse English and Scots which were prisoners with them there, and
a great deal of provision, there was a house upon this Island, upon which one
of our field pieces played, and we shot at them with Muskets; sometimes they
would shoot again, but hurt none of our men; there came a Bullet through
Colonel Chichesters hare as he stood amongst his Soldiers, but hurt him not:
All that our Army could do could not make them yield, for our shot could not
come to hurt them in regard that they had dug a Cave under ground where they
did remain; so as that it was impossible to hurt them with shot, as to shoot
down the Island, this night there was a strict watch set round about the Island
least the Rogues should steal away by night, the next morning being Sunday the
first of May, the Boat which belonged unto the Logh being ignorantly left a
float by the Rebels by the side of the Island, it became the only means of
their ruin, for six Hilanders undertook to swim for the Boat to fetch it
over, whilst they were swimming, our Army played so hard upon the Island with
Musket shot, that not a Rebel durst peep out of the Cave: Of these six
Hilanders, two returned not being able to swim over, two striving beyond
their strength were drowned, and only two got over, who swimming with their
Swords in their hands cut the Boat loose, and brought it over, which was
manned with Musketeres, which took the Island, releast the prisoners, and cut
off the Rebels.

After this was done, the Army marched on to the Nury, the Horse rid fast
before, and when they came within sight of the town they pursued the Rogues
flying out of the town, and running as fast as their nimble feet could carry
them away; upon this a Troop of Light Horse were sent out, which were under
the command of Captain Winsor, and cut off about 100. of the Rogues as they
fled, the rest of the Troops drew near unto the town, and making a stand on
a little hill about a quarter of a mile from the town, one Master Reading came
riding out of the town to them, who had been prisoner with them ever since
the beginning of this Rebellion, and he brought us word that the Rogues were
all fled out of the town except some of the ancient town dwellers, and that
they willingly yielded the town, but that the Castle stood out still, in which
were diverse prisoners of the English, among the rest Sir- Edward Trevers, Sir
Chales Poynes and his son came out to meet us who were taken prisoners at the
first surpisall of the Nury. Colonel Chrichesters Troop drew nearer the town
and stood close by the Church, within Musket shot of the Castle until the
foot came up, which was for the space of two hours, when the general Major
came, they sent away the Troops to quarter, half a mile out of the town, and
set a strickt centrey at the towns end that none should come in but those whom
he permitted; what was gotten the Horse got no share of, although they best
deserved it, the Lord Maginneses Lady was now in the Nury.

The next d^y being Monday the General Major Mount Roe, and the Lord Conway,
and Colonel Chichester resolved to come to a parley with the Castle, not that
they held it any difficulty to take it, but in regard of those prisoners which
they had within the Castle, least if they had f^llen upon it in the severest
way, the Innocent had been destroyed with the Guilty. This made the Rogues to
stand upon their terms, and to refuse many gracious proffers of mercy, and
kept them all this day in dispense, refusing to yield, the next day being
Tuesday the third of May, General Mount Roe sent word unto the Captain of the
Castle, that notwithstanding the prisoners he had of ours with him, if he would
not yield, since there was no remedy, he would blow up the Castle, the Captain
of the Castle returned him answer, that if he blew him up, we would be forced
to borrow some of his powder; this peremptory answer made all to be prepared
for to set upon the Castle, at last when the Captain of the Castle saw that
they were like to go to it in good earnest, he yielded upon quarter for
himself and some more. After this Castle was surrendered, they found but half
a Barrel of Powder, 60. Muskets, and of them not above a dozen fixed; they had
two murderers which they put out only to make a show, which were found
without Chambers, and so foul and rusty that none of them durst h^ve shot them
off; such little proof is commonly in great bragges when they come to the
trial, what other things of worth were found in the Castle were altogether
concealed from the English, except some who had great friends.

On Monday the fifth of May ten out of every Troop were sent to Dundalke to the
English Army, the next day Sir Henry Titchborne came along with them to the
Nury with a guard of three Troops of Horse, and stayed some three hours at
the Nury and returned.

The common Soldiers without direction from the General Major took some 18.
of the Irish women of the town, and stripped them naked, and threw them into the
River, and drowned them, shooting some in the water; more had suffered so but
that some of the common Soldiers were made examples on and punished.

On Thursday the 6. of May, the Lord Conwayes Troop, Colonel Chichesters, and
the Lord Cromwels with part of the Lord Grandisons, went out toward Armagh,
and by the way they saw above a thousand of the Rebels which stood in a Bogge,
but durst not stir out to inco unter with our Troops nor the Troops could
not come at them for the Bogge, although they fame would have charged them,
therefore they returned back to the Nury, thinking to fall upon them the next
morning, and bring some foot with them, but they heard the next day that they
were fled, and that Sir Philem O. Neale was among them. Some of the prisoners
that made an escape from them, reported that Armagh is burnt, and that the
Rogues are fled from thence toward Chalimount.

On Friday being the sixth of May those of the Rebels that were in the Castle
which had not Quarter, and diverse of the ill affected Irish in the town were
shot to death on the bridge, some three score or more; there was a great Iron
Battering piece taken in the Nury which was left on an old Turret in the town,
thrown off the Carriages, which I forgot to name before.

On Saturday, the seventh of May, they provided to March back again, leaving
behind in Garrison at the Nury about 300. men well armed, under the command of
Lieutenant Colonel Sinkcleare, promising to send him some 500. more from
Carrickfergus, with all the speed possibly could be made, being some of the
rest of Livetenant Collonell Sinckcleares Regiment, which came over since the
Army went abroad; General Major Mount Roe left private direction (as I heard)
with Livetenant Collonell Sinkcleare to banish all the Irish out of the town,
as soon as he was gone.

The Army marched home through Maginneses, and Mr. Cartons Country, and marched
in three Divisions, burning all the houses and corn before them, and brought
away the spoil of the country before them, and cattle in great abundance,
there was much goods left behind, and provision which they could neither
destroy nor carry away, being hid underground in the backside of every house,
the devision that Collonell Chichester commanded, burnt Mr. Cartons, and Ever
Maginneses own dwelling houses. Sunday at night was uch stormy wether, that
some thirty of the soldiers and others which followed the camp perished with
mere cold; and no wonder, for it killed some fifteen horses which were found
dead the next morning: Colonel Chichesters troop marching a pretty space
before the Army, took diverse prisoners, and killed diverse of the Rebels upon
their March.

On Tuesday the 10. of May, the Army met together and encamped in the middle of
Mr. Cartons woods, when they came altogether, there were at least 800. baggage
horses (as they call them) load on with the spoil of the Country, and I
think I speak within compass if I say 3000. Cowes; but by the way as they
came this day through the thickees of Mr. Cartons Woods, the Lord Conwayes
troop, Collonell Hills, and Captain Matthewes, and some other troops of
Light Horse; the Rogues shot at them from behind trees, and killed the
Livetenant to the Lord Conwayes troop, Lieutenant Fishers Led-horse, and him
that led him, and got in betwixt the troops and the Baggage horses, and cut
off some of the men that went along with these horses, and had cut off more,
but that Captain Trevers rid back again with some of his troop, and
relieved them.

On Wednesday, the Army marched through the rest of Mr. Cartons woods with all
the aforesaid load on horses and cowes, marching all together, but spreading
the foot abroad in the woods, to burn the Cabbins which were built there, and
to clear the woods before them: They found no opposition this day, at night
they encamped at Drumboe.

The next day when the Cowes were to be divided, many of them were stolen away
into the Ardees, and Clandeboyes the last night, and the goods so sneakt away
by the Scots, that the English troops got just nothing, and the English foot
very little, which gave them too just a cause to mutany, in so much as I think
it will be hard to get them out to march with the Scots again, who will have
both the credit and profit of whatsoever is done or had.

In the absence of the Army, there were six score Musketeres lef to Garrison at
Malone, which was set upon by the Irish, and the most of it burnt; these
valiant Scots set to keep the town, when ie was set upon, fled, and did not so
much as face the Rebels, some 800. of the Scots which lay in the Trench some
six mile of Carrickfergus, in the absence of the aforesaid Army, went out to
plunder, and being set upon by some horse, and foot of the Rebels, not much
above their number, I will not say fled from them, but retreated so fast, as
that they were forced to blow up a barrel of powder they had with them, and
blew up some eight of their men with it, and as I hear credibly, lost above a
hundred Arms, they carry the matter very privately here, but this is truth.
The Earl of Antrem is now at Glanarme, a place twelve miles off Carrickfergus,
and would feign be received into this town: what General Mount Roe, and the
Lord Conway will do in it, I know not; General Lasly will be over here within
this week, as he has sent word unto General Major Mount Roe. I have no more
to write, but desire to remain,

Carrick-fergus this 30. of May, 1642. Your Humble servant to Command, Roger
Pike.

FINIS.

