JERUSALEM BEDEWED WITH TEARS.

A Sermon preached at St. MARY WOOLNOTH London, upon the Fast Day, Martii. 30.
1642.

By John PIGOTT Curate of S. Sepulchers.

Vae mihi si non Evangelizavero.

1 COR. 9.16. Rejoice not over me O mine enemy, when I fall I shall rise; when
I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

Micah. 7.8. LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin, and are to be sold by John Wright
in the old Bailey. 1642.

To my beloved Friends, and Neighbors the Parishioners of S. Sepulchers London.
Dearly beloved and longed for, Phil. 4. 1. Romans 9.1.
my joy and crown of rejoicing, I speak the truth, in Christ and lie not,
(...), my conscience also bearing me witness, that my hearty desire for you
all is, that you may be saved, Chapter 10. 1. Acts 20.20.
and that to this end I have both publicly, and from house to house testified
both to small and great, to all sorts of people repentance toward God, and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. How weighty a burden has layen upon my
Shoulders, and how long and with what cheerfulness I have borne it, is not
unknown to you, neither do I yet shrink from it, or sink under it. I have
often said with S. Paul, you are in my heart to live and to dye with you 2 Cor.
7.3. Though (as the same Apostle in the same Epistle complains, 2 Cor.
12.15.) The more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved of some among
you: but I intend not to accuse my own Nation, neither is it equal that J
should charge the petulant miscarriages of a few prejudicate Spirits upon a
whole parish, wherein I have found so much true hearted affection, so many
real and royal expressions of love, and wherein there are many (J speak it
with comfort and thankfulness) that if it were possible, would even pluck out
their own eyes to do me good, as S. Paul magnifieth the love of his Galatians
4.15.

And now to testify unto the world that I am not insensible of so great love, I
have adventured to publish and to dedicate unto you these indigested
meditations, provided for you but elsewhere delivered, which (though rude and
unpolished) I desire you to accept as a pledge of my thankfulness, and an
earnest of farther indevours, if I may be permitted.

I weigh not any man's censure, but rest satisfied in the sincerity of my own
intentions: it is not applause that I aim at, I am no selfe-flatterer, no man
can have a meaner esteem of me or of my labors then I my self have,
Apostolorum minimus (as S. Paul said) I am the least of the Apostles, nay (...)
less then the least. Ephesians. 3.8. Yet am I not hereby discouraged from attempting
to do what good I can in that place and station which the great Shepherd and
Bishop of our souls has allotted to me, and who knows whether this Sermon
(read of many) may not through the blessing of God rouse up some hard hearted
sinner out of the sleep of security, and cause him to bring a bucket of tears
toward the quenching of Gods wrath and fiery indignation that is kindled
against our Jerusalem? this is my desire, my hope, wherein, if I shall fail of
my expectation, I shall sit down and weep with my Savior, that after so much
planting and so much watering with the dew of Gods heavenly word, there
follows so little watering with the tears of true repentance.

But I hope better things of you (dearly beloved) and things that accompany
salvation: the Lord in mercy open all our eyes, that we may at length discern
the miseries that hang over our heads by reason of our sins, that we may weep
night and day for the manifold provocations wherewith we have provoked him to
anger: so prays.

Your faithful servant in Christ, zealous of your spiritual welfare, JOHN
PIGOTT.

LVC. 19.41, 42, 43, 44. And when he was come near he beheld the City, and
wept over it saying, If thou had known, even thou in this thy day, the
things that belong to thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes.

For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and comp sse thee round, and keep thee in on every side,

And shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee, and
they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knew not
the time of thy visitation.


BEfore I come to the particular handling of these words, I shall crave leave
briefly to premise something by way of introduction, of the many engagements of
this people unto God for mercies received, and something also of their great
unthankfulness to him for the same.

There was never any Nation upon Earth more blessed with the influences of
Heaven, then this nation of the Jews, you only have I known of all the
families of the Earth. Am. 3 2. What Nation is there that has God so nigh unto
them, as the Lord our God is nigh unto us in all that we call upon him for,
Deuteronomy. 4.7. Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of
the fire, as thou have heard and live? or has God ever assad to take unto him
a Nation out of the midst of another Nation by wonders, and signs, by a mighty
hand and stretched out arm, as he did for you in Egypt, Deuteronomy. 4 33.34. God did
as it were single out this people from all the Families of the Earth, all the
Nations under Heaven, that he might make them the ob ects of his love. that he
might show kindness to them, as David dealt by Mephibosheth. Thou Israel art
my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, Es 41.8. A chosen generation a peculiar
people, Et quid ampl us potuit? and what could God do more for his Vineyard
that he did not do? wherein could he have made a fuller expression of his love
then he did? how did he bemoane them in their misery? I have seen, I have seen
the affliction of my people, and I have heard their groanings. How did he
wrestle with a stubburn hard hearted Tyrant for their enlargement? one that
slighted his messages, contemned his judgments, would not let his people go,
till at length by maine ^trength he wrested them out of his hands, when he
overthrew both the Horse and his Rider in the midst of the Sea, how did he
provide a table for them in the Wilderness, and feast them with delicious
fare, Angels food, Manna from Heaven? how did he dampe the hearts and strike
through the loins of all their enemies? how did he drive out and dispossess
seven great and mighty-Nations, and gave their land (a land flowing with milk
and honey) to be an heritage to Israel his people? goodly Cities that they
builded not, and Vineyards that they planted not, and Houses full of all good
things which they filled not, Deuteronomy. 6.11. Will you see some more privileges
and favors vouchsafed to this Nation? you may find them recorded by S Paul
Rom 3.1. What advantage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of
Circumcision? Much every way, cheifely because to them were committed the
Oracles of God, and more fully Romans 9.4. wh^re speaking of the Israelites his
brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh he describes their privileges in
these words, To whom pertains the adoption and the glory and the covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God and the promises, whose are
the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all,
God blessed for ever, singular prerogatives. First the adoption was theirs;
other Nations were strangers and forreiners, they were as it were (...) of the
household of God others were counted dogs, they only the children, as appears
by our Saviors answer to the Syr^phenic^an woman, It is not meet to take the
childrens bread and cast it to Dogs: Secondly, the Covenants were theirs; other
Nations were without God in the world, they were a people in covenant with God,
Genesis 17 7. God tells Abraham, I will esta^lish my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be
a God unto thee and to thy seed after the, Ier, 31.33. This shall be the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: after those days says the
Lord, I will write my Law in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. Thirdly, the Law was theirs: other Nations had nothing but
the blind g^id of nature to direct them, they had the Law written in Tables of
stone; he has given his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto
Israel, he has not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the heathen
knowledge of his Laws. Psalm. 147.19. 4. To them pertained the service of God,
other nations wanting the direction of Gods holy word, became vain in their
imaginations and worshipped the creature more then the Creator, prostrated
themselves to feined Deities, as we read of Dagon the God of the Philistims,
and Milcom the abomination of the Amorites, and Chemosh the abomination of
Moab, and Molech the abomination of the Amorites, and Ashtoreth the goddess of
the Sidonians, and Diana the great goddess of the Ephesians: indeed how could
they call upon him of whom they had not heard, who was (...) an unknown God to
them? but in Jury was God known, his name was great in Israel, at Salem was his
tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion, the Jews were taught to direct their
worship and service to the true God, as Christ told the woman of Samaria. Jo.
4.22. you worship, ye know not what, we know what we worship, for salvation is
of the Jews, It Is true, they were ever now and then starting aside like a
broken bow, they grieved him with their hill Altars, and provoked him to
displeasure with their images, they had their golden Calves at Dan and at
Bethel, and the names of Baalim were too frequent in their mouths. They took
unto them the Tabernacle of Molech and the Star of their god Remphan, figures
which they made to worship them, yet in the most deploreable times God had his
7000 in ^srael that did not bow the knee to Baal, he had his Church among them,
a remnant that did worship the true God after a true manner; they had his word,
and they had his Sacraments, and they had his prophets, and they had his house,
Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord was their great
confidence which other Nations could not boast of Fifthly, the Fathers were
theirs, Abraham is our Father, art thou greater then our Father, Jacob, who
gave us the well, etc. Sixthly, the promises made to the Fathers concerning the
Messiah were theirs, they were interested in them, though not solely, yet
principally, let the children first be served says Christ, the^ were the
natural branches, and therefore the fatness of the Olive tree was first
tendered to them: you may remember how the Disciples commission ran. Mat. 10.5.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter
you not, but g^e you rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, le^ the
children first be served: nay the Messiah himself was theirs, of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came, the word was made flesh, and dwelt among
them, he spent his whole pilgrimage among them, they heard his Sermons, they
saw his miracles, S. Matthew reports of him, Mat. 9 35. that he went about all
their Cities, and Villages, teach ng in their Synagogues, and preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the
people. Ob fortunatos nim^^^t hona si s^a wri^t, Oh happy people, had they be^n
sensible of their happiness, as Christ told the Samaritan woman. Jo. 4.10.
Had thou but known who it is that says to thee give me to drink, thou
might have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water; so had
they but known what a rich treasure they had among them, they would not have
desired him to depart out of their coasts as the Ge^go ens did, they would not
have set at naught this cornerstone, like foolish builders, rather with the
wise Merchant they would have parted with all for his sake: they would have
been ambitious to get a sight of him with Zacheus, to touch the hem of his
garment with the diseased woman, to kiss his feet with Mary Magdalen, they
would have entertained him triumphantly with j yfull acclamations as they did
in the verses before my Text, Hosannah to the son of David, blessed be he that
comes in the name of the Lord, Hosannah in the highest.

Happy were the eyes that saw the things which they saw (though most of them
were so blinded that they saw not their happiness) it was part of S. Augustins
ambitious wish, he desired to have seen three things; Rome in her beauty, Paul
in the pulpit, and Christ in the flesh, as Abraham and diverse other Prophets
and righteous men desired to have seen this day of Christ. Ioh. 8.56. And happy
were the ears that heard the things which they heard, the mysteries of saving
knowledge (...) those secrets and mysteries which were hidden from former ages,
and that immediately from Christ himself, Dulcius ex ipso f^nte, what a blessed
prerogative was it to hear the wisdom of the father so comfortably
discoursing of the great work of our redemption! methinkes they should have
cried out in admiration with that Disciple Ioh. 14.22. how is it that thou will
manifest thy self to us, and not unto the world? but my Text tells you they did
not know the things that belonged to their peace, they were not sensible of the
free grace, the rich mercy that was tendered to them, nay do but consider
their great unthankfulnes and disobedience in the midst of so many binding
mercies, and you may justly wonder that Jerusalem was not long before this
time made a heap of stones: read over the Prophets and you shall find
complaints in this kind without number, do ye thus requite the Lord, Oh
foolish people and unwise? The faithful City is become a harlot, she was full
of judgment, righteousness lodged in her, but now murderers, Hear O Heavens,
and give ear O Earth, I have nourished and brought up children, but they have
rebelled against me: when I fed them to the fall then they assembled themselves
by troops in the harlots houses, how shall I pardon thee for this? As I live
says the Lord, Sodom and her daughters have not done as thou have done, thou
and thy daughters, thou wast corrupted more then they in all thy ways, Ezech.
16.47. And when Christ came among them in person, how did they entertain him?
St. John will tell you, he came to his own, but his own received him not, Ioh.
1.11. Nolumus hunc regnare we will not have this man to reign over us, we have
no King but Caesar; nay, not this man but Barabbas, they prefer a public
notorious malefactor before him: himself also will tell you Mat. 13.37. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, howoften would I have gathered thy children together as
a Hen does her chickens under her wings, but ye would not? thus all the day
long he stretched out his hand, but it was (...) to a gainesaying people,
veluj, noluistis, how often would I, but ye would not?

And yet how unwilling was God to unsheath his sword, to power out the full
Vials of his fierce anger upon this rebellious Nation? though their sins were
so provoking that he knew not well how to pardon them, How shall I pardon thee
for this? thy children have forsaken me and sworn by them that are no gods, and
shall I allow this? shall I give my glory to another? how shall I pardon thee
for this? yet so infinite on the other side was his mercy, that he was
unwilling to punish them; Why will ye dye Oye house of Israel? As I live says
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner: run thorough the streets
of Jerusalem, and seek for a man that executes judgment, that I may pardon
i^: and most pathetically in the 11. of Hos. ver. 8. How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah, and
set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together: see what a conflict there seems to be in God, between his mercy and
his justice, how shall I pardon thee for this? and yet how shall I give thee
up; how shall I make thee as Admah, etc. feign would I spare thee, but thy sins
cry to Heaven for vengeance, thou art incorrigible in thy ways, and therefore
thy sin is unpardonable, I am forced to give sentence against thee, though it
be with tears in my eyes: when he came near, be beheld the City and wept over
it, etc.

Christ might have insulted over Herusalem, when he foresaw the cup of
trembling that she was to drink of, as wisdom threatens her contemners. Pro.
1.24. Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded; therefore I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your
fear comes, when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a
whirlwind, when distress and ang ish comes upon you: so seeing Herusalem
would not take warning by all former invitations, admonitions, judgments,
mercies, Christ might justly have laughed at her calamity, when he saw her
fear coming as desolation, and her destruction as a whirlwind: but our
blessed Savior came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them, and therefore
when he came near, he beheld the City and wept over it.

In the words we have Christ melting into tears for hardhearted Jerusalem,
Nihil miserius misero non mis^rante seipsum, there is not a more sad lamentable
spectacle in the world, then to see a man, or a City, or a Nation, like Simon
Magus in the gall of bitterness, in the depth of misery, in regard of a
wilful persisting in heinous and crying sins, yet themselves insensible of
their own misery, sleeping securely in their sins with Balaam, driving o still
in their wonted course of sinning, and never take notice of the Sword that is
drawn against them, hugging and embracing, sporting and delighting themselves
with those Delilahs, those lusts and corruptions which will prove their bane
and destruction. Quis talta fando temper^t a ^lachrymis? who can behold all
this with dry-Eyes? The Poet has a conceit that Heaven it self weeps for such
Creatures. Dic rogo cur toties descendit ab aethere nimbus?
Grandoque de coeso sic fine fine ruit?


What may be the reason, why there falls such store of Rain, one shower after
another? Mortales quoniam nolum sua crimina flere,
(Calum pro nobis solvitur in lachrymas.


Because hard hearted sinners will not bewail their own faults, H aven it
self is dissolved into tears for them: it is so in my Text, Heaven it self
or the heir of Heaven sals a weeping for Jerusalem, and is not here a strange
alteration, when Jerusalem sometime the joy of the whole Earth Ps 48.2. shall
not only make the Earth sad, but even darken the Heavens, cause him that was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his Fellows to melt into tears? And
when he came neat, he beheld the City and wept over it, etc.

The parts are two, the mourner, and the causes of his mourning. the Mourner is
Christ, and that in the midst of his jollity too (as I may so speak) as he
was riding in state in triumph toward Jerusalem. To show that even in
laughter the heart is sorrowful, that there is no worldly happiness without a
mixture of discontent: when he came near he beheld the City and wept over it.

The causes of his mourning are two, two heavy spectacles, for ea^h Eye one,
and either of them able to command a fountain of tears, as the Propher
speaks; the one seen, namely, malum culpe the evil of sin. If thou had
known, even thou in this thy day the things that belong to thy peace, but now
they are hid from thine Eyes, thou knew not the time of thy visitation, the
other foreseen, namely malum poenae, the evil of punishment, For the days
shall come that thy Enemies shall cast a trench abour thee, and keep thee in on
every side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within
thee, etc. Or if you please, we have here Hierusalems funeral, where we have
first the chief Mourner Christ he be^eld the City and wept over it saying; if
thou had known, even thou in this thy day! a broken speech, a passionate
expression, the right Dialect of Mourners, Si cognovisses, if thou had known,
or o si cognovisse, would to God thou had known the things that belong to
thy peace: methinks I hear him lamenting over Jerusalem, as David over his
friend Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26. I am distressed for thee my brother Jonathan,
very pleasant have, thou been unto me, or as the same David lamented over
Absalom, oh Absalom my Son, would God I had died for thee, etc. O Jerusalem,
Herusalem, would God I had died for thee, as afterward (you know) he did dye
for her and in her, and by her: when he came near he beheld the City, and wept
over it saying, etc. Secondly, we have here the malady or cause of Hierusalems
death, blindness, security, If thou had known even thou in this thy day (...)
the things that belong to thy peace, (...), but now they are did from thine
Eyes, (...) thou knew not the time of thy visitation. Thirdly, we have here
the kind or manner of Death, it is a strong death, a terrible death by the
Sword, which David so earnestly prayed against; Let me fall into the hands of
God, for his mercies are great, but let me not fall into the hands of men whose
tender mercies are cruel; For the days shall come wherein thine Enemies shall
cast a trench about thee, and lay thee even with the ground.

A love principium, we are to begin with Christ the Mourner in my Text: when he
came near he beheld the City, (...) and he wept. It was not without a cause
that Christ was styled by the Prophet Vir Dolorum, Es. 53.3. A man of sorrows
and acquainted with grief: survey his whole pilgrimage from the Cratch to the
Cross, from the Womb to the Tomb, and you shall find it like Ezechiels roll
written upon within and without, lamentation and mourning and woe; in the days
of his flesh he offered up Prayers, and Supplications with strong crying and
Tears, Heb. 5.7. At Lazarus his grave he groaned in the Spirit and wept. Ioh.
11.35. Here when he came near he beheld the City and wept, All his joy was
inward, Luc. 10.21. At that time Jesus rejoiced in Spirit, and said, I thank
thee Father Lord of Heaven, and Earth etc. Some inward joy, he rejoiced in the
spirit in the love and complacency of his Father, I thank thee Father Lord of
Heaven and Earth; I am sure he had little matter of outward joy, of re joycing
in the world: many times he complains of the hatred of the world; if the world
hate you, ye know it hated me before it hated you, Ioh. 14.18. How did the
unthankful world slight and neglect him? The Foxes have holes and the Fowls
of the Air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay his head: how
was he scorned and derided in the world? Is not this the Carpenters son? Can
there any good thing come out of Nazareth? few acknowledged him to be the
Messiah, the Lord of glory, the Prince of life, the Savior of the world, the
King of the Jews, the Son of God, the brightness of his Fathers glory, the
express image of his person, as he was indeed: how was he slandered and
scandalized by his malignant adversaries? none of them could convince him of
the least sin, yet they traduce him up and down, as if he were (as St. Paul
sometimes confessed of himself.) Peccatorum maximus, the chiefest of sinners a
gluttonous person, a Wine-hibber, a friend, a companion of Publicans and
sinners, a Sabbath-breaker, a Blasphemer, a deceiver of the people, a conjurer,
casting out Devils through Beelzebub; a Traitor, forbidding to pay tribute to
Caesar, and what not? and surely had he not been more then a man, such usage
was able not only to set open the floudgates of his Eyes, but even to break his
heart, woe is me my Mother (says the Prophet Jeremy) that thou have born me, I
have neither lent upon usury nor borrowed upon usury, yet all the people curse
me, Jer. 15.10. They cannot justly tax me with any unjust action, and yet are
continually reviling me, yet here is not all neither, to the persecution of the
Tongue they ad the persecution of the hand, no sooner were tidings of his birth
spread in Herod's Court, but presently he seeks to destroy him, and with him a
number of young innocents, that knew not their right hand from their left,
there began the weeping, Mat. 2.18. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by
the Prophet Jeremy saving, In Ramah was there a voice heard, Lamentation and
weeping and great mourning Rachel weeping for her children because they were
not: as soon as he began to preach, the Scribes and Pharisees consult how they
may destroy him, one time they were going to throw him headlong from the top of
a high hill, Luke. 4.29. As the Devil sometime would have had him thrown
himself down rom the Pinnacle of the Temple, another time they had like to have
stoned him, Joh. 10.31. Many good works have I shown you from my Father, for
which of these do ye stone me? another time they sent their Disciples to
entangle him in his Talk, Mat. 22 ^6. Another time their Officers to apprehend
him Joh. 7.32 And at last they find Judas to betray him, and sent a multitude
with swords and slaves to take him as a Thief, or a Malefactor, who hurry him
from the Garden to the high Priests Palace, from thence to Pilate, from Pilat
to Herod, from Herod, after a deal of scornful usage back again to Pilat,
where they maliciously arraigne him, falsely accuse him, unjustly condemn him,
buffet him, scourge him, make long furrows upon his back, besmeare that face
of which the Psalmist, Thou art fayrer then the children of men, with their
filthy spittle, environ his sacred Head with a Crown of Thorns, lead him
forth to be crucified, load him with his Cross, fasten him to the Cross,
pierce his Hands and his Feet, insult over him in his sufferings, Fixuris
clavorum addentes tela ^n^^^rum (says Leo) to the piercing of the Nails
adding the rankling arrows of their venomous tongues, Ah thou that destroy'st
the Temple and buildest it again in three days, save thy self, If he be the
King of Israel, let him come down from the Cross etc. Behold now and see if
ever sorrow were like unto this sorrow: the women could not forbear weeping
who had only a compassionate fellow feeling of it, I. u. 23, 27. No marvel if
Christ himself wept that felt it.

Well if Christ be a Mourner, then woe to them that are at ease in Sion, that
spend their days in mirth, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ, and the
Tabret and the Harp go not out of their Feasts, Christ did not so, Christians
have no warrant to expect it, the members must be in some measure conforma^le
to their head, Ioh. 16.20. Our blessed Savior tells his Diciples, you shall
weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice, worldlings may let loose the
reins, and seek for a Paradise, a Heaven upon Earth, in the pleasures of sin
for a season, it is their portion, but Christ's Disciples must expect Tears for
meat, and plenteousnes of Tears for drink; Mine Eye, mine Eye runs down with
Rivers of water says the Church. Lam. 3.48. Mine Eye trickleth down and
cease not, without any intermission. David will tell you of watering his
couch, and making his bed to swim with tears, and that night after night,
Every night wash I my bed with the tears of my complaint, Ps. 6.6. You shall
find St. Peter weeping bitterly, and Mary Magdalen pumping out tears enough to
wash her Saviors Feet: beloved as Christ was, so are we in this world. 1 John
4.17. that is, pilgrims and strangers, here we have no continuing City, but we
seek one to come, I am a stranger with thee, and a so journer, as all my
Fathers were; now the condition of a pilgrim is a weeping condition. By the
waters of Babylon we sat down and wept: when we remembered thee O Sion. Psalm.
137.1. Every Dog will be barking at strangers, and you know how imperiously the
Sodomites insulted over, ^^ot because he was a stranger. This fellow (say they)
came in to so journe amongst us, and he will needs be a judge over us. Now
though Christ our head met with stronger oppositions, and greater afflictions
in his pilgrimage, then we are like to meet with (for God is faithful, who
will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able) yet we must look to
drink of the same cup that he drank of, though not so deep as he drank, and to
fill up (...) the after sufferings, that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ. Col. 1.24. Beside we have tears to shed that Christ was not capable of
tears of repentance, he was a Lamb without spot and without blemish, there was
no guile found in his mouth, we are laden with sins, there is not a day
passes over our heads, wherein we do not contract unto our selves the guilt
of many, many sins. What our Lord and Savior speaks of the evil of
punishment. Mat. 6.34 is true also of the evil of sin, su ficient for the day
is the evil thereof, every day brings sin enough with it, to over cast it, to
make it a wet day, a day of weeping, for as the Father speaks, seeing after we
are baptized, and washed from the guilt of original sin, we do daily foul
our selves a new by the commission of actual sins, we should also daily
re-baptize our selves in the bitter waters of Marah, the tears of true
Repentance: what is wanting in innocence, we should Prive to make up in
penitency, ^a^th quod possum, and p ango quod non possum, (as St. Bernard) I
do what I am able, and what! cannot do I am sorry for it, but especially upon
days of solemn humiliation, days set apart for this very purpose, for the
bewailing both of our personal and of our national sins, when God by his
judgments threatened or inflicted calls to weeping and to mourning, and to
baldnes and to putting on of sackcloth, if then the voice of the turtle be not
heard in our Land, if the Mourners do not go about the streets, as the
Preacher speaks, if there be not a renting of the heart, as well as a hanging
down the head like a bulrush, what shall I say? surely we are in Hierusalems
case, near to destruction, we do not know the day of our visitation: we know
not the things that belong to our peace. So that Christ is seasonably brought
in weeping, to teach us what we must do, as at all times while we so journ
here in this valley of tears, so especially upon days of mourning and
humiliation, blessed are those that mourn (says Christ) they shall be
comforted: Though they sow in tears, they shall reap in joy; heavines may
endure for a night, joy will come in the morning; When the times of refreshing
shall come, all tears shall be wiped from their Eyes, and they shall enter
into the joy of their Master, receive the oil of gladness for the spirit of
heavines, lay aside their black mourning weeds, and attend the Lamb in white
robes with palms in their hands. Rev. 7.9. And so much briefly of the Mourner,
in the next place we are to take notice of the causes of his mourning; he
beheld the City, and wept over it.

His tears are tears of compassion, tears of love; Behold how he loved him,
said the Jews, when he wept at Lazarus his grave. lo. 11.36. Behold how he
loved this unthankefull City, in that he shed not tears only as here, but his
precious blood also afterward for it, V^dens civitat^nt, he beheld the City
and wept over it. We have a proverb Vbi amor ibi oculus, where we love there
will our Eye be gazing, where Christ's love was we may see by his Eye too, Vidit
civitatem he beheld the City, but what cause he had to love it, or to six his
Eye upon it, we see not, for what does he behold there? but matter of grief
and discontent? he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry; Jerusalem like Babylon is become a cage of
unclean Birds, Deviarunt omnes, they are all gone out of the way, fallen off
from the purity, sincerity, and religious integrity of their forefathers: there
was a time indeed when God behold no iniquity in ^acob nor saw perversenes in
Israel. Number 23.21. But now he beholds nothing else but iniquity, but
perversenes; A sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil
doers, a rebellious house, a stiff necked people, of uncircumcised Heart and
Ears, which causes him to behold it with watery Eyes, he beheld the ^ity and
wept over it, etc.

There is a twofold cause of Christ's mourning here, as I told you, Hierusalems
n, and Hierusalems misery by reason of sin, as they two are never long asunder:
we are to begin with her sin as the cause of her misery, and the chief cause
of Christ's mourning, he beheld the City and wept over it saying; ^f thou had
known, even thou in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, but now
they are hid from thine Eyes, because thou knew not the time of thy
visitation.

If thou ^adst known, even thou, etc. It is no single sin, but a wilful
senseless, secure, obstinate sleeping in sin: they will not be convinced of,
much less averted from their erroneous courses, God has sent his Prophets
rising early an calling to them, O do not this abominable sin that I hate: he
has commanded them to cry alowd against their crying sins, their idolatry,
oppression, swearing, lying, killing, stealing, neighing after their Neighbors
wives like fed Horses, and what was their answer? As for the word that thou
have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken to it, but we
will do what is pleasing in our own Eyes, to burn incense to the Queen of
Heaven. ^er. 41.16. When his servants could not work upon them, he sent his Son
(They will reverence my Son) but they cast him out of the Vineyard too; this is
the Heir, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours. God sets open a
Fountain for the inhabitants of Jerusalem to wash in, for sin an for
uncleanesse, they scorn this fountain as Naaman did Jordan; Are not Abana and
Pharpar rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel? nay they say
to Christ (who is this fountain) as St. Peter did though with a far worse
mind, thou shall never wash my feet, Joh. 13.8. God sends his Son to seek and
save the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and these lost sheep, these Sons of
perdition will not hear the Shepherds voice, braine-sick Patients, they run
at the Physician that comes to cure them, they stumble at the Cornerstone, the
rock of their salvation becomes a Rock of offense to them: and here is their
condemnation, that light is come into the World, the day Sar from on high has
visited them, but they choose darkness, rather then light, because their deeds
are evil. Joh. 3.9. They are not sensible of the day of their Visitation, God
has given them a gracious visit indeed, he has sent his beloved Son
amongst them: the promised Shiloh, whom they had so long expected, and not they
only, but also all the Families of the Earth, who expected a blessing from him,
the desire of all Nations is come among them, Ecce rextius v^an t^^, Behold thy
King comes unto thee meek, and sitti g upon an Asses Col^, as you may see in
the verses before my Text, and it is w^ll the Ox knew his owner (for he was
born in a Stable and laid in a Manger) and the Ass here his Masters crib, for
Israel did not knew his people did not consider, they reje ed him as the legion
of Devils did, Quid nobis tecum? what have we to do with thee? Mat. 8.29. Full
often he would have gathered their Children together as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her wings, but they would not, they knew not the things that
belonged to their peace. Wherefore is there a price put into the hand of a
fool (says Solomon) seeing he has no heart to it? here was an invalua^le
price put into the hand of a foolish Nation, but they had no heart to it, the
worth of it was hid from their Eyes, they were so besotted with the pleasures
of sin, so purblind in discerning the things that concerned their peace, the
welfare and salvation of their souls, that they had no list to close with
those blessed opportunities which they enjoyed, and was not this a sad
spectacle? When he beheld the City, he wept over it saying; If thou had
known, even thou in this thy day, etc.

Learn we then here by Christ's example as to weep, so when to weep, where and
for whom to bestow our tears for the backsliding of Hi^rusalem, when we see
iniquity in the holy place, the faithful City become a Harlot, when we see
precious opportunities neglected, and pearle^ trampled under foot by Swine that
know not the worth of them, when we see men regardles of their souls, and the
things that concern their peace, obstinatly to persist in their sins, without
any remorse of conscience or fear o judgment; then it is high time to set open
the floud-gates of our Eyes with David, Mine Eyes gush out with water because
men keep not thy Law, or with our Savior here, he beheld the City and wept
over it saying, if thou had known, etc.

In the ninth Chap. of Ezech. Ver 4. We find a command to set a mark upon the
forehead of all those that sigh, and cry out for all the abominations, that
were committed in the midst of Jerusalem, and indeed what Christian man's
heart can choose but bleed within him, if he shall seriously lay to heart all
the abominations that are committed before his Eyes, how was righteous Lots
soul vexed with the unclean conversation of the filthy Sodomites? 2 Pet. 2.7,
8. We read of S. Paul, that when he came into Athens, and saw the City wholly
given to Idolatry, Commotus est Spiritus, that his Spirit was moved within him.
Acts 17.16. To see the renowned City of Athens, so famous formerly for
learning, now become so infamous for Idolatry, communicating that honor and
service, which is due and proper to God alone, to dumb Idols: his spirit was
moved within him, and so far moved, that though he were in a strange place, yet
he could not contein himself, but cries aloud against those abominations;
David cries out, it grieveth me, when I see the transgressors, because they
keep not thy Law. Psalm. 119.158. And the Apostle speaking of those loose livers
in the primitive Church, whose belly was their God, and gloried in their shame,
says thus of them, I tell you weeping, they are the Enemies of the Cross of
Christ. Phil. 3.18, 19. David could not behold the transgressors without
grieving, It grieveth me when I see the transgressors, because they keep not
thy Law, nor S. Paul speak of it without weeping, I tell you weeping, they are
the Enemies of the Cross of Christ: so tender hearted have Gods children ever
been, so ready to mourn for others sins; as indeed there is a great deal of
reason we should do so both in respect of God, who is thereby dishonored, in
respect of the sinner, for whom in common humanity we cannot but weep, when we
observe how greedily he runs to his own destruction, what have he makes to that
place where shall be everlasting weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth, and
in respect of our selves who are endangered by other men's sins, their sin is
infectious, I living among them may perhaps be drawn to cast in my lot to run
with them to the same excess of riot, to partake with them in their sins:
their sin in offensive to God; if God shall unsheath his sword, and come to
visit for their iniquities, I living among them may perhaps be partaker of
their punishment, and therefore for my own sake, I have cause to mourn for the
sins of other men, Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet, it is high
time for thee to look about thee, when thy Neighbors House is on fire.

And first we cannot but mourn for the abominations of Jerusalem the sins of
other men, in resp^ct of God, in zeal to his glory, to see him daily
dishonored, his holy name blasphemed, his Sabbaths profaned, his service
neglected, al his commandemants broken, and that by the sins of other men: this
was it that made the Prophet Eliah complain so mournfully. 1 Kings 19.10. I
have been very zealous for the Lord of Hosts, for the children of Israel have
forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, slain thy Prophets with the
sword, and I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away. I have been
very jealous for the Lord of Hosts; indeed we would count him an unnatural
Son, that should stand by: see and hear his Father abused and dishonored, and
(though he could not hinder it) should not at least express himself to be
grieved and troubled at it, and surely we have just cause to suspect our selves
to be bastards, and not Sons, if we can stand by when our Heavenly Father is
dishonored in word or deed, and not so much as shed a tear for the same, we
are not of that Spirit, that the Children of God were wont to be of, Moses when
he came down from the mount, and saw the abomination of the Israelites that
they had changed the glory of God into the similitude of a Calfe that cateth
Hay, he was so daunted at the sight, that dismal sight, that for the present
he was like a man in an Ecstasy, he forgot what he was doing, he let the Tables
that were written upon by the finger of God, to fall out of his hands and be
broken, and so brake those Laws in his zeal, which the people had broken in
rebellion. Exodus 3^.19. Phinehas his zeal was so hot, that he could not hold
his hands, but runs upon the offenders Zimri and Cozbi, and runs them thorough
with his savelin. Number. 25.8. Hezechias rents his cloths heating the blasphemous
words of Rabshakeh reviling the living God, and David cries out, my zeal has
even consumed me, because mine Enemies have forgotten thy words, and here the
Son of David weeps for the sins of Jerusalem: And no marvayle, for it being
the earnest desire of Gods children, the constant aim of all their actions to
do all to the glory of God, and to let theit light shine before men, that
others seeing their good works may glorify their Father which is in Heaven; Let
their light shine in like manner, to the glory of God. Let the people praise
thee O God, let all the people praise thee; now to be crossed in their earnest
desire, to see men in stead of doing all to the glory of God, to do all to the
dishonor of God, to sell themselves to work wickedness in his sight, must needs
be a great heartbreaking or occasion of mourning.

Secondly, we have cause to mourn for the abominations of Jerusalem the sins
of other men in regard of themselves, in compassion to their souls, to see how
desperately they run themselves upon the Rock of Gods judgments, how wilfully
they embrace their own destruction, how swinishly they wallow in the mire of
sin, how willing they are to be led by the Enemy of their salvation, the spirit
that works in the children of disobedience, making it their daily trade:
their continual exercise to add sin unto sin, and to heap up wrath against
the day of wrath, and Hirc illae lachrymae, and who can behold all this with
dry Eyes? if we should see a man like Baals Pries^s, cutting himself with
lancers and knives till the blood followed: I suppose there is none of us but
would be moved with such a spectacle as this: beloved this is the sinners
case: he daily wounds and mangles himself with his sins, every sin makes a
deep gash in the soul: spare then some of those Tears, which thou usest to
shed for the death of the body, and shed them for the death of the soul, for
the sins of other men; for these without repentance lead to everlasting death
and destruction, in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone, where the
Worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

And thirdly, we have cause to mourn for the abominations of Jerusalem, the
sins of other men in regard of our selves and those dangers which by other men's
sins hang over our own heads; Woe is me (says the Psalmist) that I am
constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of
Kedar. Psalm. 120.4. There is a twofold woe hanges over the head of Gods
children by reason of sinners that live among them, a woe of infection, and a
woe of Malediction, or a woe of punishment: first I say a woe of infection, Can
a man touch pitch and not be defiled? Can a man live among sinners like Ezechid
in the midst of Scorpions, and not be poisoned, not be infected by them? can
Joseph live in Pharaohs Court, and not learn to swear by the life of Pharaoh?
it is a hard matter to live blameless, and without rebuke and to shine as
lights in the midst of a perverse and crooked generation, though the Apostle
require it, Phil. 2.15. And therefore it is no small commendations that Christ
gives the Bishop of Pergamos, Rev. 2.13. That he held fast his name and did not
deny his faith, though he lived where the Synagogue of Satan was; we are all of
an apish nature, apt to imitate the manners and conditions of those with whom
we converse, Like Labans sheep, Ger. 30.39. Ready to bring forth white or
spotted according to the patterns of innocence, or corruption we see before our
Eyes, with the holy thou shall be holy, and with the froward thou shall learn
frowardness. Psalm. 18.26. I have heard of those who knowing themselves to be
certainly infected with the plague, that they have gone out into the Streets,
and so not only poisoned the Air to the great danger of passers by, but even
breathed upon as many as they could come near that so they might be sure to
infect them: for certain it is so with those that are infected with the plague
of sin, their bad example, that is like the poisoning of the air, very
dangerous; but their lewd entising counsel, their insinuating temptations,
come let us lay wait for blood, we shall fill our houses with spoil, cast ^n
thy Lot among us Pro. 1.11. that is like the breathing of an infected person
upon another, almost inevitable.

One woe is past, a woe of infection, there is a second woe hangs over the head
of Gods children by reason of the wicked that live among them, a woe of
malediction or a woe of punishment, and that twofold; one for the wicked,
another from the wicked; First, there is a punishment hangs over them for the
wicked, fugiamus ne si balneum propter Cerinthum ruerit, nos quoque damni simus
participes, said Saint John the Evangelist, let us make haste away least the
Bath fall for Cerinthus sins, and we partake of Cerinthus punishment, come out
of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, that ye receive not
of her plagues, Rev. 18.4. all Israel smarts for Achans offense, and many times
a fruitful land is made barren for the wickedness of them that dwell therein:
Ps. 107.34. It Is true, God sometimes spares the place for the tens sake,
unwilling to weed out the tares, least he pluck up the wheat also, and yet
sometimes sin grows to such a ripeness, that it causes God to sweep away
the inhabitants of a land with the besome of destruction, as he threatens by
the Prophet; witness those three great judgments, the famine, the pestilence,
and the sword, when they come they spare none. Secondly, there is a punishment
hangs over them from the wicked, for who knows not that the wicked are
professed enemies to the children of God? this serpentine brood bears a
mortal enmity to the seed of the woman. Christ and his members, though they
cannot break their head, they will (if it be possible) bruise their heel,
prove like the Canaanites, to the Israelites, scourges in their sides, and
thorns in their eyes, always deriding, traducing, opposing, oppressing them,
making their lives bitter unto them: sheep can look for no better
entertainment among Wolves: and therefore Gods children, living among the
wicked, may justly take up the complaint of the Psalmist, our Soul is among
Lions where it is as great a miracle, that they should not be worried, as that
Daniel was not torn in pieces in the Lions den.

You see there is cause enough to weep over Jerusalem, to mourn for the sins
of other men, and yet this mourning may be much increased both from the
condition of him tha: mourns, as also from the condition of him, for whose
sins we mourn. First, from the condition of him that mourns, from that
relation, which the mourner has unto him, for whose sins he mourns: and
here I may instance in two sorts of mourners, natural parents mourning for
their children, spiritual parents ministers mourning for their flocks. To
begin with natural parents, think with your selves (and perhaps I speak to
some that know and feel it) what a grief it must needs be to parents, Godly
religious parents, to see their children take lewd courses, to walk in the
counsel of the ungodly, and sit in the seat of the scornful, to set at
naught their wholesome instructions and fatherly admonitions, a wise Son
makes a glad Father (says Solomon) but a foolish Son is a heaviness to his
Mother. Pro. 10.1. such a heaviness was Esau to his mother Rebeccah in
matching into that cursed stock of the Hittites, as you may read, Genesis 27.46. I
am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth, if Jacob take a wife of
the daughters of Heth, such as are the daughters of the land, what good will my
life do me? and Saint Augustine reports of his mother Monica, that as often as
her children did sin against God, so often she did as it were ^^vell in birth
of them again, every evil report she heard, did as it were cause a new throw,
nay I think the pains of childbirth are not so tedious to the mother, as
those after-paines that are caused by the lewd conversation of their ungracious
Children, for those pains though they be sharp, they are soon over, and there
is some comfort in the midst of them, that a child is coming into the world;
but when good Eunice shall do her best endeavor to train up her children in
the way wherein they should walk, acquainting them with the holy Scripture,
which are able to make them wise unto salvation, and yet at last shall find all
her labor lost, her hopes frustrated, her children carried away, with lewd and
vicious company, into all manner of loose conversation, as rioting and
drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, this must needs bring her gray hairs
with sorrow to the grave. From natural parents mourning for their children,
pass we to spiritual parents mourning for their flocks; think with your
selves, what a grief it is to faithful Past^rs to see no better success of
all their labors, so much planting, and so much watering, and yet little or no
increase, but they are forced to complain with the Prophet, Domini quis
credidit? Lord who has believed our report? Es. 53.1. but especially, when we
consider how heary all our preaching, and all our exhortations will one day lie
upon you, for want of your obedience, that our word which was intonded to be a
savor of life unto life, will prove to some of you the bitter savor of death
unto death, that it will be more tolerable for Sadom and Gomurha at the day of
judgment, then for many among you, because ye have despised our doctrine, that
we shall be forced to stand out and accuse you at that day, as Christ told
the Jews 10.5.45. Think not that I will accuse you to my Father, there is one
that accuses you, even Moses in whom you trust, that Moses in whom you trust,
who indeed was wont to stand in the gap to mediate and intercede for you, at
that day he shall be your chiefest enemy, Moses shall ace^se you, because you
would not believe n^^ obey his writings verse. 47. now think with your selves
what a grief this must needs be, to the Ministers of God, to consider with
themselves, that they who have desired nothing more then the salvation of those
that are committed to their charge, must at the last day be forced to appear
and rise against many of them for their condemnation, to throw the first stone
at them.

Secondly this mourning may be increased also from the condition of him for
whose sins we mourn, some men do a great deal more hurt by their sins then
others, and therefore their sins are the more to be lamented, and here likewise
I may instance in two sorts of people. First, those that are eminent in place,
aloft in the eye of the world advanced to places of eminency and dignity in
Church or Commonwealth, actiones superiorum sunt libri inferiorum the actions
of superiors are many times the books that inferiors learn by, and therefore
when they are evil, they are twice evil, evil in themselves, and evil for
example, as they are bad patterns and presidents for inferiors to imitate: if
King Iereboam turn away his ear from hearing the law, you shall you shall
soon find a miserable Kingdom, for his example will make all Israel to sin,
and therefore his sins are much to be lamented. It is therefore a mournful
spectacle to see a Magistrate that is sent for the terror of evil doere, to
bear the Sword in vain, either to live in notorious sins himself, or to
allow and wink at the sins of others, this was Gods complaint against Israel
Es. 1.23. Thy Princes are rebellious and companions of thieves, they that
should reform sin in others, they are rebellious themselves, and they that
should judge the Fatherless, and plead for the widow, they are companions of
thieves, so they may have a bribe for conniving, they never regard to deliver
the oppressed out of the hand of the spoyler, It is also a mournful spectacle
to see a minister, upon whose garments under the Law, was engraven in letters
of gold, Holiness unto the Lord, to defile this garment by living in those
sins which in his own mouth condemns out of the word of God, to see those
that sit in Moses seat do such things as these people may not imitate Matthew.
23.3. to build with one hand and pull down with the other; to lead by his good
doctrine, and mislead by his wicked conversation; to have Christ in his mouth,
and Satan in his heart; this is likewise a sad mournful spectacle. Lastly,
those that are eminent though not in place, yet in the esteem and opinion of
the Church, I mean professors of religion, their sins are more scandalous, and
therefore more to be lamented then the sins of other men: if David a pillar of
the Church step awry, the enemies of the Lord will soon have their mouths open
to blaspheme upon that advantage. 2. Sam. 12.14. To see therefore a professor,
not to live according to his profession, not to walk worthy of that new name
that Christ has given him, not to walk as becomes the Gospel, to overreach
or circumvent his neighbor in bargaining or selling, or to undermine his
brothers good reputat^on, by becoming the devils agent to scatter false and
slanderous reports, or to live in malice or adultery, or to hug any other
delightful darling lust in his bosom, this is also a sad mournful spectacle.

Well, if Christ have taught us to mourn for the backslidings of Jerusalem,
what shall we say to that (...) that rejoicing in evil which is in the world?
what shall we think of those active instruments of Satan that take such pains
to propagate sin in others? those inticers. Pro. 1.11. Come let us lay wait
for blood, cast in thy lot amongst us, let us all have one purse, we shall
fill our houses with spoil, and enrich our selves with precious substance etc.
thus the Prophet brings in a crew of Idolaters animating and encouraging one
another in their designs, Esaias 41.6. They helped every one his neighbor, and
said one to another, be of good courage; so the Carpenter encouraged the
Goldsmith, he that smootheth with the Hammer, him that smote the Anvile saying
it is ready for the sodering, and so Es. 56* 12. he brings in a company of
drunkards daring one another to sit close at it, come say they, I will fetch
wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as
to day and much more abundant, and what shall we think of Solomon's fools
that make a sport of sin? never more merry then when they hear of the
disorderly carriages, the drunkenness, the swearing, the wantonness of their
brethren; sure (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.20.) non sic didicistis
Christum, you have not so learned Christ; he mournes for Jerusalem, he beheld
the City and wept over it saying, If thou etc.

And believe it, there was never more cause of mourning in this kind then in
our days, a fountain of tears would not suffice to bewail all the
abominations that are committed in the midst of our Jerusalem: if our Lord and
Savior were now upon earth, he would never go with dry eyes: for beside that
Luke-warmnesse that is amongst us, that a great many are neither hot nor cold,
what sin was ever committed by any that is not committed by many in this
land, and in this City? how has pride jetted in one street? drunkenness
reeled in another street? oppression marched like Iehu in another street?
adultery with all her wanton positures minced in another street? we have
justified Sodom in all her abominations; Sodom which along while ago was
turned into ashes, and made an ensample to all that should afterward live
ungodly, has not done as we have done; we have exceeded Sodom if not in the
commission of greater sins, yet in committing the same sins with greater
impudency and greater obstinacy, in regard of that glorious light which shines
amongst us and did not shine among them, and yet (which is the misery) there is
scarce a Lot to be found, whose righteous soul is greived for all these
abominations, though only such mourners be marked in the forehead, to be
preserved in the destruction of Jerusalem, Ezech. 9. though only such mourners
be the followers: and Disciples of Christ, for he beheld the City and wept
over it saying, If thou had known, even thou in this thy day, etc.

And so I come to the other cause of Christ his mourning, Jerusalems misery,
for the days shall come that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and
keep thee in on every side, and lay thee even with the ground, 'twas likely we
should hear of a storm, Jerusalem was so secure, so oppressed with the spirit
of drowsinesse (she did not know the things that belonged to her peace, they
were hid from her eyes) when men shall cry peace and safety, then sudden
destruction shall come upon them as travel upon a woman that is with child.
1 Thessalonians. 5.3. the men before the deluge were eating and drinking, marrying and
giving in marriage, when the flood came and swept them all away, the men of
Laish were extreme careless and secure when the Danites came upon them and
slew them with the edge of the Sword, Elies Sons set their Fathers counsel at
naught, they would not see the vileness and danger of their sins, when the
Lord had a purpose to slay them, and Lots admonitions sounded as idle tales in
the ears of his Sons in Law, when the next morning Sodom and Gomorrha were
destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven, when the Prophets (who are
called Seers and watchmen) shall discern a cloud, a tempest arising, and shall
according to their duty, give the people warning to fly from the wrath to come,
to prevent and divert it by repentance and reformation, if the people now shall
slight the Prophets words as idle tales, say with Saint Peter's mockers, Vbi
promissio adventus? where is the promise of his coming? or with those Deuteronomy.
29.19. we shall have peace though we add drunkenness to thirst, though we go
on in our sensual courses, though we seek it yet again, as it is Pro. 23.35.
surely that people must needs be in as bad case as the ground that Saint Paul
speaks of Heb. 6.8. that drinks in the rain, and brings forth nothing but
briars and thorns, nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned: and this was
Hierusalems case here, Jerusalem, had many warnings both from the Prophets,
and from the Lord of the Prophets, many gracious tenders of mercy were made to
her, many severe threatenings were discharged against her, woe unto thee O
Jerusalem will thou not be made clean? when will it once be? Ierem. 13.27.
but she is either so blind or so obstinate, or both, that she does not, or will
not know the things that belong to her peace: here in my Text Christ himself
woos her [if thou had known, even thou in this thy day etc.] and that with
tears in his eyes, [he beheld the City and wept over it], but all in vain;
Christ did but cast an eye back upon Peter, and that recalled him, Luc. 22.61.
[the Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and Peter remembered the words of the
Lord, and he went out and wept bitterly] here he looked a long time upon
Jerusalem [he beheld the City and wept over it] but Jerusalem is so settled
upon her Lees. Zeph. 1.12. so grounded in security and hardness of heart, that
she cannot, that she will not repent, and therefore no marvel if her goods
become a booty, and her houses a desolation, as it follows there at the 13.
verse, or as it is in the Text, the days shall come, that thy enemies shall cast
a trench about thee, and keep thee in on every side, etc.

Here you see the kind of her misery, Jerusalem is exposed to the fury of her
merciless enemies, to the Sword the sharpest of Gods 3. Airewes, she has not
liberty to take her choice as David had 2. Sam. 24.13. Will thou have 7. years
famine come upon the land? or will thou flee 3. months before thy enemies
while they pursue thee? or will thou that there be 3. days pestilence in the
land? but she is peremptorily designed to the Sword, to be compassed about with
armies, that should batter down her lofty Turrets, her princely palaces, lay
them all even with the ground; For the days shall come that thine enemies
shall cast a trench about thee, etc.

It was a heavy sight to see Jerusalem blocked up in this manner, so
straightly and strongly beseiged, that they were neither able to beat off their
enemies, nor could expect succor from their friends: it had been an
uncomfortable fight to see some houses shut up in Jerusalem by the destroying
Angel; but to see Jerusalem it self shut up, was both a strange and a sad
spectacle: where is the noble valor, the heroic Spirit, that was wont to be
in this people? time was when one of them could chase a thousand, and two of
them put ten thousand to slight, when Israel lay down like a Lion, and couched
like a great Lion, and none durst rouse him up, when other nations were glad to
betake themselves to their fenced Cities because of them, and there to fortify
their walls, Barrocadoe their Gates against them, as Hiericho and other Cities
did, or if they did venture to sally out against them one way, they were forced
to flee before them seven ways: but what shall we say now, when Israel turns
their backs before their enemies? when they are forced to retreat into
Jerusalem for shelter, when the enemy pursues them to the very Ga^es, entrench
themselves round about the City, and threaten to cut them all off, either by
the Sword, or by the Famine, which is sharper then a two edged Sword. The days
shall come that thine enemies, etc.

It was strange that Jerusalem should be thus surrounded, but more strange
that it should be taken, that it should be battered down and laid even with
the ground, as it follows in the next words, They shall lay thee even with the
ground and thy children within thee, this was strange indeed, whether we
consider the situation of the City, or the protector of the City; for the
situation of it, it was feared upon such high, craggy, inaccessible rocks or
mountains, that it was even by nature made almost impregnable: the Iebusites
that held it till David's time, thought it so strong of it self, that the blind
and the lame were able to defend it against David, and all his men of valor. 2 Samuel 5.6. And to this strength of nature, was added an artificial strength of
Forts and Bulwarks. Psalm. 48.12. Walk about Sion and go round about her, and
tell the Towers thereof, mark well her Bulwarks, consider her Palaces, that
you may tell them that come after: now to see these strong Bulwarks, these
stately Palaces laid even with the ground, was a sight no less wonderful then
lamentable: The Kings of the earth and all the inhabitants of the world, would
not have believed, that the enemy should have entered into the Gates of
Jerusalem: Lam. 4.12. Again consider the Protector of the City: it is true,
except the Lord keeps the City, the watchman waketh but in vain, but
Jerusalem was the City of the great King, God was well known in her Palaces
as a sure refuge, he had his Temple there, for thy Temples sake at Jerusalem,
nay and Jerusalem had experience of his protection formerly, when it was
beseiged by the Forces of Senacherib, an Army supposed invincible, yet the Lord
being their Protector, raised the seige, as you may read. Esaias 37.35. I will
defend this City for my own sake, and for my servant David's sake, And that
night the Angel of the Lord went out and slew in the Camp of the Assyrians
185000. But where is the God of Jerusalem now? as Elishah spoke when he came
to the bank of Jordan, where is the Lord God of Eliiah now? 2. Reg. 2.14.
surely the Glory is departed from Israel, Israel has rejected the Lord, and
gone a whoring after strange Gods, they have walked extreme contrary to him in
all their ways, and therefore the Lord has at length justly with-drawne
himself from them, and left them as a prey to their enemies, Climb upon her
walls and destroy, down with her battlements, for they are not the Lords:
Ier. 5.10. And now our blossed Savior as if he saw the wall (not of Hiericho,
but) of Jerusalem tumbling down, the Soldiers on every side entering the
City, beating all down before them, dashing the young infants against the
stones, torturing the aged and honorable, deflouring the modest Virgins and
chaste Matrons, ransaking their houses, with fire and Sword, laying Jerusalem
even with the ground, and her children within her, he falls a weeping, he
beheld the City and weptover it.

As indeed it was a lamentable sight, the Lord in mercy grant we never see
such a Spectacle in our Jerusalem; no doubt, Abraham was affected with sorrow,
when he saw the smoke of Sodom ascend like the smoke of a furnace, though
Sodom was a nest of infidels, children of Belial, whose sins c^ied up to heaven
for vengeance, Genesis 13: 13.
young and old from every quartet were gathered together about Lots door,
crouding and striving who should he the foremost in that unnatural and
prodigious sin, it cannot appear that there was a Family or a Soul after Lot
was gone, which were not all most notorious sinners, and yet it was a sad
spectacle, to see Sodom said even with the ground, so in the 18. chap. of the
revelation, verse. 9 10. and so forward, it is prophesied that the Kings of the
earth, and the Merchants, and the Shipmasters shall weep bitterly for the
destruction of Babylon, when they they shall see the smoke of her burning:
alas, alas, that great City Babylon, that mighty City, for in one hour is her
judgment come, in one hour is so great riches come to nothing alas, alas that
great City! well then might our blessed Savior weep for Jerusalem, where
there was yet a Remnant according to the Election of grace, which were like to
be involved in the common calamity, the righteous with the wicked, and Templum
Domini the Temple of the Lord together with their seiled houses: O God the
Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they defiled, and
made Jerusalem a heap of stones, the dead bodies of thy Saints have they
given to be meat unto the fowls of the air, and the flesh of thy Servants,
to the beasts of the land, Ps. 79.1.2. This made the Prophet Jeremy wish, Oh
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep night and day for the slain of the daughter of my people. I^r. 9.1. this
made our Savior here, when he beheld the City, to weep over it saying, if
thou had known etc. for the days shall come that thy enemies shall cast a
trench about thee, and lay thee even with the ground and thy children within
thee.

Beloved, our Saviors example must be our direction all along, he weeps for
Jerusalem, we must also weep for the miseries and desolations of Jerusalem,
the Church and people of God abroad in the world, and for the miseries that
hang over our Jerusalem, and threaten us with ruin, unless God in mercy be
pleased to open our eyes, that we may at last be able to know, (that is to
take notice of) the things that belong to our peace. And first the miseries of
the Church abroad call for our tears. Hierusalems misery here was but a
coming [the days shall come] Christ saw the cloud arising, it was 40. years
after before the storm fell, and yet he could not forbear weeping; how can we
look upon the ruins of Jerusalem, and other famous Churches with look upon
the ruins of Jerusalem, and other famous Churches with dry eyes? Thy Servants
think upon her stones, and it pittieth them to see her in the dust, says the
Psalmist. Ps. 10^.14. to see thorns come up in her palaces, Nettles and
Brambles in her fortresses, that she is become an habitation of Dragons, and a
Court of Owls, a most forlorn desolate place. Es. 34.13. the words which her
enemies uttered in scorn, Lam. 2.15. we should utter with tears, is this the
beauty of perfection? the joy of the whole earth? alas, alas that great City.
And who can sufficiently bewail the sad desolations of other Churches? when we
call to mind the inroades, and encroachments that the wild Bore of the
Forest, the Turk has made into Christendom, and is daily threatening and
indevouring to swallow up more of it, to devour Jacob, and lay waste his
dwelling place, to root out the Church and people of God, that the name of
Israel may he no more in remembrance: and when we consider, how that Skarlet
whore of Rome has made her self drunk with the blood of the Saints. Rev.
17.6. Pity the breaches of Bohemia, the Palatinate, Germany, etc. Whose f need
Cities (many of them) are turned into ^^inous heaps, laid even with the ground,
and their fields watered with the blood of Christians. Their blood have they
shed like water on every side of H^er s^em, and there was no man to bury them.
Ps. 79.3. Pity the sad condit on of Ir^an, say with the Spouse, Cant. 8.8.
What shall we do for our little Sister? Lamentable are the scritches and
complaints that have been heard out of that Kingdom, by reason of the fury of
the oppressor; sparing neither Age nor Sex, pillaging and firing and laying
all even with the ground, where ever they prevayle: and is this nothing to you
all ye that pass by? have ye no fellow-feeling of their miseries? can ye for
all this stretch your selves upon your beds of ivory, and eat the Lambs of the
flock, and the Calves out of the stall, and drink your Wine in bowls, and
chaunte it to the sound of the Violl? and never consider the afflictions of
Joseph? S. Paul commands us to weep with those that weep, as N ^^imiah did for
the miseries of his Brethren at H^erusalem, when himself was in prosperity in
the Court of Artaxerxes: the Members of Christ's mystical Body, should be like
the members of a natural body: where if one Member suffer, all the rest suffer
with it. 1 Cor. 12.26. Pity then that bleedding Kingdom, pity and pray for
them, pity and succor them: first pity and pray for them, importune and
wrestle with God in behalf of that Kingdom by uncessant and earnest Prayer,
let tears run down like a River night and day, give him no rest till the
Vengeance of the Protestants blood that is shed be openly showed upon their
barbarous and cruel Enemies. Secondly, pity and succor them, let your
abundance now be a supply for their want, let England be to Ireland as a
refuge from the storm, as a shadow from the heat, until this Tyranny be
overpast; there are a many poor distressed souls forced to forsake that
Kingdom, and to slay hither for relief and some that had fair estates, till
those Sabaeans feazed upon them: it may be two bands with ^acob, though they
have brought nothing but a staff over Jordan with them, now if you will keep
the fast aright, that it may be an acceptable day unto the Lord, you must
observe the Lords own directions. Es 58 7. Is not this the fast that the Lord
has chosen: to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
that are cast out into thy house the poor that are cast out; as many of them
have been cast out of house and home,] and when thou see the naked, that thou
cover them, and for certain many of them have been stripped naked, not so much
as their clothes left, to cover their nakedness, or to defend them against the
injuries of the weather, fit objects of your pity.

And while we remember Ireland and other Churches wasted with misery we may not
forget our selves, as our blessed Savior ad monished the Women that bewailed
him. Luc. 23.28. Weep for your selves ye Daughters of Hieru^al^m, and for your
Children; for the days are coming wherein they shall say, blessedare the
barren, and the Wombes that nover bare, and the paps that never gave suck.
Beloved for my own part, I am not privy to the decrees of Heaven, neither am I
willing to presage ruin to this ^urch, either by the Sword, famine, or
Pestilence: long may she slourish and continue to he the joy, and praise of the
whole Earth, ev^n so long as the Sun and Moon indureth, till Shiloh come to
judgment. Yet I must tell you, first that it is possible, that this Church of
ours may be dischurched, our Jerusalem be made a heap of stones, England may
not say, as David sometime did foolishly, Psalm. 30.6. I said in my prosperity I
shall never be removed, he was deceived [thou did turn thy face from me, and
I was troubled] and so may we: nor with the malignant Church, Reva 8.7. I fit
as a Queen and shall see no sorrow: no, our Candle stick may be removed, our
Vineyard that have been fenced so many years by the providence, and protection
of the great Husbandman may have its hedge tr^den down; there is no Church
privileged from drinking of the cup of Gods Wrath. Where is the King of
Ham^th, and the King of Arpad and the King of Sepharuaim? as he said, what is
become of those famous Eastern churches? those golden Candlesticks? Ephesus,
Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira, etc. Nay Jerusalem it self laid even with the
ground, and that many hundred years ago, and if God spared not the natural
branches, we have no reason to be high minded, but to feart: what says God to
the Nations? Jer. 25.29. Do ye refuse to drink of my Cup, behold I begin to
bring evil upon the City that is called by my Name* you must not think to go
unpunished; we must not expect more favor then the Ie^res found, admit we have
Tamolum domius the Temple of the Lord, the Symbol of Gods presence amongst, us,
so had they, we have many faithful pastors and teachers according to Gods own
heart, they had Prophets and Apostles, men extraordinarly inspired, nay they
had the Lord of the Prophets, we have the Word of God, had not they? the voices
of the Prophets were heard among them every Sab ath day. Acts 13.27. But we
have Maunah in greater abundance then they had, more plenty of preaching, our
destruction may be the nearer for that, for our sins will be the sooner ripe,
the hotter the Sun shines the sooner the tares will be ripe, and ready for the
sire, but we have our monthly fastes and days of humiliation, had not they?
Zach. 7.5. When ye fasted in the fifth month, and in the seventh Month those
70 years, did ye fast unto me? all these proved vain confidences to them,
they could not keep off the stroke from them, and therefore notwithstanding all
these, it is possible that our Church may suffer as they did.

Nay I must go one step farther, It is not only possible, but it is probuble
too, we have just cause to fear, that the time may come and speedily to,
wherein our Enemies may cast a^t^^nch about us, and lay our Jerusalem even
with the ground because the Leaven of the Jews is unhappily fallen into the
lump of the Gentiles, and the abominations that were committed in Jerusalem,
are flowen over into England, nay I fear our sins do outvy theirs all things
confidered, as far as theirs outvied the sins of Sodom. Ezech. 16. What sin was
ever charged upon Hierusalent, that may not be sampled in England? there was
halting between two opinions, has there not been the like here? 'twas
yrkesome to them to observe the Sabbath day strictly and religiously, when will
the new Moon be gone that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath that we may set
forth wheat. Am. 8.5. Tell me has it not been so here? the Prophet Micah
complains of them for the scant measure, the wicked balances, and the bag of
deceitful weights, Mich. 6.10.11. Examine your shops, has it not been so here?
there were great corruptions both in the civil and Ecclesiastical state:
their Princes were rebellious and companions of thieves, that is, their
magistrates did too much countenance oppression and in justice, and their
Priests were many of them dumb dogs, lying down and loving to slumber, lazy
watchmen that suffered the people to perish for want of warning, Aarons Bells
had lost their clappers; beloved I appeal to you, have there not been such
faults in the Magistracy and Ministry of England, in some of each (...) their
Land was greatly polluted with swearing and blaspheming, because of swearing
the land mourns. Jer. 23.10. And does not our land, and this City by name
groan under this fin also? what hideous Oaths, and desperate imprecations are
heard in our streets; They were strong to drink strong drink, and when they had
sat till the Wine inflamed them, then they assembled themselves by troops in
the Harlots Houses: and how do these beastly sins, of rioting and
drunkenness, of chambering and wantonness reign in this Kingdom, and more
especially in H^^^^^^ this populons City? in a word, should a man be serious,
and with Solomon Pro. 7.6. look out at the casement of his window, and observe
the behavior of people in the streets, he might behold not only the young
wanton with his Minion marching along to the Ste^es. but also the angry Ruffian
justling for the wall, the swinish drunkard stumbling and tumbling in the mire,
the hard-hearted Usurer catching his neighbor by the throat, and haling him
to the prison, the proud fantastic more gloriously arrayed then Solomon in
all his royalty, and hear such vain bablings* such proud boastings, such
clamorous raylings, such cursed blasphemies, as might make him not only to
weep: but also to wonder at the patience of God, that he has not long before
this time made London like Jerusalem a heap of stones. In the second Chapter
of the R^^^a^i^ (Christ threatens the Asian Churches to remove their
Candlesticks, because he ^ad somewhat, or a few things against them,
nevertheless I have a few things against thee, remember therefore from whence
thou art fallen, and repent, or else^ will remove thy Candlestick out of his
place, and alas, beloved it is not a few things that God has against us, we
have walked contrary to him in every thing, what may we fear?

I will but touch upon two or three of Hierusalems latter sins, and leave you
to judge whether we have not overtaken hereven in them. One was her disrespect,
her cruelty to the Lords Prophets, Math 23.37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are font unto thee, etc. And Ver.
34. Behold (...) send unto you Prophets and wise men and scribes, and some of
them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them you shall scourge in your
Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City, That upon you may come all
the righteous blood shed upon the Earth, from the blood of Abel, to the blood
of Zacharias the Son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple, and the
Altar; they counted them their Enemies for telling them the truth, they hated
the light because their deeds were evil, and believe it, this is a provoking
sin; touch not mine anointed and do my Prophets no harm, and as he that
receives a Prophet in the name of a Pr^phet, shall receive a Prophets reward,
^o he tha^ contemnes and abuses a Prophet, one of Go^s messengers and
Ambassadors, Christ tells him (...). it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrha at the day of judgment, (...) then for that party, or that City, (if
it be a City) Matthew. 10.15. And yet beloved, we cannot hide it, England ^s in a
high degree guilty of this sin, the Prophets of the Lord, the most zealous,
painful, learned Ministers have been too much slighted* opposed, derided and
at this day the most solid ju^i^ious Divines about this City are trampled upon
with durty feet, vilified, pointed at, laden with infamous nicknames, as
Baals Priests, Popi^h teachers, Limbs of Antichrist, woeful to relate, and I
wonder how any man, that beare^ but the name of a Ch istian, dares vent such
unsavory, invective speeches against their Teachers* and that it may be for
dissenting from them only in the use of a harmless, significant Ceremony. You
know what happened to ^eroboam for stretching out his hand against the Prophet
though he were a King. 1. Reg. 13.4. And you remember the severity of Gods
Anger. against the young children for mocking the Prophet Elishah, go up thou
bald head, go up thou bald-head, it is recorded that 42 of them were presently
torn in^^^ic^s. 2. Reg. 2.24. Does. God punish foolish wanton children for such
a fault? think not that those of riper years shall escape; this was the Bane
of Jerusalem once before, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. They mocked the Messengers of the
Lord, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord ar^ se against his
people, till there was no remedy, there fore he brought upon them the King of
the C^^dees, who slew their young men with the Sword; here 'twas their bane
again, 'twas one of those sins that armed the Romans against them, and I pray
God it do not help to bane this City, Lord lay not this sin to our charge.

Another of Hierusalems latter sins was their irreverent prophanations of Gods
Temple, they put no difference between that s^cred place, set apart for the
worship and service of God; [My House shall be called the House of Prayer] and
other ordinary places: they carried burdens therough it, they bought and sold
in the outward Court of it, till Christ forbad them. Take these things hence
(...) make not my Fathers House, a House of merchandise. Beloved I must be
plain with you, we are too much guilty of this sin also, there is a vile
irreverent esteem of Gods House in the hearts of too many amongst us, and out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, words which I am almost
ashamed, and afraid to repeat: that the Church is no better then an Alehouse
or a Tavern, nay then a Bawdyhouse, I heard it spoken; profane wretches, the
Jews came not nea^e these, and yet Christ switched them out with a whip of
small cords, Huic aliud mercedi^ erit -- I fear these will be beaten with many
stripes, heavy strokes, there is a golden mean (if we could light on it)
between idolizing of a Temple, and vilifying of it, between doing reverence to
it, and irreverent profaning of it; We have warnings enough to look to our feet
when we come to the House of the Lord; you know what a breach was made upon
Vzzah, for a small miscarriage (as is may be conceived) about the Arc, and how
many thousands of the Bethshemites were cut off, for prying irreverently into
the Arc, I am sure Christ never expressed more anger then in that passage about
his Fathers House, and I do believe 'twas one of the sins that brought this
judgment upon Jerusalem* for you shall read in the verse after m^ Text. Ver.
45. That as soon as he had uttered this complaint. If thou had I known even
thou in this thy day, etc. He presently went into the Temple, and cast out them
that sold therein, and them that bought, saying, it is, written my House shall
be called the house of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves, and Lord
lay not this sin to our charge.

A third sin of Jerusalem in her declining are was the Sects and divisions
that were among them, we read of Pharisees and Sadduces, and some other Sects
that they were rent and divided into, what a tumult and an outcry there was
between the Pharisees and the Sadduces? Acts 23. The Captain was afraid least
Paul should have been ^orne 2. pieces by them, they were so violent; And
beloved, are not we conscious to our selves of this sin also? fractions and
divisions? it is a question not easily answered, whether there be more Sects or
wards in London, and what tumults have been occasioned by these Sects and
sidings? not only in the s^^ee^s, but even in the House of God? what shoutings
and clamours? to the dishonor of God, and the disturbance of the Congregation?
Lord lay not this sin to our charge. Oh that we would take out that golden
Lesson of the Apostle. To keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
that we would give credit to that undeniable sailing of our Savious, A Kingdom
or a City, or a House divided against it self cannot stand; there was a time
when Jerusalem was at unity within it self, Psalm. 122.9. And then she was not
ashamed to speak with her Enemies in the gate, but now being at cry^^l jarres
and dissensions among themselves, they become a prey to the Romans; neither
could their private differences be composed, till the Enemy took away both
their lives and their livings, and made Jerusalem ^^celdana^ a field of blood.
-- Enquo disco^dia cives p^rduxit ^nis^^os. And God grant this sin of
Jerusalem do not bring Hierusalems punishment upon us, that our private
dissensions do not encourage and give opportunity to the common Enemy to cast
a trench about us, you see Hierusalems sins are come over into England, and
therefore it is too too probable that her punishment may follow. For the days
shall come that thy Enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and lay thee even
with the ground, etc.

But that my Sun may not sit in a cloud, I shall ad one word more, that though
it be possible, nay though it be probable (the premises considered) that the
Sword may come, yet it is not necessary, there is mercy with the Lord that he
may be feared, No^^^^e am^^v^^^, sed ^^iteatiam, God is infinitely more
delighted in the conversion, then in the confusion of a sinner, why will ye dye
O house off Israel? turn ye, turn ye from your evil way, break off your sins
by repentance, and live: he that confesses and forsakes his sins shall have
mercy. Proverbs 28.13. Confession and conversion; or humiliation seconded with
reformation has sometimes reversed the sentence that has gone out against a
Nation, as in the case of Niniveh, yet forty days and Niniveh shall be
destroyed, Niniveh in the mean time repents of the evil she has committed,
and God repents also of the evil he has intended: had Jerusalem done so too,
had Jerusalem known the things that belonged to her peace, Ilia nunc staront,
Priamique urbs alta man^ret, for ought we know it might have stood until this
day: Niniveh had but forty days, Jerusalem had forty years respit to repent
in, and to make her peace: So I say now, if we shall, even we in this our day
labor to make our peace, and atonement with God (whom we have offended) by
discerning and lamenting all our former transgressions, by resolving and
endeavoring to walk more circumspectly for the time to come, to walk worthy
of those great mercies which we enjoy, to bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, no doubt, he will accept of us still, and receive us into favor
again; what else is the meaning of those Parables (...) Luc. 15. Of the Woman
rejoicing with her Neighbors when she had found her lost Groate, of the
Shepherds hugging this stray Sheep, and bringing it home with joy, of the
Father welcomming and embracing his prodigal Son upon his submission, but to
intimate unto us the will ^gnesse of Almighty GOD to be reconciled unto
sinners, upon their true Repentance; the Father does not question with his
Son, Vbi fuisl^^? ^ub^ su^t ^^e tulisti^? says Chrysologus, where have you
been? What is become of all that portion you carried hence? how is it that you
are returned thus poor, thus naked? but he calls for the best Robe, and Shoes
for his Feet, and a Ring for his finger, etc. Quis i^l^ P^t^r (says
Tertullian sweetly) who is this Father? that so lovingly entertaines his
penitent Son? who is this Father? (...) scilicet, God is this Father, we are
these Prodigals, let his enterteinment encourage us to return; to acknowledge
our own vileness [Father we have sinned against Heaven, and in thy sight, and
are no more worthy to be called thy Children] and he will receive us
graciously, a broken and a contrite heart he can not, he will not despise;
^i^ri^ no^ potest^^^ siliv^ istarum l^chrymarum ^percat^, said Saint Ambrose to
Monica bewayling her Son Austin: be of good cheer Woman, it cannot be that
the Son for whom thou daily sheddest so many Tears should perish, so I dare
say to every Soul that bedewes it self with the Tears of true Repentance:
Fieri non poi^st ut a^^, ^^a istarum la^^rymarum pereat, it cannot be that the
Soul for which so many Tears are shed should perish; it is a groundless
expostulation that is taken up by them Malac, 3.^4. What profit is it that we
have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? I answer very great profit,
for these Tears il they proceed from a truly broken and contrite heart, they
will prove like Saul's Sword, or lonathans Bow, they will never return empty,
not one of these Cristalline Pearls fal's to the ground, God puts them all
into his Bottell. Psalm 56.8. See how it fared with good Hezechiah. Esaias 38.1
The Prophet is sort to acquaint him that the time of his dissolution is at
hand; Set thy House in order, for thou shall dye, and (believe it) Death is a
grimme Surjeant that will not easily be staved off, however the good man
betakes himself to his Prayers, and mingles some ^eares with his Prayers, and
see what this produces Verse 5. Thus says the Lord I have heard thy Prayers,
I have seen thy Tears; I will add unto thy days fifteen years, and I will
deliver thee and this City out of the hand of the King of Assyria. I need not
tell you that are Parents, how far the Tears of your children will plead and
prevail with you, though you be much offended, and what says the Psalmist?
Psalm. 103.13. Like as a Father pittieth his own children, so is the Lord
merciful to his children, when his anger is kindled against them their Tears
will soon quench it again, look in the 31. of Jeremy Verse 18. There you shall
find a breach between God and Ephraim, Ephraim is stubburn, God is angry at
it, and begins to correct him, Ephraim feeling it smart falls a weeping: he
repents and smites upon his thigh Verse 19. And God presently takes notice of
it. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, and what follows at the
20. Verse? Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord, I can be
no longer angry with him, says God, now I see him weep, my bowels do even
yearne toward him, I will surely have mercy upon him, etc. It puts me in mind
of that story of Esau. Genesis 27. He brings in his venison and comes very
confidently to his Father for a blessing before his Death: the dim old man
amazed, and perceiving at last how he was deluded (for Jacob had cunningly
supplanted him, you know the story) he tells him that he was come too late, Thy
brother came with subtilty and has taken away thy blessing. Verse 35. With
that he falls a begging and complaining, and is very importunate; Have thou
not reserved a blessing for me? bless me, even me also, O my Father: Isaac
tells him, I have given all his brethren to him for servants, I have given him
Corn and Wine to sustain him, what can I do for thee my Son? Have thou but
one blessing my Father? says Esau, bless me even me also; and Esau lift up
his voice and wept, Verse 38. And those Tears fetched a blessing presently:
his Father answered, Thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the Earth, and the
dew of Heaven from above, and thou shall, serve thy Brother, and it shall come
to pass, that in process of time thou shall break his yoke from off thy
neck, etc. Tears are loud Orators with an Earthly Father, much more with
our Heavenly Father, because he is infinitely more pitiful then any Earthly
Father: If you being evil know how to give good gifts to your children, (...)
how much more shall your Heavenly Father? Matthew 7.11. If you that have but a
Rivulet of mercy be so moved with Tears, (...) how much more will your
Heavenly Father? who has a boundless, bottomless Ocean of mercy?

We may be the more confident, that the Tears which we shed upon Earth are
regarded in Heaven, because (as the Apostle speaks) we have a merciful high
Priest there, Hebrews 4.15. For we have not a high Priest that cannot be
touched with the feelings of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted
like unto us, sin only excepted; Christ took not on him our nature only, a
reasonable Soul and humane flesh, but also condescended to take on him the
infirmities of our nature, the infirmities of the body, as to be hungry, to be
thirsty, to sleep, to be weary; and the infirmities of the mind, as to be
angry, to be sad, to weep, etc. Christ has been experimental in all these,
he has tasted of every one of these Cups, and therefore knows how to pity,
and to succor those that labor under any of these infirmities: are we
sorrowful? so has CHRIST been, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief;
do we weep? so did Christ, he beheld the City and wept over it, and though
he do not weep for our Jerusalem, yet he is sensible of our weeping, and
makes intercession for us at the right Hand of his Father; and therefore here
is a great deal of comfort to those that mourn in Sion, and a great deal of
encouragement to those that have not yet been Mourners, if they shall now at
length see the error of their ways, and begin to weep for the abominations
of Jerusalem.

Let us therefore all of us awake betimes out of our sins, before that
vengeance awake, and the judgment which yet sleeps; seek the Lord while he
may be found, whilst with the Father of the Prodigal he is ready to meet
us, and to embrace us, let us turn to him with all our hearts, with fasting
and with weeping, and with mourning, there is ^oy in the presence of the Angels
over one sinner what joy will there be over a whole Nation that repents?
Luc. 15.10.
while God holds his peace [these things have thou ^oue, and I held my peace,
Psalm 50.21.] Let us speak and sue unto him for mercy, and say, spare us good
Lord, ^pare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood,
and be not angry with us for ever; And let the Priests, the Ministers of the
Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and say, be favorable, O Lord,
and give not thine heritage to reproach. Joel. 2.17.
Wherefore should they say among the Heathen, where is now their God?

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge. 1. lin. 15. for assad read, assaied. p. 3. l. 2. for estalish read
establish. p. 8. l. 2. for of death, read of her death. p. 9. l. 2. for ale
read. able. p. 9. l. 25. for find read feed. p. 12. l. 43. for Daysar read
daystar. p. 13. 12. for did not knew his people, read, did not know, his people
p. 14. 20. for it read them. p. 20. l. 33. for Domini read* Domine p. 21. l.
31. which in his own mouth, deleatur, in. l. 33. for these read the p. 27. l.
9. for Irelan read Ireland. p. 28. l. 26. for have read has. p. 34. for this
read his.


