The Lawfulness of the CELEBRATION OF CHRIST'S BIRTHDAY Debated, In case it be
Annnally known or not known.

Discussed By Scripture, and Consequence of Scripture; and many Objections
answered, and refuted by Reasons.

By George Palmer, Wel-willer to a particular and solemn joyous-thankfulness to
God, for his several special mercies in Christ; by way of Gradation.

Job. 32. 7, 8. Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
knowledge, but there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty
gives them understanding. Isa. 29. 13, 14. and 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20. For as much
as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me,
but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by
the precept of men: Therefore, behold I will proceed to do a mavelous work
and wonder; For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. LONDON, Printed in the Year,
1649.

To the READER.
BEloved, It may seem strange (to many) that I am intermedling with
Controversies amongst the Learned in Divinity. And therefore it* is likely that
some will say of me, as it was sometime said of one, Thou art but a stripling,
but they are men of War from their youth* and therefore not to be encountered
with by thee. And they will think it more safer for me to be employed about
meaner matters, of a lower Nature, rather than to encounter with giants. And
(perhaps) give me a nipping check, like that of Eliab to David; viz. Where are
those few sheep left in the Wilderness? It is thy pride that moved thee to come
and see the battle. But my answer is as that which then was made, What have I
now done? Is there not a cause? etc.

There were Israelites on the one side that stood for the glory of God* and the
lawful liberty of his children; and there were Philistines on the other side,
that did defy Christ and his redeemed Ones, and they had one great Goliath on
whom they did cast their confidence, and he did approach toward the Israelites
with reproach and defiance, and yet those Israelites remained in a kind of
astonishment.

Our condition is somewhat like theirs (if well examined.) And although I am not
furnished with such complete Armor as some other (spiritual) Warriors are,
yet if the stone of Israel be with me, I shall have good success; You know, a
jaw bone was but a strange piece of Armor, yet a thousand Philistines could not
stand against it, for God was with it: And his riddle did occasion the quarrel
between them; for they brake the Covenant of Garments and Sheets, as some have
done in a Covenant with me here.

I will not compare my self with any of those Warriors: yet give me leave to
put forth a Riddle;

By weakness comes strength* Yet strength bears down weakness.

Canterbury, May, 1648. Yours, for Truth, GEORGE PALMER.

THE LAWFVLNESSE OF THE CELEBRATION OF CHRIST'S BIRTHDAY Debated, etc.
IN the second Chapter of the Gospel by Saint Luke, from the tenth verse to the
fourteenth verse, you may find, that the Angel of the Lord, the same day that
Christ Jesus was born, did incite the Shepherds to rejoice, by reason of the
good tidings which he then the same day brought them, concerning the Birth of
Christ the Lord:

And for their Example, and greater Encouragement thereunto, the Lord our God
had then the same day, appointed a multitude of holy Angels to begin the songs
of praise with joy, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the Highest, and
on earth Peace, good will toward men. Yea, the first Angel did render them an
exceeding strong reason to move their affections and wills thereunto, in these
words; For, unto you is born (this day) a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.
From whence I will note one thing by the way, from the speedy delivery of this
message to the Shepherds; That if it had not bin the Will of our God, that that
day should be the day of their solemn joyous praise, then the Angel might have
divulged the Birthday of our Savior afterward only, and not so speedily in
the same day of his Birth; but he was speedy in the delivery of his message,
and emphatical in his expression, viz. This Day is born unto you a Savior,
which is Christ the Lord.

And very great reason there was that men should then so rejoice, For, if the
Angel told Zechariah that many should rejoice at the birth of John the Baptist
(who was but the forerunner of Christ, to prepare his way before him) as in
Chap. 1. verse 14. you may see; then much more cause had the children of God
had, to rejoice at the Birth of Christ their Savior.

In the next place, I will observe what our Lord God has caused to be written
(for our instruction in this particular,) by the Evangelist S. Matthew, in
Chap. 2. and some of the former verses. There we may see how the Lord God would
cause the wise men, of the East to honor Christ (being new- born) with
precious Gifts, Gold, Franckincense, and Myrrh; yea you may see in the second
verse, that the Star that appeared unto them, did denote to them his Birth;
These are the words, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? For we have
seen his Star in the East, and are come to worship him.

This birth of Christ was much respected by the Prophet Isaiah, as in the ninth
chapter of his Prophecy does appear; For he seeing it (by faith) admired it in
these words, Behold, unto us a Child is born! etc. Many Scriptures might be
brought in to prove the excellent esteem or account of his Birth. The Apostle
took good notice of the excellent resemblance that is between Christ's
bodily-birth, and our spiritual-birth, as well as of his Circumcision, and our
heart-circumcision, and of his death, and our dying to sin, and of his
resurrection, and our rising again to newness of life. And farther, the
excellency of his birth was typified beforehand, to be very much esteemed of
in a particular respect; For every male that first opened the womb, was to be
accounted holy to the Lord. And if the type was to be accounted holy, then much
more was the thing typified to be esteemed holy.

Thus I have noted to you the message of the angel to the shepherds, inciting
them to rejoice, with the reason to move them to perform that their duty; and
also the example set before them, to encourage them therein, by a multitude of
Angels singing out his praise, and proclaming his Glory at his birth: And how
the wise men did honor him, being moved by a Star, denoting his birth in an
especial manner. And how the Prophet Isaiah admired and esteemed of it (he
seeing it but by faith.) And how his birth was esteemed in the Types of it,
viz. The first born male was to be esteemed holy to the Lord. Therefore I
cannot but conclude, that Christ's Birth was to be esteemed very highly by them
then living, and therefore that they were to rejoice for that great blessing of
God, that same day of his birth, so many as could take notice of that day; no
man will deny this to be a truth, unless such as are of a diabolical spirit.
And also that the birth of Christ is to be much esteemed by all those that at
any time afterward do trust for salvation by him; as it was by them that lived
at that time, and so rejoiced in it.

But a question is made, Whether it be to be celebrated annually, and solemnly
with such joy for ever after, if in case his birthday be known to us now, as
it was to them then; or whether that incitation given by the Angel to the
Shepherds, belongs to us Christians successively and annually, or no?

First, I answer, that it concerns us now, as much as it did those shepherds,
and others then living and believing in him: For the chief reason or cause of
their joy at his Birth, was from the benefit which by and from him they were to
receive, who then, and at that time was newly born: and we that do believe in
him, do obtain the same benefit by his birth, as they did that then rejoiced in
him; and therefore it needed not to be commanded in express words successively.

But some object farther, That when the Jews were to keep any day successively
and annually for the remembrance and solemn Thanksgiving for any special
benefit received; they then were enjoined to do it by Gods special command
successively and annually.

To this I answer plainly, That those benefits did concern them in some
temporal deliverances, and were for that particular people only, or chiefly at
the most; as the Israelites deliverance out of Egypt, and their deliverance
from an intended slaughter in the time of Queen Hester, etc. But this Birth of
Christ concerns all Believers in all places, to the end of the World: for so
says the Angel, Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, that shall be
to all people, etc. And therefore it being for the good of all Believers in
Christ, of all sorts of people to the end of the world, it belongs to all
Believers in Christ to rejoice for the Birth of Christ, as it did belong to
them to rejoice that were then living; for the message is belonging to us, as
much as it was to them; in as much as the good tidings belongs to all people:
And therefore it being for the good of all Believers to the end of the World,
the Angel requires our greater attention and admiration, by this word, Behold,
Behold, I bring you good Tidings of great joy that shall be to all People, for
unto you is born this day, etc. a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And we
read of no command from God for the keeping of the new-Purim, but it is noted
as well done by them etc. And that it ought annually to be celebrated with joy
we may collect farther by reason, that it ought so to be; For if great temporal
deliverances deserved annual thanks-givings on some special days, then does an
everlasting deliverance from damnation, deserve much more such manner of thanks.

But it is farther objected, That all Believers in Christ, do give thanks for
that great mercy of God (as they do for all other his benefits) upon the Lords
days in special, and upon all ordinary occasions.

To this I answer thus, so were the Jews to do upon their sabbaths, for all
their temporal deliverances; as for their deliverance from Egyptian Bondage,
and Hamans decree of their death; and yet they had their feast of Passover and
Purim, to commemorate those deliverances more specially; and we have special
days set apart for us to praise the Lord for our deliverances from the Spanish
Invasion, and the Gunpowder Treason; and also for many deliverances, from
diverse great dangers in these our times of War.

But it is objected again, That we do not know certainly what day in our year
Christ's birthday can be celebrated, as the right and true annual day, it being
not certainly known; or at the least, it is questioned by many Learned
Christians.

To this I answer, first, That it is not so great a matter whether we know
(strictly) the day or no; so as we do solemnize one day thankfully, so near the
true day as we can guess; for in such a case we shall be accepted: for so says
the Apostle, God accepts the willing mind of his children for the deed,
(which endeavors to perform according to their knowledge.

Secondly, if in case we do know the day strictly, yet it is not absolutely
necessary for us to keep it upon that day always (...) for the Jews did not
keep their Purim upon the same day of the Year wherein their Deliverance was
given them, but as on the next Day after; as you may see in the Book of Esther,
the ninth Chapter, and the sixteenth verse to the two and twentienth. And
Christ Jesus himself did excuse David for eating the Shewbread in his great
(necessity:) And he excused his own Disciples for plucking the ears of Corn
upon the Sabbath Day, etc. upon their necessity; and therein was the ancient
Proverb verified, viz. Necessity has no Law. We are necessitated to observe a
day near the day of Christ's Birth.

And the Passover was to be eaten in the first month, as you may see in
Exodus 12. 2, 3. etc. Nevertheless if you look in 2 Chronicles. 30. 2, 3. compared
with verses the 13. and 15. you may there find that Hezekiah and his People
kept it (at that time) in the second month, contrary to the institution (in
that particular,) and the reason is there rendered, viz. that they could not
keep it at that time in the first month; And yet they were accepted of God
too, as in the 20. verse you may see. And although it be said in the last verse
now quoted, that Hezekiah prayed for the people, and that the Lord healed them;
which implies, that God was offended with them: You shall see that the reason
thereof was for their not preparing themselves better when they did come, (as
in the 18. verse you may see) for they came unpreparedly to that holy Sacrament.

If it be questioned whether we may keep it Festivally or not? I answer, We may
and ought so to do: (though not in excess thereof,) but first we are to be
exercised in the use of the public Ordinances, as the preaching and hearing
the Word, and in Godly prayers and praises, etc. and after that in plentiful
feasting, and giving gifts to the poor according to our several abilities: for
though Fasting be for mourners, yet Feasting is for joy and mirth, as you may
see in the 8. chapter of the book of Nehemiah, the former part of that chapter
to the 13 verse, these are those words, Eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and
send portions to those for whom nothing is prepared, etc. for the joy of the
Lord is your strength: And the Jews Purim was kept festivally, as in the ninth
chapter does appear, in verses the 19, 20. 22.

But it is objected again, that the name that is given to the day, or the
manner of its celebration is now justly excepted against, for it is called
Christ-masse day, which causes us to believe that it was instituted by the
Pope, or at the least thus named by the Pope, for his service which he
pretends to Christ, is called Mass, or at least, much of his service is so
called.

To this I answer briefly, that it is not taken for a bad service in its
signification, but indifferently for either bad or good service, (as some
affirm) and some one word may have diverse significations; And besides it is by
some Expositors taken for an heap and greatness in quantity, and so we often
now use the word, as a mass of money, and the like: but it was taken (as some
affirm) to dismiss an assembly with a blessing, called missa. And besides if
the name were given to a bad intent at the first (which I do not believe) if in
case the Pope first gave this name to it, (for the first Popes were such as did
accompany us in the way to salvation, and were not so bad as in latter times
they have been, and now are) yet may we not omit so great a duty of joyous
praise as the celebration of so great a mercy is, because some have cast in
some evil weed into it; but refine it again that it may be better spiritual
nutriment. And therefore take this example of the Prophet Elisha, who did not
cast away all the pottage which had some gourds of the wild Vine in it, but
did put in some meal that might over-powre the killing strength of the gourds
of that wild vine, as you may see 2 King. 4. 38. to 42. Therefore if the name
offend you, you may take as quick a way to alter that fault, as the Anabaptists
do in a thing not so warrantable as this; for they can provide a new name
against their next washing.

But it is further objected, that of late time this feasting has been abused,
by excess therein, and many vicious actions have been committed in that day we
lately so celebrated to that end we now plead so much for; and therefore it
ought to be no more observed as a day of joyous feasting in the remembrance of
the birth of Christ our Savior.

To this I answer: Thus the best things have been abused, as namely, the Lords
day it self; but many things which are abused may not be taken away or made
void, but the abuses purged from them, as I said before concerning the name of
the day; for, though some things may be taken away, or suspended when they are
much abused, yet such things whose loss will produce very great ill
consequences may not be made void; for in so doing we shall, lose many good
substances which are maintained and preserved by some means that are of less
concernment, (in themselves considered) and especially it is very dangerous to
clip off the special occasioning of the remembering of so great a mercy, as the
celebration of the birth of so dear a Savior.

And if we clip off so great a commemoration of Christ's birth now, it will make
way to the neglecting of some other the like mercy another time; and so (ere
long be) we shall (through the displeasure of our God) lose all good occasions
of our special thankfulness to our God for his sending of Christ in the
flesh. Selah.

The especial celebration of Christ's birthday (though uncertainly known) does
strengthen our faith concerning his humain nature, or of his taking it in, and
of the Virgin Mary, contrary to the heresy of diverse Heretics, as the
Valentinians, etc. and very likely it was therefore so specially divulged by
the Angel (as Gods messenger) to be noted, and celebrated with joy by those
shepherds, and also performed by the multitude of Angels, as an example to men
on earth, to preserve the Saints from the heresies of those Heretics, as are
mentioned by St. John in his 1. Epistle, Chap. 4. 1, 2, 3. and his 2d. Epistle,
ver. 7. For, that men may be assured that he took his humane nature in, and of
the Virgin Mary, and not otherwise, therefore his birth is expressed by name,
in these words, Unto you is born, etc. And because they should rejoice for it
timely, therefore the time is made known to them also, in these words, This
day. And lest they should not be incited or moved thereunto by the bare
promulgation, therefore their welfare in him, is divulged unto them, in this
word Savior; And that they might not think, that it should be to them only,
they are therefore certified that the benefit belonged to all sorts of people.
And because he was to save them from their sins, therefore it was tidings of
great joy, (said the Angel.) And that they might take the greater notice of
this so great a mercy, therefore the Angel prepares their attention with this
word, Behold, Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, etc. Thus we may see how
the all-sufficient fore-knowing God has provided for us a special means to
strengthen our faith, concerning the humane nature of our Savior, taking it
in, and from the Virgin Mary, against all those heretical seducings of men
(that afterward were to deny the same) by noting his birth to the shepherds
for its joyful celebration. And surely (as it is reported) the Polonians do
kneel at the receiving of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
because many Arrians deny him to be God. So we may upon the like reason, and
with a better warrant, solemnize the commemoration of Christ's birth, because
many now begin to question his humanity; I say upon better warrant: viz: from
the Angel his inciting the Shepherds to rejoice at his birth, and the multitude
of the heavenly host promulgating of their exemplary praises, for that
transcendent gift, given for the everlasting joy of all (sorts of) people. And
also, from the Shepherds exemplary gloryfying, and praising God, as they
returned from that joyful sight of Christ then new born, as appears ver. 20.

And surely the chief question is (by our Christians that oppose the
celebration of a day in commemoration of his birth) whether we may set apart
some special day for a joyous and festival celebration of his birth, or
whether we ought to do it only in the general; And me thinks it is a very
weak question for wise and knowing men to make, the premises well considered.

And you may take notice that the children of Israel (being enjoined to offer
diverse offerings) might offer some offerings over and above to the Lord of
their own voluntary will and affections, as thank-offerings, and the like, as
you may see in Levit. 22. 29. and Chap. 6. 16. And they might make some vows to
do, or not to do some things, and therefore David inciteth us to it in Psalm 50.
14. in these words, Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows to the most
high. And in Colos. 27. Paul will have us to abound in thanksgiving. And
likewise they might offer some burnt-offerings of their voluntary free will
without any strict injunction in that particular, as in 2 Chronicles. 22. 31. you
may see. And in the New Testament it is said, that Paul had a vow; and in Acts
21. 23 it is said, that there were four men that had a vow on them; for, we
have liberty to vow to humble and afflict our souls (as they of the Jews had)
when we please, (upon diverse occasions) as in Numb. 30. 13. and Act. 21. 23.
etc. And so likewise have we liberty to give thanks with joy to God
particularly, and specially, upon diverse occasions concurring, and solemnly
too; For, although all kinds of sacrifices might not be offered at man's choice
of times, yet some kinds of sacrifices might be offered at man's choice, and
choice of times (for the more part) and voluntarily of their free will only,
as in Deuteronomy. 23. 23. What think you of that which the Israelites did in the time
of the Reign of King Hezekiah, as in 2 Chronicles. 30. 23. you may read; for they
kept other seven days festivally to the Lord, after they had kept the feast of
the Passover; And that 7. days feast; was of their own free will and
affections, by their own counsel, says the text there. And you may there
perceive that the holy Ghost notes it to their commendation. And truly if this
solemn joyous thankfulness in a festival way, was so acceptable to God
without any special command, then much more will the joyous, and thankful
celebration of Christ's birthday in a festival way be acceptable upon a more
warrantable ground, namely, the proclamation from God by his holy Angel to the
shepherds (at first) to rejoice for a great good, given for the good of (all)
people; for we must abound in thanksgiving, and rejoice evermore; these being
our spiritual sacrifices, as those corporal sacrifices were for them then.
Besides all this already premised, let us take notice of the great
inconveniences that comes to the Civil State of the whole Kingdom, by the
endeavoring to overthrow the joyous observation of this birthday of our
Savior; and especially in these times wherein the State stands so fickle,
wicked men being apt to make an insurrection upon the least occasion: and much
more upon such an occasion as this, wherein ungodly men may procure so great a
party of better men to join with them, though not to so bad an end, but, in
an holy indignation; for many of those that love Christ, with a well-informed
judgment in this particular, upon the consideration of the great love that
Christ has showed to them, in coming to be their Savior, taking flesh in and
of the Virgin: will be apt to be jealous of the loss of the occasion of the
especial remembering of his coming in the flesh. And besides, wicked men will
be forward to take this occasion as a cloak to put on to make a par^ie for a
worse end, when they see the observation thereof so much opposed.

Therefore it is fitting that we i(...) itate the Apostle in the cutting off
occasion from them that seek occasion (to do wickedness and mischief) and
especially in a matter that is so clearly lawful, and convenient too, as the
special giving of thanks with joy is, or as the joyous celebration of Christ's
birthday is to the Spouse of Christ. For, although the Leviticall-ceremoniall
days, times, months, and years, are abolished, being but types of those things
that are fulfilled by Christ: as is mentioned in Gal. 4. 10. see v. 3. yet the
same Apostle affirms confidently, that he that thinks he may not set apart
some days now under the Gospel to celebrate Evangelicall duties, as hearing
the Word, and receiving the Sacraments, and offering the sacrifice of special
thanksgivings for some special mercies of God, is as weak as he that thinks
that he may eat but herbs, as you may see in Romans 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

And therefore I entreat all well affected people to use their endeavor to get
vicious men to be restrained from their abusing of themselves, and the time, to
the dishonor of our Savior, the wounding of their own souls to everlasting
death, and to the scandalizing of good men, and the perverting of others.

And this may be done sometimes by gentle means, and sometimes by
chastisements, and punishments, provided that the fault be a notorious sin, or
at the least more then an ordinary blemish; for I know that some make mountains
of mole-hils (comparing one sin to another) against some men.

And truly I believe that some do rejoice to see some men transgress against
God in that day, because they would thereby take an occasion to make the
observation of it to be odious to some that may be a mean to take it quite
away; out of a malignant spirit toward the observers of it. I hope better of
many. I entreat you to consider, that when men are restrained from the liberty
of timely recreation, they then (for a time) will be the more unruly when first
they come to obtain it again; and especially from youths, and young
raw-manner'd men; as it is with horses and cows that have been stalled up, etc.

If we under the Gospel be not afforded days of refreshing, yea, and somewhat
often too, we shall be in greater bondage (in this kind) then the Jews in or
under the Old Testament; for they had many festivals, and they were much
refreshed by them; shall we be in greater bondage to labor then they were? And
shall not we have liberty from sparing dye^, for feasting, as well as they?
They feasted diverse days together, sometimes, and thereby love and good will
was the better occasioned in many that were godly; and we may do so too; though
not with all the same ceremonies as they did, because not altogether to the
same end as they did; And at such times the poor may be the more easily
relieved, and give thanks to God, and pray for us. And by this means men will
not be so forward to borrow so much of the Sabbath, or Lords day to profane it
as (perhaps) now they do, when they shall have other convenient time, for their
necessary recreation.

I do confess that some things that are lawful to be observed and celebrated,
may (for a time) be suspended, and not celebrated; provided that it be not
forborne as a thing unlawful, but as a thing inconvenient; as to prevent a
farther mischief for the present time; but if that which in it self is lawful,
be forborne as a thing unlawful, then will honest knowing men be offended, and
so it will breed a great disturbance in the State; evil men taking that
occasion as a fair cloak to put on, for to begin a quarrel; and so incite some
better men to take part with them (though not aiming at the same end);
therefore it is fitting that men be taught how to distinguish between things
lawful, and things unlawful; and between those things that are so lawful as
that they may not be dispensed with, so as to neglect the celebration thereof
at the instant time; and those things that may be dispensed with for a time to
prevent some great mischief.

And now I will note (to those that shall either read or hear the premises in
this little Tract) some of the particulars contained in the same, for their
better remembering what I have been hitherto spelling.

First, that the celebration of Christ's birth with joy was promulgated to the
Shepherds, because he was born to them a Savior.

Secondly, that they had an example set before them to lead them on to the
performance of that their duty, by a multitude of Angels singing out his glory
at his birth.

Thirdly, that his birth was much respected by the Prophet Isaiah, he seeing it
but by faith.

Fourthly, that the Wisemen of the East were sent by the special providence of
God, by a special Star, to honor Christ being new born.

Fifthly, that because the Angel told Zachariah that many should rejoice at the
birth of John the Baptist, (who was but the forerunner of Christ) therefore,
they were to rejoice at the birth of Christ their Savior much more.

Sixthly, that it is our duty to rejoice for the birth of Christ as much as it
was their duty so to do, because the benefit of his birth belongs to us as
much as it did unto them then; for the tidings of joy by reason of the birth of
our Savior Christ, belong to all those that at any time did, do, or shall
believe in him, as said the Angel.

Seventhly, diverse questions are answered, as, first whether we are, or ought,
to keep it annually and successively, in case the day of his birth be known to
us annually in the strict time.

Eighthly, whether we ought, or may, keep the celebration of Christ's birth as
near the annual day, as may be, if in case the strict time be not known to us
as it was to those Shepherds then living at his birth, etc. and many the like
questions.

Ninthly, that if in case there had been no command given for the joyous
celebration of his birth, yet we may do it at our freedom of choice which is
left us by the will of God; for I have proved, that as the Jews might afflict
their souls voluntarily (as they had occasions) so they might rejoice, and
offer thanksgivings at their own free will solemnly without any special
command, (at some convenient time) at their own choice.

Tenthly, I have proved, that the Jews in the days of King Hezekiah did keep
seven days with joyous feasting to the Lord, by their own counsel, after they
had kept the Passover, without any command from God so to do; And yet the holy
Ghost notes it as acceptable, and therefore it is an example for us to do the
like. And if we kept more days evangelically holy, we should not sin in so
doing.

Eleventhly, I have noted diverse reasons for the keeping of the celebration of
his birthday, as to prevent us from being seduced to the heresy of those that
did (and perhaps now do) deny that Christ came in the flesh; and that he did
not take it in and of the Virgin Mary, etc.

And lastly, I have noted diverse other inconveniences that may hap to the
Civil State by our not observing it in times of divisions (in some cases,) and
therefore the premises well considered, (especially with the leave of
Authority) I will conclude with the words of St. Paul in 1 Corinthians. 5. 8.
though he spoke it in a spiritual way, Let us keep the Feast, not with old
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness: but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Thus let strength bear down weakness.

October. 17. 1648. Imprimatur John Downame.

FINIS.

