To the Right Honorable the Commons assembled in Parliament. The humble
Petition of Sir Paul Pyndar, Sir John Jacob, Sir Job Harby, Sir Thomas Dawes,
Executor to Sir Abraham Dawes, late dcceased, Sir Nicholas Crispe, Sir John
Nulls, and Sir John Harrison, Knights; late contracted Farmers of the Customs,
together with their Creditors.
HUMBLY SHEVVING,
THAT the said Farmers, having hereunto annexed a short Remonstrance of the
state of their present sad condition; with the Course of their proceedings with
His late Majesty and this Honorable House; and how far, and in what manner,
both His Majesty, and the House, have thought fit to discharge and satisfy
their disbursements and engagements, formerly assigned upon a Contracted Farm,
to be paid out of the Receipt of the Customs, which were otherwise disposed of
by the Parliament. And since having other security appointed by His Majesty for
their satisfaction, with reference and order (upon their former Petition) that
Ordinances should be prepared for their relief, according to the former
engagements of the House.

YOur Petitioners therefore do humbly pray, That this Honorable House would
vouchsafe the reading this short annexed Remonstrance, and seriously consider
the heavy pressure and burden your Petitioners have long sustained, by so great
a Debt contracted upon them; and that report may be made of the true state and
condition of their case, from the Committee of the Navy, long since referred
and examined by them; whereby your Petitioners may receive a comfortable relief
and satisfaction, for their Debt due unto them, by such ways and means as have
been propounded, and that in order thereunto, some Acts may be prepared,
according to former directions of this Honorable House: And we your
Petitioners, with all ours, shall ever have occasion to acknowledge your
Justice.

And daily pray, etc.
A brief Remonstrance of the state of the business of Sir Paul Pyndar, Sir
John Jacob, Sir Job Harby, Sir Thomas Dawes, Executor to Sir Abraham Dawes,
deceased, Sir Nicholas Crispe, Sir John Nulls, and Sir John Harrison, Knights;
late contracted Farmers of the Customs, for their Debt owing by His late
Majesty unto them thereupon.
AFTER their security of the Customs was otherwise disposed of by the
Parliament, the said contracted Farmers did apply themselves by Petition unto
His said Majesty, for their satisfaction by some other branch of His Revenue.

Which Petition was by His Majesty referred unto His then Commissioners of the
Treasury, to consider some way of satisfaction of the Debt then due unto the
Farmers.

Whereupon the said Commissioners of the Treasury, did by their Certificate
unto His Majesty, dated the 15th. of May, 1642. propose and advise His Majesty
the best and most advantageous way for the satisfaction of the Farmers said
debt, to be out of the sale of such His Forests lands, Chaces and Parkes, as
are annual charges unto His Majesty, and serve not for His royal disport,
whereby His Majesty should not only pay His Debt, but much advance His Revenue.

His Majesty by His Letter, dated the first of June, 1642. from York directed
unto His said Commissioners of the Treasury in answer to their Certificate of
the 15th. of May, 1642 aforesaid, and taking thereby consideration of a
Petition then exhibited unto His Majesty at York, with a scedule of the
Farmers Debt, together with interest incurred for the same, which He sends to
the Commissioners, signified that for the reasons in the Certificate mentioned,
He was very well inclined to discharge the Farmers said Debt, and resolved by
all possible ways and means speedily to satisfy the same; And therefore did
thereby require with all convenient speed, a List of all His Parkes, Forests,
and Chaces to be presented unto Him, to the end He might speedily give further
order how to dispose of them. And His Majesty's Surveyour general was for the
more speedy effecting His pleasure, required thereby to give particulars and
constats of the premises unto the said Commissioners: Which was done
accordingly by the said Surveyour general.

And now the Farmers business being brought to this mature condition, upon the
very point of satisfaction, to be settled for their Debt, in the way aforesaid,
the difference with His Majesty and Parliament then arising, and so continuing,
did hinder the Farmers from any further applications unto His Majesty then what
aforesaid.

Yet notwithstanding the Farmers groaning under so great a burden of Debt,
could not but endeavor all means before them offered, and being made more
miserable by a great fine paid by them to the Parliament, Anno 1641. (the sum
being 165000l.) the House then considering the greatness of the Fine, and the
special use and service the Commonwealth did receive at that present, by the
speedy payment thereof, for the then disbanding of the English and Scottish
Armies; the said Farmers were then promised, that care should be taken for the
satisfaction of their Debt in due time.

Hereupon the said Farmers in May, 1645. did renew their request unto the House
of Commons by Petition, for order and directions, that their Debt and
engagements might be discharged and satisfied.

The House the 14th. of May, 1645. ordered, That the said Petition should be
referred to the consideration of the Committee of the Navy, who were to prepare
Ordinances for the relief of the Petitioners, according to the former
engagements of the House, and they had power to receive such propositions as
should be tendered unto them by the Petitioners.

In prosecution hereof, the Farmers did attend the Committee of the Navy
several days, and did by their order, present unto them an Account of His
Majesty's Debt then due (being 276146 l. 15s. 11d.) And further did give an
account of their proceedings and former engagements of His Majesty to be
satisfied their Debt out of His Forests, Parkes and Chaces, as is
aforementioned at large: And delivered unto the said Committee a copy of His
Majesty's said Letter, of the first of June, 1642. together with a particular
List of the names of His Majesty's Forests, Parkes and Chaces, which was
formerly delivered by the Surveyour general unto His Majesty's Commissioners
of the Treasury.

The Committee of the Navy after serious debate of this business, did in fine
(as we were informed) come to this resolution, and ordered a report to be made
forthwith unto the House, in answer unto the said reference, showing to the
House, how the Petitioners might receive relief, according to the justness of
their desires.

This report the Farmers have often solicited, to be made, but the House being
taken up with general and public business, could not admit of an opportunity
or season to hear this particular, so that it remains ever since in this
condition unreported. And without speedy relief herein, the said Farmers must
perish in prison, to the utter ruin of themselves and families, together with
many honest men, women, and orphans, for this engagement unhappily become their
Creditors.

FINIS.

