THE FOUNTAIN OF LIFE, OR Life in its derivation from CHRIST.

In a SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that honored Lady, the Lady JANE
READ, The relict of Sir JOHN READ, (Sometimes whilst he lived) of Sorangle
in Lincolnshire, Knight.

By Edmund Pinchbeck, B. D.

Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, on such the
second death has no power.

Revel. 20.6. With thee it the Well of life, and in thy light shall we see
light.

Psalm, 36.9. London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Humf^ey Tuckey, at the
black-spread Eagle in Fleet street, over against St. Dunstans Church. 1652.

To the Worshipful THOMAS READ Esquire, AND Mrs. BRIDGET READ, his right
virtuous wife, eldest daughter, and one of the Coheirs of the Right-Worshipful
Sir CHARLES CROFTS of Bardwell in Suffolk, Knight.
GOd in his providence, and goodness, has so ordered the holy Scriptures, so
adapted them to all sorts and conditions of people, so fitted them for us,
according to our several wits, our several capacities, and apprehensions, that
every one (whosoever with due and requisite preparation addresses himself to
the search of the same) may receive benefit by them. Here is strong meat for
the best stomach, and milk for the tenderest babe; here are depths (according
to Gregory's resemblance) where the Elephant may swim, and shallowest foards
where the lamb may wade, without danger of drowning, here are some things
closed, and sealed up, that a Daniel cannot understand, Dan. 12.8. some thing
again so obvious and manifest (like Habakkuks vision) that he that runs may
read. From this extent and fullness of the holy Scriptures, me thinks I hear
resounding that of the Prophet Isaiah, Ho, every one that thirsts, come to
the waters. If God has thus prepared them for the general good of all, thus
furnished them to give satisfaction to all the thirsty desires of our souls:
is it not equal that every one (without exception) should take notice of them?
challenge his interest in them? improve them to the intended good of his soul?
God brooks not our ignorance in them; if God have written unto Ephraim, the
great things of the Law, and then (ungrateful fair such a favor) if he so
neglect them that they be counted as strange things, Ephraim shall hear tell of
it, God by way of complaint will charge it against him, as you see, Hosea 8.12.
But now from the perfection of the holy Scriptures, you may easily discern the
imperfection of this ensuing Sermon; for although it be derived from the
Scriptures, and for the substance and matter of it, be wholly terminated in the
same; yet herein it degenerates, and becomes unlike them, in that it affoards
no depths for Elephants, nor strong meat for stronger Christians, no
entertainment for men of higher endowments. As Job brings in the creatures,
returning their answers concerning the place of wisdom, The depth says It is
not in me; the sea says, It is not in me, Job 28.14. so if you should enquire
here for these arcane, hidden sublimities, into which Eagle-ey'd ingenuity
especially delights to pry, this poor piece would answer accordingly, that
none of these mysterious subtilties are found within the barren region of these
incult lines. And therefore not to prejudice sharper wits, more exercised in
the things of God, but to leave them to the height of their wonted
speculations, lest after they have read it over, they find cause to complain
with him in the Comoedy; Pol ego oleum and operam perdidi, I have lost no less
then my time, and labor about it. If it were in my power to make choice of my
Readers; I would admit none but such as could dispense with that, which the
Apostle calls milk, wholesome, but common and ordinary food, and that dressed up
after a plain countrey-fashion. As for your self (worthy Sir) to whom in the
first place it stands directed, although there be no Adamant, nothing of worth
in it, to attract your acceptance; yet I know you cannot, but affoard it a
courteous entertainment, if in these respects you be pleased to reflect upon
it; as first, how it was preached at the funeral of your dear mother, that
honored Lady, the Lady Anne Read. Or secondly, how (according to your love to
the Lord Jesus) it stands impressed with the image and superscription of Christ,
bearing that name in chief which is (as Bernard exalts it) as honey in the
mouth, music in the ear, Jubilee in the heart, that name which is all
fragrant, and odoriferous, as an ointment poured forth, Cant. 1.1. that sole
and only name, that imports salvatton, Acts 4.12. Or Lastly, (being a discourse
of that happy life, we derive from our blessed Savior) how it may fortify and
strengthen your hopes against that fear, wherein the hope of the wicked
fails, Prove. 11.7. even the fear of the King of fears, death. As for the
publication of it, had not the importunity of some (whose desires were
equivalent to commands, whose requests brook no denial) overcome mine
averseness, I had never adventured to tender such a poor mite to the public
treasury, such worthless goats-haire to the service of the Tabernacle. For
(according to the unexpected suddenness of the occasion) as it was hastily
formed, (not having the happiness of these (...), those second revising
considerations (to which all things accurate and polite are beholden;) It was
put off in an ordinary vulgar habit, without all requisite polish that might
make it fit for open view. But now since it must abroad to visit the world, (and
I cannot withhold it) not to dismiss it without a benediction, let it go, and
prosper; a little spark blown up amidst dry fuel, such as is apt and fit for
combustion, easily kindles, and breaks forth into a flame, so a weak word (if
stirred up by his Spirit) of whom it was said, Did not our hearts burn within
us, whilst he talked with us?) may warm affection, inflame zeal, effect
something that is good in an honest heart. If therefore your self, your
virtuous wife, your deserving sisters, Mistress Anne Ogle, Mistress Judith
Robinson, Mistress Martha Empson, whom I ever honored for their piety, and
goodness, or any other of your fair flourishing family, who for the diseased
Ladies sake, may peradventure be pleased to take notice of it, or any other of
Gods people, any where belonging to the household of God, may in the influence
of it (the Spirit of God working by it) receive any furtherance in the ways of
God, and hereby gain any nearer communion with the fountain of life, our
blessed Savior; my desired end is accomplished. Thus with the tender of all
unfeigned respect (and herein I cannot but remember him as interessed in the
same) whom mine obliged thoughts suffer not to forget, your dear Father in law,
Sir Charles Crofts, mine honored friend, together with the very good Lady, the
Lady Crofts, his prudent, virtuous, and duly respected wife;) I shall ever
petition the Father of mercies, that your Tabernacle may be peaceful, your cup
overflowing, your ways prosperous, your children gracious, your days many,
your death comfortable, your salvation sure, and that through him that loved
us, and gave himself for us, Christ our Lord: To whom be glory for ever, Amen.

Your servant in the Lord, EDMUND PINCHBECK

The Fountain of Life, or Life in its derivation from CHRIST.
PROVE. 8.35. Who so finds me, finds life. AS the faithful devout soul
admires the beauty and perfection of her beloved, sets her highest estimate
upon him, makes him her sole and only glory, and in strong desires of communion
with him, is so inflamed in her affections, that she becomes even sick of Love,
Cant. 2.5. So she preferres the knowledge of him (that excellent knowledge as
the Apostle calls it, Phil. 3.8.) above all the knowledge in the world, she
counts that knowledge not only her deepest learning, but highest happiness
upon earth, even her eternal life, (as Christ himself styles it) John 17.3.
How resolute the Apostle advances this knowledge, unwilling to exchange it for
any other, you fee by that in the 1 Cor. 2.2. I determined not to know any
thing among you, etc. The Corinthians affected learning, many of them addicted
themselves to the study of arts, and sciences, and were such good proficients
in the same, that Tully calls Corinth Lumeu totius Graeciae, the eye and light
of all Greece: But what was all this Corinthian learning, (the Apostle being
Judge) to the glad tidings of salvation? what was all their Ethics, Politics,
their Philosophical depths, Rhetorical strains, Poetical devices, to that
great mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh? the Apostle sees such
an emptiness in man's wisdom (precisely considered in it self) that he will
not own it, but rejects it as altogether unworthy to stand in competition with
the deep things of God. As St. Austin professes of himself that it abated the
heat of his love to Tullies Hortensius, a book whereof he was formerly much
enamoured, only upon this ground (as himself makes the relation) because in
that book the name of Christ was not to be found. So for all the people of God,
he that has ever rightly tasted the honey, and honeycomb of Evangelical
sweetness, can never terminate his desires, never rest fully satisfied in any
contentment (how pleasing to flesh and blood, or glorious soever it be in the
eye of the world) that relates not to Christ, is not perfumed with the odours
of his merits, is not inscribed with that holy and reverend name Jesus. Hence
it is that the Sunne-clothed woman, Rev. 12.1. (the emblem of the whole
Church) is said to have the Moon under her foot, but upon her head a crown of
twelve stars; as for the world, (all the inferior things of this life, which
for their inconstant mutability are as the Moon) she lightly regards: But as
for the Doctrine of the Gospel, (that divine light made known to the world by
those great Luminaries, those bright shining stars, in the right hand of
Christ, the twelve Apostles) that she prizes as a crown of glory, that she
highly exalts, so honors, that all other things are as nothing to her in
comparison of it. And this the saints do, not from a precipitate rashness, but
from all deliberation, and advice; I count all things but loss, etc. Phil.
3.8. The word (...) in the place before quoted, 1 Cor. 2.2 and (...) here, are
words of censure, and judgment, I determined, I count, as if the Apostle
should say, I see good reason why I should magnify this knowledge, I have good
ground for it, why I should purchase it with the loss of all things: But why
is it so desirable? what do the people of God discern in it, to be so
inamoured on it? In a word, it only availes to make wise unto salvation, 2.
Tim. 3.15. It was paradventure a rash censure which was put upon Aristotle,
that great Master and Prince of Philosophers, Vae tibi Aristoteles, laudaris
ubi non es, damnaris ubi es, Woe to thee Aristotle, that art admired where thou
art not, but damned where thou art. But I wish it prove not often too true
amongst men of highest endowments, what Austin (speaking by Anthony the
hermit) was once a fraid of, for his own particular, Indocti rapiunt coelum,
etc. The unlearned take heaven by violence; whilst we with all our learning,
(such learning,) are tumbling down to hell. Yea it matters not what a man's
qualifications be; suppose there were a man (as was spoken by one Berengarius)
that did know all knowables, were wiser then he that was wiser then all the
children of the East, 1. King. 4. were able to fathom the depths of all
secrets, comprehend the mystery of all arts and sciences; what then? did he
not amidst all these his intellectual treasures, discern the unsearchable
riches of Christ, as the Apostle calls them, Ephesians. 3.8. did he not know him the
knowledge of whom is our Justification, Isaiah. 35.11.) he would still for all
this be found to abide in darkness, still to remain a poor miserable forlorn
man. But why do I make such a preface, premise such a commendation of this
super-excellent evangelical knowledge, but that I might ingratiate my text, and
gain your attention to the same; for what is the substance, and burden of it,
but Christ? Christ in his relation to the Church, Christ as the aim and scope
of our endeavors, Christ as the fountain of life, the Author of our
happiness. Now (as the star did the wise men of old) if it bring us into the
sight and vision of our blessed Savior, deserves it not to be heeded and
observed accordingly? Oh that it had some Apollos, some golden-mouthed
Chrysostom, whose tongue might be as the pen of a ready writer, every way
furnished to a full discovery of the same; then (like Peter at the
transfiguration of Christ upon the mount) you would think it good to be here,
good through my text (like that grate or lattice the spouse speaks of, Cant.
2.9.) to behold him that is so fair, and ruddy, Cant. 5.10. fairer then then
sons of men, Psalm. 45.2. even the express image and brightness of his
Fathers glory, Heb. 1.3. Now for the answerable correspondency it bears to the
present occasion.

In times of heaviness, and dejection, when the heart is perplexed, and
troubled, when the sold, (to speak in Jeremies phrase) is filled with
bitterness, and made drunk with worme-wood, what more seasonable then words of
comfort and consolation? according to that of Solomon, Heaviness in the heart
of man makes it stoop, but a good word makes it glad, Prove. 12.25. Now for
funeral heaviness, when the mourners go abroad in the streets, for such
sorrows as these that so deeply afflict us for the present, what words more
comfortable, more cordial, and refreshful, then a doctrine of life? of such a
life as knows no death, as triumphs over death; as can expostulate with death,
in the words of the Apostle, O death, where is thy sting? O hell, where is thy
victory? such a life there is to be had in Christ, and such a life my my text
tenders, (He that finds me, finds life.)

The intent and scope of my text, is to impresse upon us the knowledge of the
Lord Jesus Christ, the argument is from the utility, and benefit of it; that
which brings an happy and blessed life, the life of grace here, and the life of
glory hereafter, such a life as my text speaks of, deserves by all means
possible with all intention, and diligence, to be sought after, and inquired
into; but such is the Lord Jevus Christ.

In the words you have first the fountain of our happiness, Me]

Secondly the benefit derived from the same, and that is Life]

Thirdly, the employment of a Christian about these blessed objects, and that's
finding]

Lastly, the party interessed in the same, and that is set down indefinitely,
and without limitation, who] That is any one, of what estate and condition
soeve he be. For the first,

Whosoever finds me] Me? who is it that makes us so happy, and blessed; if found
by us? The holy Spirit describes him by diverse characters, and properties, in
the precedent verses; as first by his name, and title, and that is wisdom: the
Hebrew word, in Prove. 1.20. and Prove. 9.1. and so in some other places of this
book, is found in the plural number, to note that this wisdom is the
perfection of wisdom; him in whom all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge
are hid, as the Apostle describes him. Col. 2.3. Secondly by his zeal, that he
bears to the good of the sons of men, this wisdom stands, and calls, and
cries, and puts forth her voice, (there is her importunity) by the ways, places
of the paths, tops of the high places, the gates, entry into the city, the
coming in of the doors (there is her vigilance, circumspection, laying hold of
opportunities) and why does wisdom take all this pains? the end she aims at
is, to make us spiritually wise, because we are simple and foolish she would
have us to understand wisdom, and be of an understanding heart, verse. 1.2, 3,
4, 5. Thirdly from the excellency of her doctrine, Give ear and I will speak*
etc. verse 6. There may be frowardness, perverseness, wickedness in the
doctrine of men, but there is nothing but verity, truth, sincerity,
righteousness in the doctrine of Christ; the doctrines of men may be vain,
fruitless, but this is of highest concernment; do you tell of silver, and
gold, etc? all things thou can desire are not to be compared to her; from the
6 verse to the 12. Fourthly, from her effects, and consequents, where wisdom
is, there is prudence, counsel, strength, exaltation, preferment, support of
thrones, decrees of justice, righteousness, holiness, riches, durable riches,
honor; from the 12. verse to the 22. Fifthly, from he eternity, before his
works of old, depths, fountains, hills, mountains, heavens, clouds, etc. from
verse 22. to the 30. Sixthly, from Gods delight and complacency in her, I was
brought up with him, etc. verse 30. Lastly, from the delight this wisdom takes
amongst the sons of men, verse 31. From all which in the union of them, you
may gather what Majesty, resides in the words of my text, here is no less then
perfection it self, the uncreated wisdom of God, the Lord Jesus Christ. From
when we may note the all sufficiency of our blessed Savior.

How the Lord Jesus, the Lord of life, whom we profess, upon whom we depend
for salvation, is a Savior every way furnished for the accomplishment of our
happiness.

He that has such wisdom, zeal, doctrine, endowments, eternity, acceptance
with God, love to the sons of men, must needs prevail in what he undertakes.
How Christ is qualified for the salvation of his people, you may gather by that
in Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell;
(...), fullness in the latitude of it, to pardon sin, heal infirmities,
sanctify corrupt natures, infuse spiritual endowments; justify sinners,
confer everlasting happiness, are high works, the least of them argues of
stock of infinite mercy, infinite grace, infinite holiness, infinite
righteousness: now for the accomplishment of all these, here was all fullness;
here was no gift, no grace, no requisite abilities withheld from him; no, here
was the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. yea what Christ was you see
by the style, and titles the Prophet Isaiah gives, Isaiah 9.6. wonderful
counselor, mighty God, everlasting Father, etc. are we lost in Adam, he is
wonderful to restore us, wonderful that is supra humanum captum, above man's
thought or apprehension of his power; are we destitute of heavenly wisdom?
have we not the knowledge of holy things? he is the counselor to advise are,
we infirm and weak, to withstand the spiritual enemies of our souls? he is
the mighty God, to save us; are we poor and indigent? he is an everlasting
Father, to provide for us; are we liable to afflictions, and troubles? he is
the Prince of peace, to quiet us, not only to speak peace, but to command peace
to our souls. To this purpose how full and effectual is that description which
the same Prophet makes of Christ as he stands in reference to the Church, as
the spiritual house and building of God; Isaiah 8.16. Bebold, I lay in Sion for
a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure
foundation, etc. As for the meaning of the words, in general, the Prophet
intimates, and that from God himself what a blessing God had ordained in
Christ, for the good of the Church; what a good foundation is to the structure,
and building erect upon it, such is Christ to the spiritual Sion, so he
supports her, so upholds her, so bears her up, that the believer rightly
founded upon him, shall not make haste in a desperate, comfortless way, as if
he were flying from the face of a pursuing, prevailing, destroying enemy, where
there were no help, none to deliver; so the Apostles render it, He shall not be
ashamed says St. Paul, Romans 9. ult. He shall not be confounded says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 2.6 And what a benefit this is, the Prophet shows by the note of
attention he sets upon it, Behold, I lay; as if he should say, This is no
ordinary common work, but of highest consequence and concernment: Now for the
explication, and better expression of this resemblance, the Prophet delivers
himself with variety of choice words, adding one metaphorical term to
another, for the deeper impression whereof it will not be lost labor (I
suppose) especially considering they all tend to the point in hand, to examine
each particular by it self; The first we meet with, is a foundation-stone,
Behold I lay in Sion for a foundation, a stone; a stone in the holy Scripture
is a frequent emblem of Christ, and it implies many mysteries; Daniel calls
him, a stone cut out of the mountains, without hands, Dan. 2.45. there is his
divine nature, together with his ordination, and mission from God. Zachary, a
carved stone, therein you may read his sufferings. The Prophet Isaiah, a
stumbling stone, and a rock of offense, Isaiah 8.14. There you have his
judgments upon the wicked. Zachary again in the same place, Zach. 3.9. calls
him a stone with seven eyes, that may note his omniscience, together with that
light, and knowledge imparted to his Saints. Peter a loving stone, 1. Pet. 1 4.
To show how he lives in himself, and gives life to others; here in this place a
foundation stone, to give us to understand how the Church is founded and built,
how she rests and depends upon him. Secondly, he is said to be a tried stone:
afflictions are the trials of strength; If thou faintest in the day of
adversity, thy strength is small, Prove. 24.10. Now what was the life or Christ,
but a tragedy of afflictions from his nativity till his resurrection, yet
(blessed be God for it) this stone crumbled not, budged not out of his place.
He came leaping by the mountains, and skipping by the hills. By mountains
some understand his greater miseries, by hills his lesser afflictions; by his
leaping and skipping, his alacrity and cheerfulness in embracing the same.
Thirdly, as he is a tried stone, so a precious cornerstone; a cornerstone, quia
utrumque parietem conjungit, because he conjoynes the several sides of the
Church into one. Here men and Angels, Jews and Gentiles, saints in heaven and
earth, men of all Countries and conditions, meet in Christ, and in him grow up
into an holy temple in the Lord. And how precious he is, may appear from the
gifts and graces he bestows upon us. He became poor* says the Apostle, that we
through his poverty might be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. how rich these spiritual
blessings make us, you may gather by that high commendation, that Solomon sets
upon wisdom, Prove. 3.14, 15. Her merchandise is better then silver, and her
gain better then gold, etc. As for silver and gold, they have that credit in
the world, find that general acceptance, that I deem it superfluous; (every
one being so well conceited of them) to speak a word in their behalf; Oh how
do the Idolatrous sons of men adore this Sun, and Moon, as Job calls them,
Job 31.26. How do they prefer this thick clay, this red and white earth;
those lumpish Idols before the strong God of their salvation? for the gaining
of these how desparately do they hazard the losing of their dearest souls? the
damage whereof the whole world cannot recompense, Mark 8.35. In a word,
therefore (neither to abase them, nor ra^e them after the overweening
imagination of the world) they are in themselves the good blessings of God upon
us; God sees them requisite for us, and therefore does promise the possession
of them to his dearest servants. Job 22.2^. Thou shall lay up gold as dust,
etc. But now this wisdom, this holy and spiritual wisdom, whose birth and
pedigree is from above, Job. 32.8. whose demeanor, and carriage in the world
is pure, peaceable, gentle, etc. James 2.17. whose employment is to fear God,
and keep his commandments, Job 28.28. whose recompense to her entertainers is
life, and peace, Romans 8.6. she does not only transcend the worth of gold, and
silver, but all things else however valued; she is more precious then Rubies,
etc. There is no precious pearl, but has some egregious virtue, as Cardan the
great searcher of nature affirms, and so experience testifies; some are
sovereigne against the sadness, and fears of melancholy, as the Topaz; some
against leprosy; others against poison, as the Saphir; others quell the
intemperate drunken distemper of the brain, as the Amethist: and as they are
virtuous in their operations, so opinion has rated them accordingly; I need
not instance in the great price of Cleopatrae's pearl, she dissolved and drunk
in an health to Mark Athony, or others according to the relation of history,
the testimony of Pliny may save that labor, Culmen principiumque omnium rerum
pretii margaritae tenent, of all precious things in the world, Margarites are
in highest estimate and account; not much inferior to which (as of all others
most lightsome, and glorious,) is the Rubie (or Carbuncle as Junius, Tremelius,
Buxtorphius and others read it;) yet all these precious things must submit and
stoop to this wisdom; yea as if all this were not enough, Solomon challenges
the very wishes, and desires of our hearts; our hearts can desire golden
mountains, ens and non ens, thousands of Rams, ten thousand rivers of oil;
yet omnes volunt ates tuae according to the Hebrew these very volitions, and
wishes of thy soul (in all those glorious objects, they aim at) fall beneath
the height of this wisdom, nor all things thou can desire. Now from hence
argue, If one particular grace be so precious, what are all these spiritual
treasures, in the whole list, and train of them together? and if there be such
a transcendent excellency in them, what is there in him, from whose fullness
they are all derived; yea he is not only the fountain of all grace, but of
glory too, and therefore must needs be precious indeed. Lastly, he is a sure
foundation, there are diverse foundations mentioned in the scriptures; Kings and
Princes are foundations, so the Psalmist styles them, All the foundations of
the earth are out of course, Psalm. 82.5. so the doctrine of the Apostles,
Ephesi. 2.20. the abridgement of the doctrine of faith, Heb. 6.1. But Christ is
fundamentum fundamentorum, the first and original foundation, upon whom all
others depend; and for his stability and surenesse, he is Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last, the beginning and end, one that never alters, never
changes, yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. Now what do these and the
like descriptions of our blessed Savior import, but his perfection for the
accomplishment of our happiness, how he is every way furnished to satisfy
Gods justice in our behalf, and to gain acceptance with God for us? yea the
result of these, and the like places, can be no less then this, that Christ is
(...), as Zachary in his hymn styles him, the horn and strength of salvation,
a mighty powerful salvation for us.

From whence in the first place, you may stand and wonder at the stupendous
folly of the sons of men, that refuse (like obstinate Jerusalem, Matthew
23.37.) to be gathered under the all-fostring wings of his especial goodness
and grace, that (notwithstanding all his pains about them, all his gracious
treaties with them, for the good of their souls,) will not be persuaded to
know the things that belong unto their peace; He came unto his own, but his own
received him not, John 1.11. No, instead of due acknowledgement and respect,
they hid their faces from him, and esteemed him not, Isa. 53. so the Jews
dealt with him of old, and what better acceptance does he find amongst us
Christians for the present? we have had a day, a fair and outstretched day of
grace, wherein the Lord Jesus for a long time together has stood knocking at
the doors of our hearts; proffering himself with all importunity, but who
has opened to his entertainment? no, have not we opposed his government by the
rebellion of our lusts? his truth by the blindness of our errors? his unity
by the faction of our schisms? his worship by the atheistical profaneness of
our indevotion? his holiness by the impurity of our lives, and conversations?
yea, may not God as justly complain against us, (especially considering what
clearer light, what more effectual means of grace we have enjoyed,) as ever
against Israel of old, as you have it, Romans 10. ult. All the day long have I
stretched out mine hand to a disobedient, gainsaying people. But now consider
here for thine own particular, in this thine averseness from him, what a
traitor art thou to thine own soul? say, art thou athirst? he is an everflowing
fountain: art thou hungry? he is the bread of life: art thou naked? he is the
robe of righteousness: art thou afflicted? he is a hiding place from the
storm, a refuge from the tempest: art thou spiritually sick? he is the
Physician of our souls: art thou liable to the wrath to come? he is thine
atonement: in a word he is unto us all, and in all, Col 3.11. Oh therefore,
why art thou so cruel to thy self as to neglect so great salvation? what is a
broken cisterne to a fountain of living water? the hungry prodigal desired
husks, to the liberal plenty of his fathers house: so what are weak, empty,
fading creature comforts, to the full, permanent, soule-reviving refreshments
of thy Savior? We count it weakness and folly in the poor Indians that they
sell their gold, pearl, richest commodities, for glass, knives, iron,
inferior trifles; but oh that we were sensible of our own madness in
exchanging (like Esau's birthright, for a mess of pottage) the inestimable
treasures of our happiness, for the trash, inconsiderable, lying vanities of
the world.

Secondly, here is a spring of abundant comfort, and consolation to believers;
what fears? what doubts? what perplexities can now possess thy soul? or
rather what boldness and confidence toward God can thou want? if Christ be
so accomplished for thine happiness; who then (according to the triumphant
challenge of the Apostle in Romans 8.) can be against us? can condemn us? can lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect? can separate from his love? To instance
in particular, what is that that does perplex and trouble thee? have thou
forgotten thy Creator in the days of thy youth? and does thine offended
conscience now condemning, write bitter things against thee? why in the blood
of Christ, here is a fountain opened for sin, and foruncleannesse, Zach. 13.1.
like leprous Naaman in Jordan could we here wash our polluted souls, the
leprosy of our sins (how filthy and impure soever) would be cured, and done
away, or in the second place, art thou dismayed in thy thoughts, and
apprehensions at the rigor of Gods justice? does thy flesh (like David's)
tremble because of him, and art thou a fraid of his judgments? Behold, there
is a reconciliation made in the blood of the Cross such a reconciliation as
shall make thee holy, and unblameable, and without fault in his sight, Col.
1.22. It was an argument of comfort to Manoahs wife the mother of Sampson, that
God would not kill her, nor her husband, because he had received an offering
from them, Judge. 13.23. why God has not only received an offering from thee, a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God, Ephesians. 5.2. but likewise (like the
Ram that was sacrificed for Isaac) prepared it for thee, and that from all
eternity. Or in the third place, art thou afraid of poverty, and want, that God
will straiten thee in his outward mercies, the things of this life, why if he
have given thee Christ, (as the Apostle argues, a majori ad minus, Rom 8.32.)
what will he withhold from thee? will he not with him give us all things also?
Or 4ly, art thou afraid of alteration, and change in thy condition? lest the
extremity and violence of afflictions, troubles, temptations should drive thee
from God, and consequently from thine expected happ nesse: why, Christ is a
Rock, if thou be sounded on him, he will hold thee up from falling, so that
neither winds nor rain, nor floods, no disturbing oppositions how malignant
soever, shall ever supplant thee, overturn thee from thy station. In a word, if
we be his, he will be ours according to all the relations wherein we draw nigh
unto him; Are we his vineyard? he will fence us about with the hedge and wall
of his providence, ordering us with all requisite husbandry for fertility and
fruitfulness, Esaiah 5.2. Are we his sheep? he will be our shepherd to feed
us, and fold us in a good pasture upon the high mountains of Israel by the
rivers, Ezeck. 34.13, 14. Are we his temple? he will be graciously present with
us, even dwelling amongst us, 2. Cor. 6.16. Are we his spouse? he will take
pleasure in our beauty, Psalm. 45.11. Are we his body? (in an holy union with
us, to direct and guide us in our ways, to order our affairs for us, to
supply us, with the influence of his spirit) he is our head, Col. 1.18. yea
according to his proprieties in us, he will accommodate himself to our several
necessities, and wants: And to this purpose all his attributes are at work for
us. In his strength he will subdue our iniquities (Micha. 7.19.) In his
patience he will spare us as a man spares his own son, that serves him,
Malach. 3.17. In his mercy and wisdom he will correct us in measure, and not
leave us altogether unpunished, Jer. 30.11. In his pity and compassion he will
preach glad tidings to the poor, bind up the brokenhearted. Isaiah 61.1.
Lastly, in his free and deserved goodness, his rich grace, as the Apostle
calls it, Ephesians. 1.7. (because this world is a Baca, a valley of tears, a sea of
glass mingled with fire) he is gone to prepare a place for us, John 14.2. even
those eternal mansions in heaven.

Thirdly, it shows where to found and settle our hopes, all our confidence,
all our expectation in the ways of happiness. The Apostle tells the Ephesians
that they were without hope, that is, solid and substantial hope, and he gives
the reason for it, in the beginning of that verse, Ephesians. 2.12. because that all
that time they were without Christ. Christus est omnium promissionum
fundamentum, and spei (says Calvin upon the place.) All the promises, and
consequently all hope is founded on Christ, and therefore as they were without
him, so they must needs be without hope. When the Emperor Nicephorus Phocas
for his security had built a mighty wall about his palace, it is related how he
heard in the night, a ^voice saying, O King, though thou build as high as the
clouds, (...); yet the city will be easily taken, the sin within will mar
all. I may apply it to all the Idolatrous sons of men, that make flesh their
arm, and withdraw their hearts from the Lord; tell me, what forts, what
castles, what strong holds do thou erect and build unto thy self? As Pharaoh
had his chariots, Asa his Physicians, Jonah his ship for Tarshish, Senacherib
his army, Israel his rest and dependence upon Egypt: so every natural heart,
has something either in her self; or the creature, to betake her self unto,
but how fair and promising those objects of our hopes be, it matters not, they
(as the Lord speaks, by the strength of Pharaoh and shadow of Egypt, Isaiah
30.3.) shall be your shame and your confusion; yea, whilst iniquity takes up
her habitation in thine heart, thou shall not prosper. As Solomon speaks by
riches, that they avail not in the day of wrath: so you may say of all those
glorious idols of the sons of men, they are all as Pharaohs chariot-wheeles,
that fell off when he had the most service for them, or as the walls of Jericho
that fell down when the enemy was nearest to enter, or as the brooks that Job
speaks of ( Job 6.19.) that were then exhaust and dried up, when the troops
of Tema, and the companies of Sheba were the most afflicted with thirst, and
stood in the greatest expectation of them. And as this appears through the
various passages of our liver, so ever in the approach of death; as death is
the King of fears, and of all terrible things the most formidable, so that
soul must needs be in an happy condition, that is then thoroughly furnished with
well-grounded comforts, when it invades. But alas, the hope of the wicked (it
matters not what the wicked man was how great, how glorious in the eyes of the
world, nor what his hope were, how presumptuous) all then fades and fails,
bequeathing the miserable soul to utter and endless desperation, Prove. 11.7.
And therefore disclaiming all other dependancies, let us betake our selves to
him that is the hope of our glory, Col. 1.27. this hope will never make thee
ashamed, Romans 5.5. no, this hope will abide with thee in the evil day, will
call unto thee in the time of affliction (like the angel to Hagar in the
wilderness) and say, Fear not. In the time of trouble it will present thee
with more fiery sentinels for thy protection, then Elisha's servant once saw
about beleag uered Dothan, yea, it will gve thee songs in the night, enlarge
thine heart with joy, and gladness, though with Paul and Silas thou be in a
dungeon.

And thus we come to the second particular in my text, the Prerogative derived
from him, and that is Life.

He that finds me] (...) invenit vitas, not life; but lives in the plural
number, to intimate peradventure that life in the whole current of it, in all
its qualifications, and respects is derived from him, and depends upon him; as
he is the original of life, giving life to the world, John 6.33. so he is the
supporter of it too, it is he that upholds all things by the word of his power,
Heb. 1.3. All things were created for him, and by him, so in him all things
consist, Col. 1.17. and hence it is, that in the 30. verse of this chapter he
is called (...) nutritious, nourisher, a foster-father, one that carefully and
faithfully looks to the creature, to preserve and maintain them in their being,
and therefore, if we discern any excellency in life, apprehend any comfort,
take any content in it, let it (with all thankfulness) be ascribed to his
praise, yea, as we live in him, so (in our souls and bodies, and all the parts
and faculties of them both) let us live to him, and to the glory of his name.
Now according to the latitude of it, we may consider of life; either as it is
in via, in this world; or as it is in Patria, in the world to come; as it is in
this world it runs in a double channel; Nature and Grace. The life of nature
since the fall of Adam (strictly and precisely considered in it self) is but a
poor miserable life; it is incident to the unregenerate, to them that be
strangers from the life of God, importing no further happiness, then that of
the brute beast, the vanity of it appears; First, in the brevity of it, what is
a vapor, a shadow, a flower, a dream? things of no stability, no duration;
such is life, had we as much happiness in our lives, as miseries; yet was not
that happiness in respect of the brevity of our lives to be rested upon.
Secondly, in respect of the difficulty of its support. O what a deal of labor
is it to live in this world! what rising early, going to bed late, eating the
bread of carfulness? a heavy burden in this respect is laid upon all the
sons of men. Thirdly, in respect of the sinfulness of it; who knows how often
he offends? no, the height and multitude of our sins exceed imagination:
Now if every sin be an opposition of Gods will, a violation of Gods law, a
dishonor to his name, a scandal to his saints, the hazard of our souls, what
comfort, what content can we expect from such a stained, polluted life?
Fourthly, from the miseries of it, Man that is born of a woman, etc. Job. 14.1.
Brevity of days, and plenitude of misery go together, and therefore let us not
terminate our desires in such a life as this, that consists only in the
conjunction of soul and body; but endeavor the attainment of that holy,
spiritual, supernatural life, the life of grace that consists in the union, and
communion of Christ and the soul; of this life the Apostle speaks of, Gal
2.20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless, I live, etc. Here was not only
a living in the flesh; but by faith, a living with Christ, and this is an
happy, and desircable life indeed, it carries the blessing of God along with
it, and howsoever it me s with much opposition, many temptations in this
world, yet in conclusion it leads to an happy end, according to that of the
Psalmist, Mark the upright man, and behold the just etc. for the discovery of
this life, let us observe it first in the several degrees and heights of it,
and then in its derivation from Christ. For the first, you may note in the
first place, the life of righteousness; There is none righteous, no not one,
Romans 3.10. no none in the state of nature. But what are we when we have put on
Christ? the Apostle tells us in 2 Cor. 5. ult. He that knew no sin, was made
sin for us, etc. the righteousness of God, etc. not righteous in the
concrete, but righteousness in the abstract; to note the perfection of that
righteousness we have in Christ; that it is such a righteousness, as God
expects, and requires from us; the receipt of this righteousness from Christ,
all believers are bound to acknowledge, Jer 23.6 This is the name whereby he
shall be called, The Lord our righteousness. This is the righteousness in
which the saints so triumph, I will greatly rejoice, etc. Isaiah 61.10. yea, if
Christ be such a righteousness for us, who can but rejoice? for then are we
free from the malediction and curse of the law, yea here is not only (...), an
happy and blessed redemption from the bondage of the law, from the captivity of
sin and Satan; but likewise (...), power to be called the sornes of God; yea
here is a blessed right and interest in the purchased possession. The second is
the life of holiness, he is not only wisdom, righteousness, redemption, but
sanctification too, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ does not only cast our sins into the
bottom of the sea, pass an act of oblivion upon them; but subdue them, Micha.
7.19. not only pardon sin, but heal infirmities, Psalm. 103.3. not only free
us from the power of sin, and of death, but enable us to walk in the Spirit,
furnish us with all requisite graces, put his Spirit in us, and cause us to
keep his commandments, Ezekiel. 36.27. yea, he that walks not with God in the way
of holiness, knows not Christ, John 14.15. Thirdly, of comfort and
consolation; Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, etc. where is joy great,
universal, etc? why, Christ is the ground of it, This day there is a Savior
born, etc. yea, as Christ is a Savior, so he that experimentally knows him so
to be, cannot but rejoice in him, as in the instance of the virgin Mary, My
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has, etc. yea hence is such a joy
the stranger meddles not with, a joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. such
a joy as the saints cannot contain within themselves, They shall sing for joy
of heart, Isaiah 65.14. and therefore be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in
the Lord, be joyful, etc. As it is a privilege, so a duty too: now how does
Christ effect all this in the hearts of his people? the means whereby he works
the same, are especially these two. First, the outward Ministry of the word,
and then the inward operation of his Spirit. For the first, consider that in
John 5.25. The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear it shall live. The dead? who are they? the Atheist, the Infidel, the
drunkard, the wanton, etc. are all dead? Ephesians. 2.1. yea, like loathsome carrions
they are most odious and abominable in the eyes of God, and man; but what? is
there for them no possibility of life? yes; if they hear and receive the
Gospel, they shall live: you see how hearing and living go together; this
should countenance and gain credit to the word, if thou would live, hear.
As for the second, the Spirit quickens the immortal seed of the word, unites
unto Christ, efformes to the image of God in holiness, replenishes the heart
with good motions, and therefore called a quickening Spirit, John 6.63. the
Spirit of life, Romans 8.2. and therefore as thou tenderest life, take heed how
thou quenchest, grievest, resistest the same, how both these conjoyne and work
together to the production of this spiritual life, we may illustrate from the
parable of the dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. The parable (properly, and in the first
place) belongs to the house of Israel upon their return and restitution from
the land of their captivity; but by similitude and resemblance (as some learned
divines have led me in the way) you may see the whole state of the Church
prefigured in the same: in Ezekiel you have the ministers of the gospel; in the
dry bones, the sons of men, all dry, and barren, and destitute of all
spiritual goodness; in his prophesying upon these dry bones the dispensation
of the Gospel, when those Ambassadors of Christ go abroad in the world, they
know not whether such and such enormous sinners may live: if any ask the
question, they would with Ezekiel refer it to God, Lord, thou know, yet
because God sends them, they go and prophecy accordingly, O ye dry bones
hear the word of the Lord: and then what follows? behold, in the first place a
noise, and a shaking, trouble of conscience, and perplexity of spirit, from the
sense of sin, and terror of the Law, as in St. Peter's converts that were
pricked in their hearts, Acts 2.37. Then in the second place, you have a
meeting of bones, bone unto his bone, the understanding, will, memory,
affections, etc. that were formerly scattered, and dispers't in the ways of
sin, all now unite and conspire together to be a new creature in Christ
Jesus. In the third place, flesh and sinews grow upon them, and the skin covers
them; flesh, that may stand for softness of heart, and tenderness of
conscience; sinews, for strength of resolution; and the skin, for boldness of
profession. And then for the perfection, and consummation of the new creature,
the wind breaths upon it, that is, the holy Spirit, (that wind that blows
where it lists) furnishes the same with saving gifts and graces, and then it
lives (a spiritual life,) stands up upon his feet (to run the ways of Gods
commandments) and becomes a very great army (prepared and ready, and enabled
to fight the Lords battles) from all which together ye may note in the first
place, that it is not impossible for the worst of sinners to be converted, dry
bones may live. Secondly, the energie and activity of Gods holy ordinances, as
they are from him, and tend to the glory of his name, so his power goes along
with them, they work wonders, when his blessing is upon them. Lastly, what an
alteration and change Christianity, and Religion makes, where it is embraced,
it turns a valley of dry bones into an army of spiritual soldiers, fighting
under the banner of Christ the Captain of their salvation. And thus we come to
the last particular, Life in its perfection, the life of glory;

He that hears my words, and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting
life, John 5.24. The glory of this life transcends all humane apprehension: all
the powers and faculties of nature, attain not the sublimity of it: the eye in
seeing, ear in hearing, heart in conce^ving, extend far, but here they are
all at a nonplus, all poor deficient; The thing which eye has not seen, ear
not heard, etc. 1 Cor, 2.9. and therefore to content our selves with a short
glimps of it, we may guess at the perfection of it, from these and the like
grounds, as first from the place where this life is led, and that is the
Kingdom of God, the paradise of God, the house of God, the Heaven of Heavens,
the city of the living God. St. John in the description of this new Jerusalem,
tells us of gold, and pearl, and precious stones, there was the Emerauld,
Jasper, Saphir, Berd, Tophas, things of highest estimate and price, but how
far does he extend these precious things? why, by these he only sets out the
glory of the walls, gates, pavements of the same, as for the inward furniture,
the delights, pleasures, state, glory, privileges, prerogatives of the blessed
citizens, he makes no resemblance; no, all the precious things in nature, are
not worthy to be tendered for a shadow to that substance. Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O thou City of God, if God has formed so many glorious things
for the creatures, why then, that which he has formed for himself, for his
own proper residence, and mansion, that must needs be completed with
surpassing glory indeed. Now to be admitted as a citizen to live in such a
place, must needs be a privilege of highest comfort. Secondly, from the glory
of the inhabitants in whose communion we enjoy the same. Now who these are the
Apostle tells in Heb. 12.22. You are come to mount Sion, etc. there is the
place, the resident Inhabitants follow, the company of innumerable Angels, the
congregation of the firstborn, etc. It Is related of Cato an old grave Roman,
that he advised in the purchase of a farm or the like inheritance, that a man
should consider of the vicinity or neighborhood there, Ne malum vicinum
haberet, and to that purpose they relate the proclamation of Themistocles a
famous Athenian captain in the sail of his lands, that if any man would deal
with him, he should be sure of a good neighbor. Beloved, there is a miserable
neighborhood in hell, none but wretched sinners, impure spirits, torturing
and tormenting devils; Oh take heed, lest by your sins, and transgressions,
you purchase that land of darkness, to your everlasting confusion. But now in
heaven, O what a glorious, what a blessed society is there; for first of all,
there is God himself, what a communion we have with him you may gather by that
petition of our blessed Savior in. John 17.21. I pray, etc. that they all may
be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; even that they also may be in
us, there is not only a communion amongst themselves, but with God too; O what
an honor is this to the nature of man, What am I, says the Prophet David, and
what is my fathers house to be the Kings son in law! nay what are we poor
creatures, to find this acceptance with the King of glory! yea, how justly may
we admire it in the words of the Prophet David, Lord, what is man that thou art
mindful of him etc! for in this communion of God, what can we want? why, God
shall be all and all unto us, he shall be beauty for the eye, music for the
ear, honey for the taste, the full content and satisfaction of our desires,
and that immediately from himself. True it is, God is all in all in this
world, In him we live, and move, and have our being, but here he works by
means, and secondary cau^es, here he gives wine to make glad the heart, and
oil, etc. but there all intervening means between God and us is removed, With
thee is the well of life, and in thy ^ight shall we see light; not in the light
of the Sun, or the light of a candle, there is no need of them, Rev. 22.4.
but in thy light, the light of God himself, yea the whole life of glory,
together with all the concomitants of it, flows from him, as the sole and
original fountain of it. O how sweet must that happiness be that is so
derived. Secondly, as we have communion with God, so with Jesus Christ the
Mediator of the new Covenant, We shall see him as he is, 1 John 3. To see
Christ in our natures, he that was so despised of men, a man of sorrows, that
laid down his life for us, whom we have served, and professed against all the
opposition of the world, to see him (I say) so advanced sitting at the right
hand of God, far above all principalities and powers, must needs be an happy
vision indeed; If the wisemen (upon his nativity) so rejoiced to see the
star, that led them to the place where he was; although he was then in a
state of humiliation, in a stable amongst brute beasts, what joy will it be to
his servants, whose souls are inamoured on him, to see him in the highest
Heavens? In a word, not to instance in particulars, here is a blessed communion
with all the blessed company of Heaven; Many shall come from the East and West,
and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of heaven; Now what
that will avail the saints, may appear. First from the purity, and holiness
of that blessed company; Without shall be dogs, and inchanters, etc. there is
no bad company there to infect or infest, all such are turned down into the
lake that burns with fire and brim-stone: no, there is none but saints, they
are all the servants of God, and his name is in their foreheads, and therefore
if holiness be in acceptance, there it dwells in its perfection. Secondly,
from their state and quality; there are no mean persons there to commerce with,
there is none but Angels, and Archangels, none but Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, none but Kings, and Priests, the meanest person there is possessor of
a crown, not an earthly, corruptible crown, but a crown of endless and
immortal glory. Thirdly, from their charity. Affection here is mutable, and
liable to alteration, whom we love to day, we may hate to morrow, but there
charity abides always, every one rejoicing in one another happiness: as they
are perfectly sanctified, and have a full communion with God, so their charity
is summo gradu, absolute and perfect indeed. And thus you see, what this life
is in respect of the association and fellowship with it. Lastly, what this life
of glory is, you may conjecture from the immunities and privileges of it: for
brevity sake, I will refer them to these three; the first is (...), the
absence of all evil, Blessed are they that die in the Lord, etc. As for
deseases, aches, pains, the labors of this life, they have an eternal
Sabbath, there is no tears. The second is, (...), the adjection of all good
things. Tell me, what would you have for the body, or the soul? would you have
this mortal to put on immortality, this corruptible to put on incorruption,
would you have this natural body to be spiritual? to be a glorious body? to
shine as the Sun, to be like the glorious body of Christ? or for the soul,
what happiness can you expect? whereas she is depraved with actual and
original sin, would you have her pure, and immaculate, whereas she is liable
to infirmities, imperfections, etc? would you have her accomplished with perfect
righteousness, perfect knowledge perfect liberty, perfect charity? would you
have her to know God, as we are known, to see him face to face? Quicquid
desiberabitur, ibi aderit, and quicquid aderit perfectum erit, whatsoever our
desires can extend unto shall be present, and that in perfection. Lastly, an
eternal and immutable abode in our happiness. In thy presence is the fullness
of joy, and pleasures for evermore; there are many and comfortable blessings to
be had in this world, but then as Solomon speaks of riches, they betake
themselves to their wings, and fly away as Eagles, there is an uncertainty, an
instability attends them; had you the strength of Sampson, the time will come
when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and strong men bow themselves; had
you the wisdom of Solomon, the time of dotage is before you, a time when all
your thoughts must perish; had you the baeuty of Absalom, the time will come
when the painted dust of the complexion must be corrupted into the putrifactive
dust of the grave but be interested in this happiness, and eternity goes along
with you, in will ab^de with you more millions of years then there are piles of
grass upon the face of the earth, or drops of water in the ocean, even whilst
God is God. And thus as Moses from the top of Nebo had some view of the
temporal Canaan, so from these and the like meditations, you may apprehend some
glimpse of this promised land, the filicity of the saints in the land of the
living; But as Solomon's Royalty and State was but, in part related to the Queen
of Sheha, so the least punctillio of this glorious condition has scarce been
discovered. O that in the thoughts of it, we might ever after be enamoured on
it, ever after order our lives and conversations to the attainment of it.

Now as all this relates to Christ as the meritorious cause of the same, we may
hence learn with what love, what delight, what stirring affections we ought to
devote our selves to the entertainment of our blessed Savior. If the rich
glutton ( Luke 16.19.) from the extremity of his hellish torments, was so
desirous of a drop of water to cool the tip of his tongue; what would he have
given for a full and plenary delivery from that accursed place? had he
apprehended any possibility (through the merits of him that has the keys of
hell and of death in whom there is no condemnation) that he might have been
translated from that miserable condition into a state of bliss, such a life as
this, would he (think you) have slighted such a redeemer? or rather in full
admiration of him, (having now by that fire and brimstone, those unspeakable
torments experimentally learned the worth of salvation in the absence of it)
would he not have endeavored by all means possible to have gained some
interest in him? But alas! there was no such redemption now to be expected, for
the outworking of his salvation: he had an opportune fitting time allowed him,
whilst he was on earth, but now being in hell there is an invincible gulf
fixed between him and Heaven, such a separation as shall divide and keep him off
from all happiness, and that (which is a confounding, heartbreaking word) for
all eternity. Now if the grace of Christ be of that concernment (to the
attainment whereof the time of this life is the sole and only allotted season)
why then, consider and be wise for thy self, whilst thou have existence and
being in this land of the living, thine inhabitation in Sion; whilst wisdoms
gates are set open to thee, her invitations so importunate with thee; let it be
thy greatest care to improve these fair opportunities to the good of thy soul,
to accept those proffers of grace, and in due time to lay hold on him that is
thine advocate, thine hope, thy peace, thy sole and only Savior; otherwise it
shall come to pass, that thou shall lament over thy forlorn soul, as Christ
did once over unhappy Jerusalem, O that thou had known the things that
belong, unto thy peace, Luke 19.42. And here to remove such obstacles as the
wisdom of the flesh (that wisdom that is enmity against God, Romans 8.17.
foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 3.19. death, Romans 8.6.) may cast in thy way to
impede and hinder thee in thy way and progress to Christ, (say) wherein do
thou take, exception at the name and profession of Christ? Art thou not in the
first place offended at the alteration, and change he requires in his converts,
because they be all new creatures? men of another fashion? bidding adieu to
their former vanities? true it is, as he is the King of saints, holy and
immaculate in himself; so he expects holiness in all his followers; they that
are his must crucify the flesh, with the corruptions and lusts of it. And does
not this go hard with corrupt nature, that takes no content but in the
pleasures of sin? This it was that troubled St. Austin at the time of his
conversion; Dimittesne nos, and ab hoc momento non erimus tecum ultra in
aeternum? what will thou (speaking under the name of his former sensual
delights and pleasures) will thou cashiere and abandon us for ever? shall we
even at this instant take our leaves of thee, and be with thee no more for
ever? But how comes it to pass of at thou art so besotted, so bewitched with
the baseness of sin, which is naught but filthiness? 2 Cor. 7.1. naught but
abomination, Prove. 15.9. so filthy, so abominable, that it makes us a derision
to our neighbors, Lam. 1.8. an abomination to the Saints, Prove. 29 ult. an
abhorring to all flesh, Esa. 66.24. yea to God himself, Psalm. 11.6. the
locusts, Rev. 9.8. had the faces of men, and hair as the hair of women, but
the teeth of lions, and tails of scorpions; herein see the picture and emblem
of thy sins, (how lovely soever they seem in their appearance) thou shall
find to thine intolerable anguish, they have lions teeth to torment thine
offended, polluted conscience, and the scorpions tails to wound and sting thee
to death. Had Amasa known that Joab had come to murder him, he would have kept
a further distance from him notwithstanding all his fair salutes and fawning
complements; why, behold, every sin (how insinuating soever) is a murderer,
and comes to slay thee, and therefore instead of that fatal, unhappy way of
sin, learn to know the way of holiness, where no lion nor ravenous beast
shall be found, Isaiah 35.9. Or in the second place, art thou troubled at the
condition of his Kingdom, because it is not of this world? John 18.36. because
the profession of his name exposes to every man's hatred, Matthew. 10.22. because
a godly life (such a life as he requires) is liable to persecution, 2 Timothy
3.12. Cyrus King of Persia, to gain followers to his party, made a proclamation
(as Plutarch tells us) that whosoever would follow him to the wars, if he
were a footman, he should be made a horseman, if an horseman, he should have a
chariot, if he had a cottage, he should have a village, if a village, he should
have a city, if he were Lord of a city he should be a Prince of a region, or
country; and as for gold, he would pour it out by heaps, sans nombre. But
now the invitation that Christ tenders to the world runner in a quite opposite
strain; If any man will come after me, let him deny himself and take up his
cross daily and follow me, Luke 9.23. and therefore the men of the world (that
have their portion in this life, that mind earthly things, and know no
happiness beyond the increase of corn, wine, and oil) cannot brook such a
master. But herein (for an antidote to this discouragement) consider in the
first place the vani^y and emptiness of all earthly, and terrene things; to
them that stand upon the top of the Alps, the great cities of Campania (they
say) seem but as mole-hills in their appearance; so were thy conversion in
heaven, were thine affections implanted on things supernal, and above; did
thou converse with God, thou would^st then see no great matter in the world why
thou should be so enamoured on it; thou would then discern not only how
uncertain those inferior comforts are for their continuance, betaking
themselves to their wings, and flying away like Eagles, as Solomon speaks of
riches, Prove. 23.5. but likewise for their use and employment how utterly
unable they are to make thee an happy man. Non domus aut sundus, etc. If
neither house, nor land, nor heaps of gold, or silver (as the Poet observed)
can cure the diseases of the body, what then can these things avail thee to
the good of thy soul? had a man all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory
of them, they could not purchase the least measure of faith, of assurance of
Gods love, of grace, or of spiritual comfort for us; no, oft-times they
endamage and ^rejudice the souls welfare, choke the seed of the word, and steal
away the heart from God. Secondly, consider how Christianity and Religion takes
not away the comfortable use of the creatures, but only regulates the same by
its subjection to Gods glory, and the good of our souls. It Is reported of the
Kings of Mexico, that it was their fashion always to be carried aloft and upon
men's shoulders, and never to touch the ground; and it is related of the King of
Japan, that if he tread upon the searth, he forfeits his regality and place.
God has not dealt co strictly with us, we may make bold with the earth, we may
comfort our selves in the desirable things of the world, only out are must be
this, that we sink not into the earth, that we ly not buried under it, that we
lose not the Creator in the creature, our future happiness in our present
fruition: it is only the, immoderate, irregular love of the world that is
inconsistent with the love of Christ; according to that of our blessed Savior,
He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me, Matthew.
10.3^. Thirdly, consider what a happy recompense betides such sufferings: had
thou such an eye of faith as the Israelites had in Egypt, when through that
house of bondage, that iron furnace, through the sea, the wilderness, whole
armies of the sons of Anak, they could see a land of promise; or as Job had,
that could apprehend a Redeemer, a resurrection, a restitution through a
dunghill, through the discomforts of his friends, the temptations of his wife,
malice of Satan, changes and armies of sorrows; or as St. Stephen had, when
through a tempest of stones he could see the heavens open, then thou would
rejoice (according to the pattern of the Apostles, Acts 5.41.) that thou art
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for his name; what an happy issue attends such
afflictions, you may see the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 4.17. For affliction,
here is glory, for light affliction, a weight of glory, for affliction which is
but for a moment, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Or in the
third place, does not the example of the world pervert thee, and keep thee at a
distance from him? is not the unbelief of Rulers and Pharisees a ground of
their infidelity? Is not that opposition of Kings and Princes, heathen and
people the Psalmist speaks of in the second Psalm, an argument to confirm and
strengthen thee in thine enmity against him? It was the saying of Hushai to
Absalom, 2. Sam. 16.18. Whom this people and all the men of Israel chose, his
will I be, and with him will I dwell. So in the matter of Religion, men are
resolved not to be singular, but to apply themselves according to the way of
the multitude. It was said of Alcibiades a Noble man of Athens, that he was
omnium horarum homo, a man for all companies, all times, and circumstances;
that he was laborious amongst the Syracusians, but loosly carried amongst the
more dissolute Athenians, grave and sober amongst the Lacedaemonians, but
intemperate amongst the Thracians, and effeminate amongst the Persians; so in
reference to religion corrupt nature, that savours not the things of the
Spirit, knows (according to the same fashion) how to garb and apply her self
to all factions, all opinions, all forms, all times how opposite soever they
be to the Scepter of Christ, yea, she deems it her wisdom never to profess
more of Christ then may stand with the comprobation and allowance of popular
acceptance: well, but what will this correspondency with the multitude avail
thee, when God comes to visit thee for thy sin? Though hand join in hand,
the wicked shall not be unpunished, Proverbs 11.21. and when the wicked shall
be turned into hell, and all the people that forget God; who will acquit thee?
the counsel of the ungodly may be pleasing, the way of sinners delightful, the
chair of scorners easy, but he only is the blessed man that studies the
avoidance of them. Lastly, art thou not offended at the interest and propriety,
he challenges in thee, as the sole and only Monarch over thee? because he
requires all thine heart, all thy strength, all thy soul, admitting no consort,
no corrival to share with thee in the same? It Is said of the Ido atrous heathen
that were placed in Samaria, that they feared the Lord, but served their own
gods too, 2 Kings 17.33. upon the like terms if Christ (accepting some
formality for himself) would dispense with the sons or men to live to their
former lusts, to persist still in the service of sin and Satan (their old
masters under whose jurisdictions they have been born, and bred,) he would then
with fairer acceptance be admitted, but because he will be absolute and alone
in his government, because he affoards no place for covetousness to reign,
drunkenness to rage, oaths and blasphemies to domineere, the world cannot
away with him, this amongst others was the reason, why, when Taberius
propounded him to the Roman Senate (with the priviledgcs of his own suffrage)
to be worshipped for a God, they rejected him, because according to his own
rules he would be God alone. But O foolish people, and unwise, do you so
requite the Lord? (as Moses expostulated with the ungrateful Israelites, Deuteronomy.
32.6.) Is not he thy Father that bought thee? has not he made chee, and
established thee? If he be all, and all unto thee, in this way of thine
happiness, why should thou not with an whole, unshared, incommunicable love
devote thy self to him in the way of homage and subjection? In a word,
whatsoever thy temptations, thy discouragements be, break through all
difficulties, and then it shall come to pass that when the fearful and
unbelieving, etc shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, thou shall find thy self in a state of happiness, yea, he that
overcomes, shall inherit all things, Rev. 21.7.

Now for the third particular in my text, the endeavor of a Christian about
the attainment of the same, Who so finds:]

The finding here spoken of is not accidental, or casual; but such a finding as
presupposes inquisition, and search: He that by harkening to this wisdom, by
hearing her instruction, by watching daily at her gates, by giving attendance
at the posts of her doors, by keeping her ways as the holy Spirit enjoynes in
the precedent verses; he that shall thus seek her, he shall find her, and he
that finds her, finds life. Whence you may note,

That where there is a due and right seeking of the Lord Jesus Christ, together
with all these inestimable blessings imported in him, there in due time shall
be a comfortable and blessed finding of him.

This was the argument of Solomon, to impresse upon us the study of wisdom,
Prove. 2.4. If thou seek for her, etc. In the words you see how a Christian
should bestow himself that expects wisdom, he must seek and search, and that
with all diligence, as for things most precious, and then the issue and event
follows, Then shall thou find, etc. So, Romans 2.7. To them that by continuance
in well-doing seek, etc. So, Lam. 3.25. The Lord is good to them that trust in
him, and to the soul that seeks him. And so it must needs be, faithful
seeking, can never find God defective in granting. First because he is a
gracious God, and delights in the prosperity of his servants. It Is the argument
of our blessed Savior, If you that are evil can give good gifts, etc. Matthew
7.11. evil in comparison of God, who is infinitely, and essentially good; evil
in the inclination of our hearts, which in all their thoughts and imaginations
are evil continually, if you know how to give good gifts, things requisite and
necessary, how much more, etc? Secondly, because his glory depends upon it, if
Gods people should wait upon him in the way of his ordinances, and serve him,
as he in his word has prescribed, and then if God should not accommodate
himself unto him, in what they seek; who would wait upon him any longer?
whose mouths would not be opened with those Atheists, in Mal. 3. It Is in vain
to serve God, etc? But now when God reveals the means of grace, gives us
hearts to apply our selves unto them, and then gives his blessing upon the
same, this is an obligation to his praise, Psalm. 22.26. They that seek after
the Lord, shall praise him. Thirdly, because it is the prescribed way for
finding: the means that God has deputed must needs be effectual, but this is
Gods way, Ask, and ye shall have, etc.

It shows in the first place the vanity and emptiness of their hopes, that
expect these inestimable treasures without any painestaking in the ways of
God; although they restreine prayer from the Almighty, profane the Sabbaths,
habitually neglect all holy duties, yet they doubt not of Gods favor, question
not their future happiness and salvation. But were not he strangely conceited
that should expect victory, triumphs, spoils, that was never in a^mes? the
depths of knowledge, that never opened book? the return of a good voyage, that
never put himself upon the adventure? a plentiful harvest, that affoarded no
tillage to the soil? No, Dii laboribus omnia vendunt, was a proverb amongst
the heathen; all the blessings we have are from God, yet obtained only by
labor, and pains, in the use of the means. The sluggard (says Solomon)
shall be clothed with rags. And he that will not work must not eat, says the
Apostle, 2. These. 3.10. so for spiritual things, he that seeks not to God in
the prescribed way of his worship, can expect nothing but the rags and famine
of spiritual poverty to betide him.

Secondly, it shows the happy issue and event of all holy endeavors. In the
things of this world, a man may seek with much diligence and never obtain; a
man may go to the Physician expecting health, but find death; to the Lawyer
for justice, but find oppression, and wrong; to his friend for acceptance,
like Joseph to his brethren, but find enmity and malice: But the Lord is nigh
unto them that call upon him, all them that call upon him faithfully; the gate
of heaven ever stands open to such seekers, they may go with boldness to the
throne of grace; Gods ear is never weary of hearing their suites, like welcome
favorites their petitions shall be granted. And therefore in the third place,
let it be an encouragement to us (as we desire to prosper in the things of God)
so to seek unto him for the same; They that know thy name, will put their trust
in thee, Psalm. 9 10. why? Thou Lord never failest them that seek thee.

And thus we come to the last particular in my text, and that is the party
interessed in this happiness, and that is set down indefinitely and without
limitation, Whose finds, etc. whence you may note,

The equality and indifferency of Gods acceptance to all sorts and conditions
of people.

As it is not honors, preferments, greatness, on the one side that commends
us to Gods favor: so on the other it is not afflictions, wants, necessities,
outward baseness, that makes us more despicable in his sight, whether we be
high, or low, rich, or poor, it matters not, Jew, or Gentile, Scythian,
Barbarian, bond, and free, are all one in Christ Jesus.

And therefore in the first place, let not great men pride themselves in the
things of this life, these are but common blessings, argue only Gods general
goodness, not his especial mercy; It is not a man of quality (quatenus talis)
because he is thus, and thus endowed, that finds these treasures, but man,
precisely man, barely considered, without any respect had to these outward
endowments; And therefore, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the
rich man, etc.

The consideration hereof in the second place, may encourage poor men to seek
after God, and to devote themselves to his service; Art thou base and
contemptible in the eyes of the world? it matters not, thou may be a vessel
of honor, an h^ire of life; as well as the greatest Emperor, or Monarch in
the world, yea, in seeking the Lord Jesus Christ, this uncreated wisdom of
God, thou as well as any other may find him, and in him Life; It Is intayled
to none, but left for all seekers in general; Whosoever finds me, finds life.
And thus I have done with my text,

Courteous Reader.
TO satisfy the desires of some that requested the same, I have (not without
some reluctant backwardness) annexed this ensuing exhortation delivered at the
enterrement of the deceased Lady, whose death occasioned this Sermon. The
Hebrew word for a grave or sepulcher is from (...), to ask, require, or expect,
to intimate peradventure how the grave with its open, inhiant mouth, seems to
invite passengers to its entertainment. True it is, we cannot long withstand
its summons, not long frustrate its expectation, all of us (how soon we know
not) must take up our lodgings there, and make our beds in the dark; and
therefore in all holy foresight of the same, it behooves us to fit, and prepare
our selves for such a change, to this purpose, if these short directions, may
any way avail thee, (howsoever I hazard my self upon thy censure) I shall not
repent the tender of them to thy view.

There is no estate nor condition of men, or women whatsoever, or howsoever
qualified, that can secure themselves from the power of death* no, be they what
they will be, sooner or later they must be going, they must all to their long
home. This is a theme that the Prophet Isaiah must proclaim, yea because
mortality (...)^ dull of hearing, he must cry it out, as you see, Isaiah 40.6.
All flesh is grass, and the grace, etc. as if he should say, Art thou strong
and lusty as an Eagle? Are thy breasts full of milk, (as Job speaks) thy bones
full of marrow? let thy flesh be what it will, it is but grass, and must
wither. Have thou all the endowments of nature, all the ornaments of education,
dexterity of wit, solidity of judgment, strength of memory, readiness of
expression, or the like, together with the abundance of these outward
blessings? why, all this is but a flower, and must fade; this we may
demonstrate from all the generations that in the several ages of the world,
have been before us; what is become of them all? what ^s become of the Giants
before the flood? of Abraham, Isaac, Ja^ob, and the blessed Patriarchs, before
the law? of all those mul^itudes, and many thousands that came out of Egypt? of
all those innumerable millions that have lived since their days? as the
Prophet Zachary propounds the quere, Zaob. 1.6. Your fathers where are they,
and do the Prophets live for ever? No, they do not; no there is a statute law
against us all, Statutum est; It is appointed for all men once to die, Heb.
9.27. Let Solomon be wise, Sampson strong, Absalom beautiful, all availes not.
An instance hereof to this purpose we have in this present spectacle of
mortality; what variety of blessings in a most plentiful and liberal measure
did God bestow upon her? here was Bona corporis, a firm and healthful
constitution of body; Bona animae, all intellectual abilities and endowments;
Bona fortunae, estate and means answerable to her rank and quality; And
together with all these how did God bless her in such an husband that all
honored Sir John Read? in such a kindred and aliance? in such an offspring?
such children and children children? how did God exalt her in making her such a
mother? such a Grand mother? to affoard her such branches from her self, so
lovely, so fair and flourishing? to have such an issue so accomplished, so
demeaned, so ordered both towar^s God and man? what a comfort she felt in this
particular (verifying that of Solomon, Prove. 10.1.) she lately in her sickness
acknowledged, and that with all thankfulness. To these I might add the
splendour of her virtues, which with an humble reverent silence, I choose rather
to leave to the ingenuous approbation of others judgments, then by the scant
and imperfect expressions of my weak Rhetoric to impair. What a sweet and
grateful influence these diffusive virtues had upon you according to you
several occasions and wants, I need not tell you; what mean these sad looks?
these dejected countenances? these overflowing eyes? the crowded press of this
present auditory? every one (to speak in the phrase of Job) having his harp
turned into mourning and his Organ into the voice of them that weep? In all
these you show how you prized her, how precious she was unto you, what an
estimate you set upon her deserts: but now in the approach of death, all these
sweet mercies, all these fair and rich enjoyments, all her acceptance and
grace in the world could not purchase for her (beyond her appointed time) the
least minute to her further abode. True it is, this is a common point, a
granted truth, there is none so foolish as to deny it; but as known and common
as it is, let me ask you, who ponders it? who considers it in his heart? who
fits and prepares himself accordingly? It was said of Ephraim, that he had gray
hairs here and there, and knew not of them, Hos. 7.9. Is it not so with our
selves? let the signs and symptoms of mortality be apparent, are we not
utterly heedlesse and forgetful of them? true it is, whilst the sound of a
passing bell is in our ears, whilst the mourners are abroad in the streets,
whilst we are within the audience of a funeral sermon, oh then we are touched
with some passionate meditations, and thoughts, such as these; oh the sting of
death, oh the severity of Gods tribunal, the strictness of the account, oh the
depth of hell, oh that I could make my peace with God, that it might go well
with me in my latter end. But when these visible signs, these sensible objects
are no sooner removed, but we are still the same we were before; just like the
doves and daws in the steeple, in the beginning of a peale, they seem in a kind
of an affright to betake themselves to their wings, and fly aloft, but
presently the bells are no sooner ceased, but they return again to their holes,
and are as secure as ever they were before. But oh that Gods people were wise,
that they would consider their latter end. It is the saying of Augustine,
Vtinam in quovis loco de gehenna diceretur, in gehenuam prohiberet incidisse: I
would men were ever talking of hell, it would be a means to keep them from it;
so for death, the more serious we are in the thoughts of it, the more safe from
the danger of it; and therefore with Joseph of Arimathea, let us make our
sepulchers in our gardens, be employed in the meditations of death at all
times, even amongst our ch^efest delights; And that we may prosper in the
thoughts of it, let me commend unto you these particulars. First, dispatch and
hasten thy repentance; Non bonum est in eo statu vivere, in quo non est tutum
mori. Do thou live in a state of sin, uncleanness, wantonness
profaneness etc? why, think with thy self, would thou dye in such a
condition? has not the Lord denounced it, that the unrighteous shall never
enter the kingdom of heaven? why, then if thou would fit thy self for
death, thou must purge thy conscience from dead works, crucify the flesh, with
the corruptions and lusts of it. Secondly, thou must set thy self about the
performance of all holy daties, thou must do that good which may be for good to
thy soul for the future. The time of my departure is at hand, (faies the
Apostle) what then? does not the Apostle tremble? no, the consideration of his
life past supports him, I have faught the good fight, etc. Thirdly; thou must
study to be built up in him, who is The Lord our righteousness, do thou rest
upon inferior things? thou shall be as the heath in the wilderness, and shall
not see when good comes; but if thou rest upon Christ; as the maine
foundation-stone, thou shall not be confounded, Isaiah 28, 16. Lastly, go unto
God in prayer, that he would help thee, and further thee in this thy
preparation; O teach us to number our days, etc. we cannot number them
rightly, except God help us; and therefore in the title of that Psalm, you
have it styled by the name of a prayer, A prayer of Moses the man of God; to
show how we should be affected in thoughts, as likewise that it is God only
that enables us in the the same. And herein we must take heed to set upon
these, and the like preparations speedily, and without delay; Hoc momentum est
unde pendet aeternitas, the time of this life is but a moment, but such a
moment, as has all eternity depending upon it. It is related of Caesar Borgia,
that he spoke it upon his death bed, that he had studied to prevent all
inconveniences that might betide him, but death; but as for that he did not
think it had been so near him; let not his case be thine, but rather let thy
resolution conspire with Jobs, to wait all the days of thine appointed time
till thy change come. I conclude all with that of St. John, Revel. 20.6.
Blessed, and holy is he, that has part in the first resurrection, on such the
second death has no power.

FINIS.

