THE Upright Protestant, AS HE WAS REFORMED From the Superstitious errors of
Popery in the happy Reigns of Edward the 6th. Qu. Elizabeth, and K. James of
blessed memory.

And for whom this (thrice happy) PARLIAMENT will live and Die.

Job 14.14. If a man die, shall he live again? All the days of mine appointed
time will I wait till my Change come.

LONDON, Printed for George Lindsey, and are to be sold at his Shop over
against THE London-STONE, 1643.

The Characters of a Believing PROTESTANT, in Paradoxes, and seeming
Contradictions.
A True Reformed PROTESTANT is one that believes things, his reason cannot
comprehend; he hopes for things which neither he nor any man alive ever saw; He
labors for that which he knows he can never obtain, yet in the issue, his
belief appears not to be false, his hope makes him not ashamed, his labor is
not in vain.

He believes Three to be One and One to be Three; a Father not to be elder then
his Son, a Son to be equal with his Father, and One proceeding from Both
to be equal with Both; he believes three Persons in one Nature, and two
Natures in one Person.

He believes a Virgin to be a Mother of a Son, and that very Son of hers;
to be her Maker. He believes him to have been shut up in a narrow room whom
Heaven and earth could never contain; he believes him to be born in time, who
was and is from everlasting; he believes him to have been a weak child carried
in arms, who is the Almighty; and him once to have died, who only has life
and immortality in himself.

He believes the God of all grace to have been angry with one that never
offended him; And that God that hates sin to be reconciled to himself, though
sinning continually, and never making or being able to make satisfaction; he
believes the just God to have punished a most just person, and to have
justified himself, though a most ungodly sinner; he believes himself freely
pardoned, and yet a sufficient satisfaction was made for him.

He believes himself to be precious in Gods sight, and yet loathes himself in
his own; he dares not justify himself, even in those things wherein he can
find no fault with himself; and ye: believes God accepts him in those
services, wherein he is able to find many faults.

He praises God for his Justice, and fears him for his Mercy. He is so
ashamed, that he dates not open his mouth before God, and yet he comes with
boldness to God, and asks any thing he needs; he is so humble as to
acknowledge himself to deserve nothing but evil, and yet believes that God
means him all good. He is one that fears always, yet is bold as a Lion. He
is often sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; many times complaining, yet always
giving of thanks; he is the most Iowly minded, yet the greatest aspires; most
contented, yet ever craving.

He bears a lofty spirit in a mean condition; when he is ablest, he thinks
meanest of himself. He is rich in poverty, and poor in the midst of riches.
He believes all the World to be his, yet he dares take nothing without special
leave from God. He covenants with God for nothing, yet looks for a great
reward. He loses his life, and gains by it; and whilst be loses it, he
saves it.

He lives not to himself, yet of all others he is most wise for himself. He
denies himself often, yet no man loves himself so well as he. He is most
reproached, yet most honored. He bath most afflictions, and most comforts. The
more injury his enemies do him, the more advantage he gains by them. The more
he forsakes worldly things, the more he enjoyes them.

He is the most temperate of all men, yet fares most deliciously. He lends and
gives most freely, yet he is the greatest Usurer. He is meek toward all men,
yet inexorable by men. He is the best child, husband, brother, friend, yet
hates father and mother, brother and sister. He loves all men as himself, yet
hates some men with a perfect hatred.

He desires to have more grace then any man in the World. yet is truly
sorrowful when he sees any man have less then himself; he knows no man
after the flesh, yet gives all men their due respects. He knows, if he please
man, be cannot be the servant of Christ, yet for Christ his sake he pleases
all men in all things; he is a Peacemaker, yet is continually fighting and an
irreconcilable enemy.

He believes him to be worse then an Infidel that provides not for his family,
yet himself lives and dies without care. He accounts all his superiors, yet
stands stiffely upon authority; he is severe to his children because he loves
them, and by being favorable unto his enemy, he revengeth himself upon him.

He believes the Angels to be more excellent Creatures then himself, and yet
counts them his servants; he believes that he receives many good turns by
their means, and yet he neither prays for their assistance, nor offers them
thanks, which he does not disdain to do to the meanest Christian; he believes
himself to be a King, how mean so ever he be; how great foever he be, he
thinks himself not too good to be a servant to the poorest Saint.

He is often in prison, yet always as liberty. A freeman, though a servant;
he loves not honor amongst men, yet highly priseth a good name.

He believes that God has bidden every man that does him good, to do so; he
yet of any man is the most thankful to them that do ought for him; he would
lay down his life to save the soul of his enemy, yet will not adventure upon
one sin to save the life of him who saved his; he swears to his own
hinderance and changes not, yet knows that his oath cannot tie him to sin.

He believes Christ to have no need of any thing be does, yet makes account he
does relieve Christ in all his acts of Charity; he knows he can do nothing
of himself, yet labors to work out his own salvation; he confesses he can
do nothing, yet as truly professes he can do all things; he knows that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, yet believes that he
shall go to heaven both body and soul.

He trembles at Gods Word, yet counts it sweeter to him then the honey and the
honey-combe, and dearer then thousands of Gold and Silver.

He believes that God will never damn him, and yet fears God for being able
to cast him into hell; he knows he shall not be saved by nor for his good
works, yet he does all the good works he can.

He knows Gods providence is over all things, yet is so diligent in his
calling and business, as if he were to cut out the thread of his own fortunes;
he believes beforehand that God has purposed what he shall be, and nothing can
make him to alter his purpose, yet prays and endeavors, as if he would force
God to save him for ever.

He prays and labors for that which he is confident God means to give, and
the more assured he is, the more earnest; he prays for that he knows he
shall never obtain, and yet gives not over; he prays and labors for that
which he knows he shall be no less happy without; he prays with all his heart
not to be led into temptation, yet rejoices when he is fallen into it; he
believes his prayers are heard, even when they are denied, and gives thanks for
that which he pray; against.

He has within him both flesh and spirit, yet he is not a double minded man;
he is often led captive by the law of sin, yet it never gets dominion over
him; he cannot sin, yet can do nothing without sin; he can do nothing
against his will, yet maintain he does what he would not; he wavers and
doubts, yet obtaines.

He is often tossed and shaken, yet is as Mount Zion; he is a Serpent and a
Dove; a Lamb, and a Lion; a Reed and a Cedar.

He is sometimes so troubled that he thinks nothing to be true in religion,
yet if he did think so, he could not at all be troubled; he thinks sometimes
that God has no mercy for him, yet resolves to die in the pursuit of it; he
believes like Abraham against hope, and though he cannot answer Gods Logic,
yet with the woman of Canaan he hopes to prevail with the rhetoric of
importunity.

He wrestles and yet prevails, and though yielding himself unworthy of the
least blessing he enjoyes, yet Jacob-like he will not let him go without a new
blessing; he sometimes thinks himself to have no grace at all, and yet how
poor and afflicted so ever he be besides, he would not change conditions with
the most prosperous man under heaven, that is a manifest worldling.

He thinks sometimes that the Ordinances of God do him no good, yet he would
rather part with his life then be deprived of them.

He was borne dead, yet so as that that it had been murder in any to have taken
his life away. After he began to live, he was ever dying; and though he has an
eternal life begun in him, yet he makes account he has a death to pass
through.

He counts selfe-murther a heinous sin, yet is ever busied, crucifying the
flesh, and in putting to death his earthly members.

He believes his soul and body shall be as full of glory as them that have
more, and no more full then theirs that have less.

He lives invisible to those that see him, and those that know him best do but
guess at him, yet those many times judge more truly of him then he does of
himself.

The world will sometimes account him a Saint, when God accounted him an
hypocrite, and afterward when the world branded him for an hypocrite, then God
owned him for a Saint.

His death makes not an end of him; his soul which was put into his body, is
not to be perfected without his body, yet his soul is more happy when it is
separated from his body, then when it was joined unto it, and his body though
torn in pieces, burnt to ashes, grownd to Powder, turned to rottenness, shall
be no loser.

His Advocate, his Surety shall be his Judge, his mortal part shall become
immortal, and what was sown in corruption shall be raised in incorruption and
glory, and a finite creature shall possess an infinite happiness.

FINIS.

