A PLEA FOR MINISTERS IN SEQUESTRATIONS; WHEREIN Mr. Mossom's Apology for the
Sequestered Clergy, is duly Considered and Discussed.

Justitia Legis, et Lex reipublicae basis. Prove. 18.17. A man that is first in
his own Cause seems just, till his neighbor comes and searches him.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the three Crowns against the lower
Conduit in Cheapside, 1660.

Mr: Mossom's Apology, FOR THE Sequestered Clergy, Duly considered and
discussed, etc.
IT IS easy to accuse any sort of men, and if accusation were enough none should
be innocent, but we say one man's tale is good till another be told: or rather
(as we read in Scripture, Pro. 18.17.) A man that is first in his own cause
seems just, till his neighbor comes and searches him. I have seen an
Apology (or rather an Alogy) for the Sequestered Clergy (a plaster too too
little for the sore) whom I had rather see to be an apology, then make an
apology, yet the latter, if not injurious and defamatory to others, would do
very well.

I thought some fit and experienced might make some timely reflections upon
that Apology, but seeing yet nothing abroad, I remembered the saying, Pudet haec
opprobria nobis, sic dici potuisse, etc. And resolved (since there is leave and
freedom for a just defense) with young Elihu, I will answer my part: I also
will show mine opinion, Job 30.17.

In the Apology therefore I shall consider the Apologists reasons for
themselves; 2. His weak objections for us (which are framed by him
proportionable to what he would fain answer); 3. I shall show him some Reasons
on our part; and lastly give him my advise.

First, Therefore if we consider the complaint, upon which the strength of all
his Reasons lie: The complaint is wondrous compassionable, That they have been
Sequestered for no other crime but acting in their callings according to the
dictate of their consciences; discharging their Ministry according to the rule
of our established Laws: Page 5.

Answ. That some have suffered unjustly for not taking late engagements, and
not owning unjust though prevailing interests, is manifest to all, and in part
redrest.

But where are the many of those black swans, that have suffered for no other
crimes then a conscientious acting in their calling; I would be glad to see the
Printed century of that truly estimable Fraternity, but men may plead high,
when almost all witness and evidence against their crimes, are dead and
forgotten.

Apol: Page 5. We conceive that the occasion of our Sequestration is removed.

Answ. He does not tell us the occasion of their Sequestr: but leaves us
plainly to conjecture, and the world that now is believes, and the former
times clearly proved, that generally the crimes, scandals, or superstitions of
their lives, were the occasion of their Sequestration, and if that occasion be
indeed removed, and the Godly and sober in their Congregations do believe that
they have renounced their former scandalous conversation, we would submit
freely to be thankfully and honorably dismissed, for their sakes.

Apol: Page 7. This. President we have ( viz: of restoring the Fathers and
Pastors of the Church) from Zeno the Emperor, etc.

Answ. The Apologist need not have gone so far back as Zeno for an example of
just restitution, our late Honorable Parliament has restored the Reverend and
Famous Reinolds, and many other Worthy Pastors, and it is our great desire that
all found and pious Divines should be restored.

But will the Apologist on the other hand, remember later Presidents then the
thirty Tyrants, even the Known, sad, and dismal ruin of so many scores of Godly
Ministers, silenced and Sequestered (ab officio et beneficio) only in the
Diocese of Dr. Wren, late Prelate of Norwich (and if they did so much there,
what was done in all the rest of the Kings Provinces) which some alive can
testify to their irreparable loss at this day.

Where were Mr. Mossom's Articuli Cleri that he speaks of in those days? what
Apology or Plea might abide and stand in our defense, either from Magna Charta
or any other Law or privilege? In what corner could we hide our selves from
the cloud and tempest of the maliciousness of Bishop Lad, what with him was the
highest cognizance of (not the scandalous but scandaled) Puritan Ministers, but
the brand of Raschals.

Apol: Page 9, 10, 11. The Apologist calls upon the Justice of the Parliament,
to restore their Sequestrations as their indubitable right.

Answ. This earnest pretender unto such undoubted right says much but proves
nothing (either by the Law of God or man) to exemplify the same, but if indeed
their right were so absolute and indubitable, that a Parliament might not
question their Title, nor censure their actions; I confess their right was
indubitable enough. But de facto, the Parliament did question and censure some
of them; (as in the years 1642 1643, and some I think after) now must we
believe the Parliament guilty of high illegality and injustice against these
men's indubitable right? or these men guilty of crimes justly censurable by so
high a Court? And if the Apologist will give us leave; we will rather adhere to
the Parliament to repute them (as they were) a just and honorable Court, then
to unbeleeve the crimes of those they censured, and our selves knew some of
them to be notorious offenders. If that Parliament were unjust, Let a
Parliament censure the action; and if they were unjust, why did the Sequestered
Ministers leave their charges many of them, before ever they felt their
injustice, and never returned in almost 20 years to their stations again; and
if they were unjustly driven away why did they not return to their Flocks, as
to the exercise of a Ministry amongst them in spite of injustice, and all
danger, as we have in the examples of the Primitive Doctors, and in some of our
own Faithful Pastors in the Bishops days, or why do they accuse us as
intruders and injust, unless they would have their Congregations lefe
destitute of Ministerial supply? or had it been just, (as it use to be done
with their poor Curates,) that we should have fed the Flock and they have taken
the Profits?

We have judged that the exercise of our Ministry in this kind was charitable,
and our possession just, there being no greater Law amongst us then Parliament
Law received in this Nation. But let us quaery (good Mr. Mossom) if the
Parliament by injustice cast out those, (whom upon proof and experience they
judged to be scandalous or superstitious men): by what did the Prelates cast
out those Godly and blameless Ministers, in the days of their severity, if
what the High-Court of Parliament therefore did were such injustice as is
pretended, and exclaimed on, how shall we judge any thing by a due standard of
right and justice hereafter?

Apol: Page 8. We desire no more but the benefit of the known Law.

Answ. It Is pity this Law and benefit of it was not known, when Bishop Wren and
that gang were in all their Ruff. O that Austins sentence you speak of, (
prated all to pieces and never practiced) had then been effectually minded,
(non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblatum,) when so many Ministers of
the Gospel were sequestered for such pitiful trifles.

No question but the Law is indeed the known Law to many of the Sequestered
Clergy, and they made it practically known to their people, (and their smartful
experience speaks it enough,) but the known Gospel would have done well to have
been practically made known by them rather, yet even the Law says (amongst
them that know the Law) that the complainams have lapsed their Livings; at
lest, by never offering to serve the cure, in almost 20 years. But now (O
Infalix evum pecus) The benefit and insultation over their flocks; and hope of
returning to their old sport again, makes them pretend a huge just Title, and
all (but they) must be intruders and themselves the Judges.

Is it not well known to the Grave and Learned in the Law and Ecclesiastic
concernments, what Jus Patronatus truly was, and what ( Residentia in cura, or)
pastoral incumbency ought to be? I would willingly submit the later disputes
and lazy controversies of Pluralists and non residents, to the True and
Faithful sentence of the Learned and Impartial. And personally I would
acquiesce in the Judicious and most elaborate knowledge of Mr. Prin; (Artifex
credendus in art sua) whose proficiency in the Law and Antiquity, speaks him
acceptable and honorable to all men.

Apol: Page 8. The Apologist frames some trifling objections; as it were to
help us at a dead lift, but indeed he framed them for easines of answer, that
he might at least seem (to some) to have said something.

He Objecteth (in our behalf forsooth) that Learned and Godly men will be
unprovided for if sequestrations be restored.

Answ. That is not our care; who Remember, and in some measure understand the
Doctrine of the Loaves, and of the Thousands, Math. 16.

Apolog: Page 8. The Apologists Answer to his own Objection is full, (that is
to say full mouthed enough) wherein he brings Learned and Godly into no
better then an Ironicall diminution. But magnifies the sequestered Clergy, to be
the Learnedest that ever England had. Saying Page 8. The learnedest Clergy that
ever England had was that Sequestered Clergy: (if he had added that were
sequestered and suspended by the Prelaticall faction; he had been nearer the
mark, for as learned men (but Learnedest is an odious Comparison) as ever
England bred were sequestered, displaced, silenced, or persecuted by the
Prelates.

Apol: ib: He says further; This learnedest Clergy was unprovided for almost
twenty years.

Answ. How can that be so? That Godly and learned (nay he says learnedest)
Ministers should be so long unprovided for? I never yet in all the Bishops
days (much less since) have seen the righteous Ministers forsaken, or long
unprovided for. But I see the Apologer counts nothing provision, nothing
tenderness, or compassion toward the now sequestered Clergy: except that we
will do the work and give them the wages; and that not of our Courtesy, but
Duty.

Apol: Page 10. Another Objection that he supposes and inventeth for us is
this. That the Restorement of the seques;tred Clergy, will disturb the
Calmnesse of the State.

Answ. This Objection proceeds from the evil boading of his Conscience;
perhaps too truly foredeeming their own turbulent subsequent actions, if they
regain their power. For we have sadly seen what a stir many of them made, to
the disquiet of Church and State with their superstitious Trampery; ( Troublers
of England indeed) that would have had the very profanation of the Sabbath,
and many knacks of their old Mumpsimus established by Law. But then, when a
Sequestration is established upon that: they cry out, O this is to establish
iniquity by a Law!

But if the Apologist fears disturbance from us we shall quietly resolve them
on the contrary; for we have not only Learned obedience from what we have some
of us formerly and later suffered; but can (I believe and truly feel it in my
heart) say with honest Mephibosheth, Let them take all; (if that were all,)
since our Gracious King is returned in peace; with that Olive Branch, of the
unfading purposes of establishing Housnesse, and Justice; (to his immortal
glory and happiness,) in these Nations.

Apol: Page 11. He serves us with another unserviceable Objection from the
Purchasers of Church Lands, (Thank him Bishops!) where he finds an appearance
of equity, and can dispense with a Rule of the Civil Law for them, partly to
cast an Odium the more on us, and a little to favor (as he could) his friends
and Relations, perhaps concerned in such Bargains: upon which (few, or I think)
none of us ever durst venture.

Apol: Page 12. He fits us yet further: Imagining this to be an Objection on
our parts; That all must be content, to be loosers.

Answ. No not all Loofers, nor all content, yet many sequestered Ministers were
better provided after their Sequestration then ever before, and that out of the
Livings, and Goods of some of us (yet feeling the loss, but not at all
content) I could instance in some Intruders, to their dread and shame, that had
need put in an Apology for such plunders, spoils, and unlawful possessions,
if the Oxford articles should fail them, as far, as they would have the Acts
and Ordinances of the former Parliament failus. But I hope it is as honest and
comely, for a poor blameless Minister, commanded to serve the cure of a
deserted Parish, for the good of their souls (more then the profit of his
purse:) to say, I have an order of Parliament to defend me; as for a violent
Intruder upon us to plunder and destroy even a man and his house, and possess
his place (as some have done) and say in his defense, I have the Oxford
Articles to show, and I plead the benefit of the Oxford articles.

Must all be content to be loosers! Infandum Mossome jubes renovare dolorem. O
how wounding a remembrance is it to think of those (so many Learned and
Reverend Ministers) that were as great loosers by the Bishops, by confiscation,
sequestrings, silencing, or persecuting, as any have been in these times, and
they were indeed sequestered, and for no other cause, but acting in their
callings according to the Dictate of their conscience, and discharging their
Ministry according to the rules both of Law and Gospel.

How sad was it that Ministers (of approved abilities for higher work) might
not be suffered so much as to School a child or two in a private family, nor to
pray in a friend or brothers house; but it did incur the danger of being
presented as an unlawful conventicle, therefore if (as learned Hooker in his
Eccl. Pol. in Pref.) as well how to want, as to abound, be the empress of a
Bishop. Surely we may claim the cognizance, if loosers may have leave to
speak; But though loosers, not lost, (blessed be God) that is always seen in
the Mount, that then provided for persecuted Ministers, and has in the midst
of all our necessities, followed us and our preservers, with abundance of
mercies.

Apol: Page 9. Thirdly, For the Ironicall and bespattering expressions of the
Apologist, who calls us (amongst other ill names, as Intruders and the like)
Pretended Godly Ministers. Page 9.

Answ. We answer first, He cannot deny us to be pretenders (and intenders too)
to Godliness, which must be denied to very many of his Sequestered Clergy, as
having neither name, nor thing, of any pretense to Godliness at all.

And why must pretended Godly be the Larva that he will put upon us, but to
have us devoured as reputed hypocrites, but as for themselves I pity them, (so
well are those trees known by their fruits,) that we can say, but of few, that
they are so much as hypocrites, or pretenders to Godliness, it being (as Greg.
Naz. says) the only Godliness of these men, to find out something, whereby to
judge others ungodly.

Apol: Page 8. The Apologist enforces his incredible scandal upon us with this
(as he supposes) undeniable question; how are they Godly who will knowingly
add sin to sin?

Answ. This Physician should begin his charitable disquisition at home, looking
into the hindermost end of their own wallet, and inquire (as others alas
inquire for them) what eminent godliness they showed in their stations! (yea,
or do now show!) How are they Godly, that never showed any repentant remorse
for their sins against God, and the Nations peace! that never bewailed their
Sabbath breaking, Alter worship, and persecution! How were they Godly, that
added sin to sin; in proclaiming, and encouraging others in the profanation of
the Sabbath! They that break the command of God, and teach men so, shall be
called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; Matthew. 5. How were they Godly, that
took away conscientious and frequent preaching, and brought in a heap of
Ceremonies, all the trash and trumpery that Rome could spare: We may say long
enough, how were they Godly that did not only possess our Livings, but plundered
our dearest Libraries, and mocked at all our suffering?

Apol: Page 10. The Apologist charge our consciences, and beseeches us to
consider, how we will answer it at the dreadful day of judgment.

Answ. Blessed be God we can (for this that we have done) cheerfully remember
that day: yea, and long for, and hasten to the coming of the Lord, knowing that
Christ will acknowledge what we have done, in feeding, visiting, and
comforting, the least flock that belongs to him, he will accept of it, for
inasmuch; as we have done it to the least of these, we have done it unto him.
We can return to God with a more happy effect of our Ministry then the
Apologists ever could; we can say (of the blessing of God upon our preaching)
here are we and the children that God has given us, as begotten by the Gospel.
We have endeavored faithfully to discharge our Embassage, and hope to render
our account with Joy, having fed the Flock that Jesus Christ has redeemed with
his own blood, and can say (in some measure) with Paul I have fought the good
fight and finished the faith. Neither are we ashamed or afraid, (in just
vindication of ourselves we may speak it modestly,) either before God or man,
to be weighed, and compared number for number with the Sequestered Clergy, which
are the worthier instruments in Christ's work, and detur digniori, Let the
fittest take it with all our hearts.

But to return to the Apologist. I also beseech the Sequestered Clergy (can I
say those Godly Ministers scoffingly, as he does, I dare not say it) but I
beseech them, such as they are; to advise before hand concerning that fearful
day! will prophanations of the Sabbath, censuring, sequestring, persecuting
Gods Ministers; will bowing at the Altar, will making Ceremonious pomp and
formality, to be of the very essence of worship: will starving the souls of
poor people, (and yet courting and excommunicating them for breaking Pasture
(or Pinfold rather) to get some small feeding elsewhere; will these things
stand in the judgment with all the rest written in the book and books forever
against them? then let us fall; but as Eccl. 3.17. I have said in my heart,
surely God will judge the righteous, and the wicked, for there is time there
for every purpose, and for every work.

What will those Ministers say, when God shall inquire where is the Flock thy
beautiful Flock? Woe unto the Pastors that destroy, and scatter the sheep of my
pasture, says the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, against
the Pastors, that feed my people, ye have scattered my flock and driven them
away, and have not visited them, behold I will visit upon you the evil of your
doings, says the Lord. Vid. Jer. 23. from 1. to 7. verse. We be to the
Sheepheards of Israel, that do feed themselves* should not the sheepheards feed
the flock? the diseased you have not strengthened, neither have you healed that
which was sick, neither have you bound up that which was broken, neither have
you brought again that which was driven away, neither have you sought that
which was list, but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them, and they
were scattered because there is no shepherd, and they became meat to all the
beasts of the field when they were scattered, my sheep wandered through all the
mountains, and upon every high hill, yea my flock was scattered upon all the
face of the earth, and none did search or seek after them. Therefore ye
sheepheards hear the word of the Lord: As I live says the Lord God, surely
because my flock became a prey, and my flock became meat to every beast of the
field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my sheepheards search for
my flock but the sheepheards fed themselves, and fed not my flock: Therefore O
ye sheepheards, hear the word of the Lord, behold I am against the sheepheards,
and I will require my flock at their hands, and cause them to cease from
feeding the flock neither shall the sheepheards feed themselves any more, for I
will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.
Ezekiel. 34. I wish these men, that talk of the judgment day in the mouth, would
think of it in their heart, and some of their Learnedest Clergy (as they are
called in the Apology) would show the fruit of the meditation, in a sound
Commentary upon this Chap: which I believe few Pluralists, non Residents, or
Sequestered, dare read and expound thoroughly.

The Reasons on our part, why they ought not to be restored and we dismissed,
might be many (if we would speak all we can in our own cause (as they have
done) but what I shall say is only what swayes with me, as to warrant my
present inoumbency as to my conscience.

Most of them were guilty of great and scandalous crimes in their places, as is
notoriously known and proved by the oaths and testimonies of sufficient
witness, and that before the highest Court in England, that had power and
right to plead the cause of God and the people.

And further for the Power that expelled them: have not former Parliaments done
the like? and may not future Parliaments do the same? Why should not we judge
their ejection by Parliament as Just and Lawful, as they judged ours by the
Bishops? and in many things (jam sumus pares) we are proportioned, we would not
take the Bishops Oath, (called ET CETERA) nor admit the whole heap of
Ceremonies, and so were put out, or kept out, and on their part, they would not
take the National Covenant (approved by King (I mean his Gracious Majesty
that now is) and Kingdoms) but stood for profaneness and superstition, and so
they were kept out on the other parts prevailing; Now who were the sufferers
(if the cause makes the Martyr) to be most pitied, I leave to all wise and
godly to Judge and censure.

The Sequestered Clergy generally left the pastoral charge, and care of their
people, and fled, and took other charges elsewhere, where some of them (to our
sad experience) ceized upon the Livings, and Estates of Godly Ministers; and
that in such a cruel manner, that the Long Parliament was necessitated, to set
up a Committee for relief of plundered Ministers: by whom some Congregations
have been supplied with faithful Ministers from thence; (in the valley of Achor
a door of hope) and those of us, that upon entreaty, and command, and of
conscience, assumed the charge of deserted congregations, whither our Labor
has not been more then our Hire, and our pains then our profits; we dare leave
(generally) to our enemies to judge, only we have this dependence in what we
have done, our labor is with the Lord and our reward with our God.

The Sequestered Ministers never attempted to return to the Pastoral care and
charge of their flocks, for these many many years. Not Read Peculium, but
pecuniam, was their cry; they Thirsted more after the Livings of the places,
then the living souls of the people.

Their Congregations desire them not (except here and there a few ungodly at
lest loos-professors, and they rather for envy to some neighbors, then of
sober affection to the sequestered Minister.) I say their Congregations affect
them not, though (as the Devout wolf to the sheep in the true fable) they
profess to love them in their very bowels, yet their people fear, (cor tibi
rest at idem non tibi presto fidem,) it is the great Godliness of gain, that
moves them so exceedingly* more then the gain of godliness. And truly I think,
(as I should also do in sum case) Though they have repented; (a thing that I
would gladly believe but never saw it in them,) yet their reformation would be
better received, and credited elsewhere, then amongst their former
congregations, where there will be on all hands, suspicion, supposition of
injury and strife, and perhaps revenge; imbittering the Spirit and hindering
their Ministry.

Lastly for our Selves; our Innocence and Labors are our greatest Arguments.
Our labors have been great; and (all things considered) our success in our
Ministry happy; Light and knowledge is increased. I remember a Christian told
me, speaking of the increase of knowledge, that he had heard more sermons in
his parrish Church in one month, then his father before him had heard, or
could hear in 30 years. But some of the Sequestered Ministers envying the work,
found ways (like those that hindered the rebuilding of Jerusalem,) by envious
reproaches and scandal to retard and hinder our success. These persuade our
Congregations to tax us heavily; To pay tithes slowly; These create false
reports of us; and if they perceive but the lest spark of heat or prejudice
between Minister and people, they are at hand to blow up a fire, and to applaud
the fact: Favoring Quakers, sabbath breakers, any thing against us. Yea, their
envy has driven some of them so far, that they exposed the Kings Friends and
Intrests to public dishonor: to bring some of our persons thereby into snares
and dangers.

Yet now, After all our hard service; If we may not be owned for Pastors, and
True and Rightful Ministers by Law in our places, by King and Parliament: but
those our spiritual sons and daughters, ( begotten by the Gospel through our
Ministry) must be left and forsaken. We can but Protest to God and man, that
(though it is our Duty to submit, yet) it is our grief to part (not with the
pittance of our means, but) with the dear society of beloved souls; more
precious unto us then our benefits or lives. And to them it will be occasion of
too much sorrow: that (as Pastors, and Fathers,) they shall see our face no
more!

Finally, To conclude my work. I will add a word or two of Advice, and friendly
Counsel to Mr. Mossom, and his number.

First, To mend his principles, and not take up his Axioms on bare trust (as
that from J. C. in his Title page) Lex justitie, Justitia reinpublieae basis;
whereas indeed (and right) it should be as I have fixed it, inserted, in my
Title page: Justitia Legis, et Lex reipublicae basis. For Justice is the first
foundation of all Law, and government, for a Law may be altered and reduced to
Justice, but not Justice altered and subdued to a Law.

2. Again, I desire him a little to sweep before the doors of his own party,
and move them to restore what they have unjustly taken; and cruelly plundered:
and then expect in charity, what we can spare them out of what we have saved of
the reward of our Labors. I could affix names, But I am not willing to blurre
any man's name; but admonish his Conscience. But if any such outrages have been
committed by any of us, let us be named, and shamed, and refund; and themselves
readmitted in those places, as more righteous then we.

I would further have Mr. Mossom (who vilifies us as necessitous) and all his
Learnedest Clergy know, that we have fed the starved Congregations they have
deserted, (and from which by Parliament they were sequestered,) not for
morsells; but of Charity, and Conscience: It Is well known that many of us need
not, (and I pray God we may never feel Prelatical compassion to us and our
families,) nor did need their estates for a subsistence, the greater number of
us (through the mercy of God) could boast of as great birth, estate, friends,
and offers of preferments, as they. We having many of us our selves, Livings
and preferments to bestow (and some bestowed) upon deserving men, yet what is
gain to us we can (I hope) account loss for Christ. And if some of us were
reduced from the deepest of neeessities, as he says, we were induced first
into those necessities by the Prelates or late Plundring, or such ways. And if
we were originally poor, and so still, we need not be ashamed that God has
taken the poor even from the Dunghill: the earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof, and we in our poverty well know, how the Sequestered Clergy, some of
them, attained their plentiful full estates: But of this thus much shall
suffice for this Time.

Only this, Let not Mr. Mossom glory, in being of the number of the Sequestered
Clergy, but if he be now a good man, let him teach those of his culpable
fraternity, that suffer for their faults, to say, as the good thief on the
Cross, Luke 23. We are justly here, for we receive the due reward of our
deeds, and my prayer with him, and for them (and him if need be) shall be that
God may give them repentance, pardon, and grace for Time to come: AMEN.

FINIS.

